        
Shopping Beauty 
20 “No-Makeup” 
Makeup Tips Every 
Guy Should Know 
These makeup tips and tricks will keep your face looking flawless. 

Posted on January 24, 2017, at 8:56 a.m. 
Treye Green 
BuzzFeed Staff 
View 23 comments 
  

Zoe Burnett/BuzzFeed 
We hope you love the products we recommend! Just so you know, BuzzFeed may collect a share of sales or other compensation from the links on this page. Oh, and FYI — prices are accurate and items in stock as of time of publication. 

1. To begin, make sure your face is properly washed and moisturized before applying any makeup products. 
   
Twentieth Century Fox 
Skin that is clean and free of dead skin will allow makeup to go on more smoothly. 
If you are new to the face wash and moisturizer game, you can try Neutrogena Naturals Facial Cleanser ($6.89 from Amazon) and Clean and Clear Moisturizer 
($4.99 from Target). 
2. After washing and moisturizing your face, consider using a makeup primer. 
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Nene Makeup Junkee, instagram.com / Via Instagram/Hourglass Cosmetics 
A makeup primer will prep your skin and create a long- lasting base for foundation or tinted moisturizer. 
You can try Maybelline Primer ($7.21 from Amazon), Sephora Collection Primer ($15 from Amazon), or Hourglass Primer ($54 from Amazon). 
3. If you want to use foundation to even out your skin tone and texture, it is important that you learn your skin’s undertone. 
   
  
theshoppingfriend.com / Via The Shopping Friend 
Knowing your undertone will guarantee you choose the best foundation to blend in with your own skin tone. Undertones are divided into the categories of cool, warm, and neutral, with many makeup companies labeling their foundations to identify the category they fall in. 
4. You also need to know your skin type. 
 
 
  
pinterest.com / Via Avon 
Knowing your skin type will ensure you choose makeup products that will give you the best coverage. 
For dry skin, try L.A. Girl Concealer ($2.38 from Walmart), CoverGirl Foundation ($13 from Amazon), or Bobbi Brown Concealer ($39.99 from Amazon). 
For oily skin, try Black Opal Concealer ($5.25 from Black Opal Beauty), L’Oreal Foundation ($9.61 from Amazon), or Make Up For Ever Concealer ($34 from Sephora). 
For combination skin, try Neutrogena Makeup ($8.99+ from Amazon), CoverGirl Foundation ($7.27 from Jet), or Smashbox BB Water ($42 from Sephora). 
For normal skin, try Clinique Foundation ($26 from Sephora), Mac Foundation 
($35 from Nordstrom), or Bare Minerals Foundation ($29 from Sephora). 
5. After choosing your foundation, use a sponge or brush to apply the product to your face. 
 
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Makeup By Jake Jamie 
You can get a set of five makeup sponges from Amazon for $9.99 — and they are a great dupe for the more expensive Beauty Blender sponges used by many makeup professionals. 
But if you prefer to use a brush, you can get one from Amazon for $6.54. 
6. Once you have your brush or sponge, use your foundation to cover up blemishes and red spots on your face. 
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Makeup By Jake Jamie 
Tailor the amount of foundation you use to fit your skin needs. Use a heavier application for skin that needs more coverage. Or you can use lighter layers if you only need to address spotty problem areas. 
Watch a full tutorial on applying foundation on YouTube by The Beauty Boy here. 
 
7. But be sure to dab your foundation instead of just rubbing it into your face. 
   
Facebook: Refinery29ShortCuts / Via Refinery 29 
This will help you make sure the product is spread evenly over your face. 
8. Using a tinted moisturizer is also a simple way to help even out your skin tone and manage oily skin. 
 
youtube.com / Via YouTube/Skin Care With Ross 
Apply the product over your face with your fingers — just like you would your regular, non-tinted moisturizer. Remember it takes a small amount to achieve your desired glow. 
Try Nars Moisturizer ($45 from Sephora), Lab Series Moisturizer ($44 from Bloomingdale's), or Laura Mercier Moisturizer ($45 from Laura Mercier). 
9. You can use concealer as a quick fix for dark circles and discoloration under your eyes. 
Jon Premosch/BuzzFeed 
You can get a concealer brush from Nordstrom for $15 for easily application. 
Watch a full tutorial on using concealer on YouTube by Salihs World here, or read a helpful list of concealer tips and tricks here. 
10. To give your eyebrows the perfect shape, just use an eyeliner pencil to fill them in. 
  
youtube.com / Via YouTube/Justin Locs 
For a natural look, choose an eyebrow pencil that's the same shade as your hair color. Just make sure to use a waterproof formula to keep sweat from ruining your look. 
You can try Revlon Eyeliner ($5.67 from Amazon), L'Oreal Paris Eyeliner ($6.63 from Amazon), or Too Faced Eyeliner ($24.99 from Walmart). 
Or you can use Charlotte Tilburry Brow Lift ($30 from Charlotte Tilburry) — which is a three-piece tool that lets you shape, lift, and shade in your brows. 
Watch a tutorial on filling in your eyebrows on YouTube by Justin Locs here. 
11. You can even use an angled 
eyeliner pencil to to fill in your beard. 

youtube.com / Via YouTube/Colin Jay 
To pull off this trick, pinpoint the areas of your beard you’d like to be fuller, using light pencil strokes to shade in those spots. It may take some extra time to draw the hair-like lines on your face. But the added detail will make for a more natural look. 
Watch a tutorial on filling in your beard on YouTube by Colin Jay here. 
12. Eyeliner is an easy way to enhance your eyelashes a little, as well. 
  
youtube.com / Via YouTube/Will Cook 
To get this look, you can apply eyeliner to your upper waterline — which is the area between your eye and your lashline. The liner will be masked behind your upper lashes, giving them a fuller appearance. 
Watch a full eyeliner tutorial on YouTube by Will Cook here. 
13. You can put a little life back into your dry lips, especially during the winter months, with a tinted lip balm. 

thedandyproject.com / Via The Dandy Project 
Simply find a color that gives your lips a subtle boost of color — like a shade from the Burts Bees Tinted Lip Balm line ($7.49 from Target). 
Then lock in moisture by adding a layer of a clear lip balm like Jack Black Intense Therapy Lip Balm ($7.50 from Jack Black) on top of the tint, lightly blotting your lips to reduce shine. 
14. Up for a bigger makeup challenge? You can contour your face to make your features really stand out. 

youtube.com / Via YouTube/MUARONI 
Contouring involves the use of different makeup shades to shape and define facial features like your nose, cheeks, and eyes. 
To give contouring a try, invest in a contouring palette like the Anastasia Beverly Hills Contour Kit ($40 from Sephora), which is a go-to for makeup artists worldwide. You will also need a contouring and highlighting brush set ($21.97 from Amazon). 
However, if you want to save some dollars, try the Makeup Revolution Contour Kit ($15 from Ulta). Or you can buy an individual bronzer and highlighter instead, using the products with your brush set to complete your sculpted look. 
Watch a full tutorial on men’s conturing on YouTube by Muaroni here. 
15. Once you've finished your 
work, you can use a setting spray to give your makeup extra staying power. 
 
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Urban Decay, Instagram: @_skinfacebeauty / Via Skin Face Beauty/Instagram 
A spritz of setting spray will make sure your face doesn’t go into full meltdown mode during the day — because struggle makeup is never a good look! 
You can try NYX Setting Spray ($5.99 from Target), Mac Finishing Mist ($26 from Nordstrom), or Urban Decay Setting Spray ($22.99 from Amazon). 
16. Always make sure to wash all of your makeup off at the end of the day. 
  
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Josie Maran, shop-links.co / Via Instagram/Clinique 
Removing your makeup before bed each night will help avoid breakouts caused by clogged pores. Sleeping in your makeup can also cause premature aging by it breaking down healthy collagen. 
To wipe away face makeup, you can use a liquid cleanser like Josie Maran Argan Cleansing Oil ($32 from Sephora) or a remover like Clinique Take The Day Off Cleansing Balm ($29 from Sephora). 
17. You can use makeup wipes in combination with these products. 
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Neutrogena 
But it is recommended you use your cleanser first to break down the makeup, using the wipes as a second step to remove any leftover product on your face. 
 
18. Also give your eyes special attention when removing your makeup. 
instagram.com / Via Instagram/Garnier UK, Twitter: @simpleskin / Via Twitter/Simple Skincare 
Because eye makeup can be tougher to remove, try using a cotton pad soaked with a oil-infused remover like Garnier Micellar Oil-Infused Cleansing Water ($8.50 from Beauty Expert) or Simple Dual Effect Eye Make-Up Remover ($8.42 from Jet). 
The mix of oil and water in these products works to gently loosen eye makeup and pull leftover dirt and other impurities from the eye area. 
19. But be sure not to scrub too hard to avoid damaging the skin around your eyes — which can lead to fine lines and wrinkles. 
  
    
birchbox.com / Via Birchbox 
Watch a tutorial on removing eye and face makeup on YouTube by Edgar's Makeup here, or read a list of tips from Birchbox here. 
20. And one final note, please make sure to routinely clean your makeup brushes and sponges. 
 
 
 
thebeautydepartment.com / Via The Beauty Department 
Use Johnson's Baby Shampoo ($4.92 from Amazon) to wash brushes and prevent bacteria from building up on them. You should also clean your sponges at least once a week with liquid or solid soap. 
Watch a full tutorial on cleaning them both on YouTube by Ashley Chantel here. 
Now go ahead and take your glow to epic new levels! 
   
youtube.com 
Looking for the perfect gift for any occasion? Check out all of BuzzFeed’s gift guides here! 
Allison Krausman / BuzzFeed 
Shopping for something specific? Check out BuzzFeed Reviews to find the best things for every budget! 
  
buzzfeed.com 
   
Shopping 
21 Products Under $10 That’ll Help Solve Your Problems In Under 10 Minutes 
*sets timer for 10 minutes* Ok go!! 
    
 Products On Amazon Our Readers Are Loving Right Now 
 Things For Your Desk That Are Basically Too Awesome Not To Buy 
 Things That Belong On Your Birthday Wish List 
 Things No One Will Believe You Got From Walmart 
See all of our Shopping content 
  
 
! 
 
Get To Know The Incredible Women Playing For The US At The World Cup 
*celebrates to a controversial degree* 

Tim Unkenholz 
        
Shopping Newsletter 
Find great products and the best- money saving deals around, delivered right to your inbox. 
Your email address 
Sign up 
   
    
 
! 

dinabdb 2yearsago 
I feel like this is so much information that for a beginner would be overwhelming..... I'm a girl who loves makeup and always tries for full coverage and there are things in here that if I were a beginner I'd just give up before even starting because it's SO MUCH all at once. especially if you're a guy and don't already own anything, that's a lot of expensive products to recommend all in one fell swoop just to try this. 
also applying make up and concealer with brushes (rather than a sponge) is really hard unless you're well practiced. sponge is the best way to get it all evenly distributed, not leave brush strokes, and blend properly. 
and did you seriously mention all these steps like concealer, foundation, setting spray and eyebrows etc and forget.... SETTING POWDER? setting powder is such a must or your concealer will crease and your cover up might just cake up and slide off and look a mess. 
guys, go on YouTube and look for some elf brand tutorials or drugstore brand tutorials, a lot of make up gurus (mostly female but just take what you need from those and leave the rest) do those so you can spend as little money as possible but still get decent brands for a nice result, and also see a hands-on demo. 
6 
sgdavis 2yearsago Boys SHOULD NEVER wear make up!!!!!! Grow 
some friggen balls 
5 Show replies (1) 
12 People Told Us The Funniest Freaking Jokes They've Ever Heard 
Promoted By 
Bring The Funny 
               
Advertise with BuzzFeed 

theowlmail 2yearsago 
This is a great article for guys who want to wear make-up, but I hope it doesn't make anyone feel like they HAVE to use make-up. Girls and boys alike are beautiful, with or without make-up. 
10 
 
Load more (14) 
