MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. 

1929-1968 



MAKING MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR.'S BIRTHDAY A NATIONAL 
holiday recognized the importance of his life and writings. Thinking 
back on his relatively brief public life, one is sometimes astonished to 
remember that the Civil Rights movement was already fifteen years old 
when he became its central figure. Still a young man in 1956, he 
emerged as the principal spokesperson of a host of equally remarkable 
men and women. 

Yet by background and training, Martin Luther King, 
Jr. was especially well prepared to make the most of that non- 
violent revolution which, in transforming the South, provided 
a training ground, a school, a university-without-walls for social 
change. Just as the Wobblies, socialists, and anarchists in the 
decade before the First World War educated labor organizers 
and reformers for the radical 30s, so the new abolitionists of the 
Civil Rights movement taught a later generation about non- 
violent resistance and agitation for change. 

Looking over the names of leaders in the antiwar and 
draft resistance movements, as well as in later campaigns against 
the nuclear arms race, one can point to many who went South 
during the 1960s, on Freedom Rides, in voter registration cam- 
paigns or the March on Selma. Philip Berrigan, for example, 
taught in a black school in New Orleans before he burned draft 
files in Maryland; Abby Hoffman ran a "Snick" (Student Non- 
violent Coordinating Committee) shop, selling crafts from 
Mississippi before he initiated his "revolution for the hell of it" 
on the Lower East Side in Manhattan; Howard Zinn and Staugh- 
ton Lynd taught in a black women's college in Atlanta before 
Zinn joined Resist in Boston and Lynd became a labor lawyer 
in Youngstown, Ohio. Similarly, Rosa Parks disobeyed an 



Alabama law against blacks and Fannie Lou Hamer challenged 
traditional roles of women in Mississippi before Betty Friedan 
and Gloria Steinem wrote a line. 

"The son, the grandson, and the great-grandson of 
preachers," as he so tactfully reminded the clergymen addressed 
in "Letter from Birmingham Jail," Martin Luther King, Jr., 
was born on January 15, 1929, in Atlanta, Georgia. Educated 
at Morehouse College there and Crozer Theological Seminary 
in Pennsylvania, he was ordained a Baptist minister in his father's 
church at 18. In 1955, he completed a doctorate in systematic 
theology at Boston University. That December, he called a city- 
wide boycott of segregated buses in Montgomery, Alabama, 
where he had been serving as pastor of a church for over a year. 
From then until his death in Memphis in 1968, he coordinated 
and inspired nonviolent movement for social change focusing 
on the rights of working people, especially blacks, and resistance to the 
American war in Southeast Asia. 

King's power is evident, not only in his extraordinary 
courage, but also in his skills as a speaker and writer. His essays, 
for example, lose little of their effect even years after the events 
that prompted them have been forgotten. "The Negro Revolu- 
tion," (1963), characteristic in style and language, makes its point 
through stories from his own life and those of his associates: 
"Some years ago," King begins, 

I sat in a Harlem department store, surrounded by 
hundeds of people. I was autographing copies of Stride 
Toward Freedom, my book about the Montgomery 
bus boycott of 1955-56. As I signed my name to a page, 
1 felt something sharp plunge forcefully into my chest. I 
had been stabbed with a letter opener, struck home by a 
woman who would later be judged insane. Rushed by 
ambulance to Harlem Hospital, I lay in a bed for hours 
while preparations were made to remove the keen-edged 
knife from my body. Days later, when I was well 
enough to talk with Dr. Aubrey Maynard, the chief of 



surgeons who performed the delicate, dangerous 
operation, I learned the reason for the long delay that 
preceded surgery. He told me that the razor tip of the 
instrument had been touching my aorta and that my 
whole chest had to be opened to extract it. "If you had 
sneezed during all those hours of waiting," Maynard 
said, "your aorta would have been punctured and you 
would have drowned in your own blood." In the summer 
of 1963, the knife of violence was just that close to the nation's 
aorta. 

Although King's name and achievement are known to 
many people, the deeper implications of his life, as with those 
of many peacemakers, are often trivialized or forgotten. This 
is particularly true of his deep, persistent commitment to non- 
violence. Fortunately, however, in Stride Toward Freedom 
(1958), he gives an account of his spiritual odyssey, beginning 
with his reading of Thoreau in college, and moving on to his 
reading of Marx, Gandhi, and Reinbold Niebuhr, and 
hearing A. J. Muste in the seminary. 

Although he sided with Gandhi, he had to come to terms with 
Niebuhr's critique of pacifism. In the intellectual struggle that 
ensued. King noticed that Niebuhr "interpreted pacifism as a sort 
of passive resistance to evil expressing naive trust in the power 
of love. But this was a serious distortion," King concluded. 

My study of Gandhi convinced me that true pacifism is 
not non-resistance to evil, but nonviolent resistance to evil. 
Between the two positions, there is a world of difference. 
Gandhi resisted evil with as much vigor and power as the 
violent resister, but he resisted with love instead of hate. 
True pacifism is not unrealistic submission to evil power, as 
Niebuhr contends. It is rather a courageous confrontation of 
evil by the power of love. . . 

Just how fully King took this principle to heart is 
indicated not only by his rejection of violence in the 



struggle for black equality, but also in his resistance to the 
war in Vietnam. The piece of writing for which he is best 
remembered, however, is a classic essay, equal in power 
and eloquence to the Declaration of Independence and 
Thoreau's "Civil Disobedience." "Letter from 
Birmingham Jail" (1963), addressed to eight Protestant, 
Catholic, and Jewish clergymen who called King's leadership 
"unwise and untimely," describes the historical, religious, 
and political justifications for his actions and helped thereby 
to win a nation to his cause. Reprinted in newsletters, 
newspapers, pamphlets, and hooks, it became the Common 
Sense of the second American revolution. 

In bringing together the principles of 19th century Ameri- 
can abolitionists and nonresisters — Garrison, Thoreau, 
Ballou and the practical teachings of Tolstoy and Gandhi, 
King gave the tradition of nonviolence a new and solid 
grounding in the American experience. In any nonviolent 
campaign, he says near the beginning of "Letter from 
Birmingham Jail," there are four basic steps: "(1) collection of 
the facts to determine whether injustices are alive; (2) 
negotiation; (3) self-purification; and (4) direct action." 
Then King shows how he arid his associates met each of those 
conditions in Birmingham, and concludes with this argument for 
the justice of the black liberation movement: 

Before the pilgrims landed at Plymouth, we were here. 
Before the pen of Jefferson etched the majestic words of 
the Declaration of Independence across the pages of 
history, we were here. For more than two centuries our 
forebearers labored in this country without wages; they 
made cotton king; they built the homes of their masters 
while suffering gross injustice and shameful humiliation — 
yet out of a bottomless vitality they continued to thrive and 
develop. If the inexpressible cruelties of slavery could not 



stop us, the opposition we now face will surely fail. We 
will win our freedom because the sacred heritage of our 
nation and the eternal will of God are embodied in our 
echoing demands. 



BY MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. 

Speeches by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., About the War in 
Vietnam. Arrendale: The Turnpike Press, n.d. 

Where Do We Go From Here: Chaos or Community. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1967. 

Why We Can't Wait. New York: Harper and Row, 1963 and New York: 
Signet books, 1964. See especially "Letter from Birmingham Jail." 

Stride Toward Freedom: The Montgomery Story. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1958. 

And others. 



ABOUT MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. 

David L. Lewis, King: A Critical Biography. New York: Praeger, 1970. 

Stephen B. Oates. Let the Trumpet Sound: The Life of Martin Luther 
King, Jr. New York: Harper and Row, 1982. 

Martin Luther King, Jr.: A Documentary: Montgomery to Memphis. 
Edited by Flip Schulke. New York: W.W. Norton Co., 1976. 



