HOWARD ZINN 

1922- 



IN HOWARD ZINN, THE AGE OF DEMOCRACY HAS ITS AMERICAN 

historian, a writer and teacher attuned to the forces that just might 
create a world with respect for equality and human rights. Unlike many 
historians, he fixes attention not on wars and government, but on the 
ideas, imagination, and courage of ordinary people. And in a host of 
articles, essays, and books published since 1959, he focuses on acts of 
disobedience and solidarity of the past two centuries that initiated mass 
movements for liberation. Confronted with such large popular 
movements against injustice, the established order — and sometimes 
even the state — has given way to reason and reform. 

In charting this history, Howard Zinn commits something 
more than his voice and tenure as an academic, beginning with his 
active involvement in the civil rights movement and moving on to 
resistance against the draft and the nuclear arms race. With a handful of 
talented and committed academics and artists, including Noam 
Chomsky, Grace Paley, Denise Levertov, George Wald, and Richard 
Falk, Zinn makes the link between scholarship and humane values, 
between the academy and the public order. He is, in fact, almost a 
National Endowment for the Humanities himself. 

Born in New York City on August 24, 1922, Zinn has lived in 
the Boston area, with his wife and family, since 1964. He, like many 
men of his generation, "grew up" in the armed services, and was 
decorated as an air force bombadier in Central Europe during the 
Second World War. Afterward, he completed his formal education at 
New York University and Columbia University under the G.I. bill, 
receiving a Ph.D. in history in 1958. Before moving to Boston 
University, he chaired the history and social science department at 
Spelman College, in Atlanta; during those years, he was also deeply 
involved in the civil rights movement and wrote an important study of 



the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC: The New 
Abolitionists (1964). 

Prior to the publication of his major work, A People's History 
of the United States (1980), Zinn wrote frequently on politics and the 
social thought of the Great Depression and on the tradition of civil 
disobedience in American history. In February 1968, he, with Father 
Daniel Berrigan, arranged the release of three American prisoners of 
war in North Vietnam, during a special visit to that country. Since that 
time, Howard Zinn has testified on behalf of people on trial for 
resisting the draft or for damaging nuclear weapons equipment; and he 
has appeared in several films, such as Holy Outlaw (1970) and 
Lovejoy's Nuclear War (1976), that dramatize those issues. He is the 
author, as well, of a successful biographical drama about the anarchist, 
feminist, and pamphleteer, Emma Goldman. 

In writing history, Zinn has taken his lead not from the 
announced purposes of governments, but from their actions, their 
deeds. He has been careful, for example, to note "the warring elements" 
of the American creed. By this he means a conflict between the 
rhetorical creed, represented by the Declaration of Independence ("all 
Men are created equal," the right to revolution, and so on) and the 
working creed. The hard evidence is 

that all men are created equal, except foreigners with whom we 
are at war, blacks who have not been signaled out for special 
attention, Indians who will not submit, inmates of prisons, 
members of the armed forces, and anyone without money. 

In his writings, as well as in his undergraduate classes and 
public lectures, Zinn spells out the consequences of this dichotomy, 
especially America's failure to alter its allocation of power and wealth. 
He occasionally admits that changes take place within the narrow 
boundaries of profit-motivated capitalism, a paternalistic political 
system, an aggressive foreign policy, and "a social system based on a 
culture of prejudices concerning race, national origin, sex, age, and 
wealth." 

Zinn's truths arc obvious to many observers outside the 



United States, but few people profess them from "inside the 
whale," and even fewer from the hallowed groves of academe. 
Although his view of history is sometimes regarded as unortho- 
dox, his authority as a teacher and writer has won him a wide 
audience among students and scholars, as well as a significant, 
perhaps permanent, place among modern historians. With E.P. 
Thomaspon, in England, Zinn has made the history of the work- 
ing class visible in a way that it has seldom been since the 1930s. 

In his histories, Zinn has always been explicit about his 
purpose and goal. In the introduction to Postwar America: 
1945-1971, for example, after encouraging the reader to take 
an active part in making history, he poses two central questions: 

First, why did the United States, exactly as it became the most 
heavily armed and wealthiest society in the world, run into so 
much trouble with its own people? From the late fifties to the 
early seventies, the nation experienced unprecedented black 
rebellion, student demonstrations, antiwar agitation, civil 
disobedience, prison uprising, and a widespread feeling that 
American civilization was faltering, or even in decay. And 
second, what are the possibilities, the visions, the beginnings of 
fresh directions for this country? 

A decade later, Zinn continues to explore the implications of 
these radical questions. In the same quiet, measured voice, with an 
understated, even wry humor, he lectures to large classes of 
undergraduates, speaks at a rally against conscription on the Boston 
Common, or addresses an annual meeting of professional historians and 
political scientists. Patient and persistent, he appears confident that his 
message will get through, amid the conventional noise and chatter. In 
the long effort to get the facts straight and to keep alive the history of 
ordinary people, he behaves as if time were on his side, "as long," he 
might add, "as the bomb doesn't fall." 



BY HOWARD ZINN 

A People's History of the United States. New York: Harper and Row, 
1980. 

Postwar America: 1945-1971. Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973. 

The Politics of History. Boston: The Beacon Press, 1970. 

Disobedience and Democracy. New York: Random House, 1968. 

"Three Prisoners: The Petty Route Home," Nation, CCVI, No. 14 
(April 1968), 431-37. 

SNCC: The New Abolitionists . Boston: The Beacon Press, 1964. 

And others. 



