DANIEL BERRIGAN 

1921- 



IN AN ELEGY FOR HIS FATHER, WRITTEN IN DANBURY FEDERAL 
Prison during Holy Week, 1971, Daniel Berrigan also sketched his 
own portrait, an outline of a complex and talented person under the 
influence of a somewhat distant parent. The poem describes his father's 
fierce shortcomings, as well as his rich legacy to six sons: 

He exacted performance, promptitude, 

deference to his moods 

the family escutcheon stained with no shit. 

The game was skillful (we never saw it so well 

played 
elsewhere), he was commonly considered 
the epitome of a just man. 

We sat on our perches blinking like six marmosets. 
There were scenes worthy of Conrad; 
the decks shuddering; 
the world coming to an end. . . . 

The expression on the face of the marmoset, a wide- 
eyed, unblinking creature, astonished by what's coming next, 
is recognizable as Daniel Berrigan's own. One has seen it in 
numerous photographs of him: at a demonstration, during a 
trial, from a pulpit, and at his arrest at Block Island after 
the months underground in 1970. It is a face that says, "Well, 
what do you know? Look what I've gotten myself in for this 
time: The Lord be praised." 

An early poem conveys that sense of wonder and the 
singular manner that characterizes Father Berrigan. "Each day 
writes/ in my heart's core/ ineradicably, what it is to be man": 



I tread my earth amazed: what land, 
what skies are these, whose shifting weathers 
now shrink my harvest to a stack of bones; 
now weigh my life with glory? 
Christ. . . your presence give 

light to my eyeless mind, reason to my heart's 
rhyme. 

For all his public activities, as poet, teacher, theologian, war 
resister, liturgist, Daniel Berrigan is a surprisingly private per- 
son. Since his eighteenth year, his vocation as Jesuit and priest 
has been the center of his life. 

Born in Virginia, Minnesota, on May 9, 1921, to an Irish 
railroad man with a flair for poetry and drama, and a devoutbut willful 
German woman, Daniel Berrigan attended parochial schools in 
Syracuse, New York, after his family moved to a farm near there 
in the 1920s. His entry into the Jesuits in 1939 preceded the 
later religious vocations of his older brother Jerome and his 
younger brother Philip after the Second World War. The 
confined, quasi-militarist regime of the Jesuits surprised 
Daniel, but he did well as a student and began publishing poems 
in national periodicals while still in college. 

Soon after his ordination as a priest in 1942, he taught 
French and English in Jesuit high schools in New Jersey and in 
Brooklyn, before joining the theology department at 
Lemoyne College, East Syracuse, in 1957. On a sabbatical 
leave in 1964, he served as a parish priest in France, where he 
had studied previously; he admired the worker priest 
movement. In further travel at this time behind the Iron 
Curtain, he found the church persecuted, but clear about its 
religious mission. Back in the United States, where his 
brother Philip had become involved in the Civil Rights 
movement, Daniel co-founded several national organizations 
opposed to the war in Vietnam. Disciplined by the church 
hierarchy in New York for these and other activities, he was 
exiled to South America, which only deepened his resistance to 



United States policies toward tiie Thiird World. 

Returning home after six weeks, he became a 
controversial figure again by his acts of revolutionary 
nonviolence and through his influence on young people, former 
students and admirers who eventually followed him into jail 
for burning draft records. In the 1970s and 80s, Father 
Berrigan participated in numerous symbolic actions against 
the state, including the damaging of nuclear weapons 
systems, the subject of a film. In the King of Prussia (1982). He 
and his brother Philip have also been an inspiration for 
activists resisting the deployment of American nuclear missiles 
in Western Europe. 

As a writer, Daniel Berrigan occupies a peculiar place 
in American letters. In spite of his honors, including the La- 
mont Poetry Prize in 1957, awarded to an outstanding first hook 
by the Academy of American Poets, as well as the Meltzer, St. 
Thomas More, and Obie awards, he is seldom treated seriously 
as an artist by influential critics. Writing outside the prevailing 
manner (whichever one is dominant at the moment), he chartshis own 
course as a poet. "Writing was as integral to his life in prison 
as counseling or rapping, or organizing, or listening to the 
anguish of a prison brother," Philip Berrigan wrote in the 
introduction to Daniel's Prison Poems. 

Some readers regard Berrigan's perpetual testing of the 
boundaries of experience, his effrontery to good behavior, as 
mere personal orneriness. And, to be sure, there is a bit of the 
Modernist spirit, the impulse "to shake up the bourgeoise," 
about his style. 

Yet it is this quality of expecting the unexpected and his 
refusal to accept traditional boundaries that accounts in part for 
Daniel Berrigan's hold on people's attention. Faced, like Her- 
man Melville's Bartleby with the inevitable (in Berrigan's case, 
obeying the law, paying war taxes, and tolerating America's 
policy of Mutually Assured Destruction — MAD), he "prefers 
not to." 



As an artist and activist, Daniel Berrigan seems to 
promise, in typical American fashion, the unexpected, the 
impossible. Who else would leave a job at Cornell University (in 
1968), fly to Hanoi to rescue three American flyers, return to a 
small suburb of Baltimore to burn draft records with 
homemade napalm, go through a long trial, and then, in 
costume to evade the FBI, slip underground? Narrowly escaping 
accidental death in prison, he embarked soon afterward on 
another series of nonviolent actions, smashing missile 
warheads and risking jail numerous times while out on 
appeal. This is attended, along the way, by an outpouring of 
poems, essays, letters to periodicals, an award-winning play, 
several films, numerous lectures, and religious retreats, a 
variety of jobs (an orderly in a cancer hospital, and teaching 
assignments at leading universities) and close associations with 
a multitude of friends, family, and fellow resisters in this country 
and Europe. 

If, as Wordsworth said, "the child is father of the man," 
some insight into Daniel Berrigan is provided by the self-portrait 
mentioned earlier. Equally significant is the famous statement 
of the Catonsville Nine, beginning, "The violence stops here, 
and death stops here, this war stops here." 

We shall beyond doubt be placed behind bars for some portion 
of our natural lives in consequence of our inability to live 
and die content in the plagued city, to say "peace, peace" 
when there is no peace, to keep the poor poor, the thirsty 
and hungry thirsty and hungry. Our apologies good 
friends for the fracture of good order, the burning of paper 
instead of children, the angering of the orderlies in the front 
parlor of the charnel house. We could not, so help us God, 
do otherwise. 

The last statement — that he "could not do otherwise" — suggests 
that, unlike other figures in the history of American radicalism 
from Thomas Paine to Dorothy Day, who chose their fates, Ber- 



rigan regards his as a given. Is this the reason for his rather 
"Zen" attitude toward it all? 

In a nuclear age, Daniel Berrigan charts a new errand 
into the wilderness, a journey to Catonsville, attempting to turn 
"lights on in the house of the dead." Even now, in his mid-60s, 
he is a figure to watch with expectation. Where will his fate carry 
him next? 



BY DANIEL BERRIGAN 

Lights on in the House of the Dead: A Prison Diary. New York: 
Doubleday and Co., 1974. 

Prison Poems. Greensboro, N.C.: Unicorn Press, 1973. 

Selected and New Poems. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1973. 

No Bars to Manhood (especially "Open Sesame: My Life and 
Good Times.") Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1970. 



And many others. 



