MURIEL RUKEYSER 

1913-1980 



SHE HAD COME BY TRAILWAYS BUS '10 WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, 
in May 1974, where she was to give a poetry reading at the 
public library that very evening. In New York, the night 
before, she had attended a performance of Ulysses in Nighttown, 
a dramatization of the last section of Joyce's novel. Shortly after 
the bus pulled up to the curb, Muriel Rukeyser moved haltingly down 
the steps of the bus, looking as if she had been jostled by a 
crowd of shoppers. Her hair, thin and graying, was in dis- 
array; she wore dark fabric slippers, resembling ballet shoes, and 
her stockings sagged a bit below the black dress that hung uneven- 
ly just below the knees. Although she looked rather confused, 
she spoke the moment she recognized me, saying, "I haven't 
quite recovered yet from the play. The Molly Bloom soliloquy 
was so powerful — her story is every woman's story." 

Two years later a friend of mine met her on a similar 
occasion. She told him she had heard a woman (while pointing 
to her on the bus) say to her daughter, "Isn't that the worst 
looking woman you ever saw?" 

Such memories remain, in part, because they conflict so 
decidedly with Muriel Rukeyser's appearance on stage, where 
she was a commanding, a noble presence. She read her remark- 
able poems in a clear, deep voice, in the grand manner, and 
the times I heard her she maintained complete command of the 
audience. There, as in private conversation, one was reminded 
of the young woman whose early photographs showed her to be 
strikingly beautiful, with large dark eyes, black hair styled in 
the 19th century manner, above a full, olive-colored face. She 
was conscious of her beauty, and the illnesses in later life and 
the increased weight troubled her and shook her confidence. 



I think of her, also, as she was photographed in 1975, 
in Seoul, Korea; she stood in the rain outside a prison, reading 
a statement on behalf of the poet Kim Chi Ha, a political prisoner 
under the military government there. Threatened with execu- 
tion for his courageous defense of others, Kim Chi Ha is alive 
today partly as a result of Rukeyser's efforts, the support of 
Amnesty International and PEN. She had been involved in 
similar struggles ever since her journey to Alabama as a college 
sophomore in 1933 to cover the Scottsboro Boys Trial, when 
it was "illegal" to do so. And she spent time in jail in Manhat- 
tan and in Washington D.C., later, in support of draft resisters 
and in civil disobedience against the nuclear arms race. Even 
after two strokes in her mid-60s, prior to her death in February 
1980, Rukeyser traveled and worked for social justice, particu- 
larly during her tenure as president of PEN, the international 
organization of poets, essayists, and novelists. 

A member of a wealthy Philadelphia family, she was born 
in New York City on December 15, 1913, educated at experi- 
mental schools there and at Vassar College (with Mary McCar- 
thy, Elizabeth Bishop, and Eleanor Clark). Shortly after leaving 
college she learned to fly a plane, and then turned to film editing, 
photography, traveling, and wrote for various periodicals. In 
1935, she received the Yale Younger Poets Award for her first 
collection. Theory of Flight. Among her well-known early poems 
are "Boy with His Hair Cut Short," about a young man look- 
ing for work during the Depression, and "The Lynchings of 
Jesus" in which she said of the young black men, in the famous 
Scottsboro Boys Trial: "Dred Scott wrestles for freedom there 
in the corner/ All our celebrated troubles are repeated here." 

In 1936 she went to England and, eventually, to Spain 
to cover the People's Olympiad, an alternative to the Olympic 
Games being held in Berlin. The beginning of the Spanish Civil 
War gave her, as it gave George Orwell, a positive view of social 
change: "Even the gypsies on the docks in Barcelona were with 
this. It was a curious vision of a 20th century world which would 



not take place," she said later. 

An assignment in the graphics division of the Office of 
War Information during World War II ended after only six 
months when, along with Ben Shahn and others, Rukeyser began 
to portray the deeper implications of the war. From there she 
moved to San Francisco, where she taught at the California Labor 
School, married, and gave birth to her only child, a son. At that 
time, she helped to initiate public poetry readings that 
contributed to the San Francisco Renaissance. Returning to New 
York in 1954, she taught at Sarah Lawrence College and was 
subsequently elected to the National Institute of Arts and 
Letters. 

During the 1960s, Rukeyser gave benefit readings for the 
antiwar movement, and in 1972, she traveled on a peace 
mission to Hanoi with Denise Levertov and Jane Hart. The women's 
movement and two excellent films about her life and work 
gradually enlarged the audience for her poetry, even as failing 
health caused a curtailment of a busy schedule of readings, 
teaching, and writing in her last years and until her death in 
1980. 

Rukeyser's poetry reflects her strong sense of the com- 
mon lot of ordinary people — their suffering, their work, their confusion 
in the midst of a sometimes cruel and awkward century. It is that 
consciousness of pain and her powerful rendering of that 
awareness that give her poetry its prophetic quality. Though 
written in some cases almost half a century ago, what she wrote 
seems especially current. The later poems, especially The Speed of 
Darkness (1968), about people out of work, about failures of 
communication between lovers, are among the truly memorable 
lyrics of the period. 

In her life and in her thirty hooks of fiction, poetry, and 
translations, Rukeyser was constantly striking out toward new 
territories. She did so not merely to rebel against convention, 
but in order to alert others to the peculiar tensions of the mo- 
ment. This penchant for the unexpected kept her readers alert 



and critics perpetually confused, so it will be some years before 
literary history and criticism attend to her achievements. In the 
meantime, the common reader, the one responsible for her pre- 
sent audience, keeps her work visible. I have never called her 
poems to the attention of readers and students without them 
responding with extraordinary enthusiasm. 

Rukeyser was not a "thinker," and her writings 
sometimes sound rhetorical rather than analytical. Her 
language is the language of song. She seems not to speak to 
the immediate hurt or social concern, the way a more 
conventional writer would, but provides, one might say, 
something more essential: a psychological grounding for a 
private or political truth. One can only guess at the depth of 
suffering on her part that is at the base of such 
understanding. The strength at the heart of these insights is the 
reason, no doubt, that her poetry is both sustaining and lasting. 
Here is one example: 

Poem 

I lived in the first century of world wars. 

Most mornings I would be more or less insane, 

The newspapers would arrive with their careless stories, 

The news would pour out of various devices 

Interrupted by attempts to sell products to the unseen. 

I would call my friends on other devices; 

They would be more or less mad for similar reasons. 

Slowly I would get to pen and paper, 

Make my poems for others unseen and unborn. 

In the day I would be reminded of those men and women 

Brave, setting up signals across the vast distances, 

Considering a nameless way of living, of almost un- 
imagined values. 

As the lights darkened, as the lights of night bright- 
ened, 

We would try to imagine them, try to find each other. 

To construct peace, to make love, to reconcile 

Waking with sleeping, ourselves with each other. 



Ourselves with ourselves. We would try by any means 
To reach the limits of ourselves, to reach beyond 

ourselves, 
To let go the means, to wake. 
I lived in the first century of these wars. 



BY MURIEL RUKEYSER 

The Collected Poems. New York: McGraw Hill Co., 1978. 

The Life of Poetry. New York: William Morrow and Co., (1949), 1974. 

"Craft Interview with Muriel Rukeyser." In The Craft of Poetry. Edited 
by William Packard. Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1974. 

And others. 



ABOUT MURIEL RUKEYSER 
Kertesz, Louise. The Poetic Vision of Muriel Rukeyser. Baton Rouge: 
Louisiana State University Press, 1980. 



