Mulford Sibley / 1 

MULFORD SIBLEY 



"THE CONFRONTATIONS OF OUR DAY RAISE MANY 
QUESTIONS." Mulford Sibley wrote fifteen years ago, both among 
those who challenge the existing structure and among those who rule. 
For the first group, the issues include "the meaning of conscience, 
the nature of obligation, and the purposes of disobedience," and for the 
second, "the justification for repression, the inherentlimitations of the 
law, and the inertia of institutions." 

Across four decades, in essays, books, and pamphlets, 
including The Obligation to Disobey (1970), Professor Sibley has 
provided the most useful body of writings on the politics of 
pacifism since Gandhi. In the meantime, he has maintained an 
active, even famous career as a teacher of political theory and 
as a civil libertarian and war resister. 

Born in Marston, Missouri, on June 14, 1912, Mulford 
Q. Sibley grew up in Oklahoma, graduating from Central State 
University, Edmund, and the university in Norman in the mid- 
thirties; in 1938, he completed a doctorate in political science 
at the University of Minnesota. After teaching for ten years at 
the University of Illinois, he returned to Minneapolis/St. Paul, 
and has taught at colleges and universities there, and throughout 
the United States and abroad. His other longtime associations 
include the American Service Committee and the Martin Luther 
King Institute of Nonviolent Social Change in Atlanta, which 
he advises. 

In the Upper Midwest, Sibley is something of a legend 
as a teacher and Socialist. His debate with a St. Paul alderman 
in the late 1960s about who should or should not be allowed to 
espouse what causes on a state university campus attracted audi- 
ences throughout the region; it raised basic questions about the 
relationship between the university and the community among 



the 

general public, as well as among scholars and students 
throughout the United States. 

The significance and originality of Sibley's political 
thought is best suggested by one of his earliest pamphlets, The 
Political Theories of Modem Pacifism: An Analysis and Criticism (1944), 
which contains both a summary of modern pacifist thought and 
a critique of its major arguments "insofar as they related 
themselves to the world of politics." 

It describes the philosophical bases of Hindu pacifism, 
Christian pacifism, and the pacifism of the secular revolutionary 
movements of the 19th and 20th centuries, and then evaluates 
several main currents or propositions that all pacifist theories 
hold in common. Among them are (1) that violence hinders the 
achievement of a democratic and peaceful order; (2) that decen- 
tralization in politics and in the economic order is desirable; and 
(3) that the ideology of nonviolence has a direct relevance 
topolitics. The last two tenets provide modern pacifism with 
its greatest challenge, if, that is, it is to deal with questions 
that go beyond personal witness. 

In showing how pacifism speaks to these concerns, Sibley 
prefers Gandhi's theory of politics to that of the Christian anar- 
chists, secularists, or other Utopians of the last two centuries, 
particularly regarding the State. "While the pacifist is right in 
protesting against the swallowing up of the individual personality 
by the Leviathan State," overemphasizing decentralization and 
agrarianism raises problems, too, he says. "A world in which 
the binding tie of political cohesion is practically severed would 
be a poor setting for social harmony and nonviolence." 

Like Gandhi and unlike the anarchists, Sibley regards 
maintenance of the State as compatible with a pacifist ethic; and 
he argues against those, such as the late Reinhold Niebuhr, who 
say pacifism has no direct relevance to modern politics. It may, 
in fact, be "the only context in which to discover the road to 
a new polity," Sibley argues. "In this respect Hindu and secular 



revolutionary pacifism are far snore penetrating than most 
emphases of Christian pacifism." Gandhi, for example, whose 
political theory involved a philosophy of history, a doctrine of 
the ideal State, as well as a theory of revolution, saw that in any 
mass action previous agreement is essential, "if the power of 
the State is to be effectively challenged." 

It is against this background — providing a theoretical 
basis for a new politics based upon nonviolence — that Sibley's 
work is best understood, including his later discussions of power, 
authority, and violence. These concepts, as Hannah Arendt also 
has argued, must be clarified if one is to deal with the crucial 
issue in politics. Who rules whom? 



by 



In considering 
various sides of this 
question, including 
those related to civil 
disobedience, Sibley 
calls upon a fund of 
knowledge of past 
nonviolent resistance 
— from his own book, 
The Quiet Battle 
(1968), as well as from 
the Civil Rights and 
antiwar movements 
and resistance to the 
nuclear arms race. He 
often supports an 
argument 
reference 
alternative or 

"revolutionary" 
practices, such as 
resisting conscription 
and war taxes, hiding 
political prisoners (Jews 
in Germany, for 
example, duringWorld 
War II), and exposing 
secret government war 
agreements. 

Sibley recognizes at 
the same time the 
hazards that continue 
to make the 

application of the 
pacifist principles 



difficult "in a world that is more violent and less free" than it 
was forty years ago. He wrote in The Obligation to Disobey. 

In attempting to make ends and means compatible with 
each other, the pacifist is both a revolutionary and a 
political realist. Only radical social reconstruction can pro- 
vide a flramewtwlc which will encourage respect for human 
personality. But peace cannot be attained by war, and 
reverence for human beings will not be advanced by 
methods deliberately meant to kill and maim them .... Only 
when radicals emancipate themselves from the fatal fascination 
which violence still apparently has for them can they 
become leaders in the cause of equalitarian revolution. 

As political theory, the writings of Mulford Sibley deserve 
serious study by everyone who works for fundamental social 
change. As a scholar, teacher, and "quiet battler" in his own 
right, Sibley has helped to lay the groundwork for a radical 
culture. In his own life, also, he provides a vivid example of the 
necessary relationship between political theory and practices be- 
tween the politics of pacifism and nonviolent direct action. 

Sibley has been an especially popular teacher, admired 
even by those not particularly sympathetic to his pacifist and 
socialist politics. For forty years his tall, lanky figure was almost 
as much of an institution as the Mississippi River that cuts 
through the University of Minnesota campus, where he taught 
seminars on Plato and Marx, general courses in Medieval 
political thought and political theory, and served as adviser to 
the program in American Studies. 

Now a lecturer at Hamline University and Macalester 
College, he is known for his ability to present all sides of a ques- 
tion fairly, even while making clear his own position. This reputa- 
tion for integrity has prompted several people, including a vice 
president of the United States, to come to his defense when 
political bureaucrats occasionally harassed him for questioning 
conventional behavior and publicly espousing unpopular causes. 



BY MULFORD SIBLEY 

The Obligation to Disobey: Conscience and the Law. New York: 
Council on Religion and International Affairs, 1970. 

The Quiet Battle: Writings on the Theory and Practice of Non- violent 
Resistance. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1963 and Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1968. 

The Political Theories of Modern Pacifism: An Analysis 
and Criticism. Philadelphia: The Pacifist Research Bureau, 1944, 
1970. 



ABOUT MULFORD SIBLEY 
Morphew, Clark. "Peace Prof: Controversial Ideas Still 
Propel Mulford Q. Sibley." St. Paul (Minn.) Post Dispatch 
(Marx;h 3, 1984), pp. IB-2B. 



