HANNAH ARENDT 

1907-1975 



EVEN HANNAH ARENDT'S CRITICS, AT THE TIME OF HER DEATH IN 

1975, generally agreed that she was one of America's foremost 
political philosophers. But William Barrett's description of her 
mind as "something of an eighth wonder" was perhaps more 
to the point. 

It was a distinction achieved through a life of considerable 
suffering, from the early death of her father through her displace- 
ment as a German Jew, first to Paris in the 1930s and then to 
the United States. In America, her talent and courage were tested 
once again when she had to face critics who almost wilfully 
misread her books, particularly the controversial study, Eichmann 
in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (1963). An analysis of 
the catastrophe of Nazi Germany, it demonstrated the inade- 
quacy of the legel system to deal with "the facts of administrative 
massacres organized by the state apparatus." Like Orwell's Nine- 
teen Eighty-Four, it was a warning to all, not just an expose of an 
isolated case; and some commentators resented her scrupulous 
honesty in telling the story of those complicit in the destruction 
of the Jews. 

Hannah Arendt was elegant, even aristocratic in 
manner and style. Although many of her books and essays 
were initially written in German, her later informal essays 
read as if they were written by someone native to American 
English. Two memorable sayings, slightly paraphrased, suggest 
something of the depth and liveliness of her thought: 

(1) One must remember that in choosing the lesser of 
two evils one still chooses evil; (2) And if you can't laugh 
away the learned and sophisticated rubbish about 



N adjustment' to one's environment, what help is there? To 
disprove point by point all the nonsense our century has 
produced would demand ten life spans, and in the end the 
disprovers would be indistinguishable from the victims. 

Born in Hannover, Germany, on October 14, 1907, 
Hannah Arendt studied at the universities of Marburg and 
Freiburg and at Heidelberg where, at 22, she received a 
Ph.D. in philosophy, minoring in theology and Greek. At 
Heidelberg, she studied with Karl Jaspers and Martin Heidegger, 
whose work she later edited, and wrote a dissertation on St. 
Augustine. With the rise of Hitler, she fled to Paris in 1933, 
working among other Jewish refugees, and finally to New 
York. Her thirty-year marriage to Heinrich Bluchner was a 
happy one, as were her friendships with various writers, 
including W. H. Auden, who once proposed to her; Randall Jarrell, 
who read poetry to her; and Mary McCarthy, who edited 
Arendt's posthumously published volumes, The Life of the Mind, 
Thinking, Willing, and Judging (1978). 

Before being named a full professor at Princeton in 1959 (the 
first woman to hold that position), Arendt worked as an editor and 
administrator in New York. Later she taught at other leading 
universities, including the University of Chicago and, at the time of 
her death, at the New School for Social Research. 

In returning to several of her writings, one is struck by how 
indispensable each of them remains: The Origins of Totalitarianism 
(1951), on the Russian and German political scenes during the 20th 
century; The Human Condition (1958), on three fundamental human 
activities of labor, work, and action; and the revised edition of 
Eichmann in Jerusalem, in which she answers her various critics. 

Among the other books, Crisis of the Republic (1972) 
deserves special attention by anyone active injustice issues, because of 
its discussions of nonviolent direct action and of fundamental social 
change. It includes a careful analysis of the successes and failures of 
student radicalism in the 1960s, defining for contemporary culture 
such terms as power, authority, force, and violence. "Out of the barrel 



of a gun grows the most effective command resulting in the most 
instant and perfect obedience," Arendt says (challenging the Maoist 
doctrine). "What never can grow out of it is power." She regarded the 
concept of civil disobedience as a peculiarly American phenomenon, 
related to other political institutions. "In contrast to the conscientious 
objector, the civil disobedient is a member of a group, whether we 
like it or not, founded in accordance with the same spirit that has 
formed voluntary associations." 

Among her more popular writings were the telling portraits of 
John XXIII and Berthold Brecht, in Men in Dark Times (1968). In all 
of her writings, for the general reader as well as for the scholar, she 
is concerned with education, which she defined as "a preparation 
for the task of renewing a common world." 

A persistent theme in Arendt's writings is the realtionship 
between private matters — a philosopher's language, for example — and 
public affairs. The philosopher, she says in Men in Dark Times, 
"resembles the statesman, in that he must answer for his 
opinions." She recognized and fulfilled that responsibility in a 
special way, continually testing her thought against the major 
issues of her time. Although she was extremely knowledgeable 
about the past (she taught seminars on Plato and Aristotle), there 
was no doubt in the reader's mind as to what century she lived 
in. (With most academics, one is never sure.) As she once said 
to Karl Jaspers, her mentor, indicating a fundamental convic- 
tion of her life, both philosophy and politics concern everyone. 

Such a position led Arendt to make rather pointed 
criticisms of her academic colleagues and of earlier philosophers. In 
"Martin Heidegger at Eighty," about her mentor, she wrote, for 
example: "We who wish to honor him . . . can hardly help finding it 
striking and perhaps exasperating that Plato and Heidegger, 
when they entered into human affairs, turned to tyrants and 
Fuhrers." 

Although she loved the United States and its political 
traditions, she spoke out vigorously against what she saw as the 



corruption of language and thought in contemporary politics, 
especially during the Nixon administration. She said in Crises of the 
Republic, 

The quicksand of lying statements of all sorts, deceptions as 
well as self-deceptions, is apt to engulf any reader who wishes 
to probe [The Pentagon Papers! which, unhappily, one must 
recognize as the infrastructure of nearly a decade of United 
States foreign and domestic policy. 

Arendt hoped nonetheless that the United States might still 
regain its integrity. It became clear to her in 1971, she said, that "the 
halfhearted attempts of the government to circumvent constitutional 
guarantees and to intimidate those who have made up their minds not to 
be intimidated, who would rather go to jail than see their liberties 
nibbled away, are not enough and probably will not be enough to 
destroy the Republic." 

As a philosopher knowledgeable about the harsh realities of 
contemporary politics, Hannah Arendt made unique contributions to 
modern social thought. Her writings and her life carry always the mark 
of true humanity, suggesting that thought and language have 
consequences and that, even in dark times, reason has a chance. 



BY HANNAH ARENDT 

Crises of the Republic: Lying in Politics, Civil Disobedience, On 
Violence, Thoughts or Politics, and Revolution. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovenovich, 1972. 

Men in Dark Times. New York: Harcourt Brace and World, 1968. 

Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York: 
The Viking Press, 1963, 1964. 



The Origins of Totalitarianism. Cleveland: World Publishing 
Company, 1951, 1966. 

And others. 



ABOUT HANNAH ARENDT 

Young-Bruehl, Elizabeth. Hannah Arendt: For Love of the World. New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1982. 



