GEORGE ORWELL 

1903-1950 



AS A YOUNG MAN, HE CALLED HIMSELF A TORY ANARCHIST, INDICATING 
both his affection for English culture and his hatred of British 
imperialism. But by 1936, at 33, George Orwell identified himself as a 
Socialist. That was the political stance, in spite of his persistent 
criticism of fellow socialists, that he respected: the only one, he felt, 
that might resist the drift toward totalitarianism in England and in other 
liberal democracies after World War II. The danger lay in the structure 
imposed on any country preparing for total war with the Soviet Union, 
he told his publisher Fred Warburg, "and the new weapons, of which of 
course the atomic bomb is the most powerful and most publicized." It 
lay also "in the acceptance of a totalitarian outlook by intellectuals of 
all colours," and the corruption of language that accompanied it. 

This drift — and the threat it posed to civil liberties — provided 
the theme for Orwell's last and most famous novel. Nineteen Eighty- 
Four (1949); but the political, social, and economic conditions leading 
up to that situation had been his concern for a long time, as early as 
Homage to Catalonia (1939), about the Spanish Civil War, and Animal 
Farm (1945), the brilliant Swiftian fable that became a best seller and 
later a popular film. 

Contrary to popular opinion. Nineteen Eighty-Four (1949) is 
not about Stalinist Russia or Hitler's Germany, but about Great Britain 
and countries with similar forms of government, including the United 
States. It is a warning about what could happen to a democratic nation 
that centers all its energy and resources on war-making, on "right 
thinking," and on repressing points of view that conflict with the status 
quo. The novel ends with two powerful images of totalitarianism, one 
of "a boot stamping on a human face — forever," and another of 
Winston Smith's loving Big Brother. In the last scene. Smith smiles at 
the telescreen, "two gin-scented tears trickling down the side of his 



nose. 

Orwell's warning may sound absurd to us who have survived 
the "real" 1984; and several critics have suggested that his prophecy 
was off the mark. But anyone who has paid attention to American 
history since 1945 will recognize those moments when American 
politics approached this absurdity. 

During the 1950s, for example, militant anti-communism 
flourished under the leadership of Senator Joseph McCarthy and — with 
the complicity of Republicans and Democrats who should have known 
better — polluted the atmosphere. In such an atmosphere, as Orwell 
pointed out, everyone loses, especially those people so blinded by 
hatred and prejudice that they no longer know the difference between 
imaginary ills and real ones. Under later administrations, the Orwell 
condition periodically recurred. Ronald Reagan, for example, described 
the Soviet Union as an "evil empire," and administrative statements 
about Latin America and about a "winnable" nuclear war resembled 
Big Brother's diatribes on the telescreen in Nineteen Eighty-Four. 
When this language was accompanied by censorship of the press, 
during the invasion of Grenada, Americans of every political 
persuasion — conservative, liberal, or radical — began to feel that basic 
democratic rights were endangered. From Thomas Paine to George 
Orwell, "common sense" indicates that totalitarianism is best resisted 
not by labels, fear tactics, and belligerence, but by open and lively 
debate and freedom of information. 

In Nineteen Eighty-Four, especially the epilogue on 
Newspeak, and in "Politics and the English Language," the most 
important essay on language in the 20th century, Orwell argued that 
cleaning up our language, making it more precise and concrete, 
improved our politics as well. He did this in his own writing through 
images — pictures and sensations — that left no doubt about the meaning 
of his argument. This was true when he focused on the injustices of his 
time or on the simple pleasures of everyday life: flowers in spring; 
strong, properly brewed tea; and the English countryside. 

"Politics and the English Language," for example, which says 
that political language in our time "is designed to make lies sound 



truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of solidity 
to pure wind," describes easily recognizable abuses of language from 
recent history. 

Defenseless villages are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants 
driven out into the countryside, the cattle machine-gunned, the 
huts set on fire with incendiary bullets; this is called 
pacification. Millions of peasants are robbed of their farms and 
sent trudging along the roads with no more than they can carry; 
this is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers. 

"Such phraseology is needed," Orwell went on to say, "if one 
wants to name things without calling up mental pictures of them." At a 
time when many of the ills that Orwell warned against still 
flourish, readers do well to return to the words and example of 
this just, rather witty, and very honest man. An unsparing 
critic of all undemocratic practices, he once described his reason 
for writing in this way: "Every line of serious work I have 
written since 1936 has been written directly and indirectly 
against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism." A 
writer of astonishing integrity, he held to that position, through 
years of neglect, poverty, and three final years of illness, while 
completing Nineteen Eighty-Four. 

Born Eric Arthur Blair, in Motlhari, Bengal (Burma), 
on June 25, 1903, "George Orwell" moved back to England 
as a child with his mother just before his father retired from the 
Indian Civil Service. Orwell attended two prestigious schools 
on scholarship, St. Cyprian's, which he described in "Such, Such 
Were the Joys," and Eton. Rather than go on to the university, 
he joined the Imperial Indian Police in 1922, and served in 
various posts in Burma until 1927. Reconciled to becoming a 
writer, he spent much of the next two years in Paris in rather 
severe poverty, as a dishwasher, tutor, and teacher. This 
experience and two years living among tramps in England 
provided material for Down and Out in Paris and London (1933). 
Subsequently he taught "at one of the most godforsaken places 



I have ever struck," and worked in a bookshop, while he wrote 
two novels and an account of working-class life in England. 
After his marriage to Eileen O'Shaughnessy in 1936, he went 
to fight on the Republican side against Franco, in the Spanish 
Civil War. Wounded and ill from tuberculosis, he lived in 
Morocco for a year. 

Physically unfit for service in the army during World War II, 
Orwell joined the Local Defense Volunteers, worked for the 
BBC, and wrote for a Socialist weekly as literary editor. The 
publication of Animal Farm in 1945, the year of his wife's 
death, made him famous on both sides of the Atlantic. No longer 
financially dependent on jobs as a journalist, he moved to the 
island of Jura, in Scotland; there, in declining health, he 
completed his last novel. Nineteen Eighty-Four. Returning to 
a sanitorium in England and, later, a hospital in London, he 
married Sonia Brownell in October 1949 and died three months later, 
on January 21, 1950. He remains, thirty-five years later, the 
most essential writer of our time. 

Orwell's best epitaph is in "Why I Write," about his wish to 
make political writing into an art: 

My starting point is always a feeling of partisanship, a sense of 
injustice. . . . But I could not do the work of writing a book, 
or even a long magazine article, if it were not also an aesthetic 
experience So long as I remain alive and well I shall 
continue to take pleasure in solid objects and scraps of useless 
information. It is no use trying to suppress that side of 
myself. The job is to reconcile my ingrained likes and 
dislikes with the essentially public, non- individual activities that 
this age forces on all of us. 



BY GEORGE ORWELL 

The Collected Essays, Journalism, and Letters of George Orwell, 4 vols. 
Edited by Sonia Orwell and Ian Angus. New York: Harcourt, 



Brace, and World, 1968. 

Animal Farm. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1954. 

Homage to Catolonia. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1952. 

Nineteen Eighty-Four, A Novel. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949. 

Down and Out in Paris and London. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 
and World, 1933. 

And others. 

ABOUT GEORGE ORWELL 

Crick, Bernard R. George Orwell: A Life. Boston: Little, Brown, 1980. 

George Orwell: A Collection of Critical Essays. Edited by 
Raymond Williams. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 
1974. 

Woodcock, George. The Crystal Spirit: A Study of George Orwell. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1966. 

The World of George Orwell. Edited by Miriam Gross. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1973. 



