DOROTHY DAY 

1897-1980 



DOROTHY DAY IS A MODEL FOR OUR TIME FOR SEVERAL REASONS. 
First, because she was peculiarly, deeply, and undeniably American, 
and thus brought a very special character to her life as a Christian. 
Although she loved Russian, French, British, and Italian novelists — 
particularly Dostoevsky, George Bernanos, Dickens, Qrwell, and 
Ignazio Silone — she was a child of the American experience, and her 
religious commitment as well as her vocation was bound up with this 
country. Her early family life, which was casually religious, her formal 
education in public schools and at the University of Illinois, as well as 
her admiration for William James's Varieties of Religious Experience, 
shaped her sensibility. She was a disciple of the American radical tradi- 
tion, persistently anarchist and religious, from Thomas Paine to Martin 
Luther King, Jr. Her close association with The Masses, Mike Gold, 
and Ammon Hennacy — as well as her admiration for Eugene Victor 
Debs, Emma Goldman, and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn — was formative 
and enduring. Peter Maurin, a French peasant, was her teacher once she 
became a Catholic; but her temper was in the American grain. 

Second, because she was a member of the laity. Unlike 
many religious figures held up for imitation to young people, 
she was not a cleric. She belonged to that group that emerged 
as a shaping force in the church at the time of the Second Vatican 
Council. As a 20th century heroine who faced the anxieties and 
challenges of a violent century, she was not so far removed from 
us as to appear foreign or aloof. 

Third, because she failed, like most people, at many 
things — as a wife, in an early marriage, and perhaps as a parent. 
Although many of us see Dorothy Day as triumphant, as a suc- 
cess, one must acknowledge also her judgment of her life in The 
Long Loneliness (1952): "I feel that I have done nothing well. But 



I have done what I could." She often said that she took on cer- 
tain responsibilities only because others (Peter Maurin, Ammon 
Hennacy, Karl Meyer) pushed them upon her. Although faithful 
and resilient, she never pretended to be all-knowing or all- 
powerful. 

Sometimes the only thing that keeps a woman going is the 
necessity of taking care of her young. She cannot sink into 
lethargy and despair because the young ones are 
dragging at her skirts, clamoring for something — food, 
clothing, shelter, occupation. She is carried outside herself. 

Fourth, because she was a writer, the kind of writer that 
the language needs at this moment. She understood the power of 
everyday speech, and wrote in a manner that was understandable to 
everyone. Although she had a complex and demanding message to 
communicate, she fashioned a style that shunned pretention, 
artifice, or "rhetoric" in order to convey that message. On 
the works of mercy, she wrote, for example: "Martyrdom is not 
gallantly standing before a firing squad. Usually it is the losing 
of a job because of not taking a loyalty oath or buying a war bond, 
or paying a tax. Martyrdom is small, hidden, misunderstood." 
Elsewhere, in a meditation on the virtue of obedience, she said: 

Obedience is a matter of love, which makes it 
voluntary, not compelled by fear or force. Pope John's 
motto was "Obedience and Peace." Yet he was the pope 
who flouted conventions which had hardened into laws 
as to what a pope could and could not do, and the 
Pharisees were scandalized and the people delighted. 

Fifth, because she internalized values associated with 
peace and justice and gave them substance. In her devotion to 
voluntary poverty, to nonviolence, and to the radical reconstruc- 
tion of the social order, she lived among workers, radicals, 
prisoners, and the down and out. For Christians, she came as 
a great shock. Here, in the life and vocation of one woman were 



the values that had been held up to church members, but often 
by people who did not embody them. Through her, the words 
became flesh: devotion to the poor, resistance to war, vulner- 
ability toward circumstance, and charity to everyone. 

Born in Brooklyn, on November 8, 1897, Dorothy Day lived 
briefly in San Francisco, but grew up in Chicago, where her father 
worked as a journalist. At 15, she won a scholarship to the University 
of Illinois and there became a socialist. Two years later, she returned to 
New York City, where she lived most of her life. As a young radical, 
she was arrested with the Wobblies (Industrial Workers of the World) 
and the suffragettes, as she was later with war resisters and United 
Farm Workers. During World War I, she wrote for the Masses and 
during the 20s lived in Greenwich Village, where she became friends 
with Eugene O'Neill, Malcolm and Peggy Cowley, Allen Tate, Caroline 
Gordon, and Kenneth Burke. At that time, she worked as a nurse, wrote 
a novel, The Eleventh Virgin, married, and lived briefly in Mexico. 

In 1926, Day's conversion to Catholicism led to her 
separation from her second husband, Foster Batterham, and to 
a break with some of her radical friends. During those years, 
she supported herself and her only daughter, Tamar Teresa, by 
writing for America, Commonweal, and other periodicals. 

On May 1, 1933, five months after meeting Peter 
Maurin, Dorothy Day founded The Catholic Worker, a monthly 
newspaper dedicated to making known "the expressed and im- 
plied teachings of Christ." It is published today, as it was over 
fifty years ago, at a penny a copy, with a circulation of 100,000. 
In the years between 1933 and her death in December 1980, 
Dorothy Day lived at various Houses of Hospitality and Catholic 
Worker farms near New York City, edited the newspaper, wrote 
five hooks, and spoke frequently at colleges, universities, churches 
and Catholic Worker communities throughout the United States. 

Over those decades, she emerged as the most remarkable 
person in the history of American Catholicism and in some ways 
the most influential. Although few people managed, like her, 
to make a total commitment to voluntary poverty, personalism, 



or Christian anarchism, they often learned a great deal from her, 
and some went on to significant vocations modeled on her 
example. 

Through her work — feeding the poor and housing the homeless, 
through her newspaper and her monthly column, "On Pilgrimage," and 
through her war tax resistance and civil disobedience, Dorothy Day 
touched the lives of numerous people: workers, intellectuals, students, 
clergy, and women of three generations. Among the writers and editors 
who, at various times, helped to edit Catholic Worker are Michael 
Harrington, author of The Other America; John Cogley, James OGara, 
and John Cort, editors of Commonweal; Tom Cornell and James 
Forest, co-founders of the Catholic Peace Fellowship; James Cook, 
author of Rags of Time: A Season and Prison: as well as a host of other 
artists and radicals who contributed to its pages: Ammon Hennacy, W. 
H . Auden, Gordon Zahn, Ade Bethume, Thomas Merton, Daniel 
Berrigan, Philip Berrigan, Eileen Egan, Fritz Eichenberg, Rita Corbin. 

When Dorothy Day died, December 1980, she was 
mourned by the down-and-out in Manhattan, whom she fed and 
clothed, as well as by the great and famous, including the car- 
dinal archbishop of New York, who came to bless her coffin. 
Many regard her as a saint. 



BY DOROTHY DAY 

By Little and By Little: The Selected Writings of Dorothy Day. 
Edited by Robert Ellsberg. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1983. 

The Dorothy Day Book: A Selection from Her Writings and Readings. 
Edited by Margaret Quigley and Michael Garvey. Springfield, 
Illinois: Templegate Press, 1982. 

On Pilgrimage: The Sixties. New York: Curtis Books, 1972. Loaves 
and Fishes. New York: Harper and Row, 1963. 1983. 



The Long Loneliness: An Autobiography. New York: Harper and 
Row, 1952(1982). 



ABOUT DOROTHY DAY 

Coles, Robert. A Spectacle Unto the World: The Catholic Worker 
Movement. Photographs by Jon Erikson. New York: Viking, 1973. 

Miller, William D. A Harsh and Dreadful Love: Dorothy Day and the 
Catholic Worker Movement. New York: Liveright, 1973. 

Piehl, Mel. Breaking Bread: The Catholic Worker and the Origin of Catholic 
Radicalism in America. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1982. 



