AMMON HENNACY 

1893-1970 



AMMON HENNACY WAS ARRESTED THIRTY-TWO TIMES DURING HIS 
lifetime for various acts of civil disobedience — in Omaha, in New York 
City, and in his native Ohio (during the First World War). From 1918 
to 1922, he did time for draft resistance, in Atlanta Federal Prison, 
where Eugene Victor Debs and Alexander Berkman, Emma Goldman's 
lover, were confined about the same time. After his release from that 
prison, Ammon and his common-law wife, Selma, walked across much 
of the United States and climbed Pike's Peak, in Colorado. That activity 
was a kind of therapy, Dorothy Day said, after the hard times in solitary 
confinement. Ammon had been so confined after leading a strike 
against conditions in the Atlanta jail when he learned that the guards 
dined on food meant for the inmates while serving the prisoners spoiled 
fish. 

Ammon said that his moral education began with that 
imprisonment, although he had previously showed extraordinary 
courage in standing against conscription during World War I. One of 
the most moving passages in his autobiography, The Book of Ammon 
(1965), describes his time in solitary, his journey out of despair, and his 
gradual conversion to Christian nonviolence: 

I had passed through the idea of killing myself. This was an 
escape, not any solution to life. The remainder of my two 
years in solitary must result in a clear-cut plan whereby I could 
go forth and be a force in the world. . . .Gradually I came to 
gain a glimpse of what Jesus meant when he said that the 
Kingdom of God must be in everyone: in the deputy, the 
warden, in the rat, and the pervert. To change the world by 
bullets or ballots was a useless procedure. . . . Therefore the only 
revolution worthwhile was the one man revolution within the 
heart. Each one would make this by himself and not need to wait 



on a majority. 

Born in Negley, Ohio, on July 24, 1893, Ammon Hennacy 
joined the Ohio Socialist Party and the Industrial Workers of the World 
(the Wobblies) at sixteen. After a year at Hiram College, he went to the 
University of Wisconsin, where he once gave up his bed to Randolph 
Bourne, the social and literary critic who had come to speak in 
Madison in 1914. From there Ammon returned to Ohio State 
University for a year and then to full-time organizing for the party of 
Eugene Victor Debs and for resistance to the draft. Following the 
prison term in Atlanta, he visited radical communes, farmed in 
Wisconsin, and wrote for various radical periodicals, including Mother 
Earth, founded earlier by Emma Goldman. 

As a social worker in Milwaukee in the 1930s, he lived with 
his wife Selma and two daughters, Carmen and Sharon. After 1937, 
when he met Dorothy Day, he became a contributor to the Catholic 
Worker. Their first meeting, important to both of them, is described 
early on in his autobiography: 

Dorothy Day spoke at the Social Action Congress in 
Milwaukee, being invited there by Bishop (later Cardinal) 
Strich. ... In answering questions from patriotic ques- 
tioners she mentioned something of my pacifist record, saying 
that I was not a Catholic, but an anarchist and that when 
the next war came she would be with me in opposition to it. 
Her continued refusal to follow the party line of most 
churchmen in praising Franco gained my admiration. 

The uncompromised principles and the practical wisdom, 
the idea and the deed, appear side by side in The Book of Am- 
mon, as well as in his posthumously published The One Man Revolu- 
tion in America (1970), a collection of portraits of and quotations 
from his eighteen great Americans, from John Woolman, 
Thomas Paine, and Thomas Jefferson (the only president in the 
group), to Dorothy Day and Malcolm X. As an anarchist Am- 
mon would not allow his two books to be published commer- 



cially; that meant earning money for the tax collection and, 
therefore, for warmakers. These extraordinary works, privately 
printed, are now available from his widow (Joan Thomas, P.O. 
Box 25, Phoenix, Arizona 85001, $5.00 each, plus postage). 
Although casual in style and organization, they belong in every 
public library and peace education center. 

Ammon Hennacy was, I think, the most courageous man I have 
ever known, in his insistence on speaking truth to power and in 
resisting injustice. Being with him or hearing him lecture — on a street 
corner, on a talk show, or in an auditorium, one felt as if he had 
suddenly caught the pulse of the American radical tradition. Even at 70, 
Ammon's face was animated and friendly, although lined from years 
spent laboring in the fields, on the picket line, and in prison. 

It would be ridiculous, however, to romanticize Ammon 
Hennacy. He could be contentious, cantankerous, and stubborn, 
often confronting his listener with theories on nutrition ("no fish, 
flesh, or fowl") or his favorite sayings on obscure subjects. He 
advised reading the morning newspaper "to find out what the 
bastards are up to today." Persistent in his radicalism and repe- 
titious in his teaching, he brought many people into movements 
for social change by selling The Catholic Worker on the street cor- 
ner and by his own example. Dorothy Day, who said Ammon's 
books resembled Thoreau's, but with a sense of humor, admit- 
ted that he had challenged her into taking a stand on issues that 
she might otherwise have neglected. 

In the 1960s, Ammon opened a Catholic Worker House 
for ex-prisoners and others on the road in Salt Lake City. It was 
named for Joe Hill, the Wobblie organizer and balladeer who 
was killed by the state of Utah in 1915. (Joan Baez and others 
sing the famous song immortalizing him: "I dreamed I saw Joe 
Hill last night/ alive as he could be.") Ammon took a grocery 
cart to nearby supermarkets each morning to beg food — day 
old bread and vegetables for the soup line at his House of Hos- 
pitality. Each year, even while picketing daily against capital 
punishment, he fasted one day for each year since 1945 when 



the atomic bomb fell on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 

He was a crusty old Irishman with a marvelous capacity 
for talk and a love of poetry, especially William Blake and Ed- 
win Markham. Many people, in fact, found him too gregarious. 
Like Peter Maurin, the co-founder of the Catholic Worker move- 
ment, Ammon never tired of preaching the gospel of Christian 
anarchism. Though critical of anyone who "chickened out" in 
the struggle for peace, he was also kind and generous, and able 
to appreciate the best in people who disagreed with him (and 
most people did). 

Ammon's numerous actions in the nonviolent tradition 
included protests against capital punishment and against mock atomic- 
air-raid drills in Manhattan in the 1950s. His last leaflet, with the 
heading "Thou Shalt Not Kill," was distributed on the picket line in 
front of the state capital building in Salt Lake City shortly before he 
died of a heart attack in early January 1970. Among the many 
statements for which he is remembered is this bit of wisdom, written 
after a day in the fields, in 1945. 

Love without courage and wisdom is sentimentality, as with the 
ordinary church member. Courage without love and wisdom is 
foolhardiness, as with the ordinary soldier. Wisdom without 
love and courage is cowardice, as with the ordinary 
intellectual. Therefore one who has love, courage, and wisdom 
is one in a million, who moves the world, as with Jesus, Buddha, 
and Gandhi. 



BY AMMON HENNACY 

The One Man Revolution in America. Salt Lake. City: Ammon Hennacy 
Publications, 1970. 

The Book of Ammon, originally published as Autobiography of a 



Catholic Anarchist. New York: Catholic Worker Books, 1954. 



ABOUT AMMON HENNACY 

Day, Dorothy. "Picture of a Prophet." Loaves and Fishes. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1963. 

Piehl, Mel. Breaking Bread: The Catholic Worker and the Origin of 
Catholic Radicalism in America. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press, 1982. 



