^ Language, Literature, 

Ifsr 

and Interdisciplinary Studies (LLIDS) 

ISSN: 2457-0044 


Exiles in Our Own Land: Native American Novelists 


Rachel Tudor 


Today I couldn 7 handle the pain of being an American Indian—Melanie Fey (Dine); As 
Indigenous women writers and artists we are continually trying to exist, live, and love in a world 
that doesn 7 always show its love for us—Tanaya Winder (Backwater Shoshone); Even during a 
time of reconciliation, Indigenous people are faced with having to defend their identities from 
being mocked, used as a trend or form of entertainment every single day—Jessica Deer 
(Mohawk); As an Indigenous person, I have to escape in order to survive, but I don 7 just escape. 
I hold this beautiful, rich Indigenous decolonial space inside and around me—Leanne Simpson 
(Michi Saagiig Nishnaabeg) from #NotYourPrincess (2017). 

Native Americans experience a sense of separation from other Americans because we fail 
to subscribe to the myth of America as an immigrant nation. Many of us live with a feeling of 
uprootedness because our people were relocated at gunpoint from our ancestral homelands and 
we often have to migrate to urban areas for employment. We experience a sense of foreignness 
when we try to explain our cultural values to our neighbours. In mainstream American literature 
and culture, we are always portrayed as the Other—from sensationalized “Captivity Narratives” 
to Frederick Jackson Turner’s paradigmatic “Frontier Thesis” to Hollywood’s The Searchers — 
Americans define themselves by their war against us. 

Our sense of being exiles in our own land is institutionalized in American master 
narratives about nation, race, class, gender, language, and sexuality. Colonial and Neocolonial 
definitions of these fundamental ontological and epistemological concepts constitute a ubiquity 
of oppression by the dominant classes. Native American authors, however, have created a form 
of novelistic dialogue that challenge these dominant conceptualizations and expose them as mere 
forms of enforced cultural hegemony. In addition. Native American authors use the novel as a 
tool to facilitate their own affirming self-transformation and to gestate the seeds of self¬ 
transformation in fellow Native American readers while simultaneously welcoming non-Native 
readers to become “woke.” 

The novel, as defined by Lukacs, is the form of narrative that develops in a culture after 
"beauty" ceases to be "the meaning of the world made visible" (Theory 34), before the soul 


12 


LLIDS VOL 1 ISSUE 3 




Exiles in Our Own Land 


"knows it can lose itself, [before] it thinks of looking for itself" (30). Specifically, "what is given 
form [in the novel] is not the totality of life but the artist's relationship with that totality, his 
approving or condemnatory attitude towards it" (53). Unfortunately, authors cannot create a new 
totality with their words, "however high the subject may rise above its objects and take them into 
its sovereign possession, they are still and always only isolated objects, whose sum can never 
equal a real totality" (53). For Native Americans living in this locus (contemporary North 
America) and time (the present) "loneliness has become a problem unto itself, deepening and 
confusing the tragic problem and ultimately taking its place...such loneliness is...the torment of 
a creature condemned to solitude and devoured by a longing for community" (45). This is 
poignantly demonstrated in Native American authored novels by James Welch in The Death of 
Jim Loney, N. Scott Momaday in House Made of Dawn, Louise Erdrich in The Round House, 
Leslie Silko in Ceremony, and Thomas King in Medicine River among many others. In addition, 
Native American novels also often contain the characteristic quest motif, a hero who searches for 
meaning, for totality, that is no longer immanent (60). Significantly, the "problematic individual" 
and the "contingent world" are the hallmarks of the novel (78) as described by Lukacs in general 
but particularly of novels by Native Americans. 

According to Lukacs, "The inner form of the novel has been understood as the process of 
the problematic individual's journeying towards himself...towards clear self-recognition" (80). 
And, "The immanence of meaning which the form of the novel requires lies in the hero's finding 
out through experience that a mere glimpse of meaning is the highest that life has to offer" (80). 
These characteristics sound remarkably like plot summaries of many contemporary Native 
American novels. Consequently, the real tension in contemporary Native American novels is 
between the integrating totality of our not too distant past, which is still a part of our living 
memory, and the fractured existence of our everyday lives. As a matter of fact, Leslie Silko's 
novels Ceremony and Almanac of the Dead may even be termed “post-tribal epics,” ala Giorgio 
Mariani, because they are tied to some other-world totality. 

However, many Native American novels emphasize a historical component that allows 
the Native American reader to reflect on their lost homes and civilization as well as exposing the 
real causes of their unarticulated feelings of loss and alienation in concrete and tangible ways. 
Thus, allowing individual Native readers to become conscious of the true origins of their anomie. 
The resulting detachment from dominant cultural discourse enables Native readers to critique 
oppressive systems and critically reflect on their sense of self, self-worth, and liberate 
themselves from self-destructive ideation. Ideally, the “woke” reader will generate their own 
liberating counter-narratives from their own particular vantage point. Non-Native readers of 
indigenous novels will also be liberated from an irrational and ahistorical conceptualization of 
American civilization and be able to be full partners and friends in the land and conceptual space 
we share. 

In order to understand Native American literature, it is necessary to be aware of and listen 
to Native American literary critics. It is not only counterproductive but also injurious to try to 
understand and explicate Native American literature using conventions, practices, assumptions, 
and techniques that have long served to oppress the very voices and narratives that constitute 
Native American literature. Lor example, non-Native literary critic Christina Patterson agrees 


SPRING 2018 


13 



Rachel Tudor 


with Louise Erdrich’s The Last Report on the Miracles at Little Horse that “clearly we are in the 
realm of magical realism; where the wilder reaches of Catholicism mingle with the hopes and 
dreams of a community whose traditions are in disarray and where the search for rigid 
classifications—saint, sinner, or miracle—is doomed to collapse in the face of messy reality” (9 
March 2002). Well, she does get some things right: Erdrich’s novel does address a community in 
disarray and her narrative does challenge the rigid classifications of the dominant society. 
However, the critical template of magical realism is anathema to understanding the text on its 
own terms. Magical realism is a form of literary criticism that colonizes instead of explicates. 

To understand why magical realism is a form of literary criticism that colonizes instead 
of explicates, we have to take a look at its origin. While many articles and books have been 
written on the topic of magical realism, and some are not as racialist as others, it is important to 
keep in mind that the atavistic origin of magical realism is found in a seminal text on the subject 
by Amaryll Chanady published in 1985. In Magical Realism and the Fantastic: Resolved Versus 
Unresolved Antinomy, Chanady asserts that a dichotomous way of thinking is expressed in 
magical realism, which she juxtaposes as the so-called "primitive," "archaic" American Indian 
mentality and the mentality of the "erudite," "rational," "empirical," "super-civilization" of 
Europe. 

Chanady’s racialist theory of narrative also assumes an exclusive white Western reader 
for magical realist narratives. White reader’s sensibilities, she asserts, will not be challenged 
because "the reader considers the represented world as alien" and because of the “impossibility 
of complete reader identification in the case of a Magico-Realist work about American Indians" 
(163). She claims that "while the [white] reader accepts the unconventional world view [of the 
American Indian], he does so only within the contexts of the fictitious world, and does not 
integrate it in his own perception of reality" (163). In critical parlance, Chanady is referring to 
the focalizer in narrative. In magical realism, for example, the focalizer is European: "The 
Indians are the object, not the subject, of focalization" (35). 

It is important to always ask, “Whose point of view is being expressed?” Chanady is 
correct to note who a reader is supposed to identify with but is in error in assuming that a non- 
Native reader will be unable to identify with a Native American character. In Native American 
novels "Indians" are the subjects, not the object, of focalization. Thus, it is erroneous to use the 
critical template of magical realism with its attendant racialist suppositions to describe or 
interpret novels by Native Americans. As a matter of fact, the term “magical realism” may only 
accurately be used to describe a text about Native Americans authored by non-Indians and 
wherein the indigenous characters are presented as objects instead of subjects. As Mohawk 
author Jessica Deer writes in #NotYourPrincess, every single day “indigenous people are faced 
with having to defend their identities from being mocked, used as trend or form of 
entertainment” (Charleyboy 61). 

M. Annette Jaimes’ The State of Native America: Genocide, Colonization, and 
Resistance, suggests that denying the subject status of indigenous people is why acclaimed and 
Nobel Prize winning non-Native authors of magical realism (strictly defined according to 
Chanady’s paradigm) have ignored and at times even facilitated the destruction of indigenous 


14 


LLIDS VOL 1 ISSUE 3 



Exiles in Our Own Land 


people and communities. How did Colombian novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez fail to note the 
destruction of indigenous communities by the Colombian government? Where are the crimes 
Mexico committed against indigenous people documented in Mexican writer Juan Rulfo’s 
oeuvre? More damning is Guatemalan literary giant Miguel Angel Asturias, who as an official of 
the Guatemalan government, participated in the razing of Maya villages. Many of Chile's 
Isabelle Allende’s fans may be surprised to find her labeling the indigenous population of her 
country as "placidly evil" (430-2). Edward Said warns that the “fictional myopia of the real-life 
suffering of real-life people is simply a continuing white tradition” (55-62). 

Although Chanady claims magical realism to be the product of the synthesis of the 
dialectical relationship between two civilizations, she assumes an exclusive non-Native audience 
and that Native people will be portrayed as objects, not subjects. In the twenty-first century these 
racialist, unscientific, and irrational aspersions as a foundational theory of literature is simply 
unacceptable. Because of the inclusion of non-white, non-Westem writers and scholars we now 
know that all people are capable of rational and irrational thought, rational and irrational 
behavior, and empirical and metaphysical reasoning. No longer may people and races be said to 
be stereotypically reduced to one or the other. In fact, Chanady's characterization of mental 
capabilities according to race may be characterized as not simply racialist but racist and we 
cannot use a template based on assumptions about the superiority of one race and civilization 
over another to explicate Native American texts or non-Westem texts. The template and the 
resulting interpretation are not only erroneous, but underpin dominant concepts that enforce a 
sense of exile and inferiority on Native American readers while reinforcing the non-Native 
readers’ sense of superiority and dominance. 

I am not proposing that we dismiss Western literary criticism in totality. Just as I am not 
suggesting that Native American storytellers reject the novel for more traditional forms of 
storytelling. For instance, some of Chanady’s critical analysis is not based on race or presumed 
civilizational hierarchies and is, indeed, helpful. She writes: “The mystery of life does not exist 
in objective reality, but in the subjective reaction to and interpretation of the world...the 
amalgamation of realism and fantasy is the means to an end, and this is the penetration of the 
mystery of reality” (27). 

A number of Native American literary critics have proposed a number of ways to really 
look (non-myopic) at indigenous novels. These are not, as a body of texts, a rejection of rigorous 
critique or shunning of the integration of scientific literary analysis. Indeed, they, like the Native 
American novel, are a syncretic cultural manifestation that is dialogical and original, a balm to 
the centuries-old injuries of the indigenous civilization currently sharing America. For example, 
Native American authors, storytellers and critics, generally share the mimetic school of literary 
criticism’s view that literature has the power to heal and that moral values that create a sense of 
mutual care and responsibility through generating empathy and understanding of the cares and 
pains of other knowing selves are a necessary component of literature. It does this by embracing 
a realist and subjective aesthetic, the application of realistic historical and experiential 
sensibilities, and the careful listening for voices embedded in the narrative. Fikewise, many 
Native American authors embrace the postmodern aesthetic of suspending disbelief, fabulation, 
and an intransitive form of writing inasmuch as it does not really resolve or come together in any 


SPRING 2018 


15 



Rachel Tudor 


finite or circumscribed way. In addition, the postmodern is multi-vocal and polyglot, rejecting 
any overriding single conception of reality or being in favour of a process of constant discovery 
and re-creation—a reflection of the incredible diversity of indigenous America. 

Native American novelists embracing a spirit of constant discovery and re-creation is 
necessary for a revitalization of American literature. American literature and criticism are sorely 
in need of new points of views and ideas. As early as 1967 John Barth claims in his essay "The 
Literature of Exhaustion” that conventional forms, genres and modes, are "used up" and their 
possibilities exhausted. Unfortunately, his essay has been widely misinterpreted to mean that 
literature itself is exhausted. However, as he subsequently explained in his 1979—admittedly, a 
long pause—essay, "The Literature of Replenishment," he simply means that new forms of 
writing, specifically what he terms postmodernist fiction, need to be developed. It is time to 
welcome America’s indigenous authors to participate. Bakhtin wrote in Formal that "New means 
of representation force us to see new aspects of visible reality"(134). Unfortunately, Native 
American contributions have yet to be commonly accepted or used by non-Native scholars and 
rarely, if ever, used by mainstream book reviewers. And, how can Native American 
contributions to literature be fully appreciated if there is not a corresponding working theory of 
criticism by which to evaluate, interpret, and appreciate the texts? 

Harold Schweizer's book Suffering and the Remedy of Art encourages authors and readers 
to reconsider the aesthetics of the novel. It is about "wounds that will not close despite the 
sutures, scarring, and bandaging, the patchwork and layering of literary technique" (1). Although 
Schweizer does not examine Native American literature per se, Native American novels 
demonstrate the power of his thesis. As he explains: “In the experience of suffering the ideology 
of objectivity, the claims of reason and knowledge, are called into question. Philosophical 
distinctions of body and spirit, sensation and intellect, the universal and the particular, the 
physical and the metaphysical, no longer apply” (2). 

Also consider, for example, two novels by Pulitzer Prize winning author N. Scott 
Momaday (Kiowa): House Made of Dawn and The Ancient Child. The Ancient Child is the 
chronicle of a man's journey into madness, facilitated by a world of broken connections and 
other wounded people, particularly, a tragically wounded young woman, Grey. And, Abel, the 
protagonist in House Made of Dawn, is alone and silent at the end of the novel, just as he is at the 
beginning: "He was alone and running on... There was no sound, and he had no voice; he had 
only the words of a song" (Momaday, House 191). Abel may have the words to the song of 
healing, but pointedly he is unable to articulate them, the word remains unspoken. Many non- 
Native authors, however, remark on Abel and Set’s respective triumphs—when the characters 
are, in fact, tropes of the idea that the average Native American can triumph in America. 

Abel's ( House Made of Dawn) and Set's (The Ancient Child ) underlying problem is that 
they do not know who their fathers are and, consequently, do not know who they are either. 
Critics have long neglected the fact that the father is absent in almost every contemporary Native 
American novel, which, it should be noted, stands in stark contrast to the stereotypical American 
novel in which it is not the absent father, but a dominating father that is ubiquitous. Thus, The 
Ancient Child and House Made of Dawn are really novels of suffering, but not futile suffering if 


16 


LLIDS VOL 1 ISSUE 3 



Exiles in Our Own Land 


it awakens a reader's consciousness and conscience. Novels of suffering may perform their 
function of raising consciousness by reducing the "distances among writer, text, what is written 
about, and finally, the reader, [so they] all converge on a single point" (Lang xii). 

N.Scott Momaday cites his mentor Yvor Winters' assertion that: "Unless we understand 
the history which produced us, we are determined by that history; we may be determined in any 
event, but the understanding gives us a chance" (Schubnell xvi). Schubenell describes 
Momaday's writing as "a way to create an understanding of self and history through language" 
(xvi). On another occasion, Momaday claims his "authority to write about the Indian world" is 
"based upon experience" (Isernhagen 52). 

Native American authors often provide non-Native focalizers for non-Natives that 
embrace the universality of many of our experiences, particularly experiences of suffering. For 
example, Milly, in House Made of Dawn, is a fully-developed character with a voice and an 
attitude. In many ways she is the white, female equivalent of Abel. She has her own broken 
connections. Like Abel, she, too, has lost her father and mother and child (granting for the 
moment that Peter is Abel's child). She grew up watching her father "beaten by the land" and 
daily going into the fields "without hope," until the day he put her on a bus and told her goodbye, 
and she never saw him again (114-5). And, then she lost her four-year-old daughter, Carrie. As 
Schweizer explains, in his book’s thesis “the experience of suffering the ideology of objectivity, 
the claims of reason and knowledge, are called into question.” (2). 

While there is truth to Schweizer's conclusion about suffering being universal, suffering 
is not necessarily individualized and ahistorical—it is also communal and historical. For 
example, the passage from the beginning of Louise Erdrich's (Anishinaabe) Tracks strikes a 
familiar chord with many Native Americans because it is part of our shared history: 

We started dying before the snow, and like the snow, we continued to fall. It was 
surprising there were so many of us left to die. For those who survived the spotted 
sickness from the south, our long flights west...then a wind from the east, 
bringing exile in a storm of government papers.. .by then we thought disaster must 
surely have spent its force, that disease must have claimed all of the Anishinabe 
that the earth could hold and bury. But the earth is limitless and so is luck and so 
were our people once (1). 

Likewise, Linda Hogan (Chickasaw) describes the phenomenon eloquently in her novel Power. 
“History is the place where the Spanish cut off the hands of my ancestors. The Spanish who 
laughed at our desperation and dying, and I wish it didn't but history still terrifies me so that I 
dream it in dreams with skies the color of green bottle glass” (73). 

Unflinching realism is vital in Native American novels. It is only through realism that 
readers are able to “accept the concept of the complete human personality as the social and 
historical task humanity has to solve; only if we regard it as the vocation of art to depict the most 
important turning-point of this process with all the wealth of the factors affecting it; only if 


SPRING 2018 


17 



Rachel Tudor 


aesthetics assign to art the role of explorer and guide, can the content of life be systematically 
divided into spheres of greater and lesser importance” (Lukacs 7). 

According to Bakhtin a shared view of the world between author and reader, the realist 
aesthetic or verisimilitude, is then the underlying goal of all socially relevant fiction (135). 
Jessica Deer (Mohawk) writes, “the highly inaccurate and dehumanizing representations of 
Indigenous peoples in sports, on television, on the runway, or in costumes on the shelves of a 
Halloween store shape much of what people know and think about us...and that affects how 
society understands the real social, political, and economic issues we face” (Charleyboy 61). In 
other words, meaning matters for the author, the reader, and society. The question then becomes 
a matter of whose meanings and of what matters. Rodney Livingstone writes that for Lukacs 
what we see is appearance, whereas the great novelist reveals the driving forces of history which 
are invisible to actual consciousness (12). In other words, it is the author's job to enable the 
reader to see through the "veils of reification" that blind one's vision of one's true self and one's 
true relation to other selves. 

Lukacs's form of realism involves a genuine love for humanity and a thirst for life. For 
example, he writes that without "love for humanity and life in general, something that 
necessarily involves the deepest hatred for a society, classes and their representatives who 
humiliate and deform human beings, it is impossible for any genuinely major realism to develop" 
(Essays 148). It is also vital to remember that “the tremendous social power of literature consists 
in the fact that it depicts the human being directly and with the full richness of his inward and 
outward life” (Essays 143). In doing so, a good critic will, in Momaday's words, "enable us to 
better understand literature," and "show us things that we might not see for ourselves" 
(Isernhagen 58). 

The type of realism that Lukacs advocates and those Native American authors aspire to is 
impossible without including numerous authentic and embodied voices in the text. Bakhtin’s 
term for this is Heteroglossia. Chickasaw poet Linda Hogan explains this concept in her poem, 
“Tear”: “I remember the women/Tonight they walk/out from the shadows/with black 
dogs/children, the dark heavy horses/and the worn-out men/ They walk inside me. This blood/is 
a map of the road between us/I am why they survived ... I am the tear between them/and both 
sides live” (Charleyboy 14). These voices, sometimes referred to by Bakhtin as languages, are 
the result of real, lived experiences, personal, communal, historical, that culminate in various 
particular world-views that are expressed in the words, syntax, metaphors, grammar, and tone of 
a speaking subject that is, more or less, conscious of his or her subjectivity, or beingness vis-a- 
vis other beings. 

Native American novels are also frequently polyphonic. Polyphony is closely related to 
heteroglossia, even sometimes confused with heteroglossia. Polyphony refers to a plurality of 
consciousnesses (Morson 238), not simply languages. In addition, these consciousnesses 
represent the lived life experiences of embodied voices. Hunkpapa Lakota author Tiffany Midge 
expresses the concept this way, “When I think of a model of Indigenous womanhood, I 
immediately think of my mother: a woman who lost her own mother when she was sixteen, 
became a widow at twenty-one with a baby girl, and no education or prospects...I also think of 


18 


LLIDS VOL 1 ISSUE 3 



Exiles in Our Own Land 


my grandma Eliza, a woman who grew up dirt poor, who scraped out a living, her clothes 
threadbare through long, cold winters spent eating the same meal” (Charleyboy 67). 

N. Scott Momaday (Kiowa) explains a similar phenomenon as a process of learning, 
sometimes long after publication, "what's really going on" (Abbott 30). He explains: "When a 
man is writing, he is operating on two levels: he writes out of his consciousness and out of his 
unconsciousness. And very many times he will not, after the fact, know all about his writing" 
(30). He explains in a later interview with Gretchen Bataille that while writing there are things he 
understood "on one level and ha[s] come to understand on a different level and will again in the 
future understand on yet another level" (63). Along these same lines, Momaday consistently 
refuses to answer what happens to Abel after the end of the novel House Made of Dawn. His 
typical response is, "your idea is as good as mine" (Bonnetti 140): indicating that Abel has an 
existence independent of the author which somehow occurs through the dynamic process of 
storytelling (Bonetti 131). 

False consciousness or inauthentic voices are also a concern for Native American 
authors. For instance, Greg Sarris (Miwok) warns of his struggle with a false consciousness in 
Keeping Slug Woman Alive, a Fanonian (Frantz Fanon’s The Wretched of the Earth ) 
consciousness of internal colonization manifested through self-destructive behavior and self- 
loathing. Hayles worries that the "disintegration of the subject [authentic consciousness] will 
precipitate a crisis in representation which makes a traditional novel impossible to write" ( Chaos 
256). However, we should also keep in mind what Sholes notes in Structural Fabulation, "in its 
cognitive function, fiction helps us to know ourselves and our existential situation" (5). 

The realism of Native American novels gives added poignancy to the so-called magical 
element which is not magical at all. As explained, use of the term ‘magical’, as opposed to the 
more accurate ascription of the considered use of postmodern sensibilities and strategies by 
Native American authors to subvert hegemonic cultural discourses in reference to Native 
American history, ontology, and epistemology, is fallacious and harmful. N. Katherine Hayles 
warns us that "theories about language which claim that it is free to be interpreted in any way 
whatsoever are the allies and precursors of state terrorism" ( Chaos 126). Native Americans have 
a long experience with state terrorism and it is known as colonialism. 

Critics who fail to make the distinction between magical realism and postmodern 
sensibilities fail to recognize the conceptual ecology of Native American novels. According to 
Stanislaw Fern a "conceptual ecology" is one in which within any given conceptual space, which 
he calls a topology, certain forms are facilitated while others are suppressed. The "particularities 
of history and personality determine which actually appear and which are repressed. All forms 
that are realized...are linked to each other by the common attributes that define the space" 
(Hayles, Chaos 185). The contemporary Native American novel is an emergent form and the 
product of a literary community with a common socio-historical experience and facing similar 
epistemological and ontological challenges to their survival. 

Instead of labeling Thomas King’s (Cherokee) Green Grass, Running Water as magical 
realism, let’s take the postmodern anti-realist elements in the novel seriously. If we do, we see 


SPRING 2018 


19 



Rachel Tudor 


that his novel reveals the absurdity of life, of history; moreover, we often cannot make sense of 
them, and the harder we try, the greater fools we make of ourselves. For instance, just as the 
witnesses' differing descriptions of the tricksters vary from observer to observer to observer in 
Green Grass, Running Water , our perception of reality and anti-reality varies. Despite the 
posturing and polemics of King's characters, in the end chaos and uncertainty, angst, and 
purposelessness appears to rule the universe and drives what we call history. It is comic only in 
the sense that it is a maniacal laugh into the maw of the abyss. Similarly, Linda Hogan's 
(Chickasaw) Pulitzer Prize nominated Mean Spirit contains a minor character that the reader is 
asked to believe is a ghost. However, Mean Spirit is not a ghost story. The ghost is there to 
present a meta-textual perspective on historical events. 

Unfortunately, Native American authors are often exiles from the dominant literary 
community of America. Literary critics and fellow novelists who should be our allies are 
sometimes our enemies. For instance, in W.J. Stuckey's The Pulitzer Prize Novels: A Critical 
Backward Look , Stuckey claims Momaday was awarded the Pulitzer Prize, not because of merit, 
but because 1969 "was not a year remarkable for good fiction" (226). He does not cite any of the 
committee members to support his malign claim. Stuckey’s explication of the novel reduces the 
symbolism, the allegorical functions, and the interpersonal implications of the characters and 
actions to one single, simple metaphor with the purpose of blaming the white man. Stuckey 
claims that the scene between Abel and the "white woman" (tellingly, Stuckey does not ever use 
her name) is an "obvious" metaphor for the corruption of Indians by white society. However, 
Abel has affairs with two white women: Angela Grace St. John and Milly. Although Angela 
Grace St. John exploits Abel, Milly represents a clear opportunity for Abel to make a vital, 
loving connection, which he lamentably fails to seize. 

It seems difficult for Stuckey to imagine Momaday as anything but a simple Indian. He 
repeatedly uses the word "pretentious" in reference to Momaday. However, it should be noted 
that pretentious means pretending, make-believe, playing-at, in essence Stuckey's aspersion is 
not a literary one, but a pejorative personal one, one of character: Momaday is an Indian playing 
at being an author, he is only pretending, imitating, mimicking, being a writer. 

As a Chickasaw PhD candidate I almost asked a professor to be a member of my 
dissertation committee who shared Stuckey’s attitude. Fortunately, a white friend informed me 
that when he told this professor that he selected Native American literature as the focus of his 
studies, this professor asked him: “You are smart, why don’t you study real literature?” Until 
these attitudes change, Native Americans will continue to be exiles in our own land. A good 
beginning is to accept Native Americans as equals. Take Indigenous voices and literature 
seriously. Invite Native Americans to be participants and partners. 


20 


LLIDS VOL 1 ISSUE 3 



Exiles in Our Own Land 


Works Cited 


Bakhtin, M.M. and P.N. Medvedev. The Formal Method in Literary Scholarship. Trans. Albert J. 
Wehrle. John Hopkins UP, 1978. 

Barth, John. The Friday Book: Essays and Other Nonfiction. New York: Putnam, 1984. 


—, Further Fridays: Essays, Lectures, and Other Nonfiction 1984-94. Little, Brown and 
Company, 1995. 

Bataille, Gretchen. Interview with N. Scott Momaday. Conversations with N. Scott Momaday. 
Ed. Matthias Schubnell. Jackson: Mississippi UP, 1997. 57-66. 

Bonetti, Kay. Interview with N. Scott Momaday. Conversations with N. Scott Momaday. Ed. 
Matthias Schubnell. Mississippi UP, 1997.130-148. 

Chanady, Amaryll Beatrice. Magical Realism and the Fantastic: Resolved Versus Unresolved 
Antinomy. Garland, 1985. 

Charleyboy, Lisa and Mary Beth Leatherdale, editors. #NotYourPrincess” Voices of Native 
American Women. Annick Press, 2017. 

Erdrich, Louise. The Antelope Wife. Harper, 1998. 

—, The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No Horse. Harper, 2001. 


—, LaRose. Harper, 2016. 

—, A Plague of Doves. Harper, 2008. 

—, The Round House. Harper, 2012. 

—, Shadow Tag. Harper, 2010. 

—, Tracks. Holt, 1988. 

Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth. Groove, 1963. 

Hayles, N. Katherine. Chaos Bound: Orderly Disorder in Contemporary Literature and Science. 
Cornell UP, 1990. 


SPRING 2018 


21 



Rachel Tudor 


—, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. 
Chicago UP, 1999. 

Hogan, Linda. Mean Spirit. Ivy Books, 1991. 

—. Power. Norton, 1998. 


Isemhagen, Hartwig. Momaday, Vizenor, Armstrong: Conversations on American Indian 
Writing. Oklahoma UP, 1999. 

—, "N. Scott Momaday and the Use(s) of Modernism: Some Remarks on the Example of 

Yvor Winters." In Aspects of Modernism. Ed. Andreas Fischer, Martin Heusser, and Thomas 
Hermann. Gunter Narr Verlag, 1997. 313-328. 

Jaimes, M. Annette, editor. The State of Native America: Genocide, Colonization, and 
Resistance. South End Press, 1991. 


Kent, Thomas. Interpretation and Genre: The Role of Generic Perception in the Study of 
Narrative Texts. Bucknell UP, 1986. 


King, Thomas. Green Grass, Running Water. Houghton, 1993. 

—, Medicine River. 1989. Penguin, 1995. 

King, Tom. "MELUS Interview: N. Scott Momaday—Literature and the Native Writer." 
Conversations with N. Scott Momaday. Ed. Matthias Schubnell. Jackson: Mississippi UP, 
1997. 149-156. 

Lukacs, Georg. Contemporary Realism. Trans. John and Necke Mander. Merlin Press, 1963. 

—, Essays on Realism. Trans. David Fembach. MIT UP, 1980. 

—, Studies in European Realism: A Sociological Survey of the Writings of Balzac, Stendhal, 
Zola, Tolstoy, Gorki, and Others. Trans. Edith Bone. Hillway, 1950. 

—, Theory of the Novel. Trans. Anna Bostock. Merlin Press, 1971. 

Mariani, Giorgio. Post-Tribal Epics: The Native American Novel Between Tradition and 
Modernity. Edwin Mellen, 1996. 


22 


LLIDS VOL 1 ISSUE 3 



Exiles in Our Own Land 


Momaday, N. Scott. The Ancient Child. Harper Perinnial, 1990. 

—, House Made of Dawn. Signet, 1969. 

—, In the Presence of the Sun: Stories and Poems, 1961-1991. St. Martin, 1992. 

—, Man Made of Words. St. Martin's, 1997. 

—, The Names: A Memoir. Sun Tracks: An American Indian Literary Series. 16. Arizona UP, 
1976. 

Morson, Gary Saul and Caryl Emerson. Mikhail Bakhtin: Creation of a Prosiacs. Stanford UP, 
1990. 

Patterson, Christina. Review of Louise Erdrich’s The Last Report on the Miracles at Little No 
Horse. Harper, 2001. 9 March 2002 www.Independent.co.uk. 

Persona. "Shouting at the Machine: An Interview with N. Scott Momaday." Conversations with 
N. Scott Momaday. Ed.Matthias Schubnell. Mississippi UP, 1997. 111-129. 

Schubnell, Matthais, Introduction. Conversations with N.Scott Momaday. Ed.Matthias Schubnell. 
Mississippi UP, 1997. ix-xx 

Schwartz, Sanford. The Matrix of Modernism: Pound, Eliot, and Early 20th. Century Thought. 
Princeton UP, 1985. 

Schweizer, Harold. Suffering and the Remedy of Art. SUNY UP, 1997. 

Silko, Leslie. Almanac of the Dead. Penguin. 1992. 

—, Ceremony. Penguin, 1977. 

Weiler, Dagmar. "N. Scott Momaday: Storyteller." Conversations with N. Scott Momaday. Ed. 
Matthias Schubnell. Mississippi UP, 1997.168-177. 

Welch, James. The Death of Jim Loney. Penguin, 1987. 

—, Fools Crow. Viking Penguin, 1987. 

—, Winter in the Blood. Penguin, 1986. 


SPRING 2018 


23 



