Debra A. Harley 
Pamela B.Teaster Editors 

Handbook of 
LGBT Elders 

An Interdisciplinary Approach to 
Principles, Practices, and Policies 



<£) Springer 





Handbook of LGBT Elders 




Debra A. Harley • Pamela B. Teaster 
Editors 



Handbook of LGBT 
Elders 

An Interdisciplinary Approach 
to Principles, Practices, and Policies 



4^ Springer 




Editors 

Debra A. Harley 
University of Kentucky 
Lexington, KY 
USA 



Pamela B. Teaster 
Virginia Tech 
Blacksburg, VA 
USA 



ISBN 978-3-319-03622-9 ISBN 978-3-319-03623-6 (eBook) 

DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-03623-6 

Library of Congress Control Number: 2015943054 

Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, 
and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, 
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. 

The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in 
this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor 
the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material 
contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. 



Printed on acid-free paper 

Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland is part of Springer Science+Business Media 
(www . springer, com) 




Foreword 



Every so often, a book comes along that substantially contributes to 
much-needed broader and deeper understanding of a minority group and to 
clarifying and addressing multiple pressing questions of social justice 
regarding that group. This is one of those books. 

Contributing editors, Debra A. Harley and Pamela B. Teaster, have cre- 
ated a collection of all new essays on LGBT persons and aging that easily 
moves among elucidating the sometimes fluid boundaries of LGBT com- 
munities and individuals within those communities, to explanations and 
applications of basic principles ranging from queer theory to moral theory in 
addressing the issues facing LGBT persons and aging. And this is all done 
with an unblinking transnational eye. The collection’s reach is, in fact, a 
model for transnational studies including, as it does, discussions of LGBT 
persons and politics the worldwide, with special attention to aging. 

The collection is rightly titled as a handbook, put together expressly for 
those who work with LGBT persons and policy in a variety of human ser- 
vices, including social work, physical and mental health care, the military 
and criminal justice systems, and education. But its reach is even farther than 
that. Anyone at all interested in the social positionality of LGBT persons will 
be well served by reading the essays gathered here. 

Beginning with a clarification of who LGBT elders are and how being 
sexual/gender minorities influence social relationships from the most public 
to the most private, the collection moves through the complicated world of 
multiple identities, including race, age, health status, and how the intersec- 
tions of these identities often subject LGBT persons to multiple forms of 
oppression and exclusion. For example, in the contemporary USA, class, 
race, age, sexual orientation, and gender identity and presentation bestow 
privileges on some (namely, the middle and upper economic classes, Cau- 
casians, the young, heterosexuals, and those whose gender identity and 
presentation matches their “given” sex), and oppression and exclusion on 
others (namely, the poor, nonwhites, the elderly, gay men, and lesbian 
women, and trans persons). Every individual has multiple identities, and with 
those identities in a given society come benefits and burdens, many unique to 
certain identity combinations. So, for example, the life experiences of a 
white, middle class, lesbian elder will be importantly different from those of 
an African American, poor, transgender elder. This book takes such differ- 
ences very seriously. 



v 




The collection also takes very seriously the reality that in so many areas, 
discrimination according to these categories is even firmly protected by 
law — laws that not just allow, but actually promote, discrimination in 
housing, employment, and public accommodation. And even if not formally 
protected by law, customary exclusions on the basis of biases such as racism, 
classism, ageism, homophobia, and transphobia continue to thrive as this 
book goes to press in 2015, which is likely to be the year when, according to 
the US Supreme Court, marriage equality (the legal recognition of same-sex 
marriages) becomes the law of the land. The contributing authors of this 
collection know well that if/when that happens, homophobia will not go 
away. Indeed, as this decision by the US Supreme Court comes to seem 
inevitable, there is a “frontlash” taking place as more and more US munic- 
ipalities introduce laws that will allow frank exclusion of sexual and gender 
minorities specifically on the basis of religious belief. So, even if marriage 
equality comes into the legal light as this book goes to press, the need for this 
unique collection will remain compelling. 

By getting to the heart and effects of bias against sexual and gender 
minorities and their multiple identities as aged persons, this book makes an 
enormous and exquisitely timely contribution, not just to the empirical, 
theoretical, and practical literatures for service professionals, but to the lit- 
eratures on social justice, as well. We are all well served by it. 

Joan Callahan 
Professor Emerita 
Department of Philosophy 
Department of Gender and Women’s Studies 
University of Kentucky 




Preface 



As editors of this text, Pamela and I have over 40 years of combined 
experience in service delivery; education; and research in aging, human 
rights, disability, and social services. Beginning in 2013, we collaborated on 
a chapter, Aging and Mistreatment: Victimization of Older Adults in the 
United States, and as part of that chapter, we wrote about LGBT elders. 
Afterward, we discussed the lack of focus and collaboration across disci- 
plines in addressing LGBT elders. Although discipline-specific books have 
been published about LGBT populations, aging, health care, and human and 
social service, we decided that the time had come for a comprehensive text 
that addressed the challenges faced by LGBT elders. Our goal for this book is 
to discuss both LGBT elders who are from groups for which research was 
conducted often and groups rarely included in mainstream research (e.g., 
racial and ethnic groups, persons living in rural and remote areas, veterans, 
[ex] -offender populations, immigrants, and persons with disabilities). In 
addition, we decided to cover issues that impact LGBT persons individually 
and collectively. Our 36 chapters cover the following topics pertaining to 
LGBT elders: theories and constructs, the nexus of sexual minority status and 
aging, family relationships, deconstruction of “isms,” African American and 
Blacks, American Indians, Asian and Pacific Islanders, Europeans, Hispan- 
ics, veterans, [ex]-offenders, immigrants, transgendered persons, bisexual 
persons, mistreatment and victimization, bullying, healthcare reform and 
healthcare practices, residents of long-term care facilities, end-of-life issues, 
mental health, substance abuse, the impending US Supreme Court ruling on 
same-sex marriage, ethics and ethical standards, law enforcement and public 
safety, religious and faith communities, workplace issues, counseling, 
socialization and recreation, advocacy, disability, and trends and future 
directions. Our comprehensive handbook recognizes the intersection of 
identities because individuals do not exist or live their lives in separate 
compartments. 

At the writing of this text (March 2015), we are awaiting the outcome 
of the Supreme Court ruling on same-sex marriage. The ruling has significant 
implications for LGBT elders in many areas of their lives, including housing, 
health insurance and benefits, medical decisions, and the definition of family 
and spouse. The timing of the ruling may shed a different perspective on the 
information presented in some of the chapters. 



vii 




Preface 



Our text provides an interdisciplinary perspective on LGBT elders. 
A unique feature is that the authors of the individual chapters represent an 
array of diverse backgrounds and expertise. Among the disciplinary per- 
spectives represented are social work, public health, medicine, rehabilitation 
counseling, law, public policy, counseling, diversity consultation, gerontol- 
ogy, psychiatry, and education. The broad assemblage of disciplines is 
important in adequately addressing challenges, resiliency, and strengths of 
LGBT elders vis a vis an interdisciplinary perspective. Many of the chapters 
also include international perspectives about LGBT elders, populations, and 
cultures. 

We do not present this text as inclusive of all aspects that impact LGBT 
elders, but rather, we hope that it will be an important contribution to the 
existing literature as well as a response to identified gaps in policy, practice, 
and research. Although texts on services and programs assisting older adults 
are readily available, they focus primarily on the general population and 
rarely if ever take into account the unique circumstances facing current and 
future LGBT elders. Our desire is for the text to serve as a useful and reliable 
resource for those studying and teaching for those involved in health care, 
human and social services programs, as well as in courses on diversity and 
gender and women’s studies. Similarly, practitioners, policy and decision 
makers, advocates, community leaders, families, and LGBT elders them- 
selves may benefit from this text. 



Debra A. Harley 
Pamela B. Teaster 




Contents 



Part I Foundations of Aging and Sexual Identities 

1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications in Working 

with LGBT Elders in Human Services 3 

Debra A. Harley and Pamela B. Teaster 

2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 27 

Pamela B. Teaster, John T. White and Sujee Kim 

3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 43 

Katherine R. Allen and Karen A. Roberto 

4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among 

LGBT Older Adults 65 

Tracy Robinson-Wood and Amanda Weber 

5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Elders: 

Race, Age, Sexuality, and Care Network 83 

Melanie D. Otis and Debra A. Harley 

Part II Multicultural, International, and Select Populations 
of LGBT Elders 

6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 105 

Debra A. Harley 

7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian 

Aboriginal Two-Spirit/LGBT Elderly 135 

Debra A. Harley and Reginald J. Alston 

8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander 

LGBT Elders 159 

Debra A. Harley 

9 European LGBT Elders 177 

Melanie D. Otis 



IX 




X 



Contents 



10 Hispanic/Latino LGBT Elders 199 

Debra A. Harley 

11 Elder LGBT Veterans and Service Members 223 

Thomas W. Miller 

12 LGBT Elders and the Criminal Justice System 239 

Tina Maschi, Jo Rees, Eileen Klein and Ron Levine 

13 Immigrant LGBT Elders 261 

Amanda E. Sokan and Tracy Davis 

14 Understanding Transgender Elders 285 

Loree Cook-Daniels 

15 Bisexuality: An Invisible Community Among 

LGBT Elders 309 

William E. Burleson 

Part III Mistreatment and Victimization of Older 
LGBT Persons 

16 An Overview of Aging and Mistreatment 

of LGBT Elders 325 

Amanda E. Sokan and Pamela B. Teaster 

17 Mistreatment and Victimization of LGBT Elders 343 

Pamela B. Teaster and Amanda E. Sokan 

18 The Prevalence of Elder Bullying and Impact 

on LGBT Elders 359 

Robin P. Bonifas 

Part IV Health Care and Mental Health 

19 Impact of Healthcare Reform on LGBT Elders 375 

Debra A. Harley 

20 Healthcare, Sexual Practices, and Cultural Competence 

with LGBT Elders 391 

Tracy Davis and Amanda E. Sokan 

21 LGBT Elders in Nursing Homes, Long-Term Care 

Facilities, and Residential Communities 417 

John T. White and Tracey L. Gendron 




Contents 



XI 



22 End-of-Life Issues for LGBT Elders 439 

David Godfrey 

23 Mental Health Counseling of LGBT Elders 455 

Tracey L. Gendron, Terrie Pendleton and John T. White 

24 Substance Use Disorders Intervention 

with LGBT Elders 473 

Debra A. Harley and Michael T. Hancock 



Part V Family and Community 



25 LBGT Elders in Rural Settings, Small Towns, 

and Frontier Regions 493 

Debra A. Harley 

26 Law Enforcement and Public Safety of LGBT Elders 513 

Randy Thomas 

27 The Role of Religious and Faith Communities 

in Addressing the Needs of LGBT Elders 525 

Debra A. Harley 

28 No Money, No Work, and You’re Old 545 

Brian McN aught 

29 LGBT Intersection of Age and Sexual Identity 

in the Workplace 551 

Debra A. Harley and Pamela B. Teaster 

30 Isolation, Socialization, Recreation, and Inclusion 

of LGBT Elders 563 

Debra A. Harley, Linda Gassaway and Lisa Dunkley 



Part VI Counseling and Human Services Delivery 



31 Counseling LGBT Elders 585 

Steven D. Johnson and Anthony Fluty Jr. 

32 Advocacy and Community Needs Assessment 601 

Robert Espinoza 



33 Disabilities and Chronic Illness Among LGBT Elders: 
Responses of Medicine, Public Health, Rehabilitation, 
and Social Work 

Debra A. Harley 



619 




XII 



Contents 



Part VII Conclusion 



34 Ethical Standards and Practices in Human Services 

and Health Care for LGBT Elders 639 

Pamela B. Teaster and Amanda E. Sokan 

35 Trends, Implications, and Future Directions for Policy, 

Practice, and Research on LGBT Elders 657 

Pamela B. Teaster and Debra A. Harley 

36 Implications of DOMA and the Supreme Court Ruling 

on Same-Sex Marriage for Spousal Benefits 671 

Debra A. Harley and Pamela B. Teaster 

Glossary 685 

Index 689 




Editors and Contributors 



About the Editors 

Debra A. Harley, Ph.D., CRC, LPC is a professor in the Department of 
Early Childhood, Special Education, and Rehabilitation Counseling at the 
University of Kentucky (UK). Professor Harley holds the distinction of 
Provost’s Distinguished Service Professor. She is past editor of the Journal of 
Rehabilitation Counseling and the Journal of Rehabilitation Administration 
and guest editor of numerous special issues of rehabilitation journals. She is 
co-editor of a book, Contemporary Mental Health Issues Among African 
Americans. Professor Harley has published over 80 refereed articles and 26 
book chapters. She has served on the certification board for rehabilitation 
counselors, the Certified Rehabilitation Counselor Commission, and the 
accreditation board rehabilitation counselor education programs, Council on 
Rehabilitation Education. Professor Harley is affiliate faculty with the 
Department of Gender and Women’s Studies, the Center Research on 
Research on Violence Against Women, and the Human Development 
Institute at UK. She has received the Educator of the Year Award by the 
National Council on Rehabilitation Education and the Provost’s Award for 
Outstanding Teaching by the University of Kentucky. Professor Harley’s 
primary teaching assignment at UK is in rehabilitation counseling, in which 
she teaches courses and does research in the areas of cultural diversity, 
gender issues, and substance abuse. 

Pamela B. Teaster is the associate director for Research at the Center for 
Gerontology and a professor in the Department of Human Development at 
Virginia Tech. She established the Kentucky Justice Center for Elders and 
Vulnerable Adults and the Kentucky Guardianship Association and was its 
first president. She is the secretary general of the International Network for 
the Prevention of Elder Abuse. She served as director and chairperson of the 
Graduate Center for Gerontology/Department of Gerontology as well as the 
director of Doctoral Studies and associate dean for Research for College of 
Public Health at the University of Kentucky. She serves on the editorial 
board of the Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect and Frontiers. Dr. Teaster is 



xiii 




XIV 



Editors and Contributors 



a fellow of the Gerontological Society of America and the Association for 
Gerontology in Higher Education, a recipient of the Rosalie Wolf Award for 
Research on Elder Abuse, the Outstanding Affiliate Member Award 
(Kentucky Guardianship Association), and the Distinguished Educator 
Award (Kentucky Association for Gerontology). She has served as both 
board member and president of the National Committee for the Prevention of 
Elder Abuse. She has received funding from The Retirement Research 
Foundation, Administration on Aging, National Institute on Aging, Kentucky 
Cabinet for Families and Children, National Institute of Justice, Centers for 
Disease Control, National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, Health 
Resources and Services Administration, and the Office of Victims of Crime. 
Her areas of scholarship include the mistreatment of elders and vulnerable 
adults, public and private guardianship, end-of-life issues and decision 
making, ethical treatment of vulnerable adults, human rights issues for 
vulnerable adults, public policy and public affairs, public health ethics, and 
quality of life. She is the co-author of two books and of over 100 
peer-reviewed articles, reports, and book chapters. 



Contributors 

Katherine R. Allen is professor of Human Development at Virginia Tech, 
and a faculty affiliate of the Center for Gerontology, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, and the Women’s and Gender Studies Program. She is a fellow 
of the Gerontological Society of America and the National Council on 
Family Relations. Her research involves the study of family diversity over the 
life course, family experiences of LGBT adults, feminist family studies, and 
sexuality in adulthood. 

Reginald J. Alston, Ph.D., CRC, NCC is a professor and associate 
chancellor at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 

Robin P. Bonifas, Ph.D. is an associate professor at the Arizona State 
University School of Social Work. She has over 15 years of experience 
working with elders and their families in both long-term care and inpatient 
psychiatric settings. Her research focuses on enhancing psychosocial care for 
persons with chronic illness and disability, especially those with comorbid 
mental health conditions and those requiring long-term care. Her current 
projects examine elder social justice issues such as resident-to-resident 
aggression in nursing homes, late-life bullying, and other challenges to social 
relationships in senior care organizations. 

William E. Burleson is the author of Bi America: Myths, Truths, and 
Struggles of an Invisible Community (Rutledge 2005), a book about the 
bisexual community and the bisexual experience. Burleson’s work has 
appeared in the Lambda Book Report, the Journal of Bisexuality, and various 
print and online LGBT publications, and he has been a speaker at college 
campuses across the country (www.williamburleson.com). 



Editors and Contributors 



xv 



Loree Cook-Daniels has been working on LGBT aging issues for more than 
four decades, focusing particularly on public policy and social change. She is 
the founder of the Transgender Aging Network and currently serves as policy 
and program director for FORGE, Inc. 

Tracy Davis is an assistant professor at Rutgers University, School of 
Health Related Professions in the Department of Interdisciplinary Studies. 
She holds a Ph.D. from the University of Kentucky in gerontology. Her 
research interests include LGBT aging, HIV/AIDS and aging, health pro- 
motion, and disease prevention. 

Lisa Dunkley, M.A., CRC is a doctoral student in Rehabilitation Counseling 
Program at the University of Kentucky. 

Robert Espinoza is vice president of policy at Paraprofessional Healthcare 
Institute, a national organization focused on transforming eldercare and 
disability services by improving the lives of direct care workers — nearly 4 
million home health aides, certified nurse aides, and personal care attendants. 
Espinoza currently serves on advisory boards for Story Corps, the Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine, and Aging Today, the national newspaper for 
the American Society on Aging. 

Anthony Fluty Jr., MSW, LCSW is a substance abuse counselor at Eastern 
State Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky. He has also had clinical experience 
working with senior adults in an intensive outpatient program conducting 
group psychotherapy. 

Linda Gassaway, Ed.D is a lecturer in the Department of Early Childhood, 
Special Education, and Rehabilitation Counseling at the University of 
Kentucky. 

Tracey L. Gendron is an assistant professor with the Department of 
Gerontology in the School of Allied Health Professions at Virginia Com- 
monwealth University. Tracey has a Master of Science in gerontology, a 
Master of Science in psychology and a Ph.D. in developmental psychology. 
She teaches several graduate and undergraduate service-based courses 
including grant writing, research methods, and old is the new young. She is 
also a Service-Learning faculty fellow at Virginia Commonwealth Univer- 
sity. Tracey takes an all-inclusive approach to teaching about aging, partic- 
ularly highlighting those understudied and underrepresented groups that are 
at increased risk of negative health outcomes and discrimination. Her 
community-engaged research interests include the professional identity 
development and career commitment of gerontologists, education through 
community engagement and service-learning, aging anxiety, ageism and 
gerontophobia, LGBT aging and staff knowledge and quality of care. 

David Godfrey, J.D. is a senior attorney to the ABA Commission on Law 
and Aging in Washington DC. He is responsible for the ABA’s role in the 
Administration on Aging funded National Legal Resource Center and for 




XVI 



Editors and Contributors 



producing the National Aging and Law Conference. He is a board member 
of the National Academy of Elder Law Attorneys. Prior to joining the 
Commission, he was responsible for elder law programming at Access to 
Justice Foundation in Kentucky. 

Michael T. Hancock, M.A. is a doctoral student in the Rehabilitation 
Counseling Program at the University of Kentucky. 

Steven D. Johnson, Ph.D., LCSW is vice-chair of Education for the 
Department of Psychiatry at the University of Kentucky. He works exten- 
sively with LGBTQ clients as well as teaching and supervising psychiatry 
residents in their psychotherapy training. 

Sujee Kim is a doctoral student in the Adult Development and Aging 
Program at Virginia Tech. Her research interests include long-term care- 
giving and productive aging. 

Eileen Klein, Ph.D. is an assistant professor at the Ramapo College 
Department of Social Work. Her research interests LGBT persons with 
serious mental health issues and culturally responsive and LGBT affirming 
treatment. 

Ron Levine is a professional photographer and documentary maker. He is 
known for his Prisoners of Age photo exhibit. 

Tina Maschi, Ph.D., LCSW, ACSW is an associate professor at the 
Fordham University Graduate School of Social Service with research inter- 
ests at the intersection of trauma, mental health, and aging, especially related 
to vulnerable elders in the criminal justice system. She is the founder and 
president of Be the Evidence International: www.betheevidence.org. 

Brian McNaught was named “the godfather of gay diversity training” by 
The New York Times. He has been brought to offices throughout the world to 
help managers create welcoming environments for LGBT employees. He is 
the author of several books and is featured in numerous DVDs on LGBT 
issues. He and his spouse, Ray Struble, have been together since 1976. 

Thomas W. Miller, Ph.D., ABPP is professor emeritus, senior research 
scientist, master teacher, great teacher and university teaching fellow during 
forty-year tenure at the University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Uni- 
versity of Connecticut, School of Allied Health, and Murray State University. 
Tenured in the Department of Psychiatry, he held joint appointments in the 
Department of Psychology, College of Arts and Sciences and the Department 
of Educational, School and Counseling Psychology, College of Education, 
University of Kentucky. He served as a career VA chief psychology service 
and developed the first APA-approved Psychology Internship in the Com- 
monwealth of Kentucky. He received his doctorate from the State University 
of New York, is a diplomate of the American Board of Professional Psy- 
chology in Clinical Psychology, fellow of the American Psychological 



Editors and Contributors xvii 

Association, the Association of Psychological Science and the Royal Society 
of Medicine. He is editor and author of the Praeger Handbook on Veterans 
Health. 

Melanie D. Otis, Ph.D. is the Richard K. Brautigam Professor of Criminal, 
Juvenile, and Social Justice in the College of Social Work at the University 
of Kentucky. Dr. Otis has served as editor-in-chief of the Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Social Services since 2010. 

Terrie Pendleton is a Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW) in Rich- 
mond, Virginia. She received her master’s degree in social work from Vir- 
ginia Commonwealth University. Ms. Pendleton has held positions as an 
adjunct instructor and faculty field liaison with Virginia Commonwealth 
University, School of Social Work. She has served as a Steering Committee 
Member for the organization. Services and Advocacy for Gay, Lesbian, and 
Bisexual & Transgender Elders (SAGE) in Richmond VA and has provided 
clinical counseling and support to the LGBT community. Terrie lives happily 
with her partner of 22 years and their two dogs. 

Jo Rees, Ph.D. is an assistant professor on Long Island University Depart- 
ment of Social Work. Her research interests lie at the intersection of LGBT 
issues, mental health, and the criminal justice system. 

Karen A. Roberto is professor and director of the Center for Gerontology 
and the Institute for Society, Culture and Environment at Virginia Tech, and 
a faculty member in Human Development, the Faculty of Health Sciences, 
and in the Departments of Internal Medicine and Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Medicine at the Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine. She is a fellow 
of the American Psychological Association, the Gerontological Society of 
America, and the National Council on Family Relations. Her research 
focuses on health and social support in late life and includes studies of the 
health of rural older women, family relationships and caregiving, and elder 
abuse. 

Tracy Robinson-Wood is a professor in the Department of Applied Psy- 
chology at Northeastern University. She is author of The Convergence of Race, 
Ethnicity, and Gender: Multiple Identities in Counseling. The fifth edition, to 
be published by SAGE, is anticipated in 2016. Her research interests focus on 
the intersections of race, gender, sexuality, and class in psychosocial identity 
development. She has developed the Resistance Modality Inventory (RMI), 
which is a psychometrically valid measure of resistance, a theory she 
co-developed for black girls and women to optimally push back against rac- 
ism, sexism, classism, and other forms of oppression. Her research is also 
focused on parents’ racial socialization messages within interracial families, 
and the relational, psychological, and physiological impact of microaggres- 
sions on highly educated racial, gender, and sexual minorities. 



Amanda E. Sokan is an assistant professor (part-time) at University of 
Kentucky, Department of Health Management and Policy, in the College of 




Editors and Contributors 



xviii 

Public Health. She holds a Ph.D. in gerontology and masters in health 
administration from the University of Kentucky. Her research interests include 
elder rights and justice, elder abuse and mistreatment, LGBT aging, long-term 
care, aging and healthcare navigation, and health promotion. 

Randy Thomas is a retired police officer having served for over 25 years in 
the law enforcement profession (Tampa Police Department, Richland County 
(SC) Sheriff’s Office and South Carolina Department of Public Safety). He was 
a member of the South Carolina Adult Protection Coordinating Council and 
was instrumental in the passage of South Carolina’s Omnibus Adult Protection 
Act. He received his bachelor’s degree from Chaminade University (1971) and 
his master’s degree in political science from the University of South Florida 
(Tampa 1974). 

Amanda Weber is a doctoral student at Boston College in the department of 
Counseling Psychology. Her research interests include intersections of race, 
sexuality, gender and class as well as how trauma plays a role in people’s lives. 

John T. White is the director of Professional and Community Development 
for Virginia Commonwealth University’s Department of Gerontology. 
He received a BA in American history from Washington and Lee University, a 
Master of Science (gerontology) from Virginia Commonwealth University 
and is completing a doctorate in educational leadership. Previous chapters, 
articles, and presentations include LGBT and aging, operationalizing 
person-centered care and culture change, team building in long-term care and 
organizational diversity. 




Part I 



Foundations of Aging and 
Sexual Identities 




Theories, Constructs, 

and Applications in Working 

with LGBT Elders in Human Services 

Debra A. Harley and Pamela B. Teaster 



This chapter presents an overview of select theories of sexual orientation 
and gender identity. Traditional theories of life span development offer a 
general framework within which to understand issues and experiences 
common to persons in later stages of life. The intent of this chapter is to 
discuss theoretical constructs and models of sexual identity, counseling, 
public health, gerontology, and social work that can be applied with aging 
LGBT populations. These theories underscore the necessity of helping 
present and future professionals who understand differences among LGBT 
elders and the complex nature of identity, their psychosocial adjustment, 
and ways in which stigma of sexual identity and gender identity affects 
their well-being. Although the various theories and models in this chapter 
are presented according to discipline, theories are not mutually exclusive 
to disciplines. 



Keywords 

LGBT theories • Sexual orientation identity development • Gender 
identity development • Life span development theories 



Abstract 



P.B. Teaster 

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA 
e-mail: pteaster@vt.edu 



D.A. Harley (El) 

University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA 
e-mail: dharlOO@email.uky.edu 



This introductory chapter on theories, constructs, 
and applications in working with LGBT elders 
presents an overview of select theories of sexual 



Overview 



orientation and gender identity. The reader is 
reminded that just as identities are culturally 
defined, theories of sexual identity are framed 
within cultural contexts as well. Thus, the ter- 
minology of the “LGBT” acronym may not 
accurately reflect how sexual minorities are dis- 
cussed within certain cultures. However, Burle- 
son (2005) nevertheless points out that “the 
sexual identity of bisexual, heterosexual, or 
homosexual is cultural; feelings of attraction are 
organic. People are hammered into molds, albeit 
their own culture’s mold, the world over” (p. 37). 
Most of the models of sexual orientation and 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_l 



3 



4 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



gender identity are based on Eurocentric cultural 
models of sexuality. Traditional theories of life 
span development (e.g., Erikson 1950; Levinson 
1978, 1996) offer general frameworks within 
which to understand issues and experiences 
common to persons in later stages of life (Hash 
and Rogers 2013). 

Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter 
to include all theories, constructs, and applica- 
tions in human services, our intent is to present 
an overview of select theoretical constructs and 
models of sexual identity, counseling, public 
health, gerontology, and social work that can be 
applied with aging LGBT populations. These 
theories underscore the necessity of helping 
present and future professionals who understand 
differences among LGBT elders and the complex 
nature of identity, their psychosocial adjustment, 
and ways in which the stigma of sexual identity 
and gender identity affects their well-being. 
Specific theories of late adulthood development 
and functional capacity are presented in Chap. 3. 
Also, it is not the intent of this chapter to present 
techniques for counseling LGBT elder in specific 
circumstances (e.g., couples or relationship, 
family, mental), nor to critique various theories. 
Although the various theories and models in this 
chapter are presented according to discipline, 
theories are not mutually exclusive to disciplines. 
A theory may easily be applied by various dis- 
ciplines to investigate and explain behavior and 
phenomenon. 

Learning Objectives 

By the end of the chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 

1. Understand the various theories of LGBT 
identity development. 

2. Identify the counseling theories that can be 
applied effectively for work with LGBT 
elders. 

3. Identify the theories of public health and 
practice. 



4. Identify the social work theories that work 
effectively with LGBT elders. 

5. Explain how various practice models can be 
integrated in working with LGBT elders. 



Introduction 

Theory is a general statement, proposition, or 
hypothesis about a real situation that can be 
supported by evidence obtained through a sci- 
entific method. A theory explains in a proven 
way why something happens and offers guidance 
in explaining and responding to forgoing prob- 
lems (Gratwick et al. 2014). A construct is an 
idea, often referred to as a theory, which contains 
conceptual elements or parts that are put together 
in a logical order to explain something. Con- 
structs are typically subjective and not based on 
empirical evidence. A model is a blueprint for 
implementation. It describes what happens in 
practice in a general way. Theory and models are 
influenced by perspective, a value position 
(Payne 1997). Every discipline has theories to 
explain particular phenomena upon which it 
operate to guide development of hypotheses, 
research, and recommendations for best practices 
and policy. In fact, Payne suggests that theory 
succeeds best when it contains all three elements 
— perspective, theory, and model/construct. 
Theory serves the function of providing practi- 
tioners a guide for behavior in very specific cir- 
cumstances and making decisions. 

Although various disciplines study aging, the 
study of older persons occurs primarily within 
the discipline of gerontology. Hooyman and 
Kiyak (2008) suggest that because of the multi- 
disciplinary nature of gerontology, examination 
of aging on the societal, psychosocial, and bio- 
logical levels. However, on all these levels, older 
sexual minorities (lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans- 
gender [LBGT]) have been relatively ignored in 
gerontological research (Grossman 2008; Orel 
2004; Quam 2004). Similarly, very little content 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



5 



on specific care needs of LGBT persons exists in 
the nursing literature, especially for older adults. 
This lack of focus is particularly troubling 
because nurses and other such caregivers are the 
front line of care and are in a position to create 
health care environments that will meet the needs 
of LGBT elders (Jablonski et al. 2013). In 
addition, many other disciplines omit LGBT 
populations from curricula and research to the 
extent that it appears that sexual minorities do 
not even exist (Hall and Fine 2005; Harley et al. 
2014). The lack of focus on LGBT elders in 
research and training programs frequently results 
in service providers who are inadequately to 
meet the needs of this population. According to 
Gratwick et al. (2014), “even when providers of 
aging services express willingness to become 
more responsive to the needs of LGBT older 
adults there is evidence that they do not take 
sufficient action” (p. 5). Hughes et al. (2011) 
report that of service providers affiliated with the 
National Association of Area Agencies on 
Aging, only 15 % provide services tailored to the 
need of older LGBT adults. Moreover, at the 
organizational level, LGBT older adults are lit- 
erally not being seen, organizations are not 
directing resources to these populations, and it 
appears that there is agency resistance to 
acknowledging the distinctiveness of LGBT 
aging issues. 

Considering the increase in the number of 
older persons in general and the projection for 
continued growth in numbers and anticipated 
growth in the one to three million individuals in 
the USA over age 65 who are already identified 
as LGBT, the lack of focus of multidisciplinary 
research relegates older LGBT persons to a status 
of invisibility. Mabey (2011) contends that the 
omission of LGBT elders in gerontological 
research “leaves professional counselors without 
a substantive bridge with which to connect 
resources with treatment planning when working 
with sexual minorities” (p. 57). Moreover, age- 
ism as experienced in LGBT communities has 



the additional impact of making a marginalized 
and stigmatized group feel even more of a 
minority. 

Elderly LGBT Diversity, Identity, 
and Resilience 

As an LGBT person and an older person, an 
LGBT elder does not belong to one homogenous 
group within the acronym. LGBT elders come 
from every race and ethnicity, nationality, gen- 
der, ability level, socioeconomic status, place, 
and space. Some LGBT elders have been married 
and have children, while other have either or 
neither. Thus, LGBT elders cannot be grouped or 
treated as one cohesive category (Mabey 2011). 
Older LGBT persons grew up during a time 
when homosexuality and gender nonconformity 
were viewed as a mental illness, a sin, or a sexual 
perversion. Open discussion about homosexual- 
ity, sexual identity, and gender identity was not 
done. Rather, secrecy about one’s sexual desires 
and behaviors was the norm; to reveal that one’s 
sexual orientation was other than heterosexual or 
one’s gender identity was other than conforming 
to social expectations was not only vocationally 
and socially devastating, but patently unsafe. 
Negative attitudes and perceptions about LGBT 
persons are not only historical. Today, hetero- 
sexism, homophobia, transphobia, and biphobia 
continue to be intertwined in social customs, 
cultural beliefs, institutional structures, and pol- 
icy development. It is both the long-term and 
ongoing socially sanctioned discrimination, pre- 
judice, and stereotypes that present unique chal- 
lenges and, ironically, opportunities for LGBT 
persons globally (e.g., Austria, Canada, England, 
Ireland, USA). Because of the diversity among 
LGBT elders, some of the stereotypes encompass 
the entire LGBT population such as its attempts 
to covert heterosexuals that the population is 
composed of pedophiles or that it is a threat to 
marriage and structure of the family. Other 



6 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



stereotypes are specific to subgroups of LGBT 
persons such as the belief that a lesbian cannot 
“get a man,” gay men are responsible for 
HIV/AIDS, or that older LGBT persons are not 
attractive. 

In a society that places an inordinate emphasis 
on youth, older adults face stigma and discrimi- 
nation beyond that of their younger counterparts, 
especially ageism (Butler 1994) in addition to 
lifelong negative attitudes and poor treatment 
related to their sexual orientation and gender 
identity. Hash and Rogers (2013) acknowledge 
“while these difficult experiences can create a 
host of problems for LGBT individuals, they can 
also help them develop unique skill sets or 
strengths that their non-LGBT counterparts do 
not necessarily benefit from as they age” 
(p. 249). Further, Hash and Rogers suggest that 
despite difficulties associated with aging as 
LGBT persons, elders have successfully devel- 
oped social networks, successfully developed a 
strong sense of identity through the coming-out 
process, and have successfully responded to 
discrimination and stigma to develop a positive 
sense of self and identity leading to stronger ego 
integrity. Despite the challenging and threatening 
context often associated with LGBT elders’ ear- 
lier lives, most are now comfortable with their 
sexual orientation and gender identity and dis- 
play a marked resilience to the minority stress 
they experienced in their lives (Irish Association 
of Social Workers 2011; Szymanski and Gupta 
2009) (see especially Chaps. 6, 7, 8 and 10 in 
this book on resilience among LGBT elders of 
color). 

The process of aging for LGBT persons pre- 
sents the typical challenges and concerns related 
to health status, financial stability, loss of a 
spouse or partner, and so forth. We present the 
case of Maria, a Latina 73-year-old lesbian, to 
illustrate some of the challenges she faces. 

As a member of the Latino culture Maria believes 
that the Latino community is less accepting of 
homosexuality. Maria recognizes that living in Los 
Angeles she faces the challenges of being invisible 
because of ageism, an LGBT community that 



values youth, and rejection of old persons. In 
addition, cultural barriers and being very 
self-reliant further isolate Latinos LGBT elders. In 
a needs assessment of older Hispanic LGBT 
adults, participants expressed varied experiences of 
aging as: (a) not different from that of the general 
population, with more self-acceptance, particularly 
if one is financially secure, (b) there is a great deal 
of rejection of older persons because they are 
persons in which people are not interested and, 
even why they do not have a support group even 
among themselves, (c) social isolation within their 
own families because of their identities as LGBT 
people, and (d) dual discrimination as Latinos and 
as members of the LGBT community (www. 
gallup/poll/158066/special-report-adults-identity- 
lgbt.aspx). 

Case of Maria 

Maria is a Latina 73-year-old lesbian. She 
and her partner of 40 years live in a small 
third floor apartment in Los Angles. The 
building is old and does not have an ele- 
vator. Maria has arthritis in her knees and 
hands, hypertension, and glaucoma. Here 
partner, Sophia, is in better health but has 
asthma. Neither Maria nor Sophia has 
children and both have been estranged 
from their families for most of their adult 
life. They consider themselves “closeted” 
and have identified themselves publically 
as sisters. 

Maria worked for 55 years as a house- 
keeper for a wealthy family. She does not 
have retirement income and receives Social 
Security of $540 per month. Medicare, and 
food stamps. Sophia worked as a city bus 
driver for 30 years and receives retirement 
benefits, Social Security, and Medicare. 

The two of them are concerned about 
the feasibility of continuing to live in their 
apartment, but know that it will be difficult 
to find other affordable housing. In addi- 
tion, their share of cost for health care 
continues to increase. Although neither 
women have been diagnosed with depres- 
sion, both express having feelings of 
depression. 




1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



7 



Questions 

What identity issues are confronting these 
two women? 

Do they have a social network? How can 
they form a social network? 

Can you identify resilience factors for 
Maria and Sophia? 

What type of service would benefit Maria 
and Sophia? 



and openness about sexual orientation and gen- 
der identity (Humphreys and Quam). 

The remainder of this chapter concerns select 
theories and models used in the disciplines of 
counseling, public health, and selected social 
sciences. Sexual identity theories are also pre- 
sented. As mentioned earlier, theories are not 
discipline specific; however, some disciplines 
may gravitate more toward certain theories and 
models. 



As previously mentioned, the theories of 
Erikson (1950) and Levinson (1978, 1996) have 
foundational significance in explaining the psy- 
chological development of LGBT elders. In 
Erikson’s final stage of psychosocial develop- 
ment, Ego Integrity v. Despair, older adults (age 
60 and over) reflect upon and evaluate their lives. 
When confronted with loss, the older person 
must arrive at acceptance of his or her life or will 
fall into despair. The ability to accept one’s life 
and self in the ego integrity stage may be more 
complicated for LGBT elders (Hash and Rogers 
2013; Humphreys and Quam 1998). According 
to Humphreys and Quam, the social stigma 
experienced by LGBT elders can adversely affect 
how they view their identity and life. Despair can 
be influenced by the culmination of losses over a 
lifetime. Transgender persons may be at a greater 
risk for despair because of the indignity they face 
from society and lack of support from loved 
ones. Moreover, older LGBT adults may have 
struggled with development as reflected in earlier 
stages of Erikson’s theory, which could impact 
developmental tasks during the final stage. Lev- 
inson’s theories of life span development exam- 
ine primary pattern of people’s lives at particular 
points in time and the transitions necessary 
between eras in life for them to successfully 
develop into adulthood. Similar to Erikson, 
Levinson identifies the final era as older adult- 
hood (age 60 and over). This era often involves 
significant adjustment to a significant change and 
acceptance of immortality. For LGBT elders, this 
late stage life transition may involve acceptance 



Theories and Constructs on Sexual 
Identity 

An introduction to theories of sexual identity 
must at least mention the work of Sigmund Freud 
(1949). According to Freud, homosexuality and 
bisexuality resulted from unresolved conflicts 
(fixation) occurring within one of the stages of 
psychosexual development. In addition, Freud 
hypothesized that all human beings are innately 
bisexual and it is the influence of family and 
environment that determines if one becomes 
homosexual or heterosexual. However, Freud 
never identified homosexuality or bisexuality as 
a mental disorder. Freud’s theory is not empiri- 
cally tested and is not used today in discussion of 
sexual identity formation. 

Later, the work of Erving Goffman (1963), 
Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled 
Identity, was one of the most important early 
works addressing minority self-identity (Eliason 
and Schope 2007). According to Goffman, social 
stigma is learned and internalized through 
childhood socialization and shapes the minority 
person’s identity. The minority person shares the 
belief of the majority if it deems that he or she is 
a failure and abnormal. This belief leads to 
self-hate and self-derogation. Goffman proposed 
that formation of the minority sexual identity 
involves dealing with social expectations of what 
is considered normal. Conversely, Altman (1971) 
and Plummer (1973) offered explanations for the 
development of a stable “homosexual identity” 
(Eliason and Schope 2007). Altman suggested 




8 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



Table 1.1 Plummer’s stages of homosexual identity 

Stage 1: Sensitization — thinks about one’s sexual 
identity 

Stage 2: Significance and disorientation — accepts the 
deviant label with all the potential social consequences. 
Social oppression creates disequilibrium where the 
homosexual person becomes stalled, perhaps for life, in 
this stage 

Step 3: Coming-out — goes public with one’s rebuilt 
sexual identity. Disclosure is linked to the person’s 
willingness and ability to join the homosexual 
community 

Stage 4: Stabilization — no longer questions one’s 
homosexual identity 

Adapted from Plummer (1973) 

that self-disclosure of one’s homosexuality was 
beneficial because coming-out meant dealing 
with the socially learned “internalization of 
oppression,” which is liberating. Plummer’s 
approach was one of individuals adopting a 
“homosexual way of life” or a “career type” of 
sexuality. Recognizing homosexuality as a social 
construct developed by the majority to restrict 
and pathologize a sexual minority, Plummer 
argued that all forms of deviancy need to be 
viewed within a historical and cultural context. 
He regarded current social hostility to homo- 
sexuality as responsible for many of what he 
labeled “pathologies.” Plummer was one of the 
first theorists to present identifiable stages of 
“homosexual identity” (see Table 1.1) (Eliason 
and Schope). 

Subsequent to Altman (1971) and Plummer’s 
(1973) theories, an abundance of stage models on 
sexual identity formation evolved, the majority 
of which moved away from the deviance model 
to a focus on healthy consequences of accepting 
one’s sexuality (see Table 1.2). Eliason and 
Schope (2007) identify two assumptions about 
stage model theorists. First, most assumed that 
one is or is not gay or lesbian and embraced the 
argument from an Essentialists’ perspective. 
Second, most models are based on a review of 
the literature and are not empirically tested or are 
based on single case or small sample size. 

Probably, one of the most influential and 
frequently cited theories of gay and lesbian 
identity development is that of Cass (1979). Cass 



describes a process of six stages of gay and 
lesbian development. Although these stages are 
sequential, some persons revisit stages at differ- 
ent points in their life. Each stage is accompa- 
nied by a task. Cass believes that coming-out is a 
lifelong process of exploring one’s sexual ori- 
entation and lesbian or gay identity and sharing it 
with others. Table 1.3 contains Cass’s model of 
identity formation. 

Bisexual Identity Formation. Though limited 
research as been conducted on development of 
bisexual identity formation, probably the most 
important research on bisexuality was that of 
Alfred Kinsey with the publication of Sexual 
Behavior in the Human Male (Kinsey et al. 
1948) and Sexual Behavior in the Human 
Female (Kinsey et al. 1953) (as cited by Burle- 
son 2005). Kinsey developed the Kinsey scale, in 
which individuals can fall anywhere along a 
continuum of 0 (exclusively heterosexual) and 6 
(exclusively homosexual). Burleson contends 
that Kinsey had created the present model of 
bisexuality without ever once using the word 
bisexual. In addition, Kinsey scale clarified two 
issues: (a) There is great variability of sexual 
orientation, and (b) an implication that perhaps 
all human beings on this continuum are ranked 
the same way (i.e., heterosexuality is not primary 
or held above other sexual orientations). Kin- 
sey’s work, while groundbreaking, was rudi- 
mentary and did not address the complexities of 
behavior and attraction and past behavior and 
future predictions. In response to questions of 
complexity, Fritz (1993) expanded on Kinsey’s 
continuum model to measure a person’s past and 
future sexual attraction, behavior, fantasies, 
emotional preference, social preference, lifestyle, 
and self-identification. 

Stroms (1978) offers yet different model of 
sexual attraction, a multiple-variable model, in 
which sexual attraction to different genders is 
examined independently of each other. In this 
model, Stroms’ scale has one end representing no 
attraction to one gender and the other end pre- 
senting high attraction to that gender. The con- 
tinuum offers great variation within this model. 
Although this model did not include transgender 
persons, a scale could be created for them. In 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



9 



Table 1.2 Stage theories of sexual identity formation 



Theorists 


Population 


Stages of identity formation 


Ponse (1978) 


Lesbian 


"Gay trajectory " 

Subjective feelings of difference from 

sexual/emotional desire for women 

Understanding feelings as lesbian 

Assuming a lesbian identity 

Seeking company of lesbians 

Engaging in lesbian relationship (sexual and/or 

emotional ) 


“Coleman (1982) 




Precoming-out 

Coming-out 

Tolerance 

Acceptance 

Pride 

Integration 


Minton and McDonald (1984) 


Gay men 


Egocentric 

Sociocentric 

Universalistic 


“Faderman (1984) 


Lesbian 


Critical evaluation of societal norms and 
acceptance of lesbian identity 
Encounters with stigma 
Lesbian sexual experience (optional) 


Sophie (1985/1986) 


Lesbian 


First awareness 
Testing/exploration 
Acceptance 
Integration 


Chapman and Brannock (1987) 


Lesbian 


Same-sex orientation 
Incongruence 
Self-questioning 
Choice of lifestyle 


Troiden (1988) 


Men 


Spirals rather than linear 

Sensitization 

Confusion 

Assumption 

Commitment 


“Morales (1989) 


Racial/ethnic 
minority LGB 


Denial of conflicts 
Bisexual versus gay/lesbian identity 
Conflicts in allegiances 
Establish priorities in allegiances 
Integrate various communities 


“Reynolds and Pope (1991) 


Multiple identity 
formation 


Passive acceptance of society’s expectations for 
one aspect of self 

Conscious identification with one aspect of self 
Segmented identification with multiple aspects of 
self 

Intersection identities with multiple aspects of self 


“Isaacs and McKendrick (1992) 


Gay men 


Identity diffusion 
Identity challenge 
Identity exploration 
Identity achievement 
Identity commitment 
Identity consolidation 



(continued) 



10 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



Table 1.2 (continued) 



Theorists 


Population 


Stages of identity formation 


“Siegel and Lowe (1994) 


Gay men 


Turning point 

Aware of difference 

Identify source of difference 

Coming-out 

Assumption 

Acceptance 

Celebration 

Maturing phase 

Reevaluation 

Renewal 

Mentoring 


“Fox (1995) 


Bisexual 


First opposite-sex attractions, behaviors, 
relationships 

First same-sex attractions, behaviors, relationships 
First self-identification as bisexual 
Self-disclosure as bisexual 


McCam and Fassinger (1997); Fassinger 
and Miller (1996) 


Lesbian and gay 


Awareness 

Exploration 

Deepening/commitment 

Intemalization/synthesis 


“Eliason (1996) 


Lesbian 


Cycles/not linear 
Pre-identity 
Emerging identity 

Recognition/experiences with oppression 
Reevaluation/evolution of identities 


“Nutterbrock et al. (2002) 


Transgender 


Awareness 

Performance 

Congmence 

Support 


“Devor (2004) 


Transgender 


Abiding anxiety 
Confusion 

Comparison (birth sex/gender) 

Discover trans identity 
Confusion (trans) 

Comparison (trans) 

Tolerance (trans) 

Delay before acceptance 
Acceptance 

Delay before transition 
Transition 

Acceptance of post-transition gender/sex 

Integration 

Pride 



Adapted from Eliason and Schope (2007) 
“No empirical validation 



addition, Strom’s model includes people who 
tend toward asexuality. The model describes 
attraction to women and men as two separate 
variables (Burleson 2005). 

Theoretical State Stage Models. In the USA, 
the 1970s ushered in a new era of research about 



sexual orientation identity development with the 
emergence of theoretical state stage models. The 
primary focus of these models was on the resolu- 
tion of internal conflict related to identification as 
lesbian or gay and informed the “coming-out” 
process. Bilodeau and Renn (2005) describe these 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



11 



Table 1.3 Cass model of gay and lesbian identity formation 



Stage 1 


Identity Confusion — Personalization of information regarding sexuality. “Could I be gay?” This stage 
begins with the person’s first awareness of gay or lesbian thoughts, feelings, and attractions. The person 
typically feels confused and experience turmoil 


Task 


Who am I? — Accept, deny, reject 


Stage 2 


Identity Comparison — Accepts possibility one might be homosexual. “Maybe this does apply to me.” 
In this stage, the person accepts the possibility of being gay or lesbian and examines the wider 
implications of that tentative commitment. Self-alienation becomes isolation 


Task 


Deal with social alienation 


Stage 3 


Identity Tolerance — Accepts probability of being homosexual and recognizes sexual/social/emotional 
needs of being homosexual. “I am not the only one.” The person acknowledges that she or he is likely 
lesbian or gay and seeks out the other lesbian and gay people to combat feelings of isolation. There is 
increased commitment to being lesbian or gay 


Task 


Decrease social alienation by seeking out lesbian and gay persons 


Stage 4 


Identity Acceptance — Accepts (versus tolerates) homosexual self-image and has increased contact with 
lesbian/gay subculture and less with heterosexual. “I will be okay.” The person attaches positive 
connotation to her or his lesbian or gay identity and accepts rather than tolerates it. There is continuing 
and increased contact with the lesbian and gay culture. 


Task 


Deal with inner tension of no longer subscribing to society’s norm, attempt to bring congruence between 
private and public view of self 


Stage 5 


Identity Pride — Immersed in lesbian/gay subculture, less interaction with heterosexuals. Views world 
divided as “gay” or “not gay.” “I’ve got to let people know who 1 am!” There is confrontation with 
heterosexual establishment and disclosure to family, friends, coworkers, etc 


Task 


Deal with incongruent views of heterosexuals 


Stage 6 


Identity Synthesis — Lesbian or gay identity is integrated with other aspects of self, and sexual 
orientation becomes only one aspect of self rather than the entire identity 


Task 


Integrate lesbian and gay identity so that instead of being the identity, it is an aspect of self 



Adapted from Cass (1979) 



models as having the following characteristics: 
(a) begin with a stage, (b) describe individuals 
using multiple defense strategies to deny recog- 
nition of personal homosexual feelings, 
(c) include a gradual recognition and tentative 
acceptance, (d) have a period of emotional and 
behavioral experimentation with homosexuality, 
(e) involve a time of identity crisis, and (f) marked 
by the coming-out process. Although difference 
exists among the stage models, which illustrate the 
difficulty of using one model to understand the 
complex psychosocial process of the development 
of sexual orientation identity, their predominance 
and persistence in the research literature and in 
current educational practice suggest that they 
represent with some accuracy the developmental 
process (Bilodeau and Renn 2005). 

The minority stress model (Brooks 1981; 
Meyer 1995) is useful in understanding aspects 



of sexual minority identity development for older 
LGBT adults and the impact of sociocultural 
issues on their lives. Based on this model, indi- 
viduals in minority groups experience additional 
minority-related stressors that individuals who 
are part of the majority do not have to contend. 
The minority stress model is a consolidation of 
several theories and models that propose that 
minority persons experience chronic stressors 
and these stressors can lead to negative psycho- 
social adjustment outcomes. According to Meyer 
(2010), the minority stress model does not 
attempt to imply that sexual minorities have 
higher rates of psychosocial issues because of 
their sexual orientation and gender identity; 
rather, the model identifies the pathogenic con- 
ditions that stigmatize LGBT persons and treat 
them as inferior to heterosexual individuals. 
Minority stressors for LGBT persons include 



12 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



experiences of discrimination, concealment or 
disclosure of sexual orientation/gender identity, 
expectations of prejudice and discrimination, and 
internalized homonegativity (Cox et al. 2011; 
Meyer 2003). Unlike ethnic and racial minority 
groups who experience minority stress, LGBT 
persons who experience sexual minority stress 
often do not receive support and understanding 
from their families of origin (Dziengel 2008). 
Minority stress in LGBT persons has been linked 
to higher levels of depression and negative health 
outcomes (Cox et al. 2009; Huebner and Davis 
2007). 

McCarn-Fassinger (1996) developed the les- 
bian identity development model, and Fassinger 
and Miller (1996) later validated the applicability 
of the theory with gay men (subsequently refer- 
enced in the literature as Fassinger’s gay and 
lesbian identity development model), which 
examines identity development from a personal 
and a group perspective. The lesbian identity 
development model includes four phases: 
awareness, exploration, deepening/commitment, 
and internalization/synthesis. The use of “pha- 
ses” is intentional to explicitly indicate flexibility 
that individuals revisit earlier phases in new or 
different contexts. The model explores attitudes 
of lesbians and gay men toward self, other sexual 
minorities and gender identity, and heterosexu- 
als. A distinguishing aspect of Fassinger’s model 
is that lesbians, gays, or bisexuals are not 
required to “come out” or to be actively involved 
in the lesbian, gay, or bisexual community. 

A life span approach to sexual orientation 
development has been introduced an alternative 
to stage models. D’Augelli (1994) offers a “life 
span” model of sexual orientation development. 
This model takes social contexts into account in 
different ways than stage models. In addition, 
D’Augelli ’s model has the potential to represent 
a wider range of experiences than do the theories 
relating to specific racial, ethnic, or gender 
groups and addresses issues often ignored in 
other models. D’Augelli presents human devel- 
opment as unfolding in concurring and multiple 
paths, including the development of a person’s 
self-concept, relationships with family, and con- 
nections to peer groups and community. This 



Table 1.4 D’Augelli life span model of sexual orienta- 
tion development 

Exiting homosexuality 
Developing a personal LGB identity 
Developing an LGB social identity 
Becoming an LGB offspring 
Developing an LGB intimacy status 
Entering an LGB community 
D’Augelli (1994) 

model suggests that sexual orientation may be 
fluid at certain times and more fixed at others and 
that human growth is intimately connected to and 
influenced by both biological and environmental 
factors. D’Augelli’s model has six “identity 
processes” that function more or less indepen- 
dently and are not sequenced in stages (see 
Table 1.4). An individual may experience 
development in one process to a greater extent 
than another, and, depending on context and 
timing, he or she may be at different points of 
development in a given process (Bilodeau and 
Reen 2005). 

Renn and Bilodeau (2005) extended D’Aug- 
elli’s (1994) model and applied it to under- 
standing corresponding processes in the 
formation of transgender identity development. 
Bilodeau (2005) found that transgender persons 
describe their gender identities in ways that 
reflect the six processes of D’Augelli’s model. 

Since the inclusion of gender identity disorder 
(GID) for the first time in the diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM) in 
1980 as a mental illness, other theories on 
transgender identity formation have been pro- 
posed by Nutterbrock et al. (2002) and Devor 
(2004), bisexual identity formation by Fox 
(1995), and multiple identity formation by Rey- 
nolds and Pope (1991) (Table 1.2); however, 
none of these models have been empirically 
validated. In the fifth edition of the DSM, GID 
was deleted and replaced with gender dysphoria 
(GD), indicating that it is not a mental illness, 
rather a lifestyle with which individuals may 
need assistance in making adjustments. Feminist, 
postmodern, and queer theoretical theorists (e.g., 
Butler 1990, 1993; Creed 1995; Feinberg 1996, 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



13 



Table 1.5 


Lev’s transgender emergence model 


Stage 1 


Awareness — Gender-variant people are often in great distress. The therapeutic task is the normalization 
of the experiences involved in emerging as transgender 


Stage 2 


Seeking Information/Reaching Out — Gender-variant people seek to gain education and support about 
transgenderism. The therapeutic task is to facilitate linkages and encourage outreach 


Stage 3 


Disclosure to Significant Other — Involves the disclosure of transgenderism to significant other. The 
therapeutic task involves supporting the transgendered person’s integration in the family system 


Stage 4 


Exploration (Identity and Self-Labeling) — Involves the exploration of various (transgender) identities. 
The therapeutic task is to support the articulation and comfort with one’s gendered identity 


Stage 5 


Exploration (Transition Issues and Possible Body Modification) — Involves exploring options for 
transition regarding identity, presentation, and body modification. The therapeutic task is the resolution 
of the decision and advocacy toward their manifestation 


Stage 6 


Integration (Acceptance and Post-Transition Issues) — The gender-variant person is able to integrate 
and synthesis (transgender) identity. The therapeutic task is to support adaptation to transition-related 
issues 



Adapted from Lev (2004) 



1998; Halberstam 1998; Wilchins 2002) have 
introduced alternatives to medical and psychiat- 
ric perspectives on gender identity. These theo- 
rists suggest that gender is not necessarily linked 
to biological sex assignment at birth, but is cre- 
ated through complex social inequities, and 
gender identity is more fluid. These theorists 
propose transgender identities and gender fluidity 
as normative as oppose to the binary, two-gender 
system and the influence of themes reflecting 
fluidity of gender that have emerged in the dis- 
cipline of human development (Bilodeau and 
Renn 2005). 

As an extension of sexual minority identity, in 
2004 Lev introduced the transgender emergence 
model, a stage model that examines at how 
transgender people come to understand their 
identity. Lev’s model comes from the perspective 
of a counseling or therapeutic point of view and 
focuses on what the individual is experiencing 
and the responsibility of the counselor or inter- 
ventionist. As with other stage theories, Lev’s 
model begins with the first stage as awareness, 
(see Table 1.5 for Lev’s stages). Lev’s clinical 
and philosophical ideology is based on the belief 
that transgenderism is a normal and potentially 
healthy variation of human expression. As pos- 
tulated by Goldner (1988), gender dichotomies 
are not only restrictive, but also constitutive, with 
the gendering of social spheres constraining 
personal freedom and gender categories 



determining what is possible to know. Lev’s 
approach is to consider the ecosystem (i.e., 
influence of environment on perception and 
behavior) in working with transgender persons. 
According to Lev, “gender variance does not 
simply live within individuals but exists ‘within’ 
a larger matrix of relationships, families, and 
communities” (p. xx). 

Lev offers three goals for therapists working 
with transgendered persons and their families. The 
first goal is “to accept that transgenderism is a 
normal expression of human potentiality.” The 
second goal is “to place transgenderism within a 
larger social context that includes an overview of 
the existence of gender variance throughout his- 
tory.” The third goal is “to outline various etiolog- 
ical theories that impact assessment and diagnosis, 
as well as innovative, possibly iconoclastic treat- 
ment strategies to work with gender-dysphoric, 
gender-variant, transgendered, third-sexed, trans- 
sexual, and intersexed people as members of 
extended family systems” (pp. xx-xxi). 

Counseling Theories and Practice 
for Older Adults 

A commonly held view of older persons is that 
they are mentally incompetent. Although there is 
some cognitive decline associated with normal 
aging, the majority of older adults do not 



14 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



demonstrate significant mental decline. 
For LGBT elders, psychosocial issues arise from 
ongoing discrimination on the basis of their 
sexual orientation and gender identity, lack of 
acceptance from the heterosexual community and 
family members, and isolation and exclusion 
from LGBT communities because of ageism. The 
general lack of support in many political, edu- 
cational, and religious institutions and the dis- 
tinctively oppressive social climate for sexual 
minorities in which older LGBT generations live 
creates personal conflict that can manifest itself 
through internalized disorders (e.g., depression, 
homophobia) or externalized disorders (e.g., 
suicidal behavior) (Mabey 2007). Counseling or 
therapeutic intervention can help LGBT elders 
who experience multiple discrimination to come 
to terms with factors associated with ageism (Sue 
and Sue 2013) and how the historically negative 
climate of discrimination and oppression shapes 
their experiences with, and impressions of, their 
own sexual identity (Heaphy 2007; Porter et al. 

2004) . Flowever, it is important for counselors 
not to view identity as necessarily problematic 
(Berger 1982; Mabey 2011). In fact, researchers 
have introduced the concept of “crisis compe- 
tence” or “stigma competence” (Almvig 1982; 
Balsam and D’Augelli 2006; Vaughan and Wa- 
ehler 2010), in which coming-out by LGBT 
persons allows them to develop a competency for 
dealing with other crises or stigma in the life 
span, including difficulties associated with aging 
(Heaphy 2007; Kimmel et al. 2006; Schope 

2005) . Stigma competence was first developed 
with regard to persons from racial and ethnic 
minority groups who have multiple minority 
statuses, including sexual minority identity. In a 
study testing the theory of stigma competence 
with lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults over age 
60, Lawson-Ross (2013) found that older sexual 
minority adults who were more accepting of their 
sexual minority identities had lower levels of 
internalized ageism and had higher levels of life 
satisfaction and happiness than their peers who 
were less accepting of their sexual minority 
identities. 

Counseling Approaches. In working with 
LGBT elders, the selection of the counseling 



approach should be based on the individual and 
his or her needs. Counselors tend to adapt their 
approaches to working with a client based on the 
person’s developmental changes in life, the par- 
ticular cohort to which the person belongs, and 
the social context in which the person lives 
(Blando 2011). Older persons fit into a contex- 
tual, cohort-based, maturity-specific change 
model (Knight 1996) that suggests they face 
particular challenges that are unique in later life. 
Older LGBT persons belong to a particular 
cohort with a collection of experiences and 
norms that differ from those of the present and 
from heterosexual elders (Blando). In the 
remainder of this section, we will present select 
counseling approaches that may be effective with 
older LGBT populations. These counseling 
approaches are not intended to be either inclusive 
or suggestive; rather, they are a starting point or 
serve as guidelines. 

One of the most common forms of therapy 
with the general population and with older adults 
is cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). CBT may 
be particularly efficacious with older adults 
because of its focus on the present, strict struc- 
ture, emphasis on self-monitoring, psychoedu- 
cational orientation, and goal oriented. 
Adjustment may need to be made for older adults 
who have developmental changes such as speed 
of processing in intellectual configuration (e.g., 
later life of crystalized over fluid intelligence), 
emotional changes (i.e., emotions are more 
nuanced and complex and may include 
co-experience of discrepant emotions such as 
being both happy and sad), and the person’s 
worldview (Blando 2011). CBT examines the 
role thoughts play in maintaining a problem, 
stress, or concern. Emphasis is on changing 
dysfunctional thoughts that influence behavior. 
The application of CBT with LGBT elders may 
be effective in addressing behaviors stemming 
from past experiences of discrimination with 
institutions and service providers, fear of 
homophobia-based victimization, and also from 
fear or anticipation of discrimination. In addition, 
Satterfield and Crabb (2010) demonstrated the 
effectiveness of CBT for depression in an older 
gay man. 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



15 



Guided autobiography is another approach 
that is effective with older adults. Guided auto- 
biography is used to help people understand and 
make meaning from their past through reading 
and sharing brief, written essays about their lives, 
and sharing their thoughts about these stories. It 
promotes integration, fulfillment, and compe- 
tence (Blando 2011). LGBT elders often have 
not had a safe venue in which to explore 
or express their feelings, self-concept, or self- 
identity. Guided autobiography offers them a 
private mechanism to do so. 

Another approach applicable to working with 
LGBT elders is persons-centered therapy 
(PCT) by Rogers (1951). Rogers described peo- 
ple who are becoming increasingly actualized as 
having four characteristics: (a) an openness to 
experience, (b) a trust in themselves, (c) an 
internal source of evaluation, and (d) a willing- 
ness to continue growing. PCT has emphasized 
on how individuals can move forward in con- 
structive directions and how they can success- 
fully deal with obstacles both within themselves 
and outside of themselves that are blocking their 
growth. Through self-awareness, an individual 
learns to exercise choice. The therapeutic goal is 
for an individual to achieve a greater degree of 
independence and integration (Corey 2103). 

Theories of Public Health and Practice 

A number of important theories and approaches 
germane to public health are salient for LGBT 
elders. It is important that at least two distin- 
guishing approaches are borne in mind regarding 
public health constructs. First, public health pri- 
marily concerns population health versus the 
health of individuals, and so, allowing for 
within-group differences, public health efforts 
concern the population of LGBT elders rather 
than the actions of individuals. Second, public 
health stresses the importance of prevention 
efforts above and beyond any other efforts. 
Though this is not to say that public health does 
not involve intervention, public health experts 
seek to improve the health of LGBT elders far 
earlier than most other discipline’s current 



intervention efforts contemplate, for example, 
preventing poor health outcomes as a result of 
historic stressors and inequities, such as, until 
recently, the lack of health insurance coverage 
for same-sex partners. In this section, we explain 
four well-recognized approaches/theories to 
public health that have applicability to LGBT 
elders, in particular the socio-ecological model, 
the theory of reasoned action, the health belief 
model, and the transtheoretical model of change 
(DiClemente et al. 2013). 

The first of these approaches is the 
socio-ecological model, most closely associated 
with Bronfenbrenner (1986). Applied to LGBT 
elders, the model places the elder at the center of 
four nested systems (depicted graphically as 
concentric circles), consistent with an 
“elder-centered” (Quandt et al. 1999) approach to 
prevention and intervention. The microsystem, 
which includes the older adult, includes biolog- 
ical and personal factors that converge to influ- 
ence how individuals behave as well as risk 
factors for adverse health outcomes. Consider- 
ation of LGBT elders at the level of the meso- 
system focuses on close relationships (e.g., 
family, friends, neighbors) in order to explore 
how such relationships either protect against or 
promote LGBT health and quality of life. The 
exosystem identifies community contexts in 
which social relationships occur (e.g., neighbor- 
hoods, service organizations). This system pro- 
motes how characteristics settings may affect 
LGBT elders’ health and well-being. Finally, the 
macrosystem includes broad ideological values, 
norms, and institutional patterns that may foster a 
climate in which LGBT elders are either 
encouraged or prohibited, including changes in 
power and control dynamics (e.g., dominance of 
spouse/partner; reversal of child/parent roles) as 
well as age-related changes in social positions 
and financial resources. 

One of the most well-known value- 
expectancy theories in public health is the theory 
of reasoned action, which grew out of research 
Ajzen (2002) and Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) on 
behavior and attitude. Central to this theory is 
that people have control over their lives and can 
consequently make a decision made about a 



16 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



behavior to adopt or discontinue. The authors 
contend that an elder’s beliefs and attitudes shape 
his or her intent to take an action and that social 
influences or norms on LGBT elders also affect 
behavioral intent. For example, if an LGBT elder 
believes that stopping smoking is a goal but 
that society would offer little help for him or her 
to do so because of a pervasive attitude that the 
elder’s sexual orientation is causing the problem, 
then he or she is unlikely to attempt the change 
because the cost of doing so is too high or 
difficult. 

Another type of theory or perspective is those 
concerning a perceived threat. Perhaps the most 
well known is the health belief model, which has 
been used by public health practitioners and 
researchers for over 50 years. The health belief 
model has similarities to the value-expectancy 
model above, but it is also a departure, due to the 
insertion of a threat or fear that drives changes in 
health behavior as well as a person’s perception 
of health severity and his or her perception of 
health susceptibility (Salazar et al. 2013), and, 
added to the model in the late 1980s, the concept 
of self-efficacy (Bandura 1977) or an older 
adult’s conception of his or her own power or 
self-determination (Rosenstock et al. 1988). The 
cost-benefit valuation determines the course of 
action, as it also does with the theory of reasoned 
action described above. A fear appeal might be 
used to promote a health behavior change, such 
as the threat of susceptibility to HIV in older 
adult populations. 

A fourth and well-known stage is the trans- 
theoretical model of change, a model explaining 
how persons may change their health behavior and 
derived from more than 300 theories of psycho- 
therapy (Prochaska 1979; Prochaska and Di- 
Clemente 1986). Five stages, in which persons can 
facilitate, comprise the model: precontemplation, 
contemplation, preparation, action, and mainte- 
nance. Precontemplation is the stage when a per- 
son is not ready to attempt a change at all. In the 
contemplation stage, an elder is thinking of 
embarking on a change, and the impetus to act or 
not is the fulcrum of decisional balance. The scale 
must tip in favor of attempting the change rather 
than impediments to doing so. Preparation 



concerns undertaking some steps toward a change, 
such as talking to a doctor about a health condition 
or visiting another health professional to seek 
advice. The stage of action concerns undertaking 
an identifiable activity (e.g., walking, eating 
healthy foods, wearing a condom). Finally, the 
maintenance stage is when the change is adopted 
and the effort to continue the change diminishes 
from the action phase. Recidivism is possible, but 
continued progress decreases the chances of 
returning to the former and undesired behavior 
(Schneider 2013). High self-efficacy is critical to 
reach the maintenance stage (Bandura 1986). 

Social Work Theories and Approaches 

One of the unique concepts of social work prac- 
tice is an understanding of the constant state of 
change of the contextual arena in which social 
workers operate. With the continuous change in 
environments and populations, social workers 
need to rethink how they deliver services in 
response to distinct alterations in family struc- 
tures and functions, medical advances and aging, 
economic shifts, and shifting evolving profes- 
sional and political ideologies (Allen 2005). 
Gratwick et al. (2014) contend that theoretically 
driven service models are crucial to effective 
service provision. Similar to the other disciplines 
mentioned previously, various theories and model 
are used in social work practice. Social work 
practice employs the developmental theories of 
moral reasoning (Kohlberg 1973; Gilligan 1982), 
cognition (Piaget 1932), stage theories (Erikson 
1950), and transpersonal theories of human 
development (going beyond identity rooted in the 
individual body or ego to include higher levels of 
consciousness). Developmental theories focus on 
the changes and stability of behavior across the 
life span. The remainder of this section concerns a 
presentation of these theories, the primary per- 
spectives, and current social work practice mod- 
els. Infused throughout is discussion on social 
work practice with LGBT elders. 

The major theories used in social work prac- 
tice are systems theory, psychodynamic, social 
learning, and conflict theory. Systems theory 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



17 



(Bertalanffy 1968) is the interdisciplinary study 
of systems to identify and understand principles 
that can be applied reciprocal relationships 
between parts or elements that constitute a 
whole, and the relationships among individuals, 
groups, organizations, or communities and 
mutually influencing factors in the environment. 
A system is a set of elements that interact with 
one another. The system is only as strong as its 
weakest part, and the system is greater than the 
sum of its parts. The focus of this theory is on the 
interconnectedness of elements with all living 
organisms (systems) in nature and social rela- 
tionships (Gladding 2011). Bertalanffy’s model 
assumes a single-dimension cause-and-effect 
relationship between social elements within the 
environment. A demarcation of systems in social 
work involves the designation of particular social 
systems as being microlevel (small- size social 
system such as individual or couples), mezzo- 
level (intermediate-size social system such as 
support networks), and macrolevel (large-size 
social system such as communities and organi- 
zations) (Friedman and Allen 2011). It appears 
that the systems model, as it is applied to social 
systems, provides the social work practitioner the 
means to view human behavior through a com- 
prehensive lens that allows for the assessment of 
the person across a broad spectrum of human 
conditions (Lesser and Pope 2011). 

Carsetensen et al. (1999) introduced socio- 
emotional selectivity theory (SST), which builds 
upon the idea that social networks have value and 
maintains that the perception of time systemati- 
cally influences motivation. A basic tenet is that 
the perception of time affects how people regu- 
late their social environment and that those 
people who perceive time as finite spend their 
time optimizing relationships that are emotion- 
ally fulfilling. Adults are expected to contact 
their social networks and avoid unbeneficial 
relationships. LGBT elders have significantly 
diminished traditional supports when compared 
to the general older population (Lancet 2011), 
which translates into a lack of traditional support 
networks that may not be replaced by the 
strength of other close friends or informal sup- 
port networks with the LGBT community (Irish 



Association of Social Workers 2011). 
Older LGBT adults suggest that they may not use 
or disclose when qualifying for or receiving 
services because they do not trust the social 
environment in which services are delivered or 
do not perceive potential relationships in these 
contexts to be emotionally supportive or fulfill- 
ing (Gratwick et al. 2014). Discussion Box 1.1 
provides further information on the theoretical 
framework of SST. Older LGBT persons must 
perceive value in social networks in order to 
believe that they will benefit from them. Sullivan 
(2011) found that LGBT elders’ decisions to 
enter LGBT senior housing were due to an 
LGBT-accepting social environment that 
increased their sense of safety to increase their 
social networks. The extent to which older 
LGBT individuals have social networks varies by 
gender. Schope (2005) found that the appearance 
of older gay men tended to be judged more 
negatively in the gay community, resulting in 
less social support. Conversely, lesbians tend to 
have more social networks comprised of lesbians 
across the age spectrum and are revered by 
younger lesbians for their insight and perceived 
political power. Older bisexual and transgender 
adult face greater challenges than their gay and 
lesbian peers with regard to stigma, discrimina- 
tion and self-identity, and social networks 
because of their perceived lack of identity to 
either gay men or lesbians. 

Discussion Box 1.1: Socioemotional 
Selectivity Theory (SST) SST presumes 
that goals are always set in temporal con- 
texts and that the relative importance of 
specific goals within this goal constellation 
changes as a function of perceived time. 

When the future is perceived as 
open-ended, future-oriented goals weigh 
most heavily and individuals pursue goals 
that optimize long-range outcomes. 

When endings are perceived, goal con- 
stellations are recognized such that emo- 
tionally meaningful goals (related to 
feelings) are prioritized because such goals 
have more immediate payoffs. 




18 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



Although achieved more gradually, 
approaching old age is also associated with 
increasing recognition that time is, in some 
sense, running out. 

SST was originally formulated to 
explain and predict age differences in 
motivation. Because chronological age is 
associated with perceived time left in life, 
the theory predicts systematic age differ- 
ences in motivation. 

Questions: 

1. Why are individuals more motivated 
toward goal constellation as they age? 

2. Does SST consider a continuum in 
which individuals optimize goal- 
oriented outcomes? 

3. How does SST explain the role of 
social networks for LGBT elders? 

Adapted from Fung and Carstensen 
(2006). 

Another approach, psychodynamic theory, 
also known as insight-oriented theory, has its 
origin in psychoanalytic theory, similar to the 
transdisciplinary change model in public health. 
The psychodynamic approach includes all the 
theories in psychology that regard human func- 
tioning as based on how interaction, drive and 
emotions, particularly unconscious processes as 
manifested in a person’s present behavior. The 
goal of psychodynamic intervention is to increase 
a person’s self-awareness and understanding of 
the influence of the past on present behavior. 
A psychodynamic approach enables a person to 
examine unresolved conflicts and symptoms that 
arise from past dysfunctional relationships and 
manifest themselves in the need to engage in 
abusive and dysfunctional behavior (Haggerty 

2006) . The theory purports that emotions have a 
central place in human behavior and both con- 
scious and unconscious mental activity serves as 
the motivating force in human behavior (McLeod 

2007) . Individuals may become overwhelmed by 
internal and/or external demands and frequently 



use ego defense mechanisms to avoid becoming 
overwhelmed. Social workers use this theory 
when addressing early attachment relationships 
and the developmental history of the individual, 
which includes past trauma. The therapeutic 
techniques used include transference, dream and 
daydream analysis, confrontation, focusing on 
strengths, life history, and complementarity. 
Typically linear, psychodynamic-oriented ther- 
apy focuses on cause-and-effect interactions 
(Gladding 2011). 

Social learning theory (SLT) (Bandura 1971), 
also used by public health, operates from the 
hypothesis that human behavior is learned as 
individuals interact with their environment. Peo- 
ple learn through observing others’ behavior, 
attitudes, and outcomes. Individuals observe 
others and learn through modeling. From 
observing others, an elder forms an idea of how 
new behaviors are performed and later this coded 
information serves as a guide for action. SLT 
explains human behavior as continuous recipro- 
cal interaction among cognitive, behavioral, and 
environmental influences (reciprocal determin- 
ism). SLT is regarded as a bridge between 
behaviorist and cognitive learning theories 
because it encompasses attention, retention, 
reproduction, and motivation. Problematic 
behavior is maintained by positive or negative 
reinforcement. Cognitive-behavioral therapy 
examines the role that thoughts play in main- 
taining a problem, and its emphasis is on chang- 
ing dysfunctional thoughts, which influence 
behavior. Social learning theory has been used 
extensively with younger LGBT persons, espe- 
cially in the area of career choice. SLT applied to 
LGBT elders can be effective in working with 
substance abusers. For example, Bowman and 
Bryant (2011) applied SLT to understand smok- 
ing behavior among LGBT persons because 
compared to the general population, LGBT adults 
have significantly higher smoking rates. One 
plausible explanation for the higher rates is that 
the tobacco industry targets the LGBT commu- 
nity. Bowman and Bryant found that LGBT 
persons often start smoking after “coming-out” in 
direct response to social stresses and gay culture, 
which seems to be support smoking behavior. 




1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



19 



Conflict theory, introduced by Karl Marx 
(cited in Dobb 1979) as the name implies, 
involves conflict, dominance, and oppression in 
social life. Basically, groups and individuals 
attempt to advance their own interests over those 
of others. However, because power is unequally 
divided, social order is based on manipulation 
and control of non-dominant groups by dominant 
groups. In the case of LGBT elders, heterosex- 
uals and younger groups exert domination 
through heterosexism and homophobia. 
Depending on other group affiliations of LGBT 
persons (e.g., race/ethnicity, socioeconomic sta- 
tus), they may be further dominated. Conflict 
theory is further characterized by a lack of open 
conflict as a sign of exploitation. Social change is 
driven by conflict, with periods of change inter- 
rupting long periods of stability. Social workers 
use conflict theory to understand those experi- 
encing oppression in some form or another in 
society. Research indicates that LGBT elders 
experience oppression (e.g., political, religious, 
economic, cultural) and marginalization (e.g., 
sexual orientation, gender identity, age) from 
numerous sources. For example, in a study of the 
prevalence of mental disorders in LGBT persons, 
Meyer (2003) found a higher prevalence of 
mental disorders than in heterosexual persons. 
He attributed this to minority stress, explaining 
that stigma, prejudice, and discrimination create 
a hostile and stressful social environment that 
causes mental health problems. Application of 
conflict theory helps LGBT elders to deal with a 
history of homophobia and discrimination, 
experiences of antigay gay violence and hate 
crimes, addressing public opposition to gay 
marriage, expectations of rejection, internalized 
homophobia, hiding and concealing identity, and 
ameliorative coping processes. 

Perspective in social work practice represents 
the specific aspects of a session that are empha- 
sized. The primary perspectives used in social 
work practice include strengths (Saleeby 1996) 
or resilience, feminist, and ecosystem. The social 
worker believes that a person has multiple 
strengths that are assessed and incorporated into 



the helping relationship. Although resilience has 
various definitions, at times it is “defined as a 
psychological process developed in response to 
intense life stressors that facilitate healthy func- 
tioning” (Ballenger-Browing and Johnson 2010). 
Resilience has four prerequisites: (a) risk or 
predisposition to biopsychosocial or environ- 
mental conditions, (b) exposure to a high- 
magnitude stressor, (c) stress response, and 
(d) return to baseline functioning and symptom 
levels (Ballenger-Browning and Johnson 2010, 
p. 1). The feminist perspective takes into account 
the role of gender and the historical lack of 
power experienced by women in society. Social 
workers using this perspective emphasize equal- 
ity and empowerment of women in society. 
Application of the feminist approach with LGBT 
elders would place emphasis on equality with 
regard to sexual orientation, gender identity, age, 
and other characteristics of the populations. 
Finally, the ecosystem (Germain 1973) is the 
person-to-environment concept presented earlier 
in this chapter. According to Mattaini and Meyer 
(2002), the ecological system has been almost 
universally accepted in social work practice 
because of its framework for understanding net- 
work complexities. 

Social work practice model provides 
step-by-step guides for client sessions. The 
current social work practice models include 
problem-solving, task-centered, solution- 
focused, narrative, cognitive-behavioral, and 
crisis. In the problem-solving approach, one must 
first understand the presenting problem or issue 
and then brainstorm possible solutions. It is 
incumbent upon the person or client to select a 
solution, implement it, and evaluate its effec- 
tiveness. The task-centered model focuses on 
breaking down the problem into small manage- 
able tasks, thus facilitating accomplishment. The 
solution-focused model takes the approach of 
identifying the solution first and having the per- 
son establish the process that will lead to the 
solution. Finally, the narrative model uses a 
variety of method for the person to express his or 
her thoughts. 



20 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



Integration of Practice Models 
in Working with LGBT Elders 

Understanding how models work can work 
effectively in support of LGBT elders is neces- 
sary to improving service outcomes. When 
drawing from theories from the disciplines rep- 
resented in this chapter, it is efficacious to con- 
sider bringing them together from an 
interdisciplinary perspective (some cross one or 
more disciplines anyway). Tan (2009) suggests 
that many in the field of social work remain too 
focused on individual therapy and clinical prac- 
tice when there is a need to shift more globally 
and holistically. Furthermore, progressive social 
work place more emphasizes on the need for the 
individual to be part of his or her own change 
(Mullaly 2002). Tan suggests that community 
development theory (CDT) is a practical frame- 
work. Community development theory is defined 
as “the employment of community structures to 
address social needs and empower groups of 
people” (Mendes 2008, p. 3). CDT is rooted in 
sociology. Its primary functions are to provide 
norms for the practitioner’s actions and a model 
of practical help to communities. CDT depends 
heavily on general systems and on the conceptual 
frameworks of social systems, thus treating 
communities as systems (Cook 1994). Tan pur- 
ports that the principles of CDT have implica- 
tions for the ways clinicians view and engage 
with clients and ways social workers seek to 
make large-scale changes within the community. 

A key to application of CDT to LGBT elders 
is the notion that people involved in a system 
have a sense and recognition of the relationships 
and areas of common concerns with other 
members. For LGBT elders, the community may 
be their immediate surroundings as well as 
regional, national, or international organizations 
with which they have affiliation or that provide 
services and advocacy on their behalf. Because 
many theories are used in community develop- 
ment, the holistic approach of CDT consciously 
attempts to emphasize on the functional rela- 
tionship among the parts and the whole. Given 
the variety and degree of services that LGBT 



elders need, CDT offers a way of looking at the 
interconnectedness of services and activities 
from an operational level intended to improve 
outcomes. Moreover, CDT values and principles 
potentially empower LGBT elder to be involved 
in their community to have input on decisions 
that may influence them. 

Several practice models have been developed 
to assist in older LGBT adults, ranging from 
guidelines for practice to specialized support 
groups and approaches to individual therapy 
(Hash and Rogers 2013). The American Psycho- 
logical Association (APA) developed the Guide- 
lines for Psychological Practice with Lesbian, 
Gay, and Bisexual Clients (www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/ 
resources/guidelines.aspx) (APA 2012), the 
Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender Issues in Counseling (ALGBTIC 

2009) developed competencies for counseling 
LGBT clients, and ALGBTIC in conjunction with 
the American Counseling Association (ACA 

2010) approved competencies for counseling 
transgender clients. The code of ethics of the 
National Association of Social Work (NASW 
2008) (http://www.socialworkers.org/pubs/code. 
asp) emphasizes the importance of cultural com- 
petency and social diversity, including sexual 
orientation and gender identity, as does the Code 
for Professional Ethics for Rehabilitation Coun- 
selors (www.crccertification.com/filrbin/pdf/ 
crcCodeOfEthics.prf) (CRCC 2010). The Cen- 
ters for Disease Control (http://www.cdc.gov/ 
lgbthealth/) emphasize the importance of 
addressing disease in the LGBT community 
across the life course, particularly as it concerns 
HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases as 
well as violence prevention and intervention 
(CDC 2014). The Council on Social Work Edu- 
cation (CS WE) has incorporated issues relevant to 
sexual orientation (www.cswc.org/File.aspx?id= 
25501) (CSWE 2008). Through an examination of 
the unique strengths and challenges faced by older 
LGBT adults, Crisp et al. (2008) constructed a 
profile and suggested an age-competent and gay 
affirmative model for practice, including cultur- 
ally competent knowledge, attitudes, and skills for 
work with older LGBT adults in the USA. 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



21 



Building social networks to address chal- 
lenges faced by LGBT elders who share similar 
experiences and backgrounds is offered as a way 
to build an effective modality (Hash and Rogers 
2013). In a technological era, the use of cyber 
counseling has the potential to deliver services to 
LGBT elders within their residential setting 
without requiring them to travel for services. 
However, it is important to recognize that some 
LGBT elders do not have access to technology or 
do not have technology literacy. 



Summary 

In conclusion, theories from the disciplines pre- 
sented here (i.e., counseling, public health, and 
social work) are replete with theories that are 
discipline specific but also that draw upon other 
disciplines, in particular those from psychother- 
apy and sociology. Consistent among those pre- 
sented is an understanding of LGBT elders from 
the perspectives of stages of development or 
progress, of interlocking systems and networks, 
of the influence of the environment, of costs and 
benefits, of holism, and of interdisciplinarity. Not 
intended to be exhaustive, this chapter has pre- 
sented major theories, frameworks, and concepts 
necessary to provide human services for the 
LGBT population. These frameworks, either 
explicitly or implicitly, undergird the rest of the 
chapters of the book as well as provide a 
touchstone for understanding the unique per- 
spective presented. 



Learning Exercises 

Self-Check Questions 

1. What is the function of theory for 
practitioners? 

2. Even when providers of aging services 
express willingness to become more respon- 
sive to the needs of LGBT older adults, what 
usually are the outcomes? 



3. In which of Erikson’s stages of psychosocial 
development is it more complicated for an 
LGBT elder to accept one’s life and self? 
Explain why? 

4. What are the similarities between Sigmund 
Freud and Erving Gofifman’s concepts about 
childhood development? 

5. What is the difference between a theory, a 
construct, and a model? 

Experiential Exercises 

1. Select a theory and apply the concepts in a 
role-play situation to LGBT elders in a group 
counseling session or self-advocacy activity. 

2. Given current theories, constructs, and mod- 
els, identify what is a gap and propose a 
model for application to LGBT elders for 
counseling and/or service delivery. 

3. Select a theory in a specific discipline and 
deconstruct it through a critical analysis in its 
shortcoming for application to LGBT elders. 

Multiple-Choice Questions 

1. Who was one of the first theorists to present 
identifiable stages of homosexual identity? 

(a) Rogers 

(b) Skinner 

(c) Plummer 

(d) Gladding 

2. The Kinsey scale clarified which of the fol- 
lowing issues about sexuality? 

(a) Individuals are strictly heterosexual or 
homosexual 

(b) There is greater variability of sexual 
orientation 

(c) Heterosexuality is not primary or held 
above other sexual orientations 

(d) Both B and C 

(e) All of the above 

3. How does the minority stress model apply to 
LGBT persons? 

(a) Identifies pathogenic conditions that 
stigmatize LGBT persons and treat them 
as inferior to heterosexual individuals 



22 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



(b) Attempts to imply that sexual minorities 
have higher rates of psychosocial issues 
because of their sexual orientation and 
gender identity 

(c) Confirms LGBT sexual identity as a 
mental illness 

(d) Supports the notion that gender is 
socially defined 

4. Which of the following developed the 
transgender emergence model? 

(a) McCarn-Fassinger 

(b) Lev 

(c) D’Augelli 

(d) Devor 

5. Which therapy may be particularly effective 
with older adults because of its focus on the 
present, emphasis on self-monitoring, psy- 
choeducational orientation, and goal 
orientation? 

(a) Person-centered therapy 

(b) Psychoanalytic therapy 

(c) Cognitive-behavioral therapy 

(d) Existential therapy 

6. Which of the following is of primary concern 
for public health? 

(a) Health of individuals 

(b) Population health 

(c) Immigrant populations 

(d) Underserved groups 

7. Which theory emphasizes that people have 
control over their lives and can consequently 
make a decision about a behavior to adopt or 
discontinue? 

(a) Theory of reasoned action 

(b) Centrality theory 

(c) Snowball theory 

(d) Gestalt theory 

8. Which theory has as it basic tenet that the 
perception of time affects how people regu- 
late their social environment and that those 
who perceive time as finite spend their time 
optimizing relationships that are emotionally 
fulfilling? 

(a) Reality theory 

(b) Feminist theory 

(c) Behavior theory 

(d) Socioemotional selective theory 



9. Which theory hypothesizes that human 
behavior is learned through observing oth- 
er’s behaviors and through modeling? 

(a) Ecological theory 

(b) Systems theory 

(c) Social learning theory 

(d) Solution-focused theory 

10. Which theory is defined as the use of com- 
munity structures to address social needs and 
empower groups of people? 

(a) Community action theory 

(b) Community development theory 

(c) Family systems theory 

(d) Action development theory 

Key 

1- c 

2- d 

3- a 

4- b 

5- c 

6- b 

7 - a 

8- d 

9- c 

10- b 



Resources 

American Counseling Association: www. 

counseling.org. 

Association for Adult Development and Aging: 
www.aadaweb.org. 

Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, & 
Transgender Issues in Counseling: www.algbtic. 
org. 

Association of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, & 
Transgender Issues in Counseling. (2009). 
Competencies for counseling with transgender 
clients. Alexandria, VA: Author. 

Bockting, W., Knudson, G., & Goldberg, J. M. 
(2006). Counseling and mental health care of 
transgender adults and loved ones. Available at 
www.vch.ca/transhealth. 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



23 



Dworkin, S. H., & Pope, M. (Eds.). (2012). 
Casebook for counseling lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender persons and their families. 
Alexandria, VA: American Counseling 

Association. 

Institute of medicine. (2011). The health of les- 
bian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people: 
Building a foundation for better understanding. 
Available at http://www.jom.edu/Reports/2011/ 
The-Health-of-Lesbian-Gay-Bisexual-and- 
Transgender-People.aspx. 

National Association for Social Workers: www. 
socialworkers.org. 

National Gerontological Society of America: 
www.geron.org. 



References 

Ajzen, I. (2002). Residual effects of past on later 
behavior: Habituation and reasoned action perspec- 
tives. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(2), 
107-122. 

Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes 
and predicting social behavior. Englewood Cliff, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 

Allen, E. V. (2005). Teaching generalist practice in a rural 
context. In L. H. Ginsberg (Ed.), Social work in rural 
communities (pp. 445^163). Alexandria, VA: Council 
on Social Work Education. 

Almvig, M. (1982). The invisible minority: Aging and 
lesbianism. Utica, NY: Institute of Gerontology. 

Altman, D. (1971). Homosexual: Oppression and liber- 
ation. New York: E. P. Dutton. 

American Counseling Association. (2010). Competencies 
for counseling with transgender clients. Journal of 
LGBT Issues in Counseling, 4, 135-159. 

American Psychological Association. (2012). Guidelines 
for practice with LGBT clients. Available from http:// 
www.apa.org/pi/lgbt/resources/guidelines.aspx. 

Association for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender 
Issues in Counseling. (2009). Competencies for coun- 
seling with transgender clients. Alexandria, VA: 
Author. 

Ballenger-Browning, K„ & Johnson, D. C. (2010). Key 
facts of resilience. San Diego, CA: Navel Center for 
Combat & Operational Stress Control. 

Balsam, K., & D'Augelli, A. (2006). The victimization of 
older LGBT adults: Patterns, impact, and implications 
for intervention. In D. Kimmel, T. Rose, & S. Davis 
(Eds.), Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender aging: 
Research and clinical perspectives (pp. 110-130). 
New York, NY: Columbia University Press. 



Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. New York: 
General Learning Press. 

Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying 
theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review, 
84(2), 191. 

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of though and 
action: A social cognitive theory. Upper Sadie River, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Berger, R. M. (1982). The unseen minority: Older gays 
and lesbians. Social Work, 27(3), 236-242. 

von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General systems theory: 
Foundation, development, and application. New 
York: Braziller. 

Bilodeau, B. L. (2005). Beyond the gender binary: A case 
study of transgender college student development at a 
Midwestern university. Journal of Gay and Lesbian 
Issues in Education, 3(1), 29-44. 

Bilodeau, B. L., & Renn, K. A. (2005). Analysis of LGBT 
identity development models and implications for 
practice. New directions for Student Sendees, 111 , 
25-39. 

Blando, J. (2011). Counseling older adults. New York: 
Routledge. 

Bowman, L., & Bryant, L. (2011). The application of 
social learning theory to understanding smoking 
behavior among LGBTQ individuals. Retrieved July 
1, 2014 from www.adulter.org/Proceedings/2011/ 

papers/bowman_bryant.pdf. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1986). The ecology of the family as a 
context for human development: Research perspec- 
tives. Developmental Psychology, 22, 723-742. 

Brooks, V. R. (1981). Minority stress and lesbian women. 
Lexington, MA: D. C. Health. 

Burleson, W. E. (2005). Bi America: Myths, truths, and 
struggles of an invisible community. New York: 
Harrington Park Press. 

Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble: Feminism and the 
subversion of identity. New York: Routledge. 

Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter: On the discursive 
limits of sex. New York: Routledge. 

Butler, R. N. (1994). Dispelling ageism: The cross-cutting 
intervention. Changing perceptions of aging and the 
aged. New York, NY: Springer. 

Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D. M., & Charles, S. T. 
(1999). Taking time seriously: A theory of socioemo- 
tional selectivity. American Psychologist, 54(3), 165— 
181. 

Cass, V. C. (1979). Homosexual identity formation: A 
theoretical model. Journal of Homosexuality, 4, 219- 
235. 

Cass, V. C. (1984). Homosexual identity: A concept in 
need of definition. Journal of Homosexuality, 9(2-3), 
105-126. 

Centers for Desiease Control. (2014). The sociological- 
ecological model: A framework for prevention. Avail- 
able from http://www.cdc.gov/violencePrevention/ 
overvie w/social-ecologicalmodel . html . 

Chapman, B„ & Brannock, J. (1987). Proposed model of 
lesbian identity development: An empirical examina- 
tion. Journal of Homosexuality, 74(3/4), 69-80. 



24 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



Coleman, E. (1982). Developmental stages of the 
coming-out process. W. Paul, J. D. Weinrich. 
J. C. Gonsiorek & M. E. Hotvedt (eds.), Homosexu- 
ality: Social, psychological and biological issues. 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

Commission on Rehabilitation Counselor Certification. 
(2010). Code of professional ethics for rehabilitation 
counselors. Available from http://www. 
crccertification.com/filrbin/pdf/crcCodeOfEthics.pdf. 

Cook, J. B. (1994). Community development theory. 
Retrieved June 30, 2014 from http://extension. 
missouri.edu/p/MP568. 

Corey, G. (2103) Theory and practice of counseling and 
psychotherapy. Belmont, CA: Brooks Cole. 

Cox, N., Dewaele, A., van Houtte, M., & Vincke, 
J. (2011). Stress-related growth, coming out, and 
internalized homonegativity in lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual youth. An experiment of stress-related 
growth within the minority stress model. Journal of 
Homosexuality, 58, 117-137. 

Cox, N., Vanden Berghe, W., Dewaele, A., & Vincke, 
J. (2009). General and minority stress in an LGB 
population in Flanders. Journal of LGBT Health 
Research, 4(4), 181-194. 

Creed, B. (1995). Lesbian bodies: Tribades, tomboys, and 
tarts. In E. Grosz & E. Probyn (Eds.), Sexy bodies: The 
strange carnalities of feminism. New York: Routledge. 

Crisp, C., Wayland, S., & Gordon, T. (2008). Older gay, 
Lesbian, and bisexual adults: Tools for age-competent 
and gay affirmative practice. Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Social Sendees, 20(1/2), 5-29. 

D’Augelli, A. R. (1994). Identity development and sexual 
orientation: Toward a model of lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual development. In E. J. Trickett, R. J. Watts & 

D. Birman (Eds.), Human diversity: Perspectives on 
people in context (pp. 321-333). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Devor, A. H. (2004). Witnessing and mirroring: A 
fourteen-stage model of transsexual identity forma- 
tion. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Psychiatry, 8(1/2), 
41-67. 

DiClemente, R. J., Salazar, L. F., & Crosby, R. A. (2013). 
Health behavior theory for public health: Principles, 
foundations, and applications. Burlington, MA: Jones 
and Barlett Learning. 

Dobb, M. (Ed.). (1979). A contribution to the critique of 
political economy. London, Lawrence & Whishart. 

Dziengel, L. E. (2008). Older same sex couples and 
ambiguous loss theory: The mutual existence of 
ambiguity and resiliency. Doctoral dissertation. Uni- 
versity of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. 

Eliason, M. J. (1996). An inclusive model of lesbian 
identity. Journal of Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual 
Identity, 7(1), 3-19. 

Eliason, M. J., & Schope, R. (2007). Shifting sands or 
solid foundation? Lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans- 
gender identity formation. In I. H. Meyer & M. 

E. Northridge (Eds.), The health of sexual minorities 
(pp. 3-26). New York: Springer. 



Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: 
Norton. 

Faderman, L. (1984). The “new gay” lesbians. Journal of 
Homosexuality, 70(3/4), 65-75. 

Fassinger, R. E., & Miller, B. A. (1996). Validation of an 
inclusive model of sexual minority formation on a 
sample of gay men. Journal of Homosexuality, 32(2), 
53-78. 

Feinberg, L. (1996). Transgender warriors: Making 
history from Joan of Arc to Dennis Rodman. Boston: 
Beacon Press. 

Feinberg, L. (1998). Trans liberation: Beyond pink and 
blue. Boston: Beacon Press. 

Fox, R. C. (1995). Bisexual identities. In A. R. D’Augelli 
& C. J. Patterson (Eds.), Lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
identities over the lifespan: Psychological perspec- 
tives (pp. 48-86). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Freud, S. (1949). An outline of psychoanalysis. New 
York, NY: Norton. 

Friedman, B. D., & Allen, K. N. (2011). Systems theory. 
In J. Brandell (Ed.), Theory and practice of clinical 
social work (pp. 3-18). New Y ork, NY : The Free Press. 

Fritz, K. (1993). The bisexual option (2nd ed.). Bing- 
hamton, NY: The Haworth Press. 

Fung, H. H., & Carstensen, L. L. (2006). Goals change 
when life’s fragility is primed: Lessons learned from 
older adults, the September 11 attacks and SARS. 
Social Cognition, 24(3), 248-278. 

Germain, C. B. (1973). An ecological perspective in case 
work. Social Casework, 54, 323-330. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. 

Gladding, S. T. (2011). Family therapy: History, theory, and 
practice (5th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 

Gofifman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of 
spoiled identity. New York: Simon & Schuster. 

Goldner, V. (1988). Generation and gender: Normative 
and covert hierarchies. Family Process, 27 ', 17-31. 

Gratwick, S„ Jihanian, L. J., Holloway, I. W., Sanchez, 
M., & Sullivan, K. (2014). Social work practice with 
LBGT seniors. Journal of Gerontological Social 
Work, 57, 889. doi: 10. 1080/01634372.2014.885475. 

Grossman, A. H. (2008). Conducting research among 
older lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults. Journal of Gay 
and Lesbian Social Services, 20(1/2), 51-67. 

Haggerty, J. (2006). Psychodynamic therapy. Psych 
central. Retrieved July 1, 2014 From http:// 
psycentral.com/lib/psychodynamic-therapy/000 119. 

Halberstam, J. (1998). Female masculinity. Durham: 
Duke University Press. 

Hall, R. L., & Fine, M. (2005). The stories we tell: The 
lives and friendship of two older black lesbians. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29, 177-187. 

Harley, D. A., Stansbury, K., Nelson, M., & Espinosa, C. T. 
(2014). A profile of rural elderly African American 
lesbians: Meeting their needs. In H. F. O. Vakalahi, G. 
M. Simpson, & N. Giunta (Eds.), The collective spirit of 
aging across cultures (pp. 133-155). New York: 
Springer. 



1 Theories, Constructs, and Applications ... 



25 



Hash, K. M., & Rogers, A. (2013). Clinical practice with 
older LGBT clients: Overcoming lifelong stigma 
through strength and resilience. Clinical Social Work 
Journal 41(3), 249-257. 

Heaphy, B. (2007). Sexualities, gender and ageing. 
Current Sociology, 55(2), 193-210. 

Hooyman, N. R., & Kiyak, H. A. (2008). Social 
gerontology: A multidisciplinary perspective (8th 
ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson. 

Huebner, D., & Davis, M. (2007). Perceived antigay 
discrimination and physical health outcomes. Health 
Psychology, 26, 627-634. 

Hughes, A. K., Harold, R. D., & Boyer, J. (2011). 
Awareness of LGBT aging issues among aging 
services network providers. Journal of Gerontological 
Social Work, 54, 659-677 . 

Humphreys, N. A., & Quam, J. K. (1998). Middle-aged 
and old gay, lesbian, and bisexual adults. In G. 
A. Appleby & J. W. Anastas (Eds.), Not just a passing 
phase: Social work with gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
people (pp. 245-267). New York: Columbia Univer- 
sity Press. 

Irish Association of Social Workers. (2011). Lesbian, gay 
and bisexual people: A guide to good practice for 
social workers. Dublin: Health Service Executive. 

Isaacs, G., & McKendricj, B. (1992). Male homosexuality 
in South Africa: Identity formation, culture, and crisis. 
Oxford University Press, USA. 

Jablonski, R. A., Vance, D. E., & Beattie, E. (2013). The 
invisible elderly: Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans- 
gender older adults. Journal of Gerontological Nurs- 
ing, 39(11), DOl: 10.3928/00989134-20130916-02. 

Kimmel, D., Rose, T., & David, S. (Eds.). (2006). 
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender aging: 
Research and clinical perspectives. New York, NY: 
Columbia University Press. 

Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). 
Sexual behavior in the human male. Philadelphia: 
W. B. Saunders. 

Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., Martin, C. E., & 
Gebhard, P. H. (1953). Sexual behavior in the human 
female. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders. 

Knight, B. (1996). Psychotherapy with older adults (2nd 
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Kohlberg, L. (1973). The claim to moral adequacy of a 
highest stage of moral judgment. Journal of Philos- 
ophy, 70(18), 630-646. 

Lancet. (2011). Health of lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender populations. The Lancet, 377, 1211. 

Lawson-Ross, A. D. (2013, August). Testing the theory of 
stigma competence with gay, lesbian and bisexual 
adults over age 60. Dissertation, University of Akron, 
Akron, Ohio. 

Lesser, J. G., & Pope, D. S. (2011). Human behavior and 
the social environment : Theory and practice. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. 

Lev, A. 1. (2004). Transgender emergence: Therapeutic 
guidelines for working with gender-variant people 



and their families. New York: Haworth Clinical 
Practice Press. 

Levinson, D. J. (1978). The seasons of a man’s life. 
New York: Knopf. 

Levinson, D. J. (1996). The seasons of a woman’s life. 
New York: Knopf. 

Mabey, J. E. (2011). Counseling older adults in LGBT 
communities. The professional Counselor: Research 
and Practice, 7(1), 57-62. 

Mattaini, M. A., & Meyer, C. H. (2002). The ecosystems 
perspective: Implications for practice. Retrieved July 

I, 2014 from http://home.earthlink.net/~mattaini? 
Ecosystems . html . 

Maybe, J. E. (2007). Spirituality and religion in the lives 
of gay men and lesbian women. In L. Badgett & 

J. Frank (Eds.), Sexual orientation discrimination: An 
international perspective (pp. 225-235). London: 
Routledge. 

McCam, S. R., & Fassinger, R. E. (1997). Revisioning 
sexual minority identity formation: A new model of 
lesbian identity and its implications for counseling and 
research. The Counseling Psychologist, 24(3), 508-534. 

McLeod, S. (2007). Psychodynamic approach. Simply 
Psychology. Retrieved July 1, 2014 from http://www. 
simplypsychology.org/psychodynamic.html. 

Mendes, P. P. (2008). Teaching community development 
to social work students: A critical reflection. Commu- 
nity Development Journal, 44(2), 248-262. 

Meyer, I. H. (1995). Identity, stress, and resilience in 
lesbian, gay men, and bisexuals of color. The Coun- 
seling Psychologist, 38, 442-454. 

Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental 
health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: 
Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psycholog- 
ical Bulletin, 129, 674—691. 

Meyer, I. H. (2010). Identity, stress, and resilience in 
lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals of color. The 
Counseling Psychologist, 38, 442^154. 

Minton, H. L., & McDonald, G. J. (1984). Homosexual 
identity formation as a developmental process. Jour- 
nal of Homosexuality, <3(1), 47-60. 

Morales, E. S. (1989). Ethnic minority families and 
minority gays and lesbians. Journal of Homosexuality, 
17, 217-239. 

Nutterbrock, L., Rosenblum, A., & Blumenstein, R. 
(2002). Transgender identity affirmation and mental 
health. International Journal of Transgenderism, 6(4), 
237-256. 

Mullaly, B. (2002). Challenging oppression: A critical 
social work approach. Canada: Oxford University Press. 

Orel, N. A. (2004). Gay, lesbian, and bisexual elders. 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 43(2), 57-77 . 

Payne, M. (1997). Modem social work theory. Chicago, 
IL: Lyceum Books. 

Piaget, J. (1932). The moral judgment of the child. 
London: Kegan, Paul, Trench. Trubner and Company. 

Plummer, K. (1973). Sexual stigma: An interactionist 
account. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 



26 



D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster 



Porter, M„ Russell, C., & Sullivan, G. (2004). Gay, old, 
and poor: Service delivery to aging gay men in inner 
city Sydney, Australia. Journal of Gay and Lesbian 
Social Services, 16(2), 43-57. 

Prochaska, J. O. (1979). Sysyems of psychotherapy: A 
transtheoretical analysis. Homewood, IL: Dorsey 
Press. 

Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1986). Toward a 
comprehensive model of change (pp. 3-27). 
New York, NY: Springer. 

Quam, J. K. (2004). Issues in gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgender aging. In W. Swan (Ed.), Handbook of 
gay, lesbian and transgender administration and 
policy (pp. 137-156). New York: Marcel Dekker Inc. 

Quandt, S. A., Me Donald, J., Bell, R. A., & Arcury, T. A. 
(1999). Aging research in multiethnic rural commu- 
nities: Gaining entree through communty involve- 
ment. Journal of Cross-cultural Gerontology, 14(2), 
113-130. 

Renn, K. A., & Bilodeau, B. (2005). Queer student leaders: A 
case study of identity development and lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender student involvement at a 
Midwestern research university. Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Issues in Education, 2(4), 49-71. 

Reynolds, A. I., & Pope, R. L. (1991). The complexities 
of diversity: Exploring multiple oppressions. Journal 
of Counseling and Development, 70, 174-180. 

Rogers, C. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Salazar, L. F., Stephenson, R. B., Sullivan, P. S., & 
Tarver, R. (2013). Development and validation of 
HIV-related dyadic measures for men who have sex 
with men. Journal of Sex Research, 50(2), 164-177. 

Saleeby, D. (1996). The strength perspective in social 
work practice. Needham, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Satterfield, I. M., & Crabb, R. (2010). Cognitive- 
behavioral therapy for depression in an older gay 
man: A clinical case study. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 17(1), 45-55. 

Schneider, M. I. (2013). Introduction to public health 
(4th ed.). Burlington, VA: Jones & Barlett Learning. 



Schope, R. D. (2005). Who’s afraid of growing old? Gay 
and lesbian perception of aging. Journal of Geronto- 
logical Social Work, 45(A), 23-39. 

Siegel, S., & Lowe, R., Jr. (1994). Uncharted lives: 
Understanding the life passages of gay men. New 
York: Dutton. 

Storms, M. D. (1978). Sexual orientation and 
self-perception. In P. Pliner, K. R. Blanstein, I. 
M. Spigel, T. Alloway, & L. Krames (Eds.), Percep- 
tion of emotion in self and others: advances in 
the study of communication and affect (Vol. 5, 
pp. 165-180). New York: Plenum. 

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013). Counseling the culturally 
diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Sullivan, K. (2011). The experience of senior housing for 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender seniors: An 
exploratory study. Portland, Oregon: Portland State 
University Press. 

Szymanski, D. M., & Gupta, A. (2009). Examining the 
relationship between multiple internalized oppressions 
and African American lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
questioning persons’ self-esteem and psychological 
distress. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56(1), 
110-118. 

Tan, A. (2009). Community development theory and 
practice: Bridging the divide between ‘micro ’ and 
‘macro ' levels of social work. Paper presented at the 
North American Association of Christian in Social 
Work. Indianapolis Indiana. Retrieved June 10, 2014 
from www.nacsw.org/Publications/Proceedings2009/ 
T an ACommunity .pdf . 

Troiden, R. (1988). Gay and lesbian identity: A socio- 
logical analysis. Dix Hills, NY: General Hall. 

Vaughan, M., & Waehler, C. (2010). Coming out growth: 
Conceptualizing and measuring stress-related growth 
associated with coming out to others as a sexual 
minority. Journal of Adult Development, 17, 94-109. 

Wilchins, R. A. (2002). Queerer bodies. In J. Nestle, C. 
Howell, & R. A. Wilchins (Eds.), Genderqueer: Voices 
from beyond the sexual binary. Alyson: Los Angeles. 



Sexual Minority Status and Aging 

Pamela B. Teaster, John T. White and Sujee Kim 



Abstract 

There are estimated to be between 1.4 and 3.8 million LGBT Americans 
over the age of 65. This population is expected to increase between 3.6 
and 7.2 million due to the Baby Boom generation. The older adult 
population is the most rapidly growing age group in the United States and 
experiences normal age-related changes in cognition as well as in internal 
and external physical health. Although differences exist within and among 
groups, more minority elders live in more poverty and with lower incomes 
than their white counterparts. Emerging scholarship reveals that social 
isolation and discrimination experienced by many LGBT elders hinder 
them from aging well. Increasing diversity of the LGBT elder population 
has important implications for bolstering individual autonomy in the care 
environments. 



Keywords 

LGBT • Demographic characteristics • Theories of aging • Population 



Overview 



P.B. Teaster (ISI) • S. Kim 
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA 
e-mail: pteaster@vt.edu 

S. Kim 

e-mail: sujee@vt.edu 
P.B. Teaster • J.T. White 

Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
USA 

e-mail: whitejt2@vcu.edu 



Older adults as a population are living longer than 
ever before in history. Because of this phenome- 
non, one relatively recent in history, our under- 
standing of the population of older adults is 
becoming more nuanced as the once and paro- 
chially assumed homogeneity of older adults is 
disentangled to reveal a landscape that is increas- 
ingly heterogeneous. Scholars are increasingly 
examining the heterogeneity of the older adult 
population that identifies as LGBT. To that end, 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_2 



27 




28 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



this chapter delineates an understanding of LGBT 
elders by providing information on a general aging 
population as well as on those elders who identify 
as being in a minority status, particularly those 
with a sexual minority status. We consider basic 
age-related changes as well as what they may 
mean for elders who are LGBT, and we consider 
current trends and future issues (e.g., health dis- 
parities and person-centered care). 

Learning Objectives 

By the end of the chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 

1. Identify basic terms, including sexual orien- 
tation and gender identity, LGBT, unisex, 
queer, questioning, ally, sex, gender role, and 
gender expressing. 

2. Understand relevant characteristics of 
African-American, Hispanic, and Asian 
elders. 

3. Identify age-related changes. 

4. Explain the nexus between aging and LGBT 
older adults. 

5. Describe basic theories of aging salient for 
LGBT older adults. 



Introduction 

That older adults are living to longer ages are 
now culturally and historically accepted, but 
thinking beyond the fact that older adults com- 
prise approximately a fifth of the US population 
still seem enigmatic to many. Though many 
policies and services dating back from the 1960s 
have evolved to reflect a more nuanced view of 
the population of adults who are age 65 and over, 
others have lagged behind, still regarding older 
adults as a homogenous group. In fact, nothing 
could be further from the truth. Our under- 
standing of the current population of older adults 
tends to reveal great differences in race and eth- 
nicity, which is further revealed in sexual 



orientation and gender identify, education, 
income, and physical and mental health mea- 
sures. The population of elders who identify as 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender has come 
to the forefront as our understanding of the aging 
population becomes more nuanced than in pre- 
vious generations and as individuals who are 
aging are coming out more than in previous 
generations. Legislative landmarks, such as the 
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMO 1996) and the 
ensuing state by state legislative and legal battles, 
heighten the overall awareness and need to 
understand both how individuals in the general 
population age as well as how those who are of 
sexual minority status age. 

The purpose of this chapter is to help the 
reader understand the nexus of sexual minority 
status and aging. First, we provide definitions 
germane to those who identify as being members 
in the population with sexual minority status. 
Second, we characterize the population of elders, 
elders with a minority status, and the population 
of LGBT elders. Third, we explain age-related 
changes for the general population. Next, we 
discuss issues of aging for those in a sexual 
minority status. We explain theories of aging that 
are salient for the aging population and conclude 
with a discussion of future considerations for 
those who are aging and identify as LGBT. 

Definitions 

The nomenclature surrounding sexual orientation 
and gender identity, across the life span, is 
ever-expanding and increasingly complex. The 
decade between the Stonewall Riots in New 
York in 1969 and the Castro Riots in San Fran- 
cisco in 1979 saw an emergence of the term 
“gay” to replace the largely derogatory term, 
“homosexual.” Both terms served as an umbrella 
for “gay” men and women. At the same time, as 
gay women forged more public identities in 
conjunction with the second feminist movement 
for equal rights in the 1970s, the terms “gay 
and lesbian” emerged (Faderman 1991). The 
terms “bisexual” and “transgender” subsequently 
emerged also, as new and unique communities 



2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



29 



struggled for voice and identity from the mac- 
rostructural and overly inclusive “homosexual” 
umbrella. 

Toward the latter part of the 1980s, the initials 
LGBT and GLBT evolved as inclusive of the 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender commu- 
nity in place of “gay” or “gay and lesbian.” It is, 
however, important to note that significant strains 
of resistance to the inclusivity were present and 
remain, particularly among bisexual and trans- 
gender communities (Alexander and Yescavage 
2004). These strains of resistance continue as the 
LGBT initials expand to include queer, ques- 
tioning, unisex, intersex, asexual, and ally. 

To enjoy a comprehensive understanding of 
the totality of the sexual orientation and gender 
identity umbrella of terms requires a nuanced 
understanding when engaging in a true 
person-centered approach to care for elders. For 
the purposes of this and the following chapters, it 
is important to understand that sexual orientation 
(LGB) and gender identity (T) are unique. Sexual 
orientation refers to one’s sexual or romantic 
attraction and, in the case of LGB, refers to a 
sexual or romantic attraction to members of the 
same gender. Gender identity refers to someone’s 
innate, psychological (not necessarily physical) 
identification as male, female, or other gender 
(see definitions for LGBTQUIA in Fig. 2.1). 

Describing the Population 

According to the National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force (2011), there are currently between 1.4 and 
3.8 million LGBT Americans over the age of 65. 
By 2030, this number is expected to increase to 
between 3.6 and 7.2 million LGBT Americans, 
as the Baby Boom population, those born 
between 1946 and 1964, ages. Although there is 
no definitive measure to determine the percent- 
age of LGBT individuals in the USA, national 
organizations such as the Human Rights Cam- 
paign and the National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force use 3.5 % as a measure. 

Certainly, numerous limitations impact the 
LGBT census, not the least of which are indi- 
viduals who do not recognize and report their 



sexual orientation or gender identity. Further, 
there are those whom the LGBT umbrella does 
not cover, such as persons who identify as unisex, 
intersex, and asexual. In addition, the Human 
Rights Campaign believes that the data based on 
the 2010 US Census do not represent a compre- 
hensive picture, as the Census only counts indi- 
viduals from gay- and lesbian-identified 
households (Gendron et al. 2013). Much of the 
data on LGBT individuals are aggregated from 
national, urban studies, many of which do not 
include older adults; individuals from rural com- 
munities; and those who do not, or have not as 
yet, identified as LGBT. This representation is 
only one component, however, of those individ- 
uals who are considered to be older adults. 

Understanding the Older Adult 
Population 

The very description of an older adult calls into 
question at what age one becomes an older adult. 
Historians have long recognized that persons as 
young as age 40 could be characterized as old as 
late as the early 1900s; the Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act (1967) covered discrimination 
of employees aged 40 and over. What does seem 
to be clear is that most people think of them- 
selves as being “younger than” another person 
rather than “older than.” This statement illus- 
trates that being older is somewhat subjective as 
well as dependent on the population under 
examination. For example, the age at which a 
farmer is considered old is 50 (Amshoff and 
Reed 2005), which is also the age that HIV/AIDS 
researchers place research participants in the 
older adult category (Goodroad 2003). Despite 
numerous subgroups within the population, 
many of whom age differently, the age at which 
recipients qualified for full Social Security ben- 
efits was set at age 65 in 1935. In the 1960s, the 
US government again de facto established old 
age as being 65 years old or the age when most 
persons qualify for Older Americans Act, 
Medicare, and Medicaid dollars and services. 
These rough age delineations do little to encap- 
sulate what it means to be an older adult who is 



30 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



Lesbian- A woman who is attracted physically, romantically, emotionally and/or spiritually to other 
women. 

Gay- Commonly used to describe a man who is attracted physically, romantically, emotionally and/or 
spiritually to other men. Some women prefer the term “gay” over “lesbian.” Gay can also be an 
umbrella term for many people who identify within the LGBTQUIA realm. 

Bisexual- A person who is attracted sexually and emotionally to members of both sexes. (Assumes a 
binary understanding of gender) 

Transgender- A person whose gender identity and/or gender expression differs from the sex they 
were assigned at birth. A person who feels that the binary gender system (male/female) is an 
incomplete description of who they are. An umbrella term for people whose anatomies and/or 
appearance do not conform to predominant gender roles. 

Unisex: a term referring to individuals who ascribe to both a male and female gender or have an 
outward expression of both the male and female gender. 

Queer- A blanket term that some LGBTQUIA individuals use to describe themselves. It is preferred 
by some because it is inclusive of the entire LGBTQUIA community. Most often used as a self- 
identification by an LGBTQIA individual. 

Questioning- A person who is in the process of determining sexual orientation or gender identity. 
Intersex- A term to describe a person whose biological sex is ambiguous. There are many genetic, 
hormonal, and/or anatomical variations which cause someone to be intersex. The term intersex is 
preferred to “hermaphrodite,” which is now considered a derogatory term. 

Asexual- A person who does not experience sexual attraction towards anyone. Asexual individuals 
view their asexuality in different ways and are extremely diverse. 

Ally- A member of the majority/dominant group who works to support and advocate for the 
LGBTQUIA population. 

SEX, GENDER ROLE, GENDER IDENTITY, GENDER EXPRESSION: 

Sex- Classification of a person as male or female, assigned at birth based on external genitalia. Most 
often sex is based on chromosomes that an individual is bom with. Please notice that sex and gender 
are not interchangeable terms. 

Gender Role- Set of roles and behaviors assigned to females and males by society. 

Gender Identity- An individual’s internal, personal sense of their gender. 

Gender Expression- Refers to the ways in which people externally communicate their gender identity 
to others through behavior, clothing, haircut, voice, and emphasizing, de-emphasizing, or changing 
their bodies’ characteristics. 



Fig. 2.1 LGBTQUIA alphabet soup (adapted from St. Mary’s College Intercultural Lounge) 



not a member of the majority group of older 
adults (at this point, Caucasian), the face of 
which is rapidly changing (see, especially. 
Chaps. 6-10). The focus of this chapter is to 
consider older persons with a minority status, and 
in many cases, more than one. 

In order to understand what it means to be a 
person in a minority status as well as a person in a 
sexual minority status, we characterize the older 
adult population and older adult LGBT popula- 
tion and then present a brief discussion of normal 
age-related changes that many, but not all persons 



experience. The population of older adults rep- 
resents the most rapidly growing age group in the 
US. For example, in 1990, older adults composed 
13 % of the total population. By 2020, that 
number is estimated to increase to 18 % and to 
25 % in 2050 (McKinney and Young 1985). In 
2012, persons aged 65+ numbered 43.1 million, 
for an increase of 21 % since 2002, a number is 
projected to grow to 79.7 million by 2040. 
Moreover, the 85+ population, the most rapidly 
growing age cohort, is projected to increase from 
5.9 million in 2012 to 14.1 million in 2040. 




2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



31 



Consequently, approximately one in every seven 
persons in the USA is an older adult: people aged 
65+ represented 12.4 % of the population in the 
year 2000, a percentage projected to increase to 
19 % by 2030 (West et al. 2014). 

Persons who reach age 65 are projected to 
have an average life expectancy of an additional 
19.2 years (20.4 years for females and 17.8 years 
for males). Because of their ability to live to 
longer, older women outnumber older men (24.3 
to 18.8 million). Another reflection of that phe- 
nomenon is that in 2013, 36 % of older women 
were widows (Administration on Aging 2010). 
Also, older men are married far more frequently 
than are older women (i.e., 71 % of men vs. 45 % 
of women). About 28 % (12.1 million) of older 
persons live alone (8.4 million women and 
3.7 million men); 45 % of women age 75+ live 
alone. In 2012, approximately 518,000 grand- 
parents aged 65 or older assumed primary 
responsibility for their grandchildren who were 
living with them. In 2012, the median income of 
older persons was $27,612 for males and 
$16,040 for females, approximately 9.1 % of 
those persons were living below the poverty level 
(Administration on Aging 2010). 

Within the older adult population are older 
adults who are LGBT. Mentioned in Chap. 1 and 
throughout this book, no accurate percentages of 
LGBT people in the US exist; however, most 
researchers estimate that approximately 3-7 % of 
the aging population are LGBT, most of whom 
identify as lesbians and gay men. Thus, between 
one and 3.5 million older lesbians and gay men, 
this number is expected to double by 2030 
(Jackson et al. 2009). Individuals who are aging, 
those who are heterosexual and those who are 
LGBT, can expect to experience some 
age-related changes, typically starting around the 
fourth decade. 

Age-Related Changes that May Affect 
Older Adults 

Cognitive Changes. Changes in our under- 
standing of the aging brain are among the most 
exciting in all of aging science. Though many 



adults worry about becoming more forgetful and 
worry that it is the first sign of Alzheimer’s 
Disease (AD), according to NIH Medline Plus 
(2007), scientists now know that people can 
remain both alert and able as they age, although 
it may take them longer to process their memo- 
ries. The cognitive functions that aging affects 
most are attention and memory, which are not 
simultaneously affected — some aspects are rela- 
tively unaffected, while others may decline pre- 
cipitously. Though the results of studies of 
psychometric testing of persons of older ages 
seem to paint a picture of overall cognitive 
decline, enormous variability exists across aging 
individuals. Many older people out-perform 
young people, at least on some cognitive tasks, 
and others of the same age do at least as well as 
their younger counterparts (Glisky 2007). 

Internal Age-Related Changes. Internal 
changes occur as adults age. Although many 
changes occur gradually across an individual’s 
lifetime, the rate is dependent on heredity as well 
as environment (Rowe and Kahn 1998). Many 
changes are inter-related; however, the body has 
a remarkable variety of compensatory abilities 
that adjust to insults experienced over time. 
Stressed in previous sections, high variability 
exists as to when these age-related changes 
present. 

Heart. Age-related changes in heart muscle 
cells help explain alterations in the heart as a 
whole. As the heart ages, it thickens, becomes 
less elastic, and may become enlarged. An older 
heart is less able to relax completely between 
beats, and its pumping chambers stiffen. Because 
the heart is unable to pump as vigorously as it 
once did, it is less able to supply adequate blood 
and oxygen to muscles during exercise (Young 
2002). 

Lungs. Age-related changes to the pulmonary 
system are associated with structural changes 
leading to a decline in function. The reduction in 
the diameter of small airways and their tendency 
for closing early contributes to air trapping and 
ventilation problems. With age, the lungs stiffen, 
making it harder for them expand and contract. 
The chest wall becomes more rigid, and the dia- 
phragm and other muscles of respiration become 



32 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



weaker. A decreased cough reflex and a reduction 
in the number of cilia that sweep mucous up and 
out of the lungs results in increased likelihood of 
infection (Medline Plus 2010). 

External Physical Changes 

Generally accepted physical changes that occur as 
persons age include a reduction in physical 
height, usually more pronounced in women than 
in men (Currey et al. 1996), a decline in total 
body weight due to a loss of lean body mass, a 
decrease in bone strength, wrinkling and dryer 
skin (often exacerbated by exposure to UV rays), 
and changes in hair color. As with the above, 
physical changes that older adults experience are 
subject to great variability. One of the most sig- 
nificant factors thought to slow such changes is 
physical activity, which is now recommended for 
in all ages, and in sharp contrast to the prevailing 
wisdom of the early 1900s, when elder adults 
were encouraged to rest frequently and preserve 
their (remaining) strength (Buchner 1997; Roig 
et al. 2010). Below, we discuss a few examples of 
common age-related sensory changes. 

Sensory Changes. Starting roughly around 
the fourth decade, eyesight weakens; around the 
sixth decade, cataracts and macular degeneration 
may develop for some individuals. Hearing may 
also decline with age. Mentioned earlier, vari- 
ability exists within the population of older 
adults. 

Eyesight. Around age 40, most individuals 
encounter weakened eyesight, and some experi- 
ence cataracts and glaucoma. Certain adults may 
be less able to see objects at close distances or 
read fine print than in earlier years. For most, 
reading glasses or contact lens address the 
problem. Other adults are less able to see objects 
at far distances, and eyeglasses or contact lenses 
are helpful. Some individuals develop cataracts, 
which affects nearly 22 million Americans age 40 
and older; by age 80, more than half of all 
Americans have cataracts (National Eye Institute 
2008). Conective surgery is now one of the most 
common surgeries done in the US. Annual eye 



examinations can help older adults protect them- 
selves from developing severe eye problems that 
may occur for some, but not all older adults. Pre- 
ventive measures (e.g., proper nutrition, wearing 
sunglasses, and physical activity) can help mollify 
eye problems that some older adults experience. 

Hearing. About one-third of Americans 
between the ages of 65 and 74 have age-related 
hearing problems, and about half of adults aged 
85 and older have hearing loss (National Institute 
on Deafness and Other Communication Disor- 
ders 2010). Another common problem that some 
older adults encounter is ringing, roaring, or 
other noises inside the ears. This problem, known 
as tinnitus, may be diminished when certain 
medicines or other health problems (e.g., aller- 
gies or atherosclerosis) are addressed. 

The central message about age-related chan- 
ges is that variability exists among older adults. 
Some adults experience age-related changes so 
small as to be barely noticeable. Others, how- 
ever, experience such difficulties that their health 
and quality of life are greatly diminished. 
Although some age-related changes do occur 
over time, there are many opportunities and 
strategies to mitigate their affects. 

Aging and Minority Status 

Along with the general trends for America’s 
aging population and the age-related changes 
described earlier, many minority populations are 
living to older ages. In this section, we charac- 
terize the population of older adults living in a 
minority status. Below, we focus on older 
African-Americans, Hispanics, and Asians. 

African-American Elders 

In 2008, the African-American older population 
was 3.2 million in 2008 and is projected to grow 
to over 9.9 million by 2050, when African 
American elders will compose 1 1 % of the older 
population. In 2008, 50 % of black elderly peo- 
ple lived in eight states: New York (9.1 %), 
Florida (7.1 %), California (6.5 %), Texas 



2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



33 



(6.4 %), Georgia (6.1 %), North Carolina 
(5.5 %), Illinois (5.4 %), and Virginia (4.4 %). In 
2008, over 60 % of the black population aged 65 
and older had completed high school, as com- 
pared with 1970, when only 9 % did so. Also in 
2008, over 12 % of black older persons had a 
bachelor’s degree or higher. In 2008, 54 % of 
older Black men lived with their spouses, 1 1 % 
lived with other relatives, 4 % lived with 
non-relatives, and 30 % lived alone (Fig. 2.2). 

For older black women, 25 % lived with their 
spouses, 32 % lived with other relatives, 2 % 
lived with non-relatives, and 42 % lived alone. 
Households containing families headed by black 
persons aged 65+ reported a median income in 
2008 of $35,025. The comparable figure for all 
older households was $44,188. The median per- 
sonal income for black men was $19,161 and 
$12,499 for black women. Comparable figures 
for all elderly were $25,503 for men and $14,559 
for women. The poverty rate in 2008 for black 
elders (65 and older) was 20 %, or more than 
twice the rate for all older adults (9.7 %). In 2007, 
black males had an average life expectancy at age 
65 of an additional 15.3 years (to 80.3 years) and 
black women had a life expectancy of 18.7 
additional years (to 83.7 years). These figures 
are 1.3 years less than the figures for all 
elderly men and 1.1 years less than the figure 
for all elderly women. (Administration for Com- 
munity Living 2010) (see Chap. 7 for a discus- 
sion of African-American and LGBT elders). 



Hispanic Elders 

Making up 6.6 % of older adult, the Hispanic 
older population numbered 2.5 million in 2007 
and is projected to grow to over 17 million by 
2050, when they will compose 19.8 % of the 
older population. By 2019, Hispanic adults aged 
65 and older will be the largest racial/ethnic 
minority in this age group. In 2007, 70 % of 
Hispanic persons aged 65 and over resided in 
four states: California (27 %), Texas (19 %), 
Florida (16 %), and New York (9 %). In 2007, 
about 42 percent of the Hispanic population aged 
65 and older had finished high school, compared 
with 76 % of the total older population 
(Administration for Community Living 2010) 
(Fig. 2.3). 

In 2007, 65 % of Hispanic older men lived 
with their spouses, 17 % lived with other rela- 
tives, 3 % lived with non-relatives, and 15 % 
lived alone. For older Hispanic older women, 
39 % lived with their spouses, 33 % lived with 
other relatives, 2 % lived with non-relatives, and 
26 % lived alone. The percent of Hispanic elderly 
men and women living alone is lower than that of 
the general population. Also, the percent of 
Hispanic older persons living with other relatives 
is nearly twice that of the total older population 
(Administration for Community Living 2010). 

Households containing families headed by 
Hispanic persons 65+ reported a median income 
in 2007 of $31,544 (as compared to $43,654 for 
non-Hispanic Whites). Among such Hispanic 



12.0 ■ 
10.0 
8.0 
6.0 ■ 

4.0 

2.0 ■ 



Population and Projections of Black 
Persons Aged 65+: 1980-2050 
(numbers in millions) 

8.5 



3.3 



ri fi fi n 




9.9 



1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 



Fig. 2.2 Population and projections for black elders. Retrieved from http://www.aoa.acl.gov/Aging_Statistics/ 
Source Administration for Community Living (2010). minority _aging/Facts-on-Black-Elderly-plain_format. 

A statistical profile of black older Americans aged 65+. aspx 



34 



Population and Projections of Hispanic 
Persons Aged 65+ - 1 980-2050 
(numbers in millions) 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



17.5 



13.2 




8.6 








5.0 _ 

















1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 



Fig. 2.3 Population and projections for Hispanic elders. 
Source Administration for Community Living (2010). 
A statistical profile of Hispanic older Americans aged 65+. 

households, 16 % had an income of less than 
$15,000 (compared to 5.4 % for non-Hispanic 
Whites family households) and 45 % had 
incomes of $35,000 or more (compared to 62 % 
for non-Hispanic Whites). The poverty rate in 
2007 for Hispanic older persons (65 and older) 
was 17.1 %. This was more than twice the per- 
cent for non-Hispanic Whites (7.4 %) (Admin- 
istration for Community Living 2010) (see 
Chap. 10 for a discussion of Hispanic and LGBT 
elders). 

Asian Elders 

Older members of the older adult population who 
identified as Asian, Hawaiian, and Pacific Islan- 
der numbered over 1.3 million in 2008 (3.4 % of 
the older population) and is projected to grow to 
over 7.6 million by 2050, at that time accounting 
for 8.6 % of the older population. In 2008, almost 
60 % of Asian, Hawaiian, and Pacific Island 
elders lived in just three states: California 
(40.5 %), Hawaii (9.6 %), and New York 
(9.2 %). In 2008, 74 % of the older Asian pop- 
ulation aged 65 and older had finished high 
school. Also in 2008, almost 32 % of Asian older 
persons had a bachelor’s degree or higher. The 
percent of high school graduates among older 
Asians is almost as high as the percent among all 
older persons (77 %). However, the percent of 
older Asians in 2008 who had a bachelor’s 
degree or higher (32 %) was over 50 % higher 
than for the overall older population. Further- 
more, the percent of male Asians who had a 



Retrieved from http://www.aoa.acl.gov/Aging_Statistics/ 
minority _aging/Facts-on-Hispanic -Elderly. aspx 



bachelor’s degree or higher (40 %) is almost 
50 % higher than for the overall older population 
(27 %) (Administration for Community Living 
2010) (Fig. 2.4). 

In 2008, 84 % of older Asian men lived with 
their spouses, 6 % lived with other relatives, 2 % 
lived with non-relatives, and 8 % lived alone. For 
older Asian women, 47 % lived with their 
spouses, 30 % lived with other relatives, 3 % 
lived with non-relatives, and 20 % lived alone. 
Households containing families headed by Asian 
persons aged 65+ reported a median income in 
2008 of $48,859. The comparable figure for all 
older households was $44,188. The median per- 
sonal income for Asian men was $18,518 and 
$11,501 for Asian women. The comparable fig- 
ures for all elderly were $25,503 for men and 
$14,559 for women. In 2008, the poverty rate in 
for Asian elders was 12.1 %; the rate for all 
elders was 9.7 %. The rate for Asian men was 
11.1 %, and the rate for Asian women was 
12.8 % (Administration for Community Living 
2010) (see Chap. 8 for a discussion of Hispanic 
and LGBT elders). 

The data above posted by the Administration 
for Community Living and distilled from the 
information reflected by the US Census indicate 
that there are both differences and similarities 
between and among older adults with a minority 
status and those who are Caucasian. In the main, 
minority status for elders means that they live in 
greater poverty and with lower incomes that do 
those with majority status. For older 
Asian-Americans, the educational level attained 



2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



35 



Population and Projections of Asian, 
Hawaiian and Pacific Island Elderly 




(Numbers in millions) 



Fig. 2.4 Population and projections for Asian, Hawaiian, 
and Pacific Island elders. Source Administration for 
Community Living (2010). A statistical profile of Asian 



older Americans aged 65+. Retrieved from http://www. 

aoa.acl.gov/Aging_Statistics/minority_aging/Facts-on- 

API-Elderly2008-plain_format.aspx 



is actually higher than that of the general popu- 
lation. All older adults of minority status live 
with their spouses more so than those of the 
general population. Also, the older adult popu- 
lation as a whole, whether or not they are 
members of minority groups, are living longer 
than were previous generations, a trend contin- 
uing until at least 2050. Statistics are but one way 
to understand what it is like to be a member of a 
minority population. Another are stressors, 
affecting both physical and mental health — much 
has been written on early and persistent stressors 
over the life course and will not be discussed 
here. However, one important stressor that will 
be discussed below are implications for being a 
member of a minority status and a member of a 
sexual minority. 

Aging and Sexual Minority Status 

In recent years, new scholarship has emerged on 
the barriers to positive aging faced by members of 
the LGBT population (e.g., Fredriksen-Goldsen 
et al. 2011). It has taken decades for this infor- 
mation to “come out” simply because it has been 
difficult to acquire data from this largely unseen 
and fragmented population. In a 2010 study, the 
National Resource Center on LGBT Aging 
reported that there are approximately 1.5 million 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender elders 
currently residing in the USA. Given the increase 
in the number of Baby Boomers, those born 
between 1946 and 1964, this number is expected 



to increase to approximately 3.5 million by 2030. 
Among these elders, social isolation has been 
identified as affecting a disproportionate numbers 
as they continue to deal with stigma, discrimi- 
nation ageism, homophobia, and transphobia (see 
Table 2.1). 

LGBT Optimal Aging: Barriers 
and Opportunities 

Older reports and other supporting data indicate 
rates of smoking, alcohol use, and obesity higher 
for the LGBT population than their heterosexual 
peers (Hughes and Evans 2003). Also, older data 
tend to support other antiquated stereotypes of 
the LGBT population: immersed in a culture of 
alcoholism, depression, and poor health habits. 
Examples of real evidence-based qualitative and 
quantitative studies on LGBT elders began to 
emerge in the 1990s and 2000s when member- 
ship from national organizations including the 
Human Rights Campaign, National Gay and 
Lesbian Task Force, and Services and Advocacy 
for GLBT Elders (SAGE) were queried. 
Although an improvement, the data were col- 
lected from members of the LGBT population 
who are active, enfranchised, engaged, and more 
likely to participate in “out and proud” organi- 
zations. Many of the previous studies lack sta- 
tistical power due to small sample size and a high 
potential for participant bias. Therefore, it is 
unwise to unilaterally rely on research that is still 
emerging and calibrating. Although excellent, 




36 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



Table 2.1 Support systems of LGBT elders and the general elderly population 



Support system 


LGBT elders (%) 


General elder population (%) 


Live alone 


75 


33 


No children 


90 


20 


Single 


80 


40 



(Adapted from the Web site of services & advocacy for GLBT elders on social isolation. Retrieved from http://www. 
sageusa.org/issues/isolation.cfm) 



rich, and statistically significant studies have 
recently been completed (Fredriksen-Goldsen 
et al. 2011), further research that supports a 
person-centered model of care and inquiry is 
needed. 

Emerging scholarship tells us that elders who 
are isolated are at increased risk for abuse and 
premature death (Acierno et al. 2010; Pantell 
et al. 2013). Compounding this, according to 
SAGE, LGBT elders are at increased risk for 
isolation: LGBT elders are over twice as likely to 
live alone with thinner support networks, three to 
four times less likely to have children, and twice 
as likely to be single as compared to the heter- 
osexual population. LGBT elders have higher 
disability rates, struggle with economic insecu- 
rity, and have increased mental health concerns 
manifest from a lifetime of discrimination 
(SAGE 2010). 

The Caring and Aging with Pride Study 
(2011) gives additional information on why the 
barriers to inclusion and “othering” of LGBT 
elders are so real and profound. The study found 
that 82 % reported having been victimized at 
least once, with 64 % reporting experiencing 
victimization at least three times in their lives. 
The report notes: “The most common type of 
victimization is verbal insults (68 %), followed 
by threats of physical violence (43 %), and being 
hassled by the police (27 %). Nearly one in four 
(23 %) have had an object thrown at them, and 
one-fifth (20 %) have had their property damaged 
or destroyed. Nearly one in five (19 %) have 
been physically assaulted (i.e., punched, kicked, 
or beaten), 14 % threatened with a weapon, and 
1 1 % have been sexually assaulted.” 

This discrimination continues into later life. 
According to a 2005 study of LGBT long-term 
care residents, LGBT elders fear discrimination 



from administration, direct care professionals, 
and other residents (Johnson et al. 2005). These 
responses varied widely with regard to the vari- 
ables of age, income, gender, community size, 
and education level of the respondents but are 
concurrent with the notion, even among health- 
care professionals and, arguably, younger mem- 
bers of the LGBT community, that LGBT elders 
are “homogeneous, isolated, lonely and without 
hope.” (Johnson et al. p. 86). 

According to the National Gay and Lesbian 
Task Force, the fear of isolation is real among 
LGBT elders. For many elders who have expe- 
rienced marginalization and disenfranchisement 
over the life span, with advancing age comes an 
increasing reliance on public programs and social 
services. LGBT elders have less independence or 
ability to retreat from discrimination, conse- 
quently reinforcing isolative behaviors and 
leading to the negative health outcomes outlined 
above. 

Further, as of this writing, housing discrimi- 
nation based on sexual orientation and gender 
identity is prohibited in only 15 states and the 
District of Columbia: California, Colorado, 
Connecticut, the District of Columbia, Illinois, 
Iowa, Hawaii, Maine, Minnesota, New Jersey, 
Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode Island, 
Vermont, and Washington. There are also six 
states that prohibit housing discrimination based 
on sexual orientation (but not gender identity): 
Delaware, Maryland, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, and Wisconsin. In addi- 
tion, many cities prohibit discrimination on the 
basis of sexual orientation, including Atlanta, 
Chicago, Detroit, Miami, New York, Pittsburgh, 
and Seattle. While the status of the LGBT pop- 
ulation is changing, anti-discrimination is by no 
means universal. 



2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



37 



When reviewed in its sum, there are few 
“usual and normal” phenomenon facing LGBT 
elders. Social isolation is a common occurance. 
Fear of healthcare professionals is a theme that is 
worthy of note. The lack of family caregivers is 
also a barrier for positive aging. But when 
evaluating sexual orientation, gender identity, 
and aging, there is much more to the story. While 
discrimination and fear are pervasive in these 
communities, there are examples of positive 
aging. In particular, studies by Frederiksen- 
Golden et al. (2011) and others are revealing 
the emergence of stronger scaffolding, with sto- 
ries of resilience in the face of adversity (see 
Table 2.2). 

Theories of Aging as Applied to LGBT 
Elders 

Data discussed above demonstrate that diversity 
among elders is on the rise from racial, ethnic, 
sexual orientation, and gender identity perspec- 
tives. This is not only tme from basic demo- 
graphic data, but it is also true from 
gerontological theories that have applicability for 
the older adult LGBT population. 

The Continuity Theory of Aging (Atchley 
1989) suggests that, in making adaptive choices, 
middle-aged and older adults attempt to preserve 
and maintain existing internal and external 
structures. They prefer to accomplish this 
objective by using strategies tied to past experi- 
ences of themselves and their social world. 
Change is linked to the perceived past, producing 
continuity in inner psychological characteristics 
as well as in social behavior and in social 



circumstances. Continuity is thus a grand adap- 
tive strategy that is promoted by both individual 
preference and social approval. In other words, 
what makes elders unique earlier in life will only 
be enhanced in later life, particularly true for 
LGBT elders? 

Another salient theory for aging persons who 
are LGBT and that draws upon Continuity The- 
ory is Carstensen et al. (2003) Socioemotional 
Selectivity Theory, which suggests that, with age 
and the realization of mortality, individuals focus 
on more personally relevant and meaningful 
pursuits and passions. As persons age, items that 
comprise individuality and uniqueness become 
more pronounced with age. As individuals age, 
regardless of race, ethnicity, and sexual orienta- 
tion of gender identity, they tend to focus their 
attention on a more refined series of activities, 
experiences, emotions, and memories. Increasing 
the focus on “things” that make us unique that 
supports the inherent diversity of the aging 
population. 

Though most research on LGBT elders 
examines those in community settings, the 
increasing diversity of the aging population also 
has profound implications for the long-term care 
continuum (Fig. 2.5). 

One challenge is that the long-term care 
continuum, from independent living through 
skilled nursing facilities, has been developed in a 
medical model. The medical model suggests a 
top-down approach to direct care that supports 
uniformity and lack of participation in medical 
treatment, a model better suited to the general- 
izations alluded to in the previous section. The 
medical model ascribes to the philosophy that the 
dispensation of medication, the creation of 



Table 2.2 Risks for elders lacking adequate social interaction 

• Older people without adequate social interaction are twice as likely to die prematurely 

• This increased risk of mortality is comparable to smoking 15 cigarettes per day, 6 alcoholic beverages per day, and it 
is twice as dangerous as obesity 

• 43 % of elders experience social isolation 

• 11.3 million elders live alone (8.1 million are women) 

• Based on current demographic trends, 16 million elders will live alone by 2020 

• Older adults without adequate social interaction are twice as likely to die prematurely 



38 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



activities, the development of menus, and, really, 
the physical structure of the long-term care 
environment can be created on an assembly line. 

Person-centered care is a holistic approach to 
care that recognizes and empowers the unique- 
ness of each individual. It supports individual 
autonomy throughout the long-term care contin- 
uum while creating environments conducive to 
independence, engagement, social confidence, 
respect, and diversity. (Barsness and White 
2011). Scholars, educators, and employees who 
work in the long-term care continuum are seeing 
a culture-change movement that supports the 
redirection of care to a person-centered model. 
This approach is extremely important for mem- 
bers of the LGBT community because it creates 
an environment where apathy and even dis- 
crimination is unacceptable and where unique- 
ness is actually embraced. 

The person-centered care movement to inform 
culture change in long-term care is by no means 
fully accepted by owners of long-term care 
communities, administrators, direct care profes- 
sionals and regulators or inspectors. Efforts by 
organizations such as the Pioneer Network and 
initiatives such as the Eden Alternative (Thomas 



1996) are far from universally acknowledged and 
integrated into regulations, organizational mis- 
sion statements, care plans, and direct care 
practices. The push and pull of profitability ver- 
sus person-centered care and culture change, to 
say the least of more historically conservative 
values and norms, should be considered when 
evaluating the following chapters. 



Summary 

The letters LGBT represent an initialism that 
indicates lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
community. National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force (2011) reported that there are currently 
between 1.4 and 3.8 million LGBT Americans 
over the age of 65, and this population is 
expected to increase to between 3.6 and 7.2 mil- 
lion due to the Baby Boom generation. 

We have discussed the characteristics of the 
older adult population in order to aid readers’ 
understanding of elders with a sexual minority 
status. The older adult population is the most 
rapidly growing age group in the USA with 



Graphic: Barriers to Health Care Access 

According to the US Department of Health and Human Services, LGBT Adults are: 

+ Less likely to have health insurance coverage 
+ More likely to delay or not seek medical care 

+ Facing barriers to access as older adults due to isolation and a lack of culturally competent pro- 
viders. One study found 13% of older LGBT adults were denied or provided inferior health care. 

+ More likely to delay or not get needed prescription medications 

+ More likely to receive health care services in emergency rooms 

+ Fail to receive screenings, diagnoses and treatment for important medical problems. 22% of LGBT 
older adults do not reveal sexual orientation to physicians. In some states health care providers can de- 
cline to treat or provide certain necessary treatments to individuals based on their sexual orientation or 
gender identity. 

+ Particularly distressed in musing homes. One study indicates elderly LGBT adults face distress 
from potentially hostile staff and fellow residents, denial of visits from partners and family of choice, 
and refusal to allow same-sex partners to room together 



Fig. 2.5 Barriers to health care for LGBT elders. Source LGBT — health disparities impacting long-term care. 
Retrieved from http://longtermcare.gov/the-basics/lgbt/lgbt-health-disparities-impacting-ltc/ 




2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



39 



extended average life span. Older adults experi- 
ence normal age-related changes in their cogni- 
tion and internal and external physical health. 
Differences and similarities exist in the trends 
between elders in a minor racial/ethnic group, 
and those who are Caucasian, but, mainly, 
minority elders live in more poverty and with 
lower incomes. 

Although scholarly attention to aging of 
LGBT elders is increasing, much research needs 
to be done to discover this largely isolated and 
fragmented population. Nevertheless, emerging 
scholarship has investigated how social isolation 
and discrimination experienced by LGBT elders 
hinder them from achieving positive aging (e.g., 
Caring and Aging with Pride Study 2011). Also, 
several gerontological theories have applicability 
for the LGBT elders including, the Continuity 
Theory of Aging (Atchley 1989) and the Socio- 
emotional Selectivity Theory (Carstensen et al. 
2003). Increasing diversity of the aging popula- 
tion, especially the LGBT elder population, has 
important implications for the continuum of 
long-term care, suggesting the necessity of bol- 
stering individual autonomy in care 
environments. 

Discussion Box 2.1: Barriers to Optimal 
Aging Encountered by LGBT Elders 

Read the article below, “ LGBT Advocate 
Sees Hurdles Ahead ” written by Michael 
Adams, Retrieved from the Web site of 
AARP: http://www.aarp.org/relationships/ 
family/info-04-20 1 1/biggest-issues-facing- 
older-lgbt-americans.html. 

'America’s older population is grow- 
ing, and so is the number of lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and transgender (LGBT) adults 
who are moving into their later years. In 
the next several decades, LGBT adults age 
65 and above is expected to double, 
reaching more than 3 million by 2030. In 
my job as executive director of SAGE 
(that’s for Services & Advocacy for Gay, 
Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender 
Elders ). I’m constantly hearing about the 
unique challenges facing our community. 



These are the five main things we need to 

change if we want our society to be pre- 
pared for the full diversity of its aging 

population'. 

1. Basic Health Care 

In the United States, about 80 percent 
of long-term care for older people is 
provided by family members, such as 
and spouses, children and other rela- 
tives. But LGBT elders are only half as 
likely as their heterosexual counter- 
parts to have close family to lean on for 
help. This means that they rely heavily 
on the services of professional health 
care providers — doctors, pharmacists, 
or hospital and nursing home staff — 
who might be uncomfortable with or 
even hostile toward LGBT elders and 
who are not trained to work with them. 
In SAGE ’.v experience, even when these 
providers are supportive, fear of dis- 
crimination prevents many LGBT older 
people from seeking out the care they 
need. 

2. Caregiving Issues 

Can you imagine not being able to care 
for a longtime partner or spouse, or 
have any say in your loved one ’s med- 
ical care? It’s unthinkable for most of 
us. Because the support systems of 
LGBT elders — their partners and their 
families of choice — often are not rec- 
ognized under the law, LGBT people 
frequently are not granted family or 
medical leave to take care of a sick or 
terminally ill partner. Furthermore, 
LGBT people can be excluded from 
decision-making on a partner ’s medical 
care and funeral plans, unless they 
have put specific legal arrangements in 
place. Unfortunately, many people 
don ’t make such arrangements, either 
because they can ’t afford the legal costs 
or because they, like so many Ameri- 
cans, think they can put them off for 
another day. (Here ’s a link to resources 





40 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



that can help you get those documents 
prepared .) 

3. Financial Insecurity 

LGBT older people are less financially 
secure than American elders as a 
whole. For example, poverty rates 
among elder lesbian and gay couples 
are 9.1 and 4.9 %, respectively, com- 
pared with 4.6 % among elder hetero- 
sexual couples. Several factors 
contribute to higher poverty rates, 
including employment discrimination 
and barriers in Social Security, Medic- 
aid, and pension and retirement plans 
that deny same-sex couples key retire- 
ment benefits afforded to the broader 
population. In addition, state laws can 
shut LGBT partners out of an inheri- 
tance, or can require them to pay steep 
taxes on an estate that a surviving het- 
erosexual spouse would inherit tax-free. 

4. Social Isolation 

Despite creating families of choice and 
other support networks, many LGBT 
older people still experience high rates 
of social isolation. They are tw’ice as 
likely to be single and to live alone, and 
three to four times as likely to be child- 
less. They are also less likely to feel 
welcome in the places where many older 
people socialize, such as senior centers, 
volunteer centers and places of wor- 
ship. Research and SAGE’s experience 
show that the harmful effects of this 
include depression, delayed care-seek- 
ing, poor nutrition and premature 
mortality. 

5. Access to Aging Services 

LGBT older people often do not access 
aging services out of fear of harassment 
or hostility. Few aging services pro- 
viders plan for, or reach out to, the 
LGBT community — and few are pre- 
pared to address insensitivity or dis- 
crimination aimed at LGBT elders by 
staff or other older people. 



Fortunately, such attitudes are chang- 
ing. A recent survey of aging services 
providers shows that a growing number of 
respondents would welcome LGBT elders, 
but lack the proper training. Resources 
such as the federally funded National 
Resource Center on LGBT Aging have 
been created to provide training and tools 
to aging providers, LGBT organizations 
and LGBT older people themselves, 
ensuring that our community increasingly 
will be able to age with the dignity and 
respect we all deserve. ” 

Discussion Questions: 

1. What are the five unique challenges 
faced by LGBT community? 

2. Do you agree that those five challenges 
are prevalent in our society? Give spe- 
cific examples. 

3. What challenge do you think most 
problematic as a barrier to optimal 
aging for LGBT elders? 

4. Think about how LGBT elders and 
heterosexual elders differently experi- 
ence and deal with aging. 

Discussion Box 2.2: Age-related Phys- 
ical Changes 

Visit the link, Columbia University’s 
Brave Old World Web site (http://news21. 
com/columbia/20 1 1/20 1 0/growing-old/ 
index.html) and watch the four videos on 
age-related changes in vision, hearing, 
mobility, and thinking. After watching 
each video, answer the following 
questions. 

1. Describe the changes you see taking 
place with aging. 

2. When, approximately at what age, do 
you expect to undergo each of these 
changes? Why you chose that age? 

3. What strategies and/ or information do 
you know to slow the rate of these 
changes? Give examples for each 
condition. 





2 Sexual Minority Status and Aging 



41 



4. Think about how you manage your life 
once these age-related changes occur in 
your 60s or 70s? 



Learning Exercises 



Age-related physical changes at Meldline Plus’ 
Web site http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medline 
plus/seniorshealth.html. 

Frequently asked questions answered by the 
American Psychological Association at http:// 
www.apa.org/pubinfo/answers.html. 

LGBT Aging Project at http://www. 
lgbtagingproject.org/. 



Questions to Consider 

1. What makes me a unique individual? 

2. How will these qualities and interests be 
important to me as I age? 

3. What scaffolding will I need to ensure for 
myself and my loved ones to support aging in 
a person-centered environment? 

Experiential Learning 

Visit www.gensilent.com and view the film 
trailer and review the following statistics in 
Fig. 2.4. What do you find most startling from 
this brief introduction to these cases? Why would 
any elder wait until near the end of life to reach 
out for assistance? 



Resources 

National Resource Center on LGBT Aging: See 
more at http://lgbtagingcenter.org/. 

Services & Advocacy for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual 
& Transgender Elders (SAGE): See more at 
http://www.sageusa.org/issues/general.cfm. 

Caring and Aging with Pride: Learn more about 
aging and health needs of LGBT elders at 
www.caringandaging.org#sthash.qYHm9484. 
dpuf, http://www.centerforpositiveaging.org/ 
lgbt.html#sthash.qYHm9484.dpuf. 

LGBT Aging Resources Clearinghouse of the 
American Society on Aging (ASA): See more 
at http://www.centerforpositiveaging.org/lgbt. 
html#sthash.qYHm9484.dpuf. 



References 

Aciemo, R., Hernandez, M. A., Amstadter, A. B., 
Resnick, H. S., Steve, K. & Muzzy, W., et al. 
(2010). Prevalence and correlates of emotional, phys- 
ical, sexual, and financial abuse and potential neglect 
in the United States: The national elder mistreatment 
study. American Journal of Public Health, 100(2), 
292-297. doi:10.2105/ajph.2009.163089. 

Administration for Community Living. (2010). Minority 
aging facts. Retrieved on February 20, 2015 at http:// 
www.aoa.acl.gov/Aging_Statistics/minority_aging/ 
Facts-on-API-Elderly2008-plain_format.aspx. 

Alexander, J. & Yescavage, J. (2004). Introduction. 
In J. Alexander & J. Yescavage (Eds.), InterSEXions 
of the others: Bisexuality and transgenderism. Bing- 
hamton: Haworth Press. 

Amshoff, S. K. & Reed, D. B. (2005). Health, work, and 
safety of farmers ages 50 and older. Geriatric Nursing, 
26(5), 304-308. 

Atchley, R. C. (1989). A continuity theory of nomial 
aging. The Gerontologist, 29(2), 183-190. 

Barsness, S. & White, J. (2011). Aging in place: A 
hallmark of person-centered care. Retrieved from 
www.alzpossible.com. 

Buchner, D. M. (1997). Preserving mobility in older adults. 
Western Journal of Medicine, 167(A), 258-264. 

Carstensen, L. L., Fung, H. H., & Charles, S. T. (2003). 
Socioemotional selectivity theory and the regulation of 
emotion in the second half of life. Motivation and 
Emotion, 27(2), 103-123. 

Currey, J. D., Brear, K., & Zioupos, P. (1996). The effects 
of ageing and changes in mineral content in degrading 
the toughness of human femora. Journal of Biome- 
chanics, 29, 257-260. 

Faderman, L. (1991). Odd girls and twilight lovers. New 
York: Columbia University Press. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H. J., Emlet, C. A., 
Muraco, A., Erosheva, E. A., Hoy-Ellis, C.P. et al. 
(2011). The aging and health report: Disparities and 
resilience among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans- 
gender older adults. Seattle: Institute for Multigener- 
ational Health. 




42 



P.B. Teaster et al. 



Gendron, T., Maddux, S„ Krinsky, L., White, J„ Lock- 
eman, K., Metcalfe, Y., & Aggarwal, S. (2013). 
Cultural competence trainings for healthcare profes- 
sionals working with LGBT older adults. Educational 
Gerontology, 59(6), 454-463. 

Glisky, E. L. (2007). Changes in cognitive function in 
human aging. Brain aging: Models, methods, and 
mechanisms, 3-20. 

Goodroad, B. K. (2003). HIV and AIDS in people older 
than 50: A continuing concern. Journal of Geronto- 
logical Nursing, 29(4), 18-24. 

Grant, J., Mottet, L., Tanis, J„ Harrison. J., Herman, J., & 
Keisling, M. (2011). Injustice at every turn: A report 
of the national transgender discrimination survey. 
Washington: National Center for Transgender Equal- 
ity and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. 

Hughes, C. & Evans, A. (2003). Health needs of women 
who have sex with women. British Medical Journal, 
327(7421), 939-940. 

Johnson, M., Jackson, N., Amette, J., & Koffman, S. 
(2005). Gay and lesbian perceptions of discrimination 
in retirement care facilities. Journal of Homosexuality, 
49(2), 83-102. 

National Eye Institute. (2008). Vision problems in the U. 
S.: Prevalence of adult vision impairment and 
age-related eye disease in America. Retrieved Febru- 
ary 20, 2015 at http://www.preventblindness.org/vpus/ 
2008_update/VPUS_2008_update.pdf|. 

National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication 
Disorders. (2010, June 7). Hearing loss and older 
adults. Retrieved July 8, 2010, from http://www.mdcd. 
nih . gov/health/hearing/older, asp . 



NIH Medline Plus (2007). Eight areas of age-related change. 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/magazine/issues/ 
winter07/articles/winter07pg 10-13 .html. 

Medline Plus. (2010). Aging changes in the lungs. 
Retrieved May 10, 2012 from http://www.nlm.nih. 
gov/medlineplus/ency/article/00401 1 .htm. 

Pantell, M„ Rehkopf, D., Jutte, D., Syme, S., Balmes, J., & 
Adler, N. (2013). Social Isolation: A predictor of mortality 
comparable to traditional clinical risk factors. American 
Journal of Public Health, 703(11), 2056-2062. 

Roig, M„ MacIntyre, D. L., Eng, J. J., Narici, M. V., 
Maganaris, C. N., & Reid, W. D. (2010). Preservation 
of eccentric strength in older adults: Evidence, mech- 
anisms and implications for training and rehabilitation. 
Experimental Gerontology, 45(6), 400-409. doi:10. 
1 0 1 6/j .exger.201 0.03 .008 . 

Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1998). Successful aging. 
New York: Pantheon Books. 

Thomas, W. H. (1996). Life worth living: How someone 
you love can still enjoy life in a nursing home: The Eden 
alternative in action. Acton: VanderWyk & Burnham. 

United States Administration on Aging. (2010). A toolkit 
for serving diverse communities. Washington, DC: 
Author. http://digitalcommons.ilr.comell.edu/key_ 
workplace/734. 

West, L.A., Cole, S., Goodkind, D., & He, W. (2014). 65 
+ in the United States: Current population reports. 
Washington: U.S. Department of the Census. 

Young, L. (2002). Heart disease in the elderly (Chap. 21). 
Retrieved 28 February from http://www.atrainceu. 
com/course-module/243 89 1 0- 1 4 1 _elders-and-their- 
care-module-03. 



Family Relationships of Older LGBT 
Adults 

Katherine R. Allen and Karen A. Roberto 




Abstract 

The study of older lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) adults 
and their families is a growing area of research and practice. This field 
addresses intersections of social structure and personal experience, 
beginning with the interaction of family and sexual minority status, and 
complicated by gender, race, social class, ability status, and other social 
locations. Older LGBT adults experience families in normative and 
non-normative ways. They have families of origin (i.e., the family one is 
born into), families of procreation (i.e., the family one creates, typically, 
through a committed union and the children they rear), and families of 
choice (i.e., the family one creates through converting friends into kin). 
Yet, there are unique aspects of what it means to be an aging LGBT 
individual that affect the emotional dynamics of family relationships, 
including the historical treatment of LGBT individuals, the increasing 
social climate of self-affirmation and public acceptance, and the policies 
that impact their lives. 



Keywords 

LGBT families • Family of origin • Family of procreation • Family of 
choice • Chosen kin 



K.R. Allen (El) • K.A. Roberto 
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA 
e-mail: kallen@vt.edu 

K.A. Roberto 
e-mail: kroberto@vt.edu 



Overview 

The purpose of this chapter is to examine the 
relationships that older lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender (LGBT) adults have with their 
families, including biological, legal, and chosen 
kin (e.g., families of choice). We address classic 
and current research on family relationships for 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_3 



43 




44 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



individuals who identify as lesbian, gay, bisex- 
ual, or transgender, as shifting social norms have 
challenged conventional definitions of families 
and have helped produce greater diversity across 
and within families (Bianchi 2014). We examine 
LGBT family dynamics, including reliance on 
families of choice and the use of formal services 
and networks to meet older adults’ care needs. 
We incorporate research and practice from pri- 
marily modern Western societies in North 
America and Northern Europe (e.g., the USA, 
Canada, and United Kingdom), and where it 
exists, include what is currently known regarding 
other LGBT families in countries on other con- 
tinents. We acknowledge that cultural differences 
influence the perceptions, behaviors, and inter- 
actions of family members; however, it is not 
feasible to include representation of all cultures 
in this chapter. Finally, we provide an assessment 
of directions for expanding the research on older 
LGBT family relationships and address the future 
of service delivery and public policies affecting 
this ever-increasing population. 

Learning Objectives 

After reading this chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 

1. Identify the similarities and differences 
between the family relationships of older 
LGBT individuals and the family relation- 
ships of older heterosexual individuals. 

2. Explain the distinctions among families of 
origin and families of choice in the LGBT 
community. 

3. Understand the history of research and 
activism regarding LGBT aging individuals 
and their families. 

4. Identify the major issues and future directions 
for research on older LGBT individuals and 
their families. 

5. Explain the service models and intervention 
strategies that are effective in addressing the 
practical and policy issues for LGBT elders 
and their families. 



6. Locate national and international resources 
for working with older LGBT individuals and 
their families. 



Introduction 

The study of older LGBT adults and their families 
is a growing area of research and practice. This 
field addresses numerous intersections of social 
structure and personal experience, beginning with 
the ways in which aging, sexual orientation, and 
family experience interact, and is further compli- 
cated by gender, race, ethnicity, social class, 
ability status, among many other social locations. 
Given the lack of comprehensive data collected on 
the experiences of LGBT individuals and families, 
it is difficult to estimate the precise number of 
LGBT aging individuals and even more difficult to 
estimate their distribution by family structure 
(e.g., LGBT-parent families; older couples; aging 
parent-adult child relationships). Estimates, 
however, do suggest that approximately one to 
four million Americans aged 65 and older identify 
as LGBT (see Cahill et al. 2000; NGLTF 2015; 
Orel 2014). With the aging of the population and 
the increasing visibility of LGBT individuals, 
these numbers will nearly double by 2030. 

Turning to the family relationships of older 
LGBT adults, it is clear that older LGBT adults 
experience families in both normative and 
non-normative ways. Structurally, older LGBT 
adults are not unlike non-LGBT adults: they have 
families of origin (i.e., the family one is born 
into), families of procreation (i.e., the family one 
creates, typically, through a committed union and 
the children they rear), and families of choice 
(i.e., the family one also creates through con- 
verting friends into kin). At the same time, there 
are some unique aspects of what it means to be 
an aging LGBT individual; thus, the emotional 
dynamics of family relationships may also vary 
from normative expectations, and for a variety of 
reasons. These reasons are associated with all 
aspects of life, including the historical treatment 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



45 



of LGBT individuals, the increasing social cli- 
mate of self-affirmation and public acceptance, 
and the policies that impact their lives. 



Historical Perspectives on the Family 
Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 

Research on sexual orientation and aging began 
to appear in the late 1970s and 1980s. As with 
many new areas of research in the study of 
LGBT individuals and families (Allen and Demo 
1995), the original papers that appeared in 
scholarly journals and books were primarily 
personal narratives and included a call to 
acknowledge and accept the study of aging of 
LGBT families as a legitimate area of investi- 
gation (Cohler and Hostetler 2002; Cooper 1997; 
Kimmel 1978, 1992). 

In part, the attempt by scholars to address 
sexual orientation and aging was spumed by the 
political activism that was initiated with the 
Stonewall Riot on Friday, June 27, 1969. The 
moment that sparked a new era of activism for 
civil and legal rights was the death of Judy 
Garland, a beloved icon for the gay community. 
In the wake of mourning, gay men who dressed 
in drag and other patrons rebelled against Man- 
hattan police raids of the popular bar (The 
Stonewall Inn) in Greenwich Village (Allen 
2005; D’Emilio and Freedman 1997; Editors of 
the Harvard Law Review 1990). The uprising 
was the lighting rod that led to the emergence of 
the Gay Liberation Front, an activist movement 
that challenged heteronormativity and sought 
self-affirmation for lesbian and gay men in pri- 
vate and public realms (Engel 2002). The gay 
liberation movement mirrored other social 
movements in privileging men, but lesbians, too, 
fought back against the oppression that both 
condemned them and outlawed their sexual 
behavior and social relationships (Faderman 
1991). 

This gay-affirmative social activism led to 
increasing visibility of lesbian and gay individ- 
uals, with reverberations throughout society. 



For example, in 1973, the American Psychiatric 
Association reversed its stance on homosexuality 
as a mental illness, setting the stage for more 
openly identifiable research and theorizing about 
the experience of LGBT aging individuals, cou- 
ples, and their families. Also in the activist realm. 
Senior Action in a Gay Environment (SAGE; 
now Services and Advocacy for Gay, Lesbian, 
Bisexual, and Transgender Elders) was founded 
in 1978 in New York City in order to create a 
support network for older gay individuals. This 
pioneering group, co-founded by gerontologist 
Douglas Kimmel, has evolved into one of the 
largest member-led organizations in both the 
LBGT community and the aging community 
(SAGE 2015). 

Case Study: Douglas Kimmel 

Douglas C. Kimmel is one of the pioneers 
in LGBT aging. His research on adulthood 
and aging, in general, and aging gay and 
lesbian couples and families, in particular, 
has broken new ground and inspired young 
and old scholars alike. In addition to his 
research and scholarship, Dr. Kimmel is 
one of the founders of SAGE: Services and 
Advocacy for GLBT Elders. He is a 
champion of all of the values described in 
this chapter: aging well, valuing family, 
and working for social justice. 

Dr. Kimmel was born in Denver in 
1943. He received his PhD in Clinical 
Psychology from the University of Chi- 
cago in 1970. For many years, he was a 
professor in the Department of Psychol- 
ogy, at City College of the City University 
of New York. He has also served as a 
visiting scholar in universities around the 
world, particularly in Japan. He has 
received many prestigious awards for his 
research and service, including several 
from the American Psychological Associ- 
ation: the Distinguished Elder Award, the 
Distinguished Service Award, and the 
Distinguished Educational Contribution 
Award. 




46 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



Currently, Dr. Kimmel lives in Maine 
with his husband, Ronald W. Schwizer. 
They were legally married on August 19, 
2013, in Hancock, Maine, on the 44th 
anniversary of their earlier wedding in 
1969 in Boulder Colorado. Dr. Kimmel’s 
Web site includes photographs and slide 
shows of their weddings and their life 
together over the years. 

W ebsite : w ww . tamarackplace.com/kimmel 

Discussion Questions: 

1. In what ways does Dr. Kimmel inte- 
grate his professional work, his family 
life, and his activist work on behalf of 
social justice for LGBT rights? 

2. As you view Dr. Kimmel’ s web site, 
how does he reveal his passions for 
social activism on behalf of LGBT 
issues? 

The emerging scholarship on older LGBT 
individuals and their families reflected this bridge 
from lived experience to research. In 1980, 
Monica Kehoe, a self-identified lifelong lesbian, 
conducted one of the first studies of older lesbi- 
ans (Kehoe 1986). She surveyed 50 lesbians aged 
65 and older in order to examine their personal 
and social concerns and well-being. Beginning 
with the premise that older lesbians have a “triple 
threat” to their well-being, due to their gender, 
age, and sexual orientation, she grounded her 
study in the observation that aging lesbians are 
an unknown, invisible, and mysterious minority, 
ignored by gerontologists, feminists, and sexol- 
ogists who studied homosexuality. Part of the 
difficulty in studying older lesbians, she demon- 
strated, was that older lesbians at that time were 
deeply closeted. Nevertheless, Kehoe was able to 
find women willing to be interviewed. Most of 
her participants were never married, childless, 
retired professional women living in California, 
and were not partnered. Most of the women had a 
positive self-image and considered themselves 
survivors of a culture that denigrated them. Yet, 
they also reported concerns about loneliness and 



the need for more companionship within the 
lesbian community. Ultimately, Kehoe con- 
cluded that they were probably well equipped to 
deal with the challenges and adjustments needed 
in old age, having dealt with and survived, dis- 
crimination and prejudice related to their gender, 
age, and sexual orientation. 

At about the same time, Berger (1984), a 
professor of social work, published one of the 
first studies on gay aging as a minority within a 
minority. Berger conducted a qualitative study of 
18 older gays and lesbians (age range 40-72, 
with a median age of 54), identifying the themes 
of (a) stereotypes, (b) coming out, (c) love and 
family, (d) intergenerational attitudes, (e) dis- 
crimination, and (f) growing older. His findings 
on love and family for this small sample presage 
the complexity that is now acknowledged among 
LGBT families as well as scholars. Although 
there was very little social acceptance and no 
legal recognition of gay partnerships when his 
study was conducted, Berger reported that in the 
gay community, individuals shared a home and a 
social and sexual life with a partner (typically 
identified by the term, lover) in order to meet 
their needs for intimacy and lifelong compan- 
ionship. Yet, not all of his participants were 
coupled in a gay or lesbian relationship. Some 
individuals did not live with their partners, and in 
one case, a man stayed in a heterosexual mar- 
riage despite identifying as gay. Berger’s 
research, as well as Kehoe’s (1986) study, 
attempted to uncover the normative aspects of 
family life for older gays and lesbians, and to 
debunk stereotypes of deviance, loneliness, and 
lack of intimate ties. 

Turning to the gerontology literature, Lipman 
(1984) wrote the first article on “homosexuals” in 
one of the premier aging handbooks. Over time, 
as public and scholarly recognition of this topic 
emerged, so did the titles and focus of the 
chapters dealing with LGBT issues in the major 
gerontology handbooks. Although the lives of 
older LGBT individuals and their families still 
are not likely to be the subject of entire chapters 
in these authoritative handbooks (for an excep- 
tion, see Allen 2005), their experiences are 
increasingly integrated into chapters dealing with 




3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



47 



relationships and families (for example, see 
Blieszner and Bedford 2012; Brock and Jennings 
2007). 

Despite these publications in scholarly ven- 
ues, the lack of integration of the research on 
aging families and sexual orientation is an 
ongoing concern. For example, in a review of 
research in the last decade (2000-2010) on aging 
families, sexual orientation was only mentioned 
as an area that lacks attention (Silverstein and 
Giarrusso 2010). Similarly, in a review of 
research about LGBT families, older LGBT 
adults and their family relationships were not 
mentioned (Biblarz and Savci 2010). Sullivan 
(2014) and Witten and Eyler (2012), as well, 
identifies the dearth of research on aging in the 
LGBT community. Yet, we also see a great deal 
of promise in the emerging literature that 
addressing aging, sexuality, and family (see 
Kimmel et al. 2006). Perhaps now, gerontolo- 
gists, family scholars, and LGBT scholars are 
discovering the importance of investigating lived 
experience at these intersections. 



Theory, Research, and Policy Related 
to LGBT Aging and Families 

Family relationships are typically defined by a 
legal or biological tie, as in legal marriage, in-law 
relationships, biological parenthood, or adoptive 
and step parenthood. Family relationships can 
also be matters of choice. In situations where 
LGBT individuals have been rejected by bio- 
logical family members, they have turned to 
LGBT community members and converted them 
to kin-like relationships. Indeed, as Maupin 
(2015), author of the iconic novels, Tales of the 
City , is credited as saying, friends are the “logi- 
cal” (compared to the biological) family for 
LGBT people. Families incorporate both struc- 
tural (i.e., household) units and emotional ties. 
Older LGBT individuals, particularly those who 
came out before a new wave of significant social 
change began in the 1990s, have had to be cre- 
ative in their family ties, given legal and social 



constraints. Now that same-sex marriage is legal 
in most of the USA as well as many other 
countries (e.g., Argentina, Canada, France, New 
Zealand, Norway, South Africa, and Spain) 
(HRC 2015), the research will uncover more 
trends and issues facing older LGBT couples and 
families. Next, we address theory, research, and 
policy linked to variations in aging LGBT family 
relationships, in terms of coming out and devel- 
oping intergenerational, intragenerational, and 
chosen kin relationships. 

Theoretical Perspectives 

Most of the research on older LGBT families was 
spurred by the articulation of the life course 
perspective, which provides a model for under- 
standing individual, family, and social historical 
processes and change over time (Allen et al. 
2000; Bengtson and Allen 1993; Bengtson et al. 
2005). There are several key concepts from the 
life course perspective that are particularly rele- 
vant to the study of LGBT aging individuals and 
their families. The concept of linked lives refers 
to the ways that individual lives are connected 
“across the generations by bonds of kinship” 
(Bengtson et al. 2005, p. 494). A second key 
concept refers to the major life transitions that 
individuals and families experience, as well as 
their timing in each person’s life (Bengtson and 
Allen 1993). For example, the first time one 
comes out to family members is an event that 
signals a major life transition. From that point 
forward, an individual is no longer seen as het- 
erosexual, or as fitting into a normative model of 
development. A third key concept refers to the 
historical time, place, and context in which 
individuals experience major social changes. For 
example, as we describe later in this chapter, the 
issue of “same-sex marriage” is likely experi- 
enced very differently for persons who are cur- 
rently age 65, compared to adults who are 
currently age 25. Older LGBT individuals part- 
nered and established their families at a time 
when same-sex marriage was legally and socially 
prohibited. This social historical reality is a likely 



48 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



contribution to so many older LGBT individuals 
first marrying heterosexually, particularly in 
order to become a parent. In contrast, young 
LGBT adults are much more free to come out as 
a sexual minority and to have the opportunity to 
legally marry their same-sex partner, as well as to 
establish their own LGBT-parent family (Tasker 
2013). 

In an application of the life course perspec- 
tive, Fredriksen-Goldsen and Muraco (2010) 
reviewed 58 empirical articles published between 
1984 and 2008 that focused on the lives of LGB 
adults aged 50 and older. They found that much 
of the research addressed two themes central to 
the life course perspective: (a) the interplay of 
lives and historical times and (b) linked and 
interdependent lives. Early studies on LGB aging 
focused on stereotypes about the mental health 
status of these populations. Contrary to popular 
belief that older gay men and lesbians were 
depressed, felt sexually undesirable, and strug- 
gled with the normative aging process, the 
majority of the early articles describe positive 
psychosocial functioning among older gay men 
and lesbians (Berger 1984; Berger and Kelly 
1986; Gray and Dressel 1985), with favorable 
feelings about aging (Whitford 1997), appear- 
ance (Gray and Dressel 1985), and sexuality 
(Pope and Schulz 1990). In fact, studies showed 
that older gay and lesbian adults typically rated 
their mental health as good or excellent 
(D’Augelli et al. 2001) and reported no more 
depressive symptoms than their heterosexual 
counterparts (Dorfman et al. 1995). With respect 
to social relationships, the research suggested 
that older gay male and lesbian women were not 
isolated but were actively engaged in supportive 
relationships with partners, friends, members of 
their families of origin, and the larger LGB 
communities (Brown et al. 2001; Grossman et al. 
2000; Nystrom and Jones 2003; Whitford 1997). 

Another major theoretical framework relevant 
to the study of LGBT aging and families is 
Minority Stress Theory. Developed by Meyer 
(2003), minority stress theory is a conceptual 
framework that explains how “stigma, prejudice, 
and discrimination create a hostile and stressful 



social environment that causes mental health 
problems” (p. 674). Minority stress for LGBT 
individuals is linked to alienation and problems 
with self-acceptance (that is, internalized homo- 
phobia). Aging-related stress is linked to con- 
cerns about the ability to maintain health and 
independence into old age, as well as fiscal 
concerns, such as outliving their income and 
having a place to live (MetLife Mature Market 
Institute 2010). Minority stress theory has been 
used to examine whether same-sex marriage is a 
protective factor against the combined effects of 
sexual minority stress and aging-related stress. 
For example, an analysis by Wight et al. (2012) 
of a subsample of gay men (age range of 44- 
75 years, with a mean age of 57 years) from the 
Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, examined the 
impact of minority stress and aging-related stress 
on their lives. They found that legal marriage 
among HIV-negative and HIV-positive older gay 
men is indeed a protective factor that may offset 
the mental health issues associated with being 
gay and growing old. 

Research Perspectives 

LGBT families are varied. There is no “typical” 
LGBT family form any more than there is a 
typical heterosexual family form. In addition, 
cultural norms dictate additional family interac- 
tions for racial and ethnic minority LGBT per- 
sons (see Chaps. 6, 7, 8, and 10). 

Families of origin. Family of origin rela- 
tionships refers to biological or genetic ties 
within the context of marriage and parenthood. 
Family of origin relationships include, then, the 
relationships that LGBT adults have with their 
aging parents and adult siblings, as well as the 
relationships they have with their same-sex 
partners, same- or different-sex partners, chil- 
dren, and grandchildren. As we note throughout 
this chapter, it is very common for LGBT indi- 
viduals to substitute chosen family relationships 
for biological ones, given the lack of acceptance 
and legal protection that has been the legacy of 
being gay, at least until very recently (Cohen and 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



49 



Murray 2006). We discuss chosen family rela- 
tionships in a subsequent section below and 
focus on the traditional understanding of “family 
of origin” in this section. 

Considering a wide age span (65+) for older 
adulthood, elders who are 65 years old in 2015 
were born in 1950; elders who are 85 years old in 
2015 were born in 1930. Representatives of these 
two eras were thus born into the baby boom 
generation (1950s) and the children of the Great 
Depression generation (1930s). All of these 
individuals came of age when sexual minority 
status was illegal, prosecuted, and considered 
morally and mentally depraved. Being a sexual 
minority was a truly isolating and underground 
experience. Individuals hid their sexual orienta- 
tion from their family members and employers in 
order to survive persecution and rejection. Thus, 
coming of age as an LGBT individual before the 
end of the twentieth century was a time when 
openness was dangerous to one’s social standing 
and familial relationships. 

As a result of the severely restricted social 
climate for LGBT individuals until the very late 
twentieth century, one of the most significant 
family of origin issues was “coming out” as 
lesbian or gay to parents and siblings (Cohen and 
Murray 2006; Jacobson and Grossman 1996; 
Orel 2014). 

Until recently, LGBT individuals did not tend 
to come out until well into adulthood, after they 
had already experienced heterosexual marriage, 
and possibly parenthood. Although mothers and 
siblings were reported to be more accepting than 
fathers (a trend that continues to this day), many 
LGBT individuals lost their family of origin ties 
(Friend 1990). As they grew older, this lack of 
sustained biological family ties contributed to a 
need for chosen kin relationships, particularly the 
development of friendship ties as a substitute for 
family ties (Muraco and Fredriksen-Goldsen 
2011). However, Connidis (2010) explains that 
coming out and experiencing rejection is not a 
lifelong legacy for LGBT adults; as time passes, 
“many gay and lesbian persons with families 
work out good relations with both their parents 
and siblings” (p. 239). 



Although aging baby boomers are among the 
first to experience a more positive social and 
legal climate in which to grow old, the literature 
on LGBT elders has documented more chal- 
lenges to their well being, compared to hetero- 
sexually identified elders (e.g., 
Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2013; Gabrielson and 
Holston 2014; Quam and Whitford 1992; Shenk 
and Fullmer 1996). A history of strained rela- 
tionships with family of origin members can add 
additional stresses to aging-related concerns. 
Naples’ (2001) autoethnography of coping with 
her father’s funeral in the face of disapproving 
adult siblings is a powerful illustration of strained 
family ties. The good news is that because pri- 
vate life is inextricably linked to broader social 
and political trends, LGBT aging family rela- 
tionships are likely to be less stressful as public 
acceptance increases. 

Reczek (2014) examined the intergenerational 
relationships of 22 lesbian women and 28 gay 
men aged 40 and older who were in an intimate 
relationship for at least seven years. The partic- 
ipants’ relationships with both their parents and 
parents-in-law included dimensions of support, 
conflict, and ambivalence. Supportive parents 
integrated the couple into their everyday lives 
and special family events (i.e., holidays, funer- 
als), used inclusive language seen as evidence of 
acceptance of the relationships regardless of legal 
status, relied on the couple for instrumental and 
emotional support, and affirmed their gay or 
lesbian identity. Evidence of conflict in their 
relationship with at least one of their parents 
manifested as rejection in everyday life (e.g., 
unpleasant or absent interactions), rejection 
around traumatic events (e.g., changing will with 
the occurrence of a severe illness), and the threat 
of being usurped (e.g., not respecting wishes at 
illness or death). Some respondents acknowl- 
edged that their parents and parents-in-law 
experienced both support and strain simulta- 
neously (e.g., acts of acceptance but words of 
disapproval). Identification of these dimensions 
in the families of aging LGBT individuals pro- 
vides the groundwork for future research on 
parent-child relationships and the consequences 



50 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



for the well-being of aging LGBT adult children 
and their older adult parents. 

Another life course issue that is complicated 
by sexual orientation diversity is the likelihood 
that older LGBT individuals, especially lesbians, 
are more likely called upon to care for aging 
parents. Although 43.5 million individuals in the 
USA provide care for a family member 50 years 
of age or older (Family Caregiver Alliance 
2012), to date, there has been little empirical 
research on family of origin caregiving by LGBT 
adults. Based on available qualitative data and 
anecdotal accounts, LGBT caregivers’ reasons 
for providing care (e.g., need; filial responsibil- 
ity), types of caregiving tasks in which they 
engage (e.g., emotional and instrumental sup- 
port), and concerns they have about caregiving 
(e.g., where to turn for help, how to access ser- 
vices, and what services are available) are very 
similar to heterosexual family caregivers. For 
example. Cantor et al. (2004) study of gay and 
lesbian adults caring for a relative from their 
family of origin identified three primary reasons 
their family member needed care: physical ill- 
ness, frailty, and Alzheimer’s disease. The types 
of care included providing emotional support and 
hands-on care, helping with decision making and 
financial management, serving as liaison with 
other family members, and arranging for medical 
care and support services. About half of the 
caregivers were women and about two-thirds of 
lesbian caregivers said that they were either the 
sole provider or provided most of the care. As 
with the general population of family caregivers, 
gay and lesbian caregivers reported significant 
burden and stress as a result of their caregiver 
role (e.g., juggling the demand of being 
employed and caregiving, limited time for self 
and other relationships, and conflicts or dis- 
agreements with other family members about the 
care of the older person). 

While family caregivers often experience both 
positive and negative aspects of caregiving, 
LGBT caregivers may face additional challenges 
when their family has a negative view of their 
sexual orientation. Cohen and Murray (2006) 
cited findings from an unpublished study by 



Murray in which lesbian caregivers described 
strained interpersonal family relationships 
because of a lack of acceptance of their sexual 
orientation or choice of partner. The following 
quote by two study participants illustrates the 
tension LGBT caregivers may face. 

Robin, single, age 46: As long as my Dad is alive, 

I cannot openly live as a lesbian. He has threatened 
to leave his estate to one of my male cousins if I 
act ‘queer.’ I thought that getting man'ied would 
get him off my case about women, but it didn’t. At 
this point in my life, it’s just easier to have female 
friends rather than lovers (p. 293) 

Anne, partnered for 16 years, age 42: Although 
I’m the only one who has taken responsibility for 
Mom and Dad, they have cut me out of their will. 
Dad said that he wouldn’t leave any money to his 
queer daughter. (Cohen and Murray, p. 293) 

From a life course perspective, with its 
emphasis on linked lives, transitions, and trajec- 
tories over time, when a person comes out, there 
is also an impact on their siblings’ lives. Thus, 
one person’s coming out is likely to be a family 
event for heterosexual and LGBT individuals 
alike (Connidis 2010). One of the most exciting 
areas of new research is how sibling relationships 
are impacted by LGBT identity among family 
members throughout the life course. For exam- 
ple, Rothblum et al. (2004), in a study of 1254 
LGB adults and their siblings, found that, in 
general, LGB adults were more highly educated, 
geographically mobile, less religious, and less 
likely to have or live with children than hetero- 
sexual siblings. Thus, understanding the nature 
of sibling ties among older adults, particularly in 
terms of companionship and caregiving, is an 
important issue for future study (Goldberg 2007; 
Gottlieb 2004; Grossman et al. 2000). 

Intergenerational relationships with chil- 
dren and grandchildren. Although about 
one-half of lesbian and gay older adults have 
biological or adoptive children from previous 
heterosexual relationships (Heaphy 2009), little 
is known about older LGBT persons’ relation- 
ships with their adult children. Coming out to 
children after years of hiding their sexual identity 
often happens indirectly and can be emotionally 
challenging for older adults (Flunter 2007). Yet, 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



51 



Goldberg (2007) found that most of the 42 adult 
children with LGB parents in her study reported 
positive relationships with their parents. 

The small, but growing literature on the 
experiences of gay and lesbian grandparents 
suggests that adult children are the key in 
determining the nature of the relationship 
between grandparents and their grandchildren 
(Orel 2014). Because adult children typically act 
as family gatekeepers, their acceptance and atti- 
tudes toward non-heterosexual identities and 
relationships often determine the amount of 
access grandparents have to their grandchildren 
(Orel and Fruhauf 2013). When adult children 
hold negative beliefs about homosexuality, many 
grandparents are reluctant to disclose their sexual 
identity to their children because they fear they 
may lose contact with their grandchildren. Con- 
versely, supportive adult children often facilitate 
the process of coming out to grandchildren, 
which many gay and lesbian grandparents 
believe is important because it promotes toler- 
ance and honesty. 

In a qualitative study of 1 1 gay grandfathers, 
aged 40-79, Fruhauf et al. (2009) found that 
adult children played an active role in the men’s 
coming-out process to grandchildren, with most 
adult children involved in explaining their 
fathers’ relationship to their children. For exam- 
ple, Bruce relayed the following story. 

The family was over for dinner and my grand- 
daughter turned to Eric, my life partner, who is 
Japanese-American. (So, hardly, you know, a 
match in terms of an obvious brother or some- 
thing.) She said, “Why do you live here?” and I 
went like that, and my daughter said, “No, no, no, 
no, I’ll deal with this.” So, they left the table, came 
back about 15 min later, and everybody, you 
know, is terribly silent waiting to see what will 
happen. My granddaughter sits there, and she said 
after a few minutes, “Mommy says that Eric is 
daddy’s special friend. When I’m older, Jessica 
will be my special friend.” (p. Ill) 

The roles grandfathers played in the lives of 
their grandchildren also depended on their rela- 
tionship with the grandchildren’s parents (Fru- 
hauf et al. 2009). Some grandfathers have no or 
limited contact with their adult children because 
they are unaccepting of their father’s sexuality. 



For example, Kerry explained that he recently 
reunited with his estranged son and had since 
become “more of a grandfather” to his 
five-year-old grandson. Conversely, Kerry’s 
son-in-law does not accept Kerry’s sexuality, 
which has influenced his relationship with his 
older grandsons with whom he does not have a 
close relationship. 

With the increase in the number of LGBT 
adults who are parents and the aging of the 
population, “doing family” will require an 
openness to complex family structures and rela- 
tionships (Perlesz et al. 2006). In their study of 
multi-generational family interviews with 20 
lesbian-parented families living in Victoria, 
Australia, Perlesz et al. (2006) revealed that 
being a grandparent in a lesbian-parented family 
was not always comfortable and challenged the 
dominant discourse around the definition family. 
In one family, the non-biological grandfather 
initially made heterosexist jokes about his 
daughter “playing daddy” in her prospective 
lesbian co-parenting role. Yet, upon the birth of 
his grandchild, he adopted the title of “Pop” and 
embraced a grandparent role in relation to his 
non-biological granddaughter. The biological 
grandmother in this family initially also was 
negative about her daughter’s decision to parent 
in a lesbian relationship, but after the child was 
born she embraced her role as a grandmother. 
The lesbian couple, while recognizing the exis- 
tence of their parents’ homophobia, was pleased 
that their parents engaged in positive relation- 
ships with their child (Perlesz et al. 2006, 
p. 193): 

Fiona: ... you do think about your own parents, 
how you were parented when you have a child and 
like Jacqui’s family, as much as they are a pain in 
the butt sometimes, they’re actually, it’s nice 
having them around you know. Like your mum, 
Imogen has a great time with your mum. Your 
mum is bloody atrocious sometimes with some of 
the stuff that she says but her relationship with 
Imogen is really good. 

Jacqui: Yeah it is good. 

Fiona: And it is great, it’s fabulous seeing 
that.... 

LGBT intimate relationships in later life. 

About 60 % of older lesbian and bisexual women 



52 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



and about 40 % of older gay and bisexual men 
are in a coupled relationship (Heaphy et al. 
2004). Historically, these couples were more 
likely than their heterosexual counterparts to 
maintain separate households (Barker et al. 
2006), which allowed them to remain closeted to 
family and others. Issues of concern for LGBT 
couples include ageist attitudes, financial stabil- 
ity, long-term care, lack of access to legal mar- 
riage, and sexuality (Baumle 2014). The study 
highlighted in the research box provides an 
illustration of the fluidity of sexuality for older 
lesbians, particularly in terms of their perceptions 
of their romantic and sexual relationships over 
time (Averett et al. 2012). 

Research Box: Older Lesbians and 
Sexual Intimacy 

Averett et al. (2012). Older lesbian sexu- 
ality: Identity, sexual behavior, and the 
impact of aging. Journal of Sex Research, 

49, 495-507. doi:10.1080/00224499.2011. 
582543 

Objective: To fill a void in the existing 
literature and to promote the experiences, 
needs, and concerns of a nearly invisible 
population, this study examined the sexual 
identity, romantic relationships, and expe- 
riences of discrimination of older lesbians. 

Method: An online national survey was 
completed by a convenience sample of 456 
lesbian women, ranging in age from 51 to 
86. To be eligible for the study, partici- 
pants had to have been involved in an 
emotional, physical, or sexual relationship 
with a woman at some point in their lives. 

Results: At the time of the survey, 
60.5 % of the women were involved in an 
emotional, physical, or sexual relationship 
with another woman. The average length 
of the relationship was of 15.4 years; 58 % 
of the women defined their relationship as 
a lifetime partner. Approximately 38 % of 
the women were satisfied with their sex life 
over the last year, 25 % were neither sat- 
isfied nor unsatisfied, and 37 % were 
unsatisfied. When asked to describe how 



their relationships with women had differed 
since age 55, common themes were conti- 
nuity (i.e., no change/difference), relation- 
ships were more stable and mature, and a 
decrease in the focus on the physical or 
sexual aspects of a relationship. 

Conclusion: Researchers must continue 
to examine the needs of older lesbians in 
order to increase both understanding and 
competencies in working with this vulner- 
able population and to enhance and further 
conceptual ideas about sexuality identities, 
experiences, and needs in late life. 

Discussion Questions: 

1 . How important is sexual intimacy in the 
lives of older lesbian women? 

2. What is the relationship between older 
lesbian women’s satisfaction with their 
sexual lives and attitudes toward aging? 

3. What are the limitations of this research 
study? 

de Vries (2007) addressed the diversity of 
coupled relationships for LGBT elders, including 
cohabiting and legal unions, as well as partner- 
ships formed post-heterosexual divorce or post 
coming out as gay or lesbian. Herdt et al. (1997) 
estimated that for older adults age 55 and over, 
approximately one-third of gay men and one-half 
of lesbians had been married at one time to a 
different-sex spouse. Among the current cohort 
of older LGBT individuals, it was likely that at 
least one of the partners was previously married 
to a cross-sex spouse, because marriage was 
typically the only way to have children (Connidis 
2010). While the growing recognition of 
same-sex marriages provides LGBT elders 
access to the personal benefits and social recog- 
nition of a formal marriage, some gay and lesbian 
adults view legalized marriage as a “sell out” to a 
heterosexist society, often fearing the loss of 
connection to their LGBT roots and social net- 
works (Lannutti 2005). Bisexual individuals, of 
whom very little is known (Biblarz and Savci 
2010; Rodriguez Rust 2012), particularly those 





3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



53 



in long-term committed heterosexual marriages, 
often experience stigma in both the heterosexual 
and the LGBT communities (de Vries 2007). 
Relationships in which an older adult is transi- 
tioning from male-to-female or female-to-male 
have added complexity as the gender-based 
socialization of the individuals and the couple 
is changed (Cook-Daniels 2006; Persson 2009). 

Caregiving norms consistent with heterosex- 
ual marital relationships appear to govern 
same-sex partnerships and marriages as well. 
When the need for care arises, older LGB adults 
report that they would first turn to their partners, 
then to friends and other family members (Cahill 
et al. 2000). Muraco and Fredriksen-Goldsen 
(2014) interviewed 36 LGB dyads comprised of 
committed partners and friends aged 50 and older 
to understand care norms in varied relationship 
contexts. Most of the best caregiving experiences 
between committed partners were identified as 
expressions of love and commitment to the 
relationship. Care recipients described their 
partners’ willingness to do anything that was 
necessary to meet their needs, both day-to-day 
and in times of crises. However, they also wor- 
ried about being a burden to their partner. 
Caregiving partners identified their best care- 
giving experiences as engaging in meaningful 
activities with the care recipient (e.g., going to a 
social event) or providing financial and emo- 
tional support. Caregivers were also aware that 
their relationship with their partner was different 
and sometimes strained because of the illness, 
but felt they would survive the challenges. They 
also expressed concerns about care burdens, 
fearing that they may someday be unable to take 
care of their partner because of their own limi- 
tations or the worsening health of their partner. 

Very little research has focused on the loss of 
a LGBT partner in late life. For couples who are 
not completely open about their relationship, the 
grief and loss experienced after the death of a 
partner has been described as disenfranchised 
grief (Doka 2002) because the loss is not openly 
acknowledged or validated by family, friends, or 
society. Discounting of the validity of the rela- 
tionship and of the loss negatively impacts the 



remaining partner’s ability to adequately grieve 
the loss. 

Jenkins et al. (2014) examined bereavement 
issues of 55 older lesbians. Older lesbians faced 
emotional, social, legal, and financial obstacles 
following the death of their partner. Only two of 
the women reported positive experiences in 
responding to the death of their partner, which in 
one case was attributed to the support of the 
partner’s family and in the second case, the 
support of friends, neighbors, children, and 
coworkers. The other women all discussed neg- 
ative experiences after the death of their partner 
including disenfranchised grief, discriminatory 
actions, loneliness of isolation, and the frustra- 
tion of relentless battles. The following quotes 
from several participants in Jenkins et al. study 
capture the essence of the lesbian women’s 
experiences with the loss of their partners. Dis- 
enfranchised grief concerns the personal attitudes 
and responses that are a result of not giving equal 
value to a loss in this kind of relationship, as one 
woman stated, “Nobody was willing to honor my 
30-year relationship with her in that I was not 
considered to be a ‘widow’ by them” (p. 258). 
Discriminatory actions concerns the refusal of 
rights — both legal and social — that would typi- 
cally be granted to spousal partners in a hetero- 
sexual relationship, described by another woman 
as: “It was especially difficult dealing with her 
biological family in spite of all of the legal 
papers and arrangements we made in advance” 
(p. 279). Another woman explained: 

Even the newspaper refused to refer to me as her 
partner and instead listed me as one of many 
“friends,” even though I had been the breadwinner 
for several years and was the primary caregiver 
and hospice caregiver the last 3 years of her life. 

(p. 281) 

Regarding the loneliness of isolation, which is 
learning to live alone and isolation from their 
partner’s family and other support systems, a 
woman stated that “the worst emotional toll was 
that her family pulled away and I don’t get to see 
the grandkids I helped raise” (p. 281). Another 
woman said, “Because most of us become 
invisible as we become older, it becomes harder 



54 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



to find other lesbians to interact with” (p. 281). 
Finally, considering the theme of frustration of 
relentless battles, which are a constant stream of 
battles — with one’s own emotions, with family 
and the partner’s family, and with other indi- 
viduals in the broader social system, a woman 
stated, “None of my family attended the funeral 
.... I have loads of anger about how I was treated 
by others over her passing” (p. 282). The authors 
concluded that until the legal status of same-sex 
marriage is widespread, it is important for service 
providers to develop appropriate means of help- 
ing lesbian women (as well as GBT individuals) 
deal with the issues surrounding the death of a 
partner. 

Families of choice. The concept of “families 
of choice”, which we have described throughout 
this chapter, was first articulated by Weston 
(1991). It is linked to Active kin concepts, which 
have strong roots in the field of family geron- 
tology (See Allen et al. 2011; Johnson 1999). 
Families of choice of older LGBT adults are 
characterized as ones comprised of a deep sense 
of belonging and feelings of safety, common 
values, and mutual trust (Gabrielson and Flolston 
2014). They provide many of the same support- 
ive and care functions as family of origin. In fact, 
research suggests that older gay and lesbian 
individuals prefer to receive care from their 
chosen family instead of their biological family 
members (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011; Hea- 
phy 2009). When receiving care from other 
LGBT people, older adults do not have to 
“de-sexualize” or eliminate evidence of their 
sexual orientation from their homes or the stories 
to appease or hide their identity from a hetero- 
sexual caregiver (Cronin et al. 2011). 

Older LGBT care recipients rely upon their 
friends as a safety net that stands between them 
and an unmet need for care (Muraco and 
Fredriksen-Goldsen 2014). For example, an older 
gay man in this study explained that when he was 
hospitalized, none of his family members came 
to visit and, “all the things that they should have 
done, could have done, ought to have done — [my 
friend] did that” (p. 262). Caregiving friends 
acknowledged the benefits they received from 
providing care including feeling good about 



themselves, perceiving improvement in their 
self-esteem, and engaging in typical friend 
activities (Muraco and Fredriksen-Goldsen 
2014). Conversely, caregiving can create con- 
flict between friends due to misunderstandings 
and short tempers. Depending on the nature of 
the conflict, it may negate the beneficial feelings 
that caregiving friends gain from providing care 
and ultimately threaten the duration of the care- 
giving relationship, leaving the care recipient 
vulnerable. 

The federal Family Caregivers Support Pro- 
gram, created with the 2000 reauthorization of 
the Older Americans Act, and amended in 2006, 
expanded its definition of family caregivers so 
that extended LGBT family members qualify 
(Administration on Aging 2012). Eligibility for 
the program is no longer limited to a married 
partner or blood relative. As a consequence, 
LGBT people caring for partners or other mem- 
bers of their chosen families can benefit from 
services provided under the program, including 
individual counseling, support groups, caregiver 
training, respite care, and other supplemental 
assistance. Research has shown that these ser- 
vices can reduce caregiver depression, anxiety, 
and stress and enable them to provide care 
longer, thereby avoiding or delaying the need for 
institutional care (Wacker and Roberto 2014). 



Service Delivery and Interdisciplinary 
Approaches 

One of the major issues affecting older LGBT 
families is the invisibility and marginalization 
they face with respect to health care and sup- 
portive social services. Reports of discrimination, 
homophobia, hostility, bias, and general lack of 
understanding of lifestyle choices are common. 
Older LGBT adults often report anxiety around 
the prospect of requiring health or supportive 
care (Cohen and Murray 2006; Davies et al. 
2006; Heaphy and Yip 2006; Price 2005) and 
fear having to come out to service providers or 
having to forcibly return to the closet (Brotman 
et al. 2007). They may be reluctant to seek 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



55 



mental health services, for fear of being invisible 
as LGBT, or if out, stigmatized (Blando 2001; 
Greene 2002). 

Brotman et al. (2003) conducted four quali- 
tative focus groups in three Canadian provinces 
(Quebec, Nova Scotia, and British Columbia) to 
assess their perceptions of health and social ser- 
vice providers. Participants included 21 gay and 
lesbian elders, and 11 familial and informal 
caregivers or service providers. All participants 
identified a profound marginalization and invis- 
ibility of gay and lesbian elders. Those who were 
gay and lesbian themselves described their lack 
of trust for health care services and professionals 
saying that issues of sexuality and the nature of 
gay and lesbian chosen family relationships were 
unacknowledged or denied. Similarly, responses 
to a survey completed by 569 LGBT adults 
attending the 2007 Palm Springs Pride weekend 
events revealed that older gay men and lesbians 
maintain some fear of openly disclosing their 
sexual orientation and some discomfort in their 
use of older adult social services (Gardner et al. 
2014). The majority of respondents reported that 
they would feel more comfortable accessing 
LGBT friendly identified services and programs. 
Women reported being somewhat more likely to 
use those services publicly identified as LGBT 
friendly than respondents who were men. 

For older LGBT families dealing with 
dementia, the entry of service providers into their 
lives is a pivotal point at which they need to 
decide whether or not to come out to profes- 
sionals. Price (2010) conducted qualitative 
interviews in England with 21 gay and lesbian 
adults aged 20-69 who cared for a parent, part- 
ner, or friend with dementia. Participants used a 
mix of strategies for disclosure of their sexuality 
to care providers including; (a) active disclosure, 
where service providers were directly informed 
that the family caregiver was not heterosexual; 
(b) passive disclosure, where caregivers’ sexual 
identity was suggested by way of clues given that 
relate to their sexuality; and (c) passive nondis- 
closure, where caregivers purposefully concealed 
aspects of their sexuality or actively avoided 
questions related to sexuality. The caregivers’ 



decision to disclose was mediated by three in- 
terlinked factors: experiences of negative reac- 
tions to and misunderstanding of their sexuality, 
their perceived feelings of discrimination, and 
their anticipation of negative responses. For 
example, a passive discloser who was a gay 
caregiver of a female friend that he and his 
partner took into their home so they could pro- 
vide her care relayed the following experience. 
This excerpt reveals how the service provider’s 
misconceptions and lack of understanding 
undermined the caregiver’s efforts to ensure his 
friend’s dignity: 

We were talking about getting her dressed and 
everything... and I was saying Yeah, ‘cos we 
bought all her clothes, so we kind of erm, and, in a 
way, we made sure she was fantastic, you know 
what I mean, she wasn’t just like, you know a lot of 
people who are like cared for, they just wear easy to 
wear clothes with elasticated things and t-shirts and 
stuff, but we liked, because she always did look 
fantastic, so we tried to keep that up as much as we 
could. ...And somebody said to us, ‘So, when 
you’re getting her dressed then, do you love it? So, 
do you sometimes think, hey, I could wear that and 
I could put that on?’ And I’m just like, ‘No, no we 
don't think like that actually!’ (p. 163-164) 

The above example and others like it found in 
the literature reinforce the need for education and 
training for health and human service providers to 
eliminate discriminatory and oppressive practices 
and implement appropriate responses and care. 
Service providers must consider the extensive 
invisibility of older LGBT families and practice 
in a manner that is culturally sensitive and com- 
petent (Healy 2002). Culturally sensitive prac- 
tices are affirming to LGBT families and include 
the use of language and behavior that validates, 
acknowledges, and accepts LGBT families. Cul- 
turally competent practice requires that service 
providers acquire knowledge about the diversity 
within the LGBT population, learn the resources 
available to LBGT families, gain an understand- 
ing of the unique challenges faced by LGBT 
families due to the laws and policies that dis- 
criminate against them, and be sensitive to the 
general impact of heterosexual assumptions in the 
health and social service system (Healy 2002). 



56 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



Unfortunately, as highlighted by cases pre- 
sented in the Discussion Box, such shifts in 
practices are slow to come about. Knochel et al. 
(2010) found that more than one-half of the 316 
directors of Area Agencies on Aging (AAA) and 
State Units on Aging (SUAs) who responded to a 
nationwide survey had not offered or funded any 
LGBT aging training to staff and very few were 
providing any LGBT aging outreach. Agencies 
whose staff had received some form of LGBT 
training were twice as likely to receive a request 
to help an LGB individual and three times as 
likely to be requested to help a transgender older 
adult. Such findings provided evidence that cul- 
tural competency training could substantially 
improve the lives of many LGBT older adults. 

Discussion Box: Older LGBT Families 
Providing Care and Seeking Services 

Partners, families, and friends are the most 
preferred sources of support and daily care 
among older LGBT adults. When the need 
for help and assistance escalates, due to 
chronic health problems or cognitive 
decline, families may seek formal services 
to assist in meeting the older adult’s care 
needs. 

All too often LGBT families face dis- 
crimination and insensitive treatment when 
they seek help from formal health and 
community service providers, which makes 
many LGBT older adults reluctant to 
access mainstream aging services, and 
ultimately may put them at greater risk for 
worsening chronic health problems, 
depression and anxiety, social isolation, 
and premature mortality. For example, 
consider the experiences of Amirah who 
felt discriminated against by her doctor 
(http://www.lgbtmap.org/file/lgbt-older- 
adults-and-inhospitable-health-care- 
environments.pdf; p. 2), Lawrence and 
Alexandre who experienced hostility from 
paid home care providers (http://www. 
lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/resource. 
cfm?r=15), and Clay and Harold’s poor 
treatment when Harold needed nursing 



home care (http://www.lgbtmap.org/file/ 
lgbt-older-adults-and-inhospitable-health- 
care-environments.pdf; p. 3). 

Training care staff on how to identify 
and address the needs of LGBT older 
adults is one important key to making 
health care and supportive services more 
welcoming to older LGBT families and to 
ensure that they have access to appropriate 
care options. 

Discussion Questions: 

1 . What recommendation do you have for 
training to help make positive changes 
in the health and formal care provision 
for LGBT elders and their families? 

2. What specific knowledge and informa- 
tion should community services pro- 
viders and long-term care providers, 
such as case managers, social workers, 
nurses, and nursing assistants, have in 
order to best assist older LGBT families 
meet their care needs? 

3. In what ways can the LGBT families 
advocate for culturally sensitive and 
appropriate services and treatment by 
formal health and human service 
professionals? 

In 2010, for the first time, the Administration 
on Aging (AoA), a federal agency that provides 
funds to state units on aging who in turn support 
local AAAs, publically recognized that older 
LGBT individuals have unique concerns and 
needs. To address these concerns and needs, the 
AoA provided a three-year grant to SAGE to 
create the National Resource Center for LGBT 
Aging. The initial objectives of the National 
Resource Center focused on both service orga- 
nizations and LGBT individuals and families: 

1 . Educate aging network services organizations 
about the existence and special needs of 
LGBT older adults. 

2. Sensitize LGBT organizations to the exis- 
tence and special needs of older adults. 





3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



57 



3. Educate LGBT individuals about the impor- 
tance of planning ahead for future long-term 
care needs. (Meyer 2011, p. 25) 

Establishing the National Resource Center for 
LGBT Aging was an integral first step in 
addressing the needs of LGBT elders and their 
families. While the education and training pro- 
cesses have shown initial signs of success, fed- 
eral, state, and local agencies must continue to 
invest in this work in order to implement the 
necessary systemic changes to the aging service 
delivery system (Meyer 2011). 



Issues to Be Resolved Through 
Research and Practice 

Although promising strides have been made, 
much more research is needed about the various 
biological and chosen family relationships of 
aging LGBT individuals. As we have noted 
throughout this chapter, these relationships 
include those with same-sex and different-sex 
partners, with children and grandchildren, with 
aging parents and adult siblings, and with friends 
and informal relationships that are converted into 
family relationships. With the changing social 
and political context, as well as the aging of the 
LGBT population, conducting the research on 
LGBT families is increasingly possible. Social 
changes in marriage equality, legalized second 
parent adoption, and recognition of friends as 
informal caregivers are likely to contribute to 
new research and thinking about aging, sexual 
minority status, and families. With all of these 
changes, there will be an expansion of resources 
for LGBT older adults and their families, beyond 
the pioneering efforts that currently exist (e.g., 
Lambda Legal Defense 2015; SAGE 2015). 

The challenges facing older LGBT individuals 
as members of families of origin, families of 
procreation, and families of choice are well 
documented. What is needed now are more 
studies about LGBT resilience over the life 
course (e.g., Oswald 2002) and successful aging 
(van Wagenen et al. 2013). Research on how 



LGBT adults bring their accumulated wisdom 
and adaptability into their later years in order to 
maintain emotional, physical, and relationship 
health is a promising pathway to deepen under- 
standing about aging differently, and aging well. 



Summary 

Families are the most important institution for the 
care and nurturance of human beings; attention to 
family ties is crucial for professionals in all areas 
working with elders. Historically, the family 
experiences of LGBT aging individuals have 
been largely ignored and stigmatized given the 
social and legal prohibitions against sexual ori- 
entation minority status. Currently, however, this 
situation of exclusion is being rectified and now 
older LGBT family life is beginning to receive 
the theoretical, empirical, and practical attention 
it deserves. 

Aging LGBT individuals have faced many 
stresses associated with the overlap between 
aging and being members of a sexual minority. 
As a result, these elders have developed very 
resilient strategies for constructing long-term 
kinship bonds, even when societal customs and 
laws have disallowed them. One of the strengths 
of this population is the activist spirit in the 
LGBT community. The desire to live an 
authentic life, despite prejudice and hardship has 
led older LGBT individuals to create a rich array 
of legal, biological, and Active kin ties. Indeed, 
some “family” ties of older LGBT individuals are 
actually with their friends. Blurring the bound- 
aries across biological and chosen kin ties is a 
legacy and a contribution of the LGBT aging 
community. 

As the aging LGBT population increases, it is 
even more imperative that health care and social 
services professionals have up-to-date knowl- 
edge about similarities and differences in families 
where members are LGBT. They also need to be 
informed about the changing legal climate that 
impacts the family relationships of these elders 
so that they can ensure their access to the ser- 
vices that will improve their quality of life. 



58 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



LGBT Older Adult Resources 

United States 

AARP (American Association of Retired Per- 
sons): AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organi- 
zation that advocates for consumers in the 
marketplace, including those who identify as 
LGBT. The AARP-Pride Web content provides 
consumers and families with information specific 
to LGBT older adults. Here, readers can find 
information on LGBT news, estate planning tips, 
social security, same-sex divorce, dating, history 
of LGBT rights, health and well-being, leisure 
activities, and read AARP’s stance on LGBT 
issues, (http://www.aarp.org/relationships/friends- 
family/ aarp-pride/) . 

ASA Clearinghouse (American Society on 
Aging LGBT Aging Resources Clearinghouse): 
The American Society on Aging has created a 
searchable database where LGBT older adults 
can find annotated listings of aging resources. 
The clearinghouse was created to provide access 
to information for elders, young persons, care- 
givers, students, researchers, and other profes- 
sionals. Listings include reports and articles, 
links for ordering DVDs and books, service 
providers, community organizations, information 
sites, and other useful products. (http://asaging. 
org/lgbt_aging_resources_clearinghouse). 

DEC (Diverse Elders Coalition): Founded in 
2010, the Diverse Elders Coalition advocates for 
policies and programs that improve the lives of 
racially and ethnically diverse people (including 
American Indians and Alaska Natives) and 
LGBT people. This coalition was created to give 
voice to those often absent from policy-making 
conversations. Here, readers can find resources 
on research, information booklets, webinars, and 
policies affecting LGBT older adults, (http:// 
www.diverseelders.org/learn/). 

FORGE TAN (FORGE Transgender Aging 
Network): The FORGE organization advocates 
for the rights of transgender individuals and their 
significant others, friends, family, and allies 
(SOFFAs). The FORGE Trans Aging Network is 
a membership-based community that offers 



listservs, publications, training, and consultations 
on issues related to aging. (http://forge-forward. 
org/aging/). 

LGBT FCA (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender Family Caregiver Alliance): The 
Family Caregiver Alliance is a nonprofit orga- 
nization dedicated to caregiver awareness and 
advocacy. The FCA has a section dedicated 
specifically to caregiving issues and strategies for 
LGBTQ populations. Here readers can find 
LGBT facts and tip sheets and access an online 
caregiver support group. (https://www. caregiver, 
org/special-issues/lgbtq). 

NRC LGBT (National Resource Center on 
LGBT Aging): Founded in 2010, the National 
Resource Center on LGBT Aging is a 
self-described “technical assistance resource 
center” created to address the needs of older 
LGBT adults as they age. Here readers can 
access training documents, technical assistance, 
and educational resources. Topics include care- 
giving, intergenerational issues, and long-term 
care, (http://www.lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/ 
index.cfm?s=3; http://www.lgbtagingcenter.org/ 
resources/resources .cfm? s= 1 6 ; http ://w w w .lgb 

tagingcenter.org/resources/resources.cfm?s=15). 

SAGE (Services and Advocacy for Gay, Les- 
bian, Bisexual, and Transgender Elders): Foun- 
ded in 1978, SAGE is the US oldest and largest 
organization dedicated to serving the needs of 
LGBT older adults. SAGE offers services and 
programs to LGBT older adults nationwide, 
advocates at all levels of government (federal, 
state, and local) for inclusive public policy, pro- 
vides training to service providers, and develops 
consumer resources to help older LGBT adults 
make informed decisions. Here readers can find 
information on their programs, advocacy, issues, 
and latest news, (http://www.sageusa.org/). 
International 

AUK (Age United Kingdom): Age UK is the 
largest charity organization consisting of over 
170 local Age UKs across England. This orga- 
nization aims to help all adults live out their later 
years to the best of their ability. Age UK pro- 
vides older LGBT adults with access to services, 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



59 



tools for planning, and support group informa- 
tion. In addition, this organization has several 
international branches in more than 40 countries. 
(http://www.ageuk.org.uk/health-wellbeing/ 
relationships-and-family/older-lesbian-gay-and- 
bisexual/). 

Equal Aging (Seta — LGBTI Rights in Fin- 
land). Founded in 1974, Seta is a national human 
rights non-governmental organization (NGO) 
with local and national branches in Finland. 
Equal Aging is a three-year project run by Seta in 
cooperation with Fin-Bears and Mummolaasko. 
Flere Finnish caregivers and students can find 
information on LGBTI care needs. In addition, 
this web site also includes a care for the elderly 
knowledge library, (http://seta.fi/yhdenvertainen- 
vanhuus/in-english/ ; http ://seta. fi/ 

yhdenvertainen-vanhuus/vanhustyon- 
tietokirjasto/). 

National LGBTI Health Alliance. (National 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Inter- 
sex Health Alliance — Australia): The 

National LGBTI Health Alliance advocates for 
the improved health and well-being of LGBTI 
individuals across Australia. This coalition group 
is made up of individuals and organizations and 
was created in response to the expected increase 
in the demand for services for LGBTI older 
adults in Australia. The Alliance Web site pro- 
vides information on the organization, their 
training initiatives, strategic documents, and a 
review of progress made in the previous calendar 
year, (http://lgbtihealth.org.au/ageing). 

ODL (Opening Doors London): Opening 
Door London is one of the largest sources of 
support and information for older LGBT adults 
in the United Kingdom. Opening Doors London 
was created as a response to the high rates of 
isolation experienced by older LGBT adults. The 
program is aimed at LGBT men and women over 
the age of 50 and includes regular social activi- 
ties, referral services, and information and guid- 
ance to service providers. (http://opening 
doorslondon.org.uk/). 

RFSL Stockholm (Swedish Federation for 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer 
Rights): Founded in 1950, the RFSL is one of the 



oldest LGBT rights organizations in the world. It 
works to serve the needs of LGBT individuals 
and their relatives and friends. The organization 
carries out advocacy work, educational courses, 
and support groups. Here readers can find 
information on projects, health, and older adult 
and family support groups. (http://rfslstockholm. 
com/). 

SPN (Senior Pride Network): The Senior 
Pride Network is a two-pronged service provider 
to LGBTQ Canadians aged 50+. This 
network-based organization is comprised of 
individuals, organizations, and community 
groups that serve or are committed to serving the 
needs of LGBT older adults. In addition, this 
Senior Pride Network also includes a six-person 
advisory committee that sets the network’s pri- 
orities, strategic direction, and future initiatives. 
Here readers can access information on programs 
and services, training, and research. (http://www. 
seniorpridenetwork.com/home.htm). 

Acknowledgment We thank Erin Lavender-Stott and 
Emma Potter for their research assistance. 



Learning Exercises 
Self-Check Questions 

1. In what ways did the scholarship on LGBT 
elders and their families emerge out of the 
social activism on behalf of LGBT civil 
rights? 

2. What are families of choice? How are they 
significant in the LGBT aging community? 

3. What impact will the legalization of same-sex 
marriage have for current generations of 
LGBT individuals as they age? 

4. What are the unique circumstances that older 
LGBT individuals and their family members 
must prepare for, due to their sexual minority 
status? 

5. What knowledge do health care professionals 
and social service providers need to be able to 
ensure quality of care to aging LGBT indi- 
viduals and their families? 



60 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



6. What do aging LGBT individuals have to 
teach others about family relationships? 

Experiential Exercises 

1. Visit a GLBT senior center or a GLBT 
community center and interview staff mem- 
bers and participants about their experiences 
of “chosen family” in their community. 

2. View the documentary, Gen Silent, and reflect on 
the issues facing the LGBT individuals and their 
partners as they consider long-term care, http:// 
www.lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/resource. 
cfm?r=14 

3. View the short video featuring Hilary Meyer, 
Director of the National Resource Center on 
LGBT Aging, discuss issues facing LGBT 
older adults (13.04 min). Identify 3-5 key 
caregiving issues in late life. http://www. 
lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/resource.cfm? 
r=13. 



Multiple-Choice Questions 

1. Families in which friends are converted into 
kin are called: 

(a) Families of procreation 

(b) Families of origin 

(c) Families of choice 

(d) Families of extension 

2. Douglas Kimmel is one of the founders of: 

(a) SAGE 

(b) NLGTF 

(c) Gray Panthers 

(d) AARP 

3. Which of the following US states has not 
allowed legal same-sex marriage? 

(a) Alabama 

(b) California 

(c) Montana 

(d) Virginia 

4. “Personal attitudes and responses that are a 
result of not giving equal value to a loss in 
this kind of relationship” is the definition of: 

(a) Discriminatory action 

(b) Disenfranchised grief 



(c) Loneliness of isolation 

(d) Frustration of relentless battles 

5. Family gatekeeper is a term that refers to 
what generation: 

(a) Grandparents 

(b) Adult children 

(c) Grandchildren 

(d) Great-grandchildren 

6. Older LGBT adults’ relationships with their 
parents and siblings are characterized by: 

(a) Ambivalence 

(b) Support 

(c) Conflict 

(d) All of the above 

7. Which theory explains how stigma, pre- 
judice, and discrimination create a hostile 
and stressful social environment that can 
cause mental health problems? 

(a) Life course theory 

(b) Social exchange theory 

(c) Minority stress theory 

(d) Activity theory 

8. LGBT care providers who purposefully 
conceal aspects of their sexuality are called: 

(a) Active disclosure 

(b) Passive disclosure 

(c) Active nondisclosure 

(d) Passive nondisclosure 

9. Which of the following does not appear to be 
a major concern for older LGBT adults: 

(a) Going on vacations 

(b) Moving into a nursing home 

(c) Relationships with biological family 
members 

(d) Chronic illness 

10. This chapter addressed the intersections 
across the following social locations: 

(a) Age, nationality, and residence 

(b) Age, family, and sexual orientation 

(c) Age, disability, and gender 

(d) Age, ethnicity, and religion 

Multiple-Choice Key 

1. c 

2. a 

3. a 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



61 



4. b 

5. b 

6. d 

7. c 

8. d 

9. a 

10. b 



References 

Administration on Aging. (2012). National Family Care- 
giver Support Program (OAA Title HIE). Retrieved 
from http ://w w w . aoa. go v/Ao A_programs/HCLTC/ 

Caregiver/index.aspx 

Allen, K. R. (2005). Gay and lesbian elders. In M. 
Johnson, V. L. Bengtson, P. Coleman, & T. Kirkwood 
(Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of age and aging 
(pp. 483^189). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press. 

Allen, K. R„ Blieszner, R., & Roberto, K. A. (2000). 
Families in the middle and later years: A review and 
critique of research in the 1990s. Journal of Marriage 
and the Family, 62, 911-926. doi: 10. Ill 1/j. 1741- 
3737.2000.00911.x. 

Allen, K. R., Blieszner, R., & Roberto, K. A. (2011). 
Perspectives on extended family and Active kin in the 
later years: Strategies and meanings of kin reinterpre- 
tation. Journal of Family Issues, 32, 1156-1177. 
doi: 10. 1177/0192513X1 1404335. 

Allen, K. R., & Demo, D. H. (1995). The families of 
lesbians and gay men: A new frontier in family 
research. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 57, 
111-127. doi:10.2307/353821. 

Averett, P., Yoon, I., & Jenkins, C. L. (2012). Older 
lesbian sexuality: Identity, sexual behavior, and the 
impact of aging. Journal of Sex Research, 49, 495- 
507. doi: 10.1080/00224499.201 1.582543. 

Barker, J. C., Herdt, G„ & de Vries, B. (2006). Social 
support in the lives of lesbians and gay men at midlife 
and later. Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 3, 1-23. 
doi:10.1525/srsp.2006.3.2.1. 

Baumle, A. K. (2014). Same-sex cohabiting elders versus 
different-sex cohabiting and married elders: Effects of 
relationship status and sex of partner on economic and 
health outcomes. Social Science Research, 43, 60-73. 
doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2013.09.003. 

Bengtson, V. L., & Allen, K. R. (1993). The life course 
perspective applied to families over time. Sourcebook 
of family theories and methods (pp. 469-499). New 
York, NY: Plenum. 

Bengtson, V. L., Elder, G. H„ & Putney, N. M. (2005). 
The lifecourse perspective on ageing: Linked lives, 
timing, and history. In M. Johnson, V. L. Bengtson, 



P. Coleman, & T. Kirkwood (Eds.), The Cambridge 
handbook of age and aging (pp. 493-501). Cam- 
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Berger, R. M. (1984). Realities of gay and lesbian aging. 
Social Work, 29, 57-62. 

Berger, R. M., & Kelly, J. J. (1986). Working with 
homosexuals of the older population. Social Case- 
work, 67, 203-210. 

Bianchi, S. M. (2014). A demographic perspective on 
family change. Journal of Family Theory & Review, 6, 
35-44. doi: 10. 1 1 1 1/jftr. 12029. 

Biblarz, T. J., & Savci, E. (2010). Lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender families. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 72, 480-497. doi: 10.1 11 1/j. 1741-3737.2010. 
00714.x. 

Blando, J. A. (2001, Summer). Twice hidden: Older gay 
and lesbian couples, friends, and intimacy. Genera- 
tions, 25, 87-89. 

Blieszner, R., & Bedford, V. (Eds.). (2012). Handbook of 
families and aging (2nd ed.). Denver, CO: Praeger. 

Brock, L. J., & Jennings, G. (2007). Sexuality & 
intimacy. In J. A. Blackburn & C. N. Dunn (Eds.), 
Handbook of gerontology: Evidence-based 

approaches to theory, practice, and research 
(pp. 244-268). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

Brotman, S., Ryan, B., Collins, S., Chamberland, L., 
Cormier, R., Julien, D. et al. (2007). Coming out to 
care: Caregivers of gay and lesbian seniors in Canada. 
The Gerontologist, 47, 490-503. 

Brotman, S., Ryan, B„ & Cormier, R. (2003). The health 
and social service needs of gay and lesbian elders and 
their families in Canada. The Gerontologist, 43, 192- 
202 . 

Brown, L. B., Alley, G. R„ Sarosy, S., Quarto, G., & 
Cook, T. (2001). Gay men: Aging well! Journal of 
Gay and Lesbian Social Services, 13(4), 41-54. 

Cahill, S„ South, K., & Spade, J. (2000). Outing age: 
Public policy issues affecting gay, lesbian, bisexual 
and transgender elders. Washington, DC: National 
Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute. 

Cantor, M. H„ Brennan, M., & Shippy, R. A. (2004). 
Caregiving among older lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender New Yorkers. New York: National Gay and 
Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute. Retrieved from 
http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/down- 
loads/reports/reports/CaregivingAmongOlderLGBT.pdf. 

Cohen, H. L., & Murray, Y. (2006). Older lesbian and gay 
caregivers: Caring for families of choice and caring for 
families of origin. Journal of Human Behavior in the 
Social Environment, 14(1/2), 275-298. doi:10.1300/ 
J137vl4n01_14. 

Cohler, B. J., & Hostetler, A. J. (2002). Aging, intimate 
relationships, and life story among gay men. In R. 
W. Weiss & S. A. Bass (Eds.), Challenges of the third 
age: Meaning and purpose in later life (pp. 137-160). 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Connidis, I. A. (2010). Family ties and aging (2nd ed.). 
Los Angeles, CA: Pine Forge Press. 



62 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



Cook-Daniels, L. (2006). Trans aging. In D. Kimmel, T. 
Rose, & S. David (Eds.), Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender aging: Research and clinical perspectives 
(pp. 20-35). New York. NY: Columbia University 
Press. 

Cooper, B. (1997). The view from over the hill. In M. 
Pearsall (Ed.), The other within us: Feminist explora- 
tions of women and aging (pp. 121-134). Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press. 

Cronin, A., Ward, R„ Pugh, S., King, A., & Price, E. (2011). 
Categories and their consequences: Understanding and 
supporting the caring relationships of older lesbian, gay 
and bisexual people. International Social Work, 54, 
421^-35. doi: 10. 1177/0020872810396261. 

D’Augelli, A. R., Grossman, A. H., Hershberger, S. L., & 
O’Connell, T. S. (2001). Aspects of mental health 
among older lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults. Aging 
and Mental Health, 5, 149-158. doi:10.1080/ 

713650002. 

Davies, M., Addis, S„ MacBride-Stewart, S., & Shepherd, 
M. (2006). The health, social care and housing needs 
of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender older 
people: Literature review. Cardiff, UK: Cardiff Insti- 
tute of Society, Health and Ethics. 

de Vries, B. (2007). LGBT couples in later life: A study in 
diversity. Generations, 31, 18-23. 

D’Emilio, J., & Freedman, E. B. (1997). Intimate matters: 
A history of sexuality in America (2nd ed.). Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Doka, K. J. (Ed.). (2002). Disenfranchised grief: New 
directions, challenges, and strategies for practice. 
Champaign, IL: Research Press. 

Dorfman, R., Walters, K., Burke, P., Hardin, L„ Karanik, 
T., Raphael, J., & Silverstein, E. (1995). Old, sad and 
alone: The myth of the aging homosexual. Journal of 
Gerontological Social Work, 24(1/2), 29 — 44. 

Editors of the Harvard Law Review. (1990). Sexual 
orientation and the law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Engel, S. (2002). Making a minority: Understanding the 
formation of the gay and lesbian movement in the 
United States. In D. Richardson & S. Seidman (Eds.), 
Handbook of lesbian and gay studies (pp. 377^4-02). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Faderman, L. (1991). Odd girls and twilight lovers: A 
history of lesbian life in twentieth century America. 
New York, NY: Penquin. 

Family Caregiver Alliance. (2012). Selected caregiver 
statistics. Retrieved from https://www.caregiver.org/ 
selected-caregiver-statistics. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Cook-Daniels, L., Kim, H., 
Erosheva, E. A., Emlet, C. A., Hoy-Ellis, C. P., et al. 
(2013). Physical and mental health of transgender 
older adults: An at-risk and underserved population. 
The Gerontologist, 54, 488-500. doi:10.1093/geront/ 
gnt021. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I.. Kim, H.-J., Emlet, C. A., 
Muraco, A., Erosheva, E. A., Hoy-Ellis, C., et al. 
(2011). The aging and health report: Disparities and 
resilience among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 



transgender older adults. Seattle, WA: Institute for 
Multigenerational Health. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., & Muraco, A. (2010). Aging 
and sexual orientation: A 25-year review of the 
literature. Research on Aging, 32, 372-413. doi:10. 
1177/0164027509360355. 

Friend, R. A. (1990). Older lesbian and gay people: 
Responding to homophobia. In F. W. Bozett & M. 
B. Sussman (Eds.), Homosexuality and family rela- 
tions (pp. 241-263). New York, NY: Harrington Park 
Press. 

Fruhauf, C., Orel, N., & Jenkins, D. (2009). The coming 
out process of gay grandfathers: Perceptions of their 
adult children’s influence. Journal of GLBT Family 
Studies, 5, 99-118. doi: 10. 1080/15504280802595402. 

Gabrielson, M. L., & Holston, E. C. (2014). Broadening 
definitions of family for older lesbians: Modifying the 
Lubben social network scale. Journal of Gerontolog- 
ical Social Work, 57, 198-217. doi:10.1080/ 

01634372.2013.879683. 

Gardner, A. T., de Vries, B., & Mockus, D. S. (2014). 
Aging out in the desert: Disclosure, acceptance, and 
service use among midlife and older lesbians and gay 
men. Journal of Homosexuality, 61, 129-144. doi:10. 
1080/00918369.2013.835240. 

Goldberg, A. E. (2007). Talking about family: Disclosure 
practices of adults raised by lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
parents. Journal of Family Issues, 28, 100-131. 
doi: 1 0. 1 1 77/0 1 925 1 3X06293606. 

Gottlieb, A. R. (2004). Side by side: On having a gay or 
lesbian sibling. New York, NY: Haworth Press. 

Gray, H., & Dressel, P. (1985). Alternative interpretations 
of aging among gay males. The Gerontologist, 25, 83- 
87. 

Greene, B. (2002). Older lesbians’ concerns and psycho- 
therapy: Beyond a footnote to the footnote. In F. 
K. Trotman & C. M. Brody (Eds.), Psychotherapy and 
counseling with older women: Cross-cultural, family, 
and end-of-life issues (pp. 161-174). New York, NY: 
Springer. 

Grossman, A. H., D'Augelli, A. R., & Hershberger, S. L. 
(2000). Social support networks of lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual adults 60 years of age and older. Journal of 
Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 55B, 171-179. 
doi: 1 0. 1093/geronb/55 .3 .P 171. 

Healy, T. C. (2002). Culturally competent practice with 
elderly lesbians. Geriatric Case Management Journal, 
72(3), 9-13. 

Heaphy, B. (2009). Choice and its limits in older lesbian 
and gay narratives of relational life. Journal of GLBT 
Family Studies, 5(1-2), 119-138. doi:10.1080/ 

15504280802595451. 

Heaphy, B., & Yip, A. K. T. (2006). Policy implications 
of ageing sexualities. Social Policy and Society, 5, 
443^451. doi: 10. 1017/S 1474746406003150. 

Heaphy, B„ Yip, A. K., & Thompson, D. (2004). Ageing 
in a non-heterosexual context. Ageing and Society, 24, 
881-902. doi:10.1017/S0144686X03001600. 

Herdt, G., Beeler, J., & Rawls, T. (1997). Life course 
diversity among older lesbians and gay men: A study 



3 Family Relationships of Older LGBT Adults 



63 



in Chicago. Journal of Gay, Lesbian, arid Bisexual 
Identity, 2, 231-246. doi: 10. 1023/A: 1026338004449. 

Human Rights Campaign (HRC). (2015, January). Mar- 
riage equality and other relationship recognition 
laws. Retrieved from www.hrc.org 

Hunter, S. (2007). Coming out and disclosures: LGBT 
persons across the life span. Binghamton, NY: 
Haworth Press. 

Jacobson, S., & Grossman, A. H. (1996). Older lesbians 
and gay men: Old myths, new images, and future 
directions. In R. C. Savin-Williams & K. M. Cohen 
(Eds.), The lives of lesbians, gays, and bisexuals: 
Children to adults (pp. 345-373). Fort Worth, TX: 
Harcourt Brace. 

Jenkins, C. L., Edmundson, A., Averett, P., & Yoon, I. 
(2014). Older lesbians and bereavement: Experiencing 
the loss of a partner. Journal of Gerontological Social 
Work, 57, 273-287. doi: 10. 1080/01634372.2013. 
850583. 

Johnson, C. L. (1999). Fictive kin among oldest old 
African Americans in the San Francisco Bay area. 
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 54B, S368- 
S375. doi:10.1093/geronb/54B.6.S368. 

Kehoe, M. (1986). Lesbians over 65: A triply invisible 
minority. Journal of Homosexuality, 72(3/4), 139— 
152. doi:10.1300/J082vl2n03_12. 

Kimmel, D. C. (1978). Adult development and aging: A gay 
perspective. Journal of Social Issues, 34(3), 113-130. 

Kimmel, D. C. (1992). The families of older gay men and 
lesbians. Generations, 77(3), 37-38. 

Kimmel, D., Rose, T., & David, S. (Eds.). (2006). 
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender aging 
research and clinical perspectives. New York, NY: 
Columbia University Press. 

Knochel, A., Croghan, C., Moone, R., & Quam, J. (2010). 
Ready to serve ? The aging network of LGB and T 
older adults. St. Paul, MN: Author. Retrieved from 
http://www.lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/pdfs/ 
ReadyToServe.pdf. 

Lambda Legal. (2015). Seniors. Retrieved from http:// 
www.lambdalegal.org/issues/seniors. 

Lannutti, P. J. (2005). For better or worse: Exploring the 
meanings of same-sex marriage within the lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgendered community. Journal 
of Social and Personal Relationships, 22, 5-18. 
doi: 1 0. 1 1 77/02654075050493 1 9 . 

Lipman, A. (1984). Homosexuals. In E. Palmore (Ed.), 
Handbook on the aged in the United States (pp. 323- 
337). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 

Maupin, A. (2015, January). Books. Retrieved from www. 
armisteadmaupin.com. 

MetLife Mature Market Institute. (2010). Still out, still 
aging: The Metlife study of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender baby boomers. Retrieved from www. 
metlife.com/mmi/research/still-out-still-aging.html. 

Meyer, H. (2011). Safe spaces? The need for LGBT 
cultural competency in aging services. Public Policy 
& Aging Report, 27(3), 24-27. 

Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental 
health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: 



Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psycholog- 
ical Bulletin, 129, 674-697. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909. 
129.5.674. 

Muraco, A., & Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I. (2011). “That’s 
what friends do”: Informal caregiving for chronically 
ill LGBT elders. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 28, 1073-1092. doi:10.1177/ 

0265407511402419. 

Muraco, A., & Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I. (2014). The 
highs and lows of caregiving for chronically ill 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual elders. Journal of Geron- 
tological Social Work, 57, 251-272. doi:10.1080/ 
01634372.2013.860652. 

Naples, N. A. (2001). A member of the funeral: An 
introspective ethnography. In M. Bernstein & R. 
Reimann (Eds.), Queer families, queer politics: Chal- 
lenging culture and the state (pp. 21 — 43). New York, 
NY : Columbia University Press. 

National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF). (2015). 
FAQ sheet on LGBT elders & outing Age 2010. 
Retrieved from www.thetaskforce.org. 

Nystrom, N. M., & Jones, T. C. (2003). Community 
building with aging and old lesbians. American 
Journal of Community Psychology, 32, 293-300. 

Orel, N. A. (2014). Investigating the needs and concerns 
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender older adults: 
The use of qualitative and quantitative methodology. 
Journal of Homosexuality, 61, 53-78. doi: 10. 1080/ 
00918369.2013.835236. 

Orel, N. A., & Fruhauf, C. A. (2013). Lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender grandparents. In A. E. Gold- 
berg & K. R. Allen (Eds.), LGBT-parent families: 
Innovations in research and implications for practice 
(pp. 177-192). New York, NY: Springer. 

Oswald, R. F. (2002). Resilience within the family 
networks of lesbians and gay men: Intentionality and 
redefinition. Journal of Marriage and Family, 64, 
374-383. doi: 10. 1 1 1 l/j,1741-3737.2002.00374.x. 

Perlesz, A., Brown, R., Lindsay, J., McNair, R„ De Vaus, 
D., & Pitts, M. (2006). Family in transition: parents, 
children and grandparents in lesbian families give 
meaning to ‘doing family’. Journal of Family Therapy, 
28, 175-199. doi: 10. Ill 1/j. 1467-6427. 2006.00345.x. 

Persson, D. I. (2009). Unique challenges of transgender 
aging: Implications from the literature. Journal of 
Gerontological Social Work, 52, 633-646. doi: 10. 
1080/01634370802609056. 

Pope, M., & Schulz, R. (1990). Sexual attitudes and 
behavior in midlife and aging homosexual males. 
Journal of Homosexuality, 20, 169-177. 

Price, E. (2005). All but invisible: older gay men and 
lesbians. Nursing Older People, 17(4), 16-18. doi:10. 
7748/nop2005. 06. 17.4.16x2377. 

Price, E. (2010). Coming out to care: Gay and lesbian 
carers’ experiences of dementia services. Health and 
Social Care in the Community, 18, 160-168. doi: 10. 
1 1 1 1/j. 1365-2524.2009.00884.X. 

Quam, J. K., & Whitford, G. S. (1992). Adaptation and 
age-related expectations of older gay and lesbian 
adults. The Gerontologist, 32, 367-374. 



64 



K.R. Allen and K.A. Roberto 



Reczek, C. (2014). The intergenerational relationships of 
gay men and lesbian women. Journals of Gerontol- 
ogy. Series B, Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences, 69, 909-919. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbu042. 

Rodriguez Rust, P. C. (2012). Aging in the bisexual 
community. In T. M. Witten & A. E. Eyler (Eds.), 
Gay, lesbian, bisexual & transgencler aging: Chal- 
lenges in research, practice & policy (pp. 162-186). 
Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 

Rothblum, E. D., Balsam, K. F., & Mickey, R. M. (2004). 
Brothers and sisters of lesbians, gay men, and 
bisexuals as a demographic comparison group: An 
innovative research methodology to examine social 
change. The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 
40, 283-301. doi: 10. 1 177/002 1886304266877. 

SAGE: Services and Advocacy for Gay, Lesbian, Bisex- 
ual & Transgender Elders. (2015). Retrieved from 
www.sageusa.org/about/history. 

Shenk, D., & Fullmer, E. (1996). Significant relationships 
among older women: Cultural and personal construc- 
tions of lesbianism. In K. A. Roberto (Ed.), Relation- 
ships between women in later life (pp. 75-89). New 
York, NY: Harrington Park Press. 

Silverstein, M„ & Giarrasso, R. (2010). Aging and family 
life: A decade review. Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 72, 1039-1058. doi: 10. 1 1 1 1/j . 1741-3737. 
2010.00749.x. 

Sullivan, K. M. (2014). Acceptance in the domestic 
environment: The experience of senior housing for 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender seniors. 



Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 57, 235- 
250. doi: 10. 1080/01634372.2013.867002. 

Tasker, F. (2013). Lesbian and gay parenting 
post-heterosexual divorce and separation. In A. 
E. Goldberg & K. R. Allen (Eds.), LGBT-parent 
families: Innovations in research and implications for 
practice (pp. 3-20). New York, NY: Springer. 

van Wagenen, A., Driskell, J., & Bradford, J. (2013). “I’m 
still raring to go”: Successful aging among lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender older adults. Journal of Aging 
Studies, 27, 1-14. doi:10.1016/j.jaging.2012.09.001. 

Wacker, R. R., & Roberto, K. A. (2014). Community 
resources for older adults: Programs and services in 
an era of change (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Weston, K. (1991). Families we choose: Lesbians, gays, 
kinship. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Whitford, G. S. (1997). Realities and hopes for older gay 
males. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Social Services, 6, 
79-95. 

Wight, R. G., LeBlanc, A. J., de Vries, B., & Detels, R. 
(20 12). Stress and mental health among midlife and older 
gay-identified men. American Journal of Public Health, 
102, 503-510. doi: 10.2 105/AJPH. 201 1.300384. 

Witten, T. M„ & Eyler, A. E. (2012). Transgender and 
aging: Beginnings and becomings. In T. M. Witten & 
A. E. Eyler (Eds.), Gay, lesbian, bisexual & trans- 
gender aging: Challenges in research, practice & 
policy (pp. 187-269). Baltimore, MD: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 



Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions 
Among LGBT Older Adults 

Tracy Robinson-Wood and Amanda Weber 




Abstract 

The purpose of this chapter is to interrogate oppression through an 
analysis of discourses related to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
(LGBT) older adults. As part of our reflexive posture, we attend to the 
social constructions of meaning about age, ability, gender, race, and sex 
and their colossal impacts on LGBT older adults. We are mindful of the 
weight of oppression for LGBT older adults in general but in particular 
overlooked subgroups of this diverse population (e.g., people who are 
with low income, people of color, and people who are transgender and do 
not fit into the binary of woman or man, gay or straight). We confront 
multiple layers of discrimination by deconstructing cultural assumptions 
of normalcy (e.g., heteronormativity within the LGBT community) 
presented in visual form, verbal text, and within discourses. 



Keywords 

LGBT elders • Ageism • Racism • Homophobia • Transphobia • Multiple 
oppressions 



Overview 

In this chapter, we examine gender and sexuality, 
race, privileged queer identities, and policy 
issues affecting lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 



T. Robinson-Wood (E3) 

Northeastern University. Boston, USA 
e-mail: tr.robinson@neu.edu 

A. Weber 

Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Boston, MA 02467, 
USA 

e-mail: weberai@bc.edu 



transgender (LGBT) older adults. A case study 
with discussion questions concludes our work. 
The following tenets guide our formulations and 
constructions of meaning: (1) Sexuality is fluid; 
(2) there is a difference between LGBT identity 
and same-sex behavior; (3) differences as well as 
inequities exist within the LGBT population and 
mirror the differences and inequities that exist 
among non-LGBT and the under-65 population; 

(4) there is inadequate attention devoted to ethnic 
and racial diversity among LGBT older adults; 

(5) there is inadequate attention devoted to 
transgender issues in the research on LGBT older 
adults; and (6) patriarchy and racism produce and 

65 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_4 




66 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



perpetuate silence about race and transgender 
among LGBT older adults. 

As authors, we bring our lens, biases, and 
positions to the writing of this chapter. We 
acknowledge our subjectivity informed by our 
location within multiple identities. We are het- 
erosexual and lesbian, faculty member and 
graduate student in counseling psychology, black 
and white, married and single, and baby boomer 
and millennial. Despite our differences, our 
similarities are greater and galvanize us to speak 
truth to power. We monitor our proximity to a 
multitude of live discourses in our interactions 
with LGBT people and clients. We have queried 
ourselves and one another about the unconscious 
and/or unspoken discourses that lie beneath 
socially constructed categories of difference rel- 
ative to LGBT older adults. 

Learning Objectives 

Upon completion of this chapter, the reader 
should be able to: 

1 . Understand the role of discourses in the lives 
of LGBT individuals in general and for 
LGBT elders, in particular. 

2. Understand the multiple impacts of racism, 
sexism, homophobia, transphobia, and bi- 
phobia on the LGBT older adult population. 

3. Understand the roles of policies and laws on 
older LGBT individuals. 



Introduction 

Within the last few years, the United States of 
America (USA) has witnessed dramatic changes 
regarding who can legally marry. As of the 
writing of this book, nineteen states now sanction 
marriage between two women or two men. The 
heterosexist discourse is being challenged that 
dictates that marriage between a normal XY male 
and a normal XX female is the only acceptable 
union that warrants legal protection. Another 



major cultural shift pertains to people with 
65 years of age and older. Older adults are living 
and working longer than ever before. Although 
the actual numbers are inaccurate, millions of 
older adults are LGBT. In not being young and 
not being heterosexual, LGBT older adults are 
distinguished by multiple identities that run 
counter to the dominant culture’s fascination 
with and insistence on youth, beauty, and tradi- 
tional gender roles (Robinson-Wood 2013). 

Ageism or age discrimination is fueled by a 
cultural belief that people who are middle-aged 
and older are past their prime, disabled and 
unproductive that denies the vast diversity 
among old LGBT adults. Although successful 
aging refers to the physical and emotional ability 
to thrive, cope, socialize, and learn (Van Wage- 
nen et al. 2013), the USA culture places con- 
siderable emphasis on anti-aging, youth, and the 
body beautiful (Robinson-Wood 2013). Ageism 
and ableism intersect and are codependent on one 
another for their existence. 

Gender prescriptions normalized by hetero- 
sexuals extend to LGBT populations. Moreover, 
the social construction of race is evident within 
the LGBT community. LGBT individuals of 
color experience more psychological distress, 
financial instability, limited access to culturally 
competent care, and housing inequality than their 
white counterparts. 

Discrimination occurs among most LGBT 
older adults; however, vast intragroup differences 
exist and are related to disability, age, gender 
status, race, income, the quality of aging, and 
identity development. An LGBT older adult, who 
is transgender, single, working class, a person of 
color, and resides with friends in an apartment, 
lives in a society where his or her gender, sexual- 
ity, and marital status are inconsistent with cultural 
values such as patriarchy, heterosexual marriage, 
home ownership, economic success, and repro- 
duction. Conversely, the middle-class gay male, 
who is married to and living with his husband, has 
children, and owns a home, occupies identity sta- 
tuses that are culturally privileged and valued. 

The purpose of this chapter is to interrogate 
oppression through an analysis of discourses 
related to LGBT older adults. As part of our 



4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



67 



reflexive posture, we attend to the social con- 
structions of meaning about age, ability, gender, 
race, and sex and their colossal impacts on LGBT 
older adults. We are mindful of the weight of 
oppression for LGBT older adults in general but in 
particular overlooked subgroups of this diverse 
population (e.g., people who are with low income, 
people of color, and people who are transgender 
and do not fit into the binary of woman or man, 
gay or straight). We confront multiple layers of 
discrimination by deconstructing cultural 
assumptions of normalcy (e.g., heteronormativity 
within the LGBT community) presented in visual 
form, verbal text, and within discourses. 

Self-Check Exercise: What kind of mes- 
sages did you receive from your family 
about LGBT people and the elderly? What 
is your proximity to current discourses 
about LGBT elders? Do you know any 
persons who are LGBT elders? 

Weedon (1987) defined discourses “as ways 
of constituting knowledge, together with the 
social practices, forms of subjectivity, and power 
relations which inhere in such knowledge and 
relations between them. Discourses are more 
than ways of thinking and producing meaning, 
they constitute the ‘nature’ of the body, uncon- 
scious and conscious mind, and emotional life of 
the subjects they seek to govern” (p. 105). Dis- 
courses can be subtle, yet they are pervasive 
throughout society and hold enormous power. 
Discourses can be unconscious. They can be 
insidious in that people are unaware of where 
they are located within and positioned by certain 
other discourses (Robinson- Wood 2013). 

Discourses portray older people as homoge- 
nous, feeble, disabled, unproductive, asexual, 
unattractive, and forgetful (Robinson- Wood 
2013). The tenets of patriarchy privilege LGBT 
older adults whose lives are most closely aligned 
with dominant cultural values and norms. In 
America, marriage, youth, gender conformity, 
wealth, ability, heterosexuality, and white skin 
operate as valued identities and commodities. 



Falling outside of this cultural swath has signif- 
icant implications for financial stability, 
employment, dating, marriage, access to and 
quality of health care, and social capital. 

Discussion Box: Can you think of any 
movies (non-musicals) where LGBT elders 
have been depicted? What were their lives 
like? What race were they? How similar 
were their lives to cultural values? How do 
movies reinforce dominant cultural values 
and often perpetuate race, gender, and 
sexuality stereotypes? 



LGBT Older Adults 

Within the next 15 years, the number of older 
adults in the USA will nearly double, from 38 to 
72 million. In 2030, one in five Americans will be 
65 or older (Grant et al. 2010a). Between 2012 
and 2030, the non-Hispanic white population is 
expected to increase by 54 % compared to 125 % 
for older racial and ethnic minority populations, 
including Hispanics (155 %), African Americans 
(104 %), American Indian and Native Alaskans 
(116 %), and Asians (119 %) (US Department of 
Health and Human Services 2012). Widely rep- 
resented among LGBT older adults are people of 
color: black (non-Hispanic), Hispanic, American 
Indian or Native Alaskan, Asian or Pacific 
Islander. See Chaps. 6-8, and 10 respectfully, for 
further discussion on these groups. 

Self-Check Exercise: What does decon- 
struction mean to you? How does decon- 
struction take place within society? Social 
construction suggests that society creates 
race, gender, and sexuality as meaningful 
categories of privilege and oppression 
among people. Society makes sense of 
these meanings, and difference is created 
rather than intrinsic to a phenomenon. 
Deconstruction is taking part; unlearning; 






68 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



analyzing the way that meaning was con- 
structed; and engaging in a different pro- 
cess of social construction with different 
meanings and outcomes. 



Health and policy researchers have examined 
the implications of this dramatic increase in the 
numbers of older adults with respect to Medicare, 
the sustainability and availability of social secu- 
rity, healthcare affordability, retirement pensions, 
and tax revenues. LGBT older adults have recent 
scant attention from researchers. Approximately 
3.5 % of the adult population or 8 million adults 
in the USA are lesbian, gay, or bisexual. Over 
700,000 people are transgender (The Williams 
Institute, 2011). Due largely to advances in 
health care, aging baby boomers are living longer 
than those in previous decades. There are also 
significant numbers of LGBT people among 
aging baby boomers. Nonetheless, LGBT aging 
has been grossly understudied in health research. 

Examining 2010 Census data, demographer 
Gary Gates (August 25, 201 1) from the Williams 
Institute Study reports that in the USA there are 
901,997 same-sex couples who are represented in 
99 % of the counties. The 2010 Census included 
LGBT persons; however, marital status was que- 
ried but not sexual orientation. For instance, a 
woman living with another woman to whom she is 
not married could check the “unmarried partner” 
box. According to Gates (201 1), as many as 15 % 
of same-sex couples were not identified as 
same-sex couples in the 2010 Census. Approxi- 
mately 10 % of same-sex couples described their 
relationship as “roommates” or “non-relatives” 
and not as “spouses” or “unmarried couples.” 
When queried further, researchers learned that 
confidentiality was a concern among one-quarter 
of respondents. One-third took issue with the 
Census for not asking about sexual orientation or 
gender identity. Some people were offended by 
the options presented to them. 

The actual percentage of the LGBT population 
is a complex issue. People can and do, for a 



variety of reasons, conceal and/or camouflage 
their sexuality. The invisibility of LGBT sexuality 
and, in some cases, lack of disclosure about one’s 
sexual status presents methodological obstacles to 
research investigations on aging. The fluidity of 
sexuality over time and the nebulous nature of 
defining LGBT identity confound the methodo- 
logical difficulties involved with researching this 
population. Estimates of persons who report any 
lifetime same-sex sexual behavior and any 
same-sex sexual attraction are substantially higher 
than estimates of those who identify as lesbian, 
gay, or bisexual. The distinction between behav- 
ior and identity may be illuminating. An estimated 
19 million Americans (8.2 %) report that they 
have engaged in same-sex sexual behavior. 
Nearly 25.6 million Americans (11 %) acknowl- 
edge at least some same-sex sexual attraction. 

According to Rust (2006), a person’s “sexual 
landscape might change, thus creating new 
opportunities for self-description while trans- 
forming or eliminating existing possibilities” 
(p. 174). LGBT individuals may be recently out, 
whereas others have been out for a lifetime since 
adolescence or early adulthood. Others lived 
primarily heterosexual lives and came out during 
middle adulthood. Some people have lived a 
portion of their lives according to a particular 
sexual orientation and have, with time, come to 
question their sexuality. 

Methodological challenges withstanding in 
researching this largely invisible population 
(Shankle et al. 2003), recent research has begun to 
explore the unique issues LGBT older adults face. 
Pressing issues include these: (1) social isolation 
from communities of support; (2) identifying 
suitable and affordable LGBT-friendly housing; 
(3) elder abuse; (4) financial instability; and 
(5) health concerns related to aging (Grant et al. 
2010a; Hash and Rogers 2013; Sargeant 2009; 
Fredriksen-Goldsen and Muraco 2010; Graham 
2011; Hudson 2011; SAGE 2010). Research on 
the intersection of race and LGBT older adults 
has begun and is spearheaded by Services and 
Advocacy for GLBT Elders (SAGE) and the 
National Resource Center on LGBT Aging. 




4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



69 



Gender and Sexuality 

Gender refers to the complex interrelationship 
between those traits and one’s internal sense of 
self as male, female, both, or neither as well as 
one’s outward presentations and behaviors related 
to that perception (American Psychological 
Association 2006). Whereas sex refers to the XX 
and XY chromosome pairs for genetically healthy 
female or male (Atkinson and Hackett 1998), 
gender is a crucial part of identity presentation and 
representation across the life span. Although the 
meaning of gender varies among different cultures 
and changes throughout time (McCarthy and 
Holliday 2004), the most common definition 
refers to culturally determined attitudes, cogni- 
tions, and belief systems about females and males. 
Sex, gender, and gender expression are formed 
from interactions with parents, peers, and teachers 
and transmitted through the educational system, 
religious institutions, politics, and the media. 

Gender marginalization can be found within 
the LGBT older adult community. Due to sexism 
or the institutionalized system of inequality based 
on the biological and social stratification of gen- 
der, LGBT individuals who are born male enjoy 
privileges that women and transgender persons do 
not. More specifically, power and privilege are 
conferred upon men who are viewed as mascu- 
line, powerful, and wealthy and conferred upon 
women who are regarded as attractive and emo- 
tionally available and pliable. As forms of 
expressions of one’s gender, masculinity and 
femininity are shaped by traditional gender roles. 
Masculinity discourses embody men as aggres- 
sive, strong, and in control (much like America 
herself), whereas feminine discourses include 
female submission to men and masculinity vali- 
dation. Lesbians, across age groups, suffer from 
gender discrimination by virtue of their sex and 
also due to a failure to compliment men as sexual 
and emotional partners (Sargeant 2009). 

Discussion Box: Lesbians, across age 
groups, suffer from gender discrimination 
by virtue of their sex and also due to a 
failure to compliment men as sexual and 



emotional partners (Sargeant 2009). Do 

you think this applies to lesbian elders? 

Cisgender individuals are those who have 
gender-confirming identities where biological 
sex and gender match. This sex-gender congruity 
affords privilege and a cover of normalcy within 
society. Conversely, gender non-conformity 
refers to an individual’s gender identity that 
does not align with biological sex; however, 
one’s view of their sex is consistent with their 
sex at birth. Individuals who are gender 
non-conforming and transgender/transsexual 
(e.g., trans*) contest the dominant model of 
gender identity. People who are trans* may be 
biologically one sex but identify emotionally, 
physiologically, and psychologically with 
another sex or gender expression. They may 
identify as gay, lesbian, bisexual, or heterosex- 
ual. A male-to-female transsexual who has 
completed gender-confirming surgery might say: 
I see myself being with a man, but I did not see 
myself as a man with a man. I saw myself as a 
woman with a man. 

According to the Diagnostic Statistic Manual 
of Mental Disorders (DSM)-5, people who are 
transgender have gender dysphoria. The DSM-5 
is the diagnostic authority relied upon by all 
mental health clinicians to classify diagnostic 
codes for their patients, but this diagnosis can be 
controversial with people who are trans* and 
trans* rights advocates. Required for third-party 
billing, the DSM-5 has more than a 60-year 
history in the USA. Transgender is an umbrella 
term for people whose gender identity differs 
from that which is typically associated with their 
sexual assignment at birth. Often a source of 
confusion, transgender is not synonymous with 
homosexuality. Various transgender terms exist, 
including transsexual, genderqueer, transman, 
and transwomen. 

Across race, class, culture, disability, and 
sexuality, gender influences what we believe 
about ourselves and others. Gender labels are 
applied to people, and, once assigned, people 
behave toward individuals based on a set of 





70 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



expectations for persons with the same label. 
Deviation from prescribed gender roles attracts 
notice and comment from a scrutinizing public. 
At the center of cultural and gender normativity 
is patriarchy through which gender oppression is 
maintained. Among older people, gender is 
eclipsed by age unless it is nestled within 
youthfulness or age defiance. Among people of 
color, gender tends to be obscured by race, in 
that race vies for more attention as the salient 
identity construct (Robinson-Wood 2013). 

Social constructions of gender and sexual 
identity impact one’s lived experience. The vis- 
ible signs of aging that mark a person as unde- 
sirable or unappealing are a phenomenon in the 
LGBT community (Sargeant 2009). Ageism in 
the gay community is rampant with gay men 
being particularly vulnerable to becoming “too 
old” for relationships if over the age of 35 
(Sargeant 2009). Gay and bisexual men are twice 
as likely to live alone as heterosexual men. Gay 
and bisexual men tend to have a harder time 
successfully aging, and they seemed to be over- 
whelmed and even depressed, in comparison 
with lesbian and bisexual women (Macdonald 
and Rich 1983; Schope 2005). Feminism has 
exerted a tremendous impact on the formation of 
lesbian and bisexual women’s communities, thus 
inspiring resistance to and confrontation of age- 
ism (Grant et al. 2010a). 

Gay and bisexual men appear to have had 
little connection to dialogues in which queer 
women have participated (Grant et al. 2010a). 
The youth orientation of gay culture has helped 
to cultivate internalized ageism among some gay 
and bisexual men who feel rejected and isolated 
from the mainstream gay community. Schope 
(2005) took a different position and argues that 
gay men are actually better able to cope with 
aging than are heterosexual men. 

Although lesbian and bisexual women are 
more likely to live alone than heterosexual 
women (Grant et al. 2010a), lesbians seem to fare 
better than their gay counterparts and have 
broader social support networks and community 
involvement. Many lesbians enjoy intimate and 
sexual relationships well into older adulthood 
(Kimmel et al. 2013) and are less likely to be 



viewed as unattractive as they age. The hetero- 
normative standard of beauty has been critiqued 
by many older lesbians who refuse to be bound 
by body image ideals that harass heterosexual 
women (Kimmel et al. 2013). Although older 
lesbians are likely to be welcomed, respected, 
and even “treasured” by younger lesbians 
(Schope 2005), the challenge with this endear- 
ment is the perception of being patronized 
(Macdonald and Rich 1983). 

Unlike the majority of lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual (LGB) individuals, many trans* indi- 
viduals decide to transition later in life after 
retirement and after adult children have moved 
out of the house (Kimmel et al. 2013). The 
economic means to live one’s gendered and 
sexual identity exists for many older trans* 
individuals; nonetheless, problems remain with 
dating, finding culturally competent healthcare 
providers, and coexisting within a marginalizing 
society. Little research is available on trans* 
individuals and how they live in older adulthood. 



Privileged Queerness 

Queer theorists have excluded LGBT older 
adults from their research in much the same way 
that LGBT older adults have been excluded from 
health care, policy, and mental health research. 
Brown (2009) argued that the producers of queer 
and gerontological theory communicate from a 
position of power that both silences and ignores 
the realities of LGBT older adults. She argues 
that homophobia, heterosexism in gerontology, 
and ageism in queer theory drive this production. 

Halberstam (2005) identified two new terms 
in queer theory that have direct implications for 
LGBT older adults. Queer time and queer space 
is a model for minimizing the heteronormative 
gaze of aging. A new queer version centers on 
the present and is not focused on biological 
reproduction and the traditional family. Queer 
time and queer space questions the mainstream 
definition of healthy development and identity 
politics. Brown (2009) proposed that this per- 
spective of living for today may have emanated 



4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



71 



from the AIDS epidemic during the 1980s, which 
had a profound and lasting impact on the LGBT 
community. Brown (2009) also postulates that 
queer theory has historically focused on the 
young, creating a power differential and a dis- 
missal of LGBT older adults’ voices, bodies, 
desires, and perspectives. 

Research and media on LGBT individuals 
ignores stratification and diversity within the 
LGBT community. Television shows such as The 
L Word and Will and Grace made a valiant 
attempt to empower and give voice to LGBT 
individuals. LGBT portrayals were overwhelm- 
ingly problematic because they presented people 
in stereotypical and sensationalized fashion 
(Akita et al. 2013). Far too often, a preferred type 
of LGBT person blankets the media. Despite the 
number of prime time television shows that give 
voice to the LGBT experience, such as Orange is 
the New Black and Gray 's Anatomy , more often 
than not, media reflect dominant discourses 
concerning which LGBT individuals are worthy 
of watching. People who are young, attractive, 
white, wealthy, promiscuous, dramatic, gender- 
conforming, and physically fit are iconic. 
Most LGBT individuals and heterosexuals do not 
resemble these unrealistic television images. 

A bifurcated and binary system of gender and 
gender expression is still imposed at this point in 
the twenty-first century. Within this system 
some, albeit not all, LGBT individuals are posi- 
tioned at the periphery of mainstream society, 
which can increase one’s susceptibility to 
oppression, prejudice, and stereotyping. Adher- 
ence to a binary gender and sexuality system 
contributes to discrimination against bisexuals 
within the LGBT community. Men and women 
who identify as bisexual experience biphobia and 
may not be considered as serious romantic part- 
ners or are perceived to be in transition or 
experimenting sexually, similar to adolescence. 
Bisexuals and trans* individuals have historically 
been silenced and excluded with many regarding 
them as part of the “out group” within LGBT 
organizations and movements (Graham 2011). 
Little research is available on internalized trans- 
phobia and ageism within the trans* older adult 
population. 



Internalized homophobia can cause serious 
mental health effects and is fairly prevalent in the 
LGBT older adult population. Although many 
LGBT older adults are typically well adjusted and 
mentally healthy (Graham 2011), the Aging 
Health Report (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011) 
stated that 26 % of the 2500 LGBT older adults in 
the project tried at one time or another to not be 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender. On a scale 
of 1-4 with 4 representing higher levels of 
stigma, the average level of stigma on a nine-item 
measure adapted from the Homosexuality- 
Related Stigma Scale was 1.5 for LGBT older 
adult participants; 1.3 for lesbians; 1.5 for 
bisexual women; 1.5 for bisexual men; and 1.8 
for transgender older adults. 



Multiple Oppressions Among 
and Between LGBT Older Adults 

Defining systems of oppression is critical to a 
thoughtful analysis of the history of LGBT people 
during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. 
Pre- and post-WWII era policies banned LGBT 
individuals from serving in the military. In 1952, 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-I) published by the American 
Psychiatry Association referred to homosexual- 
ity, pedophilia, and sexual sadism (e.g., rape and 
mutilation) as sexual deviation. WWII and the 
DSM were watershed events that perpetuated a 
cultural belief about homosexuality — that it was 
pathological, immoral, deviant, and unpatriotic. 
LGBT individuals were banned from mainstream 
society; however, wartime accelerated social 
changes, providing recruits who joined the mili- 
tary with an opportunity to escape to large cities. 
Such an exodus served to jump-start the forma- 
tion of large LGBT communities. 

Senator McCarthy was intent on excising 
identifiable LGBT individuals from government 
positions through arrests, blackmail, and coer- 
cion. Many private businesses followed suit. 
LGBT individuals living through pre- and 
post-WWII were largely closeted. Exorbitant 
amounts of energy were spent cloaking the 



72 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



vestiges of their sexual orientation. Being out as 
a gay person was a serious threat to the state, 
personal safety, occupational, and residential 
security (Shankle et al. 2003). 

A turning point for the social liberation of the 
LGBT community was Stonewall, a 1969 protest 
against police discrimination and brutality faced 
by countless openly LGBT individuals. The 
post-Stonewall generation is characterized by 
individuals who came of age during a period in 
history where homosexuality was less stigmatized 
(Shankle et al. 2003). In 1973, the American 
Psychiatry Association declassified homosexual- 
ity as a mental disorder. 

During the 1980s’ AIDS epidemic, the per- 
ception of gay men as deviant and unnatural was 
reified. Hudson (2011) states: 

Due to the perception of being lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, or transgender, 82 % of these older adults 
have been victimized at least once in their lives 
and nearly two-thirds at least three times. More 
than 66 % have experienced verbal insults; 42 % 
have been threatened with physical violence; 27 % 
have been hassled by police; 23 % faced the threat 
of being outed as LGBT; 22 % were not hired for a 
job; and 20 % had property damaged. Transgender 
older adults experience higher levels of victim- 
ization and discrimination than non-transgender 
older adults. 

More so than in the past, the twenty-first 
century ushered in inclusive policies for the 
LGBT community, including the repeal of 
“Don’t Ask; Don’t Tell.” Same-sex marriage is 
now legal across 19 states and the District of 
Columbia. Eight Native American tribes as well 
as nine states declare the ban on same-sex mar- 
riage as unconstitutional (Freedom to Marry 
2013). On June 2, 2014, President Obama 
declared that gender confirmation surgery could 
be reviewed for possible Medicare coverage. 

Policy Box: On June 2, 2014, President 
Obama declared that gender confirmation 
surgery could be reviewed by Medicare 
for coverage http://www.hhs.gov/dab/ 
decisions/dabdecisions/dab2576.pdf. 



Despite these important legal advancements, 
LGBT older adults face social isolation, high 
rates of suicidality, and depression. Among 
LGBT older adults, 59 % feel lonely and lack 
companionship, and 53 % feel isolated from 
others (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). Recent 
research shows that lesbians, gay men, and 
bisexuals who have experienced prejudice- 
related life events were about three times more 
likely to have suffered a serious physical health 
problem over a one-year follow-up period com- 
pared to those who had not experienced such 
stressful events (Frost et al. 2011). The effects of 
prejudice-related events remain statistically sig- 
nificant after controlling for the experience of 
other stressful events and other factors known to 
affect physical health, such as age, gender, 
employment, and lifetime health history. Older 
LGBT adults have a lifetime of prejudice-related 
events as a function of living in a society that has 
struggled with extending equality to all people. 



The Grand Master Status of Skin 
Color 

Research is scarce on older adults of color who 
are LGBT. As a social construction, race is based 
on phenotype (i.e., hair, skin color, facial fea- 
tures). These variables do not accurately reflect 
one’s race but rather represent a basis for 
assigning people to a particular racial group 
(Robinson-Wood 2013). Racism renders an 
explanation for why LGBT people of color are 
vulnerable to experiencing the worst outcomes 
and receiving the least institutional attention. 

The aging concerns of LGBT older adults of 
color are virtually absent in national policy dis- 
cussions on aging, health, and economic security 
(Auldridge and Espinoza 2013). LGBT older 
adults who are also people of color contend with 
racism and homophobia, which increases levels 
of psychological distress. Fredriksen-Goldsen 
et al. (2011) reported that Hispanic and Native 
American LGBT older adults are more likely to 




4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



73 



experience victimization than white LGBT older 
adults. She also reported that both Hispanic and 
Native American LGBT older adult participants 
report lower levels of general mental health, 
higher rates of depression, and more stress than 
do whites. The likelihood of neglect for Hispanic 
and black LGBT older adults is also greater. 
Compared to whites. Native Americans are more 
likely to experience anxiety, suicidal ideation, 
and loneliness. Asian/Pacific Islanders do not 
differ on mental health indicators from whites 
with one exception; Asian/Pacific Islanders have 
lower rates of suicidal ideation. The Center for 
Black Equity has hosted black LGBT Prides for 
years in an effort to grant LGBT people of color a 
separate voice outside of the mainstream LGBT 
community. Please visit the Center for Black 
Equity (http://centerforblackequity.org/) for more 
information on how this organization promotes 
social justice for black LGBT communities. 

Some people of color understand the LGBT 
movement as complied with an imperialistic 
culture in support of white superiority. A history 
of excluding some sexual, gender, and racial 
minorities influenced some people of color not to 
identify as LGBT but rather endorse other iden- 
tifiers (e.g., third gender, down low, MSM, 
WSW, same gender-loving). Previous studies 
found that black men having sex with men 
(MSM) are generally less likely to self-identify 
as being “gay” when compared to white men, 
even when they are open about their sexuality 
(Han et al. 2014). Han et al. (2014) also found 
that black MSM do not identify as gay because 
of their marginalization in the larger gay com- 
munity. Some black MSM men have come to 
reject what they perceive to be a narrow and 
non-inclusive definition of sexual relations with 
other men. Very little research has been con- 
ducted on marginalization among LGBT people 
of color in general and the trans* community of 
color in particular. 

Racism is undeniable in the marginalization of 
far too many LGBT older adults of color. 
Research suggests that black and Latino elders 
experience poverty at twice the rate of the gen- 
eral US elder population. For LGBT elders. 



including many of color, a lifetime of employ- 
ment discrimination translates into earning dis- 
parities, reduced lifelong earnings, smaller social 
security payments, and fewer opportunities to 
accumulate large pensions and retirement pack- 
ages (Auldridge and Espinoza 2013). 

Patriarchy and racism have contributed to the 
institutionalization of privilege for some and to 
disadvantage for others. Although context and 
situation are relevant, race occupies grand master 
status in that race has enormous power to eclipse 
other identities, such as socioeconomic class, 
professional dress, and title/position (Robinson- 
Wood 2013). LGBT older adults of color occupy 
multiple marginalized identities within a system 
where the grand master status of race is active 
with respect to one’s position in society, expe- 
riences with discrimination, and overall treat- 
ment. Irrespective of gender and sexuality, 
elderly African Americans are more than three 
times as likely as elderly Caucasians to live in 
poverty, while elderly Hispanics are more likely 
than the older population to be poor and in need 
of long-term care. Elderly women also are highly 
vulnerable. Nearly three out of four older 
Americans who fall below the poverty line are 
women, and retirement incomes for older women 
average about 55 % of those for comparable men 
(SAGE 2010). 

Internalized homophobia and transphobia 
exist among some LGBT people of color. Black 
men experience higher levels of internalized 
homophobia and are less likely to disclose their 
homosexual orientation. They are also more 
likely to perceive their friends and neighbors as 
disapproving of homosexuality (Graham 2011). 
In both the Latino and Asian American com- 
munities, cultural expectations surrounding 
family role obligations encourage the mainte- 
nance of strong ties to families of origin. 

Discussion Box: Concerns about individ- 
ual behavior that is outside of cultural 
dictates and subsequent implications for a 
family’s honor or social standing can 
weigh heavily on groups characterized by a 




74 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



collectivistic orientation. How has indi- 
vidualism or collectivism shaped your 
prescribed identities? 

Cultural collectivism may discourage indi- 
viduation that is commonly seen and necessary to 
the “coming out” process (Cochran et al. 2007). 
These cultural expectations may also cultivate 
internalized homophobia and transphobia expe- 
rienced by some LGBT older adults. 



LGBT Elder Policies in a Young, 

White, Rich, Straight, Valuing Culture 

Half of Americans living with HIV will be over 
the age of 50 by 2015, and over 80 % of people 
with HIV are people of color (Hudson 2011). 
The National Hispanic Council on Aging (2013) 
recently released a report stating that HIV/AIDS 
disproportionately affects older gay men. Despite 
these disturbing data, HIV prevention programs 
targeted at older adults are virtually nonexistent. 
Doctors and other healthcare providers avoid 
talking with their older patients about HIV/AIDS 
risks (SAGE 2010; Davis 2013). Many health- 
care providers endorse the belief that LGBT 
older adults are not sexually active or are not 
included in their patient database (National 
Resource Center on LGBT Aging 2013). Failure 
to provide adequate care to LGBT individuals is 
the unfortunate result. 

Access to health insurance and to culturally 
competent healthcare providers is vital to LGBT 
older adults. That said, LGBT older adults use 
health care less often than their heterosexual 
counterparts (Graham 2011). LGBT individuals 
face stigma from the larger society and also at the 
physician’s office. LGBT individuals face dis- 
crimination in the healthcare system that can lead 
to difficulty obtaining care, denial of care, or to the 
delivery of inadequate care (Graham 2011). The 
National Resource Center on LGBT Aging (2013) 
outlined a few misconceptions often heard from 
healthcare providers: (1) We do not have any 



LGBT older adult clients; (2) I can identify the 
LGBT individuals within my service population; 
(3) I treat everyone as equal; (4) there is not a 
distinction between gender and sexual identity; 
and (5) it is illegal to ask about a person’s sexual 
orientation or gender identity. Healthcare pro- 
viders’ inability to recognize differences between 
the LGBT older population and the heterosexual 
population can be costly to LGBT older adults 
whose histories include an active substance abuse 
or chronic illness such as HIV/AIDS and/or 
depression. For trans* individuals, hormones 
must be monitored and adjusted as people age 
(Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2014). 

Research Box: As individuals age, it is 
important for doctors to monitor trans* 
individuals’ hormones and adjust testos- 
terone and estrogen levels as they fluctuate 
with age. Estrogen and testosterone can 
have effects on menopause, osteoporosis, 
hair loss, weight distribution, and ovarian 
and breast cancer as adult age. See http:// 
transhealth. ucsf.edu/trans?page=protocol- 
aging for more information. How do hor- 
mones play a role in trans* individuals’ 
life? Are medical intake forms asking 
broad enough questions to understand 
possible medical issues that trans* indi- 
viduals may face? How do black market 
hormones play a role in medical care? 

In long-term care facilities where LGBT older 
adults are at their most vulnerable stage, dis- 
crimination endures. A recent national report 
with LGBT older adults found that more than 
half of the survey’s respondents believed that 
staff or other residents would abuse or neglect an 
LGBT elder. The same study revealed that 
respondents reported a disproportionate amount 
of mistreatment in long-term care facilities out of 
fear of and hatred toward LGBT people, even 
among those who are elderly (Auldridge and 
Espinoza 2013). Many LGBT older adults con- 
tinue to be forced into the closet and are for- 
bidden to make essential choices about and for 





4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



75 



their partners. Because, in most cases, LGBT 
couples are not legally recognized, hospital vis- 
itation policies may exclude same-sex partners or 
other family members, which can impede or 
complicate critical health decision-making pro- 
cesses (Grant et al. 2010a). Although President 
Obama issued a memorandum (House 2010) 
allowing for LGBT couples to make decisions 
for each other, many hospitals and long-term care 
agencies refuse to follow suit. 

Another challenge for LGBT older adults is 
financial insecurity as they enter retirement. 
Overall, 42 % of all LGBT elders indicated that 
“financial problems” are a big concern in their 
lives (SAGE 2010). Many LGBT individuals 
have faced historical employment discrimination 
that has resulted in lower levels of financial 
security throughout life and that directly affects 
retirement income and social security payouts. 
A recent article by New York Times economists 
Tara Siegel Bernard and Ron Lieber estimated the 
added costs incurred by a hypothetical same-sex 
couple between $41,196 and $467,562 (Grant 
et al. 2010a). The poverty rate for senior gay 
couples is 5 and 9 % for lesbian couples (SAGE 
2010). Trans* individuals are more likely to live 
in extreme poverty and are nearly four times more 
likely to have a household income of less than 
$ 10,000/year as compared to the general popu- 
lation (Grant et al. 2010b). Employment dis- 
crimination against trans* individuals is rampant; 
90 % of those surveyed reported harassment, 
mistreatment, or discrimination (Grant et al. 
2010b) with no legal protection because the 
Employment Non-Discrimination Act (END A) 
has not passed through Congress yet. With the 
repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), 
LGBT older adults are able to receive retirement 
benefits, social security, benefits for military 
action, and Medicaid after their spouse is 
deceased. This important legislation does not 
alleviate the lost financial opportunities for LGBT 
older adults whose partners died prior to DOMA. 

Recently, the US Department of Housing and 
Development (HUD) (Friedman et al. 2013) 
released a study about housing discrimination 
toward individuals who identify as LGBT. HUD 
(Friedman et al. 2013) concluded that gross 



estimates of discrimination, which reflect the 
extent to which heterosexual couples were con- 
sistently favored over gay male or lesbian cou- 
ples, are 15.9 and 15.6 %, respectively. Sexual 
orientation and gender identity are not federally 
protected classes. In efforts to end housing dis- 
crimination against LGBT individuals, on Feb- 
ruary 3, 2012, HUD published its Final Rule, 
“Equal Access to Housing in HUD Programs 
regardless of Sexual Orientation or Gender 
Identity.” This ruling prohibits HUD-assisted 
organizations from discriminating on the basis of 
sexuality or gender identity. There is very little 
recourse for LGBT individuals when other 
organizations continue to discriminate, particu- 
larly with laws written as they are. 

Contending with financial insecurities, hous- 
ing, and other types of chronic discrimination is a 
breeding ground for social isolation and depres- 
sion. LGBT older adults may be denied housing, 
including residency in mainstream retirement 
communities, based on their sexual orientation, 
gender identity, and expression. This discrimi- 
nation may separate LGBT older adults from 
beloved friends or partners or push them into 
homelessness (SAGE 2010). In response to sys- 
temic housing discrimination, some LGBT older 
adults have created non-mainstream retirement 
communities that honor diversity. LGBT older 
adults have even been able to erect small retire- 
ment communities and assisted living commu- 
nities. For resources and advocacy groups, please 
visit theses Web sites for more information 
(Legal Resources; http://www.lambdalegal.org/ 
and http://www.hrc.org/resources/entry/maps-of- 
state-laws-policies . 

Research Box'. Research shows that the rate 
of homelessness among elders has 
increased in the last decade with about 
2,960,000 elder adults who are homeless. 
Rates for LGBT older adults homelessness 
are currently not recorded, but 30 % of LGB 
older adult couples faced housing discrim- 
ination and 19 % of trans* older adults 
being denied a home or an apartment. 




76 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



Policy Impact and Mental Health 
for LGBT Older Adults 

As individuals transition into older adulthood, 
multiple challenges arise, such as disability and 
loss of loved ones. Compared to their hetero- 
sexual counterparts, lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
older adults are at an elevated risk of disability 
and psychological distress (Hudson 2011). 
A 2006 study reported evidence of higher levels 
of depression and psychological distress among 
midlife and older lesbians and gay men, which 
the researchers attribute to the accumulated effect 
of a lifetime of stigma (SAGE 2010). 

Defined as chronic stress related to stigmati- 
zation and actual experiences of discrimination 
and violence, minority stress has been found to 
increase loneliness in LGBT older adults (SAGE 
2010). An alarming 41 % (out of 6450 individ- 
uals) of trans* older respondents reported 
attempting suicide compared to 1.6 % in the 
general population (Grant et al. 2010a). In an 
effort to address disparities, former Secretary 
Kathleen Sebelius of the US Department of 
Health and Humans Services (HHS) announced 
on June 29, 2011, that HHS would begin col- 
lecting data through population health surveys to 
facilitate identification of health issues (National 
Resource Center on LGBT Aging 2013). 

In light of the mental health disparities 
between heterosexual and LGBT older adults, 
there is a distinction between health policies that 
perpetuate marginalization and policies that 
protect human rights. Policy differences between 
state and federal governments are a hindrance to 
having full protection under federal mandates. 
Medicaid now offers benefits to legally married 
same-sex couples. Prior to 2014, this was not the 
case. Thousands of people have access to 
healthcare providers. The Institute of Medicine 
(IOM) defines access to health care as the “timely 
use of personal health services to achieve the best 
possible outcomes.” With the passage of the 
Affordable Care Act (ACA), LGBT older adults 
will have health insurance previously unavail- 
able. Moreover, the ACA has created an 
insurance-based system that allows LGBT 



individuals access to healthcare plans targeted for 
same-sex families and trans* individuals. 
Unfortunately, homophobia and multicultural 
incompetence from healthcare professionals have 
contributed to primary care underutilization for 
many LGBT individuals (Grant et al. 2010a). 

The Lederal Lamily Caregivers Support Pro- 
gram, which was created with the 2000 reau- 
thorization of the Older Americans Act and 
amended in 2006, expanded its definition of 
family caregivers to include extended LGBT 
family members (Grant et al. 2010a). This pro- 
gram provides LGBT individuals who are care- 
givers to partners or family members by choice 
with the ability to utilize respite care, counseling, 
support groups, and training groups. This bill is 
significant for many reasons. Lirst, it reflects 
social justice and basic human rights. Second, 
when the data are examined, it is evident that 
LGBT individuals are more likely than are het- 
erosexuals to report a disability: 41 % aged 50 
and older report a disability (Hudson 2011). 

The Lamily Caregivers Support Program 
broadened the definition of families in 2006. In 
2013, with the repeal of the Defense of Marriage 
Act (DOMA), individuals were protected by the 
Lamily Medical Leave Act (LMLA). LMLA 
allows people to take extended periods of paid 
leave to care for their partners (United States 
Department of Labor 2013). Family of choice is 
critical for caregiving given the substantial 
numbers of LGBT older adults receiving support 
from families of choice or partners; 27 % provide 
assistance to someone close to them with a health 
issue. A national survey of LGBT baby boomers 
by the MetLife Mature Market Institute found 
that 42 % of LGBT caregivers reported assisting 
partners, friends, neighbors, or others outside of 
their families of origin. Another recent study 
found 32 % of gay men and lesbians providing 
some sort of informal caregiving; 61 % of their 
care recipients were friends, and 13 % were 
partners (Grant et al. 2010a). There is a limited 
research on trans* individuals with respect to 
family of choice and caregiving. The National 
Center for Transgender Equality (Grant et al. 
2010b) stated that 55 % of respondents 



4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



77 



experienced family rejection; 45 % of respon- 
dents reported that their family is as strong today 
as it was before coming out. 



Case Study 

In the case study of Ginger, we see a common 
story that is told among trans women veterans. 
Pay close attention to the intersections of gender, 
race, age, religion, employment, and substance 
use in Ginger’s life. 

Ginger was born male. For as long as Ginger 
could remember, being male felt like a mistake. 
Ginger had a military career for over three dec- 
ades. Once Ginger left the military, she went to 
culinary school and worked as a chef for ten years. 
Ginger is now retired. For the last two years, 
Ginger’s outward appearance has been feminine 
with respect to appearance, hairstyle, makeup, 
dress, and mannerism. Ginger identified as a male 
for 60 years but did not identify as gay in her 
attraction to men. For her 65 birthday, Ginger’s 
gift to herself is gender-confirming/reassignment 
surgery. Ginger’s youngest sister is present to 
support Ginger before and after the surgery. 
Raised in a very devout Catholic, Puerto Rican 
family that vehemently denounced Ginger’s 
interest in girls’ toys and clothes, Ginger could not 
reconcile being openly transgender with her 
family. Out of respect for her parents’ feelings and 
reputation, her plan was to come out after both her 
parents died. At the age of 60, Ginger decided the 
wait was over. Both her parents are in their late 
80s and enjoy good health. Ginger is determined 
to live the remaining years of her life as authen- 
tically and honestly as possible. Married to a 
woman for 16 years, Ginger fathered three chil- 
dren who are now adults in their 40s. Fler children 
have limited contact largely due to Ginger’s 
emotional unavailability to them and her history 
of addiction. Ginger credits her sanity to a good 
therapist whom she has seen for three years. In 
therapy. Ginger learned that she was dying as she 
waited for her parents to die. She also came to 
realize that respect was not driving her decision to 
come out after her parents’ deaths but fear, 



deception, and shame. Therapy also helped Gin- 
ger think about what it means to be an older 
transsexual woman of color. Throughout her life. 
Ginger battled not only heterosexism but also 
racism, sexism, internalized self-hatred, and age- 
ism. She also struggled with alcoholism but has 
been sober for eight years with the help of Alco- 
holics Anonymous. Therapy provided a space for 
Ginger to declare that she was a transfemale who 
has always been and is currently attracted to men. 
Her decision to undergo surgery was not attached 
to the presence of a life partner, although finding a 
loving relationship with a man is something that 
Ginger desires. She has found dating to be chal- 
lenging, especially as she ages. Once Ginger came 
out as a transgender, Ginger’s parents ceased 
communication, claiming that Manuel (Ginger’s 
birth name) is dead to them. 

Self -Check Exercise : Pair and share with 
another student in the classroom. Discuss 
your feelings about Ginger. How do you 
feel about her decision to marry when she 
knew she was queer? What are your feel- 
ings about Ginger’s surgery at age 60? 
How do socially constructed notions of 
beauty, age, and sexuality collide for Gin- 
ger and/or impact your feelings about her 
life choices? 



Discussion of Case Study 

Trans* individuals may be less likely to disclose 
their sexuality than their heterosexual counter- 
parts. Ginger resisted the asexualization of her 
sexuality by disclosing her sexuality and step- 
ping into her life as the female that she knew she 
was. Disclosure of sexual and gender identity can 
lead to an array of social and community support 
in the LGBT community (Fredriksen-Goldsen 
et al. 2011). Mental healthcare providers are 
encouraged to be familiar with community 
resources. Knowledge of sexual identity devel- 
opment models (e.g., Cass 1979 and Troiden 




78 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



1989) can assist the clinician in understanding 
phases and junctures of development, from 
fragmentation to affirmation (Robinson- Wood 
2013). Ginger’s therapist needs knowledge of 
the historical implications of homophobia and 
transphobia on transgender individuals, medical 
care concerns, particularly given Ginger’s recent 
surgery and continued hormone use, and aspects 
of LGBT culture for older transwomen. 

Hardacker et al. (2013) and the Howard 
Brown Health Center (HBHC) developed the 
nurses’ Health Education About LGBT Elders 
(HEALE) curriculum, a 6-h cultural competency 
curriculum that focuses on providing training for 
nurses and other direct caregivers (for more 
information, visit http://www.nursesheale.org/ 
curriculum/). Individuals who have been trained 
using the HEALE modules have shown increase 
in health care providers’ confidence in adminis- 
tering culturally sensitive care to older LGBT 
individuals. There are six modules that would be 
helpful for Ginger’s medical team to review: 

(1) introduction to the LGBT elder community; 

(2) barriers to health care and health disparity; 

(3) sex and sexuality of LGBT elders; (4) legal 
concerns for LGBT elders; (5) an introduction to 
transgender community; and (6) human immu- 
nodeficiency virus (HIV) and aging (Hardacker 
et al. 2013). 

Interprofessional collaborations are needed to 
provide the best care for Ginger. A multipronged 
approach would encompass nursing, geriatric 
medicine, and psychosocial education. Ginger’s 
multiculturally competent therapist needs the 
ability to create a holding environment for Gin- 
ger’s excitement, fear, anger, and shame while 
facilitating the acquisition of skills needed to be 
healthy and whole as a transwoman of color in a 
society that struggles with extending justice and 
decency for Ginger and others like her. 



Summary 

LGBT older adults have faced a lifetime of dis- 
crimination yet continue to fight for equality and 
resist homophobia and ageism. A 63 -year-old 



gay man quoted in The Aging Health Report 
(Lredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011) said, “The 
LGBT community has stepped up in the past to 
address coming out, AIDS, and civil rights. The 
next wave has to be aging.” LGBT older adults 
have a distinct experience of aging stemming 
from shared experiences in relation to the LGBT 
community, the lifelong process of coming out, 
the experience of sexual and gender minority 
stress, marginalization inside and outside LGBT 
communities, and LGBT pride and resilience 
(Van Wagenen et al. 2013). 

LGBT older adults have created families of 
choice when biological family is physically 
removed or emotionally detached. Family of 
choice is one way that older LGBT adults thrive 
and alleviate isolation and depression. In many 
ways, the LGBT older adult community shows 
resilience (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011) and 
the ability to handle adversity and challenges 
successfully, which are important keys to main- 
taining good physical, social, and mental health. 
Meyer et al. (2011) found that participants spoke 
of the positive aspects of exposure to stigmatiz- 
ing experiences. Some who identify as a LGBT 
individual, and for some, persons of color and 
women, felt like they were better people for 
surviving and thriving in the midst of oppression. 
It is possible that some LGBT older adults may 
be in a better position to age successfully com- 
pared to their heterosexual counterparts because 
some older LGBT adults have acquired strengths, 
including adaptability, self-reliance, advocacy 
skills, crisis competencies, and gender role flex- 
ibility (Hash and Rogers 2013). 



Discussion Box 

1. What are issues experienced by trans* 
individuals that may differ from those 
experienced by gay men or lesbians? 

2. Is there a relationship between cumu- 
lative and multiple oppressions (racism, 
heterosexism, transphobia, ageism) and 
Ginger’s addiction to alcohol? 




4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



79 



3. What are the health implications of 
surgery and hormones at Ginger’s age 
and as she continues to age? 

4. Although sexual orientation is unlikely 
to change (APA 2009), some persons 
modify their identity (e.g., change their 
reference group or self-label behavior). 
What was the impact on Ginger in her 
early years when trying to deny her 
sexual and gender identities? 



Experiential Exercises (3) 

1 . Draw four stick figures on the board and label 
them each as follows: sex, gender, sexual 
attraction, and sexual behaviors. As a group, 
have people draw what each of these four 
categories mean on the stick figures. After 
you are finished, discuss identities and how 
they intersect. 

2. Create a character that embodies several of 
the identities in the chapter (older adult, LGB, 
trans*, and person of color). Have each 
individual partner up and role-play a scene 
that would be common in their profession 
(counselor, nurse, social worker). Ask each 
pair of individuals to discuss challenges in the 
conversation. 

3. Watch “Gen Silent” and discuss how loss, 
health, sexuality, gender, and family play 
important roles in people’s lives as they age. 

Multiple-Choice Questions (5) 

1. Based on the social stratification of gender, 
which of the following groups benefit from 
privilege among LGBT populations? 

a. Those born as female 

b. Those born as male 



c. Those with gender reassignment 

d. None of the above 

2. Individuals who have gender-conforming 
identities where biological sex and gender 
match are referred to as: 

a. Bisexual 

b. Transgender 

c. Cisgender 

d. Questioning 

3. Which of these is an instance of homophobia 
and elder abuse? 

a. An individual says that a woman with 
short hair looks like a man. 

b. An older gentleman is visiting his partner 
in a nursing home, a nurses aid enters the 
room and says please leave visitation 
rights are only for family members only. 

c. A grocery store bagger helps carry out an 
older woman’s bags to her car. 

d. A doctor forgetting to ask about an older 
individual’s sexual behaviors. 

4. What are older LGBT individuals more at risk 
of developing than the older heterosexual 
population? 

a. More friendships 

b. Arthritis 

c. Dementia 

d. Depression 

5. What are discourses? 

a. Ways of constituting knowledge, together 
with the social practices, forms of 
subjectivity. 

b. Power relations that inhere in such 
knowledge and relations between them. 

c. Practices based on knowledge 

d. a and b 

Key 

1- b 

2- c 

3- b 

4- d 

5- d 





80 



T. Robinson-Wood and A. Weber 



Resources 

A Report of the National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey: http:// 

endtransdiscrimination.org/. 

Lambda Legal: www.lambdalegal.org/. 
National Center for Lesbian Rights: http:// 
www.nclrights.org/. 

National Center for Transgender Equality: 
http : //transequality . org /. 

National Gay and Lesbian Task Force: http:// 
www.thetaskforce.org/. 

National Resource Center on LGBT Aging: 
http://lgbtagingcenter.org/. 

Nurses HEALE Curriculum: http://www. 
nursesheale.org/curriculum/. 



References 

Akita, K., Besel, R. D., Comeforo, K., Drushel, B., 
Guthrie, J., Hidahl, B., & Zingsheim, J. (2013). Queer 
media images: LGBT perspectives. T. Carilli, & 
J. Campbell (Eds.). Lexington Books. 

Auldridge, A., Espinoza, R. (2013). Health equity and 
LGBT elders of color: Recommendations for policy 
and practice. Retrieved from SAGE website: http:// 
issuu.com/LGBTagingcenter/docs/sage_LGBT_ 
healthequities/l?e=2766558/2092028. 

American Psychological Association. (2006). Answers to 
your questions about transgender individuals and 
gender identity. Retrieved May, 17, 2014 from: http:// 
www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg_race-ethnicity. 

Atkinson, D. R., & Hackett, G. (1998). Counseling 
diverse populations. McGraw-Hill. 

Brown, M. T. (2009). LGBT aging and rhetorical silence. 
Sexuality Research and Social Policy Journal of 
NSRC , 6(2), 65-78. 

Cass, V. C. (1979). Homosexual identity formation: a 
theoretical model. Journal of Homosexuality, 9, 219— 
235. 

Cochran, S. D., Mays, V. M„ Alegria, M., Ortega, A. N., 
& Takeuchi, D. (2007). Mental health and substance 
use disorders among Latino and Asian American 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults. Journal of Consult- 
ing and Clinical Psychology, 75(5), 785-794. 

Davis, T., (2013). An exploratory study of primary care 
providers ' HIV prevention practices among older 
adults (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., & Muraco, A. (2010). Aging and 
sexual orientation: A 25-year review of the literature. 
Research on Aging, 32(3), 372 — 413. 



Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I.. Hoy-Ellis, C. P., Goldsen, J., 
Emlet, C. A., & Hooyman, N. R. (2014).Creating a 
vision for the future: Key competencies and strategies 
for culturally competent practice with lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) older adults in the 
health and human services. Journal of Gerontological 
Social Work, (ahead-of-print), 1-28. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. L„ Kim, H., Emlet, A. C., 
Muraco, A., Erosheva, A. E., & Hoy-Ellis. (2011). 
The aging and health report: Disparities and resil- 
ience among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
older adults. Retrieved from Caring and Aging with 
Pride website: http://caringandaging.org/wordpress/ 
wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Full-reportl0-25-12.pdf. 

Freedom to Marry. (2013). Why marriage matters to 
native Americans. Retrieved from http://www. 
freedomtomarry.org/communities/entry/c/native- 
americans. 

Friedman, S., Reynolds, A., Scovill, S., Brassier, F. R., 
Campbell, R„ & Ballou, M. (2013). An estimate of 
housing discrimination against same-sex couples. 
Available at SSRN. 

Frost, D. M., Lehavot, K., & Meyer, 1. H. (2011). 
Minority stress and physical health among sexual 
minorities. Poster Presented at the american Psycho- 
logical Association, Washington, DC. Retrieved from 
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h25x5sh. 

Gates, G. J. (2011). How many people are lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and transgender? Retrieved April 6, 2014 
from http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wpcontent/ 
uploads/Gates-How-Many-People-LGBT-Apr-201 1 . 
pdf. 

Graham, R. (2011). The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender people: Building a foundation for 
better understanding. Washington, D.C: Institute of 
Medicine, The National Academic Press. 

Grant, J. M., Koskovich, G„ Frazer, S., & Bjerk, S. 
(2010a). Outing age 2010: Public policy issues 
affecting gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender older 
adults. National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. 

Grant, J. M., Mottet, L. A., Tanis, J., Herman, J. L., 
Harrison, J., & Keisling, M. (2010b). National trans- 
gender discrimination survey report on health and 
health care. National Center for Transgender Equality 
and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Washing- 
ton, DC, 1-23. 

Halberstam, J. (2005). In a queer time and place: 
Transgender bodies, subcultural lives. NYU Press. 

Hardacker, C. T., Rubinstein, B., Hotton, A., & Houlberg, 
M. (2013). Adding silver to the rainbow: The 
development of the nurses’ health education about 
LGBT elders (HEALE) cultural competency curricu- 
lum. Journal of Nursing Management, 22, 257-266. 

Hash, K. M„ & Rogers, A. (2013). Clinical practice with 
older LGBT clients: Overcoming lifelong stigma 
through strength and resilience. Clinical Social Work 
Journal, 41(3), 249-257. 

House, W. (2010). Presidential memorandum: Hospital 
visitation. Retrieved from https://www.whitehouse. 



4 Deconstructing Multiple Oppressions Among LGBT Older Adults 



81 



gov/the-press-office/presidential-memorandum- 
hospital- visitation. 

Han, C. S., Rutledge, S. E„ Bond, L., Lauby, J., & 
LaPollo, A. B. (2014). You’re better respected when 
you carry yourself as a man”: Black men’s personal 
accounts of the down low “lifestyle. Sexuality and 
Culture, 18(1), 89-102. 

Hudson, R. B. (2011). Integrating lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender older adults into aging policy and 
practice. Public Policy and Aging Report, 21(h), 1-35. 

Kimmel, D. C., Rose, T., & David, S. (Eds.). (2013). 
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender aging: 
Research and clinical perspectives. Columbia Univer- 
sity Press. 

Macdonald, B., & Rich, C. (1983). Look me in the eye: 
Old women, aging, and ageism. Tallahassee: Spinsters 

Ink. 

Meyer, I. H., Ouellette, S. C., Haile, R., & McFarlane, T. 
A. (2011). “We’d be free”: Narratives of life without, 
or sexism. Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 8(3), 
204-214. 

McCarthy, J„ & Holliday, E. L. (2004). Help-seeking and 
counseling within a traditional male gender role: An 
examination from multicultural perspective. Journal of 
Counseling and Development, 82, 25-30. 

National Resource Center on LGBT Aging. (2013). 
Inclusive questions for older adults: A practical guide 
to collecting data on sexual orientation and gender 
identity. Retrieved from National Resource Center on 
LGBT Aging website: http://www.LGBTagingcenter. 
org/resources/resource.cfm?r=601. 

Robinson-Wood, T. L. (2013). The convergence of race, 
ethnicity, and gender: Multiple identities in counseling 
(4 th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Inc. 

Rust, P. C. (2006). Sexual identity adn bisexual identities: 
The struggle for self-description in a changing sexual 
landscape. In T. E. Orr (Ed.), The social construction 
of difference and inequality: Race, class, gender and 
sexuality (pp. 169-186). Boston: McGraw-Hill. 



SAGE & MAP. (2010, March). Improving the lives of 
GBT older adults. New York and Denver, CO: 
Author. 

Sargeant, M. (2009). Age discrimination, sexual orienta- 
tion and gender identity: UK/US perspectives. Equal 
Opportunities International, 28(S), 634-645. 

Schope, R. D. (2005). Who’s afraid of growing old? Gay 
and lesbian perceptions of aging. Journal of Geron- 
tological Social Work, 45(4), 23-39. 

Shankle, M. D., Maxwell, C. A., Katzman, E. S., & 
Landers, S. (2003). An invisible population: Older 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals. 
Clinical Research and Regulatory Affairs, 20(2), 159— 
182. 

The National Hispanic Council on Aging. (2013). In their 
own words: A needs assessment of Hispanic LGBT 
older adults. Retrieved from The National Hispanic 
Council on Aging website: http://www.nhcoa.org/wp- 
content/uploads/2014/02/NHCOA-Hispanic-LGBT- 
Older- Adult-Needs- Assessment-In-Their-Own- 
Words.pdf. 

Troiden, R. R. (1989). The formation of homosexual 
identities. Journal of Homosexuality, 17, 43-73. 

United States Department of Labor. (2013). Fact sheet 
#28F: Qualifying reasons for leave under the Family 
and Medical Leave Act. Retrieved from http://www. 
dol.gov/whd/regs/compliance/whdfs28f.htm. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Admin- 
istration on Aging. (2012). A profile of older Amer- 
icans: 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2014, from http:// 
www.aoa.gov/Aging_Statistics/Profile/2012/docs/ 
2012profile.pdf. 

Van Wagenen, A., Driskell, J., & Bradford, I. (2013). 
“I’m still raring to go”: Successful aging among 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender older adults. 
Journal of Aging Studies, 27(1), 1-14. 

Weedon, C. (1987). Feminist practice and poststructur- 
alist theory. New York: Blackwell Publishing. 



The Intersection of Identities of LGBT 
Elders: Race, Age, Sexuality, and Care 
Network 



5 



Melanie D. Otis and Debra A. Harley 



Abstract 

This chapter focuses on the complexity of human identity by considering 
the multifaceted and intertwined relationships between sexuality, gender, 
race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and age, as well as other aspects of 
one’s social and personal identity. To assist in illuminating our 
understanding of these relationships, the structural, political, and social 
factors that contribute to social inequality experienced by LGBT elders 
situated at the multidimensional intersections of different races, ethnicities, 
socioeconomic status (SES), sexes, and sexualities are explored. By 
simultaneously considering the multiplicity and fluidity of identity and 
exposing the diversity of experiences of LGBT elders, we are able to 
underscore some of the many reasons for extant research involving sexual 
minorities which must be carefully and critically evaluated. 



Keywords 

Intersection of identities • Multiple identities • Race • Age • Sexuality • 
Care network 



M.D. Otis (El) • D.A. Harley 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA 
e-mail: Melanie.Otis@uky.edu 



To help us make sense of this multifaceted set of 
intertwined relationships, this chapter will begin 
by defining the foundational organizing constructs 
of multiple identities and intersectionality and 
providing some background on how these con- 
structs have evolved into useful heuristic tools that 
can guide the conceptualization and execution of 



Overview 



meaningful inquiry in the social and behavioral 
sciences (Bowleg 2008; Crenshaw 1993; Fish 
2008). Once the core constructs of multiple iden- 
tities and intersectionality have been defined, 
we explore the structural, political, and social 
factors that contribute to social inequality experi- 
enced by elderly LGBT persons situated at the 
multidimensional intersections of different races, 
ethnicities, socioeconomic status (SES), sexes, 
sexualities, and among others (Fukuyama and 
Ferguson 2000; Hancock 2007). Exposing the 
diversity of experience of elderly LGBT persons 
underscores some of the many reasons extant 
research involving sexual minorities must be 
carefully and critically evaluated, particularly 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_5 



83 



84 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



when the predominant subjects of that research 
seem to mirror the longstanding stereotypical 
profile of young, white, gay, well-educated, 
middle-class, and urban dwelling (Albelda et al. 
2009). To be fair, while this profile describes a 
segment of the population, it is most notable for the 
many LGBT persons it excludes — and for the fact 
that its persistence as a presumably adequate proxy 
for the population of sexual minorities as a whole 
is based on a tacit acceptance of the study partic- 
ipants as representative (Institute of medicine 
[IOM] 2011). Building on this platform, we 
explore the ways that racism, sexism, ageism, and 
heterosexism impact the processes through which 
individuals develop, experience, and manage their 
multifaceted social identities (Kertzner et al. 2009; 
Purdie- Vaughns and Eibach 2008; Settles 2006). 
With a clearer understanding of the diversity rep- 
resented among elder LGBT persons, the chapter 
will consider the relevance of these factors for the 
development of informal support and caregiver 
networks, as well as their implications for the 
creation and maintenance of formal care networks 
that are responsive to the needs of the multidi- 
mensional population of elder LGBT persons with 
whom we will engage (Van Der Bergh and Crisp 
2004). Finally, having established a foundation 
upon which we might build, suggestions for the 
development of models of culturally competent 
practice (Leyva et al. 2014), training of human 
service professionals (Hardacker et al. 2014; 
Hillman and Hinrichsen 2014), creation of effec- 
tive and responsive communities of care and ser- 
vice organizations (Meyer and Johnston 2014), 
and the development of inclusive policies will be 
delineated (Auldridge and Espinoza 2013). 

Learning Objectives 

By the end of the chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 

1. Understand the multiple dimensions of iden- 
tities and their intersections. 

2. Identify the stigmatization of “isms” with 
regard to race, age, and sexuality in informal 
and formal care networks. 



3. Understand the diversity of relationships in 
the LGBT community. 

4. Understand the complexities of families of 
choice as impacting intersectionality. 

5. Summarize the convergence of race, age, 
sexuality, and service provision. 



Introduction 

A common theme and driving force behind this 
book is an acknowledgment that the elder LGBT 
community/population is made up of a complex 
and diverse collection of human beings about 
whom we know relatively little. Yet, if we are to 
effectively address the needs of such a diverse 
aging population, we must develop care networks, 
services, and programs that acknowledge and 
affirm the multiplicity of social identities that 
converge to create the unique human beings with 
whom we will work (Abes et al. 2007 ; Jones and 
McEwen 2000). In a very real sense, one can look 
to this book as a call to action for human service 
professionals — seeking to simultaneously educate 
and inspire them to become the very best practi- 
tioner possible while moving forward on their 
career paths. Throughout our careers, we are 
called upon to act as culturally competent pro- 
fessionals in a variety of practice settings. In an 
effort to rise to that challenge, we will turn to the 
scholarly professional literature to seek guidance 
on best practices and insights into the lived 
experiences of aging sexual minorities from 
diverse backgrounds. In the process, we are con- 
stantly confronted by the reality that our knowl- 
edge of this heterogeneous population of 
individuals who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
or transgender is based largely on a fairly mono- 
chromatic and unidimensional body of research 
(Huang et al. 2010; IOM 2011). In short, we know 
very little about the full spectrum of LGBT lives. 

Until recently, the relative dearth of research 
focusing on diversity within the LGBT popula- 
tion drew little attention. Whether this was the 
result of a failure to acknowledge the actual 
diversity of the LGBT population, a level of 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



85 



satisfaction with the fact that there was finally an 
evolving body of LGBT-focused scholarship in 
general, a combination of the two, or something 
else entirely, LGBT-focused research tended to 
ignore the roles of potentially relevant issues 
such as race, ethnicity, social class, age, and 
among others, in the lives of sexual minorities 
(IOM 2011; Van Sluytman and Torres 2014; 
Young and Meyer 2005). Over the last twenty 
years, a growing number of studies have inclu- 
ded more diverse samples, yet recent systematic 
reviews of the literature reveal that extant 
scholarship still offers only a limited look a more 
diverse LGBT population (Eliason et al. 2010; 
Fredriksen-Goldsen and Muraco 2010; Huang 
et al. 2010). When researchers do give consid- 
eration to differences related to race, ethnicity, 
age, sexual minority identity, gender identity, 
geographic location, and/or SES, this acknowl- 
edgment comes primarily in the form of a sample 
description that rarely translates into a more 
in-depth analysis (IOM 2011). Generally, when 
acknowledged, the absence of such analysis is a 
limitation that is attributed to having insufficient 
numbers of individuals representing specific 
demographic characteristics (IOM 2011). Among 
the very limited number of studies that seek to 
specifically address some aspect of the diversity 
within the LGBT population, we find research 
that is typically characterized by small sample 
sizes and a reliance on qualitative research 
methods (e.g., case studies, focus groups, inter- 
views). While these studies provide us with 
valuable and useful information, the reality is 
that our knowledge of significant portions of the 
LGBT community is based on the experiences of 
a very small number of people whose experi- 
ences may or may not share commonalities with 
others who have a similar, much less different, 
demographic profile. Thus, we remain fairly 
uninformed about the lives of LGBT persons of 
color or elderly LGBT persons of any race/eth- 
nicity and/or socioeconomic background, with 
scholars recently noting that amidst this limited 
scope of available research, transgender persons 
remain all but invisible in the vast majority of all 
sexual minority-focused scholarship (Averett 



et al. 2012; Fredriksen-Goldsen and Muraco 
2010; Siverskog 2014). 

Against this less than satisfying backdrop, this 
chapter focuses on one of the more challenging 
aspects of understanding the lives of human 
beings — confronting the reality that each of us is 
much more than the sum of our parts, and amidst 
this complexity, we each experience our identi- 
ties as simultaneously fluid, contextual, and in 
some ways, concrete (Diamond 2005; Fish 2008; 
Hancock 2007). If that description seems to 
suggest inherent contradictions, in reality, it only 
offers the tip of the iceberg of what makes the 
process of developing a meaningful understand- 
ing of human beings and the human condition so 
challenging. Of particular relevance to the cur- 
rent focus of inquiry, this task is made all the 
more difficult by the fact that sexual minorities 
confront stigma, prejudice, and discrimination on 
a daily basis and thus have often been justifiably 
reticent about participating in research (Bowleg 
2008; DeBlaere et al. 2010; Moradi et al. 2009). 
Despite this reality, social scientists must con- 
tinue to acknowledge the complex combination 
of factors that contribute to individual experi- 
ences, seek ways to measure these factors, and 
subsequently configure this newly acquired 
knowledge into a narrative that can guide human 
service professionals in areas of practice, pro- 
gram development, and policy to positively 
impact the lives of aging LGBT persons (Eliason 
et al. 2010; Van Der Bergh and Crisp 2004). 

The Limitations of LGBT Scholarship 
Related to Diversity 

As efforts are underway to increase the diversity 
of questions explored in research involving elder 
LGBT persons, certain identity-related assump- 
tions that have influenced past scholarship have 
been exposed. First, the centrality of 
problem-focused inquiry in the literature 
involving LGBT persons has been well estab- 
lished (IOM 2011). Although this work has 
provided the basis for seeking funding for 
much-needed LGBT-focused services and 



86 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



programming, it has also been used to support 
politically and culturally charged arguments, 
suggesting that sexual minorities as a group are 
physically and mentally less healthy than heter- 
osexual men and women (Bowleg et al. 2003; 
Purdie- Vaughns and Eibach 2008), and as such 
must be precluded from certain environments 
and/or activities (i.e., teaching young children, 
adoption/having children, serving in the mili- 
tary). Amidst this body of work sits a significant 
number of studies that focus on the centrality of 
the role of coming out as being either highly 
problematic, essential to well-being, and/or the 
indisputable foundation of a sexual minority 
person’s identity (Hunter 2007). Conceptually, 
this work suggests that for persons who identify 
as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender, one’s 
sexuality is/should be the primary dimension 
defining one’s identity. Given that some research 
suggests that elder LGBT persons who came out 
prior to the beginning of the gay rights move- 
ment (generally considered to be the day of the 
Stonewall riots — June 28, 1969) may not view 
publically acknowledging their sexuality (in any 
way) as necessary or appropriate, this assumption 
about the primacy of one’s identification as a 
sexual minority may be highly problematic. 

There can be little argument that each of these 
paths of inquiry has produced some important 
information that has enhanced our understanding 
of the lives of LGBT persons and that could (and 
does) assist in creating some form of positive 
change, for direct practice, programming, policy 
development, or community change (IOM 201 1). 
Yet, beyond the debate about whether coming out 
is critical to the development of one’s identity as a 
sexual minority, research demonstrates both the 
significance and fluidity of the prioritization of 
multiple identities among sexual minorities — 
including shifts in the centrality of one’s identity 
as a sexual minority (Diamond 2005; Kertzner 
2001). For instance, in a study of gay men in 
midlife, Kertzner (2001) found that many of the 
men viewed their sexual minority identity as less 
important to them as they aged, with greater 
significance being shifted to aspects of their 
non-sexual identity associated with race (for men 



of color), their relationship status (particularly 
among single men in the study), and their phys- 
ical appearance (i.e., being overweight). Simi- 
larly, in a qualitative study of older lesbians, 
Averett et al. (2012) found that the women 
viewed their sexuality as less central to their 
identity as they aged and instead emphasized on 
establishing stability and a sense of security. 

Multiple Dimensions of Identity 
and Intersectionality 

Identity is a central organizing tool for under- 
standing how human beings create and maintain 
a sense of self (Howard 2000). Social scientists 
(primarily in the fields of sociology and psy- 
chology) have been studying identity for many 
decades. In general, the field of inquiry has been 
guided by three fundamental assumptions: 

1. Identities are not innate qualities, rather they 
are socially constructed; 

2. Identities are fluid; and 

3. Identities are created/recreated over and over 
again through processes of social interaction 
and meaning-making. 

Utilizing these three basic building blocks, we 
can acknowledge that at the heart of our discus- 
sion about multiple dimensions of identity and 
intersectionality sits a fairly simplistic premise — 
each of us possesses a number of characteristics 
that coalesce and sometimes conflict to create the 
unique individuals that we become (Jones and 
McEwen 2000; McCall 2005). We self-identify 
and we are identified and labeled by others based 
on multiple dimensions, including our 
race/ethnicity, age, sexuality, sex, and social 
class (Hancock 2007 ; Roccas and Brewer 2002). 
While all of these characteristics constitute parts 
of us as unique human beings, a number of 
influences we encounter across time and space 
contribute to the salience of particular identities 
at any given point in time (Abes et al. 2007). By 
framing our understanding of the lived experi- 
ences of elder LGBT persons around the 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



87 



construct of multiple dimensions of identity/ 
multiple identities, we acknowledge and embrace 
this reality (Abes et al. 2007; Jones and McEwen 
2000; Omi and Winant 1994; Tornstam 2005; 
Weber 1998). 

Because our focus is on understanding and 
appreciating the lives of elder lesbians, gay men, 
bisexual men and women, and transgender per- 
sons, the fluidity of multiple identities experi- 
enced across the life course figures prominently 
in our discussion (Kertzner et al. 2009; Omi and 
Winant 1994). Although our own developmental 
trajectories and associated expectations and roles 
(i.e., becoming older, becoming a parent, part- 
nering) certainly play a critical role in the pro- 
cess, the impact of embracing or being ascribed a 
particular identity is bigger than just knowing 
which predetermined box we are expected to 
check on a survey. In fact, given the fluidity of 
identity, how we self-identify may be both his- 
torically and situationally influenced (Cronin and 
King 2010; Deaux and Martin 2003; Howard 
2000; Stirratt et al. 2007). For instance, in one’s 
place of employment, our sexuality may seem of 
little relevance to us while highly relevant in 
others. A situation may be compounded by the 
fact that those around us may be prioritizing, and 
thus responding to, aspects of identity that we 
may or may not see as pertinent or primary in the 
moment. Or we may become a parent and come 
to centralize that aspect of our identity, regardless 
of what other aspects of our identity may remain 
more or less prominent as a result of our shifting 
priorities. In summary, as we move through 
various activities, interactions, and cognitive 
processes over the course of a given day, a 
month, or year(s), different aspects of our identity 
may be more or less salient — some of these shifts 
may be fleeting, while others may mark a 
long-term or permanent shift in our identity 
process (Abes et al. 2007; Fuss 1989; Kertzner 
2001; McCall 2005; Roccas and Brewer 2002). 

The question of which identity is primary has 
long been a subject of debate for many ethnic 
minority LGBT persons (see Chap. 6-8, 10). The 
politics of multiple identities, especially sexual 
minority status inclusion in ethnic minority 
communities, has become more fluid in recent 



decades. Moore (2010) examined strategies black 
LGBT persons use in black environments to 
proclaim a sexual minority identity that is 
co-occuring with a black identity. The belief is 
that increasing their visibility in black spaces will 
promote a greater understanding of minority 
sexuality as an identity status that can coexist 
rather than compete with race. One of the foci of 
the study was to examine the particular health 
and social support concerns faced by older and 
aging segments of this population (see Research 
Box 5.1). 

Research Box 5.1 See Moore (2010). 

Purpose: To analyze the ways black 
gay people who feel a sense of solidarity 
with the racial group experience the cross 
cutting issue of openly expressing a gay 
sexuality in black community contexts. 

Method: The data for this study come 
from a larger project, Black Los Angeles 
Project, a research study examining 
neighborhoods, religious life, political 
participation, cultural production, and 
social justice in South Los Angeles, Cali- 
fornia. Approximately 30 months of qual- 
itative data collection were used. This 
study was designed to examine the rela- 
tionship that black LGBT persons have 
with their racial communities, the types of 
kin arrangements they participate in, the 
role religion plays in their lives, and the 
particular health and social support con- 
cerns faced by the older and aging seg- 
ments of this population. In-depth, 
semi-structured interviews were con- 
ducted with self-identified LGBT 
African-Americans who live and/or work 
in predominately Black or Black and 
Latino neighbors. The researcher gathered 
data at churches, art exhibits, backyard 
barbeques, public forums, and other private 
activities. 

Results: Black lesbians and gay men in 
LA born before 1954 tend to conceptualize 
black group membership as an identity 
status that must remain primary for the 




88 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



continued advancement of the race. These 
individuals grew up when civil rights 
issues began to take center stage and they 
experienced gay sexuality as a stigma they 
had to endure throughout their lives. Con- 
versely, their younger counterparts experi- 
ence gay sexuality amidst a more public 
discourse about LGBT sexuality. 

Questions 

1. Do you think that this sample is repre- 
sentative of black LGBT elders’ atti- 
tudes about the intersection identities? 

2. What are the implications of this study 
for larger discussions of multiple iden- 
tities across diversity in the LGBT 
community? 

3. How can this study be redesigned or 
replicated with multiracial LGBT 
elders? 

Debate about whether the costs and benefits of 
particular identity categories can be compart- 
mentalized or even empirically captured contin- 
ues, yet indisputable evidence remains elusive. 
Despite this, feminist scholars have contributed 
some important tools to assist us in the process of 
inquiry. Although a large body of work in this 
arena exists, over the last twenty-five years 
Crenshaw (1993), Hooks (1984, 1990) and Col- 
lins (1990, 2000, 2005) have been central figures 
in the development of feminist intersectionality 
theory. Their work focused initially on the 
intersection of race and sex, with black feminist 
scholars arguing that despite the growing number 
of researchers and theorists challenging 
long-standing notions that supported sexist and 
racist structures, the complex issues associated 
with the intersection between the two had been 
largely ignored. At the heart of their critique is 
the argument that identities and their related 
opportunities for advantage/disadvantage and 
privilege/oppression cannot be viewed in isola- 
tion, nor can they be understood as simply 
additive (Bowleg 2008; Settles and Buchanan 



2014; Weber and Parra-Medina 2003). Instead, 
the impact of oppression associated with the 
ageism, sexism, racism, ethnocentrism, hetero- 
sexism, and classism (among other isms) cannot 
be teased out into separate parts, but instead must 
be understood as a complex intersection of dif- 
ferent identities (Ferguson et al. 2014; Knapp 
2005; McGibbon and McPherson 2011; Meyer 
2003). As a consequence of the weight of 
oppression being disproportionately shouldered 
by those who possess multiple stigmatized 
identities, differences in mental, physical, social, 
and economic well-being should be expected 
(Diaz et al. 2001; Kertzner et al. 2009; Meyer 
et al. 2008; Szymanski 2005). 

The “isms” and Identity. This chapter focuses 
on the lives of older sexual minorities — two 
identity categories that are individually and col- 
lectively stigmatized and disadvantaged in myr- 
iad ways. When we examine this within the 
conceptualization of multiple identities as con- 
textual in nature, we are confronted with the fact 
that sexual minorities spend a significant amount 
of their time in environments dominated by het- 
erosexuals. In the prevailing heterosexist envi- 
ronment, sexual minorities experience both 
blatant and subtle forms of oppression and dis- 
crimination due to their sexuality. Additionally, 
research involving sexual minority and/or pre- 
sumably (or predominantly) heterosexual sam- 
ples support the endorsement of ageist views 
within these groups. Despite the seeming uni- 
versality of ageist views, some research indicates 
that gay men perceive the gay community to be 
particularly prejudicial when it comes to older 
men, while many lesbians felt ageism is largely a 
non-issue in the lesbian community (Schope 
2005). Thus, it should not be surprising that a 
substantial amount of discussion centers around 
the individual and collective impact of “isms” 
(e.g., racism, sexism, ethnocentrism, ageism, 
heterosexism) on those who are disadvantaged, 
with some concern over whether particular 
identities are being or should be privileged 
within that debate (Case et al. 2012). As a result, 
in the midst of the complexity of trying to 
understand the interrelatedness of diverse 




5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



89 



identities, questions arise about whether one 
aspect of one’s identity should be considered as 
primary in relation to another. If we attempt to 
position this discourse at the intersections of 
identity components, we are confronted with an 
array of questions: Is it more challenging to be a 
white gay man, a black heterosexual man? an 
Hispanic lesbian ? or an Asian transgender per- 
son? Moreover, what are the challenges of being 
multiracial, a sexual minority, and elderly? And, 
perhaps most critical for our consideration at this 
juncture, are these even the questions we should 
be asking? 

As noted at the outset of this chapter, data 
addressing the lives of the diverse spectrum of 
individuals who identify as sexual minorities are 
limited. Despite this, research conducted in 
recent years offers some opportunities for 
glimpses into the lives of a growing number of 
LGBT persons from a diversity of backgrounds, 
and encompassing a broadening spectrum of 
identities (Albelda et al. 2009; Diaz et al. 2008). 
As a result, an examination of secondary data 
from three population-based studies, including 
the US Census, the National Survey of Family 
Growth (NSFG), and the California Health 
Interview Survey (CHIS), offers insight into a 
few of the ways the lives of sexual minorities 
converge and diverge in relation to some basic, 
yet influential, demographic characteristics (Al- 
belda et al. 2009). Collectively, the information 
offers evidence of some of the ways that race, 
sex, age, and geography combine to impact the 
economic well-being of self-identified LGB 
persons. For instance, the NSFG identified higher 
rates of poverty for women of sexual minority 
status as compared to heterosexual women, yet 
lower rates for gay men as compared to bisexual 
or heterosexual men (Albelda et al. 2009). Data 
from the 2000 US Census revealed that lesbian 
couples over age 65 had a poverty rate that was 
twice that of heterosexual married couples. When 
the analysis took into consideration the possible 
influence of race and geographic location (more 
precisely, population density), the findings were 
even more compelling. Specifically, same-sex 
couples living in rural areas were twice as likely 
to live in poverty as those in urban areas. The 



combination of race and couple status revealed 
that being a same-sex couple versus a 
different-sex couple meant significantly higher 
rates of poverty for African-Americans, and 
same-sex African-American couples had poverty 
rates three times that of white same-sex couples 
(Albelda et al. 2009). It is worth noting that 
limitations in the US Census Bureau’s data col- 
lection process preclude examination of these 
relationships for single sexual minorities or those 
who may be part of a non-cohabiting couple. The 
expansion of data collection categories to include 
a more direct indicator of sexual minority status 
would offer an unprecedented opportunity to 
capture a meaningful picture of the number of 
self-identified sexual minorities living in the 
USA (Gates 2006). To date, while scholars and 
advocates have called for a change in census data 
collection practices as they relate to sexual 
minorities (Auldridge and Espinoza 2013; Brown 
and Grossman 2014; IOM 2011), there is no 
indication that the Census Bureau has plans to 
make this adjustment. 

Research in the health and mental health fields 
has also exposed physical and mental well-being 
disparities between sexual minorities and the 
heterosexual majority and among LGBT persons 
(Auldridge and Espinoza 2013; Banks 2012; 
Kertzner et al. 2009), with some of these differ- 
ences being linked to economic inequalities 
captured in the studies described above 
(Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011; IOM 2011). In 
their study of LGBT persons age 50 and older, 
Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. (2011) found that, 
compared to white respondents, LGBT persons 
of color were more likely to experience higher 
rates of a number of physical and mental health 
problems, including HIV/AIDS, hypertension, 
heart disease, and diabetes, among others. These 
scholars go on to note that despite these elevated 
risks, little to no discussion focusing on 
addressing the specific needs of aging LGBT 
persons of color has occurred 
(Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). 

Assumptions of Hierarchical Socialization. 
While basic demographic characteristics such as 
one’s sex, age, race, ethnicity, and sexual orien- 
tation may be viewed simply as benign 



90 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



descriptive information, the way these qualities 
are experienced as a part of one’s identity is 
greatly influenced by the social construction of 
meanings attached to those characteristics (Abes 
et al. 2007) and the context in which those 
meanings are constructed and reinforced (Jenkins 
2014). Thus, the existence of prejudicial beliefs 
that characterize racism, sexism, ageism, and 
heterosexism plays a significant role in the social 
processes associated with identity development 
and identity management (Jackson III 2012; 
Jones 1997). As we navigate daily life, we must 
manage both internalized beliefs and external 
forces related to the socially constructed meaning 
assigned to various facets of our identities, and 
we are often challenged to do so in different 
environments and groups that hold varying per- 
spectives on the “appropriate” hierarchy associ- 
ated with our particular demographic profile 
(Raetz and Lease 2002). 

Examining Multiple Oppressions 

Along with multiple identities come opportunities 
to experience multiple oppressions (and privileges 
— depending on one’s status location in the hier- 
archy). In her research examining the lives of black 
lesbians, Greene (1995) referred to this as “triple 
jeopardy,” arguing that being part of three 
oppressed groups (i.e., women, lesbians, and 
blacks) resulted in the potential for black lesbians 
to experience a disproportionate share of the neg- 
ative consequences of oppression. Following 
Greene’s argument, we argue that elder black les- 
bians experience quadruple jeopardy. Similar 
arguments have been made by other scholars who 
have utilized intersectionality as a model to explore 
the multiplicity of identity components in 
LGBT-focused research (Szymanski and Gupta 
2009). As suggested by the limited research 
available on LGBT persons, framing the potential 
consequences associated with possessing more 
than one stigmatized minority status is supported 
by much of our available evidence (Purdie- Vaugns 
and Eibach 2008; Robinson-Wood 2009). 



In a study examining factors that serve as 
social determinants of women’s health, McGib- 
bon and McPherson (2011) argue that “the 
oppressions of sexism, racism, heterosexism, and 
ageism, to name a few, can and do happen 
together to produce a complex synergy of 
material and social disadvantage” (p. 61). As 
both a challenge and a reminder to social scien- 
tists and helping professionals, the authors go on 
to assert that this conglomerate cannot be dis- 
sected into separate parts that conveniently 
address the influence of one ism in isolation from 
another (McGibbon and McPherson 2011). Their 
assertions offer important tools to utilize when 
critically examining extant research, with its 
minimally diverse samples, and define the limits 
of what it may or may not be able to tell us about 
the lives of elderly LGBT persons. 

Proceeding with this cautionary note in mind, 
research offers a number of insights into ways 
that multiple oppressions impact our lives. While 
stigma and discrimination often make it difficult 
to access study participants who are representa- 
tive of the diverse population of sexual minority 
persons (Fish 2008; Moradi et al. 2009), a 
growing, albeit small, body of work exists. This 
research underscores the ways that members of 
already marginalized groups may be particularly 
disadvantaged as they age. For instance, in gen- 
eral, Black and Latino persons are dispropor- 
tionately concentrated in low wage jobs that offer 
limited, if any, access to opportunities for 
advancement, health insurance, and retirement 
security (National Hispanic Council on Aging 
[NHCOA] 2014; Services and Advocacy for 
LGBT Elders [SAGE] 2013; Social Security 
Administration 2011). Limited work opportunity 
increases the likelihood that these individuals 
will experience greater health-related challenges 
as they age and that they will encounter these 
challenges with a limited spectrum of resources. 
While the available information is certainly lim- 
ited, research suggests that this scenario may be 
similar, if not more problematic, for elder Black 
and Latino sexual minorities (Auldridge and 
Espinoza 2013). See Chaps. 6 and 10 for 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



91 



additional information on African-American/ 
Black and Latino LGBT elders. Against this 
backdrop, it is important to acknowledge that 
those experiencing the impact of multiple forms 
of oppression may be highly dependent on 
support from their informal care/support 
networks. 



Diversity in Relationships 

To this point, this chapter has focused on the 
significance of multiple identities and intersec- 
tionality in the lives of individual LGBT persons. 
However, given the increasing importance of 
social relationships as source of support as one 
ages, consideration of the ways sexual minority 
couples are impacted by intersectionality is also 
important. Although research on intimate rela- 
tionships of sexual minorities is somewhat lim- 
ited, there is an evolving body of work that 
speaks to the unique challenges faced by LGBT 
couples (Brown and Grossman 2014; Gates 
2006; Jeong and Horne 2009; Kurdek 2001; 
Long 2008). Numerous studies of same-sex 
couple relationships have documented similari- 
ties in relationship quality and relationship 
dynamics for both same-sex and different-sex 
couples (e.g., Blumstein and Schwartz 1983; 
Kurdek 2004; Malouff et al. 2010), yet the neg- 
ative consequences of minority stress in 
same-sex couples have also been a frequent 
themes. This work is guided by minority stress 
perspective (Meyer 1995), whereby experiences 
of stigmatization and discrimination, as well as 
differences in degree of “outness” are examined 
as contributing factors in relationship well-being 
(Green and Mitchell 2008; Otis et al. 2006). 
A limited body of scholarship examines the lives 
of older sexual minorities of color or LGBT 
persons who are identified in some way (e.g., 
race, ethnicity, SES, geographic location) that 
goes beyond sexuality or gender identity (L, G, 
B, or T) and/or sex. This dearth of information 
about older LGBT racial and ethnic minorities 
living outside urban areas was captured in Huang 
et al.’s (2010) content analysis of the literature. 



which focused on LGB persons of color. Like the 
bulk of LGB research in general, their analysis 
found the typical profile of study participants to 
be young- to middle-aged living in an urban area, 
and relationship status is either not addressed or 
peripheral to the analysis. 

In an effort to gain insights into the ways race, 
ethnicity, and age may impact the intimate rela- 
tionships of LGBT persons, research focusing on 
heterosexual couples may prove useful. A case in 
point can be gleaned from the research that has 
been guided by the increasingly popular minority 
stress model for LGBT research (Balsam et al. 
2011; Meyer 1995). Initial research using the 
minority stress model focused on understanding 
the impact of racism in the lives of 
African-American men and women. As Pinder- 
hughes (2002) discussed in her review of the 
literature examining African-American marital 
relationships, both economic conditions and sex 
role expectations serve to impact the stability and 
quality of these unions. While other factors that 
are unique to opposite-sex relationships were 
also found to be relevant in these studies, the 
influence of racism on economic well-being and 
how that intersection manifests itself as a stressor 
in intimate relationships is likely to traverse 
relationship types (NHCOA 2014; SAGE 2013). 
Similarly, given that members of same-sex cou- 
ples are raised within the same environment as 
their heterosexual peers, expectations and 
assumptions (both positive and negative) asso- 
ciated with being a person of color are also 
potentially influential in the lives of the sexual 
minority couples (SAGE 2013). 

Families of Choice 

While the previously described complexity of the 
lives of LGBT persons offers a daunting array of 
challenges to consider when attempting to 
understand and appreciate the social identities of 
sexual minorities, the concept of “families of 
choice” offers yet another important element. 
Families of choice is a construct originally 
attributed to Weston (1991), who sought to 



92 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



understand ways that sexual minorities cope with 
the loss of family ties and relationships associ- 
ated with rejection by their families of origin. In 
her qualitative study of lesbians and gay men, 
Weston found that many described a process of 
recreating many of the dynamics typically asso- 
ciated with traditional family models in their 
relationships with intimate partners and networks 
of friends (many of whom also identified as 
sexual minorities). Because Weston completed 
her study more than two decades ago, the role of 
families of choice (similar to the social anthro- 
pology concept of Active kin) in the lives of 
LGBT persons holds a significant place in the 
sexual minority-focused literature (Cronin 2004; 
Grossman et al. 2000; Hughes 2007). While the 
development of families of choice offers both 
positives and negatives in the lives of elderly 
sexual minorities (Croghan et al. 2014), in the 
current context, we are particularly interested in 
how this socially constructed model of family 
relates to the multiplicity of LGBT identities and 
the lived experiences of elderly persons. The 
reader will find further discussion on the func- 
tions of families of choice in many chapters in 
this book. 

The Convergence of Race, Gender, 
Sexuality, Age, and Care Networks 

As we age, the quality and quantity of sources of 
emotional and instrumental support become 
increasingly relevant in our lives. This is true, 
regardless of one’s sexuality. Despite the uni- 
versality of the development of aging-related 
needs and concerns, for elder LGBT individuals 
securing access to stable supportive and affirming 
care networks offers unique challenges and 
opportunities for concern (Addis et al. 2009; 
Brennan-Ing et al. 2014). Care networks are 
constructed of both formal and informal care- 
givers and resources. Understanding the signifi- 
cance of the multiplicity of identities both within 
and between formal and informal care networks 
is highly relevant to efforts to secure positive 
outcomes for aging LGBT persons (Hughes and 



Kentlyn 2011). Thus, to better understand these 
relationships, below, we consider relevant 
aspects of informal and formal care networks 
separately, and then in relation to one another. 



Preparing to Address the Needs 
of Elder LGBT Persons 

In light of multiple sources of evidence indicat- 
ing that sexual minorities experience myriad 
forms of prejudice, discrimination, and even 
victimization in healthcare settings, aging and 
LGBT advocates championed a call for action 
(Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). Other studies 
addressing the preparedness of communities of 
care to meet the needs of elderly LGBT persons 
found that only about one-third of the agencies 
contacted had provided their employees with any 
form of training related to working with LGBT 
persons (Knochel et al. 2011), despite indications 
that trainings addressing culturally competent 
practice with sexual minorities have been shown 
to be effective (Crisp et al. 2008; Porter and 
Krinsky 2014). An examination of the content of 
those trainings provides little evidence that those 
who are developing and/or implementing these 
trainings have done so with any awareness of the 
relevance of the intersectionality of multiple 
identities. Thus, despite some recognition of the 
needs of elder sexual minorities as a monolithic 
entity, any particular needs that might be asso- 
ciated with other aspects of elder LGBT persons’ 
identities are treated as invisible or irrelevant. 

An examination of the responses of 
LGBT-related educational practice in the helping 
professions offers a number of efforts (e.g., 
identification of key competencies and content, 
constructing comprehensive assessment, under- 
stand and articulate ways in which agency, pro- 
gram, and service policies marginalize and 
discriminate against LGBT older adults) to 
increase the cultural competence of future human 
service professionals (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 
2014; Hardacker et al. 2014). In the process, 
students are learning about the unique challenges 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



93 



faced by sexual minorities, the essential role of 
families of choice, and the ways that practitioners 
and agencies can create a more welcoming and 
supportive environment and reduce barriers to 
access (Van Der Bergh and Crisp 2004). And, 
while training in being a culturally competent 
human service professional also challenges stu- 
dents to think about other marginalized and 
stigmatized groups (e.g., the elderly, persons of 
color, immigrants), similar to the bulk of extant 
research, this training is generally constructed 
based on compartmentalized identity components 
rather than the intersectionality of multiple 
identities (Eliason et al. 2010). 

Clearly, formal communities of care are con- 
fronted with substantial challenges in terms of 
being responsive to the needs and well-being of a 
diverse population of elder LGBT persons. With 
this as a foundation, we can begin to consider 
ways we can develop practices, programs, and 
policies that are actually responsive to the needs 
of this heterogeneous population (Knochel et al. 
2011; Leyva et al. 2014; Portz et al. 2014). 
A number of recent studies in various fields of 
the helping professions offer insight into ways to 
transfer this knowledge about the complexity of 
elder LGBT population into effective practice 
(Leyva et al. 2014; Porter and Krinsky 2014; 
Portz et al. 2014). For example, recent studies in 
community nursing practice have demonstrated 
the effectiveness of developing new programs or 
refining existing programs within the community 
through a process of active engagement with 
future/current program participants and service 
users (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2014; Orel 
2004). In other arenas, community-based 
research has given way to models of cultural 
competence that offer some useful techniques for 
increasing availability and accessibility of 
resources (Boulder County Aging Services 2004; 
Moone et al. 2014; Rainbow Train 2003). 

Informal care networks. The preceding pages 
of this chapter offer a sampling of supportive evi- 
dence related to the relevance of various social 
identity factors as influences on mental and phys- 
ical health and access to life-enhancing opportu- 
nities. When we consider the relevance of these 
factors on families of choice, we realize that LGBT 



elders may be particularly disadvantaged because 
challenges that they face may be quite similar to 
those experienced by members of their family of 
choice — a network likely to constitute their circle 
of informal caregivers (Brennan-Ing et al. 2014; 
Gabrielson 2011). Unlike their heterosexual 
counterparts, LGBT elders are likely to share 
commonalities with their informal caregivers, not 
the least of which may be that they are of similar 
ages. Whereas many heterosexuals may be more 
likely to have caregivers across multiple genera- 
tions (e.g., children, nieces/nephews), LGBT 
elders’ informal care networks often consist of 
generational peers (Brotman et al. 2007 ; Fitzgerald 
2013; Shippy 2007). 

Similarities in age may increase the likelihood 
that LGBT elders and their families of choice 
may experience concurrent increases in support 
and resource needs, and so additional strains may 
be experienced by elder LGBT persons of color 
(Glass and Few-Demo 2013; Lehavot et al. 
2009), and sexual minorities who identify as 
transgender (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011; 
Siverskog 2014). For instance, research suggests 
that sexual minorities of color may be more 
likely to experience isolation in old age due to 
lower levels of integration into the LGBT com- 
munity throughout their lives (Lehavot et al. 
2009; Szymanski and Gupta 2009; Woody 
2014). This situation may be compounded by the 
greater likelihood that elder LGBT persons of 
color are living in poverty, lacking 
healthcare-related resources, and experiencing 
higher rates of disease (Fitzgerald 2013; 
Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). These chal- 
lenges may be particularly salient for lesbians, 
bisexual women, and transgender persons who 
may often have lived much of their lives with 
very limited formal and informal support net- 
works (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). Simi- 
larly, aging LGBT persons who are living with 
HIV/AIDS often have informal support networks 
that are largely constituted by peers who are also 
living with HIV/AIDS (Cantor et al. 2009). 
Notably, among LGBT elders living with 
HIV/AIDS, persons of color are disproportion- 
ately represented (Auldridge and Espinoza 
2013). 



94 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



Table 5.1 Suggestions for working with LGBT elders 

Do not assume heterosexuality or gender identity even when you know the client is in a relationship with someone of 
the opposite sex, is married, or has children and grandchildren 

Respect the privacy of clients you think might be LGBT 
Explain and emphasize your agency’s policy on confidentiality 

Make sure intake forms include the category of partner or significant other. For a sex or gender question, add a 
category for transgender 

Put LGBT-friendly language in your brochures and other program materials 

Be aware transgender elders frequently face isolation, negative judgments, and ostracism from health and social 
service professional. Thus, educate yourself and others in your agency about gender diversity 

Respect the gender that transgender clients consider themselves to be by using gender-correct pronouns 
Advertise and promote your programs and services in the LGBT press 
Adapted from Flaxman (2005) 



Formal care networks. The availability of 
culturally competent formal communities of care 
is critical to the well-being of the diverse popu- 
lation of aging LGBT persons. Yet, research 
indicates that many LGBT minorities express 
great concern over needing to access aging ser- 
vices in environments that they either perceived 
to be unwelcoming or where they or their peers 
have already experienced prejudice and dis- 
crimination (Brotman et al. 2007; Gabrielson 
2011; Hughes 2007; Johnson et al. 2005; 
National Senior Citizens Law Center et al. 2010). 
As a result, LGBT elders are more likely to 
forego preventive or needed treatment or care, 
thus increasing the likelihood of experiencing 
more severe physical and mental health conse- 
quences in the future (Tjepkema 2008). Unfor- 
tunately, because these concerns are not simply 
manifested in later life, elder lesbians, gay men, 
bisexual men and women, and transgender per- 
sons often enter old age having experienced a 
disproportionate number of health-related issues 
(Heck et al. 2006; IOM 2011). Research indi- 
cates that such concerns are not without merit. 
A collaborative study involving three prominent 
national organizations focused on aging (Move- 
ment Advancement Project [MAP], Services and 
Advocacy for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and 
Transgender Elders [SAGE], and the Center for 
American Progress [CAP] 2010) documented 
LGBT elders’ experiences of being denied ser- 
vices (or provided inappropriate services), and 
the marginalization of same-sex partners in the 



decision-making process. Similarly, in 2011, 
Fredriksen-Goldsen and colleagues reported that 
13 % of their respondents (adults age 50 and 
over) had experienced some form of discrimi- 
nation or victimization within a healthcare 
setting. 

Intersection of informal and formal care 
networks. Given the centrality of families of 
choice in the lives of many LGBT elders, it is 
particularly important for human service pro- 
viders and agencies to develop a comprehensive 
understanding of informal care networks. With 
studies indicating that elder sexual minorities are 
more likely to turn to families of choice for 
support, while also suggesting that a significant 
number of elder lesbians, gay men, and trans- 
gender persons are likely to be single and often 
isolated, human service professionals play a 
significant role in the lives of LGBT elders. 
Where informal networks are available, service 
providers and policies need to serve as a bridge 
connecting these critical aspects of the person’s 
overall care network. Additionally, by being 
aware of the greater likelihood that LGBT elders 
may be less likely to have a either a traditional 
family network and/or family of choice network 
available for support, human service providers 
can reach out to sexual minorities to assure that 
they are not isolated and receive the care and 
support that they need as they age (Brennan-Ing 
et al. 2014). In addition, human service providers 
need to be well versed in appropriate communi- 
cation strategies with LGBT elders. Flaxman 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



95 



(2005) identified practical suggestions to that end 
(see Table 5.1). 



Summary 

People throughout the world have multiple and 
intersection identities. Other attributes include 
racial and gender identities, sexual orientation or 
gender identity, belief systems, and aging. In this 
chapter, we highlighted a seemingly obvious, yet 
often ignored, reality; elderly lesbians, gay men, 
bisexuals, and transgender persons are made up 
of a complex and fluid combination of social 
identities that have been influenced by their life 
experiences, which continue to reconfigure as 
they age (Abes et al. 2007; Azmitia 2014; 
McCall 2005). The presence of ageism, sexism, 
racism, ethnocentrism, classism, and heterosex- 
ism, among other sources of discrimination, has 
contributed to myriad inequities in the lives of 
LGBT elders. The consequences of those past 
experiences, as well as current ones, are mani- 
fested on a daily basis (Meyer 1995). As has 
already been documented in a number of studies, 
we anticipate that these consequences will con- 
tinue to be manifested in differences in disease 
rates, life chances and opportunities, and overall 
quality of life across the life course. Although we 
are unlikely to eliminate these sources of inequity 
any time soon, our awareness of them should be 
a catalyst for change (Crisp et al. 2008; Van Den 
Bergh and Crisp 2004). 

Intersectionality as a conceptual framework 
for understanding the complex identities of 
LGBT elders offers a useful heuristic tool with 
which to build a bridge between the processes of 
conceptualization and program development in 
the helping professions. Intersectionality invites 
us to consider not only the categories associated 
with different aspects of identity but also the 
impact associated with privileges and oppres- 
sions that correspond with those categories 
(Garry 2011). As a body of knowledge, extant 
scholarship on intersectionality reflects the 
influence of many disciplines. As research moves 
forward with the guidance of multidisciplinary 



teams. Bowleg (2008) argues that we will garner 
the benefits of creative approaches to conceptu- 
alization, measurement and analyses that better 
capture the complex and fluid model of social 
identity that is more representative LGBT lives. 
For example, while research is constrained by 
our ability to develop measures that are reliable 
and valid indicators of the aspects of identity we 
wish to consider, increasingly sophisticated sta- 
tistical methods offer techniques for simulta- 
neously considering these factors in complex 
ways more closely aligned with human experi- 
ence (Stirratt et al. 2007). As we increase our 
ability to capture evidence of the intersectionality 
of identity, sophisticated research will offer 
greater insight into how we might best develop 
programs that avoid the compartmentalization of 
identity components in favor of programs that 
holistically embrace the complexity of LGBT 
elders’ identities (Bowleg 2008; Weber and 
Parra-Medina 2003). Notably, Stirratt et al. 
(2007) acknowledge that while statistical analy- 
sis allows us to model a multidimensional view 
of the intersectionality of identities, we are still 
challenged to capture the contextual variation 
that contributes to the fluidity of identities 
(Deaux and Martin 2003; Stirratt et al. 2007). 
Environments that construct and nurture norms 
and values that support hierarchical views of 
race, ethnicity, age, sex, and sexuality, among 
other targets for differential treatment, contribute 
to the development and maintenance of social 
identity. Consequently, we have further evidence 
of the critical role that advocacy for social 
change can play in the elder LGBT persons lives. 



Learning Activities 

Self-Check Questions 

1. Why is it important to understand why and 
how people are more than the sum of their 
parts? 

2. What are some of the limitations of research 
on the LGBT population related to identity 
intersectionality within this population? 



96 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



3. What are the fundamental assumptions used 
by social scientists to guide the study of 
identities? 

4. What types of intersectionalities should be 
addressed when working with LGBT elders? 
Why are these important? 

5. What are presenting problems between for- 
mal and informal care networks when work- 
ing with LGBT elders? 

Experiential Exercises 

1. Develop a survey to determine how LGBT 
elders view their identities. Potential question 
can include how they define their identity 
(one vs. multiple), how they rank their iden- 
tities, how elements of their identity fit with 
the majority or dominant group, and so forth. 

2. “Walk a mile in an LGBT person’s shoes” — 

(a) imagine yourself as an LGBT older per- 
son, (b) think of issues that you will have 
address because of your intersection of iden- 
tities (e.g., what are the cultural concerns, 
what are the communication concerns), and 
(c) what types of strategies do you recom- 
mend to address these concerns. 

3. As a human service provider, develop a pro- 
tocol for your work setting that is inclusive of 
LGBT elders, keeping in mind that their 
multiple identities must be addressed. 

Multiple-Choice Questions 

1. An individual who is a lesbian, Latino, and 
age 70 is considered to be which of the 
following? 

(a) A triad member 

(b) Risk of triple jeopardy 

(c) Nexus of sexual orientation 

(d) Decreased risk of discrimination 

2. Which of the following refers to the move- 
ment through various activities, interactions, 
and cognitive processes over the course of 
time in which different aspects of one’s 
identity may be more or less salient? 



(a) Single identities 

(b) Compounded identities 

(c) Fluidity of identity 

(d) Particular identity 

3. Which of the following is attributed to dif- 
ferences in mental, physical, and economic 
well-being due to shouldering the weight of 
oppression disproportionately? 

(a) Multiple stigmatized identities 

(b) Residence in certain regions of the 
country 

(c) Type of employment 

(d) Multiple personality disorders 

4. Which of the following is at the heart of 
feminist intersectionality theory? 

(a) Isms can be understood in separate parts 

(b) Isms must be understood as the result of 
complex intersection of different 
identities 

(c) Isms can be viewed in isolation 

(d) Isms can best be understood as additive to 
other identities 

5. Which of the following is particularly 
important for human service providers to 
understand in working with older sexual 
minorities? 

(a) The centrality of families of choice 

(b) Greater likelihood that KGBT elders may 
be less likely to have a traditional family 
network 

(c) LGBT elders are likely to be single and 
often isolated 

(d) All of the above 

(e) None of the above 

6. Which of the following is an accurate 
description of identity? 

(a) Identities are innate qualities 

(b) Identities are socially constructed 

(c) Identities are fixed and static 

(d) Identities are unidimensional 

7. Which of the following is a good strategy for 
human service providers working with 
LGBT elders? 

(a) It is important to share their identity with 
other service providers 




5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



97 



(b) Exclude LGBT — specific language in 
agency brochures and materials as not to 
embarrass them 

(c) Do not assume heterosexuality or gender 
identity when a client is married or have 
children or grandchildren 

(d) Avoid using categories other than male or 
female sex or gender question to protect 
client confidentiality 

8. Who is credited with construction of the 
concept of families of choice? 

(a) Albert Ellison 

(b) Vivian Cass 

(c) Sigmund Freud 

(d) Kath Weston 

9. Which of the following is an organizing tool 
for understanding how human beings create 
and maintain a sense of self? 

(a) Identity 

(b) Personality 

(c) Family of origin 

(d) Family of choice 

10. Which of the following best describe human 
service agencies preparedness to work with 
LGBT Elders? 

(a) Highly qualified 

(b) Inadequately qualified 

(c) Interdisciplinary trained 

(d) Culturally competent 

Key 

1- B 

2- C 

3- A 

4- B 

5- D 

6- B 

7- C 

8- D 

9- A 

10- B 



Resources 

Center for Intersectionality & Social Policy 
Studies : www .intersectionality-center. org . 
Lee, D., & Noble, M. (2014). “ Addressing 
whole identities or fragmented lives ” An 
introductory service provision and employer 
guide to multiple identities and discrimina- 
tion in Northern Ireland, www. rainbow- 
project. org/assets/publications/ 
addressingwholeidentitiesorfragmentedlives. 
pdf. 

Nettles, R., & Balter, R. (eds.). (2012). Mul- 
tiple minority identities: Applications for 
practice, research, and training. New York, 
NY: Springer. 

Vakalahi, H. F. O., Simpson, G. M., & Gi- 
unta, N. (Eds.). (2014). The collective spirit of 
aging across cultures. New York, NY : 
Springer. 



References 

Abes, E. S., Jones, S. R., & McEwen, M. K. (2007). 
Reconceptualizing the model of multiple dimensions 
of identity: The role of meaning-making capacity in 
the construction of multiple identities. Journal of 
College Student Development, 48(1), 1-22. 

Addis, S„ Davies. M„ Greene, G„ MacBride-Stewart, S., 
& Shepherd, M. (2009). The health, social care and 
housing needs of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen- 
der older people: a review of the literature. Health and 
Social Care in the Community, 17(6), 647-658. 
doi:10.1111/j. 1365-2524.2009. 00866.x. 

Albelda, R„ Badgett, M. V. L., Schneebaum, A., & Gates, 
G. (2009). Poverty in the lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
community. Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute. 

Auldridge, A., & Espinoza, R. (2013). Health equity and 
LGBT elders of color: Recommendations for policy 
and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications 
Inc. 

Averett, P., Yoon, I., & Jenkins, C. L. (2012). Older 
lesbian sexuality: Identity, sexual behavior, and the 
impact of aging. The Journal of Sex Research, 49(5), 
495-507. 

Azmitia, M. (2014). Reflections on the cultural lenses of 
identity development. In K. C. McLean & M. Syed 
(Eds.), The Oxford handbook of identity development 
(pp. 286-296). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 



98 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



Balsam, K. F., Molina, Y„ Beadnell. B.. Simoni, J., & 
Walters, K. (2011). Measuring multiple minority 
stress: The LGBT people of color microaggressions 
scale. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psy- 
chology, 17(2), 163-174. 

Banks, M. E. (2012). Multiple minority identities and 
mental health: Social and research implications of 
diversity within and between groups. In R. Nettles & 
R. Balter (Eds.), Multiple minority identities: Appli- 
cations for practice, research, and training (pp. 35- 
58). New York: NY, Springer Publishing Company. 

Blumstein, P„ & Schwartz, P. (1983). American couples: 
Money, work, sex. New York: William Morrow. 

Boulder County Aging Services. (2004). Project visibil- 
ity: Awareness and sensitivity training manual for 
sendee providers of lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender elders. Boulder: CO: Author. 

Bowleg, L. (2008). WhenBlack+Lesbian+Woman^ Black 
Lesbian woman: The methodological challenges of 
qualitative and quantitative intersectionality research. 
Sex Role, 59, 312-325. 

Bowleg, L., Huang, J„ Brooks, K.. Black, A., & 
Burkholder, G. (2003). Triple jeopardy and beyond: 
Multiple minority stress and resilience among black 
lesbians. Journal of Lesbian Studies, 7(4), 87-108. 

Brennan-Ing, M„ Seidel, L., Larson, B., & Karpiak, S. E. 
(2014). Social care networks and LGBT older adults: 
Challenges for the future. Journal of Homosexuality, 
61(1), 21-52. 

Brotman, S., Ryan, B., Collins, S., Chamberland, L., 
Cormier, R., Julien, D. et al. (2007). Coming out to 
care: Caregivers of gay and lesbian seniors in Canada. 
Gerontologist, 47(4), 490-503. 

Brown, M. T., & Grossman, B. R. (2014). Same-sex 
sexual relationships in the national social life, health 
and aging project: Making as case for data collection. 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 57(2-4), 108— 
129. 

Cantor, M. H„ Brennan, M„ & Karpiak, S. E. (2009). The 
social support network of older people with HIV. 
In M. Brennan, S. E. Karpiak, R. A. Shippy, & M. 
H. Cantor (Eds.), Older adults with HIV: An in-depth 
examination of an emerging population (pp. 61-74). 
Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers. 

Case, K. A., Iuzzini, J., & Hopkins, M. (2012). Systems 
of privilege: Intersections, awareness, and applica- 
tions. Journal of Social Issues, 68, 1-10. doi: 10.1111/ 
j. 1540-4560.201 1.01732.x. 

Collins, P. H. (1990). Black feminist thought. Boston: 
Unwin Hyman. 

Collins, P. H. (2000). Black feminist thought (2nd ed.). 
New York, NY: Routledge. 

Collins, P. H. (2005). An entirely different world: 
Rethinking the sociology of race and ethnicity. In C. 
Calhoun, B. Turner, & C. Rojeck (Eds.), Handbook of 
sociology (pp. 208-222). London: Sage Publications 

Inc. 

Crenshaw, K. (1993). Mapping the margins: Intersection- 
ality, identity politics, and violence against women of 
color. Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241-1279. 



Crisp, C., Wayland, S., & Gordon, T. (2008). Older gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual adults: Tools for age-competent 
and gay affirmative practice. Journal of Gay & 
Lesbian Social Sendees, 20(1-2), 5-29. 

Croghan, C. F„ Moone, R. P., & Olson, A. M. (2014). 
Friends, family, and caregiving among midlife and 
older lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender adults. 
Journal of Homosexuality, 6/(1), 79-102. 

Cronin, A. (2004). Sexuality in gerontology: A hetero- 
normative presence, a queer absence. In S. O. Daatland 
& S. Biggs (Eds.), Ageing and diversity: Multiple 
pathways and cultural migrations (pp. 107-122). 
Bristol: Policy Press. 

Cronin, A., & King, A. (2010). Power, inequality, and 
identification: Exploring diversity and intersectionality 
amongst older LGB adults. Sociology, 44(5), 876- 
892. 

Deaux, K., & Martin, D. (2003). Interpersonal networks 
and social categories: Specifying levels of context in 
identity processes. Social Psychology Quarterly, 66 
(2), 101-117. 

DeBlaere, C„ Brewster, M. E., Sarkees, A., & Moradi, B. 
(2010). Conducting research with LGB people of 
color: Methodological challenges and strategies. The 
Counseling Psychologist, 38(3), 331-362. 

Diamond, L. M. (2005). A new view of lesbian subtypes: 
Stable versus fluid identity trajectories over an 8-year 
period. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29(2), 1 19— 
128. 

Diaz, R. M., Ayala, G„ Bein, E., Jenne, J., & Marin, B. V. 
(2001). The impact of homophobia, poverty, and 
racism on the mental health of Latino gay men. 
American Journal of Public Health, 91, 927-932. 

Diaz, R. M., Peterson, J. L., & Choi, K. (2008). Social 
discrimination and health outcomes in African Amer- 
ican, Latino, and Asian/Pacific Islander gay men. In R. 
J. Wolitski, R. Stall, & R. O. Valdiserri (Eds.), 
Unequal opportunity: Health disparities affecting gay 
and bisexual men in the United States (pp. 327-354). 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 

Eliason, M. J., Dibble, S., & DeJoseph, J. (2010). 
Nursing’s silence on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender issues: The need for emancipatory efforts. 
Advances in Nursing Science, 33(3), 206-218. 

Ferguson, A. D., Carr, G., & Snitman, A. (2014). 
Intersections of race-ethnicity, gender, and sexual 
minority communities. In M. L. Miville & A. 
D. Ferguson (Eds.), Handbook of race-ethnicity and 
gender in psychology (pp. 45-63). New York, NY: 
Springer Science. 

Fish, J. (2008). Navigating queer street: Researching the 
intersections of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans 
(LGBT) identities in health research. Sociological 
Research Online, 13(1), 12. http://www.socresonline. 
org.uk/13/l/12.html doi: 10.5 153/sro. 1652. 

Fitzgerald, E. (2013). No golden years at the end of the 
rainbow: How a lifetime of discrimination compounds 
economic and health disparities for LGBT older 
adults. Washington, D.C.: National Gay and Lesbian 
Task Force. 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



99 



Flaxman, N. (2005). Practical suggestions for working 
with LGBT elders. Retrieved January 18, 2015 from 
www.lavenderseniors.org/wp-content/uploads/pdf/ 
PracticalSuggestionsforWorkingwithLGBTElders.pdf. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. W., FIoy-EUis, C. P., Goldsen, J., 
Emlet, C. A., & Plooyman, N. R. (2014). Creating a 
vision for the future: Key competencies and strategies 
for culturally competent practice with lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) older adults in the 
health and human services. Journal of Gerontological 
Social Work, 57(2^1), 80-107. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H.-J., Emlet, C. A., 
Muraco, A., Erosheva, E. A., FIoy-Ellis, C. P., et al. 
(2011). The aging and health report: Disparities and 
resilience among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans- 
gender older adults. Seattle, WA: Institute for Mul- 
tigenerational Flealth. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., & Muraco, A. (2010). Aging 
and sexual orientation: A 25-year review of the 
literature. Research on Aging, 52(3), 372^-13. 

Fukuyama, M. A., & Ferguson, A. D. (2000). Lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual people of color: Understanding 
cultural complexity and managing multiple oppres- 
sions. In R. M. Perez & K. A. DeBord (Eds.), 
Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy with 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients (pp. 81-105). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological 

Association. 

Fuss, D. (1989). Essentially speaking: Feminism, nature, 
and difference. New York: Routledge. 

Gabrielson, M. (2011). “We have to create family”: Aging 
support issues and needs among older lesbians. 
Journal of Gay and Lesbian Social Sendees, 23(3), 
1-13. 

Garry, A. (2011). Intersectionality, metaphors, and the 
multiplicity of gender. Hypatia, 26(4), 826-850. 

Gates, G. J. (2006). Same-sex couples and the gay, 
lesbian, bisexual population: New estimates from the 
American Community Survey. The Williams Institute. 
UCLA: The Williams Institute. Retrieved from: http:// 
escholarship.org/uc/item/8h08t0zf. 

Glass, V. Q., & Few-Demo, A. L. (2013). Complexities of 
informal social support arrangements for Black lesbian 
couples. Family Relations, 62(5), 714-726. 

Green, R. J., & Mitchell, V. (2008). Gay and lesbian 
couples in therapy: Minority stress, relational ambi- 
guity, and families of choice. In A. S. Gurman (Ed.), 
Clinical handbook of couple therapy (4th ed., 
pp. 662-680). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 

Greene, B. (1995). Lesbian women of color: Triple 
jeopardy. In B. Greene (Ed.), Women of color: 
Integrating ethnic and gender identities in psycho- 
therapy (pp. 389^427). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press. 

Grossman, A. H., D’Augelli, A. R., & Flershberger, S. L. 
(2000). Social support networks of lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual adults 60 years of age and older. 77ie Journal 
of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences & Social 
Sciences, 55(3), P171-P179. 



Hancock, A.-M. (2007). When multiplication doesn’t 
equal quick addition: Examining intersectionality as a 
research paradigm. Perspectives on Politics, 5(1), 63- 
79. 

Hardacker, C. T.. Rubenstein, B., Hotton, A., & Houl- 
berg, M. (2014). Adding silver to the rainbow: the 
development of nurses’ health education about LGBT 
elders (HEALE) cultural competency curriculum. 
Journal of Nursing Management, 22(2), 257-266. 

Heck, J. E., Sell, R. L., & Gorin, S. S. (2006). Health care 
access among individuals involved in same-sex rela- 
tionships. American Journal of Public Health, 96, 
1111-1118. 

Hillman, J., & Hinrichsen, G. A. (2014). Promoting an 
affirming, competent practice with older lesbian and 
gay adults. Professional Psychology: Research and 
Practice, 45(4), 269-277 . 

Hooks, B. (1984). Feminist theory: From margin to 
center. Cambridge, MA: South End Press. 

Hooks, B. (1990). Yearning: Race, gender, and cultural 
politics. Cambridge, MA: South End Press. 

Howard, J. A. (2000). Social psychology of identities. 
Annual Review of Sociology, 26, 367-393. 

Huang, Y., Brewster, M. E., Moradi, B., Goodman, M. B., 
Wiseman, M. C., & Martin, A. (2010). Content 
analysis of literature about LGB people of color: 
1998-2007. The Counseling Psychologist, 38(3), 363- 
396. 

Hughes, M. M. (2007). Familiar theories from a new 
perspective: The implications of a longitudinal 
approach to women in politics research. Politics & 
Gender, 3(3), 370-378. 

Hughes, M., & Kentlyn, S. (2011). Older LGBT people’s 
care networks and communities of practice: A brief 
note. International Social Work, 54(3), 436^144. 

Hunter, S. (2007). Coming out and disclosure: LGBT 
persons across the life span. New York: Haworth. 

Institute of Medicine. (2011). The health of lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and transgender people: Building a founda- 
tion for better understanding. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. 

Jackson III, B. W. (2012). Black identity development: 
Influences of culture and social oppression. In C. 
Wijeyesinghe & B. W. Jackson III (Eds.), New 
perspectives on racial identity development: Integrat- 
ing emerging frameworks (2nd., pp. 33-50). New 
York, NY: New York University Press. 

Jenkins, R. (2014). Social identity. New York, NY: 
Routledge. 

Jeong, J. Y., & Home, S. G. (2009). Relationship 
characteristics of women in interracial same-sex 
relationships. Journal of Homosexuality, 56(4), 443- 
456. 

Johnson, M. J., Jackson, N. C., Amette, J. K., & Koffman, 
S. D. (2005). Gay and lesbian perceptions of discrim- 
ination in retirement care facilities. Journal of Homo- 
sexuality, 49, 83-102. 

Jones, S. R. (1997). Voices of identity and difference: A 
qualitative exploration of the multiple dimensions of 



100 



M.D. Otis and D.A. Harley 



identity development in women college students. 
Journal of College Student Development, 38, 376- 
386. 

Jones, S. R., & McEwen, M. K. (2000). A conceptual 
model of multiple dimensions of identity. Journal of 
College Student Development, 41(4), 405-414. 

Kertzner, R. M. (2001). The adult life course and 
homosexual identity in midlife gay men. Annual 
Review of Sex Research, 12, 75-92. 

Kertzner. R. M., Meyer, I. H., Frost, D. M., & Stirratt, M. 
J. (2009). Social and psychological well-being in 
lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals: The effects of race, 
gender, age, and sexual identity. American Journal of 
Orthopsychiatry, 79(4), 500-510. 

Knapp, G. A. (2005). Race, class, gender: Reclaiming 
baggage in fast travelling theories. European Journal 
of Women’s Studies, 12(3), 249-265. 

Knochel, K. A., Crogan, C. F., Moore, R. P., & Quam, 
J. (2011). Ready to serve! The aging network and 
LGB and T older adults. Washington, DC: National 
Association of Area Agencies of Aging. 

Kurdek, L. A. (2001). Differences between 
heterosexual-nonparent couples, and gay, lesbian, 
and heterosexual-parent couples. Journal of Family 
Issues, 22, 727-754. 

Kurdek, L. A. (2004). Gay men and lesbians: The family 
context. In M. Coleman & L. H. Ganong (Eds.), 
Handbook of contemporary families: Considering the 
past, contemplating thefiiture (pp. 96-115). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Lehavot, K., Balsam, K. F„ & Ibrahim-Wells, G. D. 
(2009). Redefining the American quilt: Definitions 
and experiences of community among ethnically 
diverse lesbian and bisexual women. Journal of 
Community Psychology, 37, 439^-58. doi:10.1002/ 
jcop.20305. 

Leyva, V. L., Breshears, E. M., & Ringstad, R. (2014). 
Assessing the efficacy of LGBT cultural competency 
training for aging services providers in California’s 
Central Valley. Journal of Gerontological Social 
Work, 57(2^1), 335-348. 

Long, J. (2008). Interracial and intercultural lesbian couples: 
The incredibly tme adventures of two women in love. 
Couples & Relationship Therapy, 2(2/3), 85-101. 

Malouff, J. M., Thorsteinsson, E. B„ Schutte, N. S., 
Bhullar, N., & Rooke, S. E. (2010). The five factor 
model of personality and relationship satisfaction of 
intimate partners: A meta-analysis. Journal of 

Research in Personality, 44, 124-127. 

McCall, L. (2005). The complexity of intersectionality. 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 30 
(3), 1771-1800. 

McGibbon, E„ & McPherson, C. (2011). Applying 
intersectionality & complexity theory to address the 
social determinants of women’s health. Women’s 
Health & Public Policy, 10(1), 59-86. 

Meyer, I. (1995). Minority stress and mental health in gay 
men. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 56(1), 
38-56. 



Meyer, I. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental 
health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: 
Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psycholog- 
ical Bulletin, 129, 674—697 . 

Meyer, FI., & Johnston, T. R. (2014). The National 
Resource Center on LGBT Aging provides critical 
training to aging service providers. Journal of Geron- 
tological Social Work, 57, 407-412. 

Meyer, I. H., Schwartz, S., & Frost, D. M. (2008). Social 
patterning of stress and coping: Does disadvantaged 
status confer excess exposure and fewer coping 
resources? Social Science and Medicine, 67, 368-379. 

Moone, R. P„ Cagle, J. G., Croghan, C. F., & Smith, 
J. (2014). Working with LGBT older adults: an 
assessment of employee training practices, needs, 
and preferences of senior service organizations in 
Minnesota. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 57 
(2-4), 322-334. doi:10.1080/01634372.2013.843630. 

Moore, M. R. (2010). Articulating a politics of (multiple) 
identities: LGBT sexuality and inclusion in Black 
community life. Du Bois Review, 7(2), 1-20. 

Moradi, B„ Mohr, J. J., Worthington, R. L., & Fassinger, 
R. E. (2009). Counseling psychology research on 
sexual (orientation) minority issues: Conceptual and 
methodological challenges and opportunities. Journal 
of Counseling Psychology, 56(1), 5-22. 

Movement Advancement Project, Services & Advocacy 
for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, & Transgender Elders, & 
Center for American Progress. (2010) LGBT older 
adults: Facts at a glance. Can be accessed from: 
http://lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/resource.cfm?r= 
22 . 

National Hispanic Council on Aging. (2014). In their own 
words: A needs assessment of Hispanic OGBT older 
adults. Retrieved January 18, 2015 from www. 
lgbtagingcenter.org/resources/pdfs/ 

InTheirO wn W ords .pdf . 

National Senior Citizens Law Center et al. (2010). Stories 
from the field: LGBT older adults in long-term care 
facilities. Washington, DC: National Senior Citizens 
Law Center. Retrieved from: http://www. 

lgbtlongtermcare.org. 

Omi, M„ & Winant, H. (1994). Racial formation in the 
United States from the 1960s to the 1990s. New York, 
NY: Routledge. 

Orel, N. A. (2004). Gay, lesbian, and bisexual elders: 
Expressed needs and concerns across focus groups. 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 43(2/3), 57- 
77. 

Otis, M. D., Rostosky, S. S., Riggle, E. D. B., & Hamrin, 
R. (2006). Stress and relationship quality in same-sex 
couples. Journal of Social and Personal Relation- 
ships, 23, 81-99. doi: 10. 1 177/0265407506060179. 

Pinderhughes, E. B. (2002). African American marriage 
in the 20th century. Family Process, 41(2), 269-282. 

Porter, K. E., & Krinsky, L. (2014). Do LGBT aging 
trainings etfectuate positive change in mainstream 
elder service providers? Journal of Homosexuality, 61 
(1), 197-216. 



5 The Intersection of Identities of LGBT Eiders ... 



101 



Portz, J. D., Retrum, J. H., Wright, L. A., Boggs, J. M., 
Wilkins, S., Grimm, C., et al. (2014). Assessing 
capacity for providing culturally competent services to 
LGBT older adults. Journal of Gerontological Social 
Work, 57 ( 2-4), 305-321. 

Purdie-Vaughns, V., & Eibach, R. P. (2008). Intersec- 
tional invisibility: The distinctive advantages and 
disadvantages of multiple subordinate-group identi- 
ties. Sex Roles, 59(5-6), 377-391. 

Raetz, T., & Lease, J. (2002). The construction of identity. 
Unpublished manuscript. Athens: University of 

Georgia. 

Rainbow Train. (2003). Rainbow train: Sexual/gender 
minority sensitivity trainings for providers of health 
and social services for elders [Brochure], Seattle, 
WA: Author. 

Robinson-Wood, T. (2009). The convergence of race, 
ethnicity, and gender: Multiple identities in counseling 
(3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill. 

Roccas, S., & Brewer, M. B. (2002). Social identity 
complexity. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, (5(2), 88-106. 

SAGE. (2013). Health equity and LGBT elders of color: 
Recommendations for policy and practice. Retrieved 
January 18, 2015 from http://sageusa.org/resources/ 
publications.cfm?lD=203. 

Schope, R. (2005). Who’s afraid of growing old?: Gay 
and lesbian perceptions of aging. Journal of Geron- 
tological Social Work, 45, 23-39. 

Settles, 1. H. (2006). Use of an intersectional framework 
to understand black women’s racial and gender 
identities. Sex Roles, 54, 589-601. 

Settles, I. H., & Buchanan, N. T. (2014). Multiple groups, 
multiple identities, and intersectionality. In V. 
Benet-Martinez & Y. Hong (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of multicultural identity (pp. 160-180). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Shippy, R. A. (2007). We cannot do it alone: The impact 
of informal support and stressors in older gay, lesbian 
and bisexual caregivers. Journal of Gay and Lesbian 
Social Services, 18( 3/4), 39-51. 

Siverskog, A. (2014). “They just don’t have a clue”: 
Transgender aging and implications for social work. 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 57(2-4), 386- 
406. 

Social Security Administration. (2011). Annual statistical 
supplement to the social security bulletin, 2010. 



Retrieved January 18, 2015 from http://www.ssa. 
gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement. 

Stirratt, M. J., Meyer, I. H., Ouellette, S. C., & Gara, M. 
A. (2007). Measuring identity multiplicity and inter- 
sectionality: Hierarchical classes analysis (HICLAS) 
of sexual, racial, and gender identities. Self and 
Identity, 7(1), 89-111. 

Szymanski, D. M. (2005). Heterosexism and sexism as 
correlates of psychological distress in lesbians. Jour- 
nal of Counseling and Development, 83, 355-360. 

Szymanski, D. M., & Gupta, A. (2009). Examining the 
relationship between multiple internalized oppressions 
and African American lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
questioning persons’ self-esteem and psychological 
distress. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56(1), 
110-118. 

Tjepkema, M. (2008). Health care use among gay, 
lesbian, and bisexual Canadians. Health Reports, 19 
(1), 53-64. 

Tomstam, L. (2005 ). Gerotranscedence: A developmental 
theory of positive aging. New York, NY: Springer 
Publishing Company. 

Van Den Bergh, N., & Crisp, C. (2004). Defining 
culturally competent practice with sexual minorities: 
Implications for social work education and practice. 
Journal of Social Work Education, 40(2), 221-238. 

Van Sluytman, L. G., & Torres, D. (2014). Hidden or 
uninvited? A content analysis of elder LGBT of color 
literature in gerontology. Journal of Gerontological 
Social Work, 57( 2 — 4), 130-160. 

Weber, L. (1998). A conceptual framework for under- 
standing race, class, gender, and sexuality. Psychology 
of Women Quarterly, 22, 13-22. 

Weber, L., & Parra-Medina, D. (2003). Intersectionality 
and women's health: Charting a path to eliminating 
health disparities. Advances in Gender Research, 7, 
181-230. 

Weston, K. (1991). Families we choose: Lesbians, gays, 
kinship. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Woody, I. (2014). Aging out: A qualitative exploration of 
ageism and heterosexism among aging African Amer- 
ica lesbians and gay men. Journal of Homosexuality, 
61, 145-165. doi: 10. 1080/009 18369.2013. 835603. 

Young, R. M., & Meyer, I. H. (2005). The trouble with 
“MSM” and “WSW”: Erasure of the sexual-minority 
person in public health discourse. American Journal of 
Public Health, 95(7), 1 144-1 149. 



Part II 



Multicultural, International, and Select 
Populations of LGBT Elders 




African-American and Black LGBT 
Elders 

Debra A. Harley 




Abstract 

This chapter discusses issues relevant to African-American and 
Black LGBT elders, including historical influences that frame these 
issues, demographic and cultural contexts, and sociopolitical consider- 
ations that impact policy and service delivery. This chapter describes the 
cultural capital of the African-American community and examines Black 
homo-bi-transphobia, the intersection of identities is presented along with 
multiple oppressions and gay racism, and the ways in which historical 
hostilities influence help-seeking by older African-American LGBT 
persons are presented. Information is presented on health disparities and 
services. The ways in which service models nationally, cross-culturally, 
and multidisciplinarily work to promote effective interventions are 
discussed. Finally, the impact of policy on African-American LGBT 
elders is presented within the context in which by this population 
perceives services. 



Keywords 

African-American • Aging • Black • Health disparities • Intersectionality • 



LGBT 



Overview 

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss issues 
relevant to African-American and Black LGBT 
elders, including historical influences that frame 
these issues, demographic and cultural contexts. 



D.A. Harley (13) 

University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA 
e-mail: dharlOO@email.uky.edu 



and sociopolitical considerations that impact pol- 
icy and service delivery. This chapter begins with 
information on characteristics that comprise older 
African-American and Black adults. Next, rele- 
vant research is infused throughout the chapter. 
The chapter then describes the cultural capital of 
the African-American community, including 
perceptions about homosexuality and gender 
nonconformity, how elders are viewed, issues of 
acculturation and assimilation, and strength-based 
concepts. Subsequently, the chapter examines 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_6 



105 




106 



D.A. Harley 



Black homophobia and other phobias and “isms” 
about sexual identity, including the attitudes and 
practices of the Black Church toward sexual 
minorities. Because African-American LGBT 
elders have multiple positionalities in society, the 
intersection of identities is presented along with 
multiple oppressions and gay racism. The ways in 
which historical hostilities influence help-seeking 
by older African-American LGBT persons are 
presented. In addition, information is presented on 
health service disparities of African-American 
LGBT elders. The chapter examines ways in 
which service models nationally, cross-culturally, 
and multidisciplinary work to promote effective 
interventions. Finally, given that the manner in 
which services are perceived is, in part, influenced 
by policy, the impact of policy on 
African-American and Black LGBT elders is 
presented within the context. The reader is 
reminded that the information in this chapter is not 
presented as absolute or definitive of all 
African-Americans or Black people. There is great 
intercultural, intracultural, and cross-cultural 
diversity within African-American, African, 
Caribbean, and other populations of African 
descent. 

Learning Objectives 

By the end of the chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 

1. Identify relevant characteristics of 
African-American culture that influence atti- 
tudes and behaviors. 

2. Discuss the concepts of homo-bi-transphobia 
in the African-American/Black community. 

3. Describe sociocultural issues, healthcare dis- 
parities, and health-seeking patterns of 
African-American LGBT elders. 

4. Explain service models and intervention 
strategies that are effective with 
African-American/Black LGBT elders. 

5. List areas in which policy development is 
needed to address concerns of 
African-American/Black LGBT elders. 



Introduction 

An accurate estimate of the number of 
African-American and Black LGBT persons is not 
known, and the number of elderly LGBT among 
them is unknown because of an inability to 
determine an exact number of the total lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning 
(LGBTQ) population of all ages in the USA. 
Approximately 3.4 % of Americans identify 
LGBT and 4.6 % of African-Americans. 
Regardless of ethnicity, younger Americans are 
more likely to identify as LGBT, and among those 
aged 30-64, LGBT identity declines with age 
(Gates and Newport 2012). It is difficult to glean 
how many African-American or Black LGBT 
persons are elderly because of reasons such as the 
rate of non-disclosure, the limited research on 
sexual minorities of color, a lack of national sur- 
veys that ask about sexual orientation or gender 
identity, reluctance to coming out, and of variation 
in responses to surveys due to the methodologies 
used (Bostwick 2007; DeBlaere et al. 2010). 
However, the number of LGBT older adults is 
projected to more than double in size to approxi- 
mately 3 million by 2050 (2009). In 2012, 
African-Americans made up 9 % of the older 
population and the African-American older pop- 
ulation is projected to increase to 12 % by 2060 
(Administration for Community Living 2012). 
The rapid growth of the aging population in the 
USA offers the opportunity to embrace diversity 
as it appears at all stages of life (National Hispanic 
Council on Aging 2013), and “understanding their 
differences in health and addressing disparities are 
critically important for improving the nation’s 
overall health and well-being” (Today’s Research 
on Aging 2013, p. 1). 

As the reader proceeds in this chapter, one is 
informed that the terms African-American and 
Black are used sometimes interchangeably to 
reflect common themes across groups. At other 
times, the terms are used separately to reflect 
distinctiveness between groups. 

African-Americans are descended from slaves 
who were brought to America during the eigh- 
teenth and nineteenth centuries. The term Black 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



107 



is more inclusive and is comprised of diverse 
groups of ethnicities and cultures, including 
those who immigrated from Africa and the 
Caribbean (Welch 2003) and may include mul- 
tiple heritage individuals with Black ancestry 
(e.g., biracial, multiracial) who experience life 
and development differently from monoracial 
minority and majority individuals (Henriksen and 
Paladino 2009). Persons of African descent may 
identify as African-American, Afro-American, 
Black Hispanic, Black Caribbean, Black Ameri- 
can, and Black African (Lewis and Marshall 
2012). It is not uncommon for older 
African-Americans to refer to themselves as 
Colored , Negro (both terms were used deroga- 
torily), or Black, which are terms that were 
commonly used to refer to them for a substantial 
portion of their lives. These terms emphasize 
skin color, not cultural heritage (Paniagua 2014). 
In addition, while it is acceptable to use lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender or LGBT when 
referring to African-American and Black sexual 
minorities, it is an error to assume that all people 
use these terms to describe themselves. The 
Communities of African Descent Resource Kit 
(2014, http://www.glaad.org/publications.coadkit 
) indicates that many individuals have adopted 
the term “Same Gender Loving” (SGL) or other 
terms that are more inclusive of both sexual 
orientation and race, and others may not identify 
with any terms at all. 

Elderly (age 65 and over) African-American 
and Black LGBT persons represent multiple 
classifications of minority statuses, and each of 
their identities dictates certain social positions in 
society and further relegates them to positions of 
marginality. For many African-American and 
Black LGBT elders, addressing issues of racism 
in general and within the LGBT community 
specifically, heterosexism and homophobia both 
internal and external to their ethnic group, emo- 
tional isolation (Kuyper and Fokkema 2010), and 
internalized oppression (Szymanski and Gupta 
2009) have been the hallmark of their experi- 
ences. Even with the distinction of being a 
minority (ethnic) within a minority (sexual ori- 
entation), transgender (see Chap. 14 in this text) 
and bisexual (see Chap. 15 in this text) persons 



are further marginalized. In fact, Dworkin (2006) 
refers to bisexual LGBT elders as the “invisible 
of the invisible minority” because as they enter 
into romantic relationships, they sometimes 
begin to identify as lesbian, gay, or heterosexual 
and thus become invisible as a bisexual aging 
person (p. 36). 



Characteristics of Older 
African-American/Black Adults 

African-American and Black older adults are 
heterogeneous, multidimensional, and diverse in 
their cultural identities and social affiliations. They 
represent various levels of educational attainment, 
socioeconomic statuses and financial stability, 
beliefs and values, marital status, sexual orienta- 
tion and gender identity, and so forth. However, 
older Black adults share commonalities. Overall, 
older African-Americans are more highly edu- 
cated than previous older generations. In 2013, 
7 1 % of African-Americans age 65 and older had 
finished high school and 15 % had a bachelor’s 
degree or higher compared to the fact that only 
44 % were high school graduates and 7 % had a 
bachelor’s degree or higher in 1998 (Administra- 
tion for Community Living 20 1 2) . In employment, 
many were overrepresented in low-wage posi- 
tions, resulting in economic insecurity in retire- 
ment. Social security benefits constitute the largest 
share of income of older African-Americans, but 
are modest in size. Many Black elders grew up in 
southern states during a time of legal segregation 
and overt discrimination, which imposed limits on 
their earnings, educational attainment, poor living 
conditions, and health outcomes (Social Security 
Administration 2011). A residential shift has 
occurred as to where the majority of older 
African-Americans currently live. The largest 
percentage of Black residents per total population 
in 2012 was in the District of Columbia (51.6 %) 
and Mississippi (28 %), with the largest total 
number of Black residents in New York (3.7 mil- 
lion) (Centers for Disease Control 2010). Table 6. 1 
lists the states with the largest percent of older 
African-Americans. 



108 



D.A. Harley 



Table 6.1 States with highest percent of older 
African-Americans 



New York 


320,127 


Florida 


271,554 


Texas 


241,356 


California 


237,924 


Georgia 


236,463 


North Carolina 


210,772 


Illinois 


190,521 


Maryland 


166,186 



Administration for Community Living (2012) 



In a study of self-rated health status in 2010- 
2012, 62 % of older African-American men and 
61 % of women reported “good,” “very good,” or 
“excellent” health status compared to 78 % for 
White older men and 80 % for women. Positive 
health evaluations decline with age, with 67 % of 
African-American men ages 65-74 reporting 
“good,” “very good,” or “excellent” health com- 
pared with 52 % among those aged 85 or older. 
Similarly, 65 % of African-American women ages 
65-74 reported “good” to “excellent” health, with 
58 % at ages 85 or older (Administration for 
Community Living 2012). African-Americans 
have a disproportionately higher rate of chronic 
illnesses and lower survival rates. The most fre- 
quently occurring health issues among 
African-Americans include AIDS/HIV, asthma, 
cancer, diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, 
obesity, and stroke (Centers for Disease Control 
20 1 3). In addition, African-Americans have higher 
rates of HIV and AIDS, many of whom were 
infected at a younger age and who are now living 
longer (Baker and Rrehely 2012). A combination 
of health inequities and financial and cultural bar- 
riers to receiving health care in later life negatively 
affects the health of African-American older 
adults. Table 6.2 compares the most frequently 
occurring conditions among older African- 
Americans compared to all other older persons. 
In comparison to White elders, Black elders have 
severe limitations in daily tasks requiring assis- 
tance with housework, personal care, and prepar- 
ing meals. The life expectancy for Blacks, at any 
age, tends to be lower than that for Whites. In 2010, 



Table 6.2 Frequently occurring health conditions of 
older African-Americans 



African-Americans 


All older persons (%) 


Hypertension (85 %) 


72 


Diagnosed arthritis (52 %) 


50 


Heart disease (26 %) 


30 


Diagnosed diabetes (40 %) 


20 


Cancer (17 %) 


24 



Adapted from Administration for Community Living 
( 2012 ) 



Table 6.3 Leading causes of death for 
African-Americans 

Heart disease 
Cancer 
Stroke 
Diabetes 

Unintentional injuries 

Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome and nephrosis 

Chronic lower respiratory disease 

Homicide 

Septicemia 

Alzheimer’s disease 

Adapted from Centers for Disease Control (2010) 

a 65-year-old African-American male was expec- 
ted to live another 15.9 years, compared with 17.7 
for White males, and a Black female at age 65 was 
expected to live another 19.3 years, a full year less 
than a White woman. Comparatively, Latino males 
(additional 18.8 years) and Latina females (addi- 
tional 22 years) are expected to liver longer than 
Black or White males and females (National 
Center for Health Statistics 2013). Interestingly, 
these data do not disaggregate outcomes forLGBT 
persons. The leading causes of death for all 
African-Americans are in Table 6.3. 

African-American LGBT elders face chal- 
lenges similar to those in both the 
African-American and the older adult populations 
as a whole. Collectively, more than 68 % of 
African-American elders are poor, marginally 
poor, or economically vulnerable, are more than 
one and a half times as likely as White elders to live 
below the poverty line, and more than one in four 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



109 



African-American elders have incomes that fall 
below the poverty line. Some gender disparity 
exists among older African-American women and 
men with regard to living arrangement. More older 
African-American women are vulnerable to social 
isolation and economic hardship, with nearly 40 % 
of women ages 65 and older living alone compared 
to 19 % of men (Administration on Aging, n.d.). 
The circumstances of older LGBT African- 
Americans are difficult to discern and separate 
from the Black population at large because of their 
covert existence in the Black community (Harley 
et al. 2014). Many years of living, secretive or 
closeted lives often lead to a heightened sense of 
isolation for Black LGBT elders. Y et, as a separate 
group, less is known about unique challenges faced 
by African-American transgender persons or those 
who identify as queer, even though they were 
intricately involved in the Civil Rights Movement 
of the 1960s and have been active contributors to 
history (Roberts 2012). One of the earliest docu- 
mented cases of an African-American transgender 
person is that of Lucy Hicks Anderson who was 
born in Waddy, Kentucky, in 1886, as Tobias 
Lawson. See Discussion Box 6. 1 for information 
on Anderson and on Carlett Angianlee Brown, 
who was scheduled to become the first African- 
American to have sex reassignment surgery (SRS). 

Discussion Box 6.1: Historical Trans- 
gender African-Americans Lucy Hicks 
Anderson (1886-1954): Bom in Waddy, 
Kentucky, as Toias Lawson. When Law- 
son entered school she insisted on wearing 
dresses and began calling herself Lucy. 
Upon the advice of a physician, Lawson’s 
mother raised her as a girl. After leaving 
school at age 15, Lucy worked as a 
domestic. She eventually married and then 
moved to California. After a divorce in 
1929, she remarried in 1944 to a soldier. 
Eventually, when the Ventura County dis- 
trict attorney discovered that Lucy was 
biologically male, he decided to try her for 
perjury. Lucy was convicted of perjury and 
placed on probation for 10 years. Later, the 
federal government prosecuted Lucy and 



her husband for fraud for receiving allot- 
ment checks as the wife of a member of the 
US Army. After her release from prison, 
she lived the remainder of her life in Los 
Angeles (http://www.blackpast.org/aaw/ 
anderson-lucy-hicks-1 886- 1954). 

Carlett Angianlee Brown (1927): She was 
born as Charles Robert Brown. In 1953, 
Carlett was a 26-year-old female illusionist 
and shake dancer from Pittsburgh. She had 
served in the Navy, during which time she 
was examined for an issue with recurring 
monthly bleeding through her rectal area. 
The medical exam revealed that she was 
intersex and had some female sex organs. 
She declined to have surgery to remove the 
female organs and opted for SRS instead. 
Her plan was to get marry after completing 
SRS. In order to do so, Carlett had to 
renounce her US citizenship because laws in 
countries where the surgery could be per- 
formed did not allow foreign nationals to 
obtain SRS. HerUS passport was issued with 
her name as Carlett Angianlee. On July 9th, 
she was arrested for cross-dressing. She 
postponed her departure to get a feminizing 
face-lift in New York in August. Eventually, 
she was ordered not to leave the USA until 
$1200 in back taxes were paid. Unable to 
make payment, she worked as a cook at Iowa 
State’s Pi Kappa frat house to earn money. 
Additional information regarding her final 
outcome is not found. If Carlett is still alive, 
she will be into her mid- to late 1970s (http:// 
www.racialicious.com/2009/07/15/the- 
story-of-carlett-brown/). 

Discussion Questions: 

1. What sociopolitical issues are in play 
for Anderson and for Brown? 

2. Compare and contrast the challenges 
facing transgender African-Americans 
in the 1940s, 1950s, and today. 

3. How accepting was the Black commu- 
nity of transgender persons within the 
community? Civil Rights Movement? 





110 



D.A. Harley 



4. Have the attitudes of the Black com- 
munity changed toward transgendered 
persons? 

5. In what ways can the Black community 
promote advocacy and equality for 
Black transgendered persons? 

In 2007, a national survey of transgender and 
nonconforming gender populations was con- 
ducted by Trans Equality to determine discrimi- 
nation experiences (www.transequality.org/PDFs/ 
BlackTransFactsheetFINAL_0908 1 1 .pdf). Of the 
6456 respondents, 381 were Black or Black mul- 
tiracial. While the focus of the survey was on 
anti-transgender bias, the results also show the 
complex interactions of bias with race and socio- 
economic status. The survey did not identify those 
experiences by age. Nevertheless, “the combina- 
tion of anti-transgender bias and persistent, struc- 
tural and individual racism was especially 
devastating for Black transgender people and other 
people of color” (p. 1). Black transgender persons 
live in extreme poverty with 34 % reporting a 
household income of less than $10,000 per year. 
These data indicate that for Black transgender 
persons, this is more than twice the rate for trans- 
gender people of all races (15 %), four times the 
general Black population rate (9 %), and over eight 
times the general US population rate (4 %). In 
addition, more than half of Black respondents were 
HIV positive. Although African-Americans have a 
significantly lower suicide rate than other racial 
groups, nearly 49 % of Black transgender persons 
indicated they had attempted suicide at some point. 
On a more positive note, the study found that those 
who were “out” to their families found acceptance 
at a higher rate than the overall sample of trans- 
gender respondents. 



Research and Practice 

The National Alliance on Mental Illness (2007) 
acknowledges that to date, most research on 
LGBT populations has been done with 



predominately White samples and the mental 
health (MH) concerns and needs of LGBT of 
color are still largely unknown and vastly 
understudied. In addition, health disparities and 
disabilities among African-Americans are higher 
than their White counterparts, with women 
experiencing early onset of disease and disability 
and increased mortality (Jones 2009; Lekan 
2009). LGBT older adults and LGBT elders of 
color deal with significant health disparities 
across domains related to physical and mental 
health, including chronic conditions and 
HIV/AIDS, depression, suicide, and substance 
abuse (Administration on Aging, 2013; 
Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011; Institute of 
Medicine, 2011). 

The long-term financial stability of many 
LGBT elders of color is shaped by employment 
discrimination. Many LGBT elders of color are 
concentrated in employment sectors with low 
wages, no labor unions or few labor protections, 
routine discrimination, and limited health and 
savings options. Economic security is core to the 
health and well-being of LGBT elders of color 
(Auldridge and Espinoza 2013). 

Lekan (2009) emphasizes that 
African-American women experience more stress 
and health disadvantages than their White 
counterparts because of the interaction and mul- 
tiplicative effects of race, gender, socioeconomic 
status, and age. Although there is a growing body 
of research about health concerns among 
African-American women in general, there exists 
a dearth of information on African-American 
lesbians (Dibble et al. 2012). Similarly, 
African-American gay men are rarely researched 
outside of a focus on HIV/AIDS. 
African-American transgender persons also 
experience many health and socioeconomic 
challenges including substance abuse, HIV 
infection, difficulty in obtaining housing and 
employment, and reliance on commercial sex 
work for survival (Clements-Nolle et al. 2001; 
Wilkinson, nd). Understanding bisexual Black 
women and men within the context of culture and 
community is difficult because they experience 
isolation from heterosexual as well as lesbian and 
gay communities, which may affect aspects of 




6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



111 



identity development, internalized binegativity, 
and access to social and psychological resources 
(Isarel 2007). While LGBT people of color 
experience the worst outcomes and receive the 
least institutional attention, the aging concerns of 
LGBT of color are virtually absent in national 
policy discussions on aging health and economic 
security (Auldridge and Espinoza 2013). Because 
of the limited research on LGBT elders of color, 
there is reliance on the literature concerning 
LGBT elders in general, from which information 
is glean about African-American LGBT elders. 
However, additive research for 
African-American LGBT should be avoided 
because it does not equal research applicable to 
this group (Bowleg 2008). As author of this 
chapter, I suggest that additive research may offer 
some comparative insight; however, should at 
least approached with caution. 

In advancing the research of LGBT persons of 
African descent, Lewis and Marshall (2012) offer 
several considerations. First, research on 
Black LGBT populations should not attempt to 
separate the various aspects of the individual’s 
identities into mutually exclusive categories and 
expect to understand their experiences. Second, 
research must incorporate questions of the par- 
ticipants that do not force them to respond to 
items as to which identity is more important, 
which identity causes more stress, or rank iden- 
tities in order of concern on a daily basis. 
Questions such as these assume an additive value 
to the multiple identities, and further marginal- 
izing as opposed to an intersecting relationship 
among the identities (Bowleg 2008; Lewis and 
Marshall). According to Wheeler (2003), 
researchers must realize that the intersecting 
identities of sexual orientation, gender, race, and 
ethnicity are more likely to be geometric rather 
than additive. Finally, Afrocentric theorizing, 
which has “secured its own identity among 
dominant Eurocentric thought” (p. 13), must stop 
being neglectful of prevalent sexual realities in 
African-American culture. 

All too often, research methodologies on 
African-Americans and Black LGBT populations 
involve a comparison to White LGBT groups, 
with whom they share few similarities beyond 



sexual orientation and gender identity. Moreover, 
most studies on sexual minorities do not include 
sufficient numbers of African-American or Black 
participants to perform adequate or sophisticated 
statistical analyses. In addition, research on 
LGBT African-Americans focuses on urban 
populations and ignores those in rural setting or 
smaller cities (Deblaere et al. 2010). For addi- 
tional information on LGBT persons in rural 
settings, the reader is referred to Chap. 25 in this 
text. LGBT persons in urban areas have the 
privilege of anonymity, access to more services 
and supports, and the opportunity to belong to an 
LGBT community. The language used in many 
research studies present another barrier to 
instrumentation design. Much of the terminology 
that is used is characteristics of the White LGBT 
community (e.g., “out”), which involves identi- 
fication by labels, whereas in Black culture, the 
approach is more a use of descriptions. 
Researchers will need to develop measures that 
are consistent with indigenous structures in the 
Black community. Finally, limited research 
exists that examines African-American LGBT 
issues and concerns across the life span (Harley 
et al. 2013). 



Cultural Capital 

The African-American community is known as a 
collective society that provides support and ref- 
uge to its people. The cultural characteristics of 
the community consist of strong kinship bonds, 
valuing education, strong religious orientation, 
high achievement orientation, strong work ethic, 
self-reliance, and adaptability of family roles 
(Brown Wright and Fernander 2005). Table 6.4 
consists of value characteristics of the 
African-American community. Homosexuality 
and nonconforming sexual identity are largely 
considered incompatible with values in the Black 
community. Lewis and Marshall (2012) suggest 
factors that may influence the attitudes and per- 
ceptions among Black people about LGBT per- 
sons of African descent, including racism and 
ancestral baggage (i.e., rejection by some in their 



112 



D.A. Harley 



Table 6.4 Value characteristics of the African-American Community 
Self-reliant 
Oral traditions 
Strong work ethic 
Unity and cooperation 
Flexibility in family roles 
Present-time orientation 
Firm child-rearing practices 
Educations as a means of self-help 
Strong work and achievement ethic 
Strong spiritual and religious values 
Respect for elders and authority figures 
Collateral interpersonal relations are highly valued 
Giving people status as a function of age and position 
Strong kinship bonds with family, extended family, and friends 

“Strong Black Woman” (pride in racial identity, self-reliance, capability in handling challenges) 
Nonverbal communication patterns (body movement, postures, gestures, facial expressions) 
Adapted from Robinson-Wood (2009) 



own race in an attempt to project noticeable 
“normal” Blackness), a lack of promotion of 
historically accurate information on diverse 
Black sexuality, and selective attention bias 
regarding interpretations of specific biblical 
scriptures. Some evidence suggests that more 
ambivalence, tolerance, and acceptance have 
emerged in African-American families for LGBT 
family members (Hunter 2005). Hunter suggests 
that family instructions such as “be silent and 
invisible” may allow the family to accept a 
LGBT member without having to deal with his or 
her sexual orientation and the issues associated 
with it. In fact, the lack of disclosure increases 
acceptance of their sexual orientation for older 
LGBT Black persons. However, the circum- 
stances for African-American LGBT elders are 
difficult to discern and separate from the general 
Black population because of their cover exis- 
tence in the Black community. 

Although African-American culture may be 
inclusive of other Black families and communi- 
ties, it is a misnomer to assume that it is repre- 
sentative of those other diverse Black groups. 
There is no one description that can accommo- 
date the various identities, behaviors, and 



perceptions among African-Americans (Wilson 
2005). Similarly, the terms used in the African 
diaspora are different, with some being highly 
derogatory (Lewis and Marshall 2012). LGBT 
issues of people of color play out differently in 
families and communities of different back- 
grounds, yet many communities of color share 
cultural bias against homosexuality and gender 
nonconformity (Somjen 2009). The way in 
which an individual expresses his or her gender 
and/or sexuality may be defined by cultural val- 
ues such as whether the culture focuses on the 
individual or the group; the level of acceptance in 
talking about sexuality; the degree of separation 
of public and private domain; the social organi- 
zation and definitions of gender; the role of 
religion within their own culture; and the degree 
of assimilation into the dominate society (Rust 
1996). LGBT persons of color, regardless of age, 
share the common experience of being a minority 
within a minority, which may contribute to an 
increased vulnerability to psychosocial issues. 

African-American and Black LGBT persons 
have always been part of the Black community. 
The roles and impact of LGBT persons in the 
Black community was in part demonstrated 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



113 



through involvement in the Civil Rights Move- 
ment. On April 1, 1998, in the Chicago Tribune, 
Coretta Scott King acknowledged the role of 
sexual minorities stating, “gay and lesbians stood 
up for civil rights in Montgomery, Selma, in 
Albany, Georgia and St. Augustine, FL., and 
many other campaigns of the Civil Rights 
Movement. Many of these courageous men and 
women were fighting for my freedom at a time 
when they could find few voices for their own, and 
I salute their contributions.” Although the rate of 
homophobia and heterosexism is high in the Black 
community, especially in the Black Church 
(which is discussed later in this chapter), most 
African-American LGBT persons indicate that 
they still find more support and refuge in the Black 
community, especially against the tyranny of 
racism in the White gay community (Boykin 
1996; Green 1994; Savage and Harley 2005). For 
African-American LGBT people, there is “a per- 
ceived link that connects its members regardless 
of other differences that might also exist” (Moore 
2010, p. 17). In fact, some researchers suggest that 
African-American lesbians, having learned to 
handle their ethnic minority status, have devel- 
oped a great deal of resilience and personal 
strength and may be better equipped to also handle 
their status as a sexual minority (Cooper-Lewter 
2007; Dibble et al. 2012; Hall and Fine 2005). Yet, 
gender discrimination is not equal for LGBT 
persons in the Black community. Lesbians often 
face disproportionately more ridicule in the Black 
community, and based on their multiple 
subordinate-group identities, Black lesbians have 
“intersectional invisibility: as targets of sexism, 
heterosexism, homophobia, and racism within the 
dominant culture and the Black community” 
(Purdie-Vaugns and Eibach 2008, p. 377). 

Views Held About Elders. From a cultural 
perspective, elderly African-Americans are rev- 
ered and entitled to respect within the 
African-American community, and a position of 
age carries with it a high level of cultural capital 
(Harley et al. 2014). Ageism is not a prevalent 
characteristic in the Black community; however, 
it is in the gay community, especially with regard 
to physical attractiveness. However, the reader 
should be aware of some generational changes 



within the Black community about attitudes and 
behaviors toward their elders. For example, 
elders in the Black community are increasingly 
targets of violence and crime, mistreatment, and 
assault. This shift in attitudes toward 
African-American elders must be placed within a 
culturally sensitive context and considered 
alongside culturally specific risk factors (Teaster 
et al. 2014). For example, in the 
African-American community, a single incidence 
of yelling or hitting an elder is not viewed as 
elder abuse, whereas physical abuse is extreme 
abusive behavior. Extreme abusive behavior 
toward elders is considered as unacceptable in 
the Black community (Tauriac and Scruggs 
2006). 

African-American elders hold the distinction 
of being the family historian. The elders continue 
the oral tradition of passing on cultural meaning, 
legacy, and knowledge. Within the Black com- 
munity, elders are not referred to as old, but as 
wise, illustrating that they have reached the “age 
of wisdom.” Although aging is associated with 
lived experience, chronological age is not the 
only criterion for ascension into the “age of wis- 
dom.” The experience that one has accumulated 
allows one, especially women to gain this wis- 
dom. Experience may include emotional and 
spiritual support, information, advice, and ser- 
vice. Old age for Black women is a matter of the 
functions they carry out (e.g., teaching values, 
convening the family on certain occasions, reli- 
gious role model). Thus, wise women gain pres- 
tige and power, and important matters are brought 
to them (Brown Wright and Fernander 2005; 
Peterson 1990). Peterson summarized the 
important role of older Black women in the 
family and church, “they move beyond the 
potential constraints of class, money and blood 
relationships to reinforce cultural values of the 
importance of children, the significance of Active 
kin, the problem of clinging to possessions and 
the wisdom derived from lived experience” 
(p. 227). Given that the family and church are 
considered to be the two most important institu- 
tions in the Black community and a high degree 
of respect for elders, the question is raised, what is 
the role of LGBT elders within these institutions? 



114 



D.A. Harley 



Deutsch (2006) suggests that through civilized 
oppression (the experience of repeated, wide- 
spread, systematic injustice), Black LGBT per- 
sons receive unequal treatment, are relegated to 
invisibility, and are silenced, condemned, 
shamed, and forbidden from participation in 
activities afforded to heterosexual couples. 

Acculturation and Assimilation Issues. 
Numerous definitions of acculturation exist to 
explain the multifaceted ways in which changes 
occur at the group and individual level. Riva 
(2010) offers the definition of acculturation as “a 
dynamic process of change that individuals 
undergo as they interact with and adapt to a new 
or different cultural environment; it is an inter- 
active process that occurs along different life 
domains at different rates of change” (p. 331). 
Inherent in the practice of acculturation is the 
concept of inequality and the lack of mutual 
respect that the dominant culture tends to project, 
consciously or unconsciously, on racial minori- 
ties (Wilson 2005). Assimilation is viewed more 
as voluntary aspiration to identify and integrate 
with and adapt to the ways of the dominant, 
Anglo-Saxon mainstream. The intent of present- 
ing information on acculturation and assimilation 
is not to debate if Black LGBT elders are one or 
the other, but rather to illustrate that acculturation 
and assimilation involve changes in both values 
and behaviors related to identity (Schwartz et al. 
2007). Cultural identity is the sense of belonging 
that one derives from membership in groups that 
provide knowledge, beliefs, values, traditions, 
attitudes, and ways of life (Jameson 2007). 
Although acculturation and cultural identity are 
not totally uncorrelated, an individual who is 
highly acculturated can have a high level of ethnic 
identity or a low level of ethnic identify (Moore 
et al. 2010). It is important to point out that race 
and culture are not synonymous. 

For Black people in America, the assimilation 
model is most useful for understanding voluntary 
immigrants, not native-born Black who entered 
the USA involuntarily who were selectively 
incorporated through enslavement, coercion, and 
Jim Crow laws (Lacy 2004). Wamwara-Mbugua 
et al. (2006) contend “the experience of Black 
immigrants in the United States is different from 



that of other non-white groups because of the 
existence of a large African-American population 
and the complexities of race relations” (p. 428). 
Black immigrants may conform more to seg- 
mented assimilation (Portes and Zhou 1993) in 
which they take three paths of adaptation: (1) the 
White middle class, (2) identify with the Black 
underclass, and (3) carve out a path by deliber- 
ately retaining the culture and values of their 
immigrant community. Frequently, older Black 
immigrants and subsequently generations take 
the third path, relying on their ethnic communi- 
ties for social capital, employment leads, and 
relief from discrimination. Segmented assimila- 
tion allows the individual to maintain an ethnic 
identity as an invaluable resource (Lacy). 

The question of whether Black LGBT elders 
more acculturated because of their sexual orien- 
tation and gender identity is not known. The 
extent to which Black LGBT elders are accul- 
turated or assimilated has not been studied, and, 
at best, one can glean from the research on 
acculturation of African-Americans in general. 
Furthermore, the reality may be that neither 
acculturation nor assimilation is the issue, but 
more one of cultural immersion in which indi- 
viduals reject mainstream culture and their 
emotional needs are met exclusively in their 
ethnic or in the gay community. Where one lives 
may be a major determinant of cultural immer- 
sion. For example, LGBT persons who live in 
urban areas may immerse themselves in LGBT 
communities; however, this is not an option 
available to most LGBT people who must live in 
many worlds/cultures and communities. 



Black Homophobia, Biphobia, 
Transphobia, and Heterosexism 

African-American LGBT elders often face social 
stigma in the Black community. Historically, the 
Black community view homosexuality as a 
characteristic of European culture, and they deny, 
or at least overlook its existence in their own 
community. Many in the Black community 
believe that homosexuality and any form of 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



115 



alternative sexual identity is a strategy to destroy 
Black people and the Black family, is a moral 
sin, and goes against the values of the Black 
community. The Black community values pri- 
vacy, which is in contrast to the White LGBT 
community’s value of “coming out.” Strong 
family and kinship ties stress that marriage and 
family always come first, and the family may 
present a united front against the LGBT member 
or disown him or her, resulting in a loss of the 
sense of unity that helps the LGBT member form 
cultural and/or race identity (Savage and Harley 
2005). The National Black Justice Coalition 
(2009) found that while statistically 
African-Americans are more disapproving of 
marriage equality for sexual minorities, these 
attitudes do not arise from simple homophobia; 
rather, they come from their diverse experiences, 
opinions, and beliefs and are influenced by fac- 
tors such as geographic location, age, class, and 
other markers of differences. Often, this moral 
disapprobation is linked to the pulpit and rhetoric 
of the conservative right that suggests that the 
gay rights movement has appropriated the civil 
rights philosophy and incorrectly equated racial 
oppression with oppression based on sexual ori- 
entation and gender identity (National Black 
Justice Coalition). As a historically oppressed 
group, African-Americans have placed great 
importance on reproductive sexuality to ensure 
continue existence of the group in face of racist, 
genocidal practices by the dominant White group 
(Greene and Boyd-Franklin 1996). Thus, Black 
LGBT individuals are seen as a threat to the 
social structure of the family (Battle and Bennett 
2000; Boykin 1996; National Black Justice 
Coalition 2009). 

Research suggests that homophobia is greater 
in the African-American community than in the 
European American community (National Black 
Justice Coalition2009; Savage and Harley 2005; 
Stanford 2013). The existence of homophobia 
among Black people in America is largely 
reflective of the homophobic culture in which we 
live (Clarke 1999). According to Clark, Black 
Americans assimilated the Puritan value that sex 
is for procreation, occurs only between men and 
women, and is only valid within the confines of 



heterosexual marriage. The result of this assimi- 
lation is that Black people have to live with the 
contradictions of this restricted sexual system by 
repressing or closeting any other sexual or erotic 
feelings or desires. However, the whole 
African-American community is not homophobic 
or heterosexist, and the “accusation of homo- 
phobia” directed toward the whole Black com- 
munity is inaccurate (Boykin 1996, p. 185), and 
studies on the African-American community’s 
attitudes and perceptions of sexual minorities 
continue to unfold. Nevertheless, it cannot be 
denied that the existence of homophobia has 
always been a reality in Black life (Hooks 2001). 
Today, the invisibility of homosexuality in the 
Black community remains prevalent and is syn- 
onymous with its own form of “don’t ask,” 
“don’t tell.” Despite the sometime disapproving 
attitudes and religious condemnation, the 
majority of Black LGBT individuals remain in 
predominantly Black communities and social 
contexts and negotiate daily with family and 
community. They remain because they trust in 
racial solidarity and racial group membership 
(Moore 2010), which often provide protection 
from racial discrimination in the larger society. 

Religion and Spirituality in the Lives of Black 
Elders. The Black Church is recognized as the 
oldest and one of the most influential institutions 
of the Black community. Both religion and 
spirituality are vital components of 
African-American racial and cultural activities 
(Harley 2005a). Laderman and Leon (2003) 
suggest that religion supplies perhaps the best 
vantage point from which to describe the devel- 
opment of African-Americans in relationship to 
themselves, others, and the larger universe. 
National research data indicate that approxi- 
mately 97 % of African-Americans identify some 
religious affiliation (Pew Center 2006). The 
church is more than a place of worship and fel- 
lowship; it is a place of advocacy, empowerment, 
personal and psychological support, socializa- 
tion, emotional outlet, social status, political 
action, cultural affirmation, and connection to the 
community (Evans and George 2008; Loue 
2014) and is essentially impossible to separate 
from Black life for most African-American 



116 



D.A. Harley 



elders. Research Box 6.1 contains a study of 
older African-Americans’ perception of spiritu- 
ality and its role in dealing with depression. The 
amount of support and assistance provided by the 
Black Church is second only to that provided by 
the family (Robinson-Wood 2009). In many 
ways, the Black Church takes on increased sig- 
nificance as a source of support because LGBT 
seniors, especially gay men, do not have children 
who can care for them as they age. Within the 
LGBT population, child rearing is much more 
common among racial and ethnic minority 
women (41 % of African-Americans) compared 
with White LGBT women (28 %) and less so 
among African-American men (14 %). However, 
these data include younger average ages of racial 
and ethnic groups in the USA (Gates and New- 
port 2012). In fact, lesbians and gay men are 
twice as likely as their heterosexual counterparts 
to grow old un-partnered and almost ten times 
more likely not to have a spouse, child, or other 
family member to care for them in old age (Al- 
belda et al. 2009). 

Research Box 6.1: Depression and 
Spirituality Wittink, M. N., Joo, J. H., 
Lewis, L.M., & Barg, F. K. (2009). Losing 
faith and using faith: Older African- 
Americans discuss spirituality, religious 
activities, and depression. Journal of Gen- 
eral Internal Medicine, 24(3), 402-407. 

Objective: This study aimed to understand 
how spirituality might play a role in the 
way older African-Americans conceptual- 
ize and deal with depression in order to 
inform possible interventions aimed at 
improving the acceptability and effective- 
ness of depression treatment. 

Method: A cross-sectional qualitative 

interview design was used with older 
African-American primary care patients. 
Forty-seven patients were recruited from 
primary care practices in Baltimore, DM 
area, and interviews were conducted in the 
homes of participants. 



Results: Participants in this study held a 
faith-based explanatory model of depres- 
sion with a particular emphasis on the 
cause of depression. Specifically, partici- 
pants described depression as being due to 
a “loss of faith,” and faith and 
spiritual/religious activities were thought to 
be empowering in the way they can work 
together with medical treatments to provide 
the strength for healing to occur. 

Conclusion: Older African-Americans are 
more likely to identify spirituality as 
important in depression care. 

Questions 

1. How are spiritual/religious activities 
facilitative of depression treatment? 

2. How would you evaluate the extent to 
which the findings of the research rep- 
resent insider versus outsider 
perspective? 

3. What do you see as the limitations to 
this research methodology for 
Black LGBT elders? 

Although reference is made to “the Black 
Church,” the church is heterogeneous, 
non-monolithic, and disparate collective of 
churches that reflect the diversity of the Black 
community itself and are diversified by origin, 
denomination, doctrine, worship culture, spiritual 
ethos, class, size, and numerous other factors. 
Yet, Black Churches share a common history and 
function as a unique role in Black life, which 
attest to their collective identify as the Black 
Church (Douglas 2006). The Black Church, with 
its heterogeneous character, is more monolithic 
in its attitude toward homosexuality. The Black 
Church adheres to traditional religious values, 
which condemn homosexuality and gender non- 
conformity. Some Black ministers hurl con- 
descending insults in their sermons to express 
distain toward non-heterosexuals (Ward 2005). 
African-Americans attend religious services 





6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



117 



more frequently than Whites and are less sup- 
portive of gay rights (Pew Center 2006). 
According to Douglas (2006), “the Black Church 
community, even with all of their diversity, the 
Black Church people are regarded as strikingly 
similar in their attitudes toward non-heterosexual 
sexualities. Black Church people are viewed as 
not simply homophobic but more homophobic 
than other populations of society” (p. 12). 
Although the majority of Black people in 
America regard themselves as Christians, grow- 
ing numbers are counted among Islamists, Bud- 
dhists, Jews, and agnostics (Robinson- Wood 
2009). 

In a study of Black lesbian spirituality, Betts 
(2012) found that African-American lesbians 
continually strive for a sense of spiritual whole- 
ness. While the lesbians in Betts’ study had no 
difficulty connecting to Black culture, they did 
report difficulty connecting with their initial 
religious roots within the churches of their 
childhood and actively sought alternative spiri- 
tual outlets. Other studies suggest that for certain 
populations of Blacks, perceived religiosity is 
related to faith healing (Harley 2005b; Mitchem 
2002; Lawson and Thomas 2007), and elderly 
Black women have higher religiosity (e.g., 
prayer, giving thanks to God, reading the Bible, 
going to church) than Black men (Taylor et al. 
2004). Black people who may not go to church 
or even have a church home may still pray to the 
Lord when confronted with difficult times 
(Boyd-Franklin 2003). Even Black persons who 
denounce religiosity often note religious ideol- 
ogy as important to their moral beliefs and 
practices (Dyson 2003; Ward 2005). With the 
importance placed on religion and spirituality by 
African-Americans and their disapproval of 
homosexuality, transgender, and nonconforming 
gender persons. Black LGBT persons may be 
denied the sense of community and support 
afforded to others within the community when 
the church denies them fellowship. Many LGBT 
African-Americans often face the same ignorance 
within the very institution that has for so many 
been the centerpiece of their community as they 
face from the larger society (Harley et al. 2014). 
Because many LGBT persons have encountered 



condemnation from churches, they often esteem 
personal faith in a higher power other than their 
religious institutions, and spirituality maintains 
their formal connections to religious establish- 
ments (Ward 2005). While homonegativity is not 
unique to Black Churches, it has dire psychoso- 
cial consequences for Black LGBT persons 
(Jeffries et al. 2008). 

The presence of homophobia and heterosex- 
ism are persistent in the Black Church and Black 
community as a whole, but not in all Black 
Churches or all of the Black community. Clark 
(1983, 1999) warned that the “accusation of 
homophobia” should not be directed toward the 
whole African-American community. Neverthe- 
less, the continual stance of many Black Chur- 
ches to both condemn homosexuality and to deny 
fellowship to LGBT African-Americans appears 
to be in direct opposition to the mission of reli- 
gion to be accepting of all people. Moreover, 
such opposition contradicts beliefs and values of 
the Black community as collective and commu- 
nal (Harley et al. 2014). According to Greene 
(2000), because of the importance of family, 
community, and church as buffers against racism 
and as sources of tangible support, homophobia 
in the Black community often leaves LGBT 
persons feeling vulnerable and less likely to 
reveal their sexual orientation or gender identity. 



Intersection of Racial/Ethnic 
and LGBT Identities 

Frequently, Black LGBT persons are challenged 
to choose between their sexual and racial iden- 
tities. Black LGBT persons are confronted with a 
dichotomy of allegiances. Meyer (2010) argues 
that the intersection of racial/ethnic and LGBT 
identities contain several basic truths. First, 
Blacks and other racial/ethnic minorities in the 
USA do not form a different culture; they are 
surrounded, contribute to, shape, and are affected 
by mainstream American culture; thus, the notion 
of a gay community is not alien to them. Second, 
many LGBT of color in the USA were raised in 
the same culture as their White counterparts. 



118 



D.A. Harley 



Third, among immigrants to the USA, many tend 
to acculturate and adopt local sociocultural 
norms. Finally, the gay liberation movement has 
had a great impact globally on cultures. Although 
Meyer acknowledges that local cultures matter in 
the analysis of LGBT populations and that sub- 
culture differences and clashes with White 
American culture exist, a fundamental challenge 
to these truths is that they fail to account for 
social and historical contexts in which a myriad 
of cultural variables affect the lives of elderly 
African-American LGBT persons. However, this 
is not to say that elderly Black LGBT persons 
cannot have several, even seemingly, conflicting 
identities while maintaining a coherent sense of 
themselves (Meyer 2010; Singer 2004). In fact, 
Purdue- Vaughns and Eibach (2008) use the term 
intersectional invisibility to refer to the failure to 
fully recognize people with intersecting identities 
as members of their constituent groups. Because 
Black LGBT persons do not fit the prototype of 
their constitute group, they are likely to experi- 
ence social invisibility (Lewis and Marshall 
2012). 

Gibson (2009) explored the behavioral and 
psychological strategies used by lesbians of 
African descent to negotiate relationships within 
their families of origin while simultaneously 
developing and maintaining an affirmative les- 
bian identity. The results showed that lesbians of 
African descent negotiated multiple identities of 
race, sexual orientation, disability, and gender 
through application of several identity manage- 
ment strategies (e.g., cultivate LGBT community 
and support systems, educate others about les- 
bian identity, maintain visibility, and engage in 
LGBT activism), including ways to manage 
conflicting loyalties between the community and 
Black community without any loss of significant 
relationships and cultural ties. 

In a similar study, Moore (2010) examined 
strategies that Black LGBT people used in Black 
environments to proclaim a gay identity that is 
simultaneous with a Black identity. Moore found 
three distinct features: (a) Black gay protest takes 
on a particular form when individuals are also 
trying to maintain solidarity with the racial group 
despite the treat of distancing that occurs as a 



result of their sexual minority status, (b) Black 
sexual minorities who see their self-interests 
linked to those of other Blacks use cultural ref- 
erences to connect their struggles to historical 
efforts for Black equality and draw from 
nationalist symbols and language to frame their 
political work, and (c) they believe that increas- 
ing their visibility in Black spaces will promote a 
greater understanding of gay sexuality as an 
identity status that can exist alongside, rather 
than in competition with race. Conversely, Bates 
(2010) found African-American lesbians who 
were once married and bisexual women expres- 
sed difficulty assimilating into the 
African-American community since coming out. 
Each of these studies focused on young to 
middle-aged LGBT. 

As is the case for any individual or group, the 
intermingling of identities for older Black LGBT 
persons represents a degree of integration. Iden- 
tity models conclude with integration of sexual 
identity into the personality as a seamless whole, 
when in reality one’s social circumstances 
change constantly and dictate priority of aware- 
ness and identity importance (Eliason and 
Schope 2007). For example, depending on what 
is occurring in society, for Black lesbians, the 
race may be the priority in the face of discrimi- 
nation. Yet, in another situation, the murder of 
sexual minorities may pose greater importance 
than race. And still, ageism may be the salient 
factor. The point that Eliason and Schope make 
is that all people have multiple intersecting 
identities, and while people seek validation of all 
parts of their identity and not just one facet, full 
integration all the time is unrealistic. 

Multiple Oppressions. African-American 
LGBT elders, unlike their younger counterparts 
who experience their young adult development 
within a dual identity or bicultural framework, 
experience their development through three dis- 
tinct cultural perspectives: race/racism, 

homo-prejudice, and aging. African-American 
LGBT persons tend to construct their experi- 
ences in two distinct minority environments: (a) a 
racial minority within the dominant White cul- 
ture and (b) a sexual minority within the main- 
stream heterosexual culture (Burlew and Serface 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



119 



2006). Racial minority status appears to be a 
significant variable in determining the quality of 
life of people of color in the USA (Wilson et al. 
2001). It is through the intersection oppressions 
of race and sexual identity that African-American 
and LGBT persons experience multiple oppres- 
sions. On the one hand, they are subjected to 
racism and oppression from mainstream society, 
and on the other hand, they face prejudice 
because of their sexual orientation from main- 
stream heterosexual society of all races (Burlew 
and Serface). In addition, African-Americans/ 
Blacks are subjected to “colorism,” a differential 
treatment based on skin hue, in which individuals 
with lighter skin color are seen as more intelli- 
gent or attractive (Kelly and Greene 2010). 
A lifetime of discrimination (e.g., racial 
inequality, anti-LGBT policies) has adversely 
affected African-American LGBT elders (Francis 
and Acey 2013). 

Gay Racism. Experiences of racism by ethnic 
minority LGBT people in the White LGBT 
community are well documented in the USA and 
internationally (Asanti 1999; Boykin 1996; 
Brown 2008; Harley et al. 2013; Loiacano 1989; 
Plummer 2007; Stansbury et al. 2010). Smith 
(1999) asserts that the racism that has pervaded 
the mainstream gay movement only intensifies 
the perceived divisions between Blacks and 
LGBT persons. The majority of African- 
American LGBT persons are exposed to racist 
and heterosexist messages in their daily lives, 
and they frequently internalize these negative 
messages about being both a Black person and a 
sexual minority person (Szymanski and Gupta 
2009). According to Parham et al. (1999), “irre- 
spective of how one comes to understand the 
concept of racism, there is little doubt that its 
origins, promotion, and continuation are 
anchored in the context of how Whites relate to 
African-descent people and other people of color 
on individual, institutional, and cultural levels” 
(p. 134). It has and remains necessary to dehu- 
manize African ancestral people and to cast them 
as inferior beings to enforce White, heterosexual 
superiority (Gibson 2009). In Cuba’s LGBT 
community, lesbians, especially Black lesbians, 
continue to be one of Cuba’s most socially 



marginalized populations (Sanders 2010). The 
exposure to the tri-vector of racial and sexual 
orientation microaggressions, and ageism are 
likely to manifest as health-related problems and 
mental health issues. 

In a review of the intersections of sexual 
orientation, race, religion, ethnicity, and heritage 
languages, Van der Meide (2002) found a com- 
mon theme; the assumption by developed Wes- 
tern nations that non-Western/non- White 
communities and cultures are more homophobic 
than the dominant Western/White communities. 
The basis of this assumption is not one of 
research, but rather one of simplistic racist and 
ethnophobic assumptions about the lack of 
sophistication or the cultural and religious 
backwardness of non-Western/White cultures. In 
this review. Van der Meide (2002, p.9) incor- 
porates an observation by Gunnings that: 

Too often White folk in the lesbian and gay 
community want to latch on to statements or inti- 
mations that the Black community is more 
homophobic maybe because it releases them from 
some of the hard and painful work of dealing with 
their racism, personally as well as organizationally. 
Perhaps, it allows them to avoid becoming multi- 
cultural and multiperspectival. 

The descriptive (tell how people in a group 
supposedly behave) and prescriptive (tells how 
certain groups should think, feel, and behave) 
beliefs (Fiske 1993) continue to shape the part- 
nership between discrimination and prejudice, 
allowing them to maintain a constant course in 
subordinating the minority race status and pre- 
serving the majority race privileges. 



World View and Historical Hostilities’ 
Influence on Help-Seeking 

African-American elders and their LGBT coun- 
terparts tend to have a high degree of suspicion 
of institutions and healthcare institutions because 
of becoming of age in the 1930s, 1940s, 1950s, 
and 1960s when institutional bigotry, hatred, and 
stigma were commonplace. They lived during an 
era of “forced segregation and enforced Jim 
Crow etiquette” (Cooper-Lewter 2007, p. 214). 



120 



D.A. Harley 



Elderly Black LGBT persons may exhibit a dis- 
proportionate rate of historical hostility (Vontress 
and Epp 1997) relating to past dealings with 
Whites and systems of oppression and discrimi- 
nation. For example, the Tuskegee Syphilis 
experiments in which Black men were infected 
with and untreated for syphilis and allowed to die 
during the 40-year study remain fresh in the 
minds of many African-American elders. The 
United States Public Health Service (USPHS) 
designed the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, and dur- 
ing its existence, the men in the study were not 
provided with treatment and, in some instances, 
were prevented from obtaining treatment (Loue 
2014). The Tuskegee study is a reminder that of 
how Black people may be at risk from the 
medical community and it serves to increase 
distrust of health professionals and researchers, 
as well as decrease participation of Blacks in 
clinical trials. The historical devaluation of Black 
bodies (Lemelle 2003) continues to produce 
significant negative health outcomes of 
African-Americans. Even with social transfor- 
mation, African-American LGBT elders continue 
to possess vivid memories of institutional and 
structural discrimination associated with race, 
gender, gender identity, socioeconomic status, 
and sexual orientation (Francis and Acey 2013). 
Like for all LGBT elders. Black LGBT elders 
had the additional experience of coming of age at 
a time of acute homophobia at every level of 
society (Funders for Lesbian and Gay Issues 
2004) and being medically classified with a 
psychiatric disorder and being subject to criminal 
charges because of their sexual orientation 
(Woody 2012). Until 1973, the American Psy- 
chological Association (APA) considered 
homosexuality to be a mental illness. 

The reaction of individuals with distrust toward 
an individual or group who have acted in a dis- 
criminatory way toward them is commonplace. In 
general, LGBT persons mistrust heterosexuals; 
LGBT persons of color may distrust White LGBT 
individuals; transgender and bisexual persons 
may distrust gays and lesbians; lesbians may 
distrust gay men; older LGBT persons may dis- 
trust young LGBT individuals; and so on. “The 
oppressor and the oppressed are changing social 



phenomenon, dependent on context” (Eliason and 
Schope 2007, p. 21). The impact of dual or mul- 
tiple identities of race, age, class, gender, gender 
identity, and sexual orientation intersects in 
diverse ways, which depending on rigidity of 
labels allows adaptations to changes in one’s 
cultural and sexual landscape (Rust 1996). 

Frequently, African-American LGBT elders 
are cautious about where they seek services 
whereas to avoid discrimination (Redman and 
Woody 2012). Table 6.5 identifies some con- 
cerns LGBT elders have about healthcare envi- 
ronments, which are magnified twofold for 
African-American and other ethnic minority 
LGBT persons. African-Americans across the 
age spectrum tend to underuse mental health 
services to the exclusion of needed mental health 
specialist for the following reasons: (a) reliance 
on personal connections such as family members, 
friends, and other community members, (b) reli- 
ance on primary care providers or other 
non-specialists, (c) dependence on emergency 
departments for diagnosis and treatment of 
mental health concerns, and (d) use of folk 
remedies, faith leaders, herbalists, and other 
nonstandard modes of care (Primm and Lawson 
2010). Regardless of race, studies consistently 
find that LGBT persons have negative interac- 
tions with their healthcare providers and are less 
likely to disclose their sexual identity and 
behavior (Bernstein et al. 2008; 
Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011; Funders for 
Lesbian and Gay Issues 2004; Mayer et al. 2008; 
Somjen 2009). Discrimination related to 
race/ethnicity and sexual orientation or gender 
identity can be considered a social risk for Black 
elderly LGBT persons’ health and well-being 

Research suggests that older LGBT persons 
are generally well adjusted (Graham 2011); 
however, compared to the general population, 
gay and bisexual men are twice as likely to have 
mental health concerns, and lesbian and bisexual 
women are three times as likely (Grant et al. 
2009). However, the number of Black LGBT 
participants in theses studies is low. Although 
Black older adults have lower rates of psychiatric 
illness, including depression, than older White 
adults (Jimenez et al. 2010), substantial 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



121 



Table 6.5 Concerns of behaviors from healthcare providers 
Hostility 
Rejection 
Invisibility 
Denial of care 
Stigmatization 
Anti-gay violence/safety 
Multiple forms of discrimination 
Reduction or poor quality of care 
Inadequate/substandard health care 
Refrain from touching a patient who is LGBT 
Careless management of private information and identity disclosure 
Inappropriate verbal and/or nonverbal responses from providers and office staff 

Refusal of service providers and healthcare systems to recognize extended families within the gay community 
Unfamiliarity of healthcare providers with the unique care needs of the LGBT population and ethnic minorities 
Adapted from Auldridge and Espinoza (2013) and Hughes et al. (2011) 



ethnic/racial disparities exist in the care given to 
Black older adults with depression (Shellman 
2011). In comparison with other groups, Black 
older adults are less likely to seek help from 
mental health providers, are less likely to be 
identified as depressed, and often delay or fail to 
seek treatment until their symptoms are severe 
(McGuire and Miranda 2008; Neighbors et al. 
2007). Nevertheless, a lower number of 
African-Americans in general seek mental health 
services. There are several explanations for lower 
rates of service participation, including 
culture-specific beliefs about the causes of men- 
tal illness, lack of awareness of mental health 
services, poverty, stigma, inadequate insurance 
coverage, lack of access to transportation, lack of 
culturally relevant approaches, and mistrust of 
service providers (Bailey et al. 2009; Connor 
et al. 2010; McGuire and Miranda 2008; Morrell 
et al. 2008). Even after entering the mental 
healthcare system, older Black adults are less 
likely to receive quality care. 

Another potential explanation for underutili- 
zation of mental health services by older Black 
adults is the notion of “positive marginality” 
(Mayo 1982), which suggests that for those who 
exist and live in the margins of social arrange- 
ments result in strength, resilience, and vibrancy. 



Mayo explains that for people who are situated at 
the social margins do not necessarily internalize 
their exclusion or devaluation, but instead 
embrace differences as a source of strength and 
sometimes as a source of empowerment. The 
application of positive marginality to Black 
LGBT elders and their tri-vector of microag- 
gressions, one can deduce that they may dem- 
onstrate more positive psychosocial adjustment 
than their younger, heterosexual, and White 
counterparts. In fact, Hall and Fine (2005) assert 
that positive marginality is the cornerstone of the 
Black experience that provides psychological 
and political tools that teach survival skills for 
successive generations. 



Healthcare and Service Disparities 

Older LGBT adults in general are an at-risk 
population experiencing significant health dis- 
parities (Fredriksen-Goldsen 2011), which is 
further exacerbated for ethnic minorities. Older 
adults in the general population and among 
LGBT groups tend to be the most frequent users 
of healthcare services in the USA. For older 
LGBT adults, health concomitants of aging may 



122 



D.A. Harley 



be exacerbated by factors associated with gender 
and sexual orientation (Institute of Medicine 
Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and 
Transgender Health Issues 2011). Historically, 
disadvantaged groups (e.g., ethnic minorities, 
LGBT adults) within the older adult population 
continue to have higher levels of illness, dis- 
ability, and premature death (Fredriksen-Goldsen 
and Muraco 2010). LGBT people of all ages are 
much more likely than heterosexual adults to 
delay or not seek medical care (Institute of 
Medicine Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, 
and Transgender Health Issues 2011) because 
they usually encounter two unique obstacles in 
navigating healthcare, social, and human service: 
homophobia and heterosexism. Fear of discrim- 
ination causes LGBT elders five times less likely 
than non-LGBT seniors to access services 
(Funders for Lesbian and Gay Issues 2004). In 
addition, LGBT seniors of color and transgen- 
dered elders feel unwelcome even among other 
LGBT elders, and many view LGBT elder pro- 
grams as hostile to their participation (Plumb and 
Associates 2003/2004). Navigating those ser- 
vices can be further complicated by the degree to 
which LGBT elders self-disclose to others 
(Maccio and Doueck 2002). Racial and ethnic 
disparities in health care exist in the broader 
historic and contemporary social and economic 
inequality and in evidence of persistent racial and 
ethnic discrimination in numerous sectors of 
American society (Institute of Medicine of the 
National Academies 2003). African-Americans 
receive necessary health care and mental health 
intervention at half the rate of their White 
counterparts (Neighbors et al. 2007). These 
inequities create additional barriers that do not 
exist for most White heterosexual older adults. 

African-American and Black LGBT persons 
are at risk for a variety of poor physical health 
outcomes. Over the years, data collected have 
consistently demonstrated significant health dis- 
parities between minority and non-minority 
groups in the USA. With the passage of the 
Health Disparities Act, increased visibility and 
funding went to interventions created to address 
health disparities between persons of different 
racial/ethnic groups; however, the act neglected 



to place attention on the special health needs of 
LGBT persons. Moreover, work has been done 
to increase the importance of understanding and 
eliminating health disparities across race cate- 
gories, and little work has focused specifically on 
the healthcare needs of ethnic minority LGBT 
persons (Wilson and Yoshikawa 2007). 
According to Wilson and Yoshikawa, “most 
attention to health disparities has been placed 
either on the needs of ethnic minorities or 
LGBTs, but not the needs of persons who belong 
to both groups” (p. 609) an, certainly not on 
those belonging to both groups who are elderly. 

For all adults, later life is known as a period of 
both growth and decline, with studies over- 
whelmingly focused on the latter (Institute of 
Medicine Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, 
and Transgender Health Issues and Research 
2011), yet we know very little about the health- 
care needs of African-American LGBT elders 
and health issues specific to aging, disability, 
health, and sexuality (Comerford et al. 2004; 
Dibble et al. 2012). Given the projected growth 
in the number of older African-Americans, 
numerous questions are raised about the health 
status, quality of life, and service delivery for 
Black LGBT elders. Some of the most urgent 
questions are as follows: Why are ethnic minor- 
ity LGBT populations at heightened risk for poor 
health outcomes compared to other populations? 
Why are ethnic minority LGBT persons less 
likely than White LGBT persons to receive 
high-quality health care (Wilson and Yoshikawa 
2007)? What are the long-term elfects of dis- 
crimination, oppression, and homophobia on the 
lives of ethnic minorities? 

Ethically, only culturally appropriate testing 
instruments and procedures should be used in the 
assessment of people of color. In addition, mea- 
sure and scale used must be psychometrically 
reliable and valid and culturally sensitive within 
the LGBT communities. Disparities in service 
delivery for African-American LGBT elders may 
also be as a result of cultural bias or culturally 
insensitive assessment instrument and measures. 
Clinicians serving Black LGBT persons should 
be familiar with instruments or scales recom- 
mended to assess racial/ethnic identity, 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



123 



acculturation, acculturative stress, sexual 
identity/orientation, and internalized homophobia 
(Chung 2007). When assessing and treating older 
Black LGBT persons, circumstances that are 
unique to them should be part of the protocol. 
Consideration should be given to the impact of 
ageism, lifelong discrimination, and racism. In 
addition, the role of sexism becomes more per- 
tinent as a covariant of ageism and racism for 
African-American/Black LGBT elders because 
of cultural gender role expectations, as well as 
the value (lack of) that society places on women 
of color. 



Models for Service 

The provision of services to African-American 
and Black LGBT elders is based on theories, 
concepts, and methods, which have emanated 
largely from Western countries and with pri- 
marily White populations, despite the fact that 
Afrocentric and culturally specific interventions 
have been recommended. Scholars from various 
health and human services disciplines, including 
psychology, counseling, gerontology, social 
work, medicine, public health, and others, have 
developed and advocated for alternate paradigms 
and models to understand the realities in the 
contexts of people of African descent. In a study 
of LGBT health and human services needs in 
New York State, one reason that high rates of 
barriers to care were reported is attributed to 
current LGBT-specific and general services that 
do not provide culturally sensitive services to the 
full range of people of color. 

Great emphasis has been placed on service 
models being inclusive of all people. However, 
for LGBT populations, especially in mental 
health services, substantial barriers exist because 
of a care system that is completely unprepared to 
deal with their needs. In addition, LGBT persons 
face harassment in general and participate mini- 
mally in mental health programs, and they go off 
their medication, spiral down, and in a few 
months are back in the hospital. For these rea- 
sons, a specialized system of care is needed to 



meet the needs of LGBT elders of color; thus, an 
ethno-specific system appears to be more 
appropriate. Mainstream services are not always 
welcoming to Black LGBT persons. It is 
important to recognize that treating people in the 
same way does not account for difference and in 
treating people equally may tantamount to dis- 
criminatory treatment. In essence, treating 
everyone in a uniform way ignores differences. 
The aim should be to treat every individual with 
the same level of dignity and respect (Social Care 
Institute for Excellence [SCIE] 2011). 
Ethno-specific programs and services do not 
imply an acceptance of the need for separate 
services for all ethnic elderly LGBT. Neverthe- 
less, moving beyond the controversy over the 
pluralistic versus assimilative nature of American 
society, a pluralistic or multicultural model 
allows for inclusiveness. In the post-separate but 
equal era, one of the primary objections to sep- 
arate programing is that if all ethnic groups 
subscribe to a common core of American values, 
it should be possible for ethnic groups to benefit 
from mainstream programming (Gelfand 2003). 
Unfortunately, this oversimplification often 
ignores the long-standing historical hostilities 
(Gelfand 2003) that have existed among LGBT 
Black elders, as well as mistrust and justified 
paranoia toward discrimination and microag- 
gressions (Sue and Sue 2013) of which they are 
subjected. 

According to Social Care Institute for Excel- 
lence (SCIE), LGBT persons do not necessarily 
feel they need special treatment, but they do not 
want to have to explain or justify their lives or 
relationships; instead, they want to be in an 
environment in which service providers under- 
stand issues related to LGBT persons and are 
competent to work in an inclusive, 

anti-discriminatory way. For African-American 
and Black LGBT elders, this sentiment becomes 
magnified with the addition of race and age. 
Thus, person-centered approaches are recom- 
mended as a means of service delivery. The 
multiple and intersecting identities of 

Black LGBT elders can come into play when 
designing person-centered services because they 
have usually experienced homophobia. 



124 



D.A. Harley 



transphobia, and racial discrimination in their 
lives and have concerns of losing choice and 
control over their care. For LGBT elders to have 
choice and control over their care and support, 
“they need to have accessible, sensitive main- 
stream services as well as the opportunity to get 
support from specialist services” (SCIE, p. 3). 

Another emphasis of service model is on 
cultural competency of service providers. Too 
often. Black LGBT elders enter a system in 
which they experience the tri-vector barrier to 
race and ethnicity, age, and sexual orientation 
and gender identity. In the USA, the Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) may benefit LGBT populations 
in a variety of ways since it requires the devel- 
opment of a culturally competent and diverse 
healthcare workforce that has expertise providing 
care to underserved populations such as the 
LGBT communities. The ACA prohibits insur- 
ance companies from denying coverage based on 
pre-existing conditions, which would be benefi- 
cial to Black LGBT elders, of whom have many 
chronic conditions (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 
2011). The ACA affords access to healthcare 
services, which for older Black LGBT popula- 
tions may provide consistency of care (e.g., a 
routine annual checkup) and health outcomes 
(e.g., early detection, providers who are familiar 
with medical histories), remove barriers, and 
foster trust in healthcare settings (American 
Medical Association 2009). The reader is refer- 
red to Chap. 19 for additional information on the 
impact of ACA on LGBT elders. 

Older adults disproportionately experience 
isolation. A complex set of circumstances and 
factors that exist at the individual, social net- 
work, community, and societal levels contribute 
to isolation (Elder and Retrum 2012). Elder and 
Retrain suggest that many disciplines, including 
sociology, psychology, social work, nursing, 
public health, gerontology, medicine, social 
neuroscience, public policy, and urban planning, 
have recognized isolation and offer approaches to 
isolation in older adults. There is extensive 
overlap across disciplines in how isolation 
among older adults is conceptualized (see Elder 
and Retrum 2012). LGBT elders have risk factors 
for isolation that are compounded by less support 



from family members and fear of facing stigma 
and discrimination in the health and legal sys- 
tems (Muraco and Fredriksen-Goldsen 2011). In 
a study of African-Americans and White older 
Americans, Troxel et al. (2010) found that 
African-Americans were the most isolated. 
Among older African-Americans, Black women 
are most likely to be socially isolated and to 
possess the lowest amount of social support and 
capital, to not to have a source of reliable trans- 
portation, to being limited in life space, to lim- 
iting activities for fear of an attack, and to not 
being married (Locher et al. 2005). As a mar- 
ginalized group, social isolation might be inten- 
sified for African-American LGBT elders, who 
may be isolated from their racial community as 
LGBT older persons and isolated from the 
mainstream LGBT community as people of color 
(Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). In response to 
social isolation among LGBT elders of color, 
GRIOT Circle developed an intervention pro- 
gram called Buddy-2-Buddy. The program pairs 
elders who are homebound or in facilities with 
more active elders for visits and invites them to 
join in activities. The objective is to promote 
independence and self-reliance among LGBT 
elders by countering isolation and restricted 
mobility. Buddy-2-Buddy distinguishes itself in 
work with elders of color who are often reticent 
about discussing personal problems with strang- 
ers or outsiders (http://www.asaging.org/blog/ 
reducing-isolation-community-engagement- 
service-model.pdf). In general, 

African-American populations, especially elders, 
do not share their problems with outsiders 
because of a high degree of distrust and privacy. 

Because of multiple medical and psychosocial 
issues among Black LGBT elders, a team 
approach or collaborative model in the treatment 
of persons from this age, race/ethnic, and sexual 
orientation/gender identity group should always 
be used (Paniagua (2014). In addition to the cli- 
nician, physician, or mental health professional, 
Vazquez et al. (2010) recommend the inclusion of 
social workers, cultural healer, at least a family 
member, nursing home of care facility adminis- 
trator, and the religious leader (if requested by the 
person and/or family as members of a 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



125 



multidisciplinary team. Conversely, a continuum 
of care is frequently used to classify services for 
the elder in the USA (Gelfand 2003). This con- 
tinuum entails moving from placing no restrictions 
to becoming more restrictive. Gelfand explains 
that serious problems underlie the concept of the 
continuum of care because it does not represent the 
reality of American programs and services for 
elders. The continuum of care model is based on 
the faulty assumption that elderly persons have 
only one need at any one point-in-time. As men- 
tioned previous in this chapter, elderly persons 
have multifaceted needs, and these needs may be 
extensive. Older persons in general and 
African-American LGBT elders specifically need 
a combination of services, and the components of 
these services may vary over time. 

Finally, the Black community has a helping 
tradition and “being part of a unique community 
has long dominated the social consciousness of 
African-Americans,” which emerged from a 
commonality of experience related to racism and 
oppression (Rasheed and Rasheed 2004, p. 142). 
Although the Black community is considered to 
be more homophobic than the general population, 
African-American LGBT persons contend to 
have always had more of a sense of belonging to 
the Black community than LGBT communities. 
Therefore, a consolidated approach of 
community-based, outreach, gatekeeper, and 
case-find model might offer a practical approach 
to identification of LGBT elders in need of ser- 
vices and service delivery. In fact, the Gatekeeper 
Model of Case Finding was created in 1978 by 
Raymond Raschko, a social worker in Spokane, 
Washington, as a community- wide system of 
proactive case finding to identify at-risk older 
adult who remain invisible to the service delivery 
systems created to serve them. Gatekeepers are 
people in the community (e.g., postal service 
worker, apartment manager, meter reader, code 
enforcement workers, emergency response teams, 
business owners) who come into contact with 
older persons through their everyday activities. 
They are trained to look for signs and symptoms 
that might indicate that an older person needs 
assistance (http://Spokane.wsu.edu/researchout- 
reach/wimhrt/A7.pdf). Using the gatekeeper 



model as the core of the consolidated approach 
offers Black LGBT elders an informal response 
and referral system that they may trust. The more 
service models that are available to deliver pro- 
gramming to African-American LGBT elders 
might increase their options to get assistance. 
Community-based programs have proven to be 
effective with in the Black community. 



Policy Issues 

The role of gender and sexuality is increasingly 
critical to policy development and implementa- 
tion. The Black Racial Congress has incorporated 
gay rights issues as part of its agenda. One of 
their principles, “Gender and sexuality can no 
loner be viewed as a personal issue but must be a 
basic part of our analyses, politics, and strug- 
gles,” underscores the importance and urgency to 
integrate gay rights into broader issues affecting 
the African-American community (National 
Black Justice Coalition 2009). Leaders in the 
Black community support the rights of LGBT 
persons as civil rights and as public policy issues. 
In 2005, Julian Bond as chairman of the NAACP 
emphasized that gay rights are civil rights, and 
the Rev. A1 Sharpton, founder of the 
Harlem-based National Action Network, stated, 
“unless you are prepared to say gays and lesbians 
are not human beings, they should have the same 
constitutional right of any other human beings” 
(National Black Justice Coalition 2009, p. 4). 

Health disparities among African-American 
elders and their LGBT counterparts are alarming, 
and these populations remain largely invisible in 
services, policies, and research (Fredriksen- 
Goldsen and Muraco 2010; Metlife 2010). 
Research suggests that knowledge of health and 
health disparities is crucial to inform the devel- 
opment and implementation of effective services 
and public policies (Auldridge and Espinoza 
2013; Comberford et al. 2004; 
Fredrikson-Goldsen et al. 2011; MetLife 2010; 
Wilson and Yoshikawa 2007). Fredriksen- 
Goldsen et al. (2011) assert that in order to 
develop policies and effective interventions to 



126 



D.A. Harley 



Table 6.6 SAGE recommendations for policy and practice for older LGBT of color 

Include specific provisions for LGBT elders in the Older Americans Act (OAA), ensuring that vulnerable LGBT 
elders of color are able to age in good health and with broad community support 

Ensure that community services and supports in the OAA are offered in a culturally and linguistically competent 
manner, better reaching LGBT elders of color 

Increase federal funding for organizations and programmatic interventions targeting LGBT elders of color 

Ensure that implementation of the Affordable Care Act engages LGBT elders of color as advocates, so that new health 
reform effectively reach communities of color and LGBT communities that are dealing with aging challenges 

Strengthen Social Security and increase access for LGBT elders and elders of color who experience diminished 
economic security in their retirement years. A stronger, more inclusive Social Security will enhance the lives of 
millions of LGBT people of color 

Improve data collection on sexual orientation and gender identity to better identify and address health disparities 
among LGBT elders of color 

Decrease elder abuse among more vulnerable and socially isolated elders by strengthening outreach and community 
support to LGBT elders of color 

Increase federal funding for safe and affordable senior housing and housing supports, while expanding the 
development of culturally and linguistically competent senior housing communities 

Strengthen the federal response to HIV and aging, which includes public awareness about the issue, equipping aging, 
and healthcare providers with the skills to effectively serve older adults with HIV, and specifically addressing the 
impact of the epidemic on LGBT elders of color 

Eliminate discriminatory exclusion of medically necessary transition-related care from federally funded health 
programs impacting LGBT older people of color 

Adapted from Auldridge and Espinoza (2013) 



address the needs of LGBT elders, we must first 
understand the conditions and factors that result 
in health disparities and lack of access to aging 
and health services. Formation of policy will 
continue to be compromised until we have a 
thorough understanding of the needs of 
Black LGBT elders. 

Questions on sexual orientation and gender 
identity are rarely asked in Federal surveys or by 
state and local aging service providers, resulting 
in limited ability to understand the nature of 
health disparities among older Black LGBT 
persons. Auldridge and Espinoza (2013) recom- 
mend the federal agencies (e.g., AOA, Centers 
on Medicare & Medical Services) should include 
uniform questions on sexual orientation and 
gender identity in their national survey instru- 
ments and encourage state and local agencies to 
follow suit through their aging systems. Other 
recommendations by Auldridge and Espinoza on 
policy and practice for older LGBT persons of 
color are presented in Table 6.6. Equitable dis- 
tribution of program resources requires 



consideration of the relative needs of 
Black LGBT elders. For example, elderly Black 
persons have a shorter life expectancy than 
White or Latino elderly. The equity argument has 
been put forth that because of this shorter life 
expectancy, African-Americans should qualify 
for programs and services at an earlier age 
(Gelfand 2003). 

In the UK, the Equality Act of 2010 provides 
protection against discrimination for protected 
classes, including sexual orientation and gender 
identity. Comparable legislation in the USA 
includes Title VII of The Civil Rights Act, the 
Protection of Freedom Act (2012), and the 
Employment Nondiscrimination Act (ENDA). 
Some individuals will argue that the Constitution 
of the USA is the ultimate legislation that 
includes rights and protections for all persons, 
including LGBT persons and African-Americans. 
Other legislation varies state-by-state. 

Barriers to effective and appropriate services 
for African-American LGBT elders can be 
eliminated through policy reform at institutional. 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



127 



community, and system levels. Thus, to improve 
healthcare access and health outcomes across the 
population of Black LGBT elders, we must 
implement policy that can reach entire commu- 
nities (Wilson and Yoshikawa 2007). Policy 
makers should explore best practices and 
evidence-based practices to develop policy for 
African-American LGBT elders. Cost of imple- 
mentation should not be the only or primary 
determining factor in policy development and 
implementation. 



Summary 

African-American and Black LGBT elders in the 
USA have been victims of a dualistic and bias 
system of health care and service delivery. These 
individuals have come to distrust service pro- 
viders and the system of care that are designated 
for their care. Research suggests that these mis- 
trusts, cautions, and suspicions continue to have 
credence. In fact, Sue and Sue (2013) refer to this 
mistrust as a “healthy cultural paranoia” by 
African-Americans that can serve as a coping 
strategy with respect to racism (p. 375). While 
various disciplines have begun to study the cul- 
tural, psychological, wellness, and resilience of 
elderly African-American and other LGBT per- 
sons of color, more understanding of their cir- 
cumstances, life experiences, and needs is 
needed. Just as African-American and Black 
LGBT populations have differences and distinc- 
tions from White LGBT communities, there are 
numerous commonalities and convergences 
(Meyer 2010). However, recommendations for 
inclusion of African-American and Black LGBT 
elders in policy must move beyond an additive 
approach in which race and ethnicity are incor- 
porated as the “other.” 

Healthcare and human services providers have 
the responsibility to make available appropriate 
and effective services to all consumers, regard- 
less of minority status (Maccio and Doueck 



2002). The need and advocacy for equity in 
services for LGBT elders are well documented 
(e.g., American Society on Aging; Auldridge and 
Espinoza 2013; Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011, 
2013; Movement Advancement Project [MAP]; 
MetLife 2010; Services & Advocacy for Gay, 
Lesbian, Bisexual & Transgender Elders; Wilson 
and Yoshikawa 2007), and with the rapid 
expansion of both aging and ethnic minority 
populations, the time is now to increase the 
quality and quantity of services for those among 
them who are LGBT. 



Learning Exercises 
Self-Check Questions 

1. What types of challenges do 
African-American LGBT elders face that 
differ from those of their White counterparts? 

2. How do historical hostilities influence 
help-seeking behavior of older 
African-American LGBT persons? 

3. What type of income constitutes the largest 
share of income of older African-Americans? 

4. Who was one of the first documented cases of 
an African-American transgender person? 

5. Explain how the long-term financial stability 
of many LGBT elders of color is shaped by 
employment discrimination. 

Experiential Exercises 

1. Identify a Black Church that is accepting of 
LGBT persons and volunteer to help to 
establish a senior program and resources that 
is inclusive of LGBT elders. 

2. Develop an anthology or documentary of 
older LGBT African-Americans. 

3. Identify one way in which you can change the 
life of an LGBT African-American elder and 
work with him or her to implement it. 



128 



D.A. Harley 



Multiple-Choice Questions 

1. Which of the following African-American 
group is rarely researched outside of a focus 
on HIV/AIDS? 

a. Gay men 

b. Lesbians 

c. Bisexual men 

d. Heterosexual men 

2. Which of the following increases acceptance 
of sexual orientation for older LGBT 
African-American/Blacks in their families? 

a. Coming out at an early age 

b. Strong religious ties 

c. Lack of disclosure 

d. Partial disclosure 

3. In which community does the majority of 
older African-American/Black LGBT per- 
sons find more support and refuge? 

a. LGBT community 

b. Black community 

c. Both of the above 

d. Neither of the above 

4. Which of the following is not as prevalent a 
characteristic in the Black community as it is 
in the gay community? 

a. Sexism 

b. Ageism 

c. Heterosexism 

d. Internalized homophobia 

5. Unlike their younger counterparts, in which 
of the following cultural perspectives did 
African-American/Black LGBT elders expe- 
rience their development? 

a. Dual identity framework 

b. Bicultural framework 

c. Racism, homo-prejudice, and aging 

d. Integration, social visibility, and aging 

6. The statement, “Gender and sexuality can no 
longer be viewed as a personal issue but 
must be a basic part of our analyses, politics, 
and struggles,” is attributed to which of the 
following Black organizations? 

a. Southern Christian Association 

b. National Association for the Advance- 
ment of Colored people 

c. National Black Justice Coalition 

d. Black Racial Congress 



7. Which of the following are reasons as to why 
African-Americans underuse mental health 
services? 

a. Reliance on primary care providers 

b. Reliance on family members, friends, and 
other community members 

c. Dependence on emergency departments 
for diagnosis and treatment of mental 
health concerns 

d. All of the above 

e. None of the above 

8. Which of the following approaches should 
be used in the treatment of African- 
American/Black LGBT elders? 

a. Multidisciplinary 

b. Continuum of care 

c. Selective service model 

d. Consciousness model 

9. Which group among older African-Ameri- 
can/Black adults tends to be the most eco- 
nomically insecure and isolated? 

a. Men 

b. Women 

c. Gay men 

d. Baby boomer 

10. Which of the following is a primary barrier 
to quality services for African-American 
/Black LGBT elders? 

a. Lack of control over their care 

b. Limited transportation 

c. Lack of culturally competent service 
providers 

d. Prohibitions of insurance carriers 

Key 

1- a 

2- c 

3- b 

4- b 

5- c 

6- d 

7- d 

8 - a 

9- b 

10- c 




6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



129 



Resources 

BGRG (Black Gay Research Group): BGRG was 
developed to address the paucity of research 
regarding the disproportionate HIV infection 
rates among Black MSM. BGRB is made up of 
Black gay men who engage in interdisciplinary 
research in the fields of African diaspora studies, 
gender studies, sexuality studies, and public 
health (http://www.thebgrg.org). 

Diverse Elders Coalition: The DEC advocates 
for policies and programs that improve aging in 
communities as racially and ethnically diverse 
people. The Coalition is made up of five national 
organizations representing a growing majority of 
millions of older people throughout the country 
(www.diverseelders.org). 

GLAAD’S Communities of African Descent 
(COAD): COAD provides a Resource Kit with 
guidelines, terminology, and contact information 
for leading Black LGBT organizations and indi- 
viduals as tools for more inclusive, fair, and bal- 
anced coverage of the Black LGBT community 
(http://www.glaad.org/publications/coadkik). 

GMAD (Gay Men of African Descent): 
(gmad @ gmad.org). 

GRIOT Circle: An intergenerational and cul- 
turally diverse community-based social service 
organization responsive to the realities of older 
LGBT and two-spirit people of all colors (www. 
griotcircle.worldpress.com). 

NBGMAC (National Black Gay Men’s 
Advocacy Coalition): NBGMAC is committed to 
improving the health and well-being of Black 
gay men through advocacy that is focused on 
research, policy, education, and training (http:// 
www.nbgmac.org). 

NBJC (National Black Justice Coalition): 
(http://www.nbjcoalition.org). 

ULOAH (United Lesbians of African Heri- 
tage): (http://www.uloah.com). 

ZAMI NOBLA ( National Organization of 
Black Lesbians on Aging): ZAMI is an organi- 
zation for lesbians of African descent based in 
Atlanta, Georgia (http://www.zami.org). 

ZUNA Institute: Organized in 1999, ZUNA 
Institute is a national nonprofit organization for 



Black lesbians that address issues on health, eco- 
nomic development, education, and public policy 
and strives to eliminate barriers and other forms of 
social discrimination (www.zunainstitute.org). 



References 

Administration for Community Living. (2012). A statis- 
tical profile of older African Americans. Retrieved 
June 3, 2014 from http://www.acl.gov/NewsRoom/ 
Publications/doc/A_Statistical_Prolie_of_01der_ 
African_Americans.pdf. 

Administration on Aging, (n.d.). AOA information for 
African American elders. Retrieved June 3, 2014 from 
http://seniorhealth.about.com/library/news/blfa.htm. 

Administration on Aging. (2013). Older Americans 
behavioral health-issue Brief 11: Reaching diverse 
older adult populations and engaging them in pre- 
vention services and early interventions. Available at 
http://ww.aoa.gov/AoARoot/AoA_Programs7HPW/ 
Behavioral/docs2AssueBriefllReachingandEngaging. 
PDF. 

Albelda, R., Lee Badgett, M. V., Schneebaum, A., & 
Gates, G. J. (2009). Poverty in the lesbian, gay and 
bisexual community. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA School 
of Law. 

American Medical Association. (2009). AMA policy 
regarding sexual orientation: H -65. 973 Health care 
disparities in same-sex partner households. Huston, 
TX: Author. 

Asanti, T. (1999). Racism in the 21 st century: How will 
the lesbian & gay community respond. Lesbian News, 
24(9), 24. 

Auldridge, A., & Espinoza, R. (2013). Health equity and 
LGBT elders of color: Recommendations for policy 
and practice. New York: SAGE. 

Bailey, R. K., Blackmon, H. L„ & Stevens, F. L. (2009). 
Major depressive disorder in the African American 
population: Meeting the Challenges of stigma, misdi- 
agnosis, and treatment disparities. Journal of the 
National Medical Association, 101, 1089-1094. 

Baker, K., & Krehely, J. (2012). How health care reform 
will help LGBT elders. Public Policy & Aging Report, 
27(3), 19-23. 

Bates, D. D. (2010). Once-married African American 
lesbians and bisexual women: Identity development 
and coming-out process. Journal of Homosexuality, 
57, 197-225. 

Battle, J., & Bennett, M. (2000). Research on lesbian and 
gay populations within the African American com- 
munity: What have we learned? African American 
Research Perspectives, 6, 35M6. 

Betts, E. C. (2012). Black lesbian spirituality: Hearing 
our stories. Retrieved September 12, 2013 from http:// 
www.adulterc.org/Proceedings/2012/papers/betts.pdf. 



130 



D.A. Harley 



Bernstein, K. T., Liu, K. L„ Begier, E. M., Koblin, B.. 
Karpati, A., & Murrill, C. (2008). Same-sex attraction 
disclosure to health care providers among New York 
City men who have sex with men. Archives of Internal 
Medicine, 168(13), 1458-1464. 

Bostwick, W. B. (2007). Disparities in mental health 
treatment among CLBT populations. Arlington, VA: 
National Alliance on Mental Illness. 

Bowleg, L. (2008). When black + lesbian + women = black 
lesbian woman: The methodological challenges of 
qualitative and quantitative intersectionality research. 
Sex Roles, 36(2), 207-325. 

Boyd-Franklin, N. (2003). Race, class, and poverty. In F. 
Walsh (Ed.), Normal family process (pp. 260-279). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Brown, C. E. (2008). Racism in the gay community and 
homophobia in the Black community: Negotiating the 
gay Black male experience. Dissertation. Blacksburg, 
VA: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. 

Brown Wright, L„ & Femander, A. (2005). The African 
American family. In D. A. Harley & J. M. Dillard 
(Eds.), Contemporary mental health issues among 
African Americans (pp. 19-34). Alexandria, VA: 
American Counseling Association. 

Boykin, K. (1996). One more river to cross: Black and 
gay in America. New York: Anchor Books. 

Burlew, L. D., & Serface, H. C. (2006). The ticultural 
experience of older, African American, gay men: 
Counseling implications. Adultspan Journal, 5(2), 
81-90. 

Centers for Disease Control. (2010). National vital 
statistics system. Retrieved June 3, 2014 from http:// 
www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth/populations/remp/black. 
html. 

Centers for Disease Contro. (2013). Black and African 
America populations. Retrieved February 20, 2015 
from http://www.cdc.gov/minority/healthpopulations/ 
REMP/black.html 

Chung, Y. B. (2007). Lesbian, gay, and bisexual people of 
color. In M. G. Constantine (Ed.), Clinical practice 
with people of color (pp. 143-161). New York: 
Teachers College Press. 

Clarke, C. (1983). The failure to transform: Homophobia 
in the Black community. In B. Smith (Ed.), Home 
girls: A Black feminist anthology (pp. 197-208). New 
York: Kitchen Table, Women of Color Press. 

Clarke, C. (1999). In E. Brandt (Ed.), Dangerous liaisons: 
Blacks, gays, and the struggle for equality (pp. 31- 
44). New York: The New Press. 

Clements-Nolle, K., Marx, R., Guzman, R., & Katz, M. 
(2001). HIV prevalence, risk behaviors, health care 
use, and mental health status of transgendered persons 
in San Francisco: Implications for public health 
intervention. American Journal of Public Health, 91 
(6), 915-921. 

Comerford, S. A., Henson-Stroud, M. M., Sionainn, C., & 
Wheeler, E. (2004). Crone songs: Voices of lesbian 
elders on aging in a rural environment. Affilia, 1 9(4), 
418—436. 



Connor, K. O., Copeland, V. C., Grote, N. K„ Rosen, D., 
Albert, S., McMurray, M. L., et al. (2010). Barriers to 
treatment and culturally endorsed coping strategies 
among depressed African American older adults. 
Aging and Mental Health, 14, 971-983. 

Cooper-Lewter, N. (2007). Conceptualizing soul as a 
mental health resource in the Black community. In S. 
M. L. Logan, R. W. Denby, & P. A. Gibbson (Eds.), 
Mental health care in the African American commu- 
nity (pp. 213-231). New York: Haworth Press. 

DeBlaere, C„ Brewster, M. E., Sarkees, A., & Moradi, B. 
(2010). Conducting research with LGBT people of 
color: Methodological challenges and strategies. The 
Counseling Psychologist, 38(3), 331-362. 

Deutsch, M. (2006). A framework for thinking about 
oppression and its change. Social Justice Research, 1 9 
(1), 7-41. 

Dibble, S. L., Eliason, M. J., & Crawford, B. (2012). 
Correlated of wellbeing among African American 
lesbians. Journal of Homosexuality, 59, 820-838. 

Douglas, K. B. (2006). Black church homophobia: What 
to do about it. Available at www.yale.edu/divinity/ 
publications/reflections/spring06/12_17.pdff. 

Dworkin, S. H. (2006). The aging bisexual: The invisible 
of the invisible minority. In D. Kimmel, T. Rose, & S. 
Davis (Eds.), Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
aging — Research and clinical perspectives (pp. 36- 
52). New York, NY: Columbia University Press. 

Dyson, M. E. (2003). Open mike: Reflections on philos- 
ophy, race, sex, culture and religion. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Elder, K„ & Retmm, J. (2012, May 30). Framework for 
isolation in adults over 50. AARP Foundation. 
Retrieved June 16, 2014 from http://www. 

aarpfoundation.org. 

Evans, K. M., & George, R. (2008). African Americans. 
In G. McAuliffe (Ed.), Culturally alert counseling: A 
comprehensive introduction (pp. 146-187). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Fiske, S. T. (1993). Controlling other people: The impact 
of power on stereotyping. American Psychologist, 48 
(6), 621-628. 

Francis, G. M., & Acey, K. (2013, February 2). Reducing 
isolation: A community engagement service model. 
Retrieved June 5, 2013 from http://www.asaging.org/ 
blog/reducing-isolation-community-engagement- 
service-model. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K., & Muraco, A. (2010). Aging and 
sexual orientation: A 25-year review of the literature. 
Research on Aging, 32(3), 372 — 413. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Kim, H„ Emlet, J., Muraco, A., 
Erosheva, E. A., Hoy-Ellis, C. P„ et al. (2011). The 
aging and health report: Disparities and resilience 
among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender older 
adults. Seattle: Institute for Multigenerational Health. 

Fredriksen-Goldsen, K., Kim, H. J., Golsen, J., Hoy-Ellis, 
C. P., Emlet, C. A., Erosheva, E. A., & Muraco, A. 
(2013, January). LGBT older adults in San Francisco: 
Health, risks, and resilience — Findings from caring 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



131 



and aging with pride. Seattle: Institute for Multigen- 
erational Health. 

Funders for Lesbian and Gay Issues. (2004). Aging in 
equity: LGBT elders in America. New York: Author. 

Gates, G. J., & Newport, F. (2012, October 18). Special 
report: 3.4 % of U.S. adults identify as LGBT. 
Inaugural Gallup findings. Retrieved May 29, 2014 
from http://www.gallup.com/158066/special-report- 
adults-identify-as-lgbt.aspx. 

Gelfand, D. E. (2003). Aging and ethnicity: Knowledge 
and sendees. New York: Springer. 

Gibson, D. (2009). Negotiating multiple identities: The 
experiences of African American lesbians. Disserta- 
tion. New York: Seaton Hall University. 

Graham, R. (2011). The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender people: Building a foundation for 
better understanding. Institute of Medicine. Washing- 
ton, DC: The National Academic Press. 

Grant, J. M„ Koskovich, G„ Frazer, M. S„ & Bjerk, S. 
(2009, September). Outing age: Public policy issues 
affecting gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender 
elders. Washing, DC: National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force Policy Institute. Retrieved May 29, 2014 from 
http://www.thetaskforce.org/downloads.reports. 
reports/outinage_final.pdf. 

Greene, B. (1994). Ethnic-minority lesbians and gay men: 
Mental health and treatment issues. Journal of Con- 
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 243-251. 

Greene, B. (2000). African American lesbians and bisex- 
ual women. Journal of Social Issues, 56, 239-249. 

Greene, B., & Boyd-Franklin, N. (1996). African Amer- 
ican lesbian couples: Ethnocultural considerations in 
psychotherapy. Women & Therapy: A Feminist Quar- 
terly, 19(3), 49-60. 

Hall, R. L„ & Fine. M. (2005). The stories we tell: The 
lives and friendship of two older black lesbians. 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29, 177-187. 

Harley, D. A. (2005a). The Black church: A 

strength-based approach in mental health. In D. 
A. Harley & J. M. Dillard (Eds.), Contemporary 
mental health issues among African Americans 
(pp. 191-203). Alexandria, VA: American Counseling 
Association. 

Harley, D. A. (2005b). African Americans and indigenous 
counseling. In D. A. Harley & J. M. Dillard (Eds.), 
Contemporary mental health issues among African 
Americans (pp. 293-306). Alexandria, VA: American 
Counseling Association. 

Harley, D. A., Stansbury, K. L., & Nelson, M. (2013). 
Sisters gone missing: The lack of focus on African 
American lesbians in mental health counseling and 
research. In H. Jackson-Lowman (Ed.), African 
American women: Living at the crossroads of race, 
gender, class, and culture (pp. 287-304). San Diego, 
CA: Cognella Academic Press. 

Harley, D. A., Stansbury, K. L., Nelson, M., & Espinosa, 
C. T. (2014). A profile of rural elderly African 
American lesbians: Meeting their need. In H. F. O. 
Vakalahi, G. M. Simpson, & N. Giunta (Eds.), 
Collective spirit of aging across cultures (pp. 133— 



155). New York: Springer Science and Business 
Media Publisher. 

Henriksen, R. C., & Paladino, D. A. (2009). Identity 
development in a multiple heritage world. In R. 
C. Henrisken Jr & D. A. Paladino (Eds.), Counseling 
multiple heritage individuals, couples, and families 
(pp. 25^-3). Alexandria, VA: American Counseling 
Association. 

Hughes, A. K„ Harold, R. D., & Boyer, J. M. (2011). 
Awareness of LGBT aging issues among aging 
services network providers. Journal of Gerontological 
Social Work, 54(7), 659-677. 

Hunter, S. (2005). Midlife and older LGBT adults: 
Knowledge and affirmative practice for the social 
services. New York: Haworth Press. 

Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Committee on Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual, and Transgender Health Issues. (2011). The 
health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
people: Building a foundation for better understand- 
ing. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences. 
Retrieved February 4, 2012 from http://www.ncbi. 
nlmnih.gov/books/NBK64806/?report=prin table. 

Institute for Women’s Policy Research. (201 1, May). Fact 
sheet: Social Security and Black women (IWPR 
#D496). Washington, DC: George Washington 

University. 

Israel, T. (2007). Training counselors to work ethnically 
and effectively with bisexual clients. In B. A. Firestein 
(Ed.), Becoming visible: Counseling bisexuals across 
the lifespan (pp. 381-394). New York: Columbia 
University Press. 

Jameson, D. (2007). Reconceptualizing cultural identity 
and its role in intercultural business communication. 
Journal of Business Communication, 44(3), 199-235. 

Jeffries, W. L„ Dodge, B„ & Sandfort, T. G. M. (2008). 
Religion and spirituality among bisexual Black men in 
the USA. Culture, Health and Sexuality, 10(5), 463- 
477. 

Jimenez, D. E., Alegria, M„ Chen, C. N., Chan, D., & 
Laderman, M. (2010). Prevalence of psychiatric 
illnesses in older ethnic minority adults. Journal of 
the American Geriatrics Society, 58, 256-264. 

Jones, D. A. (2009). Disabilities in older African Amer- 
ican women: Understanding the current state of the 
literature. Journal of National Black Nurses Associa- 
tion, 20(2), 55-64. 

Kelly, J. F., & Greene, B. (2010). Diversity within 
African American, female therapists: Variability in 
clients’ expectations and assumptions about the ther- 
apist. Psychotherapy: Theory Research, Practice, & 
Training, 47, 186-197. 

Kuyper, L., & Fokkema, T. (2010). Loneliness among 
older lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults: The rol of 
minority stress. Archieves of Sex Behavior, 39(5), 
1171-1180. 

Lacy, K. R. (2004). Black spaces. Black places: Strategic 
assimilation and identity construction in middle-class 
suburbia. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 27(6), 908-930. 

Landerman, G„ & Leon, L. (2003). Religion and 
American cultures: An encyclopedia of traditions, 



132 



D.A. Harley 



diversity, and popular expressions (Vol. 1). Santa 
Barbara, CA: ACB-CLIO. 

Lawson, E., & Thomas, C. (2007). Wading in the waters: 
Narrative of older Katrina survivors. Journal of the 
Poor and Underserved, 18, 341-354. 

Lekan, D. (2009). Sojourner syndrome and health 
disparities in African American women. Annuals of 
Advance Nurse Science, 32(4), 307-321. 

Lemelle, Jr., A. J. (2003). Linking the structure of African 
American criminalization to the spread of HIV/AIDS 
(pp. 1-34). Conference papers, American Sociological 
Association, Annual meeting, Atlanta. 

Lewis, M., & Marshall, I. (2012). LGBT psychology: 
Research perspectives and people of African descent. 
New York: Springer. 

Locher, J. L., Ritchie, C. S., Roth, D. L., Baker, P. S., 
Bodner, E. V., & Allman, R. M. (2005). Social 
isolation, support, and capital and nutritional risk in an 
older sample: Ethnic and gender differences. Social 
Science and Medicine, 60(4), 747-761. 

Loiacano, D. K. (1989). Gay identity issues among Black 
Americans: Racism, homophobia, and the need for 
validation. Journal of Counseling & Development, 68, 
21-25. 

Loue, S. (2014). Understanding theology and homosex- 
uality in African American communities. New York: 
Springer. 

Maccio, E. M., & Doueck, H. J. (2002). Meeting the 
needs of the gay and lesbian community: Outcomes in 
the human services. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social 
Services: Issues in Practice, Policy & Research, 14(A), 
55-73. 

Mayo, C. (1982). Training for positive marginality. In C. 
L. Bickman (Ed.), Applied social psychology annual 
(Vol. 3, pp. 57-73). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

McGuire, T. C., & Miranda, J. (2008). New evidence 
regarding racial and ethnic disparities in mental health: 
Policy implications. Health Affairs, 27, 393 — 403. 

MetLife. (2010, March). Still out. still aging: The MetLife 
study of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender baby 
boomers. Westport, CT: Mature Market Institute. 

Meyer, I. H. (2010). Identity, stress, and resilience in 
lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals of color. The 
Counseling Psychologist, 38(3), 442—454. 

Meyer, K. H., Bradford, J. B., Makadon, H. J., Stall, R., 
Goldhammer, H„ & Landers, S. (2008). Sexual and 
gender minority health: What we know and what 
needs to be done. American Journal of Public Health, 
98(6), 989-995. 

Mitchem, S. Y. (2002). “There is a balm...” Spirituality & 
healing among African American women. Michigan 
Family Review, 7(1), 19-33. 

Moore, M. R. (2010). Articulating a politics of (multiple) 
identities: LGBT sexuality and inclusion in Black 
community life. Du Bois Review, 7(2), 1-20. 

Moore, K. A., Weinberg, B. D., & Berger, P. D. (2010). 
The effect of ethnicity and acculturation on African 
American food purchases. Innovative Marketing, 6(4), 
17-29. 



Morrell. R. W., Echt, K. V., & Caramagno, J. (2008). 
Older adults, race/ethnicity and mental health dispar- 
ities: A consumer focused research agenda. Retrieved 
June 11, 2014 from http://www.tapartnership.org/ 
doc s/researchAgendaOnAgingAndMHDispari ties.pdf. 

Muraco, A., & Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. (2011). “That’s 
what friends do”: Informal caregiving for chronically 
ill midlife and older lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults. 
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 28(8), 
1073-1092. 

Coalition, National Black Justice. (2009). At the cross- 
roads: African American same gender loving families 
and the freedom to marry. Washington, DC: Author. 

National Alliance on Mental Health. (2007). Disparities 
in mental health treatment among GLBT populations. 
Arlington, VA: Author. 

National Center for Health Statistics. (2013). Deaths: 
Final data for 2010. National Vital Statistics Report, 
61(A). Available at www.cdc.gov.nchs/data/dvs/ 
deaths_20 1 0_release.pdf. 

National Hispanic Council on Aging. (2013, December). 
Hispanic LGBT older adult needs assessment. 
Retrieved May 29, 2014 from www.gallup.com/poll/ 
158066/special-report-adults-identify-lgbt.aspx. 

Neighbors, H. W., Caldwell, C., Williams, D. R., Neese, 
R., Taylor, R. J., Bullard, K., M., et al. (2007). Race, 
ethnicity, and the use of services for mental disorders. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 485^194. 

Paniagua, F. A. (2014). Assessing and treating culturally 
diverse clients: A practical guide. Los Angeles, CA: 
Sage. 

Parham, T. A., White, J. L., & Ajamu, A. (1999). The 
psychology of Blacks: An African-centered perspec- 
tive. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Peterson, J. W. (1990). Age of wisdom: Elderly Black 
women in family and church. In J. Sokolovsky (Ed.), 
The cultural context of aging: Worldwide perspective 
(pp. 213-227). Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey. 

Pew Center. (2006, August 3). Pragmatic Americans 
liberal and conservatives on social issues: Most wan 
middle ground. Retrieved September 29, 2014 from 
www.people-press.org/2006/08/03/pragmatic- 
americans-liberal-and-conservative-on-social-issues/2/ 

Plumb, M. & Associates. (2003/2004). SAGE national 
needs assessment: A report prepared for senior action 
in a gay environment. New York: SAGE. 

Plummer, M. D. (2007). Sexual racism in gay communi- 
ties: Negotiating the etlmosexual marketplace. Thesis. 
University of Washington. Available at http://hdl. 
handle.net/1773/9181. 

Portes, A., & Zhou, M. (1993). The new second 
generation: Segmented assimilation and its variants. 
Annals of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science, 530, 74—96. 

Primm, A. B„ & Lawson, W. B. (2010). Disparities 
among ethnic groups: African Americans. In P. Ruiz 
& A. B. Primm (Eds.), Disparities in psychiatric care: 
Clinical and cross-cultural perspectives. Wolters 



6 African-American and Black LGBT Elders 



133 



Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: Baltimore, 
MD. 

Purdie-Vaugns, V., & Eibach, R. (2008). Intersectional 
invisibility: The distinctive advantages and disadvan- 
tages of multiple subordinate-group identities. Sex 
Roles, 59(5-6), 377. 

Rasheed, M. N., & Rasheed, J. M. (2004). Rural African 
American older adults and the Black helping tradition. 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 47(1/2), 137— 

150. 

Redman, D., & Woody, I. (2012, lune 19). Creating a safe 
harbor for African American LGBT elders. Aging 
Today. Retrieved September 19, 2014 from http:// 
www.asaging.org/blog/creating-safe-harbor-African 
American-lgbt-elders. 

Riva, L. M. (2010). Acculturation: Theories, measure- 
ment, and research. In J. G. Ponterotto, I. M. Casas, L. 
A. Suzuky & C. M. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of 
multicultural counseling (3 rd edn., pp. 331-341). Los 
Angeles: Sage. 

Roberts, M. (2012, March. A look at African American 
trans trailblazers. Retrieved lune 3, 2014 from http:// 
www.ebony.com/news-views/trans- 
trailblazers#axzz33cJowprP. 

Robinson-Wood, T. (2009). The convergence of race, 
ethnicity, and gender: Multiple identities in counseling 
(3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill. 

Rust, P. (1996). Managing multiple identities: Diversity 
among bisexual women and men. In B. Firestein (Ed.), 
Bisexuality: The psychology and politics of an invis- 
ible minority. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Sanders, T. L. (2010). Black lesbians and racial identity in 
contemporary Cuba. Black Women, Gender, and 
Families, 4(1), 9-36. 

Savage, T. A., & Harley, D. A. (2005). African American 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual persons. In D. A. Harley & 
I. M. Dillard (Eds.), Contemporary mental health 
issues among African Americans (pp. 91-105). Alex- 
andria, VA: American Counseling Association. 

Scherrer, K. S. (2009). Images of sexuality and aging in 
gerontological literature. Sexuality Research & Social 
Policy: A Journal of the NSRC, 6(4), 5-12. 

Schwartz, S. I., Zamboanga, B. L., Rodriguez, L., & 
Wang, S. (2007). The structure of cultural identity in 
an ethnically diverse sample of emerging adults. Basic 
and Applied Social Psychology, 29(2), 159-173. 

Shellman, J. (2011). Barriers to depression care for Black 
older adults: Practice and policy implications. Journal 
of Gerontological Nursing, 37(6), 13-17. 

Singer, J. A. (2004). Narrative identity and meaning 
making across the adult lifespan: An introduction. 
Journal of Personality, 72(3), 437^159. 

Smith, B. (1999). Blacks and gays healing the great 
divide. In E. Brandt (Ed.), Dangerous liaisons: 
Blacks, gays and the struggle for equality (pp. 15- 
24). New York: The New Press. 

Social Care Institute for Excellence. (2011, April). 
Implications for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen- 
dered (LBGT) people. Retrieved May 30, 2014 from 
www.scie.org.uk. 



Social Security Administration. (2011). Annual Statistical 
Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin, 2010. 
Retrieved lanuary 15, 2013 from http://www.ssa.gov/ 
policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/. 

Somjen, F. M. (2009). LGBT health and human sendees 
needs in New York state. Albany, NY: Empire State 
Pride Agenda Foundation. 

Stanford, A. (2013). Homophobia in the Black church: 
How faith, politics, and fear divide the Black 
community. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 

Stansbury, K., Harley, D. A., Allen, S., Nelson, N. J., & 
Christensen, K. (2010). African American lesbians: A 
selective review of the literature, African American 
Research Perspective, 77(1), 99-108. 

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013). Counseling the culturally 
diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. 

Szymanski, D. M., & Gupta, A. (2009). Examining the 
relationship between multiple internalized oppressions 
and African American lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
questioning persons' self-esteem and psychological 
distress. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56(1), 
110-118. 

Tauriac, I. J., & Scruggs, N. (2006). Elder abuse among 
African Americans. Educational Gerontology, 32, 37- 
48. 

Taylor, R. J., Chatters, L. M., & Levin, J. S. (2004). 
Religion in the lives of African Americans: Social, 
psychological and health perspectives. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage. 

Teaster, P. B., Harley, D. A., & Kettaneh, A. (2014). 
Aging and mistreatment: Victimization of older adults 
in the United States. In H. F. O. Vakalah, G. 
M. Simpson & N. Giunta (Eds.), Collective spirit of 
aging across cultures (pp. 41-64). New York, NY: 
Springer Science and Business Media Publisher. 

Todays, Research on Aging. (2013, June). The health and 
life expectancy of older Blacks and Hispanics in the 
United States , 28, 1-8. 

Troxel, W. M., Buysse, D. J., Hall, M., Kamarck, T. W., 
Strollo, P. O., Ownes, J. F., et al. (2010). Social 
integration, social contacts, and blood pressure dip- 
ping in African Americans and whites. Journal of 
Hypertension, 28(2), 265. 

Van der Meide, W. (2002, March 15). The intersections of 
sexual orientation, race, religion, ethnicity & heritage 
language: The state of research. Toronto, ON: 
Canadian Heritage Multicultural Program. 

Vasquez, L. A., Marin, M., & Garcia-Vazquez, E. (2010). 
Advances in multicultural assessment and counseling 
with culturally diverse older adults. In J. G. Ponterotto, 
J. M. Casas, L. A., Suzuki & C. M. Alexander (Eds.), 
Handbook of multicultural counseling (pp. 667-675). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Vontress, C. E., & Epp, L. R. (1997). Historical hostility 
in the African American clients: Implications for 
counseling. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and 
Development, 45, 170-184. 

Wamwara-Mbugua, L. W., Cornwell, T. B., & Boiler, G. 
(2006). Triple acculturation: The role of African 



134 



D.A. Harley 



Americans in the consumer acculturation of Kenyan 
immigrants. Advances in Consumer Research, 33, 
428. 

Ward, E. G. (2005). Homophobia, hypermasculinity and 
the U.S. Black church. Culture, Health and Sexuality, 
7, 493-504. 

Welch. M. (2003). Care of Black and African Americans. 
In J. Bigby (Ed.), Cross cultural medicine (pp. 29- 
60). Washington, DC: American College of Physi- 
cians, American Society of Internal Medicine. 

Wheeler, D. P. (2003). Methodological issues in con- 
ducting community-based health and social services 
research among urban Black and African Ameri- 
can LGBT populations. In W. Meezan & J. I. Martin 
(Eds.), Research methods with gay, lesbian, bisexual 
and transgender populations (pp. 65-78). New York: 
Haworth Press. 



Wilson, K. B. (2005). Cultural characteristics of the 
African American community. In D. A. Harley & 

J. M. Dillard (Eds.), Contemporary mental health 
issues among African Americans (pp. 149-162). 
Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association. 

Wilson, P. A., & Yoshikawa, H. (2007). Improving access 
to health care among African American, Asian and 
Pacific Islander, and Latino lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
populations. In H. H. Meyer & M. E. Northridge 
(Eds.), The health of sexual minorities: Public health 
perspective of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender 
populations (pp. 607-637). New York: Springer. 
Wilson, K. B., Harley, D. A., McCormick, K., Jolivette, 

K. , & Jackson, R. L. (2001). A literature review of 
vocational rehabilitation acceptance and rationales for 
bias in the rehabilitation process. Journal of Applied 
Rehabilitation Counseling, 32(1), 24-35. 




American Indian, Alaska Native, 
and Canadian Aboriginal 
Two-Spirit/LGBT Elderly 



7 



Debra A. Harley and Reginald J. Alston 



Abstract 



The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the status of older two-spirit 
American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian Aboriginal two-spirit 
LGBT elders. Information is presented on traditional values and 
behaviors, two-spirit tradition and roles of elders in tribal communities, 
service utilization by two-spirit elders, systems of service delivery, and 
policy implications. The authors acknowledge the heterogeneity of these 
groups and do not presume uniformity across groups. Similarity, the term 
LGBT is used as the modern roughly equivalent of the Native term 
two-spirit. A brief background of two-spirit is included to provide the 
reader with an understanding of the history and significance of 
self-identity that is implicit in how two-spirit persons refer to themselves. 



Keywords 

American Indian • Alaska Native • Canadian Aboriginal two-spirit • 
LGBT elderly 



D.A. Harley (El) • R.J. Alston 

University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA 

e-mail: dharlOO@email.uky.edu 



Understanding the implication of health status, 
aging, disability, and other sociocultural and 
economic factors for two-spirit American Indian 
and Alaska Native (AIAN) and Aboriginal Peo- 
ples (AP) elders is important to investigate 



Overview 



because little research has been done to address the 
extent to which disparities affect them. However, 
throughout the literature, historical trauma has 
profoundly shaped distinctive conditions of health 
risk and resilience of AIANs and AP, and 
two-spirit persons are considered to be at even 
greater risk for adverse health outcomes than other 
Natives (Fieland et al. 2007; Ristock et al. 2011). 
Although urban AIANs and First Nations face 
many of the same conditions as other urban poor, 
they tend to have less social support and a long 
history of circular migration and residential 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_7 



135 



136 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



mobility (i.e., regular travel between urban set- 
tings and reservations (Rhoades et al. 2005). 
Weaver (2012) suggests that cyclical migration is 
problematic, “particularly at times of illness, [it] 
can complicate accurate epidemiological infor- 
mation” (p. 477). Similar to many ethnic minority 
groups, AlANs and First Nations are typically 
overrepresented in the lower socioeconomic sta- 
tus; however, the reader is cautioned not to assume 
that all AIANs and First Nations are poor or des- 
titute. As with any group of people, there diversity 
exists across demographic characteristics. 

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the 
status of older two-spirit AIANs and APs of 
Canada. Information is presented on the status of 
AIANs and APs, traditional values and behav- 
iors, traditions and roles of two-spirit elders in 
tribal communities, service utilization by 
two-spirit elders, and systems of service delivery. 
Discussion of policy and implications for future 
directions are also presented. The authors 
acknowledge the heterogeneity of AIANs and 
APs in North America and do not presume to 
refer to the diversity of the people of tribal 
nations or indigenous peoples of Canada in a 
collectivist way. However, space prohibits dis- 
cussion of each tribal nation or indigenous peo- 
ples, and so general information is presented, 
with specific reference to select groups. Although 
the term LGBT is used throughout this book to 
reference lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
persons, the term two-spirit is the preferred term 
of traditional American Indians and Aborigi- 
nal LGBT persons. LGBT is the modern equiv- 
alent of the Native term two-spirit (Fieland et al. 
2007). Therefore, throughout this chapter, these 
two terms will be used interchangeably. A brief 
discussion of the background of two-spirit is 
included to explain the history and significance 
of self-identity implicit in how AIAN and AP 
two-spirit persons refer to themselves. 

Learning Objectives 

By the end of the chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 



1. Identify the role of historical oppression of 
AIAN and AP populations. 

2. Understand the traditions of two-spirit person 
in North American Indian culture. 

3. Identify traditions and roles of elders in North 
American Indian culture. 

4. Understand barriers to health care of North 
American Indians. 

5. Identify health practices and disparities of 
North American two-spirit elders. 

6. Identify policy issues and concerns affecting 
North American Indian two-spirit elders. 



Introduction 

American Indians represent a diverse population 
consisting of 565 tribes, including indigenous 
peoples of Alaska and Hawaii and more than 300 
reservations that serve as indigenous homelands 
and seats of tribal governments (Ogunwold 
2006). American Indians and Alaska Natives 
(AIAN) maintain a unique status as sovereign 
nations. As indigenous cultures, American Indi- 
ans reside primarily in the West, with approxi- 
mately 34 % living on-reservations and 57 % 
living in metropolitan areas. Urban American 
Indians experience significant social, health, and 
economic problems while having access to sub- 
stantially fewer Native-specific resources than 
their reservation-based counterparts (Weaver 
2012). American Indians (Al) comprise less than 
one percent of the US population, a figure the 
same for persons age 65 and over (Administra- 
tion on Aging [AOA] 2012). The low numbers of 
AIs result in a relatively invisible status, which 
make them highly susceptible to stereotypes 
(Bureau of Indian Affairs 2011). The history of 
American Indians is complex and one of disen- 
franchisement and distrust of European Ameri- 
cans and the government. According to Walters 
et al. (2001), over the past century “American 
Indians have endured a succession of traumatic 
assaults on their cultural and physical well-being, 
and continue to disproportionately experience 
violence and trauma” (p. 134). 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



137 



The “Aboriginal Peoples” (AP) refer to a 
collective name for the original peoples of North 
America and their descendants. Throughout this 
chapter, the terms Aboriginal Peoples and First 
Nations are used interchangeably. There are 
more than 50 distinct groupings among First 
Nations alone, with several dialects within 
Inuktitut. The Metis people speak a variety of 
First Nations languages such as Cree, Ojibwa, or 
Chipewyan, as well as Michif (Report of the 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples 1996). 
About 1.4 million people in Canada identify 
themselves as an Aboriginal person, 60.8 % of 
which have First Nations single identity (i.e., 
45.5 % as registered or treaty Indian, 15.3 % as 
not a Registered or Treaty Indian), 32.3 % as 
Metis single identity, 4.2 % as Inuit single 
identity, 0.8 % as multiple Aboriginal identities, 
and 1.9 % as aboriginal identities not included 
elsewhere. The Aboriginal population increased 
by 20.1 % between 2006 and 2011, compared 
with 5.2 % for the non-Aboriginal population. 
The largest numbers of Aboriginal people live in 
Ontario and the Western provinces (Manitobe, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia) 
(National Household Survey 2013). Winnipeg is 
home to the largest urban Aboriginal population 
in Canada (Ristock et al. 2011). The use of the 
terms Indian and Eskimo in Canada is considered 
pejorative. A glossary of terms for Canadian First 
Nations is provided in Table 7.1. 

Historical trauma, the universal experience of 
colonization, is a shared history for two-spirit 
persons both within and across the heterogeneity 
of the tribes in North America. Ristock et al. 
(2011) stress that it is impossible to consider the 
health and well-being of Aboriginal two-spirit 
people without taking into account the historical 
impacts of colonization and its contemporary 
effects that interacts with socio-demographic 
vulnerabilities to negatively affect them. The 
experience of two-spirit person/LGBT is one of 
the dual oppressions — heterosexism from Native 
peoples and racism from LGBT persons (Fieland 
et al. 2007). Dual oppression puts two-spirit 
persons at compounded risk for discrimination 
and violent victimization (Brotman et al. 2002). 
Given that there is such limited research on older 



two-spirit persons/LGBT, information may be 
gleaned from studies on the general population of 
older Native peoples and younger two-spirit 
persons. 

Status of AlANs and First Nations 
of Canada 

American Indians differ in their degree of accul- 
turation. In part, American Indians’ acculturation 
is muddy because what actually constitutes an 
Indian is unclear and controversial. This contro- 
versy is heightened by several factors, for exam- 
ple, in the USA: (a) the United States Census 
relies on self-report of racial identity, (b) Con- 
gress has formulated a legal definition in which an 
individual must have an Indian blood quantum of 
at least 25 %, and (c) some tribes have developed 
their own criteria and specify either tribal 
enrollment or blood quantum levels (Sue and Sue 
2013). Garret and Pichette (2000) identify levels 
of cultural orientation to explain the degree to 
which AIANs identify with native culture (see 
Table 7.2). In addition, urban dwellers do not 
have access to tribal governmental services and 
political decision-makers or to public housing as 
their counterparts on-reservations. Urban Ameri- 
can Indians may find it difficult to exercise their 
rights as citizens of Native Nations and may be 
disenfranchised and lose their voice in tribal 
governance (Weaver 2012). 

In Canada, AP (including Inuit and Metis) are 
not afforded the same privileges as other Cana- 
dians. “In 1998, a United Nation Human Rights 
Committee ruled that the treatment of AP within 
Canada stood in violation of international law and 
was the most pressing human rights issue facing 
Canadians” (Meyer-Cook and Labelle 2003, 
p. 36). Both the historical and current treatments 
of AIAN and First Nations in North America are 
discriminatory and oppressive. The circum- 
stances faced by AIANs and First Nations are 
similar to the challenges and oppression faced by 
more than three million indigenous people glob- 
ally. The concerns for indigenous peoples glob- 
ally culminated in the United Nations Declaration 
on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (“the 



138 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



Table 7.1 Glossary of terms for Canadian first nation(s) 

First Nation(s) — term used as a substitution for band or Indian, refen'ing to any of the numerous groups formally 
recognized by the Canadian government under the Indian Act of 1876. 

First Nation people — generally applied to both status and non-status Indians. Is not a synonym for Aboriginal peoples 
because it does not include Inui or Metis 

First peoples — a collective term used to describe the original peoples of Canada and their descendants. It is used less 
frequently than terms such as Aboriginal peoples and Native peoples 

Indian — collectively describes all the Indigenous People in Canada who are not Inuit or Metis. Three categories apply 
to Indians in Canada: (a) Status Indians — people who are entitled to have their names included on the Indian Register. 
Only Status Indians are recognized as Indians under the Indian Act and are entitled to certain rights and benefits under 
the law; (b) Non-status Indians — people who consider themselves Indians or members of a First Nation but whom the 
Government of Canada does not recognize as Indians under the Indian Act and are not entitled to the same rights and 
benefits available to Status Indians; and (c) Treaty Indians — descendants of Indians who signed treaties with Canada 
and who have a contemporary connection with a treaty band 

Inuit — Aboriginal People of Arctic Canada 

Metis — the French word for people of mixed blood. The Constitution Act of 1982 recognizes Metis as one of the three 
Aboriginal Peoples 

Native — a collective term to describe the descendants of the original peoples of North America 

Native American — commonly used term in the USA to describe the descendants of the original peoples of North 
America. The term has not caught on in Canada because of the apparent reference to US citizenship. Native North 
American has been used to identify the original peoples of 

Adapted from http://web.archieve.org/web/20100714021655/ http://www.aidp.bc.ca/temrinology_of_native_ 
aboriginal_metis.pdf 



Table 7.2 Levels of cultural orientation 

Traditional — the person may speak limited English and practice traditional tribal customs and methods of worship 

Marginal — the person may be bilingual but has lost touch with his or her cultural heritage, yet is not fully accepted in 
mainstream society 

Bicultural — the person is conversant with both sets of values and can communicate in a variety of contexts 
Assimilates — the person embraces only the mainstream culture’s values, behaviors, and expectations 

Pantraditional — the person has been exposed to and adopted mainstream values but is making a conscious efibrt to 
return to the “old ways” 

Adapted from Garrett and Pichette (2000) 



Declaration”), which is a framework of rights for 
indigenous peoples for states. Each Nation that 
adopts the Declaration is independently respon- 
sible for enacting domestic legislation and polices 
that comply with Declaration standards (Rowland 
2013), though the Declaration is not legally 
binding for Nations that adopt it. 

Cultural determinants of AIAN resistance and 
resilience include identity, spirituality, and tra- 
ditional health practices, the very aspects of 
Native culture targeted by colonial persecution 
(Walters and Simoni 2002). For two-spirit per- 
sons in Canada, the binary concept of gender 
conformity that prevailed in colonial days was 



contrary to that of gender variance. Canadian 
two-spirit persons who thought in more circular 
ways resulted in outlawing and discrediting of 
any processes that that could not easily be 
co-opted to advance a larger agenda of profit by 
Europeans (Meyer-Cook and Labelle 2003). In 
fact, for two-spirit persons, enculturation (the 
process by which individuals learn or re-immerse 
themselves in their cultural heritage, norms, and 
behaviors within a contemporary context) in the 
form of “retraditionalization” may be a powerful 
process because of the denigration of their for- 
mally elevated status in many tribal communities 
(Fieland et al. 2007). Meyer-Cook and Labelle 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



139 



(2003) suggest that for two-spirit persons to 
achieve a sound identity, they need to simulta- 
neously follow two tracks of identity formation: 
first as Native people or people of a minority 
group and second as people who are differently 
gendered. 

As a population, health statistics for American 
Indians reveal significant adverse outcomes 
(Roubideaux et al. 2004). As compared to the 
general US population, American Indians have 
alcoholism mortality rates that are more than 
twice as high, significantly higher obesity and 
diabetes rates, injury-related deaths (e.g., homi- 
cides, motor vehicle crashes, suicides), dispro- 
portionate rates of depression, and deaths from 
injuries and violence account for 75 % of all 
deaths (Centers for Disease Control [CDC] 2007 ; 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
2007), lower earnings, lower educational level, 
and higher poverty rates, violence, and depres- 
sion (CDC 201 1). These factors are co-occurring, 
which means that AIANs are simultaneously at 
risk for all of them, creating a potentially severe 
network of social and psychological risks that 
affect their mental well-being (Native Vision 
Project 2012). Rates for older ALAN or two-spirit 
elders are not disaggregated among the data. The 
Alaska Department of Labor estimates that 
Alaska Natives (AN) account for about 7135 
ANs over age 65 and 8040 between the ages of 
55 and 64, with the most rapid increase in elders 
between 70 and 74, followed by those 85 and 
older. There is a higher prevalence of chronic 
illnesses such as cancer and heart and lung dis- 
eases, which can lead to a higher incidence of 
functional disability, and a corresponding need 
for long-term care (Branch 2005). Table 7.3 
provides priority health needs as identified by 
Alaska Native elders. 

Currently, older single-race AIAN adults 
account for 0.87 % of the total US population 
and multiple-race AIAN for 1.53 % of the US 
population (Ogunwole 2006). Compared to the 
general population, older AIANs are less edu- 
cated, have a higher divorce rate (24.0 % vs. 
19.9 %), and a higher percentage has never 
married (11 % compared to 6.5 % of the general 
population) (Tamborini 2007). Several factors 



Table 7.3 Priority health needs identified by Alaska 
Native elders 

Personal care services 

Comprehensive care and tracking of chronic illnesses 
Medication issues 
Elder abuse 
Housing 

Alzheimer’s Disease and related disorders 
Unintentional injuries (causes and prevention of falls) 
Telemedicine 

Elder and youth activities (sharing traditions and 
participating in intergenerational activities to support 
youth and community) 

Palliative care 
Traditional healing 

Urban/rural differences (understand why elders are 
moving to town and the implications this has on service 
availability in urban and rural areas) 

Adapted from Branch (2005) 

contribute to the vulnerability of older AIANs: 
lower educational attainment, lower household 
income, greater poverty, less insurance coverage, 
and higher limited English proficiency. Further- 
more, vulnerability might be affected by multiple 
contributing factors, not by a single factor (Kim 
et al. 2012). AIANs aged 62 and older 
self-reports of health status reveals that almost 
46 % are in fair to poor health, compared with 
33.6 % of the general population. AIANs have 
higher rates of work limitations at 34.3 %, 
compared to 15.2 for the general population 
(Dunaway-Knight et al. 2012). In addition, the 
percent of AIANs who will receive Social 
Security disability benefits at some point in their 
lives is higher than the general population 
(16.0 % vs. 10.8 %) (Social Security Adminis- 
tration 2011). Typically, the age at which a per- 
son is considered elderly in American society is 
65; however, there is no such consensus among 
tribal nations. The Older Americans Act gives 
discretion to individual tribes to make this 
determination. The health status of AP of Can- 
ada, especially elders, is similar to that of AIANs 
and is substantially lower than that of average 
Canadians. Moreover, compared to other Cana- 
dians, AP have poorer social and economic 



140 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



indicators, face critical housing shortages, higher 
rates of unemployment, lack of access to basic 
health services, and lower levels of education 
attainment (Lafontaine 2006). 

First Nations elders, including Aboriginal, 
Metis, and Inuit seniors, have received limited 
attention by researchers because as a population. 
Aboriginals are younger than the non- Aboriginal 
population (Beatty and Berdahl 201 1), and a lack 
of epidemiological data results in pan- Aboriginal 
(i.e., between assimilation and traditional) evi- 
dence and approximations (Lafontaine 2006). 
The dire straits of Aboriginal elders is summed 
up thusly: they “are among the most neglected 
social class because of their increasing multiple 
physical and mental health problems and 
increasingly poor socioeconomic supports have 
forced them into even more challenging and 
dependent situations at an age when they should 
expect to be well treated and taken care of 
properly by both their families and governments” 
(Beatty and Berdahl 2011, p. 1). Metis report 
poorer health status than the non-Aboriginal 
population (Janz et al. 2009; Wilson et al. 2011) 
and are more likely than First Nations elders to 
report fair to poor health (Wilson et al. 2010, 
2011). One in five Metis has arthritis or rheu- 
matism compared to one in ten in the general 
Canadian population. In addition. Metis have 
higher rates of high blood pressure, asthma, 
diabetes (30 % of men vs. 14 % of 

non-Aboriginal men; 32 % of women vs. 11 % of 
non-Aboriginal women), and heart problems. 
First Nation elders have higher rates of disability 
due to injury and/or chronic disease, with 58.5 % 
over age 60 compared to 46.5 % of Canadian 
seniors (Lafontaine 2006). Aboriginal elders are 
more likely than non-Aboriginal elders to report 
daily smoking and heavy drinking; however, one 
in two reports not drinking at all, with the 
majority either never smoking or having quit 
smoking (Turcotte and Schellenberg 2007). 

Similar to research findings in minority 
groups in the USA, Beatty and Berdahl (2011) 
identify social and economic status as the two 
most important determinants of health among 
Aboriginal elders. The prevalence of low income 
is higher among Aboriginal elders than 



non-Aboriginal elders, and Aboriginal elders are 
often less able to pay for private or co-funded 
services. Economic differences are more pro- 
nounced among First Nations who come from 
reservations and cannot fulfill the residency 
requirements and are placed at the end of long 
waiting lists. With the increase in the number of 
people receiving homecare among those without 
alternative income to supplement higher costs, 
health care beyond post-acute care is unafford- 
able and inaccessible to Aboriginal elders. 
A related issue is the underutilization of services 
by Aboriginal elders in cities and 
on-reservations. Barriers to service utilization 
include culture, language, affordability, jurisdic- 
tion, and problems navigating the health services 
system, barriers exacerbated by limited knowl- 
edge of and access to policymakers and service 
providers. Although some policies have helped 
improve competency skills and communications 
between service providers and minority elders, 
limited efforts have been made to address insti- 
tutional structures, racism in gerontological set- 
tings, and access to care facilities for Aboriginal 
elders (Beatty and Berdahl 2011). Table 7.4 
identifies health and service needs of First 
Nations Canadian elders. 

Among other problems. Aboriginal elders 
encounter educational and literacy barriers, poor 
housing conditions, homelessness in urban areas, 
and elder abuse. In Canada, housing on reser- 
vations is among the poorest in the country, 
which means that many elders with disabilities 

Table 7.4 Priority health needs of first nation elders 

Culturally responsive programming and employment in 
healthcare systems 

Coordinated elderly care funding initiative for 
Aboriginal caregivers 

Aboriginal long-term care facilities in the major prairie 
cities 

An integrated, coordinated, and holistic healthcare 
system 

First Nations long-term care facilities on reservations 
Palliative, respite and after hour care services 
Access to all health benefits 
Adapted from Beatty and Berdahl (2011) 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



141 



and chronic conditions live in overcrowded and 
deficient homes (Health Canada 2009). Cur- 
rently, federal funding policies do not allow for 
building of long-term care facilities on reserva- 
tions (Beatty and Berdhal 2011). As a vulnerable 
population, medically compromised and depen- 
dent Aboriginal elders are often targets of abuse 
(Podneik 2008). Elder abuse occurs most fre- 
quently as physical, psychological/emotional, 
financial abuse, and neglect whether the elder is 
at home or in semi-private and public institu- 
tions. Often, elders’ and families’ preferences for 
self-determination of care are disregarded. 
Aboriginal elders living in Toronto identified 
major issues facing them including, social iso- 
lation, lack of transportation services, lack of 
assisted living services, lack of family peer sup- 
port, lack of senior housing, poor proximity to 
housing services, lack of activities programming, 
lack of physical fitness resources, and lack of 
alcohol and drug abuse counseling (McCaskill 
et al. 2011). 



Traditional Values and Behaviors 

Indigenous peoples have an identity that is rooted 
in a particular land of origin. Cultural identity is 
intimately connected with and defined by tradi- 
tional territories. Indigenous cultural beliefs and 
values (e.g., harmony, respect, generosity, cour- 
age, wisdom, humility, honesty) and spiritual 
practices (e.g., natural world) are inextricably 
linked to the land. Even when Native Peoples are 
displaced from their territories, with ethnic mix- 
ing, and sporadic contact with tribal homelands, 
the tie to core indigenous values persists (Hendry 
2003; Weaver 2012). For AIAN and First 
Nations, family or tribe is of fundamental 
importance because it provides a sense of 
belonging and security, an extension of the tribe 
(Sue and Sue 2013). This sense demonstrates the 
persistence and resilience of the community 
despite change (Weaver 2012). Different families 
and tribes have their own cultural assets. The 
cultural values and behaviors presented in the 



remainder of this section are generalizations and 
their applicability should be assessed for partic- 
ular clients or patients and their families. The 
authors acknowledge distinctiveness within and 
between indigenous persons in the USA and 
Canada, and the intent is not to obscure such 
distinctiveness. 

Native Peoples traditionally have respected 
the unique individual differences (personal dif- 
ferences) among people. This respect is demon- 
strated through staying out of the affairs of others 
and expressing personal opinions only when 
asked. An expectation is that this courtesy will be 
returned. Another traditional behavior is quiet- 
ness. The act of silence serves multiple purposes 
in Native life. Historically, silence contributed to 
survival. When angry or uncomfortable, many 
Native Peoples remain silent. Silence is a deeply 
embedded form of Native interpersonal etiquette, 
and Patience is a closely related value to silence. 
Patience is based on the belief that all things 
unfold in time. The practice of patience demon- 
strates respect for individuals, facilitates group 
consensus, and permits “the second thought” 
(deliberation) (http://www.nwindian. evergreen, 
edu/cirricu lu m/ V alue sB ehavior s .p rf) . In tradi- 
tional Native Peoples’ life, work is always 
directed toward a distinct purpose and is taken on 
when it needs to be done. Work is linked to 
accumulating only that which is needed, which 
reflects the nonmaterialistic orientation of many 
Native Peoples. Mutualism , as a value, attitude, 
and behavior, permeates everything in the tradi- 
tional Native social fabric. It promotes a sense of 
belonging and solidarity with group members 
cooperating to gain group security and consen- 
sus. The traditional manner in which most Native 
Peoples prefer to communicate is affective 
(; nonverbal orientation ) rather than verbal. That 
is, they prefer listening rather than speaking. 
Talk, like work, must have a purpose, and talking 
for talking’s sake is rarely practiced. Words have 
a primordial power, and when there is a reason 
for their expression, it is generally done care- 
fully. Closely linked to nonverbal orientation are 
the highly developed and valued skills of seeing 
and listening. Hearing, observing, and 



142 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



memorizing were highly developed skills 
because all aspects of Native culture were 
transferred orally through storytelling (http:// 
www.nwindian.evergreen.edu/cuiTiculum/ 

V aluesB ehaviors .pdf) . 

For Native Peoples, traditionally life unfolds 
when it is time. Time orientation is flexible and 
generally not structured into compartments. Sim- 
ilarly, Native Peoples have an orientation to the 
present and to immediate tasks at hand. What is 
occurring in the present takes precedence over 
vague future rewards. Emphasis is placed on 
being-rather-than-becoming (however, this value 
has shifted significantly over the past five decades 
toward a more futuristic approach). Both time 
orientation and orientation to the present tie into 
the Native value of practicality, with a focus on 
approaches that are concrete and experiential. At 
the core of traditional Native culture is a holistic 
orientation in which every aspect of life is based 
on an integrated orientation to the whole. 
A holistic perspective is essential in Native culture 
and is seen in aspects ranging from healing to 
social organization. Likewise, spirituality is inte- 
grated into every part of the sociocultural fabric of 
traditional Native Peoples’ life. Spirituality is 
considered a natural component of everything. 
Lastly, caution is exercised in unfamiliar personal 
encounters and situations. Caution is manifested 
as quiet behavior and placidity. In many cases, 
being cautious is the result of fear of how their 
thoughts and behavior will be perceived by those 
with who they are unfamiliar or in a new situation 
with which they have no experience (http://www. 
nwindian.evergreen.edu/curriculum/ 

Value sB ehaviors . pdf) . 

AIAN and Aboriginal or Lirst Nations of 
Canada have distinct tribal values, beliefs, and 
behaviors; however, as Native Peoples of North 
America, these groups share some common cul- 
tural practices. The extent to which two-spirit 
persons incorporate some or all of these practices 
into life is dependent upon their level of accul- 
turation, assimilation, or pantraditional experi- 
ence. The following section describes two-spirit 
persons of North America. 



Two-Spirit People of Indigenous 
North America 

For traditional American Indians, the terms 
gender roles and sexual orientation are false 
conceptualizations because AIANs never ana- 
lyzed human sexuality in such dichotomous and 
categorical ways. Rather, a continuum of human 
sexuality and gender behavior is appropriate for 
different people. That is, people do what they do 
best (Pope 2012). From a community perspec- 
tive, the major focus was on the fulfillment of 
social or ceremonial roles and responsibilities as 
a more important defining feature of gender than 
sexual behavior or identity (Fieland et al. 2007). 
American Indians have always held intersex, 
androgynous people, feminine males, and mas- 
culine females in high esteem. Gender is viewed 
as biological, whereas gender status is more 
culturally defined. Thus, one’s gender status may 
be either man (masculine), woman (feminine), or 
not-man/not-woman. In this model, not-man is 
not the same as woman, and not-woman is not 
the same as man. Clearly, by definition women 
are not men; however, other social groups within 
a society may consist of males whose gender 
status is that of not-men but who are also defined 
as not-women. These multiple genders are part of 
gender role construction in American Indian 
societies, and service providers for such cultures 
must be cognizant of this contextual ambiguity 
(Pope 2012). 

Instead of seeing two-spirit persons as trans- 
sexuals who attempt to make themselves “the 
opposite sex,” it is more accurate to understand 
them as individuals who take on a gender that is 
different from both women and men. In essence, 
two-spirits “will do at least some women’s work 
and mix together much of the behavior, dress, and 
social roles of women and men” (Williams 1986, 
p. 344). Early on the term “berdaches” was used 
before the term two-spirit. Berdaches refer to that 
scared person accepted in the native world who is 
said to be both female and male (two-spirited) and 
believed to have mystical powers (Warren 1998). 
The term two-spirit originated in Winnipeg, 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



143 



Canada, in 1990 during the third annual Inter- 
tribal Native American First Nation Gay and 
Lesbian conference. Two-spirit was originally 
chosen to distance Native First Nations people 
from non-Native as well as from the words 
“berdache” and “gay” (http://www. 
rainbowresourcecentre.org). In 1991, the term 
berdache was replaced with the word two-spirit 
because of various negative connotations (e.g., 
male slaves or prostitutes) (see Williams 1986 for 
additional information). According to Laframbo- 
ise and Anhorn (2008), the term two-spirit is 
preferred because it emerged from Native 
American people, whereas the term berdache was 
imposed upon Native People by the colonial 
explorers. Table 7.5 contains various terms that 
have been used to describe two-spirit American 
Indians. One of the reasons that two-spirits 
received respect was out of fear because they 
were considered to be touched by the spirits and 
to have powers on the level of a shaman. 
Two-spirits were highly regarded as artisans, 
craftspeople, child-rearers, couples counselors, 
and tribal arbiters. 

Two-spirits are considered to be a “third 
gender,” and female two-spirits are considered to 
be a “fourth gender” (similar to the way that both 
female and male homosexuals are considered to 
be gay, while females are also considered to be 
lesbian) (http://androgyne.0catch.com/2spiritx. 
htm). Rather than emphasizing the homosexual- 
ity of two-spirits, American Indian focuses on 
their spiritual gifts (Williams 1986). Laframboise 
and Anhorn (2008) make a key distinction about 



terms regarding gender-variant people, indicating 
that two-spirit is different from sexual orientation 
because such words did not exist in Native lan- 
guages. As terminology referring to LGBT per- 
sons has evolved over time, gender, which “is an 
obligatory grammatical category in the 
English/French and Latin languages”... and as a 
linguistic term “... has no connection with bio- 
logical sex or social identity of an individual” 
(p. 2). The relevance of the issue is where gender 
intersects with the Native Peoples of North 
America because two-spirit does not refer to 
people with homosexual tendencies; rather, on 
different genders being manifested and not on 
sexual preferences or practices (Lafranmoise and 
Anhorn). See Discussion Box 7.1 for ways in 
which two-spirits are honored. 

It is important to point out that the term 
two-spirited has multiple meanings within sev- 
eral different contexts. For example, Aboriginal 
people who identify as gay or lesbian use the 
term because it is more culturally relevant to their 
identities. Aboriginal people who are transgender 
might also use the term two-spirit, an umbrella 
term for Aboriginal persons who live between 
socially defined male and female gender roles 
(Balsam et al. 2004), or they may use terms of 
their own Aboriginal languages (Scheim et al. 
2013). Elders within Aboriginal culture teach 
that two-spirited people have a special place in 
their communities. Aboriginal culture is recog- 
nized for balance and harmony, and no one ele- 
ment or force dominates the others. The term 
two-spirit originates from the First Nations’ 



Table 7.5 Two-spirit American Indian gender role and sexuality terms 



Tribe 


Term 


Meaning 


Crow 


bote 


Two-spirit 


Kamia 


warharmi 


Hermaphrodite spirit 


Lakota Sioux 


winkte 


Two-soul persons 


Mohave 


hwame 


Female-bodied person who lives as a man 


Navajo 


nadleehe 


“The change” 


Omaha 


mexoga 


Homosexuality 


Shoshoni 


tainna wa’ippe 


Man-woman/woman-man 


Zuni 


Ihamana 


Man-woman 



144 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



recognition of the traditions and sacredness of 
people who maintain a balance by housing both 
female and male spirits (Wahsquonaikezhik et al. 
1976). Two-spirit persons are considered a vital 
and necessary part of the natural world and of the 
community as a whole because they possess an 
ability to see an issue from both perspectives and 
can understand and help solve problems that 
women and men may have individually or 
between each other (McLeod-Shabogesic 1995). 

Discussion Box 7.1 

Williams (1986) describes American Indian 
traditionalists as seeing a person’s basic 
character as a reflection of their spirit and 
emphasize it as being most important. 
Rather than seeing two-spirit persons as 
transsexuals who try to make themselves 
into the “opposite sex,” it is more accurate 
to understand them as individuals who take 
on a gender status that is different from both 
men and women. Since everything is 
thought to come from the spirit world, 
androgynous or transgender persons are 
seen as doubly blessed, having both the 
spirit of a man and the spirit of a woman. 
Thus, they are honored for having two 
spirits and are seen as more spiritually gifted 
than the typical masculine male or feminine 
female. Many American Indian religions 
often look to two-spirits as religious leaders 
and teachers. The emphasis of American 
Indians is not to force every person into one 
box, but to allow for the reality of diversity 
in gender and sexual identities. 

Two-spirit persons are also respected by 
native societies because of practical con- 
cerns. That is, they could do both the work 
of men and of women. They were consid- 
ered hard workers and artistically gifted of 
great value to their extended families and 
community. Two-sprit persons were 
believed to be economically beneficial as a 
relative to assist with raising children, 
taking care of the elderly, and serving as 
adoptive parents for homeless children. 



Questions 

How does the cultural view of Ameri- 
can Indians about two-spirit persons 
differ from other culture’s views? 

What are the similarities between the 
value of two-spirit persons and LGBT 
persons in LGBT communities? 

Do two-spirit persons share character- 
istics with other ethnic minority 
groups? 

Not all AIAN or First Nations who are LGBT 
identify as two-spirited. Those who choose to use 
the term two-spirit do so to reflect their sexual 
and gender identity and its connectedness with 
spirituality and traditional worldviews (Walters 
et al. 2006). At times, First Nation LGBT per- 
sons may choose to use the word lesbian or gay 
in order to be understood in Western culture. 
C. Thomas Edwards (1998) is cited in We Are 
Part of a Tradition and explains that American 
Indians do not buy into homophobia because it is 
a focus on sexual behavior rather than the intri- 
cate roles two-spirit persons play. In the context 
of gender, two-spirit people also associate with 
the term bi-gender, which involves having a 
separate male persona and a separate female one. 
Granted, these terms are not exactly alike; nev- 
ertheless, they are closely related in both expe- 
riences and representation of that person (http:// 
www .rainbowresourcecentre.org) . Laframboise 
and Anhorn (2008) suggest that it is the inner 
calling of contemporary two-spirited people that 
mix their understanding of sexuality with the 
perception that homosexuality was well accepted 
in pre-colonization instead of recognizing that 
these homosexual behaviors were accepted under 
the role of gender identity. Thus, “the modern 
movement of reclaiming Two-Spirit Traditions 
incorporates sexual orientation and sexual iden- 
tity” (p. 3). 

Ristock et al. (2011) interviewed Aboriginal 
two-spirit/LGBT persons ages 19-61 regarding 
migration, mobility, and health and found that 





7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



145 



most moved from First Nations communities 
and/or small or rural towns to metropolitan 
areas because doing so allowed them to find a 
personal identity either with their sexuality 
and/or gender identity and/or Aboriginal iden- 
tity. Other reasons for the move were to explore 
the anonymity that a big city can offer when it 
comes to exploring the “gay lifestyle,” finding 
others like them, for gender reassignment, and 
to begin a healing journey from incest and 
violence, they may have encountered as chil- 
dren. Those not actively involved in the LGBT 
community felt an affirmation of their identity 
just knowing that a large LGBT community in 
the city existed. Some distinction was made by 
two-spirit persons about the importance of 
having their own space because of the domi- 
nation in the LGBT community by White 
people. A culturally specific space also allowed 
a place to have ceremonies. 



AIAN, Aboriginal Peoples of Canada, 
and Two-Spirit Elders Physical 
and Mental Health 

Individually and collectively, AIANs and AP 
have worse health outcomes than other ethnic 
minority groups and non-Hispanic Whites 
(NHWs). Health disparities and chronic health 
conditions exist with marked variation across 
Indian Health Service (IHS) areas and within 
tribes in the USA (Wright 2009) and likewise for 
indigenous elders in Canada (Beatty and Berdahl 
2011). The disparities are especially problematic 
for low-income elders in indigenous communi- 
ties. Older AIANs and AP have greater numbers 
of chronic conditions, higher rates of disease 
comorbidity, and higher rates of disability than 
do other populations of elders (Beatty and Ber- 
dahl 2011; Satter et al. 2010). Although research 
has focused on the physical health status of older 
AIANs and AP, studies pertaining to their access 
to healthcare service are sparse, and their mental 
health status has been less often documented 
(Kim et al. 2012). Research suggests that older 



AIANs experience greater emotional and/or 
mental health problems compared to their peers 
of other racial and ethnic groups (Kim et al. 
2011; Satter et al. 2010). Arguably, the impact of 
structural oppression including homophobia, 
heterosexism, and racism is likely to play a role 
in the physical and mental health of Aboriginal 
two-spirit/LGBT persons (Canadian Rainbow 
Health Coalition 2004; Taylor and Ristock 2011; 
Ristock et al. 2011). In response to the limited 
research on healthcare access and service, Kim 
et al. (2012) examined older AIANs’ physical 
and mental health status and related healthcare 
use in comparison with NHWs and found that 
older AIANs reported poorer physical and men- 
tal health than NHWs, were less likely to see a 
medical doctor and to have a usual source of 
medical care, and were more likely to delay 
getting needed medical care and report difficulty 
understanding the doctor at their last visit. 
However, this study did not indicate if any of the 
participants were two-spirit persons. 

Two-spirit persons do not have more pro- 
pensity or pathology of mental illness than the 
general population. However, their prolonged 
exposure to hostile or intolerant environments 
can cause significant stress on LGBT persons, 
and having to manage stigma has far-reaching 
effects on their health status (Brotman et al. 
2003). Although information in this section is 
presented on the health status of AIANs and AP 
with reference to two-spirit elders as applicable, 
the authors agree with the position of Scheim 
et al. (2013) that AIAN and “Aboriginal 
gender-diverse peoples’ experiences and health 
statuses cannot be understood by simply sum- 
ming together what is known from research on 
broader (AIAN), Aboriginal, or gender-diverse 
populations. Nevertheless, health inequities doc- 
umented in studies using one or the other of these 
identity categories provide an important context 
for understanding the well-being of (AIAN) and 
Aboriginal gender-diverse peoples” (p. 109). 
Scheim et al. (2013) conducted a study to 
describe barriers to well-being in a sample of 
Aboriginal gender-diverse peoples in Ontario, 
Canada (see Research Box 7.1). 



146 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



Research Box 7.1 

Scheim, A. I., Jackson, R., James, L., 
Dopier, T.S., Pyne, J., & Bauer, G.R. 
(2013). Barriers to well-being for Aborig- 
inal gender-diverse people: Results from 
the Trans PULSE Project in Ontario, 
Canada. Ethnicity and Inequalities in 
Health and Social Care, 6(4), 108-120. 

Objective: Despite health inequities expe- 
rienced by Aboriginal and transgender 
communities, little research has explored 
the well-being of Aboriginal trans people. 
The purpose of this study is to describe 
barriers to well-being in a sample of 
Aboriginal gender-diverse people in 
Ontario, Canada. 

Method: Of the 433 participant in the 
Trans PULSE Project survey, the 32 who 
self-identified as First Nation, Metis, or 
Inuit were included in the analysis. 
Because of the small sample size, 
unweighted frequencies and proportions 
were calculated. 

Results: The participants were almost 
evenly split between male-to-female and 
female-to-male gender spectra. The 
majority was under age 35, almost half 
were living in poverty, live in metropolitan 
Toronto, and none were living on a reser- 
vation. Many were homeless or unstably 
housed, most had experienced some form 
of violence due to transphobia, including 
physical and/or sexual violence, and life- 
time suicidality was high. Most had a 
regular family doctor but had unmet 
healthcare needs. Many were unable to 
obtain services including shelters, hormone 
therapy, trans-related surgery, trans-related 
mental health, sexual health, and addic- 
tions. However, needs were met for general 
health services, emergency care, and HIV 
or sexually transmitted infections testing. 
Some had seen an Elder for mental health 



support and a range of family and com- 
munity support for gender identity and 
expression were indicated. 

Conclusion: Action is needed to address 
the social determinants of health among 
Aboriginal gender-diverse people. Using 
principles of self-determination, there is a 
need to increase access to health and 
community supports, including integration 
of traditional culture and healing practices. 
Larger study samples and qualitative 
research are required. 

Questions 

1. What implications do these findings 
have for including gender-diverse 
Elders as part of comprehensive plan- 
ning healthcare services? 

2. What are the limitations of this study? 

3. What other research methodology and 
design would you recommend for this 
study? 

Cancer is the leading cause of death for AIAN 
females (breast) and the third leading cause of 
death for males (prostate) (Paltoo and Chu 2004). 
Of all races, AIAN women have the lowest rates 
of mammogram screening (Ward et al. 2004), the 
youngest mean age (age 54) for breast cancer 
diagnosis of all racial groups (age 56-62) (Li 
et al. 2003) and the lowest survival rates. Ward 
et al. (2004) found that for all cancers combined, 
ALANs have lower mortality rates than the gen- 
eral US population, but have disproportionately 
lower 5-year survival rates than Whites. Of all 
ethnic minority groups in the USA, AIAN men 
have the highest rates of chronic disease (e.g., 
obesity, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, 
high cholesterol, diabetes, and smoking), and 
women have the highest rates of obesity, car- 
diovascular disease, smoking, and diabetes, and 
the second highest rates of hypertension and high 
cholesterol after African American women 





7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



147 



(Centers for Disease Control [CDC] 2003). 
Again, it is supposition that older two-spirit 
persons are counted among these numbers. 

Overall, AP has poorer health than other 
Canadians. The long-term health conditions that 
affect First Nations adults living on-reservations 
tend to be the same as those affecting other 
Canadians except for diabetes, which is more 
prevalent among First Nations population. 
Approximately, 60 % of the Aboriginal popula- 
tion living off-reservations has chronic conditions 
compared to 49.6 % of the non-Aboriginal pop- 
ulation (Tjepkema 2002). AP living 

off-reservations tend to have lower prevalence of 
long-term conditions than those living 

on-reservations, with the exception for diabetes, 
but these rates are still typically higher than they 
are for other Canadian adults except for the Inuit 
(Galabuzi 2004). Furthermore, Aboriginal adults 
living off-reservations are much more likely to be 
obese than non-Aboriginal adults in Canada, but 
those living on-reservations have even higher 
obesity levels (Reading and Wien 2009; Tjepk- 
ema 2002). In each geographic region (urban, 
rural, territories) (see Table 7.6 for a list of Canada 
provinces and territories), the Aboriginal popula- 
tion living off-reservations reported higher levels 
of fair to poor health than their non-Aboriginal 
counterpart in that region and percentage did not 
vary significantly between regions (Tjepkema 
2002). The First Nations Centre (2007) indicates a 
significant difference in morbidity and chronic 

Table 7.6 Canada provinces and territories 
Alberta 

British Columbia 

Manitoba 

New Brunswick 

Newfoundland and Labrador 

Northwest Territory 

Nova Scotia 

Nunavut 

Ontario 

Prince Edward Island 
Quebec 

Yukon Territory 



conditions for off- and on-reservation First 
Nations populations. For example, high blood 
pressure for off-reservation AP is 12 % versus 

20.4 % for on-reservation, diabetes is 8.3 % for 
off- and 19.7 % for on-reservation, asthma is 

12.5 % for off- and 9.7 % for on-reservation, and 
heart problem is 10.3 % for off- and 7.6 % for 
on-reservation. The higher rates of asthma and 
heart problems among off-reservation Aboriginal 
populations may suggest a function of lifestyle 
and environmental circumstances. 

Aboriginal adults living off-reservations are 
almost twice as likely to experience a major 
depressive disorder compared to other Canadians 
(Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
2004). In fact, it is suspected that the rate of 
depression may be underdiagnosed within the 
Aboriginal population. Mental health conse- 
quences among AP are linked to “persistent 
socioeconomic inequities, intergenerational 
trauma, and colonial and neo-colonial processes 
including racialization and discrimination have 
taken a serious toll on the mental health of AP as 
reflected in alarming rates of suicide, depres- 
sions, substance abuse, and violence” (Browne 
et al. 2009, p. 19). Although research on 
Aboriginal Peoples’ mental health is sparse, the 
First Nations Centre (2007) indicates that some 
evidence exists that mental health is better for 
Aboriginal populations living off-reservation 
than their on-reservation counterparts. This 
more favorable outcome may be credited to 
off-reservation AP having access to a relatively 
greater number of mental health services avail- 
able in urban areas (Place 2012). 

Rosenberg et al. (2009) report that in every 
age cohort, AP are more likely than 
non-Aboriginal people to indicate “poor/fair” 
health. Although chronic conditions increase 
with age, AP are more likely to report more 
chronic conditions than the comparable 
non-Aboriginal population. The prevalence rates 
of specific chronic conditions for elderly AP 
exceed that of non-Aboriginal people with the 
only exception being cancer. One possible 
explanation for this exception is that the lumping 
together of all cancers more than likely masks a 
number of critical differences between AP and 



148 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



Table 7.7 Elderly Aboriginal peoples prevalence of specific conditions 



Condition 


Population 


% age 65-74 


% age 75+ 


Diabetes 


Aboriginal 


26 


23 




Non-Aboriginal 


13 


13 


Arthritis 


Aboriginal 


56 


54 




Non- Aboriginal 


40 


47 


Cancer 


Aboriginal 


9 


5 




Non- Aboriginal 


5 


7 


Stroke 


Aboriginal 


7 


18 




Non- Aboriginal 


3 


7 


Heart Disease 


Aboriginal 


23 


36 




Non- Aboriginal 


18 


26 


Stomach problems 


Aboriginal 


18 


15 




Non- Aboriginal 


4 


5 


Asthma 


Aboriginal 


13 


11 




Non-Aboriginal 


7 


7 


Chronic Bronchitis 


Aboriginal 


8 


11 




Non- Aboriginal 


5 


6 


Emphysema 


Aboriginal 


13 


13 




Non- Aboriginal 


3 


4 



Adapted from Rosenberg et al. (2009) 



their non-Aboriginal counterparts. See Table 7.7 
for prevalence of specific conditions. Presum- 
ably, elderly two-sprit Nations are included in 
these data. Ristock et al. (2011) found that the 
health concerns of Aboriginal two-spirit/LGBT 
persons included HIV, hepatitis C, weight issues, 
cancer, and diabetes. Unfortunately, no distinc- 
tion of these concerns was reported based on age. 



Service Utilization by Two-Spirited 
Elders 

In a study of sexual orientation bias experiences 
and service needs of LGBT two-spirited Ameri- 
can Indians, Walters et al. (2001) found that high 
rates of American Indians had experienced bias 
from the general public, ranging from 43 to 
79 %. Types of biases they experienced include 
verbal insults, threat of attack, chased or fol- 
lowed, spat upon, object thrown, physical 
assault, assaulted with a weapon, and sexual 



assault. The attitudes of service providers toward 
AIAN were more positive than in the general 
population. Service providers indicated a high 
level of comfort working with American Indian 
two-spirit persons, and over 90 % of service 
providers indicated that they had LGBT friends 
and LGBT friends who are American Indian. The 
attitudes of service providers were consistently 
positive for specific subgroups of LGBT persons. 
However, service providers indicated a limited 
understanding of terminology associated with 
transgender, followed by homo-negativity and 
concepts of “passing,” heterosexism, gender 
identity, homophobia, and sexual orientation. 
Research on service utilization by Aboriginal 
two-spirit persons in Canada is limited to 
nonexistent. 

The problems identified facing American 
Indian LGBT or two-spirited ranged from 
HIV/AIDS epidemic to problems raising children 
(Walters et al. 2001) (see Table 7.8). Similar to 
other LGBT persons, AIAN two-spirit persons 
face many barriers to service utilization. Of the 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



149 



Table 7.8 Problems facing American Indian two-spirit 
community 

HIV/AIDS epidemic 
Substance abuse 

Homophobia in the American Indian community 
Shunned by American Indian community 
Homelessness 
Trauma 

Conflict with kin network/eiders 
Racism from non-American Indian LGBT 
Conflict with religion 
Suicide 

Anti-gay violence 
Conflict with Native traditions 
Problems of raising children 
Adapted from Walters et al. (2001) 

thirteen barriers identified by Walters et al. and 
rated as moderate or great, nine were ranked 
above 50 % as a barrier (see Table 7.9). The 
results of the focus group study identified five 
main barriers for American Indian LGBT persons 
in accessing services: invisibility, discrimination, 
trauma, identity, and program planning. Walters 
et al. suggest that invisibility in the LGBT 
community stems forms the colonization process 
and the entrenched stereotypes that exist within 

Table 7.9 Barriers to services utilization by two-spirit 
persons 

Financial resources 

Specialized programming for Native two-spirit persons 
Fear of what Native community members might think 
Fear of being “outed” 

Stigma related being LGBT 

Professionals’ knowledge of Native two = spirit issues 

Attitudes of Native two-spirit clients/family toward 
services 

Staff support by non-Native LGBT agencies 
Two-spirits’ ability to locate services 
Staff attitudes toward Native two-spirit persons 
Transportation 

Physical accessibility/location of services 
Adapted from Walters et al. (2001) 



the non-American Indian imagination that makes 
it difficult for two-spirit persons to identify each 
other for social support. In the American Indian 
community, invisibility is manifest as the failure 
to consider being LGBT as a possibility or 
“Native reality,” which fuels homophobia within 
the heterosexual American Indian community. 
Furthermore, disclosure of one’s identity as part 
of visibility is determined by cultural values, in 
which elders dictates the parameters regarding 
acceptable behavior. That is, it is not that the 
person is gay that the elder is responding to but it 
is how the person is behaving (Walters et al. 
2001). Discrimination refers to dealing with 
racism in the LGBT community and homophobia 
in the American Indian community. A point of 
distinction was made between two-spirit persons 
on-reservations versus urban-born LGBT Indi- 
ans. For those on-reservations who are required 
to leave because of publicly disclosing their 
sexual orientation, it is harder to do because of a 
lack of transportation, whereas urban-born 
two-spirit persons are able to be more open 
with their identity because they might be able to 
blend in some ways. Dealing with historical and 
cumulative trauma, including anti-gay violence, 
domestic violence, and mental and emotional 
abuse are the serious concerns of two-spirit per- 
sons. In addition, they fear being re-traumatized 
by insensitive or “homo-ignorant” service pro- 
viders, including American Indians. 

A critical issue for AIAN two-spirit persons is 
identity, or the task of integrating a healthy, 
positive identity both as an AIAN and as a 
two-spirited person. Many AIANs have lost the 
social and spiritual context of whom they are and 
are always in crisis mode in trying to hold onto 
traditions while dealing with the LGBT identity. 
Service providers find it difficult to assist 
two-spirit persons when struggling to develop an 
integrated identity because of the historical 
diversity in terms of tribal acceptance of 
two-spirit persons and the LGBT person’s search 
for a place and identity in relation to his or her 
own specific tribal nation. In addition, tribal 
acceptance is the conflict between AIAN Chris- 
tian belief systems and acceptance of 
two-spirit/LGBT (Pope 2012; Walters et al. 



150 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



2001). Two-spirit persons declare that spirituality 
is extremely important in their lives and may 
respond to spiritual conflict with adoption of an 
inclusive approach to their spirituality that com- 
prises traditional tribal, pan-Indian, and Christian 
influences (Balsam et al. 2004; Fieland et al. 
2007). 

A final theme from the focus groups was 
program planning, which identified four key 
areas. The first is the need for community-based 
discussion to identify culturally relevant and 
meaningful ways to discuss sex, sexuality, gen- 
der identity, and LGBT issues. Second was the 
importance of contextualizing anti-gay violence 
and more general two-spirited experience within 
the context of AIAN experience of the coloni- 
zation, the historical trauma, and the cumulative 
effect of anti-gay victimization and resulting 
trauma. The third area is in-service training for 
all staff regardless of sexual orientation. Finally, 
there is a need to develop programs that focus on 
health and mental health issues and to create safe 
space for two-spirit persons, especially youths. 

Another possible explanation of underutiliza- 
tion of services by AIAN elders is that the 
location of services may be a barrier. A quote 
from Rose Jerue in 1989, an Alaska Native elder, 
provides insight about the importance of elders 
wanting to be close to home. According to Jerue, 
“elders need to be near the river where they were 
raised” (cited in Branch 2005, p. 1). AIANs and 
First Nations elders do not have long-term care 
facilities in their communities and when requir- 
ing institutional care are often placed in facilities 
located great distances away. The detrimental 
effects of being removed from their communities 
may include culturally inappropriate care, lan- 
guage barriers, isolation from family and friends, 
loss of community affiliation, and loss of their 
social role as an elder (Lafontaine 2006). 

A key issue for elderly AP is gaining access to 
services because generally, more services, more 
specialized services, and better access to them is 
in urban areas than in rural areas. However, 
access to services in urban areas does not imply 
more culturally sensitivity to the needs of elderly 
AP (Rosenberg et al. 2009). The Canadian 
Community Health Survey (CCHS) and 



Aboriginal Peoples Survey (APS) asked three 
questions related to health utilization about 
whether in the past 12 months individuals visited 
a (a) physician, (b) eye doctor, and (c) nurse. The 
most notable difference in healthcare utilization 
by Aboriginal elders was a higher rate of nurse 
visits than non-Aboriginals, which may be due to 
the increased likelihood that rural and health 
centers on reservations are staffed by full-time 
nurses than physicians. 

Aboriginal elders face a variety of unique 
issues and obstacles in the provision of health- 
care services. Higher rates of Aboriginal elders 
are monolingual Aboriginal language-speaking, 
which complicates the interface between them 
and their largely non- Aboriginal healthcare pro- 
viders. Other issues include cultural differences 
related to aging, medical treatment, traditional 
care-giving roles, the power structure inherent in 
Western medicine, exclusion of Aboriginal 
worldviews, and end-of-life (Rosenberg et al. 
2009). According to Rosenberg et al., “Western 
medical practices are often viewed by AP as 
dehumanizing as they separate older AP from 
their communities and involve an 
individual-style decision making that can run 
contrary to traditional Aboriginal belief systems” 
(p. 17). These anxieties are particularly amplified 
for those who are monolingual and hold strongly 
to traditional views of health and healing. The 
informal caregiving is important in Aboriginal 
communities. Similar to AIANs and other ethnic 
minority groups in the USA, traditional care 
within Aboriginal communities is gender 
dependent, with women family members typi- 
cally being the primary caregivers. In fact. 
Aboriginal households tend to have stronger 
gender parity in residential family size and 
structure, fewer women living alone, and fewer 
Aboriginal elders living with only their partner 
(Rosenberg et al. 2009). 

AP, regardless of age, who move to urban 
areas in order to access medical services often 
face additional barriers, including a lack of 
financial and transportation support, suitable 
housing near medical services, type of services 
available, and isolation from their social support 
network in their home communities. The urban 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



151 



Aboriginal population is fairly mobile and 
movement occurs both between rural and urban 
areas, and within urban settings (Place 2012). 
Access to services is only part of the equation for 
better health outcomes. Others are appropriate- 
ness of services and being culturally safe, to 
which merely living in urban areas does not 
overcome barriers (Adelson 2005). AP, espe- 
cially Inuit and First Nations desire access to 
traditional healing practices, and as age and 
strength of Aboriginal identity increases, so does 
the perceived importance of access to this kind of 
healthcare. In fact, the Urban Aboriginal Peoples 
Survey (UAP) reveals that 72 % of Aboriginal 
residents in urban areas consider access to tra- 
ditional healing practices to be more important 
than mainstream health, only 30 % have “very 
easy” access to them (Environics Institute 2010, 
p. 116). Just over half of AP in urban areas uti- 
lizes city-based Aboriginal services and organi- 
zations. Of those, Inuit (71 %) are most likely to 
use city-based Aboriginal services and organi- 
zations followed by off-reservation First Nations 
(59 %) and Metis people (48 %). Services are 
more likely to be accessed by those aged 45 and 
older and those who are of lower socioeconomic 
status (Environics Institute 2010). 

Similar to AIANs, AP living off-reservations 
do not have access to the range of federally 
provided health services that First Nations living 
on-reservations and Inuit living in their commu- 
nities (Place 2012). Eligibility for specific federal 
government programs and services for AP 
depends on a number of factors, including status 
(i.e., status vs. non-status Indians), residency, 
treaty, and provincial and federal legislation 
(Browne et al. 2009). According to Lavoie et al. 
(2008), every scenario of status, residency, and 
so forth results in a different set of benefits and 
services, and ambiguity of eligibility, which, 
eventually, leads to gaps and inconsistencies. 

One other important consideration in 
addressing access to services for AP is the dis- 
tinct issues related to women. Women make up 
over half of the urban Aboriginal population. 
Although women tend to live longer than men, 
they have more instances of health-related issues 
and are more frequent users of the healthcare 



system, are more likely to have low incomes, and 
may have been victims of violence, which is a 
major determinant of health and requires its own 
treatment (Browne et al. 2009; Native Women’s 
Association of Canada 2007). 



Systems of Service Delivery 
for Two-Spirited Elders 

In healthcare and mental health programming, 
there is a need provide a cultural network that 
integrates the AIANs’ indigenous community 
into treatment plans along with prevention and 
early intervention services (Native Vision Project 
2012). Many AIANs ascribe to traditional health 
practices that are grounded in an indigenous 
worldview, which emphasizes harmony and 
balance. Traditional Native health practices (e.g., 
sweat lodge, pipe ceremony, Sun Dance, Native 
American Church) are ways of coping with dis- 
ease and responding to adversity. Both Indians in 
urban areas and on reservations use traditional 
healing practices in conjunction with Western 
medicine, with traditional practices to treat the 
underlying cause (e.g., violation of a cultural 
taboo) and Western medicine to treat the symp- 
toms (Fieland et al. 2007). Thin Elk’s (2011) 
model combines a holistic approach with indig- 
enous (e.g., talking circles, healers, seasonal 
ceremonies, and sweat lodge purification cere- 
monies) and mainstream approaches (e.g., 
one-on-one counseling) to wellness and healing. 
However, two-spirit persons may not be open 
about their identity or all their health practices 
because of discriminatory experiences in the 
American healthcare system and heterosexist 
attitudes among traditional healers. Among older 
urban AIAN patients in primary care, maltreat- 
ment and neglect are relatively common (Grant 
and Brown 2003). 

One area of concern is the diagnosis of mental 
health functioning of AIANs. AIANs may con- 
ceptualize mental health differently and express 
emotional distress in ways that are inconsistent 
with the diagnostic criteria of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual (DSM). For example, AIANs 



152 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



may express distress as ghost sickness and 
heartbreak syndrome. Thus, the question 
becomes how to elicit, understand, and incorpo- 
rate such expressions of distress and responding 
within the assessment and treatment process of 
the DSM (Grant and Brown 2003). The most 
recent edition of the DSM contains an updated 
version of the Outline for Cultural Formulation 
(OCF), which calls for systematic assessment 
five categories and the Cultural Formulation 
Interview (CFI), which is a set of 16 questions 
that may be used to obtain information during a 
mental health assessment about the impact of 
culture on key aspects of an individual’s clinical 
presentation and care (American Psychiatric 
Association [APA] 2013). 

Although federal and state funders of behav- 
ioral health services overwhelmingly require use 
of evidence-based practices (EBP), of which the 
“gold standard” of Western-based EBP does not 
reflect American Indian communities with regard 
to cultural, linguistic, and geographical differ- 
ences in prevention and early intervention, Native 
American cultural practices (i.e., practice-based 
evidence) have been increasingly used in effective 
service delivery (Native Vision Project 2012). 
There is a distinction between evidence-based 
practice (EBP), which is scientifically tested and 
validates, and practice-based evidence or 
community-defined evidence (CDE), which is a 
validated practice, which is accepted by the AIAN 
community but not empirically proven. EBPs are 
particularly challenging because they have not 
been tested in AIAN communities; therefore, they 
have not been culturally validated. Government 
funders mandated that behavioral health providers 
observe the same EBP standards in health care 
(Nebelkopf et al. 2011). Neblkopf et al contend 
that this mandate brings into question, how can 
Western science reconcile with indigenous 
knowledge to operationalize AIANs and First 
Nations’ core values to demonstrate EBP? The 
suggestion is to use CDE to identify cultural 
adaptations to EBPs (Martinez 2011). 

One approach of service delivery that has 
produced successful outcomes with AIANs is the 
Holistic System of Care (HSOC). The HSOC is a 
community-focused intervention that provides 



behavioral health care, promotes health, and 
prevents disease. The HSOC integrates mental 
health and substance abuse services with medi- 
cal, dental, and HIV services and provides sup- 
port for the entire family. The approach links 
prevention, treatment, and recovery and is based 
on a community strategic planning process that 
honors Native culture and relationships while 
allowing for integration of Western (EBPs) 
treatment modalities. The HSOC acknowledges 
the diversity of traditional healing beliefs among 
the different tribes and respects each tribe’s 
practice of traditional medicine. This approach 
deals with the whole person. The emphasis is on 
self-help, empowerment, and building a healthy 
community (Native Vision Project 2012). 

Although substantial fragmentation exists in 
many Native communities, some communities 
(e.g., Native community in Chicago and Port- 
land, Oregon) have developed a strong network 
of human services to meet the varied needs of 
community members (Weaver 2012). In Canada, 
practices have been implemented for First 
Nations and Inuit elders. The First Nations and 
Inuit Home and Community Care (FNIACC) 
program has been instrumental in facilitating the 
development of essential programs within 606 
First Nations reserves and communities and 53 
Inuit communities across Canada (Cyr and Oot- 
oova 2010). FNIHCC consists of eight regions 
across Canada that engage in collaborative part- 
nerships that create sustainable change in com- 
munities and jurisdictions. 



Policy Issues 

Currently, health services in the USA are deliv- 
ered through a system of interlocking programs 
made up of the IHS, tribal programs, and urban 
programs. The structure involves interrelation- 
ships between the federal government, tribal 
governments, and urban Indian groups. The IHS 
structure consists of three levels: headquarters, 
area offices, and service units including hospitals, 
health centers, health stations, and clinics (To- 
satto et al. 2006). The IHS is based on the 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



153 



medical model and as such, one of the major 
problems is that the majority of funding goes into 
direct medical care (e.g., hospital and clinical 
care) with limited dollars available for preven- 
tion. Other challenges include a lack of resources 
and technical knowledge: most tribes do not have 
departments of public health, which “is a major 
contributor to the negative health disparities 
existing among Indian people today, on and off 
reservations” (Allison et al. 2007, p. 299). 
Another crucial problem associated with the IHS 
structure is the inability to bill and collect ade- 
quately for all of the services it provides. 

Exponentially, Native American tribes are 
assuming more control of their own healthcare 
delivery systems and making decisions to create 
or plan their own departments of public health 
(Allison et al. 2007). Allison et al. propose three 
public health organizational delivery models to 
meet the public health needs of small, medium, 
and large American Indian tribes. The models 
become larger and more complex in the pro- 
gression along the continuum. Basically, these 
models create an organizational structure in 
which services and functions are handled by 
specific departments and are designed with the 
premise that tribal governments are direct care 
providers. The models build on existing services 
provided through IHS. 

In Canada, one of the greatest challenges for 
urban Aboriginal seniors in the healthcare system 
is the issue of jurisdiction, specifically for Inuit 
and status Indians peoples. Both Inuit and status 
Indian peoples face jurisdictional challenges, 
because while provinces and territories provide 
healthcare services, the federal government is 
responsible to pay for status Indian and Inuit 
health care. Although Metis and non-status peo- 
ples are declared as Aboriginal under the Con- 
stitution Act of 1982, they are not recognized as 
a federal responsibility. The result is that Metis 
and non-status Indian peoples receive the same 
provincial benefits as all other Canadians (Beatty 
and Berdahl 2011). The political jurisdiction and 
administrative barriers between federal, provin- 
cial, and regional authorities cause ongoing 
jurisdictional disputes in health regarding the 
provision of health services to AP (Beatty and 



Berdahl 2011; Cameron 2003). From a policy 
perspective, it is important to recognize that the 
off-reservation and urban Aboriginal populations 
in Canada are not distinct from the on-reservation 
and rural. They are interconnected in terms of 
mobility, culture, and politics (Graham and 
Peters 2002). AP are highly mobile between 
rural/reservations and urban areas, and within 
urban communities (“churn factor”), which has 
implications for policy (Place 2012). 

The current policy frameworks in Canada for 
AP are hampered by fragmented services, judi- 
cial boundaries, and insufficient funding, which 
is especially challenging for elders. Understand- 
ing how two-spirit persons fit into the mix of 
things is still unclear. Beatty and Berdahl (2011) 
suggest that Canada look to Sweden, Denmark, 
and Iceland for alternative ways of thinking 
about options for elderly care in Canada. In 
Sweden, elderly care policy focuses on ensuring 
the elderly economic security, adequate housing, 
and good services and care. Iceland uses a model 
that consists of a mix of family and state 
involvement. Elderly care in Denmark is largely 
state funded. These three models contain several 
key components to reconcile the fragmentation 
of services for AP. First, they support a public 
push for governments to take more responsibility 
for long-term care with increased support for 
families as a means of empowering personal 
control among the elderly and their families. 
Second, they suggest more holistic Aboriginal 
eldercare models in Canada. Third, they advocate 
for inclusion of culture, community, and mixed 
systems. Finally, they promote community 
involvement as integral to proper health care 
(Beatty and Berdahl 2011). Presumably, specific 
attention is to be given to two-spirit elders in the 
redesign of policies and procedures. 

The future brings new challenges and contin- 
uation of existing ones for development of inter- 
ventions for AIANs and First Nations. One of the 
most substantial challenges is EBP. Since EBP is 
grounded in the supposition that the most effec- 
tive practices are demonstrated through carefully 
controlled scientific experiments, which assess 
the causal efficacy of these practices, Nebelkopf 
et al. (2011) question the efficacy of EBP for 



154 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



measuring practices of indigenous peoples of 
North America. Nevertheless, a consensus in the 
literature is that two-spirit persons of North 
America and especially elders are among, if not, 
the most marginalized people of all in their 
respective country or region. 



Summary 

AIAN and Aboriginal elderly people are among 
the most vulnerable and marginalized people of 
North America, and two-spirits elderly are even 
more so. Both in the USA and Canada, these 
groups are recognized as disadvantaged status 
because of poor socioeconomic conditions on 
reservations and in communities, both urban and 
rural. Two-spirit persons among AIANs and AP 
of Canada are further marginalized in their 
communities and within the LGBT community. 
A combination of social and economic exclusion, 
barriers to health services access, ignoring cul- 
turally specific coping mechanism, ageism, and 
the effects of colonization converge to relegate 
two-spirit elders to a status of unimportance, and 
far worse, to that of invisibility. 



Learning Exercises 
Self-check Questions 

1. To what extent do urban American Indians 
have rights as citizens to tribal government on 
reservations? 

2. How is enculturation an empowering process 
for two-spirit persons? 

3. How does historical trauma shape the health 
risk factors for Native Peoples? 

4. Compared to the general population, what 
types of health issues are significantly higher 
among AIANs? 

5. Among First Nations of Canada, which group 
has poorer health status? What health issues 
do they have? 



Field-Based Experiential Assignments 

1. Interview an AIAN or First Nations elderly 
LGBT persons to understand how he or she 
defines two-spirit identity. 

2. Establish an interdisciplinary team of profes- 
sionals and develop processes and procedures 
to work with two-spirit LGBT elders in urban 
areas and rural settings. 

3. Construct an interdisciplinary, cross-cultural 
conference to address the psychological, 
social, health, housing, economic, education, 
and life-care plans of two-spirit LGBT elders. 
Be sure to: (a) purpose of the conference, 

(b) goals and objectives, (c) identify topics to 
be covered, (b) expert speakers, and (e) other 
relevant components. 

Multiple Choice Questions 

1. Which of the following is how American 
Indians analyze human sexuality? 

(a) Dichotomously and categorically 

(b) Continuum of human sexuality 

(c) Physical appearance 

(d) Biologically 

2. How do American Indians define gender and 
gender status? 

(a) Majority and minority 

(b) Biological and ambiguous 

(c) Rite of passage 

(d) Biological and cultural 

3. How are two-spirit persons viewed in First 
Nations’ culture? 

(a) Transsexuals 

(b) People who try to make themselves the 
opposite sex 

(c) Individuals who take on a gender that is 
different from both women and men 

(d) Individuals who take on one gender 
identity prior to puberty, then another 
gender to signify adulthood 

4. Why do Aboriginal Peoples view Western 
medical practices as dehumanizing? 

(a) They separate older Aboriginal peoples 
from their communities 




7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



155 



(b) They involve individual-style decision 
making that can run contrary to tradi- 
tional Aboriginal belief systems 

(c) They exclude Aboriginal worldview 

(d) All of the above 

(e) None of the Above 

5. Which of the following is true of two-spirit 
persons on reservations who are asked to 
leave because of publicly disclosing their 
sexual orientation? 

(a) Lack of transportation make it harder for 
them to leave 

(b) They are able to blend in some ways 

(c) It is easier for them to integrate a positive, 
healthy identity 

(d) Service providers’ attitudes are more 
positive 

6. Which of the following service provider is a 
higher rate of usage among rural Aboriginal 
elders than non- Aboriginal elders? 

(a) Physician 

(b) Specialist 

(c) Nurse 

(d) Eye doctor 

7. Why is the diagnosis of mental health func- 
tioning of Native Peoples a concern with the 
way diagnostic criteria are defined in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual? 

(a) The language of the DSM is difficult to 
translate into many Native languages. 

(b) Native Peoples conceptualize mental 
health differently and express emotions 
that are inconsistent with DSM diagnostic 
criteria. 

(c) As a sovereign nation Native Peoples are 
not obligated to follow the same diag- 
nostic criteria of the DSM. 

(d) The prevalence of indigenous people is 
not statically significant to meet DSM 
diagnostic criteria. 

8. With the disclosure of one’s sexual identity 
in the American Indian community, who 
dictates the parameters regarding acceptable 
behavior? 

(a) Parents 

(b) Peer group 

(c) Elders 

(d) Tribal law 



9. Which of the following is prohibited by 
federal policies for Aboriginal elderly in 
Canada? 

(a) Building of long-term care facilities on 
reservations 

(b) Staffing healthcare facilities with nurses 
in rural communities 

(c) Renting of subsidized housing 

(d) Providing healthcare services both on- 
and off-reservation 

10. Where did the term two-spirit originate? 

(a) USA 

(b) Australia 

(c) England 

(d) Canada 

Key 

1— b 

2— d 

3— c 

4— d 

5 — a 

6— c 

7— b 

8— c 

9— a 

10— d 



Resources 

Indigenous Health — Australia, Canada, Ao- 
tearoa. New Zealand, and the USA — Laying 
claim to a future that embraces health for us all: 
www.who.int/healthsystems/topic/financing/ 
healthreport/Ihno22.pdf. 

NativeOut: www.nativeout.com. 

The Provincial Health Services Authority of 
BC (training modules on Indigenous cultural 
competency): http://www.culturalcompe 

tency.ca/. 

Toronto-based organizations: http://www. 

2spirits.com/. 

Tribal Equity Toolkit 2.0: Tribal Resolutions 
and Codes to Support Two Spirit and LBGT 



156 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



Justice in Indian Country: http://graduate. 
lclark.edu/live/files/ 1581 0-tribal-equity- 
toolkit-20. 



References 

Adelson, N. (2005, March/April). The embodiment of 
inequity: Health disparities in Aboriginal Canada. 
Canadian Journal of Public Health, 96, S45-S-61. 

Administration on Aging. (2012). A profile of older 
Americans: 2012. Washington, DC: Author. 

Allison, M. T„ Rivers, P. A., & Fottler, M. D. (2007). 
Future public health delivery models for Native 
American tribes. Public Health, 121, 296-307. 

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-5). 
Washington, DC: Author. 

Balsam, K. F., Huang, B., Fieland, K. C., Simoni, J. M., 
& Walters, K. L. (2004). Culture, trauma, and 
wellness: A comparison of heterosexual and lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and two-spirit Native Americans. Cul- 
tural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 10 
(3), 287-301. 

Beatty, B. B„ & Berdahl, L. (2011). Health care and 
Aboriginal seniors in urban Canada: Helping a 
neglected class. The International Indigenous Policy 
Journal, 2(1). Retrieved from http://ir.lib.uwo.ca/iipj/ 
vol2.issl/10. 

Branch, K. (2005, August). Long term care needs of 
Alaska Native elders. U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. Retrieved July 31, 2014 from http:// 
www.anthc.org/chs/wp/elders/upload/LTC-Report.pdf 

Brotman, S., Ryan, B„ & Cormier, R. (2003). The health 
and social service needs of gay and lesbian elders and 
their families in Canada. The Gerontologist, 43(2), 
192-202. 

Brotman, S., Ryan, B., Jalbert, Y., & Rowe, B. (2002). 
Reclaiming space-regaining health: The health care 
experience of two-spirit people in Canada. Journal of 
Gay and Lesbian Social Services: Issues in Practice, 
Policy and Research, 14, 67-87. 

Browne, A. J„ McDonald, H., & Elliott, D. (2009). First 
Nations Urban Aboriginal Health research discussion 
paper. National Aboriginal Health Organization: A 
Report for the First Nations Centre. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. (2011). What we do. Retrieved 
July 24, 2014 from http://www.bia.gov/WhatWeDo/ 
index.htm. 

Cameron, L. (2003, April). First Nations health in 
Saskatchewan, 1905-2005. Western Development 
Museum/Saskatchewan Indian Cultural Centre 



Partnership Project. Saskatoon, SK: Saskatchewan 
Indian Cultural Centre and Western Development 
Museum. 

Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. (2004, 
August). 2001 census housing series issue 6: revised 
Aboriginal households. Research Highlight, 
Socio-economic Series 04-036. Ottawa, ON: CMHC. 

Canadian Rainbow Health Coalition. (2004). Health and 
wellness in the gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered 
and Two-Spirit communities: A background docu- 
ment. Available at http://www.rainbowhealth.ca. 

Centers for Disease Control. (2003). Health status of 
American Indians compared with other racial/ethnic 
minority populations — Selected states, 2001-2002. 
MMWR, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 52 
(47), 1148-1152. 

Centers for Disease Control. (2007). Injuries among 
Native Americans: Fact sheet. Retrieved July 24, 2014 
from http://www.cdc.gov/nipc/factsheet/ 

nativeamericans.htm. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). CDC 
Health disparities and inequities report — United 
States, 2011. Morbidity and mortality Weekly report 
supplement (Vol. 60). Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/ 
mmwr/pdf/other/su6001 .pdf. 

Cyr, A., & Ootoova, E. (2010, April). Mind body spirit: 
Promising practices in First Nations and Inuit home 
and community care. Canada: The Canadian Home 
Care Association. Retrieved September 5, 2014 from 
www.cdnhomecare.ca. 

Dunaway-Knight, A., Knoll, M. A. Z., Shoffner, D., & 
Whitman, K. (2012). Measures of health and eco- 
nomic well-being among American Indians and 
Alaska Natives aged 62 or older in 2030. Retrieved 
July 24, 2014 from http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/ 
rsnotes/rsn20 1 2-02 .html. 

Environics Institute. (2010). Urban Aboriginal peoples 
study. Toronto, ON: Author. 

Fieland, K. C., Walters, K. L., & Simoni, J. M. (2007). 
Determinants of health among two-spirit American 
Indians and Alaska Natives. New York, NY: Springer. 

First Nations Centre. (2007). A snapshot of off-reserve 
First Nations health: Selected health status and 
determinant indicators for adults. Ottawa, ON: 
National Aboriginal Health Organization. 

Galabuzi, G. (2004). Social exclusion. In D. Raphael 
(Ed.), Social determinants of health: Canadian per- 
spectives (pp. 235-252). Toronto, ON: Canadian 
Scholars’ Press Inc. 

Garrett, M. T., & Pichette, E. F. (2000). Red as an apple: 
Native American acculturation and counseling with or 
without reservation. Journal of Counseling and 
Development, 78, 3-13. 

Graham, K. A. H., & Peters, E. (2002, December). 
Aboriginal communities and urban sustainability. 
Ottawa, ON: Canadian Policy Research Networks 



7 American Indian, Alaska Native, and Canadian ... 



157 



Inc. Retrieved August 13, 2014 from http://www. 

urbancenter.utorontonta.ca/pdfs/clibrary/ 

CPRNUrbanAboriginal.pdf. 

Grant, J„ & Brown, T. (2003). American Indian & Alaska 
Native resource manual. Retrieved July 31, 2014 from 
www.nami.org/Content/ContentGroups/MIO? 
CDResourceManual.pdf. 

Health Canada. (2009). First Nations, hunt and Aborig- 
inal health: Summative evaluation of the First Nations 
and Inuit home and community. Ontario: Author. 

Hendry, J. (2003). Mining the sacred mountain: The clash 
between the Western dualistic framework and Native 
American religions. Multicultural Perspectives, 5(1), 
3-10. 

Janz, T., Seto, J., & Turner, A. (2009). Aboriginal peoples 
survey, 2006: An overview of the health of the Metis 
population. Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 
89-637-X-004. Ottawa: Minister of Industry. 

Kim, G., Bryant, A. N„ Goins, R. T., Worley, C. B., & 
Chiriboga, D. A. (2012). Disparities in health status 
and health care access and use among older American 
Indians and Alaska Natives and non-Hispanic Whites 
in California. Journal of Aging and Health, 24(5), 
799-811. 

Kim, G., Bryant, A. N., & Parmelee, P. (2011). 
Racial/ethnic differences in serious psychological 
distress among older adults in California. Interna- 
tiona! Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. doi:10.1002/ 
gps.2825. 

Lafontaine, C. (2006, November 27). Presentation to the 
Senate Standing Committee on Aging. Retrieved 
August 4, 2014 from www.naho.ca/documents/naho/ 
publications/agingPresentation.pdf. 

Laframboise, S., & Anhorn, M. (2008). The way of the two 
spirited people. Retrieved July 14, 2014 from http:// 
www.dancingtoeaglespiritsociety.org/twospirit.php. 

Lavoie, J., Forget, R., Rowe, G., & Dahl, M. (2008). The 
leaving for the city project (medical relocation project 
phase 2): Draft repoit. Winnipeg, MB: Manitoba First 
Nations Centre for Aboriginal Health Research 
(unpublished paper). 

Li, C. I., Malone, K. E., & Daling, J. R. (2003). 
Differences in breast cancer stage, treatment, and 
survival by race and ethnicity. Archives of Internal 
Medicine, 163, 49-56. 

Martinez, K. (2011, May). Best practices and the 
elimination of disparities: The connection. Lecture 
2011 national policy summit to Address Behavioral 
Health Disparities within Health Care Reform, San 
Diego, CA. 

McCaskill, D., FitzMaurice, K., & Cidro, J. (2011). 
Toronto Aboriginal research project final report. 
Retrieved August 8, 2014 from www.councilfire.ca/ 
Acrobat/trarp-final-report20 1 1 .pdf. 

McLeod-Shabogesic, P. (1995). The medicine wheel: A 
healing journey. Ontario: The Union of Ontario 
Indians. 

Meyer-Cook, F., & Labelle, D. (2003). Namaji. Journal 
of Gay and Lesbian Social Services, 16(1), 29-51. 



National Household Survey. (2013). Aboriginal peoples 
of Canada: First Nations peoples, Metis and 

Inuit-National Household Survey 2011. Retrieved 
August 4, 2014 from www.springeipub.com/ 

instructiormaterial/97 80826 117977/ 
AboriginalPeoplesinCanada-9781100222035.pdf. 

Native Vision Project. (2012). California reducing dis- 
parities Project Native American population report. 
Retrieved July 31, 2014 from www.nativehealth.org/ 
sites/dev.nh.edeloa.net/files/native_vision_report_ 
compressed.pdf. 

Native Women’s Association of Canada. (2007). Social 
determinants of health and Canada’s Aboriginal 
women. Ottwa, ON: Author. Retrieved August 13, 
2014 from www.nwac.ca/sites/default/files/reports/ 
NWAC_WHO-CSDH_Submission.mb.ca/. 

Nebelkopf, E., King, J., Wright, S., Schweigman, K., 
Lucero, E., Habte-Michael, T., & Cervantes, T. 
(2011). Growing roots: Native American 

evidence-based practices. Journal of Psychoactive 
Drugs, 43(4), 263-268. 

Ogunwole, S. (2006). We the people: American Indians 
and Alaska Natives in the United States. Census 2000 
special report CNSR-28. Washington, DC: Census 
Bureau. Available at http://www.census.gov/prod/ 
2006pubs/censr-28 .pdf. 

Paltoo, D. N., & Chu, K. C. (2004). Patterns in cancer 
incidence among American Indians/Alaska Natives, 
United States, 1992-1999. Public Health Reports, 
119, 443-451. 

Place, J. (2012). The health of Aboriginal peoples 
residing in urban areas. Prince George, BC: National 
Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. 

Podneik, E. (2008). Elder abuse: The Canadian experi- 
ence. Journal of Elder Abuse and Neglect, 20(2), 126- 
150. 

Pope, M. (2012). Native American and gay: Two spirits in 
one human being. In S. H. Dworkin & M. Pope (Eds.), 
Casebook for counseling lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
trans gender persons and their families (pp. 163-172). 
Alexandria, V A: American Counseling Association. 

Reading, C. L„ & Wien, F. (2009). Health inequalities 
and social determinants of Aboriginal peoples’ health. 
Retrieved August 12, 2014 from http://www.nccah- 
ccnsa.ca/docs/aocialdeterminates/nccah-loppie-wein_ 
report.dpf. 

Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. 
(1996). Report of the Royal Commission on Aborig- 
inal peoples (Vol. 1, Chap. 2). From time immemorial: 
A demographic profile. Ottawa, Canada: Ottawa 
Canada Communication Group. Available at http:// 
www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/ch/rcap/sg/sg3_e.html#9. 

Rhoades, D. A., Manson, S. M., Noonan, C., & Buch- 
wald, D. (2005). Characteristics associated with 
reservation travel among Native American outpatients. 
Journal of Healthcare for the Poor and Underserved, 
16(3), 464-474. 

Ristock, J., Zoccole, A., & Potskin, J. (2011). Aboriginal 
two-spirit and LGBTQ migration, mobility, and health 



158 



D.A. Harley and R.J. Alston 



research project: Vancouver final report. Manitoba, 
Canada: University of Manitoba. 

Rosenberg, M. W., Wilson, K., Abonyi, S„ Wiebe, A., 
Beach, K., & Lovelace, R. (2009, July). Older 
Aboriginal Peoples of Canada demographics, health 
status and access to health care. Social and economic 
dimensions of an aging population (SEDAP) research 
paper no. 249. Retrieved August 11, 2014 from http:// 
socs.erv.master.ca/sedap/P/sedap249.pfd. 

Roubideaux, Y., Zuckerman, M., & Zuckerman, E. 
(2004). A review of the quality of health care for 
American Indians and Alaska Natives. The Common- 
wealth Fund. 

Rowland, J. (2013). The new legal context of Indigenous 
peoples’ rights: The United Nations declaration on the 
rights of indigenous peoples. American Indian Culture 
and Research Journal, 37(4), 141-156. 

Satter, D. E„ Wallace, S. P., Garcia, A. N., & Smith, L. 
M. (2010). Health of American Indian and Alaska 
Native elders in California. Los Angles, CA: UCLA 
Center for Health Policy Research. 

Scheim, A. I., Jackson, R„ James, L., Dopier, T. S., Pyne, 
J., & Bauer, G. R. (2013). Barriers to well-being for 
Aboriginal gender-diverse people: Results from the 
Trans PULSE project in Ontario, Canada. Ethnicity 
and Inequalities in Health and Social Care, 6(4), 108- 
120 . 

Social Security Administration. (2011). Disability bene- 
fits. SSA publication no. 05-10029. Baltimore, MD: 
Author. Available at http://www.socialsecurity.gov/ 
pubs/10029.html. 

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013). Counseling the culturally 
diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. 

Tamborini, C. R. (2007). The never married in old-age: 
Projections and concerns for the near future. Social 
Security Bulletin, 67(2), 25-40. 

Taylor, C., & Ristock, J. (2011). We are all treaty people: 
An anti-oppressive research ethics of solidarity with 
Indigenous Two-Spirit and LGBTQ people living with 
partner violence. In J. Ristock (Ed.), Intimate partner 
LGBTQ people's lives (pp. 301-320). New York: 
Routlege. 

Thin Elk, G. (2011). Red road approach to holistic 
healing. Available at http://www.readroadapproach. 
com/aboutus.html. 

Tjepkema, M. (2002). The health of the off-reserve 
Aboriginal population. Health reports (Vol. 13, Sup- 
pi.). Ottawa: Statistics Canada, Catalogue 82-003. 
Retrieved August 11, 2014 from www.statcan.gc.ca/ 
pub/82-003-s/2002001pdf/82-003-s2002004-eng.pdf. 

Tosatto, R. J., Reeves, T. C., Duncan, W. J., & Ginter, 
P. M. (2006). Indian health service: Creating a climate 
of change. In L. E. Swayne, W. J. Duncan, & 
P. M. Ginter (Eds.), Strategic management of health 



care organizations (pp. 626-645). Malden, MA: 
Blackwell Publishing. 

Turcotte, M., & Schellenberg, G. (2007). A portrait of 
seniors in Canada, 2006. Statistics Canada catalogue 
no. 89-519-XIE. Ottawa: Minister of Industry. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2007). 
Obesity and American Indians/Alaska Natives. 
Retrieved from http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/07/AI-AN- 
obesity/report.pdf. 

Wahsquonaikezhik, D., Wahsquonaikezhik, G., & Wa- 
hsquonaikezhik, S. (1976). 2-Spirited people of the 1st 
nation (pp. 18-31). Reprinted in We are part of a 
Tradition (1998). Quebec: First Nations of Quebec and 
Labrador Health and Social Services Commission. 

Walters, K. L., Evans-Campbell, T., Simoni, J.. Ronqu- 
illo, T., & Bhuyan, R. (2006). My spirit in my heart: 
Identity experiences and challenges among American 
Indian two-spirited women. Journal of Lesbian Stud- 
ies, 10, 125-149. 

Walters, K. L., Horwath, P. F., & Simoni, J. M. (2001). 
Sexual orientation bias experiences and service needs 
of gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered, and 
two-spirited American Indians. Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Social Services, 13(1-2), 133-149. 

Walyers, K. L., & Simoni, J. N. (2002). Reconceptual- 
izing native women’s health: An "indigenist” 

stress-coping model. American Journal of Public 
Health, 92, 520-524. 

Ward, E., Jemal, A., Cokkinides, V., Singh, G. K., 
Cardinez, C„ Ghafoor, A., & Thun, M. (2004). Cancer 
disparities by race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status. 
Cancer Disparities, 54(2), 78-93. 

Warren, P. N. (1998). Berdaches... and assumptions 
about Berdaches. Retrieved July 24, 2014 from http:// 
www.whosoever.org/v3i3/berdaches.html. 

Weaver, H. N. (2012). Urban and indigenous: The 
challenges of being a Native American in the city. 
Journal of Community Practice, 20, 470^)88. 

Williams, W. L. (1986). The spirit and the flesh: Sexual 
diversity in American Indian culture. Boston: Beacon 
Press. 

Wilson, K., Rosenberg, M. W., & Abonyi, S. (2011). 
Aboriginal peoples, health and healing approaches: 
The effects of age and place on health. Social Science 
and Medicate, 72, 355-364. 

Wilson, K„ Rosenberg, M. W., Abonyi, S., & Lovelace, 
R. (2010). Aging and health: An examination of 
differences between older Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal people. Canadian Journal on Aging, 
29(3), 369-382. 

Wright, K. N. (2009). Disparities and chronic health care 
needs for elderly American Indians living on or near a 
reservation. American Indian Culture and Research 
Journal, 33(3), 85-99. 



Asian American and Native Pacific 
Islander LGBT Elders 

Debra A. Harley 




Abstract 

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss issues pertaining to LGBT Asian- 
American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) elderly in the USA. Attention is 
also given to the citizenship status of foreign-born Asian-Americans. 
Information is presented on cultural characteristics and values of Asian 
culture, acknowledging that there is great heterogenerity among AAPIs. 
Discussion focuses on attitudes and perceptions of Asian Americans’ 
perspectives about LGBT persons, characteristics, and issues pertinent to 
Asian American LGBT elders, health status and service delivery for 
LGBT Asian-American elders, and current health policy and practices. 
Whenever possible, specific reference is made to certain subgroups of 
persons of Asian descent. 



Keywords 

Asian american • Native pacific islander • LGBT elders 



Overview 

Given the diversity among Asian-American 
populations, it is not feasible to include infor- 
mation about all of them in this chapter. The 
purpose of this chapter is to discuss issues per- 
taining to LGBT Asian American and Pacific 
Islander elders in the USA. Information is pre- 



D.A. Harley (13) 

University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA 
e-mail: dharlOO@email.uky.edu 



sented on cultural characteristics and values of 
Asian culture, acknowledging that great hetero- 
generity exists within Asian-American and 
Pacific Islanders (AAPIs). The intent of pre- 
senting this information is to provide a contex- 
tual framework from which to understand 
attitudes and behaviors of this population. Sec- 
ond, research on the attitudes and perceptions of 
Asian-Americans’ perspectives about LGBT 
persons is discussed. Next, the characteristics of 
and issues pertinent to Asian American LGBT 
elderly are examined. Then, health status and 
service delivery for LGBT Asian-American 
elderly is reviewed. Finally, current policy and 

159 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_8 




160 



D.A. Harley 



practices pertaining to LGBT Asian American 
elders are examined, along with recommenda- 
tions for the future. Throughout this chapter, the 
umbrella term Asian-Americans is used to refer 
to the various groups that make up this popula- 
tion; however, specific reference is made to cer- 
tain subgroups where appropriate. In addition, 
efforts are made to distinguish between data that 
are group specific and illustrative in content 
through examples. Given the limited amount of 
research published on LGBT AAPIs, some 
inferences are made from AAPIs in general and 
generalizations are made from younger 
AAPI LGBT persons to older AAPI LGBT 
adults. 



Learning Objective 

By the end of this chapter, the reader will be able 

to: 

1. Understand the role of AAPI elders in Asian 
communities. 

2. Distinguish among cultural characteristic 
within AAPI cultures. 

3. Distinguish between generational differences 
among AAPI LGBT persons. 

4. Identify the attitudes and perceptions of 
AAPIs toward LGBT persons. 

5. Identify barriers to health care and social 
services for AAPI LGBT elders. 

6. Identify health issues and disparities of 
LGBT AAPI elders. 

7. Understand factors contributing to resiliency 
among AAPI LGBT elders. 



Introduction 

Great diversity exists among the Asian American 
population, with at least 40 distinct subgroups 
that differ in language, religion, values, and 
culture. They include Chinese, Filipinos, Kore- 
ans, Asian Indians, Japanese, Vietnamese, Lao- 
tians, Cambodians, Hmongs, Hawaiians, 



Guamanians, and Samoans (Sue and Sue 2013). 
The six largest Asian American single-race sub- 
groups are Asian Indian, Chinese, Filipino, Jap- 
anese, Korean, and Vietnamese (US Census 
Bureau 2012). The Asian-American population is 
growing rapidly and represents about five percent 
of the US population. Native Hawaiian and other 
Pacific Islanders comprise 0.4 % of the total 
population, with more than half reporting multi- 
ple races. Further examination reveals that over 
60 % of Asian Americans are immigrants, more 
than two-thirds speak a language other than 
English at home, and approximately 40 % do not 
speak English well. With the exception of Japa- 
nese-Americans, Asian-American groups are 
now principally composed of internationally 
born individuals. Nearly two-thirds of AAPIs are 
foreign born and have arrived in the USA, since 
1965. Of the Asian population in the USA, there 
are approximately 3.8 million Chinese, 2.8 mil- 
lion Asian Indians, 1.7 million Vietnamese, 1.6 
million Koreans, and 1.3 million Japanese. Cal- 
ifornia has the largest and most diverse AAPI 
population in the country (US Census Bureau 
2010 ). 

The majority of younger Asian Americans are 
highly educated. For Asian American and Pacific 
Islanders over the age of 25, over half have a 
bachelor’s degree compared to 30 % of their 
White counterparts (US Census Bureau 2011a). 
In 2010, the median income of Asian American 
families was $64,308 compared to $49,445 for 
the US population as a whole (US Census bureau 
2011b). According to Sue and Sue (2013), the 
presentation of Asian-Americans as the model 
minority is a misnomer because a closer look 
reveals disturbing contrasts with popular views 
of their success story. Specifically, Sue and Sue 
outline the following contrasts. First, the report 
of Asian American families having a higher 
median income than other minority groups does 
not take into account (a) the higher percentage of 
Asian American families having more than one 
wage earner, (b) between-group differences in 
education and income, and (c) a higher preva- 
lence of poverty despite the higher median 
income. Second, although collectively Asian 
Americans show a disparate picture of 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



161 



extraordinarily high educational attainment, they 
also have a large undereducated class among 
certain subpopulations. Third, within Asian 
American communities such as Chinatowns, 
Manilatowns, and Japantowns exist ghetto areas 
with prevalent unemployment, poverty, health 
problems, and juvenile delinquency that people 
outside these communities seldom see. Fourth, 
Asian Americans underutilize mental health ser- 
vices; however, it is unclear if this is due to low 
rates of socioeconomic difficulties, discrimina- 
tory or culturally inappropriate mental health 
practices, or cultural values inhibiting self-refer- 
ral (Asai and Kameoka 2005; Ting and Hwang 
2009). Finally, Asian Americans have been and 
continue to face discrimination, racism, and anti- 
Asian sentiments. 

Asian Americans over age 65 are among the 
fastest growing minority group in the USA. 
Between 2008 and 2030, the Asian-American 
elderly population is projected to grow 19 % to 
over 3.8 million persons (Administration on 
Aging, n.d.). Overwhelmingly, older Asian 
Americans were born outside the USA. Asian 
Americans immigrants comprise three distinct 
immigration statuses: those who voluntarily 
chose to come to a new country, refugees forced 
to leave their homeland because of war or 
political persecution, and decedents of immi- 
grants. Although Asian-Americans have immi- 
grated to the USA since the late 1800s, it was not 
until the 1950s that foreign-born Asian-Ameri- 
cans were permitted to become US citizens (Pew 
Research Center 2013). See Chapter “Immigrant 
LGBT Elders” for additional discussion on 
LGBT immigrants. It is safe to assume that 
LGBT persons are among Asian-American 
immigrants. As more AAPI LGBT persons come 
out, they continue to face invisibility, isolation, 
and stereotyping. Dang and Hu (2005) contend 
that, in particular. South Asian immigrants have 
come under increased scrutiny and attack after 
the terrorist attacks on September 1 1 , 200 1 . As a 
result, the lives of AAPI LGBT persons “involve 
a complex web of issues arising from being 
sexual, racial/ethnic, language, gender, immi- 
grant, and economic minorities” (p. ii). 



Cultural Characteristics and Values 
of Asian Americans and Pacific 
Islanders 

Collectively, AAPIs are considered as successful, 
law-abiding, intellectually superior than other 
groups, and high-achieving minorities. They are 
stereotyped as a resilient model minority. 
According to Yee et al. (2008), “this positive 
characterization overlooks the difficult life cir- 
cumstances that some AAPI individuals experi- 
ence and downplays the very real needs of those 
who are vulnerable to experiences of discrimi- 
nation, trauma, or poverty” (p. 69). In fact, there 
is considerable variation in the prevalence of risk 
and protective factors and resiliency processes 
across AAPI ethnic groups (Sue and Sue 2013; 
Yee et al. 2008). Furthermore, generational dif- 
ferences exist among cultural characteristics and 
values of AAPIs. 

Although there is substantial diversity within 
the board AAPI ethnic category, certain pan- 
AAPI values and similarities in family practices 
cut across AAPI subgroups. Four cultural themes 
are common to Chinese, Japanese, Filipino, 
Southeast Asian, South Asian, Hawaiian, and 
Samoan cultures: collectivism, a relational orien- 
tation, familism, and family obligation, all of 
which promote family interdependence (see 
Table 8.1) (Yee et al. 2008). In the USA, AAPIs 
create community around shared culture, their 
diaspora, language, and food (Alcedo 2014). 
Usually, elders are held in high regard within their 
community. Often, Asians live in an extended 
family. Other basic values and concepts of the 
modern Asian family include an emphasis on 
education; reserve conformity and harmony; 
benevolence and obligation; endurance and sac- 
rifice; and loss of face, shame, and honor (Hu 
2012). Each of these values is discussed below. 

Hu (2012) suggests that the most notable 
aspect of the modern Asian model minority ste- 
reotype is that they are academic overachievers. 
Clearly, not all Asians fit this pattern. The level of 
achievement of Asian students can be attributed 
primarily to the basic notion of the family and the 
central role that education plays. Education is the 



162 



D.A. Harley 



Table 8.1 Cultural values promote family interdependence 

Collectivism: It is the tendency to place group needs and goals above the goals and desires of the individual. 

Relational orientation: It is a cultural frame in which the self is defined in terms of its essential and continuing 
interdependence with others. 

Familism: It defines a hierarchically organized extended family system as the basic social unit. 

Family obligation: It includes both attitudinal and behavioral responsibilities in which children are expected to 
(a) show respect and alfection for older family members, (b) seek their advice and accept their decisions, and 
(c) maintain propinquity, instrumental assistance, and emotional ties with parents across the life span. 

Adapted from Yee et al. (2008) 



most valued way of achieving position, and suc- 
cess in education is viewed as an act of filial piety 
(respect for parents), a highly important principle 
(Africa and Carrasco 2011; Hu). Another modern 
stereotype is that of the silent, unassertive Asian, 
uncomplaining, unemotional, docile, and coop- 
erative. Because the well-being of the larger group 
is most important in Asian culture, great impor- 
tance is placed on maintaining harmony. Thus, the 
greatest virtue that one can achieve is fulfilling his 
or her role in the whole of the family or group, and 
individual achievement is seen as the result of the 
effort of the family or group. Maintaining har- 
mony also creates a bias against change, which is 
opposite of American values to encourage 
change. In following these principles, Asians may 
hesitate to initially accept invitations, may choose 
items of lesser value when given the choice, and 
may not be assertive in situations where they 
might speak out (Hu; Sue and Sue 2013). 

Asian culture emphasizes consideration of 
others; thus, benevolence and obligation must be 
present to reinforce relationships. As a hierar- 
chical society, Asian relationships involve a lot 
of obligation, which might be viewed as depen- 
dence or domination. In essence, a substantial 
amount of responsibility and benevolence is 
expected in return. For individuals of equal 
position, there is still the principle of reciprocity, 
goodness given out will come back and kindness 
should be paid back (Hu 2012). Overwhelm- 
ingly, Asian culture has a male-dominated power 
structure. Equally as important is birth order, 
especially for males who are expected to take on 
more unique responsibilities as they grow into 
adulthood (e.g., oldest son assists the father). 



The principles of endurance and sacrifice are 
highly applicable to early immigrants who 
worked under extreme conditions in the USA and 
endured racism because of their willingness to 
work hard for so relatively little. Endurance at all 
costs is central to the extent to which all other 
Asian values are carried out and what distin- 
guishes Asian values from values in other cul- 
tures that look at first similar. Sacrifice means 
that one’s own situation is secondary to that of 
the group as a whole. Endurance is a measure of 
self-control and inner strength, and complaining 
is seen as a sign of weakness (Hu 2012). Hu 
believes that these values may lead to the per- 
ception of Asians as being uncomplaining and 
less vocal than other ethnic minority groups. 

Many Americans are familiar with the concept of 
losing face among Asians. Maintaining good face is 
essential because shame and honor go far beyond 
the individual and reflect directly upon one’s family, 
nation, or related group. The extent to which an 
individual is able to maintain good face is a kind of 
measurement of how well one has kept faith to 
traditional values and one’s social standing among 
others. It is a strong control mechanism, which 
reinforces all other Asian values (Hu 2012). The act 
of keeping face and suppressing or not admitting 
embarrassing situations in the family history often 
manifests itself in the reluctance of Asians to seek 
mental health services (Sue and Sue 2013). 

Many AAPIs rely on traditional health beliefs 
and practices (Africa and Carrasco 2011). To 
illustrate this point, several Native Hawaiian 
cultural values are presented (Mau 2010). These 
values are often relevant in the healthcare setting 
and are not intended to be an exhaustive list of 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



163 



Hawaiian beliefs. First, lokahi (balance/harmony) 
sometimes referred to as “ Lokahi Triangle ” (i.e., 
physical body, environment, relationships with 
others, family members, ancestors, the Gods, and 
mental and emotional states) is central to under- 
standing of health. A person’s physical body 
cannot heal without setting right any problems 
within the mental or spiritual realm. Moreover, 
the person has to be willing to take responsibility 
for the healing and make amends for any wrongs 
that he or she might have caused in the past (Mau 
2010). The second value is ohana (family), 
including the extended family or multigenera- 
tional homes, which is the primary social struc- 
ture for an ethnic Native Hawaiian. Because 
illness affects the entire family, family members 
need to be involved in decision-making and 
treatment plans. The value of ohana is closely 
tied to the values of laulima (cooperation/help- 
ing) and kuleana (responsibility). Finally, the 
values of aloha (love, compassion) and nialania 
(to care for) can influence the recipient-provider 
relationship because Native Hawaiians need to 
feel that they are being respected and cared for if 
they are to be willing partners in the helping 
relationship. Thus, a service provider must 
establish trust with the person. Native Hawaiians 
feel a strong responsibility to take care of their 
loved ones (Mau). 

Many of the cultural characteristics of AAPIs 
have served them well as buffers against dis- 
crimination. However, it is important for service 
providers who work with AAPIs to look behind 
the success myth and to understand the historical 
and current experiences of AAPIs (Sue and Sue 
2013). In fact, it is even more pressing when we 
realize that LGBT AAPIs underutilize healthcare 
and mental health services. Yet, for LGBT A API 
immigrant elders who are unprepared for the 
culture shock in the USA, the need for culture- 
specific diagnostic impressions and interventions 
are paramount. Efforts to assist them to integrate 
their different identity dimensions (e.g., race/eth- 
nicity, sexual orientation, gender expression, 
culture, age) should be made with an awareness of 
self-perception and cultural perception. 



Asian Americans and Pacific 
Islanders’ Attitudes About LGBT 
Persons 

Currently, limited research on the attitudes and 
perceptions of AAPIs toward LGBT persons 
exists, especially that which is both culturally 
relevant and linguistically appropriate (Tseng 
2011). In response to this dearth of research, 
Tseng initiated a study of the attitudes of Asian 
Americans, especially Chinese-speaking Ameri- 
cans, toward LGBT persons using in-language 
interviews and using culturally specific ques- 
tions. The results indicated that for Chinese- 
speaking Americans, gender is the most salient 
lens through which they define, perceive, and 
form their attitudes toward LGBT persons and 
their attitudes in relation to prominent issues 
including children, culture, marriage, and family. 
Overwhelmingly, the majority of interviewees 
described LGBT persons as those whose gender 
characteristics (e.g., appearance, gender roles in 
relationships, behavior) do not conform to the 
gender characteristics of heterosexuals. “Gender 
nonconformity is both the most cited definition 
for being LGBT and the strongest source of 
discomfort with LGBT persons” (Tseng, p. 4). 
Moreover, strict adherence to traditional gender 
roles manifests itself in how they conceptualize 
LGBT persons in relationships. When asked to 
describe their perceptions of LGBT persons, the 
majority of interviewees described GBT men. 
Interviewees also described LGBT persons as 
people who are confused about their gender 
identity, and some admitted extreme discomfort 
with LGBT persons who are neither masculine 
nor feminine. The interviewees expressed greater 
negative attitudes toward GBT men, indicating 
that it is worse for men to be GBT than for 
women. 

Tseng (2011) also found that the interviewees 
framed the “born that way” versus “choice” in 
two ways. First, a majority of interviewees did 
not believe the causes could be narrowed down 
to either of the two. Second, their beliefs in either 
of the two concepts were not correlated with 



164 



D.A. Harley 



specific attitudes (i.e., acceptance versus rejec- 
tion) toward LGBT persons, even for those who 
were certain about the causes of being LGBT. 
Culturally, the majority of interviewees believed 
that there have always been LGBT in their home 
countries and observed that LGBT persons are 
afraid to be open in their countries of birth 
because the culture is not accepting of them. In 
addition, they believe that the relatively more 
open and liberal nature of American and Western 
cultures make it possible for LGBT persons to be 
more open about their sexuality; consequently, 
the culture is an enabler of LGBT persons being 
open about their identities (Tseng 2011). 

The attitudes of the vast majority of Chinese- 
speaking Americans in Tseng’s (2011) study 
were anti-same-sex marriage. These attitudes can 
be categorizes as follows: (a) LGBT persons 
should be able to have the same rights but not to 
call it marriage; (b) the function of marriage is 
reproduction and passing down the family name; 
and (c) same-sex marriage is a violation of tra- 
dition, and only heterosexual marriage is recog- 
nized around the world. As parents, the 
interviewees indicated that they would grudg- 
ingly accept a LGBT child but not before making 
attempts to “correct” the child. In addition, they 
expressed two types of concerns. First, they were 
concerned about being labeled as ineffective 
parents who had done a poor job of raising their 
children. Second, they felt that it would be dif- 
ficult to face close friends and relatives who may 
ridicule them, and they would feel a high degree 
of self-blame if their children turned out to be 
LGBT. On the question of the role that religion 
plays in their attitudes about LGBT person, the 
majority of Chinese-speaking Americans indi- 
cated that it only played a small role (Tseng). It 
should be noted that the majority of Chinese 
Americans identify as not religious (Dang and 
Hu 2005). Dang and Hu found that of the LGBT 
AAPIs in their survey, a large majority claimed 
to be atheist, agnostic, or without religion. Of 
those who did identify as having involvement in 
religion, on average, they said that their church 
or religion views being LGBT negatively and as 
wrong and sinful. Only 16 % said that their 
religion fully accepted LGBT persons. See 



Chapter “The Role of Religious and Faith 
Communities in Addressing the Needs of 
LGBT Elders” for further discussion of religion. 

Boulden (2009) found a clash of culture 
between older generation and younger gay 
Hmong men. In this study, the researcher found 
that the participants described the attitudes of 
their parents and the older Hmong generation 
concerning the existence of LGBT persons as the 
older generation not acknowledging that lesbians 
and gays exists. Hmong elders have never known 
a Hmong who identified him or herself as gay or 
lesbian; thus, it was not an Asian issue, but rather 
a White disease and a White issue. Participants 
indicated that if their parents knew that they are 
gay, it would “break their hearts” for not having 
children to carry on the bloodline. Therefore, to 
avoid bringing shame to the family, they moved 
away and separated themselves. Some partici- 
pants spoke of trying to manage the multifaceted 
conflicts and different aspects of their daily lives 
of being “out” at work, acting straight in public, 
and being and talking Hmong at home. In sum- 
mary, nowhere in their multiple environments 
did the participants have the luxury of interacting 
with others while acknowledging their complete 
identity (Boulden 2009). 

LGBT AAPIs strongly agree that homophobia 
and/or transphobia is a problem within the Asian- 
American community (Dang and Hu 2005). The 
perception was consistent among women, men, 
and transgender persons. For example, in India, 
being gay, the term, a recent addition to the 
Indian cultural dictionary, is challenged with 
substantial resistance. The Indian Penal Code 
#377 states: 

Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against 
the order of nature with any man, woman, or 
animal, shall be punished with imprisonment for 
life, or with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine (Indian Law Info, n.d.) 

The phrase, “against the order of nature,” 
refers to any non-heterosexual relationship 
(Bhattar and Victoria 2007, p. 40). Clearly, 
alternative sexuality is defined only in terms of 
sexual behavior, not identity, and is compared to 
acts of beastiality. In both Indian tradition and 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



165 



pop culture, gay is still defined as abnormal and 
evil. LGBT persons are portrayed stereotypically 
in Indian society in the form of a very feminine 
male of hijra. The term hijra is used to define 
transgender, intersex, and “third gender” people 
who live in communities outside of society. 
Consequently, a fear exists among Indians that if 
a person identifies as gay. he will soon start to 
dress and act as a woman. The acceptance of the 
Western ideology of LGBT persons is slow 
among more progressive Indians, and Indian 
communities in the USA find it hard to accept 
sexual differences because sexuality is a taboo 
topic in India (Bhattar and Victoria). 

In general, AAPIs hold negative and prejudicial 
attitudes toward LGBT persons. However, as with 
all groups, varying degrees of acceptance exist. 
LGBT AAPIs report experiences that are equally 
negative and positive within in different contexts 
such as family and LGBT and non-LGBT orga- 
nizations (Dang and Hu 2005). One interesting 
result of the survey by Dang and Hu is that despite 
their experiences with racism in the LGBT com- 
munity, LGBT AAPIs are more comfortable 
working in predominately White LGBT environ- 
ments than they are working in predominantly 
straight homophobic AAPI environments. 



Asian American and Pacific 
Islander LGBT Elderly 

The US Census has numerous limitations, 
including but not limited to specifically asking 
about sexual orientation or gender identity, 
individuals in same-sex relationships who are not 
living together, and homeless LGBT persons, 
which does not reflect the actual full diversity of 
LGBT persons in the USA (Dang and Hu 2005). 
However, other data suggest that of the Asian 
and Pacific Islander population, 2.8 % of adults 
identify as LGBT, including 3,246,000 in the 
USA, 32,931 of whom are AAPIs in same-sex 
couples, and that 25.9 % of AAPI same-sex 
couples are raising children. The majority of 
LGBT AAPI adults live in geographic locations 
where there are higher proportions of AAPI 



persons as opposed to areas with higher pro- 
portions of the broader LGBT population. 
Approximately, one-third of AAPI same-sex 
couples live in California, Hawaii, and New 
York. LGBT AAPIs are much younger than both 
the non-LGBT population and AAPI persons in 
same-sex couples. Approximately, 4 % of AAPI 
persons in same-sex couples are aged 65 and 
over (Kastanis and Gates 2013). Other charac- 
teristics of LGBT AAPIs include lower rates of 
college completion (42 %) as compared to AAPI 
non-LGBT adults (59 %); however, AAPIs in 
same-sex couples (58 %) have higher rates of 
educational attainment than their different-sex 
counterparts (54 %). Unemployment rates are 
higher for LGBT persons (11 %) compared to 
non-LGBT AAPIs (8 %). AAPIs in same-sex 
(81 %) couples are more likely to be employed 
than their counterparts in different-sex couples 
(70 %). Overall, AAPI persons in same-sex 
couples (40 %) are more likely to be US citizens 
by birth than those in different-sex couples 
(14 %), and same-sex couples are more likely 
than different-sex couples to have at least one 
partner with US citizenship status (Kastanis and 
Gates). 

As with many other ethnic minority popula- 
tions, not all LGBT AAPIs identify with the 
terms lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
because of cultural differences, internalized 
homo/bi/transphobia, and the dissociation 
between identity and behavior (Mangton et al. 
2002). Because of cultural pressures and expec- 
tations that exist in Asian and Pacific Island 
cultures, lesbians and gay men and women and 
men who engage in same-sex behavior are 
required to stick to family values, marry, and 
have children, or place shame on their families, 
neighbors, and community (Boulder 2009). In 
fact, many Asian cultural norms render women 
invisible and silent. Compared to heterosexual 
AAPI women and both heterosexual and gay 
AAPI men, lesbians have a higher prevalence of 
tobacco use, binge drinking, marijuana, and other 
drug use. AAPI lesbians are less likely to adhere 
to traditional family-orientated gender roles, 
unable or unwilling to gain and receive emo- 
tional support from their families, and more 



166 



D.A. Harley 



likely to compete with men for masculine privi- 
leges in order to escape sexist oppression (Hahm 
and Adkins 2009). 

In the USA, LGBT persons view “coming 
out” as a final revelation of their sexual orienta- 
tion or gender identity. For A API LGBT persons, 
the integration of their ethnicity and their 
nationality as an American is known as “coming 
home,” in which they allude to their sexuality to a 
family member who may not challenge it, as long 
as the status quo within the family is maintained 
(Hahm and Adkins 2009). AAPI LGBT persons 
tend to have a high degree of internalized biases 
about minority sexualities, which frequently 
cause them to be isolated, serve as a barrier to 
accessing services, and increase high-risk 
behavior. The internalization of homophobia by 
AAPI LGBT persons can serve as a direct health 
risk (Mangton et al. 2002). In a discussion of the 
LGBT Filipino community, Alcedo (2014) shared 
some perspectives on what LGBT elders confront 
with being “out” as ranging from not feeling 
comfortable to being forced to make connections 
with more people because of the need to keep 
healthy and being well situated in an intergener- 
ational lesbian community. Jim Toy and George 
Takei are two examples that illustrate the public 
role of AAPI LGBT elders as activists (see 
Table 8.2 for their profiles). 



Dang and Hu (2005) surveyed LGBT AAPIs 
to determine the extent to which they consider 
their sexual orientation and gender identity or 
expression as important. The results revealed that 
LGBT AAPIs ranked their sexual orientation or 
gender identity/expression as the second identity 
that most heavily influence their daily lives. 
Race/ethnicity was ranked as the most influential. 
Although LGBT persons often mask their sexual 
orientation or sexual expression and behaviors to 
avoid alienating their family and parents’ com- 
munities, in their relationships with others, they 
frequently have to decide which identity will take 
precedence — an ethnic or sexual identity (Eng 
and Horn 1998). The feeling of being caught 
between two separate or non-integrated identities 
was summarized in a dialogue between two 
Asian American gay men as, “though we are 
both Asian American and gay, our surroundings 
rarely allow these identities to coexist” (Bhattar 
and Victoria 2007, p. 39). When asked to identify 
political issues and attitudes that are most 
important, LGBT AAPIs ranked immigration, 
hate violence/harassment, media representation, 
HIV/AIDS, marriage/domestic partnership, and 
health care as the most pressing for them com- 
pared to immigration, media representation, the 
economy/jobs, health care, and language barriers 
for Asian-Americans in general. 



Table 8.2 Profile of AAPI LGBT elder activists 

Jim Toy is a Chinese American activist, social worker, and a pioneer of the LGBT movement in Michigan. He is 
considered as the first person to come out publically as queer in Michigan, which he did at an anti-Vietnam rally in 
1970. He is the founding member of several organizations, including the Ann Arbor and the Detroit Gay Liberation 
Movements, PFLAG/Ann Arbor, Transgender Advocacy Project, Washtenaw Rainbow Action Project, LGBT 
Retirement Center Task Force, and GLSEN Ann Arbor. Mr. Toy co-authored a non-discrimination policy around 
sexual orientation for the city and the university and the first LG Pride Week Proclamation from a governing body in 
the USA. He is well known for his work in establishing University of Michigan’s Lesbian-Gay Male Program Office, 
the first LGBT center in an institution of higher learning in the USA, where he served as coordinator from 1971-1994. 

George Takei is an actor, comedian, personality, and activist. He was born in Los Angeles to lapanese American parents. 
In 1942, he and his family were forced to move into an internment camp in Arkansas. When the war ended, he returned to 
California, where he completed high school and attended UCLA. He received both a bachelors and masters of art degrees 
in theater. He later attended the Shakespeare Institute at Stratford-upon-Avon in England and Sophia University in Tokyo. 
In 1959, his first professional debut as an actor on television was an episode of Playhouse 90, and Ice Palace was his first 
film debut. He was cast in his most well-known role, Mr. Sulu, in the Star Trek franchise, including six films. In the last 
50 years, Mr. Takei has appeared in over 40 feature films and hundreds of guest-starring roles. He was presented the Order 
of the Rising Star and Gold Rays with Rosette for his work on USA-Japanese relations. In addition, he has an asteroid 
named after him, a star on Hollywood’s Walk of Fame, and received an LGBT Humanist Award. Mr. Takei is well 
known for his community and political activism in support of the AAPI and LGBT communities. 



Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network (www.glsen.org) 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



167 



The survey project, A Census of Our Own , 
gathered data from 364 LGBTQ Southeast Asian 
Americans from across the USA and found 
several main points (Queer Southeast Asian 
Census 2012). First, coming out narratives and 
data suggest that an alternative coming out model 
and culturally competent programming are nee- 
ded, which addresses the unique experiences and 
challenged faced by LGBTQ Southeast Asians. 
The ability to communicate in their native lan- 
guage is challenging because, for example, there 
are no positive words within the Hmong, Khmer, 
Lao, or Viet languages to describe alternative 
sexual orientation. Second, a strict adherence to 
and policy of confidentiality is needed among 
service providers to ensure safety and garner trust 
of AAPI LGBT persons. In light of the role of 
family in the lives of elders, this may prove both 
difficult and necessary. Third, Southeast Asian 
Americans are coming out at a young age (before 
the age of 18). Because the process of coming 
out is often accompanied with psychological and 
emotional stress, education and safety should be 
essential components of any program or service. 
Finally, there are harsh realities of income dis- 
parities and limited economic opportunities for 
Southeast Asian in the USA, which adds to the 
pressure to contribute toward the family incomes. 

While there is limited research on 
AAPI LGBT persons, much less research exists 
on transgender AAPIs. Thus, transgender (trans) 
and nonconforming gender (NCG) AAPIs are 
deserving of a closer examination within this 



chapter. One of the most important findings of 
the National Transgender Discrimination Survey 
(NTDS) of 2013 was that the combination of 
anti-transgender bias and structural and inter- 
personal racism meant that trans and NCG AAPI 
transgender persons of color, including AAPIs, 
experience particularly devastating levels of 
discrimination (Grant et al. 2011). Of the 6456 
trans and NCG persons in the survey, 212 
respondents identified themselves as Asian or 
Pacific Islander, or Asian or Pacific Islander and 
multiracial. The majority of the AAPI respon- 
dents were US citizens (84 %). The key finding 
of the survey revealed that AAPI transgender and 
NCG persons often live in extreme poverty 
(18 %), which is higher than the rate for trans and 
NCG persons of all races (15 %). It is six times 
the general AAPI population (3 %) and over four 
times the general US population rate (4 %). 
AAPI trans and NCG persons are affected dis- 
proportionately by FIIV at a rate of 5 % com- 
pared to 2.64 % for trans and NCG persons of all 
races. Forty four (44 %) of AAPI trans and NCG 
persons have experienced significant family 
acceptance, with those persons being much less 
likely to face discrimination. Finally, 56 % of 
AAPI trans and NCG persons have attempted 
suicide due to discrimination. Other areas in 
which AAPI trans and NCG persons have 
experienced discrimination are presented in 
Table 8.3. In particular, discrimination in the area 
of health care is discussed in the following 
section. 



Table 8.3 AAPI trans and nonconforming gender discrimination experience 

Education'. AAPI persons who attended school expressing a trans identity of NCG report rates of harassment (65 %), 
physical assault (39 %), and sexual assault (19 %) in K-12. AAPIs who were harassed and abused by teachers in K-12 
settings show dramatically worse health and other outcomes compared to those who did not experience such abuse. 

Employment'. AAPI trans and NCG persons have an unemployment rate nearly twice that of the general population. 
Twenty-one percent have lost a job due to bias, and 41 % were not hired for a job due to bias. Forty-nine percent have 
been harasses, 8 % physically abused, and 10 % sexually assaulted at work. Twenty-three percent have been 
compelled to sell drugs or do sex work for income at some point in their lives. 

Housing'. AAPI trans and NCG persons have experienced various forms of discrimination ranging from being refused 
a home or apartment to being evicted due to bias. They have experienced homelessness at some point in their lives at 
nearly twice the rate of the general US population. AAPI trans and NCG persons are less likely than other races to 
own homes. 



Grant et al. (2011) 



168 



D.A. Harley 



Health Status, Barriers, and Service 
Delivery for Asian American LGBT 
Elderly 

Several barriers prevent obtaining a full and 
accurate picture of access to services and service 
delivery for Asian American LGBT elders. First 
is the barrier of the omission of data reports on 
Asian American participants from some of the 
largest national health studies and surveys, along 
with differentiation among various ethnic sub- 
groups in particular (Holland and Palaniappan 
2012). Second, research methods for sampling 
respondents are often limited to persons who may 
have limited English proficiency and/or low 
socioeconomic status (SES). Finally, concerns 
about the validity of chosen measures for use with 
a particular Asian ethnic group arise because 
many measures are rarely validated on Asian 
Americans, and even fewer have been validated 
on the various Asian ethnic subgroups (Sorkin 
and Ngo-Metzger 2014). Moreover, measures 
have not been validated on either the Asian 
American elderly or LGBT population among 
them. Two areas in which Asian Americans 
consistently report low-quality care include pre- 
ventive screening and detection and treatment of 
mental health disorders (Haviland et al. 2005). 
The contextual factors that impact the health of 
elders are influenced by the diversity within the 
AAPI communities with respect to health-seeking 
behavior and knowledge, SES, educational level, 
cultural traditions, and specific healthcare needs 
and issues (Trinh-Shervin et al. 2009). 

The average life expectancy for AAPIs is 
80.3 years compared to Whites at 75.1, and 
overall health among AAPIs as a group tends to 
be better than that of Whites and other ethnic 
groups (U.S. Office of Minority Health Resource 
Center 2010). Collectively, the health status of 
AAPIs is remarkably good; however, certain 
groups have high rates of illness, chronic con- 
ditions, and disability from specific health cau- 
ses. As a subgroup, Asian American elders often 
face unique types of barriers to seeking and 
receiving care, including language and health 
literacy obstacles, culture-specific stigma around 



receipt of health care, challenges with access, 
lack of health insurance, and immigrant status. 
AAPI elders are uninsured at more than double 
the rate of non-Hispanic White elders, and spe- 
cific subgroups are uninsured at rates as high as 
33 % (Sorkin and Ngo-Metzger 2014). Only 
33 % of AAPIs aged 65 and over have private 
health insurance (Schiller et al. 2012). Although 
Asian Americans are less dependent on Social 
Security than are other groups, according to 
Williamson et al. (2014), without the safety net 
provided by Social Security, approximately 19 % 
of Asian elders would fall below the poverty line. 

Language has been identified as the most 
formidable barrier for Asian American immi- 
grants in accessing health care, especially for 
older adults, who are the least likely age group to 
be proficient in English (Jones et al. 2006; Kim 
and Keefe 2010). In fact, only 41 % of AAPI 
elders feel that they speak English “very well” 
(US Census 2014). AAPIs represent more than 
100 languages and dialects (Africa and Carrasco 
2011). Language barriers for elders have impli- 
cations for both family dynamics and health care. 
For example, the lack of language proficiency 
may lead to the role disruption in Asian Ameri- 
can families when children speak, read, and 
understand English better than their parents, 
resulting in a temporarily reversed family role. 
This role reversal creates awkward situations in 
the healthcare setting. Moreover, research sug- 
gests that even with the availability of interpret- 
ers, older AAPIs refrain from asking questions 
about their health (Green et al. 2005; Sue and 
Sue 2013). 

The life expectancy of Native Hawaiian men 
(71.5 years) and women (77.2 years) is lower 
than for the state of Hawaii (75.9 years for men 
and 82.1 years for women) and the USA overall 
(Anderson et al. 2006). Mortality rates for Asian 
or Pacific Islander elders are lower than the rates 
for Whites, Blacks, or American Indians (Minino 
et al. 2007). However, these results are likely due 
to the aggregation of data from Asians, who tend 
to have longer life expectancies, with Native 
Hawaiians and other Pacific Islander racial 
groups, who tend to have lower life expectancies 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



169 



(Braun et al. 1997). In addition, death rates for 
Native Hawaiians due to heart disease, cancers, 
stroke, accidents, and diabetes are higher than 
those for the state of Hawaii (Mau 2010; US 
Office of Minority Health Resource Center 2010). 
Since 2007, cardiovascular disease (CVD) has 
been the leading cause of death in the USA and in 
Hawaii. The rates of CVD vary by ethnicity and 
SES. Filipinos and Native Hawaiians have dis- 
proportionately higher age-adjusted mortality 
rates for CVD and stroke. The lowest SES groups 
and the rural counties of Hawaii consistently 
report the highest areas with CVD-risk factors 
(i.e., high blood pressure, smoking, obesity, 
physical inactivity, and diabetes). CVD is also 
responsible for a large portion of healthcare costs 
in Hawaii due to costs associated with hospital- 
izations (Balabis et al. 2007). 

AAPI elderly people have a disproportion- 
ately high prevalence of hepatitis B. In addition, 
AAPI elderly people exhibit a greater prevalence 
of dementia than the total older population. 
Tuberculosis is 24 times more common among 
AAPIs than among Whites (Office of Minority 
Health, n.d.). Generally, Native Hawaiian elders 
were similar to their Caucasian counterparts in 
receiving certain preventive health care and in 
having healthcare coverage. In other areas of 
preventive care, AAPIs have lower rates of vac- 
cination, underutilize mental health and specific 
health services such as cancer screening, and 
have poorer early detection rates compared to 
other ethnic groups (Reyes-Salvail et al. 2008; 
Salvail et al. 2003). Consistent across various 
ethnic groups, AAPI elders are less likely to see a 
primary care provider or take prescription med- 
ication for their mental health compared to non- 
Hispanic White older adults (Sorkin and Ngo- 
Metzger 2014). In an examination of frequent 
mental distress (FMD) prevalence rate and dis- 
parity, Reyes-Salvail et al. (2008) found the 
following: (a) the FMD prevalence rate in the 
state was 8.3 %, 8.0 % prevalence rate for life- 
time anxiety, and 8.8 % for lifetime depression; 
(b) no significant difference in the average FDM 
prevalence rate between counties in the state of 
Hawaii; (c) adult aged 65 and over had a sig- 
nificantly lower prevalence rate for FMD than 



younger adults; (d) females had a higher FMD 
prevalence than males; and (e) among major 
ethnicities, Hawaiians (including part-Hawai- 
ians) had the highest FMD prevalence and Jap- 
anese had the lowest; however, this disparity is 
an artifact of SES factor combined with age. 
When these factors were controlled for, the eth- 
nic disparity disappeared. The results of this 
study also showed a relationship between FMD 
and lifestyle behaviors. Those with FMD are 
more likely to engage in smoking or heavy 
drinking than those without FMD. 

Africa and Carrasco (2011) conclude that 
among all ethnicities, AAPIs are the least likely 
to seek mental health services because of a 
variety of factors such as, but not limited to, 
stigma, cultural impact of shame, language bar- 
riers, economic reasons, mind-body conceptual- 
ization, and racial discrimination (see Table 8.4 
for additional barriers to seeking mental health 
treatments and supports). Regardless of sexual 
orientation and gender identity, many health 
disparities encountered by AAPIs have their 
origins in “cultural historical trauma” (Blaisdell 
1996), the psychological, physical, social, and 
cultural aftermath of the colonialism many 

Table 8.4 Barriers to AAPIs seeing mental health and 
healthcare services 

Cultural 

Health beliefs 

Lack of research 

Immigrant status 

Avoiding shame and stigma 

Access to healthcare/insurance 

Fear of breach of confidentiality 

Homophobia and heterosexism 

Experience of prejudice and racism 

Help-seeking behavior (e.g., traditional medicine) 

Lack of linguistically and culturally responsive 
providers 

Exclusion of traditional or indigenous providers by the 
Western system 

Health literacy (ability to read and understand health 
content in the context of specific health situations) 

Adapted from Africa and Carrasco (2011) and Kim and 
Keefe (2010) 



170 



D.A. Harley 



indigenous people have experienced. Cultural 
historical trauma also refers to the cumulative 
emotional and psychological wounding that 
seems to carry forth into successive generations 
and affects all aspects of health (Mau 2010). 
According to Mau, “cultural wounding” can 
result in communal feelings of disruption and a 
sense of collective helplessness, which can in 
turn impact one’s ‘sense of self’ and health- 
seeking behaviors (p. 21). AAPI LGBT persons 
identify the extent to which the underlying rac- 
ism and discrimination that they experience 
within the mainstream, majority culture is 
stronger than the homophobia within the AAPI 
community (Boulden 2009; Mangton et al. 
2002). Dang and Hu (2005) found that LGBT 
AAPIs overwhelmingly experience racism within 
the White LGBT community and transgender 
persons somewhat more so than lesbians or gay 
men. In addition, LGBT AAPIs experience some 
degree of racism or ethnocentrism with other 
AAPI LGBT persons. 

As a largely immigrant and refugee popula- 
tion, Asian Americans face stressors related to 
immigration and acculturation, and confounding 
factors such as war experiences and abuse that 
make them more vulnerable to advanced depres- 
sion and other mental health disorders (California 
Health Information Survey 2010). Takeuchi et al. 
(2007) indicate an individual’s age at immigration 
adds to the complexities of immigration and the 
experiences of adjustment, acculturation, and 
assimilation when looking at the AAPI commu- 
nity (see Chapter “Immigrant LGBT Elders” for 
additional discussion on issues relevant to 
immigration). Specifically, Asian immigrants 
who arrived at age 12 or younger were at greater 
risk for psychiatric disorders and substance abuse, 
while those who arrived before age 41 also had 
greater risk for mood disorders, and those who 
came after age 4 1 were likely to have experienced 
symptom onset before immigrating to the USA. 
Older Asian American women have the highest 
suicide rate of all women over age 65 in the USA 
(Office of Minority Health, n.d.). Although AA- 
PIs’ use of mental health services is low, they 
have rates of psychological distress comparable to 
the general population. 



Alcohol and substance abuse is increasing 
significantly among AAPIs, with tremendous 
variance among subgroups. According to the 
National Asian-Americans Families Against 
Substance Abuse (n.d.), Japanese Americans 
have the highest lifetime prevalence for alcohol 
abuse, and Vietnamese Americans are at high 
risk for heavy drinking. Immigrants from Japan 
and Korea are almost twice as likely to use 
alcohol than those from the Philippines, China, 
Vietnam, and India. Moreover, Filipino men are 
at greater risk than Chinese men for a lifetime 
substance abuse disorder. Research also suggests 
an association between generational status and 
depressive and substance abuse disorders among 
women, with second-and third-generation 
women being at increased risk. 

As a subgroup, AAPI trans and NCG persons 
refuse medical care due to bias. In addition, they 
postpone care when sick or injured due to fear of 
discrimination. AAPI trans and NCG persons are 
less likely to have accessed counseling and 
mental health services. For AAPI trans and NCG 
elders, inaccessibility to mental health services in 
the USA is attributed often to language and 
cultural barriers. Thus, there are consequences 
for those wishing to seek certain forms of tran- 
sition-related medical care that is dependent on 
prior counseling (Grant et al. 2011). 

The role and care of AAPI elders within 
families vary depending on factors such as cul- 
ture, filial piety values and behavior, tradition- 
alism, and acculturation. AAPI elders serve as a 
family resource while they are healthy, but they 
may be a source of burden when their health 
fails. Conditions in the household and commu- 
nity influence how long elders are able to func- 
tion independently as their health declines (Yee 
et al. 2008). According to Yu et al. (1993), more 
traditional desires such as living with one’s 
family increased as an elder’s health declined 
among Chinese and Korean American elders. An 
acculturation-related consequence for Asian 
American families is that they have become more 
accepting of the institutionalization of the 
elderly, but are still more reluctant to access that 
care than the general population (Watari and 
Gatz 2004). South Asian elderly women find it 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



171 



difficult to ask for their family’s help in dealing 
with chronic illness or financial assistance. For 
these women, especially those with limited 
English proficiency, fear of isolation is increased 
disproportionately as they become less mobile 
due to poor health. In more traditional AAPI 
families, the sense of responsibility to care for 
their elderly members may be a barrier to seeking 
professional support services. In addition, the 
potential for elder abuse may occur when 
immigrant families’ resources are stretched 
beyond their capacity to care for ill family elders 
(Yee et al. 2008). (see Chapters “An Overview of 
Aging and Mistreatment of LGBT Elders” and 
“Mistreatment and Victimization of LGBT 
Elders” for further discussion on elder mistreat- 
ment and victimization). 

Among AAPI elders, the use of traditional 
healing practices is commonplace. Within spe- 
cific subgroups of AAPIs, regardless of age, 
specific health questions are difficult to answer. 
For example, Samoans consider questions about 
sexual relations as distasteful. Because most 
Samoans are extremely private in matters about 
of family diseases and/or abnormalities of the 
genitals and consider it shameful to speak of such 
things, questions pertaining to these areas are 
usually not answered directly (Mau 2010). To 
illustrate this point, consider the case of Kim, a 
65 -year-old Samoan transgender female who is 
closeted and holds to traditional cultural values. 

The Case of Kim Kim is a 65-year-old 
transgender. She has not self-disclosed her 
sexual identity to anyone, including her 
healthcare provider. At the age of 28, she 
went to Europe and had gender reassign- 
ment surgery, male-to-female. Kim had 
live in several countries after her surgery, 
but has lived in the UK since the age of 38. 
She continues to hold to the traditional 
values and gender role expectations of 
Samoan culture. 

Kim has been experiencing abdominal 
and vaginal pain, and the pain has become 
severe enough that she had to go to the 
doctor. When asked questions about 



childbirth, vaginal bleeding, and other 
discomfort, Kim does not provide answer, 
responding only to say that she has past the 
age of such issues. 

Questions 

1. What other types of question can be 
asked of Kim before making such 
“highly personal and distasteful 
questions”? 

2. How can you work with Kim to 
understand the purpose of disclosure as 
a health-related issue? 

3. What might you do to reduce her fears? 

4. Are there any cultural considerations 
that you can employ to work more 
effectively with Kim? 

A major question arises for service providers 
working with AAPI LGBT elders. That is, how 
do we identify those who are not “out” and do 
not want to be identified so that they receive 
appropriate services? While much of the appre- 
hension of AAPI LGBT elders to be “out” is 
cultural, other aspects are related to discrimina- 
tion. Overall, the process to assist these elders 
must start, in part, with policy development and 
implementation. 



Policy and Practice Issues 

Forging a political agenda for AAPI LGBT per- 
sons is badly needed. Dang and Hu (2005) 
emphasize that hate crimes, police misconduct, 
media representation, worker exploitation, and 
gentrification/displacement impact AAPI LGBT 
persons, but their presence is absent in these 
campaigns. Moreover, many LGBT civil rights 
issues lack an Asian or immigrant analysis. Dang 
and Hu assert that AAPI “advocacy and social 
service groups must also be held accountable to 
the needs of all their constituents, including those 
of all sexual orientations, and gender identities 
and expressions” (p. 11). The survey, A Census of 





172 



D.A. Harley 



Our Own, recommended that to counter the 
debilitating effects of racism, homophobia, and 
genderphobia, more education, resources, and 
systems of support are needed. In addition, 
mainstream LGBTQ organizations and programs 
fail to address the unique ways in which AAPI 
LGBT persons face multiple identities and mul- 
tiple oppressions. Thus, there is a need for more 
inclusive practices, including an analysis and 
acknowledgment of racism, class, and gender- 
phobia (Queer Southeast Asian Census 2012). 

To improve access and quality of health care, 
health, and social policy, analysts need to consider 
several important factors that can either remove or 
mitigate the effects of barriers for AAPIs. First, 
patient characteristics such as primary language, 
ethnicity, culture, health literacy, insurance cover- 
age, and immigration status must be taken into 
account (Kim and Keefe 2010). Africa and Carr- 
asco (2011) emphasize that acknowledging the 
wide diversity of experiences within the AAPI 
community is critical for providing effective and 
efficient services responsive to particular needs and 
influential cultural factors. AAPI elders may exhi- 
bit a high degree of mistrust toward service pro- 
viders and institutions because of past negative 
personal and historical experiences endured from 
the government (e.g., internment camps, exploit- 
ative labor practices) and racism and discrimination 
that have lingering impacts upon cultural groups 
today. The recommendation from participants in 
Africa and Carrasco’s report is for service provid- 
ers to have a “balanced approach to representation 
of both communities and perspectives at different 
levels” (p. 13). 

Strength and Resiliency. AAPIs have cultural 
values that provide strength and resiliency and 
help them deal with difficult life events (Sue and 
Sue 2013). Enculturation or identification with 
racial and ethnic background can buffer prejudice 
and discrimination, family conflicts, and psy- 
chosocial adjustment issues (Kim 2011). Thus, 
both policy and practice should be geared toward 
promotion of cultural strengths. In addition, 
practitioners should maintain a distinction 
between identity and behavior because AAPIs 
participating in same-sex behavior may not 
always identify with the terms LGBT (Mangton 



et al. 2002). Likewise, policy development and 
implementation will need to address potential 
barriers that filial piety values and behaviors may 
impose for service intervention. 

A major barrier to effective policy develop- 
ment regarding AAPI families, subgroups, and 
LGBT AAPIs is the model minority myth ste- 
reotype. This model minority myth stereotype 
obstructs the examination of how AAPIs cope 
with normative and non-normative life span 
developmental hurdles that expend the resources 
of even the most resilient individuals and fami- 
lies. Furthermore, Yee et al. (2008) contend that 
the model minority myth stereotype, in con- 
junction with an overrepresentation of Asian 
American investigators conducting research in 
the biomedical and physical sciences, has rein- 
forced the mistaken notion that there is a suffi- 
cient AAPI family research infrastructure. 
Similarly, the same error in reasoning may lead 
to such an assumption about LGBT AAPI elders. 
AAPIs as a population and LGBT elders in 
particular have been omitted from national data 
sets and studies. Many researchers who study 
AAPIs contend that since 1976, which marks the 
pivotal beginning in the use of data for evidence- 
based health policy in the USA, core issues about 
the lack of data persist for this population (Ponce 
2011). Clearly, organizations and service pro- 
viders must expand efforts to serve AAPI LGBT 
elders. 



Summary 

AAPI LGBT elders represent a unique subgroup 
within culturally specific populations. Their 
value systems are influenced by tradition, lan- 
guage, and a host of other factors. Many AAPI 
LGBT elders maintain a covert lifestyle in order 
to save face and to not bring shame to their 
families. Their multiple identities are encapsu- 
lated not only by cultural attitudinal barriers, but 
also by racism, discrimination, and phobias 
within society as a whole. All of these factors 
contribute to the limited research and available 
information on AAPI LGBT elders. 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



173 



In general, AAPIs bear the burden of the 
stereotyped model minority, which puts them at a 
disadvantage for various services. AAPI LGBT 
elders may never exercise the option of “coming 
out” because they may view the risks as far too 
great. Thus, for both AAPI LGBT elders who are 
“out” and for those who are not, there is utility in 
using lay health workers and service providers or 
“cultural communicators” as facilitators for 
improving communication and shared decision- 
making (Sorkin and Ngo-Metzger 2014). In the 
final analysis, service providers must be able to 
work around many barriers that put AAPI LGBT 
elders at risk for poor health, social, and emo- 
tional outcomes. 



Learning Exercises 
Self-Check Questions 

1. What is the general perception of AAPI cul- 
tures toward LGBT persons? 

2. What is meant by the stereotype of Asian 
Americans being seen as the model minority? 

3. Who are the largest Asian American single- 
race subgroups? 

4. What are some of the often unseen challenges 
in Asian American communities such as 
Chinatowns, Manilatowns, and Japantowns? 

5. Were the majority of older Asian Americans 
born inside or outside of the USA? 

Field-Based Experiential Assignments 

1. Conduct a survey of healthcare service pro- 
viders or social service provider to determine 
their knowledge level about working with 
AAPI LGBT elders. 

2. Interview an AAPI LGBT elder to understand 
issues and concerns they had about “coming 
out” and how they addressed them. 



3. The religious view of many AAPI groups is 
that alternative sexuality is wrong and sinful. 
Develop a presentation to address their view. 
Be sure to include cultural concerns. 

Multiple-Choice Questions 

1. Which of the following Asian American 
cultural values creates a bias against change? 

a. Cooperation 

b. Harmony 

c. Education 

d. Benevolence 

2. Which of the following means respect for 
parents? 

a. Ohana 

b. Uncomplaining 

c. Filial piety 

d. Emotional centeredness 

3. Which of the following is a concern of AAPI 
parents whose child is gay? 

a. Being labeled as ineffective parents 

b. Ridicule from relatives and close friends 

c. Self-blame 

d. All of the above 

e. None of the above 

4. Which of the following terms is used to 
define transgender, intersex, and third gender 
Asian Indians? 

a. Hijra 

b. Kuelna 

c. Laulima 

d. Lokahi 

5. LGBT AAPI adults live in geographic loca- 
tions with higher proportions of which type 
of populations? 

a. LGBT persons 

b. AAPI persons 

c. Diverse persons 

d. No data are available 

6. What is the integration of their ethnicity and 
their nationality known as for AAPI LGBT 
persons? 

a. Coming out 

b. Assimilation 



174 



D.A. Harley 



c. Coming home 

d. Acculturation 

7. What is the origin of many health disparities 
for both LGBT and non-LGBT AAPI 
persons? 

a. Hepatitis B 

b. Mental distress 

c. Cultural historical trauma 

d. Language barriers 

8. Which of the following acculturation-related 
consequence has become more accepting for 
Asian American families for the elderly? 

a. Utilization of mental health services 

b. Use of substances 

c. Public assistance 

d. Institutionalization 

9. Which type of health questions do Samoans 
find distasteful and they may not answer 
directly? 

a. Sexual relations 

b. Mental health 

c. Elder mistreatment 

d. Healing practices 

10. Which of the following AAPI groups expe- 
rience the most devastating levels of 
discrimination? 

a. Lesbians 

b. Gay men 

c. Bisexuals 

d. Transgender 



1. b 

2. c 

3. d 

4. a 

5. b 

6. c 

7. c 

8. d 

9. a 

10. d 



Resources 

Asian Pacific American Legal Center: www. 
gleh.org 

Asian Pacific Policy & Planning Council: www. 
asianpacificpolicyplanningcouncil.org 

Asian and Pacific Islander Queers United for 
Action: www.aquadc.org 

Asian and Pacific Islander Wellness Center: 
w w w . api wellness .org 

Asian Pacific Islander Resource Kit: www.glaad. 
org 

Gay Asian Pacific Alliance: www.gapa.org 

Gay Asian Pacific Support Network: www. 
gapsn.org 

National Asian Pacific Center on Aging: www. 
napca.org 

National Queer Asian Pacific Islander Alliance: 
www.noapia.org 

Pacific Center for Human Growth: www. 

pacificcenter.org 

Southeast Asia Resource Action Center: www. 
searac.org 



References 

Administration on Aging, (n.d.). A statistical profile of 
Asian older Americans aged 65 and older. Retrieved 
November 15, 2014 from http://www.aoa.gov/ 

AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/Minority_Aging/Facts-on- 
API-Elderly2008-plain_format.aspx. 

Africa, J., & Carrasco, M. (2011). Asian American and 
Pacific Islander mental health: Report from a NAMI 
listening session. Retrieved December 8, 2014 from 
www.name.org/Template.cfm?Section=Multicultural_ 
Support 1 &Template=/ContentManagement/ 
ContentDispaly.cfm&ContentID=l 1528 1 . 

Alcedo, M. (2014). LGBT Filipino community. Retrieved 
October 31, 2014 from http://sageusa.org/about/face/ 
cfm?ID=22. 

Anderson, I., Crengle, S., Kamaka, M. L„ Chen, T. H., 
Palafox, N„ & Jackson-Pulver, L. (2006). Indigenous 
health in Australia, New Zealand, and Pacific. Lancet, 
367(9524), 1775-1785. 



8 Asian American and Native Pacific Islander LGBT Elders 



175 



Asai, M. O., & Kameoka, V. A. (2005). The influence of 
Sekentei on family caregiving and underutilization of 
social services among Japanese caregivers. Social 
Work, 50, 111-118. 

Balabis, J., Pobutsky, A., Baker, K. K., Tottori, C., & 
Salvail, F. (2007). The burden of cardiovascular 
disease in Hawaii 2007. Hawaii: Hawaii State 
Department of Health Retrieved November 20, 2014 
form www.health.hawaii.gov/brfss/2013/1 1/TheBur- 
denofCVD.pdf. 

Bhattar, R. G„ & Victoria, N. A. (2007). Rainbow rice: A 
dialogue between two Asian American gay men in 
higher education and student affairs. The Vermont 
Connection, 28, 39-50. 

Blaisdell, R. K. (1996). 1995 update on Kanaka Maoli 
(Indigenous Hawaiian) health. Asian Pacific Islander 
Health, 4(1-3), 160-165. 

Boulden, W. T. (2009). Gay Hmong: A multifaceted clash 
of cultures. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services, 
21, 134-150. 

Braun, K. L., Yang, H., Onaka, A. T., & Horiuchi, B. Y. 
(1997). Asian and Pacific Islander mortality differ- 
ences in Hawaii. Biodemogrphy and Social Biology, 
44(3/4), 213-226. 

California Health Information Survey. (2010). 2010 
survey. Retrieved November 20, 2014 from www. 
chris.ucla.edu. 

Dang, A., & Hu, M. (2005). Asian Pacific American 
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people: A 
community portrait. A report from New York’s cjueer 
Asian Pacific Legacy Conference, 2004. New York: 
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute. 

Eng, D. L., & Horn, A. Y. (1998). Q & A: Queer in Asian 
America. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 

Grant, J. M„ Mottet, L. A., Tanis, J., Harrison, J., Herman, 
J. L., & Keisling, M. (2011). Injustice at every turn: A 
report of the National transgender discrimination 
survey. Washington DC: National Center for Trans- 
gender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force. Retrieved December 5, 2014 from www. 
endtransdiscrimination.org/PDFs/NTDS_Report.pdf. 

Green, A. R„ Ngo-Metzger, Q., Legedza, A. T. R., 
Massagli, M. P., Phillips, S. R., & Iezzoni, L. I. 
(2005). Interpreter services, language concordance, 
and health care quality: Experiences of Asian Amer- 
icans with limited English proficiency. Journal of 
General Internal Medicine, 20(11), 1050-1056. 

Hahm, H. C., & Adkins, C. (2009). A model of Asian and 
Pacific Islander sexual minority acculturation. Journal 
of LGBT Youth, 6, 155-173. 

Haviland, M. G., Morales, L. S., Dial, T. H„ & Pincus, H. 
A. (2005). Race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and 
satisfaction with health care. American Journal of 
Medical Quality, 20(4), 195-203. 

Holland, A. T., & Palaniappan, L. P. (2012). Problems 
with the collection and inteipretation of Asian Amer- 
ican health data: Omission, aggression, and extrapo- 
lation. Annals of Epidemiology, 22, 397 — 405. 

Hu, A. (2012). Introduction to basic Asian values. 
Retrieved November 8, 2014 from http://www. 



asianweek.com/2012/04/28/introduction-to-basic- 

asian-values/. 

Jones, R. S., Chow, T. W., & Gatz, M. (2006). Asian 
Americans and Alzheimer’s disease: Assimilation, 
culture, and beliefs. Journal of Aging Studies, 20(1), 
11-215. 

Kastanis, A., & Gates, G. J. (2013). LGBT Asian and 
Pacific Islander individuals and same-sex couples. 
Los Angeles: The Williams Institute, UCLA School of 
Law. Retrieved November 21, 2014 from www. 
williamsintitute.law/ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt- 
demographics-studies/lgbt-api-report-sept-20 1 3/. 

Kim, B. S. K. (2011). Counseling Asian Americans. 
Belmont: Cengage. 

Kim, W„ & Keefe, R. H. (2010). Barriers to healthcare 
among Asian Americans. Social Work in Public 
Health, 25, 286-295. 

Mangton, P., Carvalho, M., & Pandya, S. (2002). Lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and trans gender health. A Brown 
Paper: The health of South Asians in the United 
States. South Asian Public Health Association. 
Retrieved November 21, 2014 from www.sapha.org/ 
adminkit/uploads/files/B rownPaper-LGBTHealth.pdf. 

Mau, M. K. (2010). Health and health care of Native 
Hawaiian & older Pacific Islander older adults. 
Retrieved November 19, 2014 from http://geriatrics. 
stanford.edu/ethnomed/hawaiian_pacific_islander. 

Minino, A. M., Heron, M. P., Murphy, S. L., & 
Kochankek, K. D. (2007). Deaths: Final data for 
2004. National Vital Statistics Reports, 55(19), 1-120. 

National Asian Pacific American Families Against Substance 
Abuse, (n.d.). Fact sheet. Retrieved November 20, 2014 
from www.napafasa.org/resources/factsheets.htm. 

Office of Minority Health, (n.d.). Mental health and 
Asians. Retrieved November 20, 2014 from http:// 
minorityheal th.hhs.gov/tempplates/content/aspx71 vl= 
3& 1 v 1 IID=9&ID=6476. 

Pew Research Center. (2013). The rise of Asian Ameri- 
cans. Washington DC: Author. Retrieved December 4, 
2014 from www.pewsocialtrends.org/files/2013/04/ 
Asian-Americans-new-full-report-04-2013.pdf. 

Ponce, N. A. (2011). What a difference a data set and 
advocacy make for AAPI health. Asian American & 
Pacific Islander Policy, Practice, and Community, 9 
(1-2), 159-162. 

Queer Southeast Asian Census. (2012). A census of our 
own: The state of queer Southeast Asian America. 
Retrieved December 10, 2014 from www.prysm.us/ 
wp-content/uploads/20 1 2/08/ 
QSEAReportExecutiveSummary.pdf. 

Reyes-Salvail, F., Liang, S., & Nguyen, D. H. (2008). 
Frequent mental distress prevalence and disparity: 
Hawaii BRFSS 2005-2007. The Hawaii Behavioral 
Risk Factor Surveillance System Special Report, 6(2). 
Retrieved November 20, 2014 from www.health. 
Hawaii.gov/brfss/files/2013/ll/Frequent_Mental_ 
Distress.pdf. 

Salvail, F. R„ Nguyen, D„ & Huang, T. (2003). State of 
Hawaii, Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, 
From 2001 to 2003 — By ethnicity, tobacco use, alcohol 



176 



D.A. Harley 



use. Retrieved November 20, 2014 from http://www. 
hawaii.gov/health/statistics/brfss/index.html. 

Schiller, J. S„ Lucus, J. W„ Peregoy, J. A. (2012). 
Summary health statistics for U.S. adults: National 
Health Inten’iew Sur\>ey 2011. Washington DC: 
National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health 
Statistics, 10( 256). 

Sorkin, D. A., & Ngo-Metzger, Q. (2014). The unique 
health status and health care experiences of older 
Asian Americans: Research findings and treatment 
recommendations. Clinical Gerontologist, 37, 18-32. 

Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013). Counseling the culturally 
diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Hoboken: John 
Wiley & Sons. 

Takeuchi, D., Alegria, M., Jackson, J., & Williams, D. 
(2007). Immigration and mental health: Diverse 
findings in Asian, Black, and Latino populations. 
American Journal of Public Health, 97(1), 11-12. 

Ting, J., & Hwang, W. C. (2009). Cultural influences on 
help-seeking attitudes in Asian American students. 
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 79, 125-132. 

Trinh-Shevrin, C., Islam, N. S„ & Rey, M. J. (2009). Asian 
American communities and health: Context, research, 
policy, and action. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Tseng, T. (2011). Understanding Anti-LGBT bias: An 
analysis of Chinese-speaking Americans’ attitudes 
toward LGBT people in Southern California. LGBTQ 
Policy Journal. Harvard Kennedy School. Retrieved 
November 21, 2014 from http://isites.harvard.edu/icb/ 
icb.do?keyword=k78405&pageeid=icb.page414494. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2010). The 2011 statistical 
abstract. Retrieved November 14, 2014 from http:// 
www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/education/ 
educational_attainment.html. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2011a). Current population survey, 
annual social and economic supplement, 2010. Retrieved 



November 14, 2014 from http://www.census.gov/ 
population/www.sodemo/race/ppl-aalO.html. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2011b). Hispanic heritage month. 
Retrieved November 14, 2014 from http://www. 
census.gov/newsroom/release/archives/facts_for_ 
features_special_editions/cbl l-ffl8.html. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2012, March). The Asian popula- 
tion: 2010. Washington DC: Author. 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2014). American community sur- 
vey. Retrieved December 11, 2014 from www.census. 
gov/acs/www/. 

U.S. Office of Minority Health Resource Center. (2010). 
Highlights in minority health and health disparities, 
Asian American and Pacific Islander profile. 
Retrieved November 20, 2014 from www.cec.gov/ 
omhd/highlights/20 1 0/HMay 1 0.html. 

Watari, K. F„ & Gatz, M. (2004). Pathways to care for 
Alzheimer's disease among Korean Americans. Cultural 
Diversity & Ethnic Minority Psychology, 10, 23-38. 

Williamson, O., Gordon, F„ & Pacheco, B. (2014). Aging 
into poverty: Economic insecurity among older adults 
of color & GBT elders. Retrieved December 4. 2014 
from w w w .nclc . org/images/pdf/ conferences_and_ 

webinar_trainings/presentations/2013-2014/aging_ 
into_poverty_webinar_smaller.pdf. 

Yee, B. W. K., Debaryshe, B. D., Yuen, S., Kim, S. Y., & 
Mccubbin, H. I. (2008). Asian American and Pacific 
Islander families: Resiliency and life-span socializa- 
tion in a cultural context. Retrieved November 18, 
2014 from www.uhfamily.hawaii.edu/publications/ 
joumals/aapifamiliesbookchapter.pdf. 

Yu, E. S., Kim, K„ Liu, W. T„ & Wong, S. C. (1993). 
Functional abilities of Chinese and Korean elder in 
congregate housing. In D. Barressi & D. Stull (Eds.), 
Ethnic elderly and long term care (pp. 87-100). New 
York: Springer. 



European LGBT Elders 



Melanie D. Otis 



Abstract 

The focus of this chapter is on understanding relevant factors that may 
contribute to the unique experiences and challenges faced by LGBT elders 
of European descent. While it is often assumed that all white LGBT elders 
are part of a homogeneous group, the diverse cultures that can be found 
across the fifty countries that comprise Europe suggest that such an 
assumption would be misguided. In addition to the misconceptions that 
may result from researchers and helping professionals viewing European 
elders of LGBT descent as a monolithic group, is the fact that the heritage 
of many LGBT elders of European descent may encompass more than one 
country, and thus include influences from more than a single culture. This 
chapter considers the ways human service professionals can improve their 
capacity to meet the needs of all LGBT elders by considering the myriad 
factors that make individuals unique. 



Keywords 

European descent • Ethnic ambiguity • Intersectionality • Cultural 
competence • Families of choice 



Overview 

The challenges of identifying, studying, and 
responding to the needs and experiences of other 
groups generally acknowledged as representa- 



M.D. Otis (El) 

University of Kentucky, Lexington. USA 
e-mail: Melanie.Otis@uky.edu 



tives of the face of diversity in the LGBT com- 
munity tend to ignore the heterogeneity of 
members of this racial majority. This chapter — 
which is focused on LGBT elders of European 
descent and presented alongside the chapters 
dedicated to Hispanic, Native American, and 
African American LGBT elders — facilitates 
viewing diversity in all its forms. The chapter 
clarifies what we do know and do not know 
about this group by integrating a discussion of 
LGBT elders of European descent within the 

177 



© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 

D.A. Harley and P.B. Teaster (eds.). Handbook of LGBT Elders , 

DOI 10. 1007/978-3-3 19-03623-6_9 




178 



M.D. Otis 



larger field of inquiry. The chapter seeks to 
extend our explication of what we know and 
what we still need to learn about the diverse lives 
and needs of all LGBT elders. This reorientation 
of framework permits the understanding that 
alongside failures to include race and ethnicity as 
meaningful distinctions in research and practice 
knowledge, we also have little awareness of what 
it means to live in rural areas or what it is like to 
be a poor or working-class LGBT elder of any 
race or ethnicity. A primary goal of this chapter 
is to dismantle counterproductive yet persistent 
stereotypes that the lives of all LGBT persons 
can be sufficiently understood through the lens of 
the lives of White, Anglo-Saxon, middle-class, 
college-educated young gay men and lesbians. 
To lay the foundation for a more nuanced 
understanding of LGBT elders of European 
descent, a brief discussion of the history of 
research and practice as it relates to this popu- 
lation will be articulated, and a framework will 
be developed to identify parameters that define 
LGBT elders of European descent as a unique 
group of individuals distinguishable from others 
with whom they are often grouped. This defini- 
tion will lead to delineating challenges of 
understanding the experiences of individuals of 
European descent. Once the population has been 
defined, perspectives on coming out and 
self-disclosure as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or 
transgender at different points across the life 
course will be considered. The potential rele- 
vance of cohort effects (e.g., pre/post-Stonewall, 
Baby Boomers) on decisions about when and if 
one discloses his/her status as a sexual minority 
will be considered, along with an exploration of 
the difficulties that come with having the power 
to control the decision to disclose taken away by 
circumstances associated with one’s own aging 
or the aging of one’s partner, friend, or family 
member. 



Learning Objectives 

By the end of the chapter, the reader should be 
able to: 



1. Explain reasons why it is important to con- 
sider the relevance of country of origin in the 
lives of LGBT elders of European descent. 

2. Explain why research involving predomi- 
nantly or entirely white samples should be 
viewed with caution even when applying the 
findings to persons who identify as white. 

3. List steps that need to be taken to develop 
culturally competent practice and policies to 
meet the needs of LGBT elders. 

4. Identify key historical events that may impact 
the lives of LGBT elders of European descent. 



Introduction 

This chapter marks a notable departure from past 
approaches to acknowledging the diversity and 
complexity of the LGBT population. The pres- 
ence of a stand-alone chapter focused on LGBT 
elders of European descent alongside the chap- 
ters dedicated to Hispanic (e.g., Chap. 10), 
Native American (e.g.. Chap. 7), and African 
American LGBT elders (e.g., Chap. 6) (among 
others) (e.g.. Chaps. 8, 13) makes a significant 
statement about the importance of viewing 
diversity in all its forms. Rather than simply 
creating a juxtaposition of other racial and ethnic 
groups against the backdrop of some previously 
established and tacitly accepted one-dimensional, 
monochromatic mass labeled “Whites,” this 
chapter represents an explicit effort to clarify 
what we do know and do not know about this 
group by integrating the discussion of LGBT 
elders of European descent within the larger field 
of inquiry in a more balanced and informative 
way. The challenges of identifying, studying, and 
responding to the experiences and needs of other 
groups generally acknowledged as representa- 
tives of the face of diversity in the LGBT com- 
munity tend to encourage us to ignore the 
heterogeneity of members of this (current) racial 
majority. It has been suggested that the tacit 
acceptance of the dominance of the majority 
group leads members of the group to fail to see 
their own characteristics (e.g., race, ethnicity, 



9 European LGBT Elders 



179 



social class) (Gelfand 2003). In so doing, we lose 
track of the reality that the white LGBT elder 
population consists of people from numerous 
countries characterized by diverse heritages and 
cultural norms, who self-identify across the 
gender spectrum and who live in different geo- 
graphical corners of the USA under different 
economic conditions. Thus, this chapter seeks to 
extend our explication of what we know and 
what we still need to learn about the diverse lives 
and needs of all LGBT elders. It represents an 
effort to move scholarly inquiry, the development 
of best practice models, the enhancement of 
health and human services, and the relevant 
policy-related knowledge beyond crude distinc- 
tions based solely on race and ethnicity, without 
ignoring the reality of the importance of either 
(McDermott and Samson 2005). This reorienta- 
tion of our framework for defining difference will 
allow us to see that alongside our frequent failure 
to include race and ethnicity as meaningful dis- 
tinctions in our research and practice knowledge, 
we also have little awareness of what it means to 
live in rural areas or what it is like to be a poor or 
working-class LGBT elder of any race or eth- 
nicity. In the end, a primary goal of this chapter 
is to move us one step closer to dismantling the 
counterproductive yet persistent stereotype that 
the lives of all LGBT persons can be sufficiently 
understood through the lens of the lives of white, 
Anglo-Saxon, middle-class, college-educated 
young gay men and lesbians. 

To begin to lay the foundation for a more 
nuanced understanding of LGBT elders of 
European descent, a brief discussion of the his- 
tory of research and practice as it relates to this 
population will be articulated. With this back- 
ground in place, a framework will be developed 
to identify parameters that define LGBT elders of 
European descent as a unique group of individ- 
uals that can be distinguished from others with 
whom they are often lumped based solely on skin 
color. This definition will provide a platform for 
delineating the challenges of understanding the 
experiences of individuals of European descent 
when so much about how we view the group is 
based on ignoring any factors that make indi- 
viduals unique and when so many of these 



lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and transgender 
persons have ancestral histories that encompass 
more than one national lineage. Once the popu- 
lation has been defined, perspectives on chal- 
lenges associated with coming out and 
self-disclosure as a lesbian, gay, bisexual, or 
transgender at different points across the life 
course will be considered. The potential rele- 
vance of cohort effects (e.g., pre/post-Stonewall, 
Baby Boomers) on decisions about when and if 
one discloses his/her status as a sexual minority 
will be considered, along with an exploration of 
the difficulties that come with having the power 
to control the decision to disclose taken away by 
circumstances associated with one’s own aging 
or the aging of one’s partner, friend, or family 
member. 

Utilizing Crenshaw’s (1989) notion of inter- 
sectionality 1 will offer a framework for examin- 
ing the somewhat unique way that individuals 
who may be viewed by many as a member of the 
majority (without the privileges that accompa- 
nying that position of power) become a double 
(and in the case of lesbians triple) minority by 
virtue of their immutable status associated with 
being elderly and their ascribed status as a result 
of being a sexual minority. Further distinctions 
among LGBT elderly of European descent will 
be considered in terms of the impact of geo- 
graphical location, population density, and eco- 
nomic status. Finally, the chapter offers a look at 
extant service delivery models and interdisci- 
plinary approaches currently being used in the 
USA and considers the influence of various dis- 
ciplines on these models and programs. These 
models and programs will be considered in 
relation to efforts that are currently being 



'Crenshaw’s (1989) notion of the intersectionality of 
disadvantaged minority statuses focused on the multiple 
intersecting forms of oppression and discrimination that 
serve to compound the disadvantaged status of black 
women. This work was later revisited and further 
developed as a key part of Patricia Hill Collins’s (1990) 
standpoint theory which offered a perspective for under- 
standing the unique experiences of individuals who 
embody different minority statuses based on sex, race, 
ethnicity, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, and 
gender identity. 



