WILFRED OWEN 

1893-1918 



EVERYONE, GANDHI SAID, MUST HAVE A TEXT TO EXAMINE, TO 
compare, and to test his or her life against. For this purpose, the 
writings of recent poets and artists have been especially valuable 
sources of inspiration and wisdom for people working in social 
justice. Since the Vietnam war this has been especially true for 
the writings of Wilfred Owens, a young poet who died in the First 
World War, whose poems also provided the text for Benjamin 
Britten's moving oratorio, War Requiem (1963). 

Among modern writers, no one understood and revealed 
the philosophical and religious implications of modern warfare 
better than Wilfred Owen, writing from the Western Front, 
1916-18. In these letters and poems, he struggled with the basic 
conflict between his life as a soldier and the Christian command- 
ment of love, between his everyday condition and the ethics of 
nonviolence. 

In Owen's writings, "the language of the Bible rises like 
water in the well of his subconscious mind, polluted by war, like 
the ravaged countryside where he fought and died," his biog- 
rapher, Jon Stallworthy, has said. Owen's letter to a friend in 
June 1918, for example, spoke in this way of having drilled his 
troops with helmets and rifles the day before: 

For 14 hours yesterday I was at work — teaching Christ to lift 
his cross by numbers, and how to adjust his crown; and not to 
imagine thirst till after the last halt. I attended his supper to see 
that there were no complaints, and inspected his feet to see that 
they would be worthy of the nails. I see to it that he is dumb and 
stands to attention before his accusers. With a piece of silver I 
buy him every day, and with maps I make him familiar with 
the topography of Golgotha. 

97 



The passage is a characteristic one, a statement, like so many of his 
poems, that is self-accusing without self-pity. In it, Owen 
indicates a sound awareness of how, as an officer in charge of troops, 
he could not extricate himself from the barbarous task of war. By his 
acts, he implicated himself as surely as Pilate's soldiers or Caesar's 
armies involved themselves in the death of Christ at Golgotha, 
"the place of the skull." Owen speaks not of hereditary or 
generalized guilt, but of his personal responsibility for actions 
on the side of death. 

Wilfred Owen was, at the time of this letter to Osbert Sitwell, 
twenty-five years old. The oldest child of a lower middle-class family, 
he was born in Ostwestry, England, on March 18, 1893, and attended 
grammar schools in Birkenhead and Shrewsbury, but did not qualify 
for a university scholarship. He educated himself, nonetheless, through 
courses at the university college in Reading, an hour west of London, 
and through work as a tutor in England and France before the war. 
Those years included time as a lay assistant at the vicarage of Reverend 
Herbert Wigan, in Dunsden. At nineteen, Owen thought seriously of 
becoming an Episcopal priest himself, but went through a religious 
crisis prompted by a disillusionment with conventional Christianity. 
About the same time, he rediscovered the poems of John Keats, and 
once in the army rapidly matured as a poet. 

Wounded at the front, he returned to England in 1917 
at Craiglockhart Hospital, near Edinburgh. There he met Sieg- 
fried Sassoon, a published poet, who encouraged him; eventually 
Owen published a few lyrics in leading periodicals, powerful 
poems suggesting an acutely modern sensibility, revolutionary 
for the time. By June 1918, he was back on the Western Front, 
in the north of France, and on November 4 of that year, one 
week before the Armistice, after successfully leading his troops 
across a canal near Ors, he was killed. Although Owen left only 
a small body of work, his posthumously collected poems are 
generally regarded as some of the masterworks of modern litera- 
ture and, indeed, in the canon of English poetry. 



Wilfred Owen / 101 



A good example of this achievement is "Futility," 
written about the same time as the prose statement quoted 
above. The speaker in the poem is a soldier who stands above 
the body of his dead comrade, asking, in despair: "Was it for 
this the clay grew tall?" Dazed, the speaker wonders why the 
sun, that once brought life and stars out of the cold earth, is now 
powerless to raise his comrade from the dead? 

Futility 

Move him into the sun - 

Gently its touch awoke him once, 

At home, whispering of fields unsown. 

Always it woke him, even in France. 

Until this morning and this snow. 

If anything might rouse him now 

The kind old sun will know. 

Think how it wakes the seeds, — 

Woke, once, the clays of a cold star. 

Are limbs, so dear achieved, are sides, 

Full-nerved — still warm — too hard to stir? 

Was it for this the clay grew tall? 

— O what made fatuous sunbeams toil 

To break earth's sleep at all? 

The questions in the second stanza are posed to no one in par- 
ticular, yet the implication remains that God, in a sense, is on trial. 
Why did He bother creating the earth if — in the end — a 
young man at the height of his powers, in strength, beauty, and 
intelligence, must die so meaninglessly? Why did He make the 
sun so powerful, if it cannot — in all its glory — raise this young 
man, the end point of a diverse and complicated evolutionary 
process, to life? 

The questions posed by Owen's poems seem almost 
instinctive. How can anyone, particularly a religious person, 
he asks, stand casually by while the forces of death triumph 
all around? Such provocative questions with psychological 



and political as well as religious implications suggest at least 
two reasons for the continuing importance of his work: (1) 
Owen understood the significance of the First World War, in 
that it would profoundly alter the nature of religious belief, 
destroying the past or rendering it useless for many people. 
Human beings, in discovering the scale of destruction 
possible in mechanized warfare, were literally unhinged by that 
awareness, as Ernest Hemingway and T.S. Eliot would indicate 
in stories and poems of the 1920 s; (2) Owen understood also 
how he, as an actor in history, was responsible for war's 
destruction, preparing his men, his other Christs, for the crown 
of thorns. He recognized that even with the best intentions, 
people capitulate to the forces of death, out of conformity, laziness, 
moral indifference. 

Such cooperation with death eventually undermines not 
only a person's belief, but also the nature of the church, Owen 
said to his mother, in a 1917 letter. 

Already I have comprehended a light which never will filter into 
the dogma of any national church; namely, one of Christ's 
essential commands was. . . be bullied, be outraged, be killed; 
but do not kill. It may be chimerical and an ignominious 
principle, but there it is. It can only be ignored, and I think 
pulpit professionals are ignoring it very skillfully. 

In the same letter, Owen complained, "The practice of selec- 
tive ignorance is one cause of war. Christians have deliberately cut 
some of the main teachings of their code." 

For Owen, the main teaching that had been cut was 
Christ's disavowal of killing, and anyone trying to live as a Chris- 
tian in this century is likely to be rather shocked by Owen's 
pointed remark. In his poems, also, he gave a realistic view of 
warfare, after the idealized view projected by the Romantic and 
Victorian traditions. His antiwar sentiments, in fact, resembled 
those of Leo Tolstoy's pamphlets on Christian tradition of non- 
violence thirty years before. Coincidentally, during the early days 



of the war, Owen lived in the home of a French poet influenced 
by Tolstoy's writings, and sent home drawings of wounded 
soldiers brought by train to the south of France. 

Out of the depth of his imagination, Owen dramatized 
the threat to life rendered by modern warfare. In ironic poems 
such as "Dulce Et Decorum Est" and "Insensibility," he asked 
conventional believers to recognize their failure to uphold the 
teachings of Jesus and thereby focused attention on a major 
dilemma for contemporary Christians. 

Simone Weil's statement, during the Second World War, that 
the distance separating the individual or the church from the essential 
Christian message of peace results in a painful spiritual state. In his 
poems and letters, Wilfred Owen arrived at a similar truth thirty years 
before. It is one that must be recognized, he thought, if the ethics of 
Christianity are ever to inform people's lives and actions. This is 
especially true in an age when everyone, as Owen said, lives on an 
extended battlefield and where, in a nuclear age, "Christ dies daily in 
No Man's Land." 



BY WILFRED OWEN 

Wilfred Owen: War Poems and Others. Edited by Dominic Hibberd. 
London: Chatto and Windus, 1975. 

The Collected Poems of Wilfred Owen. Edited by C. Day Lewis. New 
York: New Directions, 1964, 1965. 



ABOUT WILFRED OWEN 

Hibberd, Dominic. Wilfred Owen. British Council Pamphlet. London: 
Longman Group Ltd., 1975. 



Stallworthy, Jon. Wilfred Owen: A Biography. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1974. 



