ELIZABETH GURLEY FLYNN 



1890-1964 

AMMON HENNACY, AMERICAN ANARCHIST AND CATHOLIC 

worker, admired people, as he said, "who never chickened." Among 
those whom he praised for her consistency and courage was Elizabeth 
Gurley Flynn, whose life was dedicated to gaining rights for and 
improving conditions of workers. With Eugene Victor Debs and Emma 
Goldman, Flynn is one of the great radicals of the early 20th century, 
who suffered for her persistence: loss of her husband and a lover, 
dismissal from the civil liberties organization she co-founded, and — at 
sixty — imprisonment. 

As a young woman Flynn, like Abby Kelley Foster, was 
famous for her beauty; with her clear voice and golden-red hair, she 
was a striking presence on the lecture platform and the picket line. In a 
memoir at the time of Flynn's death, Dorothy Day recalled the young 
rebel's effect on a crowd: 

She charmed us out of our meager money; people emptied their 
pockets when the collection was taken for the strikers. I forsook 
all prudence and emptied my purse, not even leaving myself 
carfare to get back to the office. . . .In this way she aided 
countless workers — miners through the far West, workers in 
wheat, lumber, textiles, all have benefited from her early work. 

Flynn gave her first speech for socialism at 16, in 1906, in the 
Bronx, with the encouragement of her parents and to the delight of 
reporters for the New York newspapers. From then until her death at 
seventy-four, she was the subject of articles detailing her defense of 
Wobblies in the Pacific Northwest and the Mesabi Iron Range; her 
stormy love affair with Carlo Tresca, the hero of the Lawrence, 
Massachusetts, strike in 1912; and other labor and civil liberties 
disputes. To her many other causes she added, during her last years, 

1 n^ 



that of prison reform; and My Life as a Political Prisoner (1963), about 
her twenty-eight months in Alderson (W. Va.) Federal Reformatory, is 
a powerful indictment of the system. 

Born in Concord, New Hampshire, on August 7, 1890, 
Elizabeth Gurley Flynn grew up in the Bronx, where her mother 
insisted they settle in 1900. Her father, a ne'er-do-well, whom Elizabeth 
later accused of hiding behind her "radicalism" as an excuse for not 
holding a job, encouraged her interest in socialism. She read widely in 
the Utopian novels and tracts of Mary Wollstonecraft, Edward Bellamy, 
and William Morris, and in her youth admired the anarchists Emma 
Goldman and Alexander Berkman, whom she met and followed. She 
joined the Industrial Workers of the World during its first year, in 1906, 
and two years later married John Archibald Jones, a miner active in the 
I.W.W. She had two sons by Jones, one of whom died in infancy; the 
second, reared principally by Elizabeth's mother and sister, died in 
1940. After divorcing Jones, who expected her to give up organizing 
and agitation, Elizabeth Gurley fell in love with Carlo Tresca, a 
handsome Italian anarchist. Although they separated about 1930, she 
mourned him for many years after his death in 1943. 

Victimized by various laws harassing radicals, particularly 
during the Red Scare following World War 1, Flynn combined labor 
organizing and legal defense for workers. From 1926 to 1930, she 
chaired the International Labor Defense, many of whose members were 
affiliated with the Communist party; in 1930, she herself joined the 
party. In 1940, the American Civil Liberties Union, which she had 
helped to establish, expelled her from its executive board because of 
her communist affiliations, a decision rescinded only after her death. 

In the second Red Scare, after World War II, Flynn was 
indicted for advocating the overthrow of the United States government. 
Later she described a typical political arrest in the McCarthy days: 

On a hot morning in June, 1951, the bell of our apartment on 
East 12th Street in New York City rang insistently. A knock 
came on the door, too soon for anyone to have climbed the three 
flights of stairs after we had pressed the button to open the 
downstairs door. 



Three F.B.I, agents, two men and a woman, roughly pushed 
their way past [my sister]. They stated they had a warrant for my 
arrest. I took the document and read it. It was for alleged 
violation of the infamous Smith Act. "For teaching and 
advocating the violent overthrow of the government, when and 
if circumstances permit," it said. 

With several of her old associates, some crippled with age, 
one routed from a nursing home, she was brought to prison, where she 
endured further humiliation. 

The second step after entering was to strip and leave all one's 
clothes in a side room where they were searched by an officer, 
while the prisoner was wrapped in a sheet and taken to the 
showers. Next we were ordered to take an enema and to climb 
on an examination table for examination. All openings of the 
body were roughly searched for narcotics by "a doctor" — a large 
woman who made insulting remarks about Communists who did 
not appreciate this country. I told her to mind her business. Once 
she became so animated in her opinions while she was taking a 
blood specimen that she allowed the blood to run down my arm. 
"Watch what you are doing," I said. "Never mind my politics, 
watch my blood. 

Refusing to cooperate with the government in naming her 
associates in the party, she was sentenced to the federal penitentiary, 
where she remained from January 1955 to May 1957. A famous case 
involving her and the Marxist historian Herbert Aptheker brought a 
legal victory before the Supreme Court and enabled her to travel 
abroad. In the early 1960s, she visited several times in the Soviet 
Union. When she died in Moscow, on September 5, 1964, she received 
a state funeral in Red Square. 

In a long, eventful, and often stormy public life, Flynn 
participated in most of the major struggles for justice during the first 
half of this century. Her autobiography. The Rebel Girl (1976), gives a 
detailed and instructive account of the education of a woman whose life 
was lived for the benefit of others. She gave up easier and more 



conventional careers in order to side with the workers, a choice that 
Dorothy Day suggested had religious implications. 

Gurley Flynn was of the laity, and she was also my sister in the 
deep sense of the word. She always did what the laity is 
nowadays urged to do. She felt a responsihility to do all in her 
power in defense of the poor, to protect them against injustice 
and destitution. 

The title of Flynn's autobiography is taken from a song written 
for her by Joe Hill, the Swedish immigrant laborer and Wobblie 
balladeer. She had come to Hill's defense when he was arrested and 
brought to trial, as she had for so many young radicals; and Hill's 
words, later set to a ragtime tune, are a fitting tribute to "the rebel girl": 

There are women of many descriptions 

In this queer world as everyone knows. 

Some are living in beautiful mansions. 

And wearing the finest of clothes. 

There are blue-blooded queens and princesses, 

All dressed in diamond and pearl. 

But the only and thoroughbred lady 

Is the rebel girl. 



BY ELIZABETH GURLEY FLYNN 

The Alderson Story: My Life as a Political Prisoner. New York: 
International Publishers, 1963. 

The Rebel Girl: An Autobiography— My First Life (1906-1926). New 
York: International PubUshers, (1955) 1973. 



ABOUT ELIZABETH GURLEY FLYNN 



Camp, Helen C. "Flynn." Notable American Women: The Modern 
Period: A Biographical Dictionary. Edited by Barbara Sicherman and 
Carol Hard Green. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980. 

Day, Dorothy. "Elizabeth Gurley Flynn." By Little and by Little: 
Selected Writings by Dorothy Day. Edited by Robert EUsberg. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1983. 



