RANDOLPH BOURNE 

1886-1918 



IN THE 1920S AND 30S, MANY WRITERS AND INTELLECTUALS REMEM- 
bered the First World War as a tragic, even pointless error; but during 
the four long years of the "senseless slaughter," as Ernest Hemingway 
called it, few of them publicly opposed the war. Bertrand Russell, who 
lost his Cambridge University fellowship and went to prison because of 
war resistance, was a dissenter; so was Randolph Bourne, who endured 
harassment and neglect because of his public opposition to American 
intervention. The theme of his essays, critical of Woodrow Wilson and 
the war fever, was summarized in an ironic phrase, "War is the health 
of the State." 

In the postwar decade. Bourne was a guiding spirit for young 
writers and artists in Greenwich Village and influenced the "new" Dial 
magazine, 1920-29, edited by an admirer Schofield Thayer. Since then, 
such diverse social critics as Theodore Dreiser and John Dos Passos, 
Edward Dahlberg and Noam Chomsky have regarded Bourne as a 
model of honesty and personal courage and as an intellectual hero of 
this century. 

Born in Bloomfield, New Jersey, on May 30, 1886, Randolph 
Bourne was physically disfigured at birth and progressively deformed 
later by spinal tuberculosis, but this deformity seldom impeded his 
vigorous, multi-faceted early career. After high school, where he 
indicated a talent for writing and a keen interest in the social sciences, 
he worked in factories and offices in New Jersey and New York City 
for four years before entering Columbia University on scholarship in 
1909. Harsh conditions among workers and the precariousness of their 
lives shaped the sensibility of the young writer and prompted his 
commitment to socialism during his undergraduate years. 

In 1913, an article on youth in Atlantic Monthly brought 
Bourne to the attention of editors and readers; that summer, he 



completed an M.A. degree at Columbia and left on a traveling 
fellowship to Europe. He returned from there on the eve of the war, 
having witnessed the chaos that led to "the guns of August," 1914. For 
the next three years he worked hard, but unsuccessfully, to keep 
America neutral; and his essays between April 1917 and the armistice 
in 1918 charted the effects of the war fever on the youthful spirit of the 
times, and prophesied the disillusionment that was to characterize the 
post-war period. He died during the flu epidemic of December 1918 at 
33 years of age. 

"Call this thing that goes on in the modern schoolroom 
schooling, if you like. Only don't call it education." This was the first of 
several "disagreeable truths" that Bourne preached to his readers, in this 
case from the pages of the first issue of the New Republic magazine, 
November 7, 1914; over the next four years, until his premature death, 
he applied his vigorous intelligence to American politics and culture in 
a manner that was both original and prophetic. In the pages of the "old" 
Dial and the Seven Arts, he stood almost alone in condemning 
America's entry into World War I. In essays on education and the State, 
on the "new" poetry, fiction, and film, he also left a unique record of 
one man's struggle against intellectual conformity and the war-making 
state. 

An admirer of William James and a student of John Dewey, 
Bourne brought a wide range of interests and experience to his 
discussion of "trans-national America," a country shaped by the 
immigrant migrations of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. His 
reflections on the promises and perils of the American experience 
focused on institutions such as the schools and the university, as well as 
on the arts — the poetry of Vachel Lindsay and Amy Lowell, the fiction 
of Willa Cather and Theodore Dreiser, the art of the cinema. He 
embraced early Modernism as an appropriate response to the new 
century and as a corrective to the cold intellectualism of the 19th 
century social engineers. 

For Bourne the new pragmatism, in the writings of John 
Dewey, who supported the war, simply revived the old hazards of 
Puritanism, with its insensitivity to feeling and its self-righteousness. 



Such forces, masked as modern liberalism, squandered America's 
emotional capital. Bourne said, and perpetuated old errors. In sinning 
against the spirit of American promise, the social philosophers guided 
the nation "through sheer force of ideas into what the other nations 
entered only through predatory craft or popular hysteria or militarist 
madness." For Bourne, America's active participation on the side of 
Great Britain and France ended any chance of its providing any balance 
in an unstable world. 

Bourne opposed the war not as an isolationist or idealist, but 
as an enlightened realist, since America's military involvement 
prevented it from serving as an arbiter between the Allies and the 
Central Powers. In "Below the Battle," he described a young man 
victimized by the intellectual and social forces of a nation at war. 
Though not afraid to die for his country, the youth obviously had no 
hatred of the enemy. Bourne argued, "even when the government 
decided that such animus is necessary to carry out its theories of 
democracy and the future organization of the world." Conscripted to 
fight, the draftee will go, but in the work of annihilation his youthful 
skepticism will turn to bitterness. Bourne said. And so it did. 

In the midst of the war. Bourne came to understand the 
excesses of the modern state and the consequences for peacetime, 
especially the usurpation of the individual conscience by institutions 
established during times of stress. Under such tyranny, he argued, the 
desire for personal freedom becomes the impersonal instinct of the herd 
for conformity, creating a "conscience" no longer capable of 
distinguishing between good and evil, but only between what is 
acceptable to the state and what is unacceptable. His theme was to 
recur in numerous works later in the century, in such diverse writings 
as George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four, Albert Camus's The Rebel, 
and Gordon Zahn's German Catholics and Hitler's Wars. In the Red 
Scare of 1919, when American radicals and labor agitators were im- 
prisoned and exiled. Bourne's worst fears were confirmed. 

In writing about cultural issues. Bourne drew upon his 
knowledge in many areas, the philosophy of education, adolescent 
psychology, political theory, and literary criticism. His artistic 



1 , o , „ J 1 I Ti Randolph Bourne / 113 

112 / Randolph Bourne ^ 

sensibility, attentive to the new directions in music and poetry, as well 
as fiction and film, enabled him to absorb the full impact of the war, 
when many of his contemporaries ignored its aesthetic and moral 
implications. 

Bourne's portraits of young conscripts in his essays, for 
example, strongly resemble the fictional characters in the novels of the 
"lost generation" shortly afterward. And there are close similarities 
between the conscripts described in his anti-war essays and the three 
young Americans in John Dos Passos's novel Three Soldiers (1921), 
Frederick Henry in Ernest Hemingway's A Farewell to Arms (1929), 
and the disillusioned and psychologically troubled narrator of Robert 
Graves's memoir. Goodbye to All That (1929). Though older by several 
years. Bourne spoke a language similar to that of the soldiers in 
Wilfred Owen's ironic poems, "Futility" and "Dulce et Decorum Est 
Pro Patria Mori" (It is sweet and just to die for one's country). 

In his honesty, "his relying on analysis rather than on 
rationalizations or ideologies," as Olaf Hansen has said. Bourne 
focused his attention on immediate experience rather than onabstract 
concepts or preconceived ideas. He treated culture and society as 
something lived rather than as something passively accepted. 

A posthumously published "The History of a Literary Radical" 
described the intellectual tradition, from Thomas Paine to William 
James, that sustained Bourne in his social criticism. He called it "the 
new classicism," combining literary art and social thought, which he 
thought held promise for the future: 

Finding little in the American tradition that is not tainted with 
sweetness and light and burdened with the terrible patronage of 
bourgeois society, the new classicist will yet rescue Thoreau and 
Whitman and Mark Twain and try to tap through time a certain 
eternal human tradition of abounding vitality and moral freedom 
and so build out the future. 

Bourne, a model for later social critics, redeemed the times by 
appreciating what the times made available, while refusing to be their 
prisoner. 



BY RANDOLPH BOURNE 

The Radical Will: Randolph Bourne Selected Writings, 1911-1918. 
Edited by Olaf Hansen. New York: Urizen Books, 1977. 

War and Intellectuals: Collected Essays, 1915-1919. Edited by Carl 
Resek. New York: Harper and Row, 1964. 



ABOUT RANDOLPH BOURNE 

Moreau, John Adams. Randolph Bourne: Legend and Reality. 
Washington, D.C.: Public Affairs Press, 1966. 

Schlissel, Lillian. The World of Randolph Bourne. New York: E.P. 
Dutton and Co., 1965. 



