BERTRAND RUSSELL 

1872-1970 



RECOGNIZING BERTRAND RUSSELL AS A GREAT MORAL LEADER OF 
this century is somewhat complicated by the fact that he was also one 
of its famous scoundrels. A characteristic remark in this vein was his 
comment to a woman friend in 1947: "How right you are about 
chastity. I gave it a good try once, but never again." An appropriate 
response from another woman friend was thatif Russell thought that he 
was the nearest man could get to being God, he was close to being 
Satan as well. 

Russell's refusal to endorse the war fever during World War I 
was, nonetheless, a courageous assault on the moral indifference of that 
period. For his pacifism, he lost a major fellowship at Cambridge 
University; from then until his death in 1970, at ninety-eight, he 
effectively exposed the immorality of pompous and pious Christians. 
While they went off to war, killing their brothers and sisters on the 
other side with easy consciences, Russell, the agnostic, withheld his 
approval and suffered the consequences of his dissent. With impressive 
logic and enviable humor, he won a permanent place in the history of 
movements for social justice, calling nations and their leaders to task 
for their inhumanity to one another and fostering a moral regeneration 
on issues of war and peace during the dark ages following World War 
II. 

Although hesitant at times about supporting widespread civil 
disobedience, he was nonetheless an advocate of direct action, arguing 
in Which Way to Peace? (1936) that 

all great advances have involved illegality. The early Christians 
broke the law; Galileo broke the law; the French revolutionaries 
broke the law; early trade unionists broke the law. The instances 
are so numerous and so important that no one can maintain as an 
absolute principle obedience to constituted authority. 



Or, as he said at the time of World War I: "I don't know how one can 
advocate an unpopular cause unless one is either irritating or 
ineffective." 

Born in Revenscrot, Monmouthsire, England, on May 18, 
1872, Bertrand Russell was reared by his grandmother, Lady Russell, 
wife of the former prime minister under Queen Victoria. His parents 
had both died by the time he was four. His brother Frank gave "Bertie" 
his first lessons in Euclid, which thrilled him and led to his early love 
of mathematics. After private tutoring, he entered Trinity College, 
Cambridge University in 1890, and was elected a fellow there five 
years later. The following year he married an American woman, Alys 
Smith, the first of four marriages, and traveled to the United States. 

Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1908, Russell 
collaborated with Alfred North Whitehead on Principia Mathematica 
(1910), and continued to lecture widely in Europe. Support for a 
conscientious objector and agitation against England's entrance into 
World War I got him into trouble. He lost his fellowship in 1916, and 
for writing against the war he later served six months in Brixton Prison, 
where he wrote Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. The attitude 
that overtook him, as news about the slaughter on the Western Front 
poured in, surprised him. 

I have at times been paralyzed by skepticism, at times I have 
been cynical, at other times indifferent, but when the war came I 
felt as if I heard the voice of God. I knew that it was my 
business to protest, however futile protest might be. ... As a 
lover of truth, the national propaganda of all the belligerent 
nations sickened me. As a lover of civilization, the return to 
barbarism appalled me. As a man of thwarted parental feeling, 
the massacre of the young wrung my heart. 

In the early 20s, Russell traveled to Russia, China, and Japan, 
and ran for parliament as a member of the Labor Party. After a second 
marriage and parenthood, he returned to lecture several times in the 
United States, and in 1931, on the death of his brother, he became the 



Third Earl Russell, though he rarely used his title. In 1940, he gave the 
William James lectures at Harvard, an inquiry into meaning and truth, 
and then was refused permission to teach at the College of the City of 
New York because of his political and moral views. Re-elected to a 
fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, he continued to lecture 
widely both in his native country and abroad. In 1949, he was awarded 
the Order of Merit by the British government; and in 1950, he received 
the Nobel Prize for Literature, "in recognition of his many-sided and 
important work in which he constantly stood forth as a champion of 
humanity and freedom of thought." 

Internationally famous at 30, Russell was destined for 
immortality from the beginning, and the books by and about him are 
legion. His friends, associates, and students included many famous 
people of his time: Aldous Huxley, T.S. Eliot, Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
D.H. Lawrence, John Maynard Keynes. Sometimes regarded as the 
greatest logician since Aristotle, he combined a skeptical turn of mind 
with wicked wit and regarded "impersonal non-human truth as a 
delusion." A rationalist even in his eighties, he thought neither misery 
nor folly had any part in the inevitable lot of man. "And I am convinced 
that intelligence, patience, and eloquence can, sooner or later, lead the 
human race out of its self-imposed torture provided it does not 
exterminate itself meanwhile." 

But the quality which gives Russell special claim on one's 
attention is his persistence in the pursuit of peace and justice. "Seldom 
indeed," wrote Daniel O'Connor, "has a philosopher shown such a 
sense of responsibility." 

Faithfulness in upholding values of social justice has, of 
course, characterized the lives of many heroes of nonviolence. One 
thinks of Dorothy Day, at 78, arrested in California in support of the 
United Farm Workers; Ammon Hennacy, at 76, picketing the capital 
building in Salt Lake City against capital punishment; and Eugene 
Victor Debs, at 65, serving a three-year sentence in Atlanta federal 
prison for draft resistance. Among those who persisted, however, 
Bertrand Russell, Nobel laureate and lord of the realm, may hold the 
record. Jailed at 89 for planning a demonstration advocating unilateral 



disarmament, he said later, "What I want is some assurance before I die 
that the human race will be allowed to continue." There were, at the 
same time, his speeches at rallies in Trafalgar Square against apartheid 
and against nuclear weapons, and the initiation of the Campaign for 
Nuclear Disarmament, which continues to thrive, more active than 
ever, in England and other European countries. 



BY BERTRAND RUSSELL 

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols. New York: Allen 
Unwin, 1967, 1968, 1969. 

The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell. Edited by Robert E. Egner and 
Lester E. Dennon. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1961. 

Why I Am Not a Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related 
Subjects. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1957. 

Portraits from Memory and Other Essays. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1956. 



And many others. 



ABOUT BERTRAND RUSSELL 

Clark, Ronald W. The Life of Bertrand Russell. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1976. 



