MOHANDAS GANDHI 

1869-1948 



"THIS IS THE. MAN," ROMAIN ROLLAND SAID OF GANDHI IN 1924, 
"who has stirred three hundred miUion people to revolt, who has 
shaken the foundations of the British Empire, and who has introduced 
into human politics the strongest religious impetus of the last two 
hundred years." But the most unusual tribute to Gandhi is undoubtedly 
George Orwell's, shortly before his death in 1950. Suspicious of 
pacifists and vegetarians, Orwell had to overcome most of his instincts 
to find anything good in a person venerated by so many: "Saints," his 
"Reflections on Gandhi" begins, "should always be judged guilty until 
they are proved innocent, but the tests that have to be applied to them 
are not, of course, the same in all cases." 

After putting Gandhi to the test, Orwell comes down clearly 
on the side of the Mahatma ("great soul"), with a comment on his 
ability to "disinfect" the political air, as India and Great Britain settled 
down to decent and friendly relations. "One may feel, as I do, a sort of 
aesthetic distaste for Gandhi," Orwell said, and regard his basic aims 
"as anti-human and reactionary; but regarded simply as a politician, and 
compared with other leading political figures of our time, how clean a 
smell he has managed to leave behind!" 

This rather minimalist endorsement of one of the great 
teachers of nonviolence is instructive, since it dramatizes the con- 
flicting attitudes aroused by even the most consistent pacifist. It 
suggests as well how little is known and understood still about 
nonviolent approaches to social change. 

In a relatively brief history, nonviolence made a great leap 
forward, nonetheless, during and through Gandhi's experiments with 
truth, and his writings, as well as the scholarship about him, provide the 
most extensive record available of its history. Among the items central 
to students are the film of Richard Attenborough, Gandhi (1982) and 

119 



the psychoanalytic study, Gandhi's Truth, by Erik Erikson. 

Mohandas Karamhand Gandhi was born on October 2, 1869, 
in Porbandar, India, on the Kathiawar peninsula, where his father was 
prime minister of the region. Married, according to custom, at thirteen, 
Gandhi attended Samaldas College, after completing the local high 
school. In 1888, leaving his wife and child, he sailed for England, 
where he was admitted to the Inner Temple to learn the law. 
Completing his studies and called to the bar in 1891, he returned to 
India, still rather infatuated with English tradition and finery. 

Unsuccessful in his practice at home, Gandhi sailed for South 
Africa as an adviser to a Muslim in 1893. There he became active as an 
organizer in various associations and served in the ambulance corps 
during the Boer War. In 1903, after two years inlndia and the birth of 
his fourth son, he returned with his family to South Africa. Taking a 
vow of chastity at this time, he became more deeply involved, through 
his law practice in Johannesburg, in seeking a redress of grievances for 
Asians in South Africa. By this time he knew the essays of John Ruskin 
and Thoreau's Civil Disobedience; he also translated Tolstoy's Letter to 
a Hindu and established Tolstoy Farm, for Indian resisters. Imprisoned 
on several occasions, Gandhi was nonetheless successful in campaigns 
against discrimination, and by the time he returned to India in 1914, he 
was well-known in his home country. In 1909 he had written, while in 
jail, that one of the inner struggles of his life was "to bring Hindus and 
Muslims together." 

In 1915, Gandhi founded his own ashram, a retreat for 
communal living, near Ahmedabad, in northern India, and began a 
campaign on behalf of millworkers. That continued, with mass civil 
disobedience, through the 1920s. His goal by this time was Indian 
independence from Great Britain, as well as peaceful co-existence 
between Hindus and Muslims. In prison, he wrote Satyagraha in South 
Africa, published essays in numerous periodicals, and read daily in the 
Bhagavad Gita. 

In the early 1930s, following the proclamation of the Indian 
Declaration of Independence, Gandhi was imprisoned on several 
occasions, and in 1932, he announced a fast unto death in protest 



Mohandas Gandhi / 123 



against the treatment of untouchables. His efforts for independence, 
which included a successful trip to England, continued through the 
early years of the Second World War. The struggle led to his and his 
wife's imprisonment, where they remained until her death in February 
1944, and his release the following May. In 1947, he initiated another 
fast to bring an end to religious strife in India. A year later, on January 
30, 1948, he was assassinated by a radical Hindu, as he moved through 
a crowd at Birla House, in New Delhi. 

"We must widen the prison gates, and we must enter them as a 
bridegroom enters the bride's chamber. Freedom is to be wooed only 
inside prison walls and sometimes on gallows, never in council 
chambers, courts, or in the schoolroom," Gandhi wrote. The extent of 
his influence as a thinker is suggested by the frequency with which 
such statements serve as a source of inspiration and guidance for 
resisters throughout the world. This particular one provided the title for 
Philip Berrigan's fourth book. Widen the Prison Gates, written during 
his own imprisonment between 1970 and 1972. For almost every civil 
disobedient for justice in the latter 20th century, Gandhi, that "seditious 
Middle Temple lawyer and half-naked fakir," as Winston Churchill 
called him, has been a presence, a person to be contended with, either 
challenged or imitated. 

Martin Luther King, Jr., in a famous photograph from the 
Civil Rights movement, is seated beneath a picture of Gandhi, and 
Daniel Berrigan, S. J., recorded his own reflections during his time in 
Danbury Federal, in Lights on in the House of the Dead. Numerous 
Americans have gone to India to learn how to appropriate Gandhi's 
spirit and tactics to later struggles for justice. Most recently, the 
Reverend Carl Kline, who initiated the peace witness of citizens from 
the United States on the borders of Nicaragua and Honduras, conducted 
such a pilgrimage as an apostle of Satyagraha (truth-seeking). 

In this most violent of centuries, Gandhi's influence still 
manages, as Orwell said, to "disinfect" the political air; and Martin 
Luther King, Jr., Gandhi's principal American disciple, regarded his 
approach to social change as the only practical one for a nuclear age. 
"The choice," as King said, "is clearly between nonviolence and 



nonexistence. 



BY MOHANDAS GANDHI 

An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with Truth. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1962. 



ABOUT MOHANDAS GANDHI 

Erikson, Erik H. Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant 
Nonviolence. New York: W.W. Norton and Co., 1969. 

Fischer, Louis. Gandhi: His Life and Message for the World. New 
York: New American Library, 1954. 

Payne, Robert. The Life and Death of Mahatma Gandhi. New York: 
E.P. Dutton and Company, 1969. 



