EUGENE VICTOR DEBS 

1855-1926 



IN HIS EXCELLENT SOCIAL BIOGRAPHY OF DEBS, NICK SALVATORE 
states a fact that should be kept in mind in remembering almost every 
American radical, from Thomas Paine to Dorothy Day and David 
Dellinger. Too often, Salvatore warns. Debs is regarded as a "larger- 
than-life hero," as someone born eternally at odds with the culture 
around him. Such a view does violence to Debs' full story, especially to 
the indigenous nature of his radicalism, nurtured as it was by the land, 
people, and traditions shared by most Americans. 

Debs was a product of the American experience and his hope 
in the reconstruction of the social order resembled that of settlers from 
the 17th century to the present. At twenty-eight, for example, still under 
the influence of William Riley McKeen, whom Debs called "the model 
railroad president," he gave this ringing endorsement of America as 
"preeminently the land of great possibilities, of great opportunities, and 
of no less great probabilities. . . .We all have a fair chance and an open 
field. Long may it so remain. The time, the occasion is auspicious. 
Nothing like it was ever known before." 

Such a statement is as representative of the man as his later 
and more famous statement at his sentencing for draft resistance in 
1918: "While there is a lower class, I am in it; while there is a criminal 
element, I am of it; and while there is a soul in prison, I am not free." 
Five times the Socialist party's nominee for president of the United 
States, Debs received a significant percent of the vote on two 
occasions. Warren G. Harding, elected president in 1920, released Debs 
from Atlanta prison; earlier Woodrow Wilson had granted amnesty to 
other political prisoners after the war ended in 1918, but not to the 
popular Debs. 

Ammon Hennacy, in Atlanta prison for draft resistance at 
about the same time, regarded Debs and Malcolm X as the two greatest 



Americans who ever lived. Hennacy admired Debs for iiis courage, but 
also for his faithfulness to the poor and the down-and-out. Debs' 
dedication to the railroad workers and the Wobblies did not end once 
he became a popular leader. He was not running for office or seeking a 
power base from which to launch a political career; he was a leader 
who cast his lot with workers and who remained loyal to them to the 
end. 

Born on November 5, 1855, in Terre Haute, Indiana, where his 
parents had settled several years after immigrating from Alsace- 
Lorraine, Debs left school at fifteen to work on the railroad. Within five 
years he was secretary of the local Brotherhood of Locomotive 
Firemen. In 1885, the year of his marriage to Katherine Metzel, he was 
elected to the Indiana legislature as a Democrat, where he voted for 
measures that would now be regarded as anti-union. 

In 1893, Debs helped to form the American Railway Union 
and subsequently became its president. The next year, when employees 
of the Pullman Company went out on strike, he took charge of the 
campaign, after some initial reservations, and later served a six month 
prison sentence in the McHenry County (111.) jail for refusing to abide 
by a court injunction against the strikers. 

In jail, a reading of Marx and Engels further radicalized Debs, 
and within four years, he was nominated for president by the Socialists. 
Shortly afterward, he became an editor of the party's weekly. Appeal to 
Reason, which eventually achieved a circulation of over 800,000. In the 
summer of 1905, in Chicago, Debs co-founded the Industrial Workers 
of the World, with Mother Jones, Lucy Parsons, and Big Bill Haywood; 
and al- though he later disagreed with the Wobblies, he always 
supported their right to organize. During the presidential campaign of 
1908, Debs drew large crowds speaking from a train known as the "Red 
Special," and in the election of 1912, he polled almost a million votes, 
a figure exceeded in the election of 1920, when he campaigned from 
prison. 

Debs arrest in Canton, Ohio, in 1918, at a Socialist state 
convention, followed several warnings about his speaking against 
wartime conscription; but he believed strongly in the party's policy and 



its slogan, "Don't be a soldier, be a man." Sentenced to ten years for 
violation of the Espionage Act, he was one of many victims of the so- 
called Red Scare, during that repressive era in American history. (The 
actions of the Attorney General and an ambitious young lawyer named 
Edgar Hoover led to the deportation of Emma Goldman and two 
hundred and forty "radicals" in 1919 and the harassment and denial of 
basic civil liberties to many others.) 

Although he remained active to the end, the time in prison 
weakened Debs' health. Back in Terre Haute he wrote articles on prison 
conditions, published later as Walls and Bars, and continued leadership 
of the Socialist party. When he died in October 1926, 10,000 people 
attended the funeral services, and his home in Terre Haute is now a 
memorial to a man admired and loved by many. In 1971, when she 
received the annual Debs award, Dorothy Day spoke at his gravesite, 
acknowledging his influence on her own life, as a friend of the poor 
and as a writer and worker for social justice. 

Among Debs' contributions to social history, as Nick 
Salvatore points out, were his understanding of the complex character 
of the democratic tradition and his ability to re-define it for the 
twentieth century. Integrating social and economic themes in a way that 
his audience understood. Debs recognized the central place of the class 
struggle and of social protest in American history, without ignoring 
cultural and religious traditions. "Christ," Debs argued, "organized a 
working class movement. . . for no other purpose than to destroy class 
rule and set up the common people as the sole and rightful inheritors of 
the earth." In this and similar statements. Debs showed his mastery of 
the political and religious exhortation characteristic of American 
oratory since the time of the Puritans. In his personal example, as well 
as in his national leadership, he is, as Salvatore says, "a constant 
reminder of the profound potential that yet lives in our society and in 
ourselves." 



BY EUGENE VICTOR DEBS 



Debs. Edited by Ronald Radosh. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Pren- 
tice Hall, 1971. 

Eugene V. Debs Speaks. Edited by Gene Y. Tussey. New York: Path- 
finder Press, 1970. 

Walls and Bars. Chicago: C.H. Kerr, (1927), 1973. 



ABOUT EUGENE VICTOR DEBS 

Ginger, Ray. The Bending Cross: A Biography of Eugene Victor Debs. 
New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1949 (1962). 

Salvatore, Nick. Eugene V. Debs: Citizen and Socialist. Urbana, IL: 
University of Illinois Press, 1982. 



