LEO TOLSTOY 

1828-1910 



IN THE HISTORY OF NONVIOLENCE, TOLSTOY AND GANDHI OCCUPY 
special places; among Americans, only Dorothy Day and Martin 
Luther King, Jr. enjoy such distinction. It was Tolstoy who con- 
firmed the reputations of several American theoretians: William Lloyd 
Garrison, Henry David Thoreau, and Adin Ballou, whose 
writings Tolstoy cited after his own conversion to 
"nonresistance," as he called it, in 1880. From then until his 
death in 1910, he wrote numerous letters, essays, and 
pamphlets that constitute a major library on the subject. 

Tolstoy argued with such authority on the scriptural and 
biblical evidence for Christian nonviolence as to almost single- 
handedly transform a religious tradition or at least to redirect 
a significant minority of believers. Since then, many Christians 
have re-interpreted the social and political implications of their 
faith. Nonviolence, one might say, is the 19th century counter- 
part to liberation theology, which has had a similar effect in 
emphasizing the social implications of Christianity in recent 
times. 

For Americans, Tolstoy's pamphlets have particular sig- 
nificance, since some are based upon his reading of 19th century 
abolitionists and anarchists whom he admired. 

If I had to address the American people, I would like to 
thank them for their writers who flourished about the fifties 
. . . .And I should like to ask the American people why 
they do not pay more attention to these voices (hardly to 
be replaced by those of financial and industrial million- 
aires, or successful generals and admirals), and continue 
the good work in which they made such hopeful progress. 



In a famous polemic. The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1894), 
Tolstoy spoke of the American Quakers who responded to his 
writings on nonviolence and he quoted extensively from Gar- 
rison's "Declaration of Sentiments Adopted by the Peace Con- 
vention" (1838) in Boston. Tolstoy also corresponded with Adin 
Ballou, the founder of the Hopedale Community, and co-founder 
of the first international peace society in 1854. 

At a time when politicians justify an increase in nuclear 
weapons as a means of encouraging peace negotiations (the in- 
famous "build-down theory" of the Reagan administration, for 
example), Tolstoy's conclusion to The Kingdom of God Is Within 
You seems especially relevant: 

It has often been said that the invention of the terrible 
military instruments of murder will put an end to war, and 
that war will exhaust itself. This is not true. . . .Let them 
be exterminated by thousands and millions, let them be 
torn to pieces, men will still continue like stupid cattle to 
go to the slaughter, some because they are driven thither 
under the lash, others that they may win the decorations 
and ribbons which fill their hearts with pride. 

In his pamphlets, as in the earlier novels, Tolstoy 
combined a practical and naturalistic eye for detail with a 
theoretical and moral vision. And at the end of his polemics, 
he returned to the central question posed by most Russian 
writers and intellectuals of the 19th century: "What is to be 
done?" In "Letter to the Liberals" (1896), for example, he 
answered that elemental question in this way: 

Merely the simple, quiet, truthful carrying on of what you 
consider good and needful, quite independently of 
government and of whether it likes it or not. In other 
words; standing up for your rights, not as a member of 
the Literature Committee, not as a deputy, not as a 
landowner, not as a merchant, not even as a member 



of Parliament; but standing up for your rights as a 
rational and free man, and defending them, not as the 
rights of local boards or committees are defended, with 
concessions and compromises, but without any 
concessions and compromises, in the only way in which 
moral and human dignity can be defended. 

Born in Russia, on August 28, 1828 (old-style calendar), at 
Yasnaya Polyana, the family estate where he is buried, Leo 
Nikolayevich Tolstoy was the fourth son of Count Nikolai Ilyich 
Tolstoy. Reared by an aunt after the death of his mother and 
father, he studied briefly at Kazan University, and as a young man 
spent much of his time gambling and drinking. Later, after studying 
law, he established a progressive school for children of the serfs on 
his estate. His first stories were published during his years in the 
army, at the time of the Crimean war. Leaving the army in 1856, he 
traveled about Western Europe, principally France and Germany. In 
1863, the year after his marriage, he began work on War and Peace 
(1869). Various essays and fiction followed, including a second major novel, 
Anna Karenina (1878). Although his later fiction is sometimes regarded 
as inferior to these novels, its popularity steadily increases, 
particularly The Death of loan Ilyitch (1886), The Kreutzer Sonata (1890), 
and Resurrection (1899). 

Internationally famous at fifty, Tolstoy suddenly suffered 
from bouts of deep despair. In 1879 he wrote. 
My question was the simplest of questions lying in the soul of 
every man from the foolish child to the wisest elder: It was a 
question without an answer to which one cannot live, as I had 
found by experience. It was "What will come of what I am 
doing today or shall do tomorrow? What will come of my whole 
life?" 

Re-reading the Old and New Testaments at this time, 
Tolstoy experienced a conversion to radical Christianity. Sub- 
sequently, he wrote extensive commentaries on the Bible, blam- 
ing the decline of Christianity, after Constantine, on the church's 
failure to live up to the religious pacifism of Jesus. Christianity 
had failed, Tolstoy argued, because it refused to disassociate itself 



from political power, the sanctification of which he regarded as 
blasphemous, as the negation of Christianity. "In truth, the 
words a 'Christian state' resemble the words 'hot ice.' The thing 
is either not a State using violence, or it is not Christian," he 
argued. 

In 1888, following the birth of her thirteenth and last 
child, Tolstoy's wife and his chief disciple, Chertkov, quarrelled. 
From then until the end of his life, the conflicts in the house- 
hold worsened, as Tolstoy devoted himself to fiction, to Chris- 
tian anarchism, and to the defense of his followers, the 
Dukhobers, who were exiled to Canada in 1899. In 1910, in the 
midst of another crisis at home, Tolstoy left Yasnaya Polyana 
and, on November 7 of that year, died of pneumonia at 
Astapovo, at age eighty-two. At his funeral two servants car- 
ried a banner at the head of the procession that read, "Dear 
Leo Nikolayevich, the memory of your greatness will not die 
among us, the orphaned peasants of Yasnaya Polyana." 

Tolstoy's writings document the close relationship 
between peace and justice issues; and perhaps because 
he was writing to a most unsympathetic audienee, in an 
era when the very idea of nonviolence was foreign to 
many Christians, his arguments retain their intensity 
and vigor a century later. For that reason, almost 
everyone committed to nonviolence, from Gandhi to 
the Catholic Worker Movement, from Martin Luther 
King, Jr., to the youngest draft resister, regards 
Tolstoy's pamphlets as basic texts. 

Of the two great Russian novelists, Tolstoy and 
Dostoevsky, one usually thinks of Dostoevsky as the more 
anguished, the person severely tested by the dichotomies of life, 
and by the evils to which human beings subject one another. But 
as a prince, as an aristocrat who had much to lose by his 
conversion, Tolstoy spent much of his later life on a pilgrimage. 
He died miles from his home, still searching, one might say, for 



the proper way to live his life as a Christian pacifist. 



BY LEO TOLSTOY 

The Portable Tolstoy. Edited by John Bayley. New York: Penguin 
Books, 1978. 

Tolstoy's Writings on Civil Disobedience and Non- Violence. New 
York: Bergman Publishers, 1967. 

And many others. 



ABOUT LEO TOLSTOY 

Simmons, Ernest J. Introduction to Tolstoy's Writings. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1967. 



