ABIGAIL KELLEY 

1811-1887 

AND 
STEPHEN SYMONDS FOSTER 

1809-1881 



THE DISAPPEARANCE OF SIGNIFICANT FIGURES FROM AMERICAN 

history robs successive generations of models for moral and political 
responsibility. As a consequence married couples, among 
others who try to center their lives on justice issues, are seldom 
presented with flesh-and-blood examples of how to live their lives. 

In some instances, men and women sacrifice their spouses in 
order to follow vocations for social justice. In others, one of them lives 
in the background, maintaining the family and caring for the children, 
while the other pursues a public life. In a few instances, however, 
husbands and wives successfully maintain two vocations, the one to the 
soeial order and the one to one another. This was particularly true of 
Abigail Kelley and Stephen Symonds Foster, both of whom appear in 
the Dictionary of American Biography, though Abby is generally 
regarded as the more famous of the two. 

Both people, however, deserve a special place in the history of 
nonviolence, she as an abolitionist, feminist, and tax resister, he as a 
faithful apostle of nonviolence, abolitionist, and war resister. Their 
correspondence both before their marriage and during the years each 
stayed at home, while the other took to the circuit on behalf of 
abolitionism, is a remarkable record of a union that was oppressive to 
neither, that was liberating for both. That respect and love are reflected 
in a tribute Stephen wrote for Abby late in their lives: "O, how I wish 

145 



she could be young again, to thrill the very air with her fiery 
denunciations .... Her work, I fear, is nearly done on earth, but she 
has large investments in Heaven. In moral power I have never known 
her equal, and never shall." 

Each of them came to marriage in 1845 with a dedication to 
social justice and something of a career based upon these eoncerns. 
Abby had advocated immediate abolition of slavery since the early 
1830s, when she first heard William Lloyd Garrison speak, and 
Stephen had taken various risks in resisting slavery and militarism 
since his undergraduate days at Dartmouth College. 

Born in Pelham, Massachusetts, on January 15, 1811, Abigail 
Kelley was the daughter of Irish Quakers. She attended schools in 
Worcester, Massachusetts, where her parents, prosperous farmers, 
moved soon after Abby was born, as well as the Friends School in 
Providence, Rhode Island. At the time she heard Garrison, she was 
teaching in Lynn, Massachusetts, and later headed a five-woman 
delegation to the National Female Anti-Slavery Society convention in 
New York. In 1839, she left teaching altogether in order to devote full- 
time to abolitionism, confessing to Theodore Weld at the time that she 
had "nothing to start upon, nothing to commend me to the notice or 
favor of any, no name, no reputation, no scrip, neither money in my 
purse." 

Abby Kelley proved, nonetheless, to be an effective champion 
of the cause, traveling throughout New England, New York, and into 
the Midwest, speaking to large and appreciative audiences, and co- 
editing the Anti-Slavery Bugle. Frequently she was ridiculed for 
speaking to "promiscuous" audiences (that is, audiences of men and 
women), and for traveling about with men, both black and white. But 
she remained faithful to her motto: "Go where you are least wanted, for 
there you are most needed." 

The very qualities that scandalized conventional souls were 
the ones that attracted Stephen Foster. As a vigorous and independent 
agitator for justice, he had long faced the kind of opposition that he 
occasionally provoked. Born in southern New Hampshire, on 
November 17, 1809, the ninth of twelve children, Stephen Symonds 



Foster graduated from Dartmouth College in 1838 and went to study 
for a time at Union Theological Seminary in New York. He had been 
jailed in Hanover, New Hampshire, for refusing to perform military 
duty at college, and left Union when the administration refused 
permission for a room to hold an antiwar meeting. Later, as an itinerant 
preacher, he traveled New England, asking to speak to congregations, 
particularly if they had not endorsed abolitionism, and in 1843 he 
published a popular pamphlet entitled The Brotherhood of Thieves; or, 
A True Picture of the American Church and Clergy. It argued that any 
church that refused to condemn slavery was "more corrupt and 
profligate than any house of ill fame in the city of New York. . . ." 

The 1850s were particularly hectic years for the Fosters, with 
Stephen and then Abby on speaking tours, while the other cared for 
their daughter, "Alia," horn in 1847. That decade saw the first National 
Woman's Rights Conventions at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848, and 
in Worcester, in 1850 and 1851, in which Abigail had an active part. 
During these years, particularly because of the Fugitive Slave Law of 
1850, the Foster home in Worcester was a busy station on the 
underground railway. In 1854 an incident involving a federal marshall, 
who came to arrest a former slave, and the Worcester Vigilance 
Committee, which resisted him, tested Stephen's dedication to 
nonviolence. With two others, Foster escorted the arresting officer 
through a hostile crowd of abolitionists and onto a train back to Boston, 
to protect him from harm. In a letter to Abigail, Stephen described the 
conflict within himself; as an abolitionist, he opposed everything the 
officer stood for, but as a pacifist, he could not allow anyone to assault 
him. 

I have often been myself the object of popular rage, as you well 
know, but never did I feel half the anxiety for my own life 
which I felt for his, or make half the effort to save it. There, I 
felt that the honor of our cause was at stake, and for the moment, 
my heart yearned almost with agony for a bloodless victory. 

The Fosters were also tax resisters, maintaining that they owed 
no allegiance to a government which allowed Abigail no vote and little 



voice in its proceedings. Only in old age, when Stephen was ill and 
Abigail was exhausted from a lifetime of agitation, did they finally pay 
the taxes to regain a title to their land. Stephen died in 1881 and 
Abigail in 1887, in Worcester; their home, near Tatnuck Square, is 
preserved and named on the National Register. 

Wendell Phillips said of Stephen, who was noted for his 
resonant voice and his colorful denunciations of slaveholders, "It 
needed something to shake New England and stun it into listening. He 
was the man, and offered himself for the martyrdom." A writer for the 
Woman's Journal wrote, at the time of Abigail's death: 

The women of this land owe this woman more than to any other 
human being, a debt of gratitude for the doors she opened for 
them to enter, for the paths she made smooth for them with her 
own bleeding feet, for the courage and conscientiousness and 
the faithfulness with which, amid persecution and reviling, she 
made the way clear for them to walk safely. 

And best of all, their union was a happy one, both for the 
couple and for abolitionism, as Abigail wrote to a female friend: 

I wish to congratulate the cause on the fact that since our 
marriage, meetings have been much more successful than 
heretofore. We realize that even in the anti-slavery cause a 
whole man and a whole woman are far better than a half-man 
and a half- woman. 



BY STEPHEN SYMONDS FOSTER 

The Brotherhood of Thieves, or a True Picture of the American Church 
and Clergy. New York: Arno Press, 1863, 1866 (1969). 



ABOUT ABIGAIL KELLEY 
AND 



STEPHEN SYMONDS FOSTER 

Bacon, Margaret Hope. / Speak for My Slave Sister: The Life of Abby 
Kelley Foster. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1974. 

Burkett, Nancy. Abby Kelley Foster and Stephen S. Foster. Worcester, 
Mass.: Worcester Bicentennial Commission, 1976. 

Melder, Keith E. "Abigail Kelley Foster." In Notable American 
Women, 1607-1950: A Biographical Dictionary, vol. I. Edited by 
Edward T. James and Janet W. James. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1971. 



