Angels and 

IMMORTALITY 



POEMS OF 
MED I TAT I O N 


SORIN CERIN 




SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


SORIN CERIN 


ANGELS 

AND 

IMMORTALITY 


Poems of meditation 



SORINCERIN- ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


2017 


Copyright © SORIN CERIN 2017 

Sorin Cerin. All rights reserved. No part of this 
publications may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmited in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior written permission of Sorin Cerin. 


Manufactured in the United States of America 


ISBN-13: 

978-1548279431 

ISBN-10: 

1548279439 


3 


SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


This book have been published for first time by Paco 
Publishing House in Romanian language in Romania 

Descrierea C1P a Bibliotecii Nationals a Romaniei 

CERIN, SORIN 

Ingeri si Nemurire / Sorin Cerin. - Bucurcsti: PACO, 

2014 

ISBN: 978-606-665-070-0 


This book have been published also in Romanian language 
in the United States of America 

ISBN-13 : 978-1495416033 

ISBN-10: 1495416038 


4 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Critical appreciations about the 
poetry of meditation 


PhD Professor A1 Cistelecan within the heading Avant la 
lettre, under the title Between reflection and attitude, 
appeared in the magazine Familia nr. 11-12 November- 
December 2015, pag.16-18, A1 Cistelecan considers about 
the poetry of meditation, of Sorin Cerin, that: 

"From what I see, Sorin Cerin is a kind of volcano 
textually, in continuously, and maximum eruption, with a 
writing equally frantic, as and, of convictions. In 
poetry, relies on gusts reflexive and on the sapiential 
enthusiasm, cultivating, how says alone in the subtitle of 


5 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


the Non-sense of the Existence, from here the poems "of 
meditation". 

One approach among all risky - not of today, 
yesterday, but from always - because he tend to mix where 
not even is, the work of poetry, making a kind of 
philosophizing versified, and willy-nilly, all kinds of 
punishments and morality. 

Not anymore is case to remind ourselves of the 
words said by Maiorescu, to Panait Cerna, about 
"philosophical poetry," because the poet, them knows, and, 
he very well, and precisely that wants to face: the risk of to 
work only in idea, and, of to subordinate the imaginative, to 
the conceptual. 

Truth be told, it's not for Sorin Cerin, no danger in 
this sense, for he is in fact a passional, and never reach the 
serenity and tranquility Apolline of the thought, on the 
contrary, recites with pathos rather from within a trauma 
which he tries to a exorcise, and to sublimates, into radical 
than from inside any peace of thought or a reflexive 
harmonies. 

Even what sounds like an idea nude, transcribed 
often aphoristic, is actually a burst of attitude, a transcript 
of emotion - not with coldness, but rather with heat (was 
also remarked, moreover, manner more prophetic of the 
enunciations). 

But, how the method, of, the taking off, lyrical, 
consists in a kind of elevation of everything that comes, up 
to the dignity of articulating their reflexive (from where the 
listing, any references to immediately, whether 


6 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


biographical or more than that), the poems by Cerin, 
undertake steep in the equations big existential and 
definitive, and they not lose time in, domestic confessions. 

They attack the Principle of reality, not its 
accidents. Thus, everything is raised to a dignity 
problematic, if no and of other nature, and prepared for a 
processing, densified. 

Risks of the formula, arise fatal, and here, because 
is seen immediately the mechanism of to promote the 
reality to dignity of the lyrism. 

One of the mechanisms comes from expressionist 
heritage (without that Sorin Cerin to have something else in 
common with the expressionists), of the capitalized letter, 
through which establishes suddenly and unpredictably, or 
humility radicalized , or panic in front of majesty of the 
word. 

Usually the uppercase, baptizes the stratum 
"conceptual" (even if some concepts are metaphors), 
signaling the problematic alert. 

It is true, Sorin Cerin makes excess and wastage, of 
the uppercase, such that, from a while, they do not more 
create, any panic, no godliness, because abundance them 
calms effects of this kind, and spoil them into a sort of 
grandiloquence. 

The other mechanism of the elevation in dignity 
rely on a certain - perhaps assumed, perhaps premeditated - 
pretentious discourse, on a thickening lexical, and on a 
deep and serious declamation. 


7 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


It is insinuated - of lest, even establishes - and here 
is an obvious procedure of imaginative recipe, redundant 
over tolerant. 

How is and normal - even inevitable - in a lyrical of 
reflection what wants to coagulate around certain cores 
conceptual, the modality immediate of awareness of these 
nodes conceptual, consists in materializing the abstractions, 
making them sensual is just their way of to do epiphany 
lyrical. 

But at, Sorin Cerin, imaginative mechanics is based 
on a simple use of the genitive, which materialize the 
abstractions, (from where endless pictures like "the thorns 
of the Truth," "chimney sweeps of the Fulfillments," " the 
brushes of Deceptions" etc. etc.), under, which most often 
is a button of personification. 

On the scale of decantation in metaphors we stand, 
thus, only on the first steps, what produces simultaneously, 
an effect of candor imaginative (or discours ive), but and 
one of uniformity. 

Probable but that this confidence in the primary 
processes is due to the stake on decanting of the thought, 
stake which let, in subsidiary, the imaginative action (and 
on the one symbolized more so) as such. 

But not how many or what ideas roam, through 
Sorin Cerin's poems are, however the most relevant, thing 
(the idea, generally, but and in this particular case, has a 
degree of indifference, to lyricism). 


8 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


On the contrary, in way somewhat paradoxically, 
decisive, not only defining, it's the attitude in which they 
gather, the affect in which coagulates. 

Beneath the appearance of a speech projected on 
"thought", Sorin Cerin promotes, in fact, an lyricism (about 
put to dry) of, emotions existential (not of intimate 
emotions). 

The reflexivity of the poems is not, from this 
perspective, than a kind of penitential attitude, an 
expression of hierarchies, of violent emotions. 

Passionate layer is, in reality, the one that shake, 
and he sees himself in almost all its components, from the 
ones of blaming, to the ones of piety, or tenderness 
sublimated (or, on the contrary, becoming sentimentalist 
again). 

The poet is, in substance, an exasperated of state of 
the world and the human condition and starting from here, 
makes exercises with sarcasm (cruel, at least, as, gush), on 
account of "consumer society" or on that of the vanity of 
"Illusions of the Existence". 

It's a fever of a figures of style that contains a curse, 
which gives impetus to the lyrics, but which especially 
highlights discoursive, the exasperation in front of this 
general degradation. 

So general, that she comprised and transcendental, 
for Sorin Cerin is more than irritated by the 
instrumentalization of the God (and, of the faith) in the 
world today. 


9 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Irritation in front of corruption the sacred, reaches 
climax, in lyrics of maximum, nerve blasphemous 
("Wickedness of Devil is called Evil, / while of the God, 
Good. ", but and others, no less provocative and" infamous 
" at the address the Godhead); but this does not happen, 
than because of the intensity and purity of his own faith 
(Stefan Borbely highlighted the energy of fervor from the 
poetry of Cerin), from a kind of devotional absolutism. 

For that not the lyrics, of challenge and blame, do, 
actually Cerin, on the contrary: lyrics of devotion desperate 
and passionate, through which him seeks "on Our True God 
/ so different from the one of cathedrals of knee scratched / 
at the cold walls and inert of the greed of the Illusion of 
Life ". 

It is the devotional fever from on, the reverse, of 
imprecations and sarcasm, but precisely she is the one that 
contaminates all the poems. 

From a layer of ideals, squashed, comes out, with 
verve passionate, the attitudes, of Cerin, attitudes eruptive, 
no matter how, they would be encoded in a lyrical of 
reflections. " 

PhD Professor Elvira Sorohan - An existentialist 
poet of the 21st Century 

To fully understand the literary chronicle written by 
Elvira Sorohan in Convorbiri Literare, “Literary 
Conversations”, which refers to an article written by Magda 
Carneci regarding Trans-poetry, and published in Romania 
literara, “Romania literary”, where specified what namely 
is poetry genuine, brilliant, the great poetry, on which a 
envies the poets of the last century, Elvira Sorohan, 


10 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


specifies in the chronicle dedicated to the poetry of Cerin, 
from, Convorbiri Literare, “Literary Conversations”, 
number 9 (237), pages 25-28, 2015 under the title An 
existentialist poet of the 21st century, that: 

Without understanding what is "trans-poetry", 
which probably is not more poetry, invoking a term coined 
by Magda Carneci, I more read, however, poetry today and 
now I'm trying to say something about one certain. 

Dissatisfied of "insufficiency of contemporary 
poetry" in the same article from in Romania literara, 
"Literary Romania", reasonably poetess accuses in block, 
how, that what "delivers" now the creators of poetry, are 
not than notations of "little feeling", "small despairs" and 
"small thinking. " 

Paraphrasing it on Maiorescu, harsh critical of the 
diminutives cultivated by Alecsandri, you can not say than 
that poetry resulting from such notation is also low (to the 
cube, if enumeration stops at three). 

The cause identified by Magda Carneci, would be 
the lack of inspiration, that tension psychical, specific the 
men of art, an experience spontaneous, what gives birth, 
uncontrollably, at creation. 

It is moment inspiring, in the case of poetry, 
charged of impulses affective, impossible to defeated 
rationally, an impulse on that it you have or do not it have, 
and, of, which is responsible the vocation. 

Simple, this is the problem, you have vocation, you 
have inspiration. 

I have not really an opinion formed about poetry of 
Magda Carneci, and I can not know, how often inspiration 
visits her, but if this state is a grace, longer the case to look 
for recipes for to a induces ? 

And yet, in the name of the guild, preoccupation the 
poetess, for the desired state, focuses interrogative: "... the 
capital question that arises is the following: how do we to 
have access more often, more controlled and not just by 


11 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


accident, to those states intense, at the despised 
<inspiration>, at those levels, others of ours, for which the 
poetry has always been a witness (sic!) privileged 

We do not know whom belongs the contempt, but 
we know that the inspiration is of the poet born, not made. 

The latter not being than a craftsman and an artist. 

I have in front three volumes of lyrics of the poet, 
less known and not devoid of inspiration, Sorin Cerin, 
ordered in a logical decrescendo, understandable, Non - 
sense of the Existence, the Great silences, Death, all 
appeared in 2015, at the Publishing Paco, from Bucharest. 

After the titular ideas, immediately is striking, and 
poetic vocabulary of the first poem, and you're greeted with 
the phrase "Illusion of Life" that spelled with capital letters. 

It is, in substance, an expression inherited from 
vocabulary consecrated of the existentialist, enough to 
suspect what brand will have the poems. 

Move forward with reading, being curious to see 
you how the poet remains on same chord of background, 
and how deep, how seriously lives in this idea, not at all 
new. 

And it is not new for that the roots of the 
existentialism, reformulated modern, draw their sap from 
the skepticism of biblical, melancholic Ecclesiastes, 
discouraged, in the tragic consciousness of finitude as 
destiny. 

It is the King biblical, an, existentialist avant la 

lettre. 

He discovers that " weather is to you be bom, and a 
time is to die", otherwise "all is hunting of wind". 

What else can be said new in our time, even in 
personal formula, when the existentialism has been 
intensively supported philosophically, in centuries XIX, 
and, XX, from Kierkegaard and up to Sartre, with specific 
nuances. 


12 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


A poem in the terms, of the existentialism status, 
more can interested the being of the our days, slave of 
the visual image and the Internet, only through adaptations 
or additions updated, complementary the central idea, and 
not finally, by the power of the return over of the self. 

It is about what you are trying to achieve the poet 
Sorin Cerin, leaving us, from the beginning, the impression 
that he lives the miracle creative, the inspiration. 

Wanting to guide the reader to search for a specific 
kind of poetry cultivated in these volumes (with one and 
the same cover), author subtitled them, ne varietur "Poems 
of meditation", as and are at the level of ideas. 

But how deep and how personal, is the meditation, 
you can not say than at the end of reading, when you 
synthesize what namely aspects of ontology and from what 
perspective, intellectual and emotional, them develop the 
poet. 

Certainly, the existentialist poetry vocabulary 
universal, recognizable, is now redistributed in an another 
topic, what leads to combinations surprising of new , some 
daring, or terribly tough, such as those concerning the 
church. 

Reading only one of the three volumes is like as you 
them read on all, are singing on same chord with minimal 
renewal from, a poem to another. 

The poet closes in a unitary conceptual sphere, from 
here the specific rhetoric. 

Wherever you open one of the volumes, you are in 
the center of the universe poetic of the same ideas, the same 
attitude of skepticism outraged. 

At the level of language, the same vocabulary, well- 
tuned with the conceptual sphere, is recombined in new and 
new phrases with updates related to today's environment, 
and even immediately of the Being, thrown into the world 
to atone for the "Original Sin". 


13 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


It is known, because sages said, "Eva's son does not 
live in a world devoid of wails". 

The ambition to build a personal meditation, 
impossible to achieve at the level of poetic vocabulary, 
already tired, is compensated by the art of combination of 
the words, without being able to avoid redundant frequency 
of some phrases. 

The most frequent, sometimes deliberately placed 
and twice in the same poem is "Illusion of Life". 

Dozens of others keywords, complementary, 
surprises by ostentatious use, to emphasize the idea of 
"Non-sense of Existence". 

Are preferred, series of words written with 
uppercase: "Moment," "Immortality," "Illusion," "Absurd," 
"Silence," "Death," "Eternity", "Absolute Truth", "Dream", 
"Free Will", "Original Sin", "Love", "Loneliness", 
"Alienation", "God" and many others. 

The phrase brings here and now, living 

problematized of the existence is "Consumer Society". 

Is released from poetry a frenzy of duplication of 
word, what supports the idea. 

Often this exuberant energy of rearrangement of 
words, covers what you looking for in poems composed on 
one and the same theme, namely, living intense affective of 
feeling of "illusion of life" inside, not outside. 

Here, we more mention of manner to distinguish the 
expressive words spelled with a capital letter. 

Rain of uppercase tends to flood few basic 
meanings of the poems. 

And more there's a particularity, the punctuation. 

After each verse, finished or not as, understood, 
grammatical or not, it put a comma; the point is put 
preferably only after the last verse. 

Otherwise than biblical Ecclesiastes, our poet, more 
revolted, than melancholic, do hierarchies of vanities pretty 
little ordered that you to can follow clear ideas. 


14 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


The significances is agglomerating, in one and the 
same poem, like Hierarchy of the Vanity. 

But it's not the only one. 

Of blame can be contemporary reality which 
provokes on multiple planes, poet's sensibility. 

The word "the vanity" is engaged in a combination 
serious, sharp, put to accompany even the phenomenon of 
birth of the world, for to suggest, finally, by joins culinary 
very original, willfully, vulgar, disgust, "nausea", r la 
Sartre, left behind by the consciousness of the absurd of 
existence. 

I sent at the poem, Industry Meat Existential: "Plow 
of the Vanity dig deep, / in the dust of the Existence, / 
wanting to sow the genes of the Illusion of Life, / for to be 
bom the World, / after a prolonged gestation, / in womb 
without limits, of the Lie, / that rests on Truth for to exist, / 
... ravens blacks of the thoughts, / by developing, / A true 
Industry of the Meat Existential, / beginning, / from steaks 
of, dreams on the barbecue of the Absurd, / up to, / sausage 
of highest quality of the Hopelessness. " 

What you find in this poem: paradox, nonsense, 
nihilism, disillusionment, dreams made ashes, all this and 
more will multiply, kaleidoscopic recombine in all creation 
contained in these volumes. 

If, the notions and synthetic concepts contained in 
words maintains their meaning constant, the fate of the 
"word" is not the same, seems to go toward exhaustion, as 
and the force of renewal of poetry. 

Have and the words their fate, apart from poetry, as 
the poet says. 

At first, paradoxically, "Autumn sentimental" is 
forsaken by the "harvests passionate of words" frantically 
collected, by the temper ignited of the poet in love only of 
certain words, those from existentialist semantics. 

Sometimes, "Flocks, of words, / furrow the sky of 
Memories". 


15 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


In registry changed, the word is tormented as a tool 
of media, violent, rightly incriminated of poet: "Words 
lacustrine / cry in pots of Martyrs, / put at the windows of 
brothels of Newspapers 

Is deplored the fate of the words employed unusual, 
grotesque: "At butchery of Words, / in the street comer of 
the Destiny / are sold bones of phrases rotten, / legs of 
meanings for fried 

And with this fragment I have illustrated the 
originality resentful word combinations, which give free 
course the ideas, a poetic attitude provoked by the revolt 
against the nonsense of existence. 

Ultimately is metaphorise "the winter of the 
Words, / which snows over our Days ..." and is deplored 
their fate, the falling "in the Mud, of some Words, / 
obscene and full of invective", and finally, their death: 
"Cemeteries of words are strung in the souls, / what they 
will and hopes at Resurrection ... ". 

Here the words came back to poetry. 

But, the word is only the tool what not is only of the 
poet's, only of his, is the problem of background of 
existence illusory, perceived as such, in the existentialism 
terms from the early 21st century . 

This is the core, the leitmotif of dozens of poems 
signed by Sorin Cerin, distributed studied, I suppose 
symbolic numerological, in each volume 77 each, neither 
more or less. 

From the seed of this idea generously sown, rises 
for the poet tired of so much, kneaded thinking: "Herbs of 
questions what float lazily over the eyelids / of the Sunset, / 
what barely can keep ajar, / in the horizon of some 
Answers, / what appear to be migrated toward the cold 
distances of the Forgetfulness. " 

The note meditative of these lyrics is not entirely 
discouraging. 


16 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


The poet is neither depressed nor anxious, because 
he has a tonic temperament. 

He always goes from the beginning with undefeated 
statements the will, to understand, without accepting, as, 
thus, may to return toward the knowledge of self. 

In poetic images rare, is outlined a kind of summary 
of poetic discourse, focused in the poetry The Hierarchy of 
the Vanity, ended in contemporaneity terms of the absurd. 

It's a way to renew what was more said, that "we eat 
absurd on bread." 

The plural indicates in poet an exponent in the name 
of man in general, "the granite" signifying the mystery 
impenetrable, of which is now facing "cane thoughtfully" 
"climbed up on the rocks of Life / we want to understand 
the granite as it is, / a reed conscious of self. 

II Demolish the pillars of Nature of the Illusion of 
Life, / trying to put in their place, / A Dream far stranger of 
ourselves. II ruined the Weakness , / ... becoming our own 
wrecks, / what wander to nowhere. II ... 

Would be the eyes of Consumer Society made only 
to/ watch the Hierarchy of the Vanities? 

Love that would deserve a comment of the nuances 
at which send the poetic images, is in the Dream and 
reality, an: " icon attached to the walls of the cold and 
insensitive, / of a cathedral of licentiousness, as is the 
Consumer Society, / which us consumes the lives / for a 
Sens what we will not him know, never. " 

Beyond the game of words, is noted, the noun 
seriously, what cancels altogether the sacredness of the 
cathedral. 

It's a transfer of meanings produced by the 
permanent revolt poured out upon the type of society we 
live in. 

Our life, the poet laments in the Feline Existential: 
"is sells expensive at the counter of the Destiny / for to 
flavor the Debauchery, / subscriber with card of pleasures, 


17 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


all right / at the Consumer Society." / ... "Empty promises / 
and have lost keys of the Fulfillment / and now make, 
Moral to the cartel of Laws / alongside the prostitutes 
politicians, of the moment ". 

Violent language, as poetic arrows thrown and 
against terrible degradation of politics, gives free course to 
the ideas, a type nihilistic rebellion, raised to the rank of 
principle. 

Absolutely current target is even more evident 
when, in the poem, the Game of the Life with Death,, is 
criminalized in much the same terms, "Consumer Society 
Famine garden, / as, great athletes, of cutting of incomes / 
hysterical and false, scales of the Policy, / us skimp 
sparingly each, Moment ... ". 

Changing the subject, vocable "moment" in relation 
to "eternity", updates a note from the arsenal of specific 
words from the language of the great existentialist thinker 
who was the mystic Kierkegaard. 

After how attitudes clearly atheist, when it comes 
to God and the church, in the poems of Cerin , update 
hardness of language, with particularities of existentialism 
of Sartre, while Mathematics of the existence and many 
other poem, us bring back into the cultural memory the 
image of that "monde casse" perceived critical by the 
frenchman Gabriel Marcel. 

Perhaps the most dense in complementary 
concepts the "existence", between the first poems of the 
first volume, is Lewdness. 

Are attempts to give definitions, to put things in 
relationship through inversion with sense, again very 
serious accusatory, like the one with address at 
"monastery". 

Sure, unhappiness of the being that writes such 
poetry, comes not only from the consciousness of the fall of 
man in the world under the divine curse, but and from what 


18 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


would be a consequence, rejection, up to the blasphemy of 
the need for God. 

The interrogation, from the poetry, Lewdness, 
which, seems that leaves to the reader the freedom of to 
give particular answers, it's a trick of the poet aware of 
what affirms, at masked mode: "The existence is a ghost 
caught between two dreams, Space and / Time./ Peace will 
always be indebted to the War with her own / weapons, 
Vanity of Democracy and Dictatorship ./ Which Lewdness 
has not its monastery and which murder /her democracy?" 

The poem continues with a new definition of 
"Existence" as a "gamble", accompanied by "Hope", never 
left at the mercy of "free will", which would give to man 
the freedom to change anything. It remains only the 
freedom of the being to judge her own existence, eternal 
fenced to can overcome the absurd. 

Nature demonstrative of the poet him condemns, 
extroversion, at excesses, that, scatters, too generous what 
has gathered hardly from the library of his own life and of 
books. 

Paradoxically, the same temperament is the source 
of power to live authentic feeling of alienation and 
accentuated loneliness, until to feel his soul as a "house in 
ruins", from which, gone, the being, fallen into 
"Nothingness", more has chance, of to be, doomed 
"Eternity". 

Remain many other comments of made at few 
words the poet's favorite, written with upper case. 

But, about, "Love", "God", "Church," "Absurd", 
"Moment and Eternity", "Silence" and "Death" maybe 
another time. 

Would deserve, because this poet is not lacked of 
inspiration so coveted by others, as wrote poet Magda 
Carneci, but he must beware of the danger of remaining an 
artifex, and yet not to step too pressed the footsteps from 


19 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Bacovia or Emil Botta, toward of not them disfigure 
through excess. 

Ana Blandiana: "The poetry of meditation on 
which a writes Sorin Cerin is not a versification of 
philosophical truths, but a interweaving of revelations, 
about these truths. And the ratio of intensity of these 
revelations and doubt from which are constructed the truths 
is precisely the philosopher's stone of this poetry. 
Moreover, secrecy of being able to fasten the lightning of 
the revelation is a problem as subtle as that of keeping solar 
energy from warm days into the ones cold. " 

PhD Professor Theodor Codreanu: "Sorin Cerin 
is a paradoxist aphoristic thinker, of, a great mobility of the 
mind, who controls masterfully the antitheses, joining them 
oxymoronically, or alternating them chiasmatic, in issues 
with major stakes from our spiritual and social life. Poetry 
from, the Free Will, is an extension of his manner of 
meditation, imbuing it with a suitable dose of kynism 
(within the meaning given to the word by Peter Sloterdijk), 
succeeding, simultaneously the performance, of to remain 
in the authentic lyricism even when blames "Ravens vulgar, 
necrophiliacs and necrophagous, of the Dreams". 

PhD Professor loan Holban "About the 
expressiveness and richness of meanings transmitted to the 
Other, by silence, Lucian Blaga wrote anthological pages. 
The poet of today writes, in Great Silences, a poetry of 
religious sentiment, not of pulpit, but, in thought with God, 
in meditation and in the streak of lightning of thought 
toward the moment of Creation. Sorin Cerin's poetry is of 
an other Cain wandering in the wilderness, keeping still 
fragments from the joy of Eden, to exit from "Vise" of the 
world, where, at the fallen man, collapses the horizon of 
soul, in the rains of fire and traces of lead. " 


20 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


PhD Professor Maria Ana Tupan : "The lyrical 
meditations of Sorin Cerin have something from the 
paradoxical mixture of despair and energy of the uprising 
from Emil Cioran's philosophical essays. The notification 
of tragicalness and grotesque of the existence, does not lead 
to psychical paralysis, but to nihilism exorcised and 
blasphemous. Quarrel with "adulterine God" - appellation 
shocking, but very expressive for the idea, of, original sin 
of ... God who must be conceived the evil world through 
adultery with Satan - receives, accents sarcastic in vignettes 
of a Bibles desacralized, with a Creator who works to 
firmament at a table of blacksmith, and a Devil in whom 
were melded all rebels hippy-rap-punk-porto-Rican: 

[...] Stars alcoholic, of a universe, greedy, paltry and 
cynical, drinking by God at the table of Creation, 

on the lachrymose heavens of Happiness, scrawled, 
with graffiti by Devil, 

If the poet has set in the poem, To a barbecue, an 
exercise of Urmuz, success is perfect. Not only, ingenious 
jumps deadly for the logic of identity from one ontological 
level to another, we admire here, but and tropism, of, a 
baroque inventiveness of an Eucharist inside out, because 
in a universe of the life toward death, the one that is broken 
is the spirit, the word, to reveal a flesh ... Deleuze, animal, 
described as the meticulous anatomical map of a medical 
student. The poet us surprise by novelty and revelation of 
the definition aphoristic, because after the first moment of 
surprise, we accept the moralizing scenery of the time, with 
a past, dead, a future alive, and a present, illusory, contrary 
to common sentiment, that the lived life is our ego 
certainly, that only the present really exists, and that the 
future is a pure hypothesis. Cerin, redefines the human 
being as, finding the authenticity in multiplication mental 
of temal reality and as existentialist project ". 


21 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


PhD Professor Mircea Muthu : "The desperation 
to find a Sens to the contemporary existence fill the poetic 
testimony of Sorin Cerin, in which the twilight of language, 
associated with "broken hourglass" of time, is, felt - with 
acuity tragic - of, "our words tortured." 

"Meditation, turned towards self itself, of "the 
mirrors of the question" or of "the eyes" fabulous, of the 
Ocean endlessly, is macerated at the same temperature 
febrile, of voltaic arc, enunciated - in short - of the phrase 
"rains of fire". 

PhD Professor Cornel Ungureanu : "Sorin Cerin 
proposes a poetic speech about how to pass " beyond ", a 
reflection and a meditation that always needs capital letters. 
With capital letters, words can bear the accents pressed of 
the author who walks, with so much energy on the realms, 
beautiful crossed by those endowed with the grace of the 
priesthood. Sorin Cerin ritualization times of the poetic 
deconstruction, if is to we understand properly the 
unfolding of the lyrics under the flag of the title. " 

PhD Professor Ion Vlad :_^Sorin Cerin has defined 
his poems from the book " The Great Silences ", " poems of 
meditation ". Undoubtedly, reflexivity is the dominant of 
his creation, chaired by interrogations, riots, unrest and 
dramatic research of SILENCE, topos of the doubts, of the 
audacity, and, of the adventure of the spirit, in the 
permanent search of the truth, and his poetry follows to an 
axiology of an intense dramatic. Is the lyric of the lucidity, 
meditation and of genuine lyricism ". 

Ph.D. Lecturer Laura Lazar Zavaleanu: 

"Intellectual formed at the school Bucharest, but sensing 
the need to claim it admiringly, from the critical model, of 
the school Cluj, where he identify his exemplary models in 


22 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


the teachers, Ion Vlad and Mircea Muthu, Sorin Cerin 
builds and the poetry intertextual, because the poet of the 
Great Silences, declares all over, his experts, identified 
here, intrinsically, with Blaga ( through philosophical 
reflection and prosodic structure, sometimes deliberately 
modeled after Poems of light) and Arghezi. The very title 
of the volume, the Great Silences, impose the imperative, 
of an implicit dialogue with the poetry of Arghezi bearing 
the same title. At the searches feverish from the Psalms of 
Arghezi, of a God called to appear, answer them here the 
interpellations indefatigably of an apostate, believer, that is 
tom in the wilderness of the thought and of image broken 
mirrored by the world declared, between love denouncer, 
and affectionate revolt, between curse incantatory and 
disguised prayer, of eternally in love, without being able, to 
decline, in reality, fervor, although the word has 
experimented, aesthetic, the whole lexicon, blasphemously 
and apocalyptic. A duplicity of salvation, in fact, that - 
shouting the drama of alienation and of introspection 
missed, as and the impotence of the meeting with the other, 
or fear of overlapping with him, in a world whose meaning 
is wandered into "darkness of the camps of ideas", at the 
interference of a time and of a space reached ' at the end of 
border gives birth, in the litany, ' a rebours, the signs of 
creation redeemed, in full feast cynical, "on the table of 
potter of love". 

PhD Professor Calin Teutisan : "Poetry of Sorin 
Cerin declaim a fatal nostalgia of the Sense. Thinking 
poetic trying his recovery, from disparate fragments, 
brought back together by labor lyrical, imagining a possible 
map reconstituted, even fragmentary, of the world, but 
especially of the being. Using of metaphors, neo-visionary, 
is context of reference of these poems, crossed, from time 
to time, of parables of the real, "read" in the key symbolic, 
but and ironical. Cynicism is entirely absent in the lyrics of 


23 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Sorin Cerin. This means that the lyrical personage, what 
speaks in this pages, namely, consciousness lyrical, put an 
ethics pressure over reality, thus forcing her to assume own 
forgotten truths. " 

PhD Professor Cornel Moraru : "Prophet of 
existential nothingness, the poet is part of category of the 
moralists, summing up in a fleeting manner, precepts 
aphoristic, and rough projections from a ecstatic vision of 
the end of the world. His meditations develops a furious 
rhetoric on theme "nonsense of Existence", although 
expressing more doubts than certainties, and questions than 
answers. The intensity of involvement in this endeavor 
lyrical, touches, at a time, odds extremes: from jubilation to 
sarcasm, and from indignation again at ecstasy ..." 

PhD Professor Ovidiu Moceanu : "Through the 
cemeteries of the dreams, volume signed by Sorin Cerin, 
poetry of the great existential questions seeks a new status, 
by building in texts which communicate underground, an 
image of man interrogative. "Cathedral of the existence" 
has her pitfalls, "Absolute truth" seems unattainable, 
"White Lilies of the truth" can kill, "if not ventilates pantry 
of mind," the poetic ego discovers rather a "God too bitter" 
... All these are expressions of a state of great inner tension, 
in which the lucidity has wounded the revelation, and has 
limited the full living of the meaning of existence. " 

PhD Professor Dumitru Chioaru : "Speech 
prophetic, philosophical or poetic? - It's hard to determine 
in which fits texts of Sorin Cerin . The author, them 
incorporates on all three into a personal formula, seemingly 
antiquated, aesthetic, but, speaking with breath of, poeta 
vates, last words before Apocalypse. An apocalypse in 
which the world desacralized and dominated by false 
values, ends in order to can regenerate through Word ". 


24 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


PhD Professor Stefan Borbely : "Spirit deeply and 
sincerely religious, Sorin Cerin desperate search for the 
diamond hidden in the darkness of the rubble, of the ashes. 
A whole arsenal of the modernity negative - cups of the 
wilderness, water of the forgetfulness, slaughterhouses, the 
feast continuous of suffering, monkey of rotten wood, etc., 
etc. - is called to denounce in his lyrics, "lethal weapons of 
the consumer society" and "the madhouse" of the alienation 
by merchantability of our everyday existence. The tone is 
apodictically, passionate, prophetic, does not admit shades 
or replicas. "The new steps of faith" are enunciated 
peremptorily as hope of the salvation collective, "divine 
light" it shimmers in, deliverer, at end, still distant of the 
torture, but on the moment, the poet seems to be 
preoccupied exclusively rhetoric eschatological, glimpsing 
decadence, resignation moral or ruins almost everywhere 
where it can to walk or look " 

Gheorghe Andrei Neagu : "Defining for, this writer 
seems to be rightfully, the doubt, as the cornerstone of his 
poems (Mistake pg.73). I congratulate the author, for his 
stylistic boldness from " From the eyes of the divine light, 
page 81, as well as from the other sins, nestled in his 
creator bosom. I think Romanian literature has in Sorin 
Cerin a writer 3rd millennium that must be addressed with 
more insistence by criticism of speciality" 

Marian Odangiu : "Lyrical poetry of Sorin Cerin is 
one, of, the essential questions: the relationship of the 
Being with the Divinity, in a world of increasingly more 
distorted by point of view of value, -and distortionary the 
same time!-, disappearance of some fundamental 
benchmarks - attracting after themselves of interrogations 
overwhelming, and infinite anxieties - absence all more 
disturbing of some Truths, which to pave the way to 


25 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Salvation, deep doubts demotivating on the Meaning of 
Life, absurd raised at the rank of existential reason, feeds 
the fear and anxieties of the poet. Such, his lyrics develop 
a veritable rhetoric of despair, in which, like an insect 
hallucinated of Light, the author launching unanswered 
questions, seeking confirmations where these entered from 
far in dissolution, sailing pained, but lucid, through images 
and metaphors elevated and convincing poignancy, builds 
apocalyptic scenarios about Life, Love and Death ..." 

Eugen Evu ; "... Books seem to be objects of 
worship - culture - own testament of a ceremonial ... of, the 
neo-knowledge, Socratic -Platonic under sign, " the General 
Governing of the Genesis " for instance. What is worth 
considered is also, the transparent imperative of the author 
to communicate in native language, Romanian. The 
loneliness attributed the Sacred, is however of the human 
being, in her hypostasis reductive, of the human condition 
.... How Vinea wrote the poet sees his ideas, or the 
mirroring in the ' room with mirrors ' of the universal 
library. A destiny, of course, personal, largely assumed, 
nota bene. In the volume, the Political, at the extreme of H. 
R. Patapievici poet is well cognizant of the problem Eliade, 
of the "fall of the human in politikon zoon"... Between 
rationalism and irrationalism, Sorin Cerin sailing on the 
Interconnection Ocean. " 


26 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


CONTENTS 

1. Angels and Immortality 

2. Death and Destiny 

3. In ourselves, of ourselves 

4. Faith and understanding 

5. The street of sou 

6. Modern slaver 

7. Pliers of clouds 

8. Flags of, Divine Fight 

9. Where do we go? 

10. Drowning 

11. Fetters without address 

12. Words and Verbs 

13. The food of cemeteries 

14. Wasted lives 

15. Steps toward God 

16. Gambling 

17. Searching the Truth of the Perfection 

18. Store of funeral furnishers 

19. The soles of death 

20. Bricks of words 


27 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


21. Laughing, hysterically 

22. Flowers of ice 

23. We owe it of Illusion of Life 

24. Absolute freedom 

25. Illusion of Life, Time and Destiny 

26. Knowledge and Existence 

27. Parallel Universes 

28. The tumult of the soul 

29. Astral Time 

30. Meet again and Truth 

31. Kiss from dawn of eternity 

32. Broken branches 

33. The hair of feelings 

34. Uncertainty and God 

35. Drought 

36. Maternity 

37. The exact time 

38. Desert of cathedrals 

39. Bet 

40. Primitive brothel 

41. Loneliness and Future 

42. The wandering, the one latter 

43. At the soles of the feelings 

44. Desert 

45. Landscape 

46. The meaning of the world 

47. Humanism and religion 

48. Circus and politics 

49. Altars of vicissitudes 

50. The Sleep of the World 

51. In my life 

52. The future cemetery 

53. Obese time 

54. Deserted port 

55. Cry of dust 

56. We come, for to go further 


28 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


57. Thirst for life 

58. Beyond the world of footsteps 

59. Love and peace 

60. Values 

61. At dawn 

62. Mistake 

63. Sculpture 

64. The powerful people of the day 

65. Showcase of Existence 

66. Becoming immortals 

67. Destiny and Life 

68. You are the God from Me 

69. The Breath of Immortality 

70. The eyes of the Divine Light 

71. Snowdrifts 

72. The darkened dawns 

73. Rains devastating and cold 

74. Meeting again 

75. If 

76. The mill of the sins 

77. At the second hand market of the mankind 

78. The money of freedom 

79. Yoke of oxen 

80. Wolves disfigured by hatred 

81. Wagers 

82. Pharaonic tombs 

83. The altered present 

84. Compromise, God and Satan 

85. It's about an age of my Time 

86. Fair of bones 

87. Steams fleshless 

88. In me 

89. The sand castle 

90. Help the God 


29 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


1. Angels and Immortality 


Is so much silence, 

on wings of my angels, 

carved in the marble of, other existence, 

where does not exists, no pain and nor sighing, 

that, neither the clocks no longer have hours or days. 

I guarded the tomb, 

of Dreams, of Hopes, of Illusions of my Life, 
to which me I dedicated my entire being, 
for to kneel defeated by Immortality, 
and not by Death. 

Sharp shards of words, 
they always hurt me, 

by bleeding my soul with their indifference, 
sad and cold, 
telling me, 

that the Paradise can not be bom than from Inferno. 

And I descended into the inferno of feelings, 
becoming creator. 


30 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


2. Death and Destiny 

The fire fangs of the Truth, 
have torn the rotted flesh of the moments, 
in the cemeteries cursed to endure death, 
of forgetfulness of everything and of all. 

Cold and ravenous reptiles, 

mirrored on the flagstones of the graves from our souls, 
wanders the heavens painful and unfortunate of the endless, 
from each, 

for to give the blessed rain of the life, 

over the tombs in which decompose, 

the bodies of the memories, 

what they have built somewhere, sometime, 

consciousness and dreams, illusions and disillusions, facts 

and happenings, 

all chasing after the broken compass of the Destiny 
of a Original Sin, 

to feed the grass of a history of a Nobody. 


31 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


3. In ourselves, of ourselves 


Weeds of images invade us the thoughts, 
which nettle us the destignation, 
for to it direct faster, 

toward, the death from, the slaughterhouse of life 

Soles nibbled by the crooked ways of the feelings, 
they carry us from increasingly barefoot, 
toward the fulfillment of the fate, 
to the grave which we it receive, 
in ourselves, 

from the increasingly naked and dejected, 
of, ... ourselves. 

Horseshoes which no more bring the luck, of long time, 
were lost by the free horses of the words, 
for to be placed as landmarks of spirituality, 
of an ephemeral existence. 


32 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


4. Faith and understanding 


I can not believe in the paint brush, 
with which God has us painted the world, 
calling it the Illusion of Life. 

Kingdoms without kings and oceans, without water, 
us are given of the life by, the death 
due to which we were born. 

Values, cultures and feelings, 
bum in the flames of helplessness, 
of to us discern own covenant, 
in the menacing waves of a memory, 
which brought us from death to life, 
for to us return back, 

drowning us with the art, of the nonsense, 
of a creation on which we can not it understand, 
than, believing. 


33 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


5. The street of soul 


From what snow, to me be built the heart, 

to no longer melt 

on the street of soul, 

of ice flowers emerged, 

in the dawn of flames, of the words, 

from the body of the eternity, 

desire of to see you again? 

How many, centuries of snow, 

full of feelings, 

to longer freeze, 

on the endless roads, 

of the heart, of the sky 

from the roulettes without fate, 

frozen in the tokens, 

of, the luck lost, 

at feet of your Longing? 

How many, question marks, 
to longer be bom, 
at the soles of a cathedral, 
of the feelings, 


34 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


of the walls dejected from us, 
so full of the saints of every moments, 
that they came to collapse, 
over the altars of our souls? 


And how many dreams to it more be crushed, 

on the cold asphalt, of the wanderings, 

of some tears of words, 

deleted with the back, 

of some dead palms, of the Destinies, 

what, would be forgotten of, the eyes drawn by the clouds, 

of the torrential rains, of, glances, 

they suddenly started from serenity of the smile of the 

summers, of desires, 

which us thundered and flashed with feelings. 

Torrents of twilights, 

they bleed on the cheek dried of longing, 

of a memory, so impoverished, 

by, the snows of the steps, saved, 

of coldness of death, 

hidden in bodies of dreams, 

exhausted by the divine forgiveness, 

of the ones so forgotten, 

by, the divine nature of the worlds, 

what they seem to end, 

in the game given by life, 

to death. 


35 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


6. Modern slavery 


Mud of feelings is uncoil, 

under the cumbersome wheels of the Time , 

what us spins the life, 

in the carousel of sufferings, 

until, becomes dizzy totally, 

into the arms of death. 

Altars without faiths, 

stand hanging in the straps of the Destinies, 
tom obelisks, of the carnal love, 
sold on the stand of the supply and demand, 
with discounts, 

especially by the religious celebrations of saints, 
who they chose to prostitute in the icons, 
of a society of modem slavery. 


36 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


7. Pliers of clouds 


Bodies, of words, 

they stand killed, at the street corner of soul 
which is imbued the blood, 
of the sunset from us. 

Pliers of clouds, 

pull out merciless the molar teeth, of the sky, 
who has no longer with what, 
to eat, the endless, 
starved, 

laments the rain, 
what will no longer can to gnaw, 
the dust, of the our foreheads, 
for to them wash of memories. 


37 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


8. Flags of, Divine Light 


It seems thunder of applause, 
deafen the earth of creation, 
of which we are made, 
when, 

the hoofs of splash frozen, 
from our bodies 

they hit us the horizon of passions. 

Flags multicolored of wishes, 

irradiates us with the scepter of Divine Light, 

wanting to wrap us with happiness, 

but they find only darkness and cold, 

on the cobblestone alleys of lives, 

what they want to find their meaning, 

up to, the gates, 

locked and rusted of the cemeteries, 
of, the hopes. 


38 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


9. Where do we go? 


Where to go, 

from where we come and why we have icons? 

A life without icons and would lose meaning, 

because painting of the soul, 

would no longer have in what to be framed, 

would become a mere image, 

what, would seem without content, 

beginning from nowhere and ending nowhere, 

how, actually, is the reality of existence, 

without the veils of the Illusion of Life, 

which, without icons, 

would no longer have, where to enshroud, 

for to give us, the confidence and the Free Will, 

from the wheel of fortune, 

this bizarre world. 


39 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


10. Drowning 


Frozen bridges of the peace with ourselves, 
they crumbles in hearts, 
leaving to fall in the whirlpools of life, 
thoughts, hopes, memories, virtues, feelings, 
for to drown, 

in domestic water and dirty of the society. 

Moments shipwrecked, 

they try to find their shores, 

which crumbles always looking for happiness, 

leaving to flow the blood of wounds of a world, 

on which we not us have chosen a. 


40 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


11. Letters without address 


The pitchers of the passions, 

they stand, ready to is shed 

over the fire of religions, 

extinguishing the flame, 

what he was ready to melt 

the billows of the feelings, 

to turn them in molten lead, 

of the weapons ready to rend, 

the meat of the horizons, 

which would more be remained to the world, 

in gift from the God. 

Letters without address 

in which are written our destinies, 

they are carried by the winds of the eternity, 

what beat with the cold of the oblivion, 

on the alleys of cemeteries, from the souls, 

which somewhere, sometime, 

they were born and, have loved. 


41 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


12. Words and Verbs 


Wings of ice are crumbling, 

on the sky of the words, 

so cold that they have hardened their hearts, 

and the blood them has become, 

a rink of the silence, 

on which slips the despair. 

Deaf voices tremble downed 
by, the drifts too heavy of the verbs, 
which can no longer lead, 
their own actions and meanings, 
in a sentence, of the death. 


42 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


13. The food of cemeteries 


Sharp claws rips away the steps, 

which wandered toward fulfillment, 

seines, of, moments, 

lurk the feelings, 

for to them be fished 

in the muddy water of life, 

and then, 

to be carried, 

to the cannery of the death, 
for to be sold as, memories, 
as food, of the cemeteries 
for those who live the present, 
they feed with the past, 
which, them supplies the future. 

Trees still green, 
of feelings and hopes, 
they stand cut, 
packaged and preserved, 
at road side of the Destiny 
for to be carried, 

in the cold of end, of, world, of hopelessness, 


43 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


and sold, 

for to us warm, the Vanity, 
which always us asks, 
payment of rent of to exist, 
in this world. 


14. Wasted lives 


Rivers of unfulfilled dreams, 

have furrowed the lands of deep sleep, 

of the souls of the Illusions of Life, 

what they seem to no longer wake up, never, 

in the dawn of Truth. 

Creepy voices, 

being on the verge of drown, 

still struggling, 

with their own vain moments, 

trying to reach, 

at one of the shores, 

of the good or even of evil, 

of the beautiful or of the ugliness, 

to request a new Destiny, 

seeing their wasted lives, in the threshold of death. 


44 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


15. Steps toward God 


Did you know that and the Apocalypse 
has its steps, toward inferno or paradise? 

That happiness can be bought with illusions 
in an illusory world? 

Only the Truth of the eternity of a Moment 
can not be for sale, 

because he incarnates more than anything, 
he is the true face through which we can, 
to Him we perceive on the God. 


45 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


16. Gambling 


The rigged dice of the faith, 
are thrown to the beggars of luck, 
on the rotting table and silent of death 
where eyes prying, of the suffering, 
more seeks for the winning numbers, 
for the uplift of other and other churches, 
of, empty words and Illusions of Life. 

The stifling smoke of souls vain, 

floods the room from the casino of the souls 

where the voices seem rather cursed, 

announces a new pulling at the rusty roulette, 

what, will more born a new day, 

the same of lost and indebted, as all other, 

to, the Existence, 

the owner of the gambling, of the Destiny. 


46 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


17. Searching the Truth of the Perfection 


I searched, the Perfection, 

being convinced that the world has its part of truth. 

I gaze the absoluteness of the sky of life, 
and I can not understand why falls helplessly, 
over the horizon of wishes, 
without wanting ever, 
to understand them or fulfill them. 

I immerse myself in the dust of my body, 
full of needs, 

given, house of the soul by a God, 
on whom I not Him have understood, never, 
why he was constrained 
he to give birth and to let sin in the world, 
when he could so well, to not a do? 

What I understand? 

is that there where you seek the Truth, 

you'll find in the end, 

after lies and other Illusions of the Life 

the Death, 


47 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


alongside the own God. 


18. Store of funeral furnishers 

The world is 

store of funeral furnishers 
of the Love, 

from where customers is sourcing fully, 
with ribbons sad of mourning colors, 
on which are written, texts of love, 
addressed the ones forsaken, 

from which is not missing the eternal: "In memory of ..." 

of the one or another feeling, 

seated at horned crown, 

by other and other ribbons, 

collected throughout life, 

for to be carried with the hearse of moments, 

to the cemetery of the passions, 

without whom, the Existence, 

it would be much poorer. 

The undertakers of thoughts poke up, 
through the graves of the memories, 
have digged deep into the dust, 
from which the God created us, 
hoping that maybe sometime will find, 
the reason for which, 
we can not learn, never, 


48 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


we to die as is written, 
in their Bibles of undertakers, 
where death is a life, 

what deserve beautified with coffins of hopes, 
how more new and more expensive 
placed in cathedrals luxurious, 
of madness of to be human. 


19. The soles of death 


Strains of illusions maintain us the days, 
what they will fall like some leaves rusty 
from the calendar of the Destiny, 
at the soles of Death. 

The steps plumbed by the avarice of Time 
they sink into the morass, 
from which the God us has built the bodies, 
to delight, 

with the suffering, despair and other hardships of ours, 
those devoid of relief of the eternal flight of eternity. 

The ivy of senses 
still clings, 
by the moldy walls, 
of the cathedrals of love, 
hoping at the Afterlife. 


49 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


20. Bricks of words 


The kings of tears of so many religions, 

and they made the palaces of the laughter of crystal 

from the weeping the people. 

Bricks of words, 

they stay full of dampness of the passions, 

to build new fences of eternity, 

which to protect us from the absoluteness of the truth, 

praising the Illusion of Life. 

The craftsmen sprightly with names of clerics, 
runs lively looking of mortar financial 
which to they cement, the bricks of words, 
keeping it away from the miseries of the world, 
with empty promises, 
hanging of their foreheads Machiavellian, 
that people will get rid of all misfortunes 
through and more suffering. 


50 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


21. Laughing, hysterically 


How much peace to have had the God in His soul, 

that and wanted a creation, 

with so much vengeance, sins, and passions? 

How much had to is be bored, 

if all the churches, of the days, 

must be raised with suffering, disillusions and blood? 

What pain would him be drave, 
to give us finally, 

even and the laughing, hysterically of ourselves, 
then when we look at the Original Sin, 
how it hide in the patterns of our genes? 


51 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


22. Flowers of ice 


Not exists day of the breathing of this world, 
that to does not end, 

in the twilight what gives birth at the night of the sleep, 
whereby Illusion of Life, 
us hide the Absolute Truth. 

The flowers of field from our experiences, 
they will turn into the flowers of ice, 
from the blood of the sunset 
what will be collected by Death, 
for to be given of the Time ardent, 
what boil after a new day. 

Once they arrived in the arms of fire of Time 

the flowers of ice will melt, 

becoming, 

the water of life that will give birth to new and new 
Destinies. 


52 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


23. We owe it of Illusion of Life 


The world of the Knowledge 
is a letter without beginning or end, 
because we do not know, 

from where we come and neither where us will take, 
the Absolute Truth, 

after we will forsake the Illusion of Life. 

We wander, 

through the rotted flesh of the moments of the death , 
or the Time, 

will remain just a memory forgotten of the Eternity? 

We will us longer ever wondered, 
who we are if we will no longer be, 
owe it of Illusion of Life with a death? 


53 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


24. Absolute freedom 


Steps of dreams, 
quick of waterfalls, 
they go unwieldy, 

through, the meat, of the season of heart 

what can no longer, neither to hurt 

so deep these have thundered , 

in the beatings frail of the blood, 

what moisten with the sweat of the gaze into space, 

his temples 

of the Destiny. 

Rivers milked from the sacred cow of the clouds, 
flood the dust spiritual 
of the Free Will, 

washing him with the Illusion of Life, 
as to we can believe that exists 
Absolute Freedom. 


54 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


25. Illusion of Life, Time and Destiny 


Grains from the sand of the Eternity, 
they pay the tribute of the suffering, 
of the Hourglass of the Creation 
in the name of Existence, 
for us to be, 

an awareness with times and spaces 
which knows that the shore of birth, 
is washed by the waves of the water of life, 
and the shards of the happiness, 
sometimes hurt you, more than death. 

The fog of wrinkles of future 
is inundated, by the past gloomily 
so silent, 

that, turns to stone, 
freezing, 

every moment of the present, 
in the Eternity, 

trying to give us the Illusion of Life, 
that exists enough Time, 
to we can become aware of 
Destiny and Death. 


55 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


26. Knowledge and Existence 


How much courage would had God, 
to leave us the feeling, 

knowing that the Existence without awareness, 
can not be, 

that an unknown Universe, 
does not exist. 

Everything is reduced to knowledge, 
and if it disappears, 
the whole world is falling apart, 
with birth and her death with all. 

It would be a shame not to we know, 
or we prefer, 

the Original Sin of the Knowledge 
for to exist? 


56 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


27. Parallel Universes 


Into the bustle of the parallel Universes, 
are break the spaces and dreams of God, 
alike as the glasses at bacchic parties, 
for to avert the bad luck. 

Dimensions on which the mind can not them conceive, 
they play at roulette of fortune, 
our own Destiny. 

Doings and destructions 
knowledge, and ignorance, 
life and death, 

all are found on the stand forsaken, of the Creation, 
who can no longer pay its debts to Destiny, 
no matter how much sufferings and disillusionments would 
gather. 


57 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


28. The tumult of the soul 


Swimming through the turbid water of the future, 

not knowing how deep may be the suffering, 

of to I not you see again, 

sense, of my Existence, 

the one bom for to you conceive, 

a star alongside Destin, 

to me shine the way toward Death. 

I look toward, the sky broken in shards of longing, 

which they hurt the horizon, 

full of the blood of questions, 

what floods my way toward you, 

shore, of the happiness, 

so distant, 

by the suffering and my despondency, 
that, seems that I will not him ever touch, 
so much shipwrecked, for me is 
the Moment of the eternity, 
who would want to embrace you, 
with all the tumult of my soul. 


58 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


29. Astral Time 


Has frozen the ice of the Word in me, 
by going among the silences, of end, of, world, 
of the gaze of a sky, 

what it seems that and he tore any meaning, 

of the shirt of the horizon on which him has dressed, 

somewhere, sometime defiant, 

with the thought at the Eternity, 

on which he a believed endless, 

not knowing that it could break anytime, 

in the eyes heavy, 

of lead, 

of clouds running on the vault of a soul, 
what still it longs after the stars 
for which was cursed, 
to, not them more see, never, 
divine radiance, 

what brings back the past of the Universe, 
in the present of the vanity, of today, 
where, you no longer exist, 
beside me. 


59 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


30. Meet again and Truth 

I shipwrecked on the sea of the memories, 
alongside the silent sirens of the Moments, 
what seem to be forgotten the songs of the spells, 
forever. 

The billows of, hopes are crumble, 
on the foreheads frowning and petrified of the Truth 
what seems pervades the whole Universe between us 
barefoot, 

and the shards reckless of questions, 
them cut the soles, 

bleeding, with the tears of the rains of the mourning 
dreams, 

what still us fall into the knees of the fates, 
imploring us to us meet again. 


60 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


31. Kiss from dawn of eternity 


Dry twigs and abandoned, 

stay related by the wet trunk of the Memories, 

similar of the albums of the love, 

with yellowed photos, 

by remorse what seem, 

of a Time of the nobody, 

to whom it comes to snatch his hair of all moments, 
remaining in the drawers of the hidden thoughts, 
by, the daily, insanitary, of the present, 
only for to forget, 

of the leaves of the summer which they have given, 

the boundlessness of a fulfillments, solar, 

what now was transformed, 

in the dust of the tear, of forgetfulness, 

of the longing, heartbreaking, 

of a kiss from dawn of eternity, 

seeped at the corner of your eyes. 


61 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


32. Broken branches 


I wandered into the night inside me, 

I try to search the dawn of your heart , 

whose steps of memories 

leaves deep scars in the zodiac of my thoughts, 

filled by the roots of the splashes of unrest, 

when it's raining with Destiny, 

over, the broken branches, 

from the trunk of the happiness 

of my life. 

Feast of words in the wind, 

carried chaotic toward nowhere, 

on the deserted streets of the soul, 

hitting me with the insistence, misunderstood, of death, 

by me myself. 


62 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


33. The hair of feelings 


On the asphalt of happiness 

nobody no more occludes the sentimental pits, 
in which have frozen the longings misunderstood, 
what they will no more fly never, 
beyond of, the hair of your feelings, 
now, 

so trimmed and hairdressing, 
that no one will ever know, 
how was when alongside me, 
it became carried, 
towards all cardinal of our souls, 
so tangled, 

that not even a barber as the Time, 
it would not be succeeded to give it a concrete form, 
to the space which no longer existed, 
between me, thee and Destiny ... 


63 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


34. Uncertainty and God 


I me break from me, 
sheet of paper, 

speckled with the Original Sin, 

on which God wrote to me the Destiny, 

and later to crush Him, 

under the steps of a society, 

so confused and ill, 

that does not know if the next, day, 

will longer belong to Time or the Death, 

uncertainty with spices, of cemetery, of the values, 

drowned in a moral, equally sickening, 

such are the idols what they a build, 

with their forked tongues of venomous snakes, 

who sharing the Truth after whim, 

of the petty interests and obscure, 

of drone greedy after a God, 

painted after their, image and likeness, 

of, subhuman garbage. 


64 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


35. Drought 

There's so much drought in smiles 

in this world of vanity, 

that even the green muscles of the memory, 

were dried on the longing flagstones, 

on the tombs of cemeteries of hope. 

The internecine sun of the policy, 

is burning with the flame of carelessness, 

from the cathedrals, of thoughts, 

kneaded, leavened, baked, 

what they learned us sometime 

how to we die, 

and now to show us the way, 

toward oasis of the Illusion of life, 

where we hope to more find the water, 

which to bring us the fulfillment. 


65 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


36. Maternity 


Maternities of moments, 
torched by morals, 
they beget the future abortions, 
what they will be studded the society, 
of the Living Dead of the feelings 
from our thoughts and dreams. 

Coffins of words 
they stand strung and silent, 
at the gates of happiness, 
for to retrieve, 

the newborns of our passions 
Prince Charming of happiness, 
who they will no longer be beautiful, 
never, 

but, equally decomposed, 
as well as any corpse of the Destiny, 
bestowed by God, 
of Original Sin. 


66 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


37. The exact time 


Watches of, glances 

with the dials of the dreams broken, 

they gaze through the steamed shards of the souls 

the blood of the carnal longings sunset, 

on which would want to him cut, 

as then to gush, 

on faces full of profane, 

of the wrinkles what them crossing the times, 

toward death. 

Hours of increasingly accurate, 
they sit climbed in the tree of life, 
for to harden us once and for all, 
any freedom of the moment, 
of to be ourselves, 
the ones confused, 

by the disease of the consumer society, 

which us consume, 

on ourselves, 

day by day, 

hour by hour, 

life by life. 


67 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


38. Desert of cathedrals 


Angel wings, 

they extol the wilderness from us, 
through the desert of cathedrals of love, 
which they us kneel the souls, 
with the promise of the Hereafter, 
what can be better than the one of today, 
if we do not them inquire, the God, 
of the all-giving, all-powerful, 
why? 

Could we not know without sin? 

If God knows, he sins? 

Could be wrong God, sinning with us? 

Not to be knew the God, that he will err or did it on 
purpose? 

In fact who and what is God? 

Is not all that we can not be? 


68 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


39. Bet 


I seek you Divine Light, 

through the darkness of this life, 

which seems to have lost its own Destiny, 

at the play table of a God, 

who has not longer stopped, from to bet, 

with the whole, Time of the world, 

paid and rewarded, 

with so many, 

sufferings, abuses, separations, vanities, 
with hearts what seem to fall, 
in the abyss of the nothingness of the vanity 
forever. 

Autumns withered by kisses, 
profane and lascivious, 
want to be spring, 

on the platform of the prostitution of dreams, 
of the Illusion of Life. 


69 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


40. Primitive brothel 


The money of the moments, 

are spent by the Vulgare Instincts, 

who robber at the corner of the Prostitution Street, 

where is the primitive brothel, 

with the name of Religion, 

which always has wide open gates, 

for those who are merciful, 

with the coffins of the mercy, 

from which will be supported, 

both the girls who dancing in priestly garb, 

as well as the cemeteries, of Truths, 

decomposed and rotten, 

of a world, 

whose meaning, 

even and the God forgot Him, 

when he thinks at the Death and Destiny. 


70 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


41. Loneliness and Future 


When all the dreams of my life, 

they will bring you into the palm of love worked, 

by the moments in which you were the God of the being, 

which I will never know. 

Snowfalls of wings what fall, torn, 

by the flames in which we burned our Destinies, 

the lives, at the gates of the cemeteries, of, feelings, 

found again in a kiss of the smoke of Existence, 

in which we have lost, 

forever the glances blinded, 

of ourselves. 

I was a heart that no longer recognized Time, 
in which we bathed our dreams, 
that became nightmares, 
in loneliness where neither the infinite, 
no longer exists in us, 

those who were imprisoned forever in the freedom, 
what us fly, the Present, 
of the kisses and meetings, 
without clocks, days or years, 

71 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


where we expected the Future, 

not knowing us that he was dead long ago than the ancient 
times, 

of our souls. 


42. The wandering, the one latter 


I was going toward the star of the misunderstood, 

thinking that will lead me, 

toward the wandering, the one latter, 

of the Requiem, of the Divine Light, 

saved, from the flames, 

of the love, in front of which we have kneel, 

falsifying my the dice of Destiny, 

through promises given to Time, 

whose meaning had become Death. 

Paths, wretch of luck, 

they hit me, with the lost labyrinths, 

in the pockets patched, of the Future, 

who are still begging, 

on the street of my Destiny, 

the Life, 

of the days, of our love, 
from whose breast, I lost you, 
forever. 


72 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


43. At the soles of the feelings 

Do not tell me that the clouds of the quarrels, 
can not weep their rains which wash us the palms, 
beaten by the sweats of the labors of a Destiny, 
who ran us, 

towards the horizons of blood elapsed, 
at the soles of the feelings, 
where we kneeled, too, 
hitting us of Oblivion. 

And I digged deep into the nature of the words, 

I falling exhausted by the weight of the rocks, 

that still longer separate us, 

of commas, verbs and meanings, 

what it was snowing, on the mountains of love, 

which we had to cross them, 

for to discover, 

how high our souls can be. 


73 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


44. Desert 


Bridges of glances stay lost, 
trying to unite, 

the infinite of the forgetfulness with the finite of the 
retrieval, 

in a metamorphosis of the Illusion of Life, 
always green and full of questions, 
whose answers become, the misunderstood divine, 
of the our human condition, 
of to be a shadow, 

in the solar desert thirsty for happiness, 
crossed by the caravans of the Moments, 
toward the horizons of the decomposition. 

Sand dunes, 

shake in the ancestral writhing, 

of the death, from before birth, 

searching for the precious hourglass, souls, 

to give birth to new Times, 

draining the greatness of eternity, 

in the tiny senses, 

of the Knowledge and awareness, 

of this world, 


74 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


what will become people? 


45. Landscape 


Wings of flint hits the sky of the hearts, 
igniting them the rusty candle, 
from the forsaken cemetery of the dreams. 

Giant gates unbind the Boundlessness, 
chained until now by the human condition, 
for to be given to the Death. 

Armies of drops of the thoughts, 
are marching in honor of the rain of Destiny, 
what washing the face of life dusty by vanities and 
suffering. 

Greyhound, crippled and naive, 

wants to catch the train of the happiness, 

barely crawling through the garbage of the inferno of this 

world. 


75 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


46. The meaning of the world 


Why justice becomes vanity, 
the paradise turns into inferno, 
and happiness, 
the millstone of feeling? 

How many passions will resurrect the religions of nature, 

for to we learn to die, 

so as th e Existence demands us? 

For how much time, sins can be defeated, 
of self-proclaimed, well, 
which leads us only toward evil? 

Who knows how many vain illusions we longer have to 
defeated, 

for we to understand us, 

the meaning of the world in which we live, 

if this still exists? 

Which, knowledge may be aware, 
only through the true and not by the false, 
which has nor a link with the Absolute Truth, 


76 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


but only with the Illusion of Life? 


47. Humanism and religion 


Saints of the non-winning dice of the religions, 
they still open a casino, of fame, 
with falsified altars and icons for winning , 
where all believers of the games of life, 
will be able to fill the boxes of the mercy, 
with new and new Moments, 
from more and more expensive. 

The sick worlds that grind our destinies, 

at the mill of the political blissfulness , 

of parliaments of jackals, hyenas or other living thing, 

acquainted with culinary art, 

of verbal carrions in putrefaction, 

what were sometime smiles, glances, bodies, steps, 

on the cold alleys of Creation, 

too bored and replete, 

of, the stench of the water of life, 

that became a domestic water, 

once leaked from obligatory and original sins, 

of the beings who still believed that are human. 


77 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


48. Circus and politics 


The sinister laughter of Creation, 
invented the art of the circus of politics, 
where the clowns of the unforgettable moments, 
they make somersaults among pompous phrases, 
applauded at the scene opened by, 
a crowd satisfied with the crumbs of the promises, 
of to devour in one day, 
the same sinister carrions, 

like and the beasts who make their dressage numbers, 

in the manege gnawed by obedience, 

of society of consumption, 

where every man is consumed, 

more and more lonely, 

abandoned, 

on the stall with shop windows, broken, 
of the Existence. 


78 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


49. Altars of vicissitudes 


By what stars have traveled the atoms of the blood, 

until they get the feeling from us, 

those who are rejected by God at creation, 

and given on nothing, 

to the sins of being men? 

Altars of vicissitudes wash us the chains of the dreams, 
who have given us the slavery of liberty, 
of to believe in everything we want, 
to eventually receive only Death. 

The hypocritical faces of cherubim of the love, 

what seem cold and insensitive statues, 

they are watching us from behind the paradisiac shields of 

other worlds, 

from where shoot us with vulgar promises, 

so sacred, of the profane in us, 

of to believe, and to not research, 

the crystal globe in which God, 

he guessed us somewhere sometime, the Future. 


79 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


50. The Sleep of the World 


Worries and nightmares seasoned with uncertainties, 
a perfect recipe for the sleep, 
of to live in this world of Illusion of Life, 
between two deaths, 

the one before birth and the one after life. 

Perhaps this consistent and lucid dream, 

we have him while in another world, 

we sleep deeply, 

for to wake us up there, 

after we will die here, 

at dawn in which we will us wipe out, 

the dark circles of the memory of this weird life. 

Maybe some of us, 

will want to sleep longer, 

regretting that they woke up, 

while others will be happy to have escaped, 

by the nightmare of this world, 

and how many will they not be so? 


80 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


51. In my life 


Hit, I got up, 

over the sky of my life, 

without to carry my clouds of despair, 

beside me. 

I've always been a train station, 

where train of the parting was just a Moment, 

and me, 

the one who let him to start, 

toward new and new places from my soul. 

To can look from the dark smile of fate, 

I needed more Truth than anyone, 
saved by the life of My Original Sin, 
which I never paid. 

And yes, I waited you, before me with a Death, 

who would tell me how much love, 

could still die beyond regrets, 

smiles or other lights or shadows, 

from the Destiny of my life. 


81 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Who am I beyond me myself, 
aside from the endless, which is just now learning, 
why the eternity of love must live, 
on the rags stall where nobody can its pay, 
the maternity fee of the Immortality, 
which I believed it on the Word, 
and who rented me, her life and her eternity? 


Only the meaning of the eternity has given me momentum, 
because she was free of charge at the gates of my life, 
thirsty and torn by death I drank her soul, 
which has me comprised my birthday. 

And I have forsaken the death of separation from myself, 
where you were the Moment whose Destiny, I was to 
regret him, 

when you kissed my fulfillment, on which not even, 
the Sun of my Destiny would never have done it, 
no matter how much. Heaven, would have been around 
him. 

And I loved you how only the Longing, 
he can shed his tears, 
to the Water of Life from his heart, 
what still beat the cliffs of the memory, 
with your soul. 

Then I decided to break from me myself, 
on the way of before birth, 
what would have brought me into a dream, 
on which upon awakening, 

I could no longer deciphered it, 

82 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


without us, 

becoming the star, at which we dreamed of, 
both. 


52. The future cemetery 

I was so alone, 

without the tear of your being, 

that I drowned in the soul of the roots, 

from which you have become, 

the Princess of the Dreams, of my Time. 

You know so well that I was born, 
that I to learn by heart, my Death, 
to I will not mistake, not even a strophe, 
from the piece of the life what was given to me, 
of this world. 

I was so much Divine Light, 

that even and my birth has wondered, 

if it is good to die once with the Time, 

what us destroyed our Eternity of before, of to be, 

dust with breath of the future cemetery. 


83 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


53. Obese time 


The rusty and decomposed arches of the Knowledge, 

can barely support their Time, 

increasingly obese, 

of when the harvests of vain things, 

sufferings, vanities, prides, 

disorientations, greeds, lies, 

thefts, scams, robberies and crimes, 

have reached new social records, 

and their price at the Market of Life, 

has decreased so much, 

that there are no Moments, 

who to can not afford them, 

anytime, at any time, 

from the sacredness of the day or the profane of the night. 


84 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


54. Deserted port 


Often we are a deserted port, 
without nor a ship, 

even being and him, of the madness of windmills, 

where seems that never is not happen nothing, 

what stay abandoned at the edge of cathedral of the hope, 

who wants to believe in the miracle, 

of to see once and once the masts, 

of the waves of feelings and emotions, 

on which only the mysteries of the happening can give 

them to you. 

The seagulls of the hearts fly to nowhere, 

lost through the endless pockets of a sky, 

too greedy with all that is left of longing, 

the devourer and sadistic, 

looks toward new horizons, 

which no one will never be able to touch them, 

in the bloody horizons of Illusion of Life. 


85 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


55. Cry of dust 


Why God created us, 

cry of dust, 

willow disheveled, 

full of remorse of the absurd, 

which shades the dirty water of Illusion of Life, 

for to wash the long hair of the Moments, 

fallen and, decayed, 

in the mud of the bodies? 

How much holiness to exist in society's brothels, 
where our destinies are sold, 
as company ladies, 

to any Banknotes with profane insignia, 
of an old and libidous bank, 
anointed with all the evils of the earth, 
who sells and put in pledge, 
love, feelings, absolutely anything, 
at the price of the lottery of the luck, 
baptized by God with name of the Happening. 


86 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


56. We come, for to go further 


At the edge of Truth, 
you can never find the love, 
which will never know to tell you, 
where it comes from and where it goes, 
just like the being, 

who is born from nothingness and goes toward nowhere, 
destinations, 

which were sold the most expensive, 

in the history of mankind, 

on the stalls of religions, 

on behalf of which, 

crimes often became a duty of honor, 

and the soul murderers of the Illusion of Life, 

some saints only good, to be painted, 

on the cold and damp walls of the churches in ourselves, 

those who we continue to come for to go further. 


87 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


57. Thirst for life 


I shipwrecked through the granite jungle of the absurd, 
wanting to become the stonemason of Illusion of Life, 
for to carve new and new feelings, 
on which to expose them in the stone menagerie, 
of the soul of the tumult from me, 
trying to get out at shore, 
dumbfounded by the cries of everyday beasts, 
with bloody fangs of the prey desire, 
of some new gutters of moments, 
through which the water of life drains 
so far away, 
that every time, 
surely, 

without any error of the God, 

we reach in the mysterious arms of Death, 

thirsty for ourselves, 

by, the question, 

if we were really, 

a shadow of Illusion of Life, 

or neither even that? 


88 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


58. Beyond the world of footsteps 


All waterfalls, 
of my feelings, 
it leak, 

in the sea of your soul, 
on which my longing sails 
carried by the waves of destiny, 
alongside which, 
make a cross, 

in the cold cemetery of separation, 

of beyond of the world of the footsteps, 

what have even lost their ways, 

which have met us, 

somewhere sometime, 

the birth of a world, 

of our star. 

Neither the darkness of the Universe, 
could not oppose , 
to the Divine Light, 
what rises, 

from the infinity and eternity of love, 
which now seems that, to has nor been born, 


89 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


ever. . 
Why? 


59. Love and peace 


It's so cold, 

in the smile of the desert, 

from the round dance without song, 

of the happiness, 

that, they have frozen, 

even and dreams. 

Only the crickets of death, 
of some memories, 
are heard strange and vulgar, 
from the graves dug, 
in the dust of our bodies. 

The peaks of the peace churches, 
they stay inclined, ready to collapse, 
over the cemeteries full of loves, 
who rest in peace. 


90 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


60. Values 


Crimes, suffering, mourning, death, 
famine, sickness, despair, 
how much price has put God on us 
when he created us? 

Wishes, hopes, dreams, 
delusions, vanities, illusions, 
all to be able to save us, 
by whom, for what, and why? 

Demands, creations, miracles, 
numbers, laws, money, 
until where we will number, 
the sufferings and humiliations, 
of the values? 

Where? 

Nowhere. 


91 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


61. At dawn 


Dawns of ink, wilderness, 
wait, hunchbacked of Time, 
the pen of the day, 
which, it will soften, 
in their hearts, 
for to write, 

new happiness or sadness, 

with palms beaten, 

by the works of the Destiny. 

Spells and disenchantments are heard, 
from the night of the fate, 
what seems that does not want to leave, 
in the odyssey of forgetfulness, 
where we will reach with all. 


92 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


62. Mistake 


The silence, before of the storm, 
of the wrong creation of the God, 
was called the Nothingness or Peace, 
the Happening or Chaos? 

The venomous struggle of the Knowledge, 
really to be wrong the path what it was destined her, 
reaching to the Man, 
just Incidentally? 

How should the verb of creation be called? 

To be? 

Or Was It? 

Maybe it Will Be! 

Neither one nor another, 
because there is nothing in reality. 


93 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


63. Sculpture 


I turned me the face of the moment, 
toward the soles of your smile, 
who have crushed my future, 
trampling him with the weight of the memory, 
of the heaven of my heart that has remain to me, 
to beat my Destiny, 
tired of so much loneliness, 
slain by the multitudes of the glances, 
which spy me, 
with their souls of stone, 
from which no one will sculpt, 
never, 

the statue of my dreams, 
which to resemble with you. 

How many drops from the cold rains of autumn, 

will number the springtime, 

of the oppressive and drowned hopes, 

in the blood of the sunsets steep, 

elapsed on the foreheads of the Time, 

who has forgotten us forever, 

destignation? 


94 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


64. The powerful people of the day 


The star of the wings of my birth, 
banishes my eclipse of the life, 
toward the season of the retrieval, 
by me myself. 

Flowers of ice, 

adorn the vase of the prestigious words, 

of the powerful people of the day 

who flies in the flocks, 

for to discover new orchards of values, 

as then to destroy them, 

by placing them nonchalantly, 

on the everyday scarecrow, 

of the consumer society, 

with political press names. 

The worms of multicolored and cheerful silk, 
have polished the claws of the powerful people, 
with the glow of the larvae from the microphones of the 
moment, 

what will weave, the costumes of the lies at fashionable, 
with a plumage, of the verbs, 


95 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


increasingly more mottled, 

illuminating the cold and deaf nights, 

of those many and oppressed, 

who have lost all their harvest from orchards. 


65. Showcase of Existence 


I have often sought the water of life, 

in the endless ocean, 

of death that surrounds us, 

the Destiny, 

finally finding out, 

the shore desolated by empty words, 

of the inferno from us, 

the desert burnt by the unforgiving sun, 

of the despondency of the beaten palms, 

by the bad luck of becoming the dipper, 

from which I to sip the so desirable liquid, 

from what should have been the life, 

and not an illusory shadow of her. 

Lessons venomous, 

are taught by the snakes of fashionable politics, 
everything must be in perfect condition, 
to be able to be stolen, 

labels of the dreams and the packagings of the destinies, 
they asked to be colored as bright as possible, 
more attractive, 

to be exposed in the showcase of Existence, 


96 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


no matter what the content, 

which anyway no longer interested anyone, 

being always delivered to the Death. 


66. Becoming immortals 


A known nothingness exists, 

no longer being, 

that huge gap of the tears, 

rained from the clouds of the Destiny, 

on the grave stone of Hope, 

becoming the diamond of the Longing, 

sitting on the wedding ring of the Remembrance, 

of your heart, 

what beats the heaven of my thoughts, 
which and meets again, 
the dust of body of the words, 
what united us, 

in the summer desolated by the rust of autumn, 
thundering with passions and flashing with remorse, 
we even reached and at happiness, 
even if it was at the end of the Universe, 
which we enlighten, 

with the kisses and hugs of the Moment, 
whose Eternity we sipped a, 
becoming immortals. 


97 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


67. Destiny and Life 

You could fight with my angels of pitch, 

becoming immortals through the mist of the streets with 

names of love? 

Really, to be you, the feeling which to exist in death from 
me, 

the one gone of before being created, 
by a God, in which I never believed in? 

Spasmodic smiles, break the churches of the soul, 
on which history wants him more defeated than the Time, 
of all the senses of this world, 
blessed with love and Destiny. 

Ink rivers of Despair, 
flow towards love, 
drowning her with me, 
so much, I have meant, 
the pen killed by the fingers, 
great, cold and harsh of the Destiny, 
who could no longer write us, 
the Life. 


98 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


68. You are the God from Me 


Only the flesh of dreams, 

is requested in the showcases of Love, 

even if the nightmares, 

are much more expensive, 

than, 

all the lives together, 

of those afflicted, 

by the births in the crystal manger, 

of the Divine Light, 

from the heaven of our thoughts. 

And I began to cut, 

butcher of words in the wind, 

all your whispers and your weaknesses, 

which now can not wake up in the dawns, 

of the thoughts of the longing from me, 

the one thirsty for the endlessness, 

of the eternity from your heart, 

wind hit, 

by the sanctuary of the blood of the Words, 
who sculpts to me, 
your face and likeness, 


99 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


becoming the God from me 


69. The Breath of Immortality 


If the witches of life would us charm the death, 
would we become happier? 

Would we have been bom under the sign of uncertainty, 
of a wandering God, 
who had no idea, 

by the Original Sin of our thoughts? 

And then who we would be, we the ones who were 

dispossessed, 

of, ourselves? 

Lights and shadows, put up for auction, 
on the stage gnawed, by the time of a world, 
what died earlier than the ancient Times, 
of the soul that gave us the breath of Immortality? 


100 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


70. The eyes of the Divine Light 


All handles broken, 
of the coffee cups, 

passionate of the immortality from me, 

they will no longer be held with the solemn fingers, 

of the Existence, 

by your soul, 

but they will be drunk by the cold and sinister weapons, 

of the dirty thoughts of the end of the world, 

where only armies of dreams, 

still can do something, 

together with you, 

mistress of the cold breaths of hugs, 

on which I will never more have them, 

in the marriage bed what was worshiped us, 

of the death, of us ourselves, 

those beaten by the fate, 

of the slaughter between the Moments of a Time, 
too tired, 
to look, 

in the eyes of the Divine Light, 
of the our souls. 


101 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


71. Snowdrifts 


It's blizzard the blood of your steps, 
in the white wilderness of the dust in me, 
snows came from the world beyond, 

I being snowbound with the coldness of passions, 
which is snowing hard on me with the lead 
overwhelmingly, 
of the fall, 

from the heights without end of our memory. 

Neither the innocent sins of the angels of the encounter, 
they would not be able ever to wash us anymore, 
the snowbound of the dreams, that united us, 
the foreheads, 

on which the water of eternal life flowed, 
in a kiss of the immortality. 


102 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


72. The darkened dawns 


Blood of lead, 

what are flowing through my veins of the longing, 
the passions of the darkened dawns, 
by your eyes, 

which do no longer arise for me, 

on the sky of life, 

never. 

Unceasing flight over the mists of the being of the love, 

unique and precious, 

through which we breathe and we exist, 

together, 

now, 

dead, 

whose tomb was lost to us, 
forever from the path of steps, 
from more and more tired and depressed, 
in their way toward nothingness. 


103 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


73. Rains devastating and cold 


Rusty leaves of longing, 

break into their fall, 

the dust of the passions that fed them, 

the fulfillment. 

Rains devastating and cold, 

grinds us the path of the steps of feelings, 

what seems to be dead, 

more than the Time. 

Troubled times full of questions, 

are lay out in snowdrifts, 

snowing with memories so frozen, 

that they break into thousands of shards of the 

forgetfulness, 

at every touch. 


104 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


74. Meeting again 


Never the star of eternity, 
of our Moment, 
will not fall us, 

on the vault of the sky of the souls, 
in the cemeteries, 
of dreams and expectations, 
of the meeting again. 

We will always run, 

through the Universe of Immortality, 

where we will light, 

the darkness of the granite masks, 

of the stars of the other Moments, 

who are chained, 

separating us the path through Time, 

and they smile us in the festival of the indifference. 

Just the memory of the Divine Light, 
of the love which I have lit a, 
somewhere sometime, 
with the eternal kiss of the fulfillment, 
show us the way, 


105 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


towards the Absolute Truth, 
in which we once lived. 


75. If 


If I am heaven, 
you are his star. 

If I am the sea, 
you are its shore. 

If I am the dream, 
you are his dawn. 

If I am immortality, 
you are her eternity. 

If I am the word, 
you are his meaning. 

If I am love, 

you are her fulfillment. 

If I am the memory, 
you are her tear. 

If I am the longing, 


106 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


you are his endlessness. 


76. The mill of the sins 


I'm a blizzard born from the star, 
of your whispers with hearts of ice, 
flakes of meanings lies down, 
over the graves of the future that dress us, 
with a Present of the no one. 

Laughters of crystal broken into the shards of the 
indifference, 

they deafen the clowns of the promenade, 
by the inquisitive looks of a Time, 
so alien to ourselves, 

that neither the Mill of the Sins no longer recognizes him, 
although he eats the bread of her wealth, 
leavened between the walls by rotten wood of the 
indifference, 

from which they were cut, 

the planks of the coffin of the chance, 

of to be the good world, 

of the perverse and obscene boulevard, 

what gives life, 

only to those who know how to respect them, 
the moral of the brothel, 


107 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


called pompous, 
Parliament. 


77. At the second hand market of the mankind 


It seems to be snowing, 

with all the regrets of the monasteries of passions, 

over the white immensity, 

of the bodies blackened by words in wind, 

carried toward paltry meanings of fate, 

where the willows, 

nor to weep its water of the life, 

do not know anymore, 

by so much sincerity, 

displayed with greed, 

before the religious ax, 

with sharp blades, 

of a meeting between debauchery and faith, 

in the church gnawed by the moths of salvation, 

filled with heartless clothes, 

what they stand thrown at random, 

in pompous phrases, 

tom, patched and dirty, 

too early, 

to be donated to children by moments, 
killed earlier than the birth, 
given to death, 


108 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


in the second hand market of mankind, 
with history names. 


78. The money of freedom 


The paltry branches hit the windows of thoughts, 

for to be broken by greedy sins, 

after the money of freedom to succeed, 

to overturn the hierarchy of public toilets, 

where misery is honor, 

and mildew is glory. 

Verbs who have no longer patience, 

are ready to grab new functions in disinfection 

of the mouths which still breathes, 

the clean air of democracy, 

in the crazy world of politics. 


109 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


79. Yoke of oxen 


Caught in laws made, 
just for our manger, 

we live the days from more and more whipped, 

pierced by the harness, 

of the unfulfilled promises, 

of the bars what they want to be, 

our future freedom, 

and who deceive us from the pulpit, 

of the pantheon with name of bank account. 

Yoke, of oxen, greedy and shameless, 

sits at indigo instead to carry, 

carriages of the lives increasingly heavier, 

by the molten lead of the needs which burn us, 

loaded with desolation and anguish, 

on the face of the consumer society that consumes us,, 

wanting to show more goods, 

on the fields of the dishonesty and boorishness, 

located in property of a homeland of nothingness, 

what seems to be, of the nobody 

bathed by the holy sun of infamy, 

which is waving into the wind of the indifference, 


110 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


on the mast of the hatred and pettiness, 

of those who preach us the welfare, 

to the shaky table of the wishes, 

full of the illusions slatternly of a democracy, 

from increasingly original, 

with vanity and disgust for everything that tastes. 


80. Wolves disfigured by hatred 


The mice of callousness have lost their holes of the 
thievery, 

and now gnaw the politics of cardboard of the democracy, 
on the banks of indifference built as solid as possible, 
with the bricks in dreams brought from outside, 
by the thoughts of the welfare. 

Wolves disfigured by hatred, 
greedy and paltry, 

voted and initialed by the macabre advertising, 

of the cynical dictatorship of money, 

promise to the sheeps love and delight, 

with the hay of some moments from the best quality, 

which turns out to be the blood of a history, 

what she can never understand, 

the bitter path of helplessness, 

of to really look into the mirror of truth. 


Ill 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


81. Wagers 


The spasmodic dogs of vanity, 
have run in the gang toward the ways of the Lord, 
the one, blasphemed and worshiped, spit and kissed, 
by the relics who stand at the queue of the mistakes, 
to worship the temporals of the Illusions of Life. 

The wagers of the neighborhood stand shield, 
to the palms beaten by misfortune, 
to hackle of a carrion, for the moment, 
for to be swallowed with all with the claws, 
which cuts us the breath of the future, 
from more and more sinister. 


112 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


82. Pharaonic tombs 


Factories exhausted by their own smoke, 
are carried toward nowhere in apocalyptic fires, 
are lit by the transparent and insipid fireflies, 
which illuminates us the night of sighs, 
mocking and robbing the works of Existence, 
of to be happy. 

Political wizards look for the electoral porters, 
for the blossoming of the economy, 
of the pockets torn by the wind of the fate, 
sealed on the pharaonic tombs, 
with cathedral names, 
of laws and legalities paltry, 
disobedient of the inappropriate society, 
to the world and the afterlife, 
of the religion. 


113 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


83. The altered present 


Adjustments of spasmodic accounts, 
with the God, the one crucified , 
spikes rusty by tears, 

are stuck in ancestral mysteries and customs, 
tom them with their sharp blades, 
when the Future wants to release them, 
by the burden of their own past, 
of the sale of ourselves. 

The diadems of sins are testimony, 

on the heads of the brides of the death, 

who awaits us at the wedding with the Destiny, 

for to fulfill our fate, 

of to be the renegades of a God, 

who forgot to pay his debt, 

when he drank at the pub of the Creation, 

the water of our lives, 

until she stood in his throat and drowned with us, 

then he decided to pay for his consumption, 

on which has sprinkled it abundantly with the Original Sin, 

for to be brighter, 

with as much more alcoholic stars, 


114 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


which them brought from the past, 

throwing them chaotically as is the custom of His Time, 

for to pay on the falsified stand of the Destiny, 

by, our Present altered and sad of the Illusion of Life, 

on which neither the poorest and most banal Moments, 

they seem that not want him anymore. 


84. Compromise, God and Satan 


Wax statues melt in the blood of promises, 

taking grotesque shapes, 

of Words without meaning 

harassed and bitten, 

of teeth of the sentimental asphalt, 

where no step, 

no matter how heavy, big, proud 
or of small and insignificant would be, 
can not leave any trace, 
in the brothel of delight 
where dreams are aborted, 
to give place, 

the death ordinary everyday, 
of animal feelings from the souls, 
of the rotten mud, 

from which the God of infamy has shaped us, 
from us, 

the one denied by Satan who existed for a creed, 
too divine for to not can become religion, but science, 
too sensitive to not be compromised but art, 
with name of Perfection of Happiness, 
which God has forbidden us, it 


115 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


promising us to have this toy, 
in a Afterlife, 

where you hope he to be more generous, 
because now he no longer has, with what to pay, 
not even his own funeral expenses, 
from ourselves. 


85. It's about an age of my Time 


It's about an age of my Time 
I'm just a bud of the heaven from veins, 
nor the flocks of pains, nor even the God, 
can not die without the breath from me. 

Strangely I get close to death and hope, 

that all the lovers of love, 

will be divided by mystery, longing and heaven, 

when I will be laid with tears in the pit of the memory. 

It's about an age of my Time 
so sick of love, 

with all those present I am still alive and I hope, 
that we believe in life and character. 

We, the ones of crystals what we us smash slowly, 
in shards, of time and memories, 
we want you to give us more than mystery, 
in snowdrifts of quacks and cemeteries. 

More dead than the peace, and more alive than the war, 
we celebrate ourselves with the watchfulness of the honor, 


116 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


that we were born in another territory, 
than that one burned by a sun of the terror. 

It's about an age of my Time 

the one humiliated of faith, 

to can to feast me, with proud, and I, 

from the mystery what leaves me in the non-being. 


86. Fair of bones 


It's a fair with bones of beauties , 

winners of titles, Miss Universe , 

what they once, flaunted, the charms cold and defiant, 

not knowing how much they would value, 

in the cemetery of the Destiny, 

where undertakers of happenings, 

they shed the poison of the day, 

on the beaten hands, 

by the dust of the bodies, 

from meaningless words, 

and days undressed of any beauty, 

what they looking obscene, and swearing the horizon, 

who wants to them cover the nakedness, 

with the night out of him. 

The red lanterns only wait to be lit, 
in the sentimental brothel, 
enchanted with stands of bad taste, 
of the mercenaries of the stone hours, 
hired to negotiate the number of deaths, 
at the gates of the Inferno or Paradise, 

God's. 


117 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


87. Steams fleshless 


The switchman insalubrious change the switches of the 
fashionable policies, 

parliamentarians pornographic are preparing for the scene, 
the fleshless steams of spell of the party nights, 
it turns out to be molten lead flowing through the veins 
passionate about sex, 

who want to give new laws against prostitution, 

that's how it works well to the people who have left their 

hangover, 

in the arms of the legislators, 

for to execute them costumes of silly, 

of the most diverse colors and patterns. 


118 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


88. In me 


I am desolated, 
of empty glances, 
of the questions, of wind, 
teeth of flint, 

dismembered me the horizon of heart, 
which at each, laceration, 
it fulminate so loudly 
that he bums with his tears, 
the whole path, 

which God has crossed over, it 
in me. 

Traces of memories, 

they sit alone and sad, 

in the snow of end of world, 

what more snowing with expectations. 

The shouts of horror, 
cross the branches of the feelings, 
thrown by the blizzard of love, 
so far away, 

by the trunk of the happening that gave them life, 


119 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


that they no longer will be never, 
the steps, of the glancing of the miracle, 
what has born, 
your eternity, 
in me. 


89. The sand castle 


When I opened the gate, 
of the castle of our love, 

I realized it was built, 

from sentimental sand, 

ready to be crumble, 

over all desires and aspirations, 

becoming a washed shore, 

by the waves of the forgetfulness, 

forever. 

And I drew on the sand, 
a heart, 

but she quickly lost her contour, 
being covered by the wind of Vanity, 
what she wanted to be a young lady of honor, 
at the wedding of prejudices with the Destiny. 


120 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


90. Help the God 


Mute wings are quarrel with the air, 
writing on his back, 

the mysteries petrified, of the flight of the hopes 

which they collapse hysterically, 

over the train of the expectations, 

what seems stopped forever, 

in the train station of the cemetery, 

where is buried the Time. 

How much quietness outrageous 

it's walking on the cold and rotten platforms, 

of some solutions, 

what still whippe their steps without traces, 

full with regret and vain remorse, 

of when they have lost their meeting hours, 

to the ruthless roulette, 

brought by God to the casino of the lechery, 

for to make money, 

because the maintenance of the Heaven and Hell, 
has increased a lot lately, 
pitch, sins, fire, their heating, 
cost, 


121 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


as well as luxury of the Paradise, 

that not to mention, 

by the saints desiring of comfort, 

who have only rights but not and obligations, 

so, help the God! 


In Romanian language 
-in limba roman a- 


122 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


SORIN CERIN 


INGERI §1 NEMURIRE 


POEZII DE MEDITAJIE 


123 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Aprecieri critice despre poezia 
de meditatie la Sorin Cerin 

Prof. univ.dr. A1 Cistelecan in cadrul 

rubricii Avant la lettre , sub titlul Intre reflectie si 
atitucline aparut in revista Familia nr. 11-12 noiembrie - 
decembrie 2015, pag. 16-18, A1 Cistelecan considera 
despre poezia de meditatie a lui Sorin Cerin, ca:"Din 
cite vad, Sorin Cerin e un fel de vulcan textual in 
continua si maxima eruptie, cu o scriitura deopotriva de 
frenezie si de vituperante. In poezie mizeaza pe rafalele 
reflexive si pe elanul sapiential, cultivind, cum zice 
singur in subtitlul Nonsensului Existentei de aici, 
poeziile ”de meditatie”. O modalitate intre toate 
riscanta - si nu de azi, de ieri, ci dintotdeauna - intrucit 

124 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


tinde a se amesteca unde nu e chiar treaba poeziei, 
facind un fel de filosofare versificata si, vrind-nevrind, 
tot felul de nacazanii si moralisme. Nu mai e insa cazul 
sa ne reamintim de cele spuse de Maiorescu lui Panait 
Cerna in legatura cu ’’poezia filosofica,” intrucit poetul 
le stie si el prea bine si tocmai asta vrea sa infrunte: 
riscul de a lucra doar in idee si de a subordona 
imaginativul conceptualului. Ce-i drept, nu e, pentru 
Sorin Cerin, nici o primejdie in acest sens, caci el e, de 
fapt, un pasional si n-atinge niciodata seninatatea 
cugetarii si linistea apolinica a gindului; din contra, 
declama cu pathos, mai degraba dinlauntrul unei traume 
pe care incearca s-o exorcizeze si s-o sublimeze in 
radicale decit din interiorul vreunei paci de cuget sau al 
unei armonii reflexive. Chiar si ce suna a idee nuda, 
transcrisa adesea aforistic, e, de fapt, o rabufnire de 
atitudine, o transcriere de afect - nu cu raceala, ci mai 
curind cu fierbinteala (i s-a si remarcat, de altfel, 
maniera mai profetica a enunturilor). Dar cum metoda 
decolarii lirice consta intr-un fel de elevare a tot ce vine 
pina la demnitatea articularii lor reflexive (de unde 
delestarea oricaror referinte la imediat, lie el biografic, 
lie mai mult decit atita), poeziile lui Cerin se angajeaza 
abrupt in ecuatiile existentiale mari si definitive si nu-si 
pierd vremea in confesiuni domestice. Ele ataca 
Principiul realitatii, nu accidentele ei. Totul e ridicat 
astel la o demnitate problematica, daca nu si de alta 
natura, si pregatit pentru o procesare densificata. 
Riscurile fonnulei rasar, fatal, si aici, intrucit se vede 
imediat mecanismul acestei promovari a realului la 
dignitatea Lirei. Unul dintre mecanisme se trage din 
mostenirea expresionista (fara ca Sorin Cerin sa aiba 
altceva in comun cu expresionistii) a majusculei, prin 
care se instaureaza, brusc si imprevizibil, fie smerenia 
in fata radicalului, fie panica in fata majestatii 
cuvintului. De regula majuscula boteaza stratul 


125 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


’’conceptual” (chiar daca unele concepte sunt metafore), 
semnalizind alerta problematica. Ce-i drept, Sorin Cerin 
face exces si risipa de majuscule, astfel incit de la o 
vreme ele nu mai creeaza nici panica, nici evlavie, caci 
abundenta le sedeaza efectele de acest gen si le 
perverteste intr-un soi de grandilocventa. Celalalt 
mecanism de elevare in demnitate se bizuie pe o 
anumita - poate asumata, poate premeditata - 
emfatizare discursiva, pe o ingrosare lexicala si pe o 
declamatie de profunde si de grave. Se insinueaza - de 
nu cumva se chiar instaureaza - si aici o evidenta 
procedura de reteta imaginativa, redundanta peste 
tolerant. Cum e si normal - ba chiar inevitabil - intr-o 
lirica de reflectie ce vrea sa se coaguleze in jurul unor 
nuclee conceptuale, modalitatea imediata de 
sensibilizare a acestor noduri conceptuale consta in 
materializarea abstractiilor; senzualizarea lor e chiar 
modul lor de epifanizare lirica. Dar la Sorin Cerin 
mecanica imaginativa se bazeaza pe o simpla 
genitivizare materializanta a abstractiilor (de unde 
imagini nesfirsite de genul ’’spinii Adevarului”, ’’cosarii 
Implinirilor”, ’’periile Amagirii” etc. etc.), sub care sta 
cel mai adesea un buton de personificare. Pe scala 
decantarii in metafore stam, astfel, doar pe primii fustei, 
ceea ce produce, simultan, un efect de candoare 
imaginativa (sau discursiva), dar si unul de 
uniformizare. Probabil insa ca aceasta incredere in 
procedeele primare se datoreaza mizei pe decantarea 
gindului, miza care lasa in subsidiar actiunea 
imaginativa (iar pe cea simbolizanta cu atit mai mult) 
ca atare. 

Dar nu cite si nici ce idei bintuie prin poeziile lui Sorin 
Cerin sunt, totusi, lucrul cel mai relevant (ideea, in general, 
dar si in acest caz particular, are un grad de indiferenta la 
lirism). Dimpotriva, in mod oarecum paradoxal, decisiva, 
nu doar definitorie, e atitudinea in care ele se string, afectul 

126 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


in care coaguleaza. Sub aparenta unui discurs proiectat pe 
”gind”, Sorin Cerin promoveaza, de fapt, un lirism (cam 
pus la uscat) de afecte existentiale (nu de afecte intime). 
Reflexivitatea poemelor nu e, din aceasta perspective, decit 
un fel de penitenta atitudinala, o hieratizare a afectelor 
violente. Stratul pasional e, in realitate, cel care se agita si 
el se vede in mai toate componentele lui, de la cele de 
vituperatie la cele de evlavie sau tandrete sublimata (ori, 
din contra, resentimentalizata). Poetul e, pe fond, un 
exasperat de starea lumii si de conditia omului si pornind 
de aici exerseaza sarcasme (crunte cel putin ca suvoi) pe 
seama ’’Societatii de consum” sau pe cea a desertaciunii 
’’Iluziilor Existentei”. E o febra imprecativa care da elan 
versurilor, dar care, mai ales, pune in vedeta discursiva 
exasperarea in fata acestei degradari generale. Atit de 
generate incit ea a cuprins si transcendentele, caci Sorin 
Cerin e mai mult decit iritat de instrumentalizarea lui 
Dumnezeu (si a credintei) in lumea de azi. Iritarea in fata 
coruperii sacrelor ajunge la culme in versuri de maxim 
tupeu blasfemic (”Ticalo§ia Diavolului se nume§te Rau,/ pe 
cand a Lui Dumnezeu, Bine.”, dar si altele, nu mai putin 
provocatoare si ’’infamante” la adresa Dumnezeirii); asta nu 
se intimpla insa decit din pricina intensitatii si puritatii 
propriei credinte (Stefan Borbely a evidentiat indestul 
energia fervorii din poezia lui Cerin), dintr-un fel de 
absolutism devotional. Caci nu lirica de provocare si de 
imprecare face, de fapt, Cerin, ci dimpotriva: lirica de 
devotiune disperata si inflacarata, prin care-1 cauta ”pe 
Adevaratul Nostru Dumnezeu/ atit de diferit de cel al 
catedralelor de genunchi rosi/ la zidurile red si inerte ale 
lacomiei Iluziei Vietii”. E febra devotionala de pe reversul 
imprecatiilor si sarcasmelor, dar tocmai ea e cea care 
contamineaza toate poemele. Dintr-un strat de ideale strivit 
ies, cu verva pasionala, atitudinile lui Cerin, atitudini 
eruptive oricit ar fi ele de codificate intr-o lirica de 
reflectii." 


127 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Elvira Sorohan - Un poet existentialist din secolul 21 

FSrS sa inteleg ce e „transpoezia”, care, probabil, nu 
mai e poezie, invocind un termen creat de Magda Cameci, 
mai citesc totusi poezia de azi si acum incerc sa spun ceva 
despre una anume. NcmuUumita de JnsuficicrUa poeziei 
contemporane”, in acelasi articol din „Romania literarS”, in 
mod rezonabil poeta acuzS, in bloc, cum cS ceea ce 
„livreazS” acum creatorii de poezie nu sint decit notatii ale 
„micului sentiment”, „mici disperSri” si „mici gindiri”. 
Parafrazindu-1 pe Maiorescu, asprul critic al diminutivelor 
cultivate de Alecsandri, nu poti spune decit ca poezia 
rezultatS din astfel de notatii e si ea mica (la cub, dacS 
enumerarea se oprcstc la trei). Pricina identificatS de 
Magda Carneci ar fi lipsa de inspiratie, acea tensiune 
psihicS, specifics oamenilor de arts, o trSire spontanS, ce 
face sa se nascS, incontrolabil, crea(ia. E momentul 
inspirativ, in cazul poeziei, incSrcat de impulsuri afective 
imposibil de infrint rational, un impuls pe care ll ai sau nu-1 
ai §i de care e responsabilS vocatia. Simplu, asta e 
problema, ai vocatie, ai inspiratie. Nu prea am o pSrere 
formata despre poezia Magdei Cameci §i nici nu pot §ti cit 
de des o viziteazS inspiratia, dar daca starea asta e un har, 
mai e cazul sa cauti retete spre a o induce? §i totusi, in 
numele breslei, preocuparea poetei pentru dorita stare se 
concentreaza interogativ: „...intrebarea capitals care se 
pune este urmStoarea: cum sS facem sS avem acces mai 
des, mai controlat, §i nu doar prin accident, la acele stSri 
intense, la dispretuita <<inspiratie>> la acele niveluri altele 
ale noastre, pentru care poezia a fost intotdeauna un martor 
(sic !) privilegiat”. Nu slim cui apart ine dispre(ul, dar slim 
cS inspira(ia e a poetului nSscut si nu fScut. Acesta din 
urmS nefiind decit un mcstcsugar, un artifex. 

Am in fatS trei plachete de versuri ale putin 
cunoscutului si nu lipsitului de inspiratie poet, Sorin Cerin, 
ordonate intr-o logicS descrescendo, usor de 
inteles, Nonsensul existenfei, Marile taceri, Moartea, toate 

128 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


aparute in 2015, la Editura Paco, din Bucuresti. Dupa ideile 
titulare, indata te frapeaza si vocabularul poetic al primei 
poezii ce te intimpina cu sintagma „Iluzia Vietii”, 
ortografiata cu majuscule. Este, in fond, o expresie 
mostenita din vocabularul consacrat al existential istilor, 
deajuns ca sa banuie§ti ce marca vor avea poeziile. 
Inaintezi cu lectura fiind curios sa vezi cit se mentine 
poetul pe aceeafi coarda de fond, §i cit de adinc, cit de grav 
traie§te intru aceasta idee deloc noua. §i nu e noua pentru 
ca radacinile existcntialismului, modem reformulat, isi trag 
seva din scepticismul biblicului, melancolicului Eclesiast, 
descurajat, in constiinta tragica a linitudinii ca destin. Este 
regele biblic un existentialist avant la lettre. El descopera 
ca „vreme e a te nastc si vreme e sa mori”, in rest, „totul e 
vinare de vint”. Ce se mai poate spune nou in vremea 
noastra, chiar in formula personala, cind existcntialismul a 
fost intens sustinut filosofic in secolele al XlX-lea §i al XX- 
lea, de la Kirkegaard si pina la Sartre, cu nuantc specifice. 
O poezie in termenii existcntialismului statuat mai poate 
interesa fiinta zilelor noastre, sclava imaginii vizuale si a 
intematului, doar prin adaptari ori actualizate adaosuri 
complementare ideii centrale si nu in cele din urma, prin 
puterea intoarcerii asupra sinelui. Este cam ceea ce incearca 
sa realizeze poetul Sorin Cerin, lasindu-ne, dintru inceput, 
impresia ca traicste miracolul creator, inspiratia. Voind sa 
orienteze cititoml spre a cauta un anumit gen de poezie 
cultivate in aceste plachete (cu una si acecasi coperta ), 
automl le subintituleaza, ne varietur, „Poezii de mcditatic”, 
cum §i sint la nivelul ideilor. Dar, cit de adinca §i cit de 
personala e meditatia, n-o poti spune decit la stirs itul 
lecturii, cind sintetizezi ce anume aspecte ale ontologiei si 
din ce perspectiva intelectiv-afectiva le dezvolta poetul. 

In mod cert, vocabularul poeziei cxistentialiste 
universale, usor de recunoscut, este acum redistribuit intr-o 
alta topica, ceea ce conduce la combinatii surprinzator de 
noi, unele indraznetc, ori teribil de dure, cum sint cele ce 


129 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


vizeaza biserica. Citind numai unul dintre cele trei volume 
e ca §i cum le-ai citit pe toate, se cinta pe aceea§i coarda, cu 
minime innoiri de la o poezie la alta. Poetul se inchide intr- 
o sfera conceptuala unitara, de aici retorica specified. 
Oriunde ai deschide unul dintre volume, te afli in centrul 
universului poetic, aceleasi idei, acccasi atitudine de 
scepticism revoltat. La nivelul limbajului, acelasi 
vocabular, bine acordat cu sfera conceptuala, e recombinat 
in noi si noi sintagme, cu actualizari ce tin de mediul de 
astazi si chiar imediat al fiirUei aruncata in lume sa 
ispascasca „Pacatul Originar”. Se Stic, pentru ca spuneau 
infeleptii, „fiul Evei nu traiestc intr-o lume lipsita de 
vaiete”. Ambitia de a-si construi o meditatic personala, 
imposibil de realizat la nivelul vocabularului poetic deja 
obosit, e compensate de arta combinatici cuvintelor, fara sa 
poata evita frecvcnta redundanta a unor sintagme. Cea mai 
frecventa, uneori plasata voit §i de doua ori in aceea§i 
poezie, este „Iluzia Vietii”. Alte zeci de cuvinte cheie, 
complementare, frapeaza prin utilizare ostentativa, spre a 
sublinia ideea de „Nonsens al Existentei”. Sint preferate 
serii de cuvinte scrise cu majuscula: „Clipa”, „Nemurire”, 
„Iluzie”, „Absurd”, „Tacere”, „Moarte”, „Etemitate”, 
„Adevar Absolut”, „Vis”, „Liber Arbitru”, „Pacatul 
Originar”, „Iubirea”, „Singuratatea”, „instrainarea”, 
„Dumnezeu” si multe altele. Sintagma care aduce aici si 
acum trairea problematizata a existentei este „Societatea de 
Consum”. Se degaja din poezie o frenezie a dublarii 
cuvintului ce sustine ideea. Adesea, aceasta energie 
debordanta a reasczarii cuvintelor acopera ceea ce cauti in 
poeziile compuse pe una §i aceea§i tema, adica trairea 
intens afectiva a sentimentului „iluziei vietii”, inauntru, nu 
in afara. Aici sa mai amintim de maniera de a distinge 
cuvintele expresive ortog rail ate cu majuscula. Ploaia de 
majuscule tinde sa inunde citeva scmnificaUi de baza ale 
poeziilor. §i mai e o particularitate, punctuajia. Dupa 
fiecare vers, incheiat sau nu ca inteles, gramatical sau nu, e 


130 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


pusa virgula; punctul e pus de prcferinta numai dupa 
ultimul vers. Altfel decit Eclesiastul biblic, poetul nostru, 
mai mult revoltat decit melancolic, ierarhizeaza 
dcscrtaciunilc destul de putin ordonat ca sa poll urmari idei 
clare. Semnificaliile se aglomereaza in una §i aceea§i 
poezie, cum e Ierarhia De$ertaciunii. Dar nu e singura. De 
vina poate fi realitatea contemporana care provoaca pe 
multiple planuri sensibilitatea poetului. Cuvintul 
,,desertaciunc” e angajat intr-o combinaiie grava, taioasa, 
pus sa insoleasca chiar fenomenul nasterii lumii, pentru a 
sugera, finalmente, prin alaturari culinare foarte originale, 
voit vulgarizatoare, dezgustul, „greala”, r la Sartre, lasate in 
urma de constiinta absurdului existeniei. Am trimis la 
poezia Industrie a Carnii Existenfiale : „Plugul 

Dcscrtaciunii sapa adinc ,/ in iarina Existeniei,/ vrind sa 
insaminieze genele Iluziei Vieiii,/ pentru a nastc Lumea ,/ 
dupa o gestaiie prelunga ,/ in pintecul fara limite al 
Minciunii,/ care se sprijina pe Adevar pentru a exista,/ 
...corbii negri ai gindurilor,/ dezvoltind,/ O adevarata 
Industrie a Carnii Existeniiale,/ incepind,/ de la fripturi de 
vise pe gratarul Absurdului,/ pina la,/ mezeluri de cea mai 
buna calitate a Deznadejdii.” Ceea ce gase§ti in aceasta 
poezie: paradox, nonsens, nihilism, dezabuzare, visuri 
facute scrum, toate acestea si altele se vor multiplica, 
recombina caleidoscopic, in toata creaiia cuprinsa in aceste 
trei plachete. 

Daca noiiunile si conceptele sintetic cuprinse in 
cuvinte i§i pastreaza constant inielesul, soarta „cuvintului” 
nu e aceeasi, pare sa mearga spre epuizare, ca si forla de 
innoire a poeziei. Au si cuvintele soarta lor, in afara de 
poezie, cum zice poetul. La inceput, paradoxal, „Toamna 
sentimentala” e parasita „de recoltele inflacarate de 
cuvinte”, frenetic adunate de temperamentul aprins al 
poetului indragostit numai de anumite cuvinte, cele din 
semantica existenlialista. Alteori, „Stoluri de Cuvinte,/ 
brazdeaza cerul Amintirilor”. In registru schimbat, cuvintul 


131 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


e chinuit ca instrument al presei, violenta, pe drept 
incriminata de poet: „Cuvinte lacustre,/ pling in ghivece de 
Martiri,/ puse la ferestrele bordelurilor de Ziare,...”. Este 
deplinsa soarta cuvintelor angajate insolit, grotesc: „La 
macelaria Cuvintelor,/ in coltul strazii Destinului,/ se vind 
ciolane de fraze stricate,/ pulpe de intclesuri pentru 
prajit,...”. §i cu acest fragment am ilustrat originalitatea 
combinatiilor verbale resentimentare, ce defuleaza o 
atitudine poetica provocata de revolta impotriva 
nonsensului existentci. In cele din urma e metaforizata 
„iarna Cuvintelor,/ care ningeau peste Zilele noastre,...” §i 
e deplinsa soarta lor, caderea: „in Noroiul unor Cuvinte,/ 
obscene si pline de invective”, si, finalmente, sucombarea 
lor: „Cimitire de cuvinte se insira in sufletele,/ ce vor si 
spera la Inviere,. . Aici cuvintele s-au intors la poezie. 
Insa, cuvintul e numai instrumentul ce nu e numai al 
poetului, doar a lui e problema de fond a existentci iluzorii, 
resimtita ca atare in termenii existcntialismului de la 
inceputul secolului 21. Acesta e miezul, laitmotivul zecilor 
de poezii semnate de Sorin Cerin, distribuite studiat, 
presupun simbolic numerologic, in fiecare placheta cite 77, 
nici una in plus sau in minus. Din saminta acestei idei 
generos semanate, se ridica pentru poetul obosit de atita 
framintata gindire: „Ierburi de intrebari ce unduiesc alene 
peste pleoapele/ Asfintitului,/ ce abia se mai pot line 
intredeschise,/ in zarea unor Raspunsuri,/ ce par a fi migrat 
catre departarile reci ale Uitarii.” Nota meditativa a acestor 
versuri nu e cu totul descurajanta. Poetul nu e nici depresiv, 
nici anxios, pentru ca are un temperament tonic. El o ia 
mereu de la inceput, cu declaratii de neinvinsa vointa de a 
intelege, fara sa accepte, ca astfel sa se poata intoarce spre 
cunoasterea de sine. In imagini poetice rare se contureaza 
un fel de rezumat al discursului poetic, concentrat in 
poezia Ierarhia De§ertaciunii, incheiata, in termenii 
contcmporaneitatii absurdului. E un mod de a reinnoi ceea 
ce s-a mai spus, ca „mincam absurd pe piine”. Pluralul 


132 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


indica in poet un exponent in numele omului, in general, 
„granitul” semnificind taina de nepatruns de care se lovcstc 
„trestia ginditoare”: „Catarati pe Stincile Victii,/ vrem sa 
intelegem granitul ca si cum ar fi,/ o trestie consticnta de 
Sine. || Demolam pilonii Naturii Iluziei Victii,/ incercind sa 
punem in locul lor,/ Un Vis cu mult mai strain de noi 
inline. || Ruinam slabiciunea,/ ... devenind propriile noastre 
epave,/ ce ratacesc spre nicaieri. || ... Sa fie ochii Societa^i 
de Consum facuti doar pentru a / privi Ierarhia 
Dcscrtaciunilor? Iubirea, care ar merita un comentariu al 
nuantelor la care trimit imaginile poetice, este, in Vis §i 
realitate, o: „icoana prinsa de peretii reci si insensibili,/ ai 
unei catedrale a desfriului, cum este Societatea de 
Consum, /care ne consuma victilc,/ pentru un Sens ce nu-1 
vom afla niciodata.” Dincolo de jocul cuvintelor se remarca 
substantivul grav ce anuleaza cu totul sacralitatea 
catedralei. E un transfer de scmnificatii fabricat de revolta 
permanent revarsata asupra tipului de societate in care 
traim. Viata noastra, se lamenteaza poetul in Feline 
Existenfiale: „ se vinde scump la tejgheaua Destinului,/ 
pentru a da gust Desfriului,/ abonat cu cartela de placeri in 
regula ,/ la Societatea de Consum.”/... „Promisiuni 
Desarte,/ si-au pierdut cheile Implinirii,/ iar acum fac 
Morala cartelului de Legi ,/ alaturi de prostituatele 
politiciene ale momentului”. Limbajul violent, ca sagcti 
poetice aruncate si contra degradarii teribile a politicului, 
defuleaza o revolta de tip nihilist, ridicata la rang de 
principiu. Tinta absolut actuala este inca si mai evidenta 
atunci cind, in poezia Jocul de-a Viata cu Moartea, este 
incriminata, cam in aceiasi termeni, „gradina Societatii de 
Consum Foamete,/ drept mari atlcti ai taierilor de venituri./ 
Cintarele false si isterice ale Politicii,/ ne dramuiesc cu 
parcimonie fiecare Clipa...”. 

Schimbind subiectul, vocabula „clipa”, in raport cu 
„eternitatea”, actualizeaza o nota din arsenalul de cuvinte 
specifice din limbajul marelui ginditor existentialist care a 


133 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


fost misticul Kierkegaard. Dupa cum atitudinea clar atee, 
cind e vorba de Dumnezeu §i biserica in poeziile lui Cerin, 
actualizeaza duritati de limbaj, cu particularity^ ale 
cxistentialismului sartrean, in timp ce Matematica 
existenfei si multe alte poezii ne readuc in memoria 
culturala imaginea acelei „ monde casse ” perceputa critic 
de francezul Gabriel Marcel. 

Poate cea mai densa in concepte complementare 
„cxistcntei”, dintre poeziile celei dintii plachete, 
est eDesfriu. Sint incercari de a da definitii, de a pune in 
relatie lucrurile prin inversiune cu sens, din nou foarte grav 
acuzatoare, cum e cea cu adresa la „manastire”. Sigur, 
nefericirea fiintci care scrie o asemenea poezie, vine nu 
numai din constiinta caderii omului in lume sub blestem 
divin, dar §i din ceea ce ar fi o consecinla, respingerea, pina 
la blasfemie a nevoii de Dumnezeu. Interogatia, din 
poezia Desfriu, care pare ca lasa cititorului libertatea de a 
da particulare raspunsuri, e un tertip al poetului consticnt de 
ceea ce afinna la modul mascat: „Existcnta este o naluca 
prinsa intre doua vise, Spatiul si/ Timpul./ Pacea va fi 
mereu datoare Razboiului cu propriile ei/ anne, 
Descrtaciunca Democratiei si Dictatura./ Care desfriu nu-si 
are manastirea sa si care crima,/ dcmocratia ei? ” Poezia 
continua cu o noua deli ni tie a „Existcntei” ca „joc de 
noroc”, insotita de „Speranta”, niciodata lasata in voia 
„liberului arbitru”, care i-ar da omului libertatea de a 
schimba ceva. Ramine numai libertatea liintei de a judeca 
propria cxistenta, etern ingradita sa poata dcpasi absurdul. 
Natura demonstrativa a poetului il condamna, extroversiv, 
la excese, incit risipcste prea generos ce a adunat cu greu 
din biblioteca propriei vie^i §i a car^ilor. Paradoxal, acela§i 
temperament e sursa puterii de a trai autentic sentimentul 
de alienare, de instrainare si accentuata singuratate, pina la 
a-§i simli sufletul ca o „casa in ruina”, din care, plecata, 
fiinta cazuta in „neant”, mai are sansa de a fi sortita 
„Etern itati i”. Ramin multe alte comentarii de facut la citeva 


134 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


cuvinte preferate ale poetului, inscrise cu majuscula. Dar, 
despre „Iubire”, „Dumnezeu”, „Biserica”, „Absurd”, „Clipa 
§i Etemitate”, „Tacere” §i „Moarte”, poate, altadata. Ar 
merita, pentru ca acestui poet nu-i lipscstc inspiratia rivnita 
de al^ii, cum scria poeta Magda Carneci, dar el trebuie sa se 
fereasca de pericolul de a ramine un artifex, si, inca, sa nu 
calce prea apasat pe urmele din Bacovia ori Emil Botta, 
spre a nu le desfigura prin exces. 


Ana Blandiana:"Poezia de meditatie pe care o scrie 
Sorin Cerin nu este o versificare de adevaruri 
filozofice,ci o impletire de revelatii despre aceste 
adevaruri. Iar raportul dintre intensitatea acestor 
revelatii si indoiala din care sunt construite adevarurile 
este chiar piatra filozofala a acestei poezii.De 
altfel,secretul de a putea fixa fulgerul revelatiei este o 
problema la fel de subtila ca si aceea a pastrarii energiei 
solare din zilele calde in cele reci." 

Theodor Codreanu„Sorin Cerin este un ganditor 
aforistic paradoxist, de o mare mobilitate a mintii, 
manuind cu maiestrie antitezele, imbinandu-le 
oximoronic sau alternandu-le chiasmatic in probleme cu 
mize majore din viata noastra spirituals si sociala. 
Poezia din Liberul arbitru este o prelungire a manierei 
sale de meditate, impregnand-o si cu o doza potrivita 
de kynism (in sensul dat cuvantului de Peter Sloterdijk), 
reusind, totodata, pcrformanta de a ramane pe teritoriul 
lirismului autentic chiar si atunci cand vitupereaza 
„Corbii vulgari necroiili §i necrofagi ai Viselor”. 

loan Holban„Despre expresivitatea si bogatia 
intelesurilor transmise Celuilalt prin tacere a scris 
pagini antologice Lucian Blaga. Poetul de azi scrie, in 
Marile Taceri, o poezie a sentimentului religios, nu de 
amvon, insa, ci in gind cu Dumnezeu, in meditatie si in 
fulgerarea gindului spre clipa Creatiei. Poezia lui Sorin 


135 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Cerin este a unui alt Cain ratacind in pustie, pastrind, 
inca, franturi din bucuria edenica pentru a iesi din 
’’menghina” lumii unde omului cazut i se surpa 
orizontul sufletului in ploi de foe si unne de plumb”. 

■ Prof. univ.dr. Maria Ana Tupan "Mcditatiile lirice 

ale lui Sorin Cerin au ceva din amestecul paradoxal de 
disperare si energie a revoltei din eseurile filosofice ale 
lui Emil Cioran. Sesizarea tragismului si grotescului 
existen^ei nu conduce la paralizie psihica, ci la nihilism 
exorcizant si blasfemitor. Sfada cu “adulterinul 
Dumnezeu” - apelativ socant dar foarte expresiv pentru 
idea de pacat originar al lui ... Dumnezeu care trebuie 
sa fi zamislit lumea rea prin adulter cu Satana - capata 
accente sarcastice in vignetele unei Biblii desacralizate, 
cu un Creator care mestcrestc finnamentul la o masa de 
lierar si un Diavol in care s-au contopit loti frondistii 
hippy-rap-punk-porto-ricani: 

[...] stele le alcoolice, ale unui Univers, lacom, meschin §i 
cinic, baute de Dumnezeu la masa Creatici, 

pe cerurile inlacrimate ale Fericirii, mazgalite cu graffiti de 
Diavol, 

Daca poetul si -a propus in poemul La un gratar un cxcrcipu 
unnuzian, reusita e perfecta. Nu numai ingenioase salturi 
mortale pentru logica identitatii de pe un nivel ontologic in 
altul admiram aici, ci si tropismul de o baroca inventivitate 
al unui Eucharist pe dos, caci intr-un univers al victii spre 
moarte, cel care se frange e spiritul, cuvantul, pentru a 
revela un ... trup deleuzian, animalic, descris ca minulioasa 
harta anatomica a unui student medicinist. Poetul ne 
surprinde prin noutatea si rcvclatia delinitiei aforistice, 
caci, dupa primul moment de surpriza, acceptam peisajul 
moralizat al timpului, cu un trecut mort, un viitor viu si un 
prezent iluzoriu, contrar sentimentului comun ca viata traita 
e eul nostru cert, ca doar prezentul exista cu adevarat si ca 

136 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


viitorul e pura ipoteza. Cerin redcfinestc fiinta umana ca 
aflandu-si autenticitatea in multiplicarea mentala a real i tali i 
teme §i ca proiect existentialist". 

* Prof.univ.dr. Mircea Muthu "Disperarea de a gasi 
un Sens cxistentci contemporane aluvioneaza 
testimoniul poetic al lui Sorin Cerin in care amurgul 
limbajului, asociat cu „clepsidra sparta” a timpului,este 
res im tit - cu acuitate tragica - de „cuvintele noastre 
torturate”. 

"Meditatia, intoarsa spre sine insa§i de „oglinzile 
intrebarii”sau de catre „ochii” fabulosi ai Oceanului 
nesfarsit, se automacereaza la aceeasi temperatura febrila, 
de arc voltaic, enuntata - in nuce -de sintagma „ploilor de 
foe”. 


Prof.univ.dr. Cornel Ungureanu " Sorin Cerin 
propune un discurs poetic despre felul de a trece 
"dincolo", o refleclie si o ingandurare care are nevoie 
mereu de majuscule. Cu majuscule, cuvintele pot sa 
suporte accentele apasate ale autorului care pascstc. cu 
atata energie, pe taramurile frumos traversate de cei 
inzestraji cu harul preojiei. Sorin Cerin ritualizeaza 
timpurile deconstrucjiei poetice, daca e sa intelegem 
cum se cuvine desfasurarca versurilor sub steagul 
titlului." 

Prof.univ.dr. Ion Vlad "Sorin Cerin si-a definit 
poemele din volumul "Marile Taceri""poezii de 
meditatie" Fara indoiala,reflexivitatea e dominanta 
creatiei sale, prezidate de interogatii,revolta,nelinisti si 
o dramatica cercetare a TACERII,topos al indoielilor,al 
cutezantei si al aventurii spiritului in permananta 
cautare a adevarului;poezia sa urmeaza unei axiologii 
de un intens dramatism.E lirica luciditatii,a meditatiei si 
a lirismului autentic". 


137 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Lect. univ.dr. Laura Lazar Zavaleanu: 

"Intelectual format la scoala bucuresteana, dar simtind 
nevoia sa se revendice, admirativ, de la modelul critic 
al fcolii clujene, unde isi identified modelele exemplare 
in profesorii Ion Vlad §i Mircea Muthu, Sorin Cerin i§i 
construicste si poezia intertextual, pentru ca poetul 
Marilor Taceri isi declara peste tot maestri i, identificati 
aici, intrinsec, cu Blaga (prin refleciie filozofica §i 
structure prozodica uneori voit calchiata dupa Poemele 
luminii) si Arghczi.Insusi titlul volumului, Marile 
Taceri, impune imperativul unui dialog implicit cu 
poezia lui Arghezi purtand acclasi titlu.Cautarilor 
febrile din Psalmii arghezieni ale unui Dumnezeu 
chemat sa se arate, le raspund aici interpelarile fare 
odihna ale unui apostat credincios, care se sfasie, in 
pustia gandului si a imaginii firant oglindite de lumea 
declarata, intre dragoste dcnuntatorie si revolta tandra, 
intre blestem incantatoriu si ruga deghizata, de vcsnic 
indragostit, fara putinta de a-si declina, in realitate, 
fervoarea, desi cuvantul experimenteaza, estet, intregul 
lexic blasfemiant si apocaliptic.O duplicitate 
izbavitoare, in fapt, care - strigandu-si drama 
instrainarii si a introspcctiei ratate, ca si ncputinta 
intalnirii cu celalalt sau spaima suprapunerii cu el, intr- 
o lume al carei sens este ratacit in „tenebrele lagarelor 
de idei”, la interfcrenta unui timp si unui spatiu ajunse 
“la capat de ho tar ” -,nastc, in litania 'a rebours, 
semnele crcatiei mantuite, in plin festin cinic, “pe masa 
olarului iubirii" 

Conf. univ. dr.Calin Teuti§an "Poezia lui Sorin 
Cerin declama o fatala nostalgie a Sensului. Gandirea 
poetica incearca recuperarea lui, din fragmente 
disparate, readuse la un loc prin travaliul liric, 
inchipuind o posibila harta reconstituita, fie si 
fragmentar, a lumii, dar mai ales a fiintei. Metaforismul 
neovizionarist este cadrul de rcfcrinta al acestor poeme, 


138 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


traversate, cand si cand, de parabole ale realului, "citit" 
in cheie simbolica, dar si ironica. Cinismul lipscstc cu 
dcsavarsire din versurile lui Sorin Cerin.Aceasta 
inseamna ca personajul liric ce cuvanta in paginile de 
fata, mai exact constiirUa lirica, pune o presiune etica 
asupra real itati i, fortand-o astfel sa-si asume propriile 
adevaruri uitate." 

Prof. univ.dr. Cornel Moraru"Profet al neantului 
existential, poetul face parte din categoria moralistilor, 
rezumand intr-o maniera fulguranta precepte aforistice 
si proicctii aspre dintr-o viziune extatica de stars it de 
lume. Vledi labile sale dezvolta o retorica furibunda pe 
tema "nonSensului Existentei", dcsi exprima mai mult 
indoieli decat certitudini si intrebari decat raspunsuri. 
Intensitatea implicarii in acest demers liric atinge, pe 
rand, cote extreme: de la jub italic la sarcasm si de la 
indignare, din nou, la extaz..." 

Prof.univ.dr. Ovidiu Moceanu "Prin cimiterele 
viselor, volumul semnat de Sorin Cerin, poezia marilor 
intrebari cxistcntiale isi cauta un nou statut, construind, 
in texte care comunica subteran, un chip al omului 
interogativ. "Catedrala existentei" are capcanele ei, 
"Adevarul absolut" pare de neatins, "Crinii albi ai 
adevarului" pot ucide, "daca nu-§i aerise§ti camara 
mintii", eul poetic descopera mai degraba un 
"Dumnezeu prea amar"... Toate acestea sunt expresii 
ale unei stari de mare tensiune interioara, in care 
luciditatea sageteaza revelatia si limiteaza trairea 
deplina a sensului existentei". 

Prof.univ.dr. Dumitru Chioaru 'Discurs profetic, 
filosofic sau poetic? - e greu de determinat in care se 
incadreaza textele lui Sorin Cerin. Autorul le 
inglobeaza toate trei intr-o formula personala, aparent 
desueta estetic, rostind insa cu suflu de poeta vates 
ultimele cuvinte dinaintea Apocalipsei. O apocalipsa in 


139 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


care lumea desacralizata §i dominata de false valori 
sfirscste pentru a putea regenera prin Cuvint". 

Prof.univ.dr. §tefan Borbely "Spirit pro fund §i 
sincer religios, Sorin Cerin cauta disperat dupa 
diamantul ascuns in negurile molozului, ale cenusii. Un 
intreg arsenal al modcrnitatii negative - cani ale 
pustiului, apa uitarii, abatoare, sarbatoarea continua a 
sufcrintei, maimuta de lemn putrezit etc., etc. - e 
chemat sa denude, in versurile sale, "armele letale ale 
societa^i de consum" §i "ospiciul" alienarii prin 
mercantilizare a cxistcntei noastre de fiecare zi. Tonul e 
apodictic, pasional, profetic, nu admite nuance sau 
replici. "Noii pa§i ai crediniei" sunt enuniaii 
peremptoriu ca speranta a mantuirii colective, "lumina 
divina" se intrezarestc, izbavitor, la capatul inca 
indepartat al supliciului, insa, pe moment, poetul pare 
sa fie preocupat exclusiv de retorica eschatologica, 
intrezarind decadere, demisie morala sau mine cam 
peste tot pe unde-1 poata pasii sau privirile" 

Gheorghe Andrei Neagu "Definitoriu pentru acest 
autor pare sa fie pe drept cuvant, indoiala, drept piatra 
de temelie a poemelor sale(Greseala pag. 73)11 felicit pe 
autor pentru cutezantele sale stilistice din "Din ochii 
luminii divine pag. 81 precum si din celelalte pacate 
cuibarite in sanul lui creator. Cred ca literatura romana 
are in Sorin Cerin un scriitor al mileniului 3 care trebuie 
abordat cu mai multa insistenta de critica de 
specialitate" 

Marian Odangiu“Lirica lui Sorin Cerin este una a 
intrebarilor escntiale: relatia Fiintci cu Divinitatea intr-o 
lume din ce in ce mai distorsionata valoric ( si 
distorsionanta in acelasi timp !), disparitia unor repere 
fundamental - atragand dupa sine interogatii 
coplcsitoarc si infinite nclinisti -, abscnta tot mai 
tulburatoare a unor Adevamri care sa deschida calea 
spre Mantuire, indoielile profund demotivante asupra 

140 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


Sensului Victii, absurd inaltat la rang de rati unc 
cxistentiala alimenteaza spaima si angoasele poetului. 
Versurile sale dezvolta astfel o veritabila retorica a 
disperarii, in care, aidoma unei insecte halucinate de 
Lumina, autorul lanseaza intrebari fara raspuns, cauta 
confirmari acolo unde acestea au intrat de mult in 
disolutic, navigheaza indurerat dar lucid printre imagini 
si metafore de elevata si convingatoare pregnanta, 
construicste scenarii apocaliptice despre Viata, Iubire si 
Moarte...” 

Eugen Evu:"...cartile par a li obiecte de cult- 
cultura-proprie testamentara ale unui ceremonial, ...al 
neo-cunoasterii, platonic-socratice sub semnul 
“Guvemamantului General al Genezei” bunaoara. Ceea 
ce merita considerat este si imperativul transparent al 
autorului de a comunica in limba natala, romaneasca. 
Singuratatea atribuita Sacrului este totusi a fiintei 
umane in ipostaza ei reductiva, a conditiei 
umane....Cum Vinea scria, poetul vede idei ale sale, 
sau oglindire in ‘odaia cu oglinzi’ a bibliotecii 
universale. Un destin desigur personal, in mare parte 
asumat, nota bene.In volumul Politice, la extrema lui 
H.R. Patapievici poetul este bine-stiutor al problemei 
eliadesti, al “caderii umanului in zoon politikon”. . .Intre 
rationalism si irationalism, Sorin Cerin navigheaza pe 
Oceanul Interconnection." 


141 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


CUPRINS 


1. Ingeri §i Nemurire 

2. Moarte §i Destin 

3. In noi inline, de noi inline 

4. C redin {a §i infelegere 

5. Strada sufletului 

6. Sclavagism modern 

7. Cle§ti de nori 

8. Flamuri de Lumina Divina 

9. Incotro mergem? 

10. Inec 

11. Scrisori fara adresa 

12. Cuvinte §i verbe 

13. Hrana cimitirelor 

14. Vie# irosite 

15. Trepte spre Dumnezeu 

16. Jocuri de noroc 

17. Cautand Adevarul Desavar§irii 

18. Magazinul de pompe funebre 

19. Talpile morpi 

20. Caramizi de cuvinte 

21. Ras isteric 

22. Flori de gheaja 


142 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


23. Datori Iluziei Vie^ii 

24. Libertate absoluta 

25. Iluzia Vietii, Timp §i Destin 

26. Cunoa§tere §i Existenfa 

27. Universuri paralele 

28. Tumultul sufletului 

29. Timp astral 

30. Revedere §i Adevar 

31. Sarut din zori de eternitate 

32. Ramuri rupte 

33. Parul simlamintelor 

34. Incertitudine §i Dumnezeu 

35. Seceta 

36. Maternitate 

37. Ora exacta 

38. Desert de catedrale 

39. Pariu 

40. Bordel primitive 

41. Singuratate §i Viitor 

42. Ratacirea cea din urma 

43. La talpile sentimentelor 

44. De§ert 

45. Peisaj 

46. Sensul lumii 

47. Umanism §i religie 

48. Circ §i politica 

49. Altare de vicisititudini 

50. Somnul lumii 

51. In via la mea 

52. Viitor cimitir 

53. Timp obez 

54. Port pustiu 

55. Strigat de farana 

56. Venim pentru a merge mai departe 

57. Sete de via {a 

58. Dincolo de lumea pallor 

143 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


59. Iubire §i pace 

60. Valori 

61. In zori 

62. Gre§eala 

63. Sculptura 

64. Grangurii zilei 

65. Vitrina Existenjei 

66. Devenind nemuritori 

67. Destin §i Viafa 

68. E§ti Dumnezeul din Mine 

69. Respirajia nemuririi 

70. Ochii Luminii Divine 

71. Troiene 

72. Zori cerni^i 

73. Ploi pustii §i reci 

74. Revedere 

75. Daca 

76. Moara Pacatelor 

77. La piaja de vechituri a omenirii 

78. Banii libertajii 

79. Jug de boi 

80. Lupi desfigurali de ura 

81. Rama§aguri 

82. Morminte faraonice 

83. Prezent alterat 

84. Compromis, Dumnezeu §i Satan 

85. E vorba de-o varsta a Timpului meu 

86. Targ de oase 

87. Aburi descarnaji 

88. In mine 

89. Castelul de nisip 

90. Ajutali-L pe Dumnezeu 


144 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


l.Ingeri §i Nemurire 


E atat de multa linistc, 
pe aripile mgerilor mei, 
sculptati in marmora altei existence, 
unde nu exista nici durere si nici suspin, 
incat nici ceasurile nu mai au ore sau zile. 

Tmi strajuiesc mormantul, 
viselor, speran^elor Iluziilor Vie^ii mele, 
la care mi-am inchinat intreaga mea liinta, 
pentru a ingenunchea invins de Nemurire 
§i nu de Moarte. 

Cioburi ascutitc de cuvinte, 
m-au ranit mereu, 

sangerandu-mi sufletul cu indifercnta lor, 

trista §i rece, 

spunandu-mi, 

ca Paradisul nu se poate naste decat din Infem. 

§i-am coborat in infemul simtamintelor, 
devenind creator. 


145 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


2.Moarte §i Destin 


Coltii de foe ai Adevarului, 
sfasie carnea putrezita a clipelor, 
in cimitirele blestemate sa suporte moartea, 
uitarii de tot si de toate. 


Reptile reci §i nesa^ioase, 

oglindite pe lespezile mormintelor din sufletele noastre, 
cutreiera cerurile dureroase si nefericite ale nesfarsirii, 
din fiecare, 

spre a da ploaia binecuvantata a victii, 
peste cavourile in care se descompun, 
trupurile amintirilor, 
ce-au cladit undeva-candva, 

constiintc si vise, iluzii si deziluzii, fapte si intamplari, 
toate alergand dupa busola stricata a Destinului, 
unui Pacat Originar, 
spre a hrani iarba unei istorii a nimanui. 


146 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


3.1n noi inline, de noi inline 

Buruieni de imagini ne napadesc gandurile, 
care ne urzica menirea, 
spre a o indrepta mai repede, 
catre moartea din abatorul victii. 

Talpi roase de caile intortocheate ale simlirilor, 

ne due din ce in ce mai desculli, 

spre implinirea sortii, 

catre monnantul pe care-1 primim, 

in noi inline, 

din ce in ce mai goi §i abatuli, 
de noi inline. 

Potcoave care nu mai aduc demult norocul, 
au fost pierdute de caii liberi ai cuvintelor, 
spre a fi asczatc drept borne ale spiritualitatii, 
unei existence efemere. 


147 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


4.Credinta §i m^elegere 


Nu pot sa cred in pensula, 

cu care Dumnezeu ne-a zugravit lumea, 

denumind-o Iluzia Vietii. 


Regate fara regi si oceane fara apa, 
ne sunt daruite vietii de catre moartea, 
datorita careia ne-am nascut. 

Valori, culturi si sentimente, 
ard in flacarile neputintci, 
de a ne discerne propriul legamant, 
in valurile amcnintatoare ale unei memorii, 
care ne-a adus din moarte la viata, 
spre a ne reintoarce inapoi, 
inecandu-ne cu arta nonsensului, 
unei creatii pe care nu o putem intelege, 
decat crezand. 


148 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


5.Strada sufletului 


Din ce zapada sa-mi fi cladit inima, 
sa nu se mai topeasca, 
pe strada sufletului, 
florilor de ghcata rasarite, 
in zorii flacarilor cuvintelor, 
din trupul cternitati i, 
dorinlei de a te revedea? 


Cate secole de ninsori, 
pline de sentimente, 
sa mai inghetc, 
pe drumurile fara sfarsit, 
ale inimii cerului, 
din ruletele fara sorti, 
incremenite in jetoanele, 
norocului pierdut, 
la picioarele dorului tau? 

Cate semne de intrebare, 
sa se mai nasca, 
la talpile unei catedrale, 
a simlirii, 

zidurilor abatute din noi, 

atat de pline de sfinlii tiecaror clipe, 


149 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


incat au ajuns sa se surpe, 
peste altarele sufletelor noastre? 


§i cate vise sa se mai fi zdrobit, 
pe asfaltul rece al ratacirilor, 
unor lacrimi de cuvinte, 
stcrsc cu dosul, 

unor palme moarte a Destinelor, 
ce ar fi uitat de ochii desenati de norii, 
ploilor repezi de priviri, 

iscate din seninul zambetului verilor de dorintc, 
care ne tunau si fulgerau cu sentimente. 

§uvoaie de amurguri, 
sangereaza pe obrazul secat de dor, 
al unei amintiri atat de saracite, 
de zapezile pasilor mantuip, 
de raceala morlii, 
ascunse in trupurile viselor, 
vlaguite de iertarea divina, 
a celor atat de uitati, 
de natura divina a lumilor, 
ce par a se sfar§i, 
in jocul daruit de viata, 
mor|ii . 


150 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


6.Sclavagism modern 


Noroi de sentimente se rasfira, 
sub rotile greoaie ale Timpului, 
ce ne invarte viata, 
in caruselul suferintelor, 
pana ce ametcstc de totului, 
in bratele mortii. 

Altare fara crcdinte, 
stau agatatc in chingile Destinelor, 
s fas i ate obeliscuri ale amorului carnal, 
vandut pe taraba cererii si ofertei, 
cu reduceri, 

mai ales de sarbatorile religioase ale sfintilor, 
ce au ales sa se prostitueze in icoanele, 
unei societati a sclavagismului modern. 


151 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


7.Cle§ti de nori 


Trupuri de cuvinte, 
stau ucise la coltul strazii sufletului, 
ce in us teste de sangele, 
apusului din noi. 

Cle§ti de nori, 

scot fara mila maselele cerului, 
care nu mai are cu ce 
sa-§i mai manance nesfarsirca, 
infometat, 
i§i plange ploaia, 
ce nu va mai putea roade, 
tarana fruntilor noastre, 
pentru a le spala de amintiri. 


152 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


8.FIamuri de Lumina Divina 


Parca ropote de aplauze, 
asurzesc pamantul facerii, 
din care suntem plamaditi, 
atunci cand, 

copitele stropilor inghetap, 
din trupurile noastre, 
ne lovesc orizontul patimilor. 

Flamuri multicolore de dorinte, 
ne iradiaza cu sceptrul Tannin ii Divine, 
vrand sa ne iniasoare cu fericire, 
dar gasesc numai intuneric si frig, 
pe aleile pietruite ale vieplor, 
ce vor sa-§i afle sensul, 
pana la porlile, 

ferecate si ruginite ale cimitirelor, 
de sperantc. 


153 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


9.Incotro mergem? 


Incotro sa mergem, 

de unde venim §i de ce avem icoane? 

0 viata fara icoane si-ar pierde sensul, 
fiindca pictura sufletului, 
n-ar mai avea in ce sa se inrameze, 
ar deveni o simpla imagine, 
ce ar parea fara continut, 
incepand de nicaieri si sfarsindu-sc nicaieri, 
cum de altfel este realitatea existcntei, 
fara valurile fluziei Victii, 
care fara icoane, 

nu ar mai avea unde sa se astcarna, 
spre a ne da increderea si Liberul Arbitru, 
de la roata norocului, 
acestei lumi bizare. 


154 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


lO.Inec 


Poduri ingh elate ale pacii cu noi m§ine, 
se surpa in inimi, 
lasand sa cada in valtorile vietii, 
ganduri, speranlc, amintiri, virtup, simliri, 
spre a se ineca, 

in apa menajera si murdara a societalii. 

Clipe naufragiate, 
incearca sa-si gaseasca larmurilc, 
care se surpa mereu in cautarea fericirii, 
lasand sa curga sangele ranilor unei lumi, 
pe care nu ne-am ales-o. 


155 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


ll.Scrisori fara adresa 


Ulcioarele patimilor, 
stau gata sa se verse 
peste focul religiilor, 
stingand vapaia, 
ce era gata sa topeasca, 
talazurile simtirii, 

pentru a le transforma in plumbul topit, 
al armelor gata sa sfa§ie, 
carnea orizonturilor, 
care ar mai 11 ramas lumii, 
in dar de la Dumnezeu. 

Scrisori fara adresa, 
in care se afla scrise destinele noastre, 
sunt duse de vanturile vcsniciei, 
ce bat cu frigul uitarii, 
pe aleile cimitirelor din sufletele, 
care undeva candva, 
s-au nascut §i au iubit. 


156 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


12.Cuvinte §i verbe 


Aripi de gheata se prabuscsc, 
pe cerul cuvintelor, 

atat de reci incat le-au impietrit inimile, 
iar sangele le-a devenit, 
un patinoar al tacerii, 
pe care aluneca disperarea. 

Voci surde tremura doborate, 
de troienele prea grele ale verbelor, 
care nu-§i mai pot duce, 
propriile actiuni si intelesuri, 
intr-o propozitic a mortii. 


157 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


13.Hrana cimitirelor 


Gheare ascutitc sfasic pasii, 
care rataceau spre implinire, 
navoade de clipe, 
pandesc sentimentele, 
pentru a le pescui, 
in apa tulbure a victii, 
ca mai apoi, 
sa fie duse, 

la fabrica de conserve a mor^ii, 
spre a fi vandute ca amintiri, 
drept hrana cimitirelor, 
pentru cei care traiesc prezentul, 
hranindu-se cu trecutul, 
care le alimenteaza viitorul. 


Arbori inca verzi, 
de sentimente si spcrante, 
stau taiati, 

ambalati si conscrvati, 
la margine de drum al Destinului, 
spre a fi dusi, 

in frigul de stars it de lume al deznadejdii, 
si vandup, 

pentru a ne mai incalzi Dcscrtaciunca, 


158 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


care ne cere mereu, 
plata chiriei de a exista, 
in aceasta lume. 


14.Vie(i irosite 


Rauri de vise neimplinite, 
brazdeaza tinuturile somnului adanc, 
al sufletelor Iluziilor Vie^ii, 
ce par a nu se mai trezi niciodata, 
in zorii Adevarului. 

Voci infioratoare, 
fiind pe punctul de a se ineca, 
inca se zbat, 

cu propriile lor clipe de§arte, 
incercand sa ajunga, 
la unul dintre malurile, 
binelui sau chiar ale raului, 
frumosului sau uratului, 
pentru a cere un nou Destin, 
vazandu-si victile irosite in prag de moarte. 


159 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


15.Trepte spre Dumnezeu 


§tia^i ca §i Apocalipsa 

i§i are treptele ei spre infern sau paradis? 

Ca fericirea poate li cumparata cu iluzii 
intr-o lume iluzorie? 

Doar Adevarul ctcrn itati i unei Clipe, 
nu poate fi de vanzare, 
funded el intrupeaza mai mult decat orice, 
el este adevarata fata prin care putem, 
sa-L percepem pe Dumnezeu. 


160 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


16 Jocuri de noroc 


Zarurile masluite ale credintci, 
sunt aruncate cersetorilor de noroc, 
pe masa putrezita si tacuta a mortii, 
unde ochii iscoditori ai suferintei, 
mai cauta numerele castigatoarc, 
pentru inaltarea altor si altor biserici, 
de vorbe goale §i Iluzii ale Vielii. 

Fumul inecacios al sufletelor dcsartc, 
inunda incaperea din cazinoul sufletelor, 
unde vocile par mai degraba blestemate, 
anunta o noua tragere la ruleta ruginita, 
ce va mai na§te o noua zi, 
la fel de pierduta si datoare ca toate celelalte, 
Existentci, 

proprietara jocurilor de noroc ale Destinului. 


161 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


17.Cautand Adevarul Desavar§irii 


Am cautat Desavarsirea, 

convins Hind ca lumea are partea ei de Adevar. 

Scrutez absolutul cerului victii, 

§i nu pot sa in^eleg de ce cade neputincios, 
peste orizontul dor in tel or, 
fara sa doreasca vreodata, 
a le intelege sau a le implini. 

Ma afund in Parana corpului meu, 
plin de nevoi, 

dat casa a sufletului de un Dumnezeu, 
pe care nu L-am in^eles niciodata, 
de ce a fost nevoit, 
sa nasca §i sa lase pacatul in lume, 
cand putea atat de bine sa nu o faca? 

Ce am intclcs? 

este ca acolo unde caut,i Adevarul, 

vei gasi in cele din urma, 

dupa minciuni si alte Iluzii ale Victii, 

Moartea, 

alaturi de propriul Dumnezeu. 


162 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


18.Magazinul de pompe funebre 

Lumea este, 

un magazin de pompe funebre, 
ale Iubirii, 

de unde clien^i se aprovizioneaza din plin, 
cu panglici triste de culori cernite, 
pe care sunt scrise texte de dragoste, 
adresate celor parasiti, 
din care nu lipsestc etemul: ”In memoria. . 
cutarui sau cutarui sentiment, 
asezat la coroana incomorata, 
de alte §i alte panglici, 
stranse de-a lungul victii, 
spre a fi duse cu dricul clipelor, 
spre cimitirul patimilor, 
fara de care Existenta, 
ar fi mult mai saraca. 

Ciocli gandurilor scormonesc, 
prin mormintele amintirilor, 
sapand adanc in Parana, 
din care ne-a plamadit Dumnezeu, 
sperand ca poate vor gasi odata si odata, 
motivul pentru care, 
nu putem invata niciodata, 
sa murim asa cum scrie, 
in Bibliile lor de ciocli, 


163 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


unde moartea este o viata, 
ce merita infrumusctata cu sicrie de sperantc, 
cat mai noi si mai scumpe, 
asczatc in catedralele luxoase, 
ale nebuniei de a fi om. 


19.Talpile morpi 


Tulpini de iluzii ne men^in zilele, 
ce vor cadea asemeni unor frunze ruginite, 
din calendarul Destinului, 
la talpile Mortii. 

Pasi plumbuiti de zgarcenia Timpului, 
se afunda in mocirla, 
din care Dumnezeu ne-a cladit trupurile, 
pentru a se desfata, 

cu sufcrinta, disperarea si alte greutati ale noastre, 
cei lipsiti de usurarca zborului etern al vcsniciei. 

Iedera simturilor, 
inca se mai aga^a, 
de peretii mucegaiti, 
ai catedralelor iubirii, 
sperand la Viata de Apoi. 


164 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


20.Caramizi de cuvinte 


Regii lacrimilor atator religii, 
si-au facut palatele rasului de clcstar, 
din plansul oamenilor. 


Caramizi de cuvinte, 
stau pline de igrazia patimilor, 
sa cladeasca noi garduri ale ve§niciei, 
care sa ne apere de absolutul adevarului, 
preamarind Iluzia Vietii. 


Mestcri sprintari cu nume de clerici, 
alearga zglobiu in cautarea mortarului financiar, 
care sa le cimenteze caramizile cuvintelor, 
ferindu-se de mizeriile lumii, 
cu promisiunile desartc, 
agatatc de fruntile lor machiavelice, 
ca oamenii vor scapa de toate nenorocirile, 
prin si mai multa sufcrinta. 


165 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


21.Ras isteric 


Cata pace sa fi avut Dumnezeu in sufletul Sau, 
incat §i-a dorit o create, 
cu atatea razbunari, pacate si patimi? 

Cat de mult trebuia sa se fi plictisit, 

daca toate bisericile zilelor, 

trebuiau ridicate cu sufcrinta, deziluzii si sange? 

Ce durere Sa-L fi manat, 
de a ne da in cele din urma, 
pana si rasul isteric de noi inline, 
atunci cand privim la Pacatul Originar, 
cum se ascunde in tiparele genelor noastre? 


166 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


22.Flori de gheafa 


Nu exista zi a rcspi ratici acestei lumi, 
care sa nu se sfar§easca, 
in amurgul ce nastc noaptea somnului, 
prin care Iluzia Vietii, 
ne ascunde Adevarul Absolut. 


Florile de camp din trairile noastre, 

se vor transfonna in florile de gheata, 

din sangele apusului, 

ce vor fi culese de Moarte, 

spre a fi daruite Timpului inflacarat, 

ce fierbe dupa o noua zi. 


Odata ajunse in bratele de foe ale Timpului 

florile de gheata se vor topi, 

devenind, 

apa vietii ce va nastc noi si noi Destine. 


167 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


23.Datori Iluziei Vie^ii 


Lumea cunoastcrii, 

este o scrisoare fara inceput sau stars it, 
fiindca nu slim, 

de unde venim si nici unde ne va duce, 

Adevarul Absolut, 

dupa ce vom parasi Iluzia Vielii. 

Vom rataci, 

prin carnea putrezita a clipelor mortii, 
sau Timpul, 

va ramane doar o amintire uitata a Eternitati i? 

Ne vom mai intreba vreodata, 
cine suntem daca nu vom mai fi, 
datori Iluziei Victii cu o moarte? 


168 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


24.Libertate absolute 


Pa§i de vise, 
repezi de cascade, 
merg greoi, 

prin carnea anotimpului inimii, 
ce nu mai pot nici sa doara, 
atat de adanc tuna accstia, 
in bataile firave ale sangelui, 
ce umczcstc cu sudoarea privirii in gol, 
tamplele Destinului. 

Rauri mulse din vaca sacra a norilor, 
inunda Parana spirituals, 
a Liberului Arbitru, 
spalandu-1 cu Iluzia Vietii, 
ca sa putem crede ca exista, 

Libertate Absoluta. 


169 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


25.11uzia Vietii, Timp §i Destin 


Fire din nisipul Eternitatii, 
platesc tributul sufcrintei, 

Clepsidrei Crea^iei, 
in numele Existentci, 
pentru ca noi sa fim, 
o constientizare cu timpi si spatii, 
care §tie ca tarmul nastcrii, 
e spalat de valurile apei vie^ii, 
iar cioburile fericirii, 
te ranesc uneori mai mult decat moartea. 


Ceata ridurilor viitorului, 
e inundata de trecutul posomorat, 
atat de tacut, 
incat incremcncstc, 
inghetand, 

fiecare moment al prezentului, 
in Etemitate, 

incercand sa ne dea Iluzia Victii, 
ca exista destul Timp, 
sa ne putem consticntiza, 
Destinul si Moartea. 


170 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


26.Cunoa§tere §i Existenfa 


Cat curaj sa fi avut Dumnezeu, 
sa ne lase sim^irea, 

§tiind ca Existenta fara consticntizarc, 
nu poate fi, 

ca un Univers necunoscut, 
nu exista. 

Totul se reduce la cunoastcre, 
iar daca aceasta dispare, 
intreaga lume se destrama, 
cu nastcrca si moartea ei cu tot. 

Ar fi pacat sa nu cunoastcm. 
sau preferam, 

Pacatul Originar al Cunoasterii, 
pentru a exista? 


171 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


27.Universuri paralele 


in tumultul Universurilor paralele, 
se sparg spa^iile si visele Lui Dumnezeu, 
asemenea paharelor la petrecerile bahice, 
ca sa Mature ghinionul. 


Dimensiuni pe care mintea nu le poate concepe, 
joaca la ruleta norocului, 
propriul nostru Destin. 


Faceri §i desfaceri, 
cunoastcri si necunoasteri, 
vieli §i morli, 

toate se regasesc pe taraba parasita a Crealiei, 
care nu-si mai poate plati datoriile Destinului, 
oricat de multe sufcrinte si deziluzii ar aduna. 


172 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


28.Tumultul sufletului 


inot prin apa tulbure a viitorului, 

nestiind cat de adanca poate fi sufcrinta, 

de a nu te revedea, 

sens al Existcntci mele, 

cel nascut pentru a te plamadi, 

o stea alaturi de Destin, 

sa-mi straluccsti calea spre Moarte. 

Privesc spre cerul spart in cioburi de dor, 
care ranesc orizontul, 
plin de sangele intrebarilor, 
ce-mi inunda calea spre tine, 
tarm al fericirii, 
atat de indepartat, 
de sufcrinta si deznadejdea mea, 
incat pare ca nu-1 voi atinge niciodata, 
atat de naufragiata-mi este, 

Clipa eternitapi, 

care ar vrea sa te imbratisczc, 

cu tot tumultul sufletului meu. 


173 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


29.Timp astral 


A incremenit gheata Cuvantului in mine, 
mergand printre tacerile de stars it de lume, 
ale privirii unui cer, 
ce pare ca §i-a sfa§iat orice in^eles, 
al camasii orizontului pe care il hnbracase, 
undeva-candva sfidator, 
cu gandul la Etemitatea, 
pe care o credea fara stars it, 
ncstiind ca se poate sparge oricand, 
in ochii grei, 
de plumb, 

al norilor alergati pe bolta unui suflet, 
ce inca mai duce dorul stelelor, 
pentru care a fost blestemat, 
sa nu le mai vada niciodata, 
stralucirea divina, 
ce readuce trecutul Universului, 
in prezentul descrtaciunii de azi, 
unde tu nu mai cxisti, 
alaturi de mine. 


174 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


30.Revedere §i Adevar 


Naufragiez pe marea amintirii, 
alaturi de sirenele tacute ale Clipelor, 
ce par a-si fi uitat cantecele vrajilor, 
pentru totdeauna. 


Talazuri de spcrantc se surpa, 

pe tamplele incruntate si mcremenite ale Adevarului, 
ce par a strabate intregul Univers dintre noi, 
descultc, 

iar cioburile nesabuite de Intrebari, 
le taie talpile, 

sangerand cu lacrimile ploilor de vise cernite, 
ce inca ne mai cad in genunchii sortii, 
implorandu-ne sa ne revedem. 


175 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


31.Sarut din zori de eternitate 


Crengi uscate si parasite, 
stau legate de trunchiul umed al Amintirii, 
asemeni albumelor iubirii, 
cu fotografiile ingalbenite, 
de rcmuscarilc ce par, 
ale unui Timp al nimanui, 
caruia ii vine sa-si smulga parul tuturor clipelor, 
ramase in sertarele gandurilor ascunse, 
de cotidianul insalubru al prezentului, 
doar pentru a uita, 
de frunzele verii care le-au dat, 
nemarginirea unei impliniri solare, 
ce acum s-a transformat, 
in tarana lacrimii de uitare, 
a dorului sfasictor, 
al unui sarut din zori de eternitate, 
prelins la collul ochilor tai. 


176 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


32.Ramuri rupte 


Ratacit in noaptea din mine, 
incerc sa caut zorii inimii tale, 
ale carei pa§i de amintiri, 
lasa urme adanci in zodia gandurilor mele, 
umplute de radacinile stropilor de nclinistc, 
atunci cand ploua cu Destin, 
peste ramurile rupte, 
din trunchiul fericirii, 
al vie^ii mele. 

Festin de vorbe-n vant, 

duse haotic spre nicaieri, 

pe strazile pustii ale sufletului, 

ma lovesc cu insistent neinleleasa a morlii, 

de mine insami. 


177 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


33.Parul simtamintelor 


Pe asfaltul fericirii, 

nimeni nu mai astupa gropile sentimentale, 
in care au inghetat doruri ncintclesc, 
ce nu vor mai zbura niciodata, 
dincolo de parul simtamintclor tale, 
acum, 

atat de tuns si de coafat, 
incat nimeni nu va afla vreodata, 
cum era atunci cand alaturi de mine, 
devenea dus, 

spre toate cardinalele sufletelor noastre, 
atat de incalcit, 

incat nici macar un frizer de talia Timpului, 
n-ar fi rcusit sa-i dea o fonna concreta, 
spatiului care nu mai exista, 
dintre mine, tine si Destin ... 


178 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


34. Incertitudine §i Dumnezeu 

Ma rup de mine, 
coala de hartie, 
patata cu Pacatul Originar, 
pe care Dumnezeu mi-a sens Destinul, 
ca mai apoi sa-L striveasca, 
sub pa§ii unei societati, 
atat de debusolate si bolnave, 
incat nu Stic daca urmatoarea zi, 
ii va mai apartinc Timpului sau Mortii, 
incertitudine cu miresme de cimitir al valorilor, 
inecate intr-o morala la fel de gretoasa, 
precum sunt idolii ce-o cladesc, 
cu limbile lor bifurcate de §erpi venino§i, 
care impart Adevarul dupa bunul plac, 
al intereselor meschine §i obscure, 
de trantori ahtiati dupa un Dumnezeu, 
zugravit dupa chipul si asemanarea lor, 
de gunoaie subumane. 


179 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


35.Seceta 


E atat de multa seceta in zambete, 
pe aceasta lume a dcsertaciunii, 
incat pana si muschii verzi ai amintirii, 
s-au uscat pe lespezile dorului, 
pe cavourile cimitirelor sperantci. 


Soarele pustiitor al politicii, 
arde cu flacara nepasarii, 
din catedralele de ganduri, 
framantate, dospite, coapte, 
ce ne invatau candva, 
cum sa murim, 
ca acum sa ne arate calea, 
spre oaza Iluziei Vie^ii, 
unde speram sa mai gasim apa, 
care sa ne aduca hnplinirea. 


180 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


36.Maternitate 


Malcrnitati de clipe, 
incendiate de morala, 
nasc viitorii avortoni, 
ce vor impanzi societatea, 
mortilor vii ai sentimentelor, 
din cugetele si visele noastre. 

Sicrie de cuvinte, 
stau in si rate si tacute, 
la portilc fericirii, 
spre a prelua, 

nou nascutii patimilor noastre, 

Fell Frumosi ai fericirii, 
care nu vor mai fi frumo§i, 
niciodata, 

ci la fel de descompu§i, 

precum orice cadavru al Destinului, 

harazit de Dumnezeu, 

Pacatului Originar. 


181 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


37.0ra exacta 


Ceasuri de priviri, 

cu cadranele viselor sparte, 

privesc prin cioburile aburite ale sufletelor, 

sangele apusului de dorinte camale, 

pe care ar vrea sa-1 taie, 

ca mai apoi sa ^afneasca, 

pe fe^ele pline de profan, 

ale ridurilor ce le strabat timpii, 

catre moarte. 

Ore din ce in ce mai exacte, 

stau cataratc in pomul victii, 

spre a ne impietri odata pentru totdeauna, 

orice libertate a momentului, 

de a fi noi inline, 

cei debusolati, 

de boala societaiii de consum, 
care ne consuma, 
pe noi inline, 
zi de zi, 
ceas de ceas, 
via^a de via^a. 


182 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


38. Desert de catedrale 


Aripi de inger, 
proslavesc pustiul din noi, 
prin dcscrtul de catedrale ale iubirii, 
care ne ingenuncheaza sufletele, 
cu promisiunea Vietii de Apoi, 
ce poate fi mai buna decat cea de azi, 
daca nu le intrebam Dumnezeul, 
a toate datator si atotputernic, 
de ce? 

Nu puteam cunoastc fara pacat? 

Daca Dumnezeu cunoastc, pacatuicstc? 

Sa 11 gresit Dumnezeu pacatuind cu noi? 

Sa nu fi §tiut Dumnezeu ca va gresi sau a facut-o 
intentional? 

De fapt cine §i ce este Dumnezeu? 

Oare nu tot ceea ce nu putem fi noi? 


183 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


39.Pariu 


Te caut Lumina Divina, 
prin intunericul acestei vied, 
ce pare ca si-a pierdut propriul Destin, 
la masa de joc al unui Dumnezeu, 
care nu s-a mai oprit din a paria, 
cu intregul Timp al lumii, 
platit si rasplatit, 
cu atatea si atatea, 

suferintc, abuzuri, despartiri, desertaciuni, 
cu inimi ce par a cadea, 
in genunea neantului dcscrtaciunii, 
pentru totdeauna. 

Toamne olilitc de saruturi, 
profane §i lascive, 
se vor primaveri, 
pe taraba prostitutici de vise, 
a Iluziei Victii. 


184 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


40.Bordel primitiv 


Banii clipelor, 

sunt chcltuiti de Instinctele Vulgare, 
care talharesc la coltul strazii Prostituted, 
unde se afla bordelul primitiv, 
cu nume de Religie, 
ce are mereu portile larg deschise, 
pentru cei care sunt milostivi, 
cu sicriele milei, 
din care vor li intretinutc, 
atat fetele ce danseaza in straie preotcsti, 
cat §i cimitirele de Adevaruri, 
descompuse si putrezite, 
ale unei lumi, 
al carei sens, 

pana si Dumnezeu L-a uitat, 

atunci cand se gande§te la Moarte §i Destin. 


185 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


41. Singuratate §i Viitor 


Cand toate visele vie^ii mele, 
te vor aduce in palma iubirii muncita, 
de clipele in care erai Dumnezeul fiintci, 
pe care nu o voi cunoastc niciodata. 


Ninsori de aripi ce cad sfartecate, 
de flacarile in care ne-am ars Destinele, 
vieti la portilc cimitirelor de sentimente, 
regasite intr- un sarut al fumului Existcntci, 
in care ne-am pierdut, 
pentru totdeauna privirile orbite, 
de noi insinc. 


Eram o inima care nu-si mai recunoastca Timpul, 
in care ne-am scaldat visele, 
devenite cosmaruri, 
in singuratatea unde nici infinitul, 
nu mai exista in noi, 
cei inchisi pentru totdeauna in libertatea, 
ce ne zbura Prezentul, 
saruturilor si intalnirilor, 
fara ceasuri, zile sau ani, 
unde ne asteptam Viitorul, 


186 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


ncstiind ca era mort mai demult decat Vremea, 
sufletelor noastre. 


42.Ratacirea cea din urma 


Mergeam spre steaua neintclesului, 
crezand ca ma va duce, 
spre ratacirea cea din urma, 
a parastasului Luminii Divine, 
salvata din flacarile, 
iubirii in lata careia am ingenuncheat, 
masluindu-mi zarurile Destinului, 
prin promisiuni date Timpului, 
al carui inieles devenise Moarte. 

Cai nenorocite de noroc, 
ma lovesc cu labirintele pierdute, 
in buzunarele peticite ale Viitorului, 
care inca-si cerscsc, 
pe strada Destinului meu, 

Via^a, 

zilelor iubirii noastre, 

din sanul careia te-am pierdut, 

pentru totdeauna. 


187 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


43.La talpile sentimentelor 


Sa nu-mi spui ca norii certurilor, 
nu-§i pot plange ploile care ne spala palmile, 
batatorite de sudorile muncilor unui Destin, 
care ne-a alergat, 
spre orizonturile sangelui scurs, 
la talpile sentimentelor, 
unde am ingenuncheat si noi, 
lovindu-ne de Uitare. 

§i am sapat adanc in firea cuvintelor, 
cazand cpuizati de greutatea stancilor, 
care inca ne mai dcsparteau, 
de virgule, verbe si intclcsuri, 
ce ningeau pe muntii dragostei, 
pe care aveam sa-i strabatem, 
pentru a descoperi, 
cat de inalte ne pot fi sufletele. 


188 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


44.De§ert 


Poduri de priviri stau pierdute, 
incercand sa uneasca, 
infinitul uitarii cu finitul regasirii, 
intr-o metamorfoza a Iluziei Victii, 
mereu verde si plina de intrebari, 
ale caror raspunsuri devin nemtclcsul divin, 
al conditiei noastre umane, 
de a fi o umbra, 

in dcscrtul solar insetat de fericire, 
traversat de caravanele Clipelor, 
spre zarile descompunerii. 

Dune de nisip, 

se agita in zvarcolirea ancestrala 
a morlii de dinainte de na§tere, 
cautand prelioasele clepsidre-suflete, 
spre a nastc noi Timpi, 
scurgand maretia ctcrnitatii, 
in minusculele simtiri, 
ale cunoastcrii si constientizarii, 
acestei lumi, 
ce vor deveni oameni. 


189 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


45.Peisaj 


Aripi de cremene love sc cerul inimilor, 
aprinzandu-le candela ruginita, 
din cimitirul parasit al viselor. 

Porti uriasc desfac Nemarginirea, 
inlantuita pana acum de conditia umana, 
spre a li redata Mortii. 

Armate de stropi ai gandurilor, 
marsaluicsc in cinstea ploii Destinului, 
ce spala fata victii prafuita de descrtaciuni si suferintc. 

Ogari ologi §i naivi, 

vor sa prinda trenul fericirii, 

abia tarandu-se prin ghena infernului acestei lumi. 


190 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


46. Sensul lumii 


De ce dreptatea devine desertaciunc, 
paradisul se transforma in infern, 
iar fericirea, 

piatra de moara a simtirii? 

Cate patimi vor mai invia religiile firii, 
pentru a invata sa murim, 
asa cum ne cere Existcnta? 

Pentru a cata oara pacatele pot fi invinse, 
de autoproclamatul bine, 
care ne duce numai spre rau? 

Cine §tie cate iluzii desartc mai avem de invins, 
pentru a ne intelege, 
sensul lumii in care traim, 
daca acesta mai exista? 

Care cunoastcre poate consticntiza, 
doar prin adevarat nu si prin falsul, 
ce nu are nici o legatura cu Adevarul Absolut, 
ci doar cu Iluzia Victii? 


191 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


47.Umanism §i religie 

Sfin^ii zarurilor neca§tigatoare ale religiilor, 

i§i mai deschid un cazinou de fala, 

cu altare masluite si icoane pentru castig, 

unde toli credincio§ii jocurilor vieiii, 

vor putea umple cutiile milei, 

cu noi §i noi Clipe, 

din ce in ce mai scumpe. 

Lumi bolnave care ne macina destinele, 
la moara desfatarii politice, 

a parlamentelor de sacali, hiene sau alte victuitoarc, 
deprinse cu arta culinara, 
a hoiturilor verbale in putrcfactic, 
ce au fost candva zambete, priviri, trupuri, pasi, 
pe aleile reci ale Creaiiei, 
prea plictisita §i satula, 
de duhoarea apei vietii, 
devenita menajera, 

odata scursa din pacatele obligatorii §i originare, 
ale fiinielor care se mai cred umane. 


192 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


48.Circ §i politica 


Rasul sinistru al Creatici, 

a inventat arta circului politicii, 

unde clovnii momentelor de neuitat, 

fac tumbe printre fraze pompoase, 

aplaudate la scena deschisa de catre, 

o mulfime multumita cu firimiturile promisiunilor, 

de a devora Intr-o zi, 

acelea§i hoituri sinistre, 

ca si fiarele care-si fac numerele de dresaj, 

in manejul ros de obcdicnta, 

al societalii de consum, 

unde se consuma fiecare om, 

din ce in ce mai msingurat, 

lasat de izbclistc, 

pe taraba cu galantare stricate, 

ale Existeniei. 


193 



SORINCERIN- ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


49.Altare de vicisitudini 


Prin ce stele sa fi calatorit atomii sangelui, 
pana sa capete simtirca din noi, 
cei lcpadap de Dumnezeu la create, 

§i da|i pe nimic, 
pacatelor de a fi oameni? 


Altare de vicisitudini ne spala lanfiirile viselor, 
care ne-au dat sclavia libcrtatii, 
de a crede in tot ceea ce dorim, 
ca sa primim in cele din urma doar Moartea. 

Fete fatarnicc de heruvimi ai dragostei, 
ce par statui reci §i insensibile, 

ne privesc din spatele scuturilor paradisiace ale altor lumi, 

de unde ne sageteaza cu promisiunile vulgare, 

atat de sacre, profanului din noi, 

de a crede §i a nu cerceta, 

globul de cristal in care Dumnezeu, 

ne-a ghicit undeva-candva, Viitorul. 


194 


SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


50.Somnul lumii 


Nclinisti si cosmaruri asezonate cu incertitudini, 
o rctcta perfecta pentru somnul, 
de a trai in aceasta lume a Iluziei Vietii, 
dintre doua morti, 

cea de dinainte de na§tere §i cea de dupa via^a. 

Poate ca acest vis consistent §i lucid, 
il avem in timp ce intr-o alta lume, 
dormim adanc, 
urmand a ne trezi acolo, 
dupa ce vom muri aici, 
in zorii in care ne vom stcrge, 
cearcanele amintirii acestei victi ciudate. 


Poate unii dintre noi, 
vor dori sa mai doarma, 
regretand ca s-au trezit, 
pe cand alfii vor fi fericifi ca au scapat, 
de cosmarul acestei lumi, 
si cati nu vor li astfel? 


195 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


51. In viaja mea 


Lovit, m-am ridicat, 
peste cerul vie^ii mele, 
fara sa-mi car norii deznadejdii, 
alaturi de mine. 

Mereu am fost o gara, 

unde trenul dcspartirii era doar o Clipa, 

iar Eu, 

cel care-1 lasam sa pomeasca, 

spre noi si noi lacasuri din sufletul meu. 

Sa pot privi din zambetul intunecat al sortii, 
mi-a trebuit mai mult Adevar decat oricui, 
salvat de viata Pacatului meu Originar, 
pe care nu 1-am platit niciodata. 

§i da, te-am astcptat, dinainte de mine cu o Moarte, 
care sa-mi spuna cat de multa iubire, 
ar mai putea muri dincolo de regrete, 
zambete sau alte lumini sau umbre, 
din Destinul vie^ii mele. 


Cine sunt dincolo de mine msumi, 

in afara de ncsfarsitul care abia acum invata, 


196 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


de ce eternitatea iubirii trebuie sa traiasca, 

pe taraba de vechituri unde nimeni nu-si poate plati, 

taxa de maternitate a Nemuririi, 

pe care am crezut-o pe Cuvant, 

si care mi-a inchiriat viata si eternitatea ei? 


Doar intclesul etern itati i mi-a dat avant, 
fiindca era gratuita la portilc victii mele, 
insetat si rupt de moarte i-am baut sufletul, 
care mi-a cuprins ziua nasterii mele. 

§i am parasit moartea dcspartirii de mine insami, 
unde erai Clipa al carei Destin era sa-1 regret, 
cand imi sarutai implinirea pe care nici macar, 
Soarele Destinului meu nu ar fi facut-o niciodata, 
oricat de mult Cer ar fi fost in preajma lui. 

§i te-am iubit cum doar Dorul, 
i§i poate varsa lacrimile, 

Apei Vietii din inima lui, 

ce inca mai batea stancile amintirii, 

cu sufletul tau. 

Atunci am decis sa ma rup de mine insami, 

pe calea de dinaintea nasterii, 

ce m-ar fi adus intr-un vis, 

pe care la trezire, 

nu 1-as mai fi putut descifra, 

fara de noi, 

devenind steaua la care visam, 
amandoi. 


197 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


52. Viitor cimitir 


Eram atat de singur, 

fara lacrima fiintei tale, 

incat m-am inecat in sufletul radacinilor, 

din care ai devenit, 

prin^esa viselor Timpului meu. 

§tii atat de bine ca m-am nascut, 
ca sa-mi inval Moartea pe de rost, 
sa nu-i gre§esc nici macar o strofa, 
din piesa vie^ii ce mi-a fost data, 
acestei lumi. 

Eram atat de multa Lumina Divina, 
incat pana si nasterea mea s-a intrebat, 
daca e bine sa moara odata cu Timpul, 
ce ne-a distrus Etemitatea de dinainte de a fi, 
tarana cu suflare de viitor cimitir. 


198 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


53. Timp obez 


Arcurile ruginite si descompuse ale Cunoastcrii, 
abia-§i mai pot suspne Timpul, 
din ce in ce mai obez, 
de cand recoltele de de§ertaciuni, 
suferintc, van i tali, orgolii, 
debusolari, lacomii,minciuni, 
furturi,in§elatorii, talharii si crime, 
au atins noi recorduri sociale, 
iar p re tul acestora la Piata Vietii, 
a scazut atat de mult, 
incat nu exista Clipe, 
care sa nu si le poata permite, 
oricand, la orice ora, 
din sacralitatea zilei sau profanul noptii. 


199 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


54.Port pustiu 


Adesea suntem un port pustiu, 

fara nici un vapor, 

fie el §i al nebuniei morilor de vant, 

unde pare ca niciodata nu se intampla nimic, 

ce sta parasit la margine de catedrala a sperantci, 

care vrea sa creada in minunea, 

de a vedea odata §i odata catargele, 

valurilor de simtiri si trairi, 

pe care doar tainele intamplarii ti le pot da. 


Pcscarusii inimilor zboara spre nicaieri, 

picrdup prin buzunarele ncs far site ale unui cer, 

prea lacom cu tot ce a mai ramas din dor, 

devorator §i sadic, 

arata spre noi orizonturi, 

pe care nimeni nu le va putea atinge vreodata, 

in zarile sangerii ale Iluziei Vielii. 


200 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


55.Strigat de t a ran a 


De ce ne-a creat Dumnezeu, 
strigat de Parana, 
salcie despletita, 

plina de remuscari ale absurdului, 
care umbrestc apa murdara a Iluziei Victii, 
pentru a- si spala pletele Clipelor, 
cazute si decazute, 
in noroiul trupurilor? 

Cata slintenic sa existe in bordelurile societatii, 
unde ne sunt vandute destinele, 
pe post de dame de companie, 
oricarei Bancnote cu insemnele profane, 
ale unei band batrane §i libidinoase, 
unsa cu toate relele pamantului, 
care vinde si amaneteaza, 
iubiri, sentimente, absolut orice, 
la prctul bursei norocului, 
botezat de Dumnezeu cu nume de Intamplare. 


201 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


56. Venim pentru a merge mai departe 


La margine de Adevar, 
nu po^i afla niciodata iubirea, 
care niciodata nu va §ti sa-ti spuna, 
de unde vine §i unde se duce, 
la fel ca §i flin^a, 

care se nastc din neant si merge spre nicaieri, 
destinatii, 

care s-au vandut cel mai scump, 
in istoria omenirii, 
pe tarabele religiilor, 
in numele carora, 

crimele deveneau deseori o datorie de onoare, 
iar criminalii suflctcsti ai Iluziei Victii, 
n i stc slinti numai buni de pictat, 

pe zidurile reci §i igrazioase ale bisericilor din noi inline, 
cei care continuam sa venim pentru a merge mai departe. 


202 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


57. Sete de viafa 


Naufragiez prin jungla de granit a absurdului, 

vrand sa devin pietrarul Iluziei Victii, 

sa sculptez noi si noi trairi, 

pe care sa le expun in menajeria de piatra, 

a sufletului tumultului din mine, 

incercand sa ies la liman, 

naucit de strigatele fiarelor cotidiene, 

cu col^ii insangerati de dorul prazii, 

unor noi jgheaburi de momente, 

prin care se scurge apa vie^ii, 

atat de departe, 

incat de fiecare data, 

negresit, 

fara nici o eroare a Lui Dumnezeu, 

ajungem in bratele misterioase ale Mortii, 

insctati de noi inline, 

de intrebarea, 

daca am fost cu adevarat, 

o umbra a Iluziei Vie^ii, 

sau nici macar atat? 


203 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


58.Dincolo de lumea pallor 


Toate cascadele, 
sentimentelor mele, 
se scurg, 

in marea sufletului tau, 
pe care-mi navigheaza dorul, 
purtat de valurile destinului, 
alaturi de care, 
face cruce, 

in cimitirul rece al despartirii, 
de dincolo de lumea pa§ilor, 
ce §i-au pierdut pana §i caile, 
care ne intalneau, 
undeva-candva, 
nastcrea unei lumi, 
a stelei noastre. 

Nici intunericul Universului, 
nu se putea impotrivi, 

Luminii Divine, 
ce rasarea, 

din infinitul si eternitatea iubirii, 
care acum pare ca nici nu s-a nascut, 
vreodata 

De ce? 


204 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


59 .Iubire §i pace 


E atat de rece, 
in zambetul dcscrtului, 
din hora fara cantec, 
a fericirii, 

incat au incremenit, 
pana §i visele. 

Doar greierii mortii, 
unor amintiri, 

se mai aud straniu si vulgar, 
din mormintele sapate, 
in tarana trupurilor noastre. 

Turlele bisericilor pacii, 
stau inclinate, gata sa se prabuscasca, 
peste tinti rimurile pline de iubiri, 
care se odihnesc in pace. 


205 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


60. Valori 


Crime, suferinte, doliu, moarte, 
foamete, boli, deznadejdi, 
cat pret sa fi pus Dumnezeu pe noi, 
atunci cand ne-a creat? 


Dorintc, sperantc, vise, 
amagiri, descrtaciuni, iluzii, 
toate pentru a ne putea mantui, 
de cine, pentru ce §i de ce? 


Cereri, fauriri, minuni, 
numere, legi, bani, 
pana unde vom mai numara, 
sufcrintele si umilintele, 
valorii? 


incotro? 

Nicaieri. 


206 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


61 . 1 n zori 


Zori de cerneala pustie, 

asteapta garboviti de Timp, 

pcnita zilei, 

care se va inmuia, 

in inimile lor, 

pentru a scrie, 

noi fericiri sau tristeli, 

cu palmile batatorite, 

de muncile Destinului. 


Vraji §i descantece se aud, 
din noaptea sorlii, 
ce pare ca nu vrea sa piece, 
in odiseea uitarii, 
unde vom ajunge cu totii. 


207 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


62.Gre§eala 


Linistca de dinaintea furtunii, 
crcatici gresitc a Lui Dumnezeu, 
s-a numit Neant sau Pace, 
Intamplare sau Haos? 

Zbuciumul inveninat al Cunoastcrii, 
sa fi gre§it calea ce-i era harazita, 
ajungand la Om, 
doar Intamplator? 

Cum sa se fi numit verbul crcatici? 

AFi? 

Sau A Fost? 

Poate Va Fi! 

Sau nici una nici alta, 
fiindca in realitate nu este nimic. 


208 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


63. Sculptura 


Mi-am intors fata clipei, 
spre talpile zambetului tau, 
care mi-au strivit viitorul, 
calcandu-1 cu greutatea amintirii, 
cerului inimii care mi-a mai ramas, 
sa-mi bata Destinul, 
obosit de atata singuratate, 
rapusa de multimile privirilor, 
care ma iscodesc, 
cu sufletele lor de piatra, 
din care nu va sculpta nimeni, 
niciodata, 

statuia viselor mele, 
care sa semene cu tine. 

Cali stropi din ploile reci ale toamnelor, 
vor mai numara primaverile, 
sperantclor apasatoare si inecate, 
in sangele apusurilor prapastioase, 
prelinse pe tamplele Timpului, 
care ne-a uitat pentru totdeauna, 
menirea? 


209 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


64.Grangurii zilei 


Stea a aripilor nastcrii mele, 
alunga-mi eclipsa viepi, 
spre anotimpul regasirii, 
de mine insumi. 

Flori de ghea^a, 

impodobesc vaza cuvintelor de vaza, 

a grangurilor zilei, 

ce zboara in stoluri, 

spre a descoperi noi livezi de valori, 

ca mai apoi sa le distruga, 

asczandu-se nonsalanti, 

pe sperietoarea cea de zi cu zi, 

a societapi de consum, 

cu nume de presa politica. 

Viennii de matase multicolora si zglobie, 
lustruiesc ghearele grangurilor, 

cu stralucirea larvelor de la microfoanele momentului, 
ce vor lese costumele minciunii la moda, 
cu un penaj al verbelor, 
din ce in ce mai pestril, 
luminand noptile reci si surde, 
ale celor multi si napastuip, 
care si-au pierdut toata recolta din livezi. 


210 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


65.Vitrina Existen^ei 


Adeseori am cautat apa victii, 
in oceanul fara de stars it, 
al morfii care ne inconjoara, 

Destinul, 

afland in cele din urma, 
tarmul pustiit de vorbe goale, 
ale infemului din noi, 
desert ars de soarele neiertator, 
al deznadejdii palmilor batatorite, 
de ne§ansa de a deveni cau§, 
din care sa pot sorbi lichidul atat de dorit, 
din ceea ce ar fi trebuit sa fie viata, 
si nu o umbra iluzorie a ei. 

Lec^ii veninoase, 

sunt predate de §erpii politicilor la moda, 
totul trebuie sa fie in perfecta stare, 
pentru a putea fi furat, 
etichetele viselor §i ambalajele destinelor, 
se cer a fi colorate cat mai viu, 
mai atragator, 

pentru a fi expuse in vitrina Existentci, 
fara sa mai conteze continutul, 
care oricum nu mai interesa pe nimeni, 
fiind livrat mereu Mortii. 


211 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


66.Devenind nemuritori 


Un neant cunoscut exista, 
nemaifiind, 

acel gol imens al lacrimilor, 
plouate din norii Destinului, 
pe piatra de mormant a Sperantei, 
devenind diamantul Dorului, 
asczat pe verigheta Amintirii, 
inimii tale, 

ce-mi bate cerul gandurilor, 
carc-si reintalnestc, 
tarana trupului cuvintelor, 
ce ne-au unit, 

in vara pustiita de rugina toamnei, 
tunand cu patimi si fulgerand a remuscarc, 
ne atingeam pana si fericirea, 
chiar de era la capatul Universului, 
pe care-1 luminam, 
cu saruturile si imbratisarilc Clipei, 
ale carei Eternitate o sorbeam, 
devenind nemuritori. 


212 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


67.Destin §i Viafa 


Ai putea sa te ba^i cu ingerii mei de smoala, 

dcvcniti nemuritori prin ccata strazilor cu nume de iubire? 

Sa fii tu sentimentul care sa existe in moartea din mine, 

cel plecat de dinainte de a fi creat, 

de un Dumnezeu in care n-am crezut niciodata? 

Zambete spasmodice sparg bisericile sufletului, 
pe care istoria il vrea mai infrant decat Vremea, 
tututror simturilor acestei lumi, 
binecuvantate cu iubire si Destin. 

Rauri de cerneala a Deznadejdii, 

curg spre iubire, 

inecand-o cu mine, 

atat de mult am insemnat, 

penila ucisa de degetele, 

mari, reci si dure ale Destinului, 

care nu mai putea sa ne scrie, 

Via^a. 


213 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


68.E§ti Dumnezeul din Mine 


Numai carnea viselor, 
se cere in vitrinele Iubirii, 
chiar daca cosmarurile, 
sunt mult mai scumpe, 
decat, 

toate vielile la un loc, 

ale celor napastuili, 

de na§terile in ieslea de cristal, 

a Luminii Divine, 

din cerul gandurilor noastre. 

§i-am inceput sa tai, 

macelar de vorbe in vant, 

toate soaptele si ncputintcle tale, 

care acum nu se mai pot trezi in zorii, 

gandurilor dorului din mine, 

cel insetat de nesfarsirea, 

cternitatii din inima ta, 

vant lovit, 

de sanctuarul sangelui Cuvintelor, 
care-mi sculpteaza, 
chipul si asemanarea ta, 
devenind Dumnezeul din mine 


214 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


69.Respiratia nemuririi 


Daca vrajitoarele victii ne-ar fermeca moartea, 
oare am deveni mai fcriciti? 

Sa ne fi nascut sub semnul incertitudinii, 
unui Dumnezeu hoinar, 
care habar nu avea, 

de Pacatul Originar al gandurilor noastre? 

§i-atunci cine sa fun noi cei dcposcdap, 
de noi inline? 

Lumini si umbre scoase la mezat, 
pe scena roasa de vremea unei lumi, 
ce a murit mai demult decat Vremea, 
sufletului care ne-a dat respiratia Nemuririi? 


215 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


70.0chii Luminii Divine 


Toate toartele sparte, 

ale ce§tilor de cafea, 

patimasc nemuririi din mine, 

nu se vor mai line cu degetele solemne, 

ale Existen^ei, 

de sufletul tau, 

ci vor fi baute de annele reci §i sinistre, 
ale gandurilor murdare de stars it de lume, 
unde doar armatele de vise, 
mai pot face ceva, 
alaturi de tine, 

amanta a respi rati i lor reci de imbratisari, 

pe care nu le voi mai avea niciodata, 

in patul conjugal ce ni s-a inchinat, 

mortii de noi inline, 

cei batu^i de soarta, 

macelului dintre Clipele unui Timp, 

prea obosit, 

sa se mai priveasca, 

in ochii Luminii Divine, 

a sufletelor noastre. 


216 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


71.Troiene 


Viscole§te sangele pa§ilor tai, 
in pustiul alb al taranii din mine, 
zapezi venite din Lumea de Apoi, 
ma troienesc cu raceala patimilor, 
care ma ning greu cu plumbul apasator, 
al caderii, 

din inaltimilc fara stars it ale amintirii noastre. 

Nici pacatele nevinovate ale ingerilor intalnirii, 
nu ne-ar mai putea spala vreodata, 
troienele viselor care ne-au unit, 
fruntile, 

pe care ni se scurgea apa vie^ii eteme, 
intr-un sarut al nemuririi. 


217 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


72.Zori cernip 


Sange de plumb, 
ce-mi curgi prin venele dorului, 
patimile zorilor cerniti, 
de ochii tai, 
care nu-mi mai rasar, 
pe cerul vielii, 
niciodata. 

Zbor necontenit peste ceturilc llintei iubirii, 

unica si nestemata, 

prin care respiram si existam, 

impreuna, 

acum, 

moarta, 

al carei monnant ni s-a pierdut, 
pentru totdeauna din calea pa§ilor, 
din ce in ce mai obosi^i §i mai abatu^i, 
in drumul lor spre neant. 


218 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


73.Ploi pustii §i red 


Frunze ruginite de dor, 

rup in caderea lor, 

tarana patimilor care le-au hranit, 

implinirea. 

Ploi pustii §i reci, 

ne macina calea pa§ilor sentimentelor, 

ce par a fi moarte, 

mai demult decat Timpul. 

Vremuri tulburi pline de intrebari, 
se astern in troiene, 

fulguindu-ne cu amintiri atat de inghetatc, 
incat se sparg in mii de cioburi ale uitarii, 
la fiecare atingere. 


219 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


74.Revedere 


Niciodata steaua ctcrnitapi, 

Clipei noastre, 
nu ne va cadea, 
pe bolta cerului sufletelor, 
in cimitirele, 
de vise §i a§teptari, 
ale revederii. 

Vom alerga mereu, 
prin Universul nemuririi, 
unde vom lumina, 
intunericul mastilor de granit, 
ale stelelor celorlalte Clipe, 
care se inlanpnesc, 
despartindu-ne calea prin Timp, 
si ne zambesc in festivalul indifcrentci. 


Doar amintirea Luminii Divine, 
a iubirii pe care am aprins-o, 
undeva-candva, 
cu sarutul etem al implinirii, 
ne mai arata calea, 
spre Adevarul Absolut, 
in care traiam odata. 


220 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


75.Daca 


Daca eu sunt cerul, 
tu e§ti steaua lui. 

Daca eu sunt marea, 
tu csti tarmul ei. 

Daca eu sunt visul, 
tu e§ti zorii lui. 

Daca eu sunt nemurirea, 
tu e§ti eternitatea ei. 

Daca eu sunt cuvantul, 
tu e§ti intclcsul lui. 

Daca eu sunt iubirea, 
tu e§ti hnplinirea ei. 

Daca eu sunt amintirea, 
tu e§ti lacrima ei. 

Daca eu sunt dorul, 
tu e§ti nesfarsirea lui. 


221 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


76.Moara Pacatelor 


Sunt viscol nascut din steaua 

§oaptelor tale cu inimi de gheala, 

fulgi de intelesuri se astern, 

peste mormintele viitorului care ne mvcsmanta, 

cu un prezent al nimanui. 

Rasete de cristal sparte in cioburile indifcrcntei, 

asurzesc paiatele promenadei, 

de priviri iscoditoare ale unui Timp, 

atat de strain de noi inline, 

incat nici Moara Pacatelor nu-1 mai recunoastc, 

cu toate ca-i mananca painea huzurului, 

dospita intre perctii de lemn putrezit al indifcrcntei, 

din care au fost taiate, 

scandurile sicriului sansci, 

de a fi lumea buna, 

al bulevardului pervers si obscen, 

ce da via^a, 

numai celor ce §tiu sa-i respecte, 
morala bordelului, 
denumit pompos, 

Parlament . 


222 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


77.La piafa de vechituri a omenirii 


Pare sa fi nins, 

cu toate regretele manastirilor de patimi, 
peste imensitatea alba, 
a trupurilor cernite de vorbe-n vant, 
duse spre mtclcsurilc meschine ale soartei, 
unde salciile, 
nici sa-§i planga apa vietii, 
nu mai stiu, 

de atat de multa sinceritate, 
afisata cu ncsat, 
inaintea toporului religios, 
cu lame ascuptc, 

a unei intalniri dintre desfrau si crcdinta, 

in biserica roasa de moliile mantuirii, 

plina cu haine descarnate de inimi, 

ce stau aruncate la nimereala, 

in fraze pompoase, 

rupte, peticite si murdare, 

prea de timpuriu, 

spre a fi donate copiilor de clipe, 

ucisi mai devreme decat nastcrca, 

daruita mortii, 

in piata de vechituri a omenirii, 
cu nume de istorie. 


223 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


78.Banii liberta^ii 


Ramuri meschine lovesc ferestrele gandurilor, 
spre a 11 sparte de pacatele ahtiate, 
dupa banii 1 i bcrtati i de a rcusi, 
sa rastoame ierarhia toaletelor publice, 
unde mizeria este cinste , 
iar mucegaiul drept fala. 

Verbe care nu mai au rabdare, 

stau gata sa ins face noi functii in dezinfectarea, 

gurilor care mai respira, 

aerul curat al democratiei, 

in lumea deocheata a politicii. 


224 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


79 Jug de boi 


Inhamati in legi facute, 
doar pentru ieslea noastra, 
ne tragem zilele din ce in ce mai biciuite, 
strapunse de hamurile, 
promisiunilor neindeplinite, 
ale gratiilor ce se doresc, 
viitoarea noastra libertate, 

§i care ne amagesc din amvonul, 
panteonului cu nume de cont bancar. 

Jug de boi lacomi §i nesimlili, 

sta tras la indigo in loc sa traga, 

carele vielilor din ce in ce mai grele, 

de plumbul topit al nevoilor care ne ard, 

incarnate de dezolare si angoasa, 

pe fata societatii de consum care ne consuma, 

vrand sa aram mai multe bunuri, 

pe ogoarele necinstei si marlaniei, 

aflate in proprietatea unei patrii de nimicnicii, 

ce par a nimanui, 

scaldata de soarele sfant al infamiei, 
care flutura in vantul indifcrentci, 
pe catargul urii si meschinariei, 
a celor care ne propovaduiesc bunastarea, 
la masa subreda a dorintclor, 


225 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


pline de iluziile desantatc ale unei dcmocratii, 

din ce in ce mai originale, 

cu vanitate si dezgust fata de tot ce are gust. 


80.Lupi desfigura^i de ura 


§oarecii ncsimtirii si-au pierdut gaurile hotici, 
iar acum rod politica de mucava a dcmocratiei, 
pe malurile indifercntei cladite cat mai solid, 
cu caramizile din vise aduse de dinafara, 
de gandurile bunastarii. 

Lupi desligurati de ura, 
lacomi §i meschini, 

vo tali si para fat i de publicitatea macabra, 

a dictaturii cinice a banului, 

promit oilor iubire §i desfatare, 

cu fanul unor clipe din cea mai buna calitate, 

care se dovede§te a fi sangele unei istorii, 

ce nu-§i poate intelege niciodata, 

calea amara a neputintci, 

de a se privi cu adevarat in oglinda adevarului. 


226 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


81.Rama§aguri 


Cainii spasmodici ai dcscrtaciunii, 
alearga in haita spre caile Domnului, 

Cel hulit si adulat, scuipat si sarutat, 
de moa§tele care stau la coada gre§elilor, 
spre a se inchina vremelnicelor Iluzii a Vietii. 


Ramasaguri de cartier stau pavaza, 
palmilor batatorite de nesansa, 
sfartecarii unui hoit de moment, 
spre a fi inghipt cu tot cu ghearele, 
care ne taie respiratia viitorului, 
din ce in ce mai sinistru. 


227 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


82.Morminte faraonice 


Fabrici istovite de propriul fum, 
sunt duse spre nicaieri in incendii apocaliptice, 
aprinse de licuricii stravezii si insipizi, 
care ne lumineaza noaptea suspinelor, 
batjocorind si furand muncile Existentci, 
de a fi fcriciti. 

Vrajitori politici cauta hamali electorali, 
pentru inflorirea economiei, 
din buzunarele rupte de vantul soartei, 
pecetluita pe mormintele faraonice, 
cu nume de catedrale, 
ale legilor §i legita^ilor meschine, 
nesupuse societati i inadaptate, 
la lumea §i via^a de apoi, 
a religiei. 


228 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


83.Prezent alterat 


Reglari de conturi spasmodice, 
cu Dumnezeul cel crucificat, 
piroane ruginite de lacrimi, 
stau intepenite in taine si datini stramoscsti, 
sfartecandu-le cu taisurilc lor patrunzatoare, 
atunci cand Viitorul vrea sa le elibereze, 
de povara propriului trecut , 
al vanzarii de noi m§ine. 

Diademe de pacate stau marturie, 
pe capetele mireselor morlii, 
care ne astcapta la nunta cu Destinul, 
pentru a ne implini soarta, 
de a fi rcnegatii unui Dumnezeu, 
care a uitat sa-si plateasca datoria, 
atunci cand a baut la crasma Creatiei, 
apa vietii noastre, 

pana cand i-a stat in gat si s-a inecat cu noi, 
atunci s-a hotarat sa-si achite consumatia, 
pe care a stropit-o din belsug cu Pacatul Originar, 
spre a fi mai aprinsa, 
cu cat mai multe stele de tarie, 
pe care le aducea din trecut, 

aruncandu-le haotic precum ii este obiceiul Timpului Sau, 
spre a plati pe taraba masluita a Destinului, 


229 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


de Prezentul nostru alterat si trist de Iluzia Victii, 
pe care nici cele mai sarace §i banale Clipe, 
par ca nu-1 mai vor. 


84.Compromis, Dumnezeu §i Satan 


Statui de ceara se topesc in sangele promisiunilor, 
luand fonne grotesti, 
de Cuvinte fara capatai, 
hartuitc si muse ate, 
de dintii asfaltului sentimental, 
unde nici un pas, 
oricat de greu, de mare, de scmct, 
sau de mic si neinsemnat ar fi, 
nu poate lasa nici o urma, 
in bordelul desfatarii, 
unde se avorteaza visele, 
spre a da loc, 

morfii obi§nuite de fiecare zi, 
a trairilor animalice din sufletele, 
noroiului putred, 

din care ne-a modelat Dumnezeul infamiei, 
din noi, 

Cel lepadat de Satana care exista pentru un crez, 
prea divin spre a nu putea deveni religie ci stiinta, 
prea miscator spre a nu fi compromis ci arta, 
cu nume de Dcsavarsire a Fericirii, 
pe care Dumnezeu ne-a interzis-o, 
promitandu-ne sa avem aceasta jucarie, 
intr-o Viata de Apoi, 
unde speri sa poata li mai damic, 

230 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


deoarece acum nu mai are cu ce sa-§i plateasca, 
nici macar propriile cheltuieli de inmormantare, 
din noi inline. 


85. E vorba de-o varsta a Timpului meu 


E vorba de-o varsta a Timpului meu, 
sunt doar o mladita a cerului din vine, 
nici stoluri de dureri si nici chiar Dumnezeu, 
nu poate muri fara suflarea din mine. 

Razant ma apropii de moarte si sper, 

ca toti colluna§ii iubirii, 

vor fi impartiti de mister, dor si cer, 

cand voi fi pus cu lacrimi in groapa amintirii. 

E vorba de-o varsta a Timpului meu, 
atat de bolnav de iubire, 
cu toti cei de fata mai sunt viu si sper, 
ca mai credem in viata si lire. 

Noi , cei de cristal ce ne spargem incet, 
in cioburi de vreme si-amintirc, 
dorim sa ne clati mai mult decat mister, 
in troiene de vraci si cimitire. 

Mai mor^i decat pacea §i mai vii ca razboiul, 
ne cinstim c-un priveghi al onoarei, 
ca ne-am nascut pe un alt teritoriu, 
decat cel ars de un soare al teroarei. 


231 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


E vorba de-o varsta a Timpului meu, 
cel umilit de credinia, 
sa pot sa ma infrupt cu mandrie si eu, 
din taina ce ma lasa-n ncfiinta. 


86.Targ de oase 


E targ cu oase de frumuscp, 
castigatoarc de titluri Miss Uni vers, 
ce-si etalau candva nurii reci si sfidatori, 
ne§tiind cat vor valora, 
in cimitirul Destinului, 
unde cioclii de intamplari, 
i§i varsa otrava zilei, 
pe palmele batatorite, 
de tarana trupurilor, 
din vorbe fara rost 
si zile dezbracate de orice frumuscte, 
ce privesc obscen si injura orizontul, 
care vrea sa le acopere goliciunea, 
cu noaptea din el. 


Felinare rosii abia astcapta sa se aprinda, 
in bordelul sentimental, 
vrajit cu tarabele de prost gust, 
ale mercenarilor orelor de piatra, 
tocmiti sa negocieze numarul deceselor, 
la portilc Infernului sau Paradisului, 

Lui Dumnezeu. 


232 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


87.Aburi descarnap 


Acari insalubri schimba macazurile politicilor la moda, 
parlamentari pomograflci se pregatesc pentru scena, 
aburii dcscarnati de vraja ai noptilor de petreceri, 
se dovedesc a fi plumb topit ce curge prin venele patimase 
de sex, 

ce vor sa dea noi legi impotriva prostituliei, 

c-a§a da bine poporului care §i-a lasat mahmureala, 

in bratele legiuitorilor, 

pentru a le croi costume de prostie, 

din cele mai diverse culori §i modele. 


233 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


88 .In mine 


Sunt pustiit, 
de privirile goale, 
ale intrebarilor de vant, 
dinti de cremene, 
imi sfarteca orizontul inimii, 
care la fiecare sfa§iere, 
fulgera atat de tare, 
incat arde cu lacrimile sale, 
intreaga cale, 

pe care a strabatut-o Dumnezeu, 
in mine. 

Urme de amintiri, 
stau singure si triste, 
in zapada de stars it de lume, 
ce mai ninge cu asteptari. 

Strigate de groaza, 
strabat crengile sentimentelor, 
aruncate de viscolul iubirii, 
atat de departe, 

de trunchiul intamplarii care le-a dat viata, 
incat nu vor mai li niciodata, 
pa§ii privirii miracolului, 
ce a nascut, 


234 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


etemitatea ta, 
in mine. 


89.Castelul de nisip 


Cand am deschis poarta, 
castelului iubirii noastre, 
mi-am dat seama ca era construit, 
din nisip sentimental, 
gata sa se naruie, 

peste toate nazuintcle si asp i rati ilc, 
devenind un larm spalat, 
de valurile uitarii, 
pentru totdeauna. 

§i-am desenat pe nisip, 
o inima, 

dar si-a pierdut repede conturul. 

Hind acoperita de vantul Dcscrtaciunii, 
ce dorea sa fie domni§oara de onoare, 
la nunta prejudecatilor cu Destinul. 


235 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


90.Ajuta{i-L pe Dumnezeu 


Aripi mute se cearta cu vazduhul, 

scriind pe spatele acestuia, 

tainele impietrite ale zborului sperantelor, 

care se prabuscsc isteric, 

peste trenul asteptarilor, 

ce pare oprit pentru totdeauna, 

in gara cimitirului, 

unde este inmormantat Timpul. 

Cata linistc strigatoare la cer, 
se perinda pe peroanele reci si putrede, 
ale unor solutii, 

ce inca i§i biciuesc pa§ii fara urme, 
plini de regrete si rcmuscari zadarnice, 
de cand si-au pierdut orele intalnirilor, 
la ruleta nemiloasa, 

adusa de Dumnezeu la cazinoul Desfraului, 
ca sa faca bani, 

fiindca intretinerea Raiului si Iadului , 
s-a scumpit mult in ultima vreme, 
smoala, pacatele, focul, incalzirea lor, 
costa, 

la fel si luxul Paradisului, 
asta ca sa nu mai vorbim, 
de sfintii doritori de confort, 


236 



SORIN CERIN - ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


care au numai drepturi dar nu si obligatii, 
a§a ca ajuta^i-L pe Dumnezeu! 


237 



SORIN CERIN - 


ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


238 



SORIN CERIN - 


ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


239 



SORIN CERIN - 


ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


240 



SORIN CERIN - 


ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


241 



SORIN CERIN - 


ANGELS AND IMMORTALITY 


242 



