The Inquisition was not merely 
an expression of religious authority nor 
was it solely an instrument of social 
and political control. It was, as the title 
Cultural Encounters suggests, an arena 
where different cultures met and 
clashed on both shores of the Atlantic. 
Featuring the work of well-known his- 
torians, anthropologists, and literary 
scholars, this pioneering cross-disci- 
plinary volume presents a compelling 
picture of cultural resilience in the face 
of coercion. 

Essays in this collection address the 
limitations of the Inquisition, as well as 
its political and social uses, and explore 
the ways in which numerous social 
groups preserved their cultural identity 
despite oppression. Persecuted groups, 
whether Christianized Jews in Spain or 
native folk healers in the New World, 
were able to survive the Inquisition by 
means of strategies as diverse as pre- 
serving their experiences through lit- 
erature and answering the need for 
medical care. 

Two important bibliographical 
essays reveal the growing scope and 
maturity of Inquisition studies, while 
the wealth of original archival research 
provides specialists in Hispanic studies 
with valuable sources and models for 
future scholarship. In addition to pro- 
viding new perspectives on the cultural 
significance of the Inquisition, these 
fascinating variations on the theme of 
social resistance and cultural persis- 
tence will appeal to readers with a more 
general interest in persecution and 
survival. 



CULTURAL ENCOUNTERS 




Published under the auspices of the 
CENTER FOR MEDIEVAL AND RENAISSANCE STUDIES 
University of California, Los Angeles 



Thi s On© 




NLAD-18A-75L5 



Auto de fe in the Plaza Mayor, Madrid 



CULTURAL ENCOUNTERS 

The Impact of the Inquisition 
in Spain and the New World 



EDITED BY 



Mary Elizabeth Perry 

and 

Anne J. Cruz 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
Berkeley Los Angeles Oxford 



Copyrighted material 



University of California Press 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California 
University of California Press 
Oxford, England 
Copyright © 1991 by 
The Regents of the University of California 
Printed in the United States of America 

123456789 



Library of Congress Cataloging in 
Publication Data 

Cultural encounters: the impact of the Inquisition 
in Spain and the New World / edited by Mary 
Elizabeth Perry and Anne J. Cruz, 
p. cm. 

Papers presented at an international confer- 
ence held March 25 — 27, 1988 in Los Angeles, 
Calif., sponsored by the University of California, 
Irvine, the University of California, Los Angeles, 
and the University of Southern California. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0—520-07098—4 (alk. paper) 

1. Inquisition — Spain — Congresses. 2. In- 
quisition — Mexico— Congresses. 3. Indians of 
Mexico — Congresses. I. Perry, Mary Elizabeth, 
1 937~ II- Cruz, Anne J., 1941- 

III. University of California, Irvine. IV. Uni- 
versity of California, Los Angeles. V. Univer- 
sity of Southern California. 
BX1735.C84 1991 

272'.2 — dc20 90-22450 

CIP 



The paper used in this publication meets the minimum 
requirements of American National Standard for 
Information Sciences — Permanence of Paper for 
Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48 — 1984 @ 



CONTENTS 



I W I.Fnr. M F.NTS I Vli 

INTRODUCTION [ IX 

PART I « THE INQUISITION AND THE LIMITS 

OF DISCIPLINE 

1. Colonizing Souls: The Failure of the Indian Inquisition and 
the Rise of Penitential Discipline 
/. Jorge Klor de Alva I 3 

2. New Spain's Inquisition for Indians from the Sixteenth to the 

Nineteenth Century 

Roberto Moreno de los Arcos / 23 

3. The Inquisition's Repression of Curanderos 
Noemt Quezada I 37 

4. Sorcery and Eroticism in Love Magic 
Maria Helena Sanchez Ortega I 58 

5. Visionaries and Affective Spirituality during the First Half 

of the Sixteenth Century 
Geraldine McKendrick and Angus MacKay I 93 

6. Politics, Prophecy, and the Inquisition in Late Sixteenth-Century Spain 

Richard L. Kagan I 105 



v 



Copyrighted material 



vi 



CONTENTS 



PART IT » PERSECUTION AND PERSISTENCE 

7. Family and Patronage: The Judeo-Converso Minority in Spain 

Jaime Contreras I 127 

8. The Jew as Witch: Displaced Aggression and the Myth of the 

Santo Nino de La Guardia 
Stephen Haliczer I 146 

9. On Knowing Other People's Lives, Inquisitorially and Artistically 

Joseph H. Silverman I 157 

10. Scorched Parchments and Tortured Memories: The "Jewishness" 

of the Anussim (Crypto-Jews) 

Moshe Lazar [ 176 

11. The Inquisition and the Crypto- Jewish Community in 
Colonial New Spain and New Mexico 
Stanley M. Hordes I 207 

PART TTT » RTRT IOGR APHICAT ESSAYS 

12. Recent Historiography of the Spanish Inquisition (1977—1988): 

Balance and Perspective 
Jesus M. De Bujanda I 221 

13. Historiography of the Mexican Inquisition: Evolution of 
Interpretations and Methodologies 

Richard E. Greenleaf I 248 

INDEX L 2R1 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



The essays included in this volume were selected from papers presented 
at the international conference, "Cultural Encounters: The Impact of 
the Inquisition in Spain and the New World," which took place March 
25, 26, and 27, 1988, at the University of California, Los Angeles and 
the University of Southern California. Under the auspices of the UCLA 
Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, and sponsored by the 
University of California, Irvine, the University of California, Los 
Angeles, and the University of Southern California, this scholarly re- 
union formed part of the international observance of the quincentenary 
of Christopher Columbus's voyage to the New World. 

The conference's main purpose was to bring together scholars in sev- 
eral disciplines — anthropology, ethnology, history, and literary studies — 
from leading universities in North America, Europe, and Latin America, 
and, for the first time in Inquisition studies, to provide a forum in which 
to exchange recent research findings and take stock of the status of In- 
quisition studies in the United States and abroad. The essays included 
herein testify eloquently to the success of the conference in its endeavor 
to broaden discussion of the role of the Spanish Inquisition in Hispanic 
society, and to investigate in depth the Inquisition's powers, not only in 
Spain, but in the New World. 

For their support of the conference and the publication of the present 
volume, we are grateful to the National Endowment for the Humanities, 
the Comite Conjunto Hispano-Norteamericano para la Cooperation 
Cultural y Educativa, the UC-MEXUS Consortium, the UC Irvine 
School of Humanities, the USC College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences; 

vii 



Copyrighted material 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



the USC Doheny Library; and the Del Amo Foundation Committees at 
UCLA and the University of Southern California. The conference Plan- 
ning Committee gave us expert advice during the crucial early stages of 
the conference: we thank members Carroll B. Johnson, UCLA; Henry 
Ansgar Kelly, UCLA; Carlos Otero, UCLA; and Jaime Rodriguez, 
UCL We especially wish to recognize Maria Cristina Quintero, who or- 
ganized the USC colloquium; Fredi Chiappelli, Director of the UCLA 
Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies; Robert I. Burns, S.J., 
UCLA; and Michael J. B. Allen, who is now Director of the UCLA 
Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies. Susanne Kahle, UCLA 
Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, deserves a special note of 
thanks for her invaluable assistance to the conference and this volume. 

Finally, we would like to thank the session chairs, the conference 
participants, and the members of the Southern California community; 
their dialogue has strengthened and enriched the essays in this volume. 
We are grateful especially for the opportunity to work with Fredi Chiap- 
pelli and Joseph Silverman before their untimely deaths. We thank 
Susan Isabel Stein for translating the Spanish essays with thought and 
care, Nicholas Goodhue for his expert copyediting, and Annie Reynoso 
for her skilled word processing. 

Our greatest thanks are due those scholars who generously allowed 
us to engage their research in the growing critical discourse on the 
Spanish Inquisition, and with whom we have worked these past months 
in bringing this volume to light. To them we extend our most sincere 
admiration and gratitude. 

Mary Elizabeth Perry 
Anne J. Cruz 



Copyrighted material 



INTRODUCTION 

Mary Elizabeth Perry and Anne J. Cruz 



Ferdinand and Isabel revived a long dormant medieval institution when 
they received permission from Pope Sixtus IV in 1478 to name in- 
quisitors in the cities and dioceses of their domain. Directing their newly 
appointed inquisitors to defend the true faith, the Catholic Kings set into 
motion a machinery that would quickly expand beyond investigations of 
apostasy and heresy. The Spanish Inquisition established permanent tri- 
bunals in major towns and cities, developed a large bureaucracy to carry 
out investigations in most communities of the realm, and permeated all 
areas of human life, both private and public. Franciscan missionaries 
carried the Inquisition to the New World, where it ran headlong into 
the clash between Iberian Catholicism and Native American beliefs. 
From its quiet beginning as a papal court of inquiry restricted in the thir- 
teenth century to the Crown of Aragon, the Spanish Inquisition thus be- 
came a major theater for cultural encounters among the many peoples 
throughout the Hispanic world. 

A suprema, or council of clerics appointed by the Spanish Crown, 
supervised the vast bureaucracy of the Inquisition on both sides of the 
Atlantic, but the documents from its voluminous records show that the 
Inquisition represented more than the Crown or an official elite. Al- 
though the Crown appointed as inquisitors clerics with degrees in law 
or theology, the people who answered their questions as witnesses or 
suspects often spoke of ideas and beliefs remote from theological and 
juridical scholarship. Instead, they related both the extraordinary and 
ordinary events of their everyday lives. Inquisitors could not merely im- 
pose official views but were required to hear and record all testimony. 

ix 



Copyrighted material 



X 



MARY ELIZABETH PERRY AND ANNE J. CRUZ 



Their careful records thus reveal a continuous interweaving of various 
cultures, religions, and political power that reflects the social and intel- 
lectual climates of Spain and the New World and that documents the 
complexities of those same social groups they attempted to contain. 

Historically, the Inquisition has provided a rich source of study 
for scholars of anthropology, history, and literature. From the "Black 
Legend" descriptions of sixteenth-century writers, even to current social 
history, Inquisition studies have proved to be controversial, contradic- 
tory, and provocative. Several recent conferences indicate growing in- 
terest in Inquisition scholarship. The 1978 international symposium 
held in Cuenca, Spain, addressed the historical origins and implications 
of the Inquisition. In that same year Inquisition specialist Gustav Hen- 
ningsen organized an international symposium in Denmark, and histo- 
rian Angel Alcala organized the conference held in 1983 in the United 
States which focused on the mentalities of the Inquisition. Other recent 
symposia addressing the Inquisition have been held in Brazil, Paris, 
Rome, and Illinois. 

The essays in this volume developed from papers presented at an in- 
ternational and multidisciplinary conference held in Los Angeles in 
1988 that for the first time addressed the complex interactions between 
Hispanic cultures and the Spanish Inquisition. Representing the most 
innovative scholarship to date, these selected essays offer a comprehen- 
sive review of previous studies, investigate major issues, and explore and 
present new perspectives on the cultural significance of the Inquisition 
in Spain and the New World. 

The volume is divided into three parts, beginning with Part I: The In- 
quisition and the Limits of Discipline, which examines the methods used by 
the Inquisition in its attempts to control diverse populations in both 
Spain and the New World. The anthropological and historical studies 
in this section focus on the uses and limitations of the Inquisition and 
other forms of discipline imposed on Native Americans and such mar- 
ginalized groups in Spain as sorceresses, visionaries, and prophets. 

The Inquisition had labored diligently in Spain to contain populations 
of conversos (Christianized Jews) and moriscos (Christianized Muslims), 
increasingly catechizing these communities and monitoring their ex- 
ternal behavior. In the process of colonization — indeed, as an integral 
part of this process — the measures of control adopted by the Counter- 
Reformation resurfaced in Spanish efforts to subdue native cultures in 
the New World. Here the Holy Office faced not simply a problem of 
containing religious minority groups, but the complex task of organizing 



Copyrighted material 



INTRODUCTION 



xi 



a colonial society of non-Spanish speaking Indians. In their contribu- 
tions to this section, J. Jorge Klor de Alva and Roberto Moreno de los 
Arcos both examine the Indian Inquisition, but they reach implicitly 
contradictory conclusions about its effectiveness. 

Anthropologist Klor de Alva argues that the Indian Inquistion failed 
to carry out the Christianization of Native Americans. Instead, Spanish 
authorities turned to penitential discipline as a means of "colonizing 
souls." Noting the comparatively small number of Inquisition cases 
against Indians, this scholar concludes that neither the royal decree of 
1571 proscribing prosecution of the Indians, nor humanitarian argu- 
ments to protect them, provide satisfactory explanations. Klor de Alva 
looks instead at the military and strategic requirements for subduing the 
indigenous peoples of so many city-states, and he argues that the peni- 
tential discipline promoted by confession and missionaries served 
Spanish interests far more effectively than did severe punishments of a 
few Indians by the Holy Office. 

Studying the arrival and development of inquisitional jurisdiction in 
the Americas, historian Roberto Moreno de los Arcos distinguishes 
between the Inquisition and the institution that dealt specifically with In- 
dians, variously called the Indian Inquisition, the Protectorate of Na- 
tives, or the Indian Tribunal of Faith. In contrast with Klor de Alva, 
he details how the Indian Inquisition gained both jurisdictional and 
ecclesiastical control over the Indians by utilizing theological arguments. 
Outlining its development, Moreno de los Arcos studies the Indian Tri- 
bunal's rationale for power in its conceptualization of the Indians as 
idolaters, and the resultant need for exorcism and conversion. He con- 
cludes that, although the Inquisition was prohibited from punishing In- 
dians for transgressions of faith, the institution that administered their 
punishments originated from and remained analogous to it. 

The limits of the Inquisition were determined as much by the social 
need for certain practices as by the impossibility of total control in an 
essentially heterodox culture. In her essay on curanderos and the Inquisi- 
tion in colonial Mexico, anthropologist Noemi Quezada argues that a 
shortage of doctors prevented the Holy Office from carrying out a wide- 
spread prosecution of native healers. She investigates the role of tradi- 
tional healers in the diverse cultures of New Spain, and views them 
as serving an important function within the communities of Indians, 
mestizos, and blacks. Citing several trials of curanderos, she reveals how, 
despite their unorthodoxy, they were allowed to practice among their 
own peoples so long as they avoided certain traditions such as ingesting 



Copyrighted material 



xii 



MARY ELIZABETH PERRY AND ANNE J. CRUZ 



hallucinogens. Quezada explores the contrasting values of European 
medical practices against non-European traditions of communal healing 
regarded as superstitious by the Spaniards. 

Love magic, the subject of Maria Helena Sanchez Ortega's essay, rep- 
resents another popular activity that often came under the scrutiny of 
the Inquisition. To read her essay is to enter into a feminine world of 
spells, incantations, and invocations meant to attract and hold men. 
Through a meticulous reading of Inquisition documents on the trials 
of several sorceresses and their clients, Sanchez Ortega discovers the 
complex rituals through which women in early modern Spain conjured 
demons as well as saints in their attempts to control men's wills. 

Despite prosecutions of many accused sorceresses, the Holy Office 
could not stamp out the popular practice of love magic. Examining the 
ways through which women subverted the very system that oppressed 
them, Sanchez Ortega shows that their interest was less amorous than 
economic: underlying the sorceresses's imprecations is the pragmatic 
realization that women need male support in order to survive in a patri- 
archal society. 

Like those of Quezada and Sanchez Ortega, the two essays by histo- 
rians Richard Kagan and co-authors Angus MacKay and Geraldine 
McKcndrick examine popular cultural practices questioned by the In- 
quisition and discuss why they should draw the attention of an institu- 
tion established to prosecute apostates and heretics. MacKay and 
McKendrick study the phenomenon of visionaries in Spain and their 
treatment by the Inquisition. Noting the prominent role played by 
women, they focus on several female visionaries, including Sor Maria 
de Santo Domingo, an ignorant peasant woman who was often consulted 
by Cardinal Ximenez. To the authors, her case illustrates how women 
were actively encouraged to adopt a visionary spirituality by such great 
religious figures as Saint Ignatius Loyola and Ximenez, and how the 
Franciscan order in particular espoused female spirituality. In their 
essay, MacKay and McKendrick point out that belief in these women's 
messianic prophecies, especially by the monarchy, in fact protected them 
from the Inquisition. 

Richard Kagan cites three cases — a soldier, a lawyer's daughter, and 
a Portuguese nun — in which prophecy won considerable fame for these 
otherwise ordinary people. Church ambiguity about prophecy and the 
difficulties of distinguishing false prophets from true prophets pre- 
vented the Inquisition from taking a more active role in attempting to 
control those who said they were relaying messages from God. In fact, 
Kagan argues, the Holy Office only prosecuted those "plaza prophets" 



Copyrighted material 



INTRODUCTION 



xiii 



whose prognostications constituted a direct political threat to the mon- 
archy. Kagan challenges the conclusion of other historians that the 
Inquisition did not serve as an instrument of royal absolutism, and he 
argues instead that the practice of the Holy Office must be seen within 
the limitations of a specific political context. 

The survival of cultures persecuted by the Inquisition provides the 
focus for Part II: Persecution and Persistence. In his essay on family and 
patronage, historian Jaime Contreras questions the customary polarized 
conceptualization of conversos opposed to Christians. Using a sociolog- 
ical perspective to reexamine the presence of this minority group in 
sixteenth-century Spain, he notes its existence as one dependent upon 
secrecy and clandestinity. His study posits the importance of lineal and 
kinship relations as a means of creating and maintaining a separate iden- 
tity — both social and personal — not only within the majority group, but 
also in opposition to it. Thus, to Contreras, the crypto-Jews hold an in- 
termediary position between conversos and emigrant Jews who fled 
Spain to practice their religion elsewhere. 

Conversos are also the subject of Stephen Haliczer's essay, which ar- 
gues that a unique combination of popular and official culture promoted 
their persecution by the Spanish Inquisition. Citing the case of 1491 in 
which Jews were accused of ritually murdering a Christian child in La 
Guardia, he writes that popular anti-Semitism combined with official be- 
lief in demonic power and transformed Jews and Christianized Jews into 
agents of the Devil. Conversos thus became a target for displaced aggres- 
sion in Spain that took the form of widespread witch-hunts through 
most of the rest of Europe, and the Santo Nino became a symbol that 
inquisitors and the populace alike would use to justify their persecution. 

Through a variety of literary sources, Joseph Silverman traces the 
Spanish obsession with lineage, with "clean" blood as opposed to tainted 
marrano and converso origins. Presenting several variations on the theme 
of fear of the Inquisition, this literary scholar shows how different au- 
thors utilize similar anecdotes to lament the destruction of a pluralistic 
society. In his readings of Lope de Vega's play El nino inocente de La Guar- 
dia — which dramatizes the legend addressed earlier by Stephen Halic- 
zer — as well as the Lazarillo de Tormes and the writings of Fray Antonio 
de Guevara, he argues that the expression "to know other people's lives" 
exposes a new "mode of scrutiny," which functions as a weapon of intol- 
erance and oppression in the hands of the inquisitors. 

Yet Silverman notes that, through the undetermined nature of his 
literary hero, Cervantes is one writer who employs the maxim positively 
and gives it revolutionary force. The fact that the author reveals neither 



Copyrighted material 



xiv 



MARY ELIZABETH PERRY AND ANNE J. CRUZ 



Don Quixote's birthplace nor his lineage nor even his family name is sig- 
nificant in not only liberating Don Quixote from the fears of having a 
past, but also allowing a vision of a Spain that might have been. Don 
Quixote's curiosity about others derives not from a will to destroy, but 
from the need to create an alternative world, one which Silverman calls 
a "parenthetical paradise of Art." 

Literary critic Moshe Lazar traces the survival of Anussim or crypto- 
Jewish culture, its religious devotion and continued "Jewishness" despite 
the forcible conversion to Christianity of Sephardic Jews. Challenging 
critics who have questioned the Anussim's ability to retain over several 
centuries a hidden religious life, and recalling Jaime Contreras's argu- 
ment that stresses the clandestine existence of crypto-Jews, Lazar details 
how, despite the burning of their sacred books, the Anussim procured 
and kept hidden many Bibles, prayer books, commentaries on Jewish 
law, essays on Jewish history, and cabalistic and other mystical treatises 
that maintained their faith. When the texts were not available, they 
memorized a Judaism rescued from the scorched parchments and, iron- 
ically, from inquisitorial documents themselves. 

Lazar demonstrates how accusations and confessions echo the Anus- 
sim's frequent themes of guilt over their conversion or their life as 
crypto-Jews, of dreams of leaving the Christian lands for Jerusalem or 
Constantinople, and of the hope of messianic redemption. This scholar 
claims that, in particular, the fragments of psalms and sentences re- 
corded in Inquisition trial documents in Portugal, Majorca, and New 
Spain, as well as in Spain, confirm the Anussim's knowledge of the most 
important prayers of the Sephardic ritual and bear witness to the depth 
and continuity of their faith. 

Historian Stanley Hordes notes the persistence of a pluralistic society 
in New Spain despite Inquisition persecution of crypto-Jews. After 1 596, 
when cases of Judaizing declined in the Mexican Inquisition, many im- 
migrants from Spain and Portugal actively participated in the develop- 
ing economy of New Spain, even as they preserved their crypto-Jewish 
identity. Noting the significance of extended group relationships among 
these people, Hordes shows that Jaime Contreras's proposal to use fam- 
ily, kinship, and lineage as a basis for studying conversos is valid as well 
for the crypto-Jews of the New World. 

In his study of cases of crypto-Jews before the Mexican Inquisition, 
Hordes argues that Spain's changing relationship with Portugal resulted 
in increased Inquisition prosecutions of Judaizers in New Spain in the 
periods following 1580, when Philip II assumed the Portuguese throne, 



Copyrighted material 



INTRODUCTION 



xv 



and 1640, when the Portuguese rebelled against their Spanish rulers. He 
thus expands upon Richard Kagan's argument for the political signifi- 
cance of the Inquisition as a vehicle for the monarchy, and he under- 
scores the bonds between the Inquisition in the New World and Spain. 

Part III: Bibliographic Essays begins with a summary by Jesus Martinez 
de Bujanda of recent historiography on the Inquisition in Spain. This 
scholar points out that as a result of the numerous studies, catalogs, 
and computerized data bases that have appeared since 1977, contempo- 
rary scholars are much better informed about Inquisition documents. 
Equally important, the climate of study has evolved from a polemical 
confrontation between the traditional Catholic perspective and the pro- 
gressive liberal viewpoint to what he terms a more "serene" approach 
that aims toward a higher degree of objectivity and impartiality. Such 
early histories of the Inquistion as Jose Antonio Llorente's Historia crttica 
de la Inquisition and Henry C. Lea's monumental A History of the Inquisi- 
tion in Spain have recently been reedited; the latter has been translated 
into Spanish and its document references updated. According to Mar- 
tinez de Bujanda, the latest scholarly work on the Inquisition focuses on 
its role as a political and religious tribunal as well as on its role as an 
institution for social and religious control. He concludes his essay with 
a valuable list of these works published from 1977 to 1988. 

Historian Richard E. Greenleaf presents an authoritative compen- 
dium of the historiography of the Mexican Inquisition. Professor Green- 
leaf traces the evolution of diverse interpretations and methodologies 
applied to the Inquisition in New Spain, from its earliest primitive 
period (1522-1569) when Spanish Catholicism first clashed with native 
beliefs, through the establishment of the Tribunal of the Holy Office 
(1571-1700), whose main function was to control the influx of seditious 
literature, to the Inquisition in Bourbon Mexico (1700-1820) and its 
preoccupation with non-Catholic foreigners. This thoughtful essay de- 
votes specific sections to scholarship published both on Indians' cases 
before the Inquisition, as well as on cases of crypto-Jews. In his final sec- 
tion, Professor Greenleaf notes the problems of interpretation that face 
scholars who study the Inquisition, and he urges them to leave aside 
cliches as they continue to analyze documentary evidence. 

Whether exploring the uses of the Inquisition, its limitations, or schol- 
arship that has been published on it, the essays in this collection provide 
a unique analysis of the Inquisition as a forum for the meeting of diverse 
and, at times, even opposing cultures. Despite the violence of the en- 
counters and the inexorable changes that ensued, what emerges from 



Copyrighted material 



xvi 



MARY ELIZABETH PERRY AND ANNE J. CRUZ 



the inquisitorial documents is a vivid lesson in survival, one that sketches 
clearly and with great poignancy how various groups in different cul- 
tures strove to endure. 

Although the immediate scholarly purpose of the anthology is to 
reach a more profound knowledge of the Inquisiton, analogies are cer- 
tain to be drawn between events in the sixteenth century and those of 
our own, as the Spanish Inquisition's power is representative of oppres- 
sive institutional forces that exist to this day. For a clearer understanding 
of the systematization of this power, attention must be given both to the 
means of repression and to its reception and subversion by those groups 
it intends to constrain. The essays in this volume not only expand in 
great measure our comprehension of the Spanish Inquisition and its in- 
terrelations with Hispanic and Native American cultures, they also point 
to the larger lesson that cultural difference cannot be sustained without 
a continual process of social resistance. 



Copyrighted material 



PART ONE 



The Inquisition and the Limits 

of Discipline 



Copyrighted material 



ONE 



Colonizing Souls: The Failure of 
the Indian Inquisition and the Rise 
of Penitential Discipline 

J. Jorge Klor de Alva 

When you tell someone your secret, your freedom is gone. 
— Fernando de rojas, La Celestina 



On a November morning in 1539 don Carlos Ometochtzin, the native 
leader of the former city-state of Texcoco, was taken out of the prison 
of the Holy Office garbed in the typical sanbenito cloak and cone-shaped 
hat of the sentenced offender. He was paraded through the streets of 
downtown Mexico City, candle in hand, to a scaffold surrounded by the 
multitude that came to witness his sentencing and abjuration, and later 
to see his strangled body burn at the stake. 1 For the majority of the na- 
tives, it would be unfortunate that never again would an anti-Spanish 
rebel meet his end at such a public spectacle. In less than a decade, the 
stake where individual bodies were set ablaze was replaced by the local 
controls of provisors (or vicars-general) of the dioceses or archdioceses 2 
and, even more important, by the confessional, its penances, its magical 
threats, and its very real capacity to command the submission of tens of 
thousands of wills to the nascent colonial structure. The two related pro- 
cesses alluded to by these events — the failure of the Indian Inquisi- 
tion and the consequent rise of penitential discipline, whose control 
mechanisms played a leading role in the colonization of the Nahuas (the 
Aztecs and their linguistic and cultural neighbors) — are the subject of 
this essay. 

From the beginning of the colonial effort in New Spain, ambivalence 
about the Holy Office limited its utility as an instrument for the domina- 
tion of natives. For instance, the movement to exclude the Indians from 
the authority of the Inquisition reached an early climax in 1540, when 
the apostolic inquisitor, Fray Juan de Zumarraga, received a reprimand 
from Spain for imposing the death sentence on the cacique don Carlos. 3 



4 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 




Fig. 1. Two figures in penitential costume. 



The Indians, however, continued to be processed by the Inquisition 
throughout the decade. And although official warnings to avoid treating 
the natives with severity were heard, no official prohibition against try- 
ing them outside the local dioceses or archdioceses was issued until 1571, 
when Philip II formally removed the Indians in the Spanish colonies 
from the jurisdiction of the Holy Office. 4 Despite a previous absence of 
legislation specifically excluding the Indians, some form of proscription 
nonetheless existed, because it appears that only one case involving Cen- 
tral Mexican Indians came before the Holy Office from 1547 to 1574. 5 
Ambivalence is further suggested by the fact that out of 152 procesos 
acted upon between 1536 and 1543, the years of greatest inquisitorial 



COLONIZING SOULS 



5 



persecution of natives, only about nineteen involved Indians (see Table 
1.1) and the number accused was quite small, approximately seventy- 
five. 6 

Given the seemingly endless possibilities — painfully brought home to 
us by the experiences of some contemporary nation-states — for forcing 
subordination through a "culture of terror," 7 why were so few natives 
tried, tortured, or executed by the Inquisition? And why was colonial 
policy so inconsistent that the Indians ended up beyond its grip al- 
together, although no law demanded that that be the case until 1571, 
while the need for maximizing control was fully recognized as critical, 
by both Church and Crown, prior to this date? As is usually the case 
when spectacular forms of oppression give way to their more subtle vari- 
eties, the reasons commonly offered for the Spanish retreat from an ag- 
gressive application of such a powerful instrument for subjecting natives 
have centered on an assumed rising cry of humanitarian sentiment, 8 
which is said by some 9 to have echoed the following orders issued in 1 540 
to the apostolic inquisitor, Archbishop Zumarraga: 

since these people are newly converted . . . and in such a short time have 
not been able to learn well the things of our Christian religion, nor to be 
instructed in them as is fitting, and mindful that they are new plants, it is 
necessary that they should be attracted more with love than with 
rigor . . . and that they should not be treated roughly nor should one apply 
to them the rigor of the law . . . nor confiscate their property. 10 

But the implementation on humanitarian grounds of these instruc- 
tions could not have been the primary force that led to the exemption 
that was generally observed. First of all, the Visitor General Francisco 
Tello de Sandoval, who replaced Zumarraga in New Spain in 1544 and 
was responsible for making known the New Laws of 1542 — the laws that 
exhibited the greatest degree of toleration Charles V was able to muster 
on behalf of the Indians — not only was not instructed to avoid trying na- 
tives when acting as apostolic inquisitor but, on the contrary, during his 
three-year term failed to dismiss the cases against the Indians that came 
before the Holy Office. 11 

Second, although we know from the effects of the writings of Bar- 
tolome de Las Casas and those of other reformers that this movement 
could have an influence on the formation of colonial policy, 12 the reform 
was focused on limited circles during the middle decades of the century 
and was more successful among Spanish rulers in the Old World than 
among colonial officials, who had to face the very real wrath of the 
settlers when they ventured arguments on behalf of the Indians. Fur- 



Copyrighted material 



CM 
CM 



S-i _ 

|o 

G U 

& ' s 

<y £ 

% :2 
(n .52 

I-H 

c „ 

i :2 

C 

O <U 
C ^ 

•8 2 

:a s 

g-O 

►H O 

rd IS 
0 u 

*0 < 



J 
PQ 
< 



s- 



pd u 



3 

u 
C 

o 
U 



03 
bo 

S 



u > 

Cm Q 



In 

a 
3 

C/3 



y u 

i- — 

o £ 



u 
u 

C/3 



O 
T3 



y 
o 

p 



3 

U 



J2 



!2 
J3 



In 

u 



I 



8. M * 



OOO 
- - - - 



X 



X 



s X 



"o H "o 

M "° 

c 



X 



PL. P Ph Ph PL, Ph 



03 
c 

S 

•c 

u 

o 

it 
y 
o 

E 
Ph 

y 
O 

4-1 

<U 

E 
O 

C/5 
O 

U 

X x x c X 

o 

p 

o 
u 

ot*-ooop_oo 

U g (h L. [_ u u 

Ph-hOhP-Ph— <PhPh 



I 



Si 

§ 

u 



X X 



150 

O O O <*< 03 
— - — - t- 

Ph Ph Ph _ 1 b 



eeeeeeee 



eeeeeeeee 



CO 



o o 



(M 00 to c£> cA i> 00 00 00 00 en cn cn cri cn :t, c-. ~ ~ 



Copyrighted material 



O 
3 



CT3 

<U 

03 

3 

z 

T3 T3 



ti 
u 

In 

03 
3 

03 

z 



3 

O 



3 

O 



03 

<u 

In 
03 

03 

3 

J3 

03 

2 

T3 



3 3 3 

~ — » 

'3 "3 «S 

3 3 0 

he bo o3 

3 3 X 

03 03 



03 

o 



X 



to • 

E 



3 
U 
— 

c 

'u 

3 

03 



V 



Q £ — £ £ 



1 

u 

In 
3 
.3 

U 



^ 3 

be 03 
C be 
03 



T3 
In 

o 

u 



8 

C 

03 

8 
•c 



X 



5 



x 



S > 

JJ 03 

-5 1! 

9" 3 

> —' ^3 



3 

0 



3 

cr 

3 



0 

.In 



-3 



O 

E 



1 

03 

3 

03 

a 

O 

03 
OJ 

T3 
03 

J3 

S 
% 



03 

3 <+_ o O « 

03 3 H li ^ 

U h Cu d< Q 



o 



o 



5 



s 



o 
u 



es eeeeee^ee 



i> i> •<* 1 >— 1 

kO X 



11 u 
Q <-> 

as 

c/5 C/J 

u .a 



u 



X 

4 1 

z := 
>> a- 



C5 II 

- & 

5 



n 
be 

ra 



u 

M 

E 
C 

O. 

V 
T3 
(4 

s 

u 
s- 
u 
■t 

tn 
B 
O 

'w 
cS 

3 

u 

« . 

Ef] V 

I 6 

"3 3 

£1 

c 1c 

y ~ 

-5 - s 
s w 

u ft 

N 

3 V 
V 3 

1 a 

2 & 
£ a 

« u 

§ h 
h u 

S x 

— 4-J 

u 0 

0 QJ 

ij o 



u 
u 
,2 

E 
E 



3 

c/i 



C 

u 

V 

re 
c 

u 
2 



o 
a. 

c 

3 

>< 
U 

w 

ii 

a 

E 

o 

u 

B 



3 

U 

I 

* v 

>^ 

3 

0 

E 



B 

•0 

1 



* 



u 
0) 
— 

B 0 

.2 » 
•% 8 

eg 

a a 

if> E 

N 



8 E 

1 si 

B w u 
"SB 

u 
E 

I 



B 
0 



3 

u 
u 

3> 
3 

'u 

c 

3 

C 

Q a 1 

4j '3 
0 3 



u 

£ 
a. 



Copyrighted m aerial 



8 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



thermore, in the New World much if not most of the legislation that fa- 
vored the indigenes over Spanish interests was generally disregarded or 
selectively applied. 13 As a consequence, the disputes of the intellectuals, 
particularly those that took place in Spain, 14 had very limited practical 
significance in New Spain unless they reflected policy implications that 
supported the powerful sectors that ruled the colony. These facts point 
to the difficulties that undermine any categorical conclusion concerning 
the timing and role played by the toleration movement in the collapse 
of the Indian Inquisition. Thus, when it comes to measuring the relative 
strength of the forces that acted to remove the Indians through the Holy 
Office, it may be more profitable to pay attention to the everyday exigen- 
cies of colonial control than to the royal fiats or the juridical or theolog- 
ical arguments that sometimes informed them. 

THE INQUISITION AND THE ECONOMY OF PUNISHMENT 

Although its ostensible function was to safeguard the orthodoxy of the 
faith, the Holy Office was recognized to be and constantly was used as 
an important tool for social and political control since its founding in 
the thirteenth century. 15 In the New World the history of the Inquisition 
is primarily the story of the struggles over power and truth that marked 
the changing fortunes of the various ethnic, racial, and social sectors. 16 
Following the defeat of the Mexicas of Mexico-Tenochtitlan in 1521, 
Cortes and the Franciscan friars put the Holy Office to work to secure 
their predominance over both upstart Spaniards and recalcitrant In- 
dians. By the surprisingly early date of 1522 an Indian from Acolhuacan 
appears to have been formally accused of concubinage, thereby becom- 
ing the first person in Mexico to be tried by an agent of the Holy Office. 17 
This presaged the use of inquisitorial punishment to regulate the be- 
havior of Indians and Europeans that was generalized the following 
year, when two regulations were issued whose topics fit well into the 
hands of the Cortesian band. One edict, aimed at Europeans, opposed 
heretics and Jews; the other, whose vagueness was more a license to pro- 
secute than a guide to proper behavior, was "against any person who 
through deed or word did anything that appeared to be sinful"! 18 

In New Spain the regulatory possibilities of the latter ordinance were 
especially clear to those who interpreted the culture of the Nahuas as a 
satanic invention, and who used this as a justification for persecuting in- 
digenous religious and sociocultural practices as criminal. Indeed, as the 
military and political hegemony of the Spaniards solidified, this popular 
interpretation was implemented as an apparatus of control by turning 



Copyrighted material 





Fig. 2. "Discipline of players and gamblers and punishment of one who had 
ridiculed our holy faith, by order of Cortes." 



10 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



social customs and beliefs, acceptable in the native moral register, into 
sins, subject to temporal and symbolic punishment according to the 
Spanish criminal/canonical code. The tracing of both European and 
New World moralities onto the same penal map resolved the problem 
of cross-cultural (national) jurisdiction immediately. Thus, the Francis- 
can friar Martin de Valencia, who read into many aspects of the native 
cultures the authorship of the Devil, began to persecute recently bap- 
tized Indians in his capacity as commissary of the Holy Office im- 
mediately after his arrival in 1524. By 1527 his zeal was such that he 
had four Tlaxcalan leaders executed as idolaters and sacrificers, 19 even 
though the previous year the Franciscans had lost control of the Inquisi- 
tion to the Dominicans. 20 In turn, the Dominican leaders of the Holy 
Office lost no time setting the institution to the task of stopping Cortes 
and his Franciscan allies from monopolizing the mechanisms of social 
and political domination; they sought to accomplish this power shift 
primarily by processing scores of their rivals as blasphemers. 21 However, 
with the arrival of the first viceroy in 1535, and the initiation of Zuma- 
rraga's episcopal tribunal the following year, the attention of the Holy 
Office shifted from the highly partisan contests between Spaniards 22 to 
the need to organize a colonial society primarily out of Nahuatl-speaking 
Indians. 

It is hard to imagine a more difficult project: political and religious 
resistance, demographic ratios, language barriers, cultural distances, 
and extensive geographic spaces stood in the way, and the Spaniards had 
few precedents they could follow with confidence. Neither the confron- 
tations with heretics, apostates, or non-Christians back home, nor their 
experiences with the far less socially integrated tribal and chiefdom com- 
munities in the circum-Caribbean area, prepared the Spaniards for the 
encounter with the city-state polities of New Spain. In Central Mexico 
cultural, regulatory, and security concerns contrasted sharply with those 
faced in Spain; there, not only did a variety of effective mechanisms of 
social control exist that could not be duplicated in the New World, but 
the problems of ethnic diversity in the peninsula tended primarily to 
affect civic unity rather than to challenge political stability or cultural 
viability, as was frequently the case in Mexico. 

Consequently, from the time of the fall of Tenochtitlan, the primary 
requirement for the establishment of a colony was tactical and ethno- 
graphic knowledge, which called for the development of new disciplinary 
and intelligence techniques. 23 To gain control, the Spaniards needed in- 
formation about the topography and natural resources of the land, the 



Copyrighted material 



COLONIZING SOULS 



11 



political and social organizations and their jurisdictions, the geography 
of economic production, the type and extent of religious beliefs and ritu- 
als, the meanings and implications of ideological assumptions and local 
loyalties, and the nature and exploitability of everyday practices. All 
these data had to be elicited, translated, interpreted, and ordered within 
familiar conceptual categories that could make practical sense of the 
land and the people in order to form the New Spain out of highly 
ethnocentric and aggressively self-interested city-states. 

To this effect, what today would be called ethnography drew the 
attention of some of the early conquerors (particularly Cortes himself), 24 
priests, and secular officials, so that by the early 1530s missionary- 
ethnographers were formally instructed to collect the information 
needed to found a productive and peaceful colony. 25 Of the various 
institutions charged with the creation of new knowledge about the In- 
dians, the Inquisition seemed to hold the most promise. After all, it en- 
joyed overwhelming support on the part of Church and Crown, and it 
appeared to have access to the maximum force needed to extract confes- 
sions, draw forth information, and punish those who remained silent or 
otherwise resisted its claims. 

A close study of trial records nonetheless suggests that the efficacy of 
the Holy Office as a punitive system and the quantity and variety of in- 
formation the inquisitors could elicit were limited by a number of fac- 
tors. First, quite apart from the ruses and manipulations that sometimes 
precipitated inquisitorial accusations (denuncias or informaciones), charges 
were formally restricted to the types of crimes and breaches legally rec- 
ognized as within the competence of the Holy Office. These included a 
significant but extremely small number of categories of acts that needed 
to be controlled by the colonial powers (see Table 1.2, A). Second, there 
were legal restraints upon the interrogative procedures used that made 
it difficult for important but excludable information to enter the record. 
Third, the extreme and public nature of the penalties could serve as a 
warning to many but did so at the price of moving the key rebels who 
resisted the colonial order further underground, where it became more 
difficult to uproot them. 26 Fourth, the cultural and demographic bar- 
riers between Indians and Europeans, the Holy Office's legalistic proce- 
dures, and the Inquisition officials' constant concern with status — all 
called for levels of financing, energy, and personnel that spelled the 
need for the institution to focus its attention and resources on what it 
knew best and ultimately feared most: heresy and deviance among Euro- 
peans. Not surprisingly, of the 152 procesos tried by Zumarraga's tri- 



Copyrighted material 



12 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



table 1.2 Inquisition Cases in New Spain 
(Archivo General de la Nation, Inquisition [Mexico]) 

Type of Offense Indian Inquisition Non-Indian Inquisition 



A. 1522-1557 

Idolatry 3 15 

Bigamy/concubinage 5 

Sorcery/witchcraft 2 

Misc. religious crimes 2 

B. 1536-1543 b 

Blasphemy 56 

Judaizing 19 

Heresy 8 

Lutheran heresies 5 

Clerical crimes 5 



a Includes dogmatizing against the beliefs of the Church, hiding idols, and performing sacrifices. 

b Of a total of 152 cases, 93 concerned offenses restricted to Europeans, 19 involved Indians 
(approximately 75 individuals). 



bunal, ninety-three were for crimes associated almost exclusively with 
Europeans: blasphemy, heresy, Judaizing, and clerical crimes (Table 1.2, 
B). 27 

Together, these restrictions contributed to making the Inquisition a 
poor mechanism for meting out the type of punishment needed to effec- 
tively regulate masses of unacculturated Indians. But what ultimately 
marginalized the Holy Office from the efforts to subjugate the native 
populations was the widespread deployment, during the first half of the 
century, of two related practices: sacramental confession and missionary 
ethnography. Because each of these was far more pervasive and intru- 
sive than the Inquisition, together they were more efficient at gathering 
the kind of information needed to transform the Nahuas into disci- 
plined subjects. Elsewhere I take up the role of the penitential sys- 
tem as an inciter of discourse on the self and as an apparatus of self- 
formation; 28 here my sole concern is to study how, in the first half of 
the sixteenth century, a shift took place from the inquisitorial techniques 
of random investigation and selective punishment to a technique of 
penitential discipline that sought to affect each word, thought, and deed 
of every individual Indian. 



Copyrighted material 



COLONIZING SOULS 



13 



FROM PUNISHMENT TO DISCIPLINE 

The responsibility for the forced acculturation of the Indians moved 
from the Holy Office to the (seemingly) less stringent local offices of the 
bishops (known as the provisorato del ordinario) in 1547 (see Moreno de 
los Arcos, this volume). The archival record attests to the timing of this 
de facto shift in jurisdiction because only one relevant case 29 appears be- 
tween that date and 1574, 30 by which time the Holy Office had already 
lost its official jurisdiction over the indigenes (see Table 1.1). Although 
the change of venue is nowhere explicitly explained or noted, the letters 
sent to Zumarraga in 1540, after he had had don Carlos executed, 
suggest the outline of a new policy. Translated into today's analytical lan- 
guage, the critical points in the instructions to the archbishop could be 
summarized — and were justified then — as follows: 

1 . Punishment, by functioning as part of a regime of exercises aimed at dis- 
ciplining through indoctrination, is to be discreet and to have the self 
(mind/soul), rather than the body, as its object. That is, instead of tor- 
ture, rigorous punishments, or scandalizing executions, what was 
needed was for the Indians "first to be very well instructed in and 
informed about the faith . . . because gentleness should be applied 
first, before the sore is opened with an iron." 

2. The source and end of the discipline are to be invisible. For instance, "the 
little property they possess" should not be confiscated "because . . . 
the Indians have been greatly scandalized, thinking that they are 
burned on account of the great desire for these goods." 

3. The discipline is to be made imperceptible by appearing to be evenly applied 
throughout the whole social body. In effect, instead of teaching them 
a lesson through rigorous persecution, "the Indians would be bet- 
ter instructed and edified if (the Inquisition) proceeded against the 
Spaniards who supposedly sold them idols, since they deserved the 
punishment more than the Indians who bought them." 31 

I will continue by analyzing the meaning and implications of each of 
these points. 

PUNISHMENT AND THE DISCIPLINING OF THE SOUL 

Scholars have made much of the humanism the first point seems to 
imply. The call for tolerance is an echo of the arguments developed in 
the late 1530s by Las Casas 32 to attack the superficial and sometimes vio- 
lent means with which the Spanish officials and Franciscan friars sought 
to impose the new faith on the Indians. However, a survey of the 



Copyrighted material 



14 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



methods used by the missionaries during these early years attests to the 
futility of Las Casa's appeals for moderation. 33 It could not have been 
otherwise. The popular idea that natives needed to be treated in a spe- 
cial manner (because they were new to the faith, because they had a weak 
understanding, or because they were inclined to vice, etc.) originally 
arose out of very real political exigencies, although the specific conclu- 
sions may have been drawn from speculative reflections on ethnographic 
data or theology. However contradictory, policy was primarily driven by 
the pragmatic requirements of the colony, although, as is the case today, 
in official discourse the need to control was frequently masked by lofty 
language that expounded on the humanity of subordinates. 

A particularly vivid example of the rhetorical, rather than empirical, 
nature of assessments of native capacity to acculturate is suggested by 
the following fact: almost thirty years after the letters to Zumarraga were 
written, the priest Sancho Sanchez de Munon, while advising the king 
about the need to establish a Tribunal of the Holy Office in the New 
World, could still argue that 

[the Inquisition] would be one of the most important things in the service 
of God, for use against the Spaniards, mulattoes, and mestizos who offend 
our Lord [but] for now it should be suspended in what concerns the natives because 
they are so new to the faith, weak [gente fiaca], and of little substance.™ [My em- 
phasis] 

In effect, the movement toward leniency was less the product of the 
reformers' rejection of the spectacular punishment of criminal acts, 
which continued for the Indians in an attenuated form at the local pro- 
visorato del ordinario level, and more a recognition, on the part of most 
priests and secular officials, that what colonial order called for most was 
the eradication from Indian life of the myriad of seemingly banal devia- 
tions from Spanish cultural habits and social customs. The friars, in their 
letters, sermons, doctrinal works, and detailed manuals for confessors, 
were quick to argue that every gesture and thought, from those as- 
sociated with sexual life and domestic practice to the magical and empir- 
ical procedures employed in agriculture, the crafts, and social relations, 
had to be disciplined, retrained, and rechanneled, so as (I would add) 
to serve the interests of those who wielded power in the colony. 35 

To discover and punish these minute illegalities, systematic and per- 
vasive forms of intervention were necessary. In this situation the Inquisi- 
tion's attention to the scandalous cases of a few indigenous cult leaders 36 
was clearly a dangerous and wasteful display of colonial power. Further- 
more, too much delinquency went unperceived by most Spaniards and 



Copyrighted material 



COLONIZING SOULS 



15 



was primarily confined to the private or local spheres, which were too 
numerous to be handled with the juridical safeguards called for by the 
inquisitorial process. Meanwhile, as these minor infractions continued 
to escape the grip of the authorities, they helped to reinforce and legiti- 
mate sociocultural and political alternatives to the habits and practices 
necessary for the formation of a homogeneous, predictable, and submis- 
sive population. 

Although the need to impose some form of consistent and uniform 
discipline had been coming to light since the early 1530s, a substantial 
division in the Spanish perception of the level and nature of native resis- 
tance to Christianity made it impossible to implement one. On the one 
hand, Zumarraga's Inquisition, charged with defending the assumptions 
and practices that articulated Hispanic culture, had the debilitating ef- 
fect of propagating the idea that native heterodoxy continued primarily 
as a result of heretical dogmatizing by a few indigenous religious leaders. 
On the other hand, some of the Franciscans, especially Motolinia," a key 
figure in the Christianization process since 1524, were claiming that the 
natives were seeking salvation by the millions and were quickly forget- 
ting the beliefs of the past. On one level, these representations were 
slowly being challenged by the ethnographic studies undertaken during 
this time, primarily those begun by Olmos in 1533. 38 On another level, 
the varieties of regional experiences and the urgent need for immediate 
control were leading some priests to the realization that local knowledge 
of the Indians was fundamental to the development of the type of disci- 
pline capable of forming "docile bodies." 39 If this latter call for wide- 
spread, rather than selective and exemplary, intervention had failed, the 
Indian Inquisition might have continued — as it did for the other more 
assimilated racial castes. 

The Indian Inquisition, however, did end. And, in particular, its de- 
mise came about because it had been organized to function only among 
the baptized, who presumably already shared with the inquisitor the 
basic idea of what was and was not an infraction. If this is the case, it 
follows that the Holy Office was ill suited to discipline a people who did 
not share its basic cultural or penal assumptions. Before the spectacle 
of the stake could move beyond striking fear in the hearts of the natives 
to transforming their behavior permanently, they had to know the pro- 
hibitions of the Holy Office and accept the illegality of the things 
prohibited. Only an efficient system of indoctrination could make these 
prerequisites a reality. 

But an effective proselytizing strategy had to go far beyond violent 
or physical coercion, the performance of baptisms, or the teaching of 



Copyrighted material 



16 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



the rudiments of the Christian doctrine. It had to penetrate into every 
corner of native life, especially those intimate spaces where personal 
loyalties were forged, commitments were assessed, and collective se- 
curity concerns were weighed "against individual ambitions. Thus, "the 
invasion within" 40 could not be done by scare tactics, whose ultimate re- 
sult would more likely be resistance than acquiescence, but rather by 
shifting the moral gears to produce social and political effects that fa- 
vored the interests in stability and productivity of those in power. An 
operative indoctrination that could produce such results had to begin 
with the widespread, but localized, imposition of a constant regime of 
moral calisthenics through corporal and magical punishments (like the 
threat of the fires of Hell). These exercises, backed by the threat of the 
provisors, had to have as their aim the retraining of the individual in 
order for him or her to internalize a Christian form of self-discipline 
that would ultimately make external force secondary or unnecessary. 41 
This intrusive strategy sought to constitute the most discreet punitive 
mechanism possible: a fear of divine retribution nourished by a scrupu- 
lous consciousness of one's wrongdoings. And where this failed, as it 
very frequently did, it excused the policing intervention of the priest, 
with his threats of supernatural punishment, corporal penance, and 
public shaming and ridicule. It also permitted pious neighbors to force 
the sinner to behave properly by threatening to exclude him or her from 
the moral and civic community. It was a brilliant experiment in mass 
subordination: the costly punishment of individual bodies by colonial 
officials or the Inquisition could be replaced, for the most part, by the 
economical disciplining of myriads of souls. 

THE INVISIBLE ORIGIN AND OBJECT OF DISCIPLINE 

The authorship and end of inquisitorial punishment were always evi- 
dent. The source was obvious to all: Spanish hegemony — a force coming 
ultimately from the same external apparatus that inflicted innumerable 
other penalties and burdens. To the Indians, almost all of whom re- 
mained unacculturated in the 1540s, its ends were equally apparent: to 
deprive the accused of his or her traditions, the guiding memory of the 
ancestors, personal liberty and dignity, corporeal well-being and tem- 
poral property, and life (or so it must have seemed after the execution 
of the cacique don Carlos). Since at this early date the crimes the Inqui- 
sition sought to punish were not generally regarded as illegalities by the 
still unacculturated community, the Holy Office depended primarily on 



Copyrighted material 



COLONIZING SOULS 



17 



the exercise of power rather than assent. It therefore lacked the legiti- 
macy to turn scandalous punishments into moral lessons. 

In contrast, the transparency of the discipline the friars sought to es- 
tablish had as its source a continuous and permanent project of accultur- 
ation at the margins of Spanish life. The ritual origin and legitimating 
structure of this program of assimilation, which historians traditionally 
identify as "conversion," 42 was a baptism which, in the early colonial situ- 
ation, the friars had effectively transformed into a new social contract. 
Thus, unlike inquisitorial punishment, which turned the native subject 
into an object of punitive force, baptism, the voluntary acceptance of a 
new social pact, could force each party to it to participate as an active 
agent in his or her own punishment. 

On one level, this new social contract was put into effect by the forces 
that were slowly appropriating for themselves the authority to deter- 
mine both the rules of civic life and the nature of the new colonial truths. 
At the points of general concentration, and therefore penetration, these 
forces appeared in the form of local priests who (genuinely, for the most 
part) sought the temporal and symbolic (or supernatural) well-being of 
the Indians. Their good intentions had the rhetorical and emotive ca- 
pacity to transpose agency, making the initial phases of indoctrination 
appear to be the voluntary acceptance of new rules of behavior and new 
codes of belief. Colonial power thus could circulate at a symbolic level 
that erased in its very movements the origins and ends that drove it. At 
another level, the new social pact, by resting on the rhetoric of magic, 43 
could be enforced by the manipulation of punitive signs, 44 whose super- 
natural source was continually preached and whose human origin could 
thus remain hidden from the believers. The source of the new discipline 
was consequently made invisible by making it appear as if its foun- 
tainhead were either the individual, who voluntarily assumed it, or a 
deity who commanded it from above: Its end, the peaceful subordina- 
tion to and productive loyalty on behalf of the colonial powers, was 
reconstituted as the personal quest for temporal well-being and super- 
natural salvation. 



THE UBIQUITY AND UNIFORMITY 
OF DISCIPLINE 

The letters to Zumarraga underlined how important it was that in- 
quisitorial punishment appear to be justly assessed and evenhandedly 
applied. As already noted, this was not possible as long as the Holy 



Copyrighted material 



18 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



Office had jurisdiction over such a culturally heterogeneous population 
as the one in New Spain. By weaving the new discipline into the personal 
and public strands of native and Spanish lives, however, the friars could 
be seen to cover with it all social and cultural sectors. The widespread 
use of an apparently common Christian doctrine, penal code, and ritual 
cycle was at the heart of this tactic. 

Furthermore, by introducing the Christian sacraments in ways that 
made them coextensive with the life-cycle rituals of everyday indigenous 
life, the missionaries attempted to reify these rites and their meanings 
so that they would appear to be normal and universal. The ultimate re- 
sult was to make the Christian practices accessible through the native 
registers of common sense, thus giving them the appearance of being 
natural and ubiquitous, while freeing them of the need to justify them- 
selves on other grounds. Of course, the sporadic public punishment of 
non-Indians that continued after 1547 reinforced this image of peni- 
tential discipline as general and uniform. 

In effect, the domestication and normalization 45 of millions of unac- 
culturated Indians by dozens of friars needed far more than an Inquisi- 
tion. It called for a new regime of control that acted upon the soul to 
create self-disciplined colonial subjects. Unfortunately, an analysis of the 
methods used to effect this end, primarily through a penitential disci- 
pline founded on confessional practices, is beyond the scope of this vol- 
ume, but it is taken up elsewhere. 46 

NOTES 

1. Archivo General de la Nation (hereafter AGN), Inquisition, tomo 42, ex- 
pediente 1. 

2. Greenleaf, "The Inquisition and the Indians of New Spain: A Study in 
Jurisdictional Confusion," 141. See Moreno de los Arcos, this volume. 

3. Garcia Icazbalceta, Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga: Primer Obispo y Arzobispo 
de Mexico 4:170-173. 

4. Greenleaf, Zumdrraga and the Mexican Inquisition, 1536-1543, 74; idem, 
"The Inquisition and the Indians," 141. 

5. AGN, Inq., tomo 42, exp. 1. 

6. Greenleaf, Zumdrraga; idem, "The Inquisition and the Indians," 139. 

7. Taussig, Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wild Man, 3-36. 

8. See Gibson, "Indian Societies under Spanish Rule," 367. 

9. See Greenleaf, Zumdrraga, 14. 

10. Garcia Icazbalceta, Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga 4:171. 

1 1. AGN, Inq., tomo 34, exp. 6; tomo 37, exps. 6-10, 12. 

12. See Hanke, The Spanish Struggle for Justice in the Conquest of America. 



Copyrighted material 



COLONIZING SOULS 



19 



13. See Gibson, The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule: A History of the Indians of the 
Valley of Mexico, 15 10- 18 10. 

14. See Hanke, Aristotle and the American Indians: A Study in Race Prejudice in 
the Modern World. 

15. Tender, Sin and Confession on the Eve of the Reformation. 

16. Alberro, "La Inquisition como institution normativa"; idem, La actividad 
del Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion en Nueva Espana, 1571—1700; Behar, "Sex and 
Sin, Witchcraft and the Devil in Late-Colonial Mexico." 

17. AGN, Inq., tomo 1, exp. 1. Roberto Moreno de los Arcos disputes the 
occurrence of this case, whose record is physically missing from the Archivo, be- 
cause of the early date (personal communication). I suggest the utility of in- 
quisitorial powers was recognized well enough in the first post-Contact decade 
(see Table 1 . 1 and Greenleaf, Zumdrraga, 7-44) as to make this precipitate exer- 
cise of them plausible. 

18. AGN, Catalogo de Inquisicion, tomo 1, exps. 2, 3. 

19. Gibson, Tlaxcala in the Sixteenth Century, 34. Neither the date (1526 or 
1527?) nor the number of victims (four or six?) is beyond dispute. 

20. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century, 1 1. 

21. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition, 7—40; Baudot, Utopia e historia en 
Mexico: Los primeros cronistas de la civilizacidn mexicana ( 1520— i$6g). 

22. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition, 1-44. 

23. Alberro, "La Inquisicion"; idem, La actividad del Santo Oficio. 

24. Cortes, Cartas y documentos. 

25. See, especially, Baudot, Utopia e Historia. 

26. Klor de Alva, "Martin Ocelotl: Clandestine Cult Leader." 

27. Greenleaf, Zumdrraga, p. 14. 

28. See Klor de Alva, "Sahagun and the Birth of Modern Ethnography: Rep- 
resenting, Confessing, and Inscribing the Native Other" and "Contar vidas: La 
autobiografia confesional y la reconstruction del ser nahua." My book on the 
subject, tentatively titled The Confession of the Other: On the New World of Colonial- 
ism, Anthropology, and Modernity, is in progress. 

29. AGN, Inq., tomo 42, exp. 1 (dated 1557). 

30. AGN, Inq., tomo 48, exp. 1. 

31. Garcia Icazbalceta, Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga 4:170-173. 

32. Las Casas, Del unico modo de atraer a todos los pueblos a la verdadera religion. 

33. See Motolinia, Memoriales; 0, Libro de las cosas de Nueva Espana y de los 
naturales de ella; idem, Historia de los indios de Nueva Espana. 

34. Quoted in Cuevas, Historia de la iglesia en Mexico 1 :38c 

35. See Doctrina cristiana en lengua espanola y mexicana por los religiosos de la 
orden de Santo Domingo; Molina, Confesionario mayor en la lengua mexicana y caste- 
liana. 

36. See Gonzalez Obregon, Proceso inquisitorial del cacique de Tetzcoco; idem, 
Procesos de indios idolatras y hechiceros. 

37. Motolinia, Memoriales, 120. 



20 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



38. See Baudot, Utopia e historia, 19—81, 129—245. 

39. On discipline and the formation of "docile bodies" see Foucault, Discipline 
and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, 135—169. 

40. Axtell, The Invasion Within: The Contest of Cultures in Colonial North America. 

41. See Klor de Alva, "Sin and Confession among the Colonial Nahuas: The 
Confessional as a Tool for Domination." 

42. Cf. Klor de Alva, "Spiritual Conflict and Accommodation in New Spain: 
Toward a Typology of Aztec Responses to Christianity." 

43. On the rhetoric of magic see, for instance, Taussig, Shamanism. 

44. On punitive signs see Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 95; Fabian, Lan- 
guage and Colonial Power. 

45. On "domestication" and "normalization" as the results of disciplinary 
practices see Foucault, Discipline and Punish. 

46. See nn. 28 and 41 above. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Alberro, Solange. "La Inquisicion como institucion normativa." In Seminario de 
historia de las mentalidades y religion en el Mexico colonial, edited by Solange Al- 
berro and Serge Gruzinski. Departamento de Investigaciones Historicas, 
Cuaderno de Trabajo 24. Mexico City: Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e 
Historia, 1979. 

. La actividad del Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion en Nueva Espana, 1571—1 joo. 

Coleccion Cientifica, vol. 96. Mexico City: Instituto Nacional de Antropologia 
e Historia, 1981. 

Axtell, James. The Invasion Within; The Contest of Cultures in Colonial North America. 

New York: Oxford University Press, 1985. 
Baudot, Georges. Utopia e historia en Mexico: Los primeros cronistas de la civilizacion 

mexicana (1 520-1 $6g). Translated by Vicente Gonzalez Loscertales. Madrid: 

Espasa-Calpe, 1983. 
Behar, Ruth. "Sex and Sin, Witchcraft and the Devil in Late-Colonial Mexico." 

American Ethnologist 14 (1987): 34—54. 
Cortes, Hernan. Cartas y documentos. Introduction by Mario Hernandez Sanchez- 

Barba. Mexico City: Editorial Porrua, 1963. 
Cuevas, Mariano. Historia de la iglesia en Mexico. 4th ed. 5 vols. Mexico City: 

Ediciones Cervantes, 1942. 
Doctrina cristiana en lengua espanola y mexicana por los religiosos de la orden de Santo 

Domingo. 1548. Reprint. Madrid: Ediciones Cultura Hispanica, 1944. 
Fabian, Johannes. Language and Colonial Power. New York: Cambridge Univer- 
sity Press, 1986. 

Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Translated by Alan 

Sheridan. New York: Vintage Books, 1979. 
Garcia Icazbalceta, Joaquin. Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga: Primer Obispo y Arzobispo 



Copyrighted material 



COLONIZING SOULS 



21 



de Mexico. Edited by Rafael Aguayo Spencer and Antonio Castro Leal. 4 vols. 

Mexico City: Editorial Porrua, 1947. 
Gibson, Charles. The Aztecs Under Spanish Rule: A History of the Indians of the Valley 

of Mexico, iejig-1810. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1964. 
. Tlaxcala in the Sixteenth Century. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 

1967. 

. "Indian Societies Under Spanish Rule." In Colonial Spanish America. 

Edited by Leslie Bethell. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
Gonzalez Obregon, Luis, ed. Proceso inquisitorial del cacique de Tetzcoco. Mexico 

City: Archivo General y Publico de la Nacion, 1910. 
. Procesos de indios idolatras y hechiceros. Mexico City: Archivo General de 

la Nacion, 1912. 

Greenleaf, Richard E. Zumdrraga and the Mexican Inquisition, 1536—1543. Wash- 
ington, D.C.: Academy of American Franciscan History, 1961. 

. "The Inquisition and the Indians of New Spain: A Study in Jurisdic- 
tional Confusion." The Americas 22 (1965): 138-166. 

. The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century. Albuquerque: University 

of New Mexico Press, 1969. 

Hanke, Lewis. The Spanish Struggle for Justice in the Conquest of America. Boston: 
Little, Brown and Co., 1965. 

. Aristotle and the American Indians: A Study in Race Prejudice in the Modern 

World. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1970. 

Klor de Alva, J. Jorge. "Martin Ocelotl: Clandestine Cult Leader." In Struggle 
and Survival in Colonial America. Edited by David G. Sweet and Gary B. Nash. 
Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 1981. 

. "Spiritual Conflict and Accommodation in New Spain: Toward a Typol- 
ogy of Aztec Responses to Christianity." In The Inca and Aztec States, 1400- 
1800: Anthropology and History. Edited by George A. Collier, Renato I. 
Rosaldo, and John D. Wirth. New York: Academic Press, 1982. 

. "Sahagun and the Birth of Modern Ethnography: Representing, Con- 
fessing, and Inscribing the Native Other." In The Work of Bernardino de Sa- 
hagun: Pioneer Ethnographer of Sixteenth-Century Aztec Mexico. Edited by J. Jorge 
Klor de Alva, H. B. Nicholson, and Eloise Quinones Keber. Vol. 2 of Studies 
on Culture and Society. Albany: Institute for Mesoamerican Studies. Austin: 
University of Texas Press, 1988. 

. "Sin and Confession among the Colonial Nahuas: The Confessional as 

a Tool for Domination." In Ciudad y campo en la historia de Mexico. Edited by 
Richard Sanchez, Eric Van Young, and Gisela von Wobeser. 2 vols. Mexico 
City: Instituto de Investigaciones Historicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma 
de Mexico, 1990. 

. "Contar vidas: La autobiografia confesional y la reconstruction del ser 

nahua." Arbor 515-516 (1988): 49—78. 

Las Casas, Bartolome de. Del unico modo de atraer a todos los pueblos a la verdadera 
religion. Edited by Agustin Millares Carlo. Translated from the Latin by 
Atenogenes Santamaria. Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1942. 



Copyrighted material 



22 



J. JORGE KLOR DE ALVA 



Molina, Alonso de. Confesionario mayor en la lengua mexicana y castellana. 1569. 

Reprint, with introduction by Roberto Moreno. Mexico City: Universidad 

Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1984. 
Motolim'a, Toribio de Benavente. Memoriales: 0, Libro de las cosas de Nueva Espana 

y de los naturales de ella. Edited by Edmundo O'Gorman. Mexico City: Univer- 
sidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1971. 
. Historia de los indios de la Nueva Espana. Edited by Edmundo O'Gorman. 

Mexico City: Editorial Porriia, 1973. 
Taussig, Michael. Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wild Man. Chicago: University 

of Chicago Press, 1987. 
Tentler, Thomas N. Sin and Confession on the Eve of the Reformation. Princeton, 

N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1977. 



Copyrighted material 



TWO 



New Spain's Inquisition for Indians 
from the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth 

Century 

Roberto Moreno de los Arcos 



It is common knowledge that the Tribunal of the Holy Office of the In- 
quisition was expressly prohibited from interfering in cases involving 
Indians. "Thank God," the distinguished Spanish historian Guillermo 
Cespedes del Castillo adds recently in the volume dedicated to the col- 
ony from his Historia de Espana. x What has not been made common 
knowledge is that this does not imply in any way that the Indians were 
exempt from punishment for transgressions of the faith. In effect, 
throughout the entire colonial period and well into the nineteenth cen- 
tury, there existed an institution expressly dedicated to punishing the 
Indians' religious offenses, identified by various names: Office of Pro- 
visor of Natives, Tribunal of the Faith of Indians, Secular Inquisition, 
Vicarage of the Indians, Natives' Court. This institution generated an 
enormous number of trials, very few of which have come to light. 2 

Ignorance of this tribunal's existence is based partly on the fact that 
historiography on the colonial Church is basically furnished by clergy- 
men and Catholics eager to exalt Spain's efforts in America and to cover 
up the incidents that might appear negatively to liberal minds. The un- 
deniable existence of the Holy Office of the Inquisition has been so well 
documented — so worn out yet so poorly understood by politically liberal 
writers — that this other capacity the Catholic Church had (and still has) 
to inflict punishment should have been discovered. What is evident is 
that a great number of colonial books do exist, clearly revealing all the 
details of the inquisitorial procedure regarding Indians, but it seems that 
we cannot see the forest for the trees. 

Most of the known trials of that tribunal have been published and 

23 



Copyrighted material 



1 



24 ROBERTO MORENO DE LOS ARCOS 

studied as "sources" of indigenous ethnohistory. This they are, in effect, 
but primarily they are trials that can be used as a source for many other 
investigations, although it seems to me that the first one should be the 
study of the particular institution that generates them. In and of them- 
selves, like any other documents, they are of no use as a study of what 
they do not contain. 

It would be unjust to affirm that there has been a universal ignorance 
of this institution's existence. Obviously, those who created it knew about 
it, as did those it punished. I am more concerned with emphasizing the 
recent investigations of this institution, and I will refer to only two. 

At the end of the nineteenth century, a Mr. Carrion, a Protestant, 
published a gallery of renowned Indians. 3 Among the Indians in that 
gallery was a Dominican Indian, Friar Martin Duran, whose existence 
was invented, and who was supposed to have been burned at the stake 
by the Holy Office for heresy. Don Jose Maria Vigil, director of the Bib- 
lioteca Nacional at the time, consulted with the scholar don Joaquin Gar- 
cia Icazbalceta regarding this case. The latter had already published a 
letter debunking the myth, and with his characteristic prudence, had ar- 
rived at the conclusion that the falsifier's intention was to create the exis- 
tence of a pre-Lutheran Indian in sixteenth-century New Spain. Among 
Icazbalceta's many arguments refuting the truth of this history is that 
of jurisdiction. He demonstrates that an Indian would have been subject 
to trial not by the Holy Office but instead by the authority of the 
ecclesiastical judge (i.e., the bishop or archbishop) through the Natives' 
Court. 4 

Much more recently, Professor Richard E. Greenleaf, with great in- 
sight and acumen, has clarified the issues. In an article published in 1965 
in The Americas, he studies both tribunals, the Holy Office and the Office 
of Provisor, along with what he terms "jurisdictional confusion." This 
article allows us to clarify the underlying causes regarding the punish- 
ment of the Indians' transgressions of the faith as well as to establish a 
historical perspective of the facts. In this first essay, Professor Green- 
leaf's principal subject is the Holy Office. 5 His second article, published 
in the same journal in 1978, deals with inquisitorial trials against Indians 
as ethnohistorical sources and presents a compilation of invaluable in- 
formation on this theme. It also includes a list of trials initiated against 
Indians, derived from the Archivo General de la Nacion (AGN), princi- 
pally from the Inquisitorial branch, as well as half a dozen from the Na- 
tional Welfare branch. 6 In these investigations as well as in the author's 
other works dedicated to studying the Holy Office, the problem I am 
focusing on has been well outlined. 

My investigation of the subject takes a different approach. It focuses 



Copyrighted material 



NEW SPAIN'S INQUISITION FOR INDIANS 



25 



uniquely on the Office of Provisor, ignoring the Holy Office completely, 
except when for some reason they coincide. This is, in short, the history 
of an institution's ecclesiastical-jurisdictional power over the Indians. As 
can be easily understood, this is a major undertaking that must confront 
enormous difficulties. We are dealing with vast documentation gener- 
ated throughout three centuries, very difficult to access, of the dioceses 
and archdioceses of Mexico City (in this case the sources are located in 
part in the AGN, Bienes Nacionales, and in part in a locale which I can- 
not recognize since the destruction of the Mitre in the earthquake of 
1985), Oaxaca (which involves its own difficulties), Chiapas (which is 
organized and now publishes a bulletin), Yucatan, Michoacan (now pub- 
licly accessible since it is considered the property of the Instituto Na- 
cional de Antropologia e Historia), and Guadalajara. The undertaking 
is impossible without a team of historians. I trust I will be able to or- 
ganize one and offer the initial results by 1992, with catalogs of the trials 
and lists of the provisional judges of each diocese. The bibliography of 
the colonial books I have discovered on this material is presented in this 
essay and will soon be published, in an identical edition, as the Biblio- 
theca Superstitionis et Cultus Idolatrici Indorum Mexicanensium, beginning 
with Diego de Balsalobre's classic treatise. In this essay, I offer a sum- 
mary of the problem and will allude to the progress of the investigation. 

No one is unaware that the Church's power over society, like that of 
the state, has two axes composed of its authority and its territory — that 
is, its jurisdiction or power to set standards, to revise sentences, to cor- 
rect, and to punish, and the territory or demarcation within which all 
of this can take place. As an example that will serve for what follows, 
we remember that many medieval Spanish cities contained more or less 
isolated precincts known as Moorish mosques and Jewish synagogues. 
Civil jurisdiction over these spaces fell to the state; the Church had no 
jurisdiction over them. The Christians would enter by force in order to 
baptize Moors and Jews, thus making them liable to ecclesiastical juris- 
diction. They were prosecuted afterward if they willingly apostatized or 
attempted conversion through peaceful entrance into the precinct, a 
privilege enjoyed only by the Franciscan order. Those who were Chris- 
tianized in this way were known as moriscos or judios conversos. If this was 
not the case, then they maintained their own faith and could not be 
forced, a fact which is, it will be recalled, the cornerstone of Friar Bar- 
tolome de Las Casas's argument in his defense of the Indians. 7 Jurisdic- 
tion and territory are also the axes in the Americas of what Ricard, a 
Catholic, called "spiritual conquest," 8 and Duviols, a liberal, called "de- 
struction of the indigenous religions." 9 

Primarily, jurisdiction over the "faithful" is exercised by the bishop 



Copyrighted material 



26 



ROBERTO MORENO DE LOS ARCOS 



or ecclesiastical judge within the confines of his territory, which are al- 
most always clearly delimited. The necessity of conserving the faith and 
its orthodoxy led to the creation, generalized in the Old World, of the 
Tribunal of the Holy Office of the Inquisition against Heretical Perver- 
sity and Apostasy. Its jurisdiction, which was above that of the bishops, 
exceeded the diocese but not the kingdom. The principal crimes that it 
originally prosecuted were Christians' acts of heresy, that is, departure 
from or error concerning dogma in its two forms, material (i.e., through 
ignorance or confusion) and formal (through pertinacity), 10 and apos- 
tasy, or the rejection of the true faith in order to embrace another reli- 
gion, which was fundamentally the case with the conversos. 11 This last 
crime was punished with the severest penalties. The catalog of punisha- 
ble crimes expanded with the passage of time, and the Tribunal of the 
Holy Office gained enormous importance and respect. It is worth re- 
membering here that "inquisition" simply means "investigation." It was 
the tremendous weight of the Tribunal of Faith that led to the semantic 
change, so that its exclusive claim to inquisition was recognized and 
sanctioned. 

The encounter with the New World created many problems. To un- 
derstand what occurred jurisdictionally, we must refer to the theological 
underpinnings. The Holy Scriptures, dictated by the Holy Spirit, say in 
the New Testament that Christ's apostles preached throughout the en- 
tire world. 12 Such a decisive affirmation thus authorized created quite a 
difficulty for Catholic theologians, since the New World was populated 
by millions of human beings, none of whom were Christian. In the face 
of such a reality, some explanation had to be found. The most ingenious 
theologians postulated that the intentionally lost apostle, St. Thomas, 
had preached in the Americas. The foundations were taken from the 
indigenous myths like that of the priest Quetzalcoatl, whose alleged kind- 
heartedness the Catholic priests were set on promoting. This thesis, 
which also occurred in Peru with some variations, arose in the six- 
teenth century and was expunged by the nineteenth. 13 It did not actually 
flourish, because among other things, it implied the brutal fact that the 
entire continent had apostatized. The practical solution was to declare 
that the existence of the New World was a mystery and that the Indians 
were "gentiles" (that is, without ever having received Christian doctrine), 
and to set about evangelizing them. The Church was able to do this be- 
cause they deemed the Indians "idolaters," among other negative things. 

Idolatry is an unpardonable error for Christianity. It consists of offer- 
ing latria, or worship and service owed solely to God (the worship of the 
saints is called dulia), to an idol, an image created by human beings. 14 



Copyrighted material 





Fig. 3. "Bonfire of clothing, books, and items of idolatrous priests 

burned by the friars." 



28 



ROBERTO MORENO DE LOS ARCOS 



That the Indians were idolaters provides one of the principal justifica- 
tions for what Spanish historiography continues to call the "just titles" 
of the conquest of the New World. This implies that if Spain had con- 
ceded the existence of the Indians' own religion, it would not, in terms 
of what has been said above, have had Christian jurisdiction over them. 
As far as civil jurisdiction was concerned, the Indians were alleged to 
be, among other things, drunkards and sodomizers. 

In spite of some heroic attempts to slacken the zeal, Spain proceeded 
with the conversion of New World Indians. The process turned out to 
be more difficult than had been anticipated. The main problem is that, 
in spite of the friars' investigations which are our principal sources, the 
Indians had their own religions and were unfamiliar with Christianity, 
unlike the Moors and the Jews, who had centuries of contact with Chris- 
tians. The two religious mentalities confronted each other without mu- 
tual understanding: one exclusive, that of the Christians, and one inclu- 
sive, that of the indigenous peoples. This reality has been conceptualized 
in terms of "syncretism" or "nativism," and yet these terms are not com- 
pletely satisfactory. The fact is that the Christian Church expanded its 
battlefronts. It did not simply have to contend with the heretical devia- 
tions or the apostasies with which it was familiar in the Old World, but 
now saw itself forced to employ its imagination regarding the novelties 
that the Evil Spirit manifested in America. 

The Church held that the Devil was the guilty party. I have already 
compiled some notes toward an essay that could be entitled "The Devil 
in the New World." 15 He was the one responsible for the veil that hid 
these lands and peoples from European eyes. He had fooled the Indians 
into worshipping him with excrements in place of the sacraments of the 
Church of God and as a mockery of divinity. He was responsible for the 
fact that the Indians committed crimes against the faith after having 
been baptized. All of this resulted in the primary necessity of exorcising 
lands, animals, plants, and people. This resulted, I believe, in the initial 
Franciscan practice of limiting the baptismal rite. It also resulted in in- 
dispensable and constant vigilance in order to detect and punish all de- 
viations, that is, to exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction. 

According to Llorente, inquisitional jurisdiction was introduced in 
America when, by order of Charles V, the cardinal inquisitor Adriano 
named don Alfonso Manso, bishop of Puerto Rico, and Friar Pedro de 
Cordoba, vice-provincial of the Dominican Islands, as inquisitors of the 
Indies and other islands on 7 January 15 19. 16 

Regarding New Spain, jurisdiction arrived with the famous "first 
twelve" Franciscans headed by Friar Martin de Valencia. This privilege 



Copyrighted material 



NEW SPAIN'S INQUISITION FOR INDIANS 



29 



was derived from Pope Adrian VI's bull dated 10 May 1522, entitled 
Exponi nobis and known as Omnimoda, which stated that "in case there 
were no bishops," the friars could act as secular clergy and exercise the 
jurisdiction corresponding exclusively to the bishops. 17 This produced 
two interesting historical outcomes. The first generated a peculiar con- 
flict that lasted for almost three centuries regarding the Spanish state's 
efforts to secularize the Indian parishes, finally achieved with great ef- 
fort around 1770. The second concerns the topic I am now addressing. 

The first twelve Franciscans received episcopal jurisdiction as well as 
jurisdiction of the Holy Office and that of inquisitors of the Indies, on 
their passage through the West Indies. 18 The Franciscans arrived in New 
Spain with this power, prepared to exercise their authority. The head 
of the faculty was, obviously, Friar Martin de Valencia. We have incom- 
plete information about the number of trials he initiated, but as he 
formed part of that reality which severely punished apostates, we know 
that in 1526, one year after the evangelization of Tlaxcala, he ordered 
the hangings of at least six men and one woman from among the "most 
principal caciques" in various autos de fe, as attested in diverse sources 
and portrayed in two illustrations in the codex that accompanies Munoz 
Camargo's work. 19 1 have always believed that these acts deprived Valen- 
cia of the honor of sainthood that his order wished to bestow upon him. 

Since jurisdiction could be delegated and the Franciscans had com- 
plete control in this area, it is on record that in the following year, 1527, 
Friar Toribio de Benavente, the humble Motolinia of our literature, sen- 
tenced the conquistador Rodrigo Rangel to one day at mass with a can- 
dle and nine months in a monastery for blasphemy. 20 Scant information 
exists regarding this primitive inquisition by the secular clergy. 

I do not know whether it was intentional, but everything seems very 
well thought out. The Spanish Crown sent to Mexico Franciscans whose 
vocation was conversion, as we noted earlier. The first bishop of Mexico, 
Fray Juan de Zumarraga, was also Franciscan, with ample experience in 
the extirpation of witchcraft in the Basque provinces. The "elect one," 
as he was called, arrived in New Spain with episcopal jurisdiction in 
1528. Since it fell to Zumarraga, Friar Martin de Valencia and his com- 
panions immediately yielded the jurisdiction they had exercised for four 
years, "although he refused it," according to the document of cession. 21 
In 1534, Zumarraga was invested by delegation with the office of in- 
quisitor. In this capacity he carried out dozens of trials, among which 
many of the published ones are of increasing interest. 22 The most well 
known is that of the cacique don Carlos de Texcoco, which ended with 
his death at the stake in 1539. 23 When the king found out about it, he 



Copyrighted malarial 



ymcitn . .jut n jm *** ^wrrjufi p>y » - 




Fig. 4. "Great punishment of five major caciques and one woman for 
obstinancy and returning to idolatry after becoming Christians." 



NEW SPAIN'S INQUISITION FOR INDIANS 



31 



angrily issued a decree condemning Zumarraga's action, saying that 
since the cacique's life could not be returned to him, all his belongings 
should be returned to his kinsmen, and he prohibited the maximum 
penalty for Indians, "tender shoots in faith." 24 This decree thereafter 
saved Indians from execution on grounds concerning the Christian 
religion. 

The following and third chapter on jurisdiction concerned the inspec- 
tor Tello de Sandoval, who, between 1544 and 1547, was employed as 
apostolic inquisitor and carried out various trials. 25 Zumarraga had been 
tacitly relieved of this function, although his episcopal jurisdictional 
powers were not suspended. 

Between 1548 and 1569, jurisdiction reverted to the bishops, since the 
Holy Office had not named any inquisitors. Very little is known about 
the trials during these years. At any rate, the Omnimoda bull was not 
abolished, and the evangelists were able to exercise their authority in 
areas without bishops. Between 1561 and 1565, Friar Diego de Landa 
authorized trials in Yucatan leading to harsh denunciations which he 
was able to dispel in Spain, aided by the aforementioned bull. 26 As far 
as we know, the missionaries exercised jurisdiction in areas without 
bishops (as in the case of the Jesuits in Baja California in the eighteenth 
century — a fact which certainly must have terrorized the enlightened 
Hegel). 

After much hesitation, the Spanish Crown resolved to reestablish the 
Inquisition in American territories in 1 56a. 27 Their purpose had much 
to do with the prosecution of the old crimes of heresy and apostasy that 
were its traditional target, given that the colonies were being infiltrated 
in an effort to avoid the Old World tribunals, as was amply demon- 
strated later on. In the document regarding the creation of the Holy 
Office in America, the king expressly prohibited interference in Indian 
cases and preserved the bishops' authority. 28 Beginning at that time, in 
civil as well as ecclesiastical matters, New Spain was decidedly split into 
two republics, that of the Indians and that of the Spaniards (including 
all types of Europeans, criollos, mestizos, blacks, mulattoes, etc.). 29 

Consequently, after 1571, when the Holy Office of the Inquisition was 
formally established in Mexico, two tribunals of the faith existed until 
1820, at which time the first tribunal was definitively closed and the 
bishops published edicts proclaiming their recuperation of total jurisdic- 
tion. 30 We are thus studying a very active institution that arose in 1548 
and disappeared — if indeed it has formally disappeared — quite recently. 
It is well worth our efforts to make a thorough study of it. 



Copyrighted malarial 



32 



ROBERTO MORENO DE LOS ARCOS 



NOTES 

1. Guillermo Cespedes del Castillo, America hispdnica ( i^g2—i8g8), vol. 6 of 
Historia de Espana, ed. Manuel Tunon de Lara (Barcelona: Editorial Labor, 
1983), 241. The sentence is as follows: "As if something were lacking to intensify 
the change, the Inquisition was established in the Castilian colonies in 1571, 
without, thank God, jurisdiction over the Indians." 

2. Cited in n. 30 below. 

3. Antonio Carrion, "Indios celebres de la Republica Mexicana; o, Biografias 
de los mas notables que han florecido desde 1521 hasta nuestros dias" (i860), 
in Anastasio Zerecero, Memorias para la historia de las revoluciones en Mexico 
(Mexico City, 1869), 485—493. 

4. Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta, Carta a Jose Maria Vigil aclarando un proceso de 
la Inquisition en el siglo XVI (Mexico City: Jose Porriia e Hijos, 1939), 32. The 
letter is dated 31 May 1885. Icazbalceta states clearly: "The bishop knew of the 
trials for Indians through the Protectorate of Natives, who would afterward per- 
form the autos de fe in which the prisoners were, in general, bigamists or sorcer- 
ers, and the punishment commonly consisted of whipping. After the case that 
caused the inhibition (that of the cacique don Carlos de Texcoco), no Indian 
was ever burned at the stake for heresy or any other charge." 

5. Richard E. Greenleaf, "The Inquisition and the Indians of New Spain: A 
Study in Jurisdictional Confusion," The Americas 22, no. 2 (October 1965): 138— 
166. 

6. Richard E. Greenleaf, "The Mexican Inquisition and the Indians: Sources 
for the Ethnohistorian," The Americas 34, no. 3 (1978): 315-344. 

7. Concerning these aspects, refer to the classic work by Henry C. Lea, His- 
toria de la Inquisition espaiiola, trans. Angel Alcala and Jesus Toribio, ed. Angel 
Alcala, 3 vols. (Madrid, 1983), vol. 1, chaps. 1—3. 

8. Robert Ricard, La conquete spirituelle du Mexique: Essai sur Vapostolat et les 
methodes missionaires des Ordres Mendiants en Nouvelle-Espagne de 1523—24 d 1572 
(Paris: Universite de Paris, Institut d'Ethnologie, 1933). 

9. Pierre Duviols, La destruction de las religiones andinas (Conquista y colonia), 
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Instituto de Investigaciones His- 
toricas, Serie de Historia General, 9 (Mexico City, 1977), 480. 

10. For example, see L. Bouyer, Diccionario de teologia (Barcelona: Editorial 
Herder, 1983), 313-314. 

1 1. Bouyer, Diccionario, 86—87. 

12. Biblia de Jerusalen (Bilbao: Desclee de Brouwer, 1981). Matthew 28:16— 
20: "The eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mount which Jesus had indi- 
cated. And upon seeing him, they worshiped him; yet, some still doubted. Jesus 
went to them and said: 'I have been given all the power of heaven and earth. 
Go, then, and make all the people disciples, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to obey all that I have com- 
manded. And thus I will be with you forever until the end of the world.'" 



Copyrighted material 



NEW SPAIN'S INQUISITION FOR INDIANS 



33 



13. Jacques Lafaye, Quetzalcoatl y Guadalupe: La formation de la conciencia na- 
tional en Mexico, pref. Octavio Paz (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 
1977), 484. For another excellent summary of the topic in a study prior to 
Lafaye's, see Alfredo Lopez Austin, Hombre-dios: Religion y polUica en el mundo 
ndhuatl, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Instituto de Investiga- 
ciones Historicas, Serie de Cultura Nahuatl, monografia 15 (Mexico City, 1973), 
212. To know the colophon of such an extravagant thesis, refer to Severando 
Teresa de Mier, Obras completas: El heterodoxo guadalupano, with the brilliant pre- 
liminary study and selection of texts by Edmundo O'Gorman, vols. 81, 82, 83 
(Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Coordinacion de 
Humanidades, Nueva Biblioteca Mexicana, 1981). 

14. Bouyer, Diccionario, 324—327. 

15. The "Respuesta" anticipated Guillermo Porras Murioz, El clero secular y 
la evangelization de la Nueva Espana (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Auto- 
noma de Mexico, Academia Mexicana de la Historia, Coordinacion de Humani- 
dades, 1987), 66. 

16. Juan Antonio Llorente, Historia critica de la Inquisition en Espana, pref. 
Jose Jimenez Lozano, 4 vols. (Madrid: Hiperion, 1981), 4:2, 160-162. 

17. I am transcribing the original Latin provided by Friar Geronimo de Men- 
dieta, Historia eclesidstica indiana, ed. Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta (Mexico City, 
1870), 192-193: "Et insuper, ut melius praefata conversio infidelium fieri valeat, 
et saluti animarum omnium in praefatis terris Indorum pro tempore degentium 
provideatur, volumus, et tenore praesentium de plenitudine potestatis con- 
cedimus, ut praefati praelati fratrum, et alii quibus ipsi de fratribus suis in dictis 
Indiis commorantibus, duxerint commitendum, in partibus in quibus nondum 
fuerint Episcopatus creati (vel si fuerint tamen infra duarum dietarum spatium 
ipsi vel officiates eorum inveniri minime possint) tarn quoad fratres suos et alios 
cujuscumque ordinis qui ibidem fuerint ad hoc opus deputati, ac super Indos 
ad fidem Christi conversos, quam et alios cristicolas, ad dictum opus eosdem 
comitantes, omnimodam auctoritatem nostram in utroque foro habeant, tantam 
quantam ipsi et per eos deputati de fratribus suis, ut dictum est, judicaverint 
opportunam et expedientem pro conversione dictorum Indorum, et manuten- 
tione ac profectu illorum et aliorum praefatorum in fide catholica et obedientia 
sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae; et quod praefata auctoritas extendatur etiam quoad 
omnes actus episcopales exercendos, qui non requirunt ordinem episcopalem, 
donee per Sedem apostolicam aliud fuerit ordinatum." This also appears in 
Francisco Javier Hernaez, S.J., Coleccion de bulas, breves y otros documentos relativos 
a la Iglesia de America y Filipinas, 2 vols. (Brussels, 1879), 1:382-384, but the 
Spanish translation speaks of the "omnimoda potestad y autoridad" (385). 

18. It is evident that the inquisitorial power of the first twelve was delegated 
by those who exercised this same authority in the Indies, since they received no 
express or direct authority from the Spanish inquisitor general. Apart from the 
sentences known to have been executed, the source is Friar Antonio de Remesal, 
O.P., Historia general de las Indias Occidentales y particular de la gobernacion de Chiapa 



Copyrighted malarial 



34 



ROBERTO MORENO DE LOS ARCOS 



y Guatemala, ed. Carmelo Saenz de Santa Maria, S.J., 2 vols., Biblioteca de Au- 
tores Espanoles, vols. 175 and 189 (Madrid: Ediciones Adas, 1964-1966), 2, 2: 
122: "When in 1524 Friar Martin de Valencia and his Franciscan priests came 
to Mexico, Friar Pedro de Cordova was still alive, and due to the inquisitorial 
power that he had, he was named commissioner of all of New Spain, with au- 
thority to punish criminals in certain cases, keeping to himself the knowledge 
of the more serious crimes, for although Friar Martin de Valencia had been 
granted many privileges by Pope Leo X . . . regarding matters that concerned 
the Holy Office of the Inquisition he had no papal brief, nor any particular 
privilege, nor orders from the Spanish inquisitor general." Friar Agustin Davila 
Padilla, O.P., adds information in his Historia de la fundacion y discurso de la Pro- 
vincia de Santiago de Mexico, de la orden de Predicadores, pref. Agustin Millares 
Carlo, 3d ed. (Mexico City: Editorial Academia Literaria, 1955), 1:41-42: "And 
as the sons of God easily recognize and love one another, the spirit of the blessed 
Father Martin de Valencia, Guardian of San Francisco of Mexico, was well loved. 
This father was an eminently virtuous man, and likewise esteemed the great 
Friar Domingo de Betanzos's virtue, for it seemed to him that whenever Friar 
Domingo de Betanzos was present, everyone was quiet, and where he resided, 
all were obedient: and in all serious and didactic matters he was recognized as 
the authority. It is a characteristic of humble people to see themselves as inferior 
to others and to esteem them, feeling that they are more worthy of honor than 
themselves. The holy Guardian did not feel that it was his place to carry out the 
duties of inquisitorial commissioner by apostolic authority, but he held the po- 
sition because he deserved even higher honors. He began to arrange with his 
friars to procure the good Friar Domingo de Betanzos for this office. At this 
time there was no bishop in the area, and a bull issued by Adrian VI gave epis- 
copal cases as well as the apostolic commission for those of the Holy Office of 
the Inquisition to the prelate of San Francisco, with a declaration from the pon- 
tiff that authority could be turned over to the prelate of the order of preachers 
who assisted in that area . . . ; and thus ordained by the words of the bull to carry 
out the office, and because the city wanted him to do so, Friar Martin de 
Valencia stepped down and the blessed Friar Domingo de Betanzos took over 
the duties." Refer to Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta, "Autos de fe celebrados en 
Mexico," Obras, 10 vols. (Mexico City: Victoriano Agiieros, 1896), 1:271-275. 

19. Garcia Icazbalceta, in his text quoted in the preceding note (p. 275), 
refers to an "ancient manuscript from Tlaxcala" he had examined in which he 
discovered that Valencia "gave sentences of capital punishment." Although it is 
unclear whether there were one or three individuals executed by the Franciscan 
commissioner, Icazbalceta is inclined "favorably" to believe that it occurred in 
only one case. 

In Rene Acuna's recent excellent edition of Diego Munoz Camargo's Descrip- 
tion de la Ciudad y provincia de Tlaxcala de las Indias y del mar Oceano para el buen 
gobierno y ennoble cimiento dellas, facsimile ed. (Mexico City: Universidad Auto- 
noma de Mexico, Instituto de Investigaciones Filologicas, 1981), we find the 



Copyrighted material 



NEW SPAIN'S INQUISITION FOR INDIANS 



35 



hanging of a Tlaxcaltecan cacique for relapsing into idolatry, as well as of five 
"very important caciques" and a "woman from that area" for apostasy (fols. 26 iv, 
262V). There are also two burnings at the stake for "pertinacity." The illustration 
of the hangings reads quintlatique, which surely means that afterward, "they were 
burned." 

20. The brief sentence was published by Mariano Cuevas, S.J., Historia de la 
Iglesia en Mexico, 5 vols., 5th ed. (Mexico City: Editorial Patria, 1946-1947), 
1:248. It also appears in Friar Toribio de Benavente or Motolinia, Memoriales; 
0, Libro de las cosas de la Nueva Espana y de los naturales de ella, ed. Edmundo O'Gor- 
man (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1971), 431- 

2 1 . "Carta de Fray Martin de Valencia y otros religiosos al emperador," 
Tehuantepec, 18 January 1533, in Salvador Escalante Plancarte, Fray Martin de 
Valencia (Mexico City: Editorial Cossio, 1945), i-xi. It is obvious that Zumarraga's 
resistance to receiving ecclesiastical jurisdiction was based on the fact that he was 
only bishop-elect. In 1533 or 1534 he returned to Spain, where he was con- 
firmed, at which time he acquired inquisitorial jurisdiction. He was given the 
title of inquisitor by don Alonso Manrique, archbishop of Seville and inquisitor 
general, in the city where his see was located on 27 June 1535. Joaquin Garcia 
Icazbalceta, Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga, primer obispo y arzobispo de Mexico, ed. 
Rafael Aguayo Spencer and Antonio Castro Leal, 4 vols., Coleccion de escritores 
mexicanos, vols. 41-44 (Mexico City: Editorial Porrua, 1947), 3:7 1— 73. 

22. Luis Gonzalez Obregon, Procesos de indios idolatras y hechiceros (Mexico 
City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1912). The trials date from the period 

1536-1547- 

23. Luis Gonzalez Obregon, Proceso criminal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion y 
del fiscal en su nombre contra don Carlos, indio principal de Tetzcoco (Mexico City: 
Eusebio Gomez de la Puente Editor, 1910). 

24. Garcia Icazbalceta, Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga, 4:65-89, includes the 
transcription of an inventory of papers from the cathedral office in 1746. Entry 
number 76 reads: "Another letter from . . . the inquisitor general reprimanding 
the famous senor Zumarraga for having tried an Indian cacique for idolatry and 
thereafter sentencing him to death and burning him at the stake; dated in Ma- 
drid, 22 November 1540." The royal decree of reprimand is found in the same 
volume (4:172-173) and is dated Madrid, 22 November 1540. 

25. Francisco Tello de Sandoval's inquisitorial power over "any people what- 
soever" in New Spain was conferred by Juan Tavera, archbishop of Toledo and 
inquisitor general, in Valladolid on 18 June 1543. Refer to Vasco de Puga, 
Cedulario de la Nueva Espana, pref. Maria del Refugio Gonzalez, facsimile ed. 
(Mexico City: Centro de Estudios de Historia de Mexico Condumex, 1985), fol. 
97r. Richard E. Greenleaf, La Inquisicion en Nueva Espana, Siglo XVI, trans. Carlos 
Valdes (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1981), 85-92, deals with the 
trials initiated by Tello. 

26. Refer to France V. Scholes and Eleanor B. Adams's excellent book, Don 
Diego Quijada, alcalde mayor de Yucatan, 1561-1565, 2 vols., Biblioteca Historica 



Copyrighted material 



36 



ROBERTO MORENO DE LOS ARCOS 



Mexicana de Obras Ineditas, vols. 14 and 15 (Mexico City: Antigua Libreria 
Robredo de Jose Porrua e Hijos, 1938). 

27. Jose Toribio Medina, Historia del Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisition 
en Mexico, expanded by Julio Jimenez Rueda (Mexico City: Ediciones Fuente 
Cultural, 1952), 33-34; Greenleaf, La Inquisition; 168-169. 

28. The creation of the Holy Office was sanctioned in a decree issued by 
Philip II in the Pardo on 25 January 1569, Recopilacion de leyes de los reinos de las 
Indias. Prologo por Ramon Menendez Pidal. Estudio preliminar por Juan Man- 
zano Manzano. 4 vols. (Madrid, Ediciones Cultura Hispanica, 1973), bk. I, tit. 
XIX, leg. 1. Along with this text, some Instructions were issued which, as far as 
I know, remain unpublished in the National Historical Archive in Madrid. One 
of them states: "You are advised that, in the execution of your duties, you are 
not to take proceedings against the Indians of your district, because for now and 
until you are ordered to do otherwise, it is our will that you only act against Old 
Christians and others within these Spanish realms against whom it is customary 
to take proceedings." In Historia de la Inquisition en Espanay America, ed. Joaquin 
Perez Villanueva and Bartolome Escandell Bonet (Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores 
Cristianos, Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1984), this decree can be found 
on p. 717 and pp. 727—728. It is stated explicitly in the Recopilacion, bk. VI, tit. 
I, leg. 35, that jurisdiction over the Indians belongs to the bishops. See one very 
late attempt (1767) by the Spanish Inquisition to intervene in Indian cases on 
behalf of an Indian priest acting as petitioner, along with the negative judgment 
of the primate bishop Lorenzana of Toledo (1773), in Roberto Moreno, "Dos 
documentos sobre el arzobispo Lorenzana y los indios de Nueva Espana," His- 
toricas 10 (Sept.-Dec. 1982): 27-38. 

29. Refer to a summary illustrative of this problem in Roberto Moreno, "Los 
territorios parroquiales de la ciudad arzobispal, 1524-1974," Gaceta Oficial del 
Arzobispado de Mexico, 7a epoca, 22, nos. 9—10 (Sept.-Oct. 1982): 151-182. 

30. In a more extensive work in progress, I am concerned with various 
aspects of the Office of Protectorate: its jurisdictional and administrative func- 
tions, prosecuted crimes (mainly concubinages, idolatries, superstitions, sor- 
ceries), public autos de fe, fool's caps, and other indications of public humilia- 
tion, and so on. Obviously these functions are practically identical with those of 
the Holy Office. I also address the so-called problems of jurisdiction with both 
tribunals. 

Regarding procedure, refer to, among other texts, Gonzalo de Balsalobre's 
classic Relation autentica de las idolatrias, super sticiones, vanas observaciones de los 
indios del obispado de Oaxaca, y una instruction y prdctica . . . para el conocimiento, in- 
quisition y extirpation de dichas idolatrias y castigo delos reos (Mexico City: Viuda de 
Bernardo Calderon, 1656), 22 f. 

As one example of a trial at the beginning of the eighteenth century whose 
procedure was normal but whose object was anomalous, refer to Roberto 
Moreno, ed., "Autos seguidos por el provisor de naturales del Arzobispado de 
Mexico contra el idolo del Gran Nayar, 1722-1723," Tlalocan 10 (1985): 377- 

477- 



Copyrighted material 



THREE 



The Inquisition's Repression 

of Curanderos 

Noemi Quezada 



As an ethnologist, I have focused my interest on the curanderos, or folk 
healers, of colonial Mexico in order to explain both their persistence and 
their continuity in medical practice. I also wish to define the role of the 
curanderos and to examine their importance within this evolutionary so- 
cial process, for the curanderos' knowledge and skills contributed to the 
health of the oppressed and led to the formation of a traditional mestizo 
medicine that syncretized Indian, black, and Spanish folk medicines. 
These categories of analysis confirm the important social function of 
traditional medicine and its practitioners who offered a solution to the 
health problems of the majority of the population of colonial Mexico. 

The necessary existence and function of the curanderos in New Spain 
can be attributed to the scarcity of doctors. 1 The authorities allowed for 
their presence and practice with a degree of tolerance that came to 
characterize the prevailing social relations in the American colonies, al- 
lowing not only for the continuity of traditionalist medicine but also for 
the beliefs and practices of the ancient pre-Hispanic religions as a means 
of resistance. 2 

The Crown was politically conscientious in establishing a legal medical 
system for Spaniards, thus protecting the health of the group in power. 
The Indians, and eventually the blacks and mixed castes, were assigned 
the practices of the curandero. Yet this division along class lines went 
ignored; Spaniards frequented the curandero as much as the other 
groups. Given its social dynamics, traditional medicine permeated the 
entire New Spanish society. 3 

If the curanderos were necessary, then why were they pursued, tried, 

37 



Copyrighted material 



38 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



and punished by the Holy Office of the Inquisition? The contradiction 
presents itself in ideological terms: on the one hand, their services were 
required as experts on the human body, as able surgeons, and as 
superior herbalists; on the other hand, they were harshly repressed for 
the magical part of their treatment, which frequently contained hal- 
lucinogens and which the authorities, according to the Western world 
view of the time, viewed as superstitious. 4 The authorities intended to 
prove that medical expertise derived solely from Spanish medical knowl- 
edge; they would thus invalidate the entire medical practice of all other 
practitioners and justify their condemnation. 

THE CURANDEROS AND THE HOLY OFFICE 5 

From the very beginning of the conquest of New Spain, the Spanish 
Crown attempted to impose a Catholic world view upon which to base 
a system of normative practices that would organize the entire society 
within the framework of religion. The problems presented by the social 
and ideological heterogeneity of New Spain were extremely difficult to 
solve. The colony's reorganization was carried out along administrative, 
economic, and political lines, but resulted in a different dynamic on re- 
ligions and cultural levels. The goal was to unify the entire society under 
the Catholic faith, which in actual practice was interpreted and molded 
according to each social group's conception. Despite the Church's efforts 
to disseminate its official doctrine through regular and secular clergy 
with the support of the civil authorities, the various social groups — 
mixed castes, Indians, and marginalized Spaniards — perceived Catholi- 
cism as an ideal impossible to live up to on a daily basis. Thus, the reli- 
gious beliefs of New Spain reveal a process of syncretism reflecting 
popular religion and culture. 

At times even unconsciously, civil and religious authorities strove to 
achieve their assigned goal of social integration; unity, however, was at 
best superficial in a society where diverse ideologies coexisted and inter- 
related, ultimately resulting in a less strict and orthodox situation than 
in Spain. 6 The unification of Spanish society under the reign of the Cath- 
olic monarchs, as well as the Church's gradual loss of political power as 
it increasingly came under monarchical control, had repercussions in the 
American colonies, where the lack of jurisdictional limits over control 
and conservation of the faith led to frequent confrontations between 
civil and religious authorities. To maintain order and to ensure the sys- 
tem's equilibrium, constant vigilance was needed via the institution cre- 
ated in Europe in the thirteenth century and adopted by the Catholic 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



39 



kings at the end of the fifteenth century: 7 the Tribunal of the Holy 
Office of the Inquisition, which functioned as a disciplinary apparatus, 
"an organism of internal security," 8 controlling dissidents within the re- 
ligious, moral, and social order. 

The first missionary friars were invested with the powers of the secu- 
lar clergy where there was no priest or bishop, and they were responsi- 
ble, among their other duties, for the detection and punishment of all 
violations of the faith. 9 No case of curanderismo appears registered under 
the first commissioners of the Holy Office. 

Fray Juan de Zumarraga, the first bishop of New Spain, received in- 
quisitorial powers in 1535, and he established the episcopal inquisition 
with a tribunal and inquisitorial functionaries in 1536. Under his su- 
pervision, which lasted until 1543, twenty-three cases of witchcraft and 
superstition were tried, probably including some cases of traditional 
medical practices. 10 

Petitions first circulating in the middle of the fifteenth century ex- 
plained the need to establish a Tribunal of the Holy Office which, like 
that in Spain, would have total disciplinary control, thus avoiding the 
frequent abuses and jurisdictional equivocations of the civil authorities. 
Philip II authorized the tribunal in 1569 with royal letters-patent, and 
it was established in New Spain in November, 1571. As in Spain, the New 
Spanish inquisitors were, above all else, men of law who scrupulously 
carried out their duties in order to maintain social control. 11 

After Zumarraga had condemned the cacique of Texcoco to the stake 
for idolatry in 1539, causing him to be removed as inquisitor, the ques- 
tion arose as to whether the Indians should suffer inquisitorial penalties 
since the Crown was legally responsible for their guardianship and pro- 
tection. 12 Fully aware of the abuses committed by the provincial com- 
missioners supervised by the bishops during the episcopal inquisition, 
Philip II decided to leave the Indians outside the control of the Holy 
Office and placed them under the ordinary jurisdiction of the bishops. 

Although the royal decision was respected, inquisitorial commission- 
ers did receive accusations against the Indians. For some of these com- 
missioners the separation of jurisdictions was quite clear; 13 for others, 
confusion, jealousy, or the belief that the crime merited inquisitorial 
punishment incited them to apprehend, reprimand, and threaten the 
Indian curanderos. 14 Once the denunciation was issued, it was important 
to determine whether it concerned "pure Indians" or mestizos; to re- 
move all doubts, the Holy Office thus required that the commissioners 
formalize the proceedings with documents such as testimonies. 15 

Of the thirteen cases concerning Indians found among the proceed- 



Copyrighted material 




$4jfia'+^5c J&* ?* vn u*f*f* r * X y<*9-'*oAjr* ******* 



Fig. 5. "Punishment of a cacique of Tlaxcala for falling into idolatry after 

becoming a Christian." 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



41 



ings I have examined, that of Roque de los Santos, who was accused as 
a mestizo, appears to be illegal. During the course of the trial, it was dis- 
covered that he was an Indian; nonetheless, he was sentenced, and it 
remains unclear whether sentencing occurred because he was part of the 
same trial as Manuela Rivera, "La Lucera," or because the inquisitors de- 
cided that the punishment was appropriate for a mestizo. Proof of this 
racial status was furnished in a document not included in the proceed- 
ings. He was sentenced to be paraded in a cart preceded by a town crier 
who announced his crimes, to receive two hundred lashes, and to labor 
eight years in a mining hacienda. 16 

THE CURANDEROS PUNISHED BY THE HOLY OFFICE 

Of the seventy-one delations and denunciations which the Holy Office 
received against curanderos, fourteen warranted attestations and were 
dismissed after being considered inappropriate. Twenty-two cases were 
tried which called for testimony; in fourteen cases the inquisitors de- 
cided in favor of public or private reprimand, two suffered public 
humiliation, only one had a public auto de fe in the Church of Santo 
Domingo, and one was exiled. These were the maximum punishments 
suffered by the curanderos. 

The first cases specifically recorded in the registers of the Inquisition 
as offenses of curanderos were those of Francisco Moreno, a thirty-year- 
old Spaniard accused of healing by incantation in 1613, and the mulatta 
Magdalena, for having taken peyote as a divinatory aid. 17 

From this time until the beginning of the nineteenth century, the ac- 
cusations against the superstitious curanderos give descriptions of the 
therapies that identified specializations and the use of herbs and hal- 
lucinogens in the curative ceremonies. Most importantly, they attempted 
to understand the practitioners of traditional medicine and their pa- 
tients, disclosing the latter's reactions and fears regarding the unknown, 
the mysterious ways of those who dealt with their health, and patients' 
belief in their powerful supernatural faculties. 18 

It was also a common belief that bewitchment and all incurable ill- 
nesses resulted from hatred or unrequited love. Between these two poles 
revolved the relationships of New Spanish men and women; seeking 
good health, they appealed to the curanderos, yet when undergoing 
treatment, sometimes positive and other times negative, they often fell 
into the contradictory position of thinking they had violated the norms 
imposed by the Holy Office. This reaction, quite natural for the times, 
accounted for the detailed records of the inquisitors which have fur- 



Copyrighted material 



73 

M 

a 

M 

o 

9 

Hi 

-OS 
u 

'5 

be 

I 



2 6 

3 bo 

< g 

> 

c . 

•© O 

u _o 

3 -3 

< 



U 

tn 

1 s 

N '3 
re re 
O CM 
O • 

o — 

CM g 

o" x 
j; c 

C 3J 



c ~ 

•o re 
■ — be 

Q 2 

3 *■ 



3 

cr « 

re re 
15 '5 



- — 



1; 



bo 
M US 

3 EE 



3 
I 



c 

'a 

a. u 



a; 
u 
u 

<-> c 
«1 I 

* § > 

, 3 U O 



3 
3 



8 



X X 



X X 



xxxxxxxx 



X X X X 



XXXXXXXX X 



X X 



c 
~o 

re 

E 



a 

H I 

gj 

S 8 
•2 -° 

2 re 

E "O 

2 re 



re 4J 

s .2 
re •§ js 

i|| 

O ft M 



4j OJ U 

"O 

c c c 

2 2 2 

3 3 3 



re 

3 



T3 

M H H3 

2 !5 - t. 
O O 2 W 

•a -a t£ 

w i« S u 

u P 2 QJ 

3 3 2 2 

« « 5 j 



2 2 "S -S 

U qj 3 3 

fi 2 2 2 
8.1s 3 



'£ 

u 
aj 
-3 

re" 

'§ 

y 
a. 



2 1 
I 3 

13 



re 
t« 
o 

•a 



e 



4 



§ 2 

3 <U 



I 11 



re O 

s_ u 

o u 

-3 -3 

3 3 

re re 

- _ 

3 3 



>sJ3 

o o 

u _ 

u a> 

-3 -3 

3 C 

re as 

- i- 

3 3 




3 

'> 

t3 
re 

>. 
O 

'G 
ts 
jy 

re 
E 



■o 

3 

2 
3 



re 



o 

'C 3 

O- 3 £f> 3 



re 



n 3 2 re 
B re re .y 

O "3 3 



E 57 E u E E 



re o 
•3 O O _re 
£ T3 ^ 3 

S.S.E E 



o o o re o S 

,r- w _ w w 3 

re 113 J2 J2 2 J2 J2 ' = 

SL^ 3 3 ^ 3 3 £ 

S.EEE.EEEE 



_re 

o 
>s 

re 

a. 



£ E 



c 

3 

u 
o 
S 
o 

u 
"C 

3 

re 



re 
> 
re 

3 

5 u 



re 
'C 

3 



1 

c 



re 

-o "O 

be re j3 
«S B re 
S < ^2 



be 

3 



Hi \j 

> 3 « 

re U «« 3 

< w A < 



core" — t^N x m 

— — N !M N !D N X 

to to to to to to to to 



q 

Q 



i 

e 

c 
— 

3 

c3 re t3 S 

S u, £ £ 



35 O tO — 

x ai ai o 
to to to t> 



! 

re 
U 
re 



re re 

IS 



re 



C 

re 
Cu 
re 



o 



a. o 



re 
O 

n 2 -o 

S 

re W u 
1 2 re 



3 .2 -2 8 



^ CO CO CO CO to Jt>« 




Copyrighted material 



I 

-3 
CL 

s 

CD 
C 

:2 
'!« 

c 
S 

CL 



g-8 

CU O 



a c 



c/3 

re 



- dj c 2 c a 

5 c be u be u 

2 .5 « c re c 

2 bc-C u jC u 

S O D W) bo 

<u u g jsj SS — 

IT 3 3 

E c- cr 



re 

re , 

8 s 

o E 

C <u 



cu c 

r s 



C T3 

-O M 

'35 _2 

S3 

s > 

a § 

"3 -2 

c 

- re 



O re 

2 & 

c *> 

re > 

1/3 



— u 



re 

re h 
n 

1 G - 

I J 



c 

N 

re 



S C 

CU (U 

§.§ 

c > 

9 u 

1/5 

U ti 

-a 



CM (O 



c 
a 



o c 

O u 

<n a o « 

" 8 '?'re 
bc-3 JS 

E H 

B * 

s| 

a -o 

O B 

n cu 



re 

r< 

O 
u 
U 

re u 
5T <u 



p 
u 

re 



3 
9 
« 

c 

'3 

re 



CL re > oo 



2 «" 
re 

' „ 

O N 

CL re 

o >n 

4; CM 

re be 

CL V 

. . & 

re cu 

! « 

=3 J 



re" 3 cl 



E <o 

CL-5 
(U cu 
- — 



u 

re 
u 
_re 

T3 
re 

?* 
u 

eo 



re 
u 

cu 
> 
u 

3 

-3 -O 
CL'C 

g IS o 
:2 a •§ 

s *- e 

Cl ^ 5? 

22 



x 



X 



X 



X XX 



X 



X X X X X X 



X 



X X 



X X 



>■ 
2 

8 
8. 

re 

8 



CU 

CL 
3 

-v. 

re 



re 

8 

, _ • 

y 



u 

CL 
3 

V3 



»~ re u 

<U 3 <U 

-o •§ -o 

c 3 

re "3 re 

u re C 

3 3 

cj cj 



2 
o 
-o 

re 

X! 
O 



CU 

-a 

3 

re 
U 

U 



o 



u 

u 

CL 
3 

re 
- 
cu 
T3 
3 
re 
U 

3 

u 



re 

4—1 

's 

be 

-o 

J 

3 

4> 



2 

CJ 

re" 
fc- 
t> 
-a 
e 

re 
u 
3 

CJ 



CU 

CL 
3 

2 

u 

-c 

3 

re 
u 
9 

U 



•8 

C3 
CU 

1 

re 



> 
O 

a. 



3 

U 

re 

-a 
s 

re 
l_ 
3 

(J 



0 

0 



p 

V 

-o 

3 

2 

3 

U 



C3 

re ^cu 

tu re 

J 5 

-= o 

re^ 

re -a 

cu _ 

E ii 

S 2- 

re re 

u _ 

-O T3 

3 3 

re re 

- Si 

3 3 

cj cj 



re 
J3 



£ 
-a 

3 

re 
u 
3 

cj 



U 
re 

s 



. 3 

& E 

3 

£ a 

4J CU 
"3 -3 
3 3 



3 3 

cj cj 



"3 

N « 

•3 3 

| 8 



re 
- - 

_re 
"3 
E 



_re 

o 
>3 

W 

CL 



= 

Q 



re 
T3 
.E 



re 



re 



u 



o g 

■3 cu 

.E E 



o 2 ^ 

O — re re 

"3 S 3 3 

.E E E E 



o 

55 
'3 

re 

u 



s 



O 'O 

■ — » 

T3 CU 

.E E 



t "3 

re B 
Cu re 



N u 2 

-O -3 s 

ciS «S .2 

cu s s n 

1' a 



-p O re 



jj 



cu 
-3 



re 

M 

u 

re 

o 

re 



-3 

re re 

-3 >- cu 

< '§ T3 

^2-2 

3 3" 3 

| 8| 



I ^3 



c^ 
Oh 

re 

nJ 

re 

be 

C 

. — 

E 
o 
Q 



cu 



_re g 

cu cu 

3 = 

re -J 



I 

re 
C/3 

_o 

CU 
-3 
CU 
3 



-s 

3 

-re 
oo 



i=e_3 
re 

9J 3 



•l°< L re 
S OS 



I £ 

S.E 

cu h 

3 "3 

re 



cu 
-3 

■y. 
O 



re 



re _2 
> -re 

•a a 



3 



^ O 

"5 2 "3 J3 
2 ° re °- 



eo iO 

CM CM 



3> 
CM 



CM 



o o 

oo CO 



o 

CO 



CO 
CO 



co 

CO 



DO 

CO 



CO CO 
CO CO 



eo 
t> 



CO CO 



Copyrighted material 



■8 -J 

3 2 
* 3 

a J 
-2 c 

re s 

E O 
2 v ■ 

-C u c/5 

8 K £ 



c 
v 
— 

a 



o — 



J2 
c 



-o 

re 

u 

ii 



c 

:2 

"55 
3 
u 
C 
a. 



c 

U 

pi 
bo 

c 
c 
cl 



5b 



"2 c 

"P 3 



B 
0 

O 

V 
u 

E 

u 



£3 U 



u 

U 4J 



a 

M 

o 

CL~ JS 

-a * e 
| o 
■9 c 0 



— 

u 

91 
3 
O 

c 
c 

:2 

'7i 



C 



g B 

CL 3? CL 



So 
c 

8. 

JA 

t/3 



c 44 s 

<u -O g 
u — 3 



o 
■s 

U 1 

is 

3 C 



2 "O 



£ t I 8 



c 
-o 
. re 

S -SP 

•=> c | S3 
5 re^-o 1 ^ 

u -s o y S 



x 



x 



x 



x 



X 



XX XX 



X 



X X 



X 



X XXX 



u 

re 



u 

0 

IS 

u 
u 

-3 



re 

£ 
-a 

- 



CL.G 



J 4J 

B c 

y 



fm 
U 

Cl 
3 



U 

C 
M 

Cl 

>^ 

re 
i_ 

<u 

-a 
c 

re 

u 



s 



— 

CL 
3 



-a 
e 

re 

H 



IB 
9 "re 

1 i 
□ w 

»j 3 

CL g_ 
3 ^ 

>% 

O re 

u i_ 

cu <u 

-O T3 

S C 

2 2 



c 

i 



u 

Cl 

3 

GA 

c 
u 

V 

-a 
s 
re 



3 3 2 3 



o 

— 



■a 

B 

2 



re o 
o o 

'3 C 

- - > 

CL Cu^ 
a 3 re 

re o o 

— — — 

V 4J t) 

-a -a -a 
see 

re re re 



3 3 3 3 



_re 

O re 

'g| 
CL 3 

8 E 



. re 

M N 

C -3 

r\ in 



o 

N 

TO » 

.9 E 



_re 

o 
>c 
re 
Cl 



0 
_re 

I 



o 

-2 TO 

ll 



c 
_re 

I 



_ re c u 

1 lis 



p 



=c u 

re .2 
re 



_2 

3 

B 

re 

s 




I 

c 
o 
H 
u 
■a 
re 

u 
*-» 

a. 



B 

M 
U 

CM 



2 



re 



re 

g> re 
o Z 



"B 3 S ,2 



c -o 
re -a 

3 



*J 3. 

-T-5 re 

3 2 

l> E 

2 re 

CL — , 



O 

•c 

B P 
.3 u 

3 U 

•« a 

o 



N 
3 
C 

U 
_re 

"O 

o 
be 

.2 
'SI 

B 

J? 



s 

a; 

re 
a. 

1 J3 3 

re Cl _ 

a J J 



CO Tt< 



eo O 



to to 



to 

CO 



00 



— CM 



CM 



CM 



Tf 

r- r- 

t-- 



Copyrighted material 



I 

1 
t 



re 
3 

3 

.So 
S3 



o 

EL 

m.B 

3 2 4 

— • !fi 3 ^ 

-O re 
C <u 

a- F 



H ' 

a.2 

- o 

t, fi- 



re 



i—l oj 

re g2 -o K* Cl c 



s 

-re 

u 

J2 



be 



3 1/5 

5 a 

re C 
.3 OJ 

3 o 

% 0 on 

il 

s i 

u 



in 
3 

<* a 

L. {fl t/5 

o u 2 

CL-3 'u 



s a* 

3 U3 

(-> -o ~ 
"3 CTS C 

§2 So 



re 

"0 

S 

§ .2 :2 

— u t/1 

4j <U U 

3 c 

(X- 3. s- 

_ 1/5 CL 

O <U V 

3 -V u 



a 

o 
u 



^5-2 

u re 

3 S- 

t/1 



re 



2 S 
s c 
a 2 



a; 
3 
a" 

u 
<-» 

3 



re 

L. 

U 
i« 
u 
O 
Cl 

c .2 
uj u 

- u 

°- 5 

<u a. 

— <" 

OJ 
"3 



3 
3 



re 3 
<u .2 

be 5 
c 9 

u o 
3- u 



X X 



X 



X 



X 



X X 



X X 



^ ^ ^ ^ 



X X X X X X X 



X 



— re 



L. 
1> 

CL 
3 

ra 



ID 

-a 
3 



3 



s- 

u 

a. 

3 



-a 

3 

2 

3 



u 

-3 
3 



I 

O 

is: 
C 



1 ft 



3 

O 

U 

u 

-3 

§ 

2 



3 3 



O re 

^ xn 
O O 



3^oL 

3 3 

W5 c/1 

O 03 

— — 

•a -a 

3 3 

3 3 



- - CO 

3 2 

— 

2^ 

3 ^ 
U -3 



O. 



re 
u 
IB 



re 



3- 
3 

ta 

Sre re 
- u 
_ <u <u 

2 "O T3 
U 3 3 

<-> re re 

U U Li 

S 3 3 
CL U U 



O 
u 
U 

re .a 

.2 o 

J3 J= 

<u o 



OJ 

CL 

3 

M 
O 



2*2 •£ "2 

U 3 3 

•-i re ts re 
M (• M tH 



re 3 
Cl u 



3 



0 
"C 
'3 

u 

<u 

CL 
3 

C/5 

re 
u 

3J 

-3 
3 



3 

□ 



a 

1 
o 

Cl 



•3 



OJ 

CL 

3 

c» 

08 

u 
u 
T3 
3 



5 

1 



_re 
o 

'3 

re 

CL 

M 

V 



5 
JS 

3 



2 
_re 

3 

£ 



o 

re 
Cl 



C 
'3 

1/3 



o 

' C 3 

« -Si 



re 



U 
3 



3 

1 



£ d J 

3 «5 <J 



C 
_re 

"3 
£ 



rv. 

2 

3 



■3 
3 



re 

•3 
re 
"3 



re 
— 



re 2 
0 .£ 

| £ H 2 .2 



w £ 

re ■ 



C 

re 
bo 
u 
re 



1^ 



re 

re O 



in 
OJ 

re >- 
re PS 



re 
Z 
« 

Oh 



O <U 

'£ "2 

2 ^ 

3 3 

<! *- 



re 

o 
u 

-3 



3 CL 



re 

re^ 
be re 
3 3 

•3 re 

£ 3 



o 
u 

re 

E 

re 
U 
re 
3 



N 
OJ 
"3 
3 

-re 

3 
— 



o 

3 

0 

re 

1 1 



re s .» 

S J s 



o 

3 



re 

s 

c 

3 
1 



re 
u 
re 
-3 
o 

Cl 
< . 
ra .2 

•*i re re 

3 S 

O re r 

3 



_re 

_5 

re 
3 
u 
U 

oa 



3 

re 



CM 
OO 



CM 
00 



OO 

1^ 



00 00 



o> o cm 

00 00 CT3 Oi 

1 I- 1^ I- 



CM CO O OC 00 
03 CT3 CT> CT> 

i - 



o 
o 

oo 



o 
o 

oo 



to 
o 
oo 



Copynghied material 



46 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



nished us with all the cultural data needed to confirm the continuity of 
curanderismo within medical practice, to determine its changes, and to 
specify the concepts and judgment of that medical practice, formed, on 
one side, by the curanderos defending their practices and, on the other 
side, by the inquisitorial authorities who wished to repress them. 19 

THE ACCUSATIONS 

Self-accusations were unusual, perhaps because the curanderos did not 
consider their practice a crime. Only Francisco Moreno and Mariana 
Adad denounced themselves. The former found out in an Edict of Faith 
that the occupation of spell-caster (ensalmador), which he had practiced 
for many years in various cities in New Spain, was prohibited; present- 
ing himself before the inquisitorial commissioner of Oaxaca, he sought 
clemency through his open declaration of ignorance. In her report, 
Mariana minutely describes her case, from predestination since infancy 
through her initiation and practice; she was confident that the inquisi- 
tors would assess her healings as a gift from God. 20 

Delation was the most frequent reason for detention given in the re- 
ports, and it is not surprising to discover that the majority of the delators 
were the former patients of the accused curanderos. On occasion, 
knowledge of an edict that had been posted on the doors of the church 
and had been read by the priests during mass on Sundays or holy days 
aroused unrest and fright, unleashing in turn a series of accusations 
made by the informers "in order to relieve the conscience." 21 

When the informer presented him- or herself before the inquisitors 
at the Holy Office in Mexico City, the provincial commissioner or priest 
with inquisitorial authority swore to keep the secret. The informer was 
asked what type of declaration he or she was prepared to make, since 
the kind of process depended upon whether it was merely a delation or 
an actual accusation. The prosecutor of the Holy Office made the ac- 
cusation after hearing the attestations and presenting the case before the 
qualifying judges. 

In spite of the declaratory oath, it is probable that the actual reasons 
for a delation were hatred or resentment when the cure had negative 
results, at times worsening the patient's condition, or when the cur- 
andero had refused to attend a sick person. 22 In those cases where 
the remedy had positive results, the patients, having disobeyed the faith 
by resorting to forbidden practices and specialists, sought to lighten 
the punishment they believed they deserved by accusing someone else. 
Neither family nor romantic ties were exempt in these circumstances. 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



47 



Feelings of impotence in the face of illness, fear of the unknown, envy, 
competition, and fear inspired by love, all impelled New Spaniards to 
the Holy Office. 23 

Delations presented through public rumor were received and investi- 
gated. Between one and four attestations were sufficient to ensure con- 
tinuation of a case. In some cases, the curanderos' public reputation 
became an issue with the priests or civil authorities, as it caused a public 
disturbance and loss of control over the faithful; the priests then had 
the responsibility of making the accusation to the Holy Office. 24 

When provincial commissioners or priests with inquisitorial authority 
were involved, they usually sent the complete delations and reports to 
the commissioners of the Holy Office beforehand, so that upon receiv- 
ing a response from the qualifying judges they would know how to pro- 
ceed with each case. 25 Inquisitors were responsible for the most stringent 
enforcement of the rules and regulations of the Holy Tribunal. They 
often expedited the Instructions to ensure the correct methods of inquiry 
and to obtain greater information in order to standardize judgment by 
the qualifying judges, thus avoiding, wherever possible, errors that 
might discredit the prestige and deplete the treasury of the Holy 
Office. 26 There were few cases where the accused could not be located, 
either because too much time had transpired between the crime and the 
accusation, or because he or she had died. 27 



THE TRIALS 

Once the delation or report was received and the trial subsequently en- 
dorsed, the first step was to call upon the witnesses, dismissing those 
cases where interrogation revealed that they had been motivated by 
hatred, desire to defame, or other similar reasons. Witnesses presented 
by the informer or called by the commissioner were advised of their re- 
sponsibility and the importance of their testimony, as well as of the 
punishment incurred if their testimony should prove false or motivated 
by hatred or enmity. In accord with the rules, witnesses were assured of 
and sworn to secrecy. 28 

The purpose was to gather as much information as possible in order 
to continue the trial or to dismiss it. Although the number of witnesses 
in the cases of curanderos varied depending upon the offense commit- 
ted, it was usually determined by the conscientiousness of the commis- 
sioner. For example, more than twenty witnesses were called in the trial 
of Maria Tiburcia, while eleven were called in the trial of Manuela 
Josefa; in general, the average number was four or five witnesses. In the 



Copyrighted material 



48 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



case of Petra Narcisa, six testimonies were presented, and since the in- 
formation was considered insufficient to decide the case, the trial was 
rescheduled and six other witnesses were called in order to define the 
charges. 29 Moreover, it was common to request testimony from the 
curanderos' former patients, relatives, or assistants. 2 



30 



DETENTIONS AND IMPRISONMENT 

The judges ruled whether or not to proceed with the trial on the basis 
of the testimonies, with the prosecutor of the Holy Office presenting the 
formal accusation. 31 Once the decision to proceed had been made, the 
accused was detained and placed either in the secret jails of the Holy 
Office, in the curate jail, or in the royal jails; in some cases, women were 
taken to houses of correction. 32 The goal was to interrogate the accused 
as many times as necessary. 

When the prisoner was placed in the jail of the Holy Office, a very 
meticulous physical description was made, along with a description of 
all articles of clothing, other personal belongings, and bed clothes. 33 In 
six cases the prisoners' belongings were confiscated, and in only one was 
it noted that they were "few and poor." The other five cases make no 
mention of the value, from which we can infer that the total was unim- 
portant. Transfer of prisoners from the interior of New Spain to the 
jails of the Holy Office in Mexico City was done infrequently, since the 
expense was covered by the prisoner's own possessions. Where there 
were no possessions, the tribunal covered the expense, ordering a care- 
ful examination of "the quality of the person and the nature of the of- 
fense, and the trial to take place only under great consideration." 34 

There were anomalies in the detentions; for example, when Miguel 
Antonio and his wife presented themselves to denounce Manuel Jose de 
Moctezuma, all three were imprisoned. The curandero was set free, but 
the denouncers were detained for an additional period of three days and 
received a sharp reprimand for having taken pipiltzintzin, a hallucinogen 
recommended by Manuel Jose. 35 Priests who made arrests without the 
authorization of the Holy Office were also severely reprimanded, and 
if the civil authorities tried to make arrests, the inquisitors protested the 
encroachment on their jurisdiction. 36 

The length of time in prison varied with the duration of the trial; in 
general, it fluctuated between the three and five years it took to complete 
the trial. Only the prison cells of the Holy Office were safe and ade- 
quately guarded; in other locations the prisoners were able to escape. 
One curandera did so by burning down the door; although she was able 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



49 



to escape, she was captured because she was very ill. "El Churumbelo" 
escaped through the rafters of the jail ceiling, but he was captured and 
returned to prison. Maria Margarita, with the help of her daughter, es- 
caped in shackles. Among the fugitives was Jose de Roxas, arrested for 
teaching forbidden prayers to children; he was the only fugitive who was 
never captured. 37 



THE CONFESSION AND TORTURE 

The interrogations of the curanderos proceeded in the usual way. In 
general, they accepted the charges and confessed correspondingly; only 
Agustina Rangel denied the eighty charges imputed to her. "La Ciru- 
jana," feigning insanity and sickness with hallucinations of snakes, al- 
most managed to deceive the inquisitors and avoid indictment. 38 The 
interrogations provided proof complementing the accusations against 
the prisoners. For example, Lorenza, an elderly midwife, never "wished 
to declare the kinds of herbs" that she used in her healings. In these 
cases, specialists were sought to identify the medicinal plants in order 
to determine if they were prohibited. 39 

All of the punitive rules and regulations of the Holy Office were based 
on physical punishment: not only torture but deprivation of liberty, im- 
prisonment in dark, humid cells, solitary confinement, whipping, and 
even the public exhibition of the prisoners in specific clothing and the 
parading of male and female prisoners naked to the waist were all degra- 
dations not easily forgotten by the individual or society. That was, after 
all, the objective: to conserve a vivid memory of the punishment. 

In two cases of curanderos, both were tortured in order to obtain 
confessions: Jose Quinerio Cisneros, a mulatto whose file contains the 
decree that torture be applied, because of his reluctance, "one or more 
times, as much as is necessary," 40 and Agustina Rangel, aware of the 
inquisitorial mechanisms, who declared that she thought she was preg- 
nant, since she "finds herself with great pain in the belly and hips." 
This excuse most probably postponed both trial and torture. 41 Despite 
the torture, Agustina continued to deny the eighty charges pressed by 
the prosecutor, repeating before the inquisitors that if she had cured 
people, it was by "the grace of God and of the Holy Virgin and Santa 
Rosa," who helped and advised her, Santa Rosa entering her body to 
cure the sick. The qualifying judges were the ones who asked the pros- 
ecutor to torture her, to see if she would confess the truth. 42 Convinced 
of her revelations, she insisted on denying the charges even after tor- 
ture. When she was sentenced in October 1687, two years after she had 



Copyrighted material 



50 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



been detained, she again denied the charges. Not until February 1688, 
when the sentence was carried out, did she admit to them. 43 

THE SENTENCES 

The most frequent punishment against the curanderos was a reprimand 
with a prohibition against their practices. In most cases, the reprimand 
took place privately before the commissioner, the notary, the prosecu- 
tor, and the inquisitorial witnesses, gathered together at the trial's final 
hearing when it took place in Mexico City. In other places, it was made 
before the representatives of the Holy Office. Public reprimand was car- 
ried out by the same officials with six, eight, or more witnesses. 44 

The reprimand was meant to be a lesson to the accused, and the jus- 
tification was that in many cases no other punishment was applicable, 
since "because of their backwardness they cannot be charged with any 
heretical intention," or because they had committed the offenses "with- 
out malice, only in order to avoid working and to swindle innocent 
people." 45 The reprimand was severe and its threat was important. The 
tribunal took harsh measure against recidivists. After the reprimand, the 
prisoners would make an oath promising not to repeat the offense. Juan 
Luis, a black man, was warned he would receive public reprimand of 
twenty-five lashes at the church door if he did not honor his oath. 4 ' 5 "La 
Cirujana" was a recidivist, who, because of her illness, did not receive 
any major punishment and was placed in a convent. 47 Moreover, repri- 
mands were issued against ignorant witnesses and denouncers. 48 

PUBLIC PUNISHMENT 

Public punishment functioned as an educational ritual of inquisitorial 
power. The principal assumption was that exemplary punishment would 
prevent New Spaniards from committing offenses. Francisco Pena is em- 
phatic about the concept of punishment: "The primary objective of the 
trial and death sentence is not to save the soul of the accused but rather 
to procure public welfare and to terrify the populace." 49 

The penitents, carrying candles, gagged, and wearing tunics, cone- 
shaped hats, and nooses, covered with symbols indicating their offenses, 
were exhibited publicly, their crimes published and repeated by the 
town crier. The prisoner was thus penalized not only by inquisitorial au- 
thority but by the entire society as well, represented by those participat- 
ing in the ritual. People who attended the ritual liberated themselves 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



51 



through self-expression in the ceremony, and they learned from the 
punishments not to commit the same offenses. They saw the penitents' 
sufferings in these rituals that catalyzed the repressive New Spanish so- 
ciety. The goal of publishing the penalties was to avoid social transgres- 
sion, disequilibrium, and rupture. 

Few curanderos received these punishments. Two women suffered 
public humiliation. Manuela "La Lucera," after a long imprisonment of 
five years, was paraded in 1 734 through the customary streets by a crier 
who finally gave her twenty-five lashes at the pillory; the second part of 
her sentence consisted of working in a hospital for six months. 50 "La Sal- 
vatierrena," a forty-six-year-old free mulatta, was led through the streets 
by a crier promulgating her offense and received twenty-five lashes at 
the pillory; she was sentenced to prison and severely reprimanded, 
being required for one year thereafter to make her confession at the 
main altar, and to pray three Salve Reginas and three Apostles' Creeds 
after mass. 51 

The maximum penalty for the curanderos was the abjuration de levi, 
a formal oath to avoid this sin in the future. The only one who received 
it was Agustina Rangel. Before it was carried out, she embraced Chris- 
tianity and accepted the accusation made against her. The abjuration 
took place in the church of Santo Domingo on 8 February 1688. At the 
end of mass, she offered a votive candle to the priest and performed 
the abjuration in expiation of her sins. The following day, 9 February, 
she was "taken on a beast of burden, naked to the waist, wearing the 
aforementioned noose, and cone-shaped hat, and led through the cus- 
tomary streets," with the crier announcing her offenses as he led the way 
to the pillory where she received two hundred lashes. On 1 2 February 
she entered the Hospital of the Conception of Jesus of Nazareth to serve 
the poor for a period of two years. Her file states that she served the 
entire sentence, obtaining her liberty in February 1690. 52 

Jose Antonio Hernandez, a Spaniard whose case required ten wit- 
nesses and whose trial lasted four years, was kept prisoner by order of 
the board of royal physicians who charged him with being a curandero 
and an herbalist. The qualifying judges finally found him to be "a sus- 
pect de levi against the Holy Catholic Faith," but there is no definitive 
sentence. 53 

Finally, Jose Quinerio Cisneros, accused of being a superstitious 
curandero, received the following sentence: exile from the towns of 
Madrid, Mexico, and Salamanca for "a period of ten years, during which 
the first two are to be spent in the Castillo de San Juan de Ulua, assigned 



Copyrighted material 



52 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



to royal tasks, on prebend and without salary." After one month in San 
Juan, he made his confession, and did so also at Easter. Every Saturday 
he offered part of the rosary to the Virgin Mary. 54 

CONCLUSIONS 

The beliefs, practices, and behavior of the curanderos punished by the 
Holy Tribunal were as follows: 

1. The belief that they should not infringe upon established reli- 
gious norms. They were convinced that they should heal the sick 
through their therapeutic techniques and with the aid of super- 
natural beings, whether originating in Catholicism or in other 
religions. 

2. The use of hallucinogens that served not only as medication but 
also as a means of achieving a magic trance, consciously seeking 
auditory and visual hallucinations that would allow them to es- 
tablish contact with supernatural beings. 

3. The presence of prayers, images, and sacred and at times conse- 
crated relics in the curative ceremonies. 

4. Divination as a means of making both diagnosis and prognosis. 

New Spain's classist society, with its heterogeneous culture, included 
several conceptions and practices of the curanderos. While Spanish 
curanderos argued that they healed people "through the grace of 
God," the mestizos, mulattoes, Indians, and blacks followed a traditional 
method based on their teachings and practices. The supernatural beings 
invoked in the curative ceremonies correspond to the world view of each 
group. For the Spaniards they were the Catholic deities: Jesus Christ, 
the Virgin, the Holy Trinity, the Holy Spirit, various saints, and the 
Devil. They cured with their dialogues, revelations, and even through 
bodily possession, but always within the framework of individual heal- 
ing. The other groups however, while acknowledging and invoking 
Catholic deities, fundamentally perceived pre-Hispanic deities in the 
hallucinatory episodes; and while these divinities aided, directed, and 
prescribed, it was the curandero who healed, involving both the patient 
and the assistants in a collective healing. 

The curanderos appeared as transgressors of established morality, 
since they were said to have participated in condemned practices such 
as concubinage, homosexuality, and promiscuity. Yet the vast majority 
of the curanderos were exempt from punishment, as their herbal medi- 
cine did not merit any type of condemnation, and they were eventually 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



53 



permitted the use of officially sanctioned images and relics. The Holy 
Office's response confirms that the medical practice of the curanderos 
was viewed and accepted as a necessity. It was within reach of the general 
populace; the curanderos were as poor as their patients, since in the con- 
fiscation of personal belongings, no curandero with money was ever 
found. The colonial curandero thus served a specific function by offer- 
ing a solution to the health problems of most of New Spain through the 
use of an efficient traditional medicine. 



NOTES 

1. Documents from the Archivo General de la Nacion (Mexico) (hereafter 
AGN), Protomedicato, tomo 2, expediente 8, fol. 272. 

2. AGN, Protomedicato, tomo 3, exp. 8, fol. 159: The intendant of Guana- 
juato stated that in that town there was no medical facility and that common 
cures were provided by women who practiced with extreme conscientiousness, 
employing domestic medicines. 

Tomo 2, exp. 8, fol. 159: A mayor affirmed that if no doctor was available, 
it was common practice to employ a curandero "because as ignorant as they 
might be, they had more experience and knowledge than everyone else." 

3. Ibid., tomo 3, exp. 8, fol. 159: In 1799 the viceroy of New Spain issued 
an edict affirming that "there is no prohibition against the curanderos giving 
aid to the infirm in the dwelling areas of Indians." 

4. The hallucinogens most frequently ingested were peyote (Lophophora Wil- 
liamisii), ololiuqui (Rivea Corymbosa), and Ipomea Violacea and pipiltzintzin (Savia 
Divinorum). AGN, Edictos, tomo 2, fol. 87: The Holy Tribunal of the Inquisi- 
tion circulated the first edict published in 1617, followed by many others during 
the colonial period, which stated that the use of hallucinogens would be harshly 
punished. 

Jose Toribio Medina, Historia del Santo Oficio de la Inquisition en Mexico (Mexico 
City: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Miguel Angel Porriia, 1987), 
160. Regarding the prohibition of peyote and other hallucinogens, the inquisi- 
tors reasoned that ingestion established an implicit pact with the Devil, because 
"they estrange the senses and create visions and phantasms." 

5. The following research has been carried out in the Instituto de Investiga- 
ciones Antropologicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. 

6. Richard E. Greenleaf, Inquisition y sociedad en el Mexico colonial (Madrid: 
Ediciones Jose Porriia Turanzas, 1985), 9. Greenleaf affirms that in colonial 
Mexico neither the Tribunal nor its agents were able to exercise control over 
the ideas of the colonial population or the Indians. 

7. A. S. Turberville, La Inquisition espanola (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura 
Economica, 1971), 30. 

8. Greenleaf, Inquisition, 6. 



54 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



9. Ibid, lg. Bull issued by Leo X in April 1521 and confirmed by Adrian VI 
in the Bula Omnimoda in 1522. 

10. Medina, Historia, 24-28. 

11. Julio Caro Baroja, El Senor Inquisidor y otras vidas por oficio (Madrid: 
Alianza Editorial, 1968), 21. 

12. Jose Miranda, "Indios." In Los tribunales de la Nueva Espana (Mexico City: 
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1980), 165. Miranda notes that the 
Indians, "due to their actual situation — due to the difference in civilizations — 
had to be juridically assigned to a special category as Spaniards, that of the un- 
couth and the poor, and were therefore subjected, like the latter, to a system of 
guardianship and protection, for it was assumed that conferring upon them a 
status of equality with the common citizens, i.e., the Spaniards, or even with 
those who were not citizens, i.e., the castes, would only create prejudice against 
them." 

13. AGN, Inquisicion, tomo 830, exp. 11, fol. 156. The commissar of Aguas- 
calientes declared: "Because she is a pure-blooded Indian whose practice 
and punishment do not concern the Holy Office, let her be merely sternly 
reprimanded." 

Tomo 1433, ex P- 2 5> 22 4 : The commissar of Masaya, Nicaragua, has 
determined that "because she is an Indian, let the accused be placed in the 
file with the despised ones, forewarning the corresponding commissioner of 
the Indians." 

14. Ibid., tomo 842, fol. 104. In Bolanos, Jalisco, Juana Ma. Nava, a recidivist 
Indian, was detained and imprisoned for being an evil curandera. The Holy 
Office sent an order to the commissioner "to free her immediately," warning 
him: "Do not for any motive apprehend anyone who has been accused." 

15. Ibid., tomo 824, exp. 13, fol. 213. On certain occasions it was difficult to 
determine whether or not "pure Indians" were involved, as occurred with the 
commissioner of Queretaro, since Miguel Sanchez's parents were unknown. 

Tomo 1468, fol. 85: In the case of Juana Ma. Vanegas, "La Chalis," it was 
suggested to the priest of Paso del Norte that he formalize her file, as it was un- 
clear whether or not she was an Indian. Tomo 1 182, fol. 69: In the case of the 
Indian woman Lugarda, the denouncer's husband was called in to testify. 

16. Ibid., fols. 60-63; Miranda, "Indios," 172. Miranda points out that "In- 
dians could not be fined by law but could only be sentenced to lashes, forced 
labor, torture, or death. A sentence of forced labor was not carried out in galleys 
or other state institutions (prisons or otherwise) but rather in private institutions 
such as workshops, bacon shops, bakeries, etc., whose owners bought the labor 
of the prisoner for the duration of the sentence." 

17. AGN, Inq., tomo 878, exp. 853, fol. 510, and tomo 302, exp. 8g, fols. 
128-130. 

18. Ibid., tomo 1 150, exp. 10, fol. 136. As the commissioner of Salamanca, 
Guanajuato, notes in 1772, "these territories are very contaminated with similar 
superstitions, the people even desire to believe thus and do not wish to believe 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



55 



that the illnesses they suffer are the will of God our Father, but rather they 
vacillate and then believe that they are bewitched, from which follow all the 
inconsistencies . . ." 

19. There is abundant information from the inquisitorial records which 
facilitates a reconstruction of various aspects of New Spanish popular culture; 
one source on traditional colonial medicine is Gonzalo Aguirre Beltran's Medi- 
cinay magia (Mexico City: Instituto Nacional Indigenista, 1963). 

20. AGN, Inq., tomo 878, exp. 83, fol. 510, and tomo 830, exp. 3, fol. 49. 
Nicolau Eimeric and Francisco Pena, El manual de los Inquisidores (Barcelona: 
Muchnik Editores, 1983), 132. Eimeric indicates the great precautions that the 
commissioners must have taken in these cases, since people might accuse them- 
selves in order to avoid punishment brought on by another's accusation. 

21. AGN, Inq., tomo 746, fol. 522: In "observance of the Holy Office," the 
Indian Miguel Juan presented himself before the priest of Chapa de Mota to 
accuse Diego de Alanis, a mulatto. Tomo 862, exp. 37, fol. 288: The priest car- 
ried out his duties in the name of the Holy Office in order to locate curanderos 
or idolaters in Tixtla, and thus found the Indian Sebastian Salvador. 

22. Ibid., tomo 862, exp. 30, fol. 216: The curandero Manuel Jose de Moc- 
tezuma, a castizo, was denounced by the mulatto Miguel Antonio for refusing to 
cure his wife. Tomo 785, exp. 12, fol. 253: Luis Antonio Contreras threatened 
to denounce Maria Teresa in the Holy Office and finally actually did so, for her 
refusal to remove a spell she had cast on him because of jealousy. Tomo 674, 
exp. 12, fol. 96: Maria Calderon was accused by Nicolas Ramirez, husband of 
the sick woman, who was called later to testify. 

23. Ibid., tomo 1036, exp. 10, fol. 189: The accuser Nicolas Saucedo had 
been bewitched by his brother Pascual de Salazar for having taken away his rifle. 
Tomo 337, exp. 14, fol. 4: Juan Conquero, a Portuguese man, denounced his 
concubine, Ana de Carvajal, a black woman, for having bewitched him; he had 
tried to leave her but found to the contrary that every day he loved her more. 
Tomo 848, fol. 28: During trial, Manuela "La Lucera" denounced Roque de los 
Santos, with whom she had an "illicit relationship." 

24. Eimeric and Pena, El manual, 145: Eimeric indicates that a trial by inter- 
view was called for, in which the inquisitor brought in witnesses to clarify public 
rumors. 

AGN, Inq., tomo 1028, exp. 7, fol. 245: The vicar of Tlanepantla reported 
as a public error the healings of the Spaniard Petra de Torres, and called two 
witnesses to testify. Tomo 1427, exp. 14, fol. 78: Dominga "La Polla" was impris- 
oned by the mayor of the district of Queretaro, as there were many accusations 
made by the sick people of the Barrio de Santa Ana, where she worked. Tomo 
1168, exp. 16, fol. 232: Juan de Cordova "heard it said" that Joseph "El Za- 
patero" was very sought after as a curandero. 

25. AGN, Inq., tomo 767, exp. 33, fol. 534: Fray Juan de Zapata, a conven- 
tional Augustinian, wrote to the Holy Office and asked for its judgment regard- 
ing the superstitious cures of "La Cirujana." Tomo 826, exp. 14, fol. 336: The 



Copyrighted material 



56 



NOEMI QUEZADA 



chaplain of Aguascalientes sent the report so that the Holy Office would make 
a judgment on the case of Juana de Bustos. 

26. Ibid., tomo 543, exp. 3, fol. 13: In the case of Esteban Lorenzo, the In- 
structions were sent to the priest of Metepec to proceed properly and make more 
information available to him. Appropriate formalities were recommended in the 
following cases: tomo 826, exp. 52, fol. 15: "La Caballero," in Izucar; tomo 826, 
exp. 43, fol. 446: Francisca Aviles, in the Sultepec mines; and tomo 826, exp. 
54, fol. 535: Lucia Berrueto, in Sultepec. 

27. Ibid., tomo 1365, exp. 4, fol. 23: In Queretaro, Jeronimo Ortiz was called 
on to testify, but the black woman Maria Fernandez could not be found, accused 
ten years after the crime had been committed, so that "no investigation of her 
manner of living was possible." Tomo 1397, exp. 14, fol. 205: In the case of the 
mulatto Juan "El Cojo," four witnesses were called; it was decided, however, that 
since "nobody knew him, nor did he appear in the parish register," he was al- 
ready dead. 

28. Eimeric and Pena, El manual, 140. Refer to the examination of witnesses. 

29. Ibid., 165: Eimeric notes that the excessive number of witnesses was liable 
to extend the trial, although he believes that at times more witnesses than the 
stipulated number were necessary. AGN, Inq., tomo 1300, exp. 12, fol. 187-259; 
tomo 964, exp. 6 fols. 354—373; and tomo 1228, exp. 12, fols. 347—393- 

30. Ibid., tomo 811, exp. 16, fol. 463-470: In the case of "La Durana," two 
of the witnesses were her children. Tomo 1300, exp. 12, fol. 254: A doctor ap- 
pears among the witnesses, called to testify and give his opinion as a specialist. 

31. Ibid., tomo 598, exp. 15, fol. 538: The prosecutor requested the deten- 
tion of Estefania de los Reyes. Tomo 322, exp. 2, fol. 154: Agustina Rangel was 
formally accused by the prosecutor. 

32. Ibid., tomo 844, exp. 6, fol. 509. 

33. Ibid., tomo 322, exp. 2, fol. 142. This is what occurred with Agustina 
Rangel. 

On the secret jails and the buildings occupied by the Tribunal of the Holy 
Office, refer to Francisco de la Maza, El palacio de la Inquisition (Mexico City: 
Instituto de Investigaciones Esteticas, 1951), 82 pp., illustrations and plans. 

34. AGN, Inq., tomo 75, exp. 22, fol. 170: Instructions sent by Pedro de los 
Rios, notary of the Holy Office, to the commissioners in 1572. Medina, Historia, 
p. 22: Pedro de los Rios was named Notary of the Secret and arrived in New 
Spain with don Pedro Moya de Contreras, inquisitor general, in 1571. 

35. AGN, Inq., tomo 862, exp. 30, fol. 217. 

36. Ibid., tomo 1240, exp. 14, fol. 350; tomo 1427, exp. 14, fol. 78: The 
mayor made Dominga "La Polla" a prisoner and brought her before the com- 
missioner of the Holy Office, who assured him that imprisonment was not 
necessary. 

37. Ibid., tomo 767, exp. 33, fol. 534; tomo 1053, exp. 7, fol. 433; tomo 1240, 
exp. 14, fol. 350; and tomo 1176, exp. 5, fol. 105. 

Eimeric and Pena, El manual, 1 17: Pena comments that "the fugitive, as a re- 
sult of his evasion, transforms himself into an outlaw." 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION'S REPRESSION OF CURANDEROS 



57 



38. AGN, Inq., tomo 322, exp. 2, fol. 172 and tomo 767, exp. 33, fol. 530. 
Eimeric and Pena, El manual: 148—151: Eimeric includes feigning insanity and 
illness among "the ten deceptions of the heretics in order to respond without 
confessing." 

39. AGN, Inq., tomo 1313, exp. 12, fol. 4, and tomo 1240, exp. 14, fol. 350: 
It was recommended to the priest of Guanajuato that in the presence of a notary 
"he make identification carefully by an apothecary or herbalist if one is available 
in that place ... or if not, by two local elders of good conscience and who have 
knowledge of herbs . . . and if there is rosemary or peyote, or any other herb 
commonly applied to some superstitious use." 

40. Ibid., tomo 1150, exp. 10, fol. 231. 

41. Ibid., tomo 522, exp. 2, fol. 152. Eimeric and Pena, El manual, 187-188. 
Pena's note reads: "What can be done if the accused individual who is to be in- 
terrogated is a pregnant woman? She should not be tortured or terrorized, lest 
she give birth or abort. Other means should be employed to extract from her 
the confession before she delivers. After delivery there is no obstacle." 

42. AGN, Inq., tomo 522, exp. 2, fol. 154. 

43. Ibid., fol. 209. 

44. Ibid., tomo 862, exp. 37, fol. 297: Joseph Gonzalez was severely repri- 
manded in the presence of six or eight persons and forbidden to practice as a 
curandero. 

45. Ibid., tomo 1036, exp. 10, fol. 196, and tomo 1254, exp. 9, fols. 144-145. 

46. Ibid., tomo 1111, exp. 57, fol. 456. 

47. Ibid., tomo 767, exp. 33, fol. 534, and tomo 964, exp. 6, fol. 375. 

48. Ibid., tomo 1228, exp. 12, fol. 390, and tomo 767, exp. 30, fols. 480-491. 

49. Eimeric and Pena, El manual, 151. Medina, Historia, 35 ff. for the descrip- 
tions of the autos de fe in which the accounts of the assistants are transcribed 
and in which the social and religious ritual of the punishment is discernible. 

Michel Foucault, Vigilar y castigar (Mexico City: Siglo Veintiuno Editores, 
1980), 48-52, analyzes the transcendental significance of public execution on 
both the social and individual levels. 

50. AGN, Inq., tomo 848, fol. 12: Patients who accepted the cure were sen- 
tenced to six months' service in a hospital. 

51. Ibid., tomo 844, exp. 6, fol. 543. 

52. Ibid., tomo 522, exp. 2, fols. 209 and 226-233. Medina, Historia, 333, 
registers this case among those who abjured that day in Santo Domingo. On the 
procedure of abjuration as a consequence of slight suspicion, see Eimeric and 
Pena, El manual, 190—191. 

53. AGN, Inq., tomo 1235, exp. 1, fols. 186-187. 

54. Ibid., tomo 1333, fol. 359. 



Copyrighted material 



FOUR 



Sorcery and Eroticism in 
Love Magic 

Maria Helena Sanchez Ortega 



During the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries — and even 
now in some rural areas — Spain maintained a long and extensive tra- 
dition of magic. Men and women of all ages and social conditions pas- 
sionately practiced some of these rituals that the Church considered 
superstitions. One large group of magicians of both sexes — although 
some Inquisition tribunals prosecuted more women — claimed the power 
to cure illness, especially when caused by dark forces. The Inquisition 
prosecuted them for the improper use of Catholic liturgical prayers. A 
second large group composed mainly of men were feverishly caught up 
in the search for enchanted treasures, supposedly hidden by both Mus- 
lims and Jews at the time of their expulsion from the Iberian peninsula. 
Monks and priests, intellectuals, peasants, and city dwellers all formed 
silent partnerships with judeoconversos and moriscos, the former members 
of the expelled ethnic groups. 

Largely carried out by men, this "masculine magic" employed — or at 
least claimed to employ — knowledge derived from such sources as as- 
trology, the cabala, readings of the psalms, and the more popular 
esoteric books; thus we may also call it an "educated magic," although 
in most cases the protagonists were no more than simple amateurs with 
very vague notions of the specializations that experts — among whom we 
must include the level-headed men of science — had practiced for cen- 
turies. Women were not completely absent from these silent partner- 
ships, although their role was always that of extra or assistant in the 
complicated maneuvers intended to disenchant hidden riches. 1 

Inquisitorial proceedings clearly distinguish another group of women 

58 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



59 



as equally involved in magical practices, with the primary goal being 
seduction and conquest of a suitor. This third type of magic had a dis- 
tinctly amorous nature, not only in its objectives, but also in its cants, 
invocations, and rites. 2 The Spanish Inquisition prosecuted all of these 
men and women equally for their deviation from one of the fundamen- 
tal dogmas of the Catholic Church, the exercise of free will, and for the 
misuse of the sacred liturgy and of the names of God, the Virgin Mary, 
and the saints. The practice of love magic was also condemned for its 
invocation of evil spirits — such as the Lame Devil (el Diablo Cojuelo), 
Satan, Barabbas, and similar demons — that allowed the possibility of es- 
tablishing some kind of inadvisable pact with Evil. The "diabolical pact" 
had already been clearly defined and repudiated by ecclesiastical au- 
thorities since well before the establishment of the Spanish Inquisition. 3 
Fortunately for our sorceresses and amateurs, however, as well as for 
the solutions to their problems by means of magic, the attitude of the 
judges and prosecutors of the Spanish Holy Office were never so strict 
as in other areas, and even in the most extreme cases, prisoners usually 
received penalties limited to whipping and exile. 4 

The inquisitional archives constitute the best source available for 
studying the three types of magic referred to above. On the basis of 
these sources, I have cataloged the following summary of superstitious 
practices and sorcery performed by women who were concerned about 
the absence or possible loss of love. 



LOVE MAGIC 

In my analysis of the relaciones de causas (the lists of prisoners sent by 
every local tribunal to the central or supreme council) that I have been 
able to study to the present, the rituals practiced by the Catalan, Valen- 
cian, Andalusian, and Castilian sorceresses, as well as those tried by the 
tribunals of Las Palmas in the Canary Islands, belonged to a common 
store. Transmitted orally, and slowly elaborated over an undetermined 
period of time, they probably originated in the early Middle Ages. 5 Little 
by little the sorceresses incorporated themes and rites into a common 
repertory, which immediately "traveled" over all of Spain as a result of 
the women's great mobility. The sorceresses tried by each tribunal fre- 
quently came from areas quite distant from where they had finally been 
denounced and detained, and, as we shall see, many led restless lives, 
continually moving from place to place. 

As these women came into frequent contact with one another, their 
consultations rarely ended after visiting one "expert." Each chance oc- 



Copyrighted material 



60 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



casion — a gypsy who entered the house asking for alms, a traveler who 
arrived at the town, a short trip made to another city — provided an op- 
portunity for making contact with some new professional who contrib- 
uted original solutions and new methods. For in effect, the practice of 
sorcery is almost a profession for many women, and this double aspect 
of professionalism and geographical mobility explains the fundamental 
sameness of these practices, which offer few variations throughout the 
entire Iberian peninsula. 

The study of the various tribunals reveals very similar profiles, and 
according to the goals and content of these rituals, the characteristics of 
"love magic" may be classified in the following manner: 

First, there is a cluster of romantic procedures or spells, aimed always 
at uncovering the intentions of the man. These procedures are divided 
according to the instruments needed for the divination: 

a) procedures carried out with beans, cards, a sieve, scissors, or other 
similar instruments; 

b) divinations that make use of fire, spells that employ alum and salt, 
spells with "saucepans," "flasks," and similar items; 

c) spells with various other objects such as a rosary or oranges. 

Second, we can distinguish a cluster of rites with either an obvious or 
an underlying erotic content. Their erotic content may be termed im- 
plicit or explicit: 

a) explicit: those rites which employ menstrual blood, semen, pubic 
hairs, and similar items; 

b) implicit: those prayers and rituals whose goal — as stated in the 
documents — is to achieve "illicit" contact in a more or less implicit 
manner, such as the conjuration of the shadow-broom, and other 
similar cases. 

Finally, there are a series of cants and invocations of spirits which may 
be accompanied by a generally uncomplicated ceremony, such as gestur- 
ing with the hands, or showing oneself at a window, with the conjuration 
or recitation of the decisive act. These cants are meant to appease some 
suitor, to regain his love, to make him return and visit the enamored 
woman, and other similar goals. I am grouping them under the heading 
of "the power of the word," because without the sorceress's conviction 
and force in reciting them, no one would seriously believe in their effect: 

a) cants to placate a man and obtain his favors such as "Furious you 
come to me" ("furioso vienes a mi"), and "Hello, hello, man" 
("hola, hola, varon"), and conjurations to the sun, moon, and stars; 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



61 



b) conjurations to obtain a visit from the man, such as conjurations 
of the door and window; 

c) magic cants to obtain the love of a suitor and avenge his neglect, 
such as the cant to the Lonely Soul [Anima Sola], to Santa Marta, 
to "wicked" Marta, to Santa Elena, to San Silvestre, and to San 
Onofre. 

As we have seen, the sorceresses' objectives completely justify the label 
of "love magic," and this has appeared to be the appropriate name for 
the practices generally carried out by women, but the seeming passion 
of these sixteenth-, seventeenth-, and eighteenth-century women de- 
serves to be examined with greater thoroughness. In reality, and as is 
readily apparent in these supplications to the spirits, the presence of a 
suitor represents more of a material necessity than a truly amorous one. 
More than any other, our sorceresses' most frequent conjuration, that 
"[man's name] come, giving me what he has and telling me what he knows," 
demonstrates that the desired "friend's" presence basically meant the 
support of someone who would help the women overcome life's difficul- 
ties in a society controlled by men economically as well as religiously. 
The single woman not only saw herself obliged to fight against material 
adversity, but also became suspect to her neighbors, unless she placed 
herself under the tutelage of some mystic "spouse" by following the path 
of the nuns and beatas. Isolated in society, unable to count on any mas- 
culine support, whether real or sublimated, she risked falling into the 
category of witch, especially if she had reached middle age. The sor- 
ceresses and their clients, therefore, were deeply invested in winning 
over and retaining the man who, in this case without any extraordinary 
powers, could ward off poverty and social marginalization. The funda- 
mental goals underlying their rites were those of women who desper- 
ately sought men's redeeming company by: 

a) determining a man's amorous intentions; 

b) obtaining a man's love; 

c) recovering and retaining the love of a scornful man. 



AMOROUS ANXIETY IN FEMININE SORCERY 

The long tradition and repeated practices of the cants, rites, and con- 
jurations in the Middle Ages and the following centuries amassed so 
many possibilities for the woman in search of a stable companion that 
without having to analyze all the categories previously mentioned, and 
examining only the most frequently recited phrases and refrains," we 



Copyrighted material 



62 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



penetrate the very heart of "feminine magic," discovering the most inti- 
mate aspects of the sorceresses and their clients during these rituals. 
Judging from the cants recited by the sorceresses in order to attain the 
secret desires of their clients, love was the chief aim of these women of 
the Habsburg regime, who so readily solicited "love magic." 

Despite their assertions, these enamored women were not satisfied 
merely with having their love reciprocated. Their aspirations and amor- 
ous passion extended to the total control of the beloved's will, and the 
reasons for desiring such control had little to do with the admired mys- 
tical sighs of their religious sisters' passion. Our enamored women, prac- 
titioners of magic, were essentially pragmatic souls who realized that 
they must obtain masculine support at all costs, so as not to be socially 
devalued. 

Yet the purely amorous or erotic aspect of most of these practices is 
undeniable. Refrains of a basically impassioned nature are recited in all 
the rites and conjurations. In a client's name, a sorceress entreated the 
immediate appearance of the man, they ordered him to return if he had 
gone away, and repeated, through various chants, the desire that he be 
consumed with passion. This was only one facet of love magic, however, 
and we need to examine and learn about the others. Let us first examine 
the emotional characteristics of our foremothers. 

The usual divinatory practices with beans or cards tell us very little 
regarding feminine emotions. The expert restricted herself to telling 
fortunes and inquiring about the possible appearance of the man. The 
extremely long conjuration of the beans recited by a sorceress named 
Castellanos who was tried by the Toledo tribunal contains only one en- 
lightening phrase. After a tedious conjuration in which the beans were 
tossed to reveal the future, and after naming the Virgin, the saints, and 
such elements as the sea, the sands, the ground, and the seven heavens, 
the conjuration included only the following phrases: 

Asi como esto es verdad 

me declarers lo que os fuere preguntando . . . 

habas que me digais la verdad 

desto que os fuere preguntando 

si hubiere de venir fulano 7 

[Just as this is true 
You will tell me what I ask . . . 
Beans, tell me the truth 
About this which I ask you 
If (man's name) will come] 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



63 



Other sorceresses stated the case even more concisely. Isabel Bautista, 
also tried by the Toledo tribunal, 8 recited a long conjuration, repeating 
only: 

Si fulano ha de venir 
saiga en camino 

[If (man's name) is coming 
Let him be on his way] 

In spite of their complexity, neither the conjurations recited before 
tossing the beans nor fortune-telling with cards offers much information 
about the emotions of the women tried by the Inquisition, except for 
their desire to conjure a man who would take an interest in them. 

Fortunately for us, the conjurations and practices of love magic were 
so numerous that other sorceries and cants reveal, little by little, the most 
recondite thoughts of these enamored women as well as the extent of 
their desires. Love magic is a process through which we can observe the 
various stages of love as well as the diverse psychological states which 
the lovers — men or women — experienced in their erotic-emotional rela- 
tions. The sorceries of the beans and the cards would have been useful 
only during the initial anticipatory phase when the beloved had not yet 
appeared, or resisted doing so. The professionals would employ these 
sorceries only for women wishing to know whether or not they were 
to achieve this essential goal, but they still reserved a vast repertory 
for future situations that might occur once the coveted suitor had been 
trapped, such as the need to arouse a passion not overly potent, to 
achieve the beloved's constancy, and — admittedly — to calm the anxieties 
and thirst for revenge of a rejected woman. The professional sorceress 
applied each phrase on the conjurations, according to the specific needs 
and circumstances of the women, since they hid nothing regarding their 
personal situations. This specificity created an entire range of psycho- 
logical nuances that must also be taken into account. 

Clients requesting the appearance of a man, therefore, consulted the 
beans or the cards — a common occurrence, judging by the frequency 
with which these conjurations were solicited. But the woman visiting the 
sorceress was not always lonely or frustrated, and almost as frequently 
we encounter in the trials other sorceries, such as the oranges and the 
rosary, which confirmed that love had finally arrived, albeit without the 
desired intensity. Once again the enamored woman had to resort to an 
expert who could change the course of her future by bringing the will 
of her man to a more complete state of submission. 



Copyrighted material 



64 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



The phrases in the sorceries requiring a rosary or some oranges as 
the divinatory instrument allow us to understand the second stage of the 
amorous process. Esperanza Badia, for example, tried in Valencia, held 
a rosary and recited a long and complicated conjuration in which she 
invoked various demons and other magical characters, ending with the 
following phrase: 

Venga el corazon de fulano 
atado, preso y enamorado 9 

[Let the heart of (man's name) come 
Bound, captured, and enamored] 

The same phrase also appears in the conjuration employed in the sor- 
cery of the oranges, in Castile as well as in Valencia and the rest of the 
peninsular regions. It thus constitutes a veritable leitmotiv expressing 
the central message of such apparently diverse practices. The prelimi- 
nary phrases vary, the conjured "diabolical" beings may be different, but 
the essential phrase is always the same: "Let the heart of [man's name] 
come / Bound, captured and enamored" [Venga el corazon de fulano / 
atado, preso y enamorado]. 

The fundamental goal now became retaining the male lover. The con- 
juration accompanying the sorcery of "the palms" was recited with this 
goal in mind. The sorceress would pat the length of her arm with the 
palm of her hand in order to uncover the intentions of the absent man 
and would again recite a very similar phrase. Laura Garrigues, a sor- 
ceress in the 1655 Valencian auto de fe, stated quite bluntly: 

Fulano, 

donde quiera que estes, 
te envio este clavo 
te doy este martelazo 
Por mi amor presto vengas 
por mi amor, preso y atado 10 

[(man's name,) 

Wherever you are, 

I send you this nail 

I strike you with this passion 

Soon you will come for my love 

For my love, captured and bound] 

Like the other sorceries, the sorcery of the palms circulated in multi- 
ple versions over the entire Iberian peninsula, but the variations oc- 
curred principally at the beginning of and in addition to, the mantic 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



65 



practice. 11 The central phrase, however, is very similar in all cases and 
confirms that this sorcery belongs to the second amorous phase together 
with the sorceries of the rosary and the oranges. In Castile, Maria Cas- 
tellanos recited it as follows: 

Yo, Maria, te llamo Francisco, 

que vengas por mi amor gimiendo y llorando 12 

[I, Maria, call you, Francisco, 

To come for my love, moaning and crying] 

With this variant, this singularly interesting woman, to whom we shall 
refer again, introduces us to a new phase in love magic beginning with 
the conjurations and rites in which the symbolic value of fire intervenes: 
conjurations of salt and alum and sorceries of "pans" and "flasks" or 
"phials." In the latter, the name varies in different regions according to 
the language, but the examples all reveal the intimate feelings of women 
in search of love. 

The conjurations of alum and salt were recited in order to divine the 
future. The sorceress threw a fistful of salt or a bit of alum into the fire 
so that she could interpret the flame. In all cases the sorceresses began 
to reveal a state of mind in which impatience appeared to have played 
an important part. The woman reciting the conjuration did so on behalf 
of someone whose anxiety was much more intense than in the former 
cases. In the simplest versions, as in Geronima Gonzalez's case in the 
Valencia auto de fe, the invocation is simple: 

Sal, salida . . . 

assi como moros ni cristianos 

pueden estar sin ti 

que Fulano no pueda estar sin mi 13 

[Salt, pouring forth . . . 

Neither Moors nor Christians 

Can be without you 

Nor can (man's name) be without me] 

However, the use of fire seemed somehow to stimulate and to contrib- 
ute to a new psychological state in those women who resorted to the help 
of sorceresses, as we can clearly observe in the conjuration of alum. 
Maria Antonia de Nerona, also from Valencia, explicitly indicated her 
desire to inflame her beloved's heart: 

No pongo alumbre 

sino el corazon y entranas de Fulano 14 



Copyrighted material 



66 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



[I do not use alum 

But rather the heart and soul of (man's name)] 

Geronima Gonzalez uses a very similar phrase in the same alum ritual: 

Asi queme el corazon de Fulano 
y arada en amor mio 15 

[Thus burn the heart of (man's name) 
and plow in my love] 

The formula is repeated in Castile (in the version of our friend 
Castellanos) in even more explicit form. The beloved must be consumed 
with love and visit the woman who loves him. 

. . . Que asi como te has de quemar 
se queme el corazon de Fulano 
porque me venga a ver 16 

[Just as you will be burnt up 

(man's name)'s heart must be inflamed 

So that he comes to see me] 

Of course, all of these imprecations, which are in general quite poetic, 
were accompanied by flames and were directed toward the powers of 
Avernus, who conferred upon them their magical aspect; we are, how- 
ever, more concerned with analyzing their psychological content and 
scope. 

As we can see, the emotional temperature of the love-magic enthu- 
siasts rose quite a few degrees thanks to the use of fire, and we begin 
to understand their real intentions toward their suitors. The enamored 
women of the Habsburg regime wanted absolute control over the will 
and movements of the men they had snared, and this wish is an essential 
chapter in their magic manipulations and anxieties, clearly manifested 
in the fact that the experts' conjurations employed no instrument or 
ceremony. The unadorned word is the fundamental factor here, and it 
is an indispensable key to our elemental "psychoanalysis" of love magic. 17 

When the professional sorceress resorted to magic cants, the relation- 
ship had apparently reached its worst state. The man was scornful, he 
missed assignations, and the woman also suspected the presence of 
another woman on the scene. To revive his interest, it now became 
necessary to resort directly to evil forces. St. Marta, Marta "the wicked," 
and the entire chorus of devils already familiar to the client — Satan, 
Barabbas, the Lame Devil — were invoked directly or indirectly, but with 
almost no instruments or paraphernalia. 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



67 



At this point the enamored woman had to placate her companion's 
anger, and the sorceress placed at her disposal a wide variety of "appeas- 
ing conjurations" to rekindle his passion, mainly through the influence 
of St. Elena or St. Marta. The sorceress would also endeavor to reinstill 
in the man the need to see his abandoned lover. The conjurations aimed 
at changing the man's angry attitude were usually short and extremely 
graphic. No doubt the women of the Habsburg regime feared their com- 
panions' violent tempers, proof of which is frequently documented in 
the declarations. Prudencia Grillo, tried by the Toledo tribunal, justifi- 
ably resorted to magic because she was afraid of being locked in a castle 
by the man on whom she depended. 18 Other women also speak of the 
bad treatment they received at the hands of their husbands or lovers, 
and of attempts on their lives in various forms. One woman even stated 
that she was fed ground glass in a murder attempt. 19 Given the men's 
violence and mean temperament, it is not surprising that these women 
viewed sorcery as a far more satisfactory recourse than the customary 
Christian prayers and resignation recommended by their confessors. 

In any case, a brief reading of one of these women's versions confirms 
their obvious fears. Undoubtedly the man's presence is as much feared 
as desired. Laura Garrigues, for example, tried in Valencia in 1655, 
would conceal her hand inside her clothes when she saw her angry lover 
approach, and pulling her pubic hairs, would repeat: 

Furioso vienes a mi 
furioso vienes a mi 
tan fuerte como un toro 
tan fuerte como un horno 
tan sujeto estes a mi 
como los pelos de mi cono 
estan a mi 20 

[Furious you come to me 

Furious you come to me 

As strong as a bull 

As hot as an oven 

You will be as subject to my will 

As the hairs of my cunt 

Are to me] 

The best-known and most widely spread refrain, however, contains 
a somewhat mysterious formula — surely a synthesis achieved after cen- 
turies of use — that gives it even greater poetic charm. Most likely its 
obscure meaning and brevity contributed at the same time to its enor- 



Copyrighted material 



68 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



mous divulgation and popularity during the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries: 

Con dos te miro 
con cinco te ato 
tu sangre te bebo 
el corazon te parto 21 

[With two I watch you 
With five I bind you 
Your blood I drink 
Your heart I rend] 

Laura Garrigues also knew a version of this conjuration which reveals 
more clearly the need to control an overly impetuous man: 

Con dos te miro 

con tres te ligo y ato 

la sangre te voto 

el corazon te parto 

con las parias de tu madre 

la boca te tapo 

jHale, asno! 

sobre ti cabalgo 2 ' 2 

[With two I watch you 

With three I bind and tie you 

Your blood I curse 

Your heart I rend 

With your afterbirth 

I cover your mouth 

(The sorceress covered her mouth here) 

Come along, ass! 
I'll ride you] 

It is not difficult to infer, after reading this brief imprecation, that 
the magic enthusiast believed she would shut the mouth that insulted 
her, subjecting it to her will in the same way as women dominated the 
little asses that so frequently served as ladies' mounts precisely because 
of their inferior strength and docility. The version Isabel Bautista used 
in Castile confirms and expands my point: 

Con dos te miro 
con tres te tiro 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



69 



con cinco te arrebato 
calla, bobo, que te ato 
tan humilde vengas a mi 
como la suela de mi zapato 23 

[With two I watch you 
With three I toss you 
With five I captivate you 
Quiet, fool, 1 11 bind you 

(At this point the sorceress would slap her knee as a sign of command, 
and finish:) 

You will come to me humble 
As the sole of my shoe] 

As shown above, enamored women understood quite well the mean 
temperament of their companions, but surely this formed part of the 
rules of the game. It was extremely important to placate their tempers 
in order to achieve a reconciliation. The amorous encounters and vis- 
its — which were most likely at night, judging by the extramarital nature 
of the majority of the relationships — rekindled the love interest. Without 
a doubt, the man's return constitutes an important motive for anxiety. 
His arrival is impatiently awaited, but he does not appear. The lover 
goes to her window, opens the door and looks down the street. He is 
nowhere to be seen; feeling exasperated, she nevertheless continues to 
wish for his presence, perhaps with increased anxiety. The conjurations 
of the door and the window reflect perfectly the scene I have just 
described. 

In the conjuration of the door, like that of the window, the woman 
who recited went outside and looked down the street, where she sup- 
posed the man she wanted to attract would appear. Laura Garrigues did 
not object to going outside in broad daylight to call her lover: 

Fulano 

ni tu me ves 

ni yo tc acierto 

yo te llamo con el Padre . . . 
tan humilde 
tan sujeto 
vengas a mi 

como mi senor Jesucristo 
subio al santo arbol de la cruz 



Copyrighled material 



70 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



a morir por ti y por mi 
Amen 

[(man's name) 

You do not see me 

Nor have I found you 

I call you in the name of the Father . . . 

(Here the sorceress invoked the powers of the Holy Trinity, and this was 
followed by the supplication and command:) 

so humble 

so subjected 

You will come to me 

As my lord Jesus Christ 

Climbed the Holy Tree of the Cross 

To die for you and me 

Amen] 

Evidently the sorceress tried to evoke the sacred figure's proverbial 
docility and resignation before a superior will. But, as the reader can 
imagine, the inquisitors were not partial to complex poetic associations. 24 

Maria Antonia de Nerona, also of the Valencian tribunal, preferred 
to act at night, apparently at ten o'clock sharp. She would then invoke 
the lover, calling him three times, imagining him with a noose around 
his neck, that is, bound like a prisoner pleading for help: 

Fulano, Fulano, Fulano, 

por la calle abajo te veo venir 

una soga de ahorcado traes a la garganta 

a grandes voces diciendo 

Fulana, valeme . . . 

[(man's name, man's name, man's name,) 
from down the street I see you coming, 
A hangman's noose around your neck 
Clamoring in a loud voice, 
(woman's name,) help me . . . ] 

Repeated again and again, the refrain emphasizes not only the at- 
tempt to draw the companion's attention, but the woman who is to help 
him as well. The woman then denies him her aid, however, and turns 
him over to the conjured demons so they may penetrate the man's heart, 
provoking the same anxieties and pain she has suffered, as she recites 
this magic prayer: 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



71 



. . . No te quiero valer 
valgate Barrabas y Satanas 
y todos los diablos que alia estan 
todos os juntareis 

y en el corazon de Fulano entrareis 
y este cuchillo de cachas negras 
por el corazon le clavareis 
tantas ansias le dareis 
que a mi casa le traereis 

[I don't wish to help you, 

Let Barabbas and Satan help you 

And all the devils who are there 

You will all gather together 

And this black-handled knife 

You will plunge into his heart 

You will cause him so much anguish 

That you will lead him to my house] 

The basic intention is evident, but the woman is not satisfied with this 
wish alone, and she adds one of the refrains frequently repeated when 
the woman's anxiety led her to the brink of desperation: 

. . . Y no le dejareis 
reposar, ni comer, ni dormir 
ni en la cama reposar 
sino conmigo pensar 

[ . . . And you won't let him 
Rest or eat or sleep 
He will not rest in bed 
But will think only of me] 

The rest of Maria Antonia de Nerona's conjuration is explicit in this 
invocation "of the window": 

. . . Que venga con ansias y pena 

en su corazon 

por verme y hallarme 

[ . . . Let him come with anguish and sorrow 
In his heart 

To see me and find me . . . ] 



Copyrighted material 



72 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



The only instrument the woman employed during this ceremony was 
the black-handled dagger that was to be thrust in the windowsill at the 
opportune moment — an obvious symbol of the forgetful lover's heart. 25 

Maria Antonia de Nerona was one of the women who best expressed 
her love frustration in these cants. Her trial summary included a similar 
cant bidding the man to visit her again. On this occasion Maria Antonia 
was even more decisive: the man should appear bound and held fast by 
his most delicate parts: 

A Fulano veo venir 

soga de ahorcado trae tras el . . . 

estas le traereis 

de su coxon 

de su rinon 

de su bac6n 

de las telas de su corazon 26 

[I see (man's name) coming 

A hangman's noose after him . . . 

(At this point she conjured the demons who were in this case, interest- 
ingly enough, feminine.) 

You will bring him 
By the balls 
By his kidney 
By his spleen 
By his heartstrings 

Yet most of the sorceresses are not as explicit or rhetorical as Maria 
Antonia de Nerona. Geronima Gonzalez conjured the street and called 
the demons, limiting her entreaty: 

jAh de la calle! 

;ah, so compadre! 

. . . Satanas, Barrabas y Lucifer 

que me den a saber si Fulano vendra 27 

[Hey, the street (repeated) 
Hey, mate! 

(The invocation of the demons continued and was much longer than in 
Nerona's version, surely because Geronima Gonzalez emphasized the 
ceremony's magic aspect rather than merely stating her desires, which 
were limited to one phrase:) 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



75 



.... Satan, Barabbas, and Lucifer 

Let me know if (man's name) will come] 

Laura Garrigues employed a brief and disconsolate imprecation to 
make her man return. She then entreated him by invoking such magic 
characters as Maria de Padilla, of the so-called Circle of the Castilian 
king Pedro I, who bewitched men and subjected them to her will with 
a ring containing an enchanted demon, and condemned the souls to 
hell, diabolical figures, like the "desperate souls": 

Vecino y compadre, 
gran serior de la calle 
Fulano soh'a venir a verme 
y ahora no viene 
yo quiero que venga 
y me lo has de traer 
yo te conjurare 

[Neighbor and mate, 

Great lord of the street, 

(man's name) would come and see me 

And now he does not come 

And you are to bring him to me 

I will entreat you . . .] 

As with Maria Antonia de Neroria, Laura also added her wish that 
the demons penetrate this man's heart to induce such anguish that he 
would not rest until he had sought her out. 28 

At this precise psychological moment, these semi-abandoned women 
employed very simple ceremonies, whose symbolic value was as evident 
as the use of fire. In general, the rites associated with the door, the place 
where one awaits the appearance of the beloved man, were limited to 
sweeping the threshold and conjuring him. Laura Garrigues awaited 
nightfall, left the door of her house ajar, and recited: 

Conjurote, puerta y quicial 
por donde Fulano ha salido 
ha dc volvcr a cntrar 29 

[I conjure you, door and side-post 
where (man's name) went out 
He must enter again] 

The pleas of the sorceresses and their clients directed to the stars, the 
moon, and the sun follow the same pattern we have seen during this 



Copyrighted material 



74 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



stage, as the woman attempts to retrieve her man but also desires to 
avenge herself for his absence. These cants addressed to the stars praise 
their beauty — "Maiden star, the highest and most beautiful . . ." [Estrella 
doncella, la mas alta y la mas bella] — and entreat them to penetrate the 
ungrateful heart painfully. One of the most ancient is the prayer by the 
beata of Huete, from the Cuenca tribunal of 1499; she invokes nine stars 
in all and then proceeds to the cant's central message: 

Al monte Synay ireys 

e nueve varas de amor me saquedes 

por la cabeza de Santa Cruz las hinquedes 

e de la cabeza al coracon al rinon 

y al taso o al baco 

y a las andas del espinago 

e las tresientas coyunturas 

que en su cuerpo son 

que no pueda comer ni beber 

hasta que a mi venga a bien querer 

e a aver placer 30 

[You will go to Mount Sinai 
And bring me nine staffs of love 

You will drive them into the head of the Holy Cross 

And from the head to the heart 

And from the heart to the kidney 

And to the taso or the spleen 

And all along the spine 

And the three hundred joints 

in his body 

So that he can neither eat nor drink 
Until he comes to love me well 
And to take pleasure in me] 

The conjuration of the stars appears frequently in the Castilian tri- 
bunals at Cuenca and Toledo, and the well-known refrain from this 
conjuration, "So that he can neither eat nor drink . . ." [que no pueda 
comer ni beber], constantly accompanies other invocations throughout 
the following centuries. The Castilian Juana Dientes disrobed and let 
down her hair before reciting it, perhaps as a means of invoking the 
physical encounter with the lover; we must not forget that during this 
time, nudity and untied hair had sinful erotic connotations. Her conju- 
ration was even more forceful than that of the religious devotee from 
Huete, who does not invoke the demons Beelzebub and Satan conjured 
by Juana: 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



75 



Y con la fragua de Belzebu y Satanas 

siete rejones le amolad 

e con el coracon de Fulano las lancad 

para que ningiin reposo pueda tomar 

hasta que venga a mi mandar 

Diablos del horno 

traedmelo ayna 

diablos del peso 

diablos de la placa 

traedmelo en danca 

diablos de la encrucijada 

traedmelo a casa 31 

[ . . . and with the forge of Beelzebub and Satan 

You will sharpen seven daggers 

And thrust them into (man's name)'s heart 

So that he shall have no rest 

Until he answers my command 

Devils from the furnace 

Bring him to me now 

Devils of the scales 

Devils of the plaza 

Bring him dancing to me 

Devils of the crossroad 

Bring him to my house] 

The proceedings against Isabel Bautista contain another conjuration 
to the stars recited by the Castilian sorceresses as early as the sixteenth 
century. Isabel added a brief and surprising ritual difficult for us to in- 
terpret. She measured the door jamb and door of her house with a cord, 
threw salt into one of the door jambs and placed a broom in the other, 
conjured the nine stars just as the other sorceress did, and then specified 
her desire that the man not forget her: 

Tres varas de mimbre me traereis 

por las muelas de Barrahas las afileis 

por las calderas de Pedro Botero las pasareis 

una la hincareis por el sentido 

que no me eche en olvido 

otra por el coracon 

que vaya a mi aficion 

otra por las espaldas 

que venga por mis palabras 32 



76 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



[Bring me three willow rods 

Sharpen them on Barabbas's molars 

Carry them through hell 

Drive one into his mind 

So that he won't forget me 

Another into the heart 

So he will come when I desire 

Another into his back 

So he will answer my call] 

The conjurations that employ the stars, the sun, and the moon as the 
magical motifs, as well as others we will examine below, are basically all 
the same. The sorceress varied the invocation to the evil spirits, in- 
creased or reduced the form of the cant, but always concluded by 
supplicating the same thing: the recovery of lost love. 

We can observe this wish clearly in the cants invoking the sun and 
the moon, which are usually quite brief: ". . . so that [man's name] can- 
not live without me" [que Fulano no pueda estar sin mi], or simply, "so 
that [man's name] loves me" [que Fulano me quiera]. The cant to the 
moon recited by dona Juana de la Paz, tried in Valencia in 1655, dem- 
onstrates the features of these conjurations, actually the laments of aban- 
doned women expressed aloud: 

Luna clara 

bella y hermosa 

tan clara y tan bella 

como me paresces a mi 

tan bella y hermosa 

paresca yo a mi galan 

como la estrella que esta cerca de ti 33 

[Bright moon 

Lovely, beautiful 

As bright and beautiful 

As you appear to me 

So bright and beautiful 

May I appear to my man, 

As the star which is near to you] 

To express simultaneously their frustration and attempt to recover 
lost love, the sorceresses not only resorted to profane elements like the 
stars; their repertory also included the Church's intercessors, certain 
saints, whose relation to the golden legend associated them with the basic 
purpose of the sorceresses' love magic. The sacred figures most fre- 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



77 



quently invoked include the "Lonely Soul" [Anima Sola], who requires 
prayers because of her destitution; San Silvestre, magical because of the 
date of his feast day; and Santa Elena and San Onofre. 

The prayer to the Lonely Soul, generally quite beautiful, nonetheless 
sheds very little light on the situation of these enamored women. After 
the ritual invocation, the woman simply repeats a wish very similar to 
that which we have already seen. Dona Juana de la Paz recited thirty- 
three Our Fathers, Hail Marys, and the accompanying Glorias, standing 
by her window, and enumerated the conditions of her plea to the spirit: 

Esto que he rezado os ofrezco 
os encomiendo 
anima sola 

para que me traigas y me deis 
buena serial desto que os pido 34 

[I offer you this prayer 
I commend you 
Lonely soul 

To bring me and give me 

A hopeful sign of what I ask of you] 

In other cases, the prayer is even more similar to previous conju- 
rations. The preambles employed to conjure the Lonely Soul are not 
prayers but rather diabolical entreaties to such various elements as 
"Lucano's blood" [la sangre de Lucano], "the heart of the man who was 
stabbed in cold blood" [el corazon del hombre muerto a hierro frio], and 
the "twelve tribes of Israel" [las doce tribus de Israel] to cut nine wicker 
staffs: 

Tres me las clavaredes a Fulano por el corazon 

que no pierda mi amor 

tres por el sentido 

que no me eche en olvido 35 

[You thrust three of them into (man's name)'s heart 

So he won't forget my love 

Three of them into his consciousness 

So he won't forget me] 

Still less original are the invocations in the prayers to Santa Marta, 
San Onofre, San Silvestre, and Santa Elena, yet they are beautiful com- 
positions that would naturally impress a woman in need of help. As in 
the former case, all of these cants are simply assorted preambles fol- 



Copyrighted material 



78 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



lowed by familiar refrains employed on other occasions. In the case of 
the prayer to San Onofre, the sorceress limits herself to entreating: 

Como atasteis y encontrasteis 

a todos estos — la Draga y el Dragon — 

asi venga Fulano 

tan humilde, 

tan rendido, tan prostrado 

tan atado y tan encortado 

como todos estos se rindieron 

y prostraron a vuestros sandsimos pies . . . 

[As you bound and encountered 

All of these — the lady Dragon and the Dragon — 

Thus will (man's name) come 

So humble 

So surrendered, so prostrated 
So bound and tied 

Like all of those who surrendered themselves 
And prostrated themselves at your holy feet] 



The conjuration ends with the refrain, "May he not eat, or drink, or 
rest," and so on [Que no pueda comer, ni beber, ni reposar, etc.]. 36 

All the petitions to San Onofre are very similar. First, the sorceress 
evoked his harsh penitence in the following manner: 

Asi como estas palabras son verdad 
santo glorioso 

me cumplais esto que os pido 
de traerme a mi marido 37 

[Just as these words are true, 

Glorious saint 

Do what I ask of you 

And bring me my husband] 

The prayers to Santa Marta, Marta "the Wicked" [La Mala], and Santa 
Elena usually repeat familiar refrains ("May he not eat or drink . . ." 
[Que no pueda comer, ni beber . . . ]) and various entreaties to make the 
man appear or to "resuscitate" his heart. 



THE EROTIC BOND AS WEAPON 

Once the enamored woman had exhausted all the possibilities of the 
above magical cants, she was then obliged to employ the most powerful 
weapon in this type of magic. She had to bind her lover so tightly 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



79 



through intimate relations that he would be unable to leave her for 
another woman. The "binding" or "impotency spell" thus consists of ren- 
dering the man impotent, except when in the presence of the woman 
who bound him either through the conjuration or some other magic 
practice. 

Men and women of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries literally 
believed in the possibility of producing this kind of spell, ironically jus- 
tifying the double meaning of the term "sorceress" as pronounced by 
the male lover. Frequently we find men who appear before the Inquisi- 
tion, afraid that they have fallen victim to this embarrassing spell and 
hoping that the imprisonment and sentencing of their domestic Circe 
will release them from it. Women were at once perpetrators and victims 
of an attitude that helped them to achieve their goals, but that also 
brought them to the attention of the Inquisition. Although these details 
cannot be described here, the repertory of conjurations itself reveals 
sufficient information to help us understand their circumstances. "Love 
magic" also contains the appropriate cants for "binding" a man to pre- 
vent him from approaching anyone other than the woman who loves 
him. 

The conjuration of "the shadow-broom" appears in multiple versions 
throughout Castile, Valencia, and other regions. According to the docu- 
ments, it renewed "illicit relations," its essentially erotic content recited 
by a woman generally completely naked and with her hair down. The 
shadow-broom came to symbolize an entreaty to both a demonic spirit 
and to the man whose return was desired. Actually, each sorceress added 
the touches from her personal repertory which seemed most opportune 
or which most openly suggested the possibility of inducing the absent 
lover to desire the woman once again. In one case the woman simply 
swept her own shadow with the broom, saying, "Come, husband, for I 
am alone." 38 The beata from Huete, however, added a conjuration al- 
lowing us to appreciate the symbolic value of the scene: 

Sombra 

cabeca teneis como yo 

cuerpo teneis como yo 

yo te mando que ansi como tienes 

mi sombra verdadera 

que tu vayas a Fulano 

e lo traigas a mi 39 

[Shadow, 

You have a head like mine 
You have a body like mine 



Copyrighted material 



80 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



I command that, just as you have 

My true shadow, 

You go to (man's name) 

And bring him to me] 

Maria de Santarem, tried in Cuenca in 1538, employed a cant that 
seems to apply sorcery of the beans to her specific case. She would pitch 
several black chickpeas as she mentioned them (calling them beans in 
the invocation), finishing the spell by positioning herself to await the 
conjured man: 

Sombra senora 

con vos me vengo a enamorar 

sombra senora 

con vos me vengo a consolar 

ava, que me habeis de ir por Fulano 

y me le aveis de traer 

ava, que quiero echar las suertes 

ava, que si en vos cayere 

ava, que me lo aveis de traer . . . 

jah! en vos cayo la sombra 

presto, presto 

traedmelo preso y atado 

y presto en un credito 

y no me lo dexeys a la puerta 

sino traedmelo a mi cama 40 

[Madame shadow 

I come to fall in love with you 

Madame shadow 

I come to console myself with you 

Bean, you must fetch (man's name) 

And bring him to me 

Bean, I want to cast lots 

Bean, I want to cast them 

Bean, if it falls to you 

Bean, you must fetch him to me. 

(Here, she pitched the chickpeas, letting the last one fall in her shadow.) 

Ah! The shadow fell on you 
Quickly, quickly 
Bring him captured and tied 
And quickly on your word 
And don't leave him at my door 
But bring him to my bed] 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



81 



Sexual relations constituted the real weapon which the sorceresses 
and their clients relied upon in order to retain a man. The woman's 
physical surrender, however, guaranteed neither his constancy nor his 
good humor, the two fundamental goals that were desired. Conse- 
quently, sorceresses cast spells obliging the man to seek out only one 
woman, who became the heroine of these occult narratives. Our ena- 
mored women counted on a wide range of methods for their purposes. 
They may have bewitched the man by using his semen to cast various 
"impotency spells." Similarly, he may have been bound to the woman 
by means of some love potion composed of her sexual fluids. The follow- 
ing are examples of several practices which, while not always poetic, 
were indeed quite expressive. 

Throughout Spain, sorceresses frequently performed the "conjura- 
tion of the oil lamp's wick," which utilized semen. The woman would 
collect it after having had "contact with her friend" — called illicit in the 
documents. The cotton or linen with which the woman cleaned herself 
after intercourse was twisted into a "wick," then placed in an oil lamp 
and ignited. For several nights she would leave it burning while she 
recited: 

Asi come arde esta torcida 
arda el corazon de Fulano 

[As this wick burns 

So shall (man's name)'s heart burn] 



Dona Juana de la Paz performed this conjuration in Valencia, 41 while 
in Castile we find a similar procedure where the woman recited a more 
complex and explicit cant: 

Vida de la vida 

de la carne y de la sangre 

de Fulano 

que me ames . . . 

y te conjuro Fulano con Barrabas 

y assi como estas torcidas arden en este candil 

assi me quieras 42 

[Life of life 
Of the flesh and blood 
Of (man's name) 
You must love me 

. . . And I conjure you, (man's name), with 
Barabbas 



Copyrighted material 



82 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



And just as these wicks burn in these lamps 
You will love me] 

Another curious ceremony with wicks had to be performed collec- 
tively. The women all sat in a circle and called upon the man to perform 
"lewd acts." Lighting nine wicks, they would pass around three grains 
of salt, three lumps of coal, nine nails, nine beans, and a wax candle. 
They would throw the salt, beans, and other objects into the circle and 
then pick them up again; if the two beans indented with teeth marks 
landed together in the circle, it was a sign that the absent man would 
return. 

Women's menstrual blood also contained magical powers that could 
be channeled to the same ends as semen. In this case, the sorceresses 
generally did not utilize this ingredient alone, but would add the brains 
of an ass and pubic hairs. Once the dish containing the impotency spell 
had been prepared, the man would have to eat it for the desired effect. 
Laura Garrigues, for example, added a little pepper; dona Juana de la 
Cruz simply dried the blood and mixed it with wine; other women 
spread it on a meat dish. The conjuration recited by dona Juana de la 
Paz adds a poetic touch: 

Yo te conjuro 

sangre de la fuente — o de mi fuente — la vermeja 
que vaya Fulano tras de Fulana 
como el cordero tras la oveja 43 

[I conjure you, 

Blood from the crimson fountain — or my fountain — 
Make (man's name) follow (woman's name) 
Like the lamb after the sheep] 

The inclusion of menstrual blood, pubic hair, and semen guaranteed 
these rites the most obvious and astonishing sexual content. Yet the 
"conjuration of the sexual member" probably originated because some 
women dared to venture even further in their desire to cause their 
lovers' impotency with other women. Laura Garrigues held her lover's 
penis and, making several crosses, recited: "I repeat, the cross enters" 
[Hago coro, entra cruz]. 44 Maria Antonia de Nerona made the sign of 
the cross on her lover's back — presumably in bed, although the docu- 
ment does not specify where — and said: 

Hasta que esta cruz te veas 
tu me ames y me quieras 45 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



83 



[Until you see this cross 
May you love and desire me] 

Besides these "love potions" and magical concoctions, sorceresses re- 
sorted to less complicated rites also aimed at rendering the undecided 
lover impotent. The Valencian sorceresses would take a ribbon touched 
by the man, and at the stroke of six, they would make nine knots, tying 
and untying them nine times; the woman would then wear the belt for 
nine days. Variations of the "spell of the knots" with cloths or similar 
objects appeared in Castile and other areas. 

These rituals thus describe clearly women's anxieties regarding love, 
but a more profound analysis reveals that, although they wished to be 
accompanied and loved by men, material support was an equally desired 
goal, a fact evinced orally through the conjurations. 

SENTIMENTAL PRAGMATISM AND LOVE MAGIC 

Despite the essential constant in love magic of winning over and keeping 
a man, the institution of matrimony appears only in an occasional con- 
juration. Marriage, the official bond par excellence, is scarcely ever men- 
tioned; in most cases the magical rites were directed toward a purely 
sexual conquest. "Love magic" was also extramarital magic, one in which 
erotic relations always carried a sinful, condemnable connotation for the 
zealous priests and inquisitors. The inquisitorial proceedings refer to 
physical relations in such unequivocal terms, in spite of the fact that no 
lack of married women resorted to the sorceresses to recover husbands 
distracted by other women. In the terminology appearing in the inquisi- 
torial documents, the sorceresses and their clients sought "illicit contact" 
and "lewd acts," they used fluids from "private parts," and they were 
interested in "dishonest relations"; in effect, the words "husband" and 
"wife" were rarely mentioned, nor were marriages reclaimed. 

While the term "husband" does not always mean a spouse officially 
recognized by the Church, but can also refer to a stable couple, only 
Isabel Maria dc Mcndoza, tried in Valencia, employed the term in her 
prayer to San Onofre: 

Assi como estas palabras son verdad 
santo glorioso, 

me cumplais esto que os pido 
de traerme a mi marido 46 



84 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



[ . . . Just as these words are true, 
Glorious saint 

You will do what I ask of you 
And bring me my husband] 

Very few of the experts whose practices I have collected in this basic 
repertory of love magic make any reference to marriage or to legal hus- 
bands. Nor is the conjugal bond mentioned with any frequency in the 
proceedings and causas de relaciones in other peninsular trials I have 
studied. This does not mean that married women were not involved in 
this type of magic, but they generally resorted to it in secret when they 
suspected their husbands of leaving them for some rival. It was un- 
doubtedly better to try to recover a husband's love through spontaneous 
means such as physical relations than to suffer in silence and resign one- 
self, following the confessor's advice. In any case, love magic became an 
unorthodox method, not only for the religious reasons adduced by the 
theologians and judges of the Holy Office, but because the Church 
Fathers condemned and marginalized sexual relations. For these women, 
carnal pleasure thus assumed a significance that is more characteristic 
of the classical world than of Christianity. 

Of course, the term "husband" is not completely absent from the basic 
repertory, a term whose distinct resonances compare with the variant 
"friend," according to Cirac Estopanan. 47 Significantly most of these 
women were either prostitutes, the lovers of friars or married men, or 
simply women who had no qualms about having sexual relations with 
whomever they chose. One of the advocates they appealed to most fre- 
quently was "Marta the Wicked," whose description illustrates the extra- 
marital nature of these relations: 

Marta, Marta 

no la digna ni la santa 

la que descasa casadas 

la que junta los amancebados 

la que anda de noche por las encrucijadas 

yo te conjuro con tal y tal demonio 

y con el de la carniceria 

que me traiga a Fulano mas ayna 

o de hombre que hable 

o de perro que ladre 48 

[Marta, Marta, 

Neither decent nor a saint 

She who separates married women 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



85 



She who unites lovers 

She who travels the crossroads by night 

I conjure you with such-and-such a demon 

And with the demon of the slaughterhouse 

That you bring (man's name) to me more quickly 

Than a man speaking 

Or a dog barking] 

In truth, the women who practiced such rites were rather importu- 
nate, taking advantage of their male friends' sexual desires to benefit 
themselves. Requests for gifts are an essential part of the conjurations 
and rites that attempt to recover and maintain carnal relations with 
scornful suitors. Many of the more poetically structured compositions 
usually end with the pragmatic refrain: "Let [man's name] come, and 
give me all he has and tell me all he knows" [Venga Fulano y me de lo 
que tuviere y me diga lo que supiere]. 

Although one of the most erotic, the following conjuration of the 
wicks recorded by Paz y Melia ends on a pragmatic note: 

Que me ames 
me estimes y me regales 
que me des cuanto tuvieres 
y me digas lo que supieres 49 

[ ... So that you love 
And esteem me and give me gifts, 
So that you give me all you have 
And tell me what you know] 

The lengthy and poetic invocation to the stars also contains the same 
line: 

Que venga con ansias y pena en su corazon 

por verme y hallarme 

dandome lo que tuviere 

y diciendome lo que supiere 50 

[So that he come with anguish and pain in his heart 

To see me and find me 

Giving me all he has 

And telling me what he knows] 



The same phrase appears in Laura Garrigues's invocations of the 
street: 



86 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



Ansias le dareis 

que no le dejareis reposas 

hasta que me venga a buscar 

dandome lo que tuviere y diciendome lo que supiere 51 

[ . . . You will provoke his anguish 
And you won't let him rest 
Until he seeks me out 

Giving me all he has and telling me what he knows] 

As the reader may guess, this phrase appears in the conjurations and 
phrases that conclude the ceremonies with explicitly erotic content, and 
in the superstitious cants: 

La gloriosa santa Elena 

de la cruz los tres clavos saco 

el uno en el mar echo 

el otro a su hijo Constantino dio 

para que en las batallas entrase 

no fuese vencido sino vencedor 

asi, santa bienaventurada, 

sea yo la vencedora con Fulano 

que no pueda estar . . . 

hasta que me venga a buscar. 

Que venga volando 

que you le estoy esperando 

vengame dandome quanto tuviere 

y me diga quanto supiere 52 

[Glorious Santa Elena 

Took the three nails from the cross 

She threw one into the sea 

She gave one to Constantine her son 

So that in battle 

He would be victor instead of conquered 
In like manner, blessed saint 
Let me be the victor over (man's name) 
So that he cannot . . . 

(The sorceress adds the refrain conjuring the anxiety wished upon the 
maa) 

Until he comes to find me 

May he arrive as fast as possible 

As I am waiting for him 

Let him come to me, giving me all he has 

And telling me all he knows] 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



87 



This new leitmotiv reveals facets that were unimagined until now. 
What conclusion can we reach regarding these women and their prac- 
tices after having analyzed the material? Were they, in effect, basi- 
cally concerned with love, or were they unprotected and self-centered 
women? They seem to include elements of both, no doubt, but what is 
most essential is that their rituals created an authentic popular poetry 
that allows us a view of a previously unknown world. 



NOTES 

1. The documents in the Archivo Historico Nacional (hereafter AHN) in 
Madrid dealing with cases of superstitious practices include sixty-six men and 
two hundred women. They are incomplete as to the sentences, and in some in- 
stances the case record consists merely of a denunciation. According to the inves- 
tigation that I have carried out — which includes files 82-89 with a total of 113 
proceedings, from A through L — the cases can be grouped under the following 
headings: twenty-eight men were accused of practices related mainly to the 
search for enchanted treasures which they tried to recuperate through a more 
or less extensive knowledge of the cabala, derived from "learned magic," al- 
though there are also spell-casters (ensalmadores) and curanderos; nineteen 
women testified before the inquisitors regarding their superstitious practices for 
healing sick people, generally employing cants and similar ceremonies; another 
thirty-one women were also accused, however, of performing the evil eye (mal 
de ojo) or curses (maleficios), that is, of attempting to make their neighbors ill by 
means of magical practices; finally, thirty-eight women were tried for perform- 
ing superstitious practices related to amorous ends, what I have called "love 
magic" in this essay. To complete the picture, we need to keep in mind the four 
women considered witches by their neighbors, accused before the Holy Office 
of this supposed crime. This makes a total of ninety-two women versus the 
twenty-eight men I have mentioned. According to the previous classification, the 
four types of superstitious practices in Castile and the rest of Spain are evident: 
masculine magic, approximating "learned magic" in most of the cases and gen- 
erally dedicated to the search for enchanted treasures; feminine magic, which 
emphasizes the woman's connection to evil or to curses (maleficio); the male and 
female spell-casters (ensalmadores); and the enamored women spoken of in this 
essay. 

2. When I wrote the first version of this study, "love magic" spontaneously 
suggested itself as a title for these typically feminine manipulations, since I had 
already employed it in previous lectures. At the time, I was unfamiliar with Pro- 
fessor Noemi Quezada's interesting work, Amor y magia amorosa entre los aztecas 
(Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1984), an ethnolog- 
ical investigation of cants and techniques similar to the Spanish ones. This sig- 
nificant coincidence of titles demonstrates, from my point of view, the pressing 
need to identify the rich repertory of magical practices accumulated by women 



Copyrighted material 



88 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



in Europe and the Americas during various centuries. It is important to re- 
member Covarrubias's definition of hechizar: "a type of incantation which con- 
trols the bewitched person in such a way that his judgment is distorted and he 
desires what would normally repel him. This occurs through an express or tacit 
pact with the Devil; and sometimes, or concurrently, he rejects what he rightly 
desired before, as in the case of enchanting a man so that he rejects his wife 
and pursues another woman." Sebastian de Covarrubias, Tesoro de la lengua es- 
panola, ed. Martin de Riquer (Barcelona: Editorial Alta Fulla, 1987). Covarru- 
bias believes that the term derives from the Latin fascinum: fachizar-hechizar- 
hechizeria. 

3. The discussions in which the theory of the "diabolical pact" was formu- 
lated by theologians from the Sorbonne, as well as the evolution of ecclesiastical 
legislation, are found in Henry Charles Lea, A History of the Inquisition of Spain, 
4 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1906; reprint, New York: AMS Press, 1966). 
Refer to vol. 4, chap. 8, "Sorcery and Occult Arts." On the evolution of beliefs 
surrounding the problem of relations with the devil, see Jeffrey B. Russell, 
Witchcraft in the Middle Ages (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1972). 

4. In order to understand the evolution of the Spanish Inquisition on these 
issues, refer to the indispensable works by Julio Caro Baroja, Las brujas y su 
mundo (Madrid: Revista de Occidente, 1961) (Eng. trans., The World of the Witches 
[London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1964]), and Gustav Henningsen, The Witch's 
Advocate (Toronto: Toronto University Press, 1982). 

5. For a more complete approximation from a formal perspective on the 
practices of these women, see my La Inquisicion y los gitanos (Madrid: Taurus, 
1988). 

6. The complete versions of these conjurations and cants which I will analyze 
below are found in La Inquisicion y los gitanos. The rites I examine in this essay 
represent, from my point of view, the "fundamental repertory" familiar to and 
employed by most of the women dedicated to these practices throughout Spain. 
The common store or "basic recipe book" deserves to be examined carefully in 
its entirety. 

7. In this essay, I focus only on the phrases and gestures that are erotically 
or amorously significant. As I pointed out previously, the complete versions are 
in my book, La Inquisicion y los gitanos. The sorceries used to identify a husband 
or male friend are, in effect, very frequently employed by single women and 
can be traced to very recent times; see R. Salillas, La fascinacion en Espana (Ma- 
drid: E. Arias, 1905), and Julio Caro Baroja, La estacion de amor (Madrid: Taurus, 
1980). This does not mean, however, that this essay does not comply with its 
own basic suppositions. The "honest" woman could use love magic during the 
early stages and reserve the rest of the ritual for more serious situations which 
we will examine below. We must add to the rites of the beans and the cards that 
of the egg floating in water taken from a urinal or a wash bowl, which reveals, 
according to the way the egg floats, whether or not the boyfriend (novio) will 
arrive. This rite usually took place on the night of San Juan, and Caro Baroja 
has beautifully depicted the almost immediate repercussion of these rites. 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



89 



In any case, the theses I have arrived at in this essay seem to be confirmed 
by the admired late Jose Antonio Maravall's study in El mundo social de "La Ce- 
lestina," 3d ed. (Madrid: Gredos, 1972), and by the theories of the Swiss phi- 
losopher Denis de Rougemont in L'amour et Voccident (Paris: Plon, 1939). 

8. As noted earlier, I am concerned in this essay with what I have denomi- 
nated the "fundamental repertory." It is necessary to emphasize however, that 
this "basic recipe book" coincides almost completely with the one compiled by 
Sebastian Cirac Estopanan in his book Los procesos de hechicerias en la inquisition 
de Castilla la Nueva (tribunales de Toledo y Cuenca) (Madrid, 1942). The reasons 
for this "coincidence" are explained in my book La Inquisition. Quoted by Cirac 
Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8, p. 150. 

9. The Valencian sorceresses I have alluded to in this essay were tried in 1655 
in an auto de fe condemning forty women for the same crime. For the complete 
study of this auto, see my La Inquisition. 

10. AHN, Inquisition, libro 942, fol. 230V. Laura Garrigues's version in- 
cludes the word martelaco, augmentative of martelo, jealousy or amorous anguish 
brought on by jealousy. Covarrubias does not record the term, which appears 
for the first time in the Diccionario de autoridades. It is interesting to note that the 
word appears to have a learned origin. The dictionary of the Royal Spanish 
Academy (1980 ed.) states that it is derived from the Latin martillus. The Espasa 
encyclopedia attributes an Italian origin, since the same term appears with the 
same meaning in that language as well (Enciclopedia universal ilustrada europeo- 
americana, vol. 33, [Barcelona: Espasa, n.d.]). This dictionary notes the meaning 
of dar martelo as equivalent to "to provoke jealousy." 

The sorceresses, therefore, employ a learned term which Covarrubias did not 
consider to be worth recording; it has survived in modern Spanish in the term 
estar amartelado as synonymous with "to be in love." Laura Garrigues spoke of 
martelaco in the conjuration of the wicks and said martillaco in the conjuration 
of the palms because of its relation to the nail, which also desired the lover: 
"[Man's name], I send you this nail, I strike you with this hammer" [Fulano, te 
envio este clavo, te doy este martillaco], AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. 230V. 

1 1. Doha Juana de la Paz, from the group of sorceresses tried in 1655, said, 
"[Man's name], I send you this shooting pain / 1 extend your life / and I shorten 
your steps" [Fulano, yo te envio este ramalaco / y te alargo la vida / y te acorto 
el paso]. She made the sign of the cross and said, ergo sum. At the end of the 
conjuration one should swallow saliva and strike the left palm three times with 
a closed fist. Esperanza Badia, also from the same group, recalled the conjura- 
tions utilizing fire with her formulas: "May the fire of love burn you, let the fire 
of love be consumed as Christ was crucified" [Fuego de amor te abrase, fuego 
de amor sea abrasado asi como el Cristo fue crucificado]. There are many vari- 
ations that depend on the sorceresses' imaginations, as they try to expand and 
enrich a frequently repeated augury. 

12. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8, p. 126. 

13. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. 27V. 

14. Ibid., fol. 6ov. 



Copyrighted material 



90 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



15. Ibid., fol. 282. 

16. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8. 

17. The exclusive use of the spoken word in this group of cants and conju- 
rations led me to denominate this group "the power of the word" in my 
aforementioned book as a means of emphasizing the persuasive power of these 
women. 

18. Prudencia Grillos's trial can be found in the AHN, Inq., legajo 87, nu- 
mero 20 (1571). I referred to this woman in my essay "La mujer en el Antiguo 
Regimen: Tipos historicos y arquetipos literarios," in La mujer y la inquisition en 
la perspectiva inquisitorial (Madrid: Universidad Nacional de Education a Distan- 
cia, 1988). 

19. This was the case with Maria Ruiz, processed for bigamy, who fled from 
her husband for this reason. See my essay, "La mujer en el Antiguo Regimen." 

20. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. ^v. 

2 1 . Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8. 

22. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. 56V. 

23. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8. 

24. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. 233V. 

25. Ibid., fol. 59V. 

26. Ibid., fol. 59V. 

27. Ibid., fol. 27r. 

28. Ibid., fol. 5 6v. 

29. Ibid., fol. 54V. 

30. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los Procesos, chap. 8. 

31. Ibid. 

32. Ibid. 

33. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. i6r. 

34. Ibid., fol. i6v. 

35. Ibid., fol. 62V. 

36. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8. 

37. Ibid. 

38. Love magic experts do not frequently employ the term marido — I will re- 
turn to this point below — and seem to prefer galdn; it is interesting to recall 
Covarrubias's definition: "An elegantly dressed man who appears to be a gentle- 
man, and because enamored men usually appear very smartly dressed in order 
to capture a woman's interest, the women call them their galanes" (Tesoro de la 
lengua espanola). 

39. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8. 

40. Ibid. 

41. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. i78r. 

42. Quoted in Cirac Estopanan, Los procesos, chap. 8, p. 42. 

43. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. i8or. 

44. Ibid., fol. 230V. 

45. Ibid., fol. 62v. 



Copyrighted material 



SORCERY AND EROTICISM IN LOVE MAGIC 



91 



46. Ibid., fol. 8or. 

47. Galdn (suitor) is the word most frequently used by these women, but the 
term marido (husband) is not entirely absent. It is important to remember, how- 
ever, that in terms of rhythm it is interchangeable with amigo (friend) and it is 
not essential to refer to a marriage that is legal from the civil or ecclesiastical 
point of view. The only conjurations from this "fundamental repertory" that 
refer to a husband are Catalina Gomez, condemned in Toledo in 1535. The ver- 
sions collected by Cirac Estopanan, who adds the word amigo as variant, mention 
the arrows that must be thrust into the husband's heart in the conjuration of 
the "star maiden." 

48. Quoted in Paz y Melia, Papeles de Inquisition, Catdlogo y extractos (Madrid: 
Patrimonio del Archivo Historico Nacional, 1947), p. 240. Professor Noemi 
Sanchez has collected the American versions of devotions to this permissive 
saint. See her "Santa Marta en la tradition popular," in Anales de Antropologia 10 
(Mexico, 1973): 221-240. 

49. Paz y Melia also cites another version of the prayer to St. Marta that 
confirms the designs of this saint, protectress of enamored women in need of 
special aid according to the nature of their loves: 

Marta, Marta 

a la mala digo, no que no a la santa 
a la que por los aires anda 

a la que se encadeno, y por ella nuestro padre Adan peco 
y todos pecamos, al demonio del polo 
al del repolo 
al del repeso 

y al que suelta al preso, al que acompana al ahorcado, 

diablo cqjuelo, al del rastro, y al de la carniceria, 

que todos juntos os junteis, 

y en el corazon de (man's name) entreis 

a guerra, a sangre y fuego le deis, que no pueda parar, 

traedmelo luego 

demonio del peso, 

traedmelo preso. (Paz y Melia, p. 239) 
Marta, Marta 

I speak to the evil one, not the saint 
to the one who goes through the air 

to the one who chained herself, and for whom our father Adam sinned 
and we all sin, to the devil of the pole 
to the one of the double pole 
to the one of the double weight, 

and to the one who frees the prisoner, to the one who accompanies the hanged man, 
to the Lame Devil, to the one from the flea market, and the meat market, 
that you all may come together, 
and enter in (man's name)'s heart 

and war, blood, and fire give him, so that he cannot stop 



Copyrighted material 



92 



MARIA HELENA SANCHEZ ORTEGA 



until he comes to find me, 
bring him to me soon, 
devil of the weight, 
bring him to me a prisoner. 

50. Paz y Melia, p. 241. 

51. AHN, Inq., lib. 942, fol. 59V. 

52. Ibid. 

53. Ibid., fol. 56V. 



FIVE 



Visionaries and Affective 
Spirituality during the First Half 
of the Sixteenth Century 

Geraldine McKendrick and Angus MacKay 



Shortly before his death on 25 January 1516, Ferdinand the Catholic 
received a message from God, passed on to him by Sor Maria de Santo 
Domingo, the celebrated visionary and Dominican tertiary who was also 
known as the Beata de Barco de Avila or the Beata de Piedrahita: 1 

And while His Highness was in this place (Madrigalejo), his illness be- 
came much worse, and he was made to understand that he was very close 
to death. But he could hardly believe this because the truth is that he was 
much tempted by the enemy who, in order to prevent him from confessing 
himself or receiving the sacraments, persuaded him to believe that he 
would not die so soon. And the reason for this was that, when he was in 
Plasencia, one of the royal councilors who had come from the Beata de 
Barco de Avila told him that the Beata was sending to tell him on behalf 
of God that he would not die until he had taken Jerusalem. And for this 
reason he would not see or send for Fray Martin de Matienzo, of the 
Order of Preachers, his confessor, even though the confessor himself tried 
to see him several times. 2 

Although in this particular case Sor Maria's prophetic powers proved 
ineffective, she had for many years been a cult figure. In love with God, 
with whom she talked intimately, embracing his body, Sor Maria de- 
livered sermons-in-trance, underwent ecstatic crucifixions, and even 
claimed that she was Christ. She enthralled the royal court with her 
ecstasies and celestial dances, Cardinal Ximenez de Cisneros consulted 
her on important matters such as the conquest of Oran, and the duke 
of Alba built a magnificent convent for her in Aldenueva, near Avila. 3 
Of course, not everyone believed in her, and the Dominicans in particu- 

93 



Copyrighted material 



94 



GERALDINE MCKENDRICK AND ANGUS MACKAY 



lar were hostilely skeptical. 4 Nevertheless she had protectors in high 
places, and when a special ecclesiastical commission was set up to in- 
vestigate her, she emerged from the investigation with her reputation 
for saintliness intact. The Italian Pietro Martire d'Anghiera particularly 
commented on Cisneros's devotion to Sor Maria, and indeed the cardi- 
nal, who was himself a Franciscan, gave the beata a Franciscan girdle to 
wear under the Dominican habit, thus emphasizing both his attachment 
to her and a symbolic process of "Franciscanization." 5 

A large number of visionaries like Sor Maria de Santo Domingo, as 
well as other practitioners of an emotional, intensive, and affective 
spirituality, figure in one way or another in the Inquisition records, and 
in terms of culture and control, they raise some very interesting prob- 
lems. In the first place, the degree to which some visionaries of the first 
half of the sixteenth century were left undisturbed by the Inquisition is 
quite remarkable. Perhaps the most astonishing case is that of the mil- 
lenarian friars of Escalona. 6 In 1524 the Franciscan church in Escalona 
witnessed some bizarre scenes. Fray Olmillos, for example, improved on 
his public visionary performances by moving the altar to the middle of 
the church so that more people could witness his ecstasies, 7 and Fray 
Ocana unfolded a millennial program for the reform of the Church. 
Preaching on the text, "Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things 
that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be 
accomplished" (Luke 18:31), Ocana told his audience that the people of 
Escalona were the most blessed in the world. In another sermon he 
called for those in power in the Church to be "thrown out like pigs"; 
the messianic program revealed to him and Fray Olmillos stipulated that 
Charles V would defeat the king of France and take over his kingdom, 
the pope would be deposed by the Marquis of Villena, Ocana himself 
would be installed as the new reforming pope, and the illiterate visionary 
Francisca Hernandez would reform and revise the Holy Scriptures. 8 
Here surely was an open challenge to establish authority within the 
Church that could hardly be ignored. Yet the Inquisition never moved 
against these friars, or indeed against the group to which they belonged 
that practiced recogimiento, an interiorized religious state, but concen- 
trated instead on the dejados, who practiced spiritual abandonment to 
God and actually considered the visions, ecstatic fits, convulsions, and 
excesses to which recogimiento gave rise to be delusions induced by the 
Devil. Moreover, even when the Inquisition did condemn individual 
visionaries, it frequently did so after a considerable delay, during which 
the visionary enjoyed fame and prestige. In this sense the career of 
Magdalena de la Cruz, the celebrated visionary of Cordoba, constitutes 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION, VISIONARIES, AND AFFECTIVE SPIRITUALITY 95 



a good example. During the early decades of the sixteenth century she 
was considered saintly and was in constant and intimate communication 
with God, and her devotees included the general of the Franciscan 
Order, Fray Francisco de los Angeles Quinones; Fray Francisco de 
Osuna, the mystic whose writings were so appreciated by Santa Teresa; 
and the archbishop of Seville and inquisitor general, Alonso Manrique. 
Indeed, on the birth of the future Philip II in 1527, "the hdbitos of this 
nun were sent off as a sacred object so that the infante could be wrapped 
up in them and thus apparently be shielded and protected from the 
attacks of the Devil." In 1533 Magdalena was elected abbess of her con- 
vent and was at the height of her power and popularity. But only in 
1546, and after many prophecies, visions, and miracles, including even 
a pregnancy by the Holy Spirit, did the Cordoban Inquisition finally try 
her and sentence her to life imprisonment in a convent in Andujar. 9 

The second point of interest is the fact that so many of the visionaries 
and practitioners of intense affective spirituality were women. In ad- 
dition to the Beata de Piedrahita and Magdalena de la Cruz, already 
mentioned, a list of only a few outstanding examples would include 
Francisca Hernandez, whose powers and marvels were well known in 
Salamanca and Valladolid, and whose reputation for sanctity spread to 
New Castile; Isabel de la Cruz, leader and idealogue of the dejados; 
Isabel de Texeda, whose visionary excesses were notorious in Guadala- 
jara; the ecstatic Mother Marta, a miracle-working Benedictine nun in 
Toledo who was visited by the king, courtiers, and prelates; and Juana 
de la Cruz, the visionary abbess of Cubas. 10 Nor were these isolated cases, 
as incidental references in the Inquisition records demonstrate. In 
Guadalajara, for example, a widow went into a trance in a public square 
and claimed that she had seen more visions than St. Bridget of Sweden, 
and elsewhere in the same town another widow fell into a rapturous 
ecstasy and saw all the blessed souls in heaven." 

The object of this essay, therefore, is to place affective spirituality 
and the visionary phenomenon into context. Why were some "excesses" 
controlled and others condoned? What assumptions and beliefs lay be- 
hind Maria de Santo Domingo's assertion, and Ferdinand's apparent 
acceptance of this assertion, that the king would not die until he had 
conquered Jerusalem? Why did women play such a relatively prominent 
role in the visionary phenomenon? 

In pondering why the inquisitors failed to take any action after they 
had learned of the revolutionary reform program of the Franciscans of 
Escalona, Nieto comments: "The solution which comes readily to one's 
mind is that in some way, somehow, they themselves believed the ideas 



Copyrighted material 



96 



GERALDINE MCKENDRICK AND ANGUS MACKAY 



contained in this ideology of religious-political reformation." 12 He is 
surely right; the fact is that in the drive to define and protect orthodoxy 
the policies of both the monarchy and the Inquisition are of interest not 
only because of the war waged on "heresy" but also because of what was 
accepted or tolerated within the confines of orthodoxy. 

Christian eschatological doctrines or beliefs concerning "the last days" 
enjoyed a particularly flourishing tradition in the Iberian world: rooted 
in the appropriate biblical texts and producing Spanish and Portuguese 
variants, its last important manifestation occurred as late as 1896 in the 
famous Brazilian rebellion, inspired by Sebastianism, of Antonio the 
Councilor. 13 But its most outstanding feature was that it was based on 
a mutation of the apocalyptic legend of The Last Roman Emperor. The 
source of this West European legend was the Greek apocalypse of 
Pseudo-Methodius, written in the seventh or early eighth century, al- 
though the Greek text was itself a translation of a seventh-century Syriac 
original, also attributed to a Methodius, but composed in Mesopotamia. 
This apocalyptic legend was translated into Latin in the late seventh or 
eighth century in Merovingian Gaul, thus introducing into the West 
the belief that at the end of days a king of the Greeks or Romans 
would defeat the Muslims, conquer Jerusalem, and renounce his empire 
directly to God at the hill of the skull, Golgotha. Subsequently a tenth- 
century monk, Adso, rewrote the legend to fit an eschatological French 
king, and between the thirteenth and fifteenth centuries Germanic vari- 
ations developed, so that by the fifteenth century it was believed that 
Emperor Frederick II, who died in Apulia in 1250, was still alive and 
hidden on Mount Kyffhauser, awaiting to return and fulfil the millen- 
nial prophesy. 14 But, in addition to the last World Emperor, the figure 
of the Angelic Pope emerged toward the end of the thirteenth century 
and came to reflect the aspirations of the spiritual Franciscans. For the 
Spirituals Rome was identified with the carnal Church, to be rejected by 
Christ at the end of the sixth age. Rome was Babylon meretrix et impudica; 
ilia Babylon meretrix magna. At the end of days, therefore, the World 
Emperor would be helped by the Angelic Pope. 15 

In Spain the legend of The Last World Emperor, suitably influenced 
by Joachimite ideas and prophesies attributed to St. Isidore of Seville, 
produced a messianic king and world emperor, known variously as the 
Encubierto (the Hidden One), the Murcielago (the Bat), and the New 
David. 16 Moreover, as was amply demonstrated in the highly influential 
apocalyptic treatise of the Franciscan Fray Aleman, the eschatological 
"events" underwent a marked process of Hispanicization, for in Ale- 
man's treatise the Antichrist appears in Seville, the messianic armies 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION, VISIONARIES, AND AFFECTIVE SPIRITUALITY 97 



disembark "near Antioch, which is the port of Cadiz," and a titanic battle 
ensues in Seville near the present-day cathedral. Victorious, the mes- 
sianic forces proceed to take Granada; thereafter Jerusalem and the rest 
of the world are conquered, and of course an Angelic Pope is installed 
in Rome. 17 

Although the eschatological tradition was a long-standing one, it was 
only from about 1470 onward that reality began to match messianic 
expectations; as Milhou has demonstrated, an avalanche of prophetic 
texts, commentaries, and ballads, and even a letter of revelation which 
the Marquis of Cadiz, don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, circulated to the 
great nobles of Castile in i486, identified Ferdinand the Catholic as the 
Encubierto or Bat who would conquer the Holy House of Jerusalem and 
the whole world. 18 Nor was Ferdinand averse to believing all this. Pietro 
Martire thought in 1510 that Ferdinand was obsessed with the conquest 
of Africa, and in February of that year Ferdinand himself wrote in one 
of his letters that "the conquest of Jerusalem belongs to Us and We have 
the title of that kingdom." 19 Is it a coincidence that Sor Maria de Santo 
Domingo's rise to fame dated from 1509, or that from 1510 onward rey 
de Jerusalen came to be included by Ferdinand among his other royal 
titles? 20 In any case the dying Ferdinand would certainly have under- 
stood all the implications of the divine message which Sor Maria had 
sent him. 

Of course, such messianic ideas could be projected onto others or be 
assumed by others. Within months of the conquest of Granada, for 
example, Columbus had received royal backing for his empresa de las 
Indias, which was designed to establish contact with the pro-Christian 
Mongol grand khan in the East in order that a combined offensive 
to recover the Holy House of Jerusalem might be undertaken. Sub- 
sequently Columbus continued to regard the lands he discovered as a 
stepping-stone toward this objective, and on the basis of a purported 
Joachimite prophecy that the conqueror of Jerusalem would come from 
Spain, he eventually came to believe that he himself was the messi- 
anic figure. 21 Messianic ideals were similarly projected onto Cardinal 
Ximenez 22 and, after his death, onto Charles V. Thus, for example, 
the famous apocalyptic prophecies contained in Manuscript 1779 of the 
Biblioteca Nacional (Madrid) identify Charles V as the messianic ruler 
who will be lord of Spain, France, and Germany, and who, after being 
crowned emperor of Rome, will cross the seas, become the ruler of all 
the world, conquer the Holy House of Jerusalem, and finally surrender 
his crown, presumably to God, on the Mount of Olives. 23 When, there- 
fore, the Franciscans of Escalona prophesied that Charles V would de- 



Copyrighted material 



98 



GERALDINE MCKENDRICK AND ANGUS MACKAY 



pose Francis I in 1523 and that Clement VII would be replaced by 
the equivalent of an Angelic Pope, were they not simply confirming 
messianic notions already in circulation? As far as the inquisitors were 
concerned, it would appear that visionaries who identified Ferdinand 
the Catholic or Charles V as the world emperor should be tolerated 
and left alone. Matters would be quite different when a visionary like 
Lucrecia de Leon would identify someone like Miguel de Piedrola as the 
New David or the Encubierto destined to rule over the whole world. 24 
Yet few visionaries conformed to this precise eschatological tradition, 
and the phenomenon needs to be placed within a broader context — 
particularly, but not exclusively, within the context of the nature and 
influence of Franciscan spirituality. 25 Above all, the anti-intellectual and 
affective thought espoused by the Franciscans made them favorably dis- 
posed to certain aspects of female spirituality. 26 The dejados' opposition 
to "men of letters," for example, was a motif running through evidence 
given by witnesses in Inquisition trials. "In order to know God, the study 
of letters is not necessary," declared Pedro de Baeza, repeating what he 
had heard in Escalona about the teachings of the dejados; 27 and Isabel 
de la Cruz, a Franciscan tertiary from Guadalajara, believed that "learn- 
ing killed the spirit," a sentiment echoing the old Franciscan dictum 
that "Paris has destroyed Assisi." 28 The Franciscans' attachment to an 
intuitive and emotional religiosity also led them to value the gift of 
prophecy. By the fourteenth century the Franciscan Nicolas de Lyra 
already referred to prophetesses as illuminatae mentis, made lucid by 
special grace. 29 Thus as the example of Francisca Hernandez demon- 
strated, studying theology of the Scriptures at university was not es- 
sential — and was indeed inferior to knowledge obtained through faith 
and above all by an intimate experience of God. For when Francisca, 
responding to the request of her Franciscan devotee Fray Francisco 
Ortiz, offered her own interpretations of passages of Scripture, such as 
the Sermon on the Mount, The Song of Solomon, and Revelation, the 
friar had been astounded by her grasp of the essential truths of these 
writings; what Francisca had discussed in three short words would have 
been endlessly debated by theologians in long and arid treatises. 30 Simi- 
larly, those who listened to the sermons-in-trance of Sor Maria de Santo 
Domingo marveled at her insight into difficult theological problems: 

Sometimes in her raptures Sor Maria is accustomed to answering difficult 
questions about theology, profound problems, matters concerning the 
Holy Scriptures, things pertaining to our Holy Catholic faith or to good 
customs, the glory of Paradise, the pains of Hell, Purgatory, and the Holy 
Sacraments . . . Thus all who see her and hear her respond think that it 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION, VISIONARIES, AND AFFECTIVE SPIRITUALITY 99 



is a marvelous thing that a poor, ignorant little woman like Sor Maria, who 
was brought up in a village, should respond so well and sometimes better 
than a Master of Theology or a man of great learning. 31 

"A poor, ignorant little woman": being a "fragile" female without any 
formal education and from a suitably humble background was in itself 
a guarantee that only God (or the Devil) could work such a miracle. 32 
And so Cardinal Ximenez would consult Sor Maria as to whether he 
should cross the Straits of Gibraltar, and Fray Francisco de los Angeles 
Quinones, the General of the Franciscan Order, would ask Francisca 
Hernandez for advice about a proposed journey to Italy. 33 Even the 
clothes of these women transmitted spiritual graces and healing powers 
as if they were relics. Contact with the girdle of Francisca Hernandez, 
for example, cured Fray Francisco Ortiz of sexual temptation; Cardinal 
Ximenez gave Sor Maria a Franciscan girdle, requesting that she should 
always wear it and, through it, continually remember him in her divine 
prayers; 34 and, as has been seen, the habits of Magdalena de la Cruz were 
wrapped round the infante Philip to protect him from the Devil. 

In fact, women were positively encouraged to develop an affective 
and intense spirituality. For example, Pedro Ruiz de Alcaraz, the de- 
voted disciple of the Franciscan tertiary Isabel de la Cruz, spent long 
hours persuading women to practice dejamiento, or abandonment to the 
love of God, and Inquisition witnesses claimed that he had targeted 
three particular types of women — widows, beatas, and doncellas? 5 In Es- 
calona he had considerable success among the maidservants and ladies- 
in-waiting in the palace of the Marquis of Villena. After mass in the local 
Franciscan church, the women would kneel at his feet, with their hands 
on their breasts, and listen in adoration as he discussed dejamiento. In 
Pastrana and Madrid, likewise, he would lodge in the houses of widowed 
devotees and hold private spiritual consultations for women, particularly 
those who were not married. 36 Alcaraz, of course, was a "heretic," but 
Ignatius Loyola was to operate in a similar fashion amongst the widows 
and beatas of Alcala in 1526-1 527. 37 

Moreover, the great Cardinal Ximenez de Cisneros himself helped to 
promote a visionary spirituality characterized by such mental states as 
trances, swoons, visions, dreams, and fits. It was not simply that Mother 
Marta, Juana de la Cruz, and Sor Maria de Santo Domingo were all his 
spiritual mentors; Cisneros also exerted a powerful influence over the 
type of material that issued from the printing presses at Toledo and 
Alcala, and this included numerous works by such mystical authors as 
Vincent Ferrer, Catherine of Siena, and Angela of Foligno. 38 Indeed, 
just as Cardinal Ximenez protected Sor Maria from her Dominican de- 



Copyrighted material 



100 



GERALDINE MCKENDRICK AND ANGUS MACKAY 



tractors who thought her trances were the work of the Devil, so the 
passage in which the Dominican Vincent Ferrer condemned such mysti- 
cal excesses as revelations and visions was deliberately omitted from the 
1510 printed edition of his Tract of Spiritual Life.™ Such mystical works 
were primarily intended for friars and nuns, but, as Bataillon rightly 
pointed out, 40 Cisneros almost certainly wished them to be distributed 
among the laity as well. The works of Catherine of Siena and Angela 
of Foligno must have been of particular interest to nuns and beatas, 
for both these women were tertiaries whose mystical experiences took 
the form of visions and raptures. Angela of Foligno, for example, was 
devoted to contemplation of the minutiae of Christ's suffering on the 
Cross, and her most profound mystical experiences took place during 
this spiritual contemplation. Thus in the Franciscan church in Assisi, 
Christ appeared to her dripping in blood, whereupon she herself, like 
Sor Maria, experienced the agony and pain of the Crucifixion. 41 And, 
like many Spanish female visionaries, Angela in her raptures suffered 
from temporary loss of speech or lost the use of her limbs. 

But, although they did not enjoy the educational opportunities that 
were available to men, it should not be imagined that women who prac- 
ticed an affective spirituality or were visionaries were either ignorant or 
simply reacting in a slavish manner to the encouragement or promptings 
provided by the male establishment. The medieval Church, following 
Pauline injunctions, had silenced women; but the language and behavior 
of the female spirituality that emerged during the early sixteenth cen- 
tury circumvented this silence, and some women seized the opportunity. 
Besides, the testimony of Inquisition witnesses provides ample evidence 
that women were actively interested in the religious education of their 
own sex. The town of Guadalajara provides an example. There Maria 
de Cazalla, who was arrested by the Inquisition in 1532 on a variety 
of charges ranging from Lutheranism to alumbradismo, or illuminism, 
did not confine herself merely to educating her two daughters and 
encouraging them to read the many spiritual tracts emanating from 
the Alcala press, but she also gave catechism classes to rural women 42 
and preached in urban households. In Advent, 1522, for example, she 
visited her widow friend Catalina Hernandez Calvete and read one of 
the Epistles of St. Paul aloud, discussing its meaning in front of a female 
audience gathered together in the kitchen. As Catalina Alonso recalled: 

. . . there were a lot of people there, and it seemed as if they were all 
women. ... I think that there were more than twenty women because the 
kitchen was big and it was full. Maria de Cazalla read from a book, and 
then spoke, and everyone was silent as if they were listening to a sermon. 43 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION, VISIONARIES, AND AFFECTIVE SPIRITUALITY 101 



Nor was Maria de Cazalla unique or exceptional. In the same town of 
Guadalajara a woman recalled seeing Isabel de la Cruz reading a book 
in a public square, a cleric affirmed that he had seen many women read- 
ing books aloud in the vernacular in front of other people, and the 
aristocratic Dona Mencia de Mendoza categorically stated that "it is a 
well-known fact that literate women read aloud to illiterate women books 
such as the Scriptures and Lives of Saints." 44 

Although such examples could be multiplied, it is also important to 
note that female literacy was also assuming an even more active role, 
with women either writing books themselves or having their books writ- 
ten for them. Isabel de la Cruz and Alcaraz, for example, were rumored 
to have composed a book on contemplation, 45 Maria de Cazalla's written 
correspondence on spiritual matters was bound together like a book and 
circulated among sympathizers and acquaintances, 46 the visionary Isabel 
de Texeda enlisted the services of a cleric to commit her revelations 
and prophecies to paper, 47 Juana de la Cruz had her sermons-in-trance 
written down by three of her fellow nuns, 48 and Sor Maria de Santo 
Domingo's Oration y contemplation was published by the press of Jorge 
Coci in Aragoza in 1520. 49 This was the same Sor Maria whose celestial 
ecstasies had so enthralled the royal court, who had been protected by 
the great Cisneros himself, and who had relayed God's personal message 
to the ailing Encubierto, promising that the Bat would not die until he 
had taken Jerusalem. During the first half of the sixteenth century God 
moved in mysterious ways. 



NOTES 

1 . This study draws much of its inspiration from G. McKendrick, Franciscan 
Spirituality in Early Modern Castile (in preparation for Cambridge University 
Press). 

2. See Lorenzo Galindez de Carvajal, Anales breves de reinado de los Reyes 
Catolicos D. Fernando y Dona Isabel, de gloriosa memoria, in Cronicas de los reyes de 
Castilla, ed. Cayetano Rosell, vol. 3, Biblioteca de autores espanoles, vol. 70 
(Madrid: Real Academia Espanola, 1953), 562—563; and, with minor differ- 
ences, the same account in Alonso de Santa Cruz, Cronica de los Reyes Catolicos, 
2 vols., ed. Juan de Mata Carriazo (Seville: Escuela de Estudios Hispano- 
Americanos de Sevilla, 1951), 2:331-332. 

3. On Sor Maria de Santo Domingo, see B. Llorca, La Inquisition espanola y 
los alumbrados (i^og-i66g) (Salamanca: Universidad Pontificia, 1980), 37-64, 
259-271; V. Beltran de Heredia, Las corrientes de espiritualidad entre las Dominicos 
de Castilla durante la primera mitad del siglo XVI (Salamanca: Convento de San Este- 
ban, 1941), 9-17; Pietro Martire d'Anghiera, Epistolario, ed. J. Lopez de Toro, 



Copyrighted material 



102 



GERALDINE MCKENDRICK AND ANGUS MACKAY 



4 vols., Documentos ineditos para la historia de Espana, vols. 9—12 (Madrid: Real 
Academia de la Historia, 1953-1957), 3:41—42; Alonso de Santa Cruz, Cronica 
2:125. 

4. There was a profound split within the Dominican Order between the "ir- 
rational" group at Piedrahita and the "rational hierarchy." On the hostility of 
the latter, see V. Beltran de Heredia, Historia de la reforma de la provincia de 
Espana, 1450-1550 (Rome: Institutum historicum F. F. Praedicatorum, 1939), 
78-142. On the mixed reaction of some at the royal court, see Anghiera, Epis- 
tolario 2:300—302. 

5. Llorca, La Inquisition, 267; Anghiera, Epistolario 2:300—302; Beltran de 
Heredia, Las corrientes de espiritualidad, 10. 

6. For a short account of this affair, see Jose C. Nieto, "The Franciscan 
Alumbrados and the Prophetic-Apocalyptic Tradition," Sixteenth-Century Journal 8 
(1977): 3-16. For subsequent changes in inquisitorial attitudes to female vision- 
aries, see the excellent chapter by Claire Guilhem in B. Bennassar, Inquisition 
espanola: Poder politico y control social (Barcelona: Editorial Critica, 1981), 171- 
207. 

7. Proceso of Pedro Ruiz de Alcaraz, Archivo Historico Nacional (hereafter 
AHN), Inquisicion, legajo 106, n. 5, fol. gv. It should be emphasized that al- 
though much of the information about the excesses of the Escalona Franciscans 
derives from Alcaraz himself, there is other evidence which makes it virtually 
impossible to dismiss his allegations. See, for example, the testimony of the 
visionary wavers from Pastrana in C. Carrete Parrondo, Movimiento alumbrado y 
renacimiento espanol: Proceso inquisitorial contra Luis de Beteta (Madrid: Centro de 
Estudios Judeo-Cristianos, 1980), 70. 

8. AHN, Inq., leg. 106, no. 5, fols. 7r, 8v, 28 lr— 282V. 

9. See the documents on Magdalena de la Cruz in J. Imirizaldu, Monjas y 
beatas embaucadoras (Madrid: Editora Nacional, 1977), 33—62. 

10. For a succinct discussion of most of these women, see M. Bataillon, 
Erasmo y Espana: Estudios sobre la historia espiritual del siglo XVI (Mexico City and 
Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1966), 69-71. 

1 1. AHN, Inq., leg. 106, no. 5, fols. 47V, 4gr. 

12. Nieto, "The Franciscan Alumbrados," 9. 

13. On Iberian eschatology see the excellent studies by Alain Milhou, Colon 
y su mentalidad mesidnica en el ambiente franciscanista espanol (Valladolid: Univer- 
sidad de Valladolid, 1983) and "La chauve-souris, le Nouveau David et le roi 
cache: Trois images de l'empereur des derniers temps dans le monde iberique, 
XII— X Vile siecles," Melanges de la Casa de Velasquez 18 (1982): 61—78. Although 
discussion here is confined to Christian eschatology, it should be noted that 
the Jewish and Muslim apocalyptic ideas enjoyed vigorous traditions as well. 
On Antonio the councilor and his millennial movement, see the fundamental 
and contemporary account by Euclides de Cunha, Os sertoes (Rio de Janeiro: 
Laemmert, 1902). 

14. See P. Alexander, Religious and Political Thought in the Byzantine Empire 
(London: Variorum Reprints, 1978), study XII: "Byzantium and the Migration 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION, VISIONARIES, AND AFFECTIVE SPIRITUALITY 103 



of Literary Works and Motifs: The Legend of the Last Emperor," 54—55, 57, 
61-62; M. Reeves, Joachim of Fiore and the Prophetic Future (London: SPCK, 

l 97&), 59-64. 66-72. 

15. Reeves, Joachim, 38-48. 

16. Milhou, "La chauve-souris." 

17. The Spanish version of the treatise by Fray Aleman or Alemany is pub- 
lished in R. Alba, Acerca de algunas particularidades de las Comunidades de Costilla 
tal vez relacionadas con el supuesto acaecer terreno del Milenio Igualitario (Madrid: 
Editora Nacional, 1975), 180-197. On the importance of the treatise and of the 
mysterious Fray Aleman, who originally wrote his work in Latin, see the excel- 
lent discussion by Milhou, "La chauve-souris," 61-78. 

18. Milhou, Colon, 391-394. For the text of the letter by Rodrigo Ponce de 
Leon, see Historia de los hechos de don Rodrigo Ponce de Leon, Marques de Cadiz 
( 1443-1448), Coleccion de documentos ineditos para la historia de Espana, vol. 
106 (Madrid: Real Academia de la Historia, 1893), 247-251. And of course the 
chroniclers saw the hand of God aiding Ferdinand and Isabella in all their 
triumphs. 

19. J. N. Hillgarth, The Spanish Kingdoms, 1250-1516, 2 vols. (Oxford: Ox- 
ford University Press, 1976-1978), 2:571. 

20. Milhou, Colon, 397—398. 

2 1 . See Abbas Hamdani, "Columbus and the Recovery of Jerusalem, "Journal 
of the American Oriental Society 99 (1979): 39—48. 

22. See in particular the strange case of Charles de Bovelles and also the 
penetrating remarks about Cisneros's reactions to all the messianic expectations 
in Bataillon, Erasmo y Espana, 53-58, 70-71. 

23. See Alba, Acerca, 204-205. 

24. See Milhou, "La chauve-souris," and Richard Kagan's contribution to the 
present volume as well as his book Lucrecia's Dreams: Politics and Prophesy in Six- 
teenth Century Spain (Berkeley, Los Angeles, Oxford: University of California 
Press, 1990). 

25. On Franciscan spirituality see the forthcoming book by G. McKendrick 
cited above, n. 1. 

26. There were of course other factors at work: see in particular A. Vauchez, 
La saintete en Occident aux derniers siecles du moyen age (Rome: Ecole Francaise de 
Rome, 1981). 

27. AHN, Inq., leg. 106, no. 5, fol. 72V. 

28. J. F. Longhurst, "La beata Isabel de la Cruz ante la Inquisicion," Cuader- 
nos de Historia de Espana 25—26 (1957): 288. 

29. I. Maclean, The Renaissance Notion of Woman (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1980), 21. 

30. See A. Selke, El Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion: Proceso de Fr. Francisco Ortiz 
(Madrid: Ediciones Guadarrama, 1968), 98-99. 

31. Llorca, La Inquisicion, 262-263. 

32. Maria de Santo Domingo was the daughter of farm laborers, and both 
Francisca Hernandez and Magdalena de la Cruz were of humble backgrounds: 



104 



GERALDINE MCKENDRICK AND ANGUS MACKAY 



see Llorca, La Inquisition, 263; Selke, El Santo Oficio, 45, Imirizaldu, Monjas y 
beatas, 46. 

33. See, for example, Selke, El Santo Oficio, 1 12 n. 26. 

34. Ibid., 100, and Llorca, La Inquisition, 266-267. 

35. Some caution is needed here, however, because the leading question 
asked of witnesses was formulated in such a way as to encourage them to identify 
these types of women. 

36. AHN, Inq., leg. 106, no. 5, fols. 75r, 97V; Carrete Parrondo, Movimento 
alumbrado, 70. 

37. F. Fita, "Los tres procesos de San Ignacio de Loyola en Alcala de He- 
nares: Estudio critico," Boletin de la Real Academia de la Historia 33 (1898): 431- 
432, 442, 520-521. 

38. See Bataillon, Erasmo y Espana, 49. 

39. Ibid., 170. 

40. Ibid., 49. 

41. The Book of Divine Consolations of the Blessed Angela of Foligno, trans. M. G. 
Steegman (London and New York: Chatto and Windus, 1909), 210. Catherine's 
mysticism centered round a detailed meditation on Christ's Passion which was 
accompanied by extreme asceticism: Obra de las epistolasy oraciones de la bienaven- 
turada virgen sancta Catherine de sena de la orden de predicadores (Alcala, 1512), fols. 
38v-3gr, 144V, 225r-v, 318V. 

42. See M. Ortega Costa, Proceso de la Inquisition contra Maria de Cazalla 
(Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Espariola, 1975), 329-335. 

43. Ibid., 252-253. 

44. AHN, Inq., leg. 106, no. 5, fol. 4ir; Ortega Costa, Proceso, 281, 327. 

45. AHN, Inq., leg. 106, fol. 45V. 

46. Ortega Costa, Proceso, 258-259. 

47. Hamilton, Proceso de Rodrigo de Bivar, 123. 

48. A. Daza, Historia, vida, y milagros, extasis, y revelaciones de la bienaventurada 
virgen Santa Juana de la Cruz (Zaragoza, 1611), fols. 6iv— 62r. That this is not 
simply a pious legend can be seen by consulting Bataillon, Erasmo y Espana, 70 
n. 29. 

49. See F. J. Norton, A Descriptive Catalogue of Printing in Spain and Portugal, 
1501-1520 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978), 268; J. M. Blecua, 
Libro de la oration de Sor Maria de Santo Domingo (Beata de Piedrahita) (Madrid: 
Hauser y Menet, 1948). 



Copyrighted material 



SIX 



Politics, Prophecy, and the Inquisition 
in Late Sixteenth-Century Spain 

Richard L. Kagan 



The aim of this essay is to explore a triad of Inquisition trials, from the 
late 1580s, that centered on the issue of prophecy. The trials are those 
of Miguel de Piedrola, a seer nominated by the Castilian Cortes for the 
position of Spain's national prophet; that of Sor Maria de la Visitacion, 
a Dominican nun in Lisbon famous for her stigmata; and that of Lu- 
crecia de Leon, a young woman from Madrid known for her millennial 
dreams of Spain's future. Together these trials provide an opportunity 
to examine the Inquisition's attitudes towards seers, and, in a wider 
sense, the relationship between prophecy and politics in late sixteenth- 
century Spain. 

Prophecy — which can be understood as a spiritually-inspired teaching 
or warning — is a complex subject that has been extensively studied by 
anthropologists, sociologists, historians, and literary scholars. Generally 
speaking, research on the history of European prophecy has followed 
one of two tracks. The first considers prophecy as a literary genre; its 
principal concern is to classify various types of prophecy as well as to 
establish what might be called a "thematic genealogy," tracing individual 
prophecies back to their source, either biblical or medieval, and then 
explaining the changes and permutations that occurred along the way. 
In this guise prophecy serves as an available language, a discourse always 
available for use and one that is constantly being adapted and reformu- 
lated to fit particular purposes and needs. An excellent example of this 
type of inquiry is Robert Lerner's study of the Cedar of Lebanon 
prophecy from the Middle Ages until the Enlightenment. 1 The other 
track, pioneered by social scientists, considers prophecy primarily from 

105 



Copyrighted material 



106 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



a structural-functional perspective and views it principally as the prod- 
uct of a particular set of social circumstances, usually of moments of 
crisis and/or unusually rapid social and economic change. Scholars as 
diverse as Norman Cohn and Michael Adas thus seek to explain the role 
prophecy played in society and to understand the specific purposes to 
which prophecy was put. 2 Although these tracks are sometimes viewed 
as running in opposite directions, in this essay I shall attempt to make 
the two intersect, paying particular attention to the motivations of Pied- 
rola, Lucrecia, and Sor Maria, one aspect of prophecy that scholars have 
frequently ignored. 

Prophecy is essentially a public endeavor, though its origin is quint- 
essentially a private experience, such as a vision or dream. Prophecy is 
also a social act. Often allied with a particular cause, the prophet is a 
mediator between the supporters of that cause and the general public 
as well as a transmitter of messages received through a miraculous me- 
dium: a mysterious voice, an angel, a heavenly vision. The prophet usu- 
ally addresses a concrete, well-defined audience and intends to achieve 
specific, well-articulated ends such as the reform of the Church, a peren- 
nial theme in medieval prophecies. Prophecy is also a collective 
phenomenon; prophets rarely speak for themselves but rather serve as 
the mouthpieces for ignored, neglected, or marginal groups seeking to 
obtain legitimacy for a particular cause. Prophecy in this guise becomes 
a legitimating device, or, if you will, a cloak, a disguise; it represents a 
bid both for legitimacy and power. From this proposition it follows that 
ruling authorities almost invariably view prophets with considerable 
suspicion. 3 

Yet prophecy need not necessarily serve as a vehicle for protest. 
In early modern Europe prophecies were commonly announced to con- 
solidate support for a new monarch or regime, and in Spain royal 
births were regularly accompanied by the circulation of "fulfillment 
prophecies" which avowed that the future monarch was destined to 
complete the work of the Reconquest. 4 

The "gift of prophecy" was also considered a sign of divine favor, and 
hagiographers regularly took pains to establish the clairvoyance of the 
individual whose sainthood they sought to promote. Thus Fray Pedro 
Navarro's 1616 biography of Juana de la Cruz, the beata associated with 
the foundation of the miracle working shrine in Illescas, included a 
chapter on Juana's prophetic powers. 5 

Yet most prophets were not candidates for canonization. Many, like 
the peasant girls studied by William Christian, were ordinary individuals 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



107 



who claimed to have seen into the future as a result of a dream, a vision, 
or some other form of supernatural experience. 6 Others had a political 
agenda, especially those seers who Ottavia Niccoli has called "plaza 
prophets," that is, individuals, both clerical and lay, who used prophecy 
to establish religious standards by which to judge a secular regime. 7 
Prophecy thus often became an ideological weapon wielded by opposi- 
tion movements and radical groups. Among those who turned prophecy 
toward political protest, the best known are Savonarola, the radical 
Dominican preacher whose followers gained control of Florence in 
1491, and Thomas Miintzer, the Anabaptist leader who attempted to 
establish a millennial kingdom at Allstedt and later at Miihlhausen be- 
fore being defeated by imperial forces in 1525. William Hackett, the 
former serving man who warned of plague unless Queen Elizabeth re- 
formed her government, was somewhat less successful; he was arrested 
for sedition and executed in a London square in 1590. 8 

The history of plaza prophets in Spain has yet to be written, but there 
is ample evidence of their activity. At the start of the fifteenth century, 
for example, the fiery Dominican preacher Vicente Ferrer (1350-1419) 
cited Jeremiah 23: 16 to warn against the horde of prophets inundating 
Spanish streets: "Do not listen to the words of the prophets who proph- 
esy and deceive you. What they tell you are their visions; it does not 
come from the mouth of God." 9 Despite this admonition, a Savonarola- 
like street prophet known popularly as "el bachiller Marquillos" claimed 
to have been inspired by the Holy Spirit and collected a sizeable fol- 
lowing during the anti-converso riots that erupted in Toledo in 1449. 
Other prophets surfaced in Valladolid during the tumultuous years 
immediately preceding the outbreak of the Comunero revolt in 1520, 
among them Fray Juan de San Vicente, a Franciscan who made public 
pronouncements about the "bad government" of Spain. 10 Two years 
later, during the Germama revolt in the Valencian town of Jativa, there 
appeared a hermit who described himself as el rey encubierto (The Hid- 
den King), evoking the medieval idea of the pastor angelicus or blessed 
redeemer who would come from the east, rescue the kingdom from its 
enemies, and forever defeat the Moors. Dressed in animal skins, possibly 
to identify himself with the biblical David, the hermit claimed to have 
been sent by the Holy Spirit to destroy "the swamp of this kingdom." 
Promising riches for all his followers and rewarding some with noble 
titles, this "king" was soon assassinated by agents hired by the royal 
viceroy. 11 

The decade of the 1580s was another period in Spanish history when 
street prophets suddenly proliferated, in part prompted by international 



Copyrighted material 



108 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



events of the day. In 1580, for example, there surfaced in Albuquerque, 
a small town near the Portuguese border, a widow who claimed to have 
experienced a vision which revealed that Philip IPs endeavor to become 
king of Portugal would not succeed unless he first vowed to follow in 
the late King Sebastian of Portugal's footsteps and embark on a North 
African crusade. 12 There was also Isabel de Jesus, a Dominican nun in 
the small town of Huete, who first became known around 1583 for her 
stigmata, various miracles, and her "prophetic gift." Gradually, Isabel's 
reputation for saintliness grew and by 1587 her supporters compared 
her with the then famous Nun of Lisbon, Sor Maria de la Visitation (see 
below). Yet Isabel's prophecies were not strictly religious and among the 
"secret and future things" she told Hernando de Toledo, one of Philip's 
councilors of state, were events related to "the war with England." 13 

Most of this decade's prophetic activity was centered in Madrid and 
was linked to the monarchy's mounting economic and political difficul- 
ties, both at home and abroad. Another cloud on the horizon was the 
health of Philip II. The king suffered a serious illness in 1585 and the 
slow pace of his recovery fueled speculation that Philip was no longer 
capable of personal rule nor of protecting his kingdom against its ene- 
mies. The depth and extent of this crisis of confidence in Philip's ability 
to rule remains to be determined, yet it is clear that by the late 1580s 
many Spaniards feared that Philip's reign was nearing its end. Remark- 
ably, the monarch ruled another ten years despite his age and ill health, 
but they were years marked by the spread of apocalyptic ideas and vari- 
ous doomsday scenarios. In Madrid, Fray Alonso de Orozco, a promi- 
nent Augustinian preacher widely revered for his saintliness and 
prophetic gift, publicly expressed concern that the Armada would end 
in defeat because "our sins are great." Millenarian ideas were also 
fomented by the discovery, in a tower in Granada in March 1588, of the 
plomos de Granada, lead boxes holding a series of parchments written in 
Arabic and Greek. Among these documents was an Arabic version of 
John the Evangelist's prophecies about the end of the world, as well as 
others that scheduled the millennium for "the years just short of 1600." 
Although the parchments were later proven to be forgeries, the interest 
they aroused indicates that the current of millennialism had spread well 
beyond the royal court. 

Astrological forecasts added yet another dimension to these alarms 
about Spain's future. In 1566 Michel Nostradamus announced that "in 
the year five hundred fourscore more or less, there shall be a strange 
age." Other astrologers were more precise, predicting that 1588 would 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



109 



be a year of cataclysm because of one solar eclipse, two lunar eclipses, 
and a grand conjunction, namely a rare astronomical alignment of 
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. Since biblical times, these conjunctions had 
been associated with wars, revolutions, deaths of important persons, and 
other momentous events. In sixteenth-century Europe printed almanacs 
and popular prognostica helped to spread these astrological ideas among 
street prophets and soothsayers. Throughout the continent, 1588 was 
anticipated as the "wonder year," a time of great changes, perhaps even 
the end of the world. 14 In Spain these ideas could be found in the 
prophecies of Isabel de Jesus as well as in those of Miguel de Piedrola. 

The first Spanish street prophet who actually voiced dissatisfaction 
with the monarchy itself was probably Juan de Dios, a faith healer by 
trade and still a somewhat mysterious personage previously connected 
to a group of Toledan visionaries arrested by the Inquisition in 1574. 
By the mid- 1580s Juan de Dios turned up in Madrid, where he spent 
half of his time in the mental ward of the Hospital of Anton Martin, 
and the rest on the streets uttering prophecies about the coming destruc- 
tion of Spain. Allied to members of the Mendoza family and the court 
faction associated with Antonio Perez, the once popular royal secretary 
who had been arrested on suspicion of murder in 1 579, Juan de Dios 
identified himself with St. John the Baptist and publicly announced that 
Spain's sins would soon lead to her destruction by her enemies. 15 More 
directly critical of the monarchy was Guillen de Casaos, a royal official 
from Seville who, after a stint in the Yucatan, returned to Madrid in 
search of a royal gift and expressed his frustration at failing to ob- 
tain this prize through a series of dream visions that pertained to the 
bad government (mal gobierno) of Spain and attacked the corruption of 
Philip's court. 16 In these two examples at least, prophecy served political 
purposes, and its heralds were individuals who used it to proclaim in 
public what could otherwise only be whispered behind closed doors. 

The attitude of the Spanish Church toward prophets was somewhat 
ambivalent. On the one hand, the church could not deny the proposition 
that God had the power to communicate prophetic messages through 
ordinary individuals; to do so would be to refute Scripture itself. On the 
other hand, it was skeptical of anyone, particularly of "unlettered" men 
and "weak" women, who claimed to have received divine communica- 
tions. This skepticism was first articulated by Aquinas in the thirteenth 
century, although it was left to the famous fifteenth-century theologian, 
Jean Gerson, to develop the investigative formulae required to separate 



Copyrighted material 



110 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



the true prophet from the false. 17 In De Probatione Spirituum and De Dis- 
tinctione Verarum Visionum A Falsis, two treatises prepared for the Council 
of Constance in 1415, Gerson argued that the only sure way to dispel 
uncertainty about prophetic visions and dreams was, quoting John the 
Evangelist (1 John 4:11), to "test the spirits to see whether they are of 
God." He therefore recommended that both the contents of the vision 
and the personality of the alleged visionary or prophet be subjected to 
a series of rigorous tests, which he memorialized in a famous couplet: 

Tu, quis, quid, quare, 

Cui, qualiter, under, requiere. 

[You should seek who, what, why, 
to whom, what kind, whence.] 18 

In the course of the fifteenth century, Gerson's De Probatione Spirituum 
and its companion treatise became a vademecum no confessor could 
afford to be without. Gerson influenced Jakob Sprenger, the German 
inquisitor responsible for the Malleus Maleficarum, first published in 
1493. Gerson also had a profound effect on the Fifth Lateran Council, 
which in 1516 ordered bishops to investigate anyone who claimed pro- 
phetic knowledge on the basis of divine revelation. 19 In Spain, Gerson's 
influence can first be detected in Sanchez de Vercial's Book of Examples, 
written circa 1420, a treatise which warned "not to believe in visions," 
particularly those of women. 20 Gerson's skepticism toward prophetic vi- 
sions later appears to have influenced Diego de Simancas, author of 
the much reprinted Institutiones catholicae (first ed., Valladolid, 1552), 
a handbook widely used by Spain's inquisitors. 21 In the seventeenth 
century Gerson's rules for distinguishing true visions from false ap- 
peared in the "Interrogatorio para e examen de revelaciones, visiones, 
y suenos," a set of instructions distributed to judges by the Inquisition. 22 

Still, the criteria for distinguishing true prophets from false remained 
somewhat vague, and this perhaps explains why inquisitorial persecu- 
tion of would-be prophets was haphazard and generally limited to those 
whose prognostications constituted a direct political threat to the monar- 
chy. 23 In this sense it was politics, rather than religion, that occasioned 
the prosecution of prophets. What this suggests is that historians from 
Henry C. Lea to Henry Kamen may be wrong in concluding that the 
Holy Office did not serve as an instrument of royal absolutism. 24 As we 
shall now see with Piedrola, Lucrecia, and Sor Maria, the Inquisition 
only became involved in these cases after having been prodded to do so 
by the Crown. 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



111 



PIEDROLA 

The first of the three case studies to be discussed here is that of Miguel 
de Piedrola Beamonte, the so-called soldier-prophet. 25 Originally from 
Navarre where he had worked as an itinerant tinker (ollero), Piedrola 
later joined the army and became a foot soldier, serving first in Italy 
where, by his own account, he was captured by (and ransomed from) 
the Turks on two separate occasions. After having served briefly in the 
campaign to suppress the morisco revolt in Granada (1568-69), Piedrola 
drifted into Madrid in about 1570, hoping to secure a royal pension. 
Shortly thereafter he began writing a series of arbitrios (memorials) to 
the king, offering advice about the "conservation of his kingdoms," and 
suggestions for ending the war in Flanders. Such missives were a com- 
monplace means of communicating with the monarch, but Piedrola's 
messages had a macabre twist: he warned that Philip's children would 
die unless the monarch heeded his advice. For a while Piedrola was evi- 
dently considered harmless, and he was left alone. Official attitudes 
changed, however, some time late in 1578, when Piedrola began to de- 
liver similar messages in the streets of Madrid. Identifying himself with 
the biblical prophets Elijah and Malachi, Piedrola publicly asserted that 
the advice he was offering the monarch had a divine source. Soon after, 
one of Philip's secretaries advised Piedrola to abandon Madrid. This he 
did, sometime in 1579. Piedrola's precise movements over the next few 
years are difficult to trace. He seems to have rejoined the army, arriving 
in Naples some time before January 1580. By 1584 he had returned to 
Madrid and resumed his career as the soldier-prophet. Piedrola's repu- 
tation as a seer rested on the (mistaken) belief that he was an illiterate 
soldier who had miraculously memorized the entire Bible with divine 
assistance. He further claimed that his knowledge of the future derived 
from a series of dreams — seventy-two in all — which he attributed to 
God. No records of these dreams survive, but evidently they dealt with 
contemporary political events and openly criticized the king and his 
ministers. Some spoke of the "greatest events of the year 1588," which 
would result in the "imminent destruction of Spain." The soldier- 
prophet also proclaimed that at the moment this destruction began, his 
supporters were to seek refuge in a cave called la Espelunca. There, 
like a latter-day Pelayo, the mythical eighth-century king said to have 
planned the Reconquest, Piedrola would deliver Spain from her ene- 
mies. He envisioned a new Spain governed by a limited monarchy under 
a constitution — ideas that represented an open challenge to the abso- 
lutist principles of Habsburg rule. 



Copyrighted material 



112 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



The source of Piedrola's radical ideas remains unknown, although it 
may be traced to the constitutionalist traditions (fueros) of his native 
Navarre which limited the powers of that kingdom's monarch. Piedrola's 
adopted second surname of Beamonte — or Beaumont — further iden- 
tifies him with old Navarrese traditions of resistence to monarchs per- 
ceived to be unjust. The Beamontes were an aristocratic faction that 
surfaced in the mid-fifteenth century in opposition to Juan II, an Ara- 
gonese monarch who had deposed his son Carlos, Prince of Viana, as 
ruler of Navarre. The leader of this faction, Luis de Beamonte, claimed 
that Juan deserved to be overthrown since he violated the kingdom's 
fueros. Piedrola's position on this particular moment in Navarrese his- 
tory remains unknown, but his identification with the Beamonte faction 
suggests that he might have considered Philip II as the Castilian equiva- 
lent a Juan II — a tyrant who ruled without popular consent. 

Very little is known about the extent of Piedrola's following. In 1588 
the papal nuncio in Madrid reported to the Vatican that Piedrola "was 
esteemed by many persons of great and small estate" along with other 
"wise persons of quality" who compared his prophetic powers with those 
of Isaiah and Jerome. 26 No list of these supporters has survived, and 
Piedrola himself referred to his friends only by a series of mysterious 
aliases such as "Dr. Silence, the Strong Knight of the Golden Key, Pastor 
Anastasio, and Lady Obstinate." 27 Other sources indicate that Piedrola 
was closely allied with the supporters of Antonio Perez as well as other 
individuals directly associated with the royal court. 28 Alonso de Orozco, 
for example, alleged that Piedrola deceived "many honorable letrados," 
a group which seems to have included Juan de Herrera, the royal ar- 
chitect, and even Gaspar de Quiroga, the inquisitor general. 29 The royal 
chronicler, Jeronimo de Sepulveda, also attested that Piedrola "fooled 
and deceived . . . not just anyone but very important people," among 
them the dukes of Medina Sidonia, Najera, and Pastrana, the marquis 
of Carpio, as well as Lady Jane Dormer, an English Catholic and widow 
of the duke of Feria, who frequently meddled in the politics of the 
Spanish court. 30 In sum, Piedrola successfully gathered a small but in- 
fluential band of followers, many of whom were evidently prepared to 
enter the Espelunca once the millennium began. 31 

Piedrola's followers appear to have had several agendas, including the 
prompt release of Antonio Perez. In this respect the apocalyptic message 
of Piedrola's prophecies and the demand for governmental reform can 
be interpreted as part of an attempt to rally popular support for the 
imprisoned royal secretary. Another aim was to have Piedrola officially 
designated as Spain's national prophet, a new and previously unfilled 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



113 



post. Oddly enough, this scheme almost succeeded, owing to worries 
about the worsening economy and increasing dissatisfaction with Philip's 
government. At the prompting of Piedrola's well-placed allies, the Cas- 
tilian Cortes appointed a special commission to investigate Piedrola's 
prophetic credentials and the implications of his dire prognostications 
for Spain's future. 

Thus during the summer of 1587, at a moment when Piedrola's repu- 
tation as a prophet and seer reached its height, 32 the national assembly 
sent the head of a parliamentary commission, a certain Gaspar Gomez, 
to meet with Piedrola. Apparently, the two engaged in a learned discus- 
sion about Holy Scripture. In a report delivered to a plenary session of 
the Cortes on 22 August 1587, the commission acknowledged that many 
"important churchmen and preachers . . . consider him [Piedrola] a 
prophet, as in times past" and recommended that the king establish his 
own royal commission to determine "if Piedrola justly deserves the title 
of Prophet and if the prophecies he publicizes are sincere and true." 
During the subsequent debate in the Cortes on the merits of this pro- 
posal, Dr. Guillen, a representative of Seville, maintained that "one of 
the most important issues facing the kingdom is to determine whether 
Piedrola is a prophet." 33 

Yet Piedrola also had powerful detractors, among them, Fray Alonso 
de Orozco, a rival prophet, and Fray Juan Baptista, an Italian Franciscan 
then resident in Madrid. 34 Beginning in June 1587, Fray Juan de- 
nounced the soldier-prophet as an "evil spirit" and an "agent of Luci- 
fer"; in one sermon the friar claimed that Piedrola "was possessed by a 
demon that was responsible for everything he said and did." 35 Within a 
matter of weeks the controversy sparked by these denunciations spread 
to the royal court and apparently led Philip II to name a commission to 
investigate Piedrola's prophetic career. 

The three commissioners — Quiroga, the inquisitor general; Fray 
Diego de Chaves, the royal confessor; and Garcia de Loaysa, the royal 
almoner — met in late July and gathered a series of reports concern- 
ing Piedrola. Fray Luis de Leon, the famed Augustinian theologian 
and expert in prophetic discourse, advised that Piedrola's "spirit of 
prophecy" should not be doubted. But the vicar of Madrid accused the 
soldier-prophet of speaking only to those "a quien tocar" (that is, his 
friends) and of treating many important people with "poca modestia" 
(little respect). 36 The commission also heard testimony that Piedrola's 
prophecies included ideas that "our Holy Catholic Faith cannot toler- 
ate," and it was apparently this allegation that persuaded its members 
to recommend that the proper venue for a detailed inquiry into Pied- 



Copyrighted material 



114 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



rola's prophetic credentials was not the Cortes but the Inquisition. Thus, 
on 18 September 1587, precisely at the moment when the Cortes was 
publicly debating the merits of Piedrola's prophecies, the Holy Office 
ordered the soldier-prophet's arrest and spirited him off the following 
day to Toledo for trial. The arrest, the secretary of the Florentine 
ambassador in Madrid noted, caused "great murmurings" at the royal 
court. 37 

In the weeks that followed, Piedrola's supporters worked diligently 
to secure their prophet's release. On 19 September 1587, only a day 
after the arrest, Dr. Alonso de Mendoza, canon of Toledo, appealed to 
Cardinal Ascanio Colonna in Rome, comparing Piedrola's arrest and 
imprisonment to Darius's order to cast Daniel into the lions' den. 38 In 
the meanwhile, Piedrola saw to his own defense with a claim of insanity 
as well as a confession, offered in May 1 588, in which he asserted that 
his visions were nothing more than "illusion and deceit." Later that year 
the Holy Office decided that Piedrola was indeed a "false prophet" and 
on 18 December 1588, at an auto de fe staged in Toledo, sentenced him 
to two years' seclusion followed by perpetual exile from Madrid. 39 

Piedrola's case illustrates several points relevant to our understanding 
of the relationship between prophecy and politics in late sixteenth- 
century Spain. The Spanish Inquisition, it appears, treated false proph- 
ecy as a relatively minor offense. In Elizabeth's England, by way of 
comparison, William Hackett's prophecies and public criticisms of the 
queen's government led him directly to the scaffold. In theory the In- 
quisition, following the general tenets of the Counter-Reformation, took 
a dim view of any lay person who claimed to have the "prophetic gift." 
Yet in practice most seers were tolerated so long as they did not openly 
espouse heretical concepts or ideas. 

The Spanish Crown also tolerated the vitriol of self-proclaimed street 
prophets — for years the monarchy did not acknowledge Piedrola's pres- 
ence in Madrid — as long as the prophet had only a scattered follow- 
ing. In part, such tolerance derived from Philip II's own skepticism 
about the importance of prophecy. Thus when discussion of the "public 
abuses" emanating from various "prodigies and divinations" arose in a 
meeting with the papal legate in March 1588, Philip reportedly said, "It 
was the practice of the emperor [Charles V], my father, not to believe 
in or to act upon such things." 40 But once a prophet seemed to pose a 
political threat to the power of the throne, once the Cortes started to 
transform Piedrola into a national figure, even Philip's tolerance ceased. 
To deny Piedrola a public pulpit for further criticisms of the monarchy, 
Philip decided to have him arrested by the Holy Office rather than by 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



115 



civil authorities, since the Inquisition was the sole tribunal that could 
guarantee a secret trial. The essentially political, rather than religious, 
nature of Piedrola's arrest was evident to his supporters, one of whom 
wrote to another that the political implications of the case required the 
Inquisition to handle the trial in an "extraordinary" fashion. 41 

Even then the Crown went to extraordinary lengths to ensure that 
Piedrola be kept in strict isolation, a policy it enforced long after his 
sentence was announced. Ordinarily, the Holy Office sent those con- 
demned to a period of seclusion to any convent or monastery willing to 
take them. In this case, however, the Crown instructed the Suprema, the 
Supreme Council of the Inquisition, to undertake a thorough investiga- 
tion of a number of sites in order to make certain that security for this 
seditious prisoner was adequate. After considerable deliberation it was 
decided that Piedrola would be confined to the fortress of Guadamur, 
situated in a small and relatively isolated village six miles west of Toledo. 



LUCRECIA DE LEON 

Lucrecia de Leon was a young madrileria directly inspired by Piedrola's 
bleak vision of Spain's future. 42 Born in 1568, Lucrecia was the semi- 
literate daughter of a Madrid solicitor, Alonso Franco de Leon. Begin- 
ning when she was twelve, Lucrecia experienced a series of dream-visions 
about the future of the Spanish monarchy. By 1587 these dreams fo- 
cused on the defeat of the Armada and the subsequent destruction of 
Spain, a "loss" which Lucrecia attributed to the "bad government" and 
personal sins of Philip II. Lucrecia also envisioned the monarch as a 
tyrant who levied unjust taxes and failed to provide either charity or jus- 
tice. Some of the dreams even portrayed him as a new Roderic, the 
Visigothic monarch believed to have been singly responsible for the 
Muslim conquest of Spain in 711. 

Knowledge of these dreams was initially limited to Lucrecia's family, 
but in September 1587, immediately following Piedrola's arrest by the 
Inquisition, Lucrecia began speaking freely about these dreams in pub- 
lic. Lucrecia's father, afraid of the Inquisition, urged her to remain 
silent, but her mother, eager for the notoriety the dreams brought, 
encouraged her daughter's dreaming. Lucrecia's own aspirations are 
vague, but clearly she relished being a clairvoyant, once comparing her- 
self to "the sun in the window." She also appreciated the attention her 
dreams inspired, particularly the suitors they brought to her door. She 
in fact secretly "married" a certain Diego de Vitores, the amanuensis 



Copyrighted material 



116 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



of her confessor, although the two agreed to keep their union a secret 
so as not to jeopardize Lucrecia's prophetic career — prophets, particu- 
larly female prophets, were supposed to be chaste. The dreams also 
suggest that Lucrecia had a political "agenda" roughly akin to that of 
Piedrola and his followers. Both she and her father were supporters of 
Antonio Perez; they were also critical of Philip II and his ministers, and 
in the dreams the monarch regularly appears as a tyrant and his beloved 
Escorial as a building constructed with "the blood of the poor." Lucrecia, 
a former serving girl at court, also had personal reasons for being angry 
with the king; he had once promised her a dowry which he had failed 
to deliver. 

As with Piedrola, Lucrecia succeeded in establishing a small but en- 
thusiastic following that promoted her as a prophet whose dreams were 
divinely inspired. Her most ardent supporters were Alonso de Mendoza, 
previously a supporter of Piedrola, and Fray Lucas de Allende, the 
influential head of Madrid's Franciscan convent. Against her father's 
wishes, Lucrecia agreed to dictate her dreams to these two churchmen 
on a daily basis. They in turn prepared copies of the alleged dream texts 
and circulated them for wider distribution to their friends and allies at 
court. By February 1588, rumors of the seer who dreamed of Spain's 
impending "loss" led the Vicar of Madrid to place Lucrecia under house 
arrest for a brief period. Allende and Mendoza protested and managed 
to convince the archbishop of Toledo to order Lucrecia's release, thus 
allowing for the continuation of her prophetic career. 

Lucrecia went on to experience over four hundred dreams, nearly all 
of which warned of Spain's impending loss unless Philip reformed his 
government, altered his economic policies, and publicly repented his 
sins. Gradually, Lucrecia's prophetic reputation grew, particularly after 
her prediction about the loss of the Armada came true. She even in- 
spired a small cult, similar to Piedrola's Espelunca, whose members 
formed a brotherhood (gremio) and even hoped to establish a new 
military order — the Holy Cross of the Restoration — dedicated to the 
defense of Spain from its enemies, both Muslim and Protestant. By 
1590, Lucrecia's reputation was such that she was featured at fashion- 
able gatherings where she recited what she claimed were her dreams to 
groups of courtiers. Some of these onlookers viewed her as a mere 
curiosity, one of "the ignorant and rustic who dream marvelous things, 
including predictions about future events." But others considered her a 
prophet and expressed their belief in her prophetic powers by wearing 
a scapular similar to the one she had envisioned in her dreams. Accord- 
ing to Lucrecia, those who wore this garment would survive the disasters 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



117 



her dreams presaged and subsequently establish a new regime which, 
unlike Philip's, would be dedicated to charity, justice, and the defense 
of the Church. 

In the end Lucrecia's undoing was directly related to her fame. In 
the weeks following Antonio Perez's escape from prison in April 1590 — 
an escape known to have been aided by some of Lucrecia's supporters — 
Chaves, the royal confessor, initiated an investigation into the source of 
Lucrecia's dreams and by late May gathered evidence suggesting that 
Lucrecia and her followers were engaged in some sort of seditious plot. 
He subsequently convinced the monarch to put a stop to their activities 
and on 25 May 1590, the Inquisition, acting on Philip's orders, arrested 
Lucrecia together with five of her most ardent supporters. The follow- 
ing day, the Florentine ambassador in Madrid reported: 

Here, and in Toledo, the Inquisition has arrested some important noble- 
men, among them is the brother of Don Bernardino de Mendoza, am- 
bassador to France, and the prior of the [convent of] San Francisco [in 
Madrid]. The reason is a woman who some call a beata and who is said to 
have had divine revelations in her dreams and to have predicted the defeat 
of the Armada and now says that the king will soon die. 43 

Lucrecia's trial began within a week, with the judge noting briefly that 
she was "six or seven months pregnant." Lucrecia later gave birth to a 
girl who was still alive when her proceso was finally over, in July 1595. 
The trial itself was a tumultuous one, marked by a series of scandals that 
involved a notable lack of secrecy in the proceedings, a series of late 
night parties that disrupted life in the supposedly "secret prisons" of the 
tribunal, and even the attempt of one inquisitor, Licenciado Lope de 
Mendoza, to seduce Lucrecia. Mendoza and several other members of 
the tribunal were subsequently suspended and fined, but disruptions 
caused by these scandals help to explain why Lucrecia's trial lasted so 
long. 

In any event, the Inquisition repeatedly attempted to get Lucrecia to 
confess that she had purposely invented her dreams for political ends. 
This was something which, even in the torture chamber, she steadfastly 
refused to do. Her dreams, Lucrecia claimed, were dreams whose mes- 
sage she, as an ignorant doncella, did not understand. Finally, in July 
1595, her case was voted "en diferencias," an admission that her in- 
quisitors were unable to determine if Lucrecia was truly responsible for 
her dreams. But they did agree that the dreams contained some false 
and heretical ideas as well as statements critical of the monarchy. Cas- 
tilian law defined as alevoso or seditious, "anyone who speaks badly of 



Copyrighted material 



118 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



the king and his family." The minimum penalty for such statements was 
the confiscation of one half of one's goods. But if it was determined that 
the accused had advised or counseled anyone to rebel against or refuse 
to obey the king's law, the penalty was death. 44 In this instance, however, 
the Inquisition only punished Lucrecia — as she herself had predicted — 
with an abjuration ad levi, a relatively light sentence which called for one 
hundred (lightly delivered) lashes, two years confinement in a convent, 
and life exile from Madrid. 45 

The parallels between Lucrecia and Piedrola are many, and it is worth 
emphasizing that their arrests were prompted primarily by political as 
opposed to religious or spiritual considerations. The same applies to the 
arrest of the third of our prophets, Sor Maria de la Visitation, prioress 
of the Dominican Convento de la Anunciata in Lisbon. 



THE "NUN OF LISBON" 

Beginning in 1575, the Nun of Lisbon, as Sor Maria was called, experi- 
enced a series of ecstasies, raptures, visions, and miraculous levitations. 
She was far better known, however, for her stigmata or "llagas" five 
wounds in her side that dripped blood in the shape of a cross. These 
were publicized by her confessor, Fray Luis de Granada, the famous 
author of Guia depecadores and a number of other widely read devotional 
books. Beginning in 1584, Fray Luis wrote letters to various Church 
authorities, including Carlo Borromeo, archbishop of Milan, and Juan 
de Ribera, patriarch of Valencia, describing Sor Maria as "another Saint 
Catherine of Siena." 46 He also wrote a short, hagiographic treatise, Rela- 
tion de la vida y milagros de la priora de la Anunciata, published in Paris in 
1586 47 Adding further to Sor Maria's notoriety was a painting of her 
and her miraculous llagas by Hernan Gomez Roman, a late Manner- 
ist Spanish artist employed at the Portuguese court. The original is 
now lost, but it was reproduced (as a woodcut) in Alonso de Villegas's 
best-selling (but soon censored) Flos sanctorum. Reports of Sor Maria's 
miracles were also included in the correspondence of the Fuggers, 
the famous German banking house. 48 By 1588 Sor Maria was known 
throughout Europe for her saintliness. It was also said that no visitor to 
Lisbon failed to stop by la Anunciata convent in order to catch a glimpse 
of the famous nun. 

In addition to her visions and ecstasies, Sor Maria also had worldly 
concerns. Following the annexation of Portugal by Philip II in 1582, 
she emerged as a supporter of the exiled Portuguese pretender, An- 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



119 



tonio, Prior of Crato and nephew of the late King Sebastian. Antonio 
had taken refuge in England where he endeavored to persuade Queen 
Elizabeth to organize an invasion designed to restore him to the Por- 
tuguese throne. Expectations for such an expedition ran high in the 
months following the Armada's defeat in August 1588, and at this time 
Sor Maria stirred up the political ashes by making several public, anti- 
Spanish statements on Antonio's behalf. According to one source she 
boldly announced that "The Kingdom of Portugal does not belong to 
Philip II, but to the Braganza family," and prophesied that "if the king 
of Spain does not restore the throne that he unjustly usurped, then God 
will punish him severely." Sor Maria also presented herself as the living 
incarnation of Portugal and her wounds as the symbol of Portuguese 
sufferings under the Spanish yoke. 49 

As with Piedrola and Lucrecia, it was these overtly political statements 
that led to Sor Maria's downfall. Cardinal-Archduke Albert, the royal 
governor in Lisbon, feared that Sor Maria's prestige would strengthen 
the Portuguese nationalist cause at a time when Antonio was known to 
be actively planning an invasion, and in October 1588 he ordered the 
Holy Office to investigate Sor Maria's many miracles. The inquisitors 
soon reported that her famous stigmata were self-induced pinpricks, 
that her levitations were faked with the aid of sticks, and that her halos 
had been craftily created by mirrors and lamps. Sor Maria confessed 
her wrongdoing; on 6 December 1588 the Inquisition announced that 
she was guilty of "trickery and deceit" and sentenced her to life exile to 
Brazil, although this was later changed to Abrantes, a small town north 
of Lisbon. 50 

More needs to be learned about Sor Maria's case, but her trial resem- 
bles those of Piedrola and Lucrecia to the extent that they were all causes 
celebres, widely reported throughout Europe. These cases are also alike 
to the extent that each of three prophets considered here drew from a 
common wellspring of apocalyptic imagery and thought. On the one 
hand, the apocalyptic tradition provided these prophets with a grammar 
of political protest as well as a way of expressing various criticisms of 
the monarch and his regime. On the other hand, this grammar was not 
immutable, and each of these prophets shaped it to suit particular needs 
and purposes. In this sense, prophecy cannot be fully understood unless 
it is examined within its historical context and directly related to the 
aspirations of the individuals involved. 

As for the Inquisition, the fact that the Holy Office did not imme- 
diately muzzle plaza prophets like Piedrola but waited for instructions 



Copyrighted material 



120 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



from the king suggests that this institution, despite its celebrated role as 
a censor, was generally prepared to allow seers considerable room to 
maneuver. This is not to say that freedom of political expression in 
Habsburg Spain was any greater or lesser than in other sixteenth- 
century states — an important issue yet to be adequately studied — but 
that the Inquisition's ambivalent attitude toward prophecy, together 
with its reluctance to involve itself in cases where the religious issues 
were not necessarily clear-cut, offered Philip's vassals a political voice 
along with a political language that modern scholarship has over- 
looked. 51 To be sure, the political use of prophecy in Spain generally 
surfaced in times of political and economic crisis, moments when the 
future looked especially bleak or uncertain. But in a regime which 
offered few other modes of political expression, prophecy ensured dis- 
contents a means of being heard. Beyond the three cases discussed in 
this paper, however, much still needs to be learned about this particular 
strain of Spanish political life. 

NOTES 

The following abbreviations are used in the notes: 

AGS Est Archivo General de Simancas, Seccion de Estado (followed by legajo 
number) 

AHN Inq Archivo Historico Nacional (Madrid), Seccion de Inquisition (fol- 
lowed by number of legajo, expediente, and pieza). 

ASF Archivio di Stato di Firenze 

ASV NS Archivio Segreto Vaticano (Rome), Nunziatura spagnola 

BL Eg. British Library, Egerton Mss. 

BN Biblioteca Nacional (Madrid) 

IVDJ Instituto de Valencia de Don Juan (Madrid) 

1. Robert Lerner, The Cedar of Lebanon Prophecy from the Middle Ages until the 
Enlightenment (Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 

1983)- 

2. I refer to Norman Cohn, Pursuit of the Millennium (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1961), and Michael Adas, Prophets of Rebellion (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1979). 

3. This discussion of prophecy follows that of Keith Thomas, Religion and the 
Decline of Magic (London: Penguin Books, 1971), Thomas Kselman, Miracles and 
Prophecies in Nineteenth-Century France (New Brunswick: Rutgers University 
Press, 1983), and Adas, Prophets of Rebellion. 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



121 



4. See, for example, the prophecies that accompanied the birth of Philip IV's 
children in Cristobal Lopez de Canete, Compendio de los pronosticos y baticinios anti- 
guos y modernos . . . (Madrid, 1630). 

5. Pedro Navarro, Favores del rey del cielo (Madrid, 1622). See also Antonio 
Daca, Historia vida y milagros, extasis y revelaciones de Sor J nana de la Cruz (Madrid, 
1613). 

6. William A. Christian, Jr., Apparitions in Late Medieval and Renaissance Spain 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981). 

7. Ottavia Niccoli, "Profezie in piazza. Note sul profetismo populare nell'Ita- 
lia del primo cinquecento," Quaderni Storici 41 (1979): 500-539. See also her 
Profeti e popolo nell'Italia del Rinascimento (Bari: Laterza, 1987). 

8. See Thomas, Religion, 154. 

9. "Tratado del Cisma Moderno," in Jose M. de Garganta y Vicente Forcada, 
Biografia y escritos de San Vicente Ferrer (Madrid: Editorial Cat61ica, 1956), 448. 

10. Another was Fray Polanco, also a Franciscan; he preached against the 
Flemings in the court of Charles V and prognosticated disaster unless the new 
monarch reformed his government. See Joseph Perez, "Moines frondeurs et 
sermons subversifs en Castille pendant le premier sejour de Charles-Quint en 
Espagne," Bulletin Hispanique, lxvii (1965): 5-24, and Ramon Alba, Acerca de 
algunas particularidades de las comunidades de Castilla (Madrid: Editora Nacional, 

1975)- 

1 1 . See Gaspar Escolano, Decada primera de la historia de la insigne y coronada 
ciudad y reyno de Valencia. Segunda parte (Valencia, 1611), 1610—1621. The in- 
cident is also discussed in Ricardo Garcia Carcel, Las germanias de Valencia (Bar- 
celona, 1981), 132-138. According to Escolano, a second "rey encubierto" 
caused an "alboroto" in the city of Valencia in 1523 when his followers sacked 
parts of the city on Holy Thursday. 

12. Gregorio de Andres, "Las revelaciones de una visionaria de Albuquerque 
sobre Felipe II," Homenaje a Luis Morales Oliver (Madrid, 1986), 419-427. 

13. AHN, Inq., leg. 496, no. 1. Isabel was investigated by the Holy Office in 
October 1590. 

14. An excellent introduction to this astrological literature may be found in 
Robin B. Barnes, Prophecy and Gnosis: Apocalypticism in the Wake of the Lutheran 
Reformation (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988), esp. 120—121, 158—164. 

15. For a brief discussion of Juan de Dios, see Juan Blazquez Miguel, Hechi- 
ceria y super sticion en Castilla la Nueva-La Mancha (Toledo: Servicio de Publica- 
ciones de la Junta de Comunidades de Castilla-La Mancha, 1986), 1 14-1 15. 

16. AHN, Inq., leg. 2105. Casaos is also mentioned in Maria Zambrano, 
Edison Simons, and Juan Blazques Miguel, El proceso y suenos de Lucrecia de Leon 
(Madrid: Ternos, 1987), 46-47. 

17. Gerson's position on dreams is examined by Paschal Boland, The Concept 
of Discretio Spirituum in Johannes Gerson's "De Probatione Spirituum" and "De Dis- 
tinctione Verarum Visionum A Falsis" (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of 
America Press, 1959). 

18. Ibid., 30. 



Copyrighted material 



122 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



19. Karl-Joseph Hefele, Histoire des conciles, trans. H. Leclerq (Paris, 1917), 
viii, 526. 

20. Clemente Sanchez de Vercial, Libro de los exemplos por A.B.C., ed. John 
Easton Keller (Madrid: CSIC, 1961), 235, 329. The Spanish texts read: "Del 
engano de muger te deves bien guardar . . ." and "Tu deves de saber a todas 
visiones non es de creer." 

21. See Chap. 20, pp. lxix-lxxii, De divinatoribus. 

22. AHN, Inq., leg. 1226, fols. 787-812V. 

23. Other than the alumbrados, the heretical sect that first surfaced in 
Guadalajara, Toledo, and other towns of New Castile during the 1520s, cases 
involving ilusos, videntes, and other types of prophets were relatively few. See 
Juan Blazquez Miguel, La inquisition en Castilla-La Mancha (Madrid: Libreria 
Anticuaria Jeroz, 1986), 132. 

24. See Henry Kamen, The Spanish Inquisition (London: Weidenfeld & Nicol- 
son, 1965), 235. Recently, however, Kamen has suggested that the Holy Office 
did occasionally serve as an instrument of royal power; see his Inquisition and 
Society in Spain (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985), 242. Bartolome 
Bennassr, L'inquisition espagnole (Paris: Hachette, 1979), 373-388 offers a similar 
interpretation. 

25. The best introduction to Piedrola remains Vicente Beltran de Heredia, 
"Un grupo de visionarios y pseudoprofetas durante los ultimos anos de Felipe 
II," Revista Espanola de Teologia, vii (1947): 373—397. Heredia, however, does not 
utilize the "traza de la vida" Piedrola prepared for the Inquisition; BN: Ms. 
10,470. Further information about Piedrola may be obtained in AHN, Inq., leg. 
3712, no. 2, fol. 6. 

26. ASV NS: filza 34, fols. 352-354, dispatch of 20 May 1588. 

27. BN: Ms. 10,470, fols. 96V-97. 

28. AHN, Inq., leg. 3712, no. 2, fol. 6, n. 8, letter of Mendoza to Geronimo 
de Mendoza Manrique, 19 Sept. 1587, in which he refers to Piedrola as a "true 
prophet." 

29. Orozco, Obras, 3:47-48. On Piedrola's ties with Herrera and Quiroga, see 
AHN, Inq., leg. 3712, no. 2, fol. 5, Agustin Parra to Juan de Herrera, 22 June 
1588. Referring to Herrera's inquiry about Piedrola, Parra reports that Piedrola, 
at least prior to his arrest in Sept. 1587, was Quiroga's familiar, a term which 
connotes that he had received financial and possibly political support from the 
cardinal. 

30. Jeronimo de Sepulveda, "Historia de varios sucesos del reino de Felipe 
II," Ciudad de Dios, 115 (1918): 304. See also IVDJ: Envio 189, fol. 176, which 
contains a series of letters pertaining to his case. AGS Estado 165, fol. 340 
contains a copy of the Inquisition's sentencia of 10 Dec. 1588 against Piedrola. 
Further reference to Piedrola occurs in BL Eg. 1506, fols. 59-60, 93-95V; Eg. 
2058, fols. 205-206V. 

31. Also in this group were Dr. Mantilla, a court physician, and the alchemist 
Agustin Parra, a friend of both Juan de Herrera and Alonso de Mendoza. 



Copyrighted material 



POLITICS, PROPHECY AND THE INQUISITION 



123 



32. ASV NS, filza 33, fol. 33, letter of Juan Baptista de Pesaro, 5 June 1587. 

33. Adas de las Cortes de Costilla y Leon, 9: 1 19. 

34. For Orozco's comments see his Obras, 3:48; it is reported that Piedrola 
and Orozco had an "odio mortal" for one another. Little is known about Juan 
Baptista except that he had studied theology in Spain at the University of Alcala 
de Henares. His campaign against Piedrola apparently began in Barcelona dur- 
ing the spring of 1587; AHN, Inq., leg. 3712, no. 2, fol. 6, n. 8. 

35. AHN, Inq., leg. 3712, no. 2, fol. 6, Papel contra Garcia de Loaysa por 
Alonso de Mendoza, 7 Aug. 1587. According to Piedrola, Fray Juan's sermons 
began on 1 1 June 1587 and prompted what he described as an "alboroto" (up- 
roar, riot) in Madrid. 

36. IVDJ: Envio 89, n. 176, report of the vicar of Madrid, 9 Aug. 1587. Fray 
Luis's testimony reads: "que no se podria poner en duda sin que el tenia spiritu 
de profecia." For Fray Luis on prophecy, see Colin P. Thompson, The Strife of 
Tongues. Fray Luis de Leon and the Golden Age of Spain (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988), 94-101. 

37. ASF Mediceo, filza 5103, fol. 430. 

38. AHN, Inq., leg. 3712, no. 2, fol. 6, n. 8. Mendoza had written to Cardinal 
Colonna the previous August complaining about a letter in which Garcia de 
Loaysa had attacked Piedrola. 

39. Piedrola's sentencia is noted in Geronimo Roman de la Higuera, "Historia 
eclesiastica de Toledo," BN: Ms. 1293, vol. 7, fol. 239. Higuera refers to him as 
a "false prophet." 

40. ASV NS 34, fol. 197. 

41. AHN, Inq., leg. 3712, no. 2, fol. 5, n. 5, letter of Agustin Parra to Juan 
de Herrera, 22 June 1588. Parra also noted that the underlying reason for Pied- 
rola's arrest was Quiroga's decision to distance himself from the soldier-prophet. 

42. For Lucrecia, see Beltran de Heredia, "Un grupo de visionarios"; Si- 
mons, Blazquez Miguel, Suenos y procesos; Alain Milhou, Colon y su mentalidad 
mesidnica (Valladolid: Casa-Museo de Colon, 1983), 245, 316; and my mono- 
graph, Lucrecia's Dreams: Politics and Prophecy in Sixteenth-Century Spain (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1990). 

43. ASF Mediceo, filza 4920, fol. 515V (copy 535V), Cammillo Guidi to the 
Grand Duke of Tuscany, 30 May 1590. 

44. Nueva recopilacion de todas las leyes . . . (Alcala de Henares, 1569), Libro 8, 
titulo 18, ley 1, and titulo 26, ley 11. 

45. The full text of her sentencia is published in Jesus Imirizaldu, Monjas y 
beatas emhaucadoras (Madrid: Editora Nacional, 1977), 65—69. For Lucrecia's trial 
record; AHN, Inq., legs. 2105; 2085; 3712-3713. 

46. Cited in Ramon Robres, "La Monja de Lisboa segun nuevos documentos 
romanos con una carta de Fray Luis de Granada," Boletin de la Sociedad Castello- 
nense de Cultura, 28 (1952): 523. 

47. Fray Luis de Granada, Historia de Sor Maria de la Visitacion y sermon de las 
catdas publicas, ed. Bernardo Velado Garcia (Barcelona: Juan Flors, 1962). 



124 



RICHARD L. KAGAN 



48. The Fugger News Letters. A Selection 1566-1605, ed. Victor von Klarwill, 
trans. Pauline de Chary (London: John Lane, 1924), 265. 

49. Daniel A. Mortier, Histoire de maitres generaux de I'ordre desfreres precheurs 
(Paris: A. Picard, 191 1), v. 646. Sor Maria's political interests are confirmed by 
her contemporary, the astrologer Guillen de Casaos. Writing shortly after her 
arrest in October 1588, he noted that "it is certain that all [i.e., Sor Maria's mira- 
cles] was faked and designed to favor the party of don Antonio"; AHN, Inq., 
leg. 312, no. 2, fol. 5, Casaos to Alonso de Mendoza, Madrid, 19 Nov. 1588. 

50. For Sor Maria, see Ramon Robres Lluch, "La monja de Lisboa. Sus 
fingidos estigmas. Fray Luis de Granada y el Patriarca Ribera," Bolettn de la 
Sociedad Castellonense de Cultura 83 (1947): 182—214, 230—278. See also Alvaro 
Huerga, "La vida seudomistica y el proceso inquisitorial de Sor Maria de la 
Visitacion," and his "La Monja de Lisboa y Fray Luis de Granada," Hispania 
Sacra xii (1959): 35-96, 333-356. For a contemporary Protestant assessment of 
her "false miracles," see Cipriano de Valera, Two Treatises (London, 1599). Sor 
Maria's case is also discussed in Jose Sebastiao da Silva Dias, Correntes de sentimento 
religioso em Portugal (Coimbra, i960) 1:317-318. 

5 1 . See Henry Kamen, "Toleration and Dissent in Sixteenth-Century Spain," 
Sixteenth-Century Journal xix (1988): 3-23. 



Copyrighted material 



PART TWO 

Persecution and Persistence 



Copy righted material 



SEVEN 



Family and Patronage: 
The JudeoConverso 
Minority in Spain 

Jaime Contreras 



In 1983, Professor Heim Beinart, who has studied the crypto-Jewish 
community of Ciudad Real in great detail, called attention to the impor- 
tance attached in that community to family ties and kinship relations. 
Searching for formulas to explain the cultural community which the 
Judaizing conversos of La Mancha had apparently established, Beinart 
concluded that endogamous matrimony was the essential cause behind 
the "manifestations of a common destiny"; manifestations which the 
entire cryptic community expressed openly with the violent eruption of 
the Tribunal of Faith in the final years of the fifteenth century." 1 

Indeed, it was Julio Caro Baroja who, thirty years ago, spoke of the 
need to elaborate a "cohesive and organic" history of the Spanish crypto- 
Jews from a more ethnohistoric perspective. Don Julio recommended 
that, for such an arduous task, it would be necessary to study "a couple 
of thousand Inquisition trials," which would eventually lead to the "his- 
tory of a few hundred families united by a system of lineages." Caro 
Baroja thus defined a very precise operative method. 2 

As of today, neither the methodology proposed by Caro, nor the 
attention of H. Beinart, has elicited much enthusiasm among historians 
of the Hispanic crypto-Jews. It must be recognized that within special- 
ized historiography, the judeoconverso families and their systems of 
lineage and kinship have hardly attracted much attention. Nonetheless, 
there is an obvious need to understand the mechanisms that develop 
within the limits imposed by blood ties, kinship, or relation through 
marriage. Today, our historiography demands this knowledge. To strike 
off on that barely intuited path, to delimit its contours, to specify its des- 

127 



Copyrighted material 



128 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



tiny, and to draw up its outline, are the principal objectives we propose 
for ourselves as a team of investigators. 

Our goal is, without a doubt, ambitious, because tackling the problems 
presented by the judeoconverso minority from a multidisciplinary per- 
spective is a very involved and complicated procedure. Initially, we are 
obliged to study previous works in order to construct the first basic levels 
of study. Obviously, neither the original manuscripts, nor the printed 
sources, and certainly not the topic's enormous bibliography were con- 
ceived of or elaborated in terms of our own original focus. But whatever 
the methods of study, the questions posed were always similar in both 
structure and form from the very origins of the converso problem. All 
historical periods have dealt with the same protagonists, clothed at times 
in similar garb and at other times in contrasting dress. We are familiar 
with all the characters: they are the Old Christians and the New Chris- 
tians; they are the Jews, the Judaizers and the "marranos"; they are also 
the Inquisition, the Crown, the Church, and the rabbinical authorities 
of the Jewish communities of the Iberian Diaspora. 

The questions ordinarily posed by historians to these protagonists 
stem from the fact that two religious communities existed — the one a 
majority and the other a minority — who lived out their relationships in 
an especially dramatic manner. This much is true, but the issue of the 
degree to which the members of one community identified themselves 
vis-a-vis the members of the other, and the degree to which orthodoxy 
defined itself as such in an antinomian relationship with heresy has 
produced an inevitably simplistic and excessively rigid methodological 
framework. 

Religious overtones shaded questions formulated from the two sides. 
Did marranismo exist as a religious phenomenon, or, to the contrary, 
was it "invented" by the inquisitors? What is the significance of the term 
Judaizer? Did all the New Christians Judaize? These questions were 
posed repeatedly, and always from either side of the problem. Not sur- 
prisingly, the answers were also inevitably polemical, and always elicited 
rich and subtle interpretations. 

As a result, the issue, always complex and always unfinished, has 
remained, in my judgment, without precise horizons. Inordinate and 
at times intentional attempts to establish one sole perspective as a 
means of targeting and understanding the problem have blocked other 
interpretations. In this case, the historian must understand his own 
limitations. Is it possible to render comprehensible and objective a phe- 
nomenon which, because of its nature, resists focus? 3 Secrecy and clan- 
destinity, both inherent aspects of crypto-Jewish sociology, complicate 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



129 



any attempt to understand its nature. The cryptic nature of the Judaiz- 
ing communities was concomitant with the unstable grounding of their 
very existence. Heretics in the eyes of the Catholic majority, they also 
experienced extreme difficulties in being acknowledged as Jews by the 
Hebrew communities abroad. This lack of adaptation to either system 
created a constant and permanent tension in the daily existence of the 
cryptic community; there was no alternative but to accept the situation 
and to make of it a customary form of internal coexistence. Neverthe- 
less, and in spite of the relative guarantee of institutional security, this 
state of constant anxiety inevitably generated multiple responses from 
both individuals and groups. Both the actual situations and the social 
rejection that caused them resulted in a voluminous documentation 
from both the Catholic authorities and their Jewish counterparts which, 
while extremely interesting, is profoundly biased as well. The conversos 
who Judaized did not bequeath to posterity their own testimony; on the 
contrary, they were obliged to accept the fact that this task would be un- 
dertaken by others: at times, by their bitterest enemies, the inquisitors, 
and at others, by the Jews of the Diaspora, who frequently demonstrated 
a manifest unwillingness to integrate them into their communities. 

As a result of all this, it is an incontrovertible fact that many historians, 
of whatever leaning, have found themselves unfailingly "trapped" by the 
seduction of the documents they have studied, documents not necessar- 
ily objective. Partly because of the documental bias and mainly because 
of the unilateral methodology applied, historiography on Iberian mar- 
ranismo has turned out to be oversimplified and dualistic. There are two 
principal positions: (1) that marranismo is clandestine Judaism and (2) 
that marranismo existed only in the minds of the inquisitors and those 
who supported them. 

These two entrenched conclusions have made it difficult to distin- 
guish the diverse variations existing between one position and the other. 
More relativized positions need to be adopted: neither do all the trials 
begun by the Holy Office convey the image of a conscious and orthodox 
Judaism, nor can we assume from the rabbinical response that many 
conversos did not wish to Judaize. Liturgical obligations or traditional 
religious observances do not in themselves define the religion of the 
marranos. We are not in the presence of a religious creed that conforms 
to fixed or stable concepts. Clandestinity and secrecy reduced the reli- 
gious socialization and allowed for a varied religious individuality; the 
trials of the Holy Office provide an extensive collection of examples in 
this regard. 

Consequently, marranismo resulted less in a ritualistic and observant 



Copyrighted material 



130 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



practice than in a consciously motivated integration within Mosaic law, 4 
undertaken individually or socially. There are many paths that lead to 
such a level of consciousness, but the ethnic bonds of a community are 
the first basic step toward initiating the process of social and religious 
integration. In other words, the term so commonly used in the docu- 
ments of the times defining the con verso ethnically as a "New Christian 
of Jewish origin" is merely the starting point. From this there developed 
a more or less singular religious practice — crypto-Jewish religiosity — 
which, under favorable circumstances, may have culminated in the com- 
plete acceptance of actual Judaism. This usually occurred when the 
individual, having to flee from the Iberian peninsula, arrived at a Jewish 
community in one of the other European countries. 

This process may explain the existence of the cryptic communities 
of Iberian marranismo and their logical migratory patterns toward the 
diverse Jewish communities of Europe. 5 This produces, in turn, a "nat- 
ural" evolution that begins with the New Christian and concludes with 
the Jew; the marrano is the intermediary stage. 6 There do not appear 
to be many doubts in this respect. Therefore, ethnic issues were mainly 
responsible for social segregation and juridical-administrative differen- 
tiation. To be marginalized in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Spain, 
it was not necessary to have been tried as a Judaizer by the Tribunal of 
Faith; all that was necessary was to have a few drops of Hebrew blood. 
Only by concealing the presence of these drops could the individual 
begin to aspire to an accepted social status that conferred both respect 
and honor. A vast amount has been written on these issues, 7 and it also 
has been pointed out quite clearly that money could expunge dubious 
ancestry and create ancient and time-honored lineages. Through these 
means, one purchased the required reputation; yet one error, one small, 
barely perceptible but intentional indiscretion was sufficient to destroy 
the entire achievement. When this occurred, the affected individual 
suffered immediate exclusion. While such a thing rarely happened, the 
important fact is that it did happen, and this revealed the extent to which 
lineage, belonging to a clan line, and ethnic origin were the central issues 
in the drama of coexistence between the majority and the minority. Race 
and lineage, both separately and barely differentiated from each other, 
represented the primary characteristics of social exclusion. 8 

The statutes on purity of blood, that neurotic obsession to "stir up 
entombed bones," as Quevedo wrote, 9 functioned as a means of attack- 
ing the social and juridical rights of the New Christians, but what is 
particularly interesting is that they also made more selective the social 
mechanisms that led to marriage. The "quality of the blood" was trans- 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



131 



mitted through lineage and could be purchased with money; yet, like 
wine that must age with time, only marriage guaranteed it. For this 
reason the politics of marriage were of vital importance. 

The letters patent of nobility and the certificates of purity, results 
of tedious and complex secret investigations, were superimposed onto 
the inexorable and selective economic process and provoked a sharply 
defined and strengthened reaffirmation of the traditional social groups 
and estates. The social expansion timidly carried out in the first forty 
years of the sixteenth century was aborted after the generalization of 
the statutes. Lineages were once more reaffirmed, family ranks closed 
ever more tightly among themselves, and clans and kinships were con- 
solidated. Very few possibilities remained for persons of questionable 
background who had not succeeded in establishing themselves within 
respected and highly regarded lineages. 

If, as we know, the Edicts of Faith published by the Holy Office occa- 
sionally served as propaganda through which many crypto-Jews, hereto- 
fore ignorant of the religion they wished to practice, reaffirmed their 
faith, 10 the statutes also allowed many New Christians, isolated within the 
vast expanse of the majority, to discover their unique identity. It was 
obviously a cultural identity that consequently reinforced the bonds de- 
fining them — both social bonds and ethnic ties. 11 

In examining the wide range of implications which these premises 
suggest, my principal objective is to unravel the complex familial struc- 
tures developed internally within the ever unstable cryptic communities; 
such an objective demands as well that we focus carefully on the relations 
between these judeoconverso groups and the surrounding environment, 
that is, the Old Christian majority. 

We must therefore adopt a rigorously selective criterion with regard 
to the "diverse messages" transmitted by the documentation of the 
period. As is well known, the documentation of the time exhibits a viru- 
lent anti-Semitism, sometimes latent and at other times quite explicit. 
The image presented in this vast quantity of paper is stereotypical, but 
no less real for this reason. The Judaizer is a permanent protagonist in 
daily reality. His presence is constant — always necessary but always un- 
comfortable. He embodies adverse stereotypes; he is the typified enemy, 
the opposing archetype who permits self-affirmation by means of nega- 
tion. The Judaizer is the expiatory victim, the most hated antisocial 
agent because he is the heretic par excellence and, affirming the magic 
aspect of collective existence, he is the cause of all the evils that afflict 
the realm. 

The image, most definitely stereotypical, that emerges from these 



Copyrighted malarial 



132 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



mountains of books, documents, and treatises reveals a rarefied cultural 
atmosphere that logically corresponds to the collective parameters of the 
Catholic majority. Constant references to this stereotype have slowly 
formed a strategy of exclusion silencing all divergent manifestations. 
Uniformity has been imposed and thought has become monolithic. 

The polemic over the statutes of purity, described in meticulous and 
detailed form by Albert A. Sicroff, exemplifies the inexorable tendency 
to suppress all differences. Sicroff demonstrates how certain positions 
that emerged triumphant at the end of the process had been very weak 
at the start. The supporters of the statutes increased in number over 
time, suggesting the existence of two "periods" of diverse evolution, at 
the end of which social coexistence fossilized. The various options were 
polarized into two essential positions: the dominant groups and the 
excluded ones. The former defined themselves through racial purity, 
noble lineage, virtuous reputation, and orthodox religion. Wealth was 
also an attribute. The excluded groups, in contrast, were so defined by 
the absence of all of these factors. 12 

There were many New Christians, crypto-Jews who accepted their 
marginalized condition and used it to cement their identities; they 
viewed their isolation as the feature that most defined them. Thus, in 
the face of religious persecution, they reconfirmed their desire to 
Judaize; in the face of social rejection, they reaffirmed their clandestine 
relations; in the face of the contempt and political neglect of their king, 
they collaborated with his enemies; 13 and finally, in the face of the 
baroque exaltation of "the lineage of the peasants," they defined a pre- 
meditated familial strategy, distinctly endogamous, as an essential means 
of ensuring the survival of their ethnic lineage. 

Obviously, we cannot deduce a monolithic uniformity in either social 
structure, belief, or behavior. The attitudes learned in the bosom of the 
community, as well as those acquired in the contacts with foreign 
synagogues (aljamas), blended with difficulty within the limited and as- 
phyxiating boundaries of clandestinity. There, the pressure from the 
majority was felt as an oppressive burden. It was not easy to resist, and 
on many occasions the weakness of the cryptic system was unable to with- 
stand it. It was therefore necessary to maintain, among individual ten- 
dencies and general requirements, a certain degree of laxity that would 
guarantee coexistence, minimizing the risk of flight and the profound 
estrangement which, tragically and irreversibly, resulted in the Holy 
Office. 

Of all the elements that assured the cohesion of the cryptic group, 
two stand out: the unity of faith and the solidarity of blood ties. Americo 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



133 



Castro, with remarkable intuition, discovered the enormous importance 
that the Hebrew community of the Hispanic kingdoms gave to the issue 
of "blood." When Castro studied the emergence of the statutes, he saw 
in them the triumph of the Christian "caste ' over the Hebrew "caste," 
a triumph based precisely on a particularly Jewish characteristic: the in- 
terest in maintaining at all costs their own specific singularity. Castro's 
thesis, bold and original, provoked angry and, at times, bitter reactions. 
This is not the occasion to repeat past dissensions that can only be under- 
stood within their social and intellectual context; yet today, when many 
historians, whether they are Jewish or not, investigate these themes, 
they arrive at hypotheses quite similar to those formulated earlier by 
Americo Castro. The topic of blood and lineage is one of these over- 
worked themes. 

The Hebrews, argued don Americo, boasted of possessing pure and 
ancient blood; they thus displayed pride in having an ancestry at least 
as long and ancient as that of the Old Christians. They considered them- 
selves descendants of a superior ancestry that conferred attributes of no- 
bility upon them. In their theories, the Hebrew minority followed the 
same arguments as the Old Christians. They explained, for example, 
that the exaltation of blood and lineage was not, in and of itself, strictly 
a racist formulation. This was not a mechanistically physiological or 
biological racism but rather the nourishing of a collective sentiment that 
inherits the consciousness of a past tradition, culture, and collective fam- 
ily. In the same way that they operated for the Old Christians, the laws 
of heredity — biological laws — did not alone transmit the blessing of a 
Jewish ancestry; moral and cultural values acquired in the mythical and 
courageous past were what determined the quality of blood. Lineage was 
the end of this process. Lesser nobility, nobility, and purity of blood 
formed the essential triumvirate of the Iberian Jews' social ethic, which 
they defended with the same energy as the Christian apologists: "Do not 
try to shame me by calling my parents Hebrews. Certainly that is what 
they are, and I desire it so: if near-antiquity is nobility, then who is 
more ancient?" Alonso de Cartagena eloquently defended his Hebrew 
ancestry. 14 

The antiquity of those mythical lineages lost in the past was what 
transmitted the honor, respect, and reputation which the Old Christians 
claimed exclusively for themselves. The Iberian Jews and New Chris- 
tians developed an imitative strategy as anti-Semitism was unleashed 
and, encouraged by popular hatred, the justice system, with its Christian 
bias, penetrated the synagogues. The contempt of the masses extended 
everywhere, the Jews' protectors lost power, and the Crown acceded to 



Copyrighted material 



134 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



the cries for extermination. During those years of violence, Jewish Spain 
and the newly converted proudly exhibited the antiquity of their line- 
ages. This was a tardily awakened consciousness, since the ghetto had 
already been formed and its violent siege presaged terrible fatalities. 
That "historical" consciousness which rejected exclusion was deeply re- 
sented by the Christian majority. The palace priest exemplifies this 
attitude: "They [the Jews] pretended to supreme excellence, presuming 
that in the entire world there were no better people, neither more dis- 
creet nor more respected than they, being of the lineage of the tribes 
of Israel." 15 

The lineages of Israel, therefore, were ancient. Nobility, virtue, and 
pure and respected blood: these were the parameters Castro considered 
fundamental to the Hispanic Hebrews. They are not, in principle, new 
arguments, but nevertheless it is interesting to see how other historians, 
with another focus and different documentation, have emphasized the 
same themes that obsessed Castro. 

A recent study by Swetschinski on the Jewish communities of Amster- 
dam during the seventeenth century stresses the social differentiation 
of the Sephardic Jews as compared with the Ashkenazi branch. In the 
city of Amstel, the Jews who had emigrated from the Iberian peninsula 
acted as if they were superior to natives of other areas. Swetschinski, 
studying the apologetic writings of the founders of the "Portuguese" 
community, notes the constantly brandished argument: "the superiority 
of the Hebrews originally from Sefarad." 16 Moses Aron ha Levi, chroni- 
cler of the recently established community, argued that the Iberian Jews 
who settled in Amsterdam had brought with them the ancestry of their 
blazoned lineages. Daniel Levi de Barrios, the most prolific of all the 
Jewish writers who wrote in Castilian in Amsterdam, referring to the ori- 
gin of his brothers, could not find more authoritative terms than "purity 
of blood" and "superior lineage." Daniel Levi de Barrios was so "His- 
panicized" that Scholberg, his principal scholar, generalizes that "the 
Sephardic Jews of Amsterdam seem very Spanish in this respect." 17 

Thus, the bourgeois and "tolerant" Amsterdam of the mid-seven- 
teenth century hosted a Jewish community of Iberian origin which, hav- 
ing fled from the Holy Office, was as much obsessed with lineage as were 
the Old Christians. This obsession was their governing feature and was 
what distinguished them most clearly from Jews who were emigrants 
from other areas. Escaping from a closed and secret situation, those Jews 
who in former days had survived the persecution of the Tribunal of 
Faith knew better than anyone else that only through blood alliances 
could they preserve their religious beliefs. 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



135 



In this as in many other issues, Revah, when studying the "Bocarro 
Frances" Jewish clan, understood the interests of family ties and, con- 
sequently, the singular importance of marriage for the community. 18 It 
was therefore essential to employ the appropriate strategy. Only those 
unions which faced the future with the weight and the duty — ultimately, 
the heritage — of the past could sustain the magic of the lineage, and 
with it, tradition, honor, and esteem. 

Here we have the Jewish family or the Judaizing family constituting 
itself as a basic element of social and cultural cohesion. The classical 
endogamy of the Judeo-Christians was ultimately necessary, because it 
alone allowed religious affirmation, facilitated the process of socializa- 
tion, and also assured the reproduction and subsequent development 
of economic structures. The judeoconverso family thus fulfilled three 
principal functions: it ensured faith, preserved the entity of lineage, 
and made possible the attainment of wealth. 

Historians of the conversos have scarcely questioned this triple fa- 
milial function. In this regard, the partial and myopic vision of the 
historian has portrayed a false and incomplete image of the conversos. 
We do not know them as forming part of a social group, or within their 
familial organization, or as participating in their own specific cultural 
world; nor do we know them, with rare exceptions, as individuals, per- 
sons in and of themselves. Our knowledge is limited to an image con- 
veyed by the literature of the period and the documents of the Holy 
Office, and that image is particularly biased. In the inquisitorial docu- 
ments, their predominant role is that of victims, and they are recognized 
as such in the formal and often tragic language of the penal trials. We 
have rarely sought any meanings beyond this image; we must therefore 
find and decipher the documents. Histories of the family, lineages, and 
kinships are, in themselves, suggestive and novel vantage points which 
the historian cannot ignore. 

Caro Baroja has shown us this path. As indicated above, he believed 
it necessary to write the history of those "hundreds of lineages." But 
when striking off on that path, we discover that the methodology is un- 
known to us and that our lack of precision forcefully limits our steps. 

Nevertheless, as we know, research on the history of the family has 
increased since the decade of the 1960s. This growth is due to the qual- 
itative evolution occurring in historical demographic studies. 19 Through 
the analysis and the quantification of natural factors of population, this 
discipline has shifted toward the study of the social aspects that develop 
around the family structure such as types of marriages, transmission 
of belongings, access to property, and localization and analysis of pa- 



Copyrighted material 



136 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



tronage. The history of the family is thus an immense field where the 
interdisciplinary nature of the social sciences may well demonstrate its 
effectiveness. Whatever the future directions may be, some thoughts 
have already been firmly established: the family is the key institution 
sustaining the social system, and this occurs through two opposing yet 
complementary functions: on the one hand, the transmission of socio- 
cultural values through the biological laws of heredity, and on the 
other hand, the "control" of any dysfunctional element that might arise 
within the family. 20 In summary, contemporary cultural anthropology 
reminds us that the family in the Habsburg period reproduces itself, 
thus making "commercial strategies" possible, regulating the relations 
among its members, and perpetuating the force of authority by sacraliz- 
ing its effects. 

Nonetheless, such conclusions result from theoretical speculation, 
since concrete empirical analysis as applied to past eras is in the initial 
stages. Moreover, the scarcity of this type of research on minority groups 
is overwhelming. With such a limited background, to investigate the 
systems of familial organization of an ethnoreligious minority that also 
lives cryptically and whose real existence is not legally recognized by 
the majority implies an effort that remains to be carried out in all its 
aspects. 21 

The history of the crypto-Jewish family must be patiently recon- 
structed. Such an objective requires an initial premise on the part of the 
investigator: in the crypto-Jewish community, the family was always a 
component of internal solidarity. Let us begin, then, at the beginning. 

During the fifteenth century, when the intensity of the conversion 
process paralleled institutional violence, the converts from Judaism, the 
New Christians, developed an entire strategy in order to reach the high- 
est levels of the urban aristocracy. Thirty years ago, Francisco Marquez 
Villanueva explained that the objective was to control many municipal 
offices. 22 

Essential and complementary elements intervene in that historical 
process of social and political ascent; one is the economic level attained 
and the other, the bonds of solidarity woven by family and lineage. The 
second element is conditional upon the first, as the essential means that 
assured the marginalized minority's economic success was the harmoni- 
ous, supportive, and operative inclusion of the individual within the 
family clan. Only when this had been accomplished could the individual 
ascend socially and politically, obtaining municipal offices, positions that 
ensured a certain immunity. This was surely the social direction of the 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



137 



recently converted minority, whose specific marginality halfway between 
the two religions gravely endangered their existence as a group. 

The propensity toward sociopolitical ascent originating in familial 
solidarity does not suggest a behavior unique to the crypto-Jews, but 
their only possible strategy. The dominant sociopolitical system was 
based not upon the individual but rather upon the larger kinship system. 
Today, it is obvious to everyone that the group's definitive component 
was to be found in the hierarchical relations of loyalty, and that such 
loyalty, a primary characteristic of private family relationships, consti- 
tuted the fundamental public feature of political relationships as well. 
For this reason there was no possibility of promotion or of any kind of 
social recognition not based a priori in these primary structures. The 
converso, like any other individual, ascended socially and politically 
through channels attained by the clan and the "family" to which he be- 
longed. The political importance of groups as defined by blood and 
lineage tainted public life with a sordid and, on occasion, unabashed 
struggle for higher levels of power. The conversos were not strangers 
to such conflicts. Marquez Villanueva writes very lucidly on this point: 
"The clan spirit of the converso cliques impelled the ascent, in the face 
of all opposition, of their diverse members through tactics as efficacious 
as they were rancorous and, in the long run, prejudicial against those 
who employed them." 23 

The "clan spirit" dominated political relations, and all pertinent obli- 
gations were derived from it. Given that the attained occupation or post 
was not an individual achievement but rather a triumph in which the 
clan played the main role, this same clan could also impose its own inter- 
nal needs, the two most important being the "cession" by the individual 
of the office to a third party and the establishment of new ties or obliga- 
tions of patronage. The degree of kinship relations was a well-known 
leverage, in the cession of sinecures or municipal offices and in the per- 
sistent interest in seeking the "protection" of a powerful house. 24 

Let us summarize: blood ties and kinship bonds, whatever their extent 
and degree of intensity, wove a tight network of interests and solidarities 
throughout Iberian society with hardly any individual exceptions. Such 
were the basic principles of social structures. The conversos followed the 
same system as the majority group, but their circumstances obliged them 
to reinforce it. The mere fact of belonging to an ethnic minority was in 
itself a segregating factor, aggravated besides by harsh religious repres- 
sion; all of this thrust the conversos to the margins of the system. Inter- 
nal cohesion thus became the sole essential condition for survival. At 



Copyrighted material 



138 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



the end of the fifteenth century, when the recently created Inquisition 
penetrated straight to the heart of the cryptic communities, they had still 
not found a better solution in their defense than to practice a closed 
endogamy. Mixed marriages (between Judaizing conversos and Old 
Christians) were not very frequent, and although there were exceptions, 
nuptials within the Judaizing group were always the norm. 

This endogamous practice established networks of solidarity among 
most members of a community, and, by extension, it created connections 
with other small local communities to the point where, at the end of the 
fifteenth century, almost all communities were affected. The constant 
references to relatives and friends which abound in the procedural 
documents of the Holy Office indicate the extent to which the bonds of 
solidarity were extended far beyond the more precise limits of blood ties. 
Ethnic ties, family connections, and religious fellowship formed the de- 
fenses that guaranteed survival. Heim Beinart discovered a similar situ- 
ation in Ciudad Real around 1480, which he describes in these terms: 
"At the end of two or three generations, [the conversos of Ciudad Real] 
had become one big family whose members were as powerful as ever." 25 

Obviously, a system structured in such a way could not be perfect. Its 
coherence was not totally guaranteed because it ultimately depended 
upon the degree of individual and social adhesion. Blind loyalty could 
not be counted upon, and the existing adhesions are explained by the 
subtle results and the dialectical play that were developed internally 
in consequence of the group's needs, expectations, and gratifications. 
The complexity of these relationships inevitably created frustrations — 
implicit or explicit — affecting either the individual or the group and 
constituting the breaches through which the repressive mechanisms of 
the majority were able to penetrate the interior of the community. The 
principal mission of the cryptic authorities was to prevent this from hap- 
pening, giving warning and appealing urgently and anxiously to the 
community's internal solidarity. Their principal task was to avert the 
destructive effect of the talebearer. The Judaizers of many small com- 
munities had already experienced the devastating consequences brought 
about by the tribunal. The same thing always took place: the inquisitors 
penetrated through the breaches left open by private dissatisfactions. 
When this misfortune occurred, solidarity, which had been attained with 
such difficulty, was destroyed. 26 

The danger of intrusion was difficult to avoid given the constant fear 
one lived in: "They always live uneasily and in fear of the harsh Inquisi- 
tion," wrote Levi de Barrios. 27 Even during the periods of minor repres- 
sion, security was not guaranteed. Clandestinity and secrecy imposed a 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



139 



tense and harsh way of life. The crypto-Jew not only had to protect him- 
self from the "raids" of the tribunal but was also severely censured by 
many former compatriots who, now safely practicing Judaism in some 
foreign community, bitterly criticized the crypto-Jew's reluctance to flee, 
as they themselves had, in search of a safe port. Abandoning home and 
business, they had fled from idolatry in order to live the religious tenets 
of their faith. 28 The effects of their criticism on the crypto-Jew were thus 
very important, given the moral authority that such criticism wielded. 

It was difficult to live in a state of permanent internal exile; the need 
to leave the ghetto and participate in some way in the public arena 
was urgently felt, even when it entailed adopting a false identity. While 
dangerous, crossing into the hostile exterior of the majority could also 
alleviate the seriously conflictive tensions that accumulated within the 
interior. Permanently forced to live a double life, the cryptic community 
paid dearly for its inherently deficient structure. A progressive loss of 
cultural patrimony, an increasing weakening of religious devotion, 29 and 
also the overwhelming presence of the majority weighing down force- 
fully upon any minority cultural spirit were to blame for the grave de- 
terioration which the community inevitably suffered. 30 

It was necessary to counteract these deficiencies through compensa- 
tory means, which were not only helpful to the individual but provided 
bonds of solidarity for the group. One of these means was the economic 
influence held by the community as a whole, especially during the six- 
teenth and seventeenth centuries. 

We should, however, first consider some specific issues regarding the 
Jew's so-called aptitude for accumulating wealth. Like all generaliza- 
tions, this is a simplistic distortion of historical reality. It is no longer pos- 
sible to maintain that economic prosperity prevailed in all the Judaizing 
communities on the peninsula; examples proving the opposite abound 
everywhere, in Iberia as elsewhere. Need it be stated that neither the 
Jews nor the conversos constitute, in themselves, a specific social group 
in the production of capital of the period? One can easily demonstrate 
the presence of Hebrew blood, Jewish or converted, on each and every 
one of the rungs of the social ladder. Wealth is not a patrimony derived 
from ethnicity or beliefs. To affirm the opposite is to assume as true the 
classic typical anti-Semitic argument which endeavors to make a totality 
out of what can be no more than a partial reflection of reality. The strat- 
egy of stereotyping, 31 as we already know, consists of assimilating a par- 
tial reality (some conversos were wealthy) into a fictitious totality (all 
conversos were wealthy). 

By affirming these basic principles, the historian does not obscure 



Copyrighted material 



140 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



reality: a minority of judeocon versos had amassed substantial patrimo- 
nies and risen to the highest levels of social prestige. Jewish men played 
crucial roles in the world of commerce, in business, and in government. 32 
Although their participation in such activities assumes far more impor- 
tance if we compare it with their numerical insignificance, it is also true 
that their contemporaries' view of this problem was biased, because of 
the perpetually distorting effects of official propaganda. But when it was 
said, for example, that "the pulse of commerce is sustained only by the 
merchants of the Hebrew caste," 33 we should understand that such a 
judgment, while not totally accurate, did not convey a completely dis- 
torted image of reality. The so-called "businessmen" of the seventeenth 
century were made up of a contained group of wealthy conversos prin- 
cipally in Portugal. 

The people were not too misguided when, humiliated by their pov- 
erty, they observed, in contrast, how wealth overflowed the homes of 
some New Christians. While it would be absurd to deny this fact, it has 
not been possible to measure its entire extent and significance, nor is 
this the moment to do so. 

Nonetheless, we must ask what the reasons were for this acknowl- 
edged economic success. There is no single or direct answer, but an 
objective reading of Inquisition documents discloses several basic causes, 
one of which is the organic solidity of the kinship ties. This relation was 
pointed out above, as was the fact that even though research is scarce, 
some has been carried out. 

In his study of the Bocarro-Frances family, 34 Revah furnished proof 
of the connections between its kinship ties and the commercial enter- 
prises the family sustained. This is not the only example; in his in- 
vestigation of the Sephardic communities of Hamburg and Altona, 
Kellembez 35 patiently worked out the complex networks of commercial 
contracts uniting them among themselves and with the conversos from 
the interior of the Iberian peninsula. This splendid work outlines a 
complex variety of commercial formulas structured and guided by the 
imperatives of kinship. Kellembez demonstrated with precise genealog- 
ical data that these well-known commercial ventures, expanded across 
oceans and characterizing the rise of early capitalism in the seventeenth 
century, were built upon the permanence of blood and kinship through 
marriage. Located throughout the commercial routes that linked other 
continents to Europe, many Jewish families maintained permanent com- 
mercial ties made possible only through kinship or affinity. 

New Christians from Portugal and Castilian crypto-Jews who traded 
wool, for example, maintained close relations that merged together fam- 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



141 



ily and business. The Judaizing conversos of the interior and Jews who 
had fled to the exterior organized commercial societies that at times 
extended to the coastal boundaries under family protection. Neither 
dispersion nor distance presented any kind of obstacle to families and 
businesses; on the contrary, the strength of the blood ties conferred 
fundamental advantages on such risky ventures. 36 

Commerce, whether domestic or destined for the great overseas 
routes, was the speculative activity par excellence. The most prosperous 
fortunes were based not on production, but on trade. The secret of a 
successful business lay in knowing how to exploit the price differential 
which a particular commodity could generate on its round through 
diverse markets. The merchant in charge of buying or selling required 
specialized agents, located in each and every one of the markets on the 
circuit. He needed to gain the trust of these agents. For this reason, the 
most suitable partner or employee either was a relative or belonged to 
the same lineage. Commerce functioned through strong ties of internal 
solidarity, and such "securities" constituted an essential condition for 
its development. This is not very difficult to document; we need only 
list the great fortunes originating in the Portuguese community of Am- 
sterdam. The commercial emporia of Abraham Pereira, of Duarte Fer- 
nandez, and of Jeronimo Nunes da Costa reveal a hierarchical family 
organization, with each member of the family assigned a specific task. 

Let us summarize: there is no doubt that the history of the crypto- 
Jews of the Iberian peninsula demands new approaches in order to 
reveal the fundamental components of the life of this minority interior- 
ized by their own clandestinity. We need to ask how cryptic families 
functioned. Yet this is only part of the problem. It would be too simplis- 
tic to convey the impression of a strong, solid, socially and culturally 
cohesive minority deriving those characteristics solely from its secret 
religion, without mentioning that, together with its integrating tenden- 
cies, the minority also experienced disintegrative factors and opposing 
tendencies. 

If the study of the interiority of the crypto-Jews is suggestive and 
attractive, their external profile, their social life, is as much if not more 
so. In public the judeoconverso was an ordinary sort with no distinguish- 
ing characteristics. Like any other individual, he formed part of the com- 
plex mesh of social relations; he acted within the framework of duties 
and privileges inherent in a hierarchical society. He also shared in the 
consciousness that defined, socially, economically, and ideologically, the 
social group to which he belonged. The judeoconverso, upon leaving 
the "ghetto," could not avoid entering the corporate structures that 



Copyrighted material 



142 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



regulated everyday life. He belonged to guilds and confraternities and 
participated as well in the factions so frequent at the time. In each and 
every one of these, the importance of dual loyalty systems (bonds be- 
tween two people which provide protection and benefit) took prece- 
dence over every other form of horizontal relationship. This primary 
system functioned throughout the entire social pyramid, weaving dense 
social networks, made hierarchical and vertical according to a set of 
rights and obligations that were unwritten but were always effective. The 
society as a whole was formed by a complex graded network of dual 
relationships that ascended to the apex of the pyramid, the position held 
by the nobility, the great protector and recipient of diverse loyalties. 37 

The patronage system thus defines relations of dependence whose 
essential cohesive elements are kinship and lineage. The crypto-Jew was 
no exception to the "patron-client" relationship. When, from the secret 
recess of his private life, the Judaizer went out into the world, he did so 
in obeisance to his noble patron and, like so many others, expected his 
protection in return. Whatever vantage point on the social pyramid we 
assume, the spectacle of a society "under patronage" is the same. The 
judeoconverso behaved the same way as any other individual. At court 
they depended upon this or that patron; Rodrigo Mendez Silva, for 

example, belonged to the Cortizo clan, which was very close to the 
Conde-Duque de Olivares. 38 The great physician and philosopher who 
fled from the Venetian ghetto, Fernando Cardoso, found himself "pro- 
tected" by another illustrious Spanish personage: don Juan Alonso En- 
n'quez de Cabrera, duke of Medina de Rioseco and admiral of Castile. 39 
These are two examples of very well-known people, but there are many 
other unknown participants in the same system. To learn about these 
social mechanisms and to study the intricate network of interests is, 
ultimately, our essential objective. 

NOTES 

1. Heim Beinart, Los conversos ante el Tribunal de la Inquisition (Madrid: 
Riopiedras, 1983), 268. 

2. Julio Caro Baroja, Los judios en la Espana moderna y contempordnea, 2d ed., 
(Madrid: Istmo, 1978), 1:453. 

3. Y. H. Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto: Isaac Cardoso: A Study 
in Seventeenth-Century Marranism and Jewish Apologetics (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1971; reprint, Seattle and London: University of Washington 
Press, 1981), 23: "Let us recognize at the outset that few phenomena can be 
more elusive of historical scrutiny than a secret religion whose subterranean life 
has been documented largely by its antagonists." 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



143 



4. I. Revah, "Les marranes," Revue des etudes juives 118 (1959-60): 30-77. 
P. 55: "In reality, as the great Portuguese writer Joao de Barros would have seen, 
in 1531-1532 the 'Judaism' of the marranos was in essence a potential Judaism 
which the entrance into a Jewish community most frequently transformed into 
real Judaism." 

5. On immigration, see C. Roth, Los judios secretos. Historia de los marranos 
(Madrid: Altalena, 1979), chaps. 8 and 9. H. C. Lea, Historia de la Inquisicion Es- 
panola (Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Espanola, 1983), see vol. 3, chap. 1. 

6. "Paraphrasing Professor Revah's statement, it is perhaps even more fun- 
damental to recognize that, even before he began to Judaize, every New Chris- 
tian was a potential marrano." Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto, 

39- 

7. On these issues, see Americo Castro, De la edad conflictiva: Crisis de la cultura 
espanola en els. XVII (Madrid: Taurus, 1976), 47-137; J- A. Maravall, Poder, honor 
y elites en el s. XVII (Madrid, 1979); J. A. Maravall, "La funcion del honor en la 
sociedad tradicional," Ideologies and Literature 7 (1979): 9-27; C. Chauchadis, 
Honneur, morale et societe dans VEspagne de Philippe II (Paris: CNRS, 1984): 163- 
182. 

8. Maravall, Poder, 41-61. 

9. Quevedo, Obra poetica, ed. J. M. Blecua (Madrid: Castalia, 1969), 1:213, 
quoted in Castro, De la edad conflictiva, 25. 

10. Solange Alberro, "La gran conspiration judeo-conversos en Mexico, 
1642-1650" (These d'Etat, Universite Toulouse-Le Mirail, 1985). 

1 1. Albert A. Sicroff, Los estatutos de limpieza de sangre. Controversias entre los 
siglos XV y XVII (Madrid: Taurus, 1979), 26: "Oppressed by the Purity of Blood 
statutes, the judeocristianos discovered with more intensity their identity as an 
equivocal element of Spanish life." 

12. Chauchadis, Honneur, morale et societe, 219. 

13. H. Mechoulan, Hispanidad y judatsmo en tiempos de Espinoza: Estudio y edi- 
cidn anotada de "La Certeza del Camino" de Abraham Pereyra, Amsterdam, 1666 
(Salamanca, Universidad de Salamanca, 1987), 33: "There is no doubt that the 
Jews who had recently arrived in Amsterdam took thorough advantage of the 
fact that the Republic of the United Provinces accepted them with open arms, 
against Spain's commercial interests." 

14. Quoted in Castro, De la edad conflictiva, 143. 

15. A Bernaldez, Memorias del reinado de los Reyes Catolicos, ed. M. Gomez- 
Moreno and M. Carriazo (Madrid: Casa, 1962). 

16. D. Swetschinski, "The Portuguese Jewish Merchants of Seventeenth- 
Century Amsterdam: A Social Profile" (Ph.D. diss., Brandeis University, 1979), 
334-336- 

17. K. R. Scholberg, "Miguel de Barrios and the Sephardic Community," 
Jewish Quarterly Review 53, no. 2 (1962). 

18. I. Revah, "Une famille de 'nouveaux-cretiens': Les Bocarro-Frances," 
Revue des etudes juives, n.s. 16 (116) (1957): 73-87. 



Copyrighted material 



144 



JAIME CONTRERAS 



19. V. Perez Moreda, "Matrimonio y familia: Algunas consideraciones sobre 
el modelo matrimonial espanol en la edad moderna," Boletin de la Asociacion de 
Demografia Histdrica (Madrid) 4, no. 1 (March 1985): 3-51. 

20. J. Casey et al., La familia en la Espana mediterrdnea (siglos XV— XIX) (Bar- 
celona: Centre d'etudis d'Historia Moderna "Pierre Vilar," 1987), 13-35. 

2 1 . Although the scarcity of studies on the internal components of the cryptic 
organizations is evident, an exception such as the works of B. Vincent, which 
are especially relevant, deserves mention. Of particular interest is his essay "Los 
elementos de solidaridad en el seno de la minon'a morisca" in his Andalucxa en 
la edad moderna (Granada: Ediciones de la Universidad de Granada, 1985), 203- 
214. 

22. F. Marquez Villanueva, "Conversos y Cargos Consejiles en el siglo XV," 
Revista de Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos 7, LXIII (1957): 506. 

23. Marquez Villanueva, "Conversos y cargos," 506. 

24. J. Contreras, "Criptojudaismo en la Espana moderna: Clientelismo y 
linaje," Areas (Universidad de Murcia, 1989): 46-89. 

25. Beinart, Los conversos ante el Tribunal, 268. 

26. In this respect the study which I am carrying out at the present time of 
two Judaizing communities in Extremadura (Albuquerque) and Murcia, which 
were dispersed during the decade of the 1560s, is particularly interesting. 

27. D. Levi de Barrios, Triunfo del Gobierno Popular en la Casa Jacob (Amster- 
dam, 1684), 25, quoted in H. Mechoulan, Hispanidad y judaismo, 35. 

28. Abraham Pereyra, La Certeza del Camino (Amsterdam, 1666), in Mechou- 
lan, Hispanidad, 286. The author mercilessly criticizes the Judaizer who, carried 
away by his avarice, does not flee Spain to go abroad: "The other, wrapped up 
in his honors and misfortunes and unhappinesses, the greatness in which he 
found himself did not guide him to the love of the Blessed Father whom he 
should know, nor to the fear of the Inquisition because, being nothing but an 
idolater, committing major offenses before God, he judged himself free." 

29. Revah, "Les marranes," 54—56. 

30. On this issue, see I. Revah, Spinoza et le Dr. Juan de Prado (Paris and The 
Hague: Mouton, 1959), 13—205 and Uriel da Costa, Espejo de una vida humana 
(exemplar humanae vitae), ed. Gabriel Albiac (Madrid: Editorial Hiperion, 1985), 
37-40. 

31. J. M. Monsalvo Anton, Teoria y evolucion de un conflicto social. El anti- 
semitismo en la corona de Castilla en la baja edad media (Madrid: Siglo XXI, 1985), 
107-134. 

32. A. Dominguez Ortiz, Politica y hacienda de Felipe IV (Madrid: Derecho 
Financiero, i960), 127—141. 

33. D. Gomez Solis, Discursos sobre los comercios de las dos lndias, [1622], ed. 
Moise Bensabat Amzalak (Lisbon, 1943), 20. 

34. I. Revah, "Une famille de 'nouveaux-chretiens': Les Bocarro-Frances," 
Revue des etudes juives, no. 5, 16 (1957): 73-87. 

35. H. Kellembez, Sephardim an der Unteren Elbe: Ihre wirtschaftliche und poli- 



Copyrighted material 



FAMILY AND PATRONAGE 



145 



tische Bedeutung von Ende des 16. bis zum Beginn des 18. Jahrhunderts (Wiesba- 
den, 1958), cited in Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto, 17, n. 24. 

36. D. Swetschinski, The Portuguese Jewish Merchants of Seventeenth Century 
Amsterdam: A Social Profile (London University Microfilms International: 1979) 
135-326, describes commercial societies "which integrated them within a vast 
network which included the Philippines, the European countries, the American 
colonies, and the Af rican coasts . . ." 

37. On this issue, see W. S. Maltby, El gran duque de Alba (un siglo de Espana 
y de Europa, 1507-1582) (Madrid: Turner, 1985), 36 and 595. 

38. B. Loupias, "Recherche sur la vie, la culture et les oeuvres de Rodrigo 
Mendez Silva" (These d'Etat, Paris, 1969). 

39. "By 1632, as we shall see, he was enjoying the patronage of the most 
august of the Spanish grandees, D. Juan Alonso Enriquez de Cabrera, the 
Admiral of Castille." Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto, 95. 



Copyrighted material 



EIGHT 



The Jew as Witch: Displaced 
Aggression and the Myth of the 
Santo Nino de La Guardia 

Stephen Haliczer 



From the perspective of the social historian, one of the greatest successes 
achieved by Habsburg Spain was its ability to avoid, in large measure, 
the massive witch-hunts that swept over most of the rest of Christian 
Europe during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Historians have 
generally ascribed to the Inquisition much of the credit for this achieve- 
ment. As a highly respected institution with well-established jurisdiction 
over matters of heresy or other threats to the Catholic faith, the Inquisi- 
tion was in a position to set the tone for the entire Spanish legal sys- 
tem regarding such offenses. Although the Holy Office never attained 
complete control over crimes involving witchcraft, its skeptical attitude 
toward much of the evidence produced in these trials, and its well- 
advertised role in ending the Navarre witch panic of 1609—1612 pro- 
foundly influenced the entire climate of public and learned opinion in 
ways that tended to discourage witch-hunting on a massive scale. 

In most respects, however, early modern Spain was little different 
from other contemporary societies since it housed the same kind and 
degree of social and economic pressures that engendered witchcraft ac- 
cusations elsewhere. Spain shared with other countries, for example, the 
stereotypical image of women as being morally and intellectually weaker 
than men and, as a result, more likely to be vulnerable to the temptations 
of the Devil. 1 Moreover, apart from the reassurance in matters of reli- 
gion offered by the fact of the Inquisition's existence, early modern 
Spaniards experienced the same anxieties and insecurities as their con- 
temporaries in France or Germany and were, therefore, equally con- 
cerned about the threat from supernatural forces to their everyday life. 

146 



Copyrighted material 



THE JEW AS WITCH 



147 



For its part, the Inquisition's attitude toward witchcraft accusations 
can hardly be attributed to any enlightened rationalist negation of the 
power of the Devil. As late as 1631, seventeen years after Alonso de 
Salazar Frias's celebrated Seventh Report to the Inquisitor General, Gas- 
par Navarro published his Tribunal de la supersticion ladina, in which he 
explicitly accepted the reality of diabolical pacts, maleficia and the 
witch's sabbath and called for exemplary punishment of witches. The 
work frequently quoted from the famous Malleus Maleficarum in support 
of its arguments and carried with it the warm endorsement of Dr. Bal- 
tasar de Cisneros, inquisitorial cualificador of the Zaragoza tribunal. 2 

The Spanish rulers of the period were themselves haunted by the 
threat of foreign aggression and internal subversion, an atmosphere 
hardly conducive to calm in the face of the witch craze. One of these 
rulers, Charles II, was himself the reputed victim of witchcraft perpe- 
trated by the royal confessor Froilan Diaz. In the Franche-Comte, 
Luxembourg, and other parts of the Spanish Netherlands, the govern- 
ments of Philip II, III, and IV strongly encouraged the persecution of 
witches and in Luxembourg alone there were 355 executions between 
1606 and 1650. 3 

Given the fact that the Inquisition never had complete control over 
these cases, its increasing concern for the niceties of legal procedure 
alone could hardly have prevented a witch craze. Indeed this is amply 
demonstrated by the situation in Navarre in 1610-1612 where local jus- 
tices aided by certain parish priests carried out the initial arrests, tor- 
tured suspects unmercifully, and extorted confessions which were then 
eagerly and uncritically accepted by the inquisitors on the spot. 4 

Under sixteenth- and seventeenth-century social conditions, there- 
fore, the only thing that could account for Spain's relative inactivity in 
the face of the European witch craze was the presence in that country 
of another target of displaced aggression, a target so firmly identified 
in the public mind with all that was evil and pernicious that it could read- 
ily substitute for the witch as the ultimate source of social evil. 

During the fourteenth century, with the breakdown of the old toler- 
ation that had permitted Christian, Jew, and Moslem to live side by side 
in relative harmony, the Jew became more and more identified as the 
chief enemy of Christianity. By the time of the Cortes of Toro in 1371, 
the Jews were described as "rash and evil men, who sow corruption with 
impunity so that the greater part of our kingdom is ruined by them in 
contempt of Christians and the Catholic faith." 5 Ironically, this descrip- 
tion came at a time when the Jewish communities had suffered griev- 



Copyrighted material 



148 



STEPHEN HALICZER 



ously during the recently concluded civil war between Pedro I and his 
half brother Henry of Trastamara. 

By the 1380s the weakened condition of the Jewish communities 
and the relativistic philosophy then popular among Jewish intellectuals 
were producing numerous conversions. 6 After the rioting of 1391, Jews 
converted en masse, led by their rabbis, and from then on Spain's Jewish 
communities became smaller and more impoverished while the con- 
verted Jews grew in numbers, wealth, and political importance. By the 
middle of the fifteenth century, however, resentment of the conversos 
was giving rise to a polemical literature that rejected the possibility of 
their true conversion to Christianity and blamed them for all the crimes 
normally attributed to Jews. The most interesting and important of 
these writings was the Fortalitium Fidei (Fortress of the Faith) by the 
Franciscan Alonso de Espina, first published in 1460. The work is di- 
vided into four volumes, each dedicated to describing the iniquity of one 
of the four chief enemies of the Catholic faith: heretics, Muslims, Jews, 
and demons. For Espina, Jews and converts did not exist as a separate 
category; there were only "public Jews and secret Jews." Since conversos 
were secret Jews, they were naturally guilty of all the offenses tradition- 
ally attributed to Jews by European folk tradition, including profanation 
of Hosts and the murder of Christian children and the use of their blood 
or body parts in religious rituals. According to Espina, Jewish law, which 
is equally binding on both Jews and converts, commands the destruction 
of Christians and Christianity, which they actively strive to accomplish 
by starting fires, poisoning wells, and doing other evil deeds. 7 

It was left to the Spanish Inquisition, however, to officialize medieval 
demonological myths about Jews and apply them to Jewish converts to 
Christianity in such a way as to keep alive the flames of Spanish anti- 
Semitism long after the expulsion of the Jews themselves. This process 
began with the case of the so-called Holy Child (Santo Nino) of La 
Guardia when both Jews and converts were accused of working together 
to commit a crime of unimaginable horror which threatened the very 
existence of Christian Spain. So successful were the inquisitors in this 
that the La Guardia case served to create in the public imagination a 
kind of bogyman, a larger-than-life image of the Jew/converso who was 
at once child murderer, blood sucker, rebel, and demonic sorcerer who 
sought to reverse the divinely established order of things by destroy- 
ing Christianity so that, according to Licenciado Vegas, the Holy Child's 
first chronicler, the Jews "would become the absolute lords of the 
earth." 8 It was this bogyman who provided the Spanish masses with an 
ideal object of displaced aggression capable of absorbing the sadomaso- 



Copyrighted material 



THE JEW AS WITCH 



149 



chistic fantasies and infanticidal impulses that provided the psychologi- 
cal force behind the witchcraft panics in other parts of Europe. 

The complexity and sophistication of the Santo Nino legend stands 
out remarkably when it is compared to the closest contemporary ritual 
murder accusation of which we have a record: the case of Simon of 
Trent. This case, which began before Trent's podesta in 1475 and con- 
cluded in 1478, involved two elements that were traditionally a part of 
such accusations: extraction of blood for use in Jewish Passover rituals 
and the grotesque reenactment of the crucifixion of Christ in order to 
mock Christianity itself. 9 

Of these two elements, however, it was the use of the child's blood 
for ritual purposes that clearly predominated while the elements related 
to the mockery of the Passion and of Christians in general were weaker 
and clearly of secondary importance. Again and again, the podesta, 
whose earlier prejudices had been confirmed when a convert assured 
him that his own father had quaffed glasses of wine mixed with blood 
on Passover, forced his Jewish victims to enumerate the various ways in 
which they and their coreligionists used the blood of Christian children. 
Faithful to the traditions of the medieval ritual murder accusation, 
Samuel and Tobia, two of the most important defendants, admitted 
after repeated torture that they drank wine mixed with blood at Pass- 
over and they also sprinkled blood on the dough used to make the ritual 
matzos. 10 The court was also told that Christian blood was routinely fed 
to pregnant Jewesses so that their babies would be born fat and healthy." 
In a clear reference to Christian fears about the use by Jews of Calamus 
Draco, the dark or blood-red gum of a species of palm, to relieve pain 
after circumcision, the Trent Jews were also forced to admit that they 
applied wine mixed with blood to the circumcision wound. 12 

Of course the truth, the fact that Judaism categorically prohibits its 
adherents from consuming blood as in Leviticus 17:11-13, did have a 
way of coming out in proceedings of this nature, and the case of Simon 
of Trent was no exception. At one point, the podesta asked Mose, one 
of the defendants, very directly why Jews drank Christian blood when 
their own law prohibits the consumption of blood in any form. Mose's 
reply neatly disposed of this issue, however, when he declared that the 
law applied only to the blood of animals and not to the blood of Chris- 
tian children, which is consumed to show disdain for Christianity. After 
another session in the torture chamber, Mose even stated that leading 
rabbinical authorities had openly declared that it was no sin to consume 
the blood of Christians. In this way, through careful stage-management 
and the liberal application of torture, the podesta's potentially embar- 



Copyrighted material 



150 



STEPHEN HALICZER 



rassing question was turned into yet another way of adding to the trial 
record more "evidence" of the Jews' insatiable thirst for blood. 13 

Consistent with the emphasis placed on the ritual use of blood by Jews 
rather than the reenactment of Christ's Passion, the wounds allegedly 
inflicted on the hapless Simon seem almost haphazard rather than de- 
signed to imitate those inflicted on Christ. Simon's cheeks were torn 
with pincers, his body stuck with pins in many places and then the 
pincers were used to inflict a wound on his shins from which blood was 
collected. 14 

In contrast with the vivid imagery invoked to describe the collection 
and ritual use of Christian blood, the testimony that was forced out of 
the accused relating to their mockery of Christ's Passion seems strained 
and unnatural, almost as though the judges themselves were less than 
convinced of its centrality to the case. In the first place, although Simon 
was allegedly crucified, this was almost an afterthought since he received 
most of his wounds before his arms were extended to form a cross and 
he died shortly thereafter. 15 Furthermore, the description of the actual 
mockery of Simon's body is clumsy and childlike; the Jews were even 
made to testify that they had stuck their tongues out and shown their 
bare buttocks to the corpse. 16 

The case of the Santo Nino de La Guardia involved six Jews and 
five conversos from the villages of La Guardia and Tembleque near 
Toledo and was tried between December 1490 and 16 November 1491, 
when the accused were burned at the stake. From its very inception, the 
trial unfolded in an atmosphere of intense anti-Semitism stirred up by 
the Inquisition's tremendous wave of prosecution against the converted 
Jews of the Toledo region beginning in i486. Surprisingly enough, 
however, the case was not brought before the Toledo tribunal. Instead, 
it was heard by a special inquisitorial court convened under the watch- 
ful eye of Inquisitor General Tomas de Torquemada in the monastery 
which he himself had founded with money confiscated from the con- 
verted Jewish victims of the Holy Office: Santo Tomas of Avila. 17 

In the trial record, the blood libel itself represents only a minor 
chord in a complex variety of charges. Of course blood was allegedly 
drawn from the child's body and collected in an earthenware jug, but it 
was removed by Lope Franco, one of the accused, after the child was 
brought out for burial. Apart from this, the case omits any mention of 
the elements that normally comprised the blood libel and which figure 
so prominently in the Simon of Trent legend. Rather than concentrating 
on the ritual use of Christian blood by Jews, the case of the Santo Nino 
brings together a series of charges that are most often separated in 



Copyrighted material 



THE JEW AS WITCH 



151 



medieval anti-Semitic folk tradition. The affair of the Santo Nino was 
alleged to have begun as a Jewish plot to use black magic in order to 
destroy first the inquisitors and then all Christians. According to the con- 
fused and often contradictory testimony that was extorted from Yuce 
Franco, one of the tribunals' Jewish prisoners, this plot started as early 
as 1487 and involved the employment of Rabbi Abenamias, a master 
magician, living in Zamora. 18 Abenamias was to be responsible for cast- 
ing an evil spell using a heart torn from the body of a Christian child 
and a consecrated Host, both of which would be obtained for him by 
the accused. 19 

Furthermore, the plotters were alleged to have gone to great lengths 
in order to imitate Christ's Passion down to the smallest detail. On 
24 September 1491, Benito Garcia, one of the hapless conversos, was 
accused of having carried the child to a cave near La Guardia where he 
had been nailed to a wooden cross, lashed repeatedly, and a crown of 
thorns placed on his head. 20 While the child was being beaten, his sup- 
posed torturers recited curses designed to mock Christ for whom the 
child was a substitute. Among other things, Christ was called a "traitor 
and deceiver who had preached lies against the Jewish faith," an "evil 
sorcerer who had sought to destroy the Jews and Judaism," and the "bas- 
tard son of a perverse and adulterous woman." 21 In this way, out of the 
pain and torment inflicted on their Jewish and converso victims, Avila's 
special inquisitors had managed to concoct an extraordinarily suggestive 
myth which lent itself easily to being further elaborated and made more 
horrifying by later authors. 

We can see how this process began in the very first known account 
of the case, the Memoria muy verdadera de la pasion y martirio, que el glorioso 
martir, inocente nino llamado Cristobal, padescio . . . en esta villa de la guardia, 
written in 1544 by Licenciado Vegas, the apostolic notary of the village. 
In the Memoria verdadera the vague plot to destroy Christians through 
enchantment is assimilated to the tradition of Jewish poisoners that had 
cost so many innocent lives during the Black Death and other periods 
of unexplained epidemics. Drawing upon a French folktale from some 
time after the Black Death, Vegas makes the story of the Santo Nino 
begin in France with the frustrated attempt by several of the individ- 
uals involved in the case or their ancestors to poison the wells there 
with a magic powder made from the heart of a Christian child and a 
consecrated Host. They were successful in obtaining the Host but were 
thwarted in their efforts to secure the heart of a Christian child and were 
tricked into accepting a pig's heart instead. 22 Of course the maleficia that 
they were planning failed, but somehow these Jews or their descendants 



Copyrighted material 



152 



STEPHEN HALICZER 



found their way down to Castile, converted nominally to Christianity, 
and chose La Guardia as the ideal spot to try their enchantment because 
of its allegedly close resemblance to Jerusalem. But this time, instead of 
relying on the impoverished parents of the child to murder him and 
supply his heart as they had done in France, they determined to kidnap 
a child (whose name turned out to be Christobalico) and cut his heart 
out themselves after carrying out a mock crucifixion. 23 

It is in describing this crucifixion that Vegas gives free reign to his 
imagination, transforming the meager details contained in the tribunal's 
final sentence into a richly detailed imitation of Christ's entire Passion 
as suffered by the child martyr. According to Vegas's perfervid account, 
little Christobalico was first forced to carry a heavy cross up the hill to 
the cave where he was to be crucified. Before he was crucified he was 
given no less than 6,200 lashes, although we are told that the child in- 
formed his tormentors that only the last one thousand really hurt be- 
cause they were more than Christ himself received. 24 

Vegas's account, which must have circulated widely in Toledo since 
it was copied by the converso Sebastian de Horozco (1510-1581), was 
incorporated into Licenciado Sebastian de Nieva Calvos's El nino ino- 
cente; hijo de Toledo y martyr en La Guardia. It is in this work, published 
in 1628, where the Jew/witch connection is made quite explicit. Jews and 
conversos involved in the Santo Nino affair are depicted as fiendish, 
physically repellent creatures acting with the support of the devil to 
carry out his purposes in the world. Benito Garcia de las Mesuras, for 
example, is described as having an appearance so horrible as to "menace 
with destruction not only some poor innocent but even the most reso- 
lutely defended kingdom." His close associate, Garci Franco, had a "de- 
praved expression" and was so ugly that "it would not be strange if he 
were to be the executioner of the wrath of heaven." Franco had such 
an evil reputation in La Guardia that mothers would frighten their noisy 
or disobedient children by threatening them with his appearance. For 
his part, Franco is said to have gloried in the hatred and abhorrence of 
his neighbors, which helped to keep his "vindictive rage against Catho- 
lics" at a fever pitch. 25 Like the witches described by Sprenger and 
Kramer in the Malleus Maleficarum, Benito Garcia, Garci Franco, and 
their companions had made an explicit pact with the Devil, who sought 
their perdition by convincing them that they could destroy using the 
very things with which God gave life to the body and the spirit: the 
human heart and the consecrated Host. 26 

After Vegas's account was published, the myth of the Santo Nino took 
hold of the popular imagination and became the subject of plays by Lope 



Copyrighted material 



THE JEW AS WITCH 



153 



de Vega and Jose de Canizares and sermons by such popular preachers 
as Fray Damian Lopez de Haro (Toledo Cathedral, 1614). Little Chris- 
tobalico became a patron saint of La Guardia and his shrine received 
visits from such luminaries as Ferdinand the Catholic, Charles V, and 
Philip II. 27 The case also figured prominently in the anti-Semitic writ- 
ings of the period, including Fray Francisco de Torrejoncillo's fanatical 
Centenella contra los judios, where it served to demonstrate the "intense 
hatred" felt by Jews for Christianity. 28 

By the mid-sixteenth century, however, the story of the Santo Nino 
had become just one element in a pervasive anti-Semitism that was di- 
rected first against the Spanish conversos and later against the Por- 
tuguese New Christians who came to Spain after the union of the two 
crowns in 1580. Thus, in Spain and Portugal anti-Semitism was not just 
a social atavism but had real potential victims who were persecuted and 
discriminated against as much for their racial origins as for their reli- 
gious practices. The infamous limpieza de sangre statutes that required 
genealogical investigations designed to prevent the descendants of Jews 
from entering honorable corporations only really took hold after the 
major centers of Spanish crypto-Judaism had been exterminated. 29 For 
its part, the Inquisition kept popular anti-Semitism at a fever pitch with 
spectacular show trials directed at prominent New Christian financiers 
like Joao Nunes Saraiva and his brother Henrique, who appeared at the 
auto de fe of 1636 in spite of their staunch protestations of fervent 
Roman Catholic belief.™ Spain's Old Christian ruling elite was quick to 
see the hand of the Jew behind any threat to the faith. As early as 1556 
Philip II expressed the view that "all the heresies which have existed in 
Germany and France . . . have been sown by the descendants of Jews." 31 

Interestingly enough, at around the same time that anti-Semitic ordi- 
nances were being passed by more and more Spanish institutions, the 
Spanish Inquisition began staking out a moderate position for itself on 
the witchcraft issue. In 1526, just one year after the Franciscan Order 
adopted a limpieza statute, the Inquisition held an important meeting 
in Granada to discuss its policy toward the witchcraft trials that were be- 
ginning to take place with increasing frequency in northern Spain. After 
careful deliberation, four of the ten inquisitors present, including future 
Inquisitor General Hernando de Valdes, voted that witches only went 
to the Sabbath "in their imagination." Those present at the meeting also 
decided that henceforth witches should be tried by the Holy Office be- 
cause the murders that witches confessed might be mere illusions. 32 

In spite of the lack of unanimity on the issue of the Sabbath, the 1526 
meeting set the tone for the Inquisition's attitude toward witchcraft 



Copyrighted material 



154 



STEPHEN HALICZER 



cases. In 1538, when witches were accused of having caused harvest fail- 
ures and other evils, the local inquisitor was instructed to explain that 
these things are "either sent by God for our sins or are a result of bad 
weather, and that witches should not be suspected." In August 1614, in 
reaction to the Logrono auto de fe of 1610 at which six persons accused 
of witchcraft were burned, the Suprema officially adopted a skeptical 
attitude toward the crimes supposedly committed by witches and em- 
bodied that attitude in a set of instructions meant to guide local inquisi- 
torial tribunals. 33 In fact, the 1614 instructions changed little because, 
with the sole exception of the inquisitors of Logrono in 1609—1610, local 
inquisitors tended to be extremely unwilling to hand down harsh sen- 
tences in cases that would have earned the death penalty in France or 
the Holy Roman Empire during the same period. 34 

By officializing medieval anti-Semitic folk traditions and extending 
them from the Jews to the conversos through a well-publicized show 
trial, the Spanish Inquisition made sure that anti-Semitism and not Scho- 
lastic witch theory would answer the early modern Spaniards' craving 
for an object of social aggression. Moreover, even though France and 
the Holy Roman Empire shared many of the same folk beliefs about 
Jewish iniquity and diabolism, Jews could not provide them with an ef- 
fective object for collective anxiety and frustrations. The Jews of France 
had been expelled in 1394 and, even though the decree was repeated 
in 1615, the sight of Jews was so rare in France that they were regarded 
as an exotic sight when Frenchmen met them while traveling abroad. 35 
In sixteenth- and seventeenth-century France witches and Huguenots 
assumed a "Jewish" role and were widely accused of many of the same 
things of which the Jews had been accused in former times. 36 In the Holy 
Roman Empire most Jews were expelled during the sixteenth century 
and both Catholic and Protestant focused on the witch as an ideal 
scapegoat for social ills. 37 Only Spain and Portugal among the great 
European states of the early modern period could combine theories of 
Jewish diabolism and implacable hatred of the true faith with the actual 
presence on their territories of large numbers of persons of Jewish ori- 
gin. Significantly, serious witch persecution in Spain was mainly con- 
fined to the Basque region, precisely the area that had had least contact 
with Jews in the Middle Ages. For the rest of the country the converted 
Jew substituted for the witch as a pariah, reflecting through antithesis 
and projection society's most ingrained fears and repressed longings. 

Perpetuated in plays, paintings, and histories down to 1955 when 
Ramon Saravia published his El Santo Nino de La Guardia through a 
Catholic press specializing in children's books, the myth of Jewish in- 



Copyrighted material 



THE JEW AS WITCH 



155 



iquity represented by the Santo Nino legend has contributed powerfully 
to that curious Spanish phenomenon: anti-Semitism without Jews. Even 
today, in a Spain increasingly secular, pragmatic, and cosmopolitan, the 
legend of the holy child prowls around like the ghost of past intolerance. 
Christobalico, the holy martyr, remains the patron Saint of La Guardia, 
and the Church, which in the mid-1960s disavowed the Simon of Trent 
blood libel, continues to support and profit financially from the annual 
celebrations that commemorate the creation of the far more dangerous 
anti-Semitic myth of the Santo Nino de La Guardia. 



NOTES 

1. Brian Levak, The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe (New York: Long- 
man, 1987), 126. Women who attempt to make themselves sexually attractive 
are called "ministers of the devil" in Pedro Galindo, Parte segunda del directorio 
de penitentes y practica de una buena y prudente confesion (Madrid: Antonio de Zafra, 
1686), 518. 

2. Gaspar Navarro, Tribunal de la supersticion ladina (Huesca: Pedro Bluson, 
1631) ffs. 52-55V, 56V-57. 

3. Levak, The Witch-Hunt, 180. 

4. Gustav Henningsen, The Witches' Advocate: Basque Witchcraft and the Spanish 
Inquisition (Reno: University of Nevada Press, 1980), 62-70, 108-1 17, 217-220. 

5. Leon Poliakov, The History of Anti-Semitism, 4 vols. (New York: The Van- 
guard Press, 1973), 2:151. 

6. Ibid., 154. 

7. Henry Charles Lea, A History of the Inquisition of Spain, 4 vols. (New York: 
Macmillan, 1906), 1:149-150. 

8. Fidel Fita, "La verdad sobre el martirio del santo nino de la Guardia, o 
sea el proceso y quema (16 noviembrei49i) del judio Juce Franco en Avila," 
Boletin de la Real Academia de la Historia, XI (julio-setiembre, 1887): 135. 

9. Joshua Trachtenberg, The Devil and the Jews (Philadelphia: Jewish Publica- 
tion Society of America, 1983), 130-131. 

10. Guiseppe Divina, Storia del beato Simone de Trento, 2 vols. (Trento: Arti- 
gianelli, 1902), 1:286-287. 

1 1. Ibid., 302. 

12. Trachtenberg, The Devil, 151; Divina, Stotia, 301. 

13. Divina, Storia, 302—303. 

14. Ibid., 231-233. 

15. Ibid., 234. 

16. Ibid., 372, 380. 

17. Fray Juan Lopez, Tercera parte de la historia general del Santo Domingo y de 
su orden de predicadores (Valladolid: Francisco Fernandez de Cordoba, 1613), 
276-277. 



Copyrighted material 



156 



STEPHEN HALICZER 



18. Fita, "La verdad," 52. 

19. Ibid., 65. 

20. Ibid., 55. 

21. Ibid., 104. 

22. Trachtenberg, The Dev il, 145. 

23. Fita, "La verdad," 139. 

24. Ibid., 141. 

25. Sebastian de Nieva Calvo, El niiio inocente; hijo de Toledo y martyr en La 
Guardia (Toledo: Juan Ruiz de Pareda, 1628), 78-79, 83V. 

26. Ibid., 126V-128. 

27. Antonio de Guzman, Historia del inocente trinatario el Santo Nino de la Guar- 
dia (Madrid: Diego Lopez Abad, 1720), 186-188. 

28. Fray Francisco de Torrejoncillo, Centenella contra judios, Fray Diego Gavi- 
lan Vela, trans. (Madrid: Vda. Melchor Alegre, 1680), 132. 

29. Henry Kamen, Inquisition and Society in Spain (Bloomington: Indiana Uni- 
versity Press, 1985), 118-120. 

30. James Boyajain, Portuguese Bankers at the Court of Spain 1626-1650 (New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1983), 118. 

31. Geoffrey Parker, Philip II (London: Hutchinson, 1978), 193. 

32. Kamen, Inquisition and Society, 211. 

33. Ibid., 213-214. 

34. Archivo Historico Nacional, Inquisition, 19 June 1588, libro 937, 74-75V. 

35. Leon Poliakov, The History of Anti-Semitism From the Time of Christ to the 
Court Jews, Richard Howard, trans. (New York: The Vanguard Press, 1976), 174. 

36. Ibid., 189. 

37. H. C. Erik Midelfort, Witch Hunting in Southwestern Germany, 1562-1684 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1972). 



Copyrighted material 



NINE 



On Knowing Other People's Lives, 
Inquisitorially and Artistically 

Joseph H. Silverman 



The epigraph for my essay comes from the play by Lope de Vega, El 
nino inocente de La Guardia. Its words — spoken by a Tew — are a dramatic 
summation of many significant aspects of this conference: 

What King and Queen are these [Ferdinand and 
Isabella] who 

through such chimeric schemes 

— based on secret counsel — 

would send into exile those 

who scarcely offend them? 

What flames are these, rekindled 

from ash by Dominican hordes? 

What new Cross is this, black and white, 

that delights the Catholics so? 

What new mode of scrutiny and 

legal system have we here? 

Why are trials now held in secret? 

Oh, if only Spain had never known such rulers! 

Woe unto us, exiled from our own 

fatherland in such misery! 

The suffering that so long ago was foretold 

has not yet ceased and our 

punishment is unending. 

(Pp. 59-60) 

In an unforgettable moment of epiphanic self-revelation, the squire 
in the anonymous sixteenth-century novel Lazarillo de Tormes confesses 
to his young servant that, if he had a chance to serve a noble master, he 

157 



Copyrighted material 




Fig. 6. Auto de fe by Pedro Berruguete. 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



759 



would — among other virtuous (!) acts — "be malicious, mocking, and a 
trouble-maker, a malsin, among those of the house and outsiders; [he'd] 
go prying and trying to know other people's lives so [he] could tell his master 
about them. And [he'd] do all kinds of other things of this sort which 
are the vogue in palaces today and please the nobility well" (p. 57). As 
Covarrubias informs us in his Tesoro de la lengua, the malsin, a word of 
Hebraic derivation, is "that individual who secretly warns the authori- 
ties of the transgressions of others with evil intention and self-interest, 
and to perform this function is called malsinar" (p. 781b). 

The phrase to know other people's lives in this context, closely allied with 
the activities of the malsin, persuaded me to offer, in 1961, a very nega- 
tive appraisal of the squire, in contrast with Azorin's judgment of him 
as the most noble and worthy in Spanish history. But, more importantly, 
the words saber vidas ajenas, "to know other people's lives" were to be- 
come a signpost in my reading and teaching, which in the early 1950s 
were influenced by the irresistible imperative dimension of the writings 
and person of Americo Castro. And so, over the years, I collected exam- 
ples of the phrase, in its exact form or in words that suggested its mean- 
ing, which inevitably led me to see the aspects of Golden Age literature 
I now want to evoke, basing myself on Mordecai M. Kaplan's premise 
that the full meaning of any text cannot be derived from the contempla- 
tion of the text itself, apart from the social, economic, psychological, and 
intellectual setting to which it belongs. 

Antonio de Guevara, who always seems to be saying more than his 
words denote, even in those commonplace truths and fabulous lies that 
he manipulates between the remote past and his own moment, writes: 

Among the inhabitants of Crete it was customary, even obligatory, not 
to dare ask any visitor from a foreign land who he was, what he wanted, 
and from where he had come, under penalty of being whipped or sent 
into exile. And the purpose involved in promulgating such laws was to rid 
men of the temptation to be curious, that is to say, to want to know other 
people's lives and not pay attention to their own. . . . For what men seem to 
devote most of their time to is asking and investigating what their neigh- 
bors arc doing; what they're involved in, how they support themselves, 
with whom they have dealings, where they go, what places they enter and 
even what they're thinking; because it is not enough that they insist on ask- 
ing, they even presume to guess . . . For this reason Plato said: "Know 
thou, if thou knowest not . . . , that the sum of all our philosophizing is to 
persuade and counsel men that each one should be the judge of his own 
life and not be concerned to scrutinize the lives of others." {Menosprecio, 30—36) 



Copyrighted material 



160 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



It goes without saying — though I'll say it anyway — that despite his refer- 
ence to Plato's "Know thyself" and the realm of philosophy, Guevara is 
really talking about what Francisco Marquez termed "el problema del 
rigor inquisitorial" (p. 350). Elsewhere, becoming more specific about 
the potential danger and destructiveness involved in knowing other 
people's lives, that is, saber vidas ajenas as a weapon of an Inquisition- 
crazed society, he observes that "I have never seen a man insult another 
without prying into the life he was leading, without scrutinizing his 
blood line, [every branch and twig of his genealogical tree] ... or with- 
out disinterring his ancestors" (pp. 375-382). These last remarks appear 
in a letter addressed to a friend who had called recent converts to Chris- 
tianity "dogs, Moors, Jews, and pigs." With even greater force and 
specificity, Guevara writes that 

one solitary blemish will dishonor an entire generation. A stain on the 
lineage of some country bumpkin affects no one beyond him, but a stain 
on an hildalgo's blood affects his entire family, because it sullies the repu- 
tation of his forebears, it serves to disinter his ancestors, it leads to the in- 
vestigation of his living relatives, and it corrupts the blood of those yet to 
be born. (Pp. 441-442) 

Now, Guevara is writing these last words in answer to an Italian gentle- 
man who had sought to implicate Fray Antonio in the disappearance of 
a vial of perfume. But we can hardly believe that this is the kind of of- 
fense that would destroy a family's reputation retrospectively and pro- 
leptically. Guevara's broader and deeper meaning — his condemnation 
of irrational intolerance — is more apparent against the background of 
an earlier remark to his Italian accuser: "I, sir, am determined to pay 
no attention to your insult, nor to respond with anger to your letter, for 
I take much more pride in the religious order I belong to than in the 
pure blood of my ancestors . . ." (p. 440). 

Alonzo de Orozco, in his Victory of Death, proclaims: 

O sinner, you who go lost and wandering through the sea of life! Do you 
want to know why every passion stirs you and draws you after it? The 
reason is that you forget death, because it seems to you that you are im- 
mortal ... In the dead man's house there is the only true philosophy . . . , 
but in the gatherings of the living they speak of other people's lives, and 
not being content to speak ill of the living, they engage in a greater cruelty: 
they disinter the dead, with great offense to God and infamy to those who 
died. (P. 136 n. 7) 

It is scarcely necessary to mention that the dead alluded to here are the 
ancestors of New Christians, or that the disinterring of the dead is an 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



161 



analogue of the inquisitorial practice of exhuming and burning the mor- 
tal remains of discovered secret Jews. In 1580 — as C. R. Boxer has 
noted — the remains of the great pioneer of tropical medicine, Garcia 
d'Orta, "were exhumed and solemnly burned in an auto de fe held at 
Goa, in accordance with the posthumous punishment inflicted on 
crypto-Jews who had escaped the stake in their lifetime" (p. 1 1). For the 
Judeo-Christian Mateo Aleman, those who dug for this kind of informa- 
tion were like hyenas "who nourish themselves on the dead bodies they 
disinter" (1:48). Through the animal imagery Aleman communicated 
what Stephen Gilman called the full horror of inquisitorial dehumaniza- 
tion (p. 179). Juan de Zabaleta observed that "the malicious curiosity of 
men is so penetrating that it perceives blemishes in the bones of those 
who lie buried" (p. 247). And Gracian — writing with aphoristic density — 
recommends that "one should not be in life a book of vital statistics, an 
archive of genealogies and family traditions, for to concern oneself with 
the infamy in other people's lives is usually an indication of one's own 
tainted reputation. . . ." "In such matters," he concludes, "the one who 
digs the deepest will be most covered with mud," for which reason one 
must avoid at all costs "the effort to be a walking registry of others' ig- 
nominy, which is to be, though alive, like a soulless and despised public 
record of the Inquisition's trials and convictions" (p. 85 no. 125). In 
Quevedo's Buscon, don Pablillos's mother is imprisoned by the Inquisi- 
tion of Toledo "because she disinterred corpses," but not because she 
did it in order to know other people's lives or to destroy a reputation 
by discovering some trace of Jewish blood, as an inquisitor in her own 
right, but because, as a witch with tainted blood no less, she literally dis- 
interred freshly buried bodies, so that "in her house were found more 
legs, arms, and heads than in a shrine for miracles" (p. 94). The meaning 
of "to know other people's lives," then, in all these contexts and any 
number of others that could be cited, tells us something about the in- 
quisitorial bent of the world in which Cervantes lived while writing Don 
Quixote, a world in which these words from La Celestina had disastrous 
validity: "When you tell someone your secret, your freedom is gone" 
(p. 57). In Cervantes's Colloquy of the Dogs, Cipion suggests to his friend 
Berganza that they should take turns relating their lives, "because it will 
be better to spend the time in telling their own lives than in delving into 
the lives of others." At another point, while discussing police officers and 
notaries, Cipion observes that not all notaries are corrupt, "for there are 
many notaries who are good, faithful, law-abiding, and eager to please 
without harming anybody; for not all of them extend lawsuits, or advise 
both parties, or pocket more than what they're entitled to; nor do they 



Copyrighted material 



162 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



go searching and prying into other people's lives to put them under sus- 
picion with the law [or the Inquisition]." 

In another vein, but even closer to my subject, are these words spoken 
yet again by Cipion, who knows something about the difficulties of 
finding a decent job: 

The lords of the earth are very different from the Lord of Heaven. The 
former, before they accept a servant, first examine his lineage as if they 
were looking for fleas, then they scrutinize his qualifications and even wish 
to know what clothes he has. But to enter God's service the poorest is the 
richest, the humblest is the man of most exalted lineage, and so long as 
he sets out to serve him with purity of heart [not of blood], God orders 
his name to be written in his wage-book and assigns him such rich rewards 
that in number and excellence they surpass all his desires. 

"All this, friend Cipion, is preaching," says Berganza, and of course it 
is. But it was a sermon that Moorish dogs (perros mows) barked and 
Jewish pigs (marranos judws) squealed, that New Christians and even 
some Old Christians preached, with the hope of achieving in Spain an 
open society, that kind of society which — in the words of the spiritual 
New Christian Henri Bergson — "is deemed in principle to embrace all 
humanity. A dream dreamt, now and again, by chosen souls, it embod- 
ies on every occasion something of itself in creations, each of which, 
through a more or less far-reaching transformation of man, conquers 
difficulties hitherto unconquerable" (p. 251). 

In Hispanic terms it was a Utopian dream that a neutral society might 
awake from the nightmare of history, offering neutral spaces and public 
places where the descendants of Moors, Christians, and Jews might 
mingle civilly and socially, a social system in which differences in culture 
made no difference in society, so that different peoples could survive 
and flourish in and through their differences. But what was to prevail 
in its place was the messianic dream of the Hispano-Christians expressed 
in the words of Hernando de Acuna: "una grey y un pastor, solo en el 
suelo," "One flock and one shepherd, alone on earth." 

Before looking at the positive aspects of knowing other people's lives 
as portrayed in Don Quixote, let me provide a few more examples of the 
oppressive aspects of the phenomenon. Let us hear a brief anecdote that 
appears in two Lope de Vega plays and in the Segunda parte de la vida 
de Lazarillo de Tormes by Juan de Luna. 

In Lope's Mirad a quien alabdis (Look at Whom You're Praising), we 
read: 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



163 



A Jewish swindler and cheat, 

one of those that abound in the world, 

had a pear tree whose fruit 

he praised to one and all. 

Its renown spread so far and wide 

that an official of the Inquisition 

sent a page of his to request 

a bowl of the pears that he had grown. 

The Jew became greatly alarmed 

for, though it was cold weather at the time, 

the slightest fear seemed to set him ablaze 

[recalling, of course, the flames of the 

Inquisition]. So, he put an ax to its trunk 

and when at last he saw it fall, 

in order to have no further cause for fear, 

he sent the tree itself to the Inquisitor. 

(Pp. 420-433) 

Juan de Luna wrote: 

About this point (even though it lies outside of what I am dealing with 
now) I will tell of something that occurred to a farmer from my region. 
It happened that an inquisitor sent for him, to ask for some of his pears, 
which he had been told were absolutely delicious. The poor country fellow 
didn't know what his lordship wanted of him, and it weighed so heavily 
on him that he fell ill until a friend of his told him what was wanted. He 
jumped out of bed, ran to his garden, pulled up the tree by the roots, and 
sent it along with the fruit, saying that he didn't want anything at his house 
that would make his lordship send for him again. People are so afraid 
of them — and not only laborers and the lower classes, but lords and 
grandees — that they all tremble more than leaves on trees when a soft, 
gentle breeze is blowing, when they hear these names: Inquisitor, Inqui- 
sition. (P. 693) 

Finally, in a play of doubtful authenticity, En los indicios la culpa (Evi- 
dence Confirms Guilt), attributed to Lope de Vega, we find the follow- 
ing version of the anecdote: 

There was once an hidalgo 

who had a most fragrant 

orange tree. One day it 

occurred to someone to send 

a messenger to him for 

a sprig of orange blossom. 

The one who was to deliver the message 



Copyrighted material 



164 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



did not find the hidalgo at home. 

So, in order not to remain there, 

since the dinner hour was at hand 

and he was already tired of waiting, 

he left word with the hidalgo?, wife 

on behalf of Mr. So-and-So, 

the inquisitor, that an employee of 

the Holy Office had come to see him. 

Scarcely had the hidalgo been 

informed of the message 

when he became so violently ill 

that he could not even swallow a morsel of food. 

He mulled over and over again in his mind 

with prolix detail all that 

he had ever said and done from his birth 

to the present moment. 

And learning finally what the messenger 

had come for and that he would probably 

return for more, if the whim were 

to strike the inquisitor again, 

the hidalgo exclaimed: 

"By God, I swear that he'll have 

no further reason to return to this house!" 

And he sent the orange tree to him. 

(P. 288a) 

Let us examine the major difference in the elaboration of the three 
texts in order to grasp its implications for a more meaningful apprecia- 
tion of each version. The central figure in Mirad a quien alabdis is a Jew. 
In En los indicios la culpa, the brunt of the joke is an hidalgo. In Luna's 
sequel to Lazarillo de Tormes, however, the victim of the Inquisitor's un- 
intentional, unconscious threat to his very existence is a labrador, a pobre 
villano, "a farmer, a pitiful peasant." 

We have, then, three different levels of Spanish society represented 
in the texts at hand: (1) a Jew, (2) a member of the lesser nobility, 
undoubtedly an hidalgo cansado, a convert of recent vintage, and (3) a 
farmer, a representative of that mythical group of quintessential Old 
Christians, the last vestige of pure blood on Hispanic soil. In these three 
figures we have the basic components, the fratricidal antagonists, of the 
civil war that raged on in Spain throughout the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries. By the time that Lope was writing for the theater the 
Jew was only a phantasmagorical presence in his land, an imaginary 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



765 



threat to the catholic unity of the Spanish faith. The hidalgo, however, 
was a daily irritant to the average Spaniard, a stimulant for envy and 
resentment, an ideal scapegoat for pent-up frustrations and unfulfilled 
ambitions; he was the inevitable victim, the perfect object of scorn and 
derision, whose tainted blood was an ineradicable stigma. 

Now, why would Juan de Luna change the main character of the 
anecdote from a Jew or an hidalgo to a peasant? It is not difficult to 
suggest a reasonable justification for the change. That a Jew or convert 
should fear the proximity of an inquisitor or the interest of some In- 
quisition authority in his possessions, however innocuous that interest 
might seem, is hardly novel or unexpected. The aesthetic delight pro- 
vided by the incident derives precisely from the reinforcement of a 
shared truth. However, that a peasant, a farmer, should fear the mere 
presence of an inquisitor is an overwhelming indictment of an institution 
whose supposed function was to assure the religious purity and ortho- 
doxy of an entire nation. Thus, the psychic pleasure afforded by Juan 
de Luna's text is of a very different order. He was a violent enemy of 
the Inquisition, perhaps a converso himself, and he wrote from bitterly 
resented exile in France. He must have found it enormously satisfying 
to present a peasant — not a Jew or even someone of mixed blood — as a 
quaking coward, for it enabled him to demonstrate with insidious sub- 
tlety that no one in Spain was beyond the reach of the arbitrary and un- 
predictable injustice of the Holy Office. 

In the conclusion to his interlude El retablo de las maravillas (The Won- 
der Show), Cervantes showed the lunacy of a peasant community that 
assumed an army quartermaster had to be a coward simply because, as 
they all mistakenly believed, he was of Jewish ancestry, ex illis, "one of 
them" (p. 123). With vengeful genius Juan de Luna chose to make a 
peasant, the very symbol of Old Christianity, a coward. In the process, 
he revealed how all people in Spain — even lords and grandees — tremble 
when they hear the words inquisitor and Inquisition. Lope de Vega, faith- 
ful to the stereotypical presentation of the cowardly Jew and tainted 
hidalgo, made now one, now the other, the victim of a joke meant to 
amuse the Old Christian majority in his audience. And yet, his great gift 
for artistic empathy enabled him to present, even within the skeletal 
frame of an anecdote, the sense of anguish experienced by the hidalgo 
as he rehearsed in his mind a life's words and deeds — words and deeds, 
even a blemished birth, that might be considered heretical and could 
soon be the raw materials of a prolonged and painful inquisitional trial. 

From three versions of a simple anecdote I have teased a series of 



Copyrighted material 



166 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



details that help us to experience yet again how the Inquisition — that 
bastion of un-Christlike Christianity — destroyed the pluralist paradise 
that Spain might have been. 

And now let us look at the theme of knowing other people's lives in 
Don Quixote, surely one of those creations alluded to by Bergson, which, 
"through a more or less far-reaching transformation of man, conquers 
difficulties hitherto unconquerable." That the subject is present in Don 
Quixote as a kind of commonplace of the period is immediately apparent 
from the following references. In the opening verses of Part 1, humor- 
ously attributed to "Urganda the unknown," we find this advice: 

Keep to the business at hand 

and don't stick your nose into other people's 

lives. 

Sancho insists that he is not "one to pry into other people's lives" (p. 201) 
and Don Diego de Miranda, the Gentleman in the Green Coat, asserts: 
"I do not enjoy scandal and do not allow any in my presence. I do not 
pry into my neighbors' lives, nor do I spy on other men's actions" 
(p. 567). Finally, Dona Rodriguez informs Sancho that "squires are our 
enemies; for seeing that they are imps of the antechambers and watch 
us at every turn, such times as they are not praying — and those are 
many — they spend in gossiping about us, disinterring our bones and in- 
terring our good names" (p. 712). 

What now remains to be done is to show the unique and genial utili- 
zation of the concept in Don Quixote, the way in which the shopworn 
maxim about knowing other people's lives was infused with a new and rev- 
olutionary force, to contrast with the ominously inquisitional overtones 
that echoed in the texts I have just been citing. 

If Americo Castro impressed anything on readers of Don Quixote, it 
was his position that Cervantes conceived of literary creation as the 
re-creation of a creative process of life, of life in the making, life unen- 
cumbered by what might be called hereditary determinism. Avalle-Arce 
brilliantly exemplified Castro's view in his analysis of the novel's opening 
paragraph, which he compared to the initial pages of Lazarillo de Tormes 
and Amadis de Gaula, in order to demonstrate the extraordinary freedom 
of the Cervantine hero. But whereas both Castro and Avalle stressed the 
reasons for Don Quixote's freedom and the open, undetermined nature 
of his future, I should like to examine what he was freed from, and how 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



767 



it prepares us for the attitude toward other people's lives that will prevail 
throughout the work, though more prominently in Part 1. 

In a sense, the first paragraph of Don Quixote is more important for 
what it does not tell us than for the paradigmatic, illusorily specific, yet 
ultimately deindividualizing details about the hidalgo's life that it does 
present; for the narrator has chosen to omit precisely those details that 
were most crucial to that scrutiny of other people's lives I have just been 
describing. Let us consider the novel's first two paragraphs: 

In a certain village in La Mancha, which I do not wish to name, there 
lived not long ago a gentleman — one of those who have always a lance in 
the rack, an ancient shield, a lean hack and a greyhound for coursing. His 
habitual diet consisted of a stew, more beef than mutton, of hash most 
nights, bacon and eggs on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a young pi- 
geon as a Sunday treat; and on this he spent three-quarters of his income. 
The rest of it went on a fine cloth doublet, velvet breeches and slippers 
for holidays, and a homespun suit of the best in which he decked himself 
on weekdays. His household consisted of a housekeeper of rather more 
than forty, a niece not yet twenty, and a lad for the field and market, who 
saddled his horse and wielded the pruninghook. 

Our gentleman was verging on fifty, of tough constitution, lean-bodied, 
thin-faced, a great early riser, and a lover of hunting. They say that his 
surname was Quixada or Quesada — for there is some difference of opin- 
ion amongst authors on this point. However, by very reasonable conjecture 
we may take it that he was called Quexana. But this does not much concern 
our story; enough that we do not depart by so much as an inch from the 
truth in the telling of it. (P. 31) 

Where was he born, what was his lineage, who are the ancestors we can 
investigate, inform on, scrutinize, disinter; what, even, was his family 
name? And we are told that these details, the indispensable material to 
know other people's lives, the central concern of generations of Spaniards 
in their literature and lives, is not of much importance to our story. And 
so Don Quixote is not only free in the Castronian sense to become him- 
self, to realize his full being, but he has been freed of the fear and inhi- 
bitions provoked by that infamy that endures forever, the infamy of 
tainted blood that Fray Luis de Leon railed against in The Names of Christ, 
when he wrote: "A noble kingdom is one in which no vassal is considered 
of vile lineage, nor humiliated for his background, nor considered less 
well born than another. How can there be justice if some are despised 
and humiliated from generation to generation and the stigma is unend- 
ing?" (p. 935). It is this freedom from inquisitional pressures that allows 



Copyrighted material 



168 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



the vision of a Spain that might have been to emerge, a Spain in which 
the departure of Ricote's daughter from her village is depicted in the 
following manner by Sancho Panza: 

I can tell you that your daughter looked so beautiful when she went that 
everyone in the place came out to see her, and they all said she was the 
loveliest creature in the world. She departed weeping, and embraced all 
her friends and acquaintances and all who came to see her, begging 
everyone to commend her to Our Lord and Our Lady His Mother; and 
all this with such feeling that it brought tears to my eyes, and I'm not gen- 
erally much of a weeper. There were many in fact who wanted to go out 
and capture her on the road and hide her away, but fear of breaking the 
king's decree prevented them. (P. 822) 

Need I remind you that Ricote was a Morisco and that his daughter was 
leaving their village for exile? We have the feeling, though, that the Old 
Christian villagers loved her as much as the inhabitants of Burgos loved 
the Cid and feared to disobey King Alfonso's orders. Unlike the in- 
formers don Diego Coronel of the Buscon and Guzman de Alfarache, 
Sancho will not betray his friend Ricote. "I will not betray you," says the 
authentic Christian to his Morisco friend. But he will not do treason 
against the King either, "to favor his enemies" (p. 821). "His enemies," 
says Sancho, not mine, but he does not dare to help Ricote, since he 
shares the villagers' fear of breaking the king's decree. And the happy 
ending of the episode of Ricote and his daughter is the wish-fulfilling 
dream of a Spain that — as Francisco Marquez has written — "instead of 
shedding their blood in sterile fratricidal strife, fused the blood of all 
Spain's children, laying aside the absurd and anti-Christian division be- 
tween the pure and the tainted" (p. 335). 

In this way, Don Quixote is free to face the future on his own terms, 
precisely because he has been freed of the unending threat involved in 
having a past. The specifics of his genealogy "are of little importance to 
our story" for the same reasons that Aldonza Lorenzo, alias Dulcinea, 
is lovely and virtuous, and her lineage does not matter a bit; "for no one 
will investigate it for the purpose of investing her with any [religious] 
order and, for my part" — says Don Quixote — "I think of her as the 
greatest princess in the world" (p. 210). For similar reasons Sancho 
could become a count, even if he were not an Old Christian. "I'm an 
Old Christian," affirms Sancho, "and that is enough ancestry for a 
count." This remark has been cited over and over again, when what 
really matters is Don Quixote's answer, in which he minimizes the 
significance of Sancho's Old Christian background: "And more than 
enough," responds Don Quixote, "but even if you were not [an Old 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE S LIVES 



169 



Christian] it would not matter, for if I am King I can easily make you 
noble..." (pp. 169-170). For Don Quixote, Sancho's Old Christian 
stock was as important for his becoming a count as — in Cervantes's inter- 
lude The Wonder Show — is a musician's being identified as "a very fine 
Christian and a well-bred hidalgo," in order to enhance his musician- 
ship. The ironic reply is that "such qualities are essential indeed in a first- 
rate musician!" (p. 117). In the dream world of Don Quixote, lineage, 
purity of blood, Jewish or Moorish ancestry, meant nothing. There was 
no Inquisition and there were no relentless investigations. 

Once Cervantes has insulated his novelistic world against the real and 
ever-present danger of an Inquisition-style scrutiny of other people's 
lives, it becomes possible for the work to be comic in the Bergsonian 
sense: "The comic comes into being [within a neutral zone in which man 
simply exposes himself to man's curiosity] . . . when society and the indi- 
vidual, freed from the worry of self-preservation, begin to regard them- 
selves as works of art" (p. 73). 

Unamuno was right when he noted that "Don Quixote was extremely 
curious and given to prying into other people's lives" (p. 90), but so were 
almost all the other characters in the work! What matters, of course, is 
what was behind the curiosity. From the moment of Don Quixote's en- 
counter with the prostitutes, transformed through his persuasive will 
and art into Dona Tolosa and Dona Molinera, we are embarked on a 
seemingly endless number of encounters with people who will give up 
the secrets of their lives — or who will create marvelous fictional exis- 
tences that resemble their own — with more or less artistry to satisfy the 
insatiable and beneficent curiosity of their listeners. Over and over again 
we come to recognize the special quality of knowing other people's lives 
in Don Quixote, the overwhelming delight that derives from entering into 
the lives of others and thereby living in another dimension. A few exam- 
ples must suffice. 

Having heard some of the details of Grisostomo's tragic death, re- 
counted by a young villager named Pedro, Don Quixote interrupts to 
observe that "it is a very good story, and you, my good Peter, are telling 
it with a fine grace" (p. 93). When Pedro concludes his remarks with an 
invitation to attend Grisostomo's funeral, Don Quixote responds: "I will 
certainly be there, and I thank you for the pleasure you have given me 
by telling me such a delightful story" (p. 95). 

When Zoraida and the Captain arrive at the inn — one of those His- 
panic inns described by Angel Sanchez Rivero as "the crossroads of 
life . . . , more intimate than a modern hotel because of the primitive 
installations, the hazards of the road, the infrequency of travel, the gen- 



Copyrighted material 



170 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



erous cordiality of a group of people aware of danger and sensitive to 
adventure, all obliged to come together in a cramped and poorly lit 
space to tell one another their lives" (p. 13) — people can scarcely keep 
from asking them to tell their life story, "but no one cared to ask just 
then, for at that time it was clearly better to help them get some rest 
than to ask them for the story of their lives" (p. 338). After they have 
rested, "Don Fernando asked the Captain to tell them his life's story, for 
from what they had gathered by his coming in Zoraida's company, it 
could not fail to be strange and enjoyable" (p. 345). As in so many other 
cases throughout the work, we are made to feel the importance of the 
artistry involved, the histrionics in relating a life story as a source of 
pleasure and edification: 

Listen then, gentlemen, and you will hear a true story, and I doubt 
whether you will find its equal in the most detailed and careful fiction ever 
written. 

At these words they all sat down in perfect silence; and when he saw 
them quiet and waiting for him to speak, he began in a smooth and pleas- 
ant voice. (P. 345) 

At the conclusion of the Captain's tale, Don Fernando gives voice to the 
audience's reaction: 

I assure you, Captain, that the way in which you have told your strange 
adventure has been as remarkable as the strangeness and novelty of the 
events themselves. It is a curious tale and full of astonishing incidents. In 
fact we have enjoyed listening so much that we should be glad to hear it 
all over again, even if it took till tomorrow morning to tell it. (P. 381) 

Naturally the content of the narrated life is important; tragic events are 
to be lamented and joyous reunions celebrated, but what matters most 
is the willing suspension of belief in the Spain that really was, so as to 
enjoy to its fullest the parenthetical paradise of Art, offered up to us in 
these numerous portraits of characters as artists. 

When the irresistible Dorotea completes her tale of woe, she is asked 
to provide some additional details: 

She told him, briefly and sensibly, all that she had previously told Car- 
denio; and Don Ferdinand and his companions were so delighted with her 
story that they would have liked it to last longer, so charmingly did she 
tell the tale of her misfortunes. (PP. 331-332) 

As if to remind us of that other world where the scrutiny of people's 
lives is a sinister and venomous pursuit, there are chapters like the 
"Scrutiny of Don Quixote's Library," a small-scale model of an Inquisi- 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



171 



tion trial, rich in the lexicon of such investigations, which ends with the 
heartless destruction of innocent victims. The text reads: 

Some [books] that were burnt deserved to be treasured up among the 
eternal archives, but fate and the laziness of the inquisitor forbade it. And 
so in them was fulfilled the saying that the saint sometimes pays for the 
sinner. (P. 64) 

Unamuno, blind to the possible meanings of this chapter, refused to 
examine it, because "it deals with books and not with life" (p. 46). But 
however much the discussion of the books is conducted in aesthetic 
terms, ultimately we are forced to believe that these books, constantly 
described in human terms, are the Anne Franks of Cervantes's day, the 
innocent victims of whose beauty and genius we have been deprived 
through the indifference, the cruelty, if not the "laziness of the inquisi- 
tor": "The priest was too tired to look at any more books, and therefore 
proposed that the rest should be burned without further inspection" 
(p. 63). It is indeed ironic that an escrutinio, a scrutiny, an inquisition, 
should end on such a note, when Covarrubias tells us that escudrinar 
means "to look for something with excessive meticulousness, care and 
curiosity"; escudrinador "he who is curious to know secret things." He 
concludes, cryptically, that "there are men who are tempted to find out 
what others have locked up in their breasts and at times what God has 
concealed in his own" (p. 543a). 

In direct contrast with the Inquisition-like proceedings of the scrutiny 
made in Don Quixote's library is the knight's encounter with the galley 
slaves and his insistence — due to the infinite care and humanity in his 
notion of justice — that each galley slave be discreetly and sympathetically 
examined, since it is "better for ninety-nine guilty to escape than for one 
innocent person to be wrongfully condemned." Gines de Pasamonte, a 
galley slave who knows the dangers that lurk behind the scrutiny of 
other people's lives — Lope de Vega's "new mode of scrutiny" — and has 
learned to be wary of such interrogations, tells Don Quixote "you annoy 
me with all your prying into other people's lives" (p. 176). And these words, 
which — in the interpretation of Gines and the intention of Don Qui- 
xote — exemplify the collusion of the real world with a Utopian Spain, 
suggest yet another dimension to Don Quixote, one more way to enjoy 
and appreciate the genius of Cervantes. 

In 1973 the Nobel Prize-winning German novelist Heinrich Boll was 
asked: "How do you think a novel about Germany in the 1930s would 
differ from the idea that most people have of it?" His reply was: 



Copyrighted material 



172 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



It would be at the same time both worse and better than the propa- 
ganda was. If you imagine that children would really give the names of 
their parents to the police for political offenses, it is terrible. There's really 
a Shakespearean tragedy behind such a small fact. Reading it as a note in 
the press, you wouldn't get that. It would be a terrible fact, but you would 
forget about it. Yet out of that fact a writer can make a very informative 
and true novel, one that is much more important than nonfiction. What 
is behind it is up to me, my imagination and my experience of the time. 

And, paradoxically, literature makes it possible for us to enjoy, to derive 
pleasure as well as information and edification from reading and ex- 
periencing in an imaginatively insulated setting — the protective privacy 
of a book, the communal comfort of a theater, the womb-like intimacy 
of a darkened movie house — the suffering and persecution of others as 
well as their joys and satisfactions. 

Having mentioned suffering and persecution, I should like to close 
with some general observations, particularly since a distinguished His- 
panist claimed some years ago that "as many as ninety-nine out of every 
hundred conversos lived unmolested by the Inquisition," as if in some 
paradisiacal sanctuary. (Can one live "unmolested" — even psychically 
unmolested — with the potential threat of persecution always at hand?) 
Sister Marie Despina recently wrote in a moving essay entitled "The Ac- 
cusations of Ritual Crime in Spain" that one is amazed by the similarities 
between the procedures of the Spanish Inquisition and those of the Rus- 
sian Gulag, the similar treatment of the accused, overwhelmed by terror, 
torture, and utter despair (pp. 61-62). In a statement characteristic of 
any number of references to the oppressively negative effects of the In- 
quisition on Hispanic life, the great Argentine statesman and author 
Domingo F. Sarmiento declared that 

the crime of the Inquisition is to have destroyed in daily practice and 
in one's intimate feelings the notion of human rights, the sense of se- 
curity of life before the law, the awareness of justice, the limits of public 
power . . . Since crimes of the mind cannot be determined by a law or 
code, the Spaniard and the Hispanic American lived [because of the In- 
quisition] under the fear of possibly committing a crime by thinking. 
(P. 184) 

In her book on The Conversos of Majorca, Angela Selke reminds us that 

in stressing the terrible injustice which the Holy Office committed by per- 
secuting and punishing innocent people, there is an implicit justification of 
such persecutions provided they are based on true accusations and verified 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



173 



evidence. Yet such an attitude tends to obscure what today [we recognize 
and accept] — that is, the fundamental injustice of all persecutions for dis- 
sident beliefs, be the charges true or false. . . . [We] must reject as contrary 
to Christian ethics not only the abuses of the Inquisition or its proceedings, 
but, above all, the radical injustice inherent in any institution whose busi- 
ness — whatever its professed purpose may have been — [is] the systematic 
organization of such persecutions. (P. 19) 

Like many New Christians, Cervantes dreamed of a Spain that might 
have been, recognizing that its fulfillment was impossible. The visionary 
religious syncretism that the Moriscos of Granada strove to achieve, cer- 
tain that every individual could be saved under the law of Christ, under 
that of the Jew, and that of the Moor, if he kept the precepts of his reli- 
gion faithfully; the unified kingdom of heaven on earth which the New 
Christians struggled vainly to establish in Spain; the mythical Golden 
Age of ideal justice which Don Quixote imagined he could restore, can 
best be summed up in these words of Wallace Stevens: 

He had to choose. But it was not a choice 
Between excluding things. It was not a choice 
Between, but of. He chose to include the things 
That in each other are included, the whole, 
The complicate, the amassing harmony. 

(P. 124) 

The majority of Spaniards in the retrospectively halcyon years of 
Spain's artistic Golden Age chose, through the Inquisition, to renounce 
the opportunities for "amassing harmony," and to this day Spain has en- 
dured the consequences of that tragic choice. 

* This essay is for Robert Silverman, who taught me to appreciate the 
beauty and power of words. 

Unforeseen circumstances have made it impossible for me to provide 
the footnotes I had planned to include. Unless otherwise indicated in 
the list of works cited, the translations are my own. 

WORKS CITED 

Aleman, Mateo. Guzman de Alfarache, edited by Samuel Gili y Gaya. 5 vols. 
Cldsicos castellanos, vols. 73, 83, 90, 93, 114. Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1942- 
1950- 

Anonymous. The Life of Lazarillo de Tormes, translated by Harriet de Onis. Great 
Neck, N.Y.: Barron's Educational Series, 1959. 



Copyrighted material 



174 



JOSEPH H. SILVERMAN 



Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. "Tres comienzos de novela." In Nuevos deslindes cer- 

vantinos. Barcelona: Ariel, 1975. 
Bergson, Henri. "Laughter." In Comedy, edited by Wylie Sypher. Garden City, 

N.Y.: Doubleday, 1956. 
Boxer, C. R. Two Pioneers of Tropical Medicine: Garcia d'Orta and Nicolas Monardes. 

Diamante, vol. 14. London: The Hispanic and Luso-Brazilian Councils, 1963. 
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Adventures of Don Quixote, translated by J. M. Cohen. 

Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1950. Translation slightly revised. 
. The Colloquy of the Dogs. In Six Exemplary Novels, translated by Harriet de 

Onis, 3:12-13. Great Neck, N.Y.: Barron's Educational Series, 1961. Trans- 
lations slightly revised. 
. . In The Deceitful Marriage and Other Exemplary Novels, translated 

by Walter Starkie, 249, 258, 276. New York: New American Library, 1963. 

Translations slightly revised. 
. . In Exemplary Stories, translated by C. A.Jones, 197, 204-205, 220. 

Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1972. Translations slightly revised. 
. El retablo de las maravillas. In Interludes, translated by Edwin Honig. New 

York: New American Library, 1964. Translation slightly revised. 
Covarrubias, Sebastian de. Tesoro de la lengua castellana 0 espanola, edited by Mar- 
tin de Riquer. Barcelona: Horta, 1943. 
Despina, Sor Marie. "Las acusaciones de crimen ritual en Espana." El olivo 

(Madrid) 3, no. 9 (1979): 48-70. 
Gilman, Stephen. "The Sequel to El villano del Danubio." Revista Hispdnica Mo- 

derna 31 (1965): 175-185. 
Gracian, Baltasar. Ordculo manual y arte de prudencia, edited by Arturo del Hoyo. 

Madrid: Castilla, 1948. 
Guevara, Fray Antonio de. Menosprecio de corte y alabanza de aldea, edited by 

M. Martinez de Burgos. Cldsicos castellanos, vol. 29. Madrid: Ediciones de "La 

Lectura," 1928. 

. Libro primero de las Epistolas familiares, edited by Jose Maria de Cossio. 

Vol. 2. Madrid: Aldus, 1952. 
Leon, Fray Luis de. De los nombres de Cristo, edited by Federico de Onis. Vol. 2. 

Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1917. Material adapted and reduced. 
Luna, Juan de. Segunda parte de la vida de Lazarillo de Tormes. In La Celestina y 

Lazarillos, edited by Martin de Riquer. Barcelona: Vergara, 1959. 
Marquez Villanueva, Francisco. Personajes y temas del Quijote. Madrid: Taurus, 

*975- 

. "Critica guevariana." Nueva Revista de Filologia Hispdnica, 28 (1979): 334- 

352- 

Orozco, Alonso de. Victoria de la muerte. Cited in Americo Castro, An Idea of His- 
tory, edited by Stephen Gilman and Edmund L. King. Columbus: Ohio State 
University Press, 1977. The translation by Carroll Johnson is slightly revised. 

Quevedo, Francisco de. El buscdn, edited by Americo Castro. Cldsicos castellanos, 
vol. 5. Madrid: Ediciones de "La Lectura," 1927. 



Copyrighted material 



ON KNOWING OTHER PEOPLE'S LIVES 



175 



Rojas, Fernando de. The Spanish Bawd: La Celestina, translated by J. M. Cohen. 
Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1964. 

Sanchez Rivero, Angel. "Las ventas del Quijote." Revista de Occidente, ano 5, vol. 
17, no. 46 (1927): 1-22. 

Sarmiento, Domingo F. Conflicto y armonias de las razas en America. Buenos Aires: 
"La Cultura Argentina," 1915. Cited by Daniel E. Zalazar, "Las ideas de 
D. F. Sarmiento sobre la influencia de la religion en la democracia ameri- 
cana. " Discurso Literario, 2 (1985): 541—548. 

Selke, Angela S. The Conversos of Majorca: Life and Death in a Crypto-J ewish Commu- 
nity in XVII Century Spain, translated by Henry J. Maxwell. Hispania Judaica, 
vol. 5. Jerusalem: Magnes Press, Hebrew University, 1986. 

Stevens, Wallace. "Notes toward a Supreme Fiction." In Selected Poems. London: 
Faber and Faber, i960. 

Unamuno, Miguel de. Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho. Coleccion Austral, vol. 33. Ma- 
drid: Espasa-Calpe, 1949. 

Vega, Lope de. En los indicios la culpa. In Obras de Lope de Vega, publicadas por la 
Real Academia Espanola (nueva edicion), vol. 5. Madrid: Tipografia de la "Re- 
vista de Archeologia, Bibliografia y Museos," 1918. 

. Mirad a quien alabdis. In Obras de Lope de Vega, publicadas por la Real 

Academia Espanola (nueva edicion), vol. 13. Madrid: Imprenta de Galo Saez, 

193 °- 

. El nino inocente de La Guardia, edited by Anthony J. Farrell. London: 

Tamesis Books, 1985. 
Zabaleta, Juan de. El dta de fiesta por la manana, edited by Maria Antonia Sanz 

Cuadrado. Madrid: Castilla, 1948. 



Copyrighted material 



TEN 



Scorched Parchments and Tortured 
Memories: The "Jewishness" of the 
Anussim (Crypto-Jews) 

Moshe Lazar 

If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and is withered; and men 
gather them and cast them into the fire, and they are burned, [john 15:6] 

I enter this house [i.e., church], I will worship neither wood nor stone, but only 

God who governs the universe. 
[Converso's silent act of faith] 

Inquisitors and inquisitorial institutions initiate their pious enterprise 
with the burning of manuscripts and books to forcibly halt the dissemi- 
nation of beliefs contrary to their own dogmas. Failing to eradicate the 
faith and ritual practices of the "non-believers," stigmatized as heretics, 
they then resort to mental and physical torture most often leading to 
conversion. Those accused of being "false converts," stubborn and secret 
adherents to their earlier beliefs, are destined to burn at the stake, iron- 
ically qualified as an auto de fe, an "act of faith." The burning of books 
is often therefore a classical prelude to the burning of people. 

The road that leads from the burning of more than twelve thousand 
volumes of the Talmud (Paris, 1243), an< ^ innumerable Hebrew biblical 
and parabiblical manuscripts during the subsequent centuries, and to 
the lighting of the autos de fe is the via dolorosa of medieval European 
Jewry and its descendants, the Anussim in Spain, Portugal, Brazil, Peru, 
Mexico, and elsewhere. 1 In the thousands of trial records, which the 
Holy Office of the Inquisition has left as its enduring legacy, lay buried 
nightmarish chapters in the lives of men and women among the Anus- 
sim, from whose memories the torturers have extracted and transcribed 
religious practices and utterances as evidence of their secret Judaizing. 
These carefully elaborated minutes of the trial proceedings endlessly re- 
cord what sort of rituals the Anussim were accused of practicing (mainly 
presented in the depositions of the prosecution's witnesses) and the kind 
of prayers they were reciting daily or on certain Jewish holidays (particu- 
larly recorded in the confessions of the accused). It is possible therefore, 
even from the partially published trial records as well as from other 

7 76 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 177 



sources, to present a synthetic overview on the continuity of "Jewish- 
ness" and Jewish religious devotion among a large number of Anussim 
over a period of several centuries. 

This very continuity of retaining a hidden religious Jewish life, based 
on a set of customs and rituals, and strengthened by prayers, by biblical 
and postbiblical reminiscences, and by yearnings for a messianic deliver- 
ance has been questioned by some scholars 2 in a manner that is con- 
tradicted by the historical evidence of various sources. 

Communities of Anussim in Spain, between 1391 (a year of wide- 
spread assaults on the juderias and of mass conversions) and 1492 (the 
year of Expulsion), living amidst or beside those Jews who did not con- 
vert, certainly had different opportunities to preserve their hidden 
"Jewishness" in comparison with the Anussim of Portugal after 1497 
(where all the Jews were forcibly converted) — even more so after the 
horrible massacre in Lisbon (1506) 3 — and in comparison with those of 
Spain after 1492. While the Anussim of Spain between 1391 and 1492 
maintained close contacts with those who lived openly as Jews and had 
no major difficulties in obtaining prayer books, biblical, rabbinical, and 
Jewish-philosophical texts, 4 special ritual objects, and kosher food prod- 
ucts, the Anussim of Portugal were more dependent on their memory 
and oral transmission, on symbolic observance of traditional rituals, and 
on occasional contacts during business trips with former Anussim now 
living as Jews in Italy and the Netherlands. 5 These latter Anussim, many 
of them educated now in convents and monasteries, submitted to the 
teaching and the preaching of the friars, and had the opportunity to 
learn a great deal about Judaism, Jewish history, biblical prophecy, and 
theology excerpted in the literature of the Fathers of the Church and 
in the anti-Jewish polemical treatises; they could read in the missals, 
psalms, and other hymns derived from ancient synagogal liturgy; for 
generations they learned about their patriarchs from Villegas's Flos 
Sanctorum; and whatever details they ignored concerning specific Jewish 
customs, they were introduced to them in the cellars of the Inquisition, 
learning from both the inquisitors and the confessions of the "Judaizers" 
the traditional list of Judaizing practices. 6 Beinart's statement concern- 
ing the conversos of Ciudad Real during the fifteenth century is appro- 
priate also to the Anussim of later periods: 



And though the memory and knowledge of mitzvoth [religious command- 
ments] became increasingly blurred as the generations went by, and 
Mosaic laws were the first to be forgotten, customs and traditions never- 
theless remained in the Conversos' memory and were handed down for 



Copyrighted material 



178 



MOSHE LAZAR 



centuries from generation to generation. Furthermore, for as long as the 
Inquisition courts existed, the inquisitors were always there to remind the 
Conversos of what Jewish tradition was, and to revive their memories of 
Judaism. 7 

In the Inquisition's cellars in Lima for some twelve years (1627—1639), 
Francisco Maldonado de Silva, shortly before his death at the stake, com- 
posed a letter destined for the Jewish community in Rome, writing that 
he had a solid knowledge of the Prophets, 

. . . et memoriter teneo omnes praedictiones promissionum Dei nostri per 
ipsos et deprecationes illorum pro populo suo Israel omnesque psalmos 
David absque nulla exceptione, proverbia multa Salomonis et [eius] filii 
Sirach, et plurimas orationes tarn idiomate Hispano quam Latino a me 
compositas, sed horum maiorem partem in hoc lacu inclusus didisci, quae 
omnia (scilicet orationes prophetarum et laudes et psalmos) singulis sab- 
batis absque libro repeto flexis genibus in conspectu Dei mei depraecans 
ilium pro peccatis meis et populi sui si forte possim (licet indignus) placare 
furorem suum, ut salvet et congreget eum sicut per suos prophetas pro- 
misit. Ego quidem a die qua captus fui devovi illi mori pugnans argumentis 
viribus et posse propter veritatem eius et observare legem eius usque ad 
aras ignis qui mihi paratur in brevi (ut colligo) utque me in holocaustum 
pro peccatis nostris Deus suscipiat . . . 8 

[. . . and I know by heart all the predictions related to the promises of our 
God, revealed through them, and His deprecations in favor of his people 
Israel, as well as all the Psalms of David without exception, many Proverbs 
of Salomon and of his son Sirach, and many prayers in both Spanish and 
Latin versifications composed by me; but most of all these I have learned 
while confined in this [lion's] den; all these [i.e., the Prophets' prayers, the 
hymns and the psalms], without any book, I recite every Saturday, kneel- 
ing in the presence of God, supplicating Him for my own and His people's 
sins, in the hope I could (though unworthy) placate His wrath so that 
He may save and ingather his people as He has promised through his 
prophets. Verily, from the day I was arrested I vowed to fight to death, 
with my power and arguments, against the adversaries of His truth and 
to uphold His Law until the altar of fire being now (I think) prepared for 
me, so that God may accept me as a holocaust for our sins . . .] 

While in prison, Francisco Maldonado de Silva held fourteen disputa- 
tions with theologians and wrote a great number of essays and two 
longer works, signing them "Heli Judio, indigno del Dios de Israel, por 
otro nombre Silva." He was led to his auto de fe in Lima (January 1639) 
at the age of forty-nine; a friar describes his last moments as follows: 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 179 



frail, gray-haired, long-bearded, and with the books he had written tied 
around his neck, when led to the fire the wind had ripped off the curtain 
behind the podium; seeing this, he exclaimed: "This has been so arranged 
by the Lord of Israel as to see me face to face from heaven!" 9 

Martyrs such as Luis de Carvajal (el Mozo), Maldonado de Silva, and 
Jose de Silva, like hundreds before them during the Middle Ages, went 
to the stake sanctifying their monotheistic faith (qiddush ha-Shem), and 
imitating the martyrology of the ten celebrated rabbis ('asarah harugey 
malkhuth) which occupies a special place in ancient Jewish lore and in 
the traditional prayer books. One of these sages, Hanina ben Teradyon, 
we are told, had been draped in a Torah scroll by his persecutors and 
thrown into the fire. Seeing his daughter distressed, he said to her: 
"Were I to be burning alone, it would be dreadful to me; now that I am 
in the fire with the Torah around me, whoever will avenge the honor 
of the Torah will at the same time avenge mine." His disciples asked: 
"Rabbi, what do you see?" And he replied: "Burning scrolls, I see, and 
letters rising in the air." 

Contrary to those scholars who doubt the degree of "Jewishness" of 
the Anussim, the source materials and the sprouting of new communi- 
ties of former Anussim in Italy, the Netherlands, and the Ottoman Em- 
pire present a reality which shows that their "Jewishness" was more than 
a bundle of vague memories. Yerushalmi rightly therefore states that 

the yearning which impelled them to seek the God of Israel in Amsterdam, 
Venice, or Constantinople remains difficult to understand unless there 
existed a continuing crypto-Jewish tradition in the Peninsula itself. If, be- 
tween one hundred and two hundred years after the extinction of the last 
vestiges of organized Jewish life in Spain and Portugal, this force was still 
strong enough to graft these withered branches back onto the trunk of 
the Jewish people, it must have been considerable. 10 

Concerning the oral transmission among the Portuguese Anussim 
and, in particular, the important role played by the women, Revah 
writes: 

In this continuous or discontinuous transmission of mai iaiiism two social 
groups performed a decisive role: the family milieu and the professional 
or university milieu. The women have greatly contributed to the perpetu- 
ation of marranism, often behind the back of their husbands: they figure 
also in greater numbers than men in the autos de fe. Marranism was a 
simplified religion which ignored hierarchy. Its articles of faith and its es- 
sential practices were perpetuated not only through the clandestine oral 



Copyrighted material 



180 



MOSHE LAZAR 



transmission but also through the constant harassment by the inquisitorial 
persecution." 

A confirmation of this role played by women in the preservation of 
"Jewishness" among the Anussim is already clearly articulated in a letter 
written (1481?) by Fernando del Pulgar (of converso origin himself): "In 
Andalusia there are at least ten thousand young women who have never 
left their parents' home. They observe the ways of their fathers and 
learn from them. To burn them all is an extremely cruel and difficult 
act and will force them to flee to places where their correction will be 
impossible." 12 During his trial in the Canary Islands, Antonio Correa 
Nunez relates how his grandmother had initiated him at age thirteen to 
Judaism: 

In this book [Psalms?], he will be able to see all what God did to David 
and to those who kept the Law God gave to Moses. Through guarding 
this Law and its ceremonies he will attain the merits King David and all 
the other attained. By fulfilling the commandments he will receive God's 
blessing; not keeping them he will be cursed by God. 13 

The women's role as activists in the dissemination of Jewish customs and 
prayers, 14 and their outstanding courage in proclaiming their faith and 
accepting martyrdom at the stake, 15 are corroborated during the cen- 
turies by the trial records from Portugal, the Canary Islands, Mexico, 
Peru, and Brazil, 16 as well as by the testimonies from a community of 
"New Christians" rediscovered in this century by S. Schwartz in Bel- 
monte, Portugal. 17 Even at the time that Anussim came out from their 
schizophrenic existence and returned to open Jewish life, Rabbi Yom 
Tob Zahalon (in a responsa) expressed his admiration for the stature and 
quality, among the Portuguese Anussim, of the women amidst them, 
"from whom Torah and Judaism shall yet go forth!" 18 

The knowledge of traditions and rituals was also preserved through 
smuggling in from abroad books printed in Italy and the Netherlands, 
especially during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 19 But even be- 
fore that time, information was available from books hidden in wells, 
buried in gardens, secretly kept inside walls, or acquired from Christians 
who had snatched them from the flames. 20 

To put this in its proper historical context, let us follow Rabbi Abra- 
ham Saba's description of his flight from his hometown during the tragic 
events of 1497 in Portugal: 

Then the anger of the Lord burnt against his people, so that all the Jews 
who were in Portugal were ordered by King Emmanuel (God blot out his 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 181 

name and memory!) to leave the land. Nor was this enough; but after the 
king had commanded that boys and girls should be torn [from their par- 
ents for baptism and Christian education], and then we should be deprived 
of our synagogues, he ordered that all our books should be seized. So I 
brought all my books into the city of Porto in obedience to the royal de- 
cree; but yet I took my life in my hands by carrying with me to Lisbon the 
Commentary on the Law which I had composed, as well as a commentary 
on the treatise Ethics of the Fathers, and one on the Five Scrolls .... But 
when I reached Lisbon all the Jews came to me and told me that it had 
been proclaimed to the community that every Jew who might be found 
with a book or with philacteries in his possession would be put to death. 
So straightaway, before I entered the quarter outside the city, I took these 
books in my hand; two brothers went with me and dug a grave among the 
roots of a blossoming olive tree; there we buried them. . . . Tree of Sor- 
row, for I had buried there all that was pleasant in my sight — the Commen- 
tary on the Laws and the Commandments, more precious than gold. . . . 
For in them I had found consolation for the loss of my two little ones, torn 
from me by force to become unwilling converts. And I had said: these 
[books] are the inheritance of those who worship God; therefore must they 
be better for me than even sons and daughters. 21 

Commenting upon this rabbi's dramatic description of losing his chil- 
dren to forced baptism and endangering his life in trying to save his own 
manuscripts, W. Popper writes: "Hidden in wells, buried among the 
roots of trees, snatched from the very flames, there were always some 
volumes saved. And as soon as the watchfulness of enemies became a 
little relaxed, these treasures were brought from their hiding-places; 
others were smuggled into the city from distant lands by various devices; 
and still others perhaps were bought from neighbors." 22 At the end of the 
fifteenth century, in Soria, a mason working in the home of Juan de Sal- 
zedo (formerly Rabbi Yanto [Yom Tob?]) discovered inside a hidden 
niche in a wall some scrolls in Hebrew which, according to his testimony 
at a trial, he refused to hand over to their owner, instead taking them 
home and burning them in his stove. 23 Several centuries later, in 1848, 
during the dismantling of an old house in the former call (Jewish Quar- 
ter) of Barcelona, three late-fifteenth-century manuscript prayer books 
in Catalan were discovered inside one of the walls, including one com- 
plete traditional Jewish Ritual of daily and holidays prayers, the two 
others being of a hybrid type (personalized prayers, somewhat spiritu- 
ally Christianized), having belonged probably to a converso originally 
from Valencia. 24 The historian Caro Baroja remembers having seen in 
his childhood a leather-covered desk whose owner, while doing some 
repair work, uncovered two scrolls of Hebrew prayers hidden by some 



Copyrighted material 



182 



MOSHE LAZAR 



crypto-Jew. 25 One could multiply these cases to show that in spite of the 
burning of thousands of biblical and parabiblical manuscripts and books, 
the Anussim were able to procure for themselves over the centuries 
copies of Bibles, prayer books, commentaries on the Law, essays on 
Jewish history, and cabalistic and other mystical treatises to maintain 
their faith; and wherever those books were not available, they memo- 
rized a portable Judaism often transferred from scorched parchments 
and from inquisitorial sessions to their tortured souls. 

Accusations against the Anussim, as well as their confessions, in Spain 
and Portugal and the New World, used customs and rituals to define 
them as Judaizers, or "Jews on all four sides" ( judeus dos quatro cos- 
tados) as some of them were called in Portugal. The collection of bits 
and pieces in the already published trial documents 26 corresponds to the 
thirty or more specific "Judaic" beliefs, practices, and customs by which 
a Judaizing converso could be detected (observance of one of them being 
sufficient to be brought before the Tribunal of the Holy Office). The 
list of these practices and customs was published time and again, the 
edict issued by the Seville inquisitors Morillo and San Martin in 1481 
serving as the basic model for all subsequent promulgations. One may 
sum them up in the following groups: 

1. sweep the house clean Friday afternoon; wear clean clothing and 
festive garments that evening and Saturday; bring out fresh linen 
and a white tablecloth for the occasion; cook the necessary meals 
for the Sabbath on Friday, keeping in the oven overnight a 
special dish [adafina, calyente, hamin]; 2 ' 7 abstain from work on 
Saturday; 

2. light newly prepared candles on Friday before sunset; at dinner, 
make a blessing over a cup of wine (baraha, or baraha del vino) and 
have each family member drink from the same cup; 

3. fast from sunset to sunset, particularly on the Day of Atonement 
{Qinqepur, Qonqipur [ = tzom qippur: Fast of Yom Kippur]), on the 
eve of Purim (Ayuno de la Reina Esther [Ta'anith Esther: "Fast of 
Queen Esther"]); 28 and fast on Mondays and Thursdays; 

4. ritual bathing of women on Friday afternoon, on the eve of fast- 
ing days, possibly in a special bathhouse [batibila, bet tebilah]; 

5. observance of special holidays, such as Passover (pascua del pan 
cenceno [hag ha-matzoth = "feast of the unleavened bread]), which 
occurs at the time of "semana santa"; the feast of the Tabernacles 
(pascua de las cabanuelas), which occurs in the Fall; 

6. reciting certain Jewish prayers such as Shema Yisrael Adonay 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 183 

Elohenu, Adonay, Ehad ("Hear, o Israel, God our Lord, God is 
one"), or specific prayers when washing the hands, 29 when par- 
taking at a meal, and so on; 

7. praying in a "Jewish" fashion: facing the wall, standing rather 
than sitting or kneeling [related to prayers like the amida], cabdis 
[= qaddish], moving head, limbs, and body in a rhythmic manner 
(sabadear); 30 

8. bury or burn nail clippings, rather than throw them away; 31 

9. ritual slaughter of cattle and fowl, reciting some specific prayer 
during the process; covering the spilled blood with earth or 
ashes; 

10. purifying the meat by cleansing it from any blood, salting and 
rinsing it; removing all fat, and the sinew from the animal's leg; 32 

11. abstaining from eating certain animals, birds, or fish considered 
as impure by the Mosaic law; eating therefore manjares caseres 
("kosher food"); 33 

12. observance of special funerary rites when mourning the dead (sit- 
ting on the ground, eating hard-boiled eggs and olives); pouring 
out the water from the jars [cohuerco], for fear that the soul of 
the departed might bathe in it); 

13. when kneading bread, throw a piece of dough [hala] into the fire 
(a custom that was still preserved among the Anussim in Bel- 
monte in this century); 34 

14. celebrating, on the eve of the eighth day following the birth of a 
male child (the night before the prescribed circumcision), with 
dancing and music [hazer hadas]; 35 

15. when baptizing their children, rubbing off immediately the crisma 
(baptism); 

16. read in books of prayers [cidur, rezar en hebrayco, meldar como 
judio] 36 or other books on Jewish matters in Hebrew or in the ver- 
nacular [libros judiegos]; possess amulets with Hebrew inscriptions 
[nomina escripta en hebrayco] 31 and the like; 

17. in church, acting hypocritically (not looking at the elevation of 
the Host, at the Cross; kneeling imperfectly; changing the Pater 
Noster; etc.). 38 

All these, and some others, 39 amply documented in all trials, testify 
to the permanence and widespread preservation of essential and sym- 
bolic rituals among the Anussim over many centuries. It is in the context 
of the accusations and confessions that one finds the greatest number 
of Hebrew words, particularly frequent in fifteenth- and sixteenth- 



Copyrighted material 



184 



MOSHE LAZAR 



century documents, such as: baraha, varaha (blessing); baraha del vino 
(blessing on wine); baraha de la mesa (blessing after meal); Dio barohu (for 
barukh hu, "blessed be He"); trefa, trefe ("non-kosher food"); caser, caxer 
("kosher food"); maror ("bitter herbs"); qedaca ("alms, charity"); 40 cidur 
("prayer book" in Hebrew or vernacular); cilhod, zelahod (for selihoth, 
"penitential prayers"); targun (for targum, Aramaic translation of Penta- 
teuch); quidux (blessing on the wine); cabdis (for qaddish, "mourner's 
prayer"); guezera ("edict" of Expulsion); tafelines (for thefillin, "phylac- 
teries"); qeqit (generally for talith, "prayer shawl"); cefer, cefertora ("parch- 
ment scroll of the Law"); humas ("Pentateuch"); hevel, vanidad ("vanity, 
Christian dogmas"); cara ("trouble, tribulation"); quinyan ("property"); 
midras (for beth midrash, "synagogue, school"); 41 tibila ("ritual bath"), and 
bitibila ("house of the ritual bath"); and so on. Concerning the frequent 
use of euphemisms one may note: wood (for "cross"); bread ("Holy 
Host"); house ("church"); stone ("statue of Christ or saint"); stick 
("wooden cross"); 42 very good man ("practicing Judaizer"); servant of 
God ("of the Jewish faith"). Finally, it should also be noted that Adonay 
(rather than Senor), Dio (instead of Dios), and meldar (more than leer) are 
frequently used in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century documents as they 
are in parallel Judeo-Spanish texts after the Expulsion. 

The depth and continuity of "Jewishness" of many Anussim may best 
be grasped through a comparison beween two testaments, written cen- 
turies apart, couched in a language that testifies to the profound roots 
of religiosity in both tortured souls. They reflect in content and in style 
a cleaving devotion to the faith and practices of Judaism. Don Juda 
(from Alba de Tormes) in 1410, two decades after the forced conver- 
sions of 1391, writes a long will from which I quote the following 
excerpt: 

I give thanks to the almighty Lord God who created the universe and gov- 
erns us, who did not make me an animal and has kept me to this day in 
his commandments, for pious and noble is the man who in his last years 
and old age dies to start a new life — God willing — for I have always placed 
my hope in His love. And as I am dust and will return to dust, I desire not 
to be moaned and mourned; nor should you, dona Sol, act despondently, 
for I hold you in such esteem that should I give you a letter of divorce 
you would not accept it, as you have stated: "Were you to give me the letter 
[of divorce] I would refuse it, for your shoe is a firm warrant ... of my 
heart"; 43 and I would respond: "May it be God's will!" . . . Let my body be 
buried in the golden field where our parents are resting — God grant them 
everlasting peace . . . placed in the grave with my eyes and face looking 
eastward ... At learning about my death in the Jewish quarters of Segovia 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



185 



and Alba, where I was well loved by all my relatives, hoping for the same 
in the next world, let them say: "Alas, alas, the one who did good deeds 
has passed away!" 44 

Luis de Carvajal el Mozo, after some ten years in the Inquisition's 
cellars of New Spain, having changed his name to Joseph Lumbroso, 45 
writes his final testament a short time before his anticipated auto de fe 
(December 1596), in which he states the ten principles of his mono- 
theistic creed, partly modeled after the "Thirteen Principles of Faith" 
of Maimonides (quoted by Luis in his discussion with two doctors of 
theology during his incarceration): 

I believe in the one and only God, almighty and true, Creator of heaven, 
earth, and sea ... I believe that God our Lord and universal Creator is 
one and no more ... I believe that the law of God our Lord, which the 
Christians call the dead law of Moses, is alive and everlasting, as recorded 
in the holy Pentateuch . . . The fourth belief of mine is that it is a sin to 
worship idols and images; 46 1 believe that the Sacred Sacrament of Circum- 
cision is eternal ... I believe that Christ [literally "the anointed," as in He- 
brew mashiah] the true Father of the future son, Prince of Peace, real son 
of David, possessor of the scepter of Judah has not arrived ... I believe 
in what relates to the mysterious vision of the holy Daniel . . . Tenth: 47 I 
believe that King Antiochus, whom the Holy Scriptures called root of sin, 
because he was the persecutor of God's people and of His holy law, rep- 
resents the kings of Spain and Portugal . . . from which originate the 
branches of the inquisitions and the persecutions of the blessed mar- 
tyrs . . . true Jews [whom they call] Judaizing heretics. However, Judaizing 
is not heresy but is living according to the Commandments of God our 
Lord. 

Luis de Carvajal concludes with a confession that sounds like a prayer 
recited on the Day of Atonement: 

I again swear, in the name of the Almighty, to live and die for His faith. 
May it please Him, so that, imitating the zeal of Hananiah, Azariah, 
Mishael, 48 and Matathias, 49 I shall joyfully give away my soul for the faith 
of the Holy Testament for which they died ... I hope for strength from 
the Lord. I do not trust myself, since I am only flesh and of frail nature; 
and just as I have placed a mother and five sisters in danger for this faith, 50 
I would give away a thousand, if I had them, for the faith of each of His 
holy Commandments . . . My Lord, look upon me with grace, so that it 
may be known and seen in this kingdom and upon all the earth that Thou 
art our God and that Thine almighty and holy name, Adonay, is invoked 
with truth in Israel and among Israel's descendants. I commit this soul that 
Thou gavest me to Thy holy hands, promising with Thy help not to 
change my faith till death nor after it. 



Copyrighted material 



186 



MOSHE LAZAR 



I end happily the narrative of my present life, having lively faith in Thy 
divine hope of saving me through Thine infinite mercy and of resurrect- 
ing me, when Thy holy will is accomplished, together with our fathers 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and his faithful sons, for whose holy love I beg 
Thee humbly to confirm this and not to forsake me. May it please Thee 
to send the angel Michael, our prince, to defend and help me. . . . O Lord, 
have mercy on the glory of Thy name, Thy law, and Thy people, and the 
world which Thou Thyself didst create; fill it with Thy light and the truth- 
ful knowledge of Thy name, so that heaven and earth will be filled with 
Thy glory and praise, amen, amen. 51 

In the spaces between the multiple autos de fe over three centuries, 
and in the shadow of celebrated martyrs, thousands of humble Anussim 
led a life filled with shame and fear, guilt and despair, hoping for some 
Moses to deliver them from the Christian Pharaoh, or some new Esther 
who would defeat the Hamans of the Inquisition. Asked if he were 
not a New Christian, a certain Goncalo, who was suspected of avoiding 
crossing himself in church, replied: "No, I am not; but I am a converso." 
Commenting on this seemingly paradoxical statement, Carrete Pa- 
rrondo writes: "This sentence, if it is correct, is quite surprising as New 
Christian and Converso are synonyms." 52 They might certainly have 
been synonymous in the common language and in the minds of the 
Christians, but this Goncalo was resisting being identified as a Christian, 
New or Old, stressing the fact that he had been converted against his 
will. Elvira Garcia declared that "in the faith she was born in she wishes 
to die;" and to the question why she had converted, she replied: "for 
the sake of my children." 53 Pedro Nunez de Santa Fe, formerly don Yuca 
of Valladolid, confessed that if not for all the debts owed to him he 
would not have converted [in 1492] nor returned from Portugal [in 
1494]. 54 Ruy Dias confided to a witness 55 that "if not for his children, he 
would leave for the land of Judaea." 

Guilt feelings for having converted, or for going on to live as Anus- 
sim, dreaming of leaving Christian kingdoms for Jerusalem or Constan- 
tinople, and keeping alive the hope of messianic redemption are some 
of the most frequent themes in the confessions of the Anussim as well 
as in the most memorized traditional prayers among them and in the 
personalized poetic versions of certain Psalms transmitted from one gen- 
eration to the next. Don Yuca, who would send a barrel of wine to his 
Jewish parents every year for Purim and Passover, confessed that "he 
repented of having become a Christian, that he would give his wife all 
their common property, have her return to her father's home, because 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



187 



he wished to leave for Jerusalem." 56 In Tras-os-Montes, Portugal, the 
following fragmentary prayer has survived the centuries: 

O meus Deus, quem ja se vira 
N'aquela santa cidade 
Chamada Jerusalem. 
Jerusalem esta esperando 
cada hora e cada dia . . . 
O alto Deus d'Israel, 
Cumpri vossas profecias . . . 

[O my God, pray one would be so fortunate / to reside in that holy city / 
called Jerusalem. / Waiting for Jerusalem, / every hour and every day . . . / 
O exalted God of Israel, / accomplish your prophecies . . .] 

From a crypto-Jewish physician living in Guarda, Portugal, who had 
been denounced in 1582 to the Inquisition in Lisbon, we possess a poetic 
expression of the deep-seated yearnings for messianic redemption and 
the ingathering of the captives and exiles in the Holy Land: 57 

O SONHO 

O Sonho que eu sonhava 
Se o ouzasse a dizer, 
Mas eu ey grande vergonha 
Que mo nao quizessem crer. 

Que sonhava com prazer 
Que os mortos se erguiao 
E tornavam a viver 
E que todos [se sahiao]; 58 

Os que estavao nas prisoes 
Traz dos montes escondidos, 
Sonhava que erao sahidos 
Da dura e forte prisao. 

Vi a tribu de Adao 

Com as dentes apreganhados 

E muito espedacados 

Da serpente do dragao. 

E assi vi a Ruben 
Co hua voz de muita gente. 
O qual vira mui contente 
Cantando em Jerusalem. 



Copyrighted material 



188 



MOSHE LAZAR 



O quern vira a Belem 
E os montes de Syon 
E a esse bom Jurdao 
Para se lavar mui bem . . . 

[THE DREAM. The dream I have dreamed, / if I dared to tell it; /but I 
feel so ashamed / for fear of not being believed. 

For I dreamed with joy / that the dead were resurrected / and returned 
to live, / that all of them left their graves. 

Those who were in the prisons / beyond the mountains hidden, / 1 
dreamed that they went free / from the harsh and cruel prison. 

I saw the tribe of Adam / caught in the gnashing teeth / and bitten to 
pieces / by the serpent, the dragon. 

And I also saw Ruben / with the noise of a multitude / coming in great 
happiness, / singing in Jerusalem. 

Fortunate who would see Bethlehem / and the mountains of Zion, / 
and reach the good river Jordan / to completely wash oneself, etc.] 59 

To give expression to their guilt feelings and yearning for a prompt 
divine redemption, the Anussim made the Psalms the most important 
vehicle to convey their innermost emotions, projecting in the texts they 
often learned by heart personal variations and allusions to their own 
situation. We find therefore in the surviving documents of the Inquisi- 
tion a great number of paraphrased Psalms, particularly those dealing 
with contrition and repentance, with yearning for messianic deliverance 
and dreams of returning to Zion. Thus, the book of Psalms, available 
to them in Jewish or Christian translations in Spanish, became for the 
Anussim the most continuous source of hope and consolation, prayer 
and meditation, personal devotion and mystical spirituality. From Chris- 
tian apocalyptic literature, in particular from the commentaries on 
Daniel brought by the preachers as persuasive arguments for converting 
to Christianity, the Anussim appropriated the same texts to deepen their 
faith in the messianic redemption yet to come. Juan de Salzedo, 60 when 
asked one day about how he felt, replied "that he was feeling fine, but 
that it was said in the Scriptures of the Jews that happy the man who 
will be found as a Jew after the passing of these [troubled] times," refer- 
ring probably to Daniel 12:2—3: "And many of them that sleep in the 
dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame 
and everlasting contempt. And then they that be wise shall shine as the 
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness 
as the stars for ever and ever." 61 

A typical poetic paraphrase and personal adaptation of a psalm, fre- 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 189 



quently alluded to in inquisitorial confessions, has been preserved in two 
complete versions (in Portuguese and Spanish), with slight variations be- 
tween them, and recorded during two different trials. 62 The Portuguese 
version of 1596 opens as follows: 

Alto Dio de Abraham, 

Rey forte de Israel, 

tu que ouuiste a Ismael, 

ouue a minha orazon; 

tu que en las grandes alturas 

te aposentas Senor, 

ouue a esta pecadora 

que te chama das bajuras; 63 

The Spanish version of 1643 rea ds: 

Oh, Alto Dios de Abraham, 

Dios fuerte, Dios de Israel, 

tu que oiste a Daniel, 

oye mi oracion; 

tu que en las grandes alturas 

te pusiste, mi Senor, 

oye aquesta pecadora 64 

que te llama de las basuras; 

tii que a toda criatura 

abres caminos y fuentes; 

alee mis ojos a los montes, 

donde vendra mi ayuda. 65 

Yo bien se que en mi se encierra 

gran pecado que en mi hay. 

Mi ayuda de Adonay, 

que hizo cielos y tierra; 

Santo(s) Dios, fuerte Dios, 

misericordioso Dios immortal, 

Habed misericordia de mi, Senor. 

[O exalted God of Abraham, / almighty God, God of Israel, / you who 
hearkened to Daniel, / listen to my prayer; / you, who in the high 
spheres / have residence, O my Lord, / listen to this sinning woman / who 
calls upon you from the abyss; / you who open for every creature / path- 
ways and water sources; / 1 lifted up my eyes unto the hills / whence my 
help will come. / 1 confess that in me enclosed / a great sin is hidden. 66 / 
My help comes from Adonay / who created heaven and earth. / Holy 
God, almighty God, / merciful and immortal God, / have mercy on me, O 
Lord.] 



Copyrighted material 



190 



MOSHE LAZAR 



Manuel de Morales, an active Judaizer in Portugal, who had arrived 
in New Spain with the Carvajals and played a major part among the 
Anussim there, wrote many poetic prayers (some erroneously attributed 
to Luis de Carvajal, el Mozo) 67 which were recited on the High Holidays 
during several generations. One of them opens as follows: 

Recibe mi ayuno en penitencia, 
Senor, de todo mal que te he cometido; 
no permites me falte tu clemencia 
pues ves con cuanta angustia te la pido; 
ensalzare tu suma omnipotencia, 
sera de mi tu nombre engrandecido 
y no me des, Senor, lo que merezco, 
pues ves que aiin en pensarlo estremezco. 

Si te he ofendido gravemente, 

era por falta de entendimieto ... (P. 307) 

[Accept, O Lord, my fast as penitence for any evil I have done to Thee; 
do not withhold Thy clemency from me, seeing how anxiously I beg 
Thee for it; I will extol Thy almightiness, Thy name will be exalted by 
me; do not retribute to me, Lord, according to my merits, seeing how I 
tremble only at this thought. / If I have gravely sinned in Thy eyes, it was 
for lack of understanding; etc.] 

His disciple, Luis de Carvajal (el Mozo), destined to become the 
charismatic martyr of sixteenth-century New Spain, wrote a sonnet that 
might well be considered as one of the most outstanding mystical and 
penitential texts ever written, in the style of the traditional piyyutim (sa- 
cred hymns) recited in the synagogue on the High Holidays. This com- 
position, in fact, was composed for Yom Kippur and was still known 
among the Anussim in the mid-seventeenth century: 

I have sinned, my Lord; but not because I have sinned 

Do I abandon plaint and hope for Thy mercy; 

I fear that my punishment will equal my guilt, 

But I still hope for forgiveness through Thy kindness. 

I suspect that, as Thou hast awaited my return, 
Thou hast held me in contempt for my ingratitude; 
My sin is made still greater 
Because Thou art so worthy of being loved. 

If it were not for Thee, what would become of me? 

And who, except Thee, would free me from myself? 

Who would free me if Thy hand did not shower Thy grace on me? 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



191 



And except for me, my God, who would not love Thee? 
And, except for Thee, my God, who would bear with me? 
And, without Thee, my God, to Thee who would take me? 68 

From single sentences, fragments of psalms and hymns, and po- 
etic paraphrases preserved in both inquisitorial documents and other 
sources, one can ascertain that the Anussim had at their disposal more 
than just memorized bits and pieces of traditional prayers. However, 
the mixture of Portuguese and Spanish, or Catalan and Spanish (in Ma- 
jorca), in earlier phases illustrates the new presence of books of prayers 
and other texts in the Spanish language, smuggled in from Ferrara and 
Amsterdam in the sixteenth century. From the surviving quotations and 
fragmentary texts it is possible to state without equivocation that the 
Anussim knew the most important prayers of the Sephardic ritual, the 
daily prayers as well as those used for the Sabbath, the holidays, and for 
special occasions (blessings before and after meal, before sleeping and 
after awakening, before leaving on a journey by land or sea; rules and 
precepts for certain ceremonial customs; etc.), including some texts of 
cabbalistic origin which were not in use among non-Sephardic worship- 
ers. We will illustrate these points with a select number of samples from 
various sources and different periods. 

In spite of the mass conversion of the Jewish community in Majorca 
in 1435, almost fifty years before the official establishment of the Inqui- 
sition in the Spanish kingdom, and their seeming insulation from the 
Jewish and crypto-Jewish communities on the mainland, these Anussim 
denigratingly known as xuetes, chuetas (the Majorcan equivalent of ma- 
rranos), who 250 years later were still branded as "New Christians" and 
excluded from the "Old Christian" society, seem to have preserved im- 
portant fragments of prayers from the Sephardic ritual. 69 Isabel Marti 
y Cortes, noted for her disparaging remarks to her torturers, brings up 
in her complaints verses from Psalms among Jewish articles of faith: 

Christians believe in a God made by the hands of man, who has eyes and 
does not see, ears and does not hear, mouth and does not speak, hands 
and does not touch, feet and does not walk; and they have invented a law 
adapted for their needs which gives them sustenance, and the inquisitors 
and their secretaries obtain a good salary which sustains them, but the 
Christians know very well that the Law given by the Lord of Israel to Moses 
is the true one, and that at the hour of death they believe in the Law of 
Moses, and so are saved, and that if they would read the Bible without 
distortions they would all become Jews, but they have mixed up every- 
thing, including all the commandments, for the third commandment of 
the Mosaic Law says to observe the Sabbath . . . 



Copyrighted material 



192 



MOSHE LAZAR 



The following text, for example, recorded at her trial in 1678 and 
transcribed by Braunstein as one unit, represents in reality three dif- 
ferent segments of the introductory portion of the morning service 
(the order being II, I, III; segment II is recited when entering the 
synagogue): 

I. Bendito tu Adonay, nuestro Dios, Rey del mundo, que formo el hombre 
con sabiduria, y crio en el orados orados, huecos huecos. Descubierto(s) y 
sabi[d]o delante cilia de tu trono, que si serasse uno dellos, o si se abriesse 
uno dellos, no [seria] possible sustenarse [por] una hora. Bendito tu 
Adonay, mel[e]ci[n]an toda criatura, y maravilha(s) para hazer. 

II. Yo [ 1 ] / con muchedumbre [2] / de tu merced [3] / vendre [4] / a tu cassa 
[5] / a humillarme [6] / a [7] / Palacio(s) [8] / de tu santidat [9] / (y) con 
temor [10] 

III. Todos criados de arriba [y] abaxo . . . 70 

Segment II, recited when one enters the synagogue, comprises in the 
Hebrew original ten words from Psalm 5:8, representing the number of 
persons necessary (a minyan) for a regular full service. Segment III here 
constitutes just the opening line of a special prayer (see next example) 
of cabbalistic origin, composed by Shelomoh Mosheh Alsaqar, and only 
incorporated in the Sephardic ritual of prayers. 71 This composition 
(which starts in Hebrew, Kol beruey ma'alah u-matah ye-'idun yagidun, etc.), 
accompanying the other two segments, is already present in an early 
sixteenth-century Catalan version of the Book of Prayers (Brit. Museum, 
MS Bodl. Or. 9 ): 72 

II. Beneyt tu A[donay], nostre Deu, rey del mon. que crjha Thome ab 
sabiesa, y cria en ell forats forats, buyts, buyts; descubert y sabut davan 
cadira de ta honra, que si [sera obert un d'ells, o] sis tancha un d'ells no 
li es posible per se sostenerse sols hora una. Beneyt tu A[donay], medecin- 
ant tota criatura y maravelha[n] per far. 

I. Y io en multitud de ta merge vindre en ta casa, encorbarme a palau de 
ta santedad, en ta temor. 

III. Tot criat alt y baix testificaran y recontaran tots ells [com uno] que 
A[donay] 1 , y son nom 1 ; 30 y 2 cenderos, y tot entene[n]t sa puritat recon- 
tara[n] sa grandeza . . . 

[Blessed be Thee Adonay, our God, King of the universe, who createth 
man with wisdom, and createth in him openings, holes; it is clear and 
known before the throne of Thy glory, that if one of them would be 
obstructed, or one of them would burst open, he could not possibly sur- 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



193 



vive even for a short time. Blessed be Thee Adonay, who careth for all 
creatures, and createth with marvel. 

But as for me, I will come into Thy house in the multitude of Thy 
mercy, and in Thy fear will I worship toward Thy holy temple. 

All the creatures in heaven and on earth will testify and proclaim 
unanimously that God is one and His name is one. Thirty-two pathways, 
for those who understand their secret, will proclaim Thy greatness . . .] 

The following prayer, equally from among those preserved in the 
community of Chuetas, was used particularly during the Sabbath ser- 
vice, and is found with more elements in most Hebrew Rituals of Prayer 
as well as with some variations in the surviving prayers of several com- 
munities of Anussim (the original in Hebrew [starting Barukh she-amar 
we-hayah ha-olam comprises eighty-seven words, a number which has 
some esoteric connotations): 73 

Bendito tu Adonay, nuestro Dios, Rey del mundo, y Rey el grande, el 
Santo Padre ["santo" not in Hebr. text], el Piadoso, lloado en boca de su 
Pueblo; afermo[z]icado en lengua de todos sus buenos, y sus siervos . . . y 
con canticos de David tu siervo. Te lloa[re]mos, engrandeceremos, te 
alabaremos, te glorificaremos, te enaltezeremos, y nombraremos tu nom- 
bre, nuestro Rey, nuestro Dios, unico vivo de los mundos. Alabado y 
glorificado sea tu nombre sienpre de sienpre. Bendito tu Adonay, nuestro 
Dios, Rey alabado con alabamiento. 

[Blessed be Thee Adonay, our God, King of the universe, exalted King, 
holy Father ["holy" not in Hebr. text], the merciful, praised on the lips of 
His nation; extolled in the tongue of His pious followers and ser- 
vants, . . . and with the psalms of David Thy servant. We will praise Thee, 
exalt Thee, extol Thee, glorify Thee, magnify Thee, and we will mention 
Thy name, our King, our God, uniquely alive in all eternity. Praised and 
glorified be Thy name for ever and ever. Blessed be Thee, Adonay, our 
God, King exalted with hymns of praise.] 

Another prayer, paraphrasing Psalm 91 with additions from other 
psalms, known as Oracao da Formosura ("Prayer of Exaltation"), is 
found with slight variations in a great number of specimens preserved 
for centuries among the Anussim of Portugal, Spain, Brazil, Mexico, and 
elsewhere. 74 I present here the opening sequence of various versions, 
among many others, in Portuguese. It was recorded at the trial of Brites 
Henriques between 1674 and 1683. Arrested at the age of twenty-two 
and tortured over a period of eight years, this young woman recited a 
great number of prayers, some very extensive, including the Oracao da 
Formosura [notice the use of first person singular in this version (as in 
the original psalm) contrary to first person plural in the next examples]: 



Copyrighted material 



194 



MOSHE LAZAR 



A honra e louvor do Senhor dos altos Ceos: Seja a santa formosura de 
Adonay, nuestro Dios, perfeita a obra das minhas maos compoe, perfeita 
a obra das minhas maos compora. Sobre my cobertura do alto, que me 
lembre do abastador. Digo Adonay e meu Deus, meu abrigo, meu catelo, 
e meu Senhor, que vos Senhor dos altos Ceus me livreis e me guardeis do 
laco do encampamento, de mortandade, de quebranto. Nao temo o pavor 
da noite . . . 

In a different version recorded in Belmonte half a century ago the 
prayer reads as follows: 

Em honra e louvor dos 73 [in Hebrew text: 72] nomes 75 do Senhor seja! 
A Formosura santa do meu Deus de Adonai sobre nos seja. O Senhor dos 
Ceus compoe as obras das nossas maos, o Senhor dos Ceus as compora. 
Estamos encobertos no alto, a sombra do abastador nos adormecemos. 
Viva Adonai, meu brio, meu rei, meu Senhor, meu castelo, meu edifico. 
Elle nos guardara e nos livrara do mau laco, tortura, mortandade, cas- 
timento da sua santidade. Debaixo da sua santa Saquine [for Hebrew shek- 
hinah, "divine presence"] nao temeremos o pavor da noite . . . 

And at the trial of Diogo Teixeira, the inquisitors recorded the following 
version: 

Em formosura de ti Adonai, nosso Dcos, cxalcado sobre nos c sobre os 
feitos de nossas maos, Adonai Sabaho, sobre nos a conta do alto, a sombra 
do Abastado, maris (? meu?) rei, Adonai meu grande abriguo, minha 
penha, meu castello, o Senhor me livrara de laco encampado, de mortan- 
dade arrebatosa; debaixo de suas asas me estaziarei . . . 

Another hymn of praise, paraphrasing Psalm 148 with personal inter- 
polations, has been recorded in many trial documents or simply alluded 
to. Recorded in the 1920s in Belmonte, Portugal, the traditional exam- 
ple starts as follows: 

Louvai o Senhor, os moradores dos Ceos, 
Louvai-o nas alturas; 
Louvai-o todos os seus anjos, 
Louvai-o todas as suas virtudes. 
Louvai-o o sol, a lua, as estrellas e a luz, 
Louvai-o todos . . . 

A Spanish variation on the same Psalm 148, recorded at the trial of Juan 
Lopez de Armenia in 1590, starts as follows (showing clearly some indi- 
vidual interpolations): 76 

A. a S. [Alabad al Senor] todos los arcangeles y los 
profetas, 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



195 



A. a S. todos los patriarcas, 
A. a S. todos los martires, 
A. a S. de dia y de noche, 

A. a S. de ynvierno y en verano y en frio y en calor, 

A. a S. la luz y las tinieblas, 

A. a S. las alturas, 

A. a S. las baxecas de la tierra, 

A. a S. que no come ni beue, y juzga y ue . . . 

In Belmonte, the same psalm has been elaborated in a short song, easy 
to learn, following the structure and the style of the popular cantigas 
de amigo of the Gallego-Portuguese tradition, and adapted to a female 
congregation as a morning prayer: 77 

Levantai-vos meninas cedo, 
Ja quere amanhecer; 
Louvaremos ao altissimo senhor 
Que nos ha de fortalecer. 
Louvai o Senhor ao som da viola 
Ele e tudo som e tudo gloria. 
Louvai o Senhor meninas 
Louvai-o com vozes finas. 
Louvai o Senhor donzelas 
Louvai-o com vozes belas. 
Louvai o Senhor casadas 
Louvai-o com vozes claras. 
Louvai o Senhor viuvas 
Louvai-o com vozes puras. 
O Senhor de todos os amores, 
Louvai meninas e Mores. 

Amen, Senhor, que fizeste o dia. 

[Awake and rise, O maidens, hastily, / the time of dawn is near; / we will 
praise the almighty Lord / who will give us strength. / Praise the Lord 
with the lute / for He is sound and glory. / Praise the Lord, O maiden, / 
Praise Him with noble voices. / Praise the Lord, O damsels, / Praise Him 
with beautiful voices. / Praise the Lord, O spouses, / Praise Him with clear 
voices. / Praise the Lord, O widows, / Praise Him with pure voices. / The 
Lord of all the loves, / Praise ye maiden and flowers. / Amen, O Lord, 
who maketh the new day.] 

Among the poetic adaptations of the prayer to be recited before retir- 
ing to bed at night, we quote one recorded in Idanha-a-Nova: 

Na minha cama me deitei, 
As minhas portas fechei 



Copyrighted material 



196 



MOSHE LAZAR 



Com as chaves de Abrahao; 
Os bons entrarao, 
Os maus sahirao; 
Os anjos do Senhor 
Comigo estao. 

Amen, Senhor . . . 

[I lay down in my bed, / 1 have closed my doors / with the keys of Abra- 
ham; / the pious will come in, / the evil ones will leave; / the angels of the 
Lord / are here with me. Amen, Lord, etc.] 

As the women in Portugal were particularly active among the Anus- 
sim and served in a way as lay "cantors" or "priests" (sacerdotisas) in 
conducting the secret religious services and educating their children, 
many prayers for all the various occasions were adapted in song form, 
including allusions to their own tragic situation. These could then be 
memorized with ease and preserved as popular songs for generations. 
A good example is such an adaptation for the Day of Atonement 
(Oracao que se diz no "Dia Puro do Senhor"), possibly composed in 1 500 
or 1543 (depending on the interpretation of line five in the fragment 
quoted here; the allusion could be to D. Manuel or Don Juan III): 



Qucbrai, Senhor, cstejugO 
Que nos peza deshumano; 
Livrai-nos, Senhor, livrai-nos 
Das garras d'este tirano. 

Ha trez annos que o teu povo 
Em ferros geme e suspira, 
Bastem os males passados, 
Aplaque-se a tua ira! 

Livraste-o de hum pharao; 
Por santo prodigio novo 
De outro pharao mais duro 
Outra vez livra o teu povo. 

A tua voz formidavel 
Quebrem-se os duros grielhoes, 
Hoje, porque he o teu dia 
Deve ser o dos perdoes. 

Para nos he a ventura, 
Para ti, Senhor, a gloria; 
O teu dia sacro santo 
Seja o dia da victoria. 

Amen, Senhor . . . 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



197 



[Break, O Lord, this yoke / of inhumane oppression; / deliver us, O Lord, 
deliver us / from this tyrant's claws. / For three years already your 
people / in chains cry and complain; / suffice the past evils, / placate now 
your anger. / You delivered him from a Pharaoh; / with a new sacred 
miracle, / from another Pharaoh more cruel, / free once more your na- 
tion. / At the sound of your tremendous voice, / let the harsh chains be 
smashed; / this day, for it is your day, / has to be the day of forgiving. / It 
should be good fortune to us, / and glory to you, O Lord; / let your sa- 
cred holy day / be the day of victory. / Amen, O Lord . . .] 

From a series of Passover songs that have survived among the Anus- 
sim, I selected the following examples (the first two from Belmonte): 

Caminhamos e andamos 
Louvaremos ao Deus d'Abrahao, 
Que nos livrou do Egypto 
De terra da escravidao. 

[Let us go forth and march, / praising the Lord of Abraham, / who has 
freed us from Egypt, / the land of slavery.] 

Caminhamos e andamos 
Louvaremos ao Deus d'Israel 
Que nos livrou do Egypto 
Da quelle Rei tao cruel (bis). 

[Let us go forth and march, / praising the Lord of Israel, / who has freed 
us from Egypt, / from that very cruel king.] 

The traditional and popular song ("Who knows One? / I know One. / 
One is God. / Who knows two?" etc.) was preserved among the Chuetas 
in Majorca in the seventeenth century (with the typical opening part 
common to the Sephardim: "Qui sabes y entregues; qui es Deu alt en 
eel? Alabat sie el seu santo nom. Amen. Amen."): 

El Uno: El gran Dios de Israel; / Los Dos: Moysen y Aaron; / Los Tres: 
Abram, Isach y Jacob; / Los Quatro: Maridos de Israel; / Los Cinco: Libros 
de la Lei; / Los Seis: Dias del Sabado (Misna);/Los Siete: Dias de la 
Semana; / . . . Los Doze: Tribus de Israel; / Las Treze: Palabras que dijo 
Dios omnipotente a Moyses. Amen. Amen. 

Compare this with a later version sung among the Sephardim in the Ot- 
toman Empire, recorded in two versions by Camhy and Samuelson. 78 

And, finally, let us quote here a poetic adaptation of the Ten Com- 
mandments, originating in Belmonte, which the mother recites to her 
son as an initiation to their secret monotheistic faith. In this song form, 
the youngsters could learn with ease the basic tenets of Judaism: 



Copyrighted material 



198 



MOSHE LAZAR 



Eu sou teu Deus e Senhor, 
Deus dum poder infinito 
Que, piedoso, te salvei 
Do captiveiro do Egypto. 

Nao teras alheios Deuses — , 
Que em mim tens o sumo bem; 
Ama-me, como a ti mesmo, 
E ao teu proximo tambem. 

Nao tomaras do teu Deus 
O seu santo nome em vao — ; 
E nem por Elle, debalde, 
Jures na mais leve accao. 

Ao sabbado nao trabalhes, 
Nem tu, nem filho, ou criado — , 
Santificando este dia, 
So para mim reservado. 

Honraras teu pae e mae — , 
Com particular dever; 
Sao pessoas respeitaveis, 

Porque te derao o ser. 

Irado, nao mataras 

O teu proprio semelhante — , 

E nao conserves jamais 

O odio, nem por um instante. 

Com castidade seras — , 
Modesto em tuas ac^oes, 
Sem manchares a tua alma 
Com obscenas corrupcoes. 

Nao furtaras — , porque o furto, 
De proposito e vontade, 
E' um crime abominavel, 
Que revolta a sociedade. 

Contra o proximo nao falles, 
De todos dizendo bem; 
Nem com falso testemunho 
Jamais insultes alguem. 

Nem por leve pensamiento, 
Desejaras a mulher, 
Que nao seja a tua propria — , 
Intentando-a corromper. 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



799 



Nao cubigaras, emfim, 
Aquillo que nao for teu — , 
Contenta-te com os bens, 
Que a Providencia te deu. 

Aqui tens, querido filho, 
Do bom Deus a lei primeira, 
Que devemos observar 
Com a fe mais verdadeira. 

[I am thy God and Lord, / God of infinite power, / who mercifully deliv- 
ered thee / from captivity in Egypt. // Thou shalt not have alien gods, / 
for in me is your supreme good; / thou shalt love me as thyself, / and also 
thy neighbor. // Thou shalt not use for naught / the holy name of thy 
God; / and, in His name, never swear / in vain even for a trifling sum. // 
Thou shalt not labor on the Sabbath day, / neither thy son nor thy ser- 
vant; / sanctify this day, / set aside only for me. // Thou shalt honor thy 
father and mother / with particular devotion; / they are respectable 
people / having given thee thy being. // Irate, thou shalt not kill / any crea- 
ture in thy likeness; / and never harbor in thy heart / hatred, not even for 
an instant. // In chastity thou shalt dwell, / modest in thy deeds, / not tar- 
nishing thy soul / with obscene corruptions. // Thou shalt not steal, for 
theft / done with purpose and intention / is an abominable crime / that 
subverts society. // Thou shalt not malign thy neighbor; / say good things 
about all people; / never cause harm to anybody / by false testimony. // 
Thou shalt not desire, / not even in furtive thought, / a woman which is 
not thine, / causing her to be defiled. // Lastly, thou shalt not covet / what- 
ever is not thine; / be happy with thy lot / which Providence has given 
thee. // This is, my beloved son, / the good Lord's First Law; / and we have 
to observe it / with perfectly sincere faith.] 

On 8 December 1596, Luis de Carvajal the Younger was led to his 
auto de fe. All the way to the quemadero, Father Alonso de Contreras was 
begging him to kiss the cross — to save his soul, and thus deserve being 
garroted before burning instead of being burned alive — but in vain. He 
wanted to die, writes Father Contreras, as the "great zealot, grand 
teacher and restorer of the forgotten Law": 

He was always such a good Jew and he reconciled his understanding, 
which was very profound and sensitive, with his highly inspired divine de- 
termination to defend the Law of God — the Mosaic — and fight for it. I 
have no doubt that if he had lived before the Incarnation of Our Re- 
deemer, he would have been a heroic Hebrew, and his name would have 
been as famous in the Bible as are the names of those who died in defense 
of their Law when it was necessary. 79 

These words of Father Alonso de Contreras, which sum up the life 
and martyrdom of Luis de Carvajal, could well serve as an epitaph to 



200 



MOSHE LAZAR 



thousands of known and anonymous Anussim as well as a conclusion to 
our inquiry on the degree and continuity of their "Jewishness."* 



NOTES 

*The forcibly converted Jews in Spain and Portugal, many of whom went on 
leading double lives for generations or even centuries, were called conversos and 
New Christians but, when suspected of clinging to the Mosaic faith, were 
branded most often as Judaizers, and more denigratingly as Marranos (pigs). 
Since they were the victims of physical and mental violence in the torture cellars 
of the Inquisition, and were martyrs at the stake, the insulting anti-Jewish name 
coined by the victimizers will be avoided in this essay. The term crypto-Jews 
(secret Jews) is certainly appropriate and neutral enough but expresses only in 
part their real existential condition. In Hebrew literature they are called Anus- 
sim (singular Anuss: "coerced, raped"), signifying that they were converted 
under duress, mentally and physically raped, in opposition to meshumadim 
("apostates, willingly converted"). I therefore advocate the use of Anussim in- 
stead of marranos. It is worthwhile noting that the late Francisco Cantera Burgos 
in his Chebet Jehuda [La Vara de Juda] de Salomon Ibn Verga (Granada, 1927) con- 
sciously made a similar choice when writing: "la terrible matanza de los annusim 
o judaizantes del ano 1506." Note: All translations are mine, except where other- 
wise indicated. 

1. For some examples, see below, n. 25. 

2. Contrary to the view of most scholars dealing with the Anussim (Y. Baer, 
C. Roth, H. Beinart, Y. H. Yerushalmi, I. S. Revah, Gerson D. Cohen), who as- 
sert the continuity of a fundamental "Jewishness" among the so-called "Juda- 
izers," some others (notably B. Netanyahu, followed by E. Rivkin, and A. Domin- 
guez Ortiz) have tried to argue that it was a fiction fabricated by the inquisitors 
in their persecution of the New Christians, a political and economic weapon 
against them, and that therefore the inquisitorial trial records constitute an un- 
reliable source. For a summary presentation of this controversy and a rejection 
of the latter thesis, see Y. H. Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto: 
Isaac Cardoso. A Study in Seventeenth-Century Marranism and Jewish Apologetics (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1971; reprint, Seattle and London: Washing- 
ton University Press, 1981), 21—42. 

3. See Y. H. Yerushalmi, The Lisbon Massacre of 1506 and the Royal Image in 
the "Shebet Yehudah," Hebrew Union College Annual, Supplements, vol. 1 (Cin- 
cinnati: Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, 1976). 

4. See, for instance, even in Spanish translation, Maimonides's Guide for the 
Perplexed and Yehudah Halevi's Book of the Kuzari, preserved in fifteenth-century 
manuscripts, edited by Moshe Lazar (Los Angeles: Labyrinthos [The Sephardic 
Classical Library, 1989, 1990], vols. 2 & 4); some surviving rituals of prayers in 
Spanish and Catalan; and so on. Traveling Judaizers were guests in homes of 
relatives or in "trustworthy converso homes"; see H. Beinart, Conversos on Trial, 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



201 



The Inquisition in Ciudad Real (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1981), 246-247: "When 
a Jew came to a Converso home, crypto-Jews came to see him, listening atten- 
tively as he instructed them in the Torah and the observance of the mitzvoth . . . 
Reading from the Bible and the Sidur, the Jews acted as a stimulus to their 
crypto-Jewish brethren." 

5. Contacts were also maintained through correspondence, using a variety 
of cryptograms. For some examples, see British Museum, MS Add. 29, 868- 
1677/8; and a reproduction in S. Liebman, Jews in New Spain (Coral Gables, Fla.: 
University of Miami Press, 1970), 213. 

6. See below, a summary of the basic Jewish customs serving the inter- 
rogators in Spain, Portugal, and the New World. 

7. Beinart, Conversos on Trial, 241. 

8. Archivo Historico Nacional (hereafter AHN), Inquisition, libro 1031, fols. 
119V-126V. See the complete dossier of Maldonado de Silva published by Jose 
Toribio Medina, and also L. Garcia de Proodian, Los judios en America: Sus ac- 
tividades en los Virreinatos de Nueva Castilla y Nueva Granada, s XVII (Madrid: Con- 
sejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, 1966). 

9. A hundred years later, deported from Rio de Janeiro to Lisbon, another 
gifted young writer, Antonio Jose da Silva, was led to the stake at the age of 
thirty-four along with his wife (October 1739). His surviving dramatic works are 
known as Operas do Judeu. 

10. Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto, 32. 

1 1. See I. S. Revah, "Les Marranes portugais et l'lnquisition au XVIe siecle," 
in The Sephardic Heritage, ed. R. D. Barnett (London: Vallentine, Mitchell, 1971), 
1 :52c 

12. Quoted by Beinart, Conversos on Trial, 38. 

13. See L. Wolf, Jews in the Canary Islands (London: Spottiswoode, Ballantyne, 
1926), 466. 

14. See H. Beinart, Records of the Trials of the Spanish Inquisition in Ciudad Real, 
4 vols. (Jerusalem: The Israel National Academy of Sciences and Humanities, 
1974—1985). Maria Diaz, leading figure among a group of conversos who had 
fled from Ciudad Real in 1474, is described by Fernando de Trujillo as follows: 
"Her knowledge [of the laws] was no less than his own, for he himself could not 
instruct [the conversos] in the Law of Moses [better than she could]." Fernando 
de Trujillo had acted as a rabbi in Palma and Ecija before his conversion. 

15. See, for example, Liebman, Jews in New Spain, 263: Isabel Nunez Duarte, 
exclaiming at the stake: "Look, Mother of the Maccabees, how you are being 
revived to be the mother of so many who are going to the stake [for their faith]." 

16. See, among others, Liebman, Jews in New Spain; A. Toro, La Familia Car- 
vajal (Mexico City, 1944), 2 vols; M. A. Cohen, The Martyr: The Story of a Secret 
Jew and the Mexican Inquisition in the Sixteenth Century (Philadelphia: Jewish Pub- 
lication Society of America, 1973); VJo\{,Jews in the Canary Islands; B. Lewin, El 
Santo Oficio en America (Buenos Aires: Sociedad Hebraica Argentina, 1950); 
B. Braunstein, The Chuetas of Majorca: Conversos and the Inquisition of Majorca, 
Columbia University Oriental Studies, vol. 28 (Scottsdale, Pa.: Mennonite Pub- 



Copyrighted material 



202 



MOSHE LAZAR 



lishing House, 1936; reprint, New York: Ktav Publishing House, 1972); Lucia 
Garcia de Proodian, Los judtos en America. 

17. See S. Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos em Portugal no seculo XX," Arque- 
ologia e historia [6th ser.], 4 (1925): 5-114; also published separately (Lisbon, 
1925). References below are to page(s) of the article followed in parentheses by 
corresponding page(s) of the separate publication. 

18. Quoted by Yerushalmi, From Spanish Court to Italian Ghetto, 24 n. 37. 

19. See AHN, Inq., lib. 1021, fols. 240V-241, cited in Garcia de Proodian, 
Losjudios en America, 478-479, a fragmentary list of books confiscated from Luis 
Mendez Chaves, including some seven prayer books in Spanish published in 
Amsterdam between 1617 and 1641. 

20. Yosef ha-Kohen, Emeq ha-bakha, ed. M. Letteris (Crakow: J. Fischer, 
1895), 8: "I, Yosef ha-Kohen, saw a book which was in bad shape, one of those 
which had been hidden for a long while during those evil days [1391] inside 
wells." See also Beinart, Records 1:322. 

2 1 . See W. Popper, The Censorship of Hebrew Books (New York: Knickerbocker 
Press, 1899; reprint, New York: Ktav Publishing House, 1969), 20. 

22. See W. Popper, Censorship, 11-12; and n. 32, quoting Yehudah Lerma: 
"Then I found one book in the possession of Christians who had snatched it 
from the flames, and I secured it at great cost." 

23. See C. Carrete Parrondo, Fontes Iudaeorum Regni Castellae, II: El Tribunal 
de la Inquisicion en el Obispado de Soria ( 1486—1502) (Salamanca: Universidad Pon- 
tificia de Salamanca, 1985), 1 19. 

24. See J. Riera i Sans, "Un recull d'oracions en catala dels conversos jueus 
(segle XV)," Estudis Romanics 16 (1971-1975): 49—97. 

25. J. Caro Baroja, Los judws en la Espana moderna y contempordnea (Madrid, 
1961), 1:388; see also p. 1 19, a mention by Andres Pacheco, inquisitor general, 
in 1623, concerning the most celebrated burning of books in Salamanca after 
the establishment of the Inquisition: "cuantos libros hallaron sobre vanas artes, 
ciencias ilicitas, supersticiones de magia y encantamientos que encontraron, 
sobre todo, en poder de los judios y de los conversos, y que en auto (que se 
celebro junto al monasterio de San Esteban) ardieron unos sesenta mil libros." 
Quoted by C. Carrete Parrondo, Fontes Iudaeorum Regni Castellae, I: Provincia de 
Salamanca (Salamanca: Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca, 1981), 140. 

26. See, in particular, Beinart, Records; Wolf, Jews in the Canary Islands; 
Braunstein, Chuetas; Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos"; Lewin, El Santo Oficio; and 
Carrete Parrondo, Fontes Iudaeorum. 

27. See, for example, Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, I, nos. 3, 20, 68, 87, 111, 122, 
419, 423. Hamin ("warm," in Aramaic) and calyente ("warm"), called in Yiddish 
among Ashkenazi Jews cholent (from Old French, chalent, "warm"). 

28. See Wolf, Jews in the Canary Islands, xxiii: the Canariote New Christians 
compiled a special ritual "in which the apocryphal prayer of Queen Esther with 
its pathetic avowal of crypto-Judaism and its fierce denunciation of the persecu- 
tion and the heathen, prominently figured." Esther and Joseph are central 
figures in the life and the prayers of the Anussim in general. 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



203 



29. See Braunstein, Chuetas, 298: "Bendito tu Adonay, nuestro Dios, rey del 
mundo, que nos santifico en sus mandamientos y nos encomendo sobre limpieza 
de manos"; Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 53 (49): "Louvado seja o Senhor que 
nos deu agua para nos lavarmos"; see Liebman,/*nm in New Spain, 241: Tomas 
Trevino de Sobremonte, at his trial in 1649, confesses that he had learned from 
his mother to recite: "Blessed be the Almighty God who in his lessons has taught 
me the washing of the hands, mouth, and eyes, in order to bless, serve, praise, 
and honor Thee, O God, according to the Law of Moses." 

30. See, among others, Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, II, no. 108: "la vio que se 
levantava de la cama, e come se ovo vestido e lavado, que comenco de resar una 
oracion en abrayco estando en pie e vuelta a la pared, e sabadeava e fasia los 
abtos en el desir de la oracion, como judia"; no. 107: "que nosotros nos con- 
fesamos a hombre e los judios a la pared"; E. Lipiner, Os judaizantes nas capitanias 
de cima: Estudos sobre os cristdos-novos do Brazil nos seculos XVI e XVII (Sao Paulo: 
Editora Brasilense, 1969), 101: "dando saltos para cima dizendo: Cadox, Cadox, 
Cadox, que queria dizer Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus Sabaoth." This 
quotation from Isaiah, incorporated among the eighteen blessings of the Amidah, 
is also quoted by Tomas Trevino de Sobremonte during his trial in 1649 (see 
Liebman, Jews in New Spain, 241; and above n. 27). 

31. According to a custom based on a talmudic dictum: "three things are told 
about nails: he who burns them is virtuous; he who buries them is righteous; 
he who throws them away is wicked." 

32. See Gen. 32:33. 

33. See, for example, Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, I, nos. 6, 11, 19, 20, 42, 59, 
336, 392, and so on. 

34. See, Num. 15:20; Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 83 (79) "Quando se di- 
zima a amassadura: Bemdito meu Senhor, Meu Deus, meu Adonai, que nos en- 
comendou com as suas encomendas bemditas e bem-santas que dizimassemos 
este pao, para a boca do leao, como fizeram os nossos irmaos na Santa Terra da 
Promissao. Amen, Senhor, etc." 

35. See Beinart, Records 1:241, 456-457: "Hadas, hadas, hadas buenas que 
te vengan"; 2:10; and Conversos, 279-280. 

36. See Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, II, no. 96: "Juan Sanchez meldaba en un 
libro en abrayco en la forma que los judios suelen meldar"; no. 1 10: Diego Fer- 
rando and others going to an orchard, taking with them "su cidur [prayer book] 
e el humas [Pentateuch], que son libros de la ley judayca"; no. 111: Diego Fer- 
rando would go early morning to an orchard, "llevava su cidur, e los sabados 
que llevava el humas"; no. 134: "calla, que digo cilhod [penitential prayers], por 
que Dios me escape de esta cara; cjlhod es unos maytines que dizen los judios 
de media noche avaxo"; no. 277: "quando resava las dichas oraciones tenia ves- 
tido un abitillo que se llamava cecit e tenia puesta en la cabeca los tafelines de 
la misma forma que lo tenian los judios"; and so on. 

37. See Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, II, nos. 13, 146. 

38. Ibid., no. 347: Guiomar Lopez, wife of Juan Garcia, when going to 
church: "A ti, Dio [notice the common use among Sephardic Jews of Dio rather 



Copyrighted material 



204 



MOSHE LAZAR 



than Dios!] de mi padre, me encomiendo, Dio de Abraham, Dio de Ysaque, Dio 
de Jaco, y en ti fio, que todo lo otro es nada y vanidad [Hebrew hevel wa-riq]"; 
Lipiner, Osjudaizantes, 47: a converso, at the elevation of the holy Host, mumbles 
"eu creio o que creio" (I believe in what I believe); 154-155: Alvaro Pacheco, 
instructing his cousin Antonia de Oliveira, "taught her to save her soul as did 
their ancestors; fasting on Mondays and Thursdays, not to recite on those days 
the Pater Noster, nor Ave Maria, nor any other Christian prayers; to keep the 
Sabbath [the true "Sunday"]; to believe in One God, not to adore icons"; Amilcar 
Paulo, "Os marranos nas Beiras" in Revista Beira Alia, 1960:631-676: "Eu nao 
adoro o pao, nem a pedra, mas o grande Deu que todo governa" (I don't worship 
the wood [the cross; and/or (pao = bread? = holy Host)] nor the stone, but 
only the Great God who governs everything); "nesta igreja entro, mas nao adoro 
[pao? pau?] nem pedra, tambien nao adoro pao nem vinho; venho unicamente 
adorar ao Deus de Moises vivo" (I enter this church, but I don't worship [wood] 
and stone, nor worship bread or wine; I come only to worship the living God 
of Moses); Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 83 (79), no. 70: "Nesta casa [using 
"house" rather than "church"] entro, nao adoro nem o pau nem a pedra; so a 
Deus que em tudo governa." 

39. See Beinart, Conversos, 259—283. 

40. See Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, II, no. 80: "demando la cedaca con una 
bolsa abierta en la mano." 

41. Ibid., I, 113: "que fue midras e casa de oracion de los judios." 

42. See Liebman, Jews in New Spain, 282: Diego Diaz, 80 years old, at the 
stake in 1659, refuses to kiss the cross to save his soul: "Stop, padre, that stick 
can't save anybody." 

43. See Deut. 2:7-10; Ruth 4:6-7. 

44. Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, I, 26—27. 

45. See S. B. Liebman, The Enlightened: The Writings of Luis de Carvajal, elMozo 
(Coral Gables, Fla.: University of Miami Press, 1967). The choice of Joseph is 
obvious, he and Esther being the most revered heroes among the Anussim; 
Lumbroso, a well-known name among sixteenth-century Sephardic people, 
might be a translation of Meir (also spelled Mehir, Mayr, Mair, etc., in medieval 
Spanish documents), meaning "the enlightener" rather than "the enlightened," 
as used by Liebman. Luis de Carvajal saw himself as a new Joseph, a suffer- 
ing messianic prophet, destined to awaken and free his fellow Anussim from 
the Inquisition's bondage. His youngest brother, Miguel, who with another 
brother escaped to Salonica, became a celebrated rabbi under the name of Jacob 
Lumbroso. 

46. The fifth article of faith seems to have been omitted, unless the para- 
graph dealing with the observance of the Sabbath and the dietary laws was meant 
to be the fifth. See Liebman, The Enlightened, 128. 

47. No. 9 is missing. 

48. See Daniel 1:6-7; 3 ; 8 _2 5- 

49. See 1 Maccabees, chap. 2. 



Copyrighted material 



SCORCHED PARCHMENTS AND TORTURED MEMORIES 



205 



50. In secret messages he was circulating among them from cell to cell, 
written on scraps of paper, banana peels, avocado nuts, and eggshells, Luis 
addressed them with biblical names (calling his mother Rachel, whose son was 
Joseph); to his sisters he wrote: "Be consoled, and have consolation in [the ulti- 
mate] victory. Be suffused with high spirits and gladness, like Annas and 
Esthers; be like beautiful Rachels, faithful Sarahs, strong Jaels and Judiths. Sing 
a song of victory with Deborah and Miriam." 

5 1 . For the complete translation of Luis de Carvajal's testament, see Lieb- 
man, The Enlightened, 125—133. 

52. Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, II, no. 312, and note 3. 

53. Ibid., no. 34. 

54. Ibid., no. 231. 

55. Ibid., no. 1 14. 

56. Ibid., no. 9. 

57. Trovas Do Licenciado Antonio Vaz; see Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 91 
(87). 

58. Text: erao sahidos; scribal error: see next stanza. 

59. Possibly alluding to a "baptism" (ritual bath) that would wash off the 
baptism of forced conversion. 

60. The same Salzedo, as in Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, II, no. 134, who in 
prison prayed in Hebrew every night, reciting penitential psalms at midnight so 
that "God may deliver him from the present tribulations." 

61. Carrete Parrondo, Fontes, no. 286; see also no. 347; and Carrete Pa- 
rrondo's article "Mesianismo e Inquisition en las juderias de Castilla la Nueva," 
Helmantica 31 (1980): 251-256. 

62. See, Liebman, y*?tw in New Spain, 155-156; trial of Diego Diaz Nieto in 
1596 (Archivo General de la Nation [Mexico], tomo 159, expediente 2); and trial 
of Catalina Hennquez in 1643 (Huntington Library). 

63. The following lines are absent from the Spanish text: "pues que somes 
os teuuos seyes / de adorar ed Dioses alleihos / coissa en que tanto ho me en- 
cerra . . ."; these lines are corruptly transcribed. This is proved by a three-line 
fragment preserved in Tras-os-Montes. See Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 88 
(84): "Saimos do vosso seio / A adorar ao deus alheio, I Coisa que tanto nos erra," 
which makes perfect sense: "We went forth from your bosom / to worship an 
alien god, / thus leading us into error . . ." 

64. Notice that "sinner" is in feminine (as in many other preserved prayers), 
because of the central role played by women in the oral transmission of customs 
and prayers. 

65. See, Psalms 121: 1—2: "I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence 
cometh my help. My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and 
earth." 

66. Alluding, as always, to the capital sin of conversion. 

67. See Cohen, The Martyr, 308. 

68. Translation in Liebman, The Enlightened, 49. 



206 



MOSHE LAZAR 



69. For the history of the "Chuetas" (shamefully discriminated against by 
their neighbors well into the twentieth century) and fragmentary prayers re- 
corded in the seventeenth century, see Braunstein, Chuetas, appendix VI. 

70. I have corrected some misreadings by both the scribe and Braunstein. 

71. See Siddur Otzar ha-Thefilloth, Nosah Sefarad, with commentaries, 2 vols. 
(New York: A. Y. Friedman Publishers, n.d.), 1:103. The prayer in question is 
not discussed in A. Z. Idelsohn, Jewish Liturgy and its Development (New York: 
Schocken Books, i960), otherwise a very useful reference guide. 

72. See M. Lazar, "La traduction Hebraico-Provencale du Rituel," in Me- 
langes offerts a Jean Frappier (Geneva: Droz, 1970), 579—580. 

73. See Otzar ha-Thefilloth, 1:184—185; Idelsohn, Jewish Liturgy, 80—81. 

74. See, for example, Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 79 (75)m 108 (104); Jose 
Goncalves Salvador, Cristaos-novos: Jesuitas e Inquisicdo (Sao Paulo: Livraria 
Pioneira Editora, 1969), 181; J. Riera i Sans, "Un recull d'oracions," Catalan ver- 
sion, starting: "Aquests son los LXXII vessors del psaltiri los quals devets dir tots dies," 
and so on. 

75. Of cabalistic origin (see Abraham Ibn Ezra's Sefer ha-shem), this hymn 
comprising seventy-two verses is based on a mystical interpretation of the tetra- 
gramaton (YHWH: the abstract, symbolic and unpronounceable name of God) 
and the numerical value of its letters in Hebrew (10, 5, 6, 5). Adding the value 
of the first with that of the two first, then with the three first, and with all the 
four, the sum is 72 [10 + (10 4- 5) 4- (10 + 5 4- 6) + (10 + 5 + 6 +5)]. 
Finally, the number 72 corresponds to the numerical value of the Hebrew letters 
HSD (Hesed: "divine mercy"). Cf. Schwarz, "Os cristaos-novos," 27. 

76. See Beinart, "Converso community," 469. 

77. This and the following examples have been transcribed by Schwarz, "Os 
cristaos-novos," 51 ff. (47ff.). 

78. O. Camhy, "Le Judeo-Espagnol — facteur de conservation pendant quatre 
siecles," in Sephardic Heritage, ed. Barnett, 1:565 and 546 respectively. 

79. Quoted and translated in Liebman,y<>u« in New Spain, 182. 



ELEVEN 



The Inquisition and the 
Crypto-Jewish Community in Colonial 
New Spain and New Mexico 

Stanley M. Hordes 



Within the scope of Mexican history, the subjects of the Inquisition and 
crypto-Jews have long been the focus of heated controversy and mis- 
placed value judgments. 1 The unfortunate result of this has been, and 
still remains today, a lack of understanding of the Inquisition, par- 
ticularly in its relation to the crypto-Jewish community. The polemical 
nature of the historiography reflects the same Black Legend-versus- 
White Legend debate that has plagued colonial Latin American histori- 
ography continuously since the Spanish conquest. Because the theme of 
inquisitorial persecution strikes at the very nerve center of this debate 
between assailants and defenders of the Spanish colonial system, that is, 
the rigid enforcement of Catholic orthodoxy and exclusivity, historians 
of both schools have demonstrated a great deal of emotion and self- 
righteousness in the pursuit of their respective causes. Many authors 
have placed a heavy emphasis on the role that the Holy Office of the 
Inquisition played in the persecution of crypto-Jews, despite the fact that 
the inquisitors concerned themselves far more with more mundane 
breaches of faith and morals such as blasphemy, bigamy, witchcraft, 
impersonation of priests and solicitation of women in the confessional. 
One of the great barriers to gaining an understanding of the Inquisition 
and the crypto-Jews in New Spain has been the inappropriate imposition 
of current value-judgments on people and events in the past. The stress 
placed by certain historians on the persecution of crypto-Jews reflects 
an implicit and explicit application of twentieth-century values to an 
institution and a society of an earlier age. 

It will be the purpose of this essay to examine in a more critical and 

207 



208 



STANLEY M. HORDES 



dispassionate manner the experiences of the crypto-Jewish community 
of New Spain in the colonial era, not only their treatment at the hands 
of the Holy Office of the Inquisition but their role in the economy and 
society of the viceroyalty. I will conclude by offering some preliminary 
observations concerning a new project, just under way, to study a living 
remnant of the Mexican crypto-Jewish community only now emerging 
from the shadows in New Mexico. 

With the conquest of New Spain by Hernando Cortes in 1521, the 
long arm of the Inquisition extended across the Atlantic Ocean from 
Spain to Mexico. The small number of Judaizing cases tried by the Mex- 
ican Inquisition during the first half-century of Spanish colonization in 
New Spain indicates that crypto-Jews were able to practice their faith in 
an atmosphere of relative toleration. 2 This situation began to change in 
the 1580s, when crypto-Jewish immigration to New Spain increased 
dramatically. The establishment of Spanish hegemony over Portugal in 
1580 motivated Portuguese conversos to move in unprecedented num- 
bers to other areas of the world, including the Indies. The new arrivals 
were considerably more educated and better versed in Jewish doctrine 
than were their predecessors, and their presence resulted in a new infu- 
sion of religiosity in the viceroyalty. 3 

The increase in the number and activity of the crypto-Jews in New 
Spain did not go unnoticed by the Mexican Inquisition, only a few years 
earlier strengthened by elevation to the status of Tribunal del Santo 
Oficio. Between 1589 and 1596 almost two hundred persons were tried 
for the crime of judaizante. During this period, the most notable and 
celebrated campaign by the Holy Office was directed toward Luis de 
Carvajal, el Mozo, his family and associates. 4 The vigorous activity of the 
Mexican Inquisition against the crypto-Jews at the end of the sixteenth 
century was short-lived, however. After the auto de fe of 1601 the 
prosecution of those accused of judaizing declined, and the tribunal con- 
centrated on other breaches of Catholic orthodoxy. The nucleus of 
Portuguese crypto-Jewish settlement formed in the late sixteenth cen- 
tury served to attract ever-increasing numbers of their countrymen in 
Spain and Portugal to New Spain in the early seventeenth century. 

Indeed, the climate in New Spain was favorable for the settlement 
of crypto-Jewish immigrants in the early 1600s. The Mexican economy 
was experiencing a boom period at the end of the sixteenth century 
that carried over into the early decades of the seventeenth century. 
The mining sector enjoyed unprecedented expansion from the 1590s 
through 1620. Agriculture, stock raising, and textiles kept pace with the 
demand produced by the mining boom, and the level of trade between 



THE INQUISITION AND THE CRYPTO-JEWISH COMMUNITY 209 



New Spain and Europe reached new heights. In the succeeding decades 
the Mexican economy grew more autonomous, and, despite the decline 
in trans-Atlantic trade, it continued to grow. 5 In this atmosphere of 
economic expansion, enterprising crypto-Jewish merchants found them- 
selves ready and able to participate actively in all levels of commerce 
throughout the viceroyalty. 

While crypto-Jews were to be found in almost every region of New 
Spain in the mid-seventeenth century, Mexico City served as the focal 
point for converso society just as it did for the larger Spanish economy 
and society. With few exceptions, crypto-Jewish immigrants from Spain 
and Portugal traveled directly to the capital after landing at Veracruz. 6 
Of the majority who initially settled in Mexico City only a little over half 
remained there after two or three years. The rest dispersed to more 
remote regions of the viceroyalty in search of greater economic oppor- 
tunities. Many left to take advantage of the lucrative trade in the mining 
areas of Pachuca or northern New Spain; others established themselves 
in the ports of Acapulco, Veracruz, or Campeche, where they had direct 
access to the fleets arriving from Spain or in the Philippines. Still others 
continued westward in search of greater opportunities in the Philippines 
themselves. 

The crypto-Jews who arrived in Mexico City from their distant home- 
lands in Spain and Portugal were quickly absorbed into the mainstream 
of economic and social life. The established converso community in the 
capital was a closely knit group with a well-developed system of extended 
family and patron-client relationships. Several extended family units 
operated in Mexico City from the 1610s through the 1640s, the most 
notable of which was the family of Simon Vaez Sevilla, without question 
the wealthiest crypto-Jewish merchant in the viceroyalty. At the head of 
each such clan there generally appeared a wealthy patron who, like 
Vaez, not only directed the commercial activities of his family but also 
supervised such mundane functions as the housing, relocation, mar- 
riage, burial, and religious ceremonies of those in his charge. Often the 
passage of a nephew or cousin from Spain or Portugal was financed by 
the head of one particular clan, arranged through contacts with a rela- 
tive in Seville or Lisbon. 

In their role as merchants, the crypto-Jews blended very well into the 
mainstream of Mexican society, not distinguishing themselves as a dis- 
tinct element apart from the general community, except, perhaps, by 
their particular orientation toward mercantile careers. In a sense it is 
proper to see the converso experience in this perspective. Crypto-Jews 
were, after all, first and foremost Iberians, maintaining the language 



Copyrighted malarial 



210 



STANLEY M. HORDES 



and customs of their forebears in Spain and Portugal. Many had the 
opportunity to leave the Spanish dominions in favor of lands where they 
were free to practice Judaism openly and in peace, but most opted to 
remain in familiar cultural surroundings. 

Mexican crypto-Jews were not singled out as a separate group until 
1642, when for a variety of reasons to be examined below, the Inqui- 
sition embarked on a campaign against the community. It must be em- 
phasized that from 1610 until 1642 there was very little attention paid 
by the Inquisition, or by any other body, to the crypto-Jewish element 
in New Spain. Nevertheless, to judge from the testimony offered by the 
conversos in the trials of the 1 640s, it is evident that in certain respects 
Mexican conversos did conduct themselves in a manner that reflected a 
consciousness of their ethnic identity. 

The patterns demonstrated by crypto-Jews living in Mexico City 
strongly suggest the presence of a certain degree of ethnocentrism. The 
Mexican conversos exhibited a strong tendency to live in close proximity 
to one another, clustered mostly in a three-block area between the 
cathedral and the Church of Santo Domingo, ironically within a stone's 
throw of the palace of the Inquisition. Converso traders tended to con- 
centrate their commercial associations within the ethnic community. In 
almost every area of trade, crypto-Jewish merchants relied upon one 
another as sources of supply and credit, as agents in remote regions, as 
fiadores, and as bondsmen in business ventures. 

A further demonstration of ethnocentrism may be seen in the pro- 
pensity of Mexican crypto-Jews to marry within the faith. The practice 
of endogamy was almost universal. In over ninety-five percent of the 
marriages, conversos chose partners from within the community. In cer- 
tain instances efforts were made to "convert" a prospective bridegroom 
to Judaism in order to gain the approval of the bride's family. In 1638 
Isabel Tinoco, niece of Simon Vaez Sevilla, found herself being courted 
by Manuel de Acosta, a young man recently arrived from Lisbon. Re- 
lations between Acosta and Isabel's family were cordial throughout 
the courtship, and eventually Acosta asked her grandfather, Antonio 
Rodriguez Arias, for her hand in marriage. On the day that Rodriguez's 
response was to be delivered, Acosta visited him at his house on Calle 
Tacuba. During a stroll around the nearby Alameda, Rodriguez offered 
his consent to the marriage, but only on the condition that Acosta aban- 
don the Law of Jesus Christ in favor of the Law of Moses. Acosta agreed, 
proceeded to learn the practice of Judaism from Rodriguez's wife, and 
married Isabel Tinoco shortly thereafter. 7 

Perhaps more than any other factor, religious observances served as 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION AND THE CRYPTO-JEWISH COMMUNITY 211 



a vehicle for achieving and maintaining a sense of religious identity 
within the Mexican crypto-Jewish community. Fast days, especially that 
of Yom Kippur (referred to as el dia grande), provided an opportunity 
for families to stop their normal routine and gather together in the 
home of one of the worshipers. Inquisition procesos are filled with the 
detailed accounts of Yom Kippur observances, identifying the location 
of the service and the names of the worshipers, and vividly describing 
the manner in which the fasts were broken. Not all conversos were able 
to meet the stoic test of the fast. Pedro de Espinosa, a traveling merchant 
in the mining region of Tierra Adentro, stole away from the service at 
about three o'clock in the afternoon to relieve his hunger. 8 The Sabbath 
was also generally observed by Mexican conversos. Men refrained from 
working, and women bathed, changed clothes, and put out clean bed 
linen on Friday in preparation for the day of rest. Upon the death of a 
member of the community, the body was prepared for burial in the 
traditional manner whereby it was bathed, dressed in a shroud, and then 
placed in virgin soil. 9 Another Jewish rite that was almost universally 
practiced among Mexican conversos was that of male circumcision. 
Inspections by Inquisition surgeons revealed that almost ninety-one per- 
cent of male conversos were circumcised. When confronted with this evi- 
dence, one crypto-Jew made an effort to exonerate himself, explaining 
that the scar was due to "an earlier infirmity that I had in those parts." 
Another dismissed it as the result of "the mischief of women." Still 
another admitted that he subjected himself to the circumcision, but pro- 
tested that it was only to please a Jewish lover in Italy. 10 

These expressions of ethnic identity manifested by the crypto-Jewish 
community of New Spain passed virtually unnoticed from 1610 to 1642 
by the Holy Office, the body entrusted with the enforcement of religious 
orthodoxy in the viceroyalty. With few exceptions, Mexican conversos 
lived their lives, pursued their careers, and discreetly practiced their 
observances in relative obscurity. In the early 1640s, however, a complex 
series of developments took place that would dramatically shatter the 
calm that had prevailed in the converso community for the previous 
three decades. 

In 1640 the Portuguese Duque de Braganca led a successful move- 
ment for independence from Philip IV of Spain, thus ending a sixty- 
year period of Spanish domination. Fear on the part of royal officials 
in Mexico City that a Portuguese invasion of New Spain was imminent 
stimulated a series of anti-Portuguese measures aimed at potential sub- 
versives. 11 The viceroy suspected of harboring pro-Portuguese sympa- 
thies was deposed in 1642 and replaced by the strongly anti-Portuguese 



Copyrighted material 



212 



STANLEY M. HORDES 



archbishop of Mexico, Juan de Palafox y Mendoza. 12 It is no coincidence 
that within days of Palafox's assumption of viceregal power, the Holy 
Office issued orders for the arrest of nearly one hundred persons, most 
of Portuguese descent, on suspicion of being judaizantes. Letters sent by 
Mexican inquisitors to the Supreme Council of the Inquisition in Madrid 
after the mass arrests shed a good deal of light on the motivation for 
their actions. The letters clearly place the arrests in the context of the 
widespread fear of invasion by the Portuguese armada that gripped 
Mexico in June and July of 1642. Constant reference was made to the 
threat posed to New Spain by these "Portugueses," not so much because 
of their Judaizing activities as on account of their allegiance to the lead- 
ers of the Portuguese revolt. The inquisitors felt that it was their duty 
as zealous defenders of the kingdom to lend whatever assistance was 
necessary to counter the threat posed by these perceived subversives 
within their midst. 13 

On Saturday night, 12 July 1642, agents of the Inquisition arrested 
seven persons for Judaizing. The next night thirty more were ap- 
prehended. Within a year, over seventy-five conversos had entered the 
secret prisons of the Holy Office, charged with the criminal offense of 
observing the Law of Moses. By 1647, over 130 had been taken. The 
Holy Office issued warrants for the arrest of many more but could not 
follow through on them because the suspects had either died or suc- 
cessfully evaded the Inquisition's agents. 14 Only a small percentage of 
those convicted were relaxed and burned at the stake (and only one 
person burned alive). Most were reconciled by the Holy Office, suffering 
confiscation of their goods and exile from the Indies. In many cases, 
this sentence of exile was never enforced, and certain crypto-Jews were 
found to be living in New Spain years after leaving the Inquisition 
prisons. 15 

Following the Gran Auto de Fe of 1649, little attention was paid to the 
crypto-Jewish community of New Spain by the Inquisition. The period 
of vigorous activity against judaizantes from 1642 to 1649, like that of 
1585—1601, stands as an aberration in the context of three centuries of 
colonial Mexican history. What happened to those crypto-Jews who left 
the secret prisons of the Holy Office, or to those countless others who 
successfully evaded the suspicions of the Inquisition? One can only as- 
sume that most melded into the mainstream of Mexican society, some 
gradually losing all ethnic identity, others passing on vestiges of their 
Sephardic heritage from generation to generation. 

Today, in the former Spanish frontier province of Nuevo Mexico, it 
appears that a small remnant of these crypto-Jews is just beginning to 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION AND THE CRYPTO-JEWISH COMMUNITY 213 



emerge from the shroud of secrecy that has protected it for two dozen 
generations. Stories of Hispanic Catholic residents in diverse parts of the 
state refraining from eating pork, lighting candles on Friday nights, and 
marrying only within certain families who performed the same customs, 
have appeared with such regularity that they cannot be dismissed out 
of hand as anomalies. 

There appears to be some strong historical evidence to substantiate 
the hypothesis that New Mexico was the locus of converso settlement. 
The period of the expansion of New Spain's northern frontier into 
New Mexico coincided directly with the most significant crypto-Jewish 
immigration to New Spain, as well as with the conversos' difficulties 
with the Inquisition in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. 
Following the disappointing search for the mythical Seven Cities of 
Cibola and the Kingdom of Quivira undertaken by Francisco Vazquez 
de Coronado in 1540-1542, Spanish officials and entrepreneurs turned 
their attention toward exploiting the lucrative silver mines on north- 
ern New Spain closer to central Mexico. But in the 1580s and 1590s 
several entradas, both official and unsanctioned, were initiated north- 
ward into New Mexico. There are indications that at least three of these 
expeditions might have been designed to allow crypto-Jews from central 
Mexico and Nuevo Leon to escape from the inquisitorial persecutions 
that centered on the Carvajals and their coreligionists. 

In 1582, Governor Carvajal commissioned the expedition of Antonio 
de Espejo, ostensibly for the purpose of rescuing three Franciscan friars 
who had been left behind by the Rodriguez-Sanchez Chamuscado mis- 
sion the year before. 16 The timing of this expedition, coinciding with the 
arrival of growing numbers of secret Jews into Nuevo Leon, however, 
suggests that Carvajal may have had another motive. Perhaps he sought 
to undertake a discreet search for a refuge on the northern frontier of 
New Spain for crypto-Jews, should the need arise. Such a need did in- 
deed arise after the crackdown by the Holy Office of the Inquisition 
against the governor's nephew and his associates in 1589. The following 
year, Carvajal's lieutenant governor, Gaspar Castano de Sosa, led a hast- 
ily organized and unauthorized expedition of some 170 men, women, 
and children northwestward out of Nuevo Leon, to the Pecos River, and 
upriver into northern New Mexico. Castano's mission did not receive 
the authorization of the royal officials in Mexico City, and thus was 
considered to be illegal. 17 

The close ties maintained by Castano to Governor Carvajal, and the 
allegations that he might have been a practicing crypto-Jew in Nuevo 
Leon, 18 suggest strongly that he might have initiated the dangerous ex- 



214 



STANLEY M. HORDES 



pedition for the purpose of leading other secret Jews to a secure haven 
on the far northern frontier. This hypothesis is strengthened by a com- 
parison of names of the expedition with those found in contemporary 
Inquisition records, accused of the crime of judaizante. Others possessed 
family names identical to those tried by the Holy Office in Mexico City, 
such as Rodriguez, Nieto, Carvajal, Diaz, Hernandez, and Perez, and 
may well have been practicing crypto-Jews themselves. 19 

In 1598, after several years of preparation, Governor and Adelantado 
Juan de Onate led some 135 colonists and soldiers northward to estab- 
lish the first permanent colony in New Mexico. Substantially more is 
known about the makeup of this expedition than that of Castano de 
Sosa. As in the case of the earlier expedition, several indicators point to 
a crypto-Jewish presence among the founding settlers of New Mexico. 
The names of several individuals listed on the 8 January 1598 Muster 
Roll recruited for the enterprise also appear in the records of the In- 
quisition. Juan Rodriguez, Francisco Hernandez, Miguel Rodriguez, 
and Antonio Rodriguez were cited by the Holy Office as "fugitives"; 
three of them were burned in effigy in the autos de fe of 1596 and 1601. 
Sebastian Rodriguez, another member of the Onate expedition, was pos- 
sibly one of two individuals by that name taken by the Inquisition. One 
was reconciled in the auto de fe of 1 596, and the other denounced by 
another judaizante in 1601 as a crypto-Jew. Several other soldiers and 
colonists maintained either family names associated with conversos, or 
demographic profiles similar to others known to be practicing crypto- 
Jews. 20 

Because the Great Pueblo Revolt of 1680 resulted in the destruction 
of almost all of the locally generated documentation from New Mexico, 
very little is understood about life in the new colony during the seven- 
teenth century. On the basis of material unearthed in the archives of 
Spain and Mexico by pioneer scholars such as France V. Scholes, it is 
known that the Inquisition was administered by the Franciscan mis- 
sionaries from their base in the Salinas Province. The inquisitorial pow- 
ers vested in the friars, however, appeared to have been used selectively 
for political purposes in their struggle for power with governors and 
other civil officials. The most notorious case during this period was 
initiated against Governor Bernardo Lopez de Mendizabal, his wife, 
Teresa de Aguirre y Roche, and certain members of his entourage in 
1661-1662 for the crime of judaizante. Most of those charged were 
ultimately acquitted, including Francisco Gomez Robledo, against whom 
the inquisitors had amassed the most compelling evidence. 21 Regardless 
of the official outcomes of these and other trials, the evidence presented 



THE INQUISITION AND THE CRYPTO-JEWISH COMMUNITY 275 



raises provocative questions concerning the extent of the crypto-Jewish 
presence in New Mexico in the seventeenth century. 

In the wake of the Reconquest of New Mexico by Governor Diego de 
Vargas in 1692—1693, thirteen years after the Pueblo Revolt came a new 
wave of settlers to recolonize New Mexico. By this time the Inquisition 
was no longer actively prosecuting judaizante cases anywhere in the 
viceroyalty, and consequently there are no contemporary lists of prison- 
ers against which to compare. Nevertheless, the account of new colonists 
who accompanied Vargas in 1693, and of those recruited by Juan Paez 
Hurtado two years later, reveal some familiar names and demographic 
profiles, strongly suggesting a renewed crypto-Jewish presence. 22 Var- 
gas's secretary, for example, was named Alfonso Rael de Aguilar. A per- 
sistent family legend repeated by the present-day descendants of Rael 
holds that the name derives from "Israel." This story is validated by an 
examination of baptismal records from the mission of Isleta, where two 
entries from the year 1756 include references to Maria Manuela Israel 
de Aguilar, the granddaughter of Alfonso. 28 Several of Rael's descen- 
dants have come forward and acknowledged the presence of Judaic 
practices among the family's customs. 

The families that persevered in this remote province for the next 
three hundred years left behind few clues to explain their ethnic identity 
and origins. Many of the descendants of the converso families who 
settled here apparently assimilated, to a greater or lesser extent, into the 
mainstream. On the basis of preliminary ethnographic evidence, how- 
ever, it appears that others continued to practice vestiges of their an- 
cestral faith, some with no consciousness of their ethnic identity, and 
others maintaining a strong sense of Jewish identity. 

NOTES 

1. The term crypto-Jew refers to those baptized as Catholic Christians and liv- 
ing outwardly as such, but secretly practicing Judaic rites and customs. While 
the terms converso and New Christian strictly should refer to those Jews who 
actually converted to Catholicism, it will be extended for the purposes of this 
paper to the descendants of the original conversos, who lived as crypto-Jews. 

2. Richard E. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century (Albu- 
querque: University of New Mexico Press, 1969), 81; Seymour B. Liebman, The 
Jews in New Spain: Faith, Flame and the Inquisition (Coral Gables, Fla.: University 
of Miami Press, 1970), 123, 130. 

3. Liebman, The Jews in New Spain, 135, 151, 184. 

4. No attempt is made here to detail the events surrounding the campaign 
of the Mexican Inquisition against the Carvajals. For an elaboration on this 



216 



STANLEY M. HORDES 



period see: Liebman, The Jews in New Spain, chaps. 7 and 8; Martin Cohen, The 
Martyr (Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1973); Alfonso 
Toro, La familia Carvajal (Mexico City: Editorial Patria, 1944); Seymour B. Lieb- 
man, The Enlightened: The Writings of Luis de Carvajal, ElMozo (Coral Gables, Fla.: 
University of Miami Press, 1967); Greenleaf, Mexican Inquisition, 169-171. 

5. Jonathan Israel, Race, Class and Politics in Colonial Mexico (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1975), 20-30. 

6. Based on the discursos de la vida of those crypto-Jews arrested by the In- 
quisition in the 1640s, 82 percent of the converso immigrants settled initially in 
Mexico City, 1 1 percent in Veracruz, and the remaining 7 percent scattered 
about the viceroyalty. 

7. Archivo General de la Nacion (Mexico) (hereafter AGN), Inquisicion, 
tomo 418, expediente 1, "Proceso y causa criminal contra Manuel de Acosta" 
(1643), 156-170. 

8. AGN, Inq., tomo 403, exp. 1, "Proceso y causa criminal contra Pedro de 
Espinosa" (1642), 81-85. 

9. AGN, Inq., tomo 381, exp. 5, "Borrador de la relacion de las causas que 
se han despachado desde principio de ario de 1634 hasta fin del ano de 1635." 
The relacion de causa of Simon Montero describes the burial of Francisca Nunez. 

10. AGN, Inq., tomo 497, exp. 8, "Proceso y causa criminal contra Duarte 
Castafio," 133-138; AGN, Inq., tomo 395, exp. 3, "Proceso y causa criminal con- 
tra Melchor Rodriguez Lopez" (1642); AGN, Inq., tomo 409, exp. 1, "Proceso 
y causa criminal contra Pedro Fernandez de Castro" (1642), 52 iv; Liebman, The 
Jews in New Spain, 76. 

11. AGN, Inq., tomo 489, 84—85, "Traslado del papel que remitio a este 
Santo Oficio el Sr. Obispo Don Juan de Palafox y Mendoza . . ."; AGN, Inq., 
tomo 489, 97, Cedula of Philip IV, issued 7 January 1641; AGN, Inq., tomo 489, 
114, "Papeles del Sr. Virrey Conde de Salvatierra acerca del donativo de los 
Portugueses . . ." (1643). This document contains a partial accounting of the 
donativo collected from crypto-Jews in New Spain; AGN, "Reales Cedulas ex- 
pedidas en relacion a los Portugueses . . ." (1642); Archivo General de Indias 
(Sevilla), Contratacion, legajo 102B, "Ante los oidores de la Contratacion ... en 
Cadiz y Sevilla para embargar perteneciente a Portugueses que venia en los 
galeones y flotas del aquel ano; varios autos y diligencias" (1641—42). A total of 
332,629 pesos worth of goods sent from New Spain to Portuguese merchants 
in Seville was embargoed in compliance with a royal order of 17 June 1641. 

12. Biblioteca Nacional (Mexico), MSS. 12054, 281, 287V. 

13. Archivo Historico Nacional (Madrid), Inquisicion, legajo 1054, "Cartas 
originales del Tribunal de Mexico para el Consejo." 

14. AGN, Inq., Lote Riva Palacio, tomo 48, exp. 2, "Libro donde se sientan 
todos los presos . . . desde trece de julio de 1642 . . . "(1647?). Data are also ex- 
tracted from the procesos of judaizantes contained in the AGN. 

15. It is difficult to estimate how many of the judaizantes reconciled by the 
Inquisition remained in New Spain, as the records pertaining to the compliance 



Copyrighted material 



THE INQUISITION AND THE CRYPTO-JEWISH COMMUNITY 217 



of the sentences of exile are unavailable and only those reconciliados who relapsed 
into Judaizing were recorded by the Holy Office. An examination of civil and 
criminal records for Mexico City revealed several reconciliados picking up their 
businesses where they had left off years earlier, apparently suffering neither full 
confiscation of their estates nor exile. 

16. John Francis Bannon, The Spanish Borderlands Frontier, 1513-1821 (Nor- 
man: University of Oklahoma Press, 1970), 32-33; Cohen, The Martyr, 104. 

17. George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, The Rediscovery of New Mexico, 
1580—1^4: The Explorations of Chamuscado, Espejo, Castano de Sosa, Morlete, and 
Leyva de Bonilla and Humana (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 
1966), 28-39. 

18. Cohen, The Martyr, 103-104. 

19. Hammond and Rey, Rediscovery, 245-320; Liebman, The Inquisitors and 
the Jews in the New World: Summaries of Procesos, 1500-1810, and Bibliographical 
Guide (Coral Gables, Fla.: University of Miami Press, 1974). 

20. Hammond and Rey, Onate, Colonizer of New Mexico (Albuquerque: Uni- 
versity of New Mexico Press, 1953), 1:286-301; Liebman, The Inquisitors and the 
Jews. 

2 1 . France Scholes, Troublous Times in New Mexico, 1 65Q—i6jo (Albuquerque: 
Historical Society of New Mexico, 1942); AGN, Inquisition, tomo 583, exp. 3, 
"Proceso y causa criminal contra El Sargento Mayor Francisco Gomez . . . por 
sospechoso de delitos del judaismo . . ." (1661). 

22. Clevy Lloyd Strout, "The Resettlement of Santa Fe, 1695: The Newly 
Found Muster Roll," New Mexico Historical Review, 53, no. 3 (July 1978): 261- 
270. 

23. Archives of the Archdiocese of Santa Fe, Baptisms, Mission of Isleta, Reel 
5, frames 227 and 229. 



Copyrighted material 



PART THREE 



Bibliographical Essays 



Copyrighted material 



TWELVE 



Recent Historiography of the 
Spanish Inquisition (1977-1988): 
Balance and Perspective 

Jesus M. De Bujanda 



The commemoration ten years ago of the fifth century of the estab- 
lishment of the Spanish Inquisition with Sixtus IV's papal bull dated 
1 November 1478 coincided with a veritable explosion of inquisitorial 
studies. The relative scarcity of studies on the Spanish Inquisition in pre- 
vious decades contrasts sharply with the awakening in the 1970s and 
1980s of an interest manifested in numerous conferences and symposia 
as well as in the large number of publications that have completely 
revised our knowledge of the Inquisition and its fundamental influence 
upon the shape of modern Spain. 

It is worth noting that the March 1988 meeting in Los Angeles is 
chronologically the tenth important scientific congress to deal directly 
with the theme of the Spanish Inquisition. The previous congresses 
were: Santander (1976), Copenhagen (1978), Cuenca (1978), Rome- 
Naples (1981), Santander (ig82), Madrid (exposition and conferences, 
1982), New York (1983), Madrid-Segovia-Palma (1985), and Chicago 
(1986). 

The Los Angeles congress, investigating the Inquisition's impact on 
Spain and the New World, provides an appropriate occasion for examin- 
ing the present state of inquisitorial studies since the reevaluation that 
took place ten years ago as well as the orientations and perspectives we 
can discern on the horizon. 

It is not our intention to review here the numerous publications on 
the Inquisition of the past decade. At the end of this essay is a list of 
the main publications between 1977 and 1988 which serves as a base for 
the following considerations and focuses our attention on the issues 

221 



Copyrighted material 



222 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



characterizing the evolution of inquisitorial studies. The reader inter- 
ested in studies prior to 1977 can consult the recent edition in two 
volumes of the Bibliography of the Inquisition by Emil van der Vekene, 
published in 1982—1983. 

It is interesting to note that inquisitorial studies have become popular 
at the moment when Spanish society is becoming increasingly demo- 
cratic. If history is a teacher, then the critical and unbiased examination 
of an organism that institutionalized intolerance for three and a half 
centuries of present-day Spain's gestation may provide us with a point 
of reference and reflection for an open, pluralistic society. 

From the professional point of view, it is necessary to look beyond 
the present polemical juncture and become aware of the new orienta- 
tions of historical studies regarding social history and the history of 
mentalities. The inquisitorial sources offer the new generations of his- 
torians diverse possibilities for the practice of new history. 

A BETTER KNOWLEDGE OF THE INQUISITORIAL SOURCES 

The historian investigating the Spanish Inquisition is much better 
equipped in 1988 than the historian who began his studies in 1977. 
Many valuable publications orient the investigator's steps and put him 
in direct contact with inquisitorial documents. The content and organi- 
zation of the Fondo Inquisition of the Archivo Historico Nacional were 
described in 1978 by M. Aviles, J. Martinez Millan, and V. Pinto in the 
Revista de Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos, as well as in V. Pinto and M. Ver- 
gara Doncel's subsequent publications. Other extremely useful publica- 
tions include that of the archivist Natividad Moreno Garbajo, Catdlogo 
de alegaciones fiscales and the Inventario de los libros 1225—1281, both con- 
taining valuable indexes of people, places, and material. 

Regarding the inquisitorial documents in the Simancas Archive, A. Re- 
presa Rodriguez's work can be consulted. Of great value for those who 
frequent the Diocese Archive of Cuenca, where the most important 
inquisitorial source outside the AHN is kept, is the second volume of 
the Catdlogo del Archivo de la Inquisition de Cuenca, published in 1982 by 
the present director, Dimas Perez Ramirez, containing the reproduction 
of the first volume published in 1965 by S. Cirac Estopanan. A third vol- 
ume dedicated to the remaining papers will complete the series. 

We also have a more complete knowledge of the inquisitorial sources 
conserved in the libraries and archives outside of Spain, thanks to 
G. Henningsen's publication describing the Moldenhauer collection of 
Copenhagen and M. Aviles's contribution that not only records the 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 223 



sources from the British Museum described by E. Llamas Martinez 1 ; but 
also notes the principal European and North American sources where 
documents related to the Spanish Inquisition can be found. 2 

Investigators interested in the Tribunal of the Holy Office of Portugal 
will find Charles Amiel's presentation at the Copenhagen congress ex- 
tremely valuable; it contains a description of the vast resources on the 
Portuguese Inquisition which have been preserved but poorly cataloged. 
An important cataloging project on the Lisbon Inquisition trials, sub- 
sidized by the Gulbenkian Foundation, began in 1982 under Robert 
Rowland's direction. This is not simply a catalog or summary of data, 
but rather a bank of data which the investigator can consult interactively. 
Professor Amiel has compiled a bank of data based on the proceedings 
of thirty-eight hundred trials of the Goa Inquisition which reveal the 
unimagined wealth of the inquisitorial documents for ethnographic and 
social-historical studies. There is no doubt that the Portuguese archives 
will orient new projects in the Spanish Inquisition archives. 

Beside the catalogs and investigative tools guiding our archival con- 
sultations, we must note the publication of specific inquisitorial sources, 
among which the importance of the collections of autos de fe and re- 
laciones de causas must be emphasized. We have partial knowledge of the 
activity of the Granada Inquisition, whose archives were almost com- 
pletely destroyed, thanks to the publication of the sixteenth-century 
autos de fe conserved in the AHN by Jose Maria Garcia Fuentes. 
Antonio Dominguez Ortiz has utilized the seventeenth-century autos de 
fe to describe the activity of the Seville Inquisition. In his two volumes, 
Coleccion de documentos and Autos de fe de la Inquisition de Cordoba, Rafael 
Gracia Boix has partially reconstructed the Cordoba Inquisition docu- 
mentation; these archives were sacked and burned in 1808 and 1812 by 
order of the central powers at the time of the first suppression of the 
Inquisition. Llorenc Perez, Lleonard Muntaner, and Mateu Colom have 
recently published the first volume of a documentary corpus that will 
comprise half a dozen volumes compiled from the Majorca Inquisition's 
relaciones de causas de fe from the period 1578-1806, which have been 
scattered in various archives. The authors are analyzing the causas de 
fe using an informative procedure. 

J. Angel Sesma has published documents from the years 1489—1886 
concerning the establishment of the Aragon Inquisition. Miguel Jimenez 
Monteserin's Documentos bdsicos para el estudio del Santo Oficio offers an 
anthology of various types of inquisitorial texts. 

The publications of texts like the deliberations of the Valladolid 
Council of 1538 regarding Erasmus by M. Aviles, Maria de Cazalla's 



Copyrighted material 



224 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



trials by M. Ortega Costa, and Rodrigo de Bivar's trials by A. Hamilton 
extend the studies undertaken in previous decades by M. Bataillon, 
J. E. Longhurst, and A. Selke 3 among others, regarding the Inquisition's 
interventions with respect to Erasmism and illuminism. J. I. Tellechea's 
monumental edition of the trial of Bartolome Carranza de Miranda, 
the archbishop of Toledo, has been published by the Academia de la 
Historia 4 ; Tellechea continues publishing numerous monographs and 
documents of great interest regarding the Inquisition's repression of the 
Reformation and Molinism. 

A MORE SERENE, COMPLETE, AND CRITICAL HISTORY 

Thanks to a renovated methodological approach to the sources, the his- 
torical production on the Inquisition of recent years is generally of high 
quality. Not only has a great deal more been written than previously, 
but it is novel and generally more solid than previous investigations. 

Until recently, it was difficult to approach a topic as polemical as the 
Inquisition without provoking strong reactions of disapproval or assent. 
While many of the Inquisition historians were members of the secular 
clergy or of religious orders studying the tribunal of the faith from 
the Catholic perspective and with a Tridentine mentality (or at least a 
mentality predating that of Vatican II), others studied from a political, 
social, or cultural angle, guided by the ideals of open-mindedness and 
progress in human rights. We can thus comprehend how the outstand- 
ing work by the historian Henry C. Lea, History of the Inquisition of Spain, 
and above all its polemical conclusion entitled "Retrospect," has pro- 
voked such extremely negative reactions from the Jesuit historian Ber- 
nardino Llorca. The apologists' and detractors' aprioristic positions have 
impeded the progress of historical knowledge of the Holy Office. We 
can contrast this traditional historiography on the Inquisition with the 
position of present-day historians, whose goals of objectivity and impar- 
tiality reflect an ideal which we cannot attain, but can indeed approach. 

This does not mean that ideologies, religious creeds, political and 
social options, or natural sentiments do not continue to orient investi- 
gative projects or to be reflected in historical production. Thus for 
example, in the meritorious collective work Historia de la Inquisicion en 
Espana y America, published by the Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales 
and the Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, the first criterion established, 
which determines the elaboration of the entire work, is "the espanolidad 
of the authors invited to collaborate" (vol. 1, p. xxii). While we cannot 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 225 



but lament this completely obsolete position, we must recognize that this 
statement contrasts strongly with the spirit of collaboration of which the 
work itself is proof. The first published volume presents the work of 
thirty specialists on the subjects of "the bases of historical knowledge of 
the Holy Office" and "the stages of its historical process." This concerns, 
without a doubt, a great realization that acts as a reference point for 
everyone interested in the study of the Spanish Inquisition. 

Among the other notable anthologies of the past ten years is L'lnqui- 
sition espagnole, XVe-XIXe siecles by Bartolome Bennassar and various 
collaborators including Jean-Pierre Dedieu, whose firsthand investiga- 
tions have completely reorganized the problematics of the Holy Office. 
Nor should we forget Henry Kamen's contribution, The History of the 
Inquisition of Spain, which twenty years after publication has recently 
been followed by Inquisition and Society in Spain, a text incorporating 
many of the most interesting investigations of recent years. 

We have also recently been witness to the revalorization of historical 
works of great breadth which stimulated the polemic for many years. 
Jose Antonio Llorente's works have elicited various studies viewing them 
from a new perspective, principally the Historia cntica de la Inquisicion, 
which has come out in a new edition. For the first time, and seventy years 
after the appearance of the original version, Lea's monumental history 
has been published in Spanish as Historia de la Inquisicion Espanola. 
Edited by Angel Alcala, this version has the advantage of giving the 
references to the inquisitorial documentation as they are currently in- 
dexed in the AHN, while the original English version as well as the trans- 
lations give the catalog numbers of the previous location in the Simancas 
archive, before the documents were transferred in 1914 to the AHN in 
Madrid. 

Among the studies published in the last ten years, there are various 
important contributions that have completely renewed previous histori- 
ography, upon which we have based our synthesis of what the Spanish 
Inquisition was. 

At the same time, we are conscious that our study omits areas in which 
important progress has been made. For example, there has been a great 
step forward in our knowledge of the organization and activity of the 
local tribunals. Besides the article by J. Contreras and J. P. Dedieu on 
the formation of local districts, there are a number of impressive mono- 
graphic studies on most of the provincial tribunals. Much could also be 
said of the various monographic studies dedicated to investigating the 
catalogs of persecuted groups such as the Judaizers, moriscos, Protes- 



Copyrighted material 



226 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



tants, Illuminati, spiritualists, brujos, masons, and Gypsies. I hope that 
the reader wishing to expand his knowledge on a particular theme will 
be guided by the bibliography included at the end of this paper. 

A POLITICO-RELIGIOUS TRIBUNAL 

The Spanish Inquisition, a politico-religious institution of the Habsburg 
regime, cannot be understood without a knowledge of the latter and its 
evolution during three centuries of modern history. 

In the first place, we cannot forget that the Spanish monarchy of the 
Austrians and the Bourbons was a religious state whose very foundations 
were based upon Catholic faith. The union between Church and state 
produced a mixture, and frequently a confusion, of the political and 
religious spheres. The Catholic monarchy established its political, so- 
cial, economic, and cultural program on the basis of religion, and con- 
structed national unity upon the solid foundation of religious unity. It 
is not necessary to show here how the "Christian republic" and its cor- 
responding institutions were born and developed from the time of the 
emperor Constantine and throughout the millennium of the Middle 
Ages. We must recall that the medieval Inquisition, and to an even 

greater extent the Inquisition established by the popes in response to 
the Catholic Monarchs' pleas, is a hybrid institution at the service of 
both the altar and the throne, controlled by the religious state and the 
political Church. 

The Inquisition defines itself as the tribunal of the faith whose duty 
is not only to pass judgment following a denunciation or accusation but 
also to inquire into the prisoner's orthodoxy. If we wish to know what 
the very essence of the Inquisition is, the most fundamental question we 
must pose concerns "the juridical nature of the institution." We are not 
concerned, as Francisco Tomas y Valiente indicated at the Cuenca sym- 
posium, with entering into old polemics about whether the Tribunal of 
the Holy Office is a political organism or essentially an ecclesiastical 
institution. We must approach its examination without preconceived 
notions, studying its standards and examining its function with respect 
to political and juridical state institutions on the one hand, and to the 
ecclesiastical authorities and tribunals on the other. 

Various investigative projects and publications are contributing ele- 
ments essential for an understanding of the Holy Office as a juridical 
institution. According to Maria Palacios Alcalde's presentation at the Lis- 
bon congress in February 1987, the Department of Modern History at 
the University of Cordoba is working on the elaboration of a "legislative 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 227 



corpus of the Spanish Inquisition which attempts to record exhaustively 
the Inquisition's entire regulatory standard, that is, the demand for tem- 
poral power (royal letters patent, decrees, consultations, pragmatics, 
etc.) as well as pontifical power (bulls, briefs, motuproprios, etc.) and the 
normative demand of the Inquisition itself (council decrees, orders of 
the inquisitor general, instructions, edicts, etc.)." 5 

Knowledge of instruments utilized by the inquisitors, such as abece- 
darios de textos legates that Francisco de Borja Luque Muriel works with 6 
and the manual de inquisidores like the famous manual of the medieval 
inquisitor Eymeric which was discovered in the mid-sixteenth century 
by Francisco Pena and which Sala Molins has studied, 7 provides informa- 
tion about the normative bases guiding the inquisitorial process. The 
instrucciones issued by the first inquisitors, Torquemada and Deza, and 
the recasting carried out by Fernando de Valdes in 1561 regulating the 
Holy Office's procedures until the moment of its suppression, are 
equally deserving of our attention. 8 At the Burdeos symposium in Oc- 
tober 1987, Henningsen presented a data base of the Spanish Inqui- 
sition's secret legislation compiled in the Codex Moldenhawerianus in 
Copenhagen. There is no doubt that the sources listed here will greatly 
facilitate our understanding of the Inquisition Council and its connec- 
tions to the institutions of the monarchy and the Church. 

AN INSTITUTION WITH RELIGIOUS AND SOCIAL CONTROL 

As indicated in the founding bull of the Spanish Inquisition, Exigit 
sincerae devotionis affectus, and repeated in subsequent documents, the 
Holy Office functioned as a coercive instrument of defense of the Cath- 
olic faith against heretical depravity. It is an exact mandate, restricting 
itself to cases concerning faith, and referring solely to the fundamental 
articles of the Catholic faith. It is, in reality, an extremely long mandate. 
Everything depends upon what is understood by faith and what is con- 
sidered a transgression against the faith. Faith is a fluid concept, speci- 
fied over time by the ecclesiastical magistrate as he defines dogma and 
delimits the true content and consequences of the evangelical message. 
As the Roman Church considers itself repository of the revelation as well 
as legitimate and authorized interpreter of divine and natural law, it may 
pass judgment on morality and all human acts. The coercive power 
received by the Holy Office from the Church and the state varies accord- 
ing to how Catholic faith is understood. Foundation and pillar of the 
Habsburg society, Christianity is not interpreted and experienced uni- 
formly during the three and a half centuries of the Inquisition's exis- 



Copyrighted material 



228 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



tence. Both Church and state must modify their institutions according 
to the needs of a continually evolving society. We can thus understand 
how the Inquisition, acting as an instrument of religious and social con- 
trol throughout its entire existence, modifies the object of its activities 
and its field of action, adapting itself to changing circumstances. 

Because specialists in recent years have been able to exploit the 
sources more systematically and directly, we are much better informed 
regarding the number of people tried by the Inquisition and the nature 
of their crimes. 

Through a methodical and detailed examination of more than forty 
thousand trial summaries (relaciones de causas), sent by the regional tri- 
bunals to the Supreme Inquisition Council, Gustav Henningsen and 
Jaime Contreras have presented an impressive summary of the Inqui- 
sition's activity during the years 1540—1700, the central period of its 
existence. 

We have formed an idea of the Holy Office's main activities at the 
end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century on the basis 
of Jean-Pierre Dedieu's study of the Toledo tribunal and Ricardo Garcia 
Carcel's study of the Valencia tribunal. T. Egido has investigated Inqui- 
sition activities by studying the alegaciones fiscales and the relaciones de 
autos de fe. The catalog of alegaciones fiscales, excerpts from the cases 
sent by the provincial tribunals to the Central Council before sentencing, 
was recently published by Natividad Moreno Garbayo. The relaciones 
de autos de fe contain, among other things, much information about the 
prisoners and their crimes. 

Although many other investigations of new sources still need to be 
carried out, we now possess a more complete knowledge of inquisitorial 
activity as well as of the evolution of the numbers of trials and the nature 
of the crimes. 

The first conclusion we arrive at based on completed studies is that 
the Inquisition was an institution that evolved according to changing 
circumstances. If it is an obvious exaggeration to speak of multiple in- 
quisitions, we must distinguish among different periods of the Inquisi- 
tion, as Jean-Pierre Dedieu has done. We can perceive the alternation 
between periods of great intensity and periods of relative inactivity on 
the basis of the number of individuals tried. The second half of the six- 
teenth century is a period of great activity culminating in the 1590s; 
after 1620 there is a decline in the Holy Office's activities which con- 
tinues throughout the seventeenth century. Except for specific instances, 
the Inquisition gradually loses its importance and prestige during the 
eighteenth century until its complete suppression is called for. 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 229 



Besides the curve in the volume of people tried, the examination 
of the nature of their crimes eloquently reveals the areas of repressive 
inquisitorial activity. Henningsen and Contreras, basing their investiga- 
tion on the same classifications used by the inquisitors, have organized 
crimes prosecuted by the Inquisition in the tribunals of Spain, Sardinia, 
Sicily, and America into ten categories: (1) Jews, (2) Moors, (3) Luther- 
ans, (4) Illuminati, (5) proposiciones, (6) bigamists, (7) soliciting confes- 
sors, (8) crimes against the Holy Office, (9) superstitious individuals, (10) 
miscellaneous. 

Between 1540 and 1700, the first four categories were considered 
capital offenses and made up forty-two percent of all cases, while the 
other fifty-eight percent were considered minor offenses. The number 
of individuals prosecuted from each category of capital offense cor- 
responded directly to the political and religious circumstances of the 
period, depending considerably on the specific tribunal as well. We have 
observed, for example, that from the time of Portugal's annexation by 
the Habsburg monarchy in 1580, the number of trials of converted 
Portuguese Jews was very high in Castile until amnesty was conceded in 
1605. The number of morisco trials was very high in Aragon, Valencia, 
and Granada during the period of prosecution (1605—1609) preceding 
the expulsion. During the period 1540—1559, when the fight against the 
Protestant Reformation was most intense, Lutherans made up thirty-one 
percent of all prosecuted individuals. Faithful Christians seduced by 
false mysticism, called the Illuminati, made up a very small percentage 
(0.03 percent), and appear only at specific moments and only in certain 
tribunals such as Llerena, Seville, and Logrono. We must also note the 
low number of executions: 826 cases throughout the entire period of 
1540-1700, that is, 1.8 percent of all those brought to trial. 

During the fifty-five-year period of 1560-1614, those tried for minor 
offenses made up approximately fifty-eight percent. The victims were 
Old Christians mainly from rural areas. The Holy Office's repressive 
actions were part of the evangelical campaigns to impose the Tridentine 
model of Catholicism. The concept of heresy was extended to include 
all propositions or affirmations contrary to Catholic dogma as well as acts 
based upon a supposedly erroneous interpretation of Catholic morality. 
Thus, for example, anyone who affirmed that fornication was not a sin 
for unmarried individuals was prosecuted for going against the teach- 
ings of the Church; the same applied to someone who married twice, 
because he had not respected the indissolubility of holy matrimony. 

The Inquisition's control over religious life diminished during the 
seventeenth century. On the one hand, the Holy Office suffered a series 



Copyrighted malarial 



230 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



of internal crises of a structural and economic character, and on the 
other hand, upholding the faith and morality of Trent was no longer 
among the Church's or the state's priorities. We have few monographic 
works dealing with the Holy Office's activity during the eighteenth cen- 
tury. T. Egido's investigations of fiscal allegations and autos de fe reveal 
a reduction in repressive interventions and a typology of criminal of- 
fenses including not only those defined above but new ones such as 
Molinism, Jansenism, and Masonry. 

Civil and ecclesiastical institutions took increasingly contradictory po- 
sitions in the eighteenth century, creating a wide gap. On one side, the 
regalist state tried to domesticate the Inquisition, and on the other side 
Enlightenment philosophy sought to base society upon rational law, dis- 
pensing with religious institutions altogether. 

The existing tensions within Habsburg society that led finally to a 
dissociation between state and religion were reflected in the Inquisition, 
which, as a politico-religious organism, lost the justifications for its very 
existence. The French Revolution stimulated a new alliance between 
throne and altar, momentarily revitalizing the Holy Office as a repres- 
sive defensive instrument. The evolution leading to the abolition of 
the Inquisition, initially in 1812 and definitively in 1834, described by 
Francisco Marti Gilabert," reveals the contradictory forces at work in 
modern Spain. 

As an institution of religious and social control, the Inquisition based 
its justification upon the religious state. It ensured the survival of social 
institutions and values, maintaining the functions of certain modern 
policies. 

AN ORGANISM OF CULTURAL REPRESSION 

The Spanish Inquisition, besides being the tribunal of the faith, was 
responsible for censoring the press and thus fulfilled the functions en- 
trusted to the congregations of the Inquisition and the Index by the 
Roman Church. In this field there have been many important investi- 
gations published during the past decade that, in leaving behind the 
old and sterile polemic on the Inquisition's influence on the evolution 
of Spanish science and culture, have studied censorship from differ- 
ent angles, beginning with a direct and systematic examination of the 
sources, such as the proceedings against the author and readers or 
owners of texts, inquisitorial legislation and regulation, and indexes of 
prohibited texts. 

Antonio Marquez's Literatura e Inquisition is a description of censori- 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 231 



ous activity and Spanish literary production and provides information 
on a large number of Spanish writers and intellectuals. Recently Alfredo 
Vilchez Diaz compiled a useful list of Spanish authors and anonymous 
individuals on the inquisitorial indexes. A special issue of Arbor, entitled 
Inquisition y ciencia, appeared, including articles by various contributors, 
among whom A. Marquez (the editor), Jose Pardo Tomas, and Lucienne 
Domergue have offered partial answers to questions concerning the 
Inquisition's influence on Spain's scientific backwardness in the mod- 
ern period. In various works directly studying the sources, principally 
in Virgilio Pinto Crespo's Inquisition y control ideologico en el siglo XVI, 
various aspects of the workings of inquisitorial censorship during the 
sixteenth century have been thoroughly investigated. Marcelin Defour- 
neaux's book on the censorship of French texts during the eighteenth 
century, published in 1963, 10 has recently been supplemented by Lu- 
cienne Domergue's valuable contributions on culture and censorship 
during that century. 

For more than ten years, Domergue and various collaborators at the 
Centre d'Etudes de la Renaissance de l'Universite de Sherbrooke have 
studied the indexes of prohibited texts (including European texts in 
general, but principally Spanish and Roman ones), the results appearing 
regularly in the collection Index des livres interdits. n The first phase of the 
project focusing on the sixteenth century is composed of two volumes 
on Spanish indexes: the first volume (already published) covers the in- 
dexes of 1551, 1554, and 1559, and the second, soon to be published, 
covers the 1583 and 1584 indexes. Our investigation examines censored 
materials, that is, the content of the indexes of prohibited and expur- 
gated materials. The prohibited material reveals the presence of a re- 
pressed counterculture struggling against the dominant official culture. 
The prohibited or censored writings are but the tip of the iceberg, open- 
ing avenues of exploration of the unsuspected underlying reality not 
immediately apparent in the collective consciousness. We sincerely be- 
lieve that our study, like those previously mentioned, is of a positive 
rather than a speculative nature, and that its investigation of essential 
sources will allow us to determine the extent of inquisitorial censorship's 
influence on different aspects of Spanish reality: culture, religion, liter- 
ature, political and social development. 



THE FUTURE OF INQUISITORIAL STUDIES 

We need to ask ourselves whether the interest awakened in inquisito- 
rial studies during the past ten years is a temporary phenomenon, or 



Copyrighted material 



232 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



whether we are breaking new ground regarding Spain's history which 
must continue to be studied in order for us to achieve a greater under- 
standing of Spanish society's evolution in its totality. We have observed 
signs of weariness or apathy in some historians, attracted by more ap- 
pealing and contemporary topics. 

We believe, however, in a future full of possibilities for inquisitorial 
studies, although perhaps they will not continue to enjoy the notoriety 
and relevance of the past decade. Our faith in the future of inquisitorial 
studies is based on the following considerations: 

The historians in the forefront — Henningsen, Contreras, Dedieu, 
Garcia Carcel, and others — have tilled the fertile field of inquisitorial 
studies, and not only do they continue their own investigations, but they 
have also attracted new students who will in turn undertake new inves- 
tigations, armed with the renovated problematic and methodology as 
well as the assistance of modern technology. 

The archival documents and other inquisitorial sources offer the 
fields of social and intellectual history an arsenal of extremely valuable 
material. We need only consider the data base of the relaciones de causas 
or the inquisitorial trials which will lend themselves to unlimited quan- 
titative and qualitative surveys. Some of the investigations of the 1970s 
based on Inquisition trials — studies by Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie of 
a French Midi town called Montaillou and by Carlo Ginzburg on a 
miller named Menocchio from the Friuli region — are good examples of 
the abundance and quality of the information yielded by analyzing spe- 
cific trials with the appropriate methodology. 12 The inquisitorial sources 
also provide excellent opportunities for quantitative studies, as Michel 
Vovelle's methodology of compiling and analyzing a series of sixteenth- 
century wills from the French Province has proved. 13 Without dwell- 
ing upon or insisting only upon examples of nouvelle histoire, we are 
reminded that Jean Delumeau's work on fear and guilt in modern 
Europe 14 offers both a problematic and a qualitative model of analysis 
applicable to many inquisitorial sources. 
Notwithstanding the destruction of archival sources from the majority 
of regional Inquisition tribunals, thousands of documents still exist, 
housed mainly in the Archivo Historico Nacional in Madrid, whose 
systematic study will surpass the individual efforts of the majority of 
investigators. The individual investigator's procedure, which previously 
consisted of studying the inquisitorial archives in order to produce a 
monographic work on an individual or specific theme, can now be 
likened to the fisherman who casts his line into the water in hopes of 
finding a treasure. Such a procedure is completely anachronistic when 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 233 



we are now able to catalog and classify the sources according to clearly 
denned criteria and establish an integral and cumulative data base acces- 
sible to all investigators through the international channels of computer 
networks. 

These are the concerns of a number of Inquisition specialists who 
have met on several occasions for the purpose of coordinating their 
efforts in the direction outlined above. Realizing that the Inquisition 
documents are not essentially different from those of other ecclesiastical 
or civil tribunals, they established contact with legal historians and orga- 
nized the symposium on "Judicial Records and the Computer: Secular, 
Ecclesiastical, and Inquisitorial Courts," held at the Maison des Pays 
Iberiques in Bordeaux in October 1987 under the auspices of the Euro- 
pean Science Foundation. Inquisition historians from Spain, Italy, and 
Portugal, members of the International Association of the History of 
Crime and Criminal Justice, and representatives from the Association 
of History and Computing are studying the possibility of adopting spe- 
cific shared conceptual bases that would establish what elements should 
be in the data base, created from the codaje manual, at the service of 
historical investigation from both a quantitative and a qualitative per- 
spective. Initiatives such as these bode well for the future of inquisitorial 
studies. 

NOTES 

1. E. Llamas Martinez, Documentation inquisitorial: Manuscritos espanoles del 
siglo XVI existentes en el Museo Britdnico (Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Es- 
panola, 1975). 

2. M. Aviles, "Los fondos extranjeros," in Historia de la Inquisition en Espana 
y America, ed. J. Perez Villanueva and B. Escandell Bonet (Madrid: Biblioteca 
de Autores Cristianos, Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1984), 1:83-89. 

3. A. Selke, El Santo Oficio de la Inquisition: Proceso de Fr. Francisco Ortiz 
(Madrid: 1968). 

4. J. I. Tellechea Idigoras, Fray Bartolome Carranza: Documentos historicos, 6 
vols, to date (Madrid: Archivo Documental Espanol. Real Academia de la His- 
toria, 1962-1981). 

5. Inouisigao : I Congresso Luso-Drasileiro sobre Inquisiqao: Resumos das comuni- 
caqoes, Lisboa, ly a 20 fevereiro ig8j (Lisbon: Sociedade Portuguesa de Estudos 
do Seculo XVIII, 1987), 128-129. 

6. Ibid., 131-134. 

7. Nicolau Eymeric et Francisco Pena, Le manuel des inquisiteurs, ed. and trans. 
Louis Sala-Molins (Paris: Mouton, 1973). 

8. J. L. Gonzalez Novalin, "Las instrucciones de Valdes," in Historia de la 
Inquisition, 1:633-648. 



Copyrighted material 



234 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



9. Francisco Marti Gilabert, La abolition de la Inquisition (Pamplona: Ediciones 
Universidad de Navarra, 1975). 

10. M. Defourneau, L'lnquisition espagnole et les livres francais au XVIIIe siecle 
(Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1963; Spanish edition, Madrid: Taurus 
Ediciones, 1973). 

11. Five volumes have been published: (1) Index de I'Universite de Paris; (2) 
Index de I'Universite de Louvain; (3) Index de Venise, 1549 et 1554; (5) Index de 
l'lnquisition Espagnole, 1551, 1554, 1559; (7) Index d'Anvers, 1569, 1570, 1571 
(Sherbrooke, Quebec: Centre d'Etudes de la Renaissance, Editions de I'Univer- 
site de Sherbrooke, 1984—1988). 

12. E. Le Roy Ladurie, Montaillou, village occitan de 1294 a 1324 (Paris: Gal- 
limard, 1975); C. Ginzburg, The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth 
Century Miller (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins, 1980). 

13. M. Vollvelle, Piete baroque et dechristianisation: les attitudes devant la mort en 
Provence au XVIIIe siecle (Paris: Plon, 1973); idem, Ideologies et mentalites (Paris: 
Francois Maspero, 1982). 

14. J. Delumeau, La peur en Occident, XIVe-XVIHe siecles: Une cite assiegee 
(Paris: Fayard, 1 978); Le peche et la peur: La culpabilisation en Occident, XIIIe-XVIHe 
siecles (Paris: Fayard, 1983). 

PUBLICATIONS ON THE SPANISH 
INQUISITION, 1977-1988 

Abellan, J. L. "La persistencia de la 'mentalidad inquisitorial' en la vida y la 
cultura espanola contemporanea, y la teoria de 'las dos Espahas.'" In Inquisi- 
tion espanola y mentalidad inquisitorial: Ponencias del Simposio International sobre 
Inquisition, Nueva York, abril de 198$, edited by A. Alcala et al., 542-555. Bar- 
celona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 

Alcala, A. "Control inquisitorial de humanistas y escritores." In Inquisition es- 
panola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 288—314. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 

Alcala, A. et al. Inquisition espanola y mentalidad inquisitorial. Ponencias del Simposio 
International sobre Inquisition, Nueva York, abril de 1983. Barcelona: Editorial 
Aries, 1984. 

Alfaro, G. "Los 'Lazarillos' y la Inquisicion." Hispanofila 78 (1983): 11-19. 
Alonso Burgos, J. El luteranismo en Costilla durante el siglo XVI: Autos de fe de 

Valladolid de 21 mayo y de 8 de octubre de 1559. El Escorial: Swan Avantos y 

Hakeldama, 1983. 

Alvarez de Morales, A. "La critica al Tribunal de la Inquisicion durante la 
segunda mitad del siglo XVIII." Estudis 6 (1977): 171-182. 

. Inquisicion e ilustracion (ijoo-1834). Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria 

Espanola, 1982. 

Amiel, C. "La 'purete de sang' en Espagne." Annales du C.E.S.E.R.E. 6 (1983): 
27-45- 

. "The Archives of the Portuguese Inquisition: A Brief Survey." In The 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 235 



Inquisition in Early Modern Europe: Studies on Sources and Methods, edited by 
G. Henningsen and J. Tedeschi, in association with C. Amiel, 79-99. DeKalb, 
111.: Northern Illinois University Press, 1986. 

Andres, M. "Alumbrados, erasmistas, 'luteranos' y misticos, y su comun denomi- 
nador: el riesgo de una espiritualidad mas 'intimista.'" In Inquisicion espanola, 
edited by A. Alcala et al., 373-409. Barcelona: Editorial Aires, 1984. 

. La teologta espanola en el sigh XVI. 2 vols. Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores 

Cristianos, 1977. 

Aranda Doncell, J. Los moriscos en tierras de Cordoba. Cordoba, 1984. 

Asensio, E. "Censura inquisitorial de libros en los siglos XVI y XVII. Fluc- 
tuaciones, decadencias." In El libro antiguo espanol. Adas del primer Coloquio 
Internacional (Madrid, 18 al 20 diciembre 1986), al cuidado de M. L. Lopez- 
Vidriero, y P. M. Catedra, 2 1-36. Salamanca: Ediciones de la Universidad de 
Salamanca. Biblioteca Nacional de Madrid. Sociedad Espanola de Historia del 
Libro, 1988. 

Aspe, M. P. "El cambio de rumbo de la espiritualidad espanola a mediados del 
siglo XVI." In Inquisicion espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al.: 424-433. Bar- 
celona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 

Aviles Fernandez, M. "Los alumbrados en Andalucia." In El barroco en Andalucia, 
edited by M. Pelaez del Rosal and J. Rivas Carmona, 137-152. Cordoba, 1984. 

. "La censura inquisitorial de 'Los seis libros de la Republica' de Jean 

Bodin." Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 655—692. 

. "Delation a la Inquisicion y otras reacciones de los lectores del 'Tratado 

de la regalia de amortization de Campomanes.'" Hispania Sacra 36 (1984): 

43~ 6 9- 

. Erasmo y la Inquisicion. El libelo de Valladolid y la 'Apologia' de Erasmo contra 

los frailes espanoles. Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Espanola, 1980. 
. "Espana e Italia en los escritos del antierasmista Luis de Maluenda." 

Anexos de Pliegos de Cordel 1 (1979): 225—239. 
. "La Inquisicion en la Andalucia barroca." In El barroco en Andalucia, 

edited by M. Pelaez del Rosal and J. Rivas Carmond, 153-167. Cordoba, 

1984. 

. "Los inquisidores generales: estudio del alto funcionariado inquisitorial 

en los siglos XV y XVI." Annuario delVIstituto Storico Italiano per I'etd moderna 
e contemporanea, 37-38 (1985-1986): 261-284. 

. "Motivos de critica a la Inquisicion en tiempos de Carlos V: Aportaciones 

para una historia de la oposicion a la Inquisicion." In La Inquisicion, edited 
by J. Perez Villanueva, 165-192. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 

. Suenos ficticiosy lucha ideologica en el Siglo de Oro. Biblioteca de Visionarios, 

Heterodoxos y Marginados. Madrid: Editora Nacional, 1981. 

. " Verdaderas y falsas imagenes de la Inquisicion espanola." In La Inquisi- 
cion: Palacio de Velazquez del Retiro, Madrid, octubre— diciembre ig82, 33—50. 
Madrid: Direction General de Bellas Artes, Archivos y Bibliotecas, 1982. 
Exposition organized by the Ministry of Culture, 1982. 



Copyrighted material 



236 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



Aviles Fernandez, M., J. Martinez, and V. Pinto. "El Archivo del Consejo de la 

Inquisition: Aportaciones para una historia de los archivos inquisitoriales." 

In Revista de Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos 81 (1978): 459—517. 
Azcona, T. de. "Aspectos economicos de la Inquisition de Toledo en el siglo 

XV." V Simposio Toledo Renacentista 1 (1980): 5-72. 
Bataillon, M. "Humanismo, erasmismo y represion cultural en la Espana del 

siglo XVI." In Erasmo y el erasmismo, 162-178. Barcelona: Editorial Crftica, 

1978. 

Beinart, H. Los conversos ante el Tribunal de la Inquisicion. Barcelona: Riopiedras 
Ediciones, 1983. 

Bel Bravo, M. A. El auto de fe de 1593 Los conversos granadinos de origen judio. 

Granada: Universidad de Granada, 1988. 
Bennassar, B. L'lnquisition espagnole, XV-XIX siecles. Paris: Hachette, 1979. 

Translated by J. Alfaya, under the title: Inquisicion espanola: Poder politico y 

control social. Barcelona: Editorial Critica, 1981. 
. "Modelos de la mentalidad inquisitorial: Metodos de su 'pedagogia del 

miedo.'" In Inquisicion espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 174-183. Barcelona: 

Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Benitez Sanchez Blanco, R. Felipe II y los moriscos: El intento decisivo de asimilacion 

1550-1568. Estudios de historia de Valencia, 183—202. Valencia, 1978. 

. Moriscos y cristianos en el Condado de Casares. Cordoba, 1982. 

Blazquez Miguel, J. La Inquisicion en Albacete. Albacete: Instituto de Estudios 

Albacetenses, 1985. 

. La Inquisicion en Costilla La Mancha. Madrid: Universidad de Cordoba, 

1986. 

. Inquisicion y criptojudaismo. Madrid: Ediciones Kaydeda, 1988. 

. El Tribunal de la Inquisicion de Murcia. Murcia: Academia Alfonso X el 

Sabio, 1986. 

Borromeo, A. "Contributo alio studio dell'Inquisizione e dei suoi rapporti con 
il potere episcopale nellTtalia spagnola del cinquecento." Annuario delVIstituto 
Storico Italiano per I'etd moderna e contemporanea, 29-30 (1977-1 978) : 2 1 9-2 76. 

. "Inquisizione spagnola e libri proibiti in Sicilia ed in Sardegna durante 

il XVI secolo." Annuario delVIstituto Storico Italiano per Veta moderna e contem- 
poranea, 35-36 (1983-1984): 219-271. 

Burgarella, P. "Fonti d'archivi sull'Inquisizione spagnola in Sicilia." Annuario 
delVIstituto Storico Italiano per Veta moderna e contemporanea, 37-38 (1985-1986): 
143-160. 

Burman, E. The Inquisition: The Hammer of Heresy. Wellingborough, Eng.: Aquar- 
ian Press, 1984. 

Cardaillac, L. Moriscos y cristianos viejos: Un enfrentamiento polemico. 1402—1640. 
Madrid, 1979. 

Carrete Parrondo, C. Fontes Iudaeorum Regni Castellae. Ill: Proceso inquisitorial con- 
tra los Arias Ddvila segovianos: Un enfrentamiento social entre judtos y conversos. 
Salamanca, 1986. 

Carrete Parrondo, J. M. Movimiento alumbrado y renacimiento espanol: Proceso in- 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 237 



quisitorial contra Luis de Beteta. Madrid: Centro de Estudios Judeo-Cristianos, 
1980. 

Cascales Ramos, A. La Inquisition en Andalucia: Resistencia de los conversos a su 

implantation. Seville: Editoriales Andaluzas Unidas, 1986. 
Castro, M. de. "El franciscano Fr. Luis de Maluenda, un alguacil alguacilado de 

la Inquisicion." In La Inquisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 797- 

813. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Cobos Ruiz de Adana, J. "Sexualidad e Inquisicion en Cordoba a finales del siglo 

XVI." Axerquia 2 (1980): 175—194. 
Contreras, J. El Santo Oficio de la Inquisition de Galicia: Poder, sociedad y cultura. 

Madrid: Akal Editor, 1982. 
. "Algunas consideraciones sobre las relaciones de causas de Sicilia y 

Cerdena." In Annuario delVIstituto Storico Italiano per Veto, moderna e contem- 

poranea, 37-38 (1985-1986): 181— 191. 
. "The Impact of Protestantism in Spain 1520-1600." In Inquisition and 

Society in Early Modern Europe, edited and translated by S. Haliczer, 47-63. 

London: Croom Helm, 1987. 
. "La infraestructura social de la Inquisicion: Comisarios y familiares." In 

Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 123-146. Barcelona: Editorial 

Aries, 1984. 

. "La Inquisicion aragonesa en el marco de la monarquia autoritaria." 

Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 489—540. 

. "La Inquisicion de Aragon: Estructura y oposiciones (1550—1700)." 

Revista de Estudios de Historia Social 1 (1977): 113—141. 

. Inquisicion espanola: Nuevas aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras. Ma- 
drid: Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, Ediciones Najera, 1987. 

Contreras, J., and J. P. Dedieu. "Geografia de la Inquisicion espanola: La forma- 
cion de los distritos (1480-1820)." Hispania 40 (1980): 37-93. 

Contreras J., and G. Henningsen. "Forty-four Thousand Cases of the Spanish 
Inquisition (1540—1700): Analysis of a Historical Data Bank." In The Inquisi- 
tion in Early Modern Europe: Studies on Sources and Methods, edited by G. Hen- 
ningsen and J. Tedeschi, in association with C. Amiel, 100-129. DeKalb, 111.: 
Northern Illinois University Press, 1986. 

Coronas Tejada, L. "Estudio social de los familiares del Santo Oficio en Jaen a 
mediados del siglo XVII." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villa- 
nueva, 293-302. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 

. El inquisidor de las brujas. Jaen, 1981. 

. Los judeoconversos en el reino de Jaen. Jaen, 1978. 

Cristobal, M. A. "La Inquisicion de Logrono. Una institution de control social." 

In Inquisition espanola: Nuevas aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras, 127—158. 

Madrid: Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, Ediciones Najera, 1987. 
De Bujanda, J. M. "Censura e Inquisicion en Espana en el siglo XVI." In La 

Inquisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 179-192. Madrid: BAC, 

1980. 

. "Censure romaine et censure espagnole au XVIe siecle: Les index 



Copyrighted material 



238 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



romain et espagnol de 1559 " Annuario dell'Istituto Storico Italiano per Veto, 

moderna e contemporanea, 35—36 (1983—1984): 169—186. 
. Index de 1' Inquisition espagnole, 1551, 1554, 1559- Index des livres in- 

terdits, vol. 5. Sherbrooke, Quebec: Centre d'Etudes de la Renaissance, Edi- 
tions de l'Universite de Sherbrooke, 1984. 
. "Un indice de libros permitidos." In Homenaje a Eugenio Asensio, 311- 

319. Madrid: Editorial Gredos, 1988. 
. "Indices de libros prohibidos." In Diccionario de Historia Eclesidstica de 

Espana, 399-499. Madrid: Instituto Enrique Florez. Consejo Superior de 

Investigaciones Cientificas, 1986. 
. "Indices de libros prohibidos del siglo XVI." Arbor 108, no. 421 (enero 

1981): 7-14. 

. "Litterature castillane dans 1'Index Espagnol de 1559." In I'Humanisme 

dans les lettres espagnoles; XIXe colloque international aV etudes humanistes, Tours, 5— 

7 juillet igy6, 205-217. Paris: J. Vrin, 1979. 
. "Luther et la censure catholique." In Encounters with Luther: Papers from 

the ig82 McGill Luther Symposium, edited by E. J. Furcha, 28-44. Montreal: 

E. J. Furcha, 1984. 

. "El primer indice de libros prohibidos." Studia Theologica 61 (1984): 443- 

450. 

Dedieu, J. P. "Analyse formelle de la procedure inquisitoriale en cause de foi." 
In Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 23 (1987): 227—251. 

. "Les archives de l'Inquisition: Source pour une etude anthropologique 

des vieux Chretiens: Un exemple et quelques reflexions." In La Inquisicion 
espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 893-912. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 

. "The Archives of the Holy Office of Toledo as a Source for Historical 

Anthropology." In The Inquisition in Early Modern Europe: Studies on Sources 
and Methods, edited by G. Henningsen and J. Tedeschi, in association with 
C. Amiel, 158—189. DeKalb, 111.: Northern Illinois University Press, 1986. 

. "Les causes de foi de l'Inquisition de Tolede (1483— 1820): Essai statis- 

tique." In Melanges de la Casa de Velazquez, 14(1978): 143—171. 

. "'Christianisation' en Nouvelle Castille: Catechisme, communion, messe 

et confirmation dans l'archeveche de Tolede, 1540-1650." In Melanges de la 
Casa de Velazquez, 15 (1979): 261—293. 

. "The Inquisition and Popular Culture in New Castile." In Inquisition and 

Society in Early Modern Europe, edited and translated by S. Haliczer, 129-146. 
London: Croom Helm, 1987. 

Dedieu, J. P., and M. Demonet. "L'activite de l'Inquisition de Tolede: Etude 
statistique, methodes et premiers resultats." Annuario dell'Istituto Storico Itali- 
ano per Veto, moderna e contemporanea, 37—38 (1985—1986): 1 1—39. 

Del Rio Barbero, M. J. "Censura Inquisitorial y teatro de 1707 a 1819." Hispania 
Sacra 38 (1986): 279-330. 

Domergue, L. Censure et lumieres dans VEspagne de Charles III. Paris: CNRS, 1982. 

. "Inquisicion y ciencia en el siglo XVIII." Arbor 124, no. 484-485 (abril- 

mayo 1986): 103-130. 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 239 



. Le livre en Espagne du temps de la Revolution Francaise. Lyon, 1984. 

Dominguez Ortiz, A. Autos de la Inquisition de Sevilla (Siglo XVII). Seville: Servicio 
de Publicaciones del Ayuntamiento de Sevilla, 1981. 

Dominguez Ortiz, A., and B. Vincent. Historia de los moriscos: Vida y tragedia de 
una minoria. Madrid, 1978. 

Dominguez Salgado, M. del P. "Inquisition y Corte en el siglo XVII." Hispania 
Sacra 37 (1985): 569-584. 

. "Los ongenes del Tribunal de Corte (1580—1665)." In Inquisicion es- 
panola: Nuevas aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras, 99-1 25. Madrid: Centro 
de Estudios Inquisitoriales, Ediciones Najera, 1987. 

Drochon, P. "Une polemique sur l'lnquisition en 1869." Hispania Sacra 39 
(1987): 1 17-137. 

Dufour, G. La Inquisition Espanola: Una aproximacion a la Espana intolerante. 
Barcelona: Montesinos, 1986. 

Echevern'a, M., P. Garcia de Yebenes, and R. de Lera. "Distribution y numero 
de los familiares del Santo Oficio en Andalucia durante los siglos XVI- 
XVIII." Hispania Sacra 39 (1987): 59-94. 

Escandell Bonet, B. "Estudios de una burocracia inquisitorial en terminos funcio- 
nales: Las relaciones del Tribunal Romano y la Administration Virreinal 
como observatorio (1570—1600)." Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 387—408. 

. "El 'Fenomeno inquisitorial': Naturaleza sociologica y pervivencias ac- 
tuates. " In La Inquisition: Palacio de Velazquez del Retiro, Madrid, octubre— 
diciembre ig82, 8-55. Madrid: Direccion General de Bellas Artes, Archivos y 
Bibliotecas, 1982. Exposition organized by the Ministry of Culture, 1982. 

. "La Inquisicion como dispositivo de control social y la pervivencia actual 

del 'modelo inquisitorial'." In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 
597-612. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 

Escudero, J. A. "Los ongenes del 'Consejo de la Suprema Inquisicion.'" In 
Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 81-122. Barcelona: Editorial 
Aires, 1984. 

Eymeric, N., and F. Pena. El manual de los inquisidores. Madrid, 1983. 

Ferrer Benimelli, A. "La Inquisicion frente a masoneria e ilustracion." In In- 
quisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 81-122. Barcelona: Editorial 
Aries, 1984. 

. "Inquisicion y masoneria: un problema politico-eclesial." In La Inquisi- 
tion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 737—781. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 

Garcia Arenal, M. Inquisition y moriscos: Los procesos del Tribunal de Cuenca. 
Madrid: Siglo Veintiuno Editores, 1978. 

Garcia Carcel, R. Herejiay sociedad en el siglo XVI : La Inquisition en Valencia, 1530— 
WOO. Barcelona: Ediciones Peninsula, 1980. 

. "El itinerario de los moriscos hasta su expulsion (1609)." In Inquisicion 

espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 67-80. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 

. "El modelo mediterraneo de brujeria." Annuario dell'Istituto Storico Itali- 

ano per I'etd moderna e contemporanea, 37-38 (1985-1986): 245-257. 

. "Numero y sociologia de los familiares de la Inquisicion valenciana." In 



Copyrighted material 



240 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



La Inquisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 271-283. Madrid: BAC, 
1980. 

. "Trayectoria de la Inquisition valenciana." In La Inquisition espanola, 

edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 411-433. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Garcia de Yebenes Prous, P. "Ventura Rodriguez: De arquitecto real a ar- 

quitecto del consejo de Inquisition." Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 619-654. 
Garcia Fuentes, J. M. La Inquisition en Granada en el siglo XVI: Fuentes para su 

estudio. Granada: Universidad de Granada, 1981. 
Garcia Servet, J. El humanista Cascalesy la Inquisition murciana. Madrid: Ediciones 

Jose Porrua Turanzas, 1978. 
Gil, Sanjuan J. "Fuentes documentales del Santo Oficio Granadino para el 

estudio de las minorias disidentes en Andalucia." Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 

729-749- 

. "La Inquisition de Granada: Visita a Malaga y su comarca en 1568." 

Baetica 1 (1978): 3i3~33 6 - 
Gil Novales, A. "Inquisition y ciencia en el siglo XIX." Arbor 124, no. 484-485 

(abril-mayo 1986): 147-170. 
Gomez Pastor, P. Proyecto de reforma de la Inquisition en 1 j68: Historia economica 

y pensamiento social, 87—95. Madrid: 1983. 
Gonzalez de Caldaz, M. V. "Nuevas imagenes del Santo Oficio en Sevilla: El auto 

de fe." In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 237—267. Barcelona: 

Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Gonzalez Novah'n, J. L. "L liiquisizione spagnola. Correnti storiograhche da 

Llorente (1817) ai giorni nostri." Storia della Chiesa in Italia 39 (1985): 140- 

*59- 

. "La Inquisition espanola." Historia de la Iglesia en Espana, vol. 3. Madrid: 

Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, ig8o. 

. "Luteranismo e Inquisition en Espana (1519—1561). Bases para la pe- 

riodizacion del tema en el siglo de la Reforma." Annuario dell'Istituto Storico 
Italiano per I'etd moderna e contemporanea, 37-38 (1985-1986): 43-73. 

Gracia Boix, R. Autos de fe y causas de la Inquisition de Cordoba. Cordoba: Pub- 
licaciones de la Excma Disputation Provincial, 1983. 

. Coleccion de documentos para la historia de la Inquisition de Cordoba. Cordoba: 

Monte de Piedad y Caja de Ahorros de Cordoba, 1982. 

Gracia Guillen, D. "Judaismo, medicina y 'mentalidad inquisitorial' en la Espana 
del siglo XVI." In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 328—352. Bar- 
celona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 

Gutierrez, A.Jean Bodin et Michel de Montaigne en Espagne ( 1 ^go-i6gy): Textes de 
I'lnquisition. St. Etienne: Universite Jean Monet, 1978. 

Haliczer, S. "The First Holocaust: The Inquisition and the Converted Jews of 
Spain and Portugal." In Inquisition and Society in Early Modern Europe, edited 
and translated by S. Haliczer, 7-18. London: Croom Helm, 1987. 

. "La Inquisition como mito y como historia: Su abolition y el desarrollo 

de la ideologia politica espanola." In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala 
et al., 496-517. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 241 



Hamilton, A. El proceso de Rodrigo de Bivar ( 1539). Madrid: Fundacion Univer- 
sitaria Espanola, 1979. 

Henningsen, G. "The Archives and the Historiography of the Spanish Inquisi- 
tion." In The Inquisition in Early Modern Europe: Studies on Sources and Methods, 
edited by G. Henningsen and J. Tedeschi, in association with C. Amiel, 54- 
78. DeKalb, III: Northern Illinois University Press, 1986. 

. "El 'banco de datos' del Santo Oficio: Las relaciones de causas de la 

Inquisicion espanola." Boletin de la Real Academia de la Historia 174 (1977): 
547-570. 

. "La coleccion Moldenhawer en Copenhague: Una aportacion a la ar- 

chivologia de la Inquisicion espanola." Revista de Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos 

80 (1977): 209-270. 
. "Los daneses y la Inquisicion." Annuario dell'Istituto Storico Italianoper Veta 

moderna e contemporanea 37-38 (1985-1986): 203-216. 
. "La elocuencia de los numeros: Promesas de las 'relaciones de causas' 

inquisitoriales para la nueva historia social." In Inquisicion espanola, edited by 

A. Alcala et al., 207-225. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
. "Las victimas de Zugarramurdi: El origen de un gran proceso de 

brujerfa." Saioak (Revista des estudios vascos) 2, no. 2 (1978): 182-195. 
. The Witches' Advocate: Basque Witchcraft and the Spanish Inquisition ( 1 6og— 

1614). Reno, Nevada: University of Nevada Press, 1980. 
Henningsen, G., and J. Tedeschi. The Inquisition in Early Modern Europe. Studies 

on Sources and Methods. In association with C. Amiel. DeKalb, 111.: Northern 

Illinois University Press, 1986. 
Higueruela del Pino, L. "Actitud del episcopado espahol ante los decretos de 

supresion de la Inquisicion (1813-1820)." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited by 

J. Perez Villanueva, 939-977. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Huerga, A. "Fray Luis de Granada entre mistica, alumbrados e Inquisicion." 

Angelicum 66 (1988): 540—564. 
. Historia de los alumbrados (1570-1630). 4 vols. Madrid: Fundacion Uni- 

versitaria Espanola, 1978—1988. 
Huerga Criado, P. "Los agentes de la Inquisicion espanola en Roma durante el 

siglo XVII." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 243-256. 

Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
. "El Inquisidor General Fray Tomas de Torquemada." In Inquisicion es- 
panola: Nuevas Aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras, 7-51. Madrid: Edi- 

ciones Najera. Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1987. 
. "La etapa inicial del Consejo de Inquisicion (1483-1498)." In Hispania 

Sacra 37 (1985): 45!-404- 
Idoate, F. La brujeria en Navarray sus documentos. Pamplona: Institucion Principe 

de Viana, 1978. 

Inquisicao: 1° Congresso Lusso-Brasileiro sobre Inquisicao: Resumos das comunicaqoes, 
Lisboa, ij a 20 fevereiro, ig8y. Lisboa: Sociedade Portuguesa de Estudos do 
Seculo XVIII, 1987. 

La Inquisicion: Palacio de Velazquez del Retiro, Madrid, octubre—diciembre IQ82. 



Copyrighted material 



242 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



Madrid: Direccion General de Bellas Artes, Archivos y Bibliotecas, 1982. 

Exposition organized by the Ministry of Culture. 
Jimenez Lozano, J. "Supervivencia de cultemas islamo-hebraicos en la sociedad 

espanola o el fracaso historico de la Inquisicion." In Inquisition espanola, edited 

by A. Alcala et al., 353-371. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Jimenez Montesen'n, M. Introduction a la Inquisition espanola: Documentos bdsicos 

para el estudio del Santo Oficio. Madrid: Editora Nacional, 1980. 
Jones, J. A. "Censuras acerca de la impresion de la 'Paraphrasis Chaldaica' de 

Andres de Leon: Un aspecto de la amistad entre Benito Arias Montano y 

Pedro de Valencia." In Homenaje a Pedro Sainz Rodriguez. 4 vols. 1:339—348. 

Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Espanola, 1986. 
Kamen, H. Inquisition and Society in Spain in the Sixteenth Century. Bloomington, 

Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1985. 
. "Notas sobre brujeria y sexualidad y la Inquisicion." In Inquisition 

espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 226-236. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Kinder, Gordon A. Spanish Protestants and Reformers in the Sixteenth Century: A 

Bibliography. London: Grant and Lutler, 1983. 
Lea, H. C. Historia de la Inquisicion espanola. 3 vols. Madrid: Fundacion Univer- 
sitaria Espanola, 1982-1984. 
Lera Garcia, R. de. "Cripto-Musulmanes ante la Inquisicion granadina en el 

s. XVIII." Hispania Sacra 36 (1984): 521—575. 
Llamas Martinez, E. "Secuelas de la accion de la Inquisicion espanola contra los 

libros de Madrc Teresa de Jesus." Cultura, Historia e Filosofia 5 ( 1 986): 289-3 1 7. 
Llorente, J. A. Historia crttica de la Inquisition en Espana. Pamplona: Ediciones 

Hiperion, 1980. 

. Noticia biogrdfica: Autobiografia. Con una "nota critica" de A. Marquez, y 

un "ensayo bibliografico" por E. Van der Vekene. Madrid: Taurus Ediciones, 
1982. 

Lopez Vela, R. "Estructura y funcionamiento de la burocracia inquisitorial 
(1643—1667)." In Inquisition espanola: Nuevas aproximaciones, edited by J. Con- 
treras, 159-231. Madrid: Ediciones Najera, Centro de Estudios Inquisitori- 
ales, 1987. 

. "La generacion de funcionarios inquisitoriales de la epoca de Nithard." 

In La Inquisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 233-241. Madrid: 
BAC, 1980. 

Loy, J. R. "Los ilustrados franceses y su idea de la Inquisicion." In Inquisition 

espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 587-596. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Marquez, A. "Ciencia e Inquisicion en Espana del XV al XVII." Arbor 124, nos. 

484—485 (abril— mayo): 65—83. 
. "La Inquisicion: Estado de las investigaciones inquisitoriales." Revista de 

Occidente 6 (1981): 147-156. 
. Literatura e Inquisition en Espana ( 1478-1 834). Madrid: Taurus Ediciones, 

1980. 

Martinez Millan, J. "Las canonjias inquisitoriales: Un problema de jurisdiction 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 243 



entre le Iglesia y la monarquia." Hispania Sacra 34 (1982): 9-63. 
. "El Catalogo de libros prohibidos de 1559: Aportaciones para una nueva 

interpretation." Misceldnea Comillas, 37 (1979): 179-217. 
. "Estructuras de la Hacienda inquisitorial." In Inquisition espanola, edited 

by A. Alcala et al., 147-173. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
. "La formation de las estucturas inquisitoriales." Hispania 43 (1983): 

25-46. 

. "Los miembros del Consejo de Inquisition durante el siglo XVII." His- 
pania Sacra 37 (1985): 409-450. 

. "Los problemas de jurisdiction del Santo Oficio: 'La Junta Magna.'" 

Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 205—259. 

Martinez Millan, J., and Sanchez Rivilla. "El Consejo de la Inquisition (1483- 
1700)." Hispania Sacra 36 (1984): 71—193. 

Mechoulan, H. El Honor de Dios: Indios, judtos y moriscos en el Siglo de Oro. 
Barcelona, 1981. 

Mendoza Garcia, I. "El padre Juan Everardo Nithard: Valido e inquisidor 

general." In Inquisition espanola: Nuevas aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras, 

77-98. Madrid: Ediciones Najera. Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1987. 
Meseguer Fernandez, J. "Fernando de Talavera, Cisneros y la Inquisition de 

Granada." In La Inquisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 371-400. 

Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
. "Diego Sarmiento de Valladares, Inquisidor General: Documentos para 

su biografia." Archivo Ibero Americano 40 (1980). 
. "Instrucciones de Tomas de Torquemada: Preinstrucciones o pro- 

yecto?" Hispania Sacra 34 (1982): 197-215. 
. "El Cardenal Cisneros, inquisidor general (1507—1517)." Archivo Ibero 

Americano 43 (1983): 95-194. 
Mier, E. de. El conflicto del poder y el poder del conflicto. (El familiar del Santo Oficio 

de la Inquisition, Toribio Sanchez de Quijano de Cartes.) Santander: Ediciones 

Tantin, 1984. 

Miguel Gonzales, M. L. de. "Caracteristicas economicas de la Inquisition ara- 
gonesa desde 1506—1516." In Inquisition espanola: Nuevas aproximaciones, 
edited by J. Contreras, 53-75. Madrid: Ediciones Najera. Centro de Estudios 
Inquisitoriales, 1987. 

Monter, W. "Protestantes franceses y tolerancia inquisitorial." Hispania Sacra 39 
(i9 8 7) : 95~ 116 - 

. "The Mediterranean Inquisitions." In Ritual, Myth and Magic in Early 

Modern Europe, Athens (Ohio): Ohio University Press, 1984. 

. "The New Social History and the Spanish Inquisition." Journal of Social 

History 17 (1984): 705-7 1 3. 

Moreno Garbayo, N. Catalogo de alegaciones fiscales. Madrid: Archivo Historico 
Nacional, 1977. 

. Inventario de los libros 1225 a 1281 con indices de personas, materiasy lugares. 

Madrid: Archivo Historico Nacional, 1979. 



Copyrighted m atenal 



244 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



Moreno Mancebo, M. "Breve biografia de Olavide." In Inquisition espanola: 

Nuevas aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras, 257-296. Madrid: Ediciones 

Najera. Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1987. 
Moron Arroyo, C. "Ciencia, Inquisicion, ideologia: Temas de nuestro tiempo." 

Arbor 124, no. 484-485 (abril-mayo 1986): 29-43. 
. "La Inquisicion y la posibilidad de la gran literatura barroca espanola." 

In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 3 1 5-327. Barcelona: Editorial 

Aries, 1984. 

Murios Calvo, S. Inquisition y ciencia en la Espana moderna. Madrid: Editora 
Nacional, 1977. 

Nalle, S. "Popular Religion in Cuenca on the Eve of the Catholic Reformation." 

In Inquisition and Society in Early Modern Europe, edited and translated by 

S. Haliczer, 67—87. London: Croom Helm, 1987. 
Navarro Latorre, J. Aproximacion a Fr. Luis de Aliaga, confesor de Felipe III e 

inquisidor general de Espana. Zaragoza, 1981. 
Netanyahu, B. "Motivos o pretextos? La razon de la Inquisicion." In Inquisition 

espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 23-44. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Nieto, J. C. "El caracter no mistico de los alumbrados de Toledo, i509(?)-i524." 

In Inquisicion espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 410-423. Barcelona: Editorial 

Aries, 1984. 

. "The Heretical Alumbrados-Dexados: Isabel de la Cruz and Pedro de 

Alcaraz." Revue de litterature comparee 52 (1978): 293-313. 
Ocana Torres, M. L. "El 'Corpus juridico' dc la Inquisicion espanola." In La In- 
quisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 913-916. Madrid: BAG, 1980. 
Ortega Costa, M. Proceso de la Inquisition contra Maria de Cazalla. Madrid: Funda- 

cion Universitaria Espanola, 1978. 
. "San Ignacio de Loyola en el Libro de alumbrados: nuevos datos sobre su 

primer proceso." Arbor 107 no. 419 (noviembre 1980): 163—174. 
. "Tribulaciones de un tribunal: El Santo Oficio de Toledo (1530—1535)." 

In Homenaje a Pedro Sainz Rodriguez. 4 vols. 4:543-555- Madrid: Fundacion 

Universitaria Espanola, 1986. 
Pardo, Tomas J. "Obras y autores cientificos en los indices inquisitoriales es- 

panoles del siglo XVI (1559, 1583 y 1584)." Estudis 10 (1983): 235-259. 
. "El paracelsismo europeo en los indices inquisitoriales espanoles (1583- 

1640)." Arbor 124, no. 484-485 (abril-mayo 1986): 85-101. 
Perez, LI., LI. Muntaner, and M. Colom, eds. El Tribunal de la Inquisicion en 

Mallorca: Relation de causas de fe, 1578-1806. vol. 1. Mallorca: Miguel Font 

Editor, 1986. 

Perez Bustamante, R. "Nominas de inquisidores: Reflexiones sobre el estudio 

de la burocracia inquisitorial en el siglo XVI." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited 

by J. Perez Villanueva, 257-269. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Perez de Colosia Rodriguez, M. I. Auto inquisitorial de 1672: El criptojudaismo en 

Malaga. Malaga, 1984. 
Perez de Colosia Rodriguez, M. I., and J. Gil Sanjuan. "Malaga e Inquisicion." 

Jdbega 38 (1982): 16-21. 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 245 



Perez Ramirez, D. "El Archivo de la Inquisition de Cuenca: Formation, vicisi- 

tudes, estado actual." In La Inquisition espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 

855-875. Madrid: BAG, 1980. 
. Catdlogo del Archivo de la Inquisition de Cuenca. Madrid: Fundacion Uni- 

versitaria Espanola, 1982. 
Perez Villanueva, J., Director del volumen. La Inquisition espanola: Nueva vision, 

nuevos horizontes. Madrid: Siglo veintiuno editores, 1980. 
. "Algo mas sobre la Inquisition y Sor Maria de Agrcda: La prodigiosa 

evangelization americana." Hispania Sacra 37 (1985): 585-618. 
. "Felipe IV y la Inquisition y espiritualidad de su tiempo: Su figura desde 

tres epistolarios." In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 434-461. 

Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Perez Villanueva, J., and B. Escandell Bonet, eds. Historia de la Inquisition en 

Espana y America: El conocimiento cientifico y el proceso historico de la Institution 

(1478-1834). Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos. Centro de Estudios 

Inquisitoriales, 1984. 
Perry, M. E. "Beatas and the Inquisition in Early Modern Seville." In Inquisition 

and Society in Early Modern Europe, edited and translated by S. Haliczer, 147- 

168. London: Croom Helm, 1987. 
Peters, E. "Una morada de monstruos: Henry Charles Lea y el descubrimiento 

americano de la Inquisition." In Inquisition espanola, edited by A. Alcala et 

al., 518—541. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Pinto Crespo, V. "La actitud de la Inquisition ante la iconografia religiosa: Tres 

ejemplos de su actuation (1571-1665)." Hispania Sacra 31 (1978-1979): 285- 

322. 

. "El aparato de control censorial y las corrientes doctrinales" Hispania 

Sacra 36 (1984): 9-41. 

. "La censura: Sistemas de control e instrumentos de action." In Inquisi- 
tion espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 269-287. Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 
1984. 

. "La documentation inquisitorial." In La Inquisition: Palacio de Velazquez 

del Retiro, Madrid, octubre—diciembre 1Q82, 93-106. Madrid: Direction General 
de Bellas Artes, Archivos y Bibliotecas, 1982. Exposition organized by the 
Ministry of Culture. 

. "Los indices de libros prohibidos." Hispania Sacra 35 (1983): 161-191. 

. "Herejia y poder en el siglo XVI: Una propuesta de indagacion." His- 
pania Sacra 37 (1985): 465-488. 

. Inquisition y control ideologico en la Espana del siglo XVI. Madrid: Taurus 

Ediciones, 1983. 

. Institutionalization inquisitorial y censura de libros." In La Inquisition 

espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 513-536. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 

. "El proceso de elaboration y configuration del Indice y expurgatorio 

de 1583-1584 en relation con los indices del siglo XVI." Hispania Sacra 30 
(1977): 201-254. 

. "Thought Control in Spain." In Inquisition and Society in Early Modern 



Copyrighted malarial 



246 



JESUS M. DE BUJANDA 



Europe, edited and translated by S. Haliczer, 171-188. London: Croom Helm, 
1987. 

Reguera, I. La Inquisicion en el Pais Vasco: El Tribunal de Calahorra ( 1513-1 570). 

San Sebastian: 1984. 
Represa Rodriguez, A. "Documentos sobre la Inquisicion en el Archivo de Si- 

mancas." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 845-855. 

Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Riera, J. "Expurgo de las Academias de Matematicas de Barcelona y Segovia de 

1790." Arbor 124, no. 484-485 (abril-mayo 1986): 131-146. 
Rodriguez Besne, J. R. "Notas sobre la estructura y funcionamiento del Consejo 

de la Santa, General y Suprema Inquisicion." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited 

by J. Perez Villanueva, 61-65. Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Rodriguez Sanchez, A. "Moralizacion y represion en la Espana del siglo XVI." 

In Homenaje a Pedro Sainz Rodriguez. 4 vols. 3:591-601. Madrid: Fundacion 

Universitaria Espanola, 1986. 
Rose, C. S. "Antonio Enriquez Gomez: Historia de un converso." In El barroco 

en Andalucia, edited by M. Pelaez del Rosal and J. Rivas Carmona, 115-122. 

Cordoba, 1984. 

Ruitz, T. R. "La Inquisicion medieval y la moderna: Paralelos y contrastes." In 
Inquisicion espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 45-66. Barcelona: Editorial 
Aries, 1984. 

Sala-Molins, L. Le dictionnaire des inquisiteurs: Valence, 1494. Paris: Editions 
Galilee, 1981. 

Sanchez Ortega, M. H. La Inquisicion y los gitanos. Madrid: Taurus Ediciones, 
1988. 

. "Un sondeo en la historia de la sexualidad sobre fuentes inquisitoriales." 

In La Inquisicion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 917-930. Madrid: 
BAC, 1980. 

Santamaria Garraleta, J. L. "Ongenes de la Inquisicion en Navarra." In La 
Inquisicion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 405-410. Madrid: BAC, 
1980. 

Sarrion Mora, A. "El medico y la sociedad rural del siglo XVII: El proceso 

inquisitorial de Francisco Martinez Casas." In Inquisicion espanola: Nuevas 

aproximaciones, edited by J. Contreras, 297-321. Madrid: Ediciones Najera. 

Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1987. 
Sendon de Leon, V. La Espana heretica. Barcelona: Icaria, 1986. 
Sesma Munoz, G. A. El establecimiento de la Inquisicion en Aragon (1484—1486): 

Documentos para un estudio. Zaragoza: Institucion Fernando el Catolico, 1987. 
Tedeschi, J. "Organizacion y procedimientos penales de la Inquisicion romana: 

Un bosquejo." In Inquisicion espanola, edited by A. Alcala et al., 185-206. 

Barcelona: Editorial Aries, 1984. 
Tellechea Idigoras, J. I. "Don Carlos de Seso: Bienes y biblioteca confiscados 

para la Inquisicion (1559)." Revista Espanola de Teologia 43 (1983): 193-197. 
. "Don Carlos de Seso, luterano en Castilla: Sentencia inedita de su pro- 



Copyrighted material 



RECENT HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE SPANISH INQUISITION 247 



ceso inquisitorial." In Homenaje a Pedro Sainz Rodriguez. 4 vols. 1:295—307. 

Madrid: Fundacion Universitaria Espanola, 1986. 
. "Molinos y el quietismo espariol." In Historiade lalglesia enEspana 4:517- 

521. Madrid: Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1979. 
. Tiempos recios: Inquisition y heterodoxos. Salamanca: Ediciones Sigueme, 

1977- 

Tomas y Valiente, F. "Relaciones de la Inquisicion con el aparato institucional 

del Estado." In La Inquisicion espanola, edited by J. Perez Villanueva, 41-60. 

Madrid: BAC, 1980. 
Ungerer, G. La defensa de Antonio Perez contra los cargos que se le imputaron en el 

proceso de visita ( 1584). Zaragoza, 1980. 
Van der Vekene, E. Bibliotheca bibliographica Historiae Sanctae Inquisitionis. 2 vols. 

Vaduz, Liechtenstein: Topos Verlag, 1982—1983. 
Vazquez Janeiro, I. "Cultura y censura en el siglo XVI: A proposito de la edicion 

de Index des Livres interdits." Antonianum 63 (1988): 26-73. 
Ventura Subirats, J. "Conversos, Inquisicion y cultura en Valencia." Mayurqa 19 

(1980): 251-276. 

. Inquisicio espanyola i cultura renaixentista al Pais Valencia. Valencia: Eliseu 

Climent Editor, 1978. 
Vernet Gines, J. "Ciencia hispano-islamica y la mihna." Arbor 124, no. 484-485 

(abril-mayo 1986): 45~55- 
Vidal, J. Quand on brulait les morisques, 1544-1621. Nimes: Imprimerie Barnier, 

1986. 

Vilchez Diaz, A. Autores y anonimos espanoles en los indices inquisitoriales. Madrid: 

Universidad Complutense, 1986. 
Villa Calleja, I. "Investigacion historica de los 'Edictos de Fe' en la Inquisicion 

espanola (siglos XV-XIX)." In Inquisicion espanola: Nuevas aproximaciones, 

edited by J. Contreras, 233-256. Madrid: Ediciones Najera. Centro de 

Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1987. 



Copyrighted material 



THIRTEEN 



Historiography of the Mexican 
Inquisition: Evolution of 
Interpretations and Methodologies 

Richard E. Greenleaf 



When I began my archival investigations on the Mexican Inquisition in 
1954, study of the Holy Office was still concentrated in the pioneering 
works of Jose Toribio Medina, Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta, Henry 
Charles Lea, Luis Gonzalez Obregon, and Julio Jimenez Rueda. 1 The 
Bolettn of the Archivo General de la Nacion, in its first series, and the 
Publicaciones del Archivo General de la Nacion dealing with the Holy Office 
and the Indians and the Inquisition and the Enlightenment, provided 
most of the published documentation available. 2 The fourteen folio vol- 
umes of the "Indice del Ramo de la Inquisicion" constituted then and 
continue to be the most important research tool to investigators. 3 Studies 
dealing with the Mexican Holy Office, with a few exceptions, tended to 
recapitulate the data and tabulations contained in the printed sources. 4 
Few scholars had perceived the true importance of Luis Gonzalez Obre- 
gon's remark to the young researcher France Vinton Scholes when he 
first arrived in the Archivo in 1927. Don Luis said of the Ramo de la 
Inquisicion "in these legajos you will find the social and intellectual his- 
tory of colonial Mexico." 5 The three and one half decades since 1954 
have brought great changes in Mexican Inquisition historiography. 
Splendidly trained scholars have examined the procesos and other docu- 
mentation in the Inquisition archives both in Mexico and in Spain. 

Beginning in the 1960s a new genre of Inquisition studies appeared. 
The first of many scholarly Inquisition symposia was held in Santander 
in 1976, followed by one in Denmark organized by the distinguished 
Danish folklorist and Hispanist Gustav Henningsen. 6 A magnificent ex- 
hibition on the Inquisition was mounted in Madrid in the Palacio de 

248 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 249 



Velazquez del Retiro by the Ministerio de Cultura in 1982, 7 in tandem 
with an important symposium at the Archivo Historico Nacional. There 
followed a series of impressive scholarly conclaves in the Iberian penin- 
sula culminating with one on Toledo in February ig88. Each of these 
meetings has generated publications. Largely responsible for these de- 
velopments has been the Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, located in 
the complex that houses the Archivo Historico Nacional in Madrid. It 
has nurtured a renaissance in studies of the Holy Office of the Inquisi- 
tion in Spain and America, works based on extensive archival documen- 
tation and, for the most part, devoid of both apologias for and polemics 
against the Inquisition. Two senior scholars in Spain who direct research 
on the Spanish Inquisition (Joaquin Perez Villanueva) and the tribunals 
of the New World (Bartolome Escandell Bonet) have launched a massive 
three-volume history of the Holy Office with the collaboration of thirty- 
six specialists. 8 Volume 1 of the series on the state of knowledge and his- 
torical development of the Inquisition from 1478 to 1834 is followed by 
a volume on the bureaucratic structure of the Holy Office and a third 
tome on themes and problems of interpretation. The second and third 
volumes are currently in preparation. 

Only a synoptic view of volume 1 — 1,548 pages in two parts with mul- 
tiple chapters and subsections — can be presented here. An attempt is 
made for the first time to present a systematic history of the modern 
Inquisition "made by Spaniards who have risen above ideological biases 
and distortions" and who apply professional canons of historical re- 
search and methodology to their task (Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales 
flyer). By applying academic rigor to their analysis of the Inquisition 
the team hopes to eschew tired cliches, outmoded interpretations, and 
crosscurrents of Black Legend-White Legend historiography. Interpre- 
tations tend to be more sociological than religious. Intolerance is dealt 
with within a political and societal framework rather than from a view- 
point of persecution and religious toleration. 

French scholars of the Holy Office in Spain and the Empire are also 
making significant advances. Works by Robert Ricard, Marcel Bataillon, 
and Pierre Chaunu have been carried forward by Bartolome Bennassar 
and his students, who are in the forefront of this movement. In the 
United States, Inquisition symposia organized by Angel Alcala in New 
York in 1983 and by Stephen Haliczer and John Tedeschi in Chicago 
in 1986 have preceded this distinguished gathering in Los Angeles. 
Meetings in Paris and Rome have also focused on the Inquisition. 9 Ob- 
viously the greatest scholars of the Mexican Inquisition have come from 
Mexico, and their proud tradition is being carried on by seminars in the 



Copyrighted material 



250 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



History of Mentality and Religion in Colonial Mexico at the Department 
of Historical Investigation of the National Institute of Anthropology and 
History, and seminars on the Mexican Inquisition at the Universidad 
Autonoma Metropolitana. For several years now, the Centro de Estudios 
Linguisticos y Literarios of the Colegio de Mexico along with the Insti- 
tuto de Bellas Artes, the Archivo General de la Nacion, and the Univer- 
sidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico have sponsored a project to catalog 
literary texts of New Spain found in the Inquisition series. The project 
has completed its review of the eighteenth-century material, and a book 
entitled Catdlogo de textos literarios novohispanos en el Archivo General de la 
Nacion (Mexico) should be published within the year. Although the focus 
of this work is literature, it will include an appendix that will give infor- 
mation on, and references to documents on, witches and witchcraft, 
black magic, horoscopes, almanacs, and pacts with the Devil. The project 
is ongoing and plans eventually to provide the same type of information 
for the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 

In a brief essay it is impossible to treat in detail individual studies on 
the Mexican Inquisition or to arrange a complete bibliography of article 
literature on the subject. Only the highlights can be brought into focus 
here. It seems that both a chronological and thematic presentation is 
needed to accomplish the task in the time allotted. From a chronological 
perspective it is necessary to remember that a Primitive Inquisition 
(Medina's phrase) operated in Mexico from 1522 to 1571, first under 
the aegis of friar inquisitors in the 1520s and then under an episcopal 
jurisdiction from 1535 to 1571 when Juan de Zumarraga, Francisco 
Tello de Sandoval, and Alonso de Montufar were empowered as apos- 
tolic inquisitors. In Yucatan the monastic inquisition continued to oper- 
ate outside the jurisdiction of Mexico City in the 1560s. In 1571 the Tri- 
bunal of the Holy Office of the Inquisition began to function pursuant 
to a decree of Philip II in 1569. 10 



THE PRIMITIVE INQUISITION, 1522-1569 

Little known because only two hundred copies were printed is the sec- 
tion on Mexico's monastic and episcopal Inquisition prior to 1569 in Jose 
Toribio Medina's La Primitiva Inquisicion americana ( i4g^—i^6g), 2 vol- 
umes. (Santiago de Chile: Imprenta Elzeviriana, 1914). Medina's narra- 
tive history of the Tribunal of the Holy Office in Mexico, first published 
in 1905, picks up the story in 1569. The 1954 reprint of his Historia del 
Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion en Mexico (Mexico City: Editorial 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



251 



Cultura, 1954) has important added notes prepared by Julio Jimenez 
Rueda which refer to recent documentary discoveries and new view- 
points as of 1954. The important master's thesis of Yolanda Mariel de 
Ibanez, La Inquisition en Mexico durante el siglo XVI (Mexico City: Univer- 
sidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1945; reprint, 1979) contains one 
of the first important statistical tabulations of Inquisition activity. The 
copious Herejtas y supersticiones en la Nueva Espana by Julio Jimenez 
Rueda appeared in Mexico City in 1946 and laid the foundations for 
generalizations on the various doctrinal concerns of the Holy Office. 

Richard E. Greenleaf's 1957 doctoral dissertation published in re- 
vised form as Zumdrraga and the Mexican Inquisition 1536-1543 (Wash- 
ington, D.C.: Academy of American Franciscan History, 1962) sharply 
focused on the episcopal inquisition during the first two decades of the 
colony and for the first time examined in detail the clash of Iberian 
Catholicism and Mesoamerican native beliefs. The work also examined 
the intellectual milieu of the first half of the sixteenth century as Chris- 
tian humanism and Reformation ideas penetrated New Spain. Trials of 
the first Lutherans and crypto-Jews were treated in detail, as were the 
Holy Office's concerns with sorcery, superstition, and blasphemy, and 
the enforcement of morality in the first decades of conquest. Both 
Robert Ricard (1933) and Robert C. Padden (1967) used the Zumarraga 
Indian trials to exemplify clash of cultures in broader studies of the 
"spiritual conquest."" 

Greenleaf's second volume, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Cen- 
tury (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1969), provided 
a series of essays based on archival documentation that exposed new 
sources and interpretations on the first decade of the Mexican Inquisi- 
tion, 1522—1532, the Inquisition in Michoacan, trials of Protestants, 
physicians, and judaizantes, as well as an essay on the Montufar Inqui- 
sition and the Mexican clergy, 1555-1571- Also included were analytical 
chapters on the operation of the Tribunal of the Holy Office from 1571 
through 1601 and a detailed examination of the Mexican Inquisition 
and the first Calvinists. 12 

Confusion of Lutheran ideas and Erasmian thought in the early 
sixteenth-century colony was commonplace. Marcel Bataillon's Erasmo y 
Espana, Estudios sobre la historia espiritual del siglo XVI, 2 volumes (Mexico 
City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1950), has an appendix on Erasmian 
thought in the Zumarraga period, and Elias Trabulse has sharply de- 
lineated the influence of Erasmus in his study of Dr. Francisco Hernan- 
dez in "El Erasmismo de un cientifico," Historia Mexicana 10 (1978): 



Copyrighted material 



252 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



224—296. Jose Almoina's Rumbos heterodoxos en Mexico (Ciudad Trujillo: 
Universidad de Santo Domingo, 1947) is an important source on roots 
of Erasmian ideas in Mexico. 



THE TRIBUNAL OF THE HOLY OFFICE OF 
THE INQUISITION 1571-1700 

In the late 1960s a Frenchwoman from Mexico began her research on 
the Inquisition. Solange Alberro presented a three-volume dissertation 
that won her the coveted State Doctorate from the Sorbonne in 1984. 13 
Two volumes have been published to date, a detailed statistical survey 
entitled La actividad del Santo Oficio de la Inquisition en Nueva Espana, 
1571-1 700 (Mexico City: INAH, 1 98 1 ); and Inquisition et societe au Mexi- 
que, 1571—1700 (Mexico City: Centre D'Etudes Mexicaines et Centra- 
mericaines, 1988). Francois Chevalier, president of her doctoral defense 
committee, has characterized the work as "retrospective ethnography" 
or ethnohistory: 

The author offers an extraordinary picture of the social, picaresque, love, 
moral, political, and religious life and also of the "mentalities" of New 
Spain at that period. With this goal, she selected six or seven psycho- 
dramas with a human interest, an emotion, and an increasing transcen- 
dence from the first of the psychodramas (themes of witchcraft) to the 
last — the great tragedy of the persecution of the crypto-Jews of the middle 
of the century. 14 

Solange Alberro's many research articles and scholarly papers con- 
tinue to enrich our knowledge of Inquisition and society in colonial 
Mexico. 

After many years of archival research, Maria Asuncion Herrera 
Sotillo completed her doctoral thesis at the Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid in 1982. Her study, entitled Ortodoxia y control social en Mexico 
en el siglo XVII: El Tribunal del Santo Oficio, is a comprehensive treat- 
ment of all aspects of inquisitorial activity and is especially valuable for 
its many tabulations and statistical tables. The chapters on Mexican 
Inquisition bureaucracy and financial operation of the tribunal give 
researchers important new data. A sixty-page catalog of manuscript 
sources for study of the tribunal during 1571—1700 in the Archivo His- 
torico Nacional is excellent, informative, and a crucial tool for future re- 
search. Alberro and Herrera Sotillo worked independently of each 
other, each unaware of the other's research, and each study depended 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



253 



primarily upon the Inquisition manuscripts in Mexico (Alberro) or in 
the Archivo Historico Nacional in Madrid (Herrera Sotillo). 15 

Chapters 18 through 25 of Medina's Historia del Tribunal, pages 267- 
299 of Lea's Inquisition in the Spanish Dependencies, and sections 1—19 
of Jimenez Rueda's Herejias y super sticiones trace the narrative history of 
the Holy Office to 1700. Only Jimenez Rueda offers interpretation of 
the data. Final chapters of Greenleaf 's Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth 
Century provide analysis of the political stance of the tribunal as well as 
conflicts of jurisdiction, from which much is learned of bureaucratic 
mentality and grass-roots operation. Genealogies of Holy Office staff as 
well as limpieza de sangre of those appointed are contained in a work by 
Fernandez de Recas. A compendium of tribunal deliberations on cases 
brought before the judges has been published for the early tribunal by 
Edmundo O'Gorman, Primer libro de votos de la Inquisicion de Mexico, 
1573-1600 (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1949). 16 Julio 
Jimenez Rueda in 1944 published a brief biography of Don Pedro Moya 
de Contreras, primer Inquisidor de Mexico (Mexico City: Ediciones Xochitl, 
1944), which is amplified in the superb work of Stafford Poole, Pedro 
Moya de Contreras: Catholic Reform and Royal Power in New Spain, 1571- 
i$gi (Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 

1987)- 

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, inquisitors were preoc- 
cupied with a feared Protestant menace in Mexico even though the new 
doctrines of the Reformation never constituted a threat to orthodoxy. 
Julio Jimenez Rueda has published a volume on trials of non-Spanish 
pirates as Corsarios franceses e ingleses en la Inquisicion de la Nueva Espana 
(Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1945). Eleanor B. Adams 
suspects that the bays and coastal cities of Yucatan and Central America 
were the homes and business headquarters of many non-Spanish in- 
truders. Her research article, "The Franciscan Inquisition in Yucatan: 
French Seamen, 1560," in The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-Ameri- 
can Cultural History 25 (1969): 331-359, is part of a forthcoming book 
to be entitled "Before the Buccaneers: Non-Spanish Intruders in the 
Caribbean, 1492-1610." G. Baez-Camargo, Protestantes enjuiciados por la 
Inquisicion en Iberoamerica (Mexico City: Editorial J akeg, i960), has useful 
if somewhat misleading short biographical sketches of those thought to 
be Protestants. 17 

After one views the total documentation of the archives of the Mexi- 
can Inquisition both in Mexico and in Spain, it becomes increasingly 
clear that the most fundamental obligation of the inquisitors was to con- 



Copyrighted material 



254 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



trol the influx of printed matter which attacked or undermined the re- 
ligious culture of New Spain. 18 For the sixteenth century the important 
documentary work of Francisco Fernandez del Castillo, Libros y libreros 
en elsiglo XVI (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1914; reprint 
1982), is essential for study of the process. Irving A. Leonard's many 
studies on the book trade, censorship, and the influence of books on co- 
lonial Mexican mentality are well known, especially Books of the Brave 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1949), amplified as Los libros 
del conquistador (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1953), and 
Baroque Times in Old Mexico (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1959). 19 Almost unknown to scholars outside of the United States is 
Dorothy Schons's excellent review of Spanish archival documentation in 
the Ramo de Inquisicion of the Archivo Historico Nacional, entitled Book 
Censorship in New Spain (Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press, 1950), 
an analytical treatment of "Punitive Censorship in the Seventeenth Cen- 
tury." Both Manuel Romero de Terreros, Un bibliofilo en el Santo Oficio 
(Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1920), and Donald G. Cas- 
tanien, "The Mexican Inquisition Censors a Private Library, 1655," His- 
panic American Historical Review 34 (1954): 374-392, examine the library 
of Melchor Perez de Soto, an astrologer. Considerably more article liter- 
ature exists on books and men in colonial Mexico. 20 

One of the early uses of data in Inquisition procesos has largely es- 
caped the notice of scholars of the Holy Office. Since virtually all pro- 
vincial records of the New Mexico colony were destroyed in the Pueblo 
Rebellion of 1680—1681, most borderlands historians had been con- 
vinced that it was impossible to write the domestic history of the seven- 
teenth-century colony. France V. Scholes was able to reconstruct the 
social, political, and religious history of New Mexico from the volumi- 
nous Inquisition procesos and ancillary manuscripts in the Archivo Gen- 
eral de la Nacion in his two volumes, Church and State in New Mexico, 
1610—1650 (Albuquerque: Historical Society of New Mexico, 1937) and 
Troublous Times in New Mexico, i6^g—i6yo (Albuquerque: Historical So- 
ciety of New Mexico, 1942). His methodological tour de force in this 
regard has never been properly recognized. 

One of the most famous non-Jews tried at mid-century was an 
Irishman tried for insurrection, heresy, and other crimes and studied 
by Luis Gonzalez Obregon, in Don Guillen de Lampart: La Inquisicion y la 
independencia en el siglo XVIII (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Na- 
cion, 1908). Largely as the result of the scandals and the unprofessional 
conduct of Inquisition bureaucracy at mid-seventeenth century, Visitor 
Pedro Medina Rico formally established an organization designed to in- 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



255 



culcate professionalism and to encourage morality, brotherhood, and 
charity in the Holy Office's personnel. Greenleaf 's monographic article, 
"The Inquisition Brotherhood: Cofradia de San Pedro Martir of Colo- 
nial Mexico," in The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural 
History 40 (1983): 171—201, examines this sodality from 1656 to 1837. 
A third volume by Greenleaf, "The Inquisition in Baroque Mexico" (for 
want of a better title and still in preparation), will focus on the 1640- 
1680 period, emphasizing prosopographical analysis. But it will also deal 
with the Holy Office's political, legal, and financial scandals explored in 
the same author's work, "The Great Visitas of the Mexican Holy Office, 
1645-1669," in The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural 
History 44 (1988): 399-420. 

In general, studies of the Holy Office bureaucracy are yet to be 
researched, especially the role of the non-salaried Inquisition police 
known as familiares. When Philip II founded the Tribunal of the Holy 
Office in Mexico, he attempted to circumscribe the privileges and im- 
munities of Inquisition police and commissaries so that the bureaucracy 
of the Inquisition would not parallel the baroque and irresponsible corps 
of Holy Office functionaries in Aragon and Castilla. By royal decree, on 
16 August 1570, the privileges of the familiatura in New Spain were reg- 
ulated and strict limitations were placed upon the numbers of police al- 
lowed in urban areas and in the provinces. In general the familiares 
were given immunity from prosecution by the vice-regency in criminal 
cases, but they were subject to civil authority in civil cases. The king 
charged all of his subjects to report violations of conduct by the famili- 
atura to the Tribunal of the Holy Office and to the Audiencia. On 
13 May 1572, Philip II decreed that crimes committed by Inquisition 
officials against Indians were not covered by the familiatura's immuni- 
ties. Within a decade after the 1570 decree it became clear that the 
familiares had entrenched themselves in colonial business enterprises 
and that they were repeating the patterns of personal aggrandizement 
which Philip II so deplored in Spain. Greenleaf's study of Familiar 
"Antonio de Espejo and the Mexican Inquisition, 1571-1586," in The 
Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural History 27 (1971): 
271-292, parallels one of Bartolome Bennassar on Andalucia. 21 

Since there was an early and continuing relationship and pattern of 
migration from the islands of the Caribbean to Mexico and Central 
America, researchers will find Carlos Esteban Deive, Heterodoxia e Inquisi- 
cion en Santo Domingo, 14Q2—1822 (Santo Domingo: Universidad de 
Santo Domingo, 1983) valuable, as well as Ernesto Chinchilla Aguilar's 
La Inquisicion en Guatemala (Guatemala City: Imprenta Universitaria, 



Copyrighted material 



256 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



1 953). Jonathan I. Israel, Race, Class and Politics in Colonial Mexico, 1610— 
16 jo (London: Oxford University Press, 1975) makes excellent use of 
Inquisition manuscripts. Richard E. Greenleaf, Inquisicion y sociedad en 
el Mexico colonial (Madrid: Jose Porrua Turanzas, 1985) reproduces in 
Spanish translation twelve of Greenleaf 's studies for the convenience 
of Spanish and Latin American scholars. Thematic analysis of Mexican 
Inquisition historiography dealing with Indians and the Inquisition, 
crypto-Jews, and problems of interpretation will follow the next section. 

THE INQUISITION IN BOURBON MEXICO, 1700-1820 

Until the late 1960s our knowledge of the eighteenth-century Inquisi- 
tion rested on two excellent publications of the Archivo General de la 
Nacion edited by Nicolas Rangel: Los precursores ideologicos de la Guerra 
de la Independencia, 1 j8g—i jg4, vol. 1 , La Revolucion Francesa, vol. 2, and 
La masoneria en Mexico: Siglo XVIII, (Mexico City: Archivo General de la 
Nacion, 1929-1932). The fine thesis by Monelisa Lina Perez-Marchand, 
Dos estapas ideologicas del siglo XVIII en Mexico a traves de los papeles de la 
Inquisicion (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autonoma, 1945) added 
to our understanding, but most authors relying on Medina, Lea, and 
Jimenez Rueda continued to interpret the Holy Office as a moribund 
institution in the eighteenth century. 22 Many works continued to assert 
that the Holy Office declined because it became a political instrument, 
citing the Inquisition trials of Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, Jose Maria 
Morelos, and other Independence leaders as evidence. 23 Greenleaf's 
forthcoming volume on "The Inquisition in Bourbon Mexico, 1700- 
1820" takes issue with these interpretations and argues that while mariy 
scholars have called attention to the fact that the Holy Office of the In- 
quisition was a political instrument, what has not been examined in de- 
tail is the relationship that existed between heresy and treason during 
the three centuries of Spanish and Spanish-colonial Inquisition history. 
The belief that heretics were traitors and traitors were heretics led to 
the conviction that dissenters were social revolutionaries trying to sub- 
vert the political and religious stability of the community. These tenets 
were not later developments in the history of the Spanish Inquisition; 
they were inherent in the rationale of the institution from the fifteenth 
century onward and were apparent in the Holy Office's dealings with 
Jews, Protestants, and other heretics during the sixteenth century. The 
use of the Inquisition by the later eighteenth-century Bourbon kings of 
Spain as an instrument of regalism was not a departure from tradition. 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



257 



Particularly in the viceroyalty of New Spain during the late eighteenth 
century the Inquisition trials show how the Crown sought to promote 
political and religious orthodoxy. 24 

Monelisa Lina Perez-Marchand made an extensive study of the books 
prohibited in Mexico by the Inquisition, and her research determined 
that in the latter part of the eighteenth century, works of political phi- 
losophy predominated. It is important to note that the majority of books 
proscribed by Holy Office edicts during 1763—1805 did not simply ques- 
tion specific policies but rather challenged the theoretical existence or 
raison d'etre of the state. This indirect attack made it possible for the 
colonist to read and apply general theories to particular circumstances — 
Spanish mercantilism, monopolization of office by peninsular Spaniards, 
monolithic religion, and so on. Because the colonists saw the French 
Revolution as an attempt to put these ideas into practice, accounts of it 
had to be zealously prohibited. Such works always carried heretical re- 
ligious propositions. The banned Lettres d'une peruvienne ( 1 797) are a case 
in point. The Holy Office charged that they were filled with sedition and 
heresy and were "injurious to monarchs and Catholic rulers of Spain . . . 
and to religion itself." The same decree also prohibited Les mines; ou, 
Meditation sur les revolutions des empires by M. Volney and other works. A 
separate ban of the Volney tract alleged that its author affirmed that 
there neither is nor can be revealed religion, that all (people) are daugh- 
ters of curiosity, ignorance, interest, and imposture, and that the mys- 
tery of the birth of Jesus Christ and the rest of the Christian religion 
are mystical allegories. 

The Holy Office of the Inquisition did not limit its censorship to 
French books; English Enlightenment works were also a matter of con- 
cern. The works of Alexander Pope were most frequently mentioned in 
edicts of the Inquisition, particularly his "Cartas de Abelardo y Heloisa," 
a translation of "Eloisa to Abelard," telling the tale of a nun's love for 
Peter Abelard. Proscriptions of Pope occurred in 1792 and 1799, and 
by 1815 all of his works were banned. Other English books on the lists 
were Gullivers Travels (1803) and Pamela (1803). The most important 
edict of the period was the one issued on 25 August 1805, for it presents 
a comprehensive and alphabetical listing of all books prohibited since 
1789. Several hundred works appear on the list. The edict reflects con- 
cern not only with the French Revolution but also with the ascendancy 
of Napoleon. 

In many cases the Inquisition found it necessary not only to prohibit 
political philosophy but to deny its content and validity. An example of 



Copyrighted material 



V 



258 RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 

this was the edict of 13 November 1794 with regard to a volume pub- 
lished in Philadelphia by Santiago Felipe Puglia entitled Desengano del 
H ombre: 

The author of this book, writing in their own language, blows his raucous 
trumpet to excite the faithful people of the Spanish nation to rebellion of 
the most infamous sort. . . . The pedantic writer has made of himself a 
bankrupt merchant in such sublime goods as politics and the universal 
right, and [is] equally detestable for his impiety and insolence that, for his 
ignorance of sacred and profane literature and for the vile and ignomini- 
ous style with which he speaks of Kings divined by God, imputes the odi- 
ous name of despotism and tyranny to the monarchial regime and royal 
authority that arises from God himself and from His divine will . . . and 
the universal consent of all the people who from most remote antiquity 
have been governed by Kings. ... [He attempts] to introduce the rebel- 
lious oligarchy of France with the presumption to propose that [it is] in 
reality the best example of desolation brought on by pestilences and anti- 
evangelical principles. 

Of course many of the polemics of the rationalists were against the In- 
quisition itself, and to maintain its station in colonial life the Holy Office 
could not tolerate them. 

To conclude that the Inquisition in Mexico declined in power and be- 
came decadent in the late eighteenth century because it developed into 
a political instrument seems clearly fallacious to this writer. The appar- 
ent decadence of the Mexican Tribunal after 1 763 resulted from a whole 
complex of political and diplomatic circumstances which, in the end, led 
to a weakening of the institution. The shift of diplomatic and military 
alliances between Spain and France, and Spain and England, made it 
difficult for the Holy Office to punish foreign heretics within the vice- 
royalty of New Spain. It was equally difficult, if not impossible, to con- 
tain foreign political ideas. From the standpoint of domestic politics and 
Empire policy, the activities of the Holy Office were severely hampered 
and began to atrophy because of the tendency of royal and ecclesiastical 
officialdom to embrace philosophical eclecticism. Certainly in the case 
of the clergy this became a dangerous trend, since in the final analysis, 
the new philosophical and political ideas tended to undermine ortho- 
doxy. Social and economic tensions in the Mexican colony, pragmatically 
evident, were reinforced by consideration of the new natural laws of 
politics and economics being expounded from abroad. On the threshold 
of this societal discontent, the Holy Office was often forced to make an 
ideological retreat, adopting an attitude of tolerance or inaction instead 
of its former firmness — in reality a new kind of "flexible orthodoxy." 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



259 



The total documentation in the Mexican Inquisition archive for 1763 
to 1805 reveals that the Holy Office cannot be indicted as loath to prose- 
cute unorthodoxy of any kind. It only confirms the fact that overriding 
political considerations of the state made the inquisitors responsible for 
enforcing a rapidly changing "party-line" kind of orthodoxy, an almost 
hopeless task. It was impossible to police the far frontiers from Califor- 
nia to Florida, from Colorado to Guatemala, from Havana to Manila, a 
problem as serious to the inquisitors as the problem of "flexible ortho- 
doxy." Perhaps it was a sense of frustration in coping with the larger 
problems that led the Holy Office to concentrate on smaller ones. The 
tendency to engage in hairsplitting and tedious controversies over juris- 
diction and judicial competencies was one result of this frustration. 
Another was the preoccupation with protecting the position and dignity 
of the Tribunal of the Inquisition. 

The interpretation that the clergy (and the Inquisition) mirrored the 
times and the society to which they ministered is no doubt true of the 
Mexican experience during the second half of the eighteenth century. 
Would the Inquisition and the Crown have reacted any differently had 
the revolutionary political themes then in vogue been circulating fifty 
or one hundred years earlier? Probably not. At all events, the policies 
of Charles III (1759-1788) and Charles IV (1788-1808) did little to 
strengthen the Mexican Inquisition's mission to preserve political and 
religious orthodoxy. Indeed, the Spanish kings weakened the institution 
by failing to define the place of the Holy Office of the Inquisition in de- 
fining the Imperial self-interest. 

Nicolas Rangel's volume of documents on the Inquisition and the 
Masonic movement in New Spain was used by J. A. Ferrer Biminelli to 
compose the Mexican section of Masoneria e Inquisition en Latinoamer- 
ica durante el siglo XVIII (Caracas: Universidad Catolica Andres Bello, 
1973); and Greenleaf's article, "The Mexican Inquisition and the Ma- 
sonic Movement, 1751-1820," New Mexico Historical Review 44 (1969): 
93-117, employed new documentation of the Jalapa Lodges, Los Ca- 
balleros Racionales, and other secret societies, linking Masonry with the 
independence movement. Often the transcendental views of Masons 
were transfused with the new social and political philosophies of the En- 
lightenment, and Masonic groups carried on political activities. The 
members kept their ideas within the group, and each depended upon 
the others to be loyal and to keep discussions secret so that established 
institutions would not feel challenged by the Masonic quest to better the 
human condition. The Holy Office of the Inquisition viewed Masons as 
social revolutionaries who were trying to subvert the established order. 



Copyrighted material 



260 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



Often the Tribunal of the Holy Office made no clear distinction 
among Masonry, Enlightenment philosophy, and Protestantism. As a re- 
sult, after a century and a half of ignoring Protestants, the Holy Office 
began to be more interested in foreigners and obvious Protestants within 
its jurisdiction. William B. Taylor's Master of Arts thesis "Protestants be- 
fore the Inquisition in Mexico, 1790-1820" (Mexico City: University of 
the Americas, 1965) and Richard E. Greenleaf 's "North American Prot- 
estants and the Mexican Inquisition 1765-1820," Journal of Church and 
State 8 (1966): 186-199, investigate this new interest, and Greenleaf con- 
cludes that the primary goal of the Holy Office was to encourage Protes- 
tants to convert to Catholicism. The tribunal's function of religious in- 
struction and conversion of non-Catholics was one of the most important 
activities of the Holy Office after 1765. Studies by Jacques Houdaille, 
"Frenchmen and Francophiles in New Spain from 1760 to 1810," The 
Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter- American Cultural History 13 (1956): 
1-29, and Charles F. Nunn, Foreign Immigrants in Early Bourbon Mexico, 
1700-1760 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979) are based 
partially on Inquisition surveillance of foreigners and Protestants. 



THE INQUISITION AND THE INDIANS 

The question of the jurisdiction of the Holy Office of the Inquisition 
over the native populations in New Spain and the rest of the empire has 
been one of controversy and confusion since the earliest days of the con- 
quest. The perplexing problem of enforcing orthodoxy among the re- 
cently converted Indians was linked with the debate over whether or not 
the Indian was a rational human being who had the capacity to com- 
prehend the Roman Catholic faith and enjoy the full sacramental system 
of the Church. As in the case of the rationality controversy, the position 
of the Indian vis-a-vis the Holy Office of the Inquisition was not resolved 
articulately, and after the first decades of the spiritual conquest the ques- 
tion took on added importance as the Mexican clergy discovered recur- 
rent idolatry and religious syncretism among their flocks. 

Despite claims of traditional historiography, the Mexican Inquisition 
did try Indians from 1522 through 1571 as the friar inquisitors in Cen- 
tral Mexico and Yucatan prosecuted native transgiessions against the 
faith and as the episcopal inquisition continued to discipline Indians. 
The Archivo General de la Nacion published two important documen- 
tary compendia on the Indians and the Inquisition early in this century: 
Proceso inquisitorial del cacique de Tetzcoco (Mexico City: Archivo General 
de la Nacion, 1910) and Procesos de Indios idolatras y hechiceros (Mexico 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



261 



City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1912). Alberto Maria Carreno pub- 
lished in 1950 a documentary compendium Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga: 
Teologo y editor, humanista e inquisidor (Mexico City: Editorial Jus, 1950) 
which gave some attention to the Indian trials and disputed Joaquin 
Garcia Icazbalceta's claim in Don Fray Juan de Zumdrraga, primer obispo y 
arzobispo de Mexico (Mexico City: Editorial Porrua, 1948) that the bishop 
was never an inquisitor. Robert Ricard, Robert Padden, and Jacques 
Lafaye have made varied use of the printed procesos, while Greenleaf 
has preferred to use the original documents because he has found diffi- 
culty with the published paleographic transcriptions. 25 France V. Scholes 
and Eleanor B. Adams edited the controversial Proceso contra Tzintzicha 
Tangaxoan el Caltzontzin formado por Nuno de Guzman, ano de 1 530 (Mexico 
City: Jose Porrua Hermanos, 1952) as civil authority also assumed juris- 
diction over Indian idolatry and sacrifice among the Tarascans. 

In 1965 Greenleaf began his analysis of Indian Inquisition manu- 
scripts for the entire colonial period in "The Inquisition and the Indians 
of New Spain: A Study in Jurisdictional Confusion," The Americas: A 
Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural History 22 (1965): 138-166, fol- 
lowed by a 1978 article with a selected documentary appendix in the 
same journal, "The Mexican Inquisition and the Indians: Sources for 
the Ethnohistorian," 34 (1973): 315-344- Even though the Tribunal of 
the Holy Office of the Inquisition was denied the right to hear Indian 
cases, an Indian Inquisition continued under an institutional framework 
quite similar to that of the formal Inquisition. After 1571 the Tribunal 
of the Holy Office acted as a fact-finding agency in the uncovering and 
disciplining of Indian transgressions against orthodoxy. Actual control 
over Indian orthodoxy reverted to the bishop's or archbishop's office 
and was placed under the care of the provisor, or vicar-general, of the 
diocese or archdiocese. The provisoratos contrived an entire bureaucracy 
of officials to cope with the new function, and they appointed delegates 
and commissaries in provincial areas. Following the tradition established 
during the period of the episcopal inquisition, the provisor and his com- 
missaries often called themselves "inquisitors ordinary" and established 
tribunals and juzgados for Indians of the bishopric. 

For several decades the provisorato set-up functioned without much 
competition or invasion of power by the Inquisition tribunal, but in ac- 
tual operation of enforcement or orthodoxy there was still fusion and 
confusion of authority and responsibility of the inquisitorial and the or- 
dinary functions. Quarrels over the competence of the provisorato and 
the tribunal in cases involving Indians in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries occupy many pages of testimony in the actual procesos and 



Copyrighted material 



262 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



comprise several legajos of administrative documents sent to Spain for 
resolution. Often, because many of the colonial Mexican clergy occupied 
several portfolios or exercised a multiple function, the personnel of the 
provisorato and the Holy Office were mixed in the conduct of trials, thus 
adding to the confusion over jurisdiction, especially in the remote pro- 
vincial areas. 

Investigatory activities of the Inquisition into Indian affairs continued 
throughout the colonial period of New Spain. Of particular concern 
were studies of recurrent paganism and idolatry and violation of the de- 
grees of carnal and spiritual relationship permitted by the Church in the 
sacrament of marriage. The Inquisition usually kept meticulous records 
of these investigations, but because of the burden of work for ministers 
of the spiritual flock, the provisor or his agent kept sparse records or 
none at all. Therefore we must conclude that only the more serious de- 
viations from orthodoxy came to light in the archives. Oftentimes mate- 
rials on heresy and crimes against the faith are mixed with data on the 
spiritual activities of the regular and secular clergy. Between 1620 and 
1700 concern focused on evaluation of missionizing techniques seen 
against the background of continued pagan practices and the process of 
religious syncretism taking place in many of the Mexican provinces. 

Friars of several of the orders were charged to write full reports, and 
these relaciones document fears of the inquisitors and ordinaries as to the 
extent of paganism in the supposedly Christianized viceregal area. 26 

In the aftermath of Zumarraga's Indian Inquisition, the Visitor 
to New Spain and apostolic inquisitor Francisco Tello de Sandoval 
launched a probe into paganism among the Mixtec Indians of Oaxaca. 27 
The voluminous documentation was partially extracted for ethnological 
materials by Wigberto Jimenez Moreno and Salvador Mateos Higuera 
for commentary in their edition of Codice de Yanhuitldn (Mexico City: 
Museo Nacional, 1940), but they counsel the ethnohistorian that much 
data was left untouched. Other anthropologists have cited some of the 
data, but it was left to Richard E. Greenleaf to prepare a complete study 
with introduction in his Mixtec Religion and Spanish Conquest: The Oaxaca 
Inquisition Trials, 1544—1547 (Madrid: Jose Porrua Turanzas, 1991), and 
with ethnohistorical commentary by Maarten E. R. G. N. Jansen. Green- 
leaf's introduction also deals with the Oaxacan Inquisition of the Do- 
minicans in 1560, when Indians from both Sola and Teticpac were 
subjected to an auto de fe. The Teticpac trials were examined from 
newly discovered archival documentation. 

The climactic event of the sixteenth century Indian Inquisition came 
with the Landa idolatry trials in Yucatan during the period 1559-1562. 
In the 1930s, France V. Scholes discovered the corpus of the trials in 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



263 



Spanish archives. He and Eleanor B. Adams published most of the 
materials in Don Diego de Quijada Alcalde Mayor de Yucatan, 1561-1565, 
2 vols. (Mexico City: Jose Porrua Hermanos, 1933), including a lengthy 
introduction that summarizes the trial records. France V. Scholes and 
Ralph L. Roys, Fray Diego de Landa and the Problem of Idolatry in Yucatan 
(Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution, 1938) give an in-depth analysis 
of the proceedings. Recently Inga Clendinnen has given a new inter- 
pretation of the Landa trials in Ambivalent Conquests: Maya and Spaniard 
in Yucatan, 15 1 7- 1570 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). 
Building on several earlier research articles, she postulates that tes- 
timonies in the trial records may be unreliable and that incidences of 
idolatry and sacrifice may have been exaggerated. The Greenleaf articles 
on the Indians and the Inquisition and the Mixtec religion and Spanish 
Conquest deal with methodological problems of using the procesos de 
Indios as historical sources. 

The procesos reveal fascinating data on the use of idolatry, sorcery, 
and sacrifice within a political context of native resistance to Spanish 
power. In general, the Indians attempted to manipulate inquisitional 
procedures by denouncing Spanish-appointed caciques as idolaters in 
order to deprive them of office. There are also denunciations for idol- 
atry and human sacrifice by Indians who wanted to attack their own 
political enemies, hoping to replace them in the new political hierarchy. 
The procesos also illuminate subversive activities of Indian sorcerers, 
curers, witches, and seers who tried to perpetuate the old beliefs. Of par- 
ticular concern to the Mexican Inquisition were groups of native priests 
and sorcerers who openly defied the "spiritual conquest" by establishing 
schools or apprenticeships among the young. The teachers made a 
frontal attack on Catholicism and Spanish Catholic culture. They ridi- 
culed the new religion and urged a return to native religious practices. 
These men, branded as "dogmatizers" by the inquisitors, were consid- 
ered especially dangerous by the missionary clergy. Thus the native 
priesthood preached a counterculture and a counter-religion and took 
the lead in performing sorceries and sacrifices. They supported the 
ancient practices of concubinage and bigamy as a symbol of resistance 
to the new religion — and the dogmatizers also ridiculed the Inquisi- 
tion. Students of ritual humor among the Maya, notably Professor Vic- 
toria R. Bricker, in recent times have found survivals of plays and dances 
done in jest of the Holy Office. It is obvious that this same set of attitudes 
impelled native doctors or curers to continue the use of preconquest 
medicine, and to transmit Aztec, Maya, and Mixtec medical lore to fu- 
ture generations of Indians and mestizos in colonial Mexico. 

Obviously, procesos de Indios initiated by the Inquisition are pe- 



Copyrighted material 



264 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



ripheral to other documentation about social discontent in sixteenth- 
and seventeenth-century Mexico, but they are reliable benchmarks of 
what was taking place. Trials of all genres of mestizos, pardos, and 
others are indicative of developing syncretism, accommodation, and re- 
sistance to the culture of the conqueror. Most resistance to the Spanish 
social structure, however, probably came in more passive ways, although 
some writers would like to link forced acculturation with Indian rebel- 
lions in colonial Mexico. It is certain that native religion was important 
in Indian rebellions and that paganism became a catalyst in the up- 
heavals, but documentary studies of causal factors still await scholarly 
investigation. Important to future studies will be analyses of peyote cults 
and the use of other hallucinogens (yerba pipiltzintzin, ololiuqui) in 
idolatry, sorcery, and in other patterns of pagan resistance. 

Perhaps the thorniest problem faced by ethnohistorians as they in- 
terprets procesos de Indios relates to classical procedures of historical 
criticism: the art of determining the validity of historical sources. Do 
the Inquisition manuscripts give a reliable picture of native religion or 
pagan resistance? Did the monastic inquisitor or the provisor or the pro- 
fessional judge on the Holy Office tribunal correctly understand the 
testimony of the evidence? Did the inquisitor project an image or an 
interpretation of data in the procesos de Indios from an ethnocentric 
Christian viewpoint? Did the scribes and notaries properly report the 
proceedings? Were the interpreters really competent to transmit tes- 
timonies of Indians who did not know Spanish? While historians may 
not be able to arrive at firm answers to these questions, they must 
nevertheless be ever in their minds as they interpret. Given the nature 
of these problems, distorted pictures and fanciful interpretations result 
with alarming frequency. 

The meticulous scholar must therefore examine a broad base of archi- 
val documentation and other sources in order to place the ethnohis- 
torical data in proper perspective. Statements of historian France V. 
Scholes and anthropologist Ralph L. Roys pertaining to Fray Diego de 
Landa and the Problem of Idolatry in Yucatan may be applied to other 
areas. They concluded that Indian testimony often "confirms, supple- 
ments, and clarifies our knowledge of Maya religion derived from other 
sources," but they recognized that the evidence possibly "contains exag- 
gerations, even certain falsehoods and that Indians may have called 
upon memory of pre-Conquest practices as regards certain details." On 
the whole, they concluded cautiously that "the testimony does provide 
a generally valid description of actual cases of idolatry and sacrifice that 
had occurred subsequent to the Spanish occupation and the beginning 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



265 



of the missionary program." 28 Clendinnen, as noted, has explored these 
caveats and has taken issue with the traditional historiography on Landa 
and the Yucatan idolatry trials. 

The careful scholar should always remember that it is important to 
let the documents speak for themselves whenever possible rather than 
to force them into a fanciful or preconceived framework, a framework 
often built on grand generalizations and untested hypotheses. Several 
dissertations and theses on the Indian Inquisition, and the Inquisition 
and mestizos and blacks, deserve to be published: Bradley W. Case, 
"Gods and Demons: Folk Religion in Seventeenth-Century New Spain, 
1614-1632," (doctoral dissertation, Cornell University, 1977); Eva A. 
Uchmany, "La Conquista de Mexico: El choque de dos culturas" (tesis de 
doctorado, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 1971); Gloria R. 
Grajales, "Cristianismo y paganismo en la altiplanicie mexicana, siglo 
XVI" (tesis de maestria, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, 
1949). Colin Palmer's Slaves of the White God (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1976) uses Inquisition procesos to uncover the black 
experience in early Mexico. 

Excellent examples of the use of procesos de Indios by anthropolo- 
gists are Noemi Quezada, Amor y magia amorosa entre los aztecas: Su- 
pervivencia en el Mexico colonial (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional 
Autonoma, 1975), which gives a critical survey of pre-Hispanic and 
colonial texts dealing with magical and religious aspects of love and sex- 
uality, and, by the same author, "Hernando Ruiz de Alarcon y su per- 
secucion de idolatnas," UNAM/T, 1980: 323-354; studies of Ruth 
Behar, who is planning a volume on the eighteenth century building on 
her articles "The Visions of a Guachichil Witch in 1599: A Window on 
the Subjugation of Mexico's Hunter-Gatherers," Ethnohistory, 34 (1987): 
115-138, and "Sex and Sin, Witchcraft and the Devil in Late-Colonial 
Mexico," American Ethnologist 14 (1987): 34-54; the translation and edi- 
tion by J. Richard Andrews and Ross Hassig of Hernando Ruiz de Alar- 
con's Treatise on the Heathen Superstitions That Today Live among the Indians 
Native to This New Spain, i62g (Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1984); and the anticipated work based on provisorato and other 
documents of Serge Gruzinski. '' 



CRYPTO-JEWS 

The judaizante, or Jewish pseudo-convert to Catholicism, was a particu- 
lar problem for the Mexican Inquisition. Judaizantes and conversos 
(actual converts to Catholicism) often came to Mexico under aliases to 



Copyrighted material 



266 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



engage in conquest and commercial enterprises and, more importantly 
to the Inquisition, to practice the Jewish faith in private. Such people 
had come with Cortes and were tried in the 1520s by the first friar in- 
quisitors. Their number rapidly increased all over the Mexican vice- 
royalty, especially in the central valley, Puebla, Nuevo Leon, and the far 
Northwest. In the last decades of the sixteenth century, members of the 
famous Carvajal family of Nuevo Leon were tried for relapsing into 
Judaism; and several of them, including some women, were burned at 
the stake. The Holy Office wished to use the Carvajal burnings as a 
threat to the Jewish community in Mexico; but it failed to eradicate the 
judaizantes, who continued to practice the old religion in private and to 
proselytize. The size of the Jewish or crypto-Jewish community con- 
tinued to increase in the seventeenth century despite Church and state 
caveats. 

Many scholars who have written about the Mexican Inquisition over 
the past few decades have tended to overemphasize the Holy Office's 
persecution of judaizantes. This is not unnatural because the majority 
of the authors have approached their subject from the perspective of 
Jewish history rather than Mexican history. As a result, the student of 
colonial Mexico gets a number of misconceptions. One mistaken impres- 
sion is that the Inquisition was constantly preoccupied with prosecuting 
crypto-Jews throughout the colonial period. On the contrary, the vast 
majority of its cases dealt with breaches of faith and morals of the 
colonists: blasphemy, bigamy, superstition, doctrinal error, clerical mo- 
rality, and Indian transgressions. 

In-depth investigations in the Inquisition archive lead this writer to 
believe that there were many more Jews in colonial Mexico than is com- 
monly supposed, and the documents hint that only a small number of 
these ever came before the Holy Office. For the most part, the Inquisi- 
tion left them alone. They constituted a nebulous subculture in the 
colony, lending variety to the social scene and to the intellectual milieu. 
Except when they challenged the Church or Spanish authority in an 
open manner or when they particularly rankled the Mexican Spaniard 
as business competitors or as political rivals, these "heretics" did not 
appear in the halls of the Inquisition. 

Pioneering works on the crypto-Jews before the Mexican Inquisition 
included Alfonso Toro, Los judios en la Nueva Espana (Mexico City: Ar- 
chivo General de la Nacion, 1932), as well as his La familia Carvajal, 
2 vols. (Mexico City: Editorial Patria, 1944). Rafael Lopez's edition of 
Procesos de Luis Carvajal (El Mozo) (Mexico City: Archivo General de la 
Nacion, 1935) added significantly to our understanding of the Inquisi- 
tion and the Jews in late seventeenth-century Mexico and laid founda- 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 267 



tions for later narrative and interpretative studies. Pablo Martinez del 
Ri'o's famous Alumbrado (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 
1937) influenced the thinking of an entire generation of scholars. Green- 
leaf's chapter on "Zumarraga and the Judaizantes; 1536—1540," in Zu- 
mdrraga and the Mexican Inquisition, pp. 89—99, an d his "First Decade of 
the Mexican Inquisition, 1522—1532," in The Mexican Inquisition of the 
Sixteenth Century, pp. 7—44, present much new archival data on the auto 
de fe of 1528 and question the ethnicity of several "Jews" who were 
tried. 

Arnold Wizmitzer began a synthesis of activities of the "Holy Office 
and the crypto-Jews in Mexico during the Sixteenth Century," American 
Jewish Historical Quarterly 51 (1962): 168-214 and, in the same journal, 
"Crypto-Jews in Mexico during the Seventeenth Century," 51 (1962): 
222-268, both excellent surveys based on extensive research in both pri- 
mary and secondary sources. 

For more than twenty-five years the passionate scholar and indefatig- 
able researcher Seymour B. Liebman worked on the history of the Jews 
in New Spain and in the rest of Latin America. Liebman's basic strength 
was his tenacity in ferreting out materials; his basic weakness was his 
passionate analysis and sometimes careless use of sources. Basic to re- 
searchers is his A Guide to Jewish References in the Mexican Colonial Era 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1965). His major works 
included The Enlightenment: The Writings of Luis Carvajal el Mozo (Miami: 
University of Miami Press, 1967); The Jews in New Spain: Faith, Flame and 
the Inquisition (Miami: University of Miami Press, 1970); The Great auto 
defe of i64g in Mexico (Lawrence, Kans.: Coronado Press, 1974); The In- 
quisitors and the Jews in the New World (Miami: University of Miami Press, 
1975); Los judtos en Mexico y America Central (Mexico City: Siglo Vein- 
tiuno, 1971); Valerosas criptojudids en America colonial (Mexico City: Siglo 
Veintiuno, 1975). Liebman's books and his host of articles are excellent 
finding aids to research whether or not the researcher agrees with his 
point of view or his conclusions. His final book, published in 1982, was 
a touching tribute to his coreligionists, New World Jewry, 149$— 1825: Re- 
quiem for the Forgotten (New York: Ktav Publishing House, 1982). 

One scholar with whom Liebman had scholarly disputes is Martin A. 
Cohen, author of The Martyr: The Story of a Secret Jew and the Mexican In- 
quisition in the Sixteenth Century (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1973), a well-documented study of the life of Luis de Carvajal the 
Younger. Also valuable to the researcher for quick reference is Dr. 
Cohen's compendium of reprints, The Jewish Experience in Latin America, 
2 vols. (New York: American Jewish Historical Society, 1971). 

The soon-to-be-published doctoral dissertation of Stanley M. Hordes, 



Copyrighted material 



268 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



"The Crypto-Jewish Community of New Spain, 1600—1649: A Collective 
Biography" (New Orleans: Tulane University Press, 1980) is a model 
study for imaginative use of Inquisition sources. See also Dr. Hordes's 
article "The Inquisition as an Economic Agent: The Campaign of the 
Mexican Holy Office against the Crypto-Jews in the Mid-Seventeenth 
Century," The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural His- 
tory 39 (1982): 23-88. Greenleaf's "The Great Visitas of the Mexican 
Holy Office, 1645—1669," also sheds new light on the crypto-Jew in 
seventeenth-century Mexico, as does the Solange Alberro dissertation. 
The forthcoming work of J. Benedict Warren and Richard E. Greenleaf 
on Gonzalo Gomez: Primer Poblador de Michoacdn (Morelia: Secretaria de 
Education Publica, 1989) will integrate Inquisition manuscript sources 
with other corollary documentation on the early settlement of the Val- 
ladolid-Morelia Patzcuaro area. Often linked with the mentality of the 
crypto-Jews were the mystics in New Spain: alumbrados, Illuminati 
Quietists, the circle that practiced dejamiento. An extensive literature 
exists on the mystics in Spain, but studies on Mexico are still sparse. Julio 
Jimenez Rueda's Herejias y super sticiones, chapters 13-15, pp. 139-182 
is the most complete treatment of Alumbrados, pseudo-alumbrados, 
and mystics. Noemi Quesada's survey of "alumbrados del siglo XVII: 
Analisis de casos" in Religion en Mesoamerica, ed. Jaime Litvak-King 
(Mexico: Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologi'a, 1972), pp. 581-586, is in- 
teresting. Dolores Bravo, Ana Rodriguez de Castro, procesada por ilusa, y 
afectadora de Santos (Mexico City: Universidad Metropolitana, 1984) has 
fascinating data. Alvaro Huerga's forthcoming Historia de los alumbrados, 
vol. 3, Los alumbrados en Hispanoamerica will include New Spain. Richard 
E. Greenleaf has prepared a catalog and extracts of all alumbrado trials 
in the Archivo General de la Nation from 1 580 to the early nineteenth 
century with the hope of doing a complete study in the future. 

The statistical tabulation of Mariel de Ibanez and Solange Alberro 
on procesos in Mexico, and Gustav Henningsen 30 and Herrera Sotillo on 
those in Spain, have placed crypto-Jewish prosecutions in proper per- 
spective, showing that they constituted only a small portion of inquisi- 
torial activity in the total picture of the Holy Office's attention to per- 
ceived heresy and correction of faith and morals in New Spain. A study 
of the Inquisition and clerical morality remains to be done on Mexico. 31 

PROBLEMS OF INTERPRETATION 

There is considerable disagreement among historians over the proper 
role of religion in colonial Mexican society. Interpretation of the Church 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



269 



is made difficult because of the disagreement. Evaluation of the Inqui- 
sition is even more polemical because those who interpret the documents 
wish to do so from an Enlightenment and twentieth-century standard 
of political and legal theory, and they insist upon making religious toler- 
ation the central focus of their evaluation. Later this writer will suggest 
a wider sociological analysis of intolerance that seems more appropriate 
in understanding the problem. 32 

As a twentieth-century man, the author deplores repressive religious 
and repressive political institutions; but as a historian of religious institu- 
tions, he feels constrained to view them in a perspective of sixteenth- 
and seventeenth-century Mexico. Thus it seems fairer to judge the 
Mexican Inquisition from the vantage point of the prevailing judicial 
system and ideological structure of Spain and Spanish Catholicism than 
from the more equalitarian point of view. Some may call this a "White 
Legend" interpretation, but the writer prefers to see the Inquisition in 
the "historical present" in much the same way that the anthropologist 
would view the ethnographic present of the colonial period. 

In Spain and in Mexico the Holy Office of the Inquisition was an 
internal-security organization charged with protecting a civilization and 
its culture — culture in its broadest sense: religious, political, and social. 
Even today the social scientist has great difficulty measuring the effects 
or the degree of repressiveness of internal-security organizations and 
their procedures. Enlightenment and twentieth-century political philos- 
ophy and jurisprudence certainly call into question rules of evidence, 
procedures, and judicial torture of the Mexican Inquisition. Prior to the 
legal reformism of Beccarria and the Benthamites, however, the Holy 
Office operated within a framework of procedures prescribed by canon 
law; these procedures were consistent with the rules of law of the era. 
Examination of thousands of Inquisition trial records has demonstrated 
to this writer that within the prescribed rules and regulations the in- 
quisitors acted with zeal but also with fairness and common sense in the 
vast majority of cases. Again, one must add, this does not mean that we 
approve of these procedures today. 

Critics of the Mexican Inquisition, and of the Spanish government, 
contend that the mere fact that the Holy Office required denunciations 
and proceeded with investigations is a good index of repression. Perhaps 
this argument can be supported on philosophical grounds, but it is more 
difficult to substantiate statistically. As social scientists using techniques 
of quantification to study modern police records, they encounter many 
of the same problems of analysis facing the investigator in the Inquisi- 
tion archive. It appears that ninety-five percent of the total population 



Copyrighted material 



270 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



of colonial Mexico never had any contact with the Inquisition. Of the 
five percent who did, five-sixths never came to trial because of in- 
sufficient evidence; and of that one-sixth who were tried by the Holy 
Office, perhaps two percent were convicted, with one-half of one per- 
cent being executed. These figures, while deplorable to the modern 
man, stand out in stark contrast with the accounts of the gothic writers 
on the Inquisition who give a distorted picture of the institution's out- 
reach into society. 

Gothic writing on the Holy Office has of course emphasized that 
the Inquisition surrounded its operations with extreme secrecy while 
recording them in meticulous detail, a procedure that some modern 
scholars feel led to the lurid myths about all phases of inquisitorial ac- 
tivities. It is perhaps true that obsession with secrecy fostered lurid 
myths about the Holy Office; but because the greater part of viceregal 
operations took place in a climate of extreme confidentiality, it appears 
that this interpretation has been exaggerated. Certainly, Protestant and 
Jewish historiography of the era contributed much to the distortions and 
luridness. 

The almost universally held view that the Mexican Holy Office prose- 
cuted heretics in order to line its pockets is open to question. Until com- 
petent scholars have analyzed many hundreds of volumes of detailed 
Mexican Inquisition account books and have proved the contrary, it 
would be difficult to sustain these charges. Certainly there is no clear 
evidence that the economic backwardness of the colonies can be ascribed 
to the Inquisition. Most generalizations about Mexican Inquisition fi- 
nance have resulted from published data on the financial scandal of 
the middle of the seventeenth century when a group of impoverished 
and greedy inquisitors did indeed try to rob the Jews. However, this 
writer's preliminary investigations of the account books, and the study 
done of the scandal by Helen Phipps many decades ago, show that this 
was an atypical situation and that up until the middle of the seventeenth 
century the Mexican Holy Office was an impoverished institution. Re- 
searches by the author show that the wealth of the tribunal increased 
after the last quarter of the seventeenth century and throughout the 
eighteenth century — but that it did not increase appreciably from judi- 
cial fines or confiscations of property of heretics. The Holy Office re- 
ceived property and money in trust and in the wills of the faithful, and 
the rents and moneys were invested by the tribunal in the same manner 
that nunneries and other arms of the ecclesiastical establishment in- 
vested and increased their properties. The Treasury of the Holy Office 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



271 



was an investment institution serving primarily the economic needs of 
the creole elite. 

In Mexico and in Spain, the phenomenon of intolerance — even with 
the presence of the Inquisition — can be studied meaningfully only if in- 
tolerance is related to a wide complex of historical circumstances. Henry 
Kamen has investigated these factors in the Iberian peninsula, and he 
has concluded that the religious issue was not the most prominent or 
the most relevant factor. 33 Greenleaf 's research suggests that insularity, 
exclusivism, xenophobia, even racial attitudes, were more important fac- 
tors than religion in developing the climate of intolerance that prevailed 
from the fifteenth century to the 1800s. In Mexico as in Spain, the In- 
quisition was not a tyrannical body imposed on the populace; nor was 
the Spanish Inquisition a logical outgrowth of Catholicism. Rather, it was 
a logical expression of prevalent social prejudices. The Tribunal of the 
Holy Office was neither a despotic body in control of a hypocritical na- 
tion nor was it by nature primarily anti-Protestant or anti-Jewish. 34 

During Habsburg times, and until the middle of the eighteenth cen- 
tury in Mexico, the Inquisition found ready support from the ruling 
elite and from the humble masses. For the most part, the focus of in- 
quisitorial activities was on Indians and foreigners; thus, the Mexican 
populace regarded the Holy Office as a relatively benign institution that 
protected society and religion from traitors and fomenters of social rev- 
olution. The only real opposition to the tribunal came from conversos, 
the converted Jews. But even in the matter of the Jews, it should be re- 
membered that anti-Semitism came first and then the Inquisition. 

In colonial Mexico, the tribunal and its agents were never able to 
effect thought control over either the colonial population or Indian 
groups. Studies on colonial printing in Mexico, the book trade, literary 
production, scientific investigation, and colonial art show that a vital in- 
tellectual atmosphere prevailed and that the intelligentsia, both clergy 
and colonist, read, speculated, and wrote with a degree of freedom not 
found in Spain during the same era. In Mexico, as in Spain, those who 
wished to read about the new scientific ideas from abroad were allowed 
to do so, because none of those works ever appeared on the Index of 
prohibited reading. 

Therefore, as an agency of social control the Mexican Inquisition 
worked as all such agencies do: to constrain but not to intimidate. 
Generalizations of the more popular writers to the contrary notwith- 
standing, actual evidence of intimidation is lacking in all but a very few 
isolated cases. There were debates, theological arguments, and ideolog- 



Copyrighted material 



272 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



ical disputes within the clerical establishment, within the universities, 
and within the military and political bureaucracies — debates that might 
have led to security investigations in a more rigid intellectual milieu. But 
in Mexico they did not, at least until the middle of the eighteenth cen- 
tury. The political role of the Holy Office of the Inquisition tended to 
strengthen its mission rather than to weaken it. 

Though they tend to disagree ideologically in their various researches 
and writings on the Church in Spain and in Mexico, Henry Kamen and 
this writer have independently reached similar conclusions. Those of 
the writer are tentative ones; Kamen's are articulated. The writer views 
the Holy Office as "an organic function of a corporate whole, insepara- 
ble from the social and economic forces which affected the whole body 
of society." 35 Kamen claims that "the ruling class of Spain was the demi- 
urge of an ideology, which for good or ill, has dominated Spanish society 
into modern times," and he feels that "this class content in ideology can- 
not be too strongly emphasized as the main factor in the creation of the 
closed society of traditional Spain." 36 His research led him to conclude 
that "wherever it was established, the Inquisition drew its strength from 
the common people and the nobility over them, who together became 
the steadfast pillars of the traditional order in Spain." 37 

Research in the Mexican Inquisition papers has revealed the rele- 
vance of some of Kamen's ideas in the New World. The interesting thing 
that happened to Mexico, however, was that the ruling-class ideology of 
the Creole elite and the common people changed at the turn of the nine- 
teenth century; and with this development, the posture of orthodoxy 
changed. It became more flexible, more eclectic, and more amenable to 
attack on the Spanish monarchy from a political standpoint. 

CONCLUSION 

Revisionist studies have begun to view the Inquisition as a mirror of the 
Mexican society in which it ministered rather than as a causal force that 
brought social dislocations. Causal forces are difficult to substantiate, 
and political and social repressions are difficult to measure. The real im- 
portance to the historian of Inquisition trials may not be their religious 
content but the social and intellectual data which they contain. These 
data may well provide the social scientist with new viewpoints and re- 
vised interpretations within the framework of liberal historiography. 

In any event, modern historians — no matter what their political affili- 
ations and religious views — should be willing to do the documentary 
depth probes rather than rely on tired cliches when they interpret the 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



273 



coercive power of the colonial Church. Whatever their findings, the pur- 
poses of history will have been served by professionals rather than by 
polemicists. 



NOTES 

1. Jose Toribio Medina, Historia del Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisition 
(Mexico: Editorial Navarro, 1954); Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta, Bibliografta 
mexicana del siglo XVI (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1954) and his 
Fray Juan de Zumdrraga, primer obispo y arzobispo de Mexico, 4 vols. (Mexico City: 
Editorial Porrua, 1947); Henry Charles Lea, The Inquisition in the Spanish Depen- 
dencies (New York: Macmillan, 1908); Luis Gonzalez Obregon, Mexico viejo: 
Noticias historicas, tradiciones, leyendasy costumbres (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura 
Economica, 1959); Julio Jimenez Rueda, Herejtas y supersticiones en la Nueva Es- 
pana: Los heterodoxos en Mexico (Mexico City: Imprenta Universitaria, 1946). 

2. Proceso Inquisitorial del Cacique de Tetzcoco, Publicaciones del Archivo Gen- 
eral de la Nacion, vol. 1 (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1910; re- 
print, Guadalajara, 1968); Procesos de indios idolatras y hechiceros, Publicaciones del 
Archivo General de la Nacion, vol. 3 (Mexico: Archivo General de la Nacion, 
1912); Nicolas Rangel, Los precursores ideologicos de la Revolution Francesa, vol. 2, 
La masoneria en Mexico, siglo XVIII (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 

1 9 2 9~ 1 93 2 )- 

3. "El Indice del Ramo de la Inquisicion" in fourteen typed folio volumes 
was microfilmed in three reels by the Library of Congress in 1949. Only two vol- 
umes of the Indice have been published by the Archivo General de la Nacion: 
Guillermina Ramirez Montes, Catdlogo del Ramo de Inquisition, 2 vols. (Mexico 
City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1979-1980). New documents from the huge 
Archivo Provisional, or Indiferente as it is often called, are added at intervals 
to the Ramo de la Inquisicion. See Richard E. Greenleaf, "El Archivo Provisional 
de la Inquisicion (Mexico)," The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cul- 
tural History 31 (1974): 206-2-16, and the guide to documentary sources on the 
Mexican Inquisition in Richard E. Greenleaf, "Mexican Inquisition Materials in 
Spanish Archives," The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural His- 
tory 20 (1964): 416-42O. The Mexican Tribunal sections of Archivo Historico 
Nacional, Madrid, have been microfilmed and are available to researchers. See 
Servicio Nacional de Microfilm, Archivo Historico Nacional: Section de Inquisition 
(Madrid: Centro de UocumentaciOn, 1971:) for a catalog. 

4. See for instance two of the many works of Boleslao Lewin, Mdrtires y con- 
quistador es judios en la America (Buenos Aires, 1954); La Inquisition en Hispano- 
america (judios, protestantes, patriotas) (Buenos Aires: Editorial Proyeccion, 1962) 
among others on Mexico. The sections of Mariano Cuevas, Historia de la iglesia 
en Mexico, 4 vols. (Mexico: Editoral Patria, 1946) are valuable syntheses of the 
works of Medina, Lea, Gonzalez Obregon, and Garcia Icazbalceta. 

5. Richard E. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century (Al- 



Copyrighted material 



274 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



buquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1969), vii. A Spanish translation 
was issued by the Fondo de Cultura Economica (Mexico City: Fondo de Cultura 
Economica, 1981) with a second printing in 1985. 

6. See the proceedings edited by Gustav Henningsen, John Tedeschi, and 
Charles Amiel, The Inquisition in Early Modern Europe: Studies on Sources and 
Methods (Dekalb, 111.: Northern Illinois University Press, 1986). 

7. A beautiful catalog with articles and illustrations was published: La Inquisi- 
tion (Madrid: Direccion General de Bellas Artes, Archivos y Bibliotecas, 1982). 

8. Joaquin Perez Villanueva and Bartolome Escandell Bonet, Historia de la 
Inquisition en Espana y America: Conocimiento cientifico y el proceso historico de la 
Institution (1478—1834) (Madrid: Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1984). See 
also Joaquin Perez Villanueva, La Inquisition Espanola: Nueva vision, nuevos hori- 
zontes (Madrid: Centro de Estudios Inquisitoriales, 1980). 

9. See Henningsen et al., The Inquisition in Early Modern Europe, 3-11, for a 
listing of the conclaves. 

10. See Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century, 158-190, for 
the formative period of the Tribunal. 

1 1 . See Robert Ricard, The Spiritual Conquest of Mexico: An Essay on the Aposto- 
late and the Evangelizing Methods of the Mendicant Orders in New Spain, 1523—1572 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1966), trans. Lesley 
Byrd Simpson from the 1933 French edition, 264-282 and passim; Robert Pad- 
den, The Hummingbird and the Hawk: Conquest and Sovereignty in the Valley of Mexico 
(Columbus, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1907), chapter 13, 'Huichilobos and 
the Bishop." 

12. Richard E. Greenleaf, Mixtec Religion and Spanish Conquest: The Oaxaca 
Inquisition Trials, 1544-1547 (Madrid: Jose Porrua Turanzas, 1991). The same 
author's study of the second archbishop "Alonso Montufar and the Mexican 
Inquisition" is in preparation, and his other works on Indians and the Inqui- 
sition, including a new volume on Mixtec religion and Spanish conquest, are 
discussed in the thematic sections of this essay. 

13. Solange Alberro Bechocaray, "Inquisition et Societe au Mexique, 157 1— 
1700," 3 vols. (These d'Etat, Paris, 1984). 

14. Francois Chevalier, "New Perspectives and New Focuses on Latin Amer- 
ican Research" (Address before the Conference on Latin American History of 
the American Historical Association, Chicago, 29 December 1985). 

15. Henningsen et al., Inquisition, 68, remarks that Alberro and Herrera 
Sotillo each analyzed cases not available to the other, and he counsels that the 
two sets of statistics need to be compared. 

16. Guillermo Fernandez de Recas, Aspirantes americanos a cargos del Santo 
Oficio: Sus genealogias ascendentes (Mexico City: Archivo General de la Nacion, 

1956)- 

17. See also the author's article written under the name of Pedro Gringoire, 
"Protestantes, enjuiciados por la Inquisition," Historia Mexicana 11 (1961): 161- 
1 79. Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century, has dealt with the 



Copyrighted material 



HISTORIOGRAPHY OF THE MEXICAN INQUISITION 



275 



trials of Miles Phillips and Guillermo Orlando, and incorporates studies by 
G. R. G. Conway, An Englishman and the Inquisition (Mexico City, 1927) and Frank 
Aydelotte, "Elizabethan Seamen in Mexico and Ports of the Spanish Main," 
American Historical Review 58 (1942): 1-19. 

1 8. See Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century, 1 82-1 86, for 
"Books and Men." 

19. Leonard's articles on the book trade are a mine of information. A series 
of these were published in the Hispanic Review (HR) and The Hispanic American 
Historical Review (HAHR): "On the Mexican Book Trade 1576," HR 17 (1949): 
18-34; "On the Mexican Book Trade 1600," HR 9 (1941): 1-40; "On the Mexi- 
can Book Trade 1683," HAHR 27 (1947): 419—435. 

20. See C. H. Griffin, "Some Aspects of the Book Trade between Europe and 
the Indies in the Sixteenth Century" (Diss., Oxford University, 1982); Carlos 
Millares de la Imperial, "La censura de publicaciones en Nueva Espana (1576- 
1591)," Revista de Indias; "10 coloniales, 1585-1684," Boletin del Archivo General 
de la Nacion 10 (1939): 661-1006; "Libros mexicanos, 1553-1609," Boletin del Ar- 
chivo General de la Nacion 20 (1949): 1-63. Greenleaf has planned a study on 
"Books and Men in Sixteenth-Century Mexico." His works on the literature of 
the Enlightenment in Mexico and the important study of Monelisa Lina Perez 
Marchand are discussed below in this essay. 

21. Bartolome Bennassar, "Aux origines du caciquisme: Les familiers de 
l'lnquisition en Andalousie au XVIIe siecle," Caravelle, no. 27 (1976): 63—71. 

22. See for instance Lewis A. Tambs, "The Inquisition in Eighteenth-Cen- 
tury Mexico," The Americas: A Quarterly Review of Inter-American Cultural History 
22 (1965): 167-181; "Incapacidad Operativa," in Perez Villanueva and Escan- 
dell, Historia de la Inquisicion, 1348-1353. 

23. See Luis Gonzalez Obregon, Los procesos militar e inquisitorial del Padre 
Hidalgo (Mexico: Archivo General de la Nacion, 1887); Procesos inquisitorial y 
militar seguidos a Don Manuel Hidalgo y Costilla (Mexico City: Editorial Navano, 
i960); "El senor fiscal de este Santo Oficio contra don Jose Maria Morelos," Bole- 
tin del Archivo General de la Nacion 19 (1958). 

24. See Richard E. Greenleaf, "The Mexican Inquisition and the Enlighten- 
ment, 1763-1805," New Mexico Historical Review 41 (1966): 181-196. The same 
author is writing a volume on "The Inquisition in Baroque Mexico," which deals 
not so much with the great autos de fe of 1645 to 1649, when crypto-Jews and 
many others were punished, as with the Visita de Hacienda and the probes 
of Pedro Medina Rico and Marcos Alonso de Huydobro into procedural ir- 
regularities and violations of rights of accused in all Inquisition trials from 1640 
to 1657. Greenleaf builds on the early study of Helen Phipps, "Notes on Medina 
Rico's Visita de Hacienda to the Inquisition of Mexico," in Todd Memorial Vol- 
umes, 2 vols. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1932), 2:78-89. He also has 
built on the New Mexico studies of France V. Scholes to illuminate inquisitorial 
activities in the Spanish Borderlands. His The Inquisition in Bourbon Mexico in- 
cludes a chapter on the "Inquisition in Northern Mexico" and will incorporate 



Copyrighted material 



276 



RICHARD E. GREENLEAF 



his "The Inquisition in Spanish Louisiana 1762-1800," New Mexico Historical 
Review 50 (1975): 45-72, and "The Inquisition in Eighteenth-Century New 
Mexico," New Mexico Historical Review 60 (1985): 29-59. 

25. On Ricard and Padden see above. See also Jacques Lafaye, Quetzalcodtl 
and Guadalupe: The Formation of Mexican National Consciousness, 1531-1 813, trans. 
Benjamin Keen (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976), chap. 3, "The In- 
quisition and the Pagan Underground," 18-29. Greenleaf 's Zumdrraga and the 
Mexican Inquisition, 1536-1543 contained the first in-depth analysis of the Zu- 
marraga trials of Indians in two lengthy chapters. 

26. The treatises are reprinted in Francisco del Paso y Troncoso, Tratado de 
las idolatrias, super sticiones, dioses, ritos, hechicerias, y otras costumbres gentilicas de las 
razas aborigenes de Mexico, 2 vols. (Mexico City: Editorial Navarro, 1954), based 
on the original 1892 edition. 

27. See Greenleaf, The Mexican Inquisition of the Sixteenth Century, 75-81, for 
the Indian Inquisition of Tello de Sandoval, 1544-1547. 

28. Scholes and Roys, Fray Diego de Landa and the Problem of Idolatry in Yucatan, 
600. 

29. See Chevalier, "New Perspectives and New Focuses on Latin American 
Research." See the interesting works of Serge Gruzinski, Les hommes-dieux du 
Mexique: Pourvoir indien et societe coloniale, XVIe-XVIIIe siecles (Paris, 1985), and 
"Matrimonio y sexualidad en Mexico y Texcoco en los albores de la conquista 
o la pluralidad de los discursos," in Solange Alberro, ed., 5m ensayos sobre el dis- 
curso colonial relativo a la cotnunidad dvmistica: Matrimonio, familia y sexualidad a 
traves de los cronistas en el siglo XVI (Mexico City: INAH, 1980). 

30. In addition to the statistical analyses of Alberro and Herrera Sotillo, see 
Gustav Henningsen, "El banco de datos del Santo Oficio," Bolettn de la Academia 
de la Historia 174 (1974): 547—570. 

3 1 . Greenleaf, among his other planned studies, hopes to examine the solici- 
tantes — those priests accused of solicitation of women in the confessional. 

32. The following pages depend on Richard E. Greenleaf, "The Inquisition 
in Colonial Mexico: Heretical Thoughts on the Spiritual Conquest," in Religion 
in Latin American Life and Literature, ed. Lyle C. Brown and William Cooper 
(Waco, Tex.: Baylor University Press, 1980), 70-82. 

33. Henry Kamen, The Spanish Inquisition (London: Allen and Unwin, 1965). 

34. Ibid., 294. 

35. Ibid., 301. 

36. Ibid., 305. 

37. Ibid. 



Copyrighted material 



CONTRIBUTORS 



Jaime Contreras, faculty member of the History Department of the Uni- 
versidad Autonoma de Madrid, has published numerous articles on the 
Inquisition and participated in many international conferences. His 
book, El Santo Oficio de la Inquisition de Galicia: Poder, sociedad y cultura, 
was published by Akal in 1982. 

Anne J. Cruz, Associate Professor of Spanish, teaches Spanish and 
comparative literature at the University of California, Irvine. Her pub- 
lications include Imaitacion y transformation: El petrarquismo en la poesta de 
Boscdn y Garcilaso de la Vega (John Benjamins, 1988); the coedition of 
Renaissance Rereadings: Intertext and Context (University of Illinois Press, 
1988); and articles on Golden Age poetry, theater, and prose. 

Jesus M. De Bujanda, who received doctorates in both history and 
theology, is Professor of History and also directs the Centre d'Etudes 
de la Renaissance de l'Universite de Sherbrooke. He is author of Index 
de I'Inquisition espagnole, 1551, 1554, 1559 (Editions de l'Universite de 
Sherbrooke, 1984), volume V of Index des livres interdits, a multi- volume 
project that he directs. 

Richard E. Greenleaf, whose scholarship on the Inquisition in Latin 
America commenced publication in i960, will publish his ninth book in 
1991, Mixtec Religion and Spanish Conquest: The Oaxaca Inquisition Trials, 
1 544— 1 547 ( J os ^ Porrua Turanzas). Professor of History at Tulane Uni- 
versity, he is also Director of the Roger Thayer Stone Center for Latin 
American Studies. 

Stephen Haliczer is Professor of History at Northern Illinois Univer- 
sity. Editor of Inquisition and Society in Early Modern Europe (Croom-Helm, 

277 



Copyrighted material 



278 



CONTRIBUTORS 



1987), his new book, Inquisition and Society in the Kingdom of Valencia, has 
just been published by the University of California Press. 

Stanley M. Hordes is a visiting scholar in the Department of History 
and the Latin American Institute at the University of New Mexico, as 
well as principal consultant in the firm of HMS Associates in Santa Fe, 
New Mexico. As co-project director of "Crypto-Jews: New Mexico's 
Sephardic Legacy," he has published several scholarly papers, including 
"The Inquisition as Economic and Political Agent: The Campaign of the 
Mexican Holy Office Against the Crypto-Jews in the Mid-Seventeenth 
Century," The Americas, 39:1 (1982). 

Richard L. Kagan is Professor of History at The Johns Hopkins Uni- 
versity, where he specializes in early modern Spain. In addition to Stu- 
dents and Society in Early Modern Spain (Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1974), and Lawsuits and Litigants in Castile, 1 500-1 joo (University of 
North Carolina Press, 1981), he has published through the University 
of California Press both Spanish Cities of the Golden Age (1989), and Lu- 
crecias Dreams: Politics and Prophesy in Sixteenth-Century Spain (1990). 

J. Jorge Klor de Alva, Professor of Anthropology at Princeton Uni- 
versity, received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1987-1988. Named 
Curator for the anthropology and history sections of Expo '92 in Seville, 
he has edited two books, Encuentros interetnicos en el Nuevo Mundu: Inter- 
pretaciones contempordneas, and Imdgenes interetnicas en el Nuevo Mundo 
(both forthcoming from Editorial Siglo XXI). His book, Introduction to 
Aztec Culture: The Nahua Images of Self and Society, will be published by 
the University of Utah Press. 

Moshe Lazar, Professor of Comparative Literature at the University 
of Southern California, has carried out many years of research on the 
literature of forcibly converted Jews in Spain. 

Angus I. K. MacKay is Professor of History at the University of Edin- 
burgh. A specialist in medieval Spain, he has presented many scholarly 
papers and has published Money, Prices and Politics in Fifteenth-Century 
Castile (Royal Historical Society, 1981), and Spain in the Middle Ages: From 
Frontier to Empire, 1000—1500 (Macmillan, 1983, Third Printing). 

Geraldine McKendrick recently completed her doctorate at the Uni- 
versity of Edinburgh and now holds a lectureship at King's College in 
London. Cambridge University Press will soon publish her book, Francis- 
can Spirituality in Early Modern Castile. 

Roberto Moreno de los Arcos has taught history at the Universidad 
Autonoma de Mexico and is currently Humanities Coordinator. His 
many publications include Los nahuatlismos en el espanol de Mexico (Uni- 
versidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Coordination de Humani- 



Copyrighted material 



CONTRIBUTORS 



279 



dades, 1 989) and Ensayos de bibliografia mexicana. Autores, libros, imprenta, 
bibliotecas. Primera serie (Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, In- 
stitute) de Investigaciones Bibliograficas, 1986). 

Mary Elizabeth Perry, Research Associate at the UCLA Center for 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies, is Adjunct Professor of History at 
Occidental College. A specialist in research on the social history of Spain, 
she has published Crime and Society in Early Modern Seville (University 
Press of New England, 1980), and many articles on gender and devi- 
ance. Her most recent book is Gender and Disorder in Early Modern Seville 
(Princeton, 1990). 

Noemi Quezada is investigadora titular in the Instituto de Investiga- 
ciones Antropologicas, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. An 
ethnologist who received her doctorate from the University of Paris, 
Sorbonne, she specializes in the cultures of colonial Latin America. Her 
publications include Amor y magia amorosa entre los Aztecas (Universidad 
Autonoma de Mexico, 1984). 

Maria Helena Sanchez Ortega, profesora titular of medieval and early 
modern history in the Universidad Nacional de Education a Distancia, 
Madrid, has written extensively on sexuality in Spain and the Spanish 
gypsies, including Los gitanos espanoles: El periodo borbonico (Castellote, 
1977), and La Inquisicion y los gitanos (Taurus, 1988). Her study, La mujer 
y la sexualidad en el antiguo regimen is in press. 

Joseph H. Silverman was Professor of Spanish in the Adlai E. Steven- 
son College at the University of California at Santa Cruz before his 
recent death. He published many scholarly works on the literature of 
Golden Age Spain, including articles on the picaresque novel and Cer- 
vantes. Most recently, he published an edition of the folk literature of the 
Sephardic Jews (University of California Press, 1991), with Samuel G. 
Armistead and Israel J. Katz. 



Copyrighted material 



INDEX 



Abjuration, 51 
Acosta, Manuel de, 210 
Acuna, Hernando de, 162 
Acuna, Rene, 34—35 m 10, 
Adad, Mariana, 46 
Adas, Michael, 106 
Adrian VI, Pope, 29, 3J 
Adriano (inquisitor), 28 
Adso, 96 

Aguirre y Roche, Teresa de, 214 

Alberro Bechocaray, Solange, 252 

Albert, Cardinal-Archduke, 1 19 

Alcala, Angel, x 

Alcaraz, Redro Ruiz de, 99, loj 

Aleman, Fray, 96—97 

Aleman, Mateo, i_6_i 

Allende, Fray Lucas de, 1 l6 

Alonso, Catalina, 100 

Alsaqar, Shelomoh Mosheh, 192 

Alum, conjurations of, 60, 65-66 

Amsterdam, Jews in, 134 

Angela of Foligno, 99, 1 00 

Angeles Quinones, Fray Francisco de los, 

95> 99 

Anti-Semitism, 133—134, 147-149, 150- 
154; Inquisition makes official, 154; of 
Philip II, 153 

Antonio, Prior of Crato, 118—119 

Antonio the Councilor, 96 

Anussim. See Conversos 

281 



Apocalyptic literature, 96-98, 1 10, 
Apostasy, ix, 26, 29 
Aquinas, Thomas, 109 
Ashkenazi Jews, 134 

Astrology, prophecies based on, 108— log 
Autos de fe, 1 14, 176, 178-179, 223; of 
conversos/Jews, 153, 161, 180, 185, 
186, 199, 219; disinterment at, 161 ; of 
effigies, 2 14; in Mexico, 3, 212; of 
witches, 154 
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista, l66 

Badia, Esperanza, 64, 89 a. u 

Baeza, Pedro de, 98 

Baptism, function of, 17 

Baptista, Fray Juan, 113 

Barabbas, 59, 66 

Basque area, 154 

Bat, 96, 97, ixu 

Bataillon, M., 100 

Bautista, Isabel, 63, 68—69, 75~7^ 

Beamonte, I uis de, 1 1 2 

Beans, conjuration of, 60, 62-63, 80 

Beata de Barco de Avila/Piedrahita. See 

Santo Domingo, Sor Maria de 
Beinart, Heim, 127, 138, 177—178 
Bergson, Henri, 162, 166 
Berruguete, Pedro, 158 
Betanzos, Friar Domingo de, 33—34 m 18 
Blasphemy, 10, 29 



Copyrighted material 



282 



INDEX 



Blood: in ritual, 149-150, 155; tainted/ 
purity of, 131, 132, 153, 160. 167; as 
tie, 132-134 

Boll, Heinrich, 171-172 

Book-burning, 171, 176, 179, l8j 

Boxer, C. R., i6j 

Braganca, Duque de, 211 

Braunstein, B., 192 

Cabalism, 192, 193 

Camhy, O., 197 

Canizares, Jose de, 153 

Cantera Burgos, Francisco, 200 nJ* 

Cardoso, Fernando, 142 

Caro Baroja, Julio, 127, 135, 181—182 

Carrete Parrondo, C, 186 

Carrion, Antonio, 24 

Cartagena, Alonso de, 133 

Carvajal, el Mozo, Luis de (Joseph Lum- 
broso), 179, 185-186, 190, 199, 208 

Carvajal family, 266 

Casaos, Guillen de, 109 

Castano de Sosa, Gaspar, 213, 2 14 

Castellanos, Maria, 62—63, 66 

Castro, Americo, 132—133, 134, 1 fif» 

Catherine of Siena, 99, 100, 1 18 

Catholic Church: authority of, 25—26, 94; 
challenged, 94, 106; colonial policies 
enforce, 38, 207; controls printing 
presses, 99] enemies of, xiii, 147, 148, 
149—151, 164-165; v. Indian religion, 
26—28; Inquisition defends, 227; on 
magic, 58; and monarchy, 226-227; on 
prophets, 109—1 10; on visionaries, 94; 
on woman's role, 100 

Cazalla, Maria de, 100-101, 223—224 

Cedar of Lebanon prophecy, 105 

Censorship function of Inquisition, 171, 
176, 179. 181, 230-231, 253-254, 257- 
258, 271 

Cervantes, Miguel de, xiii— xiv, 162; Don 

Quixote of, 161, 166—171 
Cespedes del Castillo, Guillermo, 23 
Charles II, 147 
Charles V, 5, 28, 94, 97—98 
Chaves, Fray Diego de, 1 13, 117 
Christian, William A., Jr., 106 
Christobalico, 152, 1 53, 155 
Chuetas, 191—193, 197. See also Conversos 



Cirac Estopanan, Sebastian, 84 
Cisneros, Dr. Baltasar de, 147 
Clement VII, Pope, 98 
Coci, Jorge, loi 
Cohn, Norman, 106 

Colonialization, ioj Catholic Church and, 
38, 207; Inquisition's role in, x-xi, 3, 
1 1, 12. 28, 264 

Colonna, Cardinal Ascanio, 1 14 

Columbus, Christopher, 97 

Concubinage, 8 

Confession, xi, 12J torture extracts, 49, 

Conjurations of sorceresses, 60-69; of 
alum/salt, 6oj 65-66; of beans/cards, 60, 
62, 63, 80; demons invoked by, 66-67, 
70-71, 72-73, 75, 76; of doors/win- 
dows, 6T, 69, 73j to shadow-broom, 79- 
80; on sun, moon, stars, 6oj 7_3_, 74, 75- 
76,85 

Contreras, Alonso de, 190 
Contreras, Jaime, xiii, xiv, 127—145 
Conversos (forcibly converted Jews; 

crypto-Jews; Anussim; New Christians), 
85, 58, 127—145, 162. 200 n. *; anti- 
Semitism against, xiii, 153; autos de fe 
of, 153, 161. 180. 185, 186, 199, 219; 
children as, 181; in Ciudad Real, 127, 
138, 177— 178; colonies of, 130, 176, 
177, 179; cultural identity of, 131; de- 
fined, 130, 215 n. ij economic influ- 
ence/wealth of, 139, 140-141, 209-210; 
endogamous marriages of, 127, 135, 
1 37 — x 38> 210: on Esther and Joseph, 
202 n. 28, 204 n. 45; family/kinship ties 
of, 122., 132-133, 136-138, 140-141, 
210, 211; guilt over conversion of, xiv, 
186—188; hope for messianic redemp- 
tion of, 186, 187—188; on Inquisition, 
271; Inquisition on, x, xiv-xv, 26, 135, 
148, M 0 ^^. L54, 160-161, 172-173, 
176-178, 180. 182-184, 185, 186, 199, 
207-208, 210-217; internal tensions of, 
129, 138— 139; Jewish traditions pre- 
served by, 177, 179-183, 184-189, 205 
n. 64, 210-2 1 1 ; in Majorca, 1 9 1 ; as 
marginalized, 132, 136-137; in Mexico, 
xiv-xv, 207—208, 210-217, 265-268; in 
municipal office, 136, 137; in New 



Copynghled material 



INDEX 



283 



Mexico, 212-215; in patron-client re- 
lationships, 142; in Philippines, 209; in 
Portugal, 140, 153, 177, 179—180, 182, 
196-197, 208; Psalms used by, 188- 
189, 191—195; reject term "New Chris- 
tian," 186; relationship with open Jews 
of, 129, 130, 139, 177; secrecy of, 128— 
129, 176; social/legal rights of, 130; as 
witches, 154; women, 179—180, 189, 
196-197, 205 n. 64 

Cordoba, Friar Pedro de, 28 

Coronado, Francisco Vazquez de, 213 

Correa Nunez, Antonio, i_8o 

Cortes, Hernando, 1 u brought Inquisition 
to Mexico, 8, 9, lo, 208 

Council of Constance, 1 10 

Covarrubias, Sebastian de, 87-88 n, 2_, 159, 

Cruz, Isabel de la, 95, 98, 93, loj 
Cruz, Juana de la, 95, 99, 101, 106 
Cruz, Magdalena de la, 94—95, 99 
Crypto-Jews. See Conversos 
Curanderos, 37—57; accusations against, 41, 
46-47; confessions of, 49J divinations 
by, 4j_, 52J feign insanity, 49; hallucino- 
gens used by, xi-xii, 38, 4^, 48, 52J in- 
cantations by, 4jj recidivism of, 50; sen- 
tenced, 4^, 48—49, 50—52; superstitions 
of, 41J tortured, 49-50; trials of, xi— xii, 

3 8 > 39-53 

Daniel 12:2—3, 1 88 

David, the New, 96, 98 

Davila Padilla, Friar Agustin, 33-34 n. l8 

Dejadosl dejamiento, 94, 95, 98, 99 

Delations, 46-47 

Demons, 148; sorceresses invoke, 66—67, 

70-71,72-73. 75> 76 
Despina, Sister Marie, i_72 
Devil/Satan, 2JL 59, 66_, 146 
Diaz, Froilan, 147 
Diaz, Maria, 201 n> 14 
Dientes, Juana, 74-75 
Dios.Juande, 109 

Divination: by curanderos, 4J_, 52] by sor- 
ceresses, 60, 62-63, 64, 65 
Dominicans, 10, 93-94 
Don Quixote, 161, 166—171 
Doors/windows, conjurations to, 6i, 69, 73 



Duran, Fr. Martin, 24 
Duviols, Pierre, 25 

Edicts of Faith, 1^1 

Emmanuel, King of Portugal, 180-181 
Encubierto (the Hidden One), 96, 97, 98, 
101. 107 

Erasmus, Desiderius, 223, 224, 251—252 

Eschatology, 97—101, 1 10, 

Espejo, Antonio de, 213 

Espina, Alonso de, 148 

Espinosa, Pedro de, 211 

Esther, 202 a 28^ 204 m 45 

Ethnography, 1 1 

Familiares, 255 

Family: conversos' cohesion via, 127, 132- 
133. 136-138' i4°-i4i. 210. 2 1 1 ; of 
Jews, L3_L. 135 

Ferdinand of Aragon, ix 

Ferdinand the Catholic, 93, 95, 97, 98 

Ferrer, Vincent, 99, 100, 107 

Fire, symbolic use of, 60, 65-66, 73 

France, Jews expelled from, 154 

Franciscans: as anti-intellectual, 98; carry 
Inquisition to New World, ix, 8_, ux, 28— 
31, 39; on female spirituality, xii, 98- 
99; on gift of prophecy, 98 

Frederick II, 96 

Garcia, Elvira, 1 86 
Garcia d'Orta, i_6j 

Garcia Icazbalceta, Joaquin, 24^ 34-35 
m 19 

Garrigues, Laura, 64, 67, 68, 73, 82^ 85-86 

Gerson.Jean, 109—110 

Gilman, Stephen, l6_j 

Gomez, Gaspar, 1 13 

Gomez Robledo, Francisco, 214 

Gomez Roman, Hernan, 1 1 ft 

Gonzalez, Ger6nima, 65, 6JL 72—73 

Gracian, Baltasar, l6j 

Granada, Fray Luis de, 1 1_8 

Gran Auto de Fe, z±2 

Great Pueblo Revolt of 1680, 214 

Greenleaf, Richard E., xv, 24, 248—276 

Grillo, Prudencia, 67 

Guevara, Fray Antonio de, xiii, 159-160 



Copyrighted malarial 



284 



INDEX 



Hackett, William, 107, 1 14 
Haliczer, Stephen, xiii, 146-156 
Hallucinogens, curanderos use, xi— xii, 38, 
41.48, 52 

Healing, magic for, 58^ See also Curanderos 

Henningsen, Gustav, x 

Henriques, Brites, 193—194 

Heresy, 148; Inquisition on, ix, 8_, 1 1-12, 

96, 129, 229, 256 
Hernandez, Francisca, 94, 95, 98, 99 
Hernandez, Jose Antonio, 51 
Hernando de Toledo, 108 
Herrera, Juan de, 1 L2 
Herrera Sotillo, Maria Asuncion, 252—253 
Holy Child of La Guardia legend, xiii, 148, 

149- i5°-»53. 1 54~ 1 55. 1 57 
Holy Office. See Inquisition 

Holy Roman Empire, 154 

Hordes, Stanley M., xiv— xv, 207— 2 17 

Horozco, Sebastian de, 152 

Illuminism, 100. 224, 229 

Indian Inquisition (Protectorate of Na- 
tives; Indian Tribunal of Faith), 3—22, 
23, 25—31, 260—265; as acculturation/ 
social control mechanism, 13, 14, 15, 
17; accusations by, xi, 8—10, 2jL 41, 53; 
on apostasy, 29; bishops run, 13, 39; 
collapse/demise of, 5, 8, 15, 16; on 
curanderos, xi— xii, 38, 39—53; on heresy 
among Europeans, 1 1—12; as indoc- 
trinating/proselytizing strategy, xi, 15— 
16, 17; as instrument of conquest, x— xi, 
3, 11, i2j 28, 264; punishment/disci- 
pline by, L2j 13—18, 29, 30; toleration 
by, 5, 8; on transgressions of faith, 24, 
260, 261; trials by, 8—10, 24, 25, 29, 30, 
31, 39-4 262-263 

Indians (Native American; Nahuas): as 
blasphemous, 29; concubinage by, 8j as 
converts, 14; hallucinogens used by, 41^ 
53 el 4; healers of (see Curanderos); as 
idolators/pagans, xi, 8, 10, 26-28, 29, 
30, 40, 262—263; on Inquisition, i6j In- 
quisition to exclude, 3—8, i_3_, 23, 3^, 39; 
Inquisition tries (see Indian Inquisi- 
tion); religion of, 18, 26—28 

Inquisition (Tribunal of the Holy Office 



of the Inquisition against Heretical Per- 
versity and Apostasy): accusations by, 
1 U as anti-Semitic, 8, 130, 134, 138- 
139. 148, 149-150, 151. 153-154, 152, 
163, 165, 176, 177, 178, 181, 193, 199, 
208, 211. 212. 214; bibliography on, 
222—247; on blasphemy, 10, 29; 
bureaucracy of, ix, 3J_, 255, 261—262; 
censorship by, 171, 176, 179, 181, 230— 
231, 253-254, 257-258, 221; on con- 
cubinage, 8; in conquest, x— xi, 3, il? 

12, 28, 264; as control mechanism, xiii, 
8, 17,38-39, 110, HL, 113-115, 116- 
117, 1 19-120, 212, 226-230, 256, 258— 
259, 271; on conversos, x, xiv— xv, 26. 

I. 35, 148, 149-153, 154, 160-161, 172- 
173, 176-178, 180. 182-184, 185, 186, 
199, 207-208, 210—217, 265-268; con- 
versos on, 271; corruption in, 270; 
decline of, 256, 258; as defense of 
Catholicism, 227; eighteenth-century, 
256-260; evolution of, 228; executions 
by, 3, 114, 155, 154, 158, 16^ 176, 
178-179, 185, 186, 199, 212, 214, 229; 
exile by, 114, 1 15, 212; feared, 163— 
165, 271; functions/concerns of, 8—10, 

I I, 12. 207, 227, 229; on heresy, ix, 8, 
11-12, 96, 1 29, 229, 256; on illumi- 
nism, 100; Indians excluded from, 3—8, 

13, 23, 31, 39; Indians on, 16] for In- 
dians (see Indian Inquisition); intoler- 
ance of, 27 1 ; on Lutheranism, 100, 
229; marranismo invented by, 1 29; on 
Masons, 259-260; in Mexico, ix, xv, 8— 
10, 1 1—12, 28—31, 36 n. 28, 39, 207— 
208. 210-217, 248—276 (see also Indian 
Inquisition); on moriscos, x, 229 ; peni- 
tential discipline of, xi, L2, 13; in Por- 
tugal, 223; on prophecy, 105-124; rec- 
ords of, ix— x; as repressive, 172, 229, 
230-231, 269; Russian Gulag compared 
to, 172; secrecy of, 270; on sorceresses 
and their love magic, xii, 58, 59, 62-63, 
67; Spain's relationship with Portugal 
affected by, xiv— xv; torture as instru- 
ment of, 149—150, 193; on visionaries, 
xii, 94-96, 99, 100; on witchcraft, 39, 

87 n- L 146, 1 53~ 1 54 
Isabel of Aragon, ix 



INDEX 



285 



Jeremiah 23: 16, 107 

Jesus, Isabel de, 108, log 

Jews: in Amsterdam, 134; Ashkenazi, 134; 
books of burned, 176, 181; burial rites 
of, 2 1 1 ; Catholic Church against, xiii, 

12Q, 147> 148, 149-15°> 151. 153- 
154, 164—165, 192, 193; circumcision 
rites of, 149, 211; clandestine (see Con- 
versos); and conversos, 129, 130, 139, 
177; executed, 199, 212; expelled, 58, 
154, 157, 177, 180-181, 212; family of, 
131—135, 138—139; forcibly converted 
(see Conversos); historical consciousness 
of, 134; hostility to (anti-Semitism), 
t 33~ 1 34» 147-149, 150-1/S4; Inquisi- 
tion on, 8, 130, 134, 138-139, 148, 
H9~ l 5°' i53-!54> 1 JlL 163, 165, 
176. 177, 178, l&lj 1M, 159, 208, 811, 
212, 214; in Mexico, 208; in Portugal, 
180-181; posthumously punished, 161; 
Sephardic, xiv, 134; stereotypes on, 
139-140; tortured, 149-150, 193; tra- 
ditions/rituals of, 149, 176, 177, 1 79- 
183, 184-199, 205 tL 64, 2 1 1 

John 15:6, 176 

Josefa, Manuela, 47 

Joseph, 202 n. 28, 204 n. 45 

Juan II, i_L2 

Juda, Don of Alba de Tormes, 184-185 
Judaizer, 128, 129, 130, 131-132. See also 
Conversos 

Kagan, Richard L., xii-xiii, xv, 105-124 
Kaplan, Mordecai M., 159 
Kellembez, JL_, 140 
Klor de Alva, J. Jorge, xi, 3-22 
Knowing other people's lives, xiii, 159- 
173; in Don Quixote, 166—171 

Lame Devil, 59, 66 

Landa, Friar Diego de, 3 1 

Las Casas, Bartolome de, 5, 13—14, 25 

The Last Roman Emperor, 96 

The Last World Emperor, 96 

Lateran Council, Fifth, 1 10 

Lazar, Moshe, xiv, 176-206 

Lazarillo de Tormes, 157—159 

Lea, Henry C, xv 

Leo X, Pope, 33—34 n. 1S 



Leon, Lucrecia de, 98, 115—118 
Leon, Fray Luis de, 163 
Lerner, Robert, 105 
Levi, Moses Aron ha, 134 
Levi de Barrios, Daniel, 134, 138 
Llorente, Jose Antonio, xv, 2& 
Lonely Soul (Anima Sola), 6±j 75 
Lope de Mencoza, Licenciado, 1 17 
Lopez de Armenia, Juan, 194-195 
Lopez de Haro, Fray Damian, 154 
Lopez de Mendizabal, Bernardo, 214 
Luis, Juan, 50 
Luke 18:31, 94 

Luna, Juan de, 162, 163, 164, 165 
Lutheranism, 100, 229 
Lyra, Nicolas de, 98 

MacKay, Angus, xii, 93-104 
McKendrick, Geraldine, xii, 93-104 
Magic, 58, 59. See also Sorceresses, love 

magic of 
Maimonides, 185 
Majorca, 191 

Maldonado de Silva, Francisco, 178-179 
Malleus Maleficarum, 147, 152 
Malsin, 159 

Manrique, Alonso, 35 n. 21. 95 
Manso, Alfonso, 28 

Marquez Villanueva, Francisco, 136, 137, 
160, 168 

Marranismo, 128, 129—130, 200 rL *. See also 
Conversos 

Martinez de Bujanda, Jesus, xv, 221-247 

Marti y Cortes, Isabel, 191-192 

Martyrdom of ten celebrated rabbis, 1/79 

Masons, 259-260 

Medicine, 37. See also Curanderos 

Medina, Jose Toribio, 250—251 

Mendez Silva, Rodn'go, 142 

Mendieta, Friar Ger6nimo de, 33 n, 17 

Mendoza, Dr. Alonso de, 1 1 4, 1 1 6 

Mendoza, Isabel Maria de, 83 

Mendoza, Dona Mencia de, 101 

Messianic ideas, 93, 95^ 96-98; of con- 
versos, 186, 187—188 

Mexico: autos de fe in, 3, 212; city-states 
in, icb uj in colonial period (see Co- 
lonialization); conversos in, xiv-xv, 207- 
208. 210-217, 265-268; Inquisition in, 



Copyrighted malarial 



286 



INDEX 



ix, xv, 8— 10, 1 l—i 2, 28—3 1 , 36 m 28, 39, 
207—208, 210—217, 248— 276; Jews in, 
208; missionaries in. 11. 12. l8 
Milhou, Alain, 97 

Millenarianism, 94, 95, 96, 105, 108 

Miranda, Jose, 54 nn. 12^ ifi 

Moctezuma, Manuel Jose de, 48 

Monarchy: as Catholic, 226—227; Inquisi- 
tion serves, xiii, xv, 1 10, 111, 1 13—1 15, 
1 16—1 17, 1 19—120, 226—227 

Morales, Manuel de, 190 

Moreno, Francisco, 41, 46 

Moreno de los Arcos, Roberto, xi, 19 n. 17, 
23-36 

Moriscos (Moors; Muslims), x, 25, 58, 148, 
229 

Mother Marta, 95, 99 

Motolinia, Toribio de Benavente, 15, 29 

Munoz Camargo, Diego, 29 

Miintzer, Thomas, 107 

Murcielago (the Bat), 96, 97, 101 

Nahuas, 3, 8, 10, L2 
Narcisa, Petra, 48 
Navarro, Caspar, 147 
Navarro, Fray Pedro, 106 
Natives' Court. See Indian Inquisition 
Nerofia, Maria Antonia de, 65—66, 70—72, 
82 

New Christians. See Conversos 

New Mexico, 254; conversos in, 212-215 

New World, 26. See also Indian Inquisition; 

Mexico 
Niccoli, Ottavia, 107 
Nieto, Jos£ C, 95—96 

Nieva Calvos, Licenciado Sebastian de, 152 

Nostradamus, Michel, 108 

Nunez de Santa Fe, Pedro, 186-187 

Office of Provisor of Natives. See Indian 

Inquisition 
Ometochtzin, don Carlos, 3, 6, 13, 29—31 
Omnimoda, 29, 31 
Ohate, Juan de, 214 
Oracao de Formosura, 193—194 
Oranges, conjuration to, 60, 63-64, 65 
Orozco, Fray Alonso de, 108, 112,1 13, 160 
Ortiz, Fray Francisco, 98, 99 
Osuna, Fray Francisco de, 95 



Paez Hurtado, Juan, 215 
Palafox y Mondoza, Juan de, 2J_2 
Passover, 149 

Paz, Dona Juana de la, 76, 77, 8jj 82_, 89 
n. 1 1 

Paz y Melia, Antonio, 85 

Pelayo, 111 

Pena, Francisco, 50 

Penitential: costume, 4; discipline, xi, 3, L2, 

L3 

Perez, Antonio, 109, 112, 1 16. 1 17 
Peyote, 41, 53 n. 4 

Philip II, xiv, 108; as anti-Semitic, 153; 
on Indians, 4, 39; Inquisition estab- 
lished in New World by, 36 n, 2jL 39; 
prophets/prophecies on, 111, 1 12, 1 15, 
1 16-1 17, 1 icy on prophets, 1 13, 1 14— 
1 15, 1 17J visionaries protect, 95, 99; on 
witches, 147 

Philip III, 147 

Philip IV, 147 

Philippines, 209 

Piedrola, Miguel de, 98, 105, 109, 1 1 1- 
1 15. 1 16 

Fietro Martire d'Anghiera, 94, 97 
Plato, 159 

Ponce de Leon, Rodrigo, 97 
Pope, Alexander, 257 
Pope, Angelic, 97, 98 
Popper, W., 181 

Portugal: conversos in, 140, 153, 177, 179- 
180. 182, 196—197, 208 ; declares inde- 
pendence from Spain, 2 1 1—212; expels 
Jews, 180-181; Inquisition in, 223; 
nationalism in, 1 18—1 19 

Prophets/prophecies, xii— xiii; apocalyptic 
imagery of, 1 19; Aquinas on, 109; as- 
trology as basis of, 108— log; Catholic 
Church on, 109—1 10; Cedar of Leba- 
non, 105; defined, 105—106; dreams/ 
visions/ecstasies of, 106, 107, 118; Fran- 
ciscans on, 98; function of, 106; gift of, 
98, 106; Inquisition on, 105—124; as 
mediator/transmitter of messages, 106; 
on Philip II. ill, 112, 115, 1 16—1 17, 
1 19J Philip II investigates, 1 15, 114— 
1 ljj, 1 i_7_; on Portugal, 1 18—1 19; on re- 
form of Church, 106; rival, 1 13; street 
(political), 106, 107—109, 111—115, 12 °> 



INDEX 



287 



true v. false, 109-1 10; women as, 109— 

1 10; on year 1588, 108-109, 111. See 

also Visionaries 
Protectorate of Natives. See Indian 

Inquisition 
Provisorato del ordinario. See Indian 

Inquisition 
Psalms, 188-189, 191-195 
Pseudo-Methodius, 0,6 
Pulgar, Fernando del, lSq 
Purity statutes, 131, 132, 153 

Quetzalcoatl, 26 
Quevedo, Francisco de, i6j 
Quezada, Noemi, xi-xii, 37-57 
Quinerio Cisneros, Jose, 49, 51-52 
Quiroga, Gaspar de, 112, 1 13 

Rangel, Agustina, 49-50, 51 
Rangel, Rodrigo, 29 
Recogimiento, 94 

Remesal, Friar Antonio de, 33-34 m lB 

Revah, L S., 135, 140, 179—180 

Ricard, Robert, 25 

Rivera, Manuela, 41 

Rodriguez, Sebastian, 2 14 

Rosary, conjurations to, 60, 63-64, 65 

Roxas, Jose de, 49 

Saba, Rabbi, Abraham, 180—181 

Saint Ignatius Loyola, xii, 99 

Saint Isidore of Seville, 96 

Saint Thomas (the lost apostle), 2fi 

Salt, conjurations to, 60, 65-66 

Salzedo, Juan de, 181 . 1 88 

Sanchez de Munon, Sancho, 14 

Sanchez de Vercial, Clemente, 1 10 

Sanchez Ortega, Maria Helena, xii, 58-92 

Sanchez Rivero, Angel, 169-170 

San Onofre, 6i_, 77, 78 

San Silvestre, 61 , 77 

Santa Elena, 6x, 67, 77, 78 

Santa Marta, 61, 66, 67, 77, 78, 84-85 

Santarem, Maria de, 8q 

Santa Teresa, 95 

Santo Domingo, Sor Maria de, xii, 93—94, 

95- 97- 9 8 ~99- 
Santo Nino. See Holy Child of La Guardia 

legend 



Santos, Roque de los, 41 
San Vicente, Fray Juan de, 107 
Saraiva, Henrique, 153 
Saraiva, Joao Nunes, 153 
Saravia, Ramon, 154 
Sarmiento, Domingo F., 172 
Savonarola, Girolamo, 107 
Scholberg, K. R., 134 
Scholes, France V., 214 
Schwartz, S., i_8o 
Sebastianism, 96 

Secular Inquisition. See Indian Inquisition 

Selke, Angela, 172-173 

Sephardic Jews, xiv, 134 

Sepiilveda, Jeronimo de, LL2 

Sicroff, Albert A., 132 

Silva, Jose de, 179 

Silverman, Joseph, xiii-xiv, 157-175 

Simancas, Diego de, 1 10 

Simon of Trent, 149-150, 155 

Sixtus IV, Pope, ix, 2_2_i 

Sorceresses, love magic of, 59—92; binding/ 
impotency spell of, 78—83; clients of, 
61. 62, 67—69; conjurations of, 60—69, 
70—76, 79-80; divinations of, 60, 62- 
63, 64, 65; emotions of, 61—62, 63, 66j 
as erotic, 60, 6jl 74, 79, 85J as extra- 
marital, 83J fire as symbol in, 6_Oj 65—66, 
73; frustrations of, 72J Inquisition on, 
xii, 58, 59, 62-63, 67J invoke demons, 
59, 60, 66-67, 70-7 1 , 72-73, 75, 76, 77; 
invoke Holy Trinity, 70; invoke saints, 
61. 76—78, 84—85; marriage as focus of, 
83, 84; mobility/restlessness of, 59—60; 
rosary used by, 60, 63—64, 65; sorcery 
of palms by, 64-65; spell of knots of, 
83; use menstrual blood and semen, 
81-82 

Spirituality, 93-104; female, xii, 98-99. See 

also Visionaries 
Sprcngcr, Jakob, 1 in 
Stevens, Wallace, 173 
Stigmata, 105, 1 18, 1 lq 
Superstition. See Magic 
Suprema, ix, 115 
Swetschinski, D., 134 

Tavera, Juan, 35 n. 25 
Teixeira, Diogo, 194 



288 



INDEX 



Tello de Sandoval, Francisco, 5, 31 
Teradyon, Hanina ben, 179 
Texeda, Isabel de, 95, lqj 
Tiburcia, Maria, 47 
Tinoco, Isabel, 210 
Torquemada, Gen. Tomas de, 150 
Torrejoncillo, Fray Francisco de, 153 
Treasure, magic to find, 58 
Trevifio de Sobremonte, Tomas, 203 

nn. 29,30 
Tribunal of the Faith of Indians. See 

Indian Inquisition 
Tribunal of the Holy Office. See 

Inquisition 
Trujillo, Fernando de, 201 n. 14 

Unamuno, Miguel de, 169, 171 

Vaez Sevilla, Simon, 209 

Valencia, Friar Martin de, 10, 28, 29, 33— 

34 vl 18 
Vargas, Diego de, 215 
Vega, Lope de, xiii, 152-153, 157, 162- 

163, 164, 165 

Vegas, Licenciado, 148, 151—152 

Vicarage of the Indians. See Indian 
Inquisition 

Vigil, Jose Maria, 24 

Villegas, Alonso de, 1 l8 

Visionaries, 93—104; affective spirituality 
of, ggj challenge Church, 94J Domini- 
cans on, 93-94; eschatology of, 97—101; 
influence of, 99—100; Inquisition on, 
xii, 94—96, 99, 100; interpret scripture, 



g8— 99; knowledge of/communicate with 
God, 93, 95, 98; literacy/education of, 
98, 100-101 ; on monarchy, 94, 95, 99; 
mysticism of, 100; trances/swoons of, 
99—100; women as, xii, 95, g8— 100. See 
also Prophets/prophecies 
Visitaci6n, Sor Maria de la, 105, 108, 1 18— 

119 

Vitores, Diego de, 1 15-1 16 

Witches/witchcraft: execution of, 1 47, 154; 
Inquisition on, 39, 87 n. i_, 146, 147, 
153— 154; Jews accused of, 152, 153— 

154 

Women: Church on role of, 100; Devil 
tempts, 146; preserve Jewish traditions, 
179—180, 189, 196—197, 205 n- 64; as 
prophets, 109-1 10; spirituality of, xii, 
98—99; as visionaries, xii, 95, 98— 100. 
See also Sorceresses 

Ximenez de Cisneros, Cardinal, xii, 93, 94, 

97, 99-100 
Xuetes, 191. See also Conversos 

Yerushalmi, Y. fcL, 179 
Yom Kippur, 2 1 1 

Zabaleta, Juan de, l6j 
Zahalon, Rabbi Yom Tob, 180 
Zumarraga, Fray Juan de, 3, 5, 10, 14, 15, 
250, 251; as inquisitor, 1 1—12, 13, 29- 

3!>39 



Publications of the 

UCLA CENTER FOR MEDIEVAL AND RENAISSANCE STUDIES 



1. Jeffrey Burton Russell, Dissent and Reform in the Early Middle Ages (1965) 

2. C. D. O'Malley, ed., Leonardo's Legacy: An International Symposium ( 1968) 

3. Richard H. Rouse, Serial Bibliographies for Medieval Studies (1969) 

4. Speros Vryonis, Jr., The Decline of Medieval Helenism in Asia Minor and the Pro- 
cess of Islamization from the Eleventh through the Fifteenth Century (1971) 

5. Stanley Chodorow, Christian Political Theory and Church Politics in the Mid- 
Twelfth Century: The Ecclesiology of Gratian's Decretum (1972) 

6. Joseph J . Duggan, The Song of Roland: Formulaic Style and Poetic Craft (1973) 

7. Ernest A. Moody, Studies in Medieval Philosophy, Science, and Logic: Collected 
Papers 1933-1969 (1975) 

8. Marc Bloch, Slavery and Serfdom in the Middle Ages: Selected Essays (1975) 

9. Michael J. B. Allen, Marsilio Ficino: The Philebus Commentary, A Critical Edition 
and Translation (1975) 

10. Richard C. Dales, Marius: On the Elements, A Critical Edition and Translation 

(1976) 

1 1 . Duane J. Osheim, An Italian Lordship: The Bishopric of Lucca in the Late Middle 
A g es (1977) 

12. Robert Somerville, Pope Alexander III and the Council of Tours (1163): A Study 
of Ecclesiastical Politics and Institutions in the Twelfth Century (1977) 

13. Lynn White, jr., Medieval Religion and Technology: Collected Essays (1978) 

14. Michael J. B. Allen, Marsilio Ficino and the Phaedran Charioteer: Introduction, 
Texts, Translations (1981) 

15. Barnabas Bernard Hughes, O.F.M., Jordanus de Nemore: De numeris datis, A 
Critical Edition and Translation ( 1 98 1 ) 

16. Caroline Walker Rynum, J esus as Mother: Studies in the Spirituality of the High 
Middle Ages (1982) 

17. Carlo M. Cipolla, The Monetary Policy of Fourteenth-Century Florence (1983) 

18. John H. Van Engen, Rupert of Deutz (1983) 

ig. Thomas K. Keefe, Feudal Assessments and the Political Community under Henry 
II and His Sons (1983) 

20. John C. Shideler, A Medieval Catalan Noble Family: The Montcadas, 1000-1230 
(1984) 

21. Michael J. B. Allen, The Platonism of Marsilio Ficino: A Study of His Phaedrus 
Commentary, Its Sources and Genesis ( 1 984) 

22. Barbara McClung Hallman, Italian Cardinals, Reform, and the Church as Prop- 
erty, 1492-1563 (1985) 

23. Stephen L. Wailes, Medieval Allegories of Jesus' Parables (1987) 

24. Mary Elizabeth Perry and Anne J. Cruz, Cultural Encounters: The Impact of 
the Inquisition in Spain and the New World (1991) 



Designer: U.C. Press Staff 

Compositor: Prestige Typography 

Text: 10/12 Baskerville 

Display: Baskerville 

Printer: Braun-Brumfield, Inc. 

Binder: Braun-Brumfield, Inc. 



Mary Elizabeth Perry, Research As- 
sociate with the Center for Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies of the Uni- 
versity of California, Los Angeles, is 
Adjunct Professor of History at Occi- 
dental College. A specialist on the 
social history of Spain, she wrote 
Crime and Society in Early Modern 
Seville (University Press of New Eng- 
land, 1980) and, most recently, Gender 
and Disorder in Early Modern Seville 
(Princeton, 1990). 

Anne J. Cruz is Associate Professor of 
Spanish at the University of California, 
Irvine, where she teaches Spanish and 
comparative literature. She is the au- 
thor of Imitation y transformation: El 
petrarquismo en la poesia de Boscdn y 
Gartilaso de la Vega (John Benjamins, 
1988), and coedited Renaissance Re- 
readings: Intertext and Context (Uni- 
versity of Illinois, 1988). 



No. 24, Publications of the Center for Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 



Jacket design: Carrington Design 



Of related interest 

INQUISITION AND SOCIETY IN THE 
KINGDOM OF VALENCIA, 1478-1834 

Stephen Haliczer 

THE LAST JEWS ON IBERIAN SOIL 
Navarrese Jewry 1479-1498 

Benjamin R. Gampel 

THE MUSLIMS OF VALENCIA IN THE 
AGE OF FERNANDO AND ISABEL 
Between Coexistence and Crusade 

Mark D. Meyerson 





UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
Berkeley 94720 



