Searching for Stability: 

The U.S. Development of Constabulary 
Forces In Latin America and the Philippines 


Dr. Richard L. Millett 




Occasional Paper 30 


rr^ 


<*■ 


0* 


Combat Studies Institute Press 

US Army Combined Arms Center 
Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 
















Report Documentation Page 

Form Approved 

OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for the collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and 
maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, 
including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington 

VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it 
does not display a currently valid OMB control number. 

1. REPORT DATE 

2Q jq 2. REPORT TYPE 

3. DATES COVERED 

00-00-2010 to 00-00-2010 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Searching for Stability: The U.S. Development of Constabulary Forces in 
Latin America and the Philippines 

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

6. AUTHOR(S) 

5d. PROTECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S. Army Combined Arms Center,Combat Studies Institute,Fort 
Leavenworth,KS,66027 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

REPORT NUMBER 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

14. ABSTRACT 

15. SUBIECT TERMS 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 17. LIMITATION OF 

___ ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF 

OF PAGES RESPONSIBLE PERSON 

a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE Same OS 

unclassified unclassified unclassified Report (SAR) 

154 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std Z39-18 





The cover photograph is of the First Company of the Filipino Constabulary, Province of 
Pampanga, Island of Luzon, Philippines, circa 30 December 1909, Library of Congress Prints 
and Photographs Division, Washington, DC, lot 12607-2. 


Searching for Stability: 

The U.S. Development of Constabulary 
Forces in Latin America and the 
Philippines 


Dr. Richard L. Millett 


Occasional Paper 30 



Combat Studies Institute Press 
US Army Combined Arms Center 
Fort Leavenworth, Kansas 






Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Millett, Richard, 1938- 

Searching for stability : the U.S. development of constabulary forces in 
Latin America and the Philippines / Richard L. Millett. 

p. cm. — (Occasional paper / Combat Studies Institute ; 30) 

Includes bibliographical references. 

1. Police training—Caribbean Area—History—20th century. 2. Police 
training—Philippines—History—20th century. 3. Police—Philippines— 
History—20th century. 4. Police—Caribbean Area—History—20th century. 
5. Military assistance, American—Caribbean Area—History—20th 
century. 6. Military assistance, American—Philippines—History—20th 
century. 7. United States. Armed Forces—Stability operations—History— 
20th century. I. Title. II. Series. 

HV8170.A2M557 2010 
363.209729-dc22 


2010007718 


First printing: 2010 


CSI Press publications cover a variety of military history topics. 
The views expressed in this CSI Press publication are those of 
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the Department of the 
Army, or the Department of Defense. A full list of CSI Press 
publications, many of them available for downloading, can be 
found at: http://usacac.army.miPCAC2/CSPRandPTeam.asp 

The seal of the Combat Studies Institute authenticates this 
document as an official publication of the CSI. It is prohibited to use CSI’s 
official seal on any republication of this material without the expressed written 
permission of the Director of CSI. 




Foreword 


The Combat Studies Institute is pleased to present Occasional Paper 30, 
Searching for Stability: The US Development of Constabulary Forces in 
Latin America and the Philippines, by Dr. Richard L. Millett. In this study, 
Dr. Millett offers a survey of U.S. military involvement in the training of 
indigenous security forces in the Philippines and the Caribbean Basin in 
the 20th century. Given the dramatic increase of these types of efforts in 
Iraq, Afghanistan, and other countries, this study provides relevant insights 
for current military professionals facing the daunting challenges that are 
inherent to the training and advising of foreign police and military forces. 

Dr. Millett’s succinct analysis highlights several critical themes com¬ 
mon to the American experience in these types of missions. First and fore¬ 
most, despite all the best attempts to involve other departments of the fed¬ 
eral government, the U.S. military has historically served as the lead, and 
often the sole, U.S. agency in these efforts. This fact often translated into 
constabulary training programs that suffered from a lack of both guidance 
and resources. Put simply, the relatively few Soldiers and Marines work¬ 
ing on these efforts - many of whom were relatively junior in ra nk - were 
forced to make important military and political decisions that had critical 
effects on the host nation as well as on U.S. foreign policy. Additionally, 
this study emphasizes the traditional strains between U.S. goals and host 
nation desires, tensions that were often exacerbated by U.S. personnel who 
knew little or nothing about the culture in which they were working and 
had no ability to speak the language of those they were training. Dr. Mil¬ 
lett suggests that these problems contributed to the important but flawed 
assumption among both U.S. policymakers and American military officers 
that indigenous forces trained by the U.S. military would behave like the 
U.S. military. Unfortunately, rather than becoming the professional secu¬ 
rity forces that served stable representative governments, these constabu¬ 
laries often became tools of unsteady repressive regimes. 

Given the geopolitical challenges facing the United States in the early 
21st Century and the Department of Defense’s focus on creating a military 
that can conduct stability operations in a variety of countries, the mission 
to train and advise foreign security forces is unlikely to disappear any time 
soon. This study offers an important set of insights from the past that can 


contribute to a sharper understanding about the challenges of building and 
advising these forces in the future. CSI - The Past Is Prologue! 


Dr. William G. Robertson 
Director, Combat Studies Institute 


IV 



Map 1. The Philippine Archipelago. 







VI 


Map 2. The Caribbean Basin in the 20th Century. 









Contents 


Foreword.iii 

Maps.v 

Chapter 1. Introduction.1 

Chapter 2. The Philippines: Becoming a colonial Power.7 

Chapter 3. Cuba: Large Problems, Limited Influence.17 

Chapter 4. Panama: More Issues than Running a Canal.31 

Chapter 5. Haiti: Prejudice and Poverty.47 

Chapter 6. Dominican Republic: 

An Unintended Foundation for Tyranny.77 

Chapter 7. Nicaragua: Limited Success and costly Failures.97 

Chapter 8. Conclusion.123 

Bibliography.133 

About the Author.143 


vii 















Chapter 1 
Introduction 

There is remarkably little literature available on American efforts to 
create and train security forces in other nations. Only a few studies focus¬ 
ing on specific cases are available, many published by the US Army. The 
topic is included but rarely emphasized in studies of American interven¬ 
tions. There is no broad-based study examining the American experience 
in several different nations and no literature, at least in English, compar¬ 
ing the American military experience with that of other nations such as 
the United Kingdom, France, or the Soviet Union. Flopefiilly, this volume 
will begin to fill in some of these gaps and will inspire others to examine 
the prospects and pitfalls of such projects and the limits of influence that 
constrain all such efforts. 

Prior to 1898, the United States had little experience in creating 
military or police forces in other nations. In addition, we had virtually no 
experience with constabulary-type forces of our own, in part because posse 
comitatus seemed to forbid this combination of military and internal police 
functions. The closest parallel may have been the creation of various units 
among the Native Americans such as Apache Scouts and Reservation Po¬ 
lice. In the last third of the nineteenth century, Reservation Police were a 
major project of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, in part because of pressures 
to replace the military in policing reservations. The squads received very 
little training from the Army or from anyone else. 1 

The Spanish-American War of 1898 and the decision to construct a ca¬ 
nal through Panama a few years later dramatically changed the American 
interest in creating and training constabularies. The United States found 
itself responsible for internal security in the Philippines and Cuba and for 
maintaining security in the new nation of Panama. In short order, Haiti, the 
Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua became virtual protectorates of the 
United States. Chronic instability in Central America and on the island of 
Hispaniola (shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic) had previously 
been of little concern in Washington, DC, but the proliferation of American 
territories and bases in the region combined with the opening of the Pan¬ 
ama Canal suddenly made stability in this region a major policy concern. 2 

For a variety of reasons the United States found it difficult to acknowl¬ 
edge that it had become a colonial power. As a result, no Colonial Office 
or service was ever created, no body of civilian specialists put together to 
manage these new responsibilities. This even applied to the establishment 


1 


of Customs Receiverships in various nations. Responsibility was given to 
the War and Navy Departments who administered most of the territories as 
well as running operations in the protectorates. War Department responsi¬ 
bilities were centered in the Bureau of Insular Affairs which was created 
in 1898 and, at one point or another, had administrative jurisdiction over 
Puerto Rico, the Philippines, the first and second military governments in 
Cuba, and Customs Receiverships in Haiti and the Dominican Republic. 3 
The Navy ran the Virgin Islands until 1931, Guam until 1950, and Ameri¬ 
can Samoa until 1951. Government in the Canal Zone was a matter of 
prolonged controversy, but for most of its existence the Governor was an 
active-duty Army officer. 4 

Shortly after the Spanish-American War another development impact¬ 
ed American operations in the new territories and protectorates. That was 
the rapid development of wireless radio. This gave Washington the oppor¬ 
tunity to exercise much closer supervision over operations in the field and 
also gave newspapers and other media increased opportunities to report on 
developments. The independent authority of those operating in the field 
was reduced and the potential for friction between those who made policies 
and those charged with their enactment increased. 

Adapting US policies to this changed environment proved difficult and 
controversial. One reflection of this was the creation of the “Roosevelt 
Corollary” to the Monroe Doctrine, included in President Theodore Roos¬ 
evelt’s 1905 State of the Union Message. Roosevelt declared: 

It is always possible that wrong actions toward this Nation 
or toward citizens of this nation, in some State unable to 
keep order among its own people, unable to secure justice 
for outsiders, and unwilling to do justice to those outsiders 
who treat it well, may result in our having to take action to 
protect our rights; but such action will not be taken with 
a view to territorial aggression, and it will be taken if at 
all only with extreme reluctance and when it has become 
evident that every other resource has been exhausted. 5 

While never legally binding, the Corollary would be cited and expand¬ 
ed by subsequent administrations. In November 1915, Woodrow Wilson’s 
Secretary of State, Robert Lansing, wrote: 

The United States should expand the application of the 
Monroe Doctrine and declare as a definite Caribbean pol¬ 
icy that, while it does not seek domination over the terri¬ 
tory of any of these republics, it is necessary for the na- 


2 


tional safety of the United States, and particularly in view 
of its interests on the isthmus of Panama, that it aid the 
people of those republics in establishing and maintaining 
honest and responsible governments to such extent as may 
be necessary in each particular case. 6 

This justification for interventions, past and present, brought the 
United States directly into what would much later be described as “nation 
building.” The development of security forces would be a vital part of this 
mission. Dr. Dana Gardner Munro, who held several key State Department 
posts in Central America and the Caribbean during the 1920s and 30s, re¬ 
called: 

The establishment of nonpartisan constabularies in the Ca¬ 
ribbean states was one of the chief objectives of our policy 
from the time it became clear that the customs collector- 
ships wouldn’t assure stability by themselves. The old 
armies were or seemed to be one of the principal causes 
of disorder and financial disorganization. They consumed 
most of the government’s revenue, chiefly in graft, and 
they gave nothing but disorder and oppression in return. 

We thought that a disciplined force, trained by Americans, 
would do away with the petty local oppression that was 
responsible for much of the disorder that occurred and 
would be an important step toward better financial admin¬ 
istration and economic progress generally. 7 

Other aspects of these nation-building efforts would include govern¬ 
ment reorganization, election supervision, road building, improved health 
and sanitation, and judicial reform. In most of these projects the newly 
created security forces became involved. Once American tutelage ended 
these forces usually proved reluctant to give up their expanded roles. The 
combination of military and police functions in a single body also made the 
new constabularies a potentially powerful political force in their own right. 

Beginning in 1899 in the Philippines, the American assumption of 
responsibility for internal security brought the United States into direct 
involvement in prolonged civil conflicts, first there and later in Haiti, the 
Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua. In each case the desire to reduce 
American casualties and extricate forces made the creation of native troops 
an increasingly urgent priority. 8 In the process, the original emphasis on us¬ 
ing these forces for policing functions was reduced and increased emphasis 
given to military capabilities. In every case, Americans, usually military on 
active duty, not only undertook training, but filled some, if not all, of the 

3 


positions as officers in the field. The military was now involved in polic¬ 
ing, sanitation, internal communications, and sometimes even in exercising 
judicial authority over civilian populations. All this was done with severely 
constrained resources, little doctrinal preparation or guidance, limited if 
not nonexistent language skills, and in the context of prevailing racial, cul¬ 
tural, and religious prejudices. The task proved to be a formidable one. 

Relations with domestic political forces varied widely over time and 
place. There was rarely any genuine interest in the creation of a profession¬ 
al, nonpartisan force that would not serve largely the interests of whatever 
faction was in power. There were also issues of national sovereignty and 
not wanting to cede control over the forces responsible for maintaining or¬ 
der and defending sovereignty to a foreign power. At the same time, those 
in power were not unhappy to have a more powerful and capable force 
with which to confront revolutionary outbreaks. Central governments also 
saw such forces as a means of breaking the power of regional strongmen. 

Events in the wider world impinged on these efforts. Resources in the 
Philippines were strained by the diversion of troops to China during the 
Boxer Rebellion and later by the coming of war with Japan. World War I 
had a major impact, especially in Haiti and the Dominican Republic, drain¬ 
ing men and supplies, diverting the attention of Washington, and creating a 
new dimension of internal security concerns where there was a significant 
German presence. Japanese attacks in Manchuria caused Secretary of State 
Henry Stimson to accelerate the pace of American withdrawal from Haiti 
and Nicaragua so as to strengthen the moral case for opposition to Japanese 
intervention. The Great Depression also made Washington anxious to cut 
costs and conserve the resources connected with the interventions. 

Finally, domestic politics were frequently a disruptive factor. Changes 
in administrations brought changes in policy objectives and methods. Con¬ 
gressional investigations, especially in the Philippines and Haiti, both di¬ 
verted attention and forced operational changes. A vocal minority in both 
Congress and the press kept up a barrage of criticism and negative public¬ 
ity. Intervention policies were an issue in several elections, most notably in 
1912 and 1920. Political decisions led to turnover of newly created forces 
to national command much sooner than many in the military thought wise 
or prudent. 

Under these circumstances, what is perhaps surprising is not the array 
of problems that confronted efforts to develop these forces, but the surpris¬ 
ing degree of at least short-term success of most of these efforts. Relative 
peace, if not democratic government, was restored, transfers to national 
authorities completed, and in the short run, US influence, if not control, 
4 


largely maintained. Longer-range results would be much less favorable, 
but this was something those charged with creating the new security forces 
could neither envision nor control. The basic question in every case was 
the same: would the price of the stability achieved ultimately prove too 
high? 


5 


Notes 


1. For details on the training of Reservation Police, see Michael Lynn 
Barker, “American Indian Tribal Police: An Overview and a Case Study” (Ph.D. 
dissertation. State University of New York-Albany, 1994), 44-60. Remarkably 
little has been published on this subject. 

2. The United States established military bases in Puerto Rico, at both ends 
of the Canal Zone in Panama, at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba, and in the Virgin 
Islands. In addition, interest was occasionally expressed in acquiring additional 
bases in Hispaniola and in the Gulf of Fonseca between Nicaragua and Honduras. 

3. Records ofthe Bureau of Insular Affairs, RG 350,1868-1945, http:// 
www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-record groups/350.html. For a history of 
the War Department’s Bureau of Insular Affairs, see Earl S. Pomeroy, “America’s 
Colonial Office,” The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 30 (March 1944), 
521-532. 

4. For details on this see John Major, Prize Possession: The United States 
and the Panama Canal, 1903-1979 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993), 69-77. 

5. Text included in Dexter Perkins, A History of the Monroe Doctrine 
(Revised edition) (Boston, MA: Little Brown & Co., 1955), 228-229. Perkins 
goes on to discuss how this Corollary led to repeated interventions. 

6. “Memorandum by Secretary of State Robert Lansing for President 
Woodrow Wilson, November 24, 1915,” Papers Relating to the Foreign Affairs 
of the United States: The Lansing Papers, Vol. II (Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1940), 466. 

7. Letter from Dr. Dana Gardner Munro to author, 14 February 1965. 

8. For details on these conflicts, see Lester Langley, The Banana Wars: An 
Inner History of American Empire, 1900-1934 (Lexington, KY: The University 
Press of Kentucky, 1983); Max Boot, The Savage Wars of Peace: Small Wars and 
the Rise of American Power (New York, NY: Basic Books, 2002). 


6 


Chapter 2 

The Philippines: Becoming a Colonial Power 

The Philippines were America’s first, and perhaps most successful ex¬ 
perience, in organizing foreign constabulary forces. The key was the total 
control the United States, as the ruling colonial power, had over the islands 
and the expectation that such control would continue for an indefinite pe¬ 
riod. These conditions would not be replicated in later experiences in the 
Caribbean, but American officials repeatedly cited the Philippine experi¬ 
ence as both a justification of and a model for these later efforts and as an 
example of a successful counterinsurgency. Officers with experience in the 
Philippines were frequently called on for service in subsequent constabu¬ 
lary-creating efforts, most notably in Nicaragua in 1924. This makes the 
history of the Philippine Constabulary both relevant and informative when 
evaluating subsequent efforts. 

The American takeover of the Philippines from Spain had proved 
surprisingly easy. Gaining effective control over this vast archipelago, 
however, would prove much more difficult. At first Washington seemed un¬ 
sure about what to do with this territory. President McKinley told a group 
of Methodists that he was compelled to seek divine guidance as to what 
course to pursue. After fervent prayer he determined that America had an 
obligation “to educate the Filipinos and uplift and Christianize them.” 1 He 
hoped that this could be done peacefully and that the Filipinos would come 
to understand that we had their good interests at heart. This hope was to 
prove tragically misplaced. 

Besides the newly arrived American forces and the remnants of Span¬ 
ish colonial units, there were two other armed groups active in the Phil¬ 
ippines. One was armed Muslims in the south, notably on Samar and 
Mindanao. More numerous and better organized and armed was a revolu¬ 
tionary army led by Emilio Aguinaldo. He had already begun organizing 
a government and had large forces near Manila. His initial hopes that the 
Americans would support an independent government were soon dashed 
and tensions steadily increased. 2 Fighting broke out in early 1899 and the 
resultant conflict was prolonged and costly. Over 122,000 American mili¬ 
tary personnel were ultimately sent to the Philippines, although average 
monthly strength for the two and a half years of official combat averaged 
only forty thousand. More American troops were killed in action in putting 
down what was termed the Philippine Insurrection than were lost in the 
Spanish-American War. 3 


7 


On 4 July 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt proclaimed the 
Insurrection at an end, but fighting continued, especially against the Mus¬ 
lim insurgents known as Moros, for several more years. 4 Indeed the last 
organized Moro resistance did not end until 1916. The fighting strained 
the Army’s resources, generated considerable controversy at home, and 
produced numerous accounts of alleged Army atrocities. 5 An additional 
complicating factor was the need to dispatch American troops from the 
Philippines to China to help put down the Boxer Rebellion. General Arthur 
MacArthur, the Army’s commander in the Philippines, constantly resisted 
Washington’s demands that he dispatch units, complaining that, as a result, 
his forces had “been decimated to limit of safety.” 6 

The Army was also reluctant to take on policing duties throughout the 
Islands. Under the Spanish these had largely been left to the Guardia Civil, 
which, according to one source, was “regarded with detestation and terror 
by the people.” 7 A municipal police, under close American control, was 
soon organized for Manila, but the rest of the country had little in the way 
of law enforcement. Further complicating the issue was the domination 
of most courts by local elites and the multitude of languages and dialects 
spoken throughout the archipelago. 

All of these factors combined to make it imperative to raise native 
forces to assist in and eventually take over both the fighting and basic po¬ 
lice duties. Taking advantage of local feuds, the Americans had quickly 
recruited groups of local auxiliaries, some of whom proved quite effec¬ 
tive. But, stronger, more disciplined forces were needed. Ultimately, the 
decision was reached to create two separate units, one of which would be 
incorporated within the American military structure, while the other would 
be a national militarized police force. These would become the Philippine 
Scouts and the Philippine Constabulary. 

The Scouts began on 10 September 1899 with the recruitment of 100 
soldiers, from the minority Macabebes. Commanded by First Lieutenant 
Matthew Betson of the US Army, they performed so well that four more 
companies were formed in October. Other minority populations were later 
recruited, but for years there were no units from the majority Tagalog pop¬ 
ulation due to American distrust and fears of their ties to the insurgents. 8 
Reliance on the Scouts increased constantly and, by June 1901, there were 
5,400 of them serving with the American Army. 9 

Ultimately, the Scouts became part of the American Army, forming 
the heart of the “Philippine Division.” Their budget was provided by the 
United States, but enlisted men drew a significantly smaller pay than their 
American counteiparts. At first, all officers were American, but slowly Fil- 


ipinos took over the field grade officer positions. Higher posts remained 
in American hands. In one important aspect the Scouts, and later the Con¬ 
stabulary, differed from European colonial armies. They were specifically 
prohibited from serving outside the Philippines. 

As time passed, combat increasingly was taken over by Scout units, 
especially on Samar. In 1904, at the start of the fighting, there were twelve 
American Army companies and six Scout companies there. Three years 
later, there were eighteen Scout companies and only two American. 10 The 
growing reliance on the Scouts had the additional advantage of reducing 
American casualties and, consequently, some of the criticism of our oc¬ 
cupation of the Islands. 

The Scouts role in combat left the task of policing the countryside still 
unfilled. Expanding the Scouts would have also expanded the cost to the 
US budget, something that Washington wanted to avoid. However, some 
Army officers argued for Scout expansion, not wanting to see any armed 
force in the Islands outside of their control. In addition, the Army had 
undertaken the informal recruiting of local auxiliaries, often taking advan¬ 
tage of local ethnic and religious rivalries. While justified as a necessity at 
the height of combat these “unsavory allies” all too often were “motivated 
by revenge, tribal vendettas, or just bad character.” 11 Another force was 
needed to undertake policing duties, and maintain control in rural areas 
while coming under closer American control. Governor William Howard 
Taft decided that the civil, not the military authority must control such a 
force and on 1 August 1901 the Philippine Commission issued Act 175 
which created an independent Philippine Constabulary. 12 In October, in a 
report to the Secretary of War, the Philippine Commission outlined their 
plan: 

To create an insular force of not exceeding one hundred 
and fifty men for each province, selected from the na¬ 
tives thereof, who may be mounted in whole or part, and 
who are placed under the command of one or more, not 
exceeding four, provincial inspectors. The whole body 
is placed under the control of a chief and four assistant 
chiefs of constabulary. . . . Full powers are given to prop¬ 
erly arm, equip, maintain and discipline the force, which 
is enlisted for two years, unless sooner discharged. They 
are declared to be peace officers and it is their special 
duty to prevent and suppress brigandage, insurrection, 
unlawful assemblies, and breaches of the peace. For this 
purpose they are given authority to make arrests, but are 


9 


required at the earliest possible moment to bring the pris¬ 
oner before a magistrate for examination. 13 

Providing officers was an immediate issue. The Army detailed only a 
few active duty officers to fill the most senior posts. The rest were drawn 
from a variety of sources. Some were American volunteers who had mus¬ 
tered out in the Philippines, others were regular Army non-commissioned 
officers who had been discharged, and a small number were Filipinos. 14 
These were a mixed lot. Some were drunks or had other character defects. 15 
Almost all the Americans were former enlisted men who had no experi¬ 
ence and were evidently given little training as officers. Enlisted personnel 
also came from various backgrounds, including some former members of 
the hated Guardia Civil. Despite budget limitations and the problems of 
finding suitable recruits, the force grew quickly, reaching over 2,000 men 
by early 1902. 

The Constabulary had a rocky beginning. They confronted the rem¬ 
nants of Aguinaldo’s revolutionary forces, fanatical Islamic insurgents, and 
organized banditry. While their opponents were well armed the Constabu¬ 
lary was at first given only light weapons, notably single shot Remington 
shotguns. This was in part because critics in the Army and in the civilian 
government feared they might desert, taking their weapons with them. 16 
Ultimately, this prejudice was overcome and more modem arms supplied, 
but only after some disastrous engagements. 

Poorly armed, ill-trained, and, at times, not well led, the new force at¬ 
tracted considerable criticism. One American critic, who served as a judge 
in the Philippines, charged that the Constabulary was “wholly inadequate . 

. . for the maintenance of public order,” and, as a result, “by 1903 brigand¬ 
age therein was thriving like a garden of weeds.” 17 Philippine Commission 
member Dean C. Worcester explained this: “The organization of a rural 
police force was imperatively necessary. Unfortunately, the most critical 
situation which it would be call upon to meet had to be faced at the very 
outset when both officers and men were inexperienced and before adequate 
discipline could be established.” 18 At first called the Insular Constabulary 
the title was soon changed to Philippine Constabulary. An intelligence unit, 
known as the Secret Service, was established within the force and eventu¬ 
ally became the major source of information not only on insurgents and 
criminals, but also on foreign citizens living in the islands. By 1909, they 
were furnishing the War Department a forty-three page summary of Japa¬ 
nese activities. 19 

There was significant early friction between the Constabulary and 
the Scouts, especially when they served near each other in conflicted ar- 
10 


eas. The Scouts looked down on the Constabulary as a markedly inferior 
force, while the Constabulary’s commander constantly sought to expand 
his force’s authority at the expense of the Scouts. 20 These disputes would 
continue on for several years. At the same time, it became increasingly 
common for Scout and Constabulary units to mount joint operations, most 
of which proved successful. During 1903, for example, there were 357 
hostile contacts by Constabulary units that claimed to have killed 1,185 
“outlaws,” and captured another 2,722 men. 21 By 1911, when the last or¬ 
ganized resistance ceased, the Constabulary claimed to have killed 4,862 
and captured 11,977 men. Constabulary losses totaled 11 officers and 197 
enlisted killed in action plus 48 officers and 991 men who died of disease. 22 

As time passed, the Constabulary’s capacity and reputation slowly 
improved. More and more Filipinos became officers, with some rising to 
the rank of Captain. Instruction was provided for potential officers and 
non-commissioned officers, but virtually all of it was conducted in Eng¬ 
lish that severely limited enrollment. The Army’s appreciation of the Con¬ 
stabulary’s contribution also rose. In part this may have been due to cost 
savings. A US Army enlisted man earned $1,400 a year, a member of the 
Constabulary only $363.50. In addition, Constabulary enlisted men drew 
only ten and a half cents a day for rations. 23 Of even greater importance, 
while almost all Scout expenses came out of the Army’s budget, only the 
salaries of the top seven or eight Constabulary officers did. 24 

The Constabulary also relieved the Army and the Scouts of most po¬ 
lice duty and took over the more isolated posts. Because they were largely 
recruited locally, they had a good knowledge of local terrain and politi¬ 
cal structures and could speak local languages. This gave them a great 
advantage not only as police, but also in counterinsurgency operations. 
As one American officer observed, “Catching Filipino outlaws with the 
Army is like catching a flea in a 20-acre field with a traction engine.” 25 The 
Constabulary’s reliance on local recruits and the consequent ties to local 
families gave them a great advantage over both US Army and Scout units 
in small, local engagements. When led by officers who knew how to take 
advantage of these traits they often proved highly efficient. 26 

As peace was slowly imposed, the Constabulary began to concentrate 
on its other duties. Principal among these were regular rural police func¬ 
tions. They also undertook training and supervision of existing municipal 
police forces. 27 On occasion they clashed with local politicians, especially 
in cases were corruption or other malfeasance in office was alleged. Get¬ 
ting such individuals convicted, especially in local courts, was always a 
major problem, but the Constabulary did have some success. 28 They were 


11 


never able, however, to break the power of local caciques nor end the pat¬ 
terns of abuse and corruption that would long continue to dominate many 
rural areas. 

As peace returned the Constabulary’s responsibilities steadily expand¬ 
ed into additional areas. While the fighting raged they had taken over the 
Army’s responsibility for the control and maintenance of telegraph and 
telephone lines. These were eventually given to the Bureau of Posts, but 
the Constabulary acquired other duties. Outside of the major cities they 
became the firemen as well as the police. They were involved in public 
health programs, administering vaccinations, teaching rudimentary sanita¬ 
tion, and, on occasion, providing limited medical care. They undertook 
the building and maintenance of rural roads, both to enhance security 
and economic development. When a natural disaster occurred, an all too 
frequent event in an archipelago subject to violent typhoons, volcanic 
eruptions, and earthquakes, they provided relief, prevented looting, and 
helped with reconstruction. 29 Their police duties included attempting to 
prevent smuggling (something which was almost a Philippine tradition) 
and dealing with rampant livestock theft. 30 Their efforts in the latter effort 
were more successful. 

As time passed, more and more Filipinos assumed the officer posts of 
the Constabulary. With the US entrance into World War I made the detail¬ 
ing of officers to the Islands even less desirable the process was essentially 
completed. A native Filipino, Brigadier General Rafael Crame, became the 
Constabulary’s commander. Fie continued in that post until his death in 
1927. 31 By then the Constabulary had grown to a total of 6,223 officers 
and men. 32 

The Constabulary continued to function as a national militarized 
police until the Japanese invasion in December 1941. Some Americans 
continued to question the loyalty of the Scouts and Constabulary, espe¬ 
cially after a near mutiny of the Scouts, largely over pay and related issues, 
in 1924. Plans for the Islands defense included the contingency of Scout 
and Constabulary defection, but fortunately there was never any occasion 
to put these into action. 33 

By the late 1930s American policy in the Philippines was complicated 
by two divergent trends. One was preparation of the Islands for their prom¬ 
ised Independence. In early 1933, Congress passed a bill over President 
Floover’s veto, promising independence within ten years. 34 The other fac¬ 
tor was the growing fear of war with Japan. General Douglas MacArthur 
was made a Field Marshall in the embryonic Philippine Army and set about 
trying to prepare a defense. He planned to create a national army with 
12 


one regular and thirty reserve divisions, but Depression economics and 
widespread opposition forced him to sharply curtail this project. Finding 
officers to train his reserves was a major issue. Fie had hoped to use the 
Philippine Scouts for this, but that proved largely impossible. Some of¬ 
ficers were detailed from the Constabulary, but most of these preferred 
police work to military training. 35 

Eventually, MacArthur decided to incorporate the Constabulary as a 
division to be mobilized in case of war. But they were never given any 
real training for combat, never participated in large scale maneuvers with 
other units, and were so scattered among the islands as to make effective 
mobilization virtually impossible. MacArthur’s plan to repel any attack 
on the beaches further insured that the Constabulary would never func¬ 
tion as a cohesive military unit. The ultimate result was predictable. Some 
Constabulary units did join up with the rest of MacArthur’s forces and 
retreated into the Bataan Peninsula where, along with the rest of the Phil¬ 
ippine Army, they were ultimately destroyed. The remaining units were 
included in the overall surrender signed by General Jonathan Wainwright 
on 6 May 1942. 

Some of the Constabulary formed or joined guerrilla units and con¬ 
tinued to resist the Japanese occupation, but the force, as a whole, ceased 
to exist from 1942 until early 1945. They were then recreated and merged 
with the Military Police Command. Placed first under the Ministry of the 
Interior, but soon transferred to the Defense Ministry, the restored Con¬ 
stabulary was considered as part of the Philippine Armed Forces. Their of¬ 
ficers graduated from the same Military Academy as regular army officers 
and it was not uncommon for officers to spend part of their career with both 
forces. 36 They played a major role in the fight against the Fluk insurgency 
in the 1950s and 60s. At the same time some of their policing and most 
of their auxiliary duties were reduced and a separate National Police was 
formed. In 1986, Constabulary Commander, Major General Fidel Ramos, 
was a pivotal figure in the uprising that ousted Ferdinand Marcos from the 
Presidency and restored democratic rule to the Philippines. 37 Five years 
later, the Constabulary was merged with the National Police, ending its 
history as a separate force. 

The Constabulary had performed reasonably well throughout most of 
its career. Its reputation was further enhanced by its role in the fall of Mar¬ 
cos. One key was the relatively swift and smooth transition to a national 
officer corps. Another was the fact that, while it performed some military 
functions, principle responsibilities in this area always rested with other 
forces. Finally, its early years were shaped by an American colonial admin- 


13 


istration that had an indefinite mandate. Efforts to apply the principles of 
the Philippine Constabulary in other nations would encounter fundamen¬ 
tally different conditions. 


14 


Notes 


1. Quoted in Stuart Creighton Miller, Benevolent Assimilation: The American 
Conquest of the Philippines, 1899-1903 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1982), 24. 

2. For a description of the situation see John Morgan Gates, Schoolbooks 
and Krags: The United States Army in the Philippines, 1898-1902 (Westport, CT: 
Greenwood Press, 1973), 13-33. 

3. Exact casualty figures vary somewhat depending on what is included in 
the “Insurrection.” The New York Times reported in 1918 that 741 were killed and 
another 225 later dies of wounds while 2,701 died of disease. “Our Casualties in 
Other Wars,” The New York Times, 1 January 1918, 44. 

4. There are numerous excellent accounts of the fighting in the Philippines. 
See, for example, Brian M. Linn, The Philippine War, 1899-1902 (Lawrence, KS: 
University of Kansas Press, 2000); Robert D. Ramsey III, Savage Wars of Peace: 
Case Studies of Pacification in the Philippines, 1900-1902 , The Long War Series 
Occasional Paper 24 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: The Combat Studies Institute Press, 
2008). 

5. For details on the US Army and Moro resistance, see Miller, Benevolent 
Assimilation. 

6. Arthur MacArthur to Adjutant General, received 16 June 1900, 
Correspondence Relating to the War with Spain Including the Insurrection in the 
Philippines and the China Relief Expedition, May 15, 1898 to July 30, 1902, Vol. 
I (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1903), 412. 

7. Dean C. Worcester, The Philippines: Past and Present, Vol. I (Whitefish, 
MT: Kessinger Publishing Company, 2004), 378-379. Worcester had as much 
experience in the Philippines as any American, serving on the two initial presidential 
Commissions sent to recommend policies for the Islands’ government, then 
remaining for years as a senior official in the US administration of the Philippines. 

8. Arnaldo Dumindin, “Philippine-American War, 1899-1902,” http:// 
www.freewebs.com/philippineamericanwar/thewarragesl899.htm. This study, 
written in 2006, seems only available on the web. 

9. Gates, 213. 

10. Brian McAllister Linn, Guardians of Empire: The U.S. Army and the 
Pacific, 1902-1940 (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1997), 
48. 

11. Brian McAllister Linn, “The U.S. Army and Nation Building and 
Pacification in the Philippines,” in Armed Diplomacy: Two Centuries of American 
Campaigning (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2004), 87. 

12. Lieutenant Colonel Richard W. Smith, “Philippine Constabulary,” 
Military Review (May 1968), 74. 

13. Quoted in W. Cameron Forbes, The Philippine Islands (Millwood, NY: 
Kraus Reprint Company, 1976), 105. 

14. Worcester, Vol. I, 381; Linn, Guardians of Empire, 19. 

15. Smith, 74. 


15 


16. Ibid. 

17. James H. Blount, The American Occupation of the Philippines, 1898- 
1912 (New York, NY: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1913), 403-404. 

18. Worcester, Vol. I, 380-381. 

19. Linn, Guardians of Empire, 107. 

20. Ibid., 19. 

21. Smith, 77. 

22. Worcester, Vol. I, 398. 

23. Ibid., 386-387. 

24. Forbes, 118. 

25. Quoted in Worcester, Vol. I, 385. 

26. For one officer’s account of duty with the Constabulary, see John R. White, 
Bullets and Bolos: Fifteen Years in the Philippine Islands Fighting Insurgents with 
the Philippine Constabulary (New York, NY: The Century Company, 1928). 

27. Forbes, 108. 

28. Smith, 79. 

29. Worcester, Vol. I, 397-398. 

30. Smith, 80. 

31. Ramon J. Farolan, “Reveille: Anecdotes from the life of a constable,” 
Philippine Daily Inquirer, 22 June 2009, http://opinion.inquirer.net/ 
inquireropinion/columns/view/20090622-211740/Anecdotes-from-the-life-of-a- 
constable. 

32. Forbes, 118. 

33. Lind, Guardians of Empire, 148 and 158. 

34. Stanley Karnow, America s Empire in the Philippines (New York, NY: 
Random House, 1989), 254. 

35. Glen D. Gaddy, “MacArthur’s Development of the Philippine Army and 
the Defense of the Islands, 1935-1942” (M.A. thesis, Southern Illinois University- 
Edwardsville, 1974), 55. 

36. Farolan. 

37. Karnow, 416-422. 


16 


Chapter 3 

Cuba: Large Problems, Limited Influence 

Like the Philippines, the US Army occupied Cuba as a result of the 
Spanish-American War. And, like the Philippines, Americans had to deal 
with a native revolutionary army that had been fighting the Spanish for 
several years. But there were major differences as well. While Filipinos 
spoke many different languages and were divided by religion, virtually all 
Cubans were Catholic and spoke Spanish. The bulk of the population was 
concentrated on a single island, and the terrain, while often difficult, was 
not nearly as inhospitable as much of the Philippines. There was a deep 
racial divide between those of European and those of African descent, but 
there was not the heritage of ethnic violence that characterized the Philip¬ 
pines. 

The Philippines, like most of the territory acquired from Spain in 1898 
was destined to remain under American rule for the foreseeable future. 
Cuba, however, was different. The United States had pledged to allow 
Cuba to become independent, but, at the same time, was determined to 
maintain a high degree of control. This made the transition from American 
military occupation to independence difficult and uncertain and insured 
that the formation and development of Cuban security forces would be a 
constant issue. 

Occupied Cuba had two national forces in addition to the US military. 
There were remnants of the Spanish system, notably police, which had to 
be dealt with. One by one they were disarmed and the Spaniards later re¬ 
patriated. But their absence left a law enforcement vacuum in many areas 
that the American occupying force was unwilling or unable to fill. As a 
result, some American authorities, starting with Colonel Leonard Wood 
in Santiago, began recruiting local forces, largely led by and composed of 
veterans of the Cuban Revolutionary Army. 1 

While a few members of the Revolutionary Army joined the embry¬ 
onic police, many more remained with their units. They were a major force 
in internal politics as well as in military affairs. The outbreak of fight¬ 
ing in the Philippines left some American officers in Cuba fearful that 
similar events might occur there, but with Washington pledged to Cuban 
independence there was never any serious danger of conflict between the 
Americans and the revolutionaries. Dealing with them, however, presented 
problems. The American occupiers wanted them disarmed and disbanded 
as soon as possible, but had no clear plan as to what force, if any, might re- 


17 


place them. For most revolutionaries, their biggest concern was collecting 
the large amount of back pay they were owed. There were also concerns 
about future employment and, in some cases, a desire to use their military 
laurels as a springboard to national office. 

Negotiations over disbanding this force were difficult and prolonged, 
but with the help of Cuba’s senior general, Maximo Gomez, and three- 
million dollars from unexpended US War appropriations the bulk were 
ultimately disarmed with each soldier receiving $75. 2 There was some 
discontent over the relatively small amount received, but, in general, the 
process proceeded peacefully. Left unanswered was the question of what, 
if anything, would replace this force. 

While most Cuban politicians wanted a national army, there were 
arguments against it, especially from the American point of view. Alone 
among the American republics, Cuba had no land frontiers with any other 
nation. This meant no boundary disputes, the major cause of Latin Ameri¬ 
can wars, and no sanctuary in neighboring territory for rebel forces. The 
only credible external threat to Cuban sovereignty was that posed by the 
United States and the American Army obviously had no interest in helping 
Cuba defend itself against that. Finally, there was the omnipresent, if rare¬ 
ly mentioned, issue of race. A Cuban national army would include many 
Afro-Cubans, while the police forces the Americans were organizing were 
overwhelmingly white. 3 Virtually all American military officers at the start 
of the twentieth century rejected the idea of racially integrated units. 

A military government was quickly established, with Major General 
John Brooke as Governor. Brooke had few specific instructions as to the 
objects of his government or its possible duration. Fie was simply told to 
pacify the Island and establish civil authority, but was given no instruction 
on creating security forces or on taking steps towards Cuban self-rule. 4 

Into this policy vacuum moved Brigadier General Leonard Wood, 
Commander of the Department of Santiago. While Brooke and most of the 
other senior officers in Cuba were aging Civil War veterans (including ex- 
Confederate General Fitzhugh Lee), Wood was still under forty. Educated 
as a physician, he had risen with incredible speed from Captain to Briga¬ 
dier General, helped by his close ties to President McKinley and Theodore 
Roosevelt. This, combined with his tendency to seek new options rather 
than sticking to traditional practices, produced considerable friction with 
Brooke and other officers, but also led to his replacement of Brooke as 
Military Governor. 5 


18 


One of Wood’s innovative policies involved the creation of a mounted 
rural guard in his department. Most of those recruited were white veterans 
of the Cuban revolutionary army. Other Department Commanders eventu¬ 
ally followed Wood’s example. In most cases, Cuban veterans became the 
unit commanders. 6 

Washington was generally pleased with Wood’s efforts, in part be¬ 
cause it facilitated American troop withdrawals. Secretary of War Russell 
A. Alger was especially enthusiastic, urging the recruiting of constabulary 
forces for urban as well as rural duties not only in Cuba, but in Puerto Rico 
and the Philippines as well. 7 Washington’s enthusiasm was at least in part 
engendered by its reading of the British experience in Egypt and elsewhere 
and by the image of Mexico’s Rurales who had a reputation for turning 
bandits into rural mounted police. 8 Elihu Root, who had replaced Alger as 
Secretary of War, believed that a rural guard would “dispose of a lot of men 
most likely to make trouble in Cuba, turn them from possible bandits, and 
educate them into Americans.” 9 

When Wood replaced Brooke as Military Governor he was able to 
combine the separate Rural Guard units into a single, national force. While 
almost all the officers would be Cubans the American military remained in 
control of training and administration. The formal structuring of the Guard 
waited until 5 April 1901 when Wood issued Military Order 114. This 
created a force of four regiments each commanded by a Cuban lieuten¬ 
ant colonel under the overall command of a Cuban colonel. Considerable 
authority, however, continued to reside in a US Army Captain, Herbert 
Slocum, who was appointed as Superintendent of the Rural Guard, with 
responsibilities for training and organization. 10 A small artillery unit, based 
in Havana’s forts was added to the Guard. By 1902, when the first elected 
Cuban president took office and the American Army withdrew, the Guard 
had reached a strength of 1,600 officers and men and Wood believed that 
they were capable of enforcing the law and maintaining the peace. The fi¬ 
nal turnover to Cuban control went smoothly, in good part because both the 
funding and the officers were already Cuban. While an American military 
advisor remained he had little power and the Guard became essentially a 
Cuban controlled force. The new president, Tomas Estrada Palma, gave his 
assurances that the Guard would remain professional and above politics. 11 
Both his assurances and Wood’s faith would all too soon be proven wrong. 

There had been some debate as to whether the Guard, alone, was a 
sufficient military force. Many Cubans advocated the creation of a regu¬ 
lar army alongside the Guard. There was, however, little support for this 
idea within the American military establishment. This may have been due, 


19 


in part, to the controversy surrounding Washington’s insistence that, as a 
condition for ending its occupation, Cuba incorporate into its Constitu¬ 
tion and ratify a treaty containing the provisions of the Platt Amendment 
which the US Congress had added to the 1901 Army Appropriations Bill. 
Among the Amendment’s provisions were a prohibition on any other na¬ 
tion acquiring bases in Cuba, a Cuban obligation to lease naval bases to 
the United States, and the specific right of American military interven¬ 
tion “for the preservation of Cuban independence, the maintenance of a 
government adequate for the protection of life, property, and liberty. 12 In 
later writings Senator Orville H. Platt, the amendment’s author, noted that, 
“the new government of Cuba will have neither an army nor a navy,” and 
expressed his belief that the US naval bases and the explicit right of inter¬ 
vention “will prevent trouble there.” 13 

The Platt Amendment virtually insured that neither the Army nor the 
Navy would favor creation of a Cuban regular army. Should the United 
States decide to exercise its right to intervene such a force might pro¬ 
vide armed resistance. With the Navy determined to maintain a permanent 
presence in Cuba and initially hoping for much more than just the base at 
Guantanamo, they too might be called upon to intervene and had no desire 
to confront a Cuban army. 14 President Palma seemed to echo their senti¬ 
ments declaring, “We should have a degree of order such that the Army 
would become unnecessary.” 15 

For most of President Palma’s first term things seemed to go fairly 
well. The Rural Guard, which had grown to over 3,000, enforced order 
in the countryside and a National Police patrolled the cities. There were 
occasional outbreaks of violence, notably when the Guard and police 
were used against labor strikes, but most of the nation remained relatively 
peaceful. 16 But the situation rapidly deteriorated in 1905 as Cuba’s next 
round of elections approached. 

Determined to hold on to power, Palma set about rigging the 
elections. Unsure of the Guard’s personal loyalty, he expanded the Ar¬ 
tillery Corps and placed it directly under his command. It would prove 
ineffective when, in 1906, the opposition Liberals, who had boycotted 
the elections, began a revolt. While the resulting uprising included more 
political maneuvering than actual fighting, the government’s position 
steadily deteriorated. There were some clashes between rebels and the Ru¬ 
ral Guard, but there were also numerous defections of Guard units. 17 As 
the conflict spread it became apparent that both sides were counting more 
on American intervention than on a military victory. 


20 


This placed President Theodore Roosevelt on the horns of a dilemma. 
He could not let the conditions on the island continue to deteriorate but he 
wanted to avoid intervention. In a 9 September 1906 letter, he expressed 
his frustration: 

I have just been notified by the Cuban government that 
they intend to ask us forcibly to intervene in the course 
of this week, and I have sent them a most emphatic pro¬ 
test against their doing so, with a statement that I am not 
prepared to say what I will do if the request is made. On 
the one hand we can not see Cuba permanently a prey to 
misrule and anarchy; on the other hand I loath the thought 
of assuming any control over the island such as we have 
over Porto Rico or the Philippines. We emphatically do 
not want it. 18 

Roosevelt’s efforts to avoid intervention ultimately proved futile. On 
14 September, he ordered powerful Naval forces and a Marine battalion to 
Cuban waters and had the Marine Corps prepare additional units for pos¬ 
sible intervention. He also dispatched Secretary of War William Howard 
Taft and Assistant Secretary of State Robert Bacon to Cuba in an effort to 
negotiate a political settlement. But with both sides preferring American 
intervention to making any concessions to their opponents, the mission 
was doomed to failure. 19 

Shortly after Taft and Bacon arrived, President Palma suddenly 
resigned and his Vice President refused to replace him. With no Cuban 
government, Taft authorized the landing of 2,000 Marines and proclaimed 
a provisional government administered by the United States with him s elf 
as Governor. 20 The Marine Brigade quickly fanned out across the island, 
insuring that the opposing armed forces were kept separate and that rela¬ 
tive peace was restored. The Marine Corps, however, had no intention of 
taking on an extended occupation. That task would once again fall to the 
Army. 

The Marines stayed long enough to disarm many of the Cubans, 
but left within a few weeks as Army units arrived. Ultimately, over 6,000 
US troops would serve in this second occupation of Cuba, but many would 
have little to do as there would be no significant clashes between American 
and Cuban forces. Indeed things became so peaceful that many officers 
brought their families to Cuba where their salaries procured a much more 
comfortable lifestyle, complete with servants, than they could expect to 
enjoy at home. 21 


21 


Taft only remained as Governor for a few weeks as he had to return to 
his duties as Secretary of War. In his place, Roosevelt appointed a civil¬ 
ian bureaucrat with experience in Panama, Charles E. Magoon. 22 Honest, 
dedicated, but uninspiring, Magoon saw his task as creating, as soon as 
possible, conditions which would enable the United States to return the 
government to the Cubans. He was determined to minimize conflicts with 
Cuba’s political elites and was little concerned with the long-range impact 
of his policies on Cuba. 

An urgent task was insuring that Cuban forces would be able to maintain 
control over future internal political disturbances. One of the first decisions 
was to retain the Rural Guard, including its commander, but to reform and 
reequip it, making a more effective force. In their report of their mission 
to Cuba, Taft and Bacon concluded that the weakness and wide dispersal 
of the Guard had “left the government naked to its enemies and critics,” 
and “utterly unprepared to meet this attack. 23 Making the Guard more 
effective while, at the same time, keeping it separate from politics would 
not prove an easy task. The Guard had become politicized under Palma, 
cooperating in insuring his victory in the 1905 election, and then had not 
performed well against the subsequent uprising. 24 In an effort to divorce 
the Guard from Cuban politics Magoon issued a decree making political 
activity by Guard personnel a court-martial offense and the Guard’s Cuban 
Commander issued a General Order: “The members of the armed forces 
will not discuss, either publicly or privately, their political opinions. They 
are soldiers of the state and as such have no right to mix in politics. Their 
duty is to serve their government and take no part in its construction. . . 
. The welfare of the entire force depends on its being free from political 
combinations.” 25 

To undertake the task of reforming the Guard the Army called upon 
several veterans of the Wood era, notably Major Herbert Slocum who had 
earlier been the Guard’s Superintendent. Slocum and his fellow officers 
believed the Guard had to be expanded and have more of its force sta¬ 
tioned near major population centers so that it could quickly respond to any 
uprisings. They also favored making more promotions from the ranks. 26 
Despite never having more than eight other American officers to assist 
him, Slocum did manage to accomplish quite a bit. Guard weapons and 
training were improved, the ra nk s culled, and modem communications in¬ 
stalled in many posts. The force was steadily expanded, in 1907 reaching a 
strength of over 5,000 divided into three regiments. Discipline and morale 
improved steadily, something the Americans attributed to the officers ex¬ 
hibiting greater concern for the welfare of the enlisted men. 27 The Guard 


22 


undertook expanded rural patrols as well as continuing to enforce routine 
law and order. 28 An abortive revolutionary plot in 1907 was quickly dis¬ 
covered and defused, more by the Havana Police than by the Guard, and 
the occupation continued to be basically peaceful. By the end of 1907, the 
force seemed well on its way to becoming the professional, largely non¬ 
political force that its American founders had always envisioned. When 
Magoon included a list of the principle problems facing Cuba in his An¬ 
nual Report, issued in January 1908, there were no military or security 
issues on the list. 29 

Once again, however, the realities of Cuba’s political culture would 
disrupt the American’s carefully constructed plans. Much of the leadership 
of both the Liberal and Conservative Parties opposed expansion of the 
Guard and argued that Cuba should instead create a regular army. Confi¬ 
dent of victory in the 1908 elections, the Liberals were especially insistent 
that only a regular army could crush revolutionary outbreaks at their in¬ 
ception. They also argued that an infantry force would be less costly than 
an expanded, mounted Guard and that only if it had an army could Cuba be 
considered a truly sovereign state. 30 This last argument conveniently omit¬ 
ted the fact that so long as the Platt Amendment remained in force Cuban 
sovereignty would be limited at best. 

Magoon and the American officers attached to the Guard were less 
than enthusiastic about the idea of a regular army, fearing, as it turned out 
correctly, that such a force might prove easy prey to political influences. 
But the Cuban advocates of an army were unrelenting, using the press to 
criticize the Guard and argue for a regular Army. The debate lasted into 
1908. With an election approaching and the expectation that American 
withdrawal would soon follow, Washington essentially gave in, demon¬ 
strating that ending the occupation rather than Cuba’s long-range future 
was its first priority. 

A plan, advanced by Roosevelt and Taft, called for an expansion of 
the Guard, but also the creation of a brigade of regular infantry. The Army 
could later be expanded by taking in some units of the Guard. The Cuban 
Constitution was also to be modified to create a militia that could be called 
out in case of need. American officers would have little part in the training 
of the army nor would the United States have much influence in selecting 
its officers. There was little effort to pretend that the selection of officers, 
especially for the senior ranks, would be nonpolitical. This was underlined 
when Magoon acquiesced in the Liberal’s choice for Army commander, 
General Faustino, a leader of the 1906 Liberal revolt, known largely for 
not taking prisoners. 31 


23 


The American officers attached to the Guard were upset by these de¬ 
velopments, but were powerless to alter them. They correctly foresaw that 
the Cuban Army would become a political instrument and that the Guard 
would be hard pressed not to follow the same path. 32 With Washington set 
on a rapid withdrawal all they could do was finalize their training efforts 
and hope they would not have to return at some future date to again under¬ 
take a similar task. 

One American officer, Captain Fra nk Parker, was detailed to remain 
behind as advisor to the Rural Guard and another, Captain George Gate- 
ly, filled a similar function with the Cuban Artillery. Parker’s instructions 
urged him to be “discreet” and “useful,” but said nothing about trying to 
keep the Guard apolitical. 33 It is probably unlikely that any efforts he might 
have made in that direction would have had any effect, but the record indi¬ 
cates that his influence actually helped politicize the guard. He devoted his 
major effort to making it a military-oriented cavalry force, useful largely in 
discouraging political opposition. Ultimately, the Guard’s best unit became 
the personal guard of the President and the rest came increasingly under 
the control of officers known more for their political loyalties than their 
military skills. Discipline deteriorated and by 1912 the number of courts- 
martial was greater than the Guard’s enlisted strength. 34 

As the Guard deteriorated the Army expanded. By 1909-1910, the 
Army and Guard’s combined strength had reached 404 officers and 8,772 
enlisted men. 35 Six years later, the authorized strength of the Guard was 
only 5,508 while that of the Army had reached 11,715 men. 36 By then, the 
Guard had come under the command of the Army’s senior officers and had 
become a political instrument of the ruling party. In the 1916 elections, it 
played a major role in insuring that the desired results were obtained. 

In 1912, American troops had returned to Cuba but this time not as an 
occupying force. Long discriminated against and increasingly frustrated by 
the elites’ political domination, some Afro-Cubans had tried to organize an 
“Independent Party of Color.” When this predictably got nowhere, some 
of its members turned to armed revolt. In most areas, combined Army- 
Guard forces were able to quickly defeat the insurgents, but the American 
Minister to Cuba, Arthur M. Beaupre was so alarmed that he cabled the 
State Department that the revolt “will not be put down for months or even 
years without material assistance or intervention by the American govern¬ 
ment.” 37 

Marines from Guantanamo, joined by detachments from several war¬ 
ships, entered Cuba and were largely assigned to protect American prop¬ 
erty owners. But the Cuban government needed no assistance in ending 
24 


the rebellion and Washington saw no need to involve itself with their mili¬ 
tary operations. The Marines were soon withdrawn. A few years later, they 
were back. 

What was happening was that the United States was increasingly be¬ 
coming the supporter of governments that used the now totally politicized 
Army and Guard to manipulate elections and crush opposition. The vi¬ 
sion of an apolitical force that would both maintain stability and support 
at least some form of democratic government had virtually disappeared. 
Personal ambition, more than any ideology, had come to dominate Cuban 
politics. In 1916, the government was nominally Conservative, but splits 
in both major parties made this nearly meaningless. The election evolved 
into a fight by incumbent President Mario Menocal to hold on to power. 
When the returns appeared to be going against him he simply resorted to 
open fraud and proclaimed his reelection. When neither the Central Elec¬ 
toral Board nor the Supreme Court upheld this, supplementary elections 
were scheduled in two provinces. But before they could be held a group of 
Army officers tried to overthrow Menocal. Many senior officers owed heir 
appointments to the previous Liberal government and were openly sympa¬ 
thetic to that party. Others were evidently upset at the extent of government 
fraud, combined with efforts to arm the regime’s civilian supporters. Those 
plotting against the government expected at least 75 percent of the mili¬ 
tary to join them. They were wrong. Their plans were discovered and their 
leaders arrested. 38 Liberal Party supporters then launched their own upris¬ 
ing. 39 Many apparently hoped that this might force US intervention. But, 
with much of the Army occupied on the Mexican border and the prospect 
of war with Germany looming the Wilson administration was in no posi¬ 
tion to dispatch large units to Cuba. Instead Washington shipped arms and 
ammunition to the Cuban government and landed small forces at several 
coastal points, releasing Cuban forces to battle the insurgents. 40 

By this time, the United States had apparently lost all interest in or 
hope of having a professional, nonpolitical constabulary or army in Cuba. 
Its concerns focused on curbing German activities on the island and, once 
war with Germany began, protecting the sugar crop. As Liberal guerrillas 
began burning sugar fields, probably hoping this might force intervention, 
the United States and Cuba arrived at a strange formula whereby the Unit¬ 
ed States would request and Cuba would grant the use of its territory for 
training Marines. Why tropical Cuba was a desirable site for training units 
that might be destined for Europe was never explained. Ultimately, nearly 
3,000 Marines spent the war in Cuba, camped near American sugar proper¬ 
ties, and freeing the Cuban Army to destroy the last vestiges of armed op- 


25 


position. After the war, this force was slowly reduced, though one battalion 
remained until 1922. 41 Meanwhile, the Cuban Army continued to expand. 
As a last vestige of American influence, over 150 officers were given train¬ 
ing in the United States. This improved their professional skills, but also 
made their political loyalties suspect and they were largely excluded from 
key commands. 

While the Rural Guard continued to exist, it had, by the 1920s, lost 
most of its separate identity and was basically the cavalry arm of the Cu¬ 
ban Army. During the dictatorship of Gerardo Machado, 1925-1933, its 
units were used against student protests, labor strikes, and assorted efforts 
to overthrow the regime. Not trusting officers who had been trained in the 
United States, Machado began promoting officers from the ranks. 42 This 
created a faction loyal to him, but at the same time increased the discontent 
of the US-trained officers and of the sergeants who did not receive such 
promotions. As Machado’s tyranny increased and opposition, much of it 
from the left, grew increasingly violent, the United States dispatched a 
special envoy, Sumner Welles, to attempt to resolve the situation without 
military intervention. Ultimately, the Army, certainly with Welles encour¬ 
agement, if not his active participation, forced Machado into exile. 43 

Stability seemed to be returning until early September 1933, when the 
sergeants at Camp Columbia, Havana’s key military base, revolted. Led by 
Sergeant Fulgencio Batista, they allied with a reformist political movement, 
took over the government, and began purging the Army, ultimately replacing 
512 officers with enlisted men, warrant officers and a few civilians. 44 Many 
of the removed officers, together with some colleagues still technically on 
active duty, gathered together in Havana’s National Hotel, seeking ways 
to reverse the revolt and/or to promote US intervention. Batista, who had 
made himself a colonel and army chief of staff, ordered his artillery to shell 
the hotel. After two days of sporadic fighting the officers gave up. 45 This 
marked the destruction of the last vestiges of US influence over Cuba’s 
military and the beginning of Fulgencio Batista’s domination of politics. 
That would last until the end of 1958 when Fidel Castro destroyed Batista’s 
army and began his own prolonged rule. 

The American effort to form a nonpolitical, constabulary must be 
judged as a failure. In part this was because US control over events in 
Cuba was always partial and of limited duration. The Cuban political elites 
played on American desires to withdraw from Cuba and on Washington’s 
fear of internal disorders first to influence the development of the Rural 
Guard and then to make it subordinate to a clearly political (and probably 
unnecessary) army. From its inception the bulk of the officers, including 


26 


the higher ranks, were Cuban. While this facilitated the US withdrawal it 
also insured that Cuban politics were imbedded in the Guard from its in¬ 
ception. Most senior officers were revolutionary army veterans with little 
US training and strong personal ties to political factions. 

The Platt Amendment, designed to enshrine American influence in 
Cuba, proved to have an opposite effect. Cuban factions constantly ma¬ 
neuvered to create conditions that might compel US intervention while 
the United States increasingly sought to avoid such a contingency. This 
made Washington willing to tolerate violent political repression. When the 
Amendment was finally abrogated in May 1934 it gave American policy¬ 
makers new options. Unfortunately, the abrogation came much too late to 
have any impact on the destruction of the Rural Guard. 


27 


Notes 


1. Rafael Fermoselle, The Evolution of the Cuban Military, 1492-1986 
(Miami, FL: Ediciones Universal, 1987), 94-95. 

2. David F. Healy, The United States in Cuba, 1898-1902: Generals, 
Politicians and the Search for Policy (Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1963), 69-77. 

3. Freddy L. Polk, “Building Armies for Democracy: U.S. Attempts to 
Reform the Armed Forces of Cuba (1906-1909) and Nicaragua (1927-1933)” 
(Master of Military Art and Science Thesis, US Army Command and General 
Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 1987), 35; Fermoselle, 96; Louis A. Perez 
Jr., Cuba Under the Platt Amendment, 1902-1934 (Pittsburgh, PA: University of 
Pittsburgh Press, 1986), 149. 

4. James Flarrison Wilson, Under the Old Flag: Recollections of Militaiy 
Operations in the War for the Union, the Spanish War, the Boxer Rebellion, Etc., 
Vol. II (New York, NY: D. Appleton & Co., 1912), 479-480. 

5. Healy, 65-66; Wilson, Vol. II, 497. 

6. Fermoselle, 95. 

7. Allan R. Millett, “The Rise and Fall of the Cuban Rural Guard, 1898— 
1912,” The Americas, Vol. 29, No. 2 (October 1972), 192. 

8. For a history of the Rurales, see Paul J. Vanderwood, Disorder and 
Progress: Bandits, Police and Mexican Development (Lincoln, NE: University of 
Nebraska Press, 1981). 

9. Elihu Root to William McKinley, 17 August 1899, quoted in Millett, 
“Rise and Fall,” 192. 

10. Fermoselle, 95 and 103. 

11. Millett, “Rise and Fall,” 196. 

12. For the text of the Platt Amendment, along with many other relevant 
documents, see Robert F. Smith, What Happened in Cuba: A Documentary History 
(New York, NY: Twayne Publishers, 1963), 125-132. 

13. Senator Orville H. Platt to Edwin F. Atkins, “Senator Orville H. Platt on 
Relations with Cuba, May 1901,” 11 June 1901, in An Old Fashioned Senator: 
Orville H. Platt of Connecticut by Louis Arthur Coolidge (New York, NY: G.P. 
Putnam’s Sons, 1910), 314; Smith, 128-129. 

14. For a description of Navy efforts to acquire additional bases and Cuban 
opposition to this, see Richard D. Challener, Admirals, Generals, and American 
Foreign Policy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1973), 94-100. 

15. Quoted in Fermoselle, 99. 

16. Ibid., 105-106. 

17. Millett, “Rise and Fall,” 198. 

18. Theodore Roosevelt to George Otto Trevelyan, 9 September 1906; Smith, 
137. 

19. Allan R. Millett, The Politics of Intervention: The Military Occupation 
of Cuba, 1906-1909 (Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press, 1968), 
78-79. 


28 


20. Hugh Thomas, Cuba, The Pursuit of Freedom (New York, NY: Harper 
and Row, 1971), 477-480. 

21. Allan R. Millett, The General: Robert L. Bullard and Officership in the 
United States Army, 1881-1925 (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1975), 196. 

22. For a description of Magoon’s previous career, see David A. Lockmiller, 
Magoon in Cuba (Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press, 
1938), 73-76; Millett, Politics of Intervention, 150. Millett asserts that many of 
Magoon’s subsequent problems “would have been lessened had he worn a uniform 
and acted as Cubans thought a ruler should.” 

23. Quoted in Perez, Cuba Under the Platt Amendment, 105-106. 

24. Polk, 43. 

25. Republic of Cuba, Headquarters of the Armed Forces, General Order 28, 
11 March 1907, quoted in Millett, “Rise and Fall,” 199. 

26. Polk, 45. 

27. Millett, Politics of Intervention, 225. 

28. Millett, “Rise and Fall,” 199-200. 

29. Millett, Politics of Intervention, 192-193. 

30. Polk, 47. 

31. Ibid., 51. 

32. Millett, “Arise and Fall,” 204-205; Polk, 51-52; Lester D. Langley, 
Banana Wars: An Inner History of American Empire, 1900-1934 (Lexington, KY: 
The University Press of Kentucky, 1983), 48-49. 

33. Millett, “Rise and Fall,” 208. 

34. Ibid., 209-210. 

35. Fermoselle, 113. 

36. Memoria de la Administracion del Presidente de la Republica de Cuba, 
Mayor General Mario G. Menocal, durante el periodo Comprendido entre el 1 de 
Julio, de 1915 y el 30 de Junio, 1916 (Havana, Cuba: Secretaria de la Presidencia, 
1919), 153-170. 

37. Arthur Beaupre to the Secretary of State, 8June 1912, Papers Relating to 
the Foreign Relations of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing 
Office, 1919), 253. 

38. This was the first attempt at military revolt by significant elements of the 
armed forces, but would be far from the last. 

39. Louis A. Perez, Jr., Intervention, Revolution, and Politics in Cuba, 1913— 
1921 (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1978), 22-27. 

40. Perez, Cuba Under the Platt Amendment, 169-170. 

41. Allan R. Millett, Semper Fidelis: A History of the United States Marine 
Corps (Second edition) (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1992), 130. 

42. Thomas, 582-583. 

43. Bryce Wood, The Making of the Good Neighbor Policy (New York, NY: 
Columbia University Press, 1961), 62-69. 

44. Fermoselle, 152. 

45. Justo Carillo, Cuba, 1933: estudiantes, yanquis y soldados (Miami, FL: 
Institute de Estudios Interamericanos, University of Miami, 1985), 288-295; 
Thomas, 6. 


29 



Chapter 4 

Panama: More Issues Than Running a Canal 

U.S. dealings with Panama have always been distinct from those in¬ 
volving other Western Hemisphere nations. Key to this has been that na¬ 
tion’s location as a trans-isthmian route for people and commerce. From 
the California gold rush of 1849 to the present day, the United States has 
been determined to have unfettered access to that route and concerned 
about other nations’ real or imagined designs on it. In the first decade of 
the 20th century, when Panama broke away from Colombia and the United 
States determined to build a canal through the new nation, Washington’s 
concerns with and involvement in internal affairs escalated dramatically. 

Panama was the last Latin American nation to achieve independence 
and, like Cuba, did so in good part because of US intervention. It, however, 
differed from Cuba, and from the Philippines, in that there had been no 
armed struggle for independence and there was no revolutionary army to 
pose an obstacle either to US interests or to the domestic political elite. In 
addition, shortly after independence, the United States took control of the 
Canal Zone, a strip of territory that divided Panama, and stationed a perma¬ 
nent garrison there. In the process it assumed basic responsibility not only 
for the security of the Canal, but for that of Panama as well. No nation in 
Latin America was subject to greater US influence and, with the possible 
exception of Mexico, in no nation was American strategic and commercial 
interests so important. 

While Panama did not have its own army in 1903, it inherited one. The 
commander of Colombian forces on the Isthmus, General Esteban Huertas, 
was persuaded, by a combination of American threats and Panamanian 
bribes, to change sides and his garrison briefly became the Army of 
Panama. 1 From its inception this force was controversial. Panama had no 
real frontiers that it needed to defend. It was separated from Colombia 
on the south by a large expanse of virtually impenetrable jungle. On the 
north it bordered Costa Rica, which had only a tiny army, and, along with 
Uruguay, was the most democratic and pacific nation in Latin America. 
The Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty, which created the Canal Zone, also gave 
the United States the obligation to defend Panamanian independence. 2 
The following year Panama adopted its first Constitution which included 
a clause, similar to one in Cuba’s Constitution, giving the United States 
the right to intervene in order to maintain order. 3 Panamanian newspapers 
soon began criticizing the Army and the US Minister to Panama, William 
Buchanan, suggested that it should be transformed into a Guardia Rural 


31 


like the one being created in Cuba. He added, “the men should be armed 
only with revolvers and spread around the Republic so that no faction 
might use them collectively to intimidate the government.” 4 

Relations between Panama’s new government and General Huertas de¬ 
teriorated steadily. He began to take sides in politics and the Panamanian 
National Assembly, the nation’s unicameral Congress, responded by pass¬ 
ing a law reducing the army from 500 to 250 officers and men. Tensions 
escalated and coup rumors began to circulate. The American Minister was 
absent, but the Charge, Joseph Lee, bluntly informed Huertas’ political 
supporters that the United States would not tolerate revolutionary activi¬ 
ties. At the same time he cabled the State Department that the Army would 
be a source of unrest and political upheaval as long as it existed. He also 
pointed out that the Army was a weak force with some of its soldiers as 
young as eleven. 5 

Huertas, however, was not discouraged. He continued to try to force 
the president to alter his cabinet, focusing his opposition on the appoint¬ 
ment of Santiago de la Guardia as Minister of War and Foreign Affairs. The 
president, Manuel Amador, vacillated, but ultimately pressures from both 
the United States and De la Guardia convinced him that the Army should 
be abolished. This advice was strengthened by the presence of American 
naval vessels in Panamanian waters. Their commander, Rear Admiral C.F. 
Goodrich, further stiffened the president’s resolve by placing a company 
of Marines in proximity to Panama City. Huertas was forced to resign and, 
after some tense moments and with a repeated threat of US intervention, 
the army disbanded. 6 Some troops were absorbed into the National Police 
that had been created the previous year and, to the relief of both the United 
States and Panama’s government, the danger of military interference in 
politics was, at least for the moment, eliminated. 7 

From 1904 through 1914, while the Canal was being constructed, 
Washington demonstrated little interest in security conditions in the inte¬ 
rior of Panama. What attention existed was focused on the cities of Colon 
and Panama City at either end of the Canal Zone. Here, predictably, there 
were numerous clashes between Panamanian police and Americans, large¬ 
ly military, especially around the bars and houses of prostitution in Coco 
Grove. On several occasions Americans were badly beaten. 8 American 
ability to respond to these and other incidents was hampered by the un¬ 
clear division of authority between American diplomatic personnel and the 
authorities in the Canal Zone, most of who came from the Army Corps of 
Engineers. In an effort to deal with this, the positions of American Minister 
to Panama and Canal Zone Governor were briefly combined. Panama’s 


32 


Foreign Minister, De la Guardia, had agreed to this and, in 1905, Charles 
Magoon, formerly legal counsel to the Canal Commission (ICC), took the 
combined position. 9 He held it until he was sent to Cuba as Military Gov¬ 
ernor in September 1906. The posts were soon separated again and with 
the appointment of then Major George Goethals to the position of head of 
the ICC and Chief Engineer the officials in the Zone began to take over 
much of the policy formulation process from the State Department and the 
diplomatic mission. This would be especially true when security issues 
were involved. 

Meanwhile, clashes between the Panamanian police and Americans 
and canal construction workers continued with a major riot breaking out in 
1906. An attempt to have a New York police official take over training the 
force lasted only a few weeks. Magoon’s successor as Minister, Herbert 
Squiers, wanted to take away high-powered rifles from the police and to 
totally reorganize the courts, the police, and the prison system. 10 This did 
not happen. Instead the United States relied on the presence of the Marines 
and the threat of intervention to keep matters from getting completely out 
of hand. At the same time, the Americans built up their own police force in 
the Zone, consisting of a unit of 117 white Americans and another of 116 
West Indians. The former was responsible for maintaining order among 
the Zone’s Caucasian residents and for dealing with Panamanians arrested 
inside the zone, the latter dealt with the non-white labor force. 11 Few of 
either group spoke Spanish and neither did most judges who tried Panama¬ 
nians arrested inside the Zone. 12 Not surprisingly, this further exacerbated 
tensions between Panamanians and Zone authorities. 

The August 1914 opening of the Canal coincided with the outbreak of 
the World War I in Europe. Concerns over Canal security increased rapidly 
and began to encompass developments throughout Panama. In 1911, the 
first Army infantry unit had arrived in the Zone and the Army steadily re¬ 
placed the Navy as the service primarily responsible for security. By 1912, 
the Navy was even arguing that the zone be governed by an Army officer 
“who combines in his own person the functions of military command and 
civil control.” 13 

Panamanian authorities were increasingly concerned about the clashes 
between the police and Americans and worried that this might provide an 
excuse to establish an American military government. On 29 April 1915, 
Panama’s Foreign Minister, E.T. Lefevre wrote Governor Goethals, now a 
Brigadier General, asking him “to obtain through your intermediation an 
instructor for our National Police.” He continued: 


33 


Nearly all the governments of the Republic, more or less, 
have tried to acquire the services of American instructors 
to improve our Police Department, but unfortunately in 
the field of practice, these efforts have not always given 
the desired results ... A contract was entered into with a 
Mr. Jimenez who was a member of the Police Department 
of New York . . . There were suspicions the he protected 
certain interests which the police were bound to prosecute. 

The scandal caused by the revelations which resulted 
therefrom was the cause of the cancellation of the respec¬ 
tive contract. . . . Later . . . arrangements were made for 
another instructor, a Mr. Clarke. This gentleman . . . might 
have been a good military instructor, on the other hand he 
did not possess the energy nor the knowledge of police 
affairs indispensible to organize the Panamanian Police as 
was required, and this new attempt failed. 

After detailing yet another failed attempt involving an Army Major Helf- 
ert, who also lacked experience in police matters and resigned, Lefevre 
concluded: 

Among the extensive personnel of the Zone officials there 
must be someone who knowing our customs and our 
language, and appreciating us, possesses the necessary 
knowledge in order to serve as instructor of the Panama¬ 
nian Police. When this person has been found we will take 
care of the rest and the sincere desire which the President 
has ... of making of our Police Department a model of its 
kind should contribute greatly to the success of the mis¬ 
sion of the new instructor. 14 

Two months later the Acting Governor of the Canal Zone, Colonel 
Chester Harding, replied, offering the services of a Lieutenant L.A. Mc- 
Intire, but with numerous conditions attached. These included his being 
given the rank of Inspector and having four assistants appointed from the 
Zone Police, each with the rank of Captain and with authority over all but 
two members of the existing police. He also demanded: 

To have entire charge and control of the Police Force, un¬ 
der the Comandante of Police, and to be responsible for 
the instruction and discipline of the members thereof, 
which authority shall include specifically: Sole authority 
to suspend summarily and member of the Police Force 
other that the Comandante of Police. . . . Sole authority to 


34 


employ and assign to duty of members of the Police Force. 

Sole charge of the investigation of complaints against 
members of the Police Force. 15 

While negotiations over Mclntire’s possible appointment dragged on a 
major crisis erupted between the National Police and Zone authorities. In 
early 1915 there were two major clashes between Panamanians and mem¬ 
bers of the American military, in the second of which up to 1500 American 
troops engaged in a riot in the city of Colon after an American corporal 
was killed. Goethals wanted the US Army to take over policing duties in 
Panama City and Colon, but was overruled by General Leonard Wood. 
Panama proposed recruiting Americans to patrol the red light districts, but 
Goethals rejected this idea. 16 The stalemate was broken in early 1916 when 
the United States found an excuse to demand that the Panamanian Police 
be disarmed of their high-powered rifles. Panama’s government protest¬ 
ed bitterly, but could only get an exception made for the tiny Presidential 
Guard. The State Department also demanded an indemnity for the Ameri¬ 
can killed, but a Panamanian court cleared the police of responsibility and 
no indemnity was ever paid. 17 A few months later a senior Zone official 
wrote, “The arrangement of having a provost guard in the two Panamanian 
cities and taking away of rifles from the Panamanian police, has made a 
wonderful improvement in the situation respecting order in the two cit¬ 
ies.” 18 

While discussions over the appointment of Mclntire or some other 
American to supervise the police continued well into 1917, the American 
entry into World War I and consequent concerns over Canal defense soon 
overshadowed all other considerations. Taking advantage of a provision 
of the Hay-Bunau-Varilla treaty that empowered Washington to take lands 
for Canal defense, the United States expanded the area under its control 
and even tried to seize the Panamanian holiday island of Taboga. Panama 
quickly followed the US lead in declaring war on the Central Powers, but 
its major role was harassing resident Germans and exporting bananas. In 
1918, an American, Albert Lamb of the Washington, DC police, was ap¬ 
pointed as an instructor to the Panamanian police and in 1919, follow¬ 
ing more American pressure, he was made Inspector General with broad 
powers of control. He held that post until 1924 when Panama’s Assembly 
passed a law returning the force to national control. 19 

No real effort was made by either Panama or the United States to 
strengthen internal security forces during the war. Instead, the American 
military expanded its control, taking over Colon and Panama City before 
the July 1918 presidential elections. Even more controversial was the vir- 


35 


tual occupation of Panama’s northernmost province, Chiriqui. It began 
with an uprising in protest of the results of the 1918 election. Without be¬ 
ing asked, the United States sent troops to help put down the uprising, but 
they remained after the uprising was over. In 1920, after Bainbridge Colby 
replaced Robert Lansing as Secretary of State, the troops were finally with¬ 
drawn. 20 

Shortly after WWI ended, Panama had its closest brush with war with a 
neighbor. US Supreme Court Justice Edward White had apparently settled 
a lingering dispute over the boundary with Costa Rica through arbitration. 
The decision strongly favored Costa Rican claims and Panama refused to 
accept it. In 1921, Costa Rica sent troops to occupy the disputed territory. 
Despite its lack of an army, Panama responded by sending a larger force to 
the area and capturing the Costa Ricans. Costa Rica then sent a still larger 
force into the Panamanian province of Bocas del Toro. Panamanian nation¬ 
alism was aroused and there was considerable talk of raising an army, but 
the United States quashed all such ideas and ultimately forced Panama to 
accept White’s decision. 21 

The remainder of the 1920s were relatively uneventful. The police 
handled routine internal security, and the conflict with Costa Rica helped 
convince Washington that it did not want Panama to have an army. US 
officials engaged in internal debates over Canal security, leading to con¬ 
tinued annexation of small parcels of Panamanian territory, but relations 
remained generally peaceful. A revision of the Canal Treaties that removed 
some commercial irritants but also increased US control was signed in 
1926 but never ratified by Panama. That same year the US Navy helped 
settle a brief uprising by Panama’s indigenous Kuna people. 22 

Two developments in the 1930s threatened to disrupt relations. The 
first was the impact of the world depression. The other was the political 
ascent of the Arias brothers, Amulfo and Harmodio. Amulfo would be a 
major figure, and a constant source of instability, for the next half century. 

First under Herbert Hoover, and then more decisively under Frank¬ 
lin Roosevelt, the United States moved away from intervening in inter¬ 
nal Panamanian affairs. While Washington continued to discourage any 
Panamanian plans for developing their own army, it resisted temptations 
to use American force to settle political disputes, even refusing to sup¬ 
ply Panama’s police with tear gas or with any training on its use. As the 
Commander of American forces in Panama, General Fytle Brown noted, 
“Any action which might connect the United States Army with the use of 
gas against a Fatin American populace could bring forth throughout Fatin 
America a storm of protest.” 23 
36 


In 1936, the Franklin Roosevelt administration negotiated a major re¬ 
vision of the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty. This increased annual payments 
to Panama and promised equal treatment for US and Panamanian Canal 
employees. It ended the American right to acquire additional land for Ca¬ 
nal defense and, terminated the right to intervene in order to restore order. 
Although the Senate waited until 1939 to ratify the new treaty, the admin¬ 
istration acted as if it was in force and Panama began to lose its protector¬ 
ate status. 24 

The National Police were also strengthened and began to resemble a 
constabulary. Some units were mounted and used both to patrol rural areas 
and to break up labor strikes and student demonstrations in urban areas. 
The Arias brothers controlled politics and, freed from the threat of US in¬ 
tervention, used the strengthened police to manipulate elections and harass 
political opponents. A small number of machine guns and automatic rifles 
were acquired from the US Army in the Zone and a presidential guard was 
created, apart from and better armed than the police, and used to guard not 
only the president, but other government buildings. 25 

Amulfo Arias became president in 1940 and his problems with the 
United States grew rapidly. He appointed a Guatemalan crony Comman¬ 
dant of the National Police and, in October 1941, refused a US request to 
allow arming of Panamanian flagged merchant ships. Shortly thereafter, 
with the approval if not the instigation of the United States, he was over¬ 
thrown and replace by Ricardo Adolfo de la Guardia. Relations improved, 
the merchant ships were armed, but when De la Guardia asked for Lend 
Lease aid he was turned down on the grounds that Panama did not have 
an army. 26 

During World War II, unlike a quarter of a century earlier, there was 
a real danger of attacks on the Canal and the United States made a ma¬ 
jor effort to strengthen its defenses. Over 60,000 military personnel were 
stationed on 14 bases and at over 100 other defense sites. Numerous sites 
were acquired from Panama, but were now rented, not simply seized. 27 
Aside from maintaining internal order and dealing with resident Axis citi¬ 
zens, no real role was assigned to the Panamanians. 

During this period one of the few Panamanians with formal military 
training, Jose Antonio Remon, a graduate of the Mexican Military Acad¬ 
emy, rose to prominence in the Police. He had clashed with both Arias 
brothers, being dismissed for several years by Harmodio and then sent to 
take a cavalry course at Fort Riley by Amulfo. 28 Shortly after the war he 
became Police Commandant and used his position to dominate politics. 


37 


Panama had created an intelligence unit attached to the police and an 
FBI official was made technical advisor to this unit, largely to watch the 
activities of Amulfo, who had returned from exile and was running for 
president in 1948. 29 Meanwhile, Remon slowly, but steadily beefed up 
the military side of the Police and began sending Panamanians abroad for 
military training, including enrollment in several Latin American military 
academies. Fie did this with little help from the United States. From 1946 
through 1962, the only military assistance provided Panama was $100,000 
for Military Education and Training. 30 

After a period of chaos, Arnulfo Arias returned to the Presidency in 
1949. Fie lasted until 1951 when he tried to dissolve the Assembly and 
arrest his opponents. Instead Remon and the Police ousted him and the re¬ 
constituted Assembly banned him from politics for life. Remon now used 
his power to manipulate new elections and, in 1952, became president. 
One of his first acts was to have a law passed which renamed the 2,500 
strong Police the National Guard, reflecting its transformation into a con¬ 
stabulary force. 31 Panama also began sending students to US Army training 
courses held in the Canal Zone at what was originally the US Army Carib¬ 
bean School and, in 1963, became the School of the Americas. Panama’s 
costs were much lower than other nations since those assigned could stay 
at home and often were also able to work part-time at their jobs in the 
Guard. By 1984, 4,202 Panamanians had taken such courses and that was, 
despite the force’s small size, the third highest total in Latin America. 32 

Remon’s presidency was both controversial and short. He initiated so¬ 
cial reforms and strengthened the new National Guard. The Canal Treaties 
were modified, increasing payments to Panama, but also giving the United 
States continued access to military bases in the Republic. He was also ac¬ 
cused of large scale corruption and there were even allegations that he was 
involved in narcotics trafficking, which began going from Bolivia through 
Panama to the United States while he was president. 33 All of this was cut 
short in 1955 when he was assassinated. His vice president was accused 
of complicity, but neither he nor anyone else was ever tried or convicted. 

Remon’s death inaugurated a renewed period of turmoil. Inspired by 
Egypt’s seizure of the Suez Canal, students and others began a series of an¬ 
ti-American demonstrations that the Guard, at first, violently suppressed. 
Both fearful of future events and desirous of not creating martyrs the US 
Embassy urged providing the Guard with nonlethal riot control equipment 
including tear gas. 34 In 1959, there were also two attempts at exile inva¬ 
sions, one of which included a group of Cubans. With American concerns 
over Fidel Castro’s rule in Cuba rising, this contributed to a major shift in 


38 


support for the Guard. US military assistance began to flow in 1962 and 
over the next eighteen years totaled $15 million. 35 

A major crisis in US-Panamanian relations broke out in January 1964 
when Panamanian students tried to have their flag flown at Balboa High 
School in the Zone. Three days of rioting followed leaving three American 
soldiers and at least twenty Panamanians dead. During most of the rioting 
the Guard stood aside, protecting the US Embassy, but not other property 
and doing nothing to discourage the rioters. 36 In the aftermath, Panama 
broke relations with the United States and demanded that the Canal Trea¬ 
ties be renegotiated. 

These events inaugurated a prolonged period of negotiations that cul¬ 
minated in the 1977 Carter-Torrijos Treaties. Domestic politics in both 
nations prolonged the process, as did American preoccupation with the 
Vietnam War and the Watergate scandals. In Panama deteriorating rela¬ 
tions between the Guard and civilian politicians reached a boiling point 
when Amulfo Arias was returned to the presidency in the 1968 elections. 
When Arias attempted to alter the Guard’s command structure, a group 
of dissident officers, headed by Colonel Omar Torrijos and Major Boris 
Martinez ousted him and again sent him into exile. This, his third and last 
presidential term, lasted less than eleven days. 

Torrijos and Martinez soon fell out and Martinez found himself in ex¬ 
ile in Miami. Then another group of officers tried to oust Torrijos, but, 
with key support from Major Manuel Antonio Noriega, Torrijos held on to 
power. He would dominate Panama until his 1981 death in a plane crash 
and the military would rule for another eight years after that. 

Under Torrijos, a series of puppet civilian presidents held office, but 
there was never any doubt where real power resided. He ran an extremely 
hierarchical military organization. He was the only general. There was 
only one lull colonel and a small group of lieutenant colonels, including 
Noriega. The Guards military capacity slowly increased, but it was not 
until 1985, four years after his death, that the London-based International 
Institute for Strategic Studies included a listing for Panama in its annual 
publication, The Military Balance. That year, Panama was credited with a 
total force of 12,000, and several aircraft, none of which were designed for 
combat. 37 Every other Latin American nation, including Costa Rica, which 
had no army, had been included in earlier editions. 

Torrijos proved a master in playing different groups against each other. 
He made deals with the United States and with the Cubans, with the Drug 
Enforcement Agency and Colombian narcotics traffickers, with Israel and 


39 


with the Arabs. In the process he kept Panama free of the guerrilla violence 
that rocked Colombia and much of Central America. Most significantly, he 
achieved the dream of most Panamanians: he concluded a Treaty with the 
United States that provided for the end of the Canal Zone and the transfer 
of the Canal to Panama. 

Civilian opponents of the military’s rule tended to blame the United 
States and claim that Torrijos and Noriega were creations of Washington, 
DC. As one not untypical account put it: 

As for Panama, it had no real military, so its good neigh¬ 
bor to the north came and supplied one. . . . Panama had 
no military caste, so the United States began to grow one 
on the formula Toys plus Training yields Esprit de Corps 
and Elitism. . . .Whoever it was in Washington who de¬ 
cided to give the Guardia Nacional guns and bullets ought 
to have been submitted to psychiatric evaluation and, if 
found sane, shot for treason. 38 

It is true that much of the Guard, including Torrijos and Noriega, re¬ 
ceived some US training, but they also received training in Latin America. 
Under Torrijos, potential officers were encouraged to attend Latin Ameri¬ 
can military academies and eventually nearly half the Guard’s officers had 
graduated from these institutions. It was Panamanian politicians who for 
decades had pleaded for heavier weapons and an expanded force and it 
was Washington that, more often than not, turned them down. The advent 
of Castro to power changed the equation and the United States, from 1960 
on, supported a stronger Guard, though primary responsibility for defend¬ 
ing Panama and the Canal continued to rest with the American military. 
Panama’s security forces, exemplified in the career of Remon, had been en¬ 
gaged in making presidents long before this. The United States acquiesced 
in military rule in Panama, but there is no indication it desired it. 

The signing and eventual ratification of the 1979 Torrij os-Carter 
treaties meant that, by 2000, Panama would have to undertake primary 
responsibility for Canal defense, at least on the land. There was never any 
thought of giving Panama a significant air force or naval capability, but it 
did need strengthening of its land component. Indeed, having a stronger 
Guard was for some in the Congress a sine qua non of their acceptance of 
the Treaties. Along with the Treaties, the United States had pledged up to 
$50 million in Foreign Military Sales Credits to equip the Guard to defend 
the canal. Much of this was disbursed, reaching a peak of $12 million in 
1986, but subsequent conflicts with Panama’s dictator, Noriega, led to aid 
being suspended in 1987 and never fully renewed. 39 
40 


Torrijos was killed in a plane crash in 1981 and, after considerable ma¬ 
neuvering and intrigue, Manuel Antonio Noriega emerged as the Guard’s 
commandant. From the start, his rule generated conflict. Fie lacked the 
popular charisma and political skills of Torrijos. Fie renamed the Guard 
the Panamanian Defense Forces (PDF) and further strengthened its mili¬ 
tary capabilities. Noriega, like Torrijos, preferred to rule behind puppet 
presidents and in 1984 used fraud to engineer the election of international 
banker Nicholas Barletta who allegedly edged out perennial candidate Ar- 
nulfo Arias. 40 

The PDF’s 1985 murder of a prominent political critic, Flugo Spada- 
fora, was a sharp break with Panamanian political tradition and both fright¬ 
ened and infuriated the civilian opposition. Barletta wanted the murder 
investigated, but instead he was forcibly ousted and replaced with Vice 
President Eric Arturo Delvalle. The United States complained, but, with 
Washington preoccupied with events elsewhere in Central America, it took 
no action and military assistance and training continued uninterrupted. 
The combat capacity of the PDF was increased, notably the Battalion 2000 
which, by 1987, included airmobile and airborne companies and a mecha¬ 
nized company. The air and naval component was also expanded with the 
acquisition of a small fleet of helicopters. 41 Unfortunately, the corruption 
of the PDF’s officer corps also increased, with growing involvement in a 
variety of criminal enterprises, most notably narcotics trafficking. 

In the spring of 1987, Noriega moved to shunt aside his chief rival 
within the PDF, Colonel Roberto Diaz Herrera. In June 1987, Diaz Herrera 
struck back, giving interviews to the opposition press in which he out¬ 
lined a litany of charges against Noriega, including narcotics trafficking, 
involvement in the Spadafora killing, and rigging the 1984 elections. This 
led to a series of riots and demonstrations that were forcibly suppressed. It 
also began a final rupture between Noriega and Washington, DC. 42 

The next 30 months were marked by a steady deterioration in relations 
between the United States and Panama. General Fred Woemer, who had 
just taken over as the Commander in Chief of the US Southern Command, 
tried for over a year to both pressure Noriega to resign and to maintain 
ties with the PDF. Ultimately, he was unable to accomplish either objec¬ 
tive and, in 1989, was replaced by General Maxwell Thurman. During this 
period there were several unsuccessful plots within the PDF officer corps 
to oust Noriega. The one that came closest to success occurred in early Oc¬ 
tober 1989, shortly after Thurman took command. A group of Panamanian 
officers, led by Major Moises Giroldi, actually took Noriega prisoner. But 
confusion and indecision, both of the part of the plotters and of American 


41 


authorities in both Panama and Washington, allowed loyal forces to rescue 
Noriega who promptly had the plots leaders shot. 43 

After three more months of escalating tensions, the United States in¬ 
vaded Panama and quickly destroyed the PDF. 44 This, however, left Panama 
with no police force and the US military was loath to undertake this task on 
a long-term basis. A civilian government had been hurriedly installed and 
First Vice President Ricardo Arias Calderon undertook the difficult talk 
of creating a new National Police, the Panamanian Public Force (PPF). 
Overall control was firmly vested in the civilian Ministry of Government 
and Justice, which Arias Calderon also headed, but the great majority of 
the manpower, both officers and enlisted, came from remnants of the old 
PDF. 45 While distasteful to many, this was done because of the urgency of 
raising a police force and because of the fear of the impact of adding all the 
old PDF troops into Panama’s large number of unemployed. Most of the 
PDF’s higher leadership was forcibly retired with Noriega himself being 
shipped to the United States for trial. A few officers who had survived ear¬ 
lier plots against Noriega became the initial force commanders, but in short 
order all were either implicated in earlier criminal actions or involved in 
efforts to exercise influence over the government and were dismissed. The 
remnants of the small air and naval units were reorganized, and a Presiden¬ 
tial Guard was separated from the police and placed under the Ministry of 
the Presidency. 46 

The new government was determined to avoid any repeat of previous 
military dominance of government. A 1992 referendum on Constitutional 
reform included a prohibition on the creation of an army, articles giving 
the president extensive powers over the police and the Assembly control 
over all security budgets, including fixing the number of personnel, and 
making a civilian head of the PPF with the authority to discipline offi¬ 
cers and enlisted men for insubordination. 47 The referendum, however, was 
overwhelmingly defeated, largely because of political issues not connect¬ 
ed to the military reforms. In 1994, an article prohibiting a regular army 
was added to the Constitution, through a deal between outgoing President 
Guillermo Endara and his successor Ernesto Perez Balladares. The article, 
passed by two successive sessions of the National Assembly, also prohib¬ 
ited members of the Public Force from making political declarations or 
participating in political protests and made them answerable to provincial 
and municipal as well as national authorities. 48 

The United States has provided limited training and other assistance to 
the new PPF. Over time their military capabilities have slowly increased, in 
part because of intrusions across their southern border by Colombian guer- 


42 


rillas, paramilitaries, and narcotics traffickers. But the under-armed PPF 
has generally been reluctant to confront such forces, adopting a policy that 
might be characterized as strategic avoidance. The PPF remains under firm 
civilian control. Panama still has no military academy, narcotics trafficking 
through the nation continues, and defense of the Canal depends more on 
international diplomacy and the US Navy than on the capacity of Panama’s 
security forces. 

The Panamanian constabulary was never really a US creation. For 
decades, Washington expanded greater efforts trying to discourage the 
formation of such a force than it did in arming and training one. But wider 
considerations related to the Cold War, Central American conflicts, and 
most notably the 1977 Canal Treaties reversed this position. Considerable 
effort was expanded from the late 1960s through the mid-1980s in 
increasing the military capacity of what became the PDF. But, when a crisis 
developed over the political domination and rampant corruption of that 
force, American authorities discovered that their influence was much less 
than they expected. Ultimately, the US military was called on to destroy the 
PDF, creating a security vacuum that has still not been adequately filled. 


43 


Notes 


1. Steve C. Ropp, Panamanian Politics: From Guarded Nation to National 
Guard (New York, NY: Praeger, 1982), 16. 

2. For a description of the Treaty and its negotiation, see David McCullough, 
The Path Between the Seas (New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 1977), 389-396. 

3. Sheldon B. Liss, The Canal: Aspects of United States—Panamanian 
Relations (South Bend, IN: University ofNotre Dame Press, 1967), 29. 

4. Carlos Guevara-Mann, Panamanian Militarism: A Historical 
Interpretation (Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, 1996), 52; William D. 
McCain, The United States and the Republic of Panama (New York, NY: Russell 
and Russell, 1965), 48-49. 

5. Ibid., 51-52. 

6. Ibid., 54-59. 

7. Guevara-Mann, 54. 

8. William Franklin Sands, Our Jungle Diplomacy (Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1944), 48-51. Sands was an American 
diplomat in Panama during its first years of independence. 

9. Ibid., 60-62; John Major, Prize Possession: The United States and the 
Panama Canal, 1903-1979 (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 
68-69. 

10. Major, 121-22. 

11. Michael L. Conniff, Panama and the United States: The Forced Alliance 
(Second Edition) (Athens, GA: The University of Georgia Press, 2001), 75. 

12. For a discussion of this, see Henry A. Franck, Zone Policeman 88 (New 
York, NY: Arno Press and the New York Times, 1970). 

13. Quoted in Major, 72. 

14. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Panama, E.T. Lefevre, to Governor 
George Goethals, 29 April 1915, Records of the Government of the Canal Zone. I 
consulted these records in 1966 when they were in a warehouse in Balboa, Canal 
Zone. They were subsequently moved to the National Archives National Research 
Center at Suitland, Maryland and classified as RG 185. 

15. Colonel Chester Harding to Lefevre, 21 June 1915, RG 185. 

16. Major, 133. 

17. Ernesto Castillero Pimental, Panama y Los Estados Unidos, Second 
edition, Panama City, Panama: Editor Humanidad, 1964, 95-99; George W. Baker 
Jr., “The Wilson Administration and Panama, 1913-1921,” Journal of Inter- 
American Studies, Vol. VIII, No. 2 (April 1966), 282-283. 

18. Frank Neville to Governor Harding, 9 March 1917, National Archives 
and Record Service, Records of the Isthmian Canal Commission, 1904-14 and the 
Panama Canal, 1914-51, RG 185. 

19. Guevara-Mann, 56-57. 

20. Baker Jr., 290-92. For details on the Chiriqui occupation, see Carlos 
Cuestas Gomez, Soldados Americans en Chiriqui (Panama City, Panama: n.p., 
1991). 


44 


21. McCain, 206-222. 

22. Conniff, 86-87. 

23. Major, 251-253. 

24. Conniff, 90-91. 

25. Major, 257-258. 

26. Ibid., 267-269. 

27. For a detailed account of defense efforts, see Charles Morris Brooks, 
Guarding the Crossroads: Security and Defense of the Panama Canal (Panama: P 
& P Group, 2003), 43-198. There were several encounters between Panama-based 
air and sea units and German U-Boats. 

28. Guevara-Mann, 63. 

29. Major, 270. 

30. Agency for International Development, US Overseas Loans and 
Grants and Assistance from International Organizations: Obligations and Loan 
Authorizations, July 1, 1945-September 30, 1980 (Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, undated), 55. 

31. Guevara-Mann, 62. 

32. William H. Ormsbee Jr., “U.S. Army School of the Americas (USARSA): 
Profile of a Training Institution,” DISAM Journal, Vol. 7, No. 2 (Winter 1984), 88. 

33. Larry L. Pippin, The Remon Era: An Analysis of a Decade of Events in 
Panama, 1947-1957 (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University, Institute of Hispanic 
American and Luso-Brazilian Studies, 1964), 8. 

34. Conniff, 112. 

35. Agency for International Development, 55. 

36. William J. Jorden, Panama Odyssey (Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press, 1984), 63. For an excellent description of these events, based in part on 
numerous interviews with participants, see Chris Swilling, “The High Price 
of Neglect: The 1964 Flag Crisis in Panama” (M.A. thesis, Southern Illinois 
University-Edwardsville, 1993). 

37. The International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, 
1985-1986 (London, UK: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1985), 
153. 

38. R.M. Koster and Guillermo Sanchez, In the Time of the Tyrants: Panama, 
1968-1990 (New York, NY: W.W. Norton and Co., 1990), 57-58. 

39. Steve Ropp, “National Security,” in Panama: A Country Study, ed. By 
Sandra W. Meditz, Dennis Hanrath and Dennis Michael Hanratty. (Washington, 
D.C.: US Government Printing Office, 1989), 127. 

40. Margaret Scranton, The Noriega Years: U.S.-Panamanian Relations, 
1981-1990 (Boulder, CO: Lynne Reiner Publishers, 1991), 74-77. 

41. Ropp, “National Security,” 120-122. 

42. For a description of these events, see Kevin Buckley, Panama: The 
Whole Story (New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 1991), 80-101. 

43. A detailed description of this and of other events leading up to the 
December US invasion (Operation Just Cause ) are detailed in Lawrence A. 
Yates, The U.S. Military’ Intervention in Panama: Origins, Planning and Crisis 


45 


Management, June 1987-December 1989 (Washington, DC: Center for Military 
History, United States Army, 2008). 

44. There are numerous journalistic accounts of Operation Just Cause. The 
most scholarly is edited by Bruce W. Watson and Peter G. Tsouras, Operation Just 
Cause. (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1991). 

45. John T. Fishel, “The Institutional Reconversion of the Panamanian 
Defense Forces,” in Post-invasion Panama: The Challenges of Democratization 
in the New World Order, ed. By Orlando J. Perez (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 
2000), 16-22. 

46. Ibid., 18. 

47. Margaret Scranton, “Consolidation and Imposition: Panama’s 1992 
Referendum,” Journal of Inter-American Studies and World Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 
3 (Fall 1993), 75-76. 

48. Orlando J. Perez, “Elites, Power and Ideology: The Struggle for 
Democracy in Panama,” (Ph.D. dissertation. University of Pittsburgh, 1996), 
240-241. 


46 


Chapter 5 

Haiti: Prejudice and Poverty 

The longest lasting, and, in many ways, most controversial of the 
American interventions was in Haiti, where the Marines essentially 
occupied the country from 1915 until 1934. Those years were marked 
by political controversy, racism, and periods of violent conflict. At the 
end, Haiti remained the Western Hemisphere’s poorest nation with little 
prospects for escaping that position. 

The product of slave rebellion, Haiti had long been viewed by many in 
the United States with a mixture of suspicion and contempt. Alone among 
the American Republics, it had French as its official language, but the vast 
majority of its population spoke Haitian Creole, a unique blend of several 
languages largely unknown in the rest of the world. While officially Catho¬ 
lic, the most practiced religion was vodun or voodoo, a syncretic mixture 
of African and Christian beliefs that further contributed to its isolation. 
Economics and politics were dominated by a small, French-speaking mu¬ 
latto elite, concentrated in urban areas. It shared the island of Hispaniola 
with the Dominican Republic, but between these two nations there was a 
deep-rooted historical antipathy. 

Haitian politics had always been violent, with few Presidents leaving 
office alive. It became easier and easier for aspirants to national power to 
recruit a force of unemployed peasants from the nation’s north, provide 
them with rudimentary arms, and descend on the capitol of Port Au Prince, 
looting as they went. Known as cacos, most would then return to the north 
where they were available for the next would-be president. Some would 
join the national army which differed little from the cacos in armament, 
training, or discipline and which often had less motivation to fight. 

Anxious to exclude European influences from Haiti, concerned over 
the safety of American investments and citizens, and at least mildly inter¬ 
ested in acquiring a naval base, Washington had long sought to expand its 
influence. Efforts to establish a customs receivership repeatedly foundered 
on the twin rocks of Haitian intransigence and instability. By the beginning 
of 1915, President Woodrow Wilson was beginning to consider military 
intervention, something he wished to avoid. 1 

Events overtook policy. In July 1915, another caco army descended on 
Port Au Prince. Before fleeing to the French Legation, President Guillaume 
Sam had 161 political prisoners, many from elite families, murdered. An 
enraged mob broke into the legation and literally tore Sam apart. 


47 


An American Naval force, commanded by Rear Admiral William B. 
Caperton, had already been ordered to Haitian waters and, at the request of 
the diplomatic corps, quickly landed 330 Marines and armed sailors. There 
was no organized resistance, though two sailors were killed, allegedly by 
snipers, but most likely by other Americans. 2 The shooting spurred Caper- 
ton to disarm as many Haitians as possible, in the process ensuring that 
the task of policing Port Au Prince and eventually the entire nation would 
become the responsibility of the Marines. 

Reinforcements for the initial landing party arrived steadily, but the ul¬ 
timate goals of the intervention remained unclear. On 14 August, the Chief 
of Naval Operations wrote Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Fra nk lin D. 
Roosevelt, “The State Department has not yet informed us of their exact 
policy in Haiti, but Mr. Lansing has expressed the intention of outlining an 
exact policy in the near future.” 3 

Caperton could not wait for Washington to formulate a policy. On 3 
September, he proclaimed Martial Law in “the territory now occupied by 
forces under my control,” adding, “Military Authorities will not interfere 
in the functions of the Civil Administration and the Courts, except in so far 
as relates to person violating military orders or regulations or otherwise 
interfering with the exercise of Military Authority.” 4 

A major issue quickly arose. The Haitian Congress was preparing to 
elect a new president and Washington wanted to insure it picked someone 
who would be amenable to its demands. There were two candidates, Rosal- 
vo Bobo, leader of the most recent caco revolt and Senate President Philippe 
Sudre Dartiguenave. Navy Secretary Josephus Daniels cabled Caperton, 
“Allow election of President to take place whenever Haitians wish. The 
United States prefers election of Dartiguenave.” Daniels later admitted, 
“this was equivalent to America making Dartiguenave President.” 5 Caper¬ 
ton certainly saw it that way. He summoned Bobo and informed him that, 
“the United States forbids” his presidential candidacy. 6 The same message 
was transmitted to the Haitian Congress where, on 11 August 1915, with a 
squad of Marines inside the Chamber, Dartiguenave was elected President 
with 94 out of 116 votes. 7 He was immediately sworn into office. 

Washington now had a Haitian President who appeared willing to accede 
to its demands. They were rapidly forthcoming. To insure Dartiguenave’s 
cooperation, the Secretary of State sent him a personal message assuring 
him that America would “aid and protect you while you are administering 
Haitian Government provided you stand firm with the United States, no 
matter what course others may take,” and adding that if his Cabinet should 


48 


resign he should “form another Government of patriots which, in Haiti’s 
interests, will accept wishes and guidance of the United States.” 8 

Washington’s immediate priority was obtaining a Treaty that would 
legitimize the occupation, establish firm control over finances, and provide 
for the development of a constabulary. As Secretary of State Lansing 
informed the American Charge in Haiti: “It seems indispensible to organize 
and maintain a trained constabulary which will take the place of the Haitian 
Army and which, well-officered and properly equipped and disciplined 
will possess sufficient power to preserve order, suppress insurrections and 
protect life and property throughout the Republic.” 9 Caperton didn’t wait 
for a Treaty before beginning preparations for creating the constabulary. 
He seized control of Haiti’s customs houses, then informed the American 
Legation that, “funds collected will be used for the organization and 
maintenance of an efficient constabulary.” 10 

The Treaty was signed, following considerable American pressure, on 
16 September 1915, but not finally ratified by the US Senate until Febru¬ 
ary 1916. Its provision for the constabulary was the longest clause and 
provided: 

The Haitian Government obligates itself, for the preserva¬ 
tion of domestic peace, the security of individual rights, 
and the observance of the provisions of this treaty, to cre¬ 
ate without delay an efficient constabulary, urban and ru¬ 
ral, composed of native Haitians. This constabulary shall 
be organized and officered by Americans appointed by the 
President of Haiti upon nomination by the President of 
the United States. The Haitian Government shall clothe 
these officers with the proper and necessary authority and 
uphold them in the performance of their functions. These 
officers will be replaced by Haitians as they, on examina¬ 
tion conducted under direction of a board to be selected 
by the senior American officer of this constabulary and 
in the presence of a representative of the Haitian Govern¬ 
ment, are found to be qualified to assume such duties. The 
constabulary herein provided for shall, under the direction 
of the Haitian government, have supervision and control 
of arms and ammunition, military supplies, and traffic 
therein throughout the country. The high contracting par¬ 
ties agree that the stipulations in this article are necessary 
to prevent factional strife and disturbances. 11 


49 


Without waiting for ratification, the Marines immediately began put¬ 
ting the provisions of this article into practice. The most immediate issues 
were recruiting acceptable enlisted Haitians and procuring Marine officers. 
The latter proved somewhat simpler. The Marines made two decisions, 
both of which would serve as precedents for future constabulary develop¬ 
ment in the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua. The first was to draw most 
of the constabulary’s junior officers from the ranks of the Marine’s non¬ 
commissioned officers, mostly sergeants, but including some corporals. 
The second was that those commissioned in the new Gendarmerie (later 
designated as the Garde d ’Haiti) would draw a salary from the Haitian 
government in addition to their regular pay. Since most Marines served 
at two or more ranks above their rank in the Corps this was a significant 
incentive and volunteers were not hard to find. 12 

Unfortunately, the Marines had little to go on, other than prior service 
records, when it came to selecting those detailed to the Gendannerie. The 
potential pool was very limited and no Marine had significant experience 
in training and leading troops of a different race and culture and speaking 
a different language. The Marines also lacked experience in police duties 
as the Corps left this, along with medical services, to the Navy. Few Ma¬ 
rine officers and almost no enlisted men were fluent in French, while none 
spoke Haitian Creole, the language of the population’s vast majority. Most 
shared the racial prejudices of American society, which exposure to the 
appalling conditions of life in Haiti only strengthened. 13 These problems 
would get worse when many of the best qualified Marines were sent to 
Europe after America entered World War I. 

Along with the development of the Gendarmerie, the Marines faced 
the necessity of disarming existing Haitian forces. In the case of the Army, 
this did not prove particularly difficult. Admiral Caperton preferred that 
this be done by paying for weapons and that succeeded with most of the 
old Haitian Army. Each man who turned in a rifle was paid fifteen gourdes 
(less than $3) and officers might get additional funds. 14 In some cases, ex¬ 
isting municipal police were allowed to keep their weapons and remain on 
duty until the Gendarmerie could take their place. Dealing with the cacos, 
however, proved much more difficult. They were strongly opposed to the 
intervention, especially when Marines began to move into their traditional 
strongholds in the north. Caperton tried to negotiate payments with some 
of their leaders, but the results were disappointing. Ultimately, Marine pa¬ 
trols were sent into the countryside to forcibly disband them. After several 
sharp encounters, which produced few Marine but numerous caco casual¬ 
ties, resistance was broken and most of the surviving cacos disarmed. 15 


50 


The Gendarmerie was not yet sufficiently organized to take part in 
these operations. In December 1915, Major Smedley Darlington Butler 
was appointed as that force’s first commander with the Haitian rank of Ma¬ 
jor General. Butler had distinguished himself in the operations against the 
cacos and had the additional advantage of being the son of the Chairman of 
the House Naval Appropriations Committee. He was forceful, outspoken 
and ambitious. He was also strongly prejudiced against Haitians in general 
and the political leadership in particular. For example, he wrote Brigadier 
General John A. Lejeune: 

Things here in Haiti are at a standstill. This wretched Gov¬ 
ernment absolutely refuses to sign any agreement which 
may deprive them of their graft. ... I have told these mis¬ 
erable ministers what I think of them and if I stay here 
they know exactly what to expect. As far as I am able this 
country will be run as a piece of machinery, with no pref¬ 
erence being shown any negro owing to a supposed supe¬ 
riority due to the infiisement of white blood in his veins. 16 

A few months later he wrote, “This political situation here is becoming 
more ridiculous every day and in my opinion there is nothing to do, but 
kick the whole crowd out and have a military government.” 17 

Despite his misgivings, Butler set out to recruit a force. This proved 
more difficult than had been anticipated. The lowest class of Haitians, 
some of who were forcibly conscripted, had always undertaken police and 
military duties. They rarely received much of their pay. Instead, their of¬ 
ficers put the funds into their own pockets. It was difficult for them to 
conceive that conditions under the Marines would be any different. A re¬ 
quirement for minimal literacy was quickly dropped when it turned out 
that many recruits could not even speak French, much less read and write 
it. This meant that most training had to be done by the use of gestures and 
the exercise of physical force. In a few cases, Marines were able to procure 
the services of Jamaicans resident in Haiti who could speak both English 
and Creole. They received appointments as sergeants, but served largely as 
interpreters. 18 Health was also a problem. Medical examinations revealed 
that 95 percent of potential recruits had blood diseases and 85 percent were 
infected with worms. 19 

As a result, training had to be much more rudimentary and prolonged 
than initially envisioned. It was not until early February 1916 that any 
significant number of troops, referred to as Gendarmes, could be deployed 
outside of Port Au Prince. On 31 January 1916, Colonel Littleton Waller, 
the commander of the US Marines in Haiti, issued General Orders No. 35, 


51 


detailing the duties of the force, then called the Gendarmerie d’Haiti. In 
addition to preserving order and protecting individuals and property, they 
were to control arms, prevent smuggling, take charge of roads, bridges, 
public building, telephone and telegraph services, irrigation services and 
public lands, collect vital statistics and make agricultural reports, undertake 
assorted health related activities including “preventing spread of animal 
diseases,” control prisons, issue permits for internal travel, enforce weights 
and measures standard and enforce harbor and docking regulations. 20 

This huge list underscored the difficult tasks facing the new force. Their 
control over telephone and telegraph lines proved of short duration and 
was transferred to civil authorities, but most of the other functions contin¬ 
ued to be exercised throughout the occupation. Gendarmerie detachments 
were often the only effective government presence in many rural areas giv¬ 
ing them wide authority along with their extensive duties. Of course, how 
much attention was actually devoted to such tasks as controlling animal 
disease and supervising weights and measures is open to question. 

General Orders No. 35 was amplified and placed on a firmer legal 
footing on 24 August 1916 with the signing of a Protocol between the 
United States and Haiti detailing the composition, duties, and authority 
of the Gendarmerie. This provided for a force of 116 officers and 2,533 
enlisted men plus 16 clerks and a tiny coast guard of 44 officers and men. 
Pay ranged from $3,000 a year for the only general to $120 a year for pri¬ 
vates. The total budget was $766,015 for the land forces and $35,048 for 
the coast guard. The protocol further stipulated that the force should “be 
considered the sole military and police force of the Republic of Haiti” and 
gave broad powers to its American commander. 21 

At the end of January, in an action which many Marines believed was 
designed to discredit the new force, but which more likely was adopted 
to consolidate presidential power, President Dartiguenave decreed the 
abolition of local law enforcement authority previously exercised by 
a variety of local officials with little central government control. This 
compelled Caperton to issue a hurried proclamation ordering that, “all 
the military and police duties heretofore performed by these officers be 
performed by the Gendarmerie of Haiti, supported by the expeditionary 
forces under my command.” 22 Dispersing the Gendarmerie to posts 
throughout Haiti now became a matter of some urgency. Fortunately, this 
process proceeded relatively rapidly and smoothly. Most areas remained 
quiet, but there were numerous complaints of abuses of citizens and 
arbitrary arrests. The American Financial Advisor to Haiti admitted that: 


52 


The gendarmerie, which was in close contact with the 
peasants and villagers, had had an insufficient period of 
training and Haitian gendarmes, not yet thoroughly disci¬ 
plined, exhibited that brutal disregard for individual rights 
which had been a habit with the police and soldiers of 
the old regime. It is probable too that some—though not 
many—of the American officers of the gendarmerie had 
the same attitude. 23 

Arming the Haitians presented a different set of problems. Originally 
they were given outdated weapons used by the old army, for which 
little reliable ammunition was available. 24 Some Marines, distrustful of 
black Haitians, opposed providing more modem weapons. But necessity 
ultimately prevailed and a quantity of Krag-Jorgensen rifles, the standard 
American weapon in the Philippines, were made available. This was none 
too soon as they were about to go into combat, joining the Marines in 
eliminating the remaining organized cacos. Earlier Marine successes 
had produced over 200 Haitian deaths, causing Navy Secretary Josephus 
Daniels to cable Caperton to curb his offensive operations and to “inform 
Department before taking steps that would lead to loss of life on either side 
except in cases of urgent necessity.” 25 These restrictions, however, didn’t 
necessarily apply to the constabulary. In any case, the effort to establish 
Gendarme posts in Haiti’s north, the traditional caco stronghold produced 
numerous clashes in most of which the Haitian troops prevailed. There was, 
however, one especially embarrassing incident. While the Maine Sergeant/ 
Gendarme Lieutenant who commanded the prison in Port Au Prince was 
briefly absent, a massive jailbreak occurred. The escaping inmates, led by 
two caco chiefs, seized most of the prison guards’ rifles and headed back 
north. Butler was convinced that at least some of the guards had connived 
in this, and was determined to help recapture the prisoners. As it turned out 
most were soon killed or captured by a mixed Marine-Gendarme patrol. 
One group of ten prisoners who had been captured allegedly tried again to 
escape and were all shot. 26 Despite the obviously suspicious nature of this 
account, no effort seems to have been made to investigate the killings or to 
discipline those responsible. 

Relations between the Gendarmerie and the Haitian government were 
often difficult. This was in part due to Haitian efforts to maintain some 
degree of sovereignty, in part to Butler’s personality and prejudices, and in 
part to disputes among Haitian political factions. President Dartiguenave 
was repeatedly caught between US pressures and nationalist sentiments, 
especially those of Haiti’s Congress. His attempts to steer a middle 


53 


course were constantly frustrated, both by Butler, who often treated 
him with disdain, and by the Congress which was determined to assert 
its independence. 27 All of these issues came to a head with Washington’s 
determination to have Haiti adopt a new constitution which would be in 
line with the provisions of the Treaty and would also permit foreign land 
ownership. The latter had been prohibited since the expulsion of the French 
and the issue aroused strong nationalist antipathies. In an effort to deal 
with this, Dartiguenave had the Gendarmerie dissolve the Haitian Senate 
in April 1916. This action, however, also made impossible the adoption of 
a new constitution. In an effort to overcome this, both houses of the Haitian 
Congress were called into a combined session as a Constituent Assembly 
in early 1917. A draft constitution, at least partly written by then Assistant 
Secretary of the Navy Fra nk lin D. Roosevelt (who later claimed authorship 
of the entire document) was presented to the Assembly that tried to ignore 
it. Instead there was an outburst of national feeling and a rush effort to 
push through a constitution distinctly at odds with Washington’s desires. 
The assembly also refused an American request that it declare war on 
Germany. 28 

Both the United States and President Dartiguenave were increasingly 
concerned by the Assembly’s independence. The president even feared it 
might attempt to impeach him. He and Butler agreed to its forcible dis¬ 
solution. This was done on 19 June 1917, using what Butler described as 
“genuine Marine Corps methods.” 29 With a squad of gendarmes he forced 
his way into the room where the Assembly was in session. When its presi¬ 
dent discovered his mission he began to bitterly attack the Americans and 
President Dartiguenave. According to Butler: 

The gendarmes, who had previously been Haitian soldiers 
and who had taken part in this dissolving function about 
every six months, had always been accustomed to shoot 
at this stage of the game, and when the President was 
criticized they all commenced to load their rifles, which 
created considerable confusion, and we had to suspend 
operations until we ran around and took the cartridges out 
of their guns. I was their chief and they were interested in 
my cause because I paid them and fed them and treated 
them squarely. 30 

He later described what happened next in an interview with Lowell Thom¬ 
as: 

The hall was in an uproar. Tables and chairs were upset, 
deputies were surging forward. I had to calm down the 
54 


gendarmes who were clicking rifles again. Finally the pre¬ 
siding officer rang the dinner bell he used for a gavel and 
reluctantly read the presidential decree. Fie then declared 
the assembly dissolved and directed that the chamber be 
cleared. The gendarmes followed the unwilling legislators 
into the street and locked the door. 31 

FTaiti would have no Congress for the next twelve years. Dartiguenave 
appointed a Council of State, but it had largely advisory powers. With 
considerable assistance from and pressure by the United States, notably 
Assistant Navy Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, a new Constitution was 
drafted. It included clauses making the Gendarmerie the “only armed 
force of the Republic,” and allowing resident foreigners to own land. It 
also declared that, “All the acts of the United States during its military 
occupation of Haiti are ratified and validated.” 32 

With the Assembly dissolved there was no legal way for the new 
Constitution to be ratified. Dartiguenave suggested that the document be 
submitted to a plebiscite. Washington, which recognized that this was of 
dubious legality and that asking an overwhelmingly illiterate population to 
vote on a lengthy legal document had obvious elements of farce, ultimately 
agreed. The plebiscite was held on 12 June 1918. Gendarme officers 
were charged with supervising the polls and distributing the ballots and 
were told to make sure the vote was favorable. They evidently had little 
difficulty accomplishing this since the final vote total was announced as 
69,337 for and 335 against. 33 It is doubtful in many voters had any idea 
what they were voting for. One allegedly even thought he was electing a 
Pope. Not all American officials were comfortable with this result. After he 
became President, Roosevelt received a letter from Josephus Daniels, who, 
as Secretary of the Navy in 1918, had been his boss, saying: 

You know that the things we were forced to do in Haiti 
was a bitter pill for me ... I never did wholly approve of 
that Constitution of Haiti you had a hand in framing ... I 
expect in the light of experience we both regret the neces¬ 
sity of denying even a semblance of self determination in 
our control of Haiti when we had to go in and end revolu¬ 
tions or see some European government do so. 34 

While much of the Gendarme leadership was involved with national 
politics, and a few units were still engaging cacos in the north, most of 
the force settled down to more or less routine duties. As it became obvi¬ 
ous that Caperton’s original assurances that the occupation would be of 


55 


short duration were not going to be fulfilled some Marine officers began 
bringing their wives and families to Haiti. This however, was not an op¬ 
tion for those in rural areas that were isolated, impoverished, and generally 
inhospitable. Being assigned to such areas did have its advantages. As one 
observer noted: 

The marine who becomes an officer in the gendarmerie 
finds himself clothed with practically unlimited power 
in the district where he serves. He is the judge of practi¬ 
cally all civil and criminal cases, settling everything from 
a family fight to a murder. He is paymaster for all funds 
expanded by the national government, he is ex-officio di¬ 
rector of the schools, inasmuch as he pays the teachers. He 
controls the mayor and city council, since they can spend 
no funds without his o.k. As collector of taxes he exercises 
a strong influence on all individuals in the community. 35 

An extreme example of this authority was that exercised by Marine 
sergeant -Gendarme Lieutenant Faustin Wirkus, who had charge of the 
Haitian island of La Gonave. Wirkus, who had already served in Haiti for 
several years before going to La Gonave, made a sustained effort not only 
to learn Creole, but also to understand Haitian culture and religion. In the 
process he overcame most of his imported prejudices. He managed to so 
ingratiate himself on the island that, ultimately, at least some of the in¬ 
habitants, began addressing him as “the King.” 36 American author William 
Seabrook, generally a critic of the intervention, wrote glowingly about 
Wirkus. 37 Cases like this, however, were the exception rather than the rule. 
Most officers carried out their duties efficiently, but had little if any social 
contact with local populations and largely failed to understand the culture. 
This was accentuated by frequent rotations of officers from post to post and 
by the relatively low educational level of the average enlisted Marine who 
was made a Gendarme junior officer. 

One effort to incorporate what was believed to be a traditional part 
of Haitian life turned into a major disaster. This was the adoption of the 
corvee , the old French system of compulsory local labor on the roads. 
The French had built a considerable road network, but in the more than a 
century since they had been expelled these had fallen into disrepair. The 
Marines wanted an improved system to facilitate their operations and other 
Americans saw this as a key to efforts at economic development. But funds 
were scarce and, despite their poverty, almost no Haitians wanted to work 
on the roads. It was evidently Smedley Butler who discovered that there 
was an 1864 law still on the books that could compel local inhabitants who 


56 


did not pay road taxes to work on them. As Gendarme Commander, most 
of the task of securing labor and building roads fell to his command and 
he undertook this with considerable enthusiasm. He had little trouble in 
selling this idea to his Marine Corps superiors. As General George Barnett, 
Commandant of the Corps from 1914 to 1920, later testified, “you can not 
have good military control, you can not have good business, you can not 
have good anything in a country without roads.” Speaking specifically of 
Haiti, he then added, “The first thing that would occur to a military man, 
and did occur to them, was that before you could keep up any posts in the 
interior you had to have roads.” 38 

At first the road construction projects seemed to go fairly well, espe¬ 
cially the rebuilding of the road from Port Au Prince to Haiti’s second city, 
Cape Haitien. Butler was enthusiastic, personally making one of the first 
trips on the road, but cautioned: 

It is not well to describe in a letter the methods we used to 
build this road, but it might be interesting to you to kn ow 
that when this highway is finished, it will have cost the 
Haitian government only about $500 a mile. Since you 
were here we have opened nearly 400 miles of road in this 
country . . . We have over 15,000 at work in the whole 
of Haiti, a goodly sized body of intelligent voters for any 
project the United States may wish to put across. . . . Am 
taking His Excellency and his Cabinet to Cape Haitien and 
Ouanaminthe on January 5th for a big celebration and of¬ 
ficial opening of the road during which trip he will justify 
through his own people any rough stuff we may have em¬ 
ployed in the building of the road. 39 

The “rough stuff’ got worse the further the roads got from Port Au 
Prince. Gendarme officers were personally responsible for construction in 
areas under their jurisdiction and this led to abuses. The overall Ameri¬ 
can military commander in the area, Rear Admiral H.S. Knapp, reported 
that in violation of the law Haitians had been compelled to work outside 
their home districts, and had been ’’marched to and from work bound to¬ 
gether.” 40 Local officials, who were charged with preparing lists of those 
eligible for roadwork, contributed to abuses, exercising favoritism extort¬ 
ing bribes, and making some individuals work repeatedly. 41 

Complaints mounted and the use of the corvee ultimately contributed 
to a revival of the cacos. Recognizing the problem, on 1 October 1918, the 
Marine Commander in Haiti ordered the system discontinued. One officer, 
however, Major Clarke H. Wells, Commander of the District of the North, 

57 



historically the center of caco activity, ignored the order. In addition to 
continuing the corvee, with all its abuses, there were charges that Wells 
ordered his subordinates to kill prisoners and suppressed reports of these 
activities. 42 He was removed from his post, but never court-martialed for 
his offenses. 

Resistance to the occupation broke out in late 1918 and within a few 
months achieved serious proportions. Charlemagne Peralte, who had 
been imprisoned by the Marines for earlier revolutionary activities, but 
had escaped, led the resistance. He turned out to be a natural and skillful 
insurgent commander. Within a few months, aided by the widespread 
discontent caused by the corvee, he had raised a force estimated at 5,000, 
supported by up to three times that number of part-time fighters and active 
sympathizers. He even developed an effective intelligence system, using 
Haitian market women to keep him informed of Gendarme and Marine 
movements. 43 

Major responsibility for dealing with this new outbreak devolved on 
the Gendarmerie, which had mixed success at best. Many of their officers 
were new in command and of a lesser quality than their predecessors, as 
many of the best men, including their first Commander, Smedley Butler, 
had been sent to Europe to fight in World War I. 44 Their dispersal in over a 
hundred small posts, combined with their lack of combat experience and 
outdated arms made it impossible for them to undertake an effective coun¬ 
ter-insurgency campaign. That task increasingly fell to Marine unites, but 
they had seen their strength reduced due to World War I. 

Charlemagne was finally killed by a covert Gendarme operation, 
involving two Marine non-commissioned officers holding Gendarme 
commission, plus a patrol of Haitian enlisted men. They were able, through 
an elaborate ruse, to penetrate his camp, kill him, and scatter his followers. 
For their exploits, the two Americans were awarded the Medal of Honor. 45 
Charlemagne’s death did not end the fighting, which dragged on into the 
spring of 1920. At one point, a caco force actually managed to break into 
Port Au Prince, but was soon driven off. A change in policy provided 
amnesty for those who surrendered and fighting wound down. When the last 
major caco commander was killed in 1920 the conflict essentially ended, 
although clashes with isolated groups, now largely criminal, continued 
for years. During the fighting the Gendarmerie lost five American officers 
and twenty-seven enlisted men killed while caco losses were estimated at 
1,881 in 1919 and another 90 in early 1920. 46 

The problems with the coi-vee and the subsequent caco uprising had 
revealed serious deficiencies in the intervention’s organization. Jurisdic- 
58 


tions between the State Department, the Naval services, other Treaty of¬ 
ficials, and the Haitian government were often confused and overlapping. 
While the State Department, at least in theory, had overall direction, its 
Minister in Haiti, Arthur Bailly-Blanchard was weak and often absent. The 
Navy Department generally deferred to the Admiral on the scene, but when 
the United States also occupied the neighboring Dominican Republic and 
Caperton’s replacement, Rear Admiral H.S. Knapp, decided to makes his 
headquarters there, Naval direction suffered. The senior Marine officer in 
Haiti was the Brigade commander, but he had limited dealings with the 
Haitian government. The Gendarmerie Commander was always junior to 
him in rank. He was supposed to report to Haiti’s president, but in reality 
usually looked for advice and support to the Brigade Commander. The 
Customs Receivership was nominally under the direction of the Army’s 
Bureau of Insular Affairs, while the Financial Advisor reported to the State 
Department. 47 After 1917 all elements of the government in Washington 
were preoccupied with the war in Europe and gave little attention to Hai¬ 
tian affairs. When President Wilson was largely disabled by a stroke during 
his last seventeen months in office, coordination deteriorated still further. 
There seemed to be no clear direction or goals for the occupation, no con¬ 
crete plans for Haiti’s future. 

The Gendarmerie suffered from this as well. When Colonel Frederic 
Wise returned to Haiti from Europe and took command of the force he 
found that conditions had deteriorated within the force and in its relations 
with the Marine Brigade. While units stationed in the capitol were in rea¬ 
sonably good shape, he found that rural units: 

... were in bad shape. Their uniforms were in rags. Most of 
them were barefooted. Their rifles were a joke. They were 
discarded Krags, most of them with the sights knocked 
off. If they hit a house at point blank range with those 
weapons they were doing well. Their barracks were tum¬ 
bledown. Their morale was pretty low. The Cacos seemed 
to have them bluffed. 48 

Wise also found credible accusations of the killing of prisoners and 
other abuses. He immediately set about trying to remedy these conditions, 
providing a determined leadership that the force had largely lacked since 
Butler’s departure. Improvement in material conditions was steady. The 
troops were given new shoes and uniforms, armed with more modem 
Springfield rifles, and their quarters were repaired. The ration allowance 
was increased from ten to fifteen cents a day. 49 Troops began to get regular 
rifle training and soon demonstrated that they were very capable marksmen. 


59 


In 1924, a Gendarmerie rifle team tied with France for second place in the 
Olympic Rifle competition. 50 

The Gendarmerie also began to develop its own intelligence service. 
Previously, this had been a function of the Marine Brigade. During World 
War I, it had largely focused on the activities of those of German descent 
residing in Haiti, which might in part account for the failure to anticipate 
the caco uprising or to gauge the depth of resentment over the corvee. 

The end of the caco uprising and the improved condition of the Gen¬ 
darmerie meant that the remaining Marines could largely be concentrated 
in Port Au Prince and Cape Haitien and rural security left in Gendarme 
hands. From 1921 until 1929 the Marine Brigade saw almost no action and 
its strength at times dipped as low as five hundred. 51 American efforts to 
pacify Haiti seemed to have largely succeeded and the Gendarmerie was 
free to devote some of its attention to other matters such as a national im¬ 
munization campaign when an outbreak of smallpox threatened. 

The end of the caco revolt did not keep the occupation from becoming 
an issue in the 1920 US Presidential campaign, in part because Fra nk lin 
D. Roosevelt was the Democrat’s Vice-Presidential nominee. The 
Republican Presidential nominee and eventual victor, Senator Warren G. 
Harding, denounced the Democrat’s policy in Haiti and declared, “I will 
not empower an Assistant Secretary of the Navy to draft a constitution 
for helpless neighbors in the West Indies and jam it down their throats by 
bayonets borne by United States Marines.” 52 

In the fall of 1920, remarks such as this, combined with press accounts 
of abuses by the Marines and Gendannerie caused the Navy Department 
to dispatch Admiral Henry T. Mayo to Haiti to head a Court of Inquiry. 
Both the Navy and the outgoing Wilson administration had an interest in 
sweeping abuses under the rug and the Court devoted most of its efforts to 
excusing the Marines. Only held three days of hearings were held in Haiti, 
during which it carefully avoided calling the Gendarmerie Commander, 
Colonel Frederic Wise, to testify. 53 The Court then issued its report that 
concluded: 

After a careful study of the matters in issue, based not 
only upon the evidence in the record, but also upon the 
court’s own observations while in Haiti, the Court regards 
the charges which have been published as ill considered 
and thoroughly unwarranted reflections on a portion of 
the United States Marine Corps, which has performed dif¬ 
ficult, dangerous, and delicate duty in Haiti in a manner 


60 


which, instead of calling for adverse criticism, is entitled 
to the highest commendation. 54 

The March 1921 inauguration of the Harding administration seemed to 
open the possibility of at least a thorough review if not a termination of the 
occupation. The purpose of continued occupation was certainly unclear. 
The original treaty had provided for US controls lasting for up to ten years 
with a possible extension for another ten years. In 1917, the United States 
and the Dartiguenave administration had hurriedly signed an agreement to 
extend the Treaty provisions until May 1936, but the Haitian Senate never 
ratified it. With that body dissolved, the legality of this agreement was 
open to question. 55 During the last months of the previous administration, 
civilian interest in and control over events in Haiti had been at low ebb 
and the Navy and Marines had been left to run things pretty much as they 
saw fit. Predictably, this meant an emphasis on maintaining order and 
avoiding controversy, with little attention paid to longer-range matters. An 
internal Marine Corps memorandum on the possibility of withdrawing the 
Brigade admitted that, “Haitians are, in general, opposed to the occupation 
and that a large majority of educated Haitians are opposed to the 
Gendannerie.” The author, however, justified the continuance of martial 
law and the use of Marine provost Courts to try Haitians on the grounds 
that Haitians feared them and if they were abolished it “would destroy 
all good accomplishments of occupation.” If power were turned over to 
Haitians, “the time would truly be opportune for the Haitian politicians . 
. . to undermine the Gendarmerie .” In conclusion, the author argued that, 
“it would be decidedly detrimental to the interests of both Haiti and the 
United States to withdraw the occupation, to abolish the existing martial 
laws or modified form of military government.” 56 This essentially became 
the Marine position in discussions within the US government on the future 
of the occupation. 

Despite election rhetoric, the Harding administration made no effort 
to end the occupation. It did, however, recognize the need for better con¬ 
trol over events and coordination among the various agencies working in 
the country. The new Secretary of State, Charles Evans Hughes, had been 
asked by President Harding to recommend changes in US policy toward 
Haiti. Hughes responded by telling the President, “We cannot leave Haiti 
at the present time,” and argued that the prime task should be to “perfect 
the methods of administration.” This included efforts to improve the Gen¬ 
darmerie and the appointment of a senior Marine officer as the President’s 
personal representative to coordinate the work of all the American agen¬ 
cies in Haiti. 57 


61 


In addition to Hughes’ recommendations, the Harding administration 
had the recommendations of a lengthy Senate investigation of conditions 
in Haiti. A Committee of Inquiry, chaired by Senator Medill McCormick, 
was established in August 1921 to investigate the occupation of both Haiti 
and the Dominican Republic. McCormick made a much more serious ef¬ 
fort then had Mayo and the lengthy report of his Committee included nu¬ 
merous recommendations for improving the administration of Haiti. But, 
in line with both State and Navy Department sentiment, it did not rec¬ 
ommend terminating the occupation. Instead, it recommended that a High 
Commissioner be appointed to oversee and coordinate American policy. 
Hughes agreed and asked the Navy to recommend an active duty Marine 
officer for the post. Smedley Butler actively campaigned for the appoint¬ 
ment, but the State Department feared he would rely on coercion instead 
of persuasion and asked the Navy to find someone else. 58 Colonel John H. 
Russell, who had commanded the Brigade in Haiti, was the next choice. 
He was quickly promoted to Brigadier General and appointed by President 
Harding as High Commissioner with the additional ra nk of Ambassador 
Extraordinary. His instructions came from Secretary of State Hughes who 
informed him: 

In the performance of your duties, you will be guided by 
instructions from the Secretary of State and will report to 
the Department of State on all matters other than those 
solely connected with the functions of the Commanding 
Officer of the United States Forces of Occupation. . . . 

All communications from the Government of the United 
States to the Government of Haiti will be conveyed to the 
Haitian Government through the High Commissioner. . . 

. It will be your duty to coordinate the work of the Treaty 
officials . . . and of the Commanding Officer of the United 
States Forces of Occupation in Haiti... and to bring about 
harmonious cooperation between these officials and the 
members of the Haitian Government. 59 

Hughes went on to say, “the history of our intervention in Haitian Affairs 
is not viewed with satisfaction by this Government,” and to outline several 
areas the administration believed deserved priority attention. One of these 
was the Gendarmerie : 

It is understood that the United States Marines, compos¬ 
ing the Forces of Occupation cannot be withdrawn from 
Haiti until the native constabulary, or gendarmerie, is bet¬ 
ter organized and disciplined than it is at present, without 


62 


a recurrence of disorder. Inasmuch as it is the desire of the 
Government of the United States to withdraw its Forces 
of Occupation as soon as it may be possible, it should be 
one of the chief purposes of your mission to assist the 
Haitian Government in improving the discipline and or¬ 
ganization of the gendarmerie and in bringing about an 
increase in the number of men enlisted, if necessary, so 
as to make the gendarmerie, in as brief a period of time 
as possible, competent in itself to maintain order in Haiti 
without American assistance. It is believed that if such 
reorganization of the gendarmerie is taken up by the Hai¬ 
tian Government, with your support, the presence of the 
United States Forces of Occupation will not be necessary 
after a few years’ time. 60 

Despite the tone of these instructions the United States was destined to 
continue its occupation for twelve more years. 

Russell set out to fulfill his mandate immediately. One of the steps 
he took was to begin training Haitians to fill the junior officer ranks. At 
the outset of the occupation there had been some sentiment for rapidly 
training Haitian officers, but despite the protests of the Marine Brigade 
Commander, the Secretary of the Navy decided that all initial officers 
should be Marines. 61 

There were some early efforts to train Haitian officers. Ten French- 
speaking candidates recruited from the French-speaking mulatto elite 
were enrolled in an officer candidate class in 1915. All, however, soon 
left the program, in part because of cultural clashes, in part because some 
of their Marine instructors couldn’t speak French, and in part because 
many of the Marines were prejudiced against the idea of Haitian officers. 62 
Gendarmerie Commander, Smedley Butler, for example, wrote that: 

We have tried Haitian lieutenants, but have found them 
to be a failure by actual experience, and I believe that it 
will be necessary, for a time, to have all the officers of this 
force Americans. Under the leadership of our marines, the 
Constabularymen have put down disturbances in Haiti, 
showing that they will make very reliable, good police¬ 
men if officered by Americans. 63 

After Russell’s appointment, the Marines began to appoint Haitians to 
the most junior officer posts. At first, there were only five Haitian officers 
in the entire force. These numbers were slowly augmented, largely by pro- 


63 


motions from the ranks of the Gendarmerie. In addition, a revived Ecole 
Militaire was established and admitted twelve students. Twelve more were 
later admitted to what was to be a two-year course of instruction. 64 By then 
end of 1925, the force had 53 Haitian officers, and by the end of 1928 a 
majority of the lieutenants and at least one captain were Haitians and half 
of the military sub-districts were totally manned by Haitian officers. 65 

The relative tranquility of much of the 1920s also made possible 
improved and expanded training of enlisted personnel. Recruits now 
underwent eight weeks of basic training before being sent to the field. 
In typical Marine fashion, this training included strong emphasis on 
marksmanship. There was also a program established to provide basic 
elementary education for enlisted men, most of who were illiterate when 
they joined. Health services were also expanded and the constabulary 
developed its own health service, including some Haitian physicians. 66 
Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes visited Haiti and reported, “The 
Gendarmerie d’Haiti, the local police force, has been most efficiently 
handled and brought to a very high standard of excellence. It has practically 
taken over the policing of the interior of Haiti and has made possible the 
withdrawal of the Marines.” 67 

Other than the steady integration of Haitians into the junior ranks, the 
remainder of the 1920s passed with few major changes in the roles and 
missions of the constabulary. Perhaps most noteworthy was a November 
1928 change in name from Gendarmerie to the Garde d’Haiti. The original 
name evidently arose from some confusion in the French translation of 
the Treaty and was seen as increasingly inappropriate given the military 
as well as police functions undertaken by the force. Some Marines com¬ 
plained, in part because no additional funds were appropriated to cover 
such costs as new stationery, but the new name became permanent. 68 

There was also some expansion of constabulary functions during this 
period. They took control of the Port Au Prince Fire Department. They 
built and maintained several small landing strips for airplanes throughout 
the Republic. Prisons came under their jurisdiction and while still far from 
ideal, in part because of inadequate Haitian Government funding, condi¬ 
tions were much better than during any previous period of Haitian history. 

One area, which remained outside of the Garde s control, was national 
politics. The American control of the force in this area, as in many others, 
had its strengths and weakness. The strength was that in a nation where 
force had been the traditional arbiter of power the military/police were 
removed from the political equation. The weakness was that knowing they 
had no real influence over the Garde. Haiti’s political leadership was es- 
64 



sentially able to ignore it, often provide inadequate funding, and follow 
American dictates with little fear of a popular backlash. Haitian presidents, 
along with some of the Marines, repeatedly tried to use the constabulary 
to harass and arrest opposition figures, especially those of the press. This 
raised concerns in Washington which feared the results of turning critics 
into martyrs and became a major source of contention between the Haitian 
Government and the State Department. 69 

Elections, or the lack thereof, also became a growing source of discon¬ 
tent. President Dartiguenave had wanted to succeed himself in 1922, but 
the United States vetoed that idea. Not wanting popular elections, Wash¬ 
ington, and those Haitians anxious to cooperate with its desires, managed 
to have the appointed Council of State select Louis Bomo as president for 
the next six-year term. No Congress or local officials were elected. The 
United States imposed Constitution stipulated that Congressional elections 
should be held every two years unless the President stipulated that condi¬ 
tions would not allow this. Bomo so stipulated in both 1924 and 1926. 
He also had his handpicked Council of State elect him to a second term 
in 1926. When this seemed to arouse little popular protest he decreed that 
there would be no election in 1928. In agreement with Russell, Borno also 
had several Constitutional Amendments, including one extending his term 
until 1930, submitted to a plebiscite despite the absence of any Constitu¬ 
tional grounds for such a procedure. Once again the plebiscite was a farce, 
with the Government announcing that the amendments had been approved 
by a vote of 177,436 to 3,799.™ By this time, the process was becoming a 
growing source of discontent within Haiti and of potential embarrassment 
in Washington. When the world depression hit Haiti the following year the 
stage was set for major confrontations. 

On 5 October 1929, with the reluctant acquiescence of the State 
Department, Bomo announced that there would be no elections in 1930 
and that the Council of State would once again choose a President. Dana 
Gardner Munro, who as a senior State Department official supported this 
decision, later admitted, “In the light of hindsight, the wisdom of this 
decision seems doubtful. The consequences of holding an election might 
have been less embarrassing to the United States than what did happen.” 71 

What did happen was a wave of popular protests. They began with 
strikes by students at the Central Agricultural School, but quickly spread. 
Bomo wanted the protests crushed and opposition political leaders ar¬ 
rested, but Russell, at first, refused. As government workers began to join 
the strike, both Russell and Bomo began to fear that the Garde s loyalty 
might not be reliable. While these fears ultimately proved illusory, a ner- 


65 


vous Russell declared a state of martial law, something that had originally 
been decreed in 1915 and never officially revoked, and asked for Marine 
reinforc ements. 72 

Despite continued anti-American and anti-Bomo demonstrations, the 
situation seemed under control when, on 6 December, a Marine patrol 
fired on demonstrators in the coastal town of Aux Cayes, killing at least 
twelve and wounding a least 23 others. 73 Promptly dubbed the “Aux Cayes 
Massacre” this event doomed the Russell-Bomo regime and set the stage 
for ending the occupation. 

President Herbert Hoover had expressed concern over events in Haiti 
in his 3 December 1929 State of the Union message. Noting the presence 
of Marines in Haiti, Nicaragua, and China he had declared, “we do not 
wish to be represented abroad in such a manner.” Referring directly to 
Haiti, which he characterized as a “difficult problem, the solution to which 
is still obscure,” he announced his plan to “send a commission to Haiti to 
review and study the matter in an endeavor to arrive at some more definite 
policy than at present.” 74 

Following the events at Aux Cayes, the promised commission was hur¬ 
riedly established. Headed by W. Cameron Forbes and therefore kn own as 
the Forbes Commission, it arrived in Haiti on 28 February 1930 and stayed 
until 16 March. While there it not only prepared a report for the Presi¬ 
dent, it forged a political agreement between Bomo and his opponents 
which led to the selection of Eugene Roy as provisional President, serving 
from May until November 1930. Legislative elections were to be held in 
October and the new Haitian Congress would then choose a President to 
take office in November. 75 Elections were held on schedule, resulting in 
an overwhelming victory for the opponents of Bomo and the critics of the 
U.S. occupation. The new Congress then chose one of the most prominent 
critics, Stenio Vincent, as President for a six-year term. 76 

While in Haiti, the Forbes Commission looked into most aspects of the 
occupation, including the Garde. The American commander of that force, 
Major General Frank E. Evans, told the Commissioners that, “The need 
for an efficient Haitian Garde is clear,” and that Haitian officers wanted 
“some form of legislation that would protect them from displacement by 
any political favorite.” After criticizing the Haitian political class he con¬ 
cluded that Haiti’s future depended on “an efficient Garde and the legis¬ 
lation needed to insure its permanency and freedom from political influ¬ 
ence.” 77 

Some of the Commissioners were worried that the Garde, itself, might 
become an instrument of repression once the Marines departed, but their 
66 


greatest concern was the slow pace of Haitianization of the force. 78 By the 
time they arrived, only 2 of the Garde’s 23 captains, 17 of 58 first lieuten¬ 
ants, and 17 of its 57 second lieutenants were Haitians. In addition, there 
were 28 Haitian cadet officers. 79 The Commission strongly recommended 
the adoption of the plan for Haitianization that it had drawn up and its 
relatively speedy enactment. 80 

The Commissions Report and the replacement of Borno, first by Roy 
and then by Vincent, insured the end of Russell’s tenure as High Commis¬ 
sioner. He left Haiti and the office was abolished. The State Department 
was determined to regain control over Haitian affairs and named Dana 
Gardner Munro as Minister to Haiti, filling a post that had been vacant 
since Russell had been made High Commissioner. The Marines and the 
Navy Department, which had dominated Haitian affairs for the previous 
dozen years, were now clearly in a subordinate position. 81 

One of the first steps taken to Haitianize the Garde was to establish a 
permanent Ecole Militaire with regulations modeled on those of that of 
the US Naval Academy. The course, however, lasted only a year. 82 Classes 
were regularly graduated every year from 1931 through 1934, providing 
sufficient officers to man the Garde. 

The process of Haitianization was steady, but not always smooth. Vin¬ 
cent proved more difficult to deal with than Borno and there were repeated 
efforts to exert political influence over the Garde. One such dispute in¬ 
volved Vincent’s refusal to approve the promotion of a Haitian lieutenant 
to captain on the grounds that he had made “disparaging remarks.” The 
State Department was willing to give in on the issue, but Munro pressed 
the point, arguing that to give in would set a dangerous precedent of politi¬ 
cal control over Garde promotions and ultimately Vincent relented. 83 

This did not end the Haitian Governments efforts at exerting political 
influence. In September 1931, Vincent’s Minister of the Interior wrote to 
the Garde Commander, ordering him to issue instructions that the Garde’s 
police must obey all his requests. This contradicted the existing principle 
that all orders had to be given through the Commander and he refused to 
comply. 84 

Despite such conflicts, the Haitianization process continued. In late 
1930, the first Haitian was promoted to major and placed in command 
of one of Haiti’s departments. Two more promotions and subsequent ap¬ 
pointments to department commands followed in 1932. By early 1934 
a Haitian officer was in command in all the districts. This was not fast 
enough for the Vincent administration that wanted the process speeded 


67 


up. General R.P. Williams, the Marine Commander of the Garde, defended 
the progress, noting that, as of November 1931, 109 of the 195 officers 
were now Haitians and the remaining slots would be filled as more classes 
graduated from the Ecole Militaire. He added that early in 1932 a Haitian 
major would be promoted to colonel and two others would be promoted to 
major. He pointed out that Haitians were being promoted faster than their 
Marine counterparts and that the process of Haitianizaton was running well 
ahead of that projected by the Forbes Commission. 85 

The impact of the Depression complicated the process. The Vincent 
administration tried to reduce the budget for the Garde, and demanded a 
major reduction in the allowances given to Marines who served with it. 
How much of this was the result of actual budgetary pressure and how 
much was a political maneuver to gain increased control is impossible to 
determine since both factors were clearly present. In any case, after consul¬ 
tations between the State and Navy Departments, the United States agreed 
to a 15 percent reduction in the allowances given to Marines, but continued 
to press for full funding of the Garde} 6 Haiti briefly considered asking for 
an American Military Mission to be sent to continue training the Garde 
after the occupation ended, but ultimately did not pursue the idea. 

The final US withdrawal, originally planned for 1936, was moved up 
to 1934, with Assistant Secretary of State Francis White telling Munro in 
1931 that the President wanted “to withdraw from Haiti immediately if that 
were possible.” 87 If anything, the victory of Democratic candidate Frank¬ 
lin D. Roosevelt in the 1933 elections may have speeded up the process. 
There were some final minor disputes over transferring title of equipment 
and property that legally belonged to the Marines to Garde and the United 
States eventually simply donated much of this. Training programs were 
set up to prepare Haitian officers for assuming total command and other 
programs were established for those who would assume duties as quarter¬ 
masters and medical directors. On 1 August 1934, Colonel Demosthenes 
Calixte, who had originally enlisted in the Garde as a private, took com¬ 
mand and two weeks later the last Marine unit left Haiti. 88 Although the 
United States retained some control over Haitian finances until 1947, the 
occupation was over. 

The United States had created Haiti’s first truly professional armed 
force. In the process, it had virtually ended the banditry and disorder which 
had long plagued the countryside, had broken the power of local strongmen 
and eliminated much of the graft and corruption which had always char¬ 
acterized local politics, and had forever ended the danger of governments 
being overthrown by caco or other irregular armies recruited by disaffected 


68 


political leaders. What had not been done, of course, was to change the 
basic political culture where a small, ambitious elite dominated a largely 
illiterate and impoverished population. With politics circumscribed by 
Washington and the Garde controlled by the Marines, there was no viable 
pattern of civil-military relations, no formal instruments of civilian control, 
and little trust and/or communication between the political class and the of¬ 
ficer corps. This situation would play out with generally disastrous results 
in Haiti’s future. 

Problems between Vincent and the Garde increased following the Ma¬ 
rines departure. Anger over the Government’s failure to respond to a mas¬ 
sacre of Haitian peasants in the Dominican Republic led to an abortive plot 
by a group of officers in 1937. It was discovered and Colonel Calixte was 
ousted as Garde Commander and sent into exile. 89 Vincent then purged the 
officer coips of all those whose loyalty was suspect. 90 

Washington was able to block Vincent’s desire to perpetuate himself 
in office and Elie Lescot became President in 1941. He promptly declared 
himself “Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.” After Pearl Harbor, 
Haiti quickly declared war on the Axis and, in return, received a large 
supply of equipment and some US training for the Garde which acquired 
artillery, tanks and aircraft. 91 Lescot used the war as an excuse to repress 
political opposition and extend his control over the Garde. An abortive 
1945 plot against the President by some enlisted men was discovered and 
seven alleged ringleaders were summarily executed. 92 

In 1946, when Vincent tried to extend his time in office, student riots 
broke out and the Garde’s officers forced him to resign. This coup, the first 
but not the last made by the Garde, established a military junta that also 
dismissed the Congress. They promised to hold new elections and to turn 
overpower to whatever civilian government was selected. 93 To the surprise 
of many, this is exactly what happened. Dumarsais Estime became Presi¬ 
dent before the end of 1946 and the following year he renamed the Garde 
the Armee d ’Haiti. 94 

The change in title did not produce a change in behavior. In 1950, 
the military again intervened, ousted Estime and, following a questionable 
election, installed its own Commander, Colonel Paul Magloire, as presi¬ 
dent. Six years later the military forced him out. Elections the following 
year were won by Dr. Francis Duvalier, popularly known as “Papa Doc.” 
He soon established the most tyrannical and prolonged rule in modem Hai¬ 
tian history. 

Surprisingly, one of the new President’s first acts was to ask for an 
American military mission to undertake the training of the military. He 

69 


specifically wanted a Marine mission. The United States had established 
missions in most Latin American nations, but they were under Army, not 
Marine, control. His requests became more urgent when a strange con¬ 
glomeration of former Haitian officers and Dade County deputy sheriffs 
tried to invade Haiti and overthrow him. This predictably failed, but the 
following year, with the ascension of Fidel Castro to power in Cuba, US 
concerns over Haitian security grew. Another abortive invasion, this time 
including Cubans as well as Haitians, heightened anxieties in Haiti and in 
Washington. 95 A mission, led by Marine Colonel Robert Debs Heinl, was 
dispatched in January 1959. It almost immediately began to find itself in 
conflict with the regime. 

Papa Doc never trusted the military. He saw the US mission as a means 
of keeping them out of politics while at the same time strengthening their 
ability to defeat efforts to overthrow him. But, at the same time, he created 
a force of armed political thugs, known as the Tonton Macoutes, or the Vol¬ 
unteers in National Service, as a politically reliable counterweight to the 
military. As Duvalier repression grew, his problems with Washington and 
with his own military increased and there were several aborted attempts to 
overthrow him. All of this placed the Marine mission in an impossible po¬ 
sition, but they stayed on until March 1963 when the failure of an attempt 
to get the Dominican military to help oust Duvalier made their position 
impossible. 96 

Despite continued efforts to overthrow him Papa Doc clung to power 
until his death in 1971. The Presidency was inherited by his son, Jean- 
Claude Duvalier, known as “Baby Doc.” While not as conspicuously brutal 
as his father he may have been, he was even more corrupt. In February 
1986, a combination of widespread anti-regime riots and demonstrations 
and US pressures convinced Baby Doc to go into exile. A military junta 
took over. 97 

The next few years were chaotic. In 1990 a charismatic but somewhat 
unstable ex-priest, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was elected President. His 
policies rapidly collided with the interests of the military and he was 
overthrown and sent into exile. The United States refused to recognize the 
new regime, headed by General Raoul Cedras and pushed for the restoration 
of Aristide. This led to a US military intervention in 1994. Although there 
was no actual fighting, one result of this was the total destruction of the 
Haitian military. The force that Washington had created it had now helped 
destroy. 98 


70 


Notes 


1. For a detailed description of Wilson administration efforts to deal with 
Haiti without military intervention, see Dana Gardner Munro, Intervention and 
Dollar Diplomacy in the Caribbean, 1900-1921 (Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood 
Press Reprint, 1980), 329-351. 

2. Anne Cipriano Venzon, ed., “Smedley D. Butler to Maud. D. Butler, 
August 1,1915,” General Smedley Darlington Butler: The Letters of a Leatherneck, 
1898-1931 (New York, NY: Praeger, 1992), 153. 

3. Admiral Benson to Franklin D. Roosevelt, 14 August 1915, Franklin D. 
Roosevelt Papers, Naval Affairs, Box 12, Franklin Delano Roosevelt Presidential 
Library, Hyde Park, NY. 

4. W.B. Caperton, “Proclamation to the People of Port Au Prince, Haiti,” 3 
September 1915, Papers of Smedley Darlington Butler, Marine Corps Historical 
Archives, Quantico, VA. 

5. Hans Schmidt, The United States Occupation of Haiti, 1915-1934 (New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1971), 73. 

6. Captain E.L. Beach, “Admiral Caperton in Haiti,” National Archives and 
Record Service, Naval Records Collection of the Office of Naval Records and 
Library, RG 45, Subject File, Box 850. 

7. David Healy, Gunboat Diplomacy in the Wilson Era: The United States 
Navy in Haiti, 1915-1916 (Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press, 
1976), 113. 

8. Quoted in cable from Franklin D. Roosevelt, Acting Secretary of the 
Navy, to Flag, USS Washington, 25 August 1915, National Archives and Record 
Service, Naval Records Collection of the Office of Naval Records and Library, RG 
45, Subject File, Box 632. 

9. The Secretary of State to Charge Davis, 22 August 1915, full text 
included in Arthur C. Millspaugh, Haiti Under American Control (Boston, MA: 
World Peace Foundation, 1931), 208-209. 

10. Admiral Caperton to US Charge in Haiti, 2 September 1915, National 
Archives and Record Service, Naval Records Collection of the Office of Naval 
Records and Library, RG 45, Tray 47. 

11. Treaty Between the United States and Haiti, Finances, Economic 
Development and Tranquility of Haiti, Signed at Port Au Prince, 16 September 
1915, full text included in Millspaugh, 211-215. 

12. For details of the extra pay and rank structure, see Schmidt. 88-89. 

13. For details on the impact of this prejudice, see Schmidt, 79-81. 

14. Healy, 159-160. For a description of one Marine’s experience, see 
Colonel Frederic M. Wise and Meigs O. Frost, A Marine Tells It to You (New York, 
NY: J.H. Sears and Co., 1929), 132-133. 

15. Edward Bimberg Jr., “Black Bandits of Haiti,” Leatherneck (August 
1941), 6-9; Smedley Butler to Thomas Butler, 5 October 1915, General Smedley 
Darlington Butler, 154-157. 

16. Butler to Lejeune, 13 July 1916, Papers of General John A. Lejeune, Box 


71 


4, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, VA. 

17. Butlerto Lejeune, 22 June 1917, Papers of General John A. Lejeune, Box 
4, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, VA. 

18. Lieutenant General Julian C. Smith, USMC (Retired), Interview by 
author, Arlington, VA, April 1966. 

19. Schmidt, 86-87; James H. McCrocklin, compiler, Garde D'Haiti, 
1915-1934: Twenty’ Years of Organization and Training by the United States 
Marine Corps (Annapolis, MD: The United States Naval Institute, 1956), 60-62. 
McCrocklin was listed as compiler after it was discovered that much of the volume 
had been taken almost verbatim from the Marine Corps’ own Final Report written 
by future General Franklin A. Hart. 

20. Gendarmerie d’Haiti, General Orders Number 35, 31 January 1916, 
Papers of Smedley Darlington Butler, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, 
VA. 

21. “Protocol Carrying Out the Provisions of Art. X of the Treaty of 
September 6, 1915, with Reference to the Formation of a Gendarmarie and its 
Command, Signed at Washington August 24, 1916,” text in Millspaugh, 217-220. 

22. Quoted in Harry Thomas Hance, “Civil-Military Relations: The 
Organization and Control of the Constabulary Force of the Republic of Haiti, 
1915-1934” (M.A. thesis, The Ohio State University, 1965), 25. 

23. Millspaugh, 88. 

24. McCrocklin, 63. 

25. Daniels to Caperton, 20 November 1915, quoted in Healy, 183. 

26. Butler to Ethel C.P. Butler, 4 June 1916, in General Smedley Darlington 
Butler, 177-181. 

27. For an example of the problems between Butler and Dartiguenave, see 
Butler to Ethel C.P. Butler, 18 July 1916, General Smedley Darlington Butler, 
186-187. 

28. Millspaugh, 74. 

29. Butlerto John A. Mcllhenny, 23 June 1917, General Smedley Darlington 
Butler, 194-195. 

30. Testimony of Smedley D. Butler, before the US Congress, Senate, 
Select Committee on Haiti and Santo Domingo, Inquiry’ Into Occupation and 
Administration of Haiti and Santo Domingo, Senate Report, 67th Congress, 1st 
and 2nd sessions, 1922. 

31. Lowell Thomas, Old Gimlet Eye: The Adventures of Smedley D. Butler as 
Told to Lowell Thomas (New York, NY: Farrar and Reinhart, 1933), 216. 

32. A copy of key clauses of this constitution are included in Millspaugh, 
222-225. 

33. Millspaugh, 76. It is doubtful if many of the voters had any idea what 
they were voting for. 

34. Josephus Daniels to Roosevelt, 15 July 1933, quoted in E. David Cronon, 
Josephus Daniels in Mexico (Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press, 
1960), 68. 

35. Samuel Guy Inman, quoted in Schmidt. 90. 


72 


36. Faustin Wirkus and Taney Dudley, The White King of La Gonave (Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday, Doran and Co., 1931). 

37. William Seabrook, “Introduction,” in Wirkus and Dudley, xi-xv. 

38. “Testimony of Major General George Barnett,” US Senate, Inquiry, 488. 

39. Butler to Mcllhenny, 31 December 1917, Papers of Smedley Darlington 
Butler, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, VA. 

40. Admiral H.S. Knapp to Navy Secretary Josephus Daniels, 2 November 
1920, quoted in Schmidt, 101. 

41. Hance, 54. 

42. Schmidt, 104-105. 

43. McCrocklin, 103-105. 

44. Most career Marines wanted to be assigned to European Service. 
In addition, heavy casualties in such actions as Belleau Wood, made finding 
experienced replacements a matter of some urgency. 

45. McCrockllin, 113-119. 

46. Ibid., 125. 

47. Millspaugh, 64-70. 

48. Wise and Frost, 308-309. 

49. Ibid., 309-310. 

50. McCrocklin, 165-167. 

51. Richard L. Millett and G. Dale Gaddy, “Administering the Protectorates: 
The U.S. Occupation of Haiti and the Dominican Republic,” Revista/Review 
Interamericana, Vol. VI, No. 3 (Fall, 1976), 391. 

52. Quoted in Hance, 75. 

53. Wise later wrote that he had warned the Board not to call him as a witness 
because “if they put me on the stand under oath I was going to tell the truth.” Wise 
and Frost, 334. 

54. Quoted in Hance, 76. 

55. Emily GreenBalch, ed., Occupied Haiti: Being the Report of a Committee 
of Six disinterested Americans, representing organizations exclusively American, 
who, having personally studied conditions in Haiti in 1926, favor the restoration of 
the Independence of the Negro Republic (New York, NY: The Writers Publishing 
Company, 1927), 23. 

56. “Memorandum Concerning the Replacing of the Present Occupation of 
Haiti with a Legation Guard,” 1919, USMC-Haiti, Tray 228, RG 127, Records of 
the United States Marine Corps, National Archives. 

57. Hughes to Harding, 19 July 1921, quoted in Dana Gardner Munro, The 
United States and the Caribbean Republics, 1921-1933 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1974), 77. 

58. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 84. Munro was 
a senior official in the State Department’s Latin American Division and reportedly 
led the move to reject Butler. 

59. Hughes to Brigadier General John H. Russell, 11 February 1922, The 
Papers of Warren G. Harding, Box 182, Ohio State Historical Archives, Columbus, 
Ohio. 


73 


60. Hughes to Russell, The Papers of Warren G. Harding, 11 February 1922, 
Box 182, Harding Papers. 

61. Colonel Littleton Waller to Lejeune, 10 October 1915, Papers of General 
John A. Lejeune, Box 4, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, VA. 

62. McCrocklin, 92. 

63. Butler to Mr. Mann, 4 April 1916, Papers of Smedley Darlington Butler, 
Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, VA. 

64. McCrocklin, 145-146. 

65. Millspaugh, 112. 

66. McCrocklin, 147-48, 157, 162-63. 

67. Hughes to Harding, 16 June 1923, The Papers of Warren G. Harding, 
Box 182. 

68. Hance, 81-82. 

69. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 110-111. 

70. Schmidt, 192-193. 

71. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 311. 

72. Ibid., 312. 

73. Schmidt, 200. The Haitian press claimed 24 killed and 51 wounded. 

74. President Herbert Hoover, “State of the Union Message,” 3 December 
1929, www.let.rug.nl/usa/P/hh3 l/speeches/hh_l929.htm. 

75. For details of these developments see Robert M. Spector, W. Cameron 
Forbes and the Hoover Commissions to Haiti (1930) (Lanham, NY: University 
Press of America, 1985), 73-101. 

76. Schmidt, 219. 

77. Quoted in Spector, 134-135. 

78. The use of the term “Haitianization” seems to have begun about this time. 
It has odd echoes of the program of Vietnamization that would be proclaimed over 
40 years later. 

79. Spector, 136. 

80. “Report of the Forbes Commission,” Papers Relating to Foreign 
Relations of the United States, Vol. Ill (Washington, DC: Government Printing 
Office, 1930), 227. 

81. The Navy Department did attempt, with some success, to curb the 
Minister’s authority over the Marine Brigade, but had to agree to limit Brigade 
relations with the Haitian Government “to such matters as may be agreed on with 
the Minister.” Navy Secretary Adams to Secretary of State Stimson, 3 February 
1931, National Archives and Record Service, Records of the United States 
Department of State, RG 59, 838.00/2929 1/2. 

82. Michael S. Laguerre, The Military and Society in Haiti (Knoxville, TN: 
University of Tennessee Press, 1993), 77; McCrocklin, 208-210. 

83. There are numerous messages between Munro and the Department on 
this issue printed in Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, 
Vol. II (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1931), 475-481; see also 
Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 328-329. 

84. Hance, 96. 


74 


85. General R.P. Williams to Munro, 20 November 1931, RG 127, Tray 38. 

86. Memorandum of phonecall by the Assistant Secretary of State to the 
Assistant Secretary of the Navy, 29 June 1933, RG 59, 838.00/3149. 

87. White to Munro, 5 March 1931, quoted in Schmidt, 222. 

88. Hance, 96. 

89. Laguerre, 85-86; D.R Calixte, Haiti: Calvary’ of a Soldier (New York, 
NY: Wendell, Malliet & Co., 1939), 71-86. 

90. Richard A. Hagerty, ed., Haiti: A Country Study (Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office, 1989), 16. 

91. Charles T. Williamson, The U.S. Naval Mission to Haiti, 1959-1965 
(Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1999), 8. 

92. Robert D. and Nancy G. Heinl, Written in Blood: The Story of the Haitian 
People, 1492-1971 (Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1978), 543. 

93. Laguerre, 91-93. 

94. Hagerty, 16. 

95. James Ferguson, Papa Doc, Baby Doc: Haiti and the Duvaliers (Oxford, 
UK: Basil Blackwell, 1987), 41-42. 

96. Williamson’s book is a fascinating and detailed account of the travails of 
this mission and the nature of the Duvalier regime. The conflict with the Dominican 
Republic is detailed in John Bartlow Martin, Overtaken by Events (Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday and Co., 1966), 416-417. 

97. Ferguson, 112-121. 

98. For a description of this period, see Walter E. Kretchik, Robert F. 
Baumann, and John T. Fishel, Invasion, Intervention, "Intervasion: ” A Concise 
History of the U.S. Army in Operation Uphold Democracy (Fort Leavenworth, 
KS: US Army Command and General Staff College Press, 1998). 


75 



Chapter 6 

Dominican Republic: An Unintended Foundation for Tyranny 

The Dominican Republic shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti 
and has over sixty percent of the land including the most fertile areas and 
the best beaches. As a nation it had to gain independence twice, first from 
Spain and then from an occupation by Haiti. This began the traditional, 
deep-seated animosity between the two nations. Its strategic position, 
athwart the Windward Passage, long made it an object of international 
interest especially on the part of the United States. During the Grant 
administration, an effort was made to annex the nation, then known as 
Santo Domingo. A treaty was negotiated and the American flag raised, but 
ratification failed in the Senate by a single vote. 1 

Dominican politics were factionalized along family and regional rather 
than ideological lines and force. Votes were not the traditional arbiter. One 
result was a rising national debt, much of it owed to European creditors. 
During Theodore Roosevelt’s administration, the United States got directly 
involved. The State Department began efforts to negotiate a Treaty which 
would establish an American Customs Receivership, would give Washing¬ 
ton the option of leasing a naval station at Samana Bay, something much 
of the Navy ardently desired, and which might even include the right of 
military intervention to restore order. The President, at first, was reluctant 
to pursue the issue, writing a friend: 

I want to do nothing, but what a policeman has to do in 
Santo Domingo. As for annexing the island, I have about 
the same desire to annex it as a gorged boa constrictor 
might have to swallow a porcupine wrong-end-to. ... If 
I possibly can, I want to do nothing to them. If it is abso¬ 
lutely necessary to do something, then I want to do as little 
as possible. 2 

The continued problem of Dominican debts to Europe, coupled with 
the possibility that this might produce European intervention ultimately 
changed the President’s mind. In January 1905, a Treaty was signed estab¬ 
lishing an American customs receivership, but it ran into trouble gaining 
Senate ratification. Roosevelt tried to justify the Treaty in his 5 December 
1905 State of the Union Address, declaring, “there was imminent danger 
of foreign intervention,” and adding, “at least two foreign nations were on 
the point of intervening and were only prevented from intervening by the 
unofficial assurances of this government that it would itself strive to help 
Santo Domingo.” 3 


77 


The 1905 Treaty was never ratified, but a Customs Receivership was 
established under a modus vivendi. A slightly revised Treaty was negoti¬ 
ated in 1907 and this time received prompt Senate ratification, but was 
held up for several months before finally being ratified by the Dominican 
Congress. 4 This ended any threat of European intervention, but failed to 
stabilize the Republic’s internal politics. 

Political struggles revolved around the long-standing rivalry between 
the followers of General Horacio Vazquez and the partisans of ex-President 
Isidro Jimenez. By the second decade of the 20th century a third faction, 
loyal to regional strongman Desiderio Arias emerged, adding to the 
conflict. A suggestion by the American Minister that promoting baseball 
might offer “a real alternative to the excitement of revolutions,” was of 
little help and in 1914, only the threat of US intervention caused all parties 
to agree to Washington’s demand that they select a provisional President, 
hold elections, and abide by the results. 5 

Regional uprisings broke out again in 1915. The United States, which 
had just occupied neighboring Haiti, was in no mood to tolerate renewed 
conflict and William Russell, the American Minister, demanded that the 
Republic cease increasing its debt, accept an American financial advisor 
and permit the United States to create a constabulary, replacing existing 
military and police forces. 6 The government and its opponents joined in re¬ 
jecting these demands, but Washington was now just waiting for an excuse 
to impose them. 

That excuse was not long in coming. In April 1916, Desiderio Arias 
occupied the capital and forced Congress to impeach President Isidro 
Jimenez. Jimenez began gathering his own army to attempt to oust Arias. 
Russell pressured Jimenez to ask for American intervention against Arias, 
but instead Jimenez suddenly resigned. Russell then confronted Arias with 
the demand that he surrender or be attacked by the Marines who had already 
begun landing. 7 Arias refused, but fled the capital and the Marines quickly 
occupied the city without resistance. Admiral William B. Caperton, who 
was also in command of the American occupation of Haiti, seemed unsure 
as to what to do next. When he asked the Navy Department what American 
policy was, the reply directed him to “consult with the American Minister, 
examine the archives of the legation, and obtain therefrom the policy of the 
United States.” 8 

More Marines were landed and some sent north where they rapidly 
compelled the surrender of the forces loyal to Arias. But, in the capital, 
events were not going as well. The Dominican Congress met to elect a new 
president and Minister Russell tried to use the threat of force to secure a 
78 


candidate favored by the United States. American control, however, was 
not nearly as complete as in Haiti and the Dominicans were not nearly 
as compliant as their Haitian counterparts. Russell’s effort to arrest some 
senators only further inflamed Dominican nationalism and they elected 
a candidate who refused to give prior assurance of complying with US 
demands for greater financial controls and creating an American-led 
constabulary. 9 As a result, Washington refused to recognize the new 
government and the customs receiver cut off all its funds. 

This stalemate continued until November. With economic conditions 
deteriorating, new elections pending, and the government still unwilling 
to concede to all of Washington’s demands, a conference between State 
and Navy officials determined to declare martial law and install a Military 
Government. They argued that, “in order to legalize our action in keep¬ 
ing order and putting down any revolutionary activity it is considered that 
the only remedy will be the declaration of martial law.” 10 Navy Captain 
Harry Knapp, who had succeeded Caperton as area Commander, drafted a 
proclamation that Wilson reluctantly approved and, on 29 November 1916, 
Knapp proclaimed a full military occupation with himself as Governor. 
Most Dominican officials would be allowed to remain in their posts, but 
would operate “under the oversight and control of United States Forces 
exercising Military Government.” 11 

It was originally intended that the Military Government be of relatively 
short duration, but this was not to be the case. The bulk of Dominican of¬ 
ficials refused to serve under the American authorities. On 8 December, 
Knapp declared all cabinet offices vacant and appointed Navy and Marine 
officers to fill them. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels disapproved 
this action, causing Knapp to complain that reversing his position caused 
“loss of prestige and embarrassment to the Military Government.” Explain¬ 
ing that he could not order Dominicans to fill the posts and that his action 
would only be temporary, he concluded, “The Military Government will 
be saved much embarrassment if by Sunday night 1 receive an approval of 
my action.” At this point Daniels gave in with the proviso that US officials 
could assume the duties but not the titles of the cabinet offices. 12 The newly 
installed Military Government ruled by decree. One of the first of these, is¬ 
sued on 2 January 1917, indefinitely suspended the Dominican Congress. 13 

Creating a constabulary was one of the principle objectives of 
establishing Military Government and Knapp, drew up a detailed plan to 
accomplish this. He suggested the force be titled the Guardia National 
Dominicana and urged that recruitment and training by the Marines begin 
at once. 14 The State Department concurred, emphasizing the importance of 


79 


creating such a force, but also recommending that existing units of rural 
guard and frontier police be incorporated into it. 15 Some Marines, however, 
wanted a force that was strictly military rather than a combined military/ 
police constabulary. Knapp rejected this idea, arguing that the nation 
needed only a police force with limited military capabilities such as was 
being created in Haiti. Contending that it would be “many years” before 
Dominicans would “prefer ballots to revolutions,” he said that the new 
Guardia must have a strong American commander. 16 Discussion over the 
exact composition and duties of the force, the selection of its American 
officers, and the transferring of funds from the Customs Receivership to 
pay for it consumed the next three months. In the interim the Marines had 
been busy extending their control throughout the nation and disarming 
local police and other armed groups. 

It wasn’t until April 1917 that the Military Government formally is¬ 
sued Executive Order 47, establishing the Guardia and providing $500,000 
for its support. 17 Initial strength was set at 1,200 and the new force was 
supposed to perform police duties, guard the frontier with Haiti and aid 
the Marines in confronting a developing insurgency in the northeast. Its 
strength and training, however, were never adequate for all these tasks. As 
one Marine officer later noted, “it was never large enough to discharge the 
military functions incumbent on a national army and was too military to 
devote itself, except spasmodically, to its police duties.” 18 

Recruiting began quickly and securing enlisted personnel proceeded 
rapidly. The biggest problems were the scarcity of literate recruits and poor 
health of many applicants. Discipline was a problem, both because most 
recruits had never been subject to regular discipline and because growing 
internal security issues cut short the time allotted for training. Clashes with 
civilians and breeches of discipline were frequent, leading to a high rate of 
courts-martial. 19 

Procuring capable officers proved even more difficult, in part because 
organization of the Guardia corresponded with the American entry into 
World War I. The withdrawal of some of the Marines for service in Europe 
combined with increasing insurgent activities led to a rapid expansion 
of the force. While Marine officers filled the higher posts, Marine non¬ 
commissioned officers (NCOs), few of whom spoke Spanish or had any 
experience leading forces of this size in combat, filled company grade 
posts. A few literate Dominicans were also commissioned, but they lacked 
training and experience. By October 1917, the Guard had 691 enlisted men, 
with 17 Dominican and 21 Marine officers. Most of the Marines serving as 
Guardia officers were actually NCOs. 20 


80 


Under the circumstances, abuses were inevitable. Friction became 
even worse in 1918 when a new Military Governor decided to add the sup¬ 
pression of cockfighting to the duties of the Guardia. Several provincial 
governors quickly protested, with one declaring: 

With respect to the total suppression of cock-fighting, it 
is the opinion of the undersigned that this is not an op¬ 
portune time, since this is the only diversion which our 
country people have at the present time and if they were 
deprived of this, they would undoubtedly turn to other 
more obnoxious diversions where they could be far from 
the vigilance of the authorities. 21 

The Military Government not only ignored such protests, but the 
next Governor, Rear Admiral Thomas Snowden, added suppression of 
prostitution to Guardia responsibilities. 

All of this made Guardia tasks even more difficult and added to 
problems in its relations with the civilian population. Guardia posts in the 
interior took on judicial as well as police functions, with Marines serving as 
judges. Dominicans who were allegedly in violation of any decrees of the 
Military Government were tried before provost courts with few rights and 
a generalized presumption of guilt. They could be sentenced for anything 
from criticizing the Military Government to selling food above set prices. 22 
There were no appeals from most of these sentences. A State Department 
official complained that one Marine, after a brief hearing, “which usually 
took place within ten minutes of the arrest,” would invariably pronounce 
judgment by saying, “Take the son of a bitch out and bump him off.” 23 

By 1919, the force’s reputation was low even among the officials of the 
occupation. When the State Department inquired as to when the Guardia 
would be able to handle internal security by itself Minister Russell replied 
that it was “in no way fitted to insure law and order if our force should 
retire,” and added that if the Marine Brigade was withdrawn “chaos will 
prevail.” 24 In a 1919 conference between State Department and Navy De¬ 
partment officials, including acting Navy Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt, 
there was a general consensus that the Guardia needed a major reorganiza¬ 
tion, with the State Department representatives stressing that, “there could 
be no efficiency in the Guardia Nacional unless it is officered by white 
officers and not native Dominicans.” 25 Similar racial serotypes were found 
among the Guardia s Marine officers. Lieutenant Colonel Harry David, 
Commander of the Southern District, wrote President Harding’s Executive 
Secretary described Dominicans as “negroes whose minds are apt to have 
a queer sort of turn, even in the most solemn events.” 26 


81 


Even the Guardia s own Commanders admitted the force’s shortcom¬ 
ings. In an account written after he left the country, Colonel J.C. Breckin¬ 
ridge, who commanded the force from 1920 to 1921 noted that of the 1,300 
personnel of the Guardia “some 300 were in jail or should be,” and con¬ 
cluded, “An armed constabulary that is not reliable, strong and energetic is 
a menace instead of a security.” 27 Admiral Thomas Snowden, the Military 
Governor, went even further, claiming that, “there can be no doubt that the 
loyalty of the Dominicans in the Guardia to the government is directly due 
to the presence of American troops and if left to themselves through the 
withdrawal of the Marines they would revert to the former insurrectionary 
habits.” 28 

Those Dominicans who had been made officers were at times a large 
part of the problem. A graphic example of this is the case of 2nd Lieuten¬ 
ant Rafael Leonidas Trujillo. He had been commissioned on 11 January 
1919 and after minimal training was put in charge of rural patrols in one of 
the most conflicted areas. His actions on one patrol resulted in his court- 
martial on charges of multiple rape and extortion. The evidence seemed 
overwhelming, and the only defense offered was his own denials and the 
remarkable claim by his Marine Defense Attorney that since the victim 
claimed she had been raped three times, “three times implies consent.” 29 
He was, nevertheless, acquitted of all charges, returned to duty, and soon 
thereafter promoted. 30 By the time the Marines turned over command, he 
was one of the forces’ senior officers and later used this to propel himself 
into power, where he left a record as the bloodiest dictator in Caribbean 
history. 31 

This episode exemplified both the problem of finding qualified 
Dominican officers and the low standards that were expected of them. 
Trujillo was probably acquitted because the Marines did not want the 
negative publicity that his conviction would have produced and were already 
short of Guardia officers. In addition, there was virtually no precedent in 
Dominican history for officers being convicted for anything they did to 
civilians. What is even more notable is that this incident seemed to have no 
impact on his future career. He was simply sent to a four-month course at 
the newly established military academy and then steadily promoted. 

Several factors contributed to a November 1920 decision to reorga¬ 
nize and reduce the Guardia. One was the rising tide of criticism by both 
American officials and Dominican citizens. Second was a decline in the 
level of internal violence, especially the insurgent activities in the east. 
Linally, there was a looming budget crisis. The Dominican Republic de¬ 
pended heavily on sugar exports for income and the price of these had 


82 


boomed during World War I. The Military Government took advantage of 
this spending heavily on roads, health, and education. The Guardia had 
shared in this largesse, and by 1919 was consuming 26.3 percent of the 
government’s income. 32 There had been no effort to set aside money from 
sugar prices and once the war was over the sugar market collapsed, fall¬ 
ing to levels much lower then before the war. 33 The financial situation also 
revealed some incompatibility between the goals of the occupation. Two 
principle objectives had been to stabilize finances and insure payments 
to foreign bondholders through establishing a customs receivership and 
organizing a professional constabulary. In keeping with the principles of 
the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, however, the Customs 
Receiver always gave first priority to paying off the bondholders, insuring 
that foreign government had no financial excuse for possible intervention. 
In times of acute financial crisis, this left little money available for the 
government, including the constabulary. Since the Americans would not 
or could not resort to such traditional remedies as not paying the enlisted 
men, and resisted ending the double salaries paid to Marines serving with 
the Guardia, they had to find other ways of reducing expenses. As a result, 
the Guardia was steadily reduced until, on 6 December 1921, it numbered 
only 77 officers and 493 enlisted men. 34 At the same time the name of the 
force was changed from Guardia Nacional Dominicana to Policia Natio¬ 
nal Dominicana (Dominican National Police). 35 

The reduction in force probably eliminated many of the force’s worst 
offenders, though officers like Trujillo were retained. But it also substantially 
reduced the capacity of the force to maintain even minimal levels of internal 
security. One result was a proliferation of other armed bodies, some loosely 
attached to the Guardia, others generally independent. Municipal police 
forces, under local authorities, took over most urban policing. The large 
sugar producers and other wealthy rural landowners were allowed to raise 
their own private guards. Most significantly new units, designated as civil 
guards, were recruited locally, put under the command of a marine officer, 
and sent of to fight the insurgents. They proved more effective than either 
Marine or Guardia/Policia units, in part because of their local roots. 36 

While factors such as budget constraints undoubtedly played a role in 
the decisions to reorganize, reduce, and rename what became the Policia 
National, there was another factor at work, the increasing disputes between 
the State Department and the Navy, notably Admiral Thomas Snowden, 
the Military Governor. He had repeatedly expressed his low opinion of 
Dominicans in general and their political leaders in particular. In a speech 
at the opening of an American-sponsored agricultural experimental station, 


83 


he declared that the Military Government would last “until the generation 
of Dominicans then in the cradle had reached adult age.” 37 He expressed 
similar sentiments in a message to the Secretary of the Navy, declaring 
that, “Dominicans have always been subjected to some form of Military 
Government and until they have been taught differently that is the only 
kind of government that can be successful.” He concluded: “In my opin¬ 
ion, the Military Government of the United States in Santo Domingo is 
now and will be for at least ten years longer a necessity for the peace and 
prosperity of the island.” 38 In another communication he refused to con¬ 
sider suspending the provost courts and argued that if Washington made it 
clear that the Military Government would last another ten or twenty years 
“business would receive a great impetus and encouragement.” 39 At the end 
of 1919, under pressure from the State Department, he had appointed a 
Dominican advisory council, but he ignored all their recommendations, 
including an end to press censorship, and they all resigned at the start of 
1920. 40 

Bainbridge Colby, who had replaced Robert Lansing as Secretary of 
State, was increasingly concerned that the occupation of the Dominican 
Republic, especially with growing criticism of press censorship and the 
actions of the provost courts, was harming US relations with the rest of 
Latin America and he began searching for a way to end the occupation. 
Russell, who had continued to be the American Minister to the Dominican 
Republic, but with no national government in existence had spent most of 
the last few years in Washington, was sent back and was instructed to begin 
plans for withdrawal. By November 1920, Colby had obtained President 
Wilson’s approval for formulating a plan for gradual withdrawal. 41 In all 
his efforts, however, he encountered the determined opposition of Admiral 
Snowden. For Snowden, a weak and discredited Guardia/Policia served 
his purposes admirably, lending credence to his claims that Dominicans 
were incapable of maintaining order without the presence of a substantial 
force of Marines. 

In one of the stranger anomalies of the Military Government, Admiral 
Snowden had dispatched a trusted aide, Lieutenant Commander Arthur H. 
Mayo, to Washington to act as the his representative. In many ways, this 
made him the equivalent of the Dominican Republic’s Ambassador to the 
United States, a unique experience for an active duty Navy officer. He ag¬ 
gressively defended Snowden and denounced Dominican politicians and 
State Department officials. In early 1921, he wrote Snowden: 

The Navy department is now, I think, lined up flatly behind 

you.... This is true of Operations and at present—today— 


84 


seems so of Mr. Daniels—but he is not dependable. . . . 

Then followed many interviews in Latin American Affairs 
. . . Mr. Daniels had arranged an interview for me with 
Mr. Davis (Norman Davis, Acting Secretary of State). 

. . . When we reached Mr. Davis office and all through 
the interview Mr. Daniels interrupted me—replied in the 
negative on all points. ... He brought up the two orders 
issued December 6 and both he and Mr. Davis stated they 
were afraid you had destroyed your further usefulness by 
the issuance of them. Then I got mad—good and plenty— 
and let them have it. Told them that in the first place 
the orders would not have been condemned had the real 
character of the people been appreciated. . .. That you had 
not been taken into the confidence of the State Department 
or informed in advance of their plans and that therefore 
you could not be expected to know what they wanted. . . . 

In the meantime I had been working on Captain Freeman 
to endeavor to get better cooperation between the State 
and Navy Departments—exchange of information and the 
sending of orders to you through one source only—the 
Navy Department. . . . Captain Freeman and I cannot talk 
State Department with cussing. They are the limit and their 
stand can only be understood if you take it for granted that 
they are all conceited asses trying to throw a bluff to cover 
the grossest, but perhaps unknowing ignorance. 42 

That a mid-ranking Navy officer would write and talk in such a manner 
about his civilian superiors, including two of cabinet rank, is perhaps the 
strongest evidence of just how badly relations had deteriorated not only 
between the State and Navy Departments, but the Military Government 
and all of Washington. Such a situation could not be permitted to endure. 
Change, though, had to wait until the inauguration of President Warren G. 
Harding in March 1921. 

The new administration continued and expanded the policy of seeking a 
way to end the occupation. The new Secretary of State, the capable Charles 
Evans Hughes, and the new Navy Secretary, Edwin Denby, were able to 
eliminate much of the friction between the two Departments that had 
paralyzed action during the previous year. One of the first steps they took 
was to replace Admiral Snowden as Military Governor with Rear Admiral 
Samuel B. Robinson. 43 With Snowden went his Washington representative, 
Lieutenant Commander Mayo and the atmosphere quickly improved. 


85 


Within the State Department, Sumner Welles was first charged to draw 
up a plan for withdrawal and was then made Special Commissioner and 
personal Presidential Representative to the Dominican Republic with the 
ra nk of Minister and the power to negotiate an agreement on withdrawal. 
As the personal representative of the President, he took precedence over all 
other American officials in the Republic. 44 

In June 1921, at the instructions of the State Department, the Military 
Government issued a Proclamation declaring that elections would be held 
for a new Dominican government and expressing the “hope that the with¬ 
drawal may be completed .. . within a period of eight months.” 45 Issued on 
14 June, this declaration received what the American Minister described as 
“a hot blast of protest from the press, advising the people not to accept it 
as this would imply sanction of past wrongs.” 46 Most Dominican political 
leaders echoed the reaction of the press and the scheduled elections had to 
be postponed. It would be thirty-nine, not eight months, before the Marines 
finally left. 

With Snowden and Mayo finally out of the way and the State Depart¬ 
ment again in firm control over Dominican policy two major obstacles 
remained before the Marines could be withdrawn. The first was reaching 
some sort of agreement with the increasingly anti-American political lead¬ 
ers of the Republic. The second was getting the long neglected Policia 
National in a position to provide basic security. Work on this task began 
almost immediately. 

In order to better prepare Dominicans to take command of the Policia, 
the Marines established the Haina Military Academy and its first class was 
admitted in August. Many of the initial students were already serving as 
officers, but the four-month Academy class gave them at least a brief expo¬ 
sure to the duties of a professional officer. In the next three years it turned 
out a steady stream of graduates, providing the necessary material to fill 
all the Policia s officer slots. While new officers were being trained part 
of the task of dealing with the still smoldering insurgency was turned over 
to small patrols of the civic guards. Their activity, combined with an am¬ 
nesty program, finally began to restore peace to this region in the spring of 
1922. 47 This made the task that the Policia would face considerably easier. 
They could now concentrate on routine rural patrolling, guarding the fron¬ 
tier with Haiti, and enforcing the law outside of the larger towns. This also 
provided an opportunity for them to begin repairing their badly damaged 
image. 

While relations with Robison were not nearly as conflictive as they had 
been with Snowden, there were still major points of disagreement. Welles 
86 


found himself constantly trying to balance the position of the Military Gov¬ 
ernment with the demands of the Dominicans. He brought considerable 
diplomatic skills and a great deal of personal patience and determination 
to this task. In the final analysis, though, when disputes seemed irreconcil¬ 
able, he more often than not sided with the demands of the Dominicans. 48 
Admiral Robison was not concerned with extending the occupation, as his 
predecessor had been, and evidenced no interest in continuing the crusades 
against cockfighting and prostitution. His concerns were largely those of 
a military professional, notably insuring the safety of his own forces and 
maintaining security in his area of responsibility. Political problems rarely 
entered into his calculations. 49 

One additional complicating factor emerged with the 1921 visit to the 
Republic of the Senate Committee charged with investigating the occupa¬ 
tions of the Dominican Republic and Haiti. Senator Medill McCormick, 
the Committee Chair, was frustrated in his efforts to help negotiate an ac¬ 
cord on a plan of evacuation and informed the State Department that the 
occupation might need to continue for up to three more years and that a 
primary task during that period must be the training of Dominican officers 
for the Policia National. 50 

Negotiations between Welles and Dominican leaders was complicated 
by their extreme distrust of the Military Government, by the Dominicans’ 
own bitter factional divisions, and by Washington’s insistence that any 
evacuation agreement include Dominican acceptance of the actions and 
decrees of the Military Government. Leadership and training of the Policia 
was also a continuing issue and led to frequent disputes not only between 
Welles and the Dominicans but between the State and Navy Departments. On 
25 January 1922, Welles informed Hughes that the situation was “growing 
constantly more unsatisfactory,” and suggested that Robison inform the 
Dominican leaders that if an agreement wasn’t reached on installing 
a provisional government the Military Government would continue 
“until such time as the urgent public works have been completed and an 
adequate Dominican constabulary is functioning.” He also recommended 
that Washington stop insisting on the retention of an American military 
mission that would remain in charge of training the constabulary after the 
occupation ended. At the end of this message, Admiral Robison added that 
he concurred. 51 

Negotiations remained largely stalemated through the spring of 1922. 
On 16 March, Robison, acting on instructions from Hughes, issued a proc¬ 
lamation that the Military Government would continue until at least July 
1924. 52 This may have convinced some Dominican leaders that they had 


87 


to adopt a more flexible approach in negotiations. Welles resigned from 
the State Department, but was quickly sent back to the Dominican Repub¬ 
lic as American Commissioner with full powers. Negotiations proceeded 
steadily over the installation of a provisional government that would then 
conduct national elections, but this raised new concerns on the part of Ad¬ 
miral Robison. In a letter to Welles, he advanced a plan to maintain the 
US military presence under the provisional government to insure order 
and continue training the Policia. US forces would only intervene on the 
request of the provisional government or if “the situation fell apart com¬ 
pletely.” He saw the alternatives as either adopting his plan or pulling out 
completely. He also inquired as to whether the United States saw the Do¬ 
minicans as friends or enemies, arguing that if they were enemies we must 
guard against any surprise actions on their part. 53 

As negotiations with the Dominicans progressed, friction between 
Welles and Robison, notably over security issues, increased. The 
Dominicans insisted that when a provisional government was installed all 
Marine officers should be withdrawn from the Policia. Robison reluctantly 
agreed, but insisted that training be left in Marine hands and that the Military 
Government alone approve all candidates for officer’s commissions. 54 The 
Dominicans ultimately agreed to Marine control over officer training, 
something Robison attributed to their discovering that, “they did not have 
enough officers of their own,” adding, “The Dominicans are suspicious of 
us and do not want us.” 55 

Robison protested Welles’ plan to withdraw the Marines from most of 
the Republic, concentrating their forces in the three principal cities and 
confining them all to their barracks on election day, but his protests were 
all overruled. So, too, were his efforts to continue press censorship and to 
block the release of political prisoners, to obtain a one-year extension of 
American instruction of the Policia, and to have the Military Government 
continue to exercise some control over the government’s budget. Finally, 
the Navy Department had to tell him not to make any further suggestions. 56 
He was recalled to Washington two days before the provisional govern¬ 
ment took office and was replaced by the senior Marine officer in the Re¬ 
public, Brigadier General Harry Lee. 

One area where Robison and Welles were in agreement was on the 
need for continued Marine training, and here they were largely able 
to overcome Dominican objections. The agreement establishing the 
provisional government left training of both officers and enlisted recruits 
in the hands of the Military Government. As for the force itself, the 
provisional government would appoint its higher officers, but there was 


the expectation, or at least the hope, that these would be steadily replaced 
by Marine-trained officers. 57 Two last minute decrees from the Military 
government further defined the status of the Policia. The first declared that 
the Policia Nacional Dominicana would be the nation’s only armed force 
and gave control over assignments and promotions to the civilian Secretary 
of State for the Interior and Police. The second, issued just twelve days 
before the provisional government’s inauguration, reversed this giving that 
power to the colonel-commander of the Policia. Probably designed as a 
hedge against political manipulation of the force this actually set the stage 
for the rise to national power of its commander. 58 

The first Dominican commander of the Policia was General 
Buenaventura Cabral, a provincial governor with no ties to the major 
political parties. He and the other nominees for senior posts were given 
a few weeks of Marine indoctrination before assuming their duties when 
the new government was inaugurated on 21 October 1922. 59 General Lee 
retained the title of Military Governor, but his limited powers were largely 
confined to security issues. 

It would be July 1924 before a constitutional Dominican government 
was elected and installed and two months after that before the last of the 
Marines departed. This period went relatively smoothly. There were none 
of the major conflicts within the American policy community that had char¬ 
acterized earlier periods. General Lee emphasized the need to minimize 
friction between the Marines and the national population and effectively 
disciplined those who disobeyed his instructions. 60 The provost courts had 
been eliminated when the Marines were concentrated in the major cities 
and this removed a major source of Dominican complaints. Welles report¬ 
ed in April 1923: 

I feel that the relations between the provisional 
government and the military government are exceedingly 
satisfactory. The President advises me that the attitude 
of the military government under General Lee has been 
consistently helpful and has been little or no disagreement. 

. . . The increase of efficiency of the national police has 
exceeded the most optimistic expectations of the military 
government and the relations between the American 
officers in command of the training centers and the 
Dominican officers in command of the field forces are 
entirely harmonious. 61 

There, were of course, some problems. General Lee, supported by 
Welles, was concerned that the Navy, evidently assuming that its mission 

89 


was essentially completed, had begun withdrawing officers assigned to 
training the Policia and was not replacing them. Welles argued that the 
training was an obligation undertaken by the United States and that, “no 
greater service could be given the Dominican people.” He urged the State 
Department to take the matter up with the Navy. 62 Evidently this had the 
desired effect as there seem to have been no further complaints. 

Following the election there was an effort to retain some Marines 
to continue training the force. At first, this seemed to be going well, but 
ultimately the President-elect, Horacio Vasquez, introduced so many 
conditions and restrictions that the Marines decided they could not 
undertake the task and the officers assigned to training withdrew with the 
rest of the Marines in September 1924. 63 

The fate of the Policia after the Marines withdrew would be a disap¬ 
pointment to its American creators and a disaster for hopes for Dominican 
democracy. Central to this was the career of Rafael L. Trujillo. When the 
Marines left, he was the third-ranking Dominican officer of the Policia and 
before the year was out he was his chief of staff. By June 1925, he had been 
promoted to colonel and was the force’s commandant. Two years later, he 
was made a Brigadier General and the Policia Nacional were renamed 
the National Army. 64 By adroit maneuvering he managed to first force the 
ouster of the president, then had himself “elected” president in 1930. Once 
in office, he rapidly expanded the army, ending its police functions by cre¬ 
ating a new national police. This force, in turn, replaced all existing local 
police forces, centralizing power in his hands. A huge intelligence service 
was created, opposition was ruthlessly repressed, and, in 1937, an esti¬ 
mated 15,000 Haitian peasants, residing in the Republic, were massacred. 
Army equipment was updated and compulsory military service instituted. 65 

Trujillo hung onto power by a combination of ruthless terror, 
extravagant spending on the military which was allowed to engage in a 
wide variety of corrupt practices, and by doing whatever was necessary 
to stay in Washington’s good graces. 66 This worked until the late 1950s. 
By then his tyranny had become so obvious and US concerns about the 
rise to power of Castro in Cuba so central that he had become both an 
embarrassment and an obstacle in Washington’s eyes. In May 1961, he 
was assassinated by a group of Dominicans with the support of the CIA. 67 
His family tried to hang on to power as had the Somozas in Nicaragua, but 
a combination of political pressures and the threat of military intervention 
by the Kennedy administration forced them out and led to the inauguration 
of Juan Bosch as Dominican president. Seven months later the military 
overthrew him and took over the government. 68 In April 1965, an uprising 


90 


by a dissident military faction supporting the return of Bosch threatened 
to turn into a civil war. Fearful that Castro might take advantage of the 
situation, the United States intervened, first on its own, then with the 
cooperation of a few Latin American nations, notably Brazil. Months of 
uncertainty, negotiations and sporadic violence followed before the leaders 
of both military factions were sent into exile, and new elections held. 69 

The elections brought to power Joaquin Balaguer, an aging but crafty 
politician. Although there were rumors of coups, he managed, by mixture 
of dividing authority and overlooking corruption, to keep the military 
largely out of politics for the next two decades. His successors, benefitting 
from the hemisphere-wide move to civilian rule, have kept the military 
under tighter control. 70 

Divided American authority and the vague and shifting purposes of the 
occupation constantly hampered the US creation of a constabulary force 
in the Dominican Republic. The Military Government produced stability, 
but at a very high price. The force it created was the most powerful and 
unified in Dominican history and was able to bring to an end the power of 
regional caudillos and the era of political civil wars. But in the process it 
became a potential political power itself and in the hands of a ruthless indi¬ 
vidual became the instrument of establishing one of the worst and longest 
lasting dictatorships in Latin America. The remarkably smooth transition 
to national command was a significant accomplishment, but the failure to 
leave behind any mechanism for establishing effective civil control over 
the force undid any good this may have produced. Dr. Bruce Calder, au¬ 
thor of the best study of the Occupation, concluded, “foreign intervention, 
as practiced by the United States in the Dominican Republic from 1916 
to 1924, was a policy neither wise nor just, a policy unproductive for all 
concerned.” 71 


91 


Notes 


1. For details, see William Javier Nelson, Almost a Territory: Americas 
Attempt to Annex the Dominican Republic (Newark, DE: University of Delaware 
Press, 1990). 

2. Theodore Roosevelt to Joseph Bucklin Bishop, 23 February 1904, quoted 
in Dana Gardner Munro, Intervention and Dollar Diplomacy in the Caribbean, 
1900-1921 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1964), 91. 

3. Theodore Roosevelt, “State of the Union Address,” 5 December 1905, 
http://www.theodoreroosevelt.com. 

4. Munro, Intervention, 116-121. 

5. Sumner Welles, Naboth’s Vineyard: The Dominican Republic, 1844- 
1924 , Vol. II (New York, NY: Payson and Clarke Ltd., 1928), 722 and 734-743. 

6. William Russell to Dominican Foreign Office, 19 November 1915, 
Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States (Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office, 1916), 333-337. 

7. Russell to Secretary of State Lansing, 6 May and 7 May 1916, Papers 
Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States (Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1916), 224-225; Munro, Intervention, 306. 

8. Admiral William B. Caperton, “Activities of Rear Admiral William B. 
Caperton, US Navy, while in command of Cruiser Squadron, US Atlantic Fleet 
and Commander in Chief, US Pacific Fleet,” Papers of William B. Caperton, Naval 
Historical Foundation Collection, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, 256. 

9. Bruce J. Calder, The Impact of Intervention: The Dominican Republic 
during the U.S. Occupation of1916-1924 (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 
1984), 10-12. 

10. Memorandum of Conference between Admiral Benson, Captain Knapp, 
Mr. Polk, Minister Russell, and Mr. Stabler, 31 October 1916, National Archives 
and Record Service, Naval Records Collection of the Office of Naval Records and 
Library, RG 45, Subject File WH 7. 

11. Proclamation of Occupation and Military Government,” 29 November 
1916, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States (Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office, 1916), 246-247. 

12. Knapp to Secretary of the Navy, 8 December 1916, RG 59, 839.00/1972; 
Daniels to Knapp, 8 December 1916, RG 59, 839.00/1972; Knapp to Daniels, 8 
December 1916, National Archives and Record Service, Records of the United 
States Department of State, RG 59, 839.00/1972. 

13. Marvin Goldwert, The Constabulary in the Dominicari Republic and 
Nicaragua: Progeny and Legacy of United States Intervention (Gainesville, FL: 
University of Florida Press, 1962), 7. 

14. Knapp to Secretary of the Navy, 12 December 1916, RG 59, 839.1051/8 
(enclosure). 

15. Memorandum by Stabler for Secretary of State, 10 January 1917, RG 59, 
839.1051/8. 

16. Knapp to Secretary of Navy, 14 January 1917, RG 59, 839.00/1985. 


92 


17. Goldwert, 8. 

18. Colonel Rufus Lane, quoted in Calder, 55. 

19. Calder, 56. 

20. Goldwert, 12. 

21. Nasario Suardi, Governor of La Vega, to the Officer in Charge, 
Department of Interior and Police, 3 June 1918. This material was originally in 
the Marine Corps Archives at the Washington Navy Yard, but has since been 
transferred to the National Archives, RG 38, Records of the Military Government 
of Santo Domingo. 

22. For a detailed discussion of the provost courts and of Dominican reactions 
to them see Marvin A. Soloman, “Law, Order and Justice in the Dominican Republic 
During the United States Military Government, 1916 to 1924” (M.A. thesis, 
Department of Historical Studies, Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville, 
1969). 

23. Herbert Gould to Acting Secretary of State Phillips, 18 August 1918, RG 
59, 839.1051/16. 

24. Russell to Lansing, 8 August 1919, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations 
of the United States, Vol. II (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1919), 
120 . 

25. Memorandum by J.C. Dunn, State Department Division of Latin 
American Affairs, Conference held on 8 April 1919, RG 59, 839.1051/17. 

26. Lieutenant Colonel Harry David to George Christian, Executive Secretary 
to President Harding, 10 July 1921, Papers of Warren G. Harding, Ohio State 
Historical Archives, Columbus, Ohio. 

27. Colonel J.C. Breckinridge, “The Guardia Nacional Dominicana, 1920- 
21,” Papers of J.C. Breckinridge, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Quantico, 
VA. 

28. Snowden to the Secretary of the Navy, 23 June 1919, RG 59, 839.1051/20. 

29. The complete trial transcript can be found in General Records of the 
Navy Department, RG 80, File 16870-47:477. 

30. For a discussion of the trial and its aftermath, see Richard L. Millett and 
Marvin Soloman, “The Court Martial of Lieutenant Rafael L. Trujillo,” Revista/ 
Review Interamericana, Vol. II, No. 3 (Fall 1972), 396^104. 

31. The best study of Trujillo’s career is Robert D. Crassweller, Trujillo: The 
Life and Times of a Caribbean Dictator, (New York, NY: MacMillan Company, 
1966). 

32. Goldwert, 12. 

33. For a highly critical discussion of the economic crisis and its impact on 
the Guardia, see Breckinridge, 11-14. 

34. Goldwert, 13. 

35. Ibid., 19. 

36. Calder, 176-177. 

37. Quoted in Welles, 820. 

38. Snowden to the Secretary of the Navy, 23 June 1919, RG 59, 839.1051/20. 

39. Snowden to Russell, 12 February 1919, Papers Relating to Foreign 


93 


Relations of the United States (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 
1919), 141-144. 

40. Munro. Intervention, 321. 

41. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics , 45. 

42. Commander Arthur H. Mayo to Snowden, 27 January 1921, National 
Archives, Records of the Military Government of Santo Domingo, Miscellaneous 
Correspondence, RG 38. 

43. David Charles MacMichael, “The United States and the Dominican 
Republic, 1871-1940: A Cycle in Caribbean Diplomacy” (Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of Oregon, 1964), 543. 

44. Kenneth J. Grieb, “Warren G. Harding and the Dominican Republic: U.S. 
Withdrawal, 1921-1923,” Journal of Inter-American Studies, Vol. XI, No. 3 (July 
1969), 433. 

45. “Draft of Proclamation for Withdrawal of American Forces from the 
Dominican Republic,” Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, 
Vol. 1 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1921), 837. 

46. Russell to the Secretary of State, 14 June 1921, Papers Relating to 
Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. I (Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1921), 838. 

47. Calder, 176-178. 

48. Welles included a lengthy description of his efforts to negotiate a 
withdrawal in his massive, two-volume history of the Dominican Republic, 
Naboth s Vineyard (New York, NY: Payson and Clarke, 1928). 

49. Grieb, 434. 

50. Senator Medill McCormick to Hughes, 16 December 1821, RG 59, 
639.00/2456. 

51. Welles to Hughes, 25 January 1922, RG 59, 839.00/2465. 

52. Welles, Naboth s Vineyard, 852-853. 

53. Robison to Welles, 11 August 1922, RG 59, 839.1051/25. 

54. Secretary of the Navy Denby to Hughes, 14 September 1922, RG 59, 
839.1051/26. 

55. Robison to Captain F.H. Clark, USN, Office of Naval Operations, 20 
September 1922, RG 45, Subject File WH-7. 

56. MacMichael, 573-574. 

57. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 57-58. 

58. Goldwert, 20. 

59. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 58-59. 

60. Calder, 234. 

61. Welles to Hughes, 5 April 1923, RG 59, 839.00/2692 

62. Welles to Hughes, 30 April 1923, RG 59, 839.1051/29. 

63. Munro, The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 65. 

64. Crassweller, 48-51. 

65. Howard Wiarda, Dictatorship and Development: The Methods of Control 
in Trujillo’s Dominican Republic (Gainesville, FL: University of Florida Press, 
1968), 43-45. 


94 


66. For an extensive, well-researched discussion of Trujillo’s relations 
with the American military, see Bernardo Vega, Trujillo y las Fuerzas Armadas 
Norteamericanos (Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic: Fundacion Cultural 
Dominicana, 1992). 

67. Tim Weiner, Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA (New York, NY: 
Doubleday, 2007), 171-172. 

68. For a discussion of this chaotic period, see John Bartlow Martin, 
Overtaken by Events (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966). 

69. For a discussion of these events, see Martin, 637-703. For an excellent 
study of the US intervention, see Lawrence A. Yates, Power Pack: U.S. Intervention 
in the Dominican Republic, 1965-1966 (Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies 
Institute Press, 1988). 

70. For a discussion of the military since 1966, see Jonathan Hartlyn, The 
Struggle for Democratic Politics in the Dominican Republic (Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1998), 123-126, 146-149, 159, and 313 

71. Calder, 252. 


95 



Chapter 7 

Nicaragua: Limited Success and Costly Failures 

No nation in Central America has provided as many foreign policy di¬ 
lemmas or caused as much frustration as Nicaragua. From the filibustering 
expeditions of William Walker in the 1850s until the present day efforts 
to deal with the governments of President Daniel Ortega, Washington has 
repeatedly tried to direct and reshape Nicaraguan politics with little if any 
success. At the heart of many of these efforts have been dealings with Ni¬ 
caragua’s security forces. 

Nicaragua, prior to the 1990s, never had a true national army or nonpo¬ 
litical police. Up until 1926, most forces were simply armed instruments of 
partisan politics, with little training or discipline and a reputation for being 
largely instruments of individual political ambitions. From 1926 until the 
end of 1932, police and military were combined into a national guard un¬ 
der foreign command, serving to support an American intervention. From 
1933 until 1936, the force experienced numerous internal conflicts, result¬ 
ing in its domination by another ambitious individual, Anastasio Somoza 
Garcia. Fie used it to seize political power that he and his sons held until 
1979. That year, the guard was totally destroyed by a Marxist insurgency, 
the Frente Sandinista de Liberacion Nacional (FSLN). The insurgents be¬ 
came the army and police, and this highly partisan force soon found itself 
in a civil conflict against US-backed counter-revolutionaries. Only when 
the FSLN lost power in the 1990 presidential elections did the military and 
police begin to assume a national, nonpolitical orientation and even then 
the transition was slow and difficult. 

Direct United States military involvement began with the 1912 inter¬ 
vention by units of Marines and armed sailors. This ended a civil conflict 
and essentially destroyed the rebel forces, but provided no guarantee of 
future stability. Determined to prevent civil conflicts, the United States left 
a company-sized force in Managua, ostensibly to guard the American lega¬ 
tion, but actually to serve as an indicator of Washington’s refusal to tolerate 
efforts at armed revolution. 1 

The minority Conservative Party, which had been installed in power by 
the US intervention, used the Marine presence to rig elections and oppress 
the opposition Liberals. From 1913 until 1925, Nicaragua was also able 
to have one of smallest military forces and budgets in Latin America. By 
1924, the army had only 37 officers and 329 enlisted men. There were also 
934 national police, a force whose main occupation seemed to be harassing 


97 


opposition political figures. 2 The 1925 military budget was only $132,571 
with another $ 194,704 designated for the police, less than a quarter of what 
its notably peaceful neighbor, Costa Rica, was spending. 3 

In 1923, the State Department brought representatives of the five 
Central American nations (Panama was not considered part of Central 
America) to Washington for a conference on Arms Limitation. The five 
nations agreed to limit the size of their armies and, under considerable US 
pressure, to “establish a National Guard to cooperate with existing Armies 
in the preservation of order.” They also promised to “give consideration 
to the employment of suitable instructors in order to take advantage, in 
this manner, of experience acquired in other countries in organizing such 
corps.” 4 Washington clearly saw this as referring to Americans given their 
experience in the Philippines and in other Latin American nations. 

Creation of such constabulary forces was an American project and 
most of the Central Americans ignored this provision after they left Wash¬ 
ington. El Salvador did create a National Guard to maintain order in rural 
areas, but hired Spanish rather than American instructors to train it. This 
force in no way replaced the regular army. In fact its officers were gradu¬ 
ates of the same military academy as regular army officers and it was under 
the military high command. 5 Over time, it became kn own for corruption 
and extreme brutality in defending the interests of the rural oligarchy. 

Only in Nicaragua was the United States able to move its project of 
creating a constabulary forward. In 1924, that nation was experiencing 
something of a political crisis. Splits within both traditional parties had led 
to the formation of an uneasy coalition between factions of both traditional 
parties. The new president, Carlos Solorzano, faced bitter opposition from 
the Conservatives powerful military caudillo, General Emiliano Chamorro. 
So as soon as he took office he asked the State Department to suspend 
its plans to withdraw the legation guard. The Department agreed with the 
proviso that the new administration move quickly to create an American- 
trained constabulary. Solorzano wasn’t enthusiastic about American 
proposals, but fear of Chamorro, who strongly opposed the idea and US 
pressures, led him reluctantly to support a law creating the new force. As 
passed by Nicaragua’s Congress the final bill watered down US proposals, 
limiting the authority of foreign trainers, and giving control over the supply 
system, traditionally a major source of graft, to the Minister of Police. 
The new “Guardia National ” was defined as “an urban, rural and judicial 
police force,” with no mention made of its replacing the existing army. 6 

While far from what was hoped for, Washington decided to accept this 
plan and proceeded to select a retired US Army Major, Calvin B. Carter, 
98 


who had helped train the Philippine Constabulary, to command the Guard. 
To assist him an additional four American’s were selected as his assistants. 
Unlike previous Nicaraguan security forces, his force was to be recruited 
voluntarily, have regular pay, uniforms, and training, and was supposed to 
be open to all qualified citizens, not just supporters of the party in power. 

Carter arrived in Nicaragua on 16 July 1925, less than three weeks 
before the last Marines departed. Of the original 200 recruits, nearly half 
failed their entrance physicals. The force lacked weapons and supplies, 
but the nervous president wanted them rushed into service, patrolling the 
streets of the capitol and serving as his personal guard. 7 

Just over a month after Carter arrived, Nicaragua was plunged into 
political turmoil. Supporters of General Chamorro seized his War Minister, 
General Jose Maria Moncada, and other Liberals in the government, then 
demanded that the President purge all Liberals from his cabinet. Despite 
promises of support from Major Carter, Solorzano gave in. A few days 
later, Chamorro seized control of the principal army post in Managua then 
demanded that all remaining Liberals be removed from the government 
and that he be made commanding general of the army. Again, Solorzano 
caved in. 

Chamorro, who had previously opposed the constabulary, now became 
its strong supporter, urging its expansion. The US Minister to Nicaragua, 
Charles Eberhardt, explained this change of heart: 

Logically enough, the ins are usually in favor of a well- 
trained Constabulary.... It is doubtful if in these countries 
such an organization, free from politics, is ever wanted, 
but rather one made up largely of men of the same politi¬ 
cal faith as is held by those in power. Thus General Cham¬ 
orro and the Conservatives as a whole, who formerly op¬ 
posed strengthening the organization, now recommend its 
increase by several hundred men and their continued train¬ 
ing under Major Carter. 8 

Chamorro now moved steadily to place himself in total power. He had 
the congress purged of its Liberal members and the vice president, Liberal 
Juan Bautista Sacasa, fled into exile, fearing for his life. The rump con¬ 
gress promptly declared that office vacant and selected Chamorro as first 
designate to succeed the president. On 16 January, that same body grant¬ 
ed the president an indefinite leave of absence and just over two months 
later he formally resigned. The United States, committed to a policy of 
not recognizing Central American regimes that took power by non-con- 


99 


stitutional means, brushed aside the legal fa£ade Chamorro had erected 
and announced it would not recognize his government now or in the fu¬ 
ture. 9 Encouraged by this and by the absence of the Marines the Liberals 
promptly began preparations for an uprising. 

Chamorro now frantically tried to build up the guard, abandoning any 
pretense of nonpartisanship in the process. The American Minister reported 
that that force was “fast disintegrating into a politically controlled machine 
for the present regime.” 10 He later noted: 

It is very apparent that the time has not yet come, if it ever 
will, when a nonpartisan constabulary or National Guard, 
organized and maintained under American ideas and ide¬ 
als, will be a success in Nicaragua. It is not wanted. Just 
as the President may be Conservative or Liberal, so will 
he insist that the organization be made up of men of his 
following. 11 

While Chamorro managed to contain the initial Liberal uprisings others 
followed and his government began to lose control. The State Department, 
suspicious of Mexican support for the Liberals, but determined not to 
recognize Chamorro, found itself with a major policy dilemma. An effort 
to negotiate a settlement, held on the USS Denver, broke down on Liberal 
instance that Sacasa become President. Meanwhile, the Guard fought 
reasonably well, but was steadily decimated. Major Carter left Nicaragua 
and the regime appeared about to collapse. 

Chamorro finally resigned and his temporary replacement agreed to re¬ 
store the twenty-one ousted Liberals to the Congress. Only three, however, 
returned. The congress, with US support, then selected former President 
Adolfo Diaz, who had been in office during the 1912 intervention, as Presi¬ 
dent and Washington recognized him three days later. This did nothing to 
deter the Liberal forces that continued to gain ground. 

American forces had begun to land in Nicaragua in mid-January, and, by 
15 March 1927, there were nearly 2,000 Marines and sailors in Nicaragua, 
ostensibly to protect foreign lives and property. But the Liberals continued 
to advance and the United States seemed to have to choose between an all- 
out occupation and allowing Diaz to be overthrown. Trying to find a third 
option, President Coolidge sent former Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson 
to Nicaragua, backed by the threat of US force, to negotiate an end to the 
conflict. 

Initial negotiations with Liberal political leaders foundered on US in¬ 
sistence that Diaz remain in office through the 1928 elections. Stimson 


100 


then went directly to General Moncada, their principal military command¬ 
er. Faced with the threat of all-out intervention, Moncada ultimately agreed 
to a package of agreements, including restoration of local Liberal political 
officials, a disarmament of both his and the government’s forces, US su¬ 
pervision of the 1928 elections, and the replacement of existing army and 
police by a new National Guard, officered and trained by Americans. 12 All 
but one of Moncada’s Generals accepted this plan. The refusal of a rela¬ 
tively minor commander, Augusto Cesar Sandino, to disarm did not, at the 
time, arouse much concern. 

Without waiting for a formal agreement with the Nicaraguan govern¬ 
ment, the Marines quickly set about recruiting and organizing the new 
Guardia National. The remnants of the old Guard were dissolved, but 
many immediately enlisted in the new force. Recruiting formally began on 
24 May 1927 and within a month three companies had been organized and 
a Marine Colonel had assumed the ra nk of Nicaraguan Brigadier General 
and the title Jef'e Director de la Guardia National de Nicaragua , 13 The 
original plan was to give recruits several months of training, then slowly 
have them replace Marines throughout the country, but this quickly foun¬ 
dered when Sandino began to attack the government. 

Sandino’s forces were concentrated in the rural province of Nueva 
Segovia, near the Flonduran border. Stimson had suggested that an Army 
cavalry regiment be sent to the region, but the Navy and Marines opposed 
this, with Brigadier General Logan Feland, the Marine commander in 
Nicaragua noting that they “didn’t want any of the Army down here.” 14 
Sandino still was not taken seriously until, in late June, he seized an 
American-owned gold mine and took several hundred pounds of dynamite. 
Flurriedly, the newly organized First Company of the Guardia was 
dispatched to Ocotal. Shortly after they arrived, Sandino launched an all- 
out attack on the town that lasted for nearly two days and was only beaten 
off with the support of Marine aircraft dispatched from Managua. 15 

Fighting Sandino would occupy the majority of the Guardia for the 
next five and half years, but it did not release them from their other mis¬ 
sion of taking over policing duties. The Marines put in charge of this were 
ill-prepared for such a mission and encountered a host of difficulties. A 
colorful account of some of these was later recorded by the first to serve as 
Managua’s Chief of Police: 

The first few days were spent getting in touch with the 
old police force. . . . Well it was run mostly by graft. . . . 

We had to study up on existing police laws and how to cut 
thru red tape to get convictions. I had four junior officers 


101 


assigned who could read, write and speak Spanish. . . . 

To get the office going we had to borrow, bum and swipe 
what we needed. 

I immediately started schools and had the lieutenants go 
over with the men the police laws then in force. The po¬ 
liceman was taught first to know what is wrong and then to 
kn ow what to do about it. Their idea of the job was to lock 
up everybody they had a grudge against or who would not 
turn over to them a little graft. Well we had to weed out 
the undesirables at the start before we got a write up in 
the paper. . . . We worked on the newspaper men and got 
something on them and they left us alone. 

In the beginning the police force was armed with the rifle 
and the bayonet. We immediately discarded that because 
we had several policemen cut by their own bayonets. . . . 

We then had several cases where the policeman was justi¬ 
fied in shooting his rifle, but the bullet, after hitting the 
fugitive, would continue on and hit an innocent bystander. 

. . . We turned to and armed them with clubs and pistols. 

The people were against us at first because they could not 
bribe us to look blind or the other way. I used the lady 
next to the police station (Mrs. Irene de Pasos) to present 
our case to the President (Diaz) whenever we had to lock 
up some prominent Conservative or once in a while his 
nephew or brother or his secretary. . . . 

I hope it is possible ... to have the Marine Corps get 
up a pamphlet on practical police work. ... I believe it 
should be made part of the law course in the Marine Corps 
Schools in Quantico. It is very important when the Ma¬ 
rines capture a place for the Navy in a foreign country that 
we have officers competent to handle one of the most im¬ 
portant functions in getting in touch with the natives. Also 
in taking over a foreign city allowance should be made for 
differences in race, customs, laws, language and habits of 
the natives, until they get used to us. 16 

Slow progress in training, budget issues, and the growing preoccupa¬ 
tion with fighting Sandino meant that the Guardia was slow in taking over 
police functions, especially in outlying provinces. In the Department of 
Chontales, for example, the local police remained in place until mid-1928. 


102 


When the Guard took over the number of arrests, the amount of fines, and 
weapons seized increased more than twenty-fold, something which some 
segments of the population appreciated and others did not. 17 

While the initial recruiting and training was going on and the com¬ 
bat with Sandino had begun the negotiation and ratification of a formal 
agreement establishing the Guard continued to languish. Marine Generals 
John Lejeune and Logan Feland had prepared a draft treaty that the State 
Department approved. But the Diaz administration tried to make several 
basic changes, including filling the ra nk s through compulsory rather than 
voluntary service, and creating separate military and police forces. The 
Conservatives were especially strong in wanting to retain locally con¬ 
trolled police, hoping to use these to influence the 1928 elections. The 
State Department rejected all these proposals. The Liberals generally sup¬ 
ported the treaty, believing it would enhance their chances of success in 
the 1928 elections, and even wanted the United States to agree to train the 
Guardia for twelve years. All of this was rejected and the agreement was 
finally signed on 22 December 1927. 18 Final ratification was repeatedly 
delayed in the Nicaraguan Congress, but the United States simply oper¬ 
ated as if the treaty was in full force. 

The treaty provide for a force of 93 officers, initially all Americans, 
and 1,136 enlisted men with an annual budget of $689,132. Provisions 
were included for expanding both with these numbers declared to be “the 
minimum requirements for the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua.” Other 
provisions declared that the force would be “the sole military and police 
force of the Republic.” Its commander, with the title of Jefe Director, was 
given control over “recruiting, appointment, instruction, training, promo¬ 
tions, examination, discipline, operation of troops, clothing, rations, arms 
and equipment, quarters and administration.” American officers serving 
in the Guardia were exempted from the jurisdiction of Nicaraguan courts 
and those Americans serving with the force would all be appointed by the 
US President. 19 

Organizing and training this new force presented a wide variety of 
problems. Recruits were supposed to be able to pass a physical exami¬ 
nation and be literate, but STDs, parasites, and other afflictions were 
widespread and large numbers failed the physicals. Once in the Guardia 
these problems persisted, with the Medical Department reporting 487 new 
reported cases of venereal disease among enlisted men in 1932 alone, a 
figure representing nearly a quarter of the total enlisted strength. Only ma¬ 
laria, with 804 cases, represented a more serious problem. Literate recruits 


103 


were extremely scarce and that requirement was largely overlooked, with 
the Guard instead setting up schools to teach enlisted men basic literacy. 20 

Finding officers presented a different set of problems. As an incentive 
to Marines, those assigned to the Guardia drew both their Marine pay and 
Nicaraguan government pay. Since they normally served one or two ra nk s 
higher in the Guardia than in the Coips, this represented a major increase. 
But, with the Corps occupied in Haiti and China, and depression restric¬ 
tions on funding, there were never enough available officers. As had been 
the practice elsewhere, this meant that most of the junior officer slots were 
filled by Marine NCOs. While dedicated and courageous, most of these 
had limited education and often little command of Spanish. They usually 
proved effective in combat, but were less capable in many areas of train¬ 
ing, especially those related to inculcating national loyalties and nonparti¬ 
san sentiments in the troops. 

Medical duties were to be handled by Navy doctors and Corpsmen, 
but these were also in limited supply and Nicaraguan contract physicians 
eventually did much of the work. This may have had an unforeseen advan¬ 
tage as this part of the Guardia had fewer problems when the time came to 
change over to Nicaraguan command. 

Following the battle at Ocotal, Sandino was relatively inactive for 
a time, but his activities increased steadily beginning in late 1927. The 
Guardia reported three clashes in November and eight in December. In 
January 1928, there were ten and in February eight. There were even more 
with Marine units. There was some decline in late 1928 and 1929, and 
the Marines were largely withdrawn from combat. But violence escalated 
dramatically beginning in 1930 with 132 clashes, between Guardia units 
and Sandino’s forces, followed by 141 clashes in 1931 and 176 in 1932. 21 

The Guardia generally performed well in these combats and the ca¬ 
sualties inflicted on Sandino’s forces were much greater than those they 
suffered. But the strains of combat, disrupted training, reduced attention 
to policing functions, and contributed to problems between the Guardia, 
civilian populations, and the general public. It also led to a bitter hatred of 
Sandino by most of the Guardia. The United States and the Guardia helped 
run relatively free and honest elections in Nicaragua in 1928. The head of 
the electoral Commission sent by Washington to oversee the elections was 
an Army Brigadier General, Fra nk McCoy, and most of his assistants were 
also Army officers. 22 President Diaz, at the request of the State Depart¬ 
ment, gave control over the Guardia to McCoy, an action that upset the se¬ 
nior Navy and Marine officers in the area. McCoy also began investigating 
the overall military situation. Admiral David Foote Sellers, the senior US 
104 


Naval official in the area, grew increasingly upset with McCoy’s tendency 
to criticize the Marines and to issue orders directly to the Guardia, by¬ 
passing the regular chain of command. As friction increased, some began 
to fear that McCoy would try to replace the Marines with Army person¬ 
nel. Colonel L. McCarty Little, Director of Marine Corps Operations and 
Training, wrote a memorandum arguing that: 

To take from the Navy a problem it has successfully han¬ 
dled for century and to assign such duty to the Army, of 
whose functions it is not properly a part would be uneco¬ 
nomic to say the least. An Army officer assigned in charge 
of the problems of Nicaragua would under the present 
depend entirely . . . upon the support of a service with 
whose technical limitations he is not wholly familiar. Why 
introduce this possibly jarring note? ... To assign Army 
officers to the Guardia Nacional is to introduce an addi¬ 
tional system of training. . . . Army officers detailed for 
duty under Marines would require instruction in our spe¬ 
cial type of training. Army training placed over a Marine 
system would to a large degree undo the results of last 
year’s work. 23 

Sellers supported Little’s stand noting that: 

I am very decidedly of the opinion that the best results will 
not be obtained by mixing the Army with the Navy and 
Marine Corps in matters like the present operation. ... To 
import a lot of Army officers whose standards, traditions 
and methods differ from ours does not tend to promote 
harmony, efficiency or develop esprit de corps. 24 

While these inter-service rivalries proved largely ephemeral problems 
with the victor in the 1928 elections, President Jose Maria Moncada, were 
much more concrete. Unlike the compliant Diaz, who owed his position 
to the Americans, Moncada felt no such debt. He was determined both to 
assert his independence and to expand his powers. Shortly after his inau¬ 
guration he began calling for the formation of a “Volunteer Army” under 
officers appointed by him to support the fight against Sandino. The Ameri¬ 
can Minister and the Marine Jefe Director of the Guardia objected, but 
Moncada, supported by the Marine’s commander, General Feland, began 
recruiting his volunteers. Two columns, accompanied by Marines, were 
ultimately dispatched to Northern Nicaragua where they accomplished 
little in a military sense, but did arouse alarm among many Marines be¬ 
cause of their habit of shooting prisoners. Word of these actions reached 

105 


the State Department, where Henry Stimson had just become Secretary, 
and he quickly began urging Moncada to disband the volunteer troops. In 
June, the Nicaraguan President reluctantly complied with this request, but 
did not abandon his schemes to create a force under his control. 25 

The 1927 Guardia Agreement was finally ratified by the Nicaraguan 
Congress on 19 February 1929, but Moncada was able to get several 
amendments added, including some which seemed to give local officials 
the power to issue orders to the Guard, others which could limit the force to 
the size specified in the original agreement and one which required all Ma¬ 
rines serving as Guard officers to have a working knowledge of Spanish. 26 
The State Department rejected all these amendments, convinced that their 
true intent was to undermine the Guardia and make possible the creation of 
a partisan army. Efforts to resolve these differences failed and, until they 
withdrew, the Marines continued to operate as if the original agreement 
was in effect. 

Meanwhile, Mondaca persisted in efforts to manipulate the force 
for his own political interests. In April 1929, he ordered the Guardia to 
arrest sixteen of his political opponents, including a prominent newspaper 
editor. The State Department opposed such action, placing the Guardia in 
an awkward position. As the police force, it was supposed to carry out 
arrest orders from the courts, but, since the President controlled these, 
involvement in political arrests became virtually inevitable. In May, 
Moncada ordered the arrest of over forty more political opponents. Again, 
the State Department protested, but to no avail. 27 

The Nicaraguan court system was a constant problem for the Marines 
and the Guardia. In Haiti and in the Dominican Republic, Americans had 
exercised some control over the courts, but not in Nicaragua. There existed 
a welter of local and national tribunals, often with unclear and overlapping 
jurisdictions, and all highly politicized. 28 For either personal or political 
motives, judges often refused to try or sentence individuals brought before 
them by the Guardia. In rural areas, Guardia officers sometimes resorted to 
holding court themselves, trying everything from homicides to civil cases 
to domestic disputes, but this was not the general rule and the court system 
remained an object of constant frustration. 29 

Other disputes between Moncada and the Americans involved the 
Guardia’s budget. The onset of the great depression had created serious 
financial problems for both governments, but Moncada saw in these more 
opportunities to extend his control over military affairs. In 1929, he tried 
to reduce the Guardia’s budget to $800,000, an amount that would have 
forced a sharp reduction in personnel, and might have opened a door for 
106 


the return of the “volunteer” army. The newly appointed American Min¬ 
ister, Matthew Hanna, an Army veteran who had served in Cuba, tried to 
compromise. He suggested that municipal police, paid by local communi¬ 
ties, should take over much of the police duties, freeing the Guard to focus 
on the fight with Sandino. The State Department rejected this idea, insist¬ 
ing that the Guardia remain Nicaragua’s only police as well as military 
force. The following year Moncada tried to force Marines serving with 
the Guardia to take a 20-percent pay cut, something they, not surprisingly, 
resisted. 30 They denounced this effort as: 

. . . only one cog in the policy to destroy the Guardia. 

Without asking that the United States withdraw the Ma¬ 
rines attached to the Guardia he kills it by non-support and 
thus lays the blame for the death on the United States and 
attains his own end: that of substituting Nicaraguans of his 
own personal choice for United States Marines. 31 

Escalated attacks by Sandino cooled this dispute as conditions made it 
imperative that the Guardia expand, not contract. When the Marines turned 
over command at the end of 1932 it had reached a total strength of 267 
officers and 2,240 enlisted men. 32 In addition, due to President Moncada’s 
efforts, there were several hundred municipal police, ostensibly under 
Guardia control, but recruited locally and paid for by liquor taxes. Another 
group, known as civicos, served as both a reserve force and as private 
guards for companies and farms. Finally, beginning in 1931, a force of 
300 auxiliares was created, short-term armed groups who accompanied the 
Guardia on specific missions. Another 250 were added in 1932 and these 
sometimes operated independently. In all cases, Guardia officers, supplied 
through the Guardia’s Quartermaster Department, and, at least in theory, 
subject to Guardia regulations, commanded the auxiliares. 33 They do not 
seem to have generated the controversy engendered by the earlier voluntar¬ 
ies and, in early 1933, after peace was negotiated with Sandino, they were 
apparently disbanded. 

Despite limited funds, constant combat, and seemingly endless 
political disputes, the Marines did a reasonably good job in organizing and 
training the Guardia. While under their command it remained nonpartisan, 
reasonably honest, and by far the best trained, disciplined, and equipped 
force in Nicaraguan history. The very nature of Marine leadership and 
training, however, contributed to future problems in the nation’s civil- 
military relations. As one scholar has noted that, “despite [the Marines] 
efforts to eradicate the old caudillo style military history of Nicaragua 


107 


[they] ended up recreating the same style of command within the new 
Guardia.” 34 

The problem was what is characterized in Spanish as personalismo, the 
habit, especially among Latin American militaries, of giving prime loyalty 
not to a nation or an institution, but to one’s immediate commander. It is 
common to address a superior officer as mi General or mi Capitan, my 
General or Captain, emphasizing the highly personal nature of the relation¬ 
ship. This had always been a dominant characteristic in Nicaragua, and 
troops reacted to Marine officers much as they had to earlier Nicaraguan 
leaders. As Marine Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Racicot noted in 1930: 

The morale of the Guardia Nacional is in general satisfac¬ 
tory. Their loyalty appears almost wholly based on per¬ 
sonal loyalty to their officers. Development of loyalty to 
their government as the duty of a soldier, above every¬ 
thing else, is not apparent in any perceptible degree, yet. 35 

Writing after the Marines withdrew another officer stressed the role 
of personal loyalties in effective command of Guardia units, emphasizing 
that, “The Marine became guide, philosopher, and friend, and, in most in¬ 
stances, the idol of his command.” He concluded that, “with a careful eye 
upon their comfort and wellbeing, kindness, and an occasional word of 
appreciation and the Jefe became the demigod of his men. 36 

An exacerbating factor was the series of disputes between the Marines 
and Nicaraguan politicians. Many Guardia officers made little effort to 
conceal their contempt for the entire political class. One senior officer went 
so far as to declare that, “most Nicaraguan politicians should be in jail.” 37 
Such open contempt did nothing to promote Guardia loyalty to the govern¬ 
ment. Instead, both the Nicaraguan officers and enlisted men increasingly 
came to think of themselves as a class apart, not just separate from, but in 
most ways superior, to the political leadership. At its most extreme, this 
attitude created the image that they were the true defenders of the state and 
politicians among the principal menaces. 

Racial, religious, and culturalprejudices also hampered the development 
of the Guardia, though to a lesser extent than was the case in Haiti or 
the Dominican Republic. It must again be recalled that such prejudices 
were extremely common in the United States at this time. The Corps had 
no minority officers or enlisted men and many came from the segregated 
South. In addition, anti-Catholic sentiment was common, reflected in the 
defeat of A1 Smith’s run for the presidency in 1928. What is notable is 
the extent to which many Marines, detailed to the Guardia, were able to 


108 


overcome or at least modify their prejudices. Compliments on the quality 
of Nicaraguan troops were frequent and at times those of mixed heritage 
were seen as superior to the more Europeanized elites. At the same time, 
many of the enlisted men may have found the class prejudices of their 
American officers less intense than those they had experienced under 
Nicaraguan command. In the Marine Corps, ties between officers and 
enlisted personnel, especially the famous Gunnery Sergeants, were always 
close and this attitude carried over to their development of the Guardia. 
One prejudice, however, did have a real impact. As in Haiti, the Marines 
were never willing to have a native officer in a position of command over 
any Marine. This insured that Nicaraguans did not fill any posts above 
the ra nk of Captain until just before the final withdrawal. The lack of any 
professional preparation of the higher officer corps would create major 
problems for the future of the Guardia and of Nicaragua. 

Sandino was not the only major challenge that the Guardia confronted. 
On 31 March 1931, a powerful earthquake devastated the city of Managua. 
Damage and casualties were immense, water and electricity services were 
disrupted, and fires broke out, destroying much of what the earthquake had 
spared. 38 The Guardia’s Marine Commander immediately declared martial 
law, and his troops and the members of the Marine Brigade in Managua 
worked furiously to stem the fires and prevent looting. They also took over 
efforts to provide food, water, and medical care for the city’s surviving 
inhabitants. Almost all the buildings used by the Guardia were destroyed, 
as was the National Penitentiary. 39 Despite immense difficulties, the force 
functioned well and probably did more to enhance its image by these ac¬ 
tions than at any other time. In December 1972, when an earthquake again 
devastated Managua, the Guardia’s performance would produce condem¬ 
nation rather than praise. 

By the time of the earthquake, preparations were already underway 
for transferring command to Nicaraguan officers and withdrawing the 
Marines. President Hoover’s desire to end American military interventions 
in Latin America, budgetary pressures exacerbated by the depression, and 
Secretary of State Stimson’s belief that the interventions hampered his 
efforts to oppose Japan’s invasion of Manchuria all added to the urgency. 
In April 1930, a Nicaraguan military academy was finally opened, but 
there were only nine students in the initial class. Increased clashes with 
Sandino’s forces led to a very premature graduation of this class, but this 
still left the Guard with only 15 Nicaraguans among the 220 officers. 40 A 
class of thirty-seven, four of whom were already Guardia officers, was 


109 


admitted to the military academy in November 1930 and twenty-seven 
graduated on 1 June 1931. The following class graduated fifty-nine new 
second lieutenants in April 1932. Admissions to each class were supposed 
to be nonpartisan, but President Moncada had to approve them and he 
clearly favored those with Liberal party connections. 41 

The State Department continued efforts to limit political influences, 
but with little success. Washington was determined to end the intervention 
when the victor in the 1932 presidential elections took office and pres¬ 
sures to comply with this mandate overwhelmed all other concerns. The 
Academy would produce enough graduates to fill all the slots for second 
lieutenants, and promotions of existing offices would take care of the posi¬ 
tions for first lieutenants and some of those for captains. But there was no 
provision for filling the higher ranks. These positions would be critical in 
determining the Guard’s trajectory once the Marines departed. 

Washington did not seem to take serious notice of this problem until 
February 1932. Laurence Duggan of the State Department’s Division of 
Latin American Affairs wrote a memo noting that the Guardia had no 
regular promotion procedures and no means of preventing the President 
“from appointing to all the high commands his own henchmen, pledged 
to carry out his personal or party wishes.” 42 The State Department then 
asked its Nicaraguan Legation to report on preparations for turning over 
command. Charge Willard Beaulac responded by forwarding a November 
1931 proposal by Guardia Jefe Director, General Calvin B. Matthews, that 
Nicaragua adopt a law freeing the Guardia from local political control and 
prohibiting its members from any political participation including voting. 
He also included a later message from Matthews noting that none of the 
Academy graduates would have the experience necessary for high command 
and that these posts would need to be filled by “Nicaraguans of mature age 
and with previous military experience,” who would be appointed by the 
winner of the 1932 elections. 43 Since the only way Nicaraguans outside 
of the Guardia had gained such experience was in bitterly partisan civil 
conflicts, this made the future of the concept of a nonpartisan constabulary 
dubious at best. 

Washington’s response to this situation seems to have been a combi¬ 
nation of denial and wishful thinking. On 17 May 1932, Acting Secretary 
of State Francis White wrote Matthew Hanna, the American Minister in 
Nicaragua: 

It is going to be difficult to maintain the theory of the 
Guardia as a nonpartisan organization if outsiders are 
appointed to high command. However, in view of the fact 


110 


that no Nicaraguans have so far been trained to hold grades 
higher than that of lieutenant, I suppose it may be necessary 
to go outside of the Guardia for some of the appointments 
to higher grades. It would of course be advisable if such 
appointments could be given to Nicaraguans who do not 
have a record of strong political partisanship. 44 

In June 1932, Matthews pointed out that appointments to higher po¬ 
sitions could precipitate a conflict between the incumbent and incoming 
presidents and therefore urged Washington to allow fifty Marine officers 
to stay for an additional two months to facilitate the turnover. Secretary of 
State Stimson firmly rejected this suggestion. 45 An alternate plan, proposed 
by Matthews, was accepted by the State Department. It provided that each 
major party candidate for president should prepare a list of officers, drawn 
equally from both parties, before the election and that President Moncada 
should agree to appoint the list of the winning candidate. However, the key 
post of Jefe Director, was exempted from this and would obviously be a 
supporter of the winning candidate and his party. The Acting Secretary of 
State seemed satisfied with this arrangement, declaring that it provided for 
“continuance of the nonpartisan nature of the Guardia since its officers will 
be drawn equally from the two historic political parties.” 46 This assertion 
was patently false, since the new officers would be appointed because of 
their political loyalties, not the lack thereof. Moreover, the Jefe Director 
would almost certainly be an individual of strong political loyalties and 
would have great control over future assignments and promotions, virtu¬ 
ally assuring that the force would become increasingly partisan. 

With no better options readily available, this plan was put in motion. 
At President Moncada’s suggestion, the two major presidential candidates, 
on the day before the election, signed an agreement, pledging to keep the 
Guardia nonpartisan and to give President Moncada, in agreement with 
General Matthews, the right to appoint the officers on the winning candi¬ 
dates list. 47 On 6 November, the elections were held, under American su¬ 
pervision, and the Liberal Party candidate, Dr. Juan Bautista Sacasa, won a 
decisive victory. The Guardia performed well during the elections and even 
the defeated party acknowledged that it had remained completely neutral. 

While Sacasa supposedly was free to appoint whomever he wished 
as the Guardia’s new Jefe Director, he had to negotiate this with both 
President Moncada and the American Minister, Matthew Hanna. A letter 
from Matthews to Moncada confirmed this, saying Sacasa had been given 
three names—Anastasio Somoza Garda, Gustavo Abaunza, and Jose 
Maria Zelaya—from which to choose the “higher officials.” 48 All three 


111 


were strong partisans of Moncada’s faction of the Liberal Party. Eventually 
Somoza was made Jefe Director, and Abaunza Chief of Staff. 49 

Sacasa found Somoza, Moncada’s acting Foreign Minister, the least 
objectionable of this group, largely because he was married to the incoming 
President’s niece. The Americans wanted him because he had long worked 
with them, often serving as a buffer between the volatile and frequently 
intoxicated Moncada and American diplomatic and military officials. He 
also had studied at the Pierce School of Accounting in Philadelphia where 
he learned English and became an ardent baseball fan. Hanna had openly 
stated his preference for Somoza, characterizing him as “the best man in 
the country for the position” and concluding, “no one will labor as in¬ 
telligently or conscientiously to maintain the nonpartisan character of the 
Guardia or will be as efficient in all matters connected with the administra¬ 
tion and command of the Force.” 50 

With this obstacle removed the Marines set about making final 
preparations for the change of command and their departure. Matthews and 
his staff prepared a large number of proposed laws governing the Guardia 
that they wanted adopted, but no Nicaraguan administration ever acted on 
these. On 1 January 1933, Matthews turned over command to Somoza and 
departed in such a rush that his Chief of Staff doubted that he even finished 
packing. 51 They left behind the best trained, armed, and equipped military 
force in Nicaragua’s history. Despite limited academic preparation, the 
junior officers were better trained than any previous officer corps and in 
addition most had some combat experience, often under Marine direction. 
Separate medical, quartermaster, and communications departments were 
organized and functioning. 

The majority of the Guardia were destined to function more as po¬ 
lice than as military, and in this area, too, the force was better trained and 
disciplined than ever before, with much of the petty graft and almost all 
of the political harassment previously characteristic of Nicaraguan police 
eliminated. On most technical matters, the Marines had done as good a job 
as possible under the circumstances. The chances of these changes endur¬ 
ing would now depend on Nicaraguan leadership. That leadership, it soon 
became apparent, was determined to mold the Guardia into an instrument 
of personal ambitions. 

Some individuals in both the State Department and the Marine Coips 
had a good idea of what the future was likely to hold. Laurence Duggan, 
ever the pessimistic realist, had, as early as November 1931, noted that 
the animosity between traditional parties probably made establishing a 
nonpartisan constabulary an impossibility, and openly wondered what had 
112 


ever made American officials thi nk that might be possible. 52 The following 
year Duggan was even more pessimistic, predicting: 

Upon the withdrawal of the Marine officer in the Guardia 
next fall the forces of disintegration will be set into ac¬ 
tion. ... It is a foregone conclusion that Nicaragua will not 
maintain the Guardia along present Marine Corps lines. 

The loss of the spirit of impartial service, so laboriously 
instilled, involves a return to a partisan, political constab¬ 
ulary. Judging from the historical position of the Army 
in Central America and more particularly in Nicaragua a 
strictly nonpartisan military is not, at the present time, a 
possibility. 53 

Many of the Marines who had served with the Guardia were also pes¬ 
simistic about its future. Writing in the November 1932 issue of the Marine 
Coips Gazette, Lieutenant Colonel Robert Denig, who had served as Guar¬ 
dia Chief of Staff until injuries suffered in the 1931 earthquake forced his 
evacuation, criticized the plan for political appointments to the Guardia’s 
higher positions, and concluded, “At best there is sure to be a shakeup in 
the Guardia; it will soon become a partisan force used to further the party 
in power.” 54 Even General Matthews, the Guardia’s last American com¬ 
mander, was pessimistic, admitting that the best that could be hoped would 
be that the politically appointed officers would have a minimum, not an 
absence of political bias, and noting that political bias already existed as 
Moncada had openly favored Liberals for both officer and enlisted posi¬ 
tions. 55 

These fears would prove all too true. At first, though, it seemed as if the 
Marine’s withdrawal might bring peace to Nicaragua. Sandino had often 
declared that he would quit fighting when the Marines left and to the sur¬ 
prise of many, he kept his promise. On 23 January, a fifteen-day truce was 
declared to allow negotiations, and, in early February, Sacasa and Sandino 
agreed to a treaty that provided for an end to the fighting, a general am¬ 
nesty, and the disarmament of all but 100 of Sandino’s men. 

This agreement may have come just in time for General Somoza and 
the Guardia. The political appointments to the senior officer positions an¬ 
gered some military academy graduates and a disgruntled group plotted 
to force the president to fire all but Somoza and promote junior officers 
in their place. The plot was discovered, but, unsure of its dimensions, the 
president and his Jefe Director simply reassigned the ringleaders to remote 
posts or administrative billets. 56 


113 


Guardia unity was restored more by a common dislike of the peace 
terms obtained by Sandino than by anything else. The former insurgent 
leader’s retention of his own armed force, in contravention of the stipu¬ 
lation that the Guardia, was to be the nation’s sole armed force, was the 
greatest issue. Somoza repeatedly asked the American Minister, Arthur 
Bliss Lane, for permission to “lock Sandino up,” an action Lane always 
refused to endorse. 57 But, pressured by the Guardia’s officer corps, Somoza 
decided to move ahead anyway. On the night of 21 February 1934, San¬ 
dino was seized as he left a meeting with President Sacasa and, along with 
several of his chief lieutenants, shot. At the same time, other Guardia units 
attacked his followers camped along the Coco River. 58 

At first terrified that Sacasa might seize on the killings as an excuse 
to replace him, Somoza quickly recovered his nerve when the president 
failed to act. He now began to maneuver, first to gain complete control 
over the Guardia then to make himself president. The first step was having 
the congress pass an override of a presidential veto of a general amnesty 
for all those involved in Sandino’s murder. 59 Somoza also had to put down 
several plots against him from within the Guardia during 1934 and 1935. 
Their failure helped the Jefe Director to steadily purge the force of officers 
whose loyalty was suspect. In the process most of the Conservatives who 
had been appointed to senior positions following the 1932 election were 
forced out. 

With the Guardia now largely loyal to him, Somoza put into action 
plans to make himself president. President Sacasa attempted to block his 
ambitions, but to no avail. In June 1936, there was a brief armed confronta¬ 
tion between the Guardia and Sacasa’s supporters. The President appealed 
to the United States and other nations for support, but beyond a few verbal 
statements, got nothing. Terrified for his own safety, he ordered his sup¬ 
porters to surrender, then resigned and fled the country. 60 With Sacasa out 
of the way, the Liberal Party obediently nominated Somoza for president, 
the opposition boycotted the 1936 elections, and he was declared the victor 
with over 99 percent of the votes. As the Constitution required, Somoza 
ostensibly stepped down as Jefe Director during the campaign, but shortly 
after his victory resumed the post, combining in his person the civilian and 
military leadership of the nation. 61 

What many had feared had come to pass. The Guardia had become not 
only an instrument of partisan politics, it had essentially taken over poli¬ 
tics, dominating the Liberal Party, intimidating the opposition, and placing 
its commander in the presidency. This came as no surprise to Arthur Bliss 
Lane, who a year earlier had written: 


114 


The people who created the G.N. had no adequate under¬ 
standing of the psychology of the people here. Otherwise 
they would not have bequeathed Nicaragua with an instru¬ 
ment to blast constitutional procedure off the map. Did it 
ever occur to the eminent statesmen who created the G.N. 
that personal ambition lurks in the human breast, even in 
Nicaragua. In my opinion it is one of the sorriest examples 
on our part of our inability to understand that we should 
not meddle in other peoples affairs. 62 

For the next 33 years, the history of Nicaragua, the Guardia Nacional, 
and the Somoza family were inextricably intertwined. Anastasio Somoza 
Garcia and his sons built their power on the twin pillars of control of the 
Guardia and maintaining the image of Washington’s support. In the process, 
they constantly strove to portray all opposition as either pro-Axis (through 
1945) or pro-Communist. 63 They became a constant ally of the United 
States, promptly declaring war on Japan and Germany in 1941, always 
voting with Washington in the United Nations, sending his sons, Luis and 
Anastasio Somoza Debayle, to study in the United States (Luis graduated 
from Louisiana State and Anastasio from West Point) and even naming 
Managua’s main street Avenida Roosevelt. In return, the United States 
provided training and military assistance to the Guardia, especially during 
World War II and following Castro’s assumption of power in Cuba. When 
the CIA wanted bases to train an exile army to oust left-leaning Jacobo 
Arbenz from power in Guatemala, Somoza readily complied. 64 In return, 
Nicaragua received generous amounts of American military assistance 
and training and the Guardia’s strength steadily expanded. 65 His sons later 
supplied the bases from which the CIA launched its unsuccessful Cuban 
invasion in 1961. 66 This contributed to an intense hatred between the two 
regimes and to Castro’s strong support for the Nicaraguan insurgents of 
the FSLN. 

Relations were not always smooth. After World War II, the Truman 
administration pressured Somoza not to run for re-election, and then, 
when he overthrew his handpicked successor withdrew recognition, ended 
military training and assistance for a time. The Eisenhower administration 
helped block his efforts to overthrow the Costa Rican government in 
1954. 67 Despite Nicaraguan support at the Bay of Pigs, the Kennedy 
administration tried to pressure the sons to lessen their grip on power, but 
only succeeded in having a puppet president installed for one term. In every 
case, security considerations, the identification of the regimes opponents 
with Communism and, eventually, with Castro, and the perceived lack 


115 


of viable alternatives aborted these efforts and enabled the Somozas to 
maintain their power and the Guardia to continue receiving US assistance 
and training. They took full advantage of every such opportunity and, until 
relations broke down in 1978, under the Carter administration, sent more 
individuals to the US Army’s School of the Americas in the Canal Zone 
than any other Latin American nation. 68 

Anastasio Somoza Garcia was assassinated in 1956, but his sons Luis 
and Anastasio (Tachito) Somoza Debayle quickly assumed power. Luis 
handled politics and Anastasio commanded the Guardia until Luis died in 
1967. The younger brother then tried to direct both political and military 
affairs, plus manage the family’s huge business interests, but lacked the 
skills of his father and brother. Corruption became more and more blatant, 
and frustrated youth increasingly turned to the Cuban-backed Sandinista 
guerrillas. Relations with the Roman Catholic Church were also deterio¬ 
rating as Guardia human rights violations increased. When the Guardia 
largely disintegrated following the 1972 earthquake and Tachito used the 
event to further enrich himself opposition within the business class mount¬ 
ed as well. 69 

The regime’s final collapse began in January 1978 with the assassination 
of Somoza’s most prominent political opponent, newspaper editor Pedro 
Joaquin Chamorro. Widespread strikes quickly followed and there were 
scattered uprisings that the Guardia crushed. Relations with the United 
States deteriorated and Venezuela, Panama, and Costa Rica took the lead 
among Latin American nations in calling for Somoza’s ouster. In August, 
an FSLN commando unit, led by Eden Pastora (Commandante Zero) 
infiltrated Managua and took the Congress hostage. Despite opposition 
from elements of the Guardia, Somoza Debayle negotiated a settlement. 
Political prisoners were released, an FSLN communique was broadcast 
on radio and television, and the guerrillas were flown to safety in Panama 
and Venezuela. 70 This inspired a rash of uprisings across Nicaragua that 
the Guardia again put down, this time with greatly increased brutality, 
including bombing civilian areas and shooting any young men suspected 
of Sandinista sympathies. 71 

The United States devoted the next several months to trying to lever¬ 
age the Somozas out of power, but to no avail. Military assistance and 
training were suspended, but the regime managed to find other sources, 
including Israel and rightwing Latin American governments. In May 1979, 
the FSLN launched coordinated attacks on the regime from within Nica¬ 
ragua and from Costa Rica. Frantic US efforts to negotiate an end to the 
fighting, including efforts to get the Organization of American States to 


116 


intervene, and to negotiate the survival of at least elements of the Guardia 
failed. 72 Somoza was finally persuaded to resign in July 1979 and the rem¬ 
nants of the Guardia fled into exile or sought refuge with the Red Cross in 
Managua. This sanctuary was quickly violated and most of the officers and 
enlisted men from combat units were imprisoned. The United States cre¬ 
ated Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua had ceased to exist. 73 

The Nicaraguan experience demonstrates again that, while technical 
expertise can be created, altering political behavior and institutions are 
much more difficult, if not impossible. It also underscores the reality that 
policies towards small, weak nations are so often overtaken by perceived 
wider concerns, be they developing a nonintervention policy, fighting 
global enemies, promoting democracy and human rights, or simply want¬ 
ing stability at almost any price in order not to have attention diverted from 
more pressing matters. In the end, neither stability nor wider interests were 
achieved and, during the 1980s, the United States would find itself once 
more absorbed with trying to deal with Nicaragua. 


117 


Notes 


1. For details on this period, see Dana Gardner Munro, Intervention and 
Dollar Diplomacy in the Caribbean, 1900-1921 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1964), 160-216. 

2. Richard L. Millett, Guardians of the Dynasty: A History of the US Created 
Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua and the Somoza Family (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis 
Books, 1977), 34-35. 

3. Thomas M. Leonard, US Policy and Arms Limitation in Central America: 
The Washington Conference of 1923 (Los Angeles, CA: Center for the Study of 
Armament and Disarmament, California State University, Los Angeles, 1982), 59 
and 67. 

4. Leonard, 13-14. 

5. Ibid., 35-36. 

6. Walter Thurston to Secretary of State Kellogg, 15 May 1925, Papers 
Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. II (1925), 628-630. 

7. Major Calvin B. Carter to US Minister Charles Eberhardt, 30 September 
1925, RG 59, 817.1051/87 (enclosure). 

8. Eberhardt to Kellogg, 3 November 1925, RG 59,817.1051/88. 

9. Millett, Guardians, 45-47. 

10. Eberhardt to Kellogg, 14 March 1926, RG 59, 817.1051/98. 

11. Eberhardt to Kellogg, 8 April 1926, RG 59, 817.1051/99. 

12. For details of Stimson’s mission and his agreement with General 
Moncada, see Henry L. Stimson, American Policy in Nicaragua (New York, NY: 
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1927). This was republished in 1991 with additional 
essays by Paul Boeker, Alan Brinkley and Andres Perez plus the inclusion of a 
State Department History of US-Nicaraguan Relations from 1909 to 1932 under 
the title Henry L. Stimson’s American Policy’ in Nicaragua (New York, NY: Markus 
Wiener Publishing, Inc., 1992). 

13. Millett, Guardians, 61. 

14. Quoted in Neill Macaulay, The Sandino Affair (Chicago, 1L: Quadrangle 
Books, 1967), 70. 

15. For the best description of these events and of the subsequent over five 
years of war between Sandino and the Guard and the Marines, see Macaulay. 

16. Captain Herbert S. Keimling to Major Fleming, 11 March 1933, RG 127, 
Entry 198, Papers of the Jefe Director of the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua. 

17. Millett, Guardians, 74. 

18. For a more detailed description of these disputes, see Millett, Guardians, 
68-70. 

19. “Agreement between the United States and Nicaragua Establishing the 
Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua,” 22 December 1927, Papers Relating to Foreign 
Relations of the United States, Vol. Ill (1927), 434-439. 

20. Millett, Guardians, 71 and 77. 

21. Julian C. Smith et al., A Review of the Organization and Operations 
of the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua, US Marine Corps Headquarters, nd., 


118 


302-407; Richard Grossman, “Hermanos de la Patria: Nationalism, Honor and 
Rebellion: Augusto Sandino and the Army in Defense of the National Sovereignty 
ofNicaragua, 1927-1934,” (Ph.D. dissertation, University ofChicago, 1996), 198. 

22. One of these assistants was Army Captain Matthew B. Ridgeway. 

23. Admiral David Foote Sellers to Admiral Hughes, n.d., Papers of Admiral 
David Foote Sellers, Naval Historical Foundation Collection, Manuscript Division, 
Library of Congress, Box 3. 

24. Sellers to Admiral Hughes, Papers of Admiral David Foote Sellers, Box 
3. 

25. Macaulay, 136-144. 

26. Secretary of State Stimson to the American Minister in Nicaragua, 
Matthew Hanna, 29 May 1929, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United 
States , Vol. Ill (1929), 629-633. 

27. US Minister to Nicaragua, Matthew B. Hanna, to Stimson, 9 September 
1929, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. Ill 
(1929), 596-601; US Minister to Nicaragua, Matthew B. Hanna, to Stimson, 19 
September 1929, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. 
Ill (1929), 596-601; US Ministerto Nicaragua, Matthew B. Hanna, to Stimson, 25 
September 1929, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol.e 
III (1929), 596-601; US Ministerto Nicaragua, Matthew B. Hanna, to Stimson, 29 
September 1929, Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. 
Ill (1929), 596-601; Francis White to Hanna, 29 November 1929, Papers Relating 
to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. Ill (1929), 609. 

28. Smith et ah, 45-46. 

29. Captain Evans F. Carlson, “The Guardia as a Police Force,” Leatherneck, 
Vol. XV (October 1932), 20 and 62. 

30. Millett, Guardians, 114-115. 

31. Unsigned, undated memorandum from Headquarters, US Marine Corps 
Adjutant and Inspectors General Correspondence, RG 127. 

32. Smith et ah, 16. 

33. Ibid., 16-19. 

34. Grossman, 185. 

3 5. Quoted in Grossman, 211. 

36. Colonel H. C. Reisinger, “La Palahra del Gringo, Leadership of the 
Nicaraguan National Guard,” United States Naval Institute Proceedings, Vol. LXI 
(February 1935), 216 and 217. 

37. Quoted in Grossman. 

38. For a description of the earthquake and the resulting damage, see Gustavo 
Tijerino, El terremoto mas barbaro de la historia, Vol. I (Leon, Nicaragua: Instituto 
Technico La Salle de Leon, 1973), 25-32. 

39. Smith et ah, 123-134. 

40. Millett, Guardians, 126. 

41. Hanna to Stimson, 11 December 1930, RG 59, 817.223/2. Nicaraguan 
politics were sharply divided along family and regional lines and it was relatively 
easy to determine political preferences. 


119 


42. Memorandum from Laurence Duggan to Edmund Wilson, 25 February 
1932, RG 59, 817.1051/611. 

43. General Matthews to Beaulac, 16 November 1931 and 4 April 1931, 
Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. V (1932), 855-858. 

44. Francis White to Matthew Hanna, 17 April 1932, RG 59, 817.1051/643. 

45. Millett, Guardians, 129. 

46. Acting Secretary of State Castle to Hanna, 30 August 1932, Papers 
Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. V (1932), 871-872. 

47. “Agreement Signed on November 5,1932, Providing for the Maintenance 
of the Non-Partisan Character of the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua,” Papers 
Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Vol. V (1932), 887. 

48. Matthews to Moncada, 21 November 1932, Records of the Marine Corps 
in Nicaragua, Box 11, Marine Corps Historical Archives. When I examined these 
records in the 1960s they were located at the Marine Corps Archives in the Navy 
Yard, but have since been moved to the National Archives, and included in RG 
127. 

49. For a complete list of the forty-two political appointees to the officer 
corps, see Jorge Eduardo Arellano, La Pax Americana en Nicaragua, 1910-1932 
(Managua, Nicaragua: Academia de Geografia y Historia de Nicaragua, 2004), 
277-278. 

50. Hanna to White, 28 October 1932, RG 59, 817.1051//7011/2. 

51. Interview with Lieutenant General Julian C. Smith, Arlington, VA, May 
1964. 

52. Memorandum by Duggan, 16 November 1931, RG 59, 711.17/253. 

53. Memorandum from Duggan to Wilson, 23 March 1932, RG 59, 
817.1051/643. 

54. Lieutenant Colonel Robert L. Denig, “Native Officer Corps, Guardia 
Nacional de Nicaragua,” Marine Corps Gazette, Vol. XVII (November 1932), 77. 

55. Matthews to Hanna, 15 June 1932 and 8 August 1932, printed in Smith, 
149 and 151-152. 

56. Millett, Guardians, 145-146. 

57. Arthur Bliss Lane to Josephus Daniels, 4 March 1934, Papers of 
Ambassador Arthur Bliss Lane, Manuscripts Division, Yale University Library, 
New Haven, CT. 

58. Macaulay, 249-256. 

59. Knut Walter, The Regime of Anastasio Somoza, 1936-1956 (Chapel Hill, 
NC: The University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1993), 34-35. 

60. Millett, Guardians, 169-181. For President Sacasa’s own account, see 
Juan Bautista Sacasa, Como y por que cai del poder (Third edition) (Managua, 
Nicaragua: Vanguardia, 1988). 

61. Millett, Guardians, 181-182. 

62. Lane to Beaulac, 27 July 1935, Papers of Ambassador Arthur Bliss Lane. 

63. For a description of how Anastasio Somoza Garcia held on to power, see 
Richard L. Millett, “Anastasio Somoza Garcia, A Brief History of Nicaragua’s 


120 


Enduring Dictator,” Revista/Review Interamericana, Vol. VII, No. 3 (November 
1932), 486-508. 

64. For Nicaragua’s role in the 1954 overthrow of Arbenz, see Piero Gleijeses, 
Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United States, 1944-1954 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 110-113, 241-242, 248-251, 
265-266, 291-293. 

65. Walter, 214. 

66. For Nicaragua’s role, see Howard Jones, The Bay of Pigs (New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press, 2008), 73-74, 88-89, 96. 

67. For details on the feud between the Somozas and President Jose Figueres 
of Costa Rica, see Charles Ameringer, Don Pepe: A Political Biography of Jose 
Figueres of Costa Rica (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 
1978), 76-83 and 119-120. 

68. Millett, Guardians, 252. 

69. Ibid., Guardians, 235-239, 

70. For a description of this, see Bernard Diedrich, Somoza and the Legacy of 
US Involvement in Central America (New York, NY: E.P. Dutton, 1981), 176-188. 

71. Robert Kagan, A Twilight Struggle: American Power and Nicaragua, 
1977-1990 (New York, NY: The Free Press, 1996), 58-59. 

72. For insider descriptions of US efforts to resolve the conflict and of 
Somoza’s fall, see Robert A. Pastor, Condemned to Repetition: The United States 
and Nicaragua (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987); Anthony Lake, 
Somoza Falling: The Nicaraguan Dilemma: A Portrait of Washington at Work 
(Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1989); Lawrence Pezullo and Ralph Pezullo, 
At the Fall of Somoza (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1993). For 
a Sandinista account, see General Humberto Ortega Saavedra, La Epopeya de la 
Insurreccion (Managua, Nicaragua: LEA Grupo Editorial, 2004). 

73. For a discussion of Nicaragua’s military under the Sandinistas, see Luis 
Humberto Guzman, “Nicaragua’s Armed Forces: An Assessment of Their Political 
Power,” in Richard L. Millett and Michael Gold-Biss, eds ., BeyondPraetorianism: 
The Latin American Military in Transition (Miami, FL: North-South Center Press, 
University of Miami, 1996), 157-180. 


121 



Chapter 8 

Conclusions: Lessons Lost and Lessons Forgotten 

A hundred and ten years after the United States began developing the 
Constabulary in the Philippines and the Rural Guard in Cuba, it finds itself 
again engaged in efforts to create security forces, this time in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. The problems of ethnic divisions, active insurgencies, limited 
resources, language and cultural barriers, and seemingly endless political 
conflicts which bedeviled efforts to create security forces in the first third 
of the 20th century all seem to be reoccurring in the first decade of the 21 st. 
As Yogi Berra has observed, “it’s deja vu all over again.” The question is, 
can we learn from the problems of the past and achieve better results in the 
future? 

The US efforts to create constabulary-type forces in the first third 
of the 20th century produced disappointing results. Every one of the six 
nations involved—the Philippines, Cuba, Panama, Haiti, the Dominican 
Republic, and Nicaragua—ultimately fell under dictatorial rule. In all 
but the Philippines, control over the military brought these regimes to 
power and sustained them. In the Philippines, the military, including the 
constabulary, initially supported the Marcos dictatorship, but ultimately 
split and the constabulary was an important element in the uprising that 
finally forced him from power. In every case but the Philippines, the United 
States found itself intervening again, either with regular military force (in 
the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Panama) or with proxy forces (in Cuba and 
Nicaragua). 

Also disturbing is the fate of these forces. In Cuba, the Rural Guard 
and its descendents were essentially destroyed three times, first when the 
Guard lost its independence and became an adjunct of the army, second 
when the officer corps was destroyed in the sergeants’ revolt, and finally 
when the entire military apparatus was eliminated by Fidel Castro. In 
Panama, the force became progressively more militarized and more corrupt, 
culminating in the Noriega dictatorship. It took another US intervention to 
oust this regime and in the process the military was destroyed. In Haiti, 
the military made and unmade presidents until Duvalier created his own 
paramilitary thugs, the Tonton Macoute, to neutralize the Army. After 
Duvalier, the military returned to its old habits until a US-led intervention 
ended its existence. In the Dominican Republic, by contrast, the 1965 US 
intervention may have prevented the Army’s destruction while in Nicaragua 
the Guardia National first became a tool of the Somoza family, and then 
was destroyed by Marxist guerrillas. 


123 


What can we learn from this unhappy history? Would a different US 
policy, altered goals and/or methods, have produced a fundamentally 
different result? To what extent was the United States the cause of their 
subsequent trajectories, and to what extent was this largely a likely, if 
not inevitable, result of each nation’s history and social structure? When 
dealing with security forces in other nations, especially when there are 
major differences of power, culture, and human development, what are 
the limits of influence? The answers to such questions will always be at 
least partially speculative, but by raising these issues some fundamental 
principles can emerge. 

Andrew Bacevich has observed that, “Good intentions detached from 
prudential considerations can easily lead to enormous mischief, both prac¬ 
tical and moral.” 1 Thi s applies to some of Washington’s efforts to create 
constabulary forces. The weakness, corruption, and repressive nature of 
traditional military forces in Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua 
were all too apparent. So too was their inability to control insurrections. 
But, when policies were being formulated, no American official, civilian 
or military, appears to have asked if replacing such forces with a better 
trained and equipped constabulary would change their relation to the rest 
of society or in any way alter the traditional political equation which made 
force the final arbiter. Nor does there appear to have been any question¬ 
ing of how nationalist sentiments would react to a foreign-created security 
force, or how that force, itself, would react once foreign control was ended. 
Comparisons to colonial experiences, whether that of the United States in 
the Philippines or, as was often cited, that of the British in Egypt and India, 
was misleading as in those cases there was no prospect, at least in the fore¬ 
seeable future, of constabularies coming under national control. 

Instead of asking such questions, policymakers seem to have assumed 
that a constabulary created with American instructors and under American- 
imposed regulations would behave like an American military force. There 
was no understanding of traditional Latin American distinctions between 
state, government and population, with the military owing its allegiance 
only to the first of these and assuming the right to define when the govern¬ 
ment or the population became a threat to the state. Neither did there seem 
to be comprehension of the great gap between American and Latin political 
culture over the source and nature of citizens’ rights. In the United States, 
rights were inherent and the state had only the power that its citizens gave 
it. In Latin America, citizens had only the rights the state allowed them 
and, if the state believed itself threatened, it could usually impose a state of 
siege that suspended all rights. This was compounded by Latin America’s 


124 


lack of a strong tradition of judicial independence. Courts were largely 
seen as an instrument of executive power and were designed principally 
to maintain order, not protect citizens’ rights. Under such circumstances, 
a more efficient police usually meant a more repressive state, not more 
citizen security. 2 

None of this should be taken to mean that leaving the old military and 
police as they were offered any solution for American policy aims or for 
domestic peace and development. Abstaining from any effort to create ef¬ 
fective security forces can produce its own version of policy disaster, as the 
American experiences in Lebanon and Somalia demonstrate. The issues in 
each case are less what can be done than what should not be done, and what 
are the likely unintended consequences of any program. 

Analysis of these case studies can produce some basic principles. The 
first is the need for clarity of purpose. Simply wanting to create a constabu¬ 
lary force is not enough. There must be thought given to how this relates to 
other elements of government such as the courts, local governments, and 
treasury. A nation’s internal divisions, racial, ethnic, religious, ideological 
and/or regional must be carefully taken into account in determining both 
personnel and mission. What exactly such a force can accomplish and how 
it is likely to evolve when left to its own devices should enter into planning 
at the earliest stages. 

Second, there must be unity of effort. The bitter disputes between 
American civil and military personnel, notably, but, by no means exclu¬ 
sively in the Dominican Republic, are a case in point. They disrupted the 
effort to develop the Guardia, contributed to policy confusion in Washing¬ 
ton, and ultimately made it more difficult for those on the scene to get a fair 
hearing for their concerns. 

Third, goals must be realistic. A force created by outsiders, no matter 
how capable or dedicated, will be shaped by its domestic context. To the 
extent that it becomes a foreign transplant it will lose credibility, contribute 
to internal divisions, and become an object of nationalist attacks. Ameri¬ 
cans can train, equip, even command such forces, but in the end they will 
fall under national authority that will strive to remove all evidence of ex¬ 
ternal domination. 

This relates directly to the fourth and final basic point: know and ac¬ 
cept the limits of influence. No matter what is done to mold and indoctri¬ 
nate a foreign security force it will evolve into something different. No 
matter what efforts are made to shape attitudes towards civil authority, citi¬ 
zens’ rights and legal responsibilities, post occupation realities will reshape 


125 


if not eliminate such principles. This is not our country and everyone who 
is recruited into forces we create knows that and acts accordingly. 

In addition to these broad principles, there are some specific lessons 
that can be drawn from these experiences and, hopefully, applied to present 
and possible future operations. 3 

1. You will have neither the time nor the resources necessary to do 
the job the way it should be done. Resources are always limited, 
newer problems always divert attention, political and popular sup¬ 
port is a limited and diminishing resource. Arguing for more time, 
more resources can become a self-defeating exercise, diminishing 
credibility and diverting attention from determining urgent priori¬ 
ties. 

2. Once national policy begins to focus on withdrawal, this concern 
will overwhelm all others. Anything that interferes with this goal 
will be shoved aside. 

3. Always remember, technology transfers, values do not. It is rela¬ 
tively easy to train someone how to use a weapon; it is much more 
difficult to control when they use the weapon and against whom. 
Americans are very good at technical training and it is easy to 
measure success in such terms. But the political results of such 
training depend on the when and against whom aspects. 

4. Keep in mind that in the creation of security forces you are dealing 
with adults. Their values are already well formed and largely im¬ 
mutable. They know their political and social environment better 
than you and they know what it takes to survive and prosper in it. 
Any aspect of training which runs contrary to this will have little 
if any impact. If an alteration in traditional patterns is perceived as 
advancing their goals, it may be accepted and incorporated, but if 
it is perceived as largely advancing your goals or if it runs contrary 
to their cultural values it will be rejected. One Nicaraguan experi¬ 
ence provides a graphic, if somewhat comical example of this. The 
rates of sexually transmitted diseases among enlisted personnel of 
the Guardia were extremely high and the usual lectures on health 
and morality had the usual lack of effect. So the Navy doctors 
and Corpsmen passed out prophylactics. While the enlisted per¬ 
sonnel insisted they were using them, infection rates continued to 
climb. One doctor decided to investigate and discovered that they 
were indeed being used—to polish their boots before they went 
off to the brothels on payday. 4 Having highly polished boots was 


126 


a source of male pride in Nicaragua, using a prophylactic was not. 
They took American technology and adapted it to their values. 

5. Never assume that the motives for someone joining a foreign cre¬ 
ated security force are the same as those that motivate Americans. 
There is usually some similarity at enlisted levels, individuals may 
join because they need a job or hope to gain a skill. For those be¬ 
coming officers, however, the motives may be very different. This 
is especially true in nations with deep internal divisions. Candi¬ 
dates may seek to advance their own cthn ic/rac ial/rc I i gi ous group 
and/or counter the interests of others. They may be motivated 
largely by hopes for social advancement, for opportunity for per¬ 
sonal enrichment, or a means of enhancing family security. What 
Americans would define as patriotic motives, seeking to serve 
one’s nation, may be present, but usually to a lesser degree and are 
often absent altogether. 

6. Using the military in the role of police is always a bad idea, al¬ 
though not using them in such a role may be even worse. When 
Washington conceived of creating these constabularies the as¬ 
sumption was that combining police and military functions would 
serve numerous purposes: reducing expenses, giving the new force 
a credible mission, curbing political manipulation and limiting 
corruption. What it did in fact do was exacerbate the tendency to 
overly centralized authority, eliminating any police responsibil¬ 
ity to local authorities. In practice, individuals were sometimes 
deliberately assigned to areas where they had no local ties in or¬ 
der to undercut the power of regional leaders. In other cases, the 
constabulary was barely present and in its place local paramilitary 
forces were raised, operating largely outside the rule of law. Those 
assigned to police duties were under military authority and their 
officers often graduated from the national military academy. But 
these were usually those of less ability and/or ambition (and often 
in practice with fewer moral scruples). In none of these nations 
was there a tradition of a primary police responsibility being pro¬ 
tecting average citizens and once national control was established 
over the police, protecting average citizens fell off their priority 
list and traditional attitudes toward the population returned, if they 
had ever been absent. Order took precedence over justice, and pro¬ 
tecting privilege, not citizens’ rights, was the priority. 

7. Career military are not ideal trainers for police. The military, es¬ 
pecially in the early 20th century, placed a higher value on order 


127 


and discipline than did society as a whole and often tended to treat 
foreign populations in policing situations as a potential enemy. 
Admiral Robison’s inquiry as to whether he should consider the 
Dominicans as enemies illustrates this. 5 Military trainers were 
sometimes well versed in the technical skills needed for police 
work, but not in the human relations required. This is not meant 
as a criticism of the military; no one would expect a career police 
officer to be the ideal trainer of a combat unit. But it does highlight 
an ongoing problem and explains why the first Marine commander 
of the Managua police should plead for the Marines to “get up a 
pamphlet on practical police work” and argue that, “it should be 
made part of the law course in the Marine Corps schools.” 6 

8. In nations with only a constabulary force, it is the police units 
that will have most contact with the population and will determine 
popular attitudes towards the institution as a whole. When corrupt, 
brutal and/or repressive they often generate violent resistance to 
authority. For a centralized, military command, efficiency and the 
maintenance of a least the appearance of order are normally more 
important that the state of police/civilian relations. For police units 
in most of these constabulary forces, their relationship with overall 
command authority is more important and career promoting than 
their relations with the local authority or population. But for politi¬ 
cal stability and for countering an existing insurgency the opposite 
is true: relationships with local populations are key. 

9. Efforts to change a society largely through changing its security 
forces never produce the desired effect and inevitably bring un¬ 
desired effects. The most extreme case of this is when security 
forces are modernized, but the overall administration of justice 
is not. When police and judicial organs are in conflict, or when 
the courts simply don’t function effectively two things invariably 
happen. The police increasingly take justice into their own hands, 
including eliminating prisoners, and corruption spreads hand-in- 
hand with rising police frustrations. 7 

10. Prejudices and stereotypes always hinder effective force develop¬ 
ment. They are never a secret from those who are being trained and 
can have significant, negative long-range results. The Haitian case 
is rife with examples, but this impacted to a greater or lesser extent 
on every one of the six cases included in this study. The worst ex¬ 
ample was the Trujillo court-martial in the Dominican Republic. 
By not expecting a Dominican officer to come close to the stan- 


128 


dards they set for themselves, the American officers of the Guar- 
dia helped advance the career of a future mass murderer. Taking 
into account cultural and educational differences does not equate 
with abandoning standards. Differences do not imply inferiority. 8 

11. Language skills and their cultural context are vital. This does not 
simply mean achieving a certain degree of fluency, being able to 
give training lectures and conduct drills. It means learning the 
values that a language carries. It means knowing that in Spanish 
there is no good translation for rule of law, that in most indigenous 
languages our concepts of justice and of the state protecting 
citizens’ rights are largely absent. It means knowing why, for a 
Creole-speaking Haitian peasant, the concept of state authority 
and the phrase “to squeeze and suck” are essentially synonymous. 9 
Language shapes relationships with authority, values and attitudes, 
loyalties and expectations. What you think you are saying and 
what they hear are never exactly the same and sometimes the 
differences can be critical. 

12. Most of your influence will leave when you do. The traditions of 
national culture and the realities of existing power structures will 
rapidly replace most of whatever influence you may have had. This 
has nothing to do with whether you are liked or not, something to 
which Americans often give too much weight. It simply reflects 
who is in a position to dispense rewards and punishments, whose 
expectations one needs to meet. 

13. Secondary issues in development and training often become ma¬ 
jor issues once command is transferred. The role of intelligence is 
a key example. Under American control intelligence functioned 
largely as a tactical tool for both the police and the military. Data 
collection and analysis were emphasized with few questions asked 
about how this material would ultimately be utilized. But in the 
nations where we were creating constabularies, intelligence, such 
as it was, had traditionally been largely an instrument of internal 
political control and repression. When national forces took control 
intelligence quickly reverted to this pattern, only now it was nota¬ 
bly more efficient. 

14. Communications between those making policies in Washington and 
those assigned to carry them out in the field always cause problems. 
With modem communications, directives from Washington arrive 
with the speed of light, however responses from those in the field 
often seem to travel with the speed of an intoxicated turtle. The 

129 


turnover to national command in Nicaragua was a prime example. 
Those making policy persisted in the illusion that a nonpartisan 
force could somehow be maintained, while those dealing directly 
with the Guardia National knew better. But experience had taught 
them that arguing such cases with higher authority accomplished 
nothing and could be career threatening. In such cases, simply 
continuing the form of policy without the substance becomes the 
rule, and keeping the lid on for the moment, the “not on my watch” 
syndrome becomes standard operating procedure. Being able to 
honestly assess situations during operations, rather than long after, 
would be a major step towards making security force creation and 
training a more effective element of national policy. 

15. If there is a final principle, it is that an ability to learn from the past 
is always essential. Past experiences cannot be replicated. What 
works in one situation may not work at all in another context. The 
effort to apply examples from the Philippines to the Latin American 
nations well-illustrates this. We usually learn more from mistakes 
than from success. History rarely teaches us what will work, but it 
can demonstrate what doesn’t and can put us on our guard against 
the inevitable tide of unintended consequences. 10 

At the end of his study of intervention, Richard N. Haass wrote: 

Getting it right will be difficult. Policymakers must al¬ 
ways exercise judgment. Guidelines are just that; they 
are not rules, much less absolutes. Interests alone do not 
provide answers or dictate choices. One must begin with 
an assessment of whether intervention is desirable, then 
address its feasibility, and then return to the question of 
desirability. . . . Making policy is always about choosing, 
deciding whether to intervene with military force is no ex¬ 
ception. It is only that the stakes are greater. 11 

This advice applies not only to the issue of intervening but to specific poli¬ 
cies related to such a decision, notably the development of new security 
forces. We ignore the lessons of past experiences at our peril. This was 
summed up by my maternal grandfather who was fond of observing, “If 
our foresight was as good as our hindsight we’d be better off by a damn 
sight.” 


130 


Notes 


1. Andrew J. Bacevich, “The Realist Persuasion,” Boston Globe, 6 
November 2005, http://www.boston.com/news/globe/ideas/articles/2005/ll/06/ 
the_realist_persuasion. 

2. In recent decades this has slowly begun to change in many nations. But 
this was the dominant pattern in the first half of the 20th century. 

3. Much of what follows is taken from Richard L. Millett, “The Limits of 
Influence: Creating Security Forces in Latin America,” Joint Forces Quarterly, 
No. 42 (3rd quarter, 2006), 14-16. 

4. Commander J.D. Helm to Jefe Director, Guardia Nacional, 13 November 
1930, “Annual Sanitary Report of the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua for the Year 
Ending September 30, 1930,” Records of the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua, RG 
127. 

5. Robison to Welles, 11 August 1922, National Archives and Record 
Service, Records of the United States Department of State, RG 59, 839.1051/25. 

6. Captain Herberts. Kemmling to Major Fleming, 11 March 1933, National 
Archives and Record Service, Records of the United States Marine Corps, RG 
127, Entry 198. 

7. Numerous discussions 1 have had on this subject, including those with a 
former Haitian Minister of Justice, a senior US Commander in Afghanistan, and 
the first director of Panama’s Public Force confirm this trend. 

8. For a current, if somewhat exaggerated example of these problems, see 
Jeff Sharlet, “Jesus Killed Mohammed: The Crusade for a Christian Military,” 
Flarper s Magazine (May 2009), 31-43. 

9. Author’s discussions with an American linguist working in Haiti in 1998 
and with a US educated Haitian in 2006. 

10. For another view of what this period of our history can teach us, see John 
B. Judis, The Folly of Empire: What George W. Bush Could Learn from Theodore 
Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson (New York, NY: Scribner, 2004). 

11. Richard N. Haass, Intervention: The Use of American Military Force 
in the Post-Cold War World (Washington, DC: The Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 1999), 56. 


131 


Bibliography 

Government Documents and Primary Sources 

College Park, MD and Washington, DC, National Archives and Record Service, 
General Records of the Navy Department, Record Group 80. 

College Park, MD and Washington, DC, National Archives and Record Service, 
Naval Records Collection of the Office of Naval Records and Library, 
Record Group 45. 

College Park, MD and Washington, DC, National Archives and Record Service, 
Records of the Isthmian Canal Commission, 1904-14 and the Panama 
Canal, 1914-51, Record Group 185. 

College Park, MD and Washington, DC, National Archives and Record Service, 
Records of the Military Government of Santo Domingo, Record Group 
38. 

College Park, MD and Washington, DC, National Archives and Record Service, 
Records of the United States Department of State, Record Group 59. 

College Park, MD and Washington, DC, National Archives and Record Service, 
Records of the United States Marine Corps, Record Group 127. 

Columbus, Ohio, Ohio State Historical Archives, Papers of Warren G. Harding. 

Hagerty, Richard A., ed. Haiti: A Country Study. Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, 1989. 

Hyde Park, NY, Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library, Naval Affairs, Papers 
of Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

Memoria de la Administracion del Presidente de la Republica de Cuba, Mayor 
General Mario G. Menocal, durante el periodo Comprendidio entre el 1 
de Julio de 1915 y el 30 de Junio 1916. Havana, Cuba: Secretaria de la 
Presidencia, 1919. 

Munro, Dana Gardner to Richard L. Millett. 14 February 1965. Personal files of 
Richard L. Millett, Marine, IL. 

New Haven, CT, Yale University Library, Historical Manuscripts Division, Papers 
of Ambassador Arthur Bliss Lane. 

Quantico, VA, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Research Center, Papers of J.C. 
Breckinridge. 

Quantico, VA, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Research Center, Papers of John 
A. Lejeune. 

Quantico, VA, Marine Corps Historical Archives, Research Center, Papers of 
Smedley Darlington Butler. 

United States Adjutant-General’s Office. Correspondence Relating to the War 
with Spain Including the Insurrection in the Philippines and the China 
Relief expedition, May 15, 1898 to July 30, 1902, Vol. I. Washington, DC: 
Government Printing Office, 1903. 

United States Agency for International Development. US Overseas Loans and 
Grants and Assistance from International Organizations: Obligations 
and Loan Authorizations, July 1, 1945-September 30, 1980. Washington, 
DC: Government Printing Office, 1980. 


133 


United States Congress. Senate. Select Committee on Haiti and Santo Domingo. 
Inquiry into Occupation and Administration of Haiti and Santo Domingo: 
Hearings Before a Select Committee on Haiti and Santo Domingo. 67th 
Congress, 1st and 2d Session, 1922. 

United States Department of State. Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of 
the United States. Vols. for 1909-1934. Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office, various years. 

United States Department of State. Papers Relating to the Foreign Affairs of 
the United States: The Lansing Papers (1914-1920), Vols. 1 and II. 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1940. 

Washington, DC, Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, Naval Historical 
Foundation Collection, Papers of Admiral David Foote Sellers. 
Washington, DC, Library of Congress, Manuscripts Division, Naval Historical 
Foundation Collection, Papers of Admiral William B. Caperton. 
Washington, DC, Records of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, 1868-1945, Record 
Group 350. 


Books 

Ameringer, Charles. Don Pepe: A Political Biography of Jose Figueres of Costa 
Rica. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1978. 

Arellano, Jorge Eduardo. La Paz American en Nicaragua, 1910-1932. Managua, 
Nicaragua: Academia de Geografia y Historia de Nicaragua, 2004. 

Balch, Emily G., ed. Occupied Haiti: Being the Report of a Committee of Six 
Disinterested Americans, representing organizations exclusively 
American, who, having personally studied conditions in Haiti in 1926, 
favor the restoration of the Independence of the Negro Republic. New 
York, NY: The Writers Publishing Company, 1927. 

Blount, James H. The American Occupation of the Philippines, 1898-1912. New 
York, NY: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1913. 

Boecker, Paul, Brinkely, Alan, and Perez, Andres. Ilenry L. Stimson s American 
Policy in Nicaragua. New York, NY: Markus Weiner Publishing Inc., 
1992. 

Boot, Max. The Savage Wars of Peace: Small Wars and the Rise of American 
Power. New York, NY: Basic Books, 2002. 

Brooks, Charles Morris. Guarding the Crossroads: Security and Defense of the 
Panama Canal. Panama: P & P Group, 2003. 

Buckley, Kevin. Panama: The Whole Story. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, 
1991. 

Calder, Bruce J. The Impact of Intervention: The Dominican Republic During the 
US Occupation of 1916-1924. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 
1984. 

Calixte, D.P. Haiti: Calvary of a Soldier. New York, NY: Wendell, Malliet & Co., 
1939. 

Carillo, Justo. Cuba 1933: estudiantes, yanquis y soldados. Miami, FL: Instituto 
de Estudios Interamericanos, 1985. 


134 


Castillero Pimental, Ernesto. Panama y Los Estados Unidos. Second edition. 

Panama City, Panama City, Panama: Editor Humanidad, 1964. 

Challener, Richard D. Admirals, Generals, and American Foreign Policy. 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1973. 

Conniff, Michael L. Panama and the United States: The Forced Alliance. Second 
edition. Athens, GA: The University of Georgia Press, 2001. 

Crassweller, Robert D. Trujillo: The Life and Times of a Caribbean Dictator. New 
York, NY: MacMillan Co., 1966. 

Cronon, E. David. Josephus Daniels in Mexico. Madison, WI: The University of 
Wisconsin Press, 1960. 

Cuestas Gomez, Carlos. Soldados Americanos en Chiriqui. Panama City, Panama: 
n.p., 1991. 

Diedrich, Bernard. Somoza and the Legacy of U.S. Involvement in Central 
America. New York, NY: E.P. Dutton, 1981. 

Ferguson, James. Papa Doc, Baby Doc: Haiti and the Duvaliers. Oxford, UK: 
Basil Blackwell, 1987. 

Fermoselle, Rafael. The Evolution of the Cuban Military, 1492-1986. Miami, FL: 
Ediciones Universal, 1987. 

Fishel. John T. “The Institutional Reconversion of the Panamanian Defense 
Forces.” In Post-Invasion Panama: The Challenges of Democratization 
in the New World Order, ed. by Orlando J. Perez, 16-22. Lanham, MD: 
Lexington Books, 2000. 

Forbes, W. Cameron. The Philippine Islands. Revised edition. Millwood, NY: 
Kraus Reprint Company, 1976. 

Franck, Henry A. Zone Policeman 88. New York, NY: Arno Press and the New 
York Times, 1970. 

Fuller, Stephen M. and Cosmas, Graham A. Marines in the Dominican Republic, 
1916-1924. Washington, DC: History and Museums Division, 
Headquarters, US Marine Corps, 1974. 

Gates, John Morgan. Schoolbooks and Krags: The United States Army in the 
Philippines, 1898-1902. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1973. 
Gleijeses, Piero. Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United 
States, 1944-1954. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991. 
Goldwert, Marvin. The Constabulary in the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua: 
Progeny and Legacy of United States Intervention. Gainesville, FL: 
University of Florida Press, 1962. 

Guevara-Mann, Carlos. Panamanian Militarism: A Historical Interpretation. 

Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, 1996. 

Guzman, Luis Humberto. “Nicaragua’s Armed Forces: An Assessment of their 
Political Power.” In Beyond Praetorianism: The Latin American Military 
in Transition, ed. by Richard L. Millett and Michael Gold-Biss. Miami, 
FL: The North-South Center Press, University of Miami, 1996. 

Haass, Richard N. Intervention: The Use of American Military Power in the 
Post-Cold War World. Washington, DC: The Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 1994. 


135 


Hartlyn, Jonathan. The Struggle for Democratic Politics in the Dominican 
Republic. Chapel Hill, NC: The University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1998. 

Healy, David F. Gunboat Diplomacy in the Wilson Era: The United States Navy 
in Haiti, 1915-1916. Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press, 
1976. 

_. The United States in Cuba, 1898—1902: Generals, Politicians, and the 

Search for Policy. Madison, WI: The University of Wisconsin Press, 
1963. 

Heinl, Robert D. and Nancy G. Written in Blood: The Story of the Haitian People, 
1492-1971. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1978. 

The International Institute for Strategic Studies. The Military Balance, 1985-1986. 
London, UK: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1984. 

Jones, Howard. The Bay of Pigs. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2008. 

Jorden, William J. Panama Odyssey. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1984. 

Judis, John B. The Folly of Empire: What George W. Bush Could Learn from 
Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson. New York, NY: Scribner, 
2004. 

Kagan, Robert. A Twilight Struggle: American Power and Nicaragua, 1977-1990. 
New York, NY: The Free Press, 1996. 

Karnow, Stanley. America s Empire in the Philippines. New York, NY: Random 
House, 1989. 

Koster, R.M. and Sanchez, Guillermo. In the Time of the Tyrants, Panama, 1968- 
1990. New York, NY: W.W. Norton and Co., 1990. 

Kretchik, Walter E., Baumann, Robert F., and Fishel, John T. Invasion, Intervention, 
“ Intervasion, ” A Concise History of the US Army in Operation Uphold 
Democracy. Fort Leavenworth, KS: US Army Command and General 
Staff College Press, 1998. 

Laguerre, Michael S. The Military and Society in Haiti. Knoxville, TN: The 
University of Tennessee Press, 1993. 

Lake, Anthony. Somoza Falling: The Nicaraguan Dilemma, A Portrait of 
Washington at Work. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1989. 

Langley, Lester. Banana Wars: An Inner History of American Empire, 1900-1934. 
Lexington, KY: The University of Kentucky Press, 1983. 

Leonard, Thomas M. US Policy and Arms Limitation in Central America: The 
Washington Conference of 1923. Los Angeles, CA: Center for the 
Study of Armament and Disarmament, California State University-Los 
Angeles, 1982. 

Linn, Brian McAllister. Guardians of Empire: The U.S. Army and the Pacific, 
1902-1940. Chapel Hill, NC: The University ofNorth Carolina Press, 
1997. 

_. The Philippine War, 1899-1902. Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas 

Press, 2000. 

_. “The US Army and Nation Building and Pacification in the Philippines, 

1902-1940.” In Armed Diplomacy: Two Centuries of American 
Campaigning. Fort Leavenworth KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 
2004. 


136 





Liss, Sheldon B. The Canal: Aspects of United States—Panamanian Relations. 

South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1967. 

Lockmiller, David A. Magoon in Cuba. Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North 
Carolina Press, 1938. 

Macaulay, Neill. The Sandino Affair. Chicago, 1L: Quadrangle Books, 1967. 
Major, John. Prize Possession: The United States and the Panama Canal, 1903— 
1979. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 

Martin, John Bartlow. Overtaken by Events. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966. 
McCain, William D. The United States and the Republic of Panama. New York, 
NY: Russell and Russell, 1965. 

McCrocklin, James H., comp. Garde D’Haiti, 1915-1934: Twenty Years of 
Organization and Training by the United States Marine Corps. Annapolis, 
MD: United States Naval Institute, 1956. 

McCullough, David. The Path Between the Seas. New York, NY: Simon and 
Schuster, 1977. 

Miller, Stuart Creighton. Benevolent Assimilation: The American Conquest of the 
Philippines, 1899-1903. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1982. 
Millett, Allan R. The General: Robert L. Bullard and Officership in the United 
States Army, 1881-1925. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1975. 

_. The Politics of Intervention: The Military Occupation of Cuba, 1906-1909. 

Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press, 1968. 

_. Semper Fidelis: A History of the United States Marine Corps. Second 

edition. New York, NY: The Free Press, 1992. 

Millett, Richard L. Guardians of the Dynasty: A History of the US Created Guardia 
Nacional de Nicaragua and the Somoza Family. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis 
Books, 1977. 

Millspaugh, Arthur C. Haiti Under American Control. Boston, MA: World Peace 
Foundation, 1931. 

Munro, Dana Gardner. Intervention and Dollar Diplomacy in the Caribbean, 
1900-1921. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood Press Reprint, 1980. 

_. The United States and the Caribbean Republics, 1921-1933. Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974. 

Nelson, William Javier. Almost a Territory: America s Attempt to Annex the 
Dominican Republic. Newark, DE: University of Delaware Press, 1990. 
Ortega Saavedra, General Humberto. El Epopeya de la Insurreccidn. Managua, 
Nicaragua: LEA Grupo Editorial, 2004. 

Pastor, Robert A. Condemned to Repetition: The United States and Nicaragua. 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987. 

Perez Jr., Louis A. Cuba Under the Platt Amendment, 1902-1934. Pittsburgh, PA: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1986. 

_. Intervention, Revolution and Politics in Cuba, 1913-1921 , Pittsburgh, PA: 

University of Pittsburgh Press, 1978. 

Perkins, Dexter. A History of the Monroe Doctrine. Revised edition. Boston, MA: 
Little Brown & Co., 1955. 

Pezullo, Lawrence and Pezullo, Ralph. At the Fall of Somoza. Pittsburgh, PA: 


137 






University of Pittsburgh Press, 1993. 

Pippin, Larry L. The Remon Era: An Analysis of a Decade of Events in Panama, 
1947-1957. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University, Institute ofHispanic and 
Luso-Brazilian Studies, 1964. 

Platt, Senator Orville H. to Edwin F. Atkins. “Senator Orville H. Platt on Relations 
with Cuba, May 1901,” 11 June 1901. in An Old Fashioned Senator: 
Orville H. Platt of Connecticut by Louis Arthur Coolidge (New York, 
NY: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1910), 314. 

Ramsey III, Robert D. Savage Wars of Peace: Case Studies of Pacification in the 
Philippines, 1900-1902. The Long War Series Occasional Paper 24. Fort 
Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 2008. 

Ropp, Steve C. “National Security.” In Panama, A Country Study, ed. by Sandra 
W. Meditz, Dennis Hanrath and Dennis Michael Hanratty (Washington 
DC: US Government Printing Office, 1989). 

_. Panamanian Politics: From Guarded Nation to National Guard. New 

York, NY: Praeger, 1982. 

Sacasa, Juan Bautista. Como y por que cal del poder. Third edition. Managua, 
Nicaragua: Vanguardia, 1988. 

Sands, William Franklin. Our Jungle Diplomacy. Chapel Hill, NC: The University 
of North Carolina Press, 1944. 

Schmidt, Hans. The United States Occupation of Haiti, 1915-1934. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1971. 

Scranton, Margaret. The Noriega Years: U.S.-Panamanian Relations, 1981-1990. 
Boulder, CO: Lynne Reiner Publishers, 1991. 

Smith, Julian C., et al. A Review of the Organization and Operations of the 
Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua. Washington, DC: US Marine Corps 
Headquarters, 1937. 

Smith, Robert A. Wliat Happened in Cuba: A Documentary History. New York, 
NY: Twayne Publishers, 1963. 

Spector, Robert M. W. Cameron Forbes and the Hoover Commission to Haiti 
(1930). Lanham, NY: University Press of America, 1985. 

Stimson, Henry L. American Policy in Nicaragua. New York, NY: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1927. 

Thomas, Hugh. Cuba: The Pursuit of Freedom. New York, NY: Harper and Row, 
1971. 

Thomas, Lowell. Old Gimlet Eye: The Adventures ofSmedleyD. Butler as Told to 
Lowell Thomas. New York, NY: Farrar and Reinhart, 1933. 

Tijerino, Gustavo. El Terremoto mas barbaro de la historia. Vols. 1 and II. Leon, 
Nicaragua: Instituto Technico La Salle de Leon, 1973. 

Vanderwood, Paul J. Disorder and Progress: Bandits, Police, and Mexican 
Development. Lincoln, NE: University ofNebraska Press, 1981. 

Vega, Bernardo. Trujilloy lasFuerzasArmadasNorteamericanos. Santo Domingo, 
Dominican Republic: Fundacion Cultural Dominicana, 1992. 

Venzon, Anne Cipriano, ed. General Smedley Darlington Butler: The Letters of a 
Leatherneck, 1898-1931. New York, NY: Praeger, 1992. 


138 



Walter, Knut. The Regime ofAnastasio Somoza, 1936-1956. Chapel Hill, NC: The 
University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1993. 

Watson, Bruce W. and Tsouras, Peter G., eds. Operation Just Cause. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1991. 

Weiner, Tim. Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. New York, NY: Doubleday, 
2007. 

Welles, Sumner. Naboth’s Vineyard: The Dominican Republic, 1844-1924. Vols I 
and II. New York, NY: Payson and Clarke Ltd., 1928. 

White, John R. Bullets and Bolos: Fifteen Years in the Philippine Islands Fighting 
Insurgents with the Philippine Constabulary. New York, NY: The 
Century Company, 1928. 

Wiarda, Howard. Dictatorship and Development: The Methods of Control in 
Trujillo s Dominican Republic. Gainesville, FL: University of Florida 
Press, 1968. 

Williamson, Charles T. The United States Naval Mission to Haiti, 1959-1965. 
Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1969. 

Wilson, James Harrison. Under the Old Flag: Recollections of Military’ Operations 
in the War for the Union, the Spanish War, the Boxer Rebellion, Etc. Vols. 
I and II. New York, NY: D. Appleton & Co., 1912. 

Wirkus, Faustin, and Taney, Dudley. The White King of La Gonave. Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday, Doran and Co., 1931. 

Wise, Colonel Frederic M. and Frost, Meigs O. A Marine Tells It To You. New 
York, NY: J.H. Sears and Co., 1929. 

Wood, Bryce. The Making of the Good Neighbor Policy. New York, NY: Columbia 
University Press, 1961. 

Worcester, Dean C. The Philippines, Past and Present. Vols I and II. Whitefish, 
MT: Kessinger Publishing Company, 2004. 

Yates, Lawrence A. Power Pack: US Intervention in the Dominican Republic, 
1965-1966. Fort Leavenworth, KS: Combat Studies Institute Press, 1988. 

_. The U.S. Military’ Intervention in Panama: Origins, Planning and Crisis 

Management, June 1987-December 1989. Washington, DC: Center for 
Military History, United States Army, 2008. 

Dissertations and Theses 

Barker, Michael Lynn. “American Indian Tribal Police: An Overview and A Case 
Study.” Ph.D. dissertation, State University of New York-Albany, 1994. 

Gaddy, Glen D. “MacArthur’s Development of the Philippine Army and the 
Defense of the Islands, 1935-1942.” M.A. thesis, Southern Illinois 
University-Edwardsville, 1974. 

Grossman, Richard. “Hermanos de la Patria: Nationalism, Honor and Rebellion: 
Augusto Sandino and the Army in Defense of the National Sovereignty 
of Nicaragua.” Ph.D. dissertation. The University of Chicago, 1996. 

Hance, Harry Thomas. “Civil-Military Relations: The Organization and Control 
of the Constabulary Force of the Republic of Haiti, 1915-1934.” M.A. 
thesis, The Ohio State University, 1965. 


139 



MacMichael, David Charles. “The United States and the Dominican Republic, 
1871-1940: A Cycle in Caribbean Diplomacy.” Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of Oregon, 1964. 

Perez, Orlando J. “Elites, Power, and Ideology: The Struggle for Democracy in 
Panama.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1996. 

Polk, Freddy L. “Building Armies for Democracy: US Attempts to Reform the 
Armed Forces of Cuba (1906-1909) and Nicaragua (1927-1933).” 
Master of Military Art and Science thesis, US Army Command and 
General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, KS, 1987. 

Soloman, Marvin A. “Law, Order and Justice in the Dominican Republic During 
the United States Military Government.” M.A. thesis, Southern Illinois 
University-Edwardsville, 1969. 

Swilling, Chris. “The High Price of Neglect: The 1964 Flag Riots in Panama.” 
M.A. thesis, Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville, 1993. 

Periodicals 

Bacevich, Andrew J. “The Realist Persuasion.” Boston Globe. 6 November 2005. 
http://www.boston.com/news/globe/ideas/articles/2005/ll/06/the_ 
realist_persuasion. 

Baker Jr., George W. “The Wilson Administration and Panama, 1913-1921.” 
Journal of Inter-American Studies, Vol. VIII, No. 2 (April 1966), 279- 
293. 

Bimberg Jr., Edward. “Black Bandits of Haiti.” Leatherneck (August 1941), 6-9. 

Carlson, Captain Evans F. “The Guardia as a Police Force.” Leatherneck, Vol. XV 
(October, 1932), 20 and 62. 

Denig, Lieutenant Colonel Robert L. “Native Officer Corps, Guardia Nacional de 
Nicaragua.” Marine Corps Gazette, Vol. XVII (November 1932), 75-77. 

Farolan, Ramon J. “Reveille: Anecdotes from the life of a constable.” Philippine 
Daily Inquirer, 22 June 2009, http://opinion.inquirer.net/inquireropinion/ 
columns/view/20090622-21174 0/Anecdotes-from-the-life-of-a- 
constable. 

Fellowes, Edward A. “Training Native Troops in Santo Domingo.” Marine Corps 
Gazette, Vol. VIII, No. 4 (December 1923), 215-233. 

Grieb, Kenneth G. “Warren G. Harding and the Dominican Republic: US 
Withdrawal, 1921-1933.” Journal of Inter-American Studies, Vol. XI, 
No. 3 (July 1969), 425^140._ 

Hanneken, Major Herman H. “A Discussion of the Voluntario Troops in Nicaragua.” 
Marine Corps Gazette, Vol. XXVI (November 1942), 247-266. 

Millett, Allan R. “The Rise and Fall of the Cuban Rural Guard, 1898-1912.” The 
Americas, Vol. 29, No. 2 (October 1972), 192-211. 

Millett, Richard L. “Anastasio Somoza Garcia: A Brief History of Nicaragua’s 
Enduring Dictator.” Revista/Review Inleramericana, Vol. VII, No. 3 (Fall 
1977), 486-508. 

_. “The Limits of Influence: Creating Security Forces in Latin America.” 

Joint Forces Quarterly, No. 42 (3rd Quarter, 2006), 14-16. 


140 



_. “Looking Beyond Noriega.” Foreign Policy, No. 71 (Summer 1988), 46- 

64. 

Millett, Richard L. and Gaddy, G. Dale. “Administering the Protectorates: The 
US Occupation of Haiti and the Dominican Republic.” Revista/Review 
Interamericana, Vol. VI, No. 3 (Fall 1976), 383-402. 

Millett, Richard L. and Soloman, Marvin. “The Court Martial of Lieutenant Rafael 
L. Trujillo.” Revista/Review Interamericana, Vol. II, No. 3 (Fall 1972), 
396-404. 

Ormsbee Jr., William H. “U.S. Army School of the Americas (USARSA): Profile 
of a Training Institution.” DISAM Journal, Vol. 7, No. 2 (Winter, 1984), 
7-10. 

“Our Casualties in Other Wars.” New York Times, 1 January 1918, 44. 

Pomeroy, Earl S. “America’s Colonial Office.” The Mississippi Valley Historical 
Review, Vol. 30 (March 1944). 

Reisinger, Colonel H.C. “La Palabra del Gringo: Leadership in the Nicaraguan 
National Guard.” United States Naval Institute Proceedings, Vol. LXI 
(February 1935), 215-221. 

Scranton, Margaret. “Consolidation and Imposition: Panama’s 1992 Referendum.” 
Journal of Inter-American Studies and World Affairs, Vol. 35, No. 3 (Fall 
1993), 65-102. 

Sharlett, Jeff. “Jesus Killed Mohammed: The Crusade for a Christian Military.” 
Harper s Magazine (May 2009), 31-43. 

Smith, Lieutenant Colonel Richard W. “Philippine Constabulary.” Military Review 
(May 1968), 73-160. 


Interviews 

Smith, Lieutenant General Julian C., USMC (Retired). Interview by author. 
Arlington, VA, April 1966. 

Internet Sources 

Dumindin, Arnaldo. Philippine-American War, 1899-1902. Online. Available at 
http://www.freewebs.com/philippineamericanwar/thewarragesl899.htm, 
accessed December 2009. 

Hoover, President Herbert. “State of the Union Message.” 3 December 1929. 
Available at www.let.rug.ni/usa/P/hh3 l/speeches/hh_l929.htm, accessed 
December 2009. 

Roosevelt, President Theodore. “State of the Union Address.” 5 December 1905. 

Available at http://www.theodoreroosevelt.com, accessed December 
2009. 


141 



About the Author 


Dr. Richard L. Millett received his A.B. with honors from Harvard and his 
M.A. and Ph.D. from the University of New Mexico. He taught at Southern 
Illinois University from 1966 through 1999 as well as at the University of 
Miami, the Air War College, and several universities in Colombia in 2000 
and 2001. He held the Oppenheimer Chair of Warfighting Strategy at the 
Marine Corps University. 

Millett has published numerous works on Latin America, including 
Colombia’s Conflicts: The Spillover Effects of a Wider War (2002), 
Beyond Praetorianism: The Latin American Military in Transition (1996), 
and Searching for Panama (1993). His articles have appeared in Foreign 
Policy, The Wilson Quarterly, Joint Forces Quarterly, Journal of Inter- 
American Studies, Current History, The New Republic, and numerous 
other journals. Millett has also written articles for the Washington Post, 
Miami Herald, Los Angeles Times, and other national newspapers. 

Dr. Millett is Vice President and Director of the St. Louis Committee on 
Foreign Relations and a member of the Board of the American Committees 
on Foreign Relations. He is also a Board Member and past Vice President 
of the Inter-American Defense College Foundation. 


143 


