REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 


Form Approved 
0MB No. 0704-0188 


Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, 
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this 
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson 
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503. 


3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 


1. AGENCY USE ONLY 2. REPORT DATE 

S.May.OO 


4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

US-MEXICO BORDERLAND NARRATIVES: GEOPOETIC REPRESENTATIONS 
FROM THE MEXICAN AMERICAN WAR TO THE PRESENT 


6. AUTHOR(S) 

MAJ KING ROSEMARY A 


7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY 


DISSERTATION 


5. FUNDING NUMBERS 


8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 




9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

THE DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE 
AFIT/CIA, BLDG 125 
2950 P STREET 
WPAFB OH 45433 


10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 
AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 



12a. DISTRIBUTION AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Unlimited distribution 

In Accordance With AFI 35-205/AFIT Sup 1 


12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE 


13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 


20000316 034 



17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF REPORT 


18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF THIS PAGE 


15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

251 


16. PRICE CODE 


19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 20. LIMITATION OF 
OF ABSTRACT ABSTRACT 


Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) (EG) 

Prescribed by ANSI Std. 239.18 

Designed using Perform Pro, WHS/DIOR, Oct 94 























US-MEXICO BORDERLAND NARRATIVES: GEOPOETIC REPRESENTATIONS 
FROM THE MEXICAN AMERICAN WAR TO THE PRESENT 

by 

Rosemary A. King 


A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree 
Doctor of Philosophy 


ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY 


DTIQ QIIALITY IN®>ECTED 8 


May 2000 



US-MEXICO BORDERLAND NARRATIVES: GEOPOETIC REPRESENTATIONS 
FROM THE MEXICAN AMERICAN WAR TO THE PRESENT 

by 

Rosemary A. King 

has been approved 
April 2000 







Supervisory Committee 


ACCEPTED: 


22-_J 


Department Chair 


Co-Chair 





Dean, Graduate College 





ABSTRACT 


For over 150 years, borderland authors from both Mexico and the United States 
have developed novels which owe their narrative power to compelling relationships 
between literary constructions of space and artistic expressions of conflicts, characters, 
and cultural encounter. This study explores those relationships by analyzing 
representations of the spaces in which characters function—whether barrio, ballroom, or 
border city—as well as the places characters inhabit relative to the border—occupying 
native or foreign territory, traveling temporarily, or settling permanently. Concomitant 
with close attention to the conceptualization of space in border literature is a 
foregrounding of the genres that border writers employ, such as historical romance and 
the Hispanic bildungsroman, as well as the literary traditions from which they draw, such 
as travel narratives or utopian literature. Assessing geopoetics in border writing from the 
Mexican American War to the present, including writers such as Helen Hunt Jackson, 
Jovita Gonzalez, Ernesto Galarza, Americo Paredes, Harriet Doerr, Cormac McCarthy, 
Leslie Marmon Silko, and Miguel Mendez provides a paradigm for tracing the 
development and changes in individual responses to this space as well as a broad range of 
responses based on class and gender. This corpus of literature demonstrates that the 
various ways in which characters respond to cultural encounter—adapting, resisting, 
challenging, sympathizing—depends on artistic rendering of spaces and places around 
them. Thus, the central argument of this project is that character responses to cultural 
encounters arise out of geopoetics—^the artistic expression of space and place—from the 
earliest to the most recent border narratives. 


Ill 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I wish to thank Professors Kay Sands and Elizabeth Horan for their mentorship. 
They have spent countless hours reading and discussing my work, encouraging me to 
stretch intellectually and think critically about my approach to literature. Put simply, 
they have inspired me to be a better scholar, motivation that I will carry with me beyond 
ASU. I am also grateful to Professor Scott Stevens for the feedback he provided on this 
project. In addition to my dissertation committee members, I want to recognize 
Ms.Orchid Mazurkiewicz, ASU Reference Librarian, who patiently helped me locate 
important primary sources. I also wish to thank Professor David William Foster for his 
discussions about US-Mexico borderland literature. Further, I am grateful to the 
Department of English at the US Air Force Academy for sponsoring me in this doctoral 
program. The Department has given me an opportunity to serve the AF in a manner that 
allows me to do what I love—read and study literature. Beyond the academic world, I am 
very grateful to my parents who, in their words, “prayed me through this project” from 
the first day of school. Also, I am thankful to my siblings and fiiends for their endless 
patience and support. Most importantly, I offer special thanks to K.L.H. for boundless 
confidence in me now and always. 


IV 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER Page 

INTRODUCTION; BORDERLAND NARRATIVES 
AS GEOPOETIC EXPRESSIONS. 1 

1 CLAIMING SPACE: DOMESTIC PLACES, 

NATIONAL DIVIDES. 25 

Ramona: A Novel . 28 

The Squatter and the Don . 42 

Caballero: A Historical Novel . 50 

2 MOVING IN SPACE: SOUTHERN JOURNEYS 

OF TRANSFORMATION. 67 

Stones for Ibarra . 70 

Old Gringo . 83 

All the Pretty Horses . 94 

3 MAKING SPACE; NORTHERN MIGRATIONS 

IN THE HISPANIC BILDUNGSROMAN. 117 

Pocho . 120 

Barrio Bov . 135 

George Washington Gomez . 146 

4 RECLAIMING SPACE: DYSTOPIAS AND 

UTOPIAS IN THE BQRDERLANDS. 165 

Pilgrims in Aztlan . 169 

Almanac of the Dead. 187 


V 




















Page 


CONCLUSION: GEOPOETIC REPRESENTATIONS 


IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY. 212 

Geopoetics amid Multiple Poetics. 215 

Geopoetics in a Global Context. 225 

REFERENCES. 237 


VI 







INTRODUCTION; 


BORDERLAND NARRATIVES AS GEOPOETIC EXPRESSIONS 
The US-Mexico borderland generates a variety of geopoetic representations. For 
over 150 years, borderland authors from both Mexico and the US have developed novels 
which owe their narrative power to compelling relationships between literary 
constructions of space and artistic expressions of conflicts, characters, and cultural 
encounter.^ This volume explores those relationships by analyzing representations of the 
spaces in which characters function—whether barrio, ballroom, or border city—as well 
as the places characters inhabit relative to the border—occupying native or foreign 
territory, traveling temporarily, or settling permanently. Concomitant with close attention 
to the conceptualization of space in border literature is a foregrounding of the genres that 
border writers employ, such as historical romance and the Hispanic bildungsroman, as 
well as the literary traditions from which they draw, such as travel narratives or utopian 
literature. Assessing geopoetics in border writing from the Mexican American War to the 
present, including writers such as Helen Hunt Jackson, Jovita Gonzalez, Ernesto Galarza, 
Americo Paredes, Harriet Doerr, Cormac McCarthy, Leslie Marmon Silko, and Miguel 
Mendez provides a paradigm for tracing the development and changes in individual 
responses to this space as well as a broad range of responses based on class and gender. 
This corpus of literature demonstrates that the various ways in which characters respond 
to cultural encounter—adapting, resisting, challenging, sympathizing—depends on 
artistic rendering of spaces and places around them. Thus, the central argument of this 
project is that characters’ responses to cultural encounters arise out of geopoetics—^the 
artistic expression of space and place—from the earliest to the most recent border 


narratives. 


2 


Geopoetics offers a model for understanding border writing because it 
emphasizes the importance of the geopolitical US-Mexico border, the primary agent of 
ideological difference in the borderlands, while at the same time revealing how 
borderland space shapes authors’ genre choices and central narrative conflicts. The 
border “orders” the geography of place and space in this region because it is the site 
where the national territory of the US and Mexico abuts. At this nexus, cultural 
difference is codified by the two nations’ governments as they endorse official languages, 
enforce immigration laws, and reify different interpretations of history. As a result, 
cultural differences in the borderlands are acute. Geopoetics thus informs how Jovita 
Gonzalez portrays the conflicts between a Mexican family and encroaching Anglo 
squatters shortly after the creation of the border in Caballero: how Jose Villarreal depicts 
the challenges to Juan Rubio who, after crossing the border, is unable to adapt to Anglo 
culture in Pocho: or the ways that Carlos Puentes constructs Harriet Winslow’s retreat 
across the border after confronting her own Anglocentrism in Old Gringo. Writers who 
are drawn to the US-Mexico borderlands necessarily depict how characters react to 
cultural difference, a dominant theme in border fiction. Central to this project is the idea 
that the effect of the geopolitical border on the region as an agent of cultural difference 
influences the ways writers construct narrative space and the ways their characters 
negotiate those spaces, whether landscape, domestic sphere, national territory, public 
school, or utopia. The way that space is rendered aesthetically in border literature shapes 
characters’ experiences most acutely when they are confronted with the realms of 
otherness that the literature exposes. For example, Helen Hunt Jackson represents the 
space of Senora Moreno’s home in the historical romance, Ramona , as a domestic sphere 
in which Mexican heritage and the Catholic faith are preserved and protected from an 



3 


outside world corrupted by Anglo culture, members of which are intent on displacing, 
disenfranchising, and dispossessing the existing Californio elite. As this example 
illustrates, borderland fiction is valuable precisely because it constructs believable 
experiences and whole worlds in a geopolitical setting that tends to produce fragmented 
and conflicting reports. 

This study analyzes border narratives from the imposition of the US-Mexico 
border following the Mexican American War of 1846-48 to the present day in order to 
reveal the progressive development of authorial strategies for depicting the significant 
relationships between political geography and artistic expressions of cultural contact in 
the borderlands. The body of literature selected to demonstrate the intimate linkage 
between narrative style and concepts of the border extending from barrier to bridge 
includes texts that range in publication date from Jackson’s Ramona (1884) to Silko’s 
Almanac of the Dead (1991). Although a seemingly wide net, these works are connected 
by the master trope of the US-Mexico border and organized roughly through a 
chronological series of frameworks in which characters “claim space,” “move in space,” 
“make space,” and “re-claim space” in the borderlands. In Ramona . The Squatter and the 
Don, and Caballero. Mexican and Indian characters struggle to “claim space” for 
themselves in early border narratives by fighting to retain ownership of land they have 
occupied for decades preceding the Mexican American War. In Stones for Ibarra. Old 
Gringo, and All the Pretty Horses. Anglos “move in space” by traveling in Mexico during 
and following the Mexican Revolution. Fleeing the Revolution, Mexican and Hispanic 
characters figuratively “make space” for themselves in the US by carving out new 
identities that allow them to draw on Mexican/Indian heritage and Anglo culture in 
Pocho . Barrio Bov, and George Washington Gomez . Finally, Chicano/a and Indian 




characters literally “re-claim space” by fighting for the land rights of homelands stolen by 
the US government in Pilgrims in Aztlan and Almanac of the Dead . Ordering the 
chapters of this volume to trace how authors conceptualize the conflicts inherent in the 
changing ideology of the borderlands elucidates the ways in which border writers 
represent the effect of political geography on cultural encounter. 

In order to conceptualize borderland fiction as geopoetic representation, it is 
useful to understand the historical antecedents of the US-Mexico border in order to 
emphasize that the region is a space of contested territory with overlapping cultural 
traditions.^ In the first half of the nineteenth century, the US and Mexican government 
fought for ownership and control of Mexico’s northern territories. Anglo expansionists 
in the US Congress embraced the concept of Manifest Destiny and exercised a policy of 
“dollar diplomacy” in repeated efforts to buy northern tracts of land in Mexico, offers 
that the Mexican government flatly refused (Martinez 12). Meanwhile, the region was 
increasingly characterized by people in flux. Because the Mexican government was 
having trouble populating this region (since the time of independence from Spain 1821), 
it allowed foreign settlers to claim land in the uninhabited area (Skidmore 228). 
However, the policy backfired because the Anglo squatters became a dominant majority 
who increasingly ignored the dictates of a far-away Mexican government. Also in this 
era, the US and Mexican governments relocated thousands of Indian tribes to the region, 
settling them on nearly uninhabitable land, in an effort isolate them from large 
concentrated population centers. Anglos, Mexicans, and Indians struggled to co-habitat 
in the region. In 1835, Texas declared its independence from Mexico and the US 
annexed the state ten years later, acts that Mexico considered to be an invasion of 
sovereign territory. Shortly thereafter, the Mexican American War broke out in 1846 




5 

(Skidmore 228). By 1848, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had solidified the national— 
but not the cultural—geography of the borderlands which, as this brief background 
illustrates, has been a contested site where people from different cultures have 
historically claimed borderland spaces. 

The literary paradigm of geopoetics emerges not only in relation to the historical 
antecedents of the borderlands, but also from the critical work of and in response to the 
scholarship of Americo Paredes and Cecil Robinson, co-founders of border studies in the 
late 1950s.^ While acknowledging the contributions of these individuals, this volume 
moves beyond their critical work on several levels. Paredes and Robinson most popular 
studies, With a Pistol in His Hand (1958) and With the Ears of Strangers (1963), argue 
that the culture of the borderlands must necessarily include Mexican and Anglo 
influence. Appropriate as this argument continues to be, it overlooks the contributions of 
other minorities in the region, most notably that of Border Indians. To correct this 
omission, I include in this study Almanac of the Dead by Silko, a Laguna Indian, and 
Pilgrims in Aztlan b y Mendez, a Mexican Indian, as well as literature by non-natives 
about Indians such as Ramona by Jackson. I also assess writing by Anglos, Chicanos, 
Mexicans, Mexican Indians, and Hispanics in order to be as inclusive as possible of the 
many hybrid cultures in the borderlands.'^ Among these authors is Paredes himself, 
writing as a novelist rather than a folklorist, in the relatively unknown bildungsroman 
novel titled, George Washington Gomez . 

This study also challenges a notion set forth by Paredes and Robinson that the 
borderlands and its culture are situated in a well-defined “third country” sandwiched 
between the US and Mexico.* I define the borderlands more broadly to include the fringe 
area of the southwestern US and northern Mexico that extends the length of the 2,000 


6 


mile geopolitical border as well as ethnic enclaves that exist in cities geographically 
removed from the border, such as Los Angeles or La Paz. What is significant in this 
expanded view of the borderlands is that this definition is based on the premise, contrary 
to Paredes’s and Robinson’s work, that culture is not limited to nationally defined 
territory, a notion confirmed by some anthropologists and affirmed in border wnting. 
Because people move constantly to acquire resources, interact with other groups, create 
new alliances, or claim new spaces, for example, anthropologists like Michael Kearney 
and James Clifford aver that culture cannot be confined to a single, coherent, isolated 
area. 

The literature too suggests that borderland culture may be identified in locations 
far from the supposed “third country” along the border. In Pocho. for instance, 
protagonist Richard Rubio is steeped in border culture in Santa Clara, California, a town 
in which Villarreal depicts many overt “examples” of culture—pachuco gangs; Mexican 
festivals. In addition, works like Barrio Bov and George Washington Gomez illustrate 
migration and movement of people that Kearney and Clifford argue reconfigures the 
spaces of culture in literature that shows Mexicans fleeing the hardships of the Mexican 
Revolution. Culture has become increasingly deterritorialized through modem processes 
of transnationalism, migration, technology and communication in a world where “people, 
capital, commodities, driven by global political-economic forces, do not stop at national 
borders” (Clifford 330). This fact is highlighted in Silko’s rendering of the US-Mexico 
border as porous and permeable membrane across which Latin American refugees travel 
in Almanac of the Dead . In addition to the arguments already presented, I reject the term 
“third country” because it bespeaks of nationhood and nation-states, characteristics 
notably absent in a borderlands. None of the literature of this region, for example, depicts 



a central government or political leader governing the borderlands. Thus, this study 
expands Paredes’s and Robinson’s idea that border culture is limited exclusively to a 
“third country” along the border. 

Finally, this volume re-defmes Paredes’s and Robinson’s assumption of culture as 
more heterogeneous than homogeneous. Their work, for instance, does not address how 
borderland fiction depicts US culture as often fragmented into multifaceted discourses, a 
point underscored by the variety of ethnic labels that identify American citizens of 
Mexican decent. The border literature I study is replete with such examples; Villarreal 
describes characters as “pachucos/as,” “pochos/as,” and “Mexican American” and 
Galarza uses terms like “Chicanos/as,” ‘"mestizos/as,'' and “Hispanics.” Such labels 
represent people with different, even competing, discourses yet who are simultaneously 
considered part of US culture based on citizenship or as residents, temporarily or 
permanently, in Mexico. In Pilgrims in Aztlan. Mendez includes numerous illustrations 
of the way that people’s lives counter the simplification of culture as homogeneous (26, 
139, 170). A conversation between father and son demonstrates this notion: 

Papa, what are we? 

Mexicans, son. 

Mexicans and we don’t live in Mexico. Are we Americans then? 

Yes, my son, we are also Americans. 

Then why do the Mexicans call us Pochos and here [the Americans] call us 

Mexican greasers?” (Mendez 170) 

The author also defies the notion of culture as monolithic by labeling himself 
simultaneously a “Chicano, Mexican Indian, and wetback” (Mendez 2). A similar 
diffusion of culture is identifiable in the US with labels such as “gringo/a,” “North 


American,” “Anglo,” “American,” or “EuroAmerican” that represent different 
experiences among groups of people. Indians offer another example that culture is not 
homogeneous. Indian culture is not only nuanced by gender and language, but also by 
tribal affiliations. Silko underscores such differences between tribes in her novel. In one 
scene, for example, a Marxist rebel urges members of the Hopi, Yaquis, Apache, Plains, 
Mohawk, and Laguna tribes to subordinate their differences in order to unite for the 
purpose of reclaiming land. 

Moving beyond the early scholars of border studies, this project builds on a 
theoretical framework that is particularly useful to a study of borderland literature by 
drawing on terms that facilitate an understanding of the relationship between cultural 
encounter and geography. In the context of this work, culture is defined as “the nimbus 
perceived by one group when it comes into contact with and observes another one 
Culture must always be seen as a vehicle or a medium whereby the relationship between 
groups is transacted' (Italics added; Jameson 34). This definition intimates that culture 
is a fragmented, fluid, and multifaceted entity that spills beyond national borders and, 
most importantly, is bom in relation to otherness. This notion is confirmed in border 
literature through the theme of migration in Pocho. Barrio Boy , and George Washington 
Gomez in which Mexican families leave their homes and settle permanently in the US. 
Such travel results in contacts with others that enable the protagonists in these works to 
identify both Mexican and Anglo cultural practices. Stones for Ibarra provides another 
example of the way culture is conceptualized in relation to the Other. Only after being 
immersed in a culture other than her own does Sara Everton gain insight into the way 
Anglo culture has blinded her to an appreciation of Mexican culture. 


9 


Understanding culture as relational is of particular use to a geopoetic examination 
of borderland narratives when it is made clear through the useful concept of “contact 
zone,” a term coined by comparative literary theorist Mary Louise Pratt. She defines this 
zone as a “space in which peoples geographically and historically separated come into 
contact with each other and establish ongoing relations, usually involving conditions of 
coercion, radical inequality, and intractable conflict” (Pratt, Imperial 6). In this 
conception of space as an area of cultural mixing and competition, she emphasizes the 
importance of initial contact between peoples traditionally separated from one another. 

She notes that “cultures were created literally at the moment of colonial contact” and that 
in borderland zones, the ideologies of colonizing and colonized cultures directly impact 
one another (Pratt 34). Caballero and Ramona represent the borderlands as a site of initial 
contact between people in their depiction of the cultural clash between Anglos, Border 
Indians, and Mexicans following the Mexican American War of 1846-48. In particular, 
Gonzalez narrates the effect of cultural contact between the Mexican Mendoza y Soria 
family and encroaching Anglos, such as Texas politician, Alfred “Red” McLane, and US 
soldier, Lt. Robert Davis Warrener in south Texas. Similarly, Jackson portrays southern 
California as a contact zone through the initial encounters between the Mexican Moreno 
family, Border Indians like Alessandro and Ramona, and Anglo squatters. These 
historical romances depict colonial conditions of contact that include descriptions of the 
impact of the Secularization Act of 1834, Land Act of 1851, and Homestead Act of 1862 
on the Mendozas and Morenos, laws that allowed Anglos to usurp land owned and 
occupied by Mexicans, Hispanics, and Indians. Pratt’s concept of the contact zone 
provides a vehicle to understand early literature of the borderlands in particular because it 
addresses the epoch of the border’s origin when territorial changes begat severe cultural 


10 


tension. Understanding the setting of these works as a contact zone, a territory of radical 
imposition of alien culture and resistance to colonial intrusion, bridges together the two 
elements of geopoetics—a contested division of land and authorial representations of that 
conflict—to clarify the complex relationships between spatial dynamics, authorial choice 
of genres, and initial cultural contact among Mexicans, Anglos, and Indians. 

Jose David Saldivar, a theorist of the borderlands, expands Pratt’s notion of 
“contact zone” by redefining the borderlands as a “transfrontera contact zone.” In Border 
Mattprs- Remapping American Cultural Studies (1997). he explains: “This zone is the 
social space of subaltern encounters, the Janus-faced border line in which peoples 
geographically forced to separate themselves now negotiate with one another to 
manufacture new relations, hybrid cultures, and multiple-voiced aesthetics” (Italics 
added; 13-14). Such negotiation is illustrated by the stormy affair of an Anglo governess 
and macho Mexican general in Old Gringo, a romance between a Texas cowboy and the 
daughter of a Mexican hacendado in All the Pretty Horses, or the marriages joining 
Mexican women and Anglo men in Caballero . For instance, Fuentes illustrates the 
“manufacture of new relations” in Old Gringo . Immersed in a culture that she is 
unfamiliar with, Harriet slowly recognizes her paternalistic treatment of Mexican people 
when her efforts to “civilize” the children backfire as when she gets mad at school 
children for supposedly stealing pearls although, in reality, the kids take the necklace to 
adorn the Virgin Mary during a saint’s feast day. Harriet’s love affair with Arroyo also 
gradually convinces her that she knows too little about Mexican culture to try to 
“improve” it. She ultimately “manufactures new relationships” with the Mexicans 
around her, particularly Arroyo, recognizing that she is no longer teacher but the one 
being taught. Thus, Harriet re-shapes her relationship to the Other according to Saldivar’s 



definition of a transfrontera contact zone. She recognizes her difference from Mexican 
identity but also comes to temporarily incorporate elements of that culture into her 
ideology and behavior. However, she does not experience an actual lasting change in 
identity, a notion illustrated by the next concept salient to this study, cultural hybridity. 

Drawing on Edward Said’s ideology of difference, post-colonial theorist Homi 
Bhabha describes cultural hybridity as a process that emerges from the interaction 
between the colonized and colonizer in which a subject adopts and thus displaces the 
hegemonic discourse(s) of a dominant culture.^ Because colonized subjects mimic but 
can never identically replicate the mores of a dominant culture, they produce new, 
hybridized identities that ultimately challenge the hegemony of the subjugating society. 
In this framework, Bhabha notes that border zones are particularly fecund regions for 
cultural hybridities because they are transitional, provisional spaces that offer “the 
negotiation of incommensurable differences” among divergent cultures (Location 218). 
He writes of all international borders; 

These ‘inbetween’ spaces provide the terrain for elaborating strategies of 
selfhood—singular or communal—^that initiate new signs of identity, and 
innovative sites of collaboration, and contestation, in the act of defining the idea 
of society itself .. .The representation of difference must not be hastily read as 
the reflection of pre-given ethnic or cultural traits set in the fixed tablet of 
tradition. The social articulation of difference, from the minority perspective, is 
complex, on-going negotiation that seeks to authorize cultural hybridities that 
emerge in moments of historical transformation, (italics in original; Bhabha, 
Location 2) 


12 


Pocho . Barrio Bov , and George Washington Gomez offer examples of authors 
developing environs and characters that cultivate hybridity in which difference is codified 
at the US-Mexico border in accordance with Bhabha’s theories. In these Hispanic 
bildungsromans, the protagonists struggle to “articulate a strategy of selfhood” as they 
negotiate, collaborate, and contest the hegemonic influence of Anglo culture that 
threatens to negate their individuality or devalue their Mexican heritage. Ultimately, 
Richard, Ernesto, and George re-defme their relationship with society permanently by 
acculturating, assimilating, or transculturating, thus demonstrating varying degrees of 
cultural hybridity as understood by Bhabha.^ 

Anzaldua’s definition of cultural hybridity is also useful to this project because, 
unlike Bhabha, she addresses the US-Mexico borderlands in particular. She develops the 
term “cultural hybridity” through her borderland experience with the process of 
mestizaje. In The Borderlands/La Frontera (1987), she writes: 

It is where the possibility of uniting all that is separate occurs. This assembly is 
not one where severed or separated pieces merely come together. Nor is it a 
balancing of opposing powers. In attempting to work out a synthesis, the self has 
added a third element that is greater than the sum of its severed parts. The third 
element is a new consciousness—a mestiza consciousness—and though it is a 
source of intense pain, its energy comes from continual creative motion that keeps 
breaking down the unitary aspect of each new paradigm. (Anzaldua 79-80) 
Anzaldua illustrates cultural hybridity by describing how a “tolerance for ambiguity” 
enables the confluence of her Mexican, Chicana, and Native heritage to synthesize in the 
fluid, improvisational space offered within the US-Mexico borderlands (79-80). 
Mestizaje is a particularly salient theme in Almanac of the Dead (1991). In this epic 



13 


novel, Silko depicts the US-Mexico borderlands as a site where individuals from multiple 
cultures—among many others, Clinton, an African American Indian; Sterling, a Laguna 
Indian; Angela, a Mexican Indian—come together to create a social milieu characterized 
by the hybridization of language, identity, and culture. This confluence of “mestizo/a 
consciousness” enables some of the differences that alienate characters from each other to 
be overcome so they may work together to build a borderland utopia. 

Interpretation of border narratives as geopoetic representations facilitates an 
understanding of the many ways that artistic renderings of space and place inform the 
various ways characters react to cultural encounter and the resultant adaptation or 
reassessment of identity that grows out of their borderland experiences with otherness. 
Each chapter of this study offers a close analysis of space and its impact on character 
definition in various works of border literature that emerge from different literary 
traditions closely connected to the politics of the borderlands in its evolution over more 
than a century. The first chapter, “Claiming Space: Domestic Places, National Divides” 
explores the ways that historical romance centers on place as a symbol of cultural 
tradition and security in Jackson’s Ramona: A Novel (1884), Ruiz de Burton’s The 
Squatter and the Don (1885) and Gonzalez’s Caballero: A Historical Novel (1996). The 
thesis of this chapter is that these authors use the absolutist conventions of historical 
romance—^well-defined roles of hero and villain or clear-cut forces of good verses evil— 
to articulate the inflexible Anglo/Mexican divide of the newly created US-Mexican 
border in the domestic spaces of haciendas. The Alamar ranch in The Squatter and the 
Don represents open land ripe for westward expansion from the perspective of Anglo 
squatters. Caballero depicts Rancho de la Palma as a pure Mexican site from the 
perspective of Don Santiago, who challenges Anglo encroachment on his land. The 



14 


writers offer little if any neutral ground in these novels. Space, place, and poetics come 
together in these early border novels to undermine the once culturally stable geography 
and call into question the validity of nationality and identity in a territory of contested 
politics. Ultimately, the heroes in these novels become those who can bridge the 
Anglo/Mexican divide by negotiating cultural difference to “claim space” for themselves 
within the bifurcated spaces of the novels. 

This chapter further demonstrates that The Squatter and the Don and Caballero 
are incomplete representations of border experience because they omit the role of Border 
Indians and female claims on land, salient themes in Ramona . Jackson represents space in 
an absolutist sense as does Ruiz de Burton and Gonzalez: in Ramona, the Moreno ranch 
becomes a symbol of Mexican space because of Senora Moreno’s embrace of a Spanish 
heritage and Catholic faith. However, Jackson’s portrayal of Alessandro’s and Ramona’s 
disenfranchisement and dispossession of land complicates a bivalent representation of 
the nascent borderlands solely as a site of Anglo/Mexican conflict. Furthermore, Ramona 
decenters the male-male relations prevalent in The Squatter and the Don and Caballero 
by highlighting the agency of female characters like Senora Moreno, who battles Anglo 
squatters to preserve what is left of her dwindling estate. Exploring the geopoetics of 
historical romance and the conflicts and characters shaped by historically determined 
place affirms the important role of Ramona among other early border narratives. 

“Moving in Space: Southern Journeys of Transformation” transitions from novels 
depicting the formation of the US-Mexico border in the mid-nineteenth century to events 
set during and following the Mexican Revolution of 1910-17. Doerr’s Stones for Ibarra 
(1978), Puentes’s Old Grineo IGrimo vieid\ (1985), and McCarthy’s All the Pret ty 
Horses (1992J emerge from literary traditions—travel writing and the Western novel— 


15 


that share a “colonial legacy.” I use this term to refer generally to accounts in which a 
white English-speaking traveler, whether an exploratrice sociale or an American cowboy, 
imposes her/his values on the Other.^ The central argument of this chapter is that 
Fuentes, Doerr, and McCarthy weight their Anglo characters with a colonial legacy that 
precludes them, in varying degrees, from perceiving spaces and places in Mexico as do 
the native inhabitants; instead, Anglos try unsuccessfully to reshape their environs 
according to their own values. In Stones for Ibarra, for example, Sara Everton initially 
sees the countryside and the central plaza as devoid of human life even though there are 
Mexicans all around her. She also tries to encourage women’s suffrage in Ibarra when 
voting is moot—a point literally inscribed in the space of a hillside overlooking the 
village, where the ruling political party has constructed a sign informing the village of the 
name of the next president of Mexico. In Old Gringo . Harriet is insensitive to her 
surroundings. She interprets the Mexican Revolution as a “misguided” effort at reform 
and advocates social change through education rather than violence, trying to swap rifles 
for the reading, writing, and arithmetic that she teaches in school. She also fails to see the 
significance of the ballroom mirrors in the Miranda hacienda, a site representing class 
oppression to the Mexican revolutionaries, until General Arroyo points out the way they 
figuratively and literally reflect her white privilege. 

Geopoetics provide the authors of Stones for Ibarra and Old Gringo with a 
different colonial legacy in which their female protagonists initially refuse to recognize 
but which later affects their responses to otherness. I argue that Harriet and Sara are 
ultimately able to empathize with members of another culture because their role as 
women is less engaged in the explicit conquest of Mexico. In contrast, John Grady Cole’s 
role in the colonial drama is more active and violent in All the Pretty Horses than his 


16 


female counterparts, and as a result, he is unable to appreciate or absorb any of the values 
of Mexican culture. Drawing on the conventions of the western novel, McCarthy makes 
Cole a good cowboy wherever he is—he can tame mustangs equally well in Texas or 
Coahuila. His skills translate well in Mexico, but his understanding of cultural values 
does not. He crosses the border into Mexico like a “marauder” conquering new territory 
and attempts to live the American mythos of westward expansion in the “empty” space in 
Mexico as represented by a “blank” map of the region. Thus, geopoetics in All the Pretty 
Horses is represented in McCarthy’s revisionist western approach to the ideological 
differences in US and Mexican culture; as a result, the novel functions as an American 
confessional of a colonial legacy, a drama enacted by a cowboy who is ultimately driven 
out of Mexico. 

In “Making Space: Northern Migrations in the Hispanic Bildungsroman,” I turn 
the gaze north of the border to discuss Villarreal’s Pocho (1959), Galarza’s Barrio Boy 
(1971), and Paredes’s George Washington Gomez (1990). Geopoetics in these texts 
center on the spaces of home and school to illustrate the ways Mexican and Hispanic 
characters adapt to permanent residence in the US. These bildungsroman texts portray 
places of protagonists’ childhood in telling the story of their maturation to adulthood. 
Pocho is an autobiographical novel that tells us that where one is bom makes a 
difference: Mexican father, Juan Rubio, is not able to adapt to life in the US while 
American-bom son, Richard, does so. Juan’s strong attachment to the Mexican homeland 
cause him to reject and isolate himself from Anglo culture. He re-creates a mini-Mexico 
in the spaces around him by hosting, for example, fiestas for Mexican migrants on his 
property. In contrast, Richard alternates between the Mexican spaces that his father 
cultivates and an outside, public world of Americanism in school and in his 



17 


neighborhood. This causes a troubled liminal period from which the youth ultimately 
achieves a rite of passage; he transculturates by “making space” for himself as a pocho 
and writer in the US. The construction of space is more explicit in Barrio Boy . Galarza 
celebrates the communal spaces in his native Jalcocotan, the diversity in various US 
barrios, and the respect for ethnic heritage encouraged in public schools. This 
autobiographical work shapes such environs in a way that affords Ernesto an opportunity 
to painlessly adapt to American life. George Washington Gomez, a bildungsroman novel, 
counterpoints the private spaces of home to the public spaces of school. The protagonist 
develops a “checker-board consciousness” alternating between loyalty to his Mexican 
heritage and his American citizenship as a way to cope with cultural encounter. 

Ultimately, the significance of these private and public spaces clash and cause George to 
assimilate into Anglo culture, a transition facilitated by his Anglo features. Geography in 
Pocho. Barrio Bov, and George Washington Gomez informs the way the authors’ 
determine characters’ adaptations to permanent life in the US; each writer focuses on the 
places and spaces of their transitions to create intimate coming of age portraits for 
youthful Hispanic protagonists. 

“Reclaiming Space: Dystopias and Utopias in the Borderlands,” is an exploration 
of Mendez’s Pilgrims in Aztlan (1974) and Silko’s Almanac of the Dead (1991) which 
call for the dismantlement of the US-Mexico border created a century and a half earlier. 
Writing from a tradition of utopian literature, Mendez and Silko offer cautionary tales 
that depict border cities like Tijuana and Tucson as amoral dystopias in which members 
of capitalistic society squelch anyone inhibiting their quest for endless profit or self¬ 
gratification. Mendez illustrates this by personifying the “Republic of the Despised” in 
which the border city of Tijuana speaks a “language of business” from which the poor are 



18 


excluded and thereby disenfranchised. The power of the wealthy accrues unabated on 
both sides of the border forcing the impoverished to migrate between the US and Mexico 
in search of their own space, a place with ample food and water and where their voices 
are not muted. However, they journey to the Sonoran and Yuma deserts of the 
borderlands only to find that the natural landscape has turned on them as well; the sand, 
bush, and cacti prevent the migrants from reaching the utopic mirage of Aztlan, 

Mendez’s allusion to the Chicano homeland from El Plan Espiritual de Aztlan (1969- 
charter of the Chicano Movement). 

In this chapter, Silko’s portrayal of space is similar to Mendez’s: the borderlands 
in Almanac of the Dead are a chaotic wild zone where “destroyers” barricade themselves 
from others by building “closed systems” to protect their possessions and sangre pura. 
From this dystopia, Silko offers a glimpse of “One World, Many Tribes” as Native 
characters and their allies work together in the spirit of mestizo/a consciousness to 
reclaim sacred Indian lands stolen by the US government. In this chapter, geography and 
the utopian literary tradition provide readers with a warning about borders—ethnic, 
geographic, linguistic, and otherwise—^that inhibit the creation of utopias. The evil that 
characterizes the borderlands at the end of the twentieth century generates a literature of 
chaos where cultural conflict is subordinated to issues of self-indulgence, economic 
ruthlessness, and personal depravity. 

The conclusion of this study, “Geopoetic Representations in the Twenty-first 
Century,” draws together the ways that geopoetics operate in the literature of the 
borderlands over time. I compare geopoetic representations of space between early border 
literature and more recent writing to study the evolution of contact and conflict evoked by 
artistic renderings of the borderlands since the imposition of the US-Mexico border. The 


19 


chapter particularly queries how writers expose character identity as the product of 
geographic location and human interaction or how authors define ethnicity in a text 
relative to a character’s positionality in a contested landscape and among multiple 
cultures. I inquire how the binary construction of space which dominates historical 
romances such as that of Ruiz de Burton is similar to the seemingly rigid, exclusionary 
borders of destroyers’ closed-systems that characterize Silko’s post-modern work. 

Further, I question how the geopoetics of Mexicans adapting to US culture within the 
Hispanic bildungsroman tradition in a work like Pocho is different from a writer’s 
construction of space in a coming of age tale for an Anglo cowboy, as occurs in All the 
Pretty Horses . I answer these questions by arguing that borders, in their myriad 
representations, are important foci and that geopoetics is a valuable model for studying 
cultural contact in literary works set in other borderland regions. 

Clifford writes, “We need to conjure with new locations, such as the ‘border.’ A 
specific place of hybridity and struggle, policing and transgression . .. the border 
experience is made to produce powerful political visions: a subversion of binarisms, the 
projection of a ‘multicultural public sphere’” (37). Similarly, anthropologist Renato 
Rosaldo writes, “borderlands should be regarded not as analytically empty transitional 
zones but as sites of creative cultural production that require investigation” (208). These 
and other authors support not only the value of analyzing US-Mexico border literature 
but of searching for equally unique expressions of cultural contact generated by other 
border zones. 

This study provides the most comprehensive examination of borderland narratives 
to date. It offers an interpretation of borderland literature since the inception of the US- 
Mexico border approximately 150 years ago, keeping the focus on that primary agent of 



20 


ideological difference—the geopolitical border. This project further takes advantage of 
newly published works such as Caballero (1996) and George Washington Gomez (1990), 
both written in the 1930s but recently recovered. It also includes literature by male and 
female writers of Mexican, Anglo, and Indian ethnicity in a variety of genres. In an effort 
to move past the foundations set by Paredes and Robinson, pioneers whose work is now 
dated, this study also combines the nascent field of border theory with the existing 
contributions from post-colonial and anthropological theory. What ultimately emerges 
from this concentrated engagement with border writers is a model that offers insight into 
the ways words and space combine and recombine over time to create geopoetic 
representations of the borderlands as a site where places and cultures continue to generate 
powerful narrative. 


NOTES 


^ The editors of Critical Inquiry (Winter 2000) recently coined the term “geopoetics” as 
“the way geography, memory, and politics intersect in a globalized world” 
[www.uchicago.edu/research/jnl-crit-inq/main.html (31 Jan 2000)]. According to 
Chambers Dictionary of Etymology (1988), “geo” means “earth” from the Greek word 
“ge” (428). “Poetics,” traced through the root word “poetry,” refers to “creative 
literature” and is derived from the Latin word “poetrid" and Greek word “poietrid’XSll). 
^ For a full discussion of the events of the Mexican American War, see the following 
sources: Enrique Krauze’s Mexico: A Biography of Power (1997), John S.D. 
Eisenhower’s So Far From God (1989), Ramon Alcaraz’s et al. Apuntes para la historia 
de la ^erra entre Mexico v los Estados Unidos (1977). and Thomas E. Skidmore’s 
Modem Latin America (1984). For an overview of the role of US and Mexican Indians in 
the nineteenth century, see Edward Spicer’s Cycles of Conquest (1981) Oscar J. 
Martinez’s Troublesome Border (1988) (especially the chapter titled, “Border Indians). 

^ For biographical information on Paredes, see Richard Bauman’s introduction in 
Folklore and Culture on the Texas-Mexican Border (1993) and Chicano Literature: A 
Reference Guide (1985). Biographical information on Robinson is less easy to find. For 
a brief overview of his life and work, see the forward and introduction to No Short 
Journeys: The Interolav of Cultures in the History and Literature of the Borderlands 
(1992). 

For the purpose of this project, I will use the label that an individual chooses to self- 
identify to the greatest extend possible According to my research, Gonzalez does not 
specify a label for herself and therefore I refer to her as “Hispanic.” Ruiz de Burton was 



bom in Mexico but she became a refugee after the Mexican American War and moved to 
the US as a North American citizen. However, according to archival work by Aranda, 

Ruiz de Burton self-identifies as Mexican, the label I have adopted for her (562). 

^ Robinson refers to the borderlands a “third culture,” a fusion of Mexican and American 
traditions, in No Short Joumevs (1992) (129). Although Paredes did not use the term 
verbatim, his scholarship laid the foundation for this concept by constantly re¬ 
emphasizing the binary nature of the region as a site where “two” cultures meet. For 
example, in the introduction to With his Pistol in his Hand, Paredes repeatedly 
emphasizes the importance of viewing the region as the zero sum gain of two severed 
parts “half in Mexico” and “half in the US” (n.p ). Similarly, he begins one of his better 
known essays, “The Problem of Identity in a Changing Culture” with a binary model; “If 
we view a border not simply as a line on a map but, more fundamentally, as a sensitized 
area where two cultures or two political systems come face to face, then the first border 
between English-speaking people from the US and people of Mexican culture was in the 
eastern part of what was now Texas” (20). Contemporary ethnographers such as Tom 
Miller in On the Border: Portraits of America’s Southwestern Frontier (1981) and Alan 
Weisman in La Frontera. The US Border with Mexico (1986) use “third country” to 
denote the borderlands. 

^ For more information, see Homi Bhabha’s The Location of Culture (1994) and Edward 
Said’s Orientalism (1978). 

Acculturation implies that characters morph into a hybrid identity by borrowing 
elements from many cultures. This term is dated and has since been replaced by the 
notion of transculturation coined in 1940 by Cuban sociologist Fernando Ortiz (Pratt 228, 



Saldivar 204). According to Pratt, transculturation is an ethnographic term used to 
describe “how subordinated or marginal groups select and invent from materials 
transmitted to them by a dominant or metropolitan culture” (6). 

* As this example with Anzaldua shows, I will identify authors using the labels they have 
chosen to represent themselves throughout this project. When authors do not self- 
identify, I will use the following labels for the purpose of consistency: “Mexican Indian” 
to refer to indigenous people such as the Yaqui of Sonora who reside in Mexico; “US 
Indian” to identify tribes such as the Apaches or Papago living in the US; “Border 
Indians” to refer to Mexican Indians and US Indians; and “Indians” to describe all pre¬ 
contact inhabitants of the Americans. Additionally, I label a US citizen of Mexican or 
Spanish decent “Hispanic.” Finally, I use the term “Anglo” to refer to North Americans 
of European ancestry. For information on the power and problems of labeling groups of 
individuals, see Ethnic Labels. Latino Lives: Identity and the Politics of (Re)Presentation 
in the US (19951 

^ Pratt defines “exploratice sociale” in Imperial Eves: Travel Writing and 
Transculturation (19951 a global study of travel writing in which she assesses the 
narratives of Europeans who lived in Latin America in the early decades of the nineteenth 
century. Among these travel writers were “exploratrices sociales” [“social 
exploratresses”] such as Flora Tristan, who lived in Peru from 1833 to 1834 and Maria 
Graham Callott, who lived in Chile in 1822. Pratt identifies the exploratrices sociales as 
predominantly urban, white middle-class women on a civilizing mission in which they 
impose their own values on another culture (Pratt 160). While abroad, the exploratrices 
sociales assume it is their duty to perform charity work, such as visiting prisons. 


orphanages, and hospitals. Their writing contains suggestions for pragmatic reform and 
political change in what they believe to be altruistic behavior. I address the application of 
this term to Old Gringo and Stones for Ibarra in chapter two of this study. 

Clifford testifies to the nascent status of border studies, explaining that “the US/Mexico 
frontier has recently attained ‘theoretical’ status, thanks to the work of Chicano/a writers, 
activists, and scholars: Americo Paredes, Renato Rosaldo, Teresa McKenna, Jose David 
Saldivar, Gloria Anzaldua, Guillermo Gomez-Pena, Emily Hicks, and the Border Arts 
Project of San Diego/Tijuana” (37). Clifford’s assertion is backed by the growing number 
of publications dedicated exclusively to border theory such as Scott Michaelsen/David 
Johnson’s Border Theory: The Limits of Cultural Politics (1997), D. Emily Hick’s Border 
Writing: The Multidimensional Text (1991), and as discussed, Saldivar’s Border Matters: 
Remapping American Cultural Studies (1997). 



CHAPTER 1 


CLAIMING SPACE; DOMESTIC PLACES, NATIONAL DIVIDES 
Character responses to cultural encounter arise out of the relationship between 
genre and geography as is illustrated in Helen Hunt Jackson’s Ramona: A Novel (1884), 
Maria Amparo Ruiz de Burton’s The Squatter and the Don (1885), and Jovita Gonzalez s 
Caballero: A Historical Novel (1996)/ These authors use formulaic conventions of 
historical romance to articulate the inflexible bivalency of the newly created US-Mexican 
border—an Anglo/Mexican divide. Examining occupation and displacement of the land, 
Jackson, Ruiz de Burton, and Gonzalez shape domestic spheres into spaces claimed as 
either Anglo or Mexican but excluding claimants of Indian descent. The writers offer 
little if any neutral ground in these novels as Anglo, Mexican, and Border Indian 
characters battle to retain or acquire possession of land. Spatial displacement and 
romance quest come together in these early border fictions to call into question the 
validity of nationality and identity in territory contested by the US and Mexico. 
Ultimately, the heroes and heroines of these works are those characters who try to claim 
space for themselves in a world bifiircated by the US-Mexico border. In Ramona , 
Alessandro and Ramona, abused protagonists who vivify Jackson’s call to reform US 
land legislation that dispossess Indians, unsuccessfully attempt to own and occupy US 
land. Mercedes and Clarence in The Squatter and the Don as well as Susanita and Robert 
in Caballero build homes and request entrance into both the Mexican and Anglo 
communities, showing Ruiz de Burton’s and Gonzalez’s allegory of US nation building 
through the unions of a Mexican woman and Anglo man. 

Ramona, The Squatter and the Don, and Caballero represent spatial dynamics 
through conventions of historical romance, a genre that hybridizes the romance novel and 


26 


historical novel.^ These novels render space using a dialectical structure of absolute 
polarity between good and evil, hero and villain. For instance, aggressive, greedy Anglo 
squatters threaten to evict the stately Don Mariano from land that he and his ancestors 
have occupied for decades in The Squatter and the Don . In all of these border narratives, 
the artistic expression of place creates obstacles to the heroes and heroines. But 
ultimately, the romance quest is achieved through inter-cultural marriages among 
Mexicans, Anglos, and Indians. 

Attention to geopoetics in these narratives articulates a romance literary tradition 
in which domestic spaces have always been important topographical sites, particularly in 
the genteel tradition of the novel written by women and for women in the nineteenth 
century (Kelly 1126-7). Domestic spheres are often the foci of the romantic novel as a 
site where a character seeks protection from a hostile outside world. According to this 
formulaic, the outside world intrudes into the private sphere of the home “destroying the 
domestic affections and dividing families or driving them into some kind of exile” (Kelly 
1128). In each of the works under consideration, the domestic site literally takes primacy 
above other settings in the novels. Over half of Ramona and The Squatter and the Don is 
set in Seftora Moreno’s and Don Alamar’s ranch, respectively, and almost the entire plot 
of Caballero is set in Don Santiago’s hacienda. All three novels portray an Anglo world 
invading the private spheres of Mexicans and Indians at a time when white westward 
expansion flooded the nascent borderlands in the second half of the nineteenth century. 

Jackson, Ruiz de Burton, and Gonzalez also use elements of the historical novel 
in their rendering of space and place. The historical novel places emphasis on 
antiquarianism by attempting to capture “authentic” details or the “common place” as 
illustrated by Sir Walter Scott’s Waverlev novels (1814-1840) or James Fenimore 


27 


Cooper’s T.eather Stocking Tales (1823-1826). The author of Caballero , for example, 
states in the introduction that her objective is to provide a “correct and exact atmosphere 
of the people and the period it deals with” and subsequently apologizes for the stilted and 
artificial style of dialogue in the text (n.p ). The historical novel also represents past 
events in a way that inherently calls attention to geography because history in the 
Western tradition is contextualized by location—the past generally happens at a specific 
geographical site. This point is salient to an exploration of authorial choices regarding 
place and space. For example, in Mexico, Heriberto Frias’s Tomochic (1893) is a 
historical novel whose title reveals the importance of geography as the author 
reconstructs the Mexican Army’s attack on the Indian village of Tomochic.^ Similarly, 
the authors of Ramona, The Squatter and the Don, and Caballero employ the 
aforementioned emphasis on geography during an historical era characterized by tensions 
over the acquisition of land, money, and power. The setting of these texts employs 
historical events ranging from the early 1830s to 1880s. This was a period of immense 
change in the US that included the acquisition of over half of Mexico’s northern territory 
as well as the US Civil War from 1860-65 that radically polarized the nation.'* 
Specifically, the historical context of the books includes the creation of the US-Mexico 
border vis-a-vis the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo following the Mexican American War. 
Historical material also includes US land laws enacted after the war, such as the Land Act 
of 1851 and Homestead Act of 1862, which favored Anglo settlement in the contested 
region of the nascent borderlands. 

While all three authors draw heavily on such historical context, Jackson draws 
particular attention to US land legislation that affected Indian property rights, such as the 
Secularization Act of 1834 that dispossessed Mission Indians from their homelands in the 



28 

American Southwest. Exploring geography and genre in Ramona elucidates the way that 
Jackson inscribes space as a binary configuration of Anglo or Mexican influence in the 
domestic spheres of the Moreno hacienda, Alessandro’s and Ramona’s temporary homes, 
and in Felipe and Ramona’s Mexican retreat. Genre conventions and historical fact 
combine to create a portrayal of the newly created US-Mexico borderlands that, 
according to the author, affords no place for Border Indians. Jackson’s novel thus calls 
for reform of US policy that institutionalized injustice against Indians by legitimizing 
Anglo usurpation of their land, a cause that Jackson pursued in her life and work.^ 
Ramona: A Novel 

Ramona takes place in southern California, the twilight era of Californios^ rule, 
around the 1880s. From the opening pages, Jackson sets up an antagonistic relationship 
between Anglos and Mexicans indicating that the competition over dwindling amount of 
land open for settlement underlines the conflict. This is especially evident in her 
depiction of the land holdings of Senora Moreno, an elderly Mexican woman who was 
once part of the powerful landed elite that constituted the ruling Californio class: 

When the house was built. General Moreno owned all the land within a radius of 
forty miles .... It might be asked, perhaps, just how General Moreno owned all 
this land, and the question might not be easy to answer. It was not and could not 
be answered by the US Land Commission, which, after the surrender of California 
undertook to sift and adjust Mexican land titles; and that was the way it had come 
about that the Senora Moreno now called herself a poor woman. Tract after tract, 
her lands had been taken away from her. .. No wonder she believed the 
Americans thieves, and spoke of them as hounds. The people of the US have 



29 

never in the least realized that the taking of possession of California was not only 

a conquering of Mexico, but a conquering of California as well. (Jackson 12) 

The authoritative voice of the omniscient narrator makes clear early in the novel that the 
villains of the romance include Anglo “thieves” and “hounds” who steal land from the 
Morenos “tract by tract,” and US land laws that legitimate such dispossession by favoring 
Anglo squatters. This passage foregrounds the prevalent spatial relations in the novel as a 
battleground between Anglos and Mexicans that excludes Border Indians like the hero 
and heroine, Ramona and Alessandro. 

The author reminds us that competition for land fails to recognize a shared 
victimization and oppression between Californios and Border Indians, both groups 
increasingly marginalized by Anglo domination. Jackson’s intention is to demonstrate the 
dispossession of Indians who are unable to claim land in the US on which to settle. 
Historically, treaties signed by the US government and Mission Indians illustrate Border 
Indians’ dispossession. A treaty with the Luiseno tribe (to which Alessandro belongs in 
Ramnna'^ declared “indigenous lands public domain” ready for Anglo settlement (Haas 
58) thereby ignoring the fact that Natives had inhabited this land centuries. This 
phenomenon is especially evident in Jackson’s depiction of Alessandro’s father’s loss of 
village property in Temecula.^ 

Jackson represents the Moreno ranch in a way that borrows from such historical 
background to accentuate the “us/them” dynamic between the Anglo and Mexican 
communities and to dismiss the property rights of Indians. The absolutist conventions of 
the romance novel favors neatly delineated forces that either help or hinder the romance 
quest. This combination of geography and poetics renders the Moreno ranch as a symbol 
of the Californio^ once-powerful presence in the region; figuratively, the domicile 



30 


forbears Anglo expansion by privileging Mexican heritage exclusively. Jackson 
accomplishes this on one account by personifying the rancho as an icon of Mexican 
defiance to Anglo encroachment. When the US Land Commission builds a road running 
behind Senora Moreno’s home (in stead of in front), she is pleased that the Anglos never 
have the satisfaction of looking at her front door. The house figuratively turns its back on 
US westward expansion: 

Whenever she saw, passing the place, wagons and carriages belong to the hated 
Americans, it gave her a distinct thrill of pleasure to think that the house turned its 
back on them. She would like to always be able to do the same herself; but 
whatever she, by policy or in business, might be forced to do, the old house, at 
any rate, would always keep the attitude of contempt—its face turned away. 
(Jackson 13) 

Even if Senora Moreno is unable to continue resisting Anglo encroachment, the house 
will do so through its “attitude of contempt” toward the westward migrants. In this 
expression of space, the road becomes a synecdoche for the border itself, metaphorically 
placing the Moreno home in Mexican territory. Anglo settlers become wayfarers who 
must travel further to find land on which to settle because they are not welcome in the 
Mexican space that comprises the Moreno estate. This interpretation is reinforced in the 
fact that no Anglos enter the Moreno home at any point in the narrative. In addition, 
Jackson represents the Moreno estate as a place signifying exclusive Mexicanness 
through her inclusion of details of a traditional hacienda conveyed through lengthy 
descriptions of the floor plan and layout. 

The rancho also represents a space that privileges Roman Catholicism. Engaging 
elements of the romance novel that call for clearly articulated and unambiguous 


31 


conventions, Jackson builds the Moreno estate as “one of the last sure strongholds of the 
Catholic faith left in the country” (Jackson 37). Among the many examples of this, the 
Senora has erected enormous white crosses on every hill of her property as a sign that 
“heretics” should convert to Catholicism (Jackson 14). She also fills each room of the 
hacienda with religious statues rescued years ago from the San Luis Rey Mission when it 
was occupied by US troops (Jackson 17). Finally, the matriarch continues practicing El 
Alabado, the sunrise hymn of her ancestors sung by “all devout Mexican families” 
(Jackson 47). Roman Catholicism figures into Jackson’s construction of border spaces by 
affirming the Moreno estate as a space that honors the national religion of Mexico. 

Threatened outside this domestic sphere by a world that condones usurpation of 
Mexican lands, Senora Moreno uses the one domain over which she has control to 
preserve values and practices of Mexican culture that would otherwise be consumed by 
Anglo culture. Her exercise of authority in the home offers an example of hembrismo, 
the female counterpart of machismo that privileges women with power in some Hispanic 
traditions. Jackson’s characterization of the Senora projects her as a strong willed and 
stubborn female figure. She is unafraid of engaging in the battle with men over a division 
of land. Further, she clings tenaciously to fading tendrils of power rooted in this Mexican 
tradition by cultivating a machiavellian and manipulative ability to make people do what 
she wants without them knowing, a classic technique of hembrismo. For instance, the 
Senora makes most of the financial decisions on the estate while making her son, Felipe, 
think that he does (Jackson 11). In one scene, the Senora uses the power of suggestion on 
him to defer sheep shearing several weeks until the arrival of Father Salvierderra. In 
another, the matriarch manipulates Felipe into believing that Ramona is disobedient and 
willful when she tries to learn more about her biological mother. 


32 

Jackson uses hembrismo, again engaging elements of the romance tradition, to 
characterize the Senora as absolutely uncompromising: from the Mexican woman’s 
perspective, the battle for land is a fight for survival between Mexicans and Anglos. The 
more life and land that Anglos take from Senora Moreno, the more passionately she 
identifies with Mexico. The Senora is driven by a litany of losses—the death of her 
husband in battle against Anglos, dwindling acreage on the estate, and the Catholic 
Church’s loss of land—^that cause her to internalize the Mexican/Anglo battle for land. 
Jackson writes, “Through wards, insurrections, revolutions, downfalls, Spanish, Mexican, 
civil, ecclesiastical, her standpoint, her poise, remained the same. She simply grew more 
and more proudly, passionately, a Spaniard and a Moreno; more and more staunchly and 
fiercely a Catholic, and a lover of the Franciscans” (21). 

There are no challenges to Senora Moreno’s domestic sphere of power as long as 
Ramona and Alessandro fit into the symbolism of the home by privileging Spanish 
heritage and Catholic practices. Prior to falling in love, the heroine and hero are 
seemingly ideal occupants because they are devout Roman Catholics. They both speak in 
religious phraseology (“May the saints bless you”), know all of the religious hymns by 
heart (“Beautiful Queen”), and are often portrayed on bent knees praying (Jackson 103, 
49, 126). By highlighting the devotionals and rituals within the Moreno household, the 
author makes her predominantly Protestant US readers aware of the Christian tradition 
they share with Catholics, creating common ground between readers and Indian 
characters. 

Because of their Indian ancestry, however, Ramona and Alessandro are less able 
to conform to the Senora’s staunch adherence to Mexican culture—a loyalty affirmed by 
the Moreno’s pure blood ties to Mexico and Spain. Senora Moreno tries to negate 


33 


Ramona’s mixed blood heritage (half Indian and half Scottish) by ordering her not to 
discuss the origins of her biological parents in a sharp exchange that occurs when 
Ramona is a young child. This suppression of Ramona’s Indianness not only makes her 
feel unloved by Senora Moreno, who repeatedly berates “impure” mixing among races, 
but also causes Ramona to feel like an outsider in the home. She walks softly in the house 
and lowers her eyes subserviently, careful never to challenge the Senora, and Ramona 
offers to clean and sew, roles that position her more as servant than as stepdaughter. All 
are able to maintain the facade of Ramona’s identity as a non-Indian because she can pass 
as white because of her fair-skin and blue-eyes. Jackson makes Ramona “physically 
whitened,” according to literary critic Davis Luis-Brown, as a way to “invite white 
readers’ identification” (827). 

The Senora overlooks Alessandro’s Indian heritage by perceiving him as a noble 
savage rather than base Indian. She does so because of Alessandro’s magnanimous 
conduct that elevates him to the status of gentleman as if he were a member of the upper 
class. Senora Moreno also overlooks his Indian ethnicity because he is useful—^he runs 
the estate in an efficacious manner that increases her material wealth, and he heals her 
son Felipe when ill. Senora Moreno is thrilled by Alessandro’s contributions and pays 
him the ultimate “complements” by exclaiming, “[h]ow the boy makes one forget he is an 
Indian!” and “I never saw an Indian who had such behavior” (Jackson 101, 88). 

All is, given the historical circumstances, relatively well in the Moreno home 
prior to the love affair between Ramona and Alessandro. At that moment, Jackson 
employs those self-same qualities of hembrismo that give Senora Moreno strength of 
purpose against Anglos to depict her as a villainous step-mother toward Indians. She 
forbids Alessandro and Ramon’s love because it makes visible the hero and heroine’s 





34 


Indian ancestry and lower class standing. In Senora Moreno’s perspective, Alessandro 
transforms into a base Indian who threatens the pure Spanish lineage of the Moreno and 
Ortegna families because of his race and class. She admits that she loathes the notion of 
interracial mixing implied by the union of Alessandro and Ramona: “I like not these 
crosses. It is the worst and not the best of each, that remains” (Jackson 30). Almost in 
direct contrast to Senora Moreno’s earlier “complements,” she begins to refer to him in a 
derogatory tone as “the Indian Alessandro” or “that Indian” (Jackson 131,150, 129). 
Additionally, her praise of his gentlemanly behavior changes into a threat to set the dogs 
on the “beggarly Indian,” now a lowly laborer of poor class standing (Jackson 132). Thus 
Jackson sets up the barrier to marriage that is typical of the romance genre. 

The Senora’s hatred of miscegenation changes Ramona’s status in the home: she 
is accepted when her identity is white, yet ousted from the house when her mixed blood 
status is raised due to her love of Alessandro. A pivotal scene involving Ramona’s 
inheritance confirms the virtue of the heroine and the villainy of the Senora as a racist. 
Their argument reflects Jackson’s broader representation of space as racialized along the 
border because of tensions between Anglo and Mexican communities vying for limited 
land resources. Within this framework, the Senora cannot accommodate Ramona’s 
Indian heritage and continue to maintain a pristine Mexican space from which to battle 
Anglos. In the scene, Senora Moreno shows Ramona her inheritance, a dowry of jewels 
left by her biological father. The matriarch assures the girl that she will not receive a 
single pearl if she marries the Indian AJessandro. However, the dowry does not tempt 
virtuous Ramona, who uses the confrontation to find out more information about her real 
parents. Because these queries make more visible her mixed blood ancestry in a space 
privileging pure Mexican identity, Senora Moreno treats Ramona like a pariah in the 


35 


household. Her “alien position” in the home is defined not only in her newly visible 
status as part Indian, but as a member of the lower class (Jackson 155); the jewels had 
represented Ramona’s means to enter the upper class—^but she refused them. Ultimately, 
Ramona and Alessandro flee from the Moreno ranch. 

Ramona and Alessandro enter a world that repeats—in extreme—the pattern of 
space and place that Jackson has heretofore established at the Moreno estate. The 
insurmountable obstacle—Senora Moreno’s refrisal to incorporate them as a couple into 
the hacienda—^that prevents the happiness of the lovers generates the impossible task of 
finding land on which to settle permanently. Their travels lead them to Temecula, San 
Pasquale, Saboba, and the San Jacinto Mountains where, at every stop, Anglo settlers 
force them to a retreat into increasingly remote regions. At these sites, Jackson draws on 
historical background, a mechanism common to the genre of historical romance, to create 
a fictionalized account that confirms the geopoetic representation set forth in the novel. 
Jackson’s rendering of space and use of historical events seek to generate sympathy for 
the disenfranchisement of Indians through the drama of a popular literary form. 

Jackson’s novel continues the themes of Indian disempowerment set forth in the 
Jackson-Kinney Report and Mv Century of Dishonor . Critic John R. Byers, Jr. traces the 
villages in the novel to the Jackson-Kinney Report, written six months before Ramona . 

He confirms that events in the novel are grounded in the author’s governmental study of 
the Mission Indians in southern California. He writes, “Alessandro and Ramona are made 
to represent not simply individuals or even tribes of Indians, but all Indians. In their trials, 
they become the personification of all the unfortunate wards of the government” (344-5). 
In addition to the Jackson-Kinney Report, My Century of Dishonor (wntten three years 
before Ramonal also testifies to the discrimination of existing land laws against Indians. 



36 

That work focuses particularly on “the conflict between Hispanic colonial society and the 
increasing flow of American immigrants into the area,” a theme reflected in the 
Mexican/Anglo division of space in the novel (Dorris x), Ramona thus continues the 
general appeal set forth in Jackson’s earlier non-fiction works; her goal is to raise 
awareness about Indian dispossession. 

Space in Ramona confirms the message that there is no home for Indians on US 
soil. The novel personalizes and dramatizes this larger problem through Ramona and 
Alessandro, refugees in a land they consider home.^ For example, Alessandro is cast as 
an individual victim trying to escape a massive social movement of Anglo migration. In 
this incident, Anglos appropriate Temecula, the village that Alessandro’s father governs 
and, traumatized by the affair, Alessandro’s father dies. Alessandro loses both his father 
and his rightful inheritance as village leader. To further personalize such loss, Jackson 
repeatedly depicts Anglos occupying homes formerly owned by Alessandro. Such an 
expression of space makes literal the author’s larger message that the US is no longer 
home to Indians. In the search to find their own land, Ramona and Alessandro leave 
Temecula. 

They relocate to San Pasquale. Jackson uses this village as a contrast to the 
Moreno estate; it is a space of acceptance, empowerment, faith, and prosperity—^until 
Anglos arrive. In San Pasquale, Ramona does not hide her mixed blood ancestry as 
required in the Moreno household. The Indians acknowledge her ancestry and accept her 
into the community even as a “racially ambiguous” member (Luis-Brown 827). She has 
complete control over her the domestic space of her house, a traditional site of female 
empowerment in the romance novel (Jackson 250). That is to say that Jackson depicts 
the home as a place over which Ramona is fi'eed from the Senora’s domineering 



37 


hembrismo that rendered her powerless. The heroine embraces a new found autonomy 
that takes precedence over material wealth and offers access to a Victorian/late Victorian 
role of “housekeeper” that is esteemed for women. 

Perhaps the most distinguishing feature of Ramona and Alessandro’s home is that 
Jackson represents their bedroom with unmistakable connections to Eve and Adam’s 
bower in the Garden of Eden. Jackson writes, “The Madonna shrine in its bower of green 
leaves, the shelves on the walls, the white-curtained window” coupled with wild 
cucumber plants “which wreathed and re-wreathed,” make the niche “look like a bower” 
(250-3). The site becomes a “shrine for the whole village” (Jackson 250). Representing 
Ramona and Alessandro as symbolic edenic figures reflects Jackson’s repeated efforts to 
appeal to her non-Indian readership. The author posits that an audience might embrace 
and Indian hero and heroine if they are represented as practitioners of Christian traditions 
rather than Native spiritualism. 

Just when Alessandro and Ramona begin to prosper, the Indians are assailed by 
Anglos who want to settle in San Pasquale, as Jackson again incorporates the history of 
the region to depict the usurpation of lands deeded to the San Pasquale Indians. As the 
hero temporarily waivers in the face of displacement, however, Ramona’s unflagging 
optimism gives him the courage to “go out into the world again,” so that they can “find a 
place the Americans do not want” (Jackson 258, 263). Hero and heroine move to 
Saboba. 

Jackson constructs the spaces of Saboba in a way that continues the Mexican- 
Anglo contest for dwindling land resources to the exclusion of Indians. Experiences in 
Saboba illustrate how the Indian couple lives too far from white settlement to benefit 
from medical advances, but too close to Anglos to be free from encroachment. This 


38 


spatial relationship shows that the US government only tenuously supports Alessandro 
and Ramona place in the nation as citizens deserving of full public services. Specifically, 
their child gets ill in Saboba. The Indian Agent doctor refuses to travel sixty miles to 
administer medical care and, ultimately, the baby dies. Added to this tragic 
circumstance, the threat of white encroachment now comes from all sides of the town. 
Anglos upstream plan to divert the water sources from the town; the Ravallo brothers 
(who hold the land deed to the town) sell it to a large company; and “white ranchmen” 
fence off private lands preventing the free running of stock (Jackson 304). With no legal 
protection, the Indians are driven out of their homes, thus repeating the evictions at 
Temecula and San Pasquale. In addition to the death of the lovers’ baby, Jackson further 
points out the genocide experienced by the Temecula Indians, writing that the “Temecula 
Indians had disappeared that was all there was of it” (Jackson 268). The handling of 
space in the novel intimates that such genocide of Indians will be repeated across the 
country. 

Ramona and Alessandro retreat to the isolated San Jacinto Mountains where they 
vow to “hide forever” from Anglos (301). The author writes, “There, at least, they could 
live and die in peace—a poverty-stricken life, and the loneliest of deaths; but they would 
have each other” (304). There are no descriptions of the home, but instead depictions of 
the vegetation and geography of the mountain to convey its isolated locale. These 
naturalist descriptions suggest that the only place available for Ramona and Alessandro is 
in the wilderness. Jackson thus seems to suggest that noble Indians like Ramona and 
Alessandro are forced onto land on which they are destine to die. This message is 
conveyed again through the Christian imagery of Ramona’s feelings when she reaches 
the mountain hideaway: 


39 


From this day, Ramona never knew an instant’s peace or rest until she stood on 
the rim of the refuge valley, high on San Jacinto. Then, gazing around, looking up 
at the lofty pinnacles above, which seemed to pierce the sky, looking down on the 
world—it seemed the whole world, so limitless is stretched away at her feet— 
feeling that infinite unspeakable sense of nearness to Heaven, remoteness from 
earth which comes only on mountain heights, she drew a long breath of delight, 
and cried, “At last! At last, Alessandro! Here we are safe! This is freedom! This is 
joy! (309) 

In contrast to the rendering of space throughout the novel vis-a-vis land that dwindles and 
recedes about the Indians, this passage depicts space as boundless, infinite, and expansive 
on the high mountain plateau. The one place that such space exists for Indians in the 
world, according to Jackson’s vision, is in heaven. That all the Temecula Indians have 
vanished makes sense in a spatial rendition where they are doomed to extinction if Anglo 
expansion continues at pace. In this manner, “ Ramona takes seriously Indians’ struggles 
for rights in its portrayal of the consequences of Anglo expansion for the Indian 
Alessandro and his mestiza lover Ramona” (Luis-Brown 822). Through the death of the 
hero, Jackson reinforces the tragic consequences of failing to reform the unjust treatment 
of Indians. Alessandro, already driven crazy from the life of a refugee, is killed on these 
mountains in a violent exchange of gunfire with an Anglo. 

The death of the hero in the romance is highly significant because it proves the 
point Jackson has advocated over the course of the novel ; there is no US land available 
for Indian settlement. With Alessandro’s death, Jackson radically shifts geographical 
perspectives in the novel by turning to Mexico as Ramona s place of refuge. Felipe 
reappears in the narrative to rescue the now bereft heroine. He declares his love, he 



40 


marries Ramona, and they retreat to Mexico. Felipe becomes the mouthpiece vocalizing 
the shared oppression of Californios and Indians in the end of the novel, a point that his 
mother refused to acknowledge in the opening pages. He is thus a counterpart to the 
Indian characters in that he too feels unwelcome in the US nation. He senses there is no 
place for him as he grows “more and more alone in the country” as “[l]ife under the new 
government grew more and more intolerable to him” (Jackson 359). Crossing the US- 
Mexico border confirms that no more land will be “legally” stolen from the Moreno 

estate vis-a-vis unjust American land laws. 

Cuban writer and nationalist Jose Marti acknowledges such shared victimization 
in labeling Ramona a mestizo to include both Mexican and Indian ancestry. In his 
introduction to his 1888-translation of Ramona. Marti praises the novel for its political 
significance in depicting the discrimination against Indians and Mexicans (10-12). He 
calls Ramona ""nuestra noveld' [our novel] which is a foreshadowing of his similarly 
named, best-known essay, "'Nuestra america" (1891). By claiming “nuestra” Ramona for 
Spanish-speaking America, Marti speaks to a spirit of pan-Americanism in which he 
urges Latin American nations to unite against the North American “giant” that threatens 
to envelop its weaker neighbors to the south (^^Nuestrd' 149-151). This claim reflects on 
Jackson’s depiction of spatial relationships of the division of land within the US to the 
greater American continent. According to Marti, “lospueblos viriles... aman, y solo 
aman, a los pueblos virile^' [strong countries . . . love, and love only, strong countries] 
(translated by Juan de Onis; "'Nuestra" 125). Ramona’s story parallels the history of 
Latin American nations such as Mexico. Just as the US took half of Mexico three 
decades before the novel was written, the American squatters slowly invade (and 
eventually take over) Moreno property. The couple’s move south of the US-Mexico 



41 


border suggests that Mexico offers a place for people of mixed Indian and Hispanic 
origin. Felipe and Ramona’s return to Mexico signifies their desire to unite with fellow 
mestizos, a notion that Ramona heartily endorses for the welfare of her children. In fact, 
Ramona welcomes the move to Mexico so her second-bom (another daughter conceived 
with Alessandro) might be spared the “burden” of race that she “heroically bore” in the 
US (Jackson 359). In Mexico, Ramona’s mestiza daughter shares a common Indian 
heritage with Mexican citizenry, borne from Spanish and Indian progeny, that is 
dissimilar to the ethnic status in the US where socially acknowledged roots are traced to 
EuroAmerican immigration. 

Marti praises Ramona as a political work that calls for reform of existing 
stereotypes of Indians as uncivilized people. He does so by recognizing an inherent 
strength of character in the mestizo race that is different from the Anglo race. Marti calls 
Ramona “to mestiza arrogante” [the arrogant mestiza] implying that she is “the ideal 
subject of the revolutionary interracial movement he calls ‘our mestiza America’” (Luis- 
Brown 814). She is a heroine who, when Alessandro flags in the search for land, pushes 
to new locations in an effort to claim space for her family. Her strength of character 
represents Marti’s concept of a people of mixed race origin who are more civilized than 
the civilized man (“Nuestra” 119-120). His emphasis on the importance of Indian identity 
is thus a significant differentiation between Latin America and North America as he 
suggests that the supposedly “civilized” US look to the noble mestizo as a model of the 
natural man (“M/c5rra” 119-120).® 

Jackson’s construction of space in the novel helped achieve legislative reform of 
unjust property laws governing Indian land at the end of the nineteenth century. It did so 
through a sentimental appeal to the hearts of readers through formula romance and 


42 


historical context that called for reform in a manner similar to Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852). Jackson states, “If I can do one-hundredth part for the Indians 
as Mrs. Stowe did for the Negro, I will be thankful” (Bienstock 151). Jackson further 
claims that she wrote Ramona as a way to “arouse the conscience of the American 
people” to the realization that unless unjust governmental land laws and overt racial 
discrimination are stopped, there is literally and figuratively no future for Indians in the 
burgeoning American nation; they will be driven to extinction (Bienstock 151). 

Ramona’s appeal was successful; it led to the passage of the Dawes Act of 1887 and 
advocated “civilizing” US Indians through property ownership (Dorris xvii). If the 
Indians were responsible for their own land, reasoned Congress, they would more readily 
assimilate into an Anglo capitalistic culture (Spicer 347-8). 

Jackson’s coupling of geography and genre in Ramona spurs legislative reform 
for the treatment of Indians. As a geopoetic representation, it portrays the nascent 
borderlands as including Indians and female land claimants. Other historical romances of 
the epoch, such as The Squatter and the Don, omit such representations because their 
purpose is to call attention to the ways in which US land laws and courts institutionalized 
Anglo oppression against Mexicans and Hispanics in the border zone. Ruiz de Burton’s 
text combines spatial relations and conventions of historical romance that inscribe an 
allegory of US nation building in the marriage of a Mexican heroine and Anglo hero. 

The Squatter and the Don 

Because Ramona (1884) and The Squatter and the Don (1885) were published 
within one year of each other and depict conflicts over land acquisition in southern 
California during the Gilded Age, it is not surprising that Jackson and Ruiz de Burton 
offer similar geopoetic representations of cultural encounter in the region.^ However, 


43 


interpreting the novels as geopoetic representations shows that each of these writers 
expresses those conflicts through space and place differently. Ruiz de Burton’s artistic 
expression of place—primarily at Don Alamar’s ranch, secondarily the city of San 
Diego—is developed through stratifications among Anglos and Mexicans based on 
classism and the US legal system. In addition, The Squatter and the Don sets forth an 
allegory of nation building that is not addressed in Ramona . Ruiz de Burton fashions that 
allegory in a manner that resolves land conflicts and fulfills the lovers’ quest using 
absolutist conventions of historical romance and polarized depictions of space. 

The US legal system in the novel is an important mechanism in Ruiz de Burton’s 
depiction of place, particularly relative to the text’s engagement with history. The 
creation of the US-Mexico border meant that newly designated American land fell under 
the purview of US law. Land titles from Spain and Mexico were generally not recognized 
by US land courts that viewed Mexicans as rightly subjected to the laws of the US, the 
military victor over Mexico in the Mexican American War. Don Mariano Alamar, a 
landed Californio elite, explains: 

How could Mexico have foreseen then that when scarcely half a dozen years 
should have elapsed the trusted conquerors would, 7« Congress Assembled' pass 
laws which were to be retroactive upon the defenseless, helpless, conquered 
people, in order to despoil them? .... There was, and still is, plenty of good 
government land, which anyone can take. But no. The forbidden fruit is sweetest. 
They do not want government land. They want the land of the Spanish people, 
because we ‘have too much, ’ they say. So, to win their votes, the votes of the 
squatters, our representatives in Congress helped to pass laws declaring all lands 
in California open to pre-emption.... (Italics in original; 67) 




44 


Ruiz de Burton depicts space using historical background to represent a battleground 
between an Anglo-elected Congress and disenfranchised Mexicans as “conquered 
people.” Don Alamar notes that a democracy effectively uses the power of its citizens to 
disempowered him; the collective voice of Anglo squatters enacts legislation that 
legalizes and institutionalizes their acquisition of private land, such as property belonging 
to the Don. He thereby reverses the traditional interpretation of a democracy as a form of 
government designed to protect individual rights from tyranny of the majority. 

The court battle between the squatters and Mariano over land and a title that 
suggests a polarization between the squatters and the Don further engages the US legal 
system in a way that shapes the central plot of the text between Anglos and Mexicans. 

The premise of the text is based on US laws and land courts that complements Ruiz de 
Burton’s use of absolutisms associated with the genre of historical romance. The 
author’s use of historical background confirms that the US legal system fijnctions through 
clearly designated parties, defendants and plaintiffs, and it renders an unambiguous 
verdict identifying winners and losers. Even if a decision is appealed or counter-appealed 
repeatedly, as occurs in the Alamar suit, a judge’s decision ultimately produces a 
definitive ruling. Furthermore, women in this era were generally excluded from legal 
battles, sites of male-male negotiation. Ruiz de Burton uses the Alamar court battle to 
designate clear polarities between men supporting or challenging the Don’s land title. 

Ruiz de Burton defines the conflict over private property between Anglos and 
Mexicans through an individual’s status relative to the land as a “squatter” or “settler.” In 
the novel, settlers pay for the land they occupy and squatters do not (Ruiz de Burton 57). 
This distinction has class implications because it posits squatters as members of the lower 
class who either cannot afford to buy land or selfishly refuse to pay for it; the former 



45 


confirms lower class status and the latter represents ungentlemanly behavior of a lower 
class member. In contrast to squatters, settlers are considered members of the upper class 
in the text. This is confirmed by the marriages between several of the Alamar children 
and Anglo settlers. The conflict that complicates the lovers’ quest to marry occurs when 
Dona Josefa Alamar, Mercedes’s mother, refuses to permit a low class squatter from 
marrying her daughter. The Dona incorrectly assumes Clarence is a squatter rather than a 
settler. An altercation between William and Don Mariano also reinforces Dona Josefa’s 
belief that Clarence belongs to a family of lower class squatters. However, Clarence is 
actually a settler because he had secretly purchased the Darrell family plot early in the 
narrative. Clarence’s ambiguous status becomes an obstacle to his marriage. Thus, 
geography and an essential convention of the romance merge in the novel. 

Spatial relations that pit Anglo and Mexican men against one another are 
reinforced by the fact that the Don is a rancher and the Anglos are farmers. This prevents 
any form of compromise between the estranged communities. For example, the squatters 
flatly reject the Don’s proposal that the Anglos Join him raising cattle instead of 
harvesting wheat. One squatter states, “I don’t want any cattle. I ain’t no "vaquero’ to go 
"busquering’ [sic] around and lassoing cattle. I’ll lasso myself; what do I know about 
whirling a lariatT and other adds, “Perhaps you understand vaquering; we don’t (Italics 
in original; Ruiz de Burton 94-5). The author creates an “us/them” mentality that 
delineates the squatters from the Don because the Anglo community has little experience 
with stock (as their tortured Spanish suggests), an economic enterprise historically 
controlled by the local Mexican community. Whether one farms wheat or raises cattle 
makes a difference in the novel as it did historically in 1870s when the local economy of 
southern California was changing from cattle ranching to agriculture-based capitalism. 


46 


The Don mounts a class-based argument to encourage the Anglos to join the 
ranching enterprise, appealing to their class prejudice. He tells them, “You will not have 
to be a vaquero . .. You can hire an Indian boy to do that part,” but the squatters are not 
swayed (Ruiz de Burton 89). They dismiss the Don’s proposal because they recognize 
that US land laws favor squatters’ rights over a Mexican community legally considered a 
“conquered people,” a group with whom they will not join. They dismiss Mariano’s 
proposal as not “practicable” while endorsing “rational” laws passed by Congress.^” 

To complement a plot revolving around litigation, the author introduces a subplot 
in the second half of the novel that briefly turns to San Diego. Attention to this city space 
expands the author’s geographical perspective beyond conflicts between Mexican 
landholders and Anglo squatters in rural regions to include the powerfiil owners of 
monopolies in urban settings. This shift broadens the identification of victims in the novel 
from the Californios as a conquered people to Anglos who are exploited by the robber 
barons of the Gilded Age. The author accomplishes this through a change in narrative 
voice and by foregrounding what she calls “historical fact” (Ruiz de Burton 343). At the 
end of the novel, she directly criticizes the major capitalist invaders of California through 
an omniscient narrator whose voice becomes synonymous with that of the author. In 
addition, Ruiz de Burton indicts the “Big Four,” railroad barons Leland Stanford, Collis 
P. Huntington, Charles Crocker, and Mark Hopkins (Sanchez 27) through an inclusion of 
historical “evidence.” This includes letters and newspaper articles that testify to charges 
of corruption by the Big Four as well as their unbridled power as financial giants. Critics 
Rosaura Sanchez and Beatrice Pita write that “[t]he Big Four will prove to be a 
destructive force ruining the lives of many a farmer and investor. This ruin and 
dispossession of North American citizens mirrors the ruin of the Californios" like 



47 


Mariano (30). The chapter titles alone, “The Sins of Our Legislators” and “Out with the 
Invader,” highlight Ruiz de Burton’s call to action: “It seems now that unless the people 
of California take the law into their own hands, and seize the property of those men [Big 
Four], and confiscate it, to re-imburse the money due the people, the arrogant corporation 
will never pay” (Italics in original; 366). 

Ruiz de Burton completes the romance with a fairytale ending achieved through 
the death of the Mexican male and the reappearance of the Anglo hero. In the novel, 
Mariano dies an early death precipitated by the financial fiasco in San Diego just as 
Clarence returns from self-appointed exile and a bout with typhoid fever. The Anglo 
entrepreneur, who is now worth twelve million dollars garnered fi-om the stock market, 
mining, and other investments, rescues the nearly bankrupt Mexican family through his 
marriage to Susantia. In this way, the author provides a traditional romance ending. 
Clarence’s money assures the Alamars continued membership in the upper class. He 
buys the Alamar ranch, reimburses the family for the dead cattle, and hires Mercedes’s 
brother, Gabriel, to run a new bank in San Francisco. Clarence replaces the Don as the 
financial power in the family and thus, in Ruiz de Burton’s representation of space, an 
Anglo takes possession of the Alamar Ranch. In return, Clarence is afforded a sense of 
respectability—achieved by marrying into one of the established families in the region— 
that his status as nouveau riche would otherwise deny him. 

Ruiz de Burton’s employment of a traditional resolution to the romance combined 
with a re-designation of the Alamar space from Mexican to Anglo ownership is an 
allegory of US nation building. Comparatist Doris Sommer explains the relationship 
between the genre of historical romance and an allegory of nation building positing that 
historical romance emerged in the Americas as a “national novel” in the mid-nineteenth 


48 

century based on the premise that “the country and the novel practically gave birth to one 
another” (12). The national novel functions as an allegory—a narrative in which literal 
characters/events take on symbolic meanings—in which romantic love and political 
interest form an “interlocking . .. relationship between erotics and politics” (Sommer 12, 
42-3). 

Ruiz de Burton employs historical context, an element within this hybrid genre, to 
develop the allegory of nation building. After the Mexican American War, the future of 
the American republic depended on the peaceful settlement of the newly acquired 
territory." In this era, marriages between Mexican women and Anglo men reflect the 
“degree of blending and assimilation” that occurred between elite families from different 
ethnic groups in California (Limerick 231). “These marriage ties encouraged economic 
and commercial relations between Mexicanized Anglos and Hispano/Mexicano elites, 
who together formed networks of cultural, property, and class interests,” explains 
Historian Carlos Velez-Ibanez (59). Ruiz de Burton marks the emergence of a new elite 
class in the burgeoning American nation in the novel by integrating the land wealth of 
Mercedes’s family with business skills of Clarence, a proven entrepreneur. 

Within the allegory of nation building, Ruiz de Burton also redefines space 
through the transfer of title from a Mexican to Anglo man. Ironically this transaction 
involves the self-same land title that the Don defended from Anglo squatters in a legal 
battle throughout most of the novel. The author’s reformulation of land ownership is 
another example of how she draws on history within the genre. In the Gilded Age, 
explains Velez-Ibanez, “Anglos assumed more and more control of land, resources, and 
labor [such that] an inverse relationship between Mexican and Anglo marriage emerged” 
(68). That inverse relationship means that Anglos were growing increasing wealthy while 



49 


the financial resources oi Californios such as Don Alamar were flagging. Furthermore, 
recasting land ownership from Mariano to Clarence confirms a legal transaction 
exclusively among males. US land laws and courts, a space dominated by men, call for an 
absolute male victor in legal battle over land; Alamar ranch is a Mexican space prior to 
the marriage and an Anglo space thereafter. Through the marriage to a Mexican woman, 
Clarence gets the legal title to land that would have otherwise belonged to Mercedes in 
accordance with Mexican law. 

The Squatter in the Don lends itself to allegory based on a literary poetics within 
the genre that includes unambiguous character loyalties and little moral ambiguity. 
Theorist Angus Fletcher explains that all forms of writing demonstrate allegory, but some 
genres are more overt in the way they encode a narrative to make clear a larger message 
(1-23). Romance is such a genre because it polarizes all elements of a narrative around 
the facilitation or inhibition of the lovers’ quest. For example, early in Ruiz de Burton’s 
novel, William Darrel is portrayed unambiguously as obstacle to the marriage of 
Clarence and Mercedes; his tirade against the Don and his role as leader of the squatters 
aligns him against the romance quest. The author’s use of such bivalent poetics are 
salient in her engagement with allegory creating people and spaces that are clearly 
identified; Sanchez and Pita concur, “each family or character represent(s) a particular 
ethnic collectivity, class, subclass, or remnant of a class” (6). As these examples suggest, 
geopoetics is useful, necessary, and inevitable for understanding such allegories 
concerning battles over land. 

In total, Ruiz de Burton’s representations of the space of the Alamar ranch 
exposes the US legal system for its institutionalized discrimination against Mexican 
people and privileging of male-male negotiations. She uses an allegory of nation building 



50 


to criticize the ways in which Mexican people were subsumed into Anglo culture. 
Additionally, her portrayal of the city space of San Diego becomes a direct exhortation to 
readers to reform monopoly capitalism in the new nation. Moreover, Ruiz de Burton 
conveys such criticisms through the popular form of historical romance that might reach 
more readers, particularly women, than non-fictional accounts. 

Writing approximately forty-five years after the publication of Ramona and The 
Squatter and the Don. ^^ Jovita Gonzalez uses geography and genre poetics in Caballero in 
a fashion similar to Jackson and Ruiz de Burton. However, Gonzalez creates this effect 
through an explicit competition among Mexican and Anglo men for patriarchal power. In 
Caballero, that conflict takes place in south Texas along the newly created US-Mexico 
border between 1846 and 1848, the years spanning the Mexican American War. 
Caballero: A Historical Novel 

The conventions of romance and the history of the Texas region appear in 
Caballero’s depiction of the Mendoza y Soria family hacienda as a zone contested via 
us/Mexico military conflict. In this zone, a Mexican caudillo fights to claim land as a 
way to shore up a failing patriarchal authority that posits place and people as either 
Mexican or Anglo. This sharp delineation of space resembles the geopolitical border 
itself, with its militarized space, in the course of the novel. The author’s artistic 
expression of space in the novel allegorizes cultural clash in the form of male-male 
struggles for control of territory and an exchange of patriarchal power. The union of 
hero and heroine appears, in Gonzalez’s text, as an allegory of US nation building, much 
like that of Ruiz de Burton. As do Jackson and Ruiz de Burton, Gonzalez fashions the 
Anglo/Mexican competition for control of land as the central conflict that prevents the 
union of lovers from different ethnic backgrounds—heroine Susanita Mendoza, the 




51 

Mexican daughter of Don Santiago and hero Robert Warrener, a lieutenant in the US 
Army. 

The book opens with Gonzalez’s fictional “Forward” that narrates the migration 
of Santiago’s family to the outlying regions of Old Spain (what is now Texas) in the mid¬ 
eighteenth century. The tone glorifies the family as valiant, independent settlers, who 
migrate north for the worthy purpose of preserving their heritage. Santiago’s great 
grandfather, Don Jose Ramon de Mendoza y Robles, builds “Rancho La Palma de Cristo” 
after envisioning the great hacienda from a bluff: “Here he would create a new empire, 
and his place the finest of them all. Here he could rear his family and keep the old ways 
and traditions, safely away from the perfidious influence of Mexico City and the 
infiltration of foreign doctrines; not only for himself but for generations to come” 
(Gonzalez, xxxvi). For generations, the Mendoza family passes responsibility for the 
hacienda—for preserving their way of life—^through a patriarchal system that privileges 
the eldest son. When Santiago inherits Rancho La Palma, his mother tells him to be 
worthy of the “doctrine of traditionalism” that it stands for: “religion, gentility, family 
rank, patriarchism” (21). These short passages are meant to show that Santiago is a man 
who inherits much: the rancho as a symbol of the “old ways and traditions”; a social 
structure that makes him the most powerful member of the family; and responsibility for 
passing on the hacienda to future generations. Santiago’s power is derived from the 
tradition of the rural caudillo : “the strongmen, the new condottieri, the chiefl;ains, the 
masters of‘lives and haciendas,’ the inheritors of the Spanish and Moorish archetype of 
the warrior” (Italic in original; Krauze 87). 

Following the “Forward,” the novel begins with the Mendoza family facing the 
encroachment of Anglo settlers in a region that they have inhabited without question and 



52 


ruled with exclusive privilege for over one hundred years. As Santiago guards himself 
and his family against the “infiltration” of North American culture, he clings tenaciously 
to Mexican customs. Gonzalez uses historical context to portray the ways that 
encroaching Anglo settlers challenge Santiago’s authority by claiming control of the 
region through military conquest. She employs the military conflict of 1846-48, years that 
span the novel, to foreground the representation of domestic space as stratified between 
the Anglo and Mexican communities. She sets Rancho La Palma between the Nueces 
River and the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo, territory that is claimed by both the US and 
Mexican governments.^'* The author repeatedly depicts the borderlands as a zone of 
conflict that becomes increasingly violent over the location of the “bloody border” (11, 

22, 54, 124, 135, 307, 331). 

Even as Anglos squatters try to settle on his ranch, US laws require him to register 
his land, and the US army takes control of Matamoros, Santiago refuses to acknowledge 
that such conflicts signal change in the once-isolated borderlands. Ignoring such signs of 
change, he heeds the advice of his father to build “a wall between them and what is 
yours” (Gonzalez 19). Santiago does this on a literal level; he sequesters his family 
within the thick walls of the hacienda and away from outsiders. Santiago’s “policy of 
isolation” is further illustrated through Gonzalez’s use of the architectural spaces of 
Rancho La Palma (112). The walls and a palm tree in particular show the hacienda to be a 
Mexican space where the caudillo tries to protect his power and possessions from 
Anglos. This policy prevents his daughters from interacting with the US military men 
stationed in Matamoros; thus, it inhibits the romance quest of hero and heroine, Robert 


and Susanita. 


53 

In Gonzalez’s configuration of space, Santiago internalizes the significance of the 
hacienda as a Mexican place; his internal embrace of external spatial dynamics shapes the 
loyalties and allegiances in the novel in such a way that Santiago believes an acceptance 
of any thing or one Anglo as a rejection of himself and his authority. The author writes, 
“Serene in the belief that his heritage of conquest was a sort of superbravery which he 
must, inevitably, conquer again, he built a wall against the Americans—against 
everything American—and excluded himself within it” (23). Border critic Leticia Magda 
Garza-Falcon summarizes his actions in Gente Decente: A Borderlands Response to the 
Rhetoric of Dominance (1998): “Don Santiago had taken on the burden and obligation of 
upholding the old ways at the cost of isolating himself from the important events in the 
lives of the remaining members of his family” (120). 

Not only does he sequester himself and his family within the walls of the 
hacienda, Santiago also internalizes his role as a pillar of the traditional Mexican 
community. The author achieves this through overt symbolization in which both Santiago 
and the hacienda represent stalwart Mexican traditionalism: 

Don Santiago put his hands against the rough bark of the palm tree, and it felt 
strong against his back, like a firm pillar, for it was a symbol. There could be no 
compromise, neither for himself nor for those over whom he was master. What he 
had was his and his it would remain. Only so could the good things be preserved. 
He would have to hate the Americanos, for they were evil. (Gonzalez 21) 
According to Gronzalez, Santiago is uncompromising in his determination to preserve 
Mexican values and repel Anglo culture. Use of architectural space combined with 
Santiago’s characterization as unyielding, a depiction consistent with the absolutisms in 
historical romance, creates the rancho as distinctly Mexican. 



54 


Whereas Gonzalez renders Rancho La Palma a space controlled by the Don, she 
represents Matamoros and the outlying areas as lawless, wild regions. Matamoros, the 
location of Santiago’s winter home, is a site that the US military has acquired in its 
military fight with Mexico. Matamoros, amid the presence of so many soldiers, is a 
violent zone where men aggressively compete with each other for control, as illustrated 
by the Texas Rangers’ pillaging the town, destroying much Mexican property. Such 
violence reveals the Rangers’ hatred of Mexican power in the region. However, they do 
not defile the chapel even though it was built by the original Spanish inhabitants. 
Furthermore, the Rangers’ spare the bar and brothel. This represents their value of such 
institutions as neutral space. The secular spaces they spare, where men from different 
ethnic backgrounds share in activities that subordinate women, such as prostitution, 
contrast sharply with the suggestion of a shared respect for sacred spaces. Beyond 
Matamoros and Rancho La Palma, Gonzalez configures the outlying countryside as a 
chaotic wild zone where highway robbers and Indians, portrayed as barbaric savages, 
attack indiscriminately for material gain. Such a construction of space inhibits the 
romance quest to unite the lovers, for the latter operate in distinct worlds with little 
intermixing among ethnic groups and traversing them is difficult and dangerous. 

Susanita is sequestered at the rancho and Robert inhabits Matamoros. Their potential for 
interaction seems impossible. 

Yet Gonzalez unites hero and heroine following an act that disrupts male-male 
competition for control of space via Susanita’s transgression of women’s roles. In this 
scene, Susanita rides a horse to Matamoros in order to plead to US troops to spare 
Alvaro, who has joined Mexican guerrillas fighting the US army. While she considers 
the act a brave one, Santiago interprets the act as ignoble. Gonzalez writes, “Don 



55 


Santiago would have preferred his son to be hanged rather than have his daughter do 
what Susanita had done, even though her motive was completely unselfish” (280). 
Susanita’s act challenges male-male relations in the novel by intervening in the 
competition between Mexicans and Anglos men for power. Ultimately, she leaves the 
family, marries Robert, and lives in Matamoros estranged from her family. Shortly 
thereafter, her sister Angela also marries an Anglo, Alfred “Red” McLane. 

In comparing Santiago and Red, the author shows how Anglos are empowered 
and Mexicans disempowered over the course of the novel. She does so by revealing 
Anglo primacy based on accomplishment rather than sangre pura, a changing social 
dynamic that contributes to Red’s political success and Santiago’s gradual 
disempowerment. The Anglo ideal of male power based on achievement represents an 
affront to Santiago because is it negates the importance of sangre limpia, blood lines that 
are theoretically imbued with superior human qualities and that are reflection of God’s 
favor. Compared to Santiago who has inherited his wealth and position. Red is a self- 
made man. He was bom into a poor family but had worked his way to political and 
financial success by the time he marries Angela. According to Gonzalez, Red is “a tme 
Texan ... a certain breed of men different from any other” (71). The emphasis on 
“breed” in this passage contrasts with Santiago’s pure Spanish consanguinity and 
aristocratic ancestry, a source of power for the Mexican patriarch that defines male 
authority by birth rather than achievement. The quote also connects Red with future 
leadership of the nascent nation. In contrast to Santiago’s source of power in the past. 
Red’s proven abilities suggest that he will earn his place as the next governor of Texas 
confirming that his power within the US political and socio-economic stmcture is tied to 




56 

the success of the nation. In contrast, the Mexican caudillo has no future in the American 
nation. 

Shortly after the marriages of the Anglo men to Mexican women in the closing 
chapters of the novel, Gonzalez narrates the end of the Mexican American War and the 
death of Santiago and Alvaro, markers that signify a shift in patriarchal power from the 
Mexican to Anglo communities at the moment when the contested territory between the 
Nueces River and Rio Grande—the site of Rancho La Palma—is declared officially US 
territory. Alvaro’s death literally takes place on the newly created US-Mexico border 
when he attacks and is killed by an Anglo soldier in the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo, “the river 
that was so mighty it cleft a nation in two” (Gonzalez 304). His death means that there is 
no heir to Rancho La Palma (Santiago has banished his other son, Luis Gonzaga) and 
thereby represents an irrevocable break in the chain ofsangre pura. Similarly, the newly 
ratified Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo confirms that Rancho La Palma is in US territory, 
and therefore it will be impossible for its Mexican master to maintain the “doctrine of 
traditionalism” espoused by the Mendoza ancestors. Santiago’s death also signifies a 
transfer of patriarchal power to Anglo men. He dies while standing on the high bluff of 
Rancho La Palma and Robert discovers his body. Atop the bluff is the location where 
Santiago’s forefather first envisioned the rancho, and it is a place where Santiago 
confirms that he is lord of all he surveys. He has often returned to the high bluff to 
exclaim “mine, mine” over everything from the peons who work for him to the acreage of 
the hacienda his exclusive property (Gonzalez 33).^^ 

Gonzalez’s geopoetic representation of cultural conflict between Santiago and the 
encroaching Anglo community articulates an allegory of US nation building much like 
that in The Squatter and the Don in which “the romantic affair needs the nation, and the 


57 


erotic fhistrations are challenges to national development” (Sommer 50). Just as Ruiz de 
Burton draws on a historical background that records the integration of Mexican women 
and Anglo men, Gonzalez employs a similar mechanism. Montejano explains the history 
of integration through marriage among Mexicans and Anglos in Texas; “For individual 
families of the Mexican elite, intermarriage was a convenient way of containing the 
effects of Anglo military victory on their status, authority, and class position. For the 
ambitious Anglo merchant and soldier with little capital, it was an easy way of acquiring 
land” (34-5). In the novel, the dual marriages of Susanita/Robert and Angela/Red in 
Caballero are an allegory in which land controlled by a Mexican patriarch is finally won 
by Anglos and codified through the official peace treaty of the Mexican American War. 

Also within the allegory, the Anglo male must replace Santiago because there is 
no place for a Mexican caudillo in a newly forming US nation. Garza-Falcon explains; 
“In the end, the battle to preserve the old ways and the autonomy of the region is of 
course lost. The novel in many ways presents a tragic tale of the decay of an old regime, 
either because it could not compromise or because it does not compromise and make 
concessions” (Italics in original; 120). In the spatial dimensions of the allegory, 
Santiago’s death means that there is no place for the Mexican male in newly-designated 
US territory or within the burgeoning US power structure. 

While Gonzalez makes it clear that there is no future for the caudillo, she also 
assures the reader that there is a prosperous future for the newly weds. For example, 
Robert is presently a penniless soldier, but his purchase of land around Fort Brown 
guarantees him a future of great wealth as Brownsville develops into a thriving trade 
center. Red, already a wealthy man, is also assured of success in the US political system 
in part due to his wife’s charity work in which she becomes the “Angel of Good” to both 



58 


the Anglo and Mexican communities in San Antonio. Finally, both Susanita and 
Angelita give birth. Their babys’ mixed heritage marks a figurative reconciliation 
between Mexicans and Anglos and signifies the end of an era where the US and Mexico 
fought in military battle for control of borderland territory. 

Analysis of artistic expressions of place and space in Ramona, The Squatter and 
the Don , and Caballero demonstrates the value of geopoetics as a model for 
understanding cultural conflicts over the division of land as Mexicans, Anglos, and 
Border Indians fight to claim space in the newly formed US-Mexico borderlands 
following the Mexican American War of 1846-48. In the subsequent chapter, I turn from 
events set the second half of the nineteenth century to literature addressing the Mexican 
Revolution of 1910-17. The central conflicts in these novels involves Anglo characters 
traveling in and around Mexico. These authors show how their Anglo protagonists do 
not perceive their new environs in Mexico like the native inhabitants. Such doubled 
viewpoints on spatial depictions combined with elements of travel writing and formulaics 
of the Western novel create a body of fiction that replicates and responds to, a US colonial 
legacy in Mexico. 



NOTES 


^ I have selected Ramona. The Squatter and the Don, and Ramona for several reasons. 
First, these works represent the nascent borderlands from different perspectives—Jackson 
is Anglo, Ruiz de Burton is Mexican, and Gonzalez is Hispanic. In addition, these novels 
have not received the critical attention they deserve because of their recent “recovery” or 
“rediscovery.” Caballero was published by Texas A&M Press in 1996, having been 
unearthed from the author’s family archives by Mexican American scholars, Jose Limon 
and Maria Cotera. Similarly, the Recovering the US Hispanic Literary Heritage Project 
re-issued The Squatter and the Don as recently as 1997. 

^ In this chapter, I refer repeatedly to absolutist elements of the genre of historical 
romance. These conventions originate in medieval romance concerned with “knightly 
adventure, courtly love, and chivalric ideals” (“Romance” 345). By the seventeenth 
century, romance narratives perpetuated a morally unambiguous world and generally 
involved the varying motifs of journey, quest, rescue, and the eventual union of lovers. 
Conflicts preventing lovers’ “wish-fulfillment” pit hero verses enemy, a polarity around 
which all characters gravitate in a world devoid of moral ambiguity (Frye 186). 
“Characters tend to be either for or against the quest” to unify hero and heroine such that 
those who assist the lovers’ wish-fiilfillment are heroic and those who inhibit it are 
villainous in a tale that (Frye 195). The absolutist world of romance emerged in the form 
of sentimental novels in Mexico from 1810 to 1869 (Martin 546). Out of this period come 
works like Ignacio Altamirano’s El Zarco: episodio de la vida mexicana en 1861-63 . [El 
Zarco: Episodes of Mexican Life in 1861-18631 (1901) that depict the melodramatic love 
affair of Manuela and El Zarco in a setting with well-aligned forces such as highway 


bandits verses honorable citizens and a selfish, powerful sister against her meeker, nobler 
sibling. Two other novels demonstrating the genre of romance and salient to a study of 
Mexico include William Montgomery Bird’s The Infidel, o r The Fall of Mexico (1835) 
and Calavar: Or The Knight of the Conquest: A Romance of Mexico (1837). For more 
information on historical romance, see Northrop Frye’s “The Mythos of Summer: 
Romance,” in Anatomy of Criticism (1957T Janice Radwav’s Reading the Romance ; 
Women. Patriarchy, and Popular Literature (1984), Verity Smith’s Enc yclopedi a of Latjn 
American Literature (1997), The Encyclopedia of the Novel (1998), The Dictionary of 
Concepts in Literary Criticism and Theory (1992), The Bedford Glossary of Critical 
T Jterarv Terms (1997), and The Feminist Companion to Literature in English (1990). 

^ The tradition of the historical novel in Mexico is shared among both the historical and 
costumbrista narratives that emerged as popular forms in the nineteenth century. The 
former is defined by its proclivity toward overt political messages and the later defined 
by its depiction of the common place in works like Fernandez de Lizardi’s El Periquillo 
Samiento [The Itching Parrot (1816)]. 

"*The Civil War radically divided the US nation in the second half of the nineteenth 
century. Such polarization is similar (though less well known) to the sentiments that 
divided the Mexican inhabitants in the borderlands and Anglo settlers who migrated to 
the region. Of the novels that I address in this chapter, only The Squatte r and the Don 
addresses the Civil War. Ruiz de Burton does so in the final paragraph of the novel in a 
way that groups the oppression experienced by Californios with that of Southern 
Plantation owners. She he calls for a “Redeemer who will emancipate the white slaves of 
California” (343-4). For more information, see Luis-Brown’s article, “’White Slaves’ and 


the ‘Arrogant Mestiza’: Reconfiguring Whiteness in The Squatter and the Don and 


Ramona .” 

^ See the following sources for biographical information on Jackson; Ruth Odell’s Helen 
Hunt Jackson (1939), Evelyn Bannin’s Helen Hunt Jackson (1973), the 1987-edition of 
the Western Writers Series (19871. Valerie Sherer Mathes’s Helen Hunt Jackson and Her 
Indian Reform Legacy (1990), and volumes 42 and 47 of the Dictionary of Literary 
Biography. 

^ Following the Mexican American War of 1846-8, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo 
created the existing US-Mexico border, an absolute division of national territory between 
the US and Mexico that, in theory, left no terrain in ambiguous or questionable ownership 
status. Subsequent land laws strove to accomplish the same effect—^to establish clear title 
and rightful ownership to land—and resulted in creating a confrontational and 
competitive environment between Anglos and Mexicans. In Conquests and Historical 
Identities in California. 1769-1936 (1995), historian Lisbeth Haas explains that the Treaty 
of Guadalupe HSdalgo required Mexicans to declare US or Mexican citizenship and either 
remain in the US or relocate in Mexico within one year. The Treaty also claimed to 
recognize lands grants made by the Spanish Crown and Mexican government, but US 
land laws ratified thereafter assumed such titles were illegitimate unless proven otherwise 
(57). For example, the Land Act of 1851 required Spanish and Mexican property owners 
like the Morenos to defend their land titles by submitting their land grants to the US Land 
Commission (Haas 77). Meanwhile, Anglo squatters could legally encroach upon 
Californios' private property under the law while the claim was under review, a process 
that averages seventeen years and nearly bankrupts Senora Moreno (Haas 64). Few US 



courts allowed Californios to keep their land; those that upheld Spanish or Mexican 
grants often bankrupt the Mexican estates due to the cost of prolonged litigation. Thus, 
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and subsequent US land laws created an antagonistic 
relationship between Mexicans and Anglos over the division of land in the nascent 
borderlands. 

The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo did not offer US citizenship to Indians but, 
instead, treaty language labeled them “savage tribes” (Haas 57). The US government 
assumed responsibility for “policing and controlling those tribes, preventing their raids 
into Mexico and their warring against citizens of the US,” a strong provision of the peace 
treaty that the Mexican government conceded as the only benefit they gleaned from it 
(Haas 57). The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo also posits that all Indian lands on 
conquered Mexican territory now belong to the US government, the “sole and absolute 
sovereign” owners of the land formerly belonging to the conquered “republic of Mexico” 
(Haas 58-9). See Haas’s Conquests and Historical Identities in California (1995) for a 
detailed overview on US government policy toward Indian land in the nineteenth century 
(especially pages 56-63) and Spicer’s Cycles of Conquest (1981) for a history of the 
Spanish Crown’s program of “civilization” of Indians through mission activity 
(especially pages 288-298). 

’ In broad, theoretical terms, the concept of “home” implies a place of origins. It is a site 
with a known past or shared, communal history of ancestor’s relationships to the land. It 
may also be a site with a fijture; home is where one is settled and expects to stay 
permanently. 


* According to Marti, the Indian represents the “natural man” while the Hispanic carries 
the burden of culture and civilization. In his understanding of mestizaje, the Indian is 
mute, devoid of language, but present corporeally. 

^ Ruiz de Burton was bom in Mexico and became an American citizen when Baja 
California signed articles of capitulation that granted US citizenship to Mexicans who 
agreed to travel north to Alta California. Although she is technically American, Ruiz de 
Burton identified as a Mexican most of her life according to various biographical sources. 
Also, the novel reflects Ruiz de Burton’s first hand experience battling for land against 
Anglo squatters and robber barons, as evidenced by her financially draining legal battles 
to retain ownership of property that she inherited. Rancho Jamul in Baja California and 
Rancho Ensenada in Alta California. For biographical information, see Kathleen 
Crawford’s “Maria Amparo Ruiz de Burton: The General’s Lady” as well as Rosaura 
Sanchez’s and Beatrice Pita’s introduction to the 1997-edition of the novel. 

Those laws include the No Fence Law that gives squatters the right to shoot cattle that 
wander into their fields, a practice that nearly depletes the entire Alamar herd, as well as 
the Homestead Acts of 1851 and 1862 that permitted squatters to obtain land by 
homesteading on 160 acres of public or private land (even if in litigation) for five years as 
long as they were US citizens (Zinn 174). These laws also force land grant holders like 
the Don to pay property taxes on land used by squatters (who were not required to pay 
him rent for the land they occupied). 

" For years the Californios had a land monopoly and were able to manipulate the local 
economy to favor the cattle businesses (Gonzalez, “Romancing” 31). With the 
encroachment of Anglos, however, Californios lost control of the region because Anglos 


voted for policies that gave advantage to squatter and settler rights. Literary critic John 
Gonzalez summarizes; “the pauperization and proletarianization of the Californio 
population .. . occurred over a period of three or more decades (approximately 1846- 
1881) during which the relative political and economic strength of the landed Californio 
elite ebbed away” (32). For an detailed overview of the status of the borderlands 
following the Mexican American War and the role of American nation building therein, 
see Montejano’s Anglos and Mexicans in the Making of Texas. 1836-1996 (1987), 
especially “Part I: Incorporation.” 

In “Mexicans, Foundational Fictions, and the US; Caballero. A Late Border Romance,” 
Limon posits that the novel simply could not have been written earlier than the 1930s 
because “Had it been published then, Caballero would have asked a nineteenth-century 
reader to view its happy marriages as a plausible projection of the future based on 
contemporary social relations” (346-7). More specifically, he argues that the novel could 
not have been published in the time of its setting (1846-8) due to the acrimonious and 
racially charged social climate that characterized the Mexican and Anglo communities in 
South Texas. Limon continues; “But between 1920 and 1945, Caballero could and did 
occur; indeed, it became viable as a foundational fiction for resolving Anglo-Mexican 
conflict” (“Mexicans” 347). Sadly, Gonzalez and Eimer never saw Caballero published in 
their lifetime; Macmillan, Houghton-Mifflin, and Bobbs-Merrill rejected the offer to 
publish it (Limon, “Introduction” xix). Texas A&M University Press published Caballero 
in 1996 and Arte Publico Press working in conjunction with the project known as 
“Recovering the US Hispanic Literary Heritage” published Dew on the Thom in 1997. 


I refer to the author of Caballero as Gonzalez solely rather than as both Gonzalez and 


Eve Elmer (alias “Eve Raleigh”) because the original correspondence between the two 
women suggests that Elmer’s role primarily included typing the final manuscript and 
sending it to publishers (“Introduction” xviii-xxi). For more information on the 
“recovery” of the manuscript by Limon and Cotera, its circumstances of publication and 
Gonzalez’s biography, see the introduction to the text and Leticia Garza-Falcon’s 
chapter, “The Historical Fiction of Jovita Gonzalez,” and appendix, “Biographical 
Outline of Jovita Gonzalez’s Life” in Gente Decente: A Borderlands Response to the 
Rhetoric of Dominance (1998). 

According to Howard Zinn’s The People’s History of the US, the US and Mexican 
governments did not agree on Texas’s southern border at the time of annexation in 1845 
(113-5). Prior to this time, both nations informally recognized the Nueces River as the 
dividing line between the US and Mexico. After the US annexed Texas, President Polk 
relocated the border approximately 150 miles south at the Rio Grande/Rio Bravo and 
deployed troops to the region to police and protect US soil. The Mexican government, 
however, maintained that the border resided in its historical place at the Nueces River 
(Zinn 113-4). 

When Santiago’s son, Luis Gonzaga, demonstrates disloyalty to the Don by refusing to 
stay on the ranch, Santiago banishes him in an act designed to expel anything “foreign” to 
the Mexican estate. However, Luis Gonzaga refuses to be defined by the space of the 
hacienda. He thinks of himself and Captain Devlin as “neither Mexican nor Anglo Saxon 
but artists” and leaves Rancho La Palma permanently (Gonzalez 156). In return, the Don 
thinks of his son as a traitor and disinherits him. Because Santiago forces his children to 



chose between himself and Anglos, his children feel like traitors when they buy into his 
manichean construction of “us/them.” When Susanita sends a note and snip of hair to 
Robert, for instance, she calls herself a traitor to her father because she has not kept her 
promise to him (Gonzalez 114). Similarly, Luis Gonzaga calls himself a traitor to his 
father and country when he spends time drawing with the Anglo artist. Captain Devlin. 
Even Santiago thinks himself a traitor to his people when he considers Red’s offer to 
become a magistrate in the new political order, a leadership position among the local 
hidalgos (Gonzalez 181). In addition, the author frequently ascribes the epithet of traitor 
to General Santa Anna in the novel because of the military failures and political 
concessions he makes with the American government (Gonzalez 124, 203). 

According to a facsimile of the original title page of the manuscript, the authors 
proposed various titles for the novel to include “Mine, Mine!” (Gonzalez n.p.). Santiago 
echoes this mantra at the end of the novel when Alvaro dies. Holding his dead son in his 
arms, he tells a Texas Ranger coldly, “Will you go, and leave me with—what is mine?” 
(Gonzalez 307). 

For additional information on allegory, see James Clifford’s “On Ethnographic 
Allegory” in Writing Culture (1986). 




CHAPTER 2 


MOVING IN SPACE: SOUTHERN JOURNEYS OF TRANSFORMATION 

US colonialism in Mexico becomes increasingly evident in border writing set 
around the time of the Mexican Revolution of 1910-17, such as Harriet Doerr’s Stones 
for Ibarra (1978), Carlos Fuentes’s Old Gringo \Grinso vieid \ (1985), and Cormac 
McCarthy’s All the Pretty Horses (19921. These works emerge from literary traditions of 
travel writing and the Western novel in which white English-speaking travelers, whether 
exploratrices sociales or American cowboys, impose ethnocentric values on Mexico and 
Mexicans. Fuentes, Doerr, and McCarthy weight their Anglo characters with a colonial 
sensibility that precludes them from acknowledging that space and place in Mexico is 
conceived differently depending on one’s cultural viewpoint. This is reinforced as the 
travelers try to reshape their environs in Mexico according to Anglo values thereby 
perpetuating a US colonial legacy. Stones for Ibarra and All the Pretty Horses , works by 
US writers, are apologies for such a colonial mindset, while Old Gringo , a text by a 
Mexican author, directly challenges colonialism. Examining Doerr’s, Fuentes’s, and 
McCarthy’s geopoetic constructions also reveals how Anglo intervention is nuanced by 
gender—men’s roles are more active and violent than women’s.^ 

Inscription of Mexican territory and people by outsiders stretches through its 
history as a colony, empire, and emergent nation. Travel writing begins as early as Fray 
Marcos de Niza’s accounts of the search for the Seven Cities of Gold in New Spain, 
extends to Richard Henry Dana’s record of life among the Spanish hidalgos of Old 
California and to John Lloyd Stephen’s diary-based journalism recounting his 
archeological “discoveries” in the Yucatan and Chiapas. As these examples suggest. 




68 

“local color” representations by foreign writers range widely in form. What they hold in 
common is that all such representations of unfamiliar peoples and places are unavoidably 
filtered through travelers’ cultural viewpoints. These attempts to catch the “essence” of a 
place or people depend on realist portraits that are based on visual observation and first 
hand experience of Western travel-narrators (Clifford 3-13). European and Anglo 
literature of travel includes Western perspectives on native inhabitants and local places 
that are inextricably intertwined with ideologies of colonialism and imperialism. In recent 
decades, this notion has been made clear by post-colonial and cultural theorists, such as 
Edward Said and Mary Louise Pratt.^ 

In Oriftritaligm (1978), Said argues that Eurocentric representations of non-native 
peoples and places that occurs in travel writing as well as in novels results in an 
exoticization of other people, a notion he illustrates using through the traditional Western 
perspective of the Orient as a strange and mysterious place. The power of travel writing is 
that it authorizes an interpretation of other cultures “describing it, teaching it, settling it, 
ruling over it: in short, Orientalism as a Western style for dominating, restructuring, and 
having authority over the Orient” (Said 873). Similarly, Pratt argues in Imperial Eye s: 
Travel Writing and Transculturation (19951 that various forms of travel writing produce 
images of non-European people and places for readers who have never traveled beyond 
Europe (5). European travel writing of the nineteenth century in particular espouses an 
ideology that endorses capitalist expansion and benefits colonial powers on a material 
and moral level. Western writers depict themselves, others, and fictional characters 
gaining material wealth through the exploitation of natural and human resources in Latin 
America while occupying the moral “high ground” associated with the belief that they are 
“civilizing” primitive cultures (Pratt l-II). 


69 


Like European travel writing in the nineteenth century, Anglo chronicles of the 
US-Mexico border region of the same period contain colonial messages. ^ Early Anglo 
border writers describe Mexico and Mexicans as inferior subjects. They use narrative 
techniques that are molded in the crucible of warring nations and depict the need to 
survive in disputed frontier territory, or the desire to open new markets. For instance, 
soldiers such as Colonel George Turnbull Davis or Private Samuel Chamberlain, 
frontiersmen like George Wilkin’s Kendall or J. Ross Browne, and tradesmen like 
George W.B. Evens or Richard Dana justify racism, thievery, and murder as the cost 
required to impose an Anglo way of life (Robinson, Mexico 33-68). “However naive and 
ethnocentric, the early accounts of Mexico written by Americans mark the opening phase 
of a lasting cultural involvement,” writes early theorist of the borderlands, Cecil 
Robinson; “[a]n attitude toward Mexico frequently expressed by these writers and one 
with which we are still familiar in America’s response to alien cultures is one of 
contempt” (Mexico 33). 

Literary traditions of European and Anglo travel writing are marked by authors’ 
use of a variety of techniques that includes erasing the presence of natives from the text 
en toto or registering their brief appearance only in service to Anglo travelers; 
objectifying local inhabitants through a singular, limited gaze that negates how natives 
perceive outsiders; and justifying intervention or imposition of ethnocentric values on a 
host people through expressions of Manifest Destiny. Doerr and Fuentes replicate and 
refiite these techniques in their novels as a means of critiquing colonial ideology. Added 
to such poetics, Doerr and Fuentes use spatial configurations to demonstrate how US 
travelers achieve moments of realization of complicity in a colonial drama. How Anglo 
protagonists see different sites in Mexico exposes rather than veils ethnocentrism. 



70 

Set during an intense epoch of migration in the US-Mexican borderlands, Stones 
for Ibarra and Old Grineo emerge from a tradition of travel writing generated in an era 
when Anglo and English authors, such as Jack London, John Reed, Katherine Anne 
Porter, Ambrose Bierce, Graham Greene, Malcolm Lowry, and D.H. Lawrence were 
flocking south to witness the social consequences of the Mexican Revolution. Taking up 
similar travel themes in their works, Doerr and Fuentes bring to their travel based novels 
the effect of initial contact and eventual immersion in Mexico, a country previously 
inscribed in colonialist terms. While McCarthy’s novel primarily engages and responds to 
the Western novel rather than travel writing, it also illustrates how cross-border 
encounters produce a sophisticated consciousness of the impact of colonial ideology. The 
complexity of all three authors’ characterizations and critical stance toward US attitudes 
of political and cultural superiority are most effectively understood by again examining 
how landscape and language shape the borderlands experience during and after a political 
crisis that challenges the power structures of Mexico’s ruling elite.'* 

Stones for Ibarra 

Stones for Ibarra begins with the travels of Sara and Richard Everton, two fortyish 
Americans, driving from San Francisco to Ibarra. The Anglos plan to reopen Richard’s 
grandfather’s copper mine and to refurbish his adobe home, both abandoned after the 
Mexican Revolution of 1910.^ To describe the Evertons’s impressions of the Mexican 
landscape, the author engages elements of nineteenth-century travel writing typified by 
the work of German adventurer Alexander von Humboldt. In View of Nature (1808), 
Views of the Cordilleras (1810) and Personal Narrative (1814), he represents South 
America collectively as a “non-human world” (Pratt 125). These travel chronicles erase 
the native inhabitants so that “the only ‘person’ mentioned in these melancholy and 


71 

sacred solitudes’ is the hypothetical and invisible European traveler himself’ (Pratt 125). 
Such blindness to native inhabitants illustrates a colonial ideology set forth in 
Humboldt’s writing that is complimented by another feature of his work: when he does 
briefly describe a local inhabitant, it is the “immediate service of the Europeans” as 
servant, guide, or slave (Pratt 130). Doerr engages this tradition of travel writing vis-a- 
vis a construction of travelers’ cultural blindness framed in an artistic expression of place 
and space in Mexico, including the Mexican countryside and X\vq plaza mayor, in this 
way. Stones for Ibarra couples language and landscape in a geopoetic representation that 
critiques a colonial legacy of European travel writing. 

The most significant aspects of the Evertons’s trip to Mexico are both what they 
fail to see—^their own limited perceptions—and how they see the Ibarrans—as 
subordinate to them. The Evertons cannot see people in the open plains of the Mexican 
countryside. Rather than acknowledge this limitation, they conclude that the Ibarrans are 
capable of materializing in an “empty” landscape. The perceiving two American subjects 
regard themselves as the only living inhabitants of a foreign, unfamiliar place. 
Figuratively, this position affords the Anglos a “godlike, omniscient stance” over 
Mexico, a characteristic blindness by travelers also evident in Humboldt’s writing (Pratt 
124). For instance, when the Anglos get lost on their drive, help suddenly arrives from 
what seems to be a vacant and vacuous landscape; “from the east, where a moment ago 
there was nothing, runs a boy, and, for the first time, the Evertons witness a recurring 
Mexican phenomenon; the abrupt appearance of human life in an empty landscape 
Now, out of a vast unpopulated panorama, here, close at hand, is a boy” (Doerr 6). 
Among the author’s other examples of the travelers’ inability to see are their difficulty 



72 

finding the “invisible track” Domingo, their Mexican guide, points out and their failure to 
see the main road to Ibarra (2, 8, 6). 

Also like Humboldt’s work, Doerr’s narrative suggests the way that the Evertons 
see the villagers as well as Domingo is telling: yet again, the Anglos attribute qualities to 
the Ibarrans they meet, rather than reflect on their own limited perceptions. As an 
example, Sara interprets the villagers she sees in the plaza mayor as ghostly apparitions 
because their countenances are undecipherable to her; she cannot read the facial 
expressions and nonverbal communication of a people with whom she is unfamiliar; 

“[w]e have come to live among specters, Sara tells herself They are not people, but 
silhouettes sketched on a backdrop to deceive us into thinking that the stage is crowded. 
She searches for an expression, any expression, in their eyes” (Doerr 11). The allusion to 
Macbeth’s speech^ metaphorically sets the Evertons apart from their Mexican peers by 
suggesting the Anglos exist as substantive, living beings foregrounded on center stage 
while the Mexicans are dead shadows skulking in the background. 

As this catalogue of first impressions suggests, Doerr taps into a primacy on 
visual observation common to Humboldt’s travel writings. She creates a poetics in which 
Anglo travelers either ignore the presence of local inhabitants or exoticize the Ibarrans as 
magical or ghostly; the author literalizes Sara’s figurative blindness through a register of 
all that is unfamiliar and inexplicable to her. Added to that, the Evertons “explain away” 
their inability to comprehend the Ibarrans by giving them traits they do not have. This 
reaction signals the Anglo’s own culturally-specific point of view, a perspective that 
obfuscates Anglo and Mexican cultural difference. Thus far in the novel, Doerr’s 
expression of poetics and places makes visible the colonial implications of the Evertons’s 
limited perceptions that subordinate Mexicans to them. 



73 

The author continues to use spatial representations and elements of travel writing 
to show how, even as Sara begins to learn incremental lessons on cultural difference 
during her stay in Mexico, she can never escape her own cultural positioning. Nor can 
she avoid the complicity with colonial legacies that position her. Doerr’s representation 
of the big adobe home and the Malaguena mine make the Anglos the wealthiest people in 
Ibarra. This situates them within a larger history of conquest and imperialism. The 
Evertons’ purport, quite naively, to seek out the “family’s Mexican history” (2-3). 
Occupying the biggest house, operating the largest business, and acknowledging their 
family history in the community, there is no avoiding the fact that they are active 
participants in a colonial legacy. In the past and from the outset of Sara and Richard’s 
arrival, the Everton’s investments in the local economy are seen as a boon that makes the 
village priest boast, “Don Ricardo is restoring Ibarra to prosperity” (163). The Anglos 
figuratively become patrons of Ibarra, a tenuous position for outsiders unfamiliar with 
Mexican cultural codes; in time, becoming a patron evokes guilt in Sara. 

Sara’s guilt for the privileges she inherits is represented in Doerr engagement and 
critique of that singular, one-way visual perspective common in travel writing: European 
subjects objectifying native inhabitants. European ethnographers, naturalists, and 
geographers (15-37) codified this perspective, according to Pratt, in eighteenth-century 
travel narratives. Employing a scientific method that privileges observation, these 
science-writers are “seeing-men,” who, in their quest to describe local inhabitants, gather 
specimens, and chart coast lines, produce images of South American for a European 
audience (Pratt 7). For example, writings such as Charles de al Condamine’s Brief 
Narrative of Travels through the Interior of South American (1745) or History of the 
Pyramids of Quito (1751) employ a male gaze “whose imperial eyes passively look out 


74 


and possess” (Pratt 7), As the text progresses, however, Doerr exposes the colonial 
implications of “seeing-men” by reversing the gaze, switching subject and object. This 
stylistic tool effectively conveys Sara’s realization of her complicity in a colonial legacy 
through the story of Kid Munoz. 

Sara observes Kid Munoz and the blind man figuratively sees her too. Sara takes 
on a sense of responsibility and shame for how her country is seen as having a culture of 
materialism identifiable to Mexicans when they observe a wealthy Anglo sitting in a 
luxurious restaurant. In “Kid Munoz,” she watches the blind lottery vendor from the 
comfortable restaurant in the Hotel Paris and learns that he lost his sight in an Olympic 
boxing match in the US. Doerr writes, “Sara added this tragedy to the accumulating 
burden of guilt that with each passing month in Mexico weighted more intolerably upon 
her. Now, to the guilt of having too much food, too many dresses, she added the guilt of 
seeing” (37). She is uncomfortable that even a blind man is capable of focusing on her; 
she gains new found knowledge from the discomfort by realizing that as an Anglo, one of 
the richest people in Ibarra, she is part of a larger colonial history representative of the 
asymmetrical power dynamics and economic status between the US and Mexico. 

As the narrative develops, the author reverses the gaze of the travel writer and 
recasts Mexicans as seeing men and women who observe Sara and Richard through the 
front window of their home. This configuration of space reverses the novel’s first 
impression of the Ibarrans as shadows in life’s drama; in contrast, the Evertons’s big 
adobe home is a stage on which the Anglos play for the benefit of a Mexican audience. 

In one scene, villagers such as Remedios Acosta, Paz, and Maria de Lourdes watch the 
Evertons and conclude that their behavior is irrational: the Anglos bum candles on the 
dinner table when they do not need extra light; they rebuild a stone fountain twice to get 


75 


the design right even though it has no practical utility; they bring back from outlying 
regions exotic plants that may not grow in Ibarra; and they feed stray cats and dogs that 
do not belong to them. Remedies tells her neighbors that the Evertons’s habits appear 
extravagant and wasteful because they “buy special food for three dogs and a cat that are 
not theirs. Will those animals remember how to hunt mice and hares if they are fed on 
plates at the door? The senor and senora are preparing them to starve” (Doerr 16). As 
stories of Sara and Richard’s seemingly scatter-brained behavior spread throughout 
Ibarra, the villagers explain the Anglo’s odd conduct by labeling the Evertons 
“mediodesorientado” or half-disoriented (Doerr 24). 

Fashioning space in a way that objectifies the Anglos and draws on elements of 
travel writing, specifically visual observation, the author generates a geopoetic expression 
of both the Anglos and Mexicans failures to comprehend one another. The villagers are 
“as mysterious to the Evertons as the Evertons are to them” (“Doerr,” Gale n.p.). The 
Anglos are slightly disoriented in Ibarra because their previously-learned codes of 
behavior do not apply. Similarly, the Evertons label the Mexicans “magical” because of 
their ability to travel across great distances (a common occurrence in the novel). In some 
respects, the Ibarrans ability to travel afar is magical in a village devoid of railway or 
airport, technology facilitating rapid transportation. The labels “mediodesorientado” and 
“magical” suggest that both communities misunderstand each other because of their own 
cultural paradigms—what is common sense to the Anglos is nonsense to the Ibarrans and 
vice versa. 

Doerr’s presentation of dual cultural perspectives relies on how common sense 
operates relative to different cultures. Anthropologist Clifford Geertz argues that what 
appears to be common sense in one culture may not be so in another because common 



76 


sense is a socially constructed system whose authority resides in “mere matter-of-fact 
apprehension of reality” or “down-to-earth, colloquial wisdom” (LocaL73-8). He also 
notes that while an individual can never obviate one s own cultural positioning 
responsible for shaping common sense, one can learn to recognize a range of possible 
common sense practices. Common sense is a social construct that Doerr s novel makes 
visible through cultural difference; indeed, what appears to be a rational act to the 
Evertons, such as sharing the last beer in the refrigerator, is considered nonsense to the 
Ibarrans because beer costs only three pesos in Mexico. Conversely, feeding stray 
animals seems inhumane to the Ibarrans but humane to the Evertons. Geertz’s theory on 
common sense is usefiil to an understanding of the novel because it explains how Sara 
enters Ibarra much like any other foreign traveler in a strange land—with little ability at 
the outset to decipher the cultural codes of the native inhabitants. 

Consistent with Geertz’s assertion that it is only by witnessing the “common 
sense” of another culture that an individual may recognize it in her own culture (78-84), 
Sara gradually becomes more able to understand her Mexican neighbors’ points of view. 
Doerr accomplishes this through a literary technique of doubling that involves “linked 
stories.” In a 1999-interview, Doerr says linked stories describe a single event or shared 
anecdote from different cultural perspectives and, taken together, comprise the novel 
(“Doerr,” Gale n.p.). Depictions of daily life in Ibarra, whether buying a coffin or 
attending a picnic, make clear “common sense” practices of both the Evertons and 
Ibarrans. Furthermore, linked stories resemble yet refute manners-and-customs writing 
or travel narratives in which European traveler-narrators describe normal habits of 
natives (Pratt, “Scratches” 120). By including the “normal habits” of the Evertons and 
those of the local inhabitants, the author challenges the colonial implications of limited. 



77 


one-way portraits of a people set forth in customs-and-manners writing. Further, linked 
stories of the novel shape a poetics that shows Sara’s ability to experience moments of 
heightened consciousness in which she gains empathy for Mexican cultural practices. 

In separate but parallel stories, for example, Doerr describes the process of buying 
a coffin, engaging first the perspective of Chuy Santos, a local entrepreneur, and then the 
Evertons. Doerr’s technique of doubling demonstrates that what appears to be 
inappropriate to the Anglos is actually common sense to the locals and, conversely, what 
seems logical, even generous, to the Anglos is considered improper by the Mexicans 
(Doerr 183). In “The Red Taxi,” Chuy buys cheap coffins for his friends who die in a 
mining accident and charges expensive coffins to Richard. Chuy invests the difference in 
a red taxi which the three friends had formerly agreed to buy. This anecdote shows the 
reader that Chuy’s investment in cheap coffins is acceptable in Ibarra based on the 
cultural codes of the local inhabitants. Chuy believes, like the fellow Ibarrans, the deaths 
were fated. Furthermore, because the friends had already agreed to purchase the red taxi, 
Chuy feels justified in investing the extra money in his business. 

In another chapter, Doerr describes a similar transaction performed by the 
Evertons. They purchase a cheap rather than expensive coffin and altruistically plan to 
give the balance to his surviving relative, the town beggar Inocencia. However, family 
and friends of Inocencia reject the “pauper’s coffin” and the Anglos are forced to 
exchange it for the pricey one (176). Shortly thereafter, Inocencia dies and the town 
discovers that she is “the second richest woman in Ibarra” (177). Sara “revises her 
image” of the beggar woman and realizes why the Ibarrans considered the cheap coffin 
disrespectful; the Mexicans correctly recognize that the Anglos purchased the 


78 


inexpensive coffin based on the presumed poverty of Inocencia. What Sara had 
considered an act of generosity, she learns, is an act of pity (Doerr 177, 183). 

Another example of Sara’s changing behavior occurs when she begins to question 
her objective to “improve” women’s rights in Ibarra. Engaging the figure of the 
exploratrice sociale, Doerr illustrates that Sara gains an awareness that this intention 
reinforces her role within a larger colonial drama. Exploratrices sociales were female 
European travelers (or temporary residents) who visited in Latin America in the early 
decades of the nineteenth century (Pratt 147). Pratt analyzes the travel writing of 
exploratrices sociales, in a tradition that includes texts by Flora Tristan (who lived in 
Peru from 1833 to 1834) and Maria Graham Callott (who lived in Chile in 1822) (155- 
164). While abroad, such women assume a duty to perform charitable work and introduce 
pragmatic reform measures to a host country that they perceive as less advantaged or 
backward. This colonial mindset reflects a “sense of personal independence, property, 
and social authority” where the exploratrices sociales demonstrate “female imperial 
intervention” in a foreign nation as a way to debunk constrictive gender roles in their 
native countries (Pratt 157, 160). They assert themselves primarily in the private, 
domestic sphere of house or hospital, where their role is especially critical: “If the men’s 
job was to collect and possess everything else, these women travelers sought first and 
foremost to collect and possess themselves. Their territorial claim was to private space, a 
personal, room-sized empire” (Pratt 160). What the exploratrice sociale fails to 
appreciate is that her benevolent “civilizing missions” (Pratt 160) translate to a paradigm 
of superiority and paternalism—a realization that Sara slowly grasps in Stones for Ibarra, 
Doerr clearly establishes Sara as a fictional exploratrice sociale, but 
simultaneously undercuts that role in the domestic space of their home. Sara builds a 



79 


“room-sized empire” in the private sphere of their adobe home motivated by an intense 
need to “collect and possess” herself because of Richard’s imminent death (Pratt 160). 

The author’s construction of domestic space and Sara’s relationship to it shows she is 
trying “to understand a world in which people seem to believe in a ‘relentless 
providence’” (“Doerr,” Gale n.p.). In this way, Doerr uses mortality, specifically the 
difficulty of coping with her husband’s coming death, to show how Sara experiences a 
shared sense of humanity with the Ibarrans. Sara’s status as an exploratrice sociale is 
illustrated by the author’s descriptions of Sara decorating the adobe home with Mexican 
religious relics. However, even as she tries to make their home an oasis for their final six 
years together, she admits that she cannot prevent Richard’s illness: neither her sheer act 
of will power nor God’s act of grace will save him: 

If we were to be bom again, she thought, we would choose to be bom in this 
house, in that bed that is still unmade. Bom to work this mine, whose name 
should be Quien Sabe [Who Knows], and to live in this mountain town of one 
thousand souls.... All we would want out of being bom again is this place to live 
and die in, as we are living and dying now. Then she amended her words. As 
Richard is dying in it now, in spite of the hematologist’s pills, in spite of me. 

(182) 

Acknowledging the villager’s belief in fatalism, a perspective the Mexicans repeatedly 
demonstrate to her, Sara comes to understand that regardless of how hard she works to 
“collect” herself and her husband, Richard will die “in spite” of her efforts. This is a new 
perspective for Sara, a woman previously convinced that medical science would prolong 
Richard’s life beyond the six year diagnosis. Rendering the spaces of the home in a 


80 

manner that highlights yet troubles Sara’s role as an exploratrice sociale illustrates a 
moment of the protagonist’s heightened awareness. 

Doerr also mobilizes her protagonist to realize that the reform measures she 
propounds in Ibarra are both folly and egoism—Sara’s campaign to encourage women’s 
suffrage, for example, is a guise to impose her values. Sara encourages the Ibarran 
women to vote in upcoming Mexican presidential elections rather than let their husbands 
vote for them. When Ibarran women shrug off her suggestion, Sara asks a village man 
why he voted for his wife. Pointing to a hillside sign, he responds, “You are forgetting, 
senora, that when we voted we already knew the name of the next president of the 
republic” (Doerr 18). Months before the election, the Partido Revolucionario 
Institucioml (PRI) constructed ten foot high letters spelling the next president of Mexico. 
Sara realizes that her efforts are impractical because women’s suffrage does not matter 
much in a pre-determined election. She also realizes that she had incorrectly assumed that 
the voting process in Mexico is similar to US when, in fact, the PRI has governed 
Mexico’s single party system for decades. Sara’s “civilizing mission” is moot—a point 
that Doerr literally inscribes in the space of a hillside overlooking the town (Pratt 160). 

When Sara reflects on this experience, she discovers a commonality with the 
Mexican women around her in their shared status as wives. Sara achieves cross-cultural 
awareness through gendered status because the role of wife transcends cultural barriers. 
This point may highlight Doerr’s belief that patriarchal power structures in the institution 
of marriage supercede ethnic barriers that separate women from different cultures. Sara 
thinks, “They are good wives . .. not like me. They have handed over their suffrage to 
their husbands without argument, as they might hand over a plate of food or an ironed 
shirt” (Doerr 18). Sara no longer sees the Ibarrans as specters or apparitions; instead, she 



81 

secs them as living people—wives like herself—with rational reasons for not casting their 
own votes. In this moment of “higher consciousness,” Sara gains “an awareness of her 
common humanity with the villagers of Ibarra” (Alarcon 97). 

Sara’s moments of “higher consciousness” illustrate Clifford’s notion of travel as 
a translational process, a means of exploring cultural difference, of exposing hitherto 
hidden or unquestioned beliefs and norms. Clifford explains, “In the kind of translation 
that interests me most, you learn a lot about peoples, cultures, and histories different from 
your own, enough to begin to know what you’re missing” (39). In the novel, Sara learns 
enough to realize what she had been missing—that social norms within the contexts of 
marriage and local electioneering have radically different meanings depending on 
whether the locale is Ibarra or San Francisco. Crossing the US-Mexico border matters in 
Doerr’s construction of space. Clifford’s theory, moreover, suggests that travel affords 
the potential for individual transformation and translation based on an increased self- 
awareness that comes out of a recognition of cultural difference, a process that slowly 
unfolds for Sara in Stones for Ibarra . He writes: “One enters the translation process from 
a specific location, from which one only partly escapes. In successful translation, the 
access to something alien—another language, culture, or code—is substantial. 

Something different is brought over, made available for understanding, appreciation, 
consumption” (Clifford 182). The “specific location” that Clifford refers to is one’s own 
positionality or, in the novel, Sara’s rootedness to the US. Crossing borders, Sara brings 
over” a recognition that she has blindly imposed her values in Mexico without regard to 
the wishes of the locals. Such use of geography and travel, plus Doerr’s revision of the 
exploratrice sociale as a woman who becomes aware of, rather than entrenched in, her 


82 

ethnocentricity produce a geopoetic articulation of Sara’s cognizance of her role within a 
larger colonial drama. 

In the final chapters, Doerr completes the circuitous travel loop for the Evertons 
with Richard’s death from cancer. Sara packs the adobe home so she may return to the 
US. Doerr affirms how far Sara has come in her ability to understand the Ibarrans when 
she figuratively joins a village tribute to Richard, a pile of stones at the end of the 
driveway. Before leaving Ibarra permanently, she imagines herself crying out to her 
neighbors to “Remember the place. Bring stones” (214). The scene is a moving portrait of 
a woman seeking solace among her neighbors by participating in a local custom to honor 
Richard’s life. 

The separate moments of heightened consciousness she has experienced thus far 
culminate in Sara’s profound shared expression and acceptance of Richard’s death. This 
act cuts across cultural barriers as the Anglo woman shares a living memory of her 
husband with the Ibarrans, a memory that, according to the village priest, “neither rain 
nor wind can sweep away” (212). In a review of Stones for Ibarra. Native American 
writer Leslie Marmon Silko writes that “each stone marks a recalling, a remembering” 
that every inhabitant of the village, regardless of nationality, acknowledges in Richard 
(8). Sara identifies a shared humanity with the Ibarrans in dealing with the inevitability 
of death, a commonality that transcends those cultural barriers that separate the Anglos 
and Mexicans. 

Stones for Ibarra challenges travel accounts by ending on the withdrawal, rather 
than expansion, of the Anglo presence in Mexico. Everything—a fully refurbished house, 
blooming gardens, and a new vein of copper—is sold to a Mexican miner as Doerr’s way 
of ending the colonial legacy which Sara slowly came to recognize and struggled to 


83 

reconcile. The author is not discouraging travel or residency abroad, but her point in this 
final act—transferring the adobe and mine to a Mexican owner—is that Anglos should 
not occupy Mexico as the most wealthy and powerful inhabitants. The journey that began 
with Richard’s grandparents ends in Richard’s death so that there is “no North American 
left in Ibarra” (2). 

Through the lens of geopoetics in Stones for Ibarra, cross-cultural experience 
appears as enabling the protagonist to recognize the limitations of her own culturally- 
situated perceptions and to gain respect for those of others. Where Doerr implicitly 
exposes the colonial legacy of nineteenth-century travel writing through her novel, 
Fuentes is engaged in an explicit critique of that legacy in Old Gring o. Fuentes’s 
depiction of space combined with his engagement with travel writing creates in Old 
Gringo a geopoetic expression yet again illustrative of how an exploratrice sociale — 
aggressively trying to reshape environs in Mexico according to precepts of Manifest 

8 

Destiny—^becomes capable of acknowledging her contributions to a colonial legacy. 

Old Gringo 

The opening pages of Old Grineo represent an Anglo character’s first impression 
of Mexico using third person omniscient narration to register the distance between the 
author’s ubiquitous perspective and the protagonist’s limited degree of cultural 
awareness. Harriet Winslow begins her stay into Mexico around 1913, only three years 
after the start of the Mexican Revolution. She watches soldiers set fire to the Miranda 
hacienda where she had been hired to work as a governess.^ Fuentes immediately casts 
Harriet as the quintessential ugly traveler: her first words are haughty demands for the 
Mexican revolutionaries to cease destroying the estate; her commands are based in her 
claim that, as an employee, she is responsible for the property. Her comments disturb 


84 


another Anglo in Mexico, the old Gringo, as well as the Mexican troop leader. General 
Tomas Arroyo. But, Harriet is so caught up in her own world that she is blinded to the 
symbolic significance of the burning hacienda. From Arroyo’s perspective, however, that 
burning equates to the overthrow of an oppressive socio-economic system and a personal 
victory over an upper class family that discriminated against him as a child. In all, 
Harriet’s petty tirade appears trivial and absurd set against the gruesome spectacle of the 
hacienda and the bodies of federal soldiers hanging from telegraph poles. 

Fuentes engages travel writing much like Doerr through the figure of the 
exploratrice sociale, a nineteenth-century female traveler intent on implementing a 
“civilizing mission” among a “backward” people (Pratt 155-164). Compared to Sara in 
Stones for Ibarra , however, Harriet is far more aggressive in her goal to reshape the 
spaces of Mexico and the Mexican people who inhabit them. Taking up residence in the 
soldiers’ camp, Harriet imposes her ethnocentric values literally and figuratively, 
attempting to clean up the hacienda and scrub the revolutionaries clean of their own 
culture. “What these people need is education, not rifles,” Harriet mutters 
condescendingly, “A good scrubbing, followed by a few lessons on how we do things in 
the United States” (Fuentes 41). Believing herself to be the linchpin of this effort, Harriet 
tries to achieve “social authority” in Mexico, or improved individual agency and decision 
making power that may be a response to gender restrictions in the US (Pratt 159-160). 
Fuentes writes, “And she, Miss Harriet Winslow, would set the example; she would be 
the symbol around which all the work of restoring the hacienda would resolve” (93). 
Fuentes renders the immediate spaces around Harriet, the camp and hacienda, as site 
where she tries to create her a “room-sized empire” much like previous travel writers’ 
depictions of the exploratrice sociale (Pratt 160). Such a combination of poetics and 



85 

places sets up the protagonist for a later transformation in which she will realize her 
ethnocentrism. 

Fuentes’s poetic expression of a fictive exploratrice sociale also draws on a 
colonial legacy of travel writing via “female imperial intervention” in Mexico (Pratt 159). 
Sara is not simply intent on cleaning up the domestic sphere. Her real goal is to 
subordinate Mexican to US culture through an “English language” education that places 
primacy on a Protestant work ethic “today” rather than “/wawawa”; “What she had on her 
mind was to establish a basic schedule for the elementary instruction of the children. 
Today—not mamma —^the children would start learning the basic skills, the three Rs of 
English language instruction: reading, writing, and ‘rithmetic” (Fuentes 93). She believes 
that she is right to educate a “primitive” neighbor, a prevalent ideology in colonialism. 
Such sentiments resonate with the rhetoric of Manifest Destiny, the widespread 
nineteenth-century sentiment in the US that Anglos had a “moral duty” to help benighted 
and backward nations. 

Through his fiction, Fuentes responds to travel narratives that espouse the 
innocence of the exploratrice sociale who sees herself performing a moral duty to help 
others less fortunate. Harriet simultaneously asserts US hegemony while claiming moral 
high ground that she is right, innocent, civilized, progressive, and reform-spirited—what 
she believes to be legitimate justifications of her efforts (Pratt 7). To demonstrate that 
Harriet’s “innocent” efforts are not welcome in Mexico, Fuentes provides examples of 
Mexican responses to her patronizing attitude. She piques Arroyo’s anger telling him that 
she plans to “civilize” Mexicans—her “duty” to Mexico (Fuentes 41). In addition, Harriet 
directly challenges Arroyo’s authority and position revealing a superior attitude toward 
Mexicans (Fuentes 59, 41, 59). Critic Frederic Murray summarizes Arroyo’s anger and 


86 

Harriet’s naive colonial mindset; “Those attitudes that belong to a culture foreign to one’s 
experience run the risk of being viewed as misguided at best, or at worst, as being 
inherently false and deliberately pernicious” (21). 

Additionally, Puentes casts Harriet as a political meddler who willingly and 
actively accepts her role in a colonial legacy. He does this through her claim that the 
Revolution is a misguided effort at governmental reform that could better be achieved 
through peaceful, grass roots, democratic government. This intervention—an Anglo 
telling Mexicans how to govern themselves—alludes to the melding of politics with the 
personal” common to the practices and writings of exploratrices sociales (Pratt 168). 
Such travel writing is also reflective of a history of US colonial intervention in the 
domestic affairs of Latin American nations. In the scene, Harriet tells the camp followers 
that they must elect officials and learn to “truly govern themselves in a democratic 
fashion (Puentes 94). In response, the Mexicans feel “pity” for her because she does not 
realize they are fighting to oust “democratic” leader Porfirio Diaz. Harriet’s political 
meddling backfires; the Mexicans do not accept her as a “take-charge” leader but instead 
see her as an outsider who does not understand their ways. Portraying Harriet s efforts as 
counter productive to her goals is the means that Puentes uses to critique a tradition of 
travel writing that espouses personal and political intervention. 

The protagonist’s first lesson in cultural sensitivity occurs when Arroyo shames 
her into realizing that her relationship to Mexicans and Mexico is ignorant and 
inappropriate. In this scene, the Anglo woman incorrectly assumes the revolutionaries 
have stolen a pearl necklace, “spoils” and “booty” of war, during the village feastday 
(Puentes 105). The General literally drags her to the chapel where she sees the pearls 
hanging on a statue of the Virgin Mary. The poor villagers save the whole year. 



87 


senorita” Arroyo explains, “they go hungry to have their fiesta on the appointed day 
(Fuentes 108). What Harriet interprets as stealing for individual profit is, in effect, an act 
of generosity for the benefit of the whole community. Misunderstanding the 
community’s religious devotion, she tries to “hide her shame” when she realizes that she 
is an outsider ignorant of local practices (Fuentes 107). This is significant because it 
shows Fuentes’s revision of the figure of the exploratrice sociale: Harriet becomes aware 
of cross-cultural difference, a process that unfolds as she falls in love with Arroyo. 

Fuentes uses the amorous relationship to explore how an exploratrice sociale 
might gain a greater appreciation for Mexican culture. He does this on two levels. First, 
using the literary motif of mirrors, he taps into an emphasis on visual observation via 
European subjects seeing and perceiving native objects in eighteenth-century European 
travel writing. Fuentes uses the ballroom of the Miranda estate, invoking the Spanish 
verb, “mirar” [to look upon], to underscore the importance of seeing oneself in a moment 
of self-revelation and seeing others in moments of heightened consciousness (Castillo 
39). Second, he juxtaposes Arroyo and Harriet, showing how an Anglo woman is able to 
recognize cultural difference in an intimate encounter through the contrast of her 
perceptions with those of the Mexican man. This suggests a woman’s process of self- 
discovery emerges through a man, a fact revealing Fuentes’s own patriarchal biases. 
Nonetheless, these techniques coupled with Fuentes’s use of the ballroom space in the 
Miranda hacienda render a geopoetic expression of Harriet’s transformation into a more 
culturally sensitive individual, as Fuentes links a specific class-based place to the 
conventions of travel writing. 

In The Labyrinth of Solitude (1950), Mexican writer Octavio Paz explains how 
immersion in a foreign culture enables individuals to see themselves with new 




88 


awareness.^® He describes this process of self-discovery based on his experiences 
crossing the US-Mexico border: 

We can all reach the point of knowing ourselves to be Mexicans. It is enough, for 
example, simply to cross the border ... I should confess that many of the 
reflections in this essay occurred to me outside of Mexico, during a two-year stay 
in the United States. I remember that whenever I attempted to examine North 
American life, anxious to discover its meaning, I encountered my own 
questioning image. That image, seen against the glittering background of the 
United States, was the first and perhaps the profoundest answer which that 
country gave to my first questions. (12) 

When Paz examines North American life while living in Los Angeles, for instance, he 
sees his own “questioning image” because it stands out as different from Anglo culture. 

In short, the differences between one culture and another come into bold relief when 
juxtaposed. Traversing the US-Mexico border serves as an occasion for self-discovery for 
Paz. Puentes depicts a directionally opposite but parallel experience in Harriet. 

Though a series of interpersonal and intercultural interactions in the Miranda 
ballroom, the author depicts Harriet’s transformation from a state of blindness, where her 
own ethnocentrism is invisible to her, to an ability to see herself in relation to Anglo and 
Mexican culture. Puentes’s construction of ballroom space speaks to a Victorian gentility 
with which Harriet is familiar, a space that reinforces her “innocent” imposition of 
civilizing missions. When Harriet enters the ballroom for the first time with the old 
Gringo, an elderly man serving in Pancho Villa’s forces, she finds comfort in the 
company of a fellow Anglo. His presence reinforces cultural stereotypes about gentility, 
since he is a man who offers her protection from “uncivilized” Mexicans around her. 



89 

Over the course of their conversation, Harriet asserts that she did not notice her reflection 
in the mirror when she entered the ballroom. Symbolically, Harriet is not self-reflexive 
when she is with another Anglo; in accordance with Paz’s theory of self-discovery, her 
own ethnocentrism is invisible to her because she is immersed in the prison house of her 
own culture. 

Fuentes disrupts Harriet’s comfortable positioning in this space when 
revolutionaries burst into the quiet ballroom. Her fear of the Mexicans registers a degree 
of self-centeredness that suggests the revolutionaries have nothing better to do than to 
seek out the Americans among them. The author reinforces the message of Harriet’s 
egoism by contrasting her behavior with that of the old Gringo who tries to make sense of 
what he sees. Frightened by the Mexicans, Harriet takes refuge in the presence of the old 
Gringo, fi-etting, “[t]hey have seen us” (Fuentes 39). Her fears prove ungrounded. The 
revolutionaries are “indifferent to the two gringos” because they are preoccupied with the 
reflection of their own whole bodies in the mirrors, a new experience to which they 
exclaim joyfully, “it’s me” and “it’s us” (40). The old Gringo concludes that seeing 
oneself whole is a privilege the two Anglos have taken for granted, because they have 
been “doubtlessly conditioned to ballrooms” in San Francisco or Washington D.C. (39). 
With the seemingly dangerous situation averted, Harriet tries to cover up her misreading 
of the situation, stating the soldiers “are ruining the parquet” with their boots (Fuentes 
40). This statement confirms that Harriet both realizes that her fears of the Mexicans are 
unfounded and that she is still invested in the idea she is superior to Mexicans. 

Resolving to “take charge of this place” (40), Harriet completely misses the 
significance of this moment firom the perspective of the revolutionaries: they see it as a 
victory over economic oppression (Castillo 38-41). In Fuentes’s construction, the 



90 

revolutionaries see a space clearly associated with the upper class elite and representative 
of the intense classism in Mexico against which they fight. The soldiers’ reflections in 
Old Gringo can be understood in Paz’s conceptualization of the Revolution as 
“revelation.” In “ReA^^isions: Mural Painting,” Paz explains: 

Our revolution brought forth, as in the delivery of a child, an unknown Mexico. 
Except that the child that was bom in 1920 had existed for centuries: it was the 
popular and traditional Mexico, hidden by the previous regime. The Mexican 
Revolution was the discovery of Mexico by Mexicans. ... The Revolution 
revealed Mexico to us. Or better put: it made us look back so as to see it. And it 
made painters, poets, and novelists above all look back. (114) 

Paz posits that the Revolution, a powerful epoch of massive social upheaval, forced 
freedom fighters to confront the realization that Mexico had become a nation politically 
fragmented and socially divided along class and ethnic lines. Once that reality was 
confronted, the goal of the revolutionaries became one of reclaiming a “popular and 
traditional Mexico.” According to Paz, this might occur by establishing a new 
government that serves people equally regardless of class. Like the artists that Paz 
mentions, Puentes provides a “look back” at the Revolution in the novel as 
revolutionaries see the ideal, whole nation they want to claim, a vision captured 
figuratively by their reflections in the mirrors. Their moment of self-discovery is a 
victory because they witness an image “hidden” from them by decades of class 
oppression. In Puentes’s portrayal, the ballroom no longer represents an exclusive, elitist 
space as it did to Harriet, but a sphere the soldiers have conquered that entitles them to 
the right to be seen—by everyone—as wholly enfranchised citizens. 



91 


Because Harriet is too immersed in her own world to see beyond it, she 
completely misses the importance of this event. However, as the novel progresses, 

Fuentes uses the mirrors as well as Harriet’s growing love affair with Arroyo, to show 
how she begins to change. Fuentes’s engagement of visual observation, a prevalent 
element in travel writing, added to his portrayal of space ultimately produce a geopoetics 
in which Harriet’s transformation is confirmed: “All that was left was to accept the 
change Harriet had undergone in Arroyo’s violent love” (147). While dancing with him, 
she sees herself for the first time in the mirrors because his presence as a Mexican makes 
her own Anglo identity visible to her. She admits that initially she did not see the 
revolutionaries; 

Arroyo, I know, I have not looked at all of your people, I wish I had, I have 
certainly missed something, what have I missed? ... You must tell me. / cannot 
take it all in in such a short time. I am weak and foreign and, even in my shabby 
gentility, sheltered. Do you understand this? I have learned. I am making an 
effort, I swear it. I am trying to understand all this, you, your country, your 
people. (Italics in original; Fuentes 190) 

This experience signals Harriet’s changing attitude from patronizing haughtiness to a 
more sensitive appreciation of cultural difference; how she sincerely wants to 
“understand” and “learn” about a cultural that once seemed primitive to her. 

Dialogue functions in the novel to confirm Harriet’s transformation from an 
exploratrice sociale espousing a rhetoric of Manifest Destiny to a woman who recognizes 
her complicity in a colonial legacy. Fuentes accomplishes this through counter-pointing 
dialogue Harriet utters when she first arrives in Mexico with exchanges made after 
beginning the affair with Arroyo. In the opening pages, for example, the old Gringo tells 



92 


Harriet, “[y]ou aren’t going to stay to educate anyone. They would likely educate you 
first,” a comment she dismisses at the time (Fuentes 42). Harriet parrots this line back to 
him in the closing pages, stating, “You mean, although I came to teach, I am the one who 
is being taught” (Fuentes 148). Harriet also states a very similar line to Arroyo in the 
final pages (Fuentes 190). Such dialogue reveals the author’s sexism, depicting a woman 
thoroughly subordinated to men following her love affair with Arroyo, but it also 
confirms Harriet’s transformation. 

The author portrays the most overt examples of Harriet’s change in the closing 
pages of the novel when she re-enters the US. The US-Mexico border, in Fuentes’s use of 
geographic spaces, affirms the significant role travel plays in enabling the identification 
of ethnocentrism. It is in this final border crossing that she firmly realizes and rejects her 
role in a colonial legacy when reporters bombard her with questions on whether the US 
military should intervene in the Mexican Revolution. She retorts, “No! No! I want to 

learn to live with Mexico, I don’t want to save it_what mattered was to live with 

Mexico in spite of progress and democracy” (Italics added; Fuentes 187). With the 
thorough transformation of the exploratrice sociale and the author’s use of space to show 
its multiple meanings fi'om the perspective of Anglos and Mexicans, Fuentes thereby 
creates a geopoetic expression that reflects on and refutes a colonial legacy of travel 
writing. 

Authorial perspective, specifically Fuentes’s transnationality and nationality, 
helps explain the relationship between travel, identity, and cultural difference that causes 
Harriet’s transformation in Old Grineo . Because Fuentes shuttles between Mexico City 
and London, nations with distinct cultural traditions, he is uniquely positioned to convey 
the perspective that geopoetics in the novel makes clear; travel facilitates awareness and 


93 

sensitivity to cultural practices by revealing difference. “ His transnationalism contributes 
to his ability to create that message through fiction. Harriet’s behavioral changes in the 
novel must also be understood from the author’s perspective—it matters that a Mexican 
author not only writes for an American audience, but through the viewpoint of a 
woman. The gender politics of the text invoke a formula that suggests a woman’s 
transformation is contingent upon contact with the right man. Such sexism withstanding, 
narrating through Harriet’s perspective as she “sits and remembers” Mexico establishes 
common ground with a US audience who, in theory, might identity with a fellow Anglo’s 
feelings while traveling or living in a strange and exotic land and the post travel 
rumination cultural encounters might generate. Her transformation positions her as a 
“figura simbolica de la conciencia norteamericana” [“symbolic figure of North 
American conscience”] (Roy 63) suggesting that Fuentes wants the US readership to 
change, like Harriet, by recognizing their complicity in a colonial attitude toward 
Mexico. 

Furthermore, a male author’s choice to tell his story through a female perspective 
may hint that women are more sympathetic to cultural difference and more open to 
change than men. Both Fuentes and Doerr expose a colonial legacy of travel writing 
through Active accounts of women that demonstrate travel is a gendered experience. 
“Exploratrice sociale ’’ is a term that speaks to “histories of freedom and danger in 
movement” for women travelers exclusively because historically the purpose of women’s 
and men’s travel has been different; “women were impeded from serious travel”; whereas 
men travel for reasons that are “heroic, educational, scientific, adventurous, or 
ennobling” (Clifford 6, 31). Stones for Ibarra and Old Gringo demonstrate that one 
explanation for travel as a gendered phenomenon is that men’s and women s roles in the 



94 

colonial legacy are radically different; Sara Everton and Harriet Winslow initially attempt 
to “civilize” Mexicans through education while John Grady Cole, the protagonist of AU 
the Pretty Horses, tries to conquer Mexicans through force of arms. 

Stones for Ibarra and Old Grineo operate as models of emergence from cultural 
insensitivity to cross-cultural awareness; female protagonists enact and refute a colonial 
legacy. All the Pretty Horses functions as a model of transgression as the male 
protagonist embraces his role in a colonial drama, stubbornly refusing to acknowledge 
any cultural values but his own.^^ 

All the Pretty Horses 

Geopoetics in All the Pretty Horses (1992) pairs Cormac McCarthy’s engagement 
with the code of the West with artistic renderings of the open range. Big Rock Candy 
Mountain, and a Mexican prison to offer a confession and apology for a history of 
colonial expansion in the West. McCarthy writes out of and in response to the genre of 
the Western to offer a revisionist stance that exposes rather than celebrates masculine 
heroics of conquest. Protagonist John Grady Cole is an Anglo cowboy moving in the 
spaces and places of Mexico without regard to the cultural sensibilities of the native 
inhabitants. Those travels begin in San Angelo, Texas in 1949 with an image of Cole 
crossing the US-Mexico border with best friend, Lacey Rawlins. They begin their 
journey with a colonial mentality in which Mexico is a blank space ripe for the 
inscription of Anglo values. 

McCarthy counterpoints the significance of the landscape in the US and Mexico 
to the Anglo teens; they believe each nation offers radically different futures to them. 
Dwindling open range in Texas suggests to Cole and Rawlins that the old American West 
is gone forever; fences dissect the formerly open plains, oil rigs blight the horizon, and 



95 

wild mustangs no longer exist. When Cole learns that his grandfather’s 18,000-acre cattle 
ranch—what he hoped would be his legacy and life work—is to be sold, he concludes that 
he cannot live the life of a cowboy in the US. The boys presume to pursue their calling in 
Mexico where they expect to find a nineteenth-century version of the Old West. Roads 
and towns dotting US territory on Rawlins’s map seems to confirm the urban 
encroachment and economic development that threatens the life of a rancher in the US 
and the boy’s future prospects in Texas. In contrast, blank, white space denoting 
Mexican territory on Rawlins’s map reinforces what the cowboys want to see south of the 
border. Rawlins asks, “You reckon it aint never been mapped?” and even as Cole assures 
him it has, Rawlins persists in demonstrating his ethnocentrism by concluding 
definitively: “There aint shit down there” (McCarthy 34). As if a scene from Joseph 
Conrad’s Heart of Darkness (1902), the blank spaces on the map represent places 
available for those willing to and capable of occupying them. Cole and Rawlins believe 
they have a future in Mexico based on their vision of the past in the US; by traveling to 
Mexico, they think they can live as wranglers in the Old West, a tradition as nearly 
extinct in south Texas as the ghost Comanche who ride through the pages of the novel. 

Prior to entering the seemingly uncharted territory of Mexico, Cole and Rawlins 
meet a fellow Anglo traveler and, against their better judgment, allow him to join them 
because of his appeal to a sense of shared nationalism. Just north of the US-Mexico 
border, a thirteen year old boy named Jimmy Blevins, riding a big bay horse, approaches 
Cole and Rawlins. Cole and Rawlins are reluctant to let Blevins tag along because they 
find out he is a run-away and they suspect the horse is stolen. Ultimately, Blevins asks to 
ride with .the older boys because, he claims, “I’m an American” (McCarthy 45). Cole and 
Rawlins relent because crossing the US-Mexico border is a significant event that calls for 


96 


the Anglos to stick together. Although Cole and Rawlins certainly do not stand to gain 
much from Blevins’s presence, they do not abandon their “kid brother” as they enter 
unknown, foreign territory. 

The narrator’s description of the boy’s river crossing is chilling: they plunge into 
the Rio Grande/i?/o Bravo on their horses “making for the alien shore like a party of 
marauders” (45). McCarthy uses this description to clearly evoke a colonial legacy that 
calls on the Anglo frontier myth of westward expansion as represented in Blood Meridian 
(1985), his first novel set in the Southwest. Blood Meridian depicts the brutality of Anglo 
scalp hunters in the nineteenth century—a notably male paradigm for travel in which 
danger, freedom, and gender roles generally precluded women’s involvement. Just as 
Anglo soldiers invade lands inhabited by Native Americans or Mexicans, the three young 
men enter Mexico like “marauders” ready to inscribe their own values in the blank spaces 
of this “alien” world, echoing the border crossings in Blood Meridian . This interpretation 
is further supported by the intertextuality of Blood Meridian and All the Pretty Horses, 
texts separated by exactly one hundred years (the former starts in 1849 and the latter in 
1949) and their similar response to the valorization of conquest set forth in the dime 
novel tradition of early Western writing and perpetuated to the present day by writers 
such as Louis L’Amour. McCarthy’s intent is to show the cyclical nature of US history 
(Pilkington 315). Critic Tom Pilkington sums up; “McCarthy’s characters, then, search 
out frontiers, those fluid zones of freedom and opportunity, of action and destiny that 
Americans traditionally have sought. What they often find is an actual and metaphysical 
horror” (315). 

McCarthy’s portrayal of the boys’ subsequent behavior on the opposite shore 
shows how naive they are about their role in a colonial drama even as they re-enact it. 





97 


Ignorant of the fact that spaces and places are imbued with the culture of the native 
inhabitants, the Anglos ride on in order to physically inhabit the “empty” space on the 
map which, from their perspective, represents unclaimed and available land for them 
exclusively. Compared to their earlier description as “marauders,” once in Mexico 
McCarthy portrays them as demonstrating a happy-go-lucky attitude confirming that they 
have accomplished something significant by traversing the US-Mexico border. For 
example, they cross the river “fanning with their hats and laughing and pulling up and 
patting the horses on the shoulder” as Rawlins boasts, looking back at Texas; “Goddamn. 

... You know where we’re at?” (McCarthy 45-6). Rawlins’s question coupled with the 
boys’ giddy behavior evokes a spirit of high adventure typical of male travel narratives; 
he knows that they have not simply forged another stream.*^ The three cowboys provide a 
noteworthy contrast to Sara and Harriet in Stones for Ibarra and Old GrinRO as 
exploratrices sociales where the women impose their values on Mexico vis-a-vis a legacy 
of education and charity work. The boys inherit a violent and aggressive history of 
conquest that, although not exclusively male, intimates the possibility for inflicting great 
damage on Mexicans as well as themselves. 

As demonstrated in Stones for Ibarra and Old Gringo, the Anglos’ first 
impressions of life in Mexico illustrates a lack of cultural sensitivity, a pattern reinforced 
by All the Pretty Horses . In McCarthy’s novel, the boy’s initial perceptions of Mexico 
confirm again what they want to find and what they anticipate seeing based on previous- 
learned stereotypes. When they ride into the town of Reforma, for instance, they notice 
there is no electricity, roads, or cars.^^ The lack of technology affirms Cole and Rawlins’s 
preconceived notions about Mexico as a primitive place. Rawlins’s jokes, “[djrinkin 
cactus juice in old Mexico . .. What do you reckon they’re saying at home about now?” 


98 


(McCarthy 51). Rawlins’s question evokes stereotypes of lazy Mexicans in scrapes 
drinking tequila under saguaro cactus. Ironically, it is the Anglos who take siesta in this 
scene—not the villagers. Cole does not disabuse Rawlins of his preconceptions, but 
answers by stating, “I reckon they’re saying that we’re gone,” a response that illustrates 
his confidence and self-assuredness (McCarthy 51). 

In the catalogue of first impressions, the author provides a noticeable contrast 
between Cole and Rawlins as a way to show that each boy reacts differently to cultural 
encounters over the course of the novel: Rawlins slowly gains respect for the cultural 
codes of Mexicans, but Cole does not. Cole appears more sensible about their adventure 
than does Rawlins, who initially appears to be a naive sidekick less knowledgeable than 
his partner. Cole takes responsibility for charting their route in Mexico and, although 
Rawlins understands Spanish, Cole is the only one to speak to the people they encounter 
in Mexico. In casting Rawlins as relatively unaware of his ethnocentrism, McCarthy sets 
up a reversal to be exposed by later events in the plot: compared to Rawlins at the outset, 
Cole is a traveler who seems to be knowledgeable; subsequent events, however, show it 
is Cole who does not respect cultural differences. Subtly, the roles of Rawlins and Cole 
shift in this novel as Rawlins—not Cole—recognizes that the Anglos cannot impose their 
values on Mexicans without grave consequences. 

McCarthy draws on the formula characteristics of the western genre vis-a-vis land 
and horses as a way of formulating Cole’s conflict between the code of the West and 
cultural difference in Mexico.*^ As the quintessential cowboy. Cole’s skills give him 
false confidence that he can handle anything that might happen in Mexico and cause him 
to assume his values have universal application north or south of the border. Specifically, 
he can read the land and talk to horses whether in Texas or Coahuila, and he shows 




99 


repeatedly that he is capable of navigating across hundreds of miles of rugged, open 
terrain with which he is not familiar. Lest a reader think such talent is common place 
among cowboys, McCarthy frequently emphasizes Cole’s unique affinity to the land. For 
instance, when Rawlins and Blevins fall asleep at night, Cole lies awake for hours and 
feels “the wildness about him, the wildness within” (McCarthy 60), metaphorically 
connected to the landscape (Cheuse 141). In “A Note on Landscape in All the Pretty 
Horses. ” critic Alan Cheuse posits the land in All the Pretty Horses functions as a 
character in itself that shadows Cole’s “inner universe” (140-1).^* Cole’s seemingly 
spiritual relationship with the land is complemented by his mystical connection to horses; 
Cole communicates with them like a horse whisperer and communes with them like a 
kindred spirit. 

Rawlins and Cole find work at the Hacienda de Nuestra Senora de La Purisima 
Concepcion in the border state of Coahuila, claiming that they have found their own Big 
Rock Candy Mountain. The allusion to Western American writer Wallace Stegner’s Big 
Rock Candy Mountain (1938) illustrates how McCarthy uses space to further 
demonstrate the reasons that Cole believes his values are universal. Cole and Rawlins 
believe they are living the life of “the old waddy” or the US cowboy of the early 
twentieth century; 

This is some country, aint it? 

Yeah. It is. Go to sleep. 

Bud? 

Yeah. This is how it was with the old waddies, aint it? 

Yeah. 

How long do you think you’d like to stay here? 


100 

About a hundred years. Go to sleep. (McCarthy 96) 

Such naivete and exuberance, critic John Wenger reminds us, illustrates that “these are 
two teenage boys who have not yet seen enough of life to know how harsh it can be” 
(106). If Cole and Rawlins believe they have found the Old West, by extension, they 
believe it is a place governed by the code of the American West—a personal sense of 
justice to which the cowboy subordinates all else. This logic is obviously problematical in 
Mexico, a nation whose history and culture do not incorporate the western mythos of 
independence and egalitarianism. Cole may have read Stegner’s novel, as he intimates in 
the narrative, but he does not learn the message set forth to Stegner’s protagonist. Bo 
Mason; Big Rock Candy Mountain is not only an elusive place, it is an Anglo utopia 
located somewhere within the borders of the US—not in Mexico. 

McCarthy fashions one of the boy’s first adventures in Mexico, specifically the 
incident in which Blevins’ horse runs away, to illustrate Rawlins’s growing situational 
awareness in Mexico as well as Cole’s stubborn adherence to a personal code of justice. 
The cowboys find the horse in Encantada, a word meaning “delighted” or “enchanted” 
that proves to be ironic given the fact that an incident in this town later causes Blevins’s 
death and Cole’s and Rawlins’s imprisonment. The Anglos realize that the only way to 
recover and reclaim the big bay horse is to steal it back from the Mexican farmer who 
found it. Rawlins is hesitant to do so. He confronts Cole, warning him that they could be 
shot for stealing a horse in Mexico, adding half-joking that, “We’re going to die in this 
goddamned country .... I’d hate to have to shoot my way back to Texas” (McCarthy 
86). Rawlins further suggests that they abandon Blevins, who loses not only his horse in 
the flash flood, but also a pistol, saddle, and one boot. The scene unfolds in a way that 


101 

tells us that Rawlins grasps the life-threatening implications of their actions while Cole, 
in contrast, refuses to walk away from the situation. 

Cole states that he is willing to help Blevins put things right. This is an assertion 
in accordance with the code of the West and with a sense of fair play evident in the 
tradition of the Western novel. “A norteamericano ... he thinks that every man bom on 
this planet is an Adam, free of memory and external constraint, able to shape his 
illimitable ‘self in any way he chooses” (Pilkington 320). Cole reasons that the horse is 
Blevins’s property because “[i]t damn sure dont belong to them Mexicans” (McCarthy 
89). According to his logic, even if Blevins stole the horse in the US, Blevins is the 
proper owner of the big bay in Mexico because he rode it across the border. This 
exchange illustrates how Cole privileges what he thinks is right over the danger of their 
circumstances. McCarthy uses Rawlins’s and Cole’s differing degrees of situational 
awareness in Mexico as a foreshadowing of future cultural conflict. 

Specifically, Cole’s willingness to impose his values of “individualism, free will, 
[and] volition” in Mexico (Pilkington 320) set up the protagonist for a conflict between 
Mexican and American cultural norms that plays out at the Mexican hacienda where the 
cowboys work. McCarthy writes Cole as a male traveler with unrestricted space and 
innate cowboy skills that transcend borders, but when the Anglo man falls in love with a 
Mexican woman, these selfsame qualities prevent him from recognizing the Mexican 
cultural codes that block a courtship between a working class vaquero and a hacendado ’s 
daughter. McCarthy thus undermines the heroic attributes of the American cowboy as 
icon set forth in the Western novel by revealing the dangers of failing to heed the 
“complex maps and histories,” “continuing legacies of empire,” and the “intertwined 
roots and routes” that are seared onto the entangled past of the US and Mexico (Clifford 


102 

7, 5). Added to the weight of Cole’s colonial legacy is the further complication that Cole 
grew up in the US-Mexico borderlands in a household where, due to his parent’s 
estrangement, a Mexican woman rears him. McCarthy suggests that the protagonist’s 
lifelong intimacy with and exposure to Mexicans leads him to believe that he knows more 
than he does about Mexico. 

Cole’s encounter with his lover’s godmother, Dofia Alfonza, signals Cole’s first 
lesson in cultural difference. The lesson is that cultural mores in Mexico regarding social 
propriety are rigid and the consequences for violating them are permanent. Put frankly, 
Alfonza tries to tell Cole that people in Mexico are unforgiving of women who have lost 
their virginity. As the young woman’s guardian, she refuses to allow Cole to unwittingly 
undermine Alejandra’s chance for a proper marriage with a partner of commensurate 
class and social standing. Cole responds to her by privileging his own sense of justice 
over the danger of ignoring cultural difference. Specifically, Alfonza explains to Cole 
that he must be “considerate of a young girl’s reputation” because “there is no 
forgiveness” (McCarthy 136-7). Unlike men, women who “lose their honor” can never 
regain it in Mexico because “[t]his is another country. Here a woman’s reputation is all 
she has” (McCarthy 136). She adds that the consequences of tarnishing a woman’s 
reputation can be “of a gravity not excluding bloodshed. Not excluding death” (McCarthy 
136). Cole responds that the social constraints on women in Mexico are not “right.” This 
comment indicates his ignorance of how deeply embedded social mores are in Mexico 
and how drastically they differ from his own as well as his adherence to the code of the 
West. It also subtly places Cole in the role of knight: he is the male liberator who might 
free Alejandra from what appears to be an imprisoning, penalizing social code.*^ 



103 

Cole simply does not get it. His conversation with Alfonza clearly exposes him to 
Mexican cultural norms, but his understanding of them is limited at best. Note, for 
example, his conversation with Rawlins immediately after meeting with Alfonza; 

You still aint told me what answer you gave her, said Rawlins. 

I told her I’d do whatever she asked. 

What did she ask? 

I aint sure. 

They sat watching the fire. 

Did you give your word? asked Rawlins. 

I dont know. I dont know if I did nor not. 

Well either you did or you didnt. 

That’s what I’d of thought. But I dont know. (McCarthy 139) 

As the dialogue suggests. Cole is flummoxed; he does not understand that expectations 
about courtship greatly differ between the US and Mexico. Beyond that, his passion for 
Alejandra prevents him from a rational assessment of Alfonza’s warning. Cole fails to 
register the severe consequences of ignoring these differences as he insists on privileging 
his own sense of what is right over Mexican social codes. In contrast to Cole, Rawlins 
anticipates the danger that the young boys face because he has grown increasing aware of 
their status as foreigners on Mexican soil. He correctly predicts that they will be run off 
the hacienda if Cole continues to court Alejandra. 

That Cole is compelled to do what he thinks “right” is doubly reinforced because 
he believes that he has found the Old West where a cowboy’s code is paramount, and he 
disagrees with the existing social constraints placed on Alejandra. Critic Vereen Bell 
explains that Cole and Rawlins try to “move back in history by riding south. The great 



104 


irony, as Senorita Alfonza’s story underscores, it that some kind of history is 
everywhere” (926). Mexican history records not the American code of the West, but 
the colonialism of Anglo expansion into their northern frontier. Beyond a history of 
antagonism between the two nations is the potential for imperialism by Cole as a 
disinherited rancher. He knows that by marrying Alejandra he would be entitled to the 
ranch, a notion that Rawlins recognizes by goading his buddy; “You got eyes for the 
spread? ... Sure you aint” (McCarthy 138). McCarthy draws on the presumption set 
forth in the genre of classic Western novels such as The Virginian (1909) that social 
mobility is an option for the cowboy hero. Cole sees the opportunity for a future in 
Mexico as a cowboy, a desire that echoes his first impression of Mexico as an empty 
space that he intends to occupy. Despite the Dofta’s warning and because of his presumed 
mastery of cowboy skills and a childhood spent among Mexicans, Cole incorrectly thinks 
that he is well fortified to withstand the fatal consequences that both Alfonza and Rawlins 
predict for him. Ensuing events prove otherwise. When the hacendado, Don Hector, 
learns about the courtship, he has the boys imprisoned in what begins a very violent and 
dangerous experience for Rawlins and Cole. 

Ejecting the protagonist from open range space, McCarthy situates Cole in the 
unforgiving space of a Mexican prison, where again the protagonist refuses to 
acknowledge the mores of the native culture even though his life is in danger. Cole and 
Rawlins land in jail to find Blevins being held for murdering a rural and wounding two 
other Mexicans. Rawlins blames Blevins for their misfortune and recognizes the severity 
of their predicament: “We’re dead men. I knew it’d come to this. From the time I first 
seen him” (159). Rawlins’s acuity is only slightly off: it is Blevins who dies, en route to 
a federal penitentiary, when a Mexican policeman executes him. Once imprisoned, Cole 




105 


and Rawlins are constantly attacked by inmates because they are Anglos. The ruling 
papazote [big shot] explains to them that they will not survive the prison because they 
“dont speak the language,” a statement emphasizing the Anglo’s inability to understand 
and participate in cultural codes of the prison that could keep them alive; “You don’t 
know what is the situation here. You don’t speak the language. . .. Maybe in a year here 
you might understand. But you don’t have no years. You don’t have no time” (188). Cole 
dismisses the papazote’s warning and rejects his offer to protect them, to which the 
Mexican later responds, “Even in a place like this where we are concerned with 
fundamental things the mind of the anglo is closed in this rare way. At one time I though 
it was only his life of privilege. But it is not that. It is his mind” (194). Shortly thereafter, 
Rawlins is attacked in a knife fight that leaves him badly injured and, in an act of self- 
defense, Cole kills a fellow prisoner. 

Through the depiction of violent action with the confining space in the novel, 
McCarthy makes it clear that Rawlins and Cole would have died in prison had Dona 
Alfonza not obtained their release. When they are set free, Rawlins asserts that he will 
return to the US immediately. He tells Cole not to “go down there,” referring to the 
Rocha y Villareal hacienda (211). Before heading home. Cole insists he must confront 
Dona Alfonza. He suspects that she has made Alejandra promise not to see him again as 
a condition of release from jail. To this Cole adds, “I still want the horses,” a comment 
that underscores the fact that, unlike Rawlins, he learns very little from his experiences in 
prison—he stubbornly persists in the single-minded focus of reclaiming property that he 
considers has been unjustly stolen from him, even though the exact same endeavor by 


Blevins was fatal. 



106 


Cole returns to the hacienda for a second exchange with Dona Alfonza. In this 
exchange. Dona Alfonza again encourages him to respect Mexican cultural practices, 
engaging in a biographical monologue about her courtship with Gustavo Madero, brother 
to the first President elected after the Mexican Revolution. Alfonza’s biography is thus 
not only an alternate and supplemental history of Mexico as Wenger claims (106), it is 
another attempt to inform Cole about the importance of heeding cultural difference. In 
McCarthy’s rendering her cautionary tale anticipates Alejandra’s story: both Alejandra’s 
and Alfonza’s chances for a proper marriage are threatened; both suffer grave 
consequences because they are “tainted” women; and both promise their father that they 
will abandon their lover in order to save his life. Because the older woman knows the 
outcome of forbidden romance in Mexico, she tries to prevent the illicit relationship 
between Cole and Alejandra. Yet again, Alfonza explains to Cole the social restrictions 
that prohibit their courtship. She frames key aspects of her narrative by telling Cole, “I 
will tell you about Mexico” and “I’ve thought a great deal about my life and about my 
country” (McCarthy 236, 238). Cole shows no signs of recognizing the parallels stories 
of the two women or of grasping her warning to respect cultural differences or pay the 
consequences. Against Alfonza’s wishes, he resolves to see Alejandra again. 

When Cole meets Alejandra in Zacatecas, she tells him that their romance has had 
devastating consequences—an echo of Alfonza’s personal story. Alejandra’s father no 
longer loves her. Cole tries to comfort her by saying, “I’ll make it right.” He implies that 
if he is allowed to tell his version of the story to her father, Don Hector will see that Cole 
loves Alejandra and intends to marry her. First, his insistence on making it “right” shows 
again his-willingness to subordinate Mexican cultural norms to his own sense of justice. 
He falsely believes that he is capable (i.e., has the power) of reconciling the situation with 



107 

her father. Second, his repeated use of the word “right” in the exchange with Alejandra is 
an echo of his initial reaction to Alfonza that the limitations on women in Mexico “don’t 
seem right.” Finally, his assertion reinforces his role as the male hero who seeks to rescue 
an imprisoned heroine. These three implications of Cole’s desire to make things “right” 
show McCarthy’s critique of the attitudes endorsed by the conventions of the Western 
novel: the hero is wrong on each count and Alejandra’s story turns out precisely as 
Alfonza predicted. In two final parallels with Alfonza’s story, Alejandra rejects Cole s 
marriage proposal and realizes she must live with the consequences of her father’s scorn. 
Pilkington explains that she leaves him “because she is the daughter of her family, class, 
and nationality,” acknowledging the “obduracy of centuries-old conventions and 
customs” (320). 

After Alejandra leaves him. Cole resolves to get his horse before returning to the 
US. McCarthy’s inscription of the cowboy’s travels in Mexico thus far show a stubborn 
tenacity that cause him to be evicted from a hacienda and nearly killed in prison. Cole 
again resolves to impose his value system in Mexico before heading home. This fact 
demonstrates not only his failure to heed cultural difference, but his complicity in 
carrying out a colonial legacy regardless of the circumstances—a legacy that the author 
disrupts throughout the novel. Cole’s final adventure reclaiming his horse reinforces the 
message that there is no place for an Anglo in Mexico who refuses to respect the cultural 
practices of the country. In a long, daring escape. Cole gets his horse, as well as that of 
Rawlins and Blevins, but is chased out of Mexico. He survives the wicked journey only 
because he is young, resilient, and a good horseman. Comanche Indians appear to Cole 
in the closing pages of All the Pretty Horses as they did in the beginning of the novel to 
confirm that there is no place for the American cowboy either in the US, where ranching 



108 


appears doomed, or in Mexico, as his expulsion illustrates because they contribute to, 
rather than challenge, a US colonial legacy that McCarthy believes must end. McCarthy 
portrays the Indians as a ghost nation of a bygone era who recognize that Cole as a 
cowboy will someday be extinct as well: “They stood and watched him pass and watched 
him vanish upon the landscape solely because he was passing. Solely because he would 
vanish” (301). Ironically, the cowboy vanishes only to join those peoples that he has 
helped make extinct in the process of Anglo westward expansion. 

Cole’s intentions may appear to be just; after all, he helps Blevins get his horse, 
he wants to court and marry the woman he loves, and ultimately he re-claims his horse. 
However, one cannot ignore the fact that Cole refuses to learn that his values are not 
universal—^that crossing the geopolitical border necessarily involves crossing cultural 
borders. Where Doerr and Puentes enable the women travelers in Stones for Ibarra and 
Old Gringo to emerge from their journeys transformed by cultural encounter, McCarthy 
represents Cole trapped by the “spatial practices” of cultural, political, and economic 
precedents that constitute him as an American cowboy (Clifford 35). The entangled 
histories of US and Mexico have made the border a zone of “policing and transgression” 
that brutally impact Cole’s sojourn as a young Anglo moving in space (Clifford 37). 
Analysis of geopoetics in All the Pretty Horses show us that, regardless of the spaces and 
places in which the protagonist finds himself, he reaffirms aggressively and violently the 
literary code of the Western novel and a complicity in a colonial legacy. The spatial 
relationships in the novel enable McCarthy to simultaneously draw on and undercut the 
stories of the Western novel that posit the cowboy as an American icon, endorse the 
mythical code of the West, and idealize history of territorial expansion. 



109 


Artistic expressions of Anglos moving in the spaces of Mexico engage and 
critique both travel writing and the Western novel. In the following chapter, the Mexican 
Revolution serves as the catalyst that drives thousands of Mexicans and their relatives to 
the US as a way to avoid the violence and upheaval of war. These northern migrations 
are recorded in varying narrative forms in Jose Villarreal’s Pocho (1959), Ernesto 
Galarza’s Barrio Bov (1971), and Americo Paredes’s George Washington Gomez (1990). 
Geopoetic depictions of Mexicans making space for themselves in these works center on 
how the genre of the bildungsroman shapes the places and spaces of the protagonists’ 
childhood, such as homes and schools, to demonstrate the dynamic and complex 
processes of assimilation and transculturation. 



NOTES 


* I have selected the following novels for specific reasons. Stones for Ibarra, Doerr’s first 
novel, has yet to receive the critical attention it deserves. Although book critics have 
reviewed Stones for Ibarra in such elite forums as the Times Literary Supplement, 

London Review of Books, and the New York Times , it has not yet been the subject of a 
substantial, literary study. In contrast to Doerr’s work, Puentes’s writing has been the 
subject of many critical analyses that primarily concern biographical traces and 
intertextuality/allusion between the fact and fiction surrounding American writer 
Ambrose Bierce and Puentes’s protagonist, the Old Gringo. While such literary detective 
work is valuable, my approach to Old Gringo focuses on geopoetics and draws on the 
work Paz to clarify Puentes’s depiction of the spaces in a way that has not been 
previously done. Pinally, I investigate McCarthy’s All the Pretty Horses in this chapter 
because it has not been analyzed fully as literature of the borderlands with emphasis on 
cultural difference, a surprising oversight given that it is the first volume of McCarthy’s 
recently completed “Border Trilogy” [among The Crossing (1994) and Cities of the Plain 
(1998)]. Although scholarship on McCarthy’s southwestern work is growing, much of the 
existing criticism addresses the ways in which his novels are revisionary, post-modem 
westerns. This work too views McCarthy’s novel as a revisionary Western, but does so 
through the paradigm of geopoetics, in this case by exploring the depiction of cultural 
difference through genre and geography. In the novels I analyze in this chapter, 

McCarthy provides the only substantive reference to Border Indians (however brief). I 
concede that my study would be enhanced by a novel that uses the Mexican Revolution 




to illustrate cultural differences among Anglo travelers and Border Indian communities; 
however, to my knowledge, no such work currently exists. 

^ According to Said, such false interpretations arise from written accounts in which 
readers afford more authority and “authenticity” to a non-native literary portrait of a 
culture than that which is represented. He explains that “many writers of travel books or 
guidebooks compose them in order to say that a country is like this, or better, that it is 
colorful, expensive, interesting, and so forth. The idea in either case is that people, places 
and experiences can always be described by a book, so much so that the book (or text) 
acquires a greater authority, and use, even than the actuality it describes” (Said 876). 

^ My own study of Anglo soldiers’ accounts of their travels in Mexico during the 
Mexican American War witness the recurring colonialist refrain of Manifest Destiny: the 
US moral mission to enlighten a benighted southern neighbor and, in the process, expand 
westward to the Pacific Ocean. [See “Border Crossing in the US-Mexico War,” in The 
Legacy of the Mexican and Spanish American Wars: Legal Literary, and Historical 
Perspectives (200011. 

This chapter responds to Clifford’s call to study literature depicting cultures in 
movement—^traveling rather dwelling—as a means to better understand identity, set forth 
in Routes: Travel and Transculturation in the Late Twentieth Century (1997). 

^ For biographical information on Doerr, see the Gale Literary Database entry under the 
author’s name at www.galenet.com and the following internet website: 
endeavor.med.nyu.edu/lit-med.lit-med-db/webdocs/weddescrips/doerr472 (10 Jan 2000). 
^ I refer specifically to Macbeth’s speech in Act V, Scene IV: “Life’s but a walking 
shadow, a poor player, / That struts and frets his hour upon the stage, / And then is heard 





no more. It is a tale / Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, / Signifying nothing” (qtd. 


in Riverside 1337). 

^ That Sara is an exploratrice sociale is made evident when she tries to change the life of 
the Ibarrans through advocating women’s suffrage, suggesting increased use of birth 
control, encouraging children to stay in school, screening in the windows of public 
schools, advocating the women boil water to avoid dysentery, and recommending 
prenatal care to pregnant women. 

^ For a biographical summary of Fuentes’s life and work, see van Delden’s recent 
publication of Carlos Fuentes. Mexico, and Modernity (1998), Hernandez de Lopez’s la 
Ohra de Carlos Fuentes: Una vision multiple (1988), or Roy’s ""Genesisy evolucidn de 
Gringo viego ” in War and Revolution in Hispanic Literature (1990). Also, brief 
biographies of Fuentes are available at the following websites: 
www.txwesleyan.edu/scoggins/world/proiects/elboom/carlosfuentes and 
www.brown.edu/Departments/English/fuenbio . 

^ The names “Winslow” and “Miranda” take on special significance in the novel. Roy 
posits that Harriet Winslow’s last name alludes to President Woodrow Wilson and the 
“US Winslow,” an American naval warship involved in the Spanish American War. For 
more information, see Roy’s work in War and Revolution in Literature (1990). Harriet 
may be linked to Robert Lowell’s first cousin, also named Harriet Winslow, who was 
bom the same year as the fictional Harriet and died the year Fuentes started writing the 
book (Gunn 75). Fuentes may have known the real Harriet Winslow because he sublet his 
Washington DC apartment to a woman of that name (Gunn 75). For more information. 






see her article “Tongue in the Ear: Puentes’ Grimo v/e/o ” in Revista Cadaiense de 


Estudios Hispdnicos (1989). 

According to van Delden’s recently published book, Carlos Puentes, Mexico, and 
Modernity (1998), Puentes and Paz became literary allies in the 1950s when Paz declared 
he wanted to change the “literary and artistic life in Mexico by ‘opening windows, 
introducing movements, works and names that were unknown in Mexico’” (4). With 
Puentes’s publication of Los dias enmascardos (1954) and his editorial work on the 
Revista mexicana de literatura (from 1955-7), Paz identifies Puentes as an important 
force in Mexican letters. Critics such as Debra Castillo have explored the relationship 
between Old Gringo and Paz’s notion of death in Mexican culture as articulated in 
“Mexican Masks” and “The Day of the Dead” in The Labyrinth of Solitude (1950). 

Critic and historian Enrique Krauze criticizes Puentes as a “guerrilla dandy” and a 
“special kind of Mexican” particularly unfit to depict the people or the nation (38, 28). 
However, I argue his status as a transnational is fimdamental to understanding The O jd 
Gringo, particularly in light of the emphasis on travel that I have maintained as central to 
reading this novel. 

That Puentes writes for a US as well as Mexican audience is confirmed by his 
simultaneous publication of Old Gringo (as both novella/«ove//e and screen play) in 
English and Spanish (Valdes 60) and his place as the first Mexican author to make the 
New York Time’s Best-seller’s List (“Border Speak” n.p.). 

Por biographical information on McCarthy, see the website of “The Cormac McCarthy 


Society” at www.cormacmccarthy.com. 



According to Jane Tompkins’s West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns (1992), 
there are five primary elements in the Western novel; death, male language, landscape, 
horses, and cattle. She argues that such elements contribute to definition of masculinity 
that is very limiting to men. For example, terse male language in the Western novel 
favors action and results over contemplation or thoughtfulness; as a result, to be 
considered manly means to act quickly and aggressively, dealing with the consequences 
later. In general, the construction of masculinity within the genre of the Western helps to 
explain the notion that male roles are more aggressive and violent than female roles in the 
colonial legacy. 

Examples of such narrative include Mark Twain’s “Roughing It” or Jack London’s 
“Whose Business is to Live.” 

Reforma [reform] is an ironic name for a town with few modem features. First, the 
name suggests the town has not been “reformed” to a place with a more modem 
infi-astmcture, an ideal of the Mexican Revolution. Second, the name may refer to Paseo 
de la Reforma, the broad, tree-lined, luxurious thoroughfare in Mexico City, the most 
modern and progressive city in Mexico. Later in All the Pretty Horses. McCarthy uses 
another ironic place-name, Encantada. The irony of such names suggest that McCarthy 
has an extremely thorough knowledge of Mexican geography. In one of the rare 
interviews granted by McCarthy, he claims that he does not write about a place until he 
has visited it (Woodward 28). This claim supports the fact that his works appear to be 
extremely well-researched. Within the context of geopoetics, the use of ironic place 
names reinforces the idea that authors’ constmct space and place to achieve specific 
effects within their novels—most notably, intensification of character (and/or reader) 


responses to cultural encounter. In the case of Reforma, for example, Cole and Rawlins 
notice the lack of modem services in the town (i.e., no electricity, paved roads). In this 
way, McCarthy reinforces their negative stereotypes of Mexico. In total, the ironic town 
name registers the limitations of the characters while showing the author’s savvy. 

While I will not summarize here the ways numerous critics interpret McCarthy’s work 
as a postmodern (and therefore) revisionary western, it is important to my argument to 
highlight the major characteristics of the western genre; (1) a connection to the land; (2) 
an elegiac sense of rootlessness in a boom or bust world; (3) laconic language and 
emphasis on action; (4) existence outside of the dominant social order; (5) conflict 
resolved by the use (or threat) of violence; (6) a code of justice that is higher than the 
law. It is a notably male genre in terms of its hero, writers, and readers. The formulaic 
western novel emerges out of medieval romance of the solitary knight fighting for what 
he believes is fair and tme. Combining the medieval romance and western genre in M 
the Pretty Horses. Pilkington summarizes the plot: “A wandering cowboy and his 
sidekick ride innocently into hostile territory. There ensue fights against insurmountable 
odds, the hero’s romance with a lovely young senorita, chases on horseback through a 
harsh but beautiful landscape” (318-9). It is also important to note that the formulaic 
western generally does not include crossing the US-Mexico border, one reason that many 
critics label McCarthy’s work as “revisionary.” For additional information, see Jane 
Tompkins’s West of Everything; The Inner Life of Westerns (1992) and Henry Nash 
Smith’s Virgin Land; The American West as Symbol and Myth (1978), (especially “The 
Western Hero”), respectively. 


Chuse draws from Paz’s essay, “Landscape and the Novel in Mexico” (1983) that 
addresses D.H. Lawrence’s and Malcolm Lowry’s depiction of land in Mexico. Chuse 
argues that McCarthy’s use of landscape in All the Pretty Horses is as equally riveting. 

In Puentes’s work, traditional gender roles suggest that a man enables a woman to 
achieve greater self-awareness. In McCarthy’s work. Cole tries to reinforce male 
conceived views of gender roles as the agent that might free his lover from restrictive 
cultural codes regarding virginity and marriage. However, McCarthy ultimately shows 
that Cole’s quest fails and thus the author challenges, rather than reinforces, patriarchal 
gender roles. 

Bell is one of only three authors to have written a book-length critical study on 
McCarthy’s writing (The Achievement of Cormac McCarthy (1988)]. The other book- 
length studies include John Sepich’s Notes on Blood Meridian (1993) and Robert L. 
Jarrett’s Cormac McCarthy (1997). In addition, the 1992-issue of Southern Quarterly 
was devoted exclusively to McCarthy’s work. 

Even in the final volume of the Border Trilogy, Cities of the Plain (1998), Cole persists 
in following his own sense of justice, a perspective that accords with the individualistic 
code of the West. In Cities of the Plain, he again crosses the border to “save” a Mexican 
woman, this time, a prostitute; the act has deadly consequences. 


CHAPTER 3 


MAKING SPACE; NORTHERN MIGRATIONS IN THE 
HISPANIC BILDUNGSROMAN 

Whereas two of the three novels in the previous chapter depict Anglos traveling 
south to Mexico around the period of the Mexican Revolution of 1910-17, works in this 
chapter present Mexican and Hispanic characters migrating north to the US in the same 
epoch. Jose Villarreal’s Pocho (1959), Ernesto Galarza’s Barrio Boy (1971), and 
Americo Paredes’s George Washington Gomez (1990) are geographic in their attention to 
movement across the border and occupation of space in communities north of the border. 
The novels merge geography with poetic expressions originating in the bildungsroman 
novel. Within that form, the narrators’ renderings of space and place represent processes 
of transculturation and assimilation. These authors draw on the trajectory common to the 
genre of the bildungsroman. The protagonist, a naive boy, experiences comfortable, 
stable childhood; following his childhood is a tumultuous period of self-discovery that is 
resolved by the protagonist finding his place in the existing social order. That trajectory 
of the bildungsroman hero is nuanced by cultural conflict as the coming of age involves 
Mexican or Hispanic protagonists adapting to life in a dominant society that discriminates 
against them. Exploring genre and authorial constructions of space that include villages, 
households, barrios, and public schools elucidates the ways that the protagonists 
ultimately make space for themselves in the US. They carve out new hybrid identities 
that allow them to draw on their Mexican/Indian heritage and Anglo culture.^ 

Pocho and Barrio Bov demonstrate models of transculturation in which 
protagonists integrate Mexican cultural mores instilled in them as children and beliefs of 
the dominant Anglo community they learn in US public schools. Cuban sociologist 




118 

Fernando Ortiz coined the term “transculturation” in the 1940s to replace acculturation 
associated with the US “melting pot.” Acculturation implies that one’s ethnic heritage 
becomes inextricably amalgamated with greater Anglo culture (Oboler 84-86). Ortiz 
introduced transculturation as a term recognizing that an individual may retain distinct 
elements of ethnic identity while also borrowing norms from other cultures (Pratt 228; J. 
Saldivar, Border 204). The term’s contemporary currency implies a hybridization of 
identity as “subordinated or marginal groups select and invent from materials submitted 
to them by a dominant or metropolitan culture” (Pratt 6). Hybridization, then, refers to 
that process of selection and invention that is set in motion among subordinated groups 
whose marginalization is the result of transculturation. In contrast to the more 
contemporary concept of transculturation revealed in Pocho and Barrio Bov . Georg e 
Washington Gomez gestures back to the earlier model of assimilation as a reductive 
process in which an individual abandons the original culture and then replaces it Avith 
identification to another. Thus, the protagonist of George Washington Gomez struggles to 
reconcile competing loyalties to the Mexican and Anglo communities but ultimately 
rejects any identification with his Mexican heritage. 

Chicano and non-Chicano critics alike have contended that Pocho . Barrio Boy, 
and George Washington Gomez are precursors to the Chicano literary renaissance of the 
1970s (Myers 186). Within the existing scholarly discourse on these texts, my approach 
to these works as geopoetic representations figures them not only as examples of 
Chicano/a letters, but as literature of the borderlands—an important distinction—because 
the latter has clear associations to a political and physical geography, the US-Mexico 
borderlands, while Chicano/a literature is not necessarily tied to such specific 
geographies. Even as Pocho. Barrio Bov, and George Washington Gom ez are certainly 



119 

pioneer works of the Chicano movement, validating and legitimizing countless stories of 

migration, resistance, and adaptation, their social definitions are also spatial. That is, they 

show how spatial geography combines with social relations to inform characters’ 

processes of resisting and/or adapting to life in the US. Framing border literature as 

geopoetic expression emphasizes a political geography that defines the region and 

informs this body of writing. Conceptualizing these works as borderland writing offers an 

elucidation of the effect of the geopolitical border on the region as generating specific 

forms and styles of literary expression. Borders act as an agent and reflection of cultural 

difference, influencing how writers construct narrative space and how they represent 

2 

characters as negotiating those spaces. 

Pocho. Barrio Bov, and George Washington Gomez are bildungsroman narratives, 
a form that originated with Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe’s Wilhelm M eisters Lahnahre 
[Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship (1759)]. As this title suggests, the bildungsroman is 
variously conceptualized as an “apprenticeship” work or narrative of “individual 
development,” genre paradigms based on the German word “bildung” or “formation” 
(Minden 118-9). That formation is expressed as realistic narrative about the maturation 
process of a single character, usually male. Such a character emerges fi-om a comfortable 
childhood, enters a state of self-discovery, and ultimately achieves social integration as 
an adult within a larger community (Minden 119). While using the elements of the 
bildungsroman novel. Barrio Bov is, in fact, an autobiography.^ This genre is closely 
related to the bildungsroman because both forms embody youths’ “utopian projections” 
about how they can simultaneously retain a sense of individuality yet conform to societal 
demands (Minden 121). I approach all three narratives as works demonstrating 
characteristics of the bildungsroman; in the explication of space, place, and geography 




120 

within the geopoetic model, I explore Pocho and George Washington Gomez through the 
framework of liminality. This paradigm does not apply to Barrio because Galarza’s 
autobiographical recreation of a nostalgic, idyllic childhood and adaptation to a new 
cultural space and society is devoid of a tumultuous, liminal period of self-discovery. 
Thus, it does not figure as a narrative that is usefully examined in terms of liminality, a 
theory concerning a disruptive coming of age process developed by anthropologist Victor 
Turner. Turner’s concept of liminality emphasizes literal and symbolic spaces in the 
ritualization of an individual’s transition from childhood to adulthood thus offering a 
useful framework for examining how the author shapes childhood and transitional spaces 
and places in a coming of age tale in which the protagonist is temporarily suspended 
between spaces and places in society. Applying liminality to Pocho , the subject of the 
following section, frames this bildungsroman novel as an expressive representation that 
tells us that geography matters—^birthplace makes a difference in how one adapts and 
resists norms of family, community, and culture as the protagonist, Richard Rubio, 
matures from childhood to adulthood, achieving a rite of passage in which he 
transculturates to become a pocho who adopts cultural norms from both the Mexican and 
Anglo communities. 

Pocho 

Villarreal’s novel personalizes the “great exodus that come of the Mexican 
Revolution” through the story of the Rubio family that begins with Juan Rubio, a former 
Revolutionary officer (15). Villarreal begins in a way consistent with a motif in the 
bildungsroman genre in which the protagonist’s future conflicts are foreshadowed, in this 
case, before his birth. The conflicts with which the protagonist will later struggle- 
feeling tom between his Mexican ancestry and his American citizenship are set up in 



121 

the opening pages with Villarreal’s portrait of Richard’s father as a revolutionary. That 
father’s loyalties to Mexico are later manifested through the environment he creates for 
Richard as a child, loyalties from which Richard will ultimately free himself by claiming 
a hybrid identity of “pocho,” a mid-twentieth-century label for people born in the US of 
Mexican decent (Villarreal, “Chicano” 161). 

Pocho begins in Mexico where Juan kills a man during an altercation in Juarez 
and crosses into El Paso, Texas. The “old dog of the Revolution” joins an insurgency 
group to oust the “bastard opportunist,” President Alvaro Obregon, whom Juan agrees to 
assassinate to make way for the presidency ofPancho Villa (Villarreal 6, 10, 27). The 
insurgency is aborted, however, when Villa is assassinated—a death that signals the end 
of the revolution and causes Juan to despair. Shortly afterwards, Juan’s wife, Consuelo, 
gives birth to their first and only son, Richard, and the Rubios move to Santa Clara, 
California. That Juan had joined an insurgency group and agreed to assassinate Obregon 
before the move north, and mourns the end of the Revolution illustrates his intense love 
of Mexico. These feelings do not abate when he settles in the US. The Rubios’ relocation 
to Santa Clara is significant in Villarreal’s depiction of place: Juan, despite his desire to 
cross back over into Mexico, does not return to the beloved homeland Mexico because he 
murdered a man and has political enemies there. Instead, the Rubios move farther away 
from Mexico not just for economic reasons, to follow migrant farm jobs, but more 
broadly, as a register of how Juan is acutely and painfully reminded that the Revolution is 
over. 

Despite Juan’s displacement, Villarreal uses place in the novel as a means of 
showing how Juan figuratively carries a piece of Mexico with him to the US where he 
seeks or creates spaces that will teach Richard about his ethnic heritage. Such an 


122 

expression of space figures the young boy as the quintessential bildungsroman hero who 
assumes the role set forth for him as a child who, in this case is thoroughly and 
contentedly enmeshed in Mexican community. The author’s depiction of Richard’s early 
childhood is commensurate with the genre paradigm of the bildungsroman in which a 
young boy’s life is a “happy dream,” where he finds “kindred spirits,” “friendship and 
love” (Minden 119). For instance, Juan foregrounds the importance of Richard’s 
connections to the local Mexican community by bringing the boy on visits to Mexican 
and Hispanic households scattered throughout the Santa Clara Valley where, years after 
the Revolution, he boasts of someday returning to Mexico. The trips with his father 
provide deep cultural roots for Richard that squarely anchor him to community. 

With his father, Richard sat around campfires or in strange kitchens, with wood 
stoves burning strongly and the ever-present odor of a pot of pink beans boiling, 
freshly cooked tortillas filling the close, warm room, and listened to the tales of 
that strange country which seemed to him a land so distant, and the stories also 
seemed of long, long ago. It was then, listening and weaving a parallel fantasy in 
his mind, that he felt an enjoyment so great that he knew he could not possibly 
savor it all. (Villarreal 43) 

This passage illustrates Villarreal’s artistic expression of the safe spaces of Richard’s 
childhood at the hearths of Mexican households and the fire pits of migrant work camps. 
Richard is intrigued by stories of Mexico and conjures fantasy images of the beloved 
homeland to which he will belong someday. The young boy hears fellow Mexicans 
corroborating his father’s hope of returning to Mexico in a manner that suggests to 
Richard that Juan’s vision will someday be a reality for him. Although Richard has yet to 




123 


live in “that strange country,” the adults’ nostalgia for the place—which in Juan’s case 
grows over the years—is as palpable to the youth as the beans and tortillas he eats. 

Juan provides Richard with another glimpse into Mexican culture by allowing 
fellow Mexican migrant workers to camp in their yard or live in the bam during summer 
harvests. Richard has many Mexican friends during these “glorious” times when he 
learns to sing Mexican folksongs and perform regional dances at fiestas “so that there, in 
the center of Santa Clara, a small piece oiMexico, was contained within the fences of the 
lot on which Juan kept his family” (Villarreal 43). The author’s construction of spaces— 
hearth, home, lot, and bam—shows how Juan’s loyalty to Mexico influences the way he 
raises his only son, exposing him to “a small piece of Mexico” in Santa Clara (43). 

Villarreal also depicts Richard’s mother immersing her son in Mexican culture 
through involvement with the Roman Catholic Church, an institution attended by Santa 
Clara’s Spanish-speaking community. In Villarreal’s depiction of space, the church 
reinforces Richard’s place in the community. This depiction is characteristic of the 
bildungsroman novel in which religion is a force that integrates the boy hero into society 
but ultimately becomes one of the institutions that the adult protagonist rejects in 
formulating an independent sense of self. According to the author, Consuelo actively 
promotes Richard’s participation in the church as a small child to prevent him from 
feeling as alienated as she does: “She would not try to explain to him the importance of 
companionship and the security of belonging to a group. It would only make her think of 
how she herself was sometimes lonely here without any of her people” (35). To satisfy 
her needs of belonging and ensure her son’s membership in the church community, the 
family attends mass routinely and participates in saints’ days. As a child, Richard 



124 


embraces the religious zeal demonstrated by his mother, admitting, “I believe in God, 
Mama, I believe in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost” (Villarreal 65). 

In Villarreal’s portrayal, church and family reinforce the importance of Mexican 
community and celebrate Mexican identity, thereby offering Richard a “relatively fixed 
or stable condition” during his childhood, a phase that Turner labels pre-liminality 
(“Betwixt” 94-5). Artistic expressions of his childhood environs combined with a portrait 
of the boy’s childhood reveal a literal and cultural geography in which Richard feels 
intimately connected to well-defined, stable, social spaces shaped by his Mexican 
immigrant parents. However, as Richard enters prepubescence, his intellectual 
inquisitiveness drives him beyond the confines of church and home that, however 
comfortable and familiar, limit his sense of self in their exclusive identification with 
Mexicanness. Foreshadowing how the teenager begins metaphorically to outgrow the 
spaces of his childhood, Villarreal uses religious doubt and reading to mark the beginning 
of Richard’s entrance into a transitional state where he increasingly ventures into the 
surrounding community. The purpose of these adventures is to find his place in the 
existing community, an issue that troubles the bildungsroman hero. 

Richard seeks to know more about God than either his mother or the priest will 
tell him. He searches for answers to reconcile paradoxes about God that confuse him, 
such as how a benevolent God is also responsible for creating the evil thing that he fears 
the most, darkness. Richard asks his mother questions about God, but she tries to pacify 
him by urging simply faith (Villarreal 33). Her stance is backed by the church priest who 
tells Richard that “one does not question God” (Villarreal 37). Angered by responses that 
call for blind faith rather than genuine understanding, Richard silently wonders, “Why 
did they not want to tell him? God made the world. Who is God? But if He was good and 




125 

kind, why did He make darkness?” (Italics in original; 37). Richard secretly tries to find 
answers outside home and church to satisfy his quest for knowledge; among other things, 
he lies in a vacant field challenging God to respond directly to his questions.’ 

Richard’s passion for reading books also demonstrates a hunger for knowledge 
that carries him beyond the parameters of home. He loses himself, finding solace, 
comfort, and instruction in books that not only free him from the physical places that he 
inhabits—^the geography of the boy’s home space limits and confines him—^but that also 
enable him to satisfy an intellectual hunger unfulfilled by family, community, and 
congregation. The youth reads voraciously, trying to read every book in the school 
library, because, he claims, it allows him to “travel all over the world and sometimes out 
of this whole universe” (64). Villarreal suggests that Richard’s parents tolerate such 
behavior because it serves their own ends. Consuelo thinks Richard’s education will 
increase the family’s socio-economic status someday, and Juan believes Richard’s pursuit 
of knowledge will prepare him to become a professional in Mexico. 

However, when Richard reaches puberty, Consuelo’s and Juan’s expectations for 

him begin to conflict directly with his own desires. This conflict creates a situation that 

8 

plunges the teenager into a transitional state, what Turner would call a liminal phase. 
Cultural norms that made relatively few demands on Richard as a child, according to 
Villarreal, place the teen in a troubling new space characterized by “ambiguity and 
paradox” (Turner, “Betwixt” 97).^ The culture that initiated him into a sense of self 
becomes inadequate to Richard when it levies familial duties on the protagonist that he 
does not want to accept, a common struggle in the bildungsroman portrait that will lead 
Richard toward the life of an intellectual and an artist. Examining Villarreal’s use of both 
genre and space reveals that his parent’s strong associations to Mexico—Juan’s 


126 

nationalism and Consuelo’s faith—begin to stifle the US-bom teenager who increasingly 
registers less interest in his parent’s past in Mexico and more keen desire in forging his 
own future in the US/° 

As the novel progresses to reveal the protagonist’s bildungsroman development, 
true to the liminal paradigm, Richard is no longer “classified” solely as a schoolboy but 
he is “not yet classified” as a workingman (Turner, “Betwixt” 96). Villarreal signals the 
transition from stable childhood to tumultuous adolescence in a scene in which Richard’s 
mother offers him options concerning work and school that, in the young teen’s mind, are 
unacceptable. Consuelo first tells Richard, as the oldest male child, that he may have to 
quit school and find employment to help support the family in accordance with Mexican 
custom. Relenting somewhat, Consuelo then says that Richard may be allowed to 
continue school, but only to increase the Rubio family’s socio-economic status (Villarreal 
62). On top of these expectations, she adds the final requirement that both parents levy on 
Richard—^that he marry and have a family of his own someday (Villarreal 63). 

Villarreal balances family responsibility with independence of spirit to show how 
Richard attempts to reassure Consuelo of his loyalty to the family. At the same time, 
Richard recognizes education as the “freedom to think as one pleases, to discover 
knowledge on his terms and not have it imposed” (Cardenas 129). In the scene, Richard 
demands that he be allowed to stay in school: “AhiWa/wd! Try to understand me. I want 
to learn, and that is all. I do not want to be something—I am. I do not care about making 
a lot of money and about what people think and about the family in the way you speak. I 
have to learn as much as I can, so that I can live ... learn for me, for myself^ (Italics in 
original; Villarreal 64). He adds a sense of urgency by justifying his studies on the basis 
that life is short; he says, “the Mexican people are right when they say that life is only a 



127 

breath” (64). Here, the author illustrates the burgeoning liminality of the protagonist, who 
uses the familiar Spanish epithet. Mama, and a Mexican colloquialism to demonstrate 
loyalty to his family’s heritage, while also appealing to an American ethos of 
individualism that privileges the pursuit of personal dreams. 

Villarreal characterizes Richard as a figure making a transition from Mexican 
boyhood to Hispanic adulthood: 

Then he suddenly felt a responsibility so heavy as to be a physical pressure, and 
first he became sad that his lot was a dictate and that his parents believed so 
strongly in the destiny, and then he was angry that traditions could take a body 
and a soul—for he had a soul; of that he was certain—and mold it to fit a pattern. 
He spoke out then, but not in anger, saying things he sensed but did not really 
understand, an uncomprehending child with the strong desire to have a say in his 
destiny. (Italics added; Villarreal 63) 

Chicano critic Ramon Saldivar conceptualizes this scene as part of a larger discussion of 
the ways in which Richard struggles to reconcile his individualism with his Mexican 
heritage. Richard “sees the possibility of figuring his own world,” according to Saldivar, 
“which might serve as the foundation for a revitalized personal and cultural identity” 
(Chicano 67). The protagonist recognizes that the forces shaping his destiny also deny 
him the agency and power to control it. As Richard grows older, this predicament 
becomes increasingly contentious, a situation that Villarreal frames through growing 
antagonisms between parents and son. 

Several arguments with Juan highlight Richard’s positionality between his 
responsibilities to his Mexican heritage and freedom from it offered by Anglo culture. 
Literary critic Rafael Grajeda writes that Richard has an “urge to be recognized on his 


128 

own terms,” a signal of his individualism that, in this critic’s larger assessment, illustrates 
Richard’s heroic qualities (332). In a series of exchanges with his father, Richard refuses 
to identify exclusively with a sense of Mexicanness. When Richard asks about his Indian, 
Spanish, French, and Mexican ancestry, Juan barks at him, “We are Mexicans, Richard, 
that is all” and later tells him not to speak English, “the dog language,” at home 
(Villarreal 99). “But this is America, Father,” Richard retorts, “If we live in this country, 
we must live like Americans ... I mean that you must remember that we are not in 
Mexico" (Villarreal 133). Challenging his father’s singular and exclusive ties to Mexico, 
Richard disrupts the “fixed points in space-time of structural classification” set forth for 
him by Juan (Turner, “Betwixt” 97). 

Richard pushes away from the impositions of his parents and seeks out people and 
places where he is encouraged to pursue his own intellectual interests, activity typical of 
the bildungsroman character. The protagonist finds a fellow-outsider and freethinker in 
Joe Pete, a shepherd in Santa Clara who functions, among other characters in the novel, “ 
as a guide who encourages transitional characters like Richard “to think about their 
society, their cosmos, and the powers that generate and sustain them” (Turner, “Betwixt” 
99). Joe Pete’s solitary life of rigorous intellectualism appeals to Richard who “absorb(s) 
everything” (Villarreal 81). Richard is hungry for answers, but Joe Pete does not overtly 
provide them—he forces the boy to think for himself In response to questions about 
religious faith, for example, Joe Pete tells Richard, “I would do you great wrong to teach 
you what I feel, because to you it should only be important whatyow feel” (italics in 
original; Villarreal 85). Thus, Joe Pete inculcates in Richard the importance of making 
one’s own decisions, a point Martinez makes within a larger discussion of the ways in 
which Joe Pete encourages Richard’s eventual positionality as a transculturated persona 



129 


(422). Joe Pete also prompts Richard to question not only his sense of self but what 
Turner calls the “elements and basic building blocks of symbolic complexities they had 
hitherto taken for granted” (“Variations” 49-50), 

Joe Pete’s eccentric lifestyle provides a model for Richard by showing him that it 
is possible to live on the margins of society, a place where Richard might be able to 
pursue the intellectual life that he craves. Villarreal’s depiction of Richard’s mentor 
places Joe Pete literally on the fringes of Santa Clara in a shack on the outskirts of town 
and symbolically in a marginal place in the Spanish-speaking community, an agnostic 
estranged among Roman Catholics. The son of a Portuguese aristocrat, Joe Pete has also 
withdrawn from his family because he disapproves of his father’s political opportunism, 
that is, his ever-changing loyalties that shift according to the ruling group in power 
(Villarreal 81-3). Joe Pete’s refusal to compromise his beliefs affords Richard a role 
model that the liminal teenager increasingly emulates by asserting what he believes, even 
when it requires him to defy his parent’s expectations. Joe Pete’s fate in the book—being 
arrested on charges of molesting a young girl—also teaches Richard the dangers of living 
on the edge of society. 

Richard seeks out other marginalized characters, notably a pachuco/a gang, as he 
increasingly ventures into the local community and pushes away from what he perceives 
as the constraints of the institution of family. The author describes the Mexican 
zootsuiters, using an unmistakable allusion to Octavio Paz’s polemical portrait of them in 
The Labyrinth of Solitude (1949). Both Villarreal and Paz note the pachuco’s/a’s 
polyglot “Spanglish,” defiant manner of dress, and rebellious conduct. Sometimes 
American-born and sometimes a “product of migration,” pachucos/as steadfastly cling to 
a liminal position by refusing to return to Mexico or assimilate into US culture 



130 


(Monsivais 109).^^ In Mexican Postcards (1997), Carlos Monsivais explains that 
pachucos in Texas and California mapped out new territory between the Mexican and 
Anglo communities between 1938 and 1942 (109-110). Like Joe Pete, the pachucos/as 
teach Richard that it is possible to occupy a marginal place in society, though such 
positionality comes with sacrifices and risks. Villarreal illustrates the latter when the 
gang is arrested on allegations of stealing that reflect more a climate of racism in the 
community than the youths’ criminal intentions. The liminality of the pachucos earns 
them scorn from their Mexican parents and Anglo peers because they are “affiliated to 
the American Way of Life only eccentrically,” even as they are identified as “part of 
Mexican culture by confronting racism” (Monsivais 110). 

At this point in the narrative, the protagonist emerges from a liminal state. In the 
course of enduring several “ordeals,” which fit Turner’s paradigm of literal or symbolic 
challenges for initiands, spatial dynamics come into play as Richard figuratively tries to 
make a place for himself by accessing both Mexican and Anglo cultural mores. If 
liminality offers, as Turner avers, “a realm of pure possibility whence novel 
configurations of ideas and relations may arise” (“Betwixt” 97), Richard emerges from 
the first ordeal, a conflict with his father, by rejecting familial mandates that his parents 
have imposed on him since childhood. In this scene, Juan tells Richard, “Your life 
belongs to us, and will belong to us even after you marry, because we gave it to you. You 
can never forget your responsibility to the family” (Villarreal 130). He also tells his son 
that Richard has “fulfilled but a part of your debt to your race,'" adding, “you must fulfill 
the destiny of your God. When you are older, you will marry and have a family” (Italics 
added; Villarreal 130). Juan frames his exhortation for Richard to have children as if it 
were a national obligation to Mexico. Ignoring his father’s patriotic demand, Richard, 



131 


states that he does not plan to get married, a “false” and meaningless institution in his 
mind (Villarreal 144-5).^^ 

Richard’s rejection of marriage in broader theoretical terms means that he 
embraces individualism to the degree that it precludes him from participating in an 
institution that not only pairs him with another individual for life but may obstruct him 
from achieving his personal goals that, although unspecified at this point, suggest an 
artist in the making. This depiction of Richard resonates with the kiinstlerroman, a form 
made famous by James Joyce’s Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916j. In the 
kiinstlerroman, the hero struggles to become an artist accepted by society, negotiating 
“poetry of the heart and the prose of the world”; in the bildungsroman, the hero attempts 
to attain a sense of individuality and social position (Minden 121). Richard is challenged 
to do both in Pocho, as his various tests demonstrate. 

Richard’s second test involves a confrontation with his mother. Deconstructing 
ethnic labels in this scene, Villarreal marks Richard’s rejection of the term “wholly 
Mexican” imposed by others on him. When Juan threatens to leave the family, Consuelo 
tells Richard that he will be responsible for the family should this occur. Richard balks: 
“He thought of himself, and starkly, without knowledge of the words that would describe 
it, he saw the demands of tradition, of culture, of the social structure on an individual. 
\Mierda! jEspura mierdal And he knew that he could never again be wholly Mexican” 
(Villarreal 95). He forswears a “wholly Mexican” identity that threatens to subsume his 
personal sense of self. This incident foreshadows Richard’s final test that occurs when 
Consuelo and Juan separate. 

Grajeda conceptualizes Richard’s predicament as a struggle for individualism 
from which Richard later emerges a hero who remains true to his unique sense of self 




132 


Grajeda summarizes; “His father wants him to be a ‘man’ and a Mexican; his mother 
wants him to be a provider and a good Mexican son . .. Valuing only his own 
individuality, he attempts to wind his way through the many obstacles that he sees as 
attempts at stifling him as a person” (334). When his father leaves the family, Richard 
dismisses his mother’s new role for him in the Rubio family and reasserts the importance 
of education in his life. Richard offers to work temporarily until he can find the means to 
go to college but he also informs her, “when the time comes that I want to go to school, 
Mama, I will do so” (172). 

With the youth’s dismissal of the roles imposed by both his father and mother, 
Villarreal signals Richard’s coming of age. Richard breaks away from the spaces of his 
origin to make space for himself in the larger national society, a common motif in the 
bildungsroman. For Richard, this assertion of self marks a rite of passage into 
adulthood—a transformational “change in being” (Turner, “Betwixt” 102)—in which he 
transculturates into the hybrid identity of a pocho who selects elements from both his 
Mexican and American heritage. Richard affirms a bicultural identity when he tells a 
Mexican friend, “I am a Pocho” (Villarreal 165); an important signpost in Richard’s 
personal sojourn, it marks the first time in the novel that he self-identifies. His 
identification as a pocho is significant because it is Villarreal’s only reference to the title 
throughout the novel; the author underscores the importance of Richard’s chosen identity 
following a difficult liminal sojourn. In addition, this statement anticipates the 
empowerment Richard feels as a pocho who, on one hand, is no longer bound by the 
responsibilities associated with the labels of eldest son in a Mexican family or devout 
Catholic parishioner. On the other hand, Richard simultaneously embraces an 
identification with Anglo culture based on his status as American-born. 


133 

In a 1979-interview, Villarreal defined “pocho” as a label for people born in the 
US of Mexican decent (“Chicano” 161). As an example of its use, he notes that Mexican 
parents call their American-born sons and daughters “pocho” to recognize the confluence 
of Mexican and Anglo cultures that influence their sense of self (“Chicano” 161-2). 
Villarreal recognizes it as an insider’s term of “endearment, that is, an epithet used 
exclusively between people with Mexican ancestry. Villarreal also states that ‘ pocho 
connotes the difficulties of adapting to Mexican and Anglo culture as if “alone in a new 
country—alien, striving, expending our every energy merely to keep ourselves alive” 
(161-2). As a pocho, Richard can be “part of everything,” to use Villarreal’s words in the 
novel (152), thereby transforming “his ambiguous status as a child of two cultures into an 
acceptable identity for himself’ (R. Saldivar, Chicano 61). 

Self-identifying as a pocho is empowering because it is a chosen rather than 
imposed label; “When we name things, we give them a life of their own,” explains 
Paredes, “By naming ourselves, we affirm our own identity” (“Problem” 31). Self¬ 
naming is also important, particularly among minority cultures because, as Suzanne 
Oboler notes, ethnic labels are powerful mechanisms that have traditionally been used to 
homogenize or otherwise control a particular group of people (generally minorities) (1- 
16). Within a larger discussion of the term “Hispanic,” an official government 
categorization, she notes that ethnic labels invoke a politics of representation that is 
minimized through self-identification. Richard’s choice to assert himself as a pocho is an 
act demonstrating a degree of agency that prevents others from imposing a label on him. 

In addition to labeling himself a pocho, Richard asserts himself in another 
manner: he confidently tells his father that he plans to be a writer. The protagonist’s 
reintegration into the existing social order as a pocho and writer projects a literary 



134 


identity in which Richard re-establishes a space for himself within the literal home in 
Santa Clara and his larger home in the US. This combination of genre elements and 
spatial depiction ultimately mark a resolution of the conflict between father and son 
building throughout the text. When Richard tells his father that he will be a writer, Juan 
is surprisingly supportive even though Richard undercuts his father’s dream for his son to 
be a doctor or lawyer in Mexico. In this exchange, Juan links Richard’s selected vocation 
to his ethnic heritage by stating, “if it does not stand in your way, do not ever forget that 
you are Mexican” (Villarreal 169). Although somewhat uncharacteristic, Juan’s statement 
nonetheless confirms Richard’s status as a transculturated and bicultural man. It 
acknowledges what his son has been struggling to reconcile since adolescence; the notion 
that his identity is not wholly a “dictate” of Mexican cultural norms. Juan’s comment also 
subordinates Richard’s ethnic heritage as a Mexican to Richard’s adoptive identity as a 
pocho, that becomes for the boy “a new and different source of personal, cultural, and 
political consciousness” (R. Saldivar, Chicano 70). The competing values that surface 
during his liminal period—^Juan’s proud hope that Richard will be a professional in 
Mexico verses Richard’s desire to become a writer in the US—are resolved. 

In the closing pages of the book, Richard permanently leaves the Rubio family. 
Villarreal suggests the military is Richard’s only escape fi-om his promise to help support 
the family following Juan’s abandonment of them. In a bar one day, he realizes that he 
could be easily “carried along in the stream of life in Santa Clara” as a working class man 
who simply grows older and worn out (Villarreal 178). He thinks, “There was nothing to 
be done now, except run away from the insidious tragedy of such an existence” 

(Villarreal 186). He enlists in the Navy sensing that it is “his only alternative—to get 
away from this place” (Villarreal 185). Villarreal uses this final act in the novel to 




135 

guarantee Richard a place far beyond the confines of those spaces and places that limited 
his sense of self by imposing narrow culturally defined roles. 

Villarreal’s artistic expression of space combines with incremental phases of 
liminal experience to demonstrates the protagonist’s process of transculturation. Over the 
course of the novel, Richard moves from a world defined by and associated with his 
parent’s inculcation of Mexicanness through an experimental, liminal phase to a world 
outside home and church where he defines himself as a pocho and writer. These dual self- 
identifications mean Richard, both the bildungsroman and kiinstlerroman hero, achieves 
his objective of finding an acceptable “accommodation between the individual and 
society” (Minden 120). Like Pocho . Barrio Bov also fits the bildungsroman paradigm in 
Galarza’s depiction of the maturation of an individual—^ffom a specific starting point in 
childhood to a specific endpoint in adulthood. Barrio Bov is also an expressly 
autobiographical narrative, a “work of self-revelation” that, in conjunction with the 
bildungsroman, is also a “development of the self’ (Minden 122). Exploring the 
overlapping genres of autobiography and bildungsroman as well as Galarza’s depictions 
of place in Mexico and the US in Barrio Bov shows the ways the protagonist smoothly 
adapts to the influences of Americanization, while maintaining pride in his Mexican 
roots. 

Barrio Bov 

Barrio Bov describes Galarza’s own migration to the US and his own coming of 
age story. To accomplish this, the author combines elements of the autobiography and 
bildungsroman genre with depictions of space and place, specifically an idyllic Mexican 
village, US public schools, and urban barrios. The work culminates in a process of 
transculturation wherein the protagonist, Ernesto Galarza, becomes a social activist, a 


136 


cultural mediator between the Mexican and American communities; thus, Galarza 
achieves the objective of the bildungsroman hero, which is to harmonize one’s internal 
needs with external demands from society (Minden 119). In Galarza’s expression of this 
experience, “inner and outer combine fruitfully, without one being subordinated to the 
other” (Minden 119). 

Rendering of the past in Barrio Bov begins in Mexico. Galarza nostalgically 
fashions his hometown of Jalcocotan, Nayarit as a paradisiacal space for a young boy’s 
early childhood. He accomplishes this by depicting the protagonist as contentedly 
immersed in village culture because, among other reasons, the community defines and 
enforces social roles and acceptable behavior for children through well-articulated norms. 
Omitting the foreshadowing that often begins the bildungsroman narrative, Galarza 
portrays the hero as a content child, happily enmeshed in the community that surrounds 
him (Minden 119). For example, the author explains that children are assigned distinct 
gender roles around the age of six: girls are relegated to domestic work and boys begin to 
help their fathers at odd jobs outside of the house, in activities such as collecting 
firewood and tending the cornfields. Ernesto accepts and embraces such prescribed roles 
as giving him a chance to prove himself capable of being a man. 

Traditional ritual exchanges associated with children’s roles also explain 
Ernesto’s feelings of stability and security as a child. For Ernesto, Jalcocotan is an “easy 
place” to live because he simply adheres to the well-articulated roles for children and 
practices the traditional exchanges expected by the community (Galarza 51). For 
example, children running errands for adults must do so according to prescribed 
behaviors. “When you delivered something,” Ernesto explains, “you always began by 
saying: ‘My mother sends greetings and says may God give you a good day, and here is 



137 


an egg’” (Galarza 46). Adults in the village enforce ritual exchanges because of the 
values that such behavior implies; children are to respect adults. In addition to revealing a 
premium on respecting elders, this quote reveals a prevalence of oral tradition and 
reciprocity of gift giving in the town that contribute to Galarza’s nostalgic, 
autobiographical recreation of it. 

Galarza depicts homogeneity as another factor contributing to his happy 
childhood; he finds his place easily in the social fabric of a community with little social 
or economic diversity. This depiction yet again speaks to the harmonious integration of a 
child’s inner and outer selves, an element representative of the bildungsroman narrative. 
Galarza renders the village space as well as the boy’s social space in a utopian projection 
of the past: Jalcocotan appears part of a Golden Age characterized as an epoch of natural, 
pastoral, simple life governed by virtuous moral order (Williams 35-45). In addition to a 
shared consanguinity and common Native ancestry, every family in town has a similar 
quality of life. Identical mud houses line the street featuring two doors, no windows, and 
a corral in the back yard. Everyone lacks electricity and plumbing and most of the men 
work similar agricultural jobs. The fact that there is no governor, priest, teacher, or police 
in Jalcocotan further contributes to the pervasive homogeneity of a community that lacks 
an official regulatory hierarchy. 

Community spirit in Jalcocotan also manifests in the lack of distinct spatial 
borders between public and private spheres. People keep their front and back doors open 
all day and, demonstrating the colloquialism that “mi casct es su casa, Jalcocotecanos 
enter each other’s houses as if they were their own. Similarly, the street and plaza have 
no name and the town itself has no artificial boundaries. There is also no delineation of 
property between different villages regarding the surrounding forest. 



138 


At this point in the autobiography, the author has established a sense of 
community in which Ernesto recognizes the importance of his own membership. A 
geopoetical approach reveals Galarza’s triple engagement with autobiographical 
recollection and recreation of the past, a bildungsroman paradigm of utopian harmony 
between personal desires and community demands, and a fashioning of pastoral, idyllic 
spaces where the protagonist thrives. The narrative goes on to chronicle the author’s 
migration to the US through Ernesto’s travels to Tepic, Acaponeta, and Mazatlan that 
occur when the violence of the Mexican Revolution threatens to invade the tranquil 
Jalcocotan. Galarza reconstructs the journey to the US as an exciting adventure for a 
young boy. In each city that Ernesto temporarily inhabits before continuing the journey 
north, he is exposed to varying degrees of technological innovation, class stratification, 
and capitalism that broaden his provincial sensibility. In accordance with the 
bildungsroman, the protagonist is thrust into the world for the purpose of self-discovery 
(Minden 119). But this is not a troubling or tumultuous period for Ernesto; instead, 
traveling beyond Jalcocotan offers a world of “possibilities” where he hopes to learn 
more about himself and others through new experience (Minden 120). As the youth 
becomes more worldly and cosmopolitan, however, he also retains an appreciation of 
those values his Mexican roots herald, such as respect for adults, community 
involvement, helping others. 

Galarza uses the journey to the US to celebrate the Mexican nation and to 
illustrate the ways that the protagonist identifies as a Mexican citizen. Specifically, he 
notes how a sense of shared nationalism in each city that he visits also helps him to 
maintain a sense of his Mexican selfhood. Whether admiring the horsemanship of a 
charro or comparing the plazas de armas in different towns, Ernesto maintains a firm 


139 

sense of identity due to the imagined community of the nation. Here it is useful to 
consider this larger sense of fidelity in the context of the work of theorist Benedict 
Anderson. He defines the nation as an “imagined political community which is 
conceived through a “deep, horizontal comradeship” (6-7). In this framework, citizens 
who do not know one another, and indeed may never meet one another, share a common 
conception of what it means to be a Mexican citizen. Their communal “taken-for-granted 
frames of reference,” according to Anderson, create an “imagined community” (6-7). 
Even though the Galarzas come from an isolated mountain town, they find common 
ground with other Mexican citizens in their shared concept of the nation. That concept of 
the nation is stressed, especially, in national institutions, such as public schools, the 
military, and mythic representations of the past, particularly in past battles against other 
nations. As the star of the school play, Ernesto experiences such shared comradeship 
when he is cast as a Mexican soldier in battle against French invaders. The raucous 
approval of the audience makes Ernesto proud. 

Even though the concept of the nation is in transition due to the Mexican 
Revolution, the war also helps Ernesto maintain a strong attachment to his ethnic heritage 
while also depicting the journey as an exciting adventure for the boy. Galarza 
accomplishes these acts by using the Revolution to provide a clearly identifiable, 
common hero around which his family and multiple communities rally. His mother and 
uncles clearly side with Francisco Madero’s efforts to reform the government when the 
Revolution begins in 1910. His uncles, Jose and Gustavo, explain to Ernesto that they 
support the revolutionaries because of the abuses of the thirty-year dictatorship of 
Porfiriato Diaz. On another occasion, Ernesto and his family live through a siege of 
Mazatlan, an exciting but scary event for the boy. After their home is nearly bombarded 



140 


by the hated federal troops, Ernesto proudly watches the revolutionaries march 
victoriously into the plaza (Galarza 168). He affirms his role as a member in the 
community, a role firmly established in Jalcocotan, and broadens it to include his position 
within the imagined community of the nation. This expanded sense of self is an element 
in the bildungsroman in which the protagonist’s “fundamental integrity as a human 
individual emerges strengthened” from new experiences (Minden 120). In addition, 
Ernesto’s new sense of identity is a celebration of Mexican nationalism, a recreation of 
national pride in an autobiography written fifty years after the Mexican Revolution. 

After narrating months of travel in Mexico that take up over a hundred pages of 
text, the author writes a brief paragraph describing how he disembarked from a train 
having “finally arrived” in “The North” (Galarza 183). Crossing the US-Mexico border 
from Nogales to Tucson is an experience, in other words, that does not warrant much of 
the author’s attention. In the book, Galarza recalls that the US flag is different from the 
Mexican one, but he does not recollect any other signifier of the border as a demarcation 
of national territory or cultural difference. 

Galarza’s scant attention to actual border crossing in Barrio Bov is telling when 
compared to Villarreal’s representation of Juan’s experiences at the border in Pocho . 
Galarza’s reconstruction of this event suggests that the US-Mexico border does not 
constitute a jarring moment of cultural difference—a depiction consistent in an 
autobiography that goes on to show Ernesto’s transition to life in the US as an 
opportunity for empowerment or, in the structure of the bildungsroman, a chance to 
widen a range of “intellectual and emotional experiences” (Minden 120). As a recreation 
of Galarza’s own process of Americanization and transculturation. Barrio Bov depicts the 
border crossing as an exciting adventure in Ernesto’s young life, not as vexing entrance 


141 


into a liminal state. Thus, Galarza downplays the physical border crossing in the 
narrative because it is not as important as the new spaces of his childhood that he eagerly 
enters in the US. 

Having moved from the simple life of Jalcocotan to atrip of high adventure, 

Barrio Bov takes the reader to a new world of the author’s childhood in the US, the 
spaces of public school and neighborhood barrios. The autobiography renders such places 
and spaces by means of Ernesto’s eager interest in becoming an American citizen while 
also retaining a sense of pride in his Mexican identity. This “process of becoming” 
constitutes the “formation” (or the “bildm^’ in German) of the bildungsroman 
protagonist. In Galarza’s depiction, school in the US is a place that does not demand 
abandonment of one culture for another. He explains, “At Lincoln, making us into 
Americans did not mean scrubbing away what made us originally foreign. ... It was 
easy for me to feel that becoming a proud American, as [Miss Hopely] said we should, 
did not mean feeling ashamed of being Mexican” (211). Miss Hopely encourages the 
students to share stories about their homelands; during show-and-tell, Emes^to learns 
about fishing in the Philippines and quilting in Italy, yet also talks about his adventures 
on a stagecoach in Mexico. School also promotes cultural diversity as demonstrated by 
the fact that teachers pronounce students’ names using their proper accent. Miss Hopely’s 
name is important too, perhaps as an invocation by Galarza of the boy’s hope to achieve 
the American Dream. Finally, Villarreal depicts school as a place where teachers do not 
discount national heroes from countries other than the US. Ernesto must determine for 
himself “whether Abraham Lincoln was as great as Benito Juarez, or George Washington 
braver than the priest Don Miguel Hidalgo” (Galarza 238), choices that he ultimately 
does not make because he lauds each as heroes of nations with which he identifies. 



142 


Gralarza represents the barrios of Tucson and Sacramento much as he does the 
public schools—spaces in which cultural difference is heralded in a way that makes the 
young boy’s transition to life in the US a process of exhilarating self-discovery by a 
bildungsroman hero, demonstrating the “idealism of the genre” (Minden 122). Ernesto’s 
neighborhood in Sacramento is a “collage of nationalities” in which fellow migrants 
retain pride in their homeland even as they strive to acculturate in the US (Galarza 212). 
He recreates the barrio in the text as a “kaleidoscope of colors and languages and customs 
that surprised and absorbed me at every turn” (199). He records a place where it is 
common to see Filipino farm workers walking home after work, Portuguese and Italian 
families gathering outside their houses, Hindus living in rooming houses, and African 
American men drifting in and out of the neighborhood (199). He also enumerates the 
diverse jobs of the people in the barrio including “farm workers, riverboat stewards, 
houseboys,. .. bartenders, rent collectors, insurance salesmen, the mates on the river 
boats, the landladies” (199). His own family also continues their ethnic practices 
swearing their loyalty to Madero, eating traditional foods, and speaking Spanish (Galarza 
245). Language in this space is also diverse as Ernesto notes the different tongues of the 
Poles, Yugo-Slavs, Koreans, Filipinos, Portuguese, and Italians in the barrio. 

Language ultimately plays a fundamental role in Ernesto’s transition into life in 
the US and his eventual positioning as a transculturated adult able to “select and invent” 
from cultural norms in both the Mexican and Anglo communities (Pratt 6). Under the 
tutelage of Miss Hopely’s one-on-one tutoring, Ernesto becomes an advanced English 
speaker. Bilingualism not only gives Ernesto access to the Anglo world that he wants to 
know more about, it also reconfigures his position in the family and community by 
reversing the role of child-adult. Galarza illustrates this when the family moves out of the 





143 


barrio to Oak Park, a white, middle class suburb of Sacramento. Because the Galarzas 
are the only family that speaks Spanish in the suburb and his mother’s and uncles’ 

English remains poor, Ernesto’s bilingual language skills take on increased importance. 
He translates between the realtor and his mother in negotiating the purchase of their 
house. 

Ernesto is thrust into adulthood following the deaths of his mother and Uncle 
Gustavo, who die in the international flu epidemic after WWI. He returns to the barrio 
with Uncle Jose and, at this point in the memoir, Galarza depicts Ernesto using his 
bilingualism to serve the people in the barrio of Sacramento, a community that replaces 
his biological family which is all but gone. The author subtly shifts spatial depictions 
fi-om home and school, initially the boy’s foci of identification, to the barrio where 
Ernesto identifies more broadly with the local community. This marks the beginning of 
the protagonist’s transition into a larger social order, the goal of the bildungsroman hero. 
Ernesto begins to translate for his neighbor Dona Transito: “To her tiny parlor chicanos 
in trouble came for advice, and the firm old lady with the rasping voice and commanding 
ways often asked me to interpret or translate for them in their encounters with the 
Autoridades” (Galarza 254). Ernesto also “interprets for chicanos in distress” at various 
(unnamed) public offices and for “chicano patients” at a local pharmacy (259-60). 
Galarza does not attack any US institutions, but establishes Ernesto as a helpmate to non- 
English speakers trying to attain “licenses, certificates, documents” from “Americans 
uptown, Autoridades’^ (256). 

Just as his role as translator incrementally broadens from family to community, so 
does his fight in “/a lucha” or “the struggle” for economic survival (Galarza 134).^® That 
struggle marks the gradual integration of the bildungsroman hero into society. Ernesto 





144 


enters la lucha for the first time in the novel when he tries to help Uncle Jose pay the 
funeral debts incurred by the family. Thereafter, Ernesto joins la lucha on behalf of his 
community as a bicultural individual fighting against economic oppression of Mexicans 
in his local community. For example, while performing temporary work in a farm camp, 
Ernesto learns first-hand about dangerous working conditions of laborers and how white 
bosses cheat the Mexican workers at the scales. On one occasion, several Mexican 
children in a labor camp die due to water poisoning. Because of his bilingualism, the 
camp committee sends him to Sacramento to find a state Autoridad to report the incident. 
Shortly thereafter, he makes his “first organizing speech” as a camp unionizer (Galarza 
265). Again,Galarza does not overtly attack any specific US institutions but decries 
capitalism in general and those bosses willing to exploit others for profit. Anthropologist 
Renato Rosaldo argues that the real “enemy” in the book is capitalism more than overt 
racism (76), a claim supporting his larger argument that the text represents one 
individual’s story of the “Chicano struggle against Anglo-American domination” (80). 

Ernesto’s role as cultural mediator marks the apex of his transculturation into 
Mexican and Anglo culture as he negotiates between the working class interests of the 
Mexican barrio and the profit-seeking practices of agri-business. The combining of 
autobiography and bildungsroman literary forms has prepared the reader for this moment. 
Place and space—roots in Mexico and a migratory experience—enable the protagonist to 
identify shared values with oppressed Mexicans in the US. A public school education 
provides enough training for him to understand and access US institutions. Ernesto’s 
well-defined integration into the existing social order, a formulaic of the bildungsroman 
and autobiography, plus Galarza’s representation of the barrio as an integrating space 
confirms Ernesto’s maturation into community activism. He becomes the hero of the 


145 

book’s title—^unnamed save the Spanish and English words that position him squarely in 
both Mexican and Anglo communities. He adapts by navigating the precarious borders 
between both worlds, “inhabiting both in good faith, and finally forging a span between 
his original Mexican and his acquired American enculturations,” a claim Saldivar makes 
while arguing that the text offers a model of transculturation (“Ideologies” 32). 

Barrio Bov illustrates the protagonist’s successful transculturation achieved 
through Ernesto’s negotiation of village, school, and barrio spaces as well as the 
bildungsroman and autobiographical pattern of the hero’s trajectory from childhood to 
adulthood. As an autobiography, Barrio Bov anticipates a future where the author 
becomes an academic intellectual and community activist who remembers his roots in the 
barrio (Flores 88).The success of the book as a best-selling autobiography testifies to 
the author’s ability to tap into the US publishing industry, all the while voicing resistance 
to the self-same capitalistic system. 

While Pocho and Barrio Bov are artistic expressions of transculturation, Paredes’s 
bildungsroman novel, George Washington Gomez, illustrates assimilation as the 
protagonist subordinates and replaces one cultural identification for another. In Georg e 
Washington Gomez. Paredes sharply contrasts the private spaces of home to the public 
spaces of school in the life of protagonist, George Washington Gomez. These imaginative 
depictions, when paired with specific characteristics of the bildungsroman, reveal the 
protagonist’s ultimately unsuccessful attempt to sustain a “checker-board consciousness” 
(147) in order to cope with his loyalties to different cultures. Paredes shows that George 
eventually makes space for himself by moving away from the borderlands to Washington 
D.C. where he aggressively denies his Mexican heritage and fully assimilates into Anglo 


culture. 



146 


George Washington Gomez 

George Washington Gomez is a child of Mexican descent bom in South Texas, a 
region characterized by cultural tension. The bildungsroman novel begins by creating an 
environment that anticipates the problems the protagonist will encounter later in life, a 
motif also illustrated in Pocho . Paredes accomplishes such foreshadowing through the 
roles of George’s uncles and the family’s physical location on the border of South Texas. 
George’s uncles, Lupe and Feliciano, are members of the sedicioso movement comprised 
of Northern Mexicans and South Texans who seek to establish a Republic of the 
Southwest, a place independent of both the US and Mexico. Thus, George is bom into a 
family who identify themselves as “Mexicotexans,” a label that Paredes later defines as 
“dual personality” split between attachments to the US and Mexico (195). Furthermore, 
the Gomez family appears caught between the violence of the Mexican Revolution, that 
prevents his Mexican-bom parents from “going home,” and a life in the US where they 
are discriminated against by the Texas Rangers. These circumstances later contribute to 
the hero’s status as a liminal adolescent caught between competing loyalties to the 
Mexican and Anglo communities. 

Paredes also uses George’s name to foreshadow those later conflicts that he will 
confront in his transitional adolescence. His parents, Gumersindo and Maria, name the 
baby “George Washington” because they want him “to have a great man’s name. 

Because he’s going to grow up to be a great man who will help his people” (Paredes 16). 
Instead of picking a historical Mexican leader’s name, his parents purposely select the 
name of a “great North American.” George’s parent’s idyllic vision for social justice 
blinds them to the irony of naming their son after the founder of a country whose political 
machinery, economic practices, and social institutions so vehemently discriminate against 




147 


them. In addition, Greorge’s physical appearance as fair skinned may, his parents think, 
give him access to mainstream Anglo society where he could become a leader. 

When George’s father is suddenly killed by Texas Rangers, Paredes refocuses the 
narrative. The family moves away from the border, led by Uncle Feliciano who is 
determined to heed Gumersindo’s dying wish that his newborn son not be subjected to 
racial violence in the borderlands. Paredes moves the family from the tumultuous border 
city of “Jonesville-on-the Grande” to the peaceful town of San Pedrito. In this new place, 
the author engages a characteristic element of the bildungsroman that begins with “a 
young man entering into life in a happy dream, seeking kindred spirits, finding, 
friendship and love” (Minden 119). Concomitantly, the author characterizes George as a 
pre-liminal persona whose relationship to his family, community, and culture are secure 
and stable (Turner, “Betwixt 94-5). Specifically, the opening chapters of the text portray 
George with a sense of belonging to the community that is defined by the familiar, 
comfortable spaces around him. For example, the third person narrator describes the 
Gomez’s blue framed house as an “enchanted place” with multi-colored rose bushes in 
the front yard, fecund gardens of figs, papayas, and guayabas near the house, and a front 
porch swing that marks the family’s affluence in the poor Mexican barrio. Like many 
seven-year-old boys, George has a favorite place: the banana grove in the back yard that 
he calls his “best friend” (Paredes 67). 

Paredes describes the banana grove as George’s “playground and playmate” and 
renders this space as a site where the boy imagines mortal battles between Anglos and 
Mexicans (50). Here George enacts the heroism of his namesake as a great American 
man who “saves his people.” In this way, George’s daydreams—^temporary liminal 
states—appear to be more than the natural fantasy of a child’s imagination because they 




148 

are colored by the ethnic conflicts of the region. For example, George pretends that he is 
Gregorio Cortez fighting the Texas Rangers (which he calls rinches) in shoot outs and 
knife fights where he alternately kills or gets killed by a white man (Paredes 63, 67), In 
either case, George images he is a brave Mexican hero, outnumbered and outgunned, in a 
violent conflict with Anglos. He thus imagines himself reacting decisively to injustice, 
being persecuted for his actions, and fleeing to Mexico, as if he were a corrida hero. 
George plays this role based on what he has learned from Uncle Feliciano, whom George 
knows “hated the rinches" (Paredes 63).*^ He plays out his version of the conflicts in a 
safe space where he can resolve the extant cultural conflicts between Anglos and 
Mexicans that occur beyond his backyard. 

If the banana grove offers a private space to rehearse his imaginary role as a great 
leader, in Paredes’s rendering, the rough barrio where he lives fulfills a sense of 
belonging to the local Mexican community. George lives in “Dos Veintidos" (i.e., the 
second ward, twenty-second political precinct), a working class neighborhood that lacks 
electric and sewage services. This space in the novel is more than merely a setting. As 
Saldivar points out, Paredes engages space as a “formative presence” that envelops and 
shapes the hero (79). In Turner’s paradigm, the neighborhood space represents a 
“structure of positions” where George is securely anchored to the Mexican community 
(Turner, “Betwixt 94-6). One Sunday in church, for example, George threatens to fight a 
white boy. The aggressor backs down when he learns that George lives among the “bad 
people, rowdies, tough characters” of Dos Veintidos (Paredes 61). In the exchange, 
George realizes that “being tough was the Two Twenty-Twoers greatest pride” (Paredes 
61). This small victory confirms George’s place in Dos Veintidos to himself and his 
peers. Thus far in the novel, immediate space surrounding the protagonist coupled with 



149 


the conventions of the bildungsroman novel and pre-liminal model that call for a stable 
childhood reveal a geopoetics in which the hero is closely attached to both Mexican folk 
heroes and comfortably immersed in the Mexican community. 

Uncle Feliciano, who raises George when the boy’s father is killed, also 
contributes to the boy’s sense of Mexican identity by inculcating in him pride for 
Mexico. Paredes intimates that George’s uncle feels responsible for ensuring the child 
develops a strong appreciation for his roots in Mexico, particularly given the fact the 
family has moved away from the border.^^ He instills in George reverence for his 
Mexican Indian heritage. For example, when Feliciano registers George for preschool as 
“Gualinto” (his grandmother’s mispronunciation of “George Washington”), Feliciano 
tells the teacher it is an Indian name from Mexico. In turn, George feels immensely 
proud of his heritage “with all of its associations with familial, cultural, and local history” 
(R. Saldivar, “Borderlands” 285). In addition, Feliciano teaches George through 
storytelling. Although Paredes’s characterizes Feliciano as a laconic man, the author 
highlights his attachments to Mexico by showing that Feliciano enjoys swapping tales of 
Mexican folklore with his neighbors. Even when George is frightened by the legends, he 
also learns much about his heritage from them, most notably the ways in which the 
stories confirm his corrida heroes. In all, the boy’s relationship to Uncle Feliciano further 
contributes to a secure identity from which, in accordance with the bildungsroman, he 
will emerge into a threatening world. 

That occurs when he enters public school in circumstances that differ sharply 
from those in Pocho and Barrio Bov . Villarreal uses school as an escape for Richard: it 
metaphorically frees the protagonist into a larger world of knowledge when he feels 
trapped by the confines of his parent’s impositions in Pocho . Galarza heralds public 



150 

schools as sites where teachers encourage mutual respect for different cultures in Barrio 
Bov. Rather than a place of possibility and hope, Paredes’s grammar school is “a kind of 
hell” for George because his teachers discount and devalue his Mexican heritage (124). It 
is an intensely Americanizing institution, and as such, enacts a convention of the 
bildungsroman in which the hero begins to encounter “the struggles of hard reality” as he 
“matures amidst the many experiences of life” (Minden 119). Entering school changes 
George into a liminal persona caught “betwixt and between” a private life at home and 
public life at school (Turner, “Betwixt” 96). The difficult experiences in school, outside 
the safe confines of home, ultimately help the protagonist find his place in the social 
order of greater society. For instance. Miss Cornelia, George’s first grade teacher, 
belittles the boy publicly when he includes the Spanish letters ch, ll, and n in the English 
alphabet. Miss Cornelia tells him sharply that this is not a Mexican school. Also, when 
he mistakenly pronounces the word “equals” in math class, she pokes fim at him, calling 
George “Mr. Eckles” until his classmates adopt this new nickname for him. 

George becomes a figure tom between the Mexican culture of his early childhood 
and the process of Americanization fostered in the classroom. “[H]is heart and mind 
become the battleground for cultural hegemony” (R. Saldivar, “Borderlands” 279) when 
he is subjected to the legitimacy a public institution has to advance Anglo culture and 
foster US nationalism. He begins “to acquire an Anglo-American self’ at odds with his 
Mexican identity; “The boy nurtured these two selves within him, each radically different 
and antagonistic to the other, without realizing their separate existences” (Paredes 147). 
The following lengthy but significant passage demonstrates concrete examples of 
George’s liminal state caught between competing cultural values; 


151 


Consciously he considered himself a Mexican. He was ashamed of the 
name his dead father had given him, George Washington Gomez. He was 
grateful to this Uncle Feliciano for having registered him in school as “Gualinto” 
and having said that it was an Indian name. He spoke Spanish, literally his 
mother tongue; it was the only language his mother would allow him to use when 
he spoke to her. The Mexican flag made him feel sentimental, and a rousing 
Mexican song would make him feel like yelling. The Mexican national hymn 
brought tears to his eyes, and when he said “we” he meant the Mexican people. 
“La CapitaC did not mean Washington, D.C., for him but Mexico City. Of such 
matter were made the basic cells in the honeycomb that made up his personality. 

But there was also George Washington Gomez, the American. He was 
secretly proud of the name his more conscious twin, Gualinto, was ashamed to 
avow publicly. George Washington Gomez secretly desired to be a full-fledged 
American without the shameful encumberment of his Mexican race. He was the 
product of his Anglo teachers and the books he read in school, which were all in 
English. He felt a pleasant warmth when he heard “The Star-Spangled Banner.” 

It was he it was who fought the British with George Washington and Francis 
Marion the Swamp Fox, discovered pirate treasure with Long John Silver, and got 
lost in a cave with Tom Sawyer and Becky Thatcher. Books had made him so. 
(Italics added; Paredes 147-8) 

This passage provides ample evidence of the ways that Paredes’s illustrates George’s “in- 
between existence,” the hallmark of a liminal persona (Paredes, “Problem” 25). Saldivar 
identifies, such struggles as part of this transitional experience by noting that the “double 
Mexican and American culture systems each acquire within their own spheres a 



152 


presumed priority by virtue of their apparent production of a formed subject” 
(“Borderlands” 282). That formed subject is a conflicted boy with a “bilingual-bicultural 
makeup” who must constantly switch cultural modes because he perceives them as 
exclusive (Paredes, “Problem” 37). 

George is able to maintain a checkerboard consciousness because the public and 
private spheres of his early school life do not overlap: “[i]n the schoolroom he was an 
American; at home on the playground he was a Mexican” (Paredes 147); his behavior is 
contingent upon the physical space that he occupies. Paredes summarizes the boy’s 
predicament; “Hating the Gringo one moment with an unreasoning hatred, admiring his 
literature, his music, his material goods the next. Loving the Mexican with a blind 
fierceness, then almost despising him for his slow progress in the world” (Paredes 150). 
Paredes explains, “Immigrants from Europe can become Americanized in one generation. 
Gualinto [George], as a Mexicotexan, could not. Because, in the first place, he was not 
an immigrant come to a foreign land. Like other Mexicotexans, he considered himself 
part of the land on which his ancestors had lived before the Anglotexans had come” (147- 
8). Paredes recalls the label of Mexicotexan bestowed on George at birth, a label that 
registers the cultural tensions seemingly pulling apart George’s formerly coherent sense 
of self 

By the time he becomes a high school student, George can no longer segregate his 
bifiircated identity as a Mexicotexan. According to Paredes’s depiction, the protagonist 
exists in a troubled state of limbo where he is “no longer ... a member of a culturally- 
defined social position or class” (Samuels 61). The goal of the bildungsroman hero- 
social integration—combined with the author’s construction of separate spheres reveal a 
the hero in a tenuous, liminal position. Paredes figuratively and literally shows George’s 




153 


private and public spheres colliding due to conflicts over official interpretations of the 
history of Texas and the roles that Mexican and Anglo families alike played in that 
history. When the US-Mexico border shifted in the mid-nineteenth century, explains 
Renato, the borderlands became “as much a homeland as an alien environment” for 
Mexicans and their descendants (“Politics” 67-8). George confronts this complex legacy 
in the classroom when, in his junior year for example, he presents an oral report that 
celebrates the heroism of Mexican soldiers. Anglo classmate challenge the veracity of 
George’s report starting a bitter debate in which students attack each others’ families ad 
hominem, accusing the others’ fathers and grandfathers of being Mexican criminals or 
murdering rinches. 

The older he gets, the more George feels compelled to vocalize a counter history 
to that offered in his school textbooks. He sadly recognizes that “Texas history is a cross 
he must bear,” but he refiises to invalidate the heroes of his childhood (Paredes 149). In 
this conflict, Paredes entangles his protagonist in a “politics of location” that highlights 
the interstitial relationship between space and social relations in the context of a 
geocultural identity and the historicity of narrative (J. Saldivar, Border 41, 72-91). 

Paredes characterizes the protagonist as increasingly conflicted and alienated by 
the time he reaches his senior year in high school. George will have no choice but to 
decide his allegiance, a decision that the author sets forth through a dramatic scene that 
teaches George a painful lesson: publicly supporting his Mexican heritage comes at 
significant expense. In this incident, George stands up for fellow Mexican students when 
they are not admitted to the Senior Class Party at La CasaMexicana because, the 
doorman explains, “orders is no Mexicans” (Paredes 173). Although the fair-skinned 
George could have entered the restaurant, he refuses, declaring himself Mexican. This 





154 


claim causes his Anglo girlfriend to break up with him on the spot. Paredes’s heavy- 
handed use of irony in naming the restaurant La Casa Mexicana is not lost on the 
protagonist, who realizes the paradox of a “Mexican House” that does not admit 
Mexicans. The four students who are not admitted to the Senior Party, “lo5 cuatro 
Mexicano^' as they become known, grow increasingly alienated from their peers during 
the remainder of their senior year. Even though George demonstrates an act of resistance 
against racism, he is far from rewarded like the hero of his childhood fantasies. 

Just before graduation, it becomes impossible for George to continue fluctuating 
between “checkerboard” identities at school and home. On one hand, he disavows his 
namesake, wishing that his father had never saddled him with a responsibility to help a 
race he considers inferior; “I’m not going to be a great man. I’ll just be another Mexican 
with the seat of his pants tom and patched up. That’s all I’ll ever be. And I don’t want to 
help my people. Help my people? What for? Let them help themselves, the whole lot of 
ragged, dirty pelados" (Paredes 265).^* Although Paredes portrays George’s diatribe as 
caused by frustration and anger, the author also contextualizes the scene amid socio¬ 
economic forces that oppress Mexicans. Such oppression creates obstacles so great that 
they cannot be overcome by a boy from the barrio.. His Mexican heritage, he decides, 
undermines his chances of future success, but, at this point in his life, claiming American 
heritage proves impossible as his graduation ceremony illustrates. 

Paredes shapes the bildungsroman novel to a point where the protagonist can no 
longer viably juggle his bifurcated identities and experiences an identity crisis where the 
“appearance of an awakening sense of identity was coupled with a challenge to that same 
identity” (Paredes, “Problem” 40). The liminal teenager appears to have slipped between 
the threads of social fabric altogether, fitting neither into home or school life fiilly, as he 



155 

defends and forswears his Anglo and Mexican identities. George experiences a meltdown 
of identity when confronted with Paredes’s ironic character of K. Hank Harvey, a 
graduation speaker who is a racist. A presumed Anglo “expert” on Mexican culture, 
Harvey delivers a graduation address that includes an anecdote where Harvey tricks an 
Anglo farmer into shooting a Mexican, a lengthy commentary on “Mexican cruelty and 
tyranny” at the Alamo, and a celebration of Texas independence over Mexico.^^ Harvey’s 
remarks are grossly inappropriate to members of the audience like George, but the 
ethnographer does not realize his blatant offensiveness. Enraged, George leaves the 
ceremony calling Anglos “the cause of all evil” (273). As the narrator explains, “All the 
tales of hate and violence from his childhood came back to him from the half¬ 
consciousness in which they had been submerged. He thought how there had always been 
an Anglo blocking his path to happiness, to success, to plain dignity” (Paredes 273). 

Shortly after this tense graduation scene, Paredes makes an interesting structural 
move in the last section of the novel titled, “Leader of His People.” The author jumps 
ahead chronologically to depict George nine years later as a twentyish lieutenant in the 
US Army’s counter-intelligence department. What is significant about this gap in the 
narrative is that Paredes does not explain the protagonist’s transformation from a 
conflicted boy struggling with his attachments to the Mexican and Anglo communities to 
an assimilated persona who has joined the Americanizing institution of the US military. 

In the narrative, George is not afforded a rite of passage per say; he leaves San Pedrito a 
liminal teenager and returns as an assimilated man who has integrated into Anglo society. 

By omitting George’s transition, Paredes underscores the radicalness of George’s 
change. The reader cannot help but see the difference between the agitated high school 
graduate troubled by competing, mutually exclusive identities and the highly assimilated 



156 

lawyer/soldier with an American-sounding name. He also changes his name to the neutral 
sounding “George G. Gomez” to disassociate himself from the burdensome presidential 
name. Paredes engages an important element of the bildungsroman—the protagonist’s 
break with a tradition or institution—through George’s disavowal of his attachments to 
Mexican culture, but does not explain how that occurs specifically. 

Metaphorically and literally, George must distance himself from his childhood 
inculcation in Mexican heritage in order to assimilate into Anglo culture. When he first 
sees his old classmates, George tells them that he is proud that he got away from San 
Pedrito and recommends they get away too if they want to “make something of 
themselves” (300). This logic resonates with George’s early childhood coping 
mechanism of separating his bicultural selves spatially between a Mexican home and 
Anglo school. Only by leaving the border town where he grew up is George able to frilly 
assimilate into Anglo culture. According to Saldivar, the novel is “precisely about the 
large and small dislocations in space that must occur before, at the novel’s end, the hero 
George G. Gomez can completely assimilate” (Border 41). 

In the final section of the novel, Paredes achieves the goal of the bildungsroman 
hero to integrate into the larger social structure. That process is illustrated by his job in 
the military which is to spy on Mexicans and Mexican Americans along the US-Mexico 
border. In contrast to Pocho . where the protagonist uses the military to escape Santa Clara 
and possibly pursue higher education, George Washington Gomez represents the military 
as an assimilationist institution that has in some unspecified way (implied by the gap in 
the narrative) contributed to George’s transformation into a man who not only refuses to 
acknowledge his Mexican roots, but agrees to become a traitor to it by spying. 


157 

Paredes reintroduces his protagonist to the people and places of his childhood that 
were once so important to him, an act that confirms the radical way in which he has 
changed into an assimilated adult. By the time he returns to San Pedrito, George has 
married an Anglo ethnographer who studies Mexican migrant workers, a fact that 
undercuts his earlier antagonism toward ethnographer K. Hank Harvey. In addition, 
George’s father-in-law was once a Texas Ranger, the paramilitary force that killed his 
father and fought against sedicios like Uncle Feliciano. George endures his father-in- 
law’s racist slurs without comment, a behavior unlike his adolescent protests against 
Anglo versions of Texas history or his fight against discrimination at La Casa Mexicana. 
Also, George praises the fair skin of one of his sister’s children while calling his other 
sister’s children “little Indians” because of their dark features (Paredes 285). Literary 
critic Hector Perez concludes fi-om this behavior that the protagonist’s “attitude toward 
darker-skinned Mexicans becomes one element in his rejection of his community” (40). 

Whether the protagonists in Pocho, Barrio Bov, and George Washington Gomez 
transculturate or assimilate, each works to make space for himself, literally moving away 
fi-om the borderlands and figuratively creating a hybrid transculturated or new assimilated 
identity. In these narratives, the authors use the Mexican Revolution as a force that casts 
the characters on chaotic physical and personal journeys. These works provide insight 
into a historical era of northern migration through coming of age narratives of the 
bildungsroman hero. Leaving behind transitional childhood spaces in both the US and 
Mexico, Villarreal, Galarza, and Paredes carry the reader into the modem world. That 
world is represented in Leslie Marmon Silko’s Almanac of the Dead (1991) and Miguel 
Mendez’s Pilgrims in Aztlan (1974). Drawing from conventions of a literature of utopia, 
Mendez and Silko offer cautionary tales that depict border cities like Tijuana and Tucson 


158 

as amoral dystopias in which members of capitalistic society squelch anyone inhibiting 
their quest for endless profit or self-gratification. The power of the wealthy accrues 
unabated on both sides of the border forcing the impoverished to migrate between the US 
and Mexico trying to reclaim their own space, a place with ample food and water and 
where their voices are not muted. 


NOTES 


' The term Mexican heritage describes the fact that Richard Rubio and George 
Washington Gomez are US citizens with Mexican parents and Ernesto Galarza is 
Mexican-born living in the US. By Anglo cultural norms, I refer to Richard’s assertion of 
his unique individualism and determination to unburden himself from gendered Mexican 
familial roles. In addition, Anglo cultural norms generally includes Ernesto’s use of the 
English language and factors associated with George’s complete assimilation into US 
culture (i.e., his job as a spy in the military, internalization of anti-Hispanic sentiment). 

^ This expanded perspective on the border as an agent and reflection of cultural difference 
makes sense particularly in regard to Pocho, a work that Villarreal adamantly claims is 
not representative of Chicano writing exclusively, an assertion contrary to Chicano 
critics’ claims (Villarreal, “Interview” 40-47). In other words, Villarreal rejects the 
labeling of his work as “Chicano literature” because, according a 1976-interview, he 
believes the finest writing crosses racial lines by appealing to a common sense of shared 
humanity (42-45). To some extent, his refiisal to be limited by an ethnic label is 
captured in the plot of Pocho. specifically in the protagonist’s rejection of culturally 
defined roles. 

^ Critics agree that Barrio Bov is an autobiography, a fact confirmed by Galarza’s preface 
to the book as well as the connections between the author’s biography and the story of the 
protagonist, Ernesto Galarza (Flores 81; R. Saldivar 251 George Washi ngton Gomez is 
clearly recognized as a work of fiction, as is Pocho. though critics variously describe the 
latter. Chicano critic Joe Rodriguez, for example, identifies Pocho as a “survival 
narrative” (68) while Villarreal terms it a “novel of character development” (422). 


For a biographical sketch of Villarrears life, see the entry (by his name) in Chicano 
Literature: A Reference Guide (1985). For information on his career as a writer, see 
Revista Chicano Riquefia (19761 as well as Identification and Analysis of Chicano 
Literature (1979). 

^ In Villarreal’s portrayal, Juan re-channels the longing to achieve social justice that he 
was unable to achieve as a soldier of Pancho Villa’s army, into his expectations for 
Richard to grow up to be a lawyer or doctor practicing in Mexico. Juan’s goal for his son 
is that he should follow his own model of serving the Mexican people—a problematical 
expectation for a boy bom in El Paso and raised in California, who has never even seen 
Mexico. For example, he tells his son, “[IJearn all that you can in the English, for next 
year by this time we will be in our country” (Villarreal 96). While other Mexican parents 
make their children work, Juan keeps Richard in school because he wants him to get a 
good education. 

^ Folklorist Arnold Van Gennep identifies three rites of passage universal to the human 
experience in Rites of Passage (1960): pre-liminal rites, liminal rites, and post-liminal 
rites (11). He defines these stages as rites of separation, transition, and incorporation. 

^ He hides this experiment from everyone because, at this point in his life, he does not 
want to challenge openly a religious community in which priests serve as intermediaries 
between believers and God—a belief contrary to his attempt to commune directly with 
God. Villarreal also suggests that as long as Richard’s love of reading, like his queries of 
God, do not directly compete with the demands of his parents or priests, reading does not 
threaten his place in the home. 



^ Villarreal only sporadically includes the date or Richard’s age in the novel. In this 
instance (as well as with the other novels in this chapter), I estimate the age of characters 
based on chronological events in the novel. 

® The Latin root of liminal is limen meaning margin. Liminality, however, should not be 
confused with marginal or alienated, terms suggesting displacement from mainstream or 
dominant norms. In contemporary literary theory, for example, a marginal or alienated 
person is situated outside a theoretical center of social ideology, bell hook’s works, 
Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984), demonstrates this position. A liminal, 
in contrast, is situated in a place “betwixt and between” margin and center in time and 
space. For additional information, see Turner’s “Betwixt and Between: The Liminal 
Period m Rites of Passage’’’ in The Forest of Symbols (1967). 

A common familial dynamic throughout Latin America is men’s nationalism and 
women’s faith. Pocho registers this dynamic clearly: Juan is exceedingly loyal to Mexico 
but only tangentially interested in Catholicism; conversely, Consuelo appears mildly 
nationalistic, but fanatically religious. 

In addition to Joe Pete, other liminal guides exist in the text. Richard’s best friend, 
Ricky Malatesta, and a gang of pachucos/as show Richard what he does not want to be 
when he grows up (e.g., pursuing the American Dream as does Ricky and living 
permanently as a liminoid as do the pachucos/as). 

Villarreal distinguishes between “pocho” and “pachuco” in the novel to illustrate the 
fact that Richard’s chosen identity is an affirmation of individuality rather than 
subordination to gang mentality. The author accomplishes this at the end of the narrative 
when Richard asserts his individuality and pulls away from group membership required 



by the pachuco/a gang: “I can be part of everything, he thought, because I am the only 
one capable of controlling my destiny.... Never—no, never—^will I allow myself to 
become part of a group—^to become classified, to lose my individuality. . . . I will not 
become a follower, nor will I allow myself to become a leader, because I must be myself 
and accept for myself only that which I value” (Villarreal 152-3). He distinguishes 
himself from the pachucos/as who occupy a liminal space “betwixt and between” the 
Anglo and Mexican cultures and affirms himself as a pocho who resolutely occupies an 
acculturated place in both cultures. Monsivais also recognizes the subtle but important 
difference between the terms “pachuco” and “pocho” that Villarreal sets forth in the 
novel. Monsivais claims that the Mexican and American communities scorn pachucos/as 
because of their steadfast resolve to be liminal personas; whereas, pochos are scorned 
because they dare to acculturate into both cultures. 

Because of the cultural nationalism associated with “La Raza,” it is a term that means 
more than its literal translation of “the race.” The Oxford English Dictionary (1989) 
defines “Zai?aza” as a phrase connoting “a strong sense of racial and cultural identity 
held by Mexican Americans” (244). According to this source, “Z,a Raza” may be traced 
to Mexican educator and philosopher Jose Vasconcelos who identified La Raza as “the 
people of mixed race [who] will inherit the earth” (244). El Diccionario del Espanol 
Usual en Mexico (1996) associates the term with “rasgos culturales, historicos, 
lingulsticos, and religiosos’' [distinctive features of a cultural, historical, linguistic, and 
religious nature] (757). 

Ernesto’s role as family translator resonates with that of Richard Rodriguez in Hunger 


of Memory: The Education of Richard Rodriquez (1982) as the protagonists in each text 




occupy a position that reverses the role of child and adult based on the needs of their 
family. 

This is one distinction that critics note between Galarza’s and Rodriguez’s texts: 

Ernesto transculturates creating an identity that involves aspects of both Mexican and 
Anglo culture whereas Richard assimilates into the Anglo community. As might be 
expected, Rodriquez’s work is not well received among Chicano critics. See Saldivar’s 
“Ideologies of the Self Chicano Autobiography” and Flores’s “Chicano Autobiography: 
Culture, Ideology and the Self” 

Throughout the novel, the term “/a lucha ” is used solely to refer to the economic 
hardships of the Galarza family. Even though the term has been used to connote the 
Mexican Revolution, it is not related to the war explicitly in the novel, even though 
Revolution causes the family’s economic problems because it forces them to abandon life 
in Jalcocotan. 

For a brief biography of Galarza’s life, see Rosaldo’s “Politics, Patriarchs, and 
Laughter” (1987). 

The corrida or Mexican ballad is a “narrative poem in Spanish set to music” (Griffith 
22). The corrida is “one of the most important verbal folk art forms in the twentieth- 
century,” explains folklorist James Griffith, because it “reflects the point of view of the 
working [Mexican and Hispanic] people” (22). One of the most well-known examples is 
El Corrida de Gregorio Cortez, a ballad analyzed and popularized by Americo Paredes. 
El Corrida de Gregorio Cortez serves as an example of the corrida tradition, a living oral 
poetics, that constructs the characteristics of a border hero in particular and the traits of 


Mexican and Hispanic people in general, both in response to Anglo class and ethnic 


oppression. 

Perez is one of the few critics who recognizes the connections between this novel and 
‘ With a Pistol in His Hand . ’ In “Voicing Resistance on the Border,” he argues that 
Feliciano epitomizes the corrido hero who young George tries to emulate while playing 
in the banana grove. 

For a detailed history of the sedicio movement in the American Southwest in 1915, see 
David Montejano’s Anglos and Mexicans in the Making of Texas (1987V 

Pelados is a slang term that refers to working class Mexicans who are crude in their 
behavior. The term intimates the socio-economic obstacles that George faces in achieving 
the expectations of his namesake to be a great man. 

Two comments warrant mention. First, I believe the fictional Harvey is an allusion to 
the early Anglo anthropologists and folklorists such as J. Frank Dobie, Charles F. 
Lummis, or John Gregory Bourke against whom Paredes’s rails for their “less than 
satisfactory” studies of Mexicans in “The Problem of Identity” as well as “On 
Ethnographic Work Among Minority Groups.” In these essays, Paredes contends that the 
work of such supposed “experts” perpetuated racism. Second, Paredes’s use of the term 
“identity crisis” resonates with Juan Flores and George Yudice’s identification of Latino 
consciousness as schizophrenic. See “Living Borders/Buscando Americd' in Social Text 
(1990). For fiction on the ways male Latinos construct identity in response to forces of 
transculturation and assimilation, see Muv Macho: Latin Men Confront their Manhood 


(1996). 




CHAPTER 4 


RECLAIMING SPACE; DYSTOPIAS AND UTOPIAS IN THE BORDERLANDS 

Protagonists in works explored in the previous discussion make space for 
themselves in the US as transculturated or assimilated individuals. They metaphorically 
carve out new identities by drawing on Mexican heritages and accessing Anglo cultural 
norms. Characters in Pilgrims in Aztlan \Perep-inos de Aztldri\ (1974) and Almanac of 
the Dead (1991) seek more than figurative space. Miguel Mendez and Leslie Marmon 
Silko portray characters carving out and re-claiming sacred Chicano/a and Indian 
homelands in the US-Mexico borderlands. That struggle takes place in the border 
dystopias of Tijuana and Tucson and in the desert utopias of Yuma and Sonora. 

Mendez’s and Silko’s renderings of space combined with formulaic elements and 
common themes in utopian writing result in a geopoetics that critiques society by offering 
a glimpse into a more humane world. Mendez represents that place as Aztlan, a site 
where the poor will have sustenance and self worth. Ultimately, however, that vision is 
unobtainable for poor Chicano/a people; Aztlan is a desert mirage that cannot materialize; 
the aggressive and violent forces of capitalism prevent its realization. Silko portrays 
utopia as a locale where Native characters and their allies live harmoniously in sacred 
Indian lands. Although she does not actualize utopia in the novel, the final pages suggest 
that it will come to fi^lition through the efforts of multi-ethnic resistance movements 
poised to destroy the borderland dystopia that they inhabit. 

An interlocking relationship exists between the artistic expression of utopias and 
dystopias. Critic B.G. Knepper explains that relationship writing, “the basic characteristic 
of either form is that an imagined society is compared and contrasted with an existing 



166 


one” (20). For example, Thomas More’s Utopia (1516), the text that gave the genre its 
name, portrays an idyllic community as a way to expose the immorality and 
imperfections of European society without critiquing it overtly.^ As Paul Turner writes: 
“ Utopia does not represent a positive ideal, but a negative attack on European 
wickedness. Its object is to shame Christians into not behaving worse, as they do now, 
but far better than the poor Utopian heathen” (11). Mendez and Silko suggest ideal 
societies by exposing immoral ones. Their work functions as strong social criticism and 
daunting cautionary tale. Pilgrims in Aztlan condemns capitalism as a form of genocide 
to lower class Chicanos and their allies; Almanac of the Dead attacks literal and 
figurative class stratification, racism, or cultural conflict that estrange human beings. 

Utopian and dystopian literature is also characterized by little moral ambiguity in 
representations of communities. Genre critic Artur Blaim explains that in the case of 
More’s text, “all positive values are associated with Utopia and all the negative ones with 
Europe” (19). More, Bacon, and others^ depict true republics founded on equality, peace, 
and community spirit and dystopias characterized by inequality, violence, and 
individualism (Blaim 19). The same is true in Mendez’s construction of space and place. 
He vilifies greed, egoism, and self-gratification in Tijuana and valorizes social justice, 
egalitarianism, and universal enfranchisement in Aztlan. Mendez’s romanticization of 
Aztlan, a site of all positive values, alludes to the Chicano homeland cited in El Plan 
Espiritualde Aztlan, the charter of the First Chicano National Conference (1969). 
According to legend, Aztlan existed in 19,000BC as an island situated in the Atlantic 
Ocean “where an advanced civilization, the Chanes (which means the ‘people of the 
snake’ in. Mayan) established the center of their civilization” (Alurista 221). In both the 
novel and El Plan Espiritual, Aztlan represents an idyllic society based on shared 


167 

communal property and social harmony. Both works suggest Aztlan would be inhabited 
by Chicano/a people, a term not clarified by specific ethnic labels but seemingly inclusive 
of Indians, Mexicans, Hispanics, and perhaps other poor, disenfranchised minorities. The 
primary difference between the artistic expression of Aztlan in the novel and the Chicano 
charter is that Mendez’s narrative shows that the desert utopia cannot be attained. Thus, 
the author’s message is that reclaiming ancestral land between the US and Mexico is not 
a realistic means for Chicanos/as to achieve social justice. Instead, Mendez’s closing 
paragraph urges readers to create a utopia within existing society. Ultimately, he argues 
that Aztlan need not be a far-off, mythic, legendary homeland, but might be achieved 
through massive socio-economic reform wherever Chicanos/as live. 

Mendez’s message makes visible the pragmatic, realistic considerations required 
of a genre meant to critique the world outside the novel. More’s text established the 
conventions associated with geographical placement of an idealized community based on 
the term, “utopia,” meaning “no-place” and “well-place” (Blaim 25). According to these 
conventions, an idealized society is located in an unspecified geographical location far 
beyond existing civilization. Authors usually account for the descriptions of the “well- 
place,” which constitute the bulk of the narrative, through a travel-narrator. Travel to the 
utopia involves a long, dangerous journey or near ship-wreck as occurs in, for example, 
Francis Bacon’s New Atlantis (1626), Shakespeare’s The Tempest (1623), Joseph Hall’s 
MiinHiis Alter et Idem I Another World vet the Same 1160011. or Tommaso Campanella’s 
City of the Sun (1623). In contrast to utopian writing, dystopian literature is set in an 
immoral civilization in which evil is nearly ubiquitous, except in the far-off utopian land. 
Authors must account for the manner in which protagonists extricate themselves from the 



168 

dysfunctional society to reach utopia or the ways in which characters orchestrate an 
overthrow of the dystopia. 

Mendez and Silko employ some, but not all, of these pragmatic conventions of 
utopian literature. For all but the final paragraph in the novel, Mendez situates Aztlan 
somewhere in the Yuma and Sonoran deserts along the border. Silko locates utopia in 
tribal lands of the American Southwest. Also, both authors address the need to physically 
travel to a utopia. For Mendez, the pilgrims of the book’s title are migrant workers who 
cross and re-cross the US-Mexico border in search of higher paying jobs and figuratively 
looking for Aztlan. For Silko, thousands of Mexican and Indian migrants comprising an 
“odd new mystical movement” marching from Mexico to the US to reclaim ancestral 
land (709). In neither work, however, do the pilgrims reach a utopia.^ 

Both works set out specific dystopic societies as the catalyst for the traveler’s 
search for an ideal, just society. Mendez fashions a dystopia called the “Republic of the 
Despised.”'^ This name identifies the inhabitants of the immoral society without 
specifying ethnicity, thus suggesting the “despised” belong to all racial groups. Also, the 
place name is a “republic,” a term suggesting that its citizens freely established the evil 
society according to their own desires. The relationship between Mendez’s 
representation of this dystopic space and his engagement with a utopian literary tradition 
warns readers against the dangers of economic ruthlessness. In this evil society, 
capitalism oppresses poor Mexicans, Indians, Chicanos, and mestizos/as who do not 
speak the language of business and who may not speak English, both of which are 
necessary for survival. The power of the wealthy accrues unabated on both sides of the 
border, forcing the impoverished to migrate between the US and Mexico in search of 
Aztlan, a site with ample food and water. In addition to providing nourishment, the utopia 




169 

is a place where the voices of the poor are not muted and they are respected as human 
beings. 

Pilgrims in Aztlan 

The form o f Pilgrims in Aztlan emphasizes voice and dialogue of characters 
through a heteroglot style. This style represents qualities of the utopia and the dystopia: 
the former is illustrated through Mendez’s novel in its inclusion of dialogue by many 
poor characters, representing the ideals of free speech in Aztlan; the latter is 
demonstrated by the primacy of a language of commerce and trade that pervades the 
dystopia. For example, if the promised land is a place in society where the poor will be 
able to voice their grievances, Mendez’s novel articulates those concerns through a form 
concomitant with Bakhtinian primacy on dialogue. Bakhtin conceptualizes language as a 
dynamic, unstable, creative system that evolves in/from social exchange through 
dialogue, defined as an exchange of speech utterances. He says, “As a living, socio- 
ideological concrete thing, a heteroglot opinion, language, for the individual 
consciousness, lies on the borderline between oneself and the other” (Bakhtin 35). 
Multiple voices in dialogue create a discourse of heteroglossia where “tensions that are 
holding together and pulling apart a language at any one time ... are producing multiple 
changes that constitute the history of language” (Bakhtin 35). 

Those tensions “holding together and pulling apart” simultaneously constitute the 
centripetal and centrifugal forces in Pilgrims in Aztlan . This form is illustrated by the 
“orchestration of a diversity of social discourses” (Morris 112), including, among other 
voices, crude bar talk of hard working Mexicans, lyrical descriptions of the desert by 
poet-worker Lorenzo, a hippy’s free-love jive, and advice on picking cotton by migrant 
farm help. Further, Mendez writes in shades of ethnic speech by characters who define 


170 

themselves as pochos, Mexican Americans, Chicanes, and mestizos/as. Finally, the fact 
that the book is published in English and Spanish also testifies to its polyvocality. Even 
as the language of commerce nearly quells the oppressed, their dialogue in Mendez’s 
narrative testifies to their presence and purpose. While literary Utopians generally achieve 
harmony by enforcing conformity, Mendez’s depiction of utopia challenges that 
convention of the genre by encouraging individual self-expression—dissonant voices 
each articulating needs that are muted.^ 

Pilgrims in Aztlan presents a dystopia fueled by extreme capitalism—profit at any 
cost—^that begets inequality among its citizens. Market forces stratify society along class 
lines by segregating the upper class from the disenfranchised, disempowered, and 
silenced members of the lower class that generally (but not exclusively) include 
Chicano/a people. Mendez’s expression of space focuses on Tijuana, a border city of 
“dubious reputation” (Mendez 12). This city t3q)ifies the greater borderland dystopia as a 
site where societal ethics give way to any form of selfish gratification that makes money. 

Mendez’s depiction of Tijuana shows how commercial marketing of sex, drugs, 
and alcohol excludes the poor who have no goods or services to sell. He accomplishes 
this by personifying Tijuana as a “mythical goddess” and “damsel off her rocker” who, 
without compunction, takes advantage of “human weaknesses to fill its farthest comers” 
(Mendez 13). A city that speaks the language of commercial exploitation sells dirty 
brothels, cheap drink, and easy dmgs to anyone with fast cash. Cloaked by the “beauty 
of supply and demand,” Tijuana aggressively courts her customers by saying, “In here, in 
here, you marijuana smokers and dmg addicts, come on in, come on in! ... You got 
greenbacks? Yea, dollars. Because if you don’t, you’re out of luck, sweethearts.... It 



171 

doesn’t matter if you’re assassins, thieves, slave drivers or dirty social climbers” (Mendez 
13). 

If you have money and guts, Tijuana appears to be a tough but enticing city. 
However, if you are hungry, homeless, and injured—as is the hero of the book—it is also 
a place where “living meant struggling unto death” (Mendez 8). Mendez creates a 
protagonist Loreto Maldonado with whom he clearly sympathizes. Loreto is an eighty 
year old Yaqui Indian who can hardly sustain a living in Tijuana by washing car 
windows. He is also a former colonel in Mexican Revolution who has earned a “crippled 
leg and a shack to live in located in the poorest part of the city” in exchange for his 
service to a nation that once valued Yaqui warriors (Somoza 69).^ Although Tijuana is 
governed by those with money, influence, and an insatiable appetite for each, the bulk of 
its citizens are “enslaved Chicanos” and “Indian peoples reduced by the torture of hunger 
and the humiliation of plunder” (Mendez 82-3). 

In the Republic of Despised Mexicans, power is in the hands of anyone motivated 
by uninhibited greed and sexual perversion—people who show gross indifference to 
human life. For example. Pilgrims in Aztlan contains a litany of villains on both sides of 
the border, one of whom is Mario Miller de Cocuch, a Mexican ex-revolutionary turned 
millionaire “by combining the activities of politicians and thieves” (Mendez 123). His 
relentless pursuit of wealth and status is best illustrated by the fact that Mario encourages 
his wife to have sex with prominent men so that he may be promoted. Mendez sums up 
Mario as a “prodigious acrobat on the trapezes of politics and an expert manipulator of 
the levers of the machines of the influential” (10). Unbridled ambition demonstrated by 
this Mexican character is paralleled by Anglo characters as well. One Anglo 
businesswoman (unnamed in the text) builds a hot dog stand into a restaurant franchise, 



172 


Siesta Chile Dogs, by exploiting illegal Mexican workers. She makes a fortune paying 
them menial wages (i.e., four dollars a day plus a dozen hot dogs) and employing them in 
substandard working conditions. Mendez writes, “Once the voracious old dame began to 
count off the endless advantages the wetbacks had, hidden away in her hotdog factory, 
there was no stopping her” (29). She further boosts profits by routinely inviting the 
Migra to her business; they promptly deport the Mexican workers sans paychecks. As 
these examples show, wealthy people perpetuate their own power and “deprive the poor 
of any participation in the system” so that “the tragedy of the oppressed knows no 
borders” (Somoza 74-5). 

When an individual is no longer useful to the powerful, she or he is discarded. 
Mendez illustrates this through the story of Grood Chuco (alias Jorge Curiel), a migrant 
farm hand. Chuco began working at age twelve and, after several years, becomes the 
number one harvester of grapes, tomatoes, and eggplants throughout the Imperial Valley. 
Mendez exclaims ironically, “If the work in the farm fields had been classified as an 
Olympic sport, how many gold medals of Chuco would have won” (27). However, 
Chuco gets no prize for years of strenuous labor in the capitalistic system; twenty-three 
years of breaking records leaves Chuco broken down. He is unable to qualify for 
workers’ protections in the US—health care, compensation, or social security—^because 
of his illegal status. He eventually becomes an unemployed alcoholic wandering the 
streets of Tijuana. 

Mendez shows that Chuco is acutely aware that the very society that his work fed 
has now discarded him like a broken tool because he no longer serves them. In one 
scene, middle and upper class pedestrians (whose ethnicity is unspecified) accuse Chuco 



173 


of being a lazy Mexican drunk and threaten to call the cops. He retorts by pointing to a 
sign with a Mexican sleeping under a saguaro wearing a sombrero and sarape. 

You see that pal there, leaning against the cactus? These people, pal, say that he’s 
lazy, that he doesn’t work, you know, but that guy’s [sic] there, really, because 
he’s all beat and all sad. The fellow was the harvest champion, you know. He’s 
there because he’s all tired out with no one to help him, not even anyone to 
respect him, just like a shovel or a worn pick that’s not worth a damn any more. 
(Mendez 28) 

But, because the privileged consider the destitute less than human, the words of the poor 
are viewed as meaningless. In this scene, it appears as if the passersby cannot hear the 
words of Chuco even when he tries to establish common ground. Chuco calls his 
accusers “pal” numerous times and pleads for them “to see” and “to know” what he is 
talking about. He cries during his emotional speech. In return, the pedestrians pelt him 
with hatred: “Damned lazy people! All they think of is booze and sleep! Yes, drink and 
do something . .. manaha\ By the way, has someone called the cops?” (Mendez 28). 
Ultimately, the police haul him away; “Everyone was happy to see them carting the 
drunken Chicano off, real decent people, most of them wearing nice ties, the sign of well¬ 
being and good jobs” (Mendez 28). 

Mendez offers other examples of the ways that people in power, notably the rich 
or those who serve them, silence the voices of the poor. This occurs because empowered 
individuals in the dystopia hate the poor, considering them inferior or merely tools of 
their own success and pleasure. Once they are no longer useful, they are vilified. For 
instance, citizens in Tijuana treat Candelita, a lottery vendor, with invective because she 
is old and ugly. When she begs them to buy a ticket, passersby respond with sere hatred: 



174 


“Well, just what are you doing here in the world, old woman? You should be good and 
dead” (Mendez 60).^ 

In the Republic of the Despised, the greed that drives individuals to make more 
money spreads to civil institutions such as the police force, legal courts, and border 
patrol * This occurs on both sides of the US-Mexico border. Mendez does not explicitly 
label the institutions of the borderland dystopia as does, say, Aldoux Huxley in Brave 
New World (1923) with the “College of Emotional Engineering,” “Hospital for the 
Dying,” or the “Slough Crematorium.” Instead Mendez makes his vision perhaps more 
frightening by leaving the reader with the extant, familiar names of institutions while 
simultaneously exposing the unjust values institutionalized in the infrastructure of the 
dystopia. For example, satirically labeling theM/gra, “jealous guardians of the law,” 
Mendez states that they “never bothered the old cunt of a businesswoman, despite the fact 
that on the border patrol lists there were more than two-hundred names of Mexicans who 
had worked at Siesta Chile Dogs” (31). The US border patrol is as unethical as are judges 
of US courts. Rudolph Smith, an Anglo judge, is a racist. He commutes the sentence of a 
guilty Anglo woman because she is from a wealthy family. Smith reasons that the 
“inopportune occurrence” which landed her in jail (i.e., strangling her baby to death) is 
attributable to a temporary lapse into madness for the angelic-looking blond girl of fine 
breeding. In contrast, he doles out a disproportionately heavy sentence to Chuco because 
he is Mexican. “For [Smith], it was more than natural to believe that not to be white 
constitutes, in a certain sense, a crime that must somehow be punished” (Mendez 112). 
When the Judge hears Chuco speaking Spanish in the courtroom, his face twists into a 
“grimace of profound hate” because he cannot understand a word of it. Smith unjustly 
sentences Chuco to four years in jail for stealing four bottles of liquor (117). 


175 


Justice is equally tainted in Mexico. In one of many bar scenes, Trompas, a 
Mexican police officer, harasses a character named Jesus, a modem day apostle, for no 
apparent reason. Mendez describes the bully cop; “Trompas is the one who’s paid to kill 
students in Mexico City. He came to the border with his tail between his legs because a 
careless photographer took his picture at the time he was getting a student during one of 
the many bloodbaths” (Mendez 96). In the bar, Trompas is aggressive and violent. He 
breaks Jesus’s jaw with a rifle butt, literally and figuratively preventing him from 
speaking. As this incident shows, institutionalized bmtality causes “the poor disappear 
silently, without anyone knowing the truth about their lives.... No one knows who or 
what they are” (Bruce-Novoa, “Mendez” 208-9). 

The novel counters its portrayal of the oppression by individuals and institutions 
in the borderlands by offering hope through occasional examples of humanity. In 
Mendez’s rendering of the dystopia, only the poor treat each other as respectable human 
beings because the downtrodden have not internalized the values of greed and egoism 
that motivate the upper class. In contrast to the businessmen and woman who hoard their 
money, Loreto, the destitute car washer, shares what little he has with others. In one 
instance, he gives a Chicano named Frankie Perez his overcoat, fresh water, and watches 
over him all night with careful vigilance. Fellow laborers also demonstrate acts of 
kindness by sharing advice on how to survive oppressive work environments or 
inclement weather. For example, Chuco is first taught how to pick cotton by a fellow 
laborer who tells him, “Well, watch your step, buddy. Look, here is how you strip these 
babes” (Mendez 26). 

In Mendez’s world, characters who perform small acts of charity are primarily— 
but not exclusively—Chicanos, Indians, or Mexicans. Poor Anglos are also capable of 



176 


generously treating societal outcasts, such as disturbed war veterans, homeless people, 
prostitutes, and the mentally ill. In this way, Mendez suggests that the heroes of the 
novel, characters who reject the values of the dystopia, cut across ethnic lines but not 
across class divisions. For example, a Yaqui Indian and Anglo man treat each other with 
compassion but, Mendez seems to suggest, such humanity is only demonstrated among 
fellow poor. In one scene, Bobby Foxye (rebellious son to the Anglo millionaires, Mr. 
and Mrs. Foxye) occasionally keeps vigil for Loreto. “The young hippie ... watched over 
the sleep of the ancient man with great seriousness, as though the Indian were an 
important piece in something he needed to identify” (Mendez 98). Bobby does not 
dismiss Loreto as a mad man even when he babbles incoherently about his memories of 
the Revolution. In turn, Loreto does not abandon Bobby when he is high on drugs. Bobby 
and Loreto do not communicate verbally, but they commune in another way by simply 
sharing space along a wall or in an alley. The Yaqui and Anglo men treat each other with 
compassion befitting of human beings even in the most oppressive circumstances. 
Mendez generally portrays the poor as dignified and proud characters without 
romanticizing them. 

In contrast to poor characters’ rejection of the values that govern the dystopia, 
upper class characters are incapable of envisioning a more humane world. In a society 
that worships money, they have internalized values that subordinate all to a false god of 
profit. The author conveys this idea in the portrait of the rich as hypocrites who use 
religion to mask their own vile natures. This critique of institutional religion in Pilgrims 
in Aztlan is a common motif in literature of the dystopia and utopia. For example, 
Tommaso Campanella’s City of the Sun (1623) is a utopian work that calls for reform of 
the Church of Rome. Campanella criticizes clergy who seek to be secular rulers of 


177 


empires rather than spiritual leaders concerned with souls (Donno 14-19). Pilgrims in 
Aztlan also exposes false religion. In the novel, good “Christians” go through public 
motions of devotion. Don and Dofia de Couch, for instance, dress impeccably for Church, 
after which they imagine themselves as saints among the poor; “On Sundays it was their 
pleasure to mingle among the poor. They admired themselves deeply. On many 
occasions in which they wandered among the ragged and hungry people, they 
complimented themselves” (9). Mr. and Mrs. Foxye, the stingy millionaires, also pervert 
religion for their own ends. “They ate poorly in order to save money,” writes Mendez, 
“The precepts of religion were a great help to them in their economic goals, since they 
were forbidden to drink or smoke or do anything that might mean spending money 
without income” (100). Finally, the hot dog entrepreneur thinks that she is “the heart of 
Christianity” when she introduces the migrant employees to “civilization” (Mendez 30). 
Mendez reveals a caustic wit: “She likes to pretend she was charitable, a real Christian” 
when she allows the Mexican workers to use the gleaming toilets in her restaurant (29). 

Again, the poor offer a contrast to the hypocritical behavior of the rich. Loreto is 
not a religious man, but conducts himself according to a “code of honor,” to use 
Mendez’s term (11). He is characterized as more ethical than his rich Christian brethren 
even though Loreto does not attend church. His code of honor mandates that he treat 
others—^regardless of their rank in society—^with the due respect appropriate to every 
human being. When Loreto violates this code, he feels genuine regret. This happens on 
one occasion when Loreto swears at the kids who encroach on his business but later he 
feels guilty, especially because one of them dies from a cold he gets on the job. Loreto 
has nothing material with which to make amends, so he imagines acts of kindness in 
which “He drew handfuls of money from his pockets with which he filled the hands of 



178 

the kids” (Mendez 65).^ This example illustrates Mendez’s point that only the poor 
genuinely experience regret; they do not quell guilt through false alms giving. 

Mendez’s dystopia also exposes the perverted nature of family relationships, a 
theme popularized in contemporary utopian novels such as Margaret Atwood’s The 
Handmaid’s Tale (1985).^” Such literature posits the breakdown of the family institution 
where, for instance, children are separated from their parents, genetic engineering or 
eugenics replaces sexual relations, or a state institution replaces the family. Pilgrims in 
Aztlan suggests the gradual breakdown of the family by portraying a climate in which 
there are no loving familial relationships among the rich. The de Cocuchs, like others, use 
each another for personal gain. There are also no healthy parent-child relationships 
because attempts at genuine love are thwarted by unquenchable egoism. Mendez shows 
that even the lower classes are slowly being infected by such societal trends. Lencho 
Garcia y del Valle is a poor Mexican with ten children who lives south of the US-Mexico 
border. To prevent the family from slowly starving to death, a process well underway, his 
sons shine shoes and wash cars while his wife and daughters clean clothes and make 
tortillas. However, Lencho has no job. He occupies himself by drinking away the 
earnings that he robs from his wife and children.“ 

The dysfunctional Foxye family offer a more detailed example of the break down 
of caring familial relationships. In this example, Mendez further shows how downtrodden 
characters articulate the absurdity of a society driven exclusively by commercially-based 
values. The author accomplishes this by depicting the spaces of this borderland dystopia 
through a camivalesque atmosphere and satirical tone. These poetic devices, like utopian 
literature in general, function as a social critique and attack on unloving familial 
relationships. In a predictable story, Mr. and Mrs. Foxye invest their energy into their 



179 

business rather than raising their son, Bobby. The boy becomes estranged from them and, 
by age twenty-three, he is a hippie and drug addict wandering the streets of Mexico. 

When Mr. and Mrs. Foxye decide they are ready to invest love rather than money, they 
buy a dog that Mrs. Foxye “came to love with the love of a mother” (Mendez 103). 

Though Mr. and Mrs. Foxye are hailed as competent, respected people, they see 
their dog as human and their son as an animal because he is dressed in ragged clothes and 
smells like a sewer. Mendez highlights that inversion using a carnivalesque style that 
resonates with the work of theorist and linguist Mikhail Bakhtin. According to Bakhtin, 
the power dynamics of a carnival successfully “invert hierarchies and undermine 
boundaries” in its “affirmative, militantly anti-authoritarian attitude toward life” (74, 66). 
In Mendez’s dystopia, Bobby appears more adult in his behavior than his parents, who 
fail to recognize that the dog is a substitute for the love they do not give Bobby. 

Like Bobby’s ability to point out the absurdity of his parent’s misplaced love, 
many members of the lower class identify the values of aggressive individualism and 
relentless egoism that prevail in the dystopia. Mendez uses characters such as Jesus to 
expose that immoral code in a way that engages the conventions of the dystopian novel. 
According to critic Gary Saul Morson, the climax of dystopic fiction involves characters 
rebelling against the existing order once they acknowledge the societal “Lie” that governs 
the dystopia (125-128). Having recognized the oppressive world in which they live, 
characters like Jesus want to reform the society. In the novel, Jesus is a Mexican Indian 
bom in a village called Bethlehem in the Yaqui Nation of Sonora, Mexico. He recognizes 
the lie of the borderlands as a place that privileges reckless commercialism at the expense 
of human life. Jesus rebels against those values by calling “anyone who had bread to 


180 

share it with the hungry, for anyone who was dying from the cold to receive from his 
brother who had clothes a piece of his blanket” (Mendez 93-4). 

Mendez’s unmistakable allusion to Jesus Christ demonstrates broader Christian 
themes, such as the humanitarian ideal of loving one’s neighbor. Like Jesus Christ, Jesus- 
the-character believes himself to be part of the greater brotherhood of humankind—a 
communal spirit common to utopias but antithetical to the extreme individualism of 
dystopias. The allusion to Jesus Christ also evokes a parallel between Aztlan in the novel 
and Heaven in a Christian tradition. The fictional character and Christian God are 
spiritual pilgrims in desert civilizations who rebel against injustice rampant among 
individuals and institutions alike. Both strive for creating a more egalitarian world in this 
life and their good deeds promise them entrance into an ideal world. 

Another character who strives for a better society is Lorenzo, a working class poet 
who serves as the voice of Aztlan in the novel. He is one of thousands of pilgrims trying 
to reach Aztlan. While crossing the US-Mexico illegally, Lorenzo has a vision of Aztlan. 
In Mendez’s narrative, Aztlan is a mirage; “The lakes that magic paints from a distance, 
as though they had only been lighted by the centuries, would suddenly take on the life 
that would return them to the reality of the movement than animates the fountains and the 
rivers” (82-3). Lorenzo envisions his place in the utopia stating, “In the future I would be 
a true citizen requesting and receiving justice” (Mendez 82). Compared to the dystopia, 
the utopia offers a space for self-expression by the poor; in Aztlan, what the 
impoverished say will matter. They will also be treated like human beings and share a 
code of honor similar to Loreto’s. Further, Lorenzo tells us that the inhabitants of Aztlan 
will have adequate food and water because the desert’s “unploughed lands” will be 



181 

transformed by “multitudes of Chicano brothers who made paths and roads to peace and 
tranquility from the immense sandy plains” (Mendez 83). 

Mendez’s conceptualization of Aztlan is similar to the ideal community set forth 
in the Chicano charter, El Plan Espiritual. Creating the site as a pastoral oasis in the 
novel resonates with the civil rights document which states, “Aztlan belongs to those who 
plant the seeds, water the fields, and gather the crops and not to foreign Europeans” (1). 
Both the novel and El Plan Espiritual intimate a communal utopian society where those 
who work the land—migrant farm workers for example—are the rightful owners rather 
than the “foreign Europeans” or exploiters who, under present circumstances, have legal 
title to the land. Mendez’s expression of Aztlan is also similar to that image set forth in 
the El Plan Espiritual in terms of the US-Mexico border. The charter reads: 

In the spirit of a new people that is conscious not only of its proud historical 
heritage but also of the brutal ‘gringo’ invasion of our territories, we, the Chicano 
inhabitants and civilizers of the northern land of Aztlan from whence came our 
forefathers, reclaim the land of their birth ... We do not recognize capricious 
frontiers on the bronze continents.... We are a bronze people with a bronze 
culture. Before the world, before all of North America, before all our brothers in 
the bronze continent, we are a nation, we are a union of free pueblos, we are 
Aztlan. (1) 

Both the novel and El Plan Espiritual view the US-Mexico border as an artificial 
construct. In the passage, the reference to the “capricious” border is an indictment of US 
aggression in the Mexican American War. According to this view, the US military 
acquired sacred Chicano homelands that rightly belong to the Mexica and Aztec nations 
of Mezoamerica (Alurista 221). 


182 


In Mendez’s expression of Aztlan, the US-Mexico border is an ineffective 
boundary. It does not prohibit or impede travel. Characters are constantly traversing the 
border according to push-pull dynamics of market forces, as economist Immanuel 
Wallerstein defines and explains, that characterizes the relation of core to peripheral 
nations in a system of global economics. In the novel, Loreto, Chuco, Vate, Ramagacha, 
and Lorenzo migrate north “as though it were a Mecca for the hungry” because they feel 
the pull of higher wages in the US, a core nation in world trade markets (Mendez 39). 
After nearly fatal journeys across the Sonoran desert, they enter the US illegally and 
work as migrant farm hands. However, nearly all of the characters return to Mexico, a 
peripheral nation in international markets. The migrant workers are pushed back to 
Mexico by the Mgra, poor health, family necessity, or other such reasons. Mendez 
writes: 

Day after day of crossing the territory in order to cross the river or jump the fence, 
coming finally to destroy their souls for a few dollars they exchange for sausage, 
bread, beans. The M/gra! The border patrol arresting wetbacks, mistreating them, 
jailing them because they break the law by working in an alien land. Ah! The 
wetbacks break the law by working in the US, but those who give jobs to the 
wetbacks do not. They have the freedom to employ them and to pay them 
whatever they want... Slaves in an alien land, forgotten and banned in their own. 
(39-40) 

The border is a permeable membrane as pilgrims—migrant, illegal workers searching for 
a better quality of life—cross and re-cross the desert seeking the elusive Aztlan. 

Although Lorenzo is able to visualize Aztlan, it proves to be an elusive promise of 
a better life. He sees Aztlan on the horizon, but he is also slowly dying of thirst. The 



183 

desert wasteland offers the traveling pilgrims that Lorenzo symbolizes only death or “the 
worthy embrace of the graveyard” amid “thorns of scorn and indifference” and “dunes 
that rise up to look like tombs” (Mendez 82-3). The water imagery that drips and drowns 
fails to quench the thirst that will eventually kill Lorenzo. Water is a symbol of life and 
hope that satisfies the pilgrim’s thirst for voice and extinguishes the flames of the 
dystopia. However, the lack of water in this desert space provides infertile ground for 
language, even Lorenzo’s lyrical ballads. The poet’s words are lost in a “no-man’s-land” 
and consumed by “dust storms” that cover any trace of his “tightly spaced steps” (82). He 
thinks, “I lose myself in the tangle of vocabulary and the words that still are not bom of 
thought and that makes one’s heart ache. I lost myself among the sand drifts of the 
Sonoran desert” (Mendez 82). No matter how vibrant and alive the verse—or how vivid 
and powerful the dream of Aztlan—Lorenzo’s poems collapse in a “tangle of 
vocabulary” that is covered by dust and sand of the desert’s “language of silence.” 

As Lorenzo slowly dies of thirst, Mendez depicts the deserts Yuma and Sonora 
transforming into a place as perilous as the city streets of Tijuana. The author inscribes 
the landscape with the values of the dystopia to show that the Republic of the Despised 
has spread fi'om cityscape to countryside. For example, he writes, “Sand and moon 
dripped from their clothes, and driven by the thirst of the winds, the exodus of wetbacks 
dragged its feet because of the greed of the powerful” (83). He adds, “Scourged by the 
tenebrous winds that roast with the cmelty of pyres, the voices of the deceitful would 
flee, bearing with them tribunes of hypocrites who betray the trust of their children and 
their forebears” (83). The passages suggest that familial dysfimctionality is now 
associated with the fiery deserts that consume the young and old. The passages also 
refers to the betrayal of familial love among parents. According to the imagery, the 



184 

institutionalization of the “greed of the powerful” consumes workers like fuel for the 
market. 

Lorenzo’s final act is to imagine a utopia forged in a great battle between the 
pilgrims of Aztlan and the mighty deserts that looks much like Milton’s epic war between 
heaven and hell. In Mendez’s version, the Yuma Desert commands a militia of 
succulents, such as “armies of prickly cholla bushes,” “fierce beavertail cacti, their tails 
turned up,” “barrel cacti armed with daggers,” and saguaro “watchmen” welding “swords 
of steel” (73). Nature tries to stop the advancing forces of the pilgrims who defiantly 
surge forward, each mechanical step a victory over the desert. The migrants march 
defiantly forward in the hot and hazy battleground: 

We will come to your center, cursed desert, anointed by the spirit of the ancient 
gods of our race. And there, filled with rage, we will drive into your unmoving 
heart the tom flag of the wetbacks. Who are you, desert? You have stolen the 
beauty of the seas, aspiring to the majesty of its movements. Who are you? A 
monster of otherworldly refuges, lost in the chaos of the primeval times. Altar 
Desert... Are you perhaps the promised land of the hungry who have no 
country? Ah! Now I know who you are. You’re the immense tomb of the 
banished and of the empire of the Indians. Yuma Desert! (Mendez 74) 

The pilgrims plant the “tom flag of the wetbacks” firmly in the desert, an act that signals 
Mendez’s allusion to the mythic Chicano homeland where people with “no country” 
claim one for their own.^'* However, Aztlan proves only to be a desert mirage eternally 
beyond the reach of poor Chicano pilgrims. Following this battle, it does not materialize. 
The weary pilgrims claim only a “tomb” shared by the fellow oppressed. When Aztlan 
fails to actualize, Lorenzo dies in the desert. Lorenzo’s death, according to the 


185 

conventions of utopian literature, means there is no hope to escape from the increasingly 
pervasive dystopia. In Mendez’s construction of space, the natural landscape, like 
society itself, has turned on the pilgrims; the sand, bush, and cacti prevail. 

Just as the corruption of the city metaphorically spreads to the deserts, Mendez 
shows similar values infecting all of society. The author uses the death of Loreto, the 
Yaqui car washer, to suggest that the humane relationships common among the poor may 
be ultimately tainted by the greed prevalent in greater society. Loreto dies silently from 
hunger in a shack whose cardboard and metal walls are covered with pictures of food. 
Garbage collectors rifle through his possessions in search of anything worth material 
value, but find nothing that will earn them profit. They pause momentarily when they see 
a picture of Loreto during the revolution, young, strong, healthy and of high rank. 
However, reflecting the practices of greater society as a whole, they throw his body and 
shack into the dump because it has no value to them. The deaths of Loreto, the most 
dignified character in the book, as well as Lorenzo, the spokesperson of Aztlan, cautions 
that capitalistic values in a dystopia may become so pervasive that they become a form of 
genocide to poor Chicano people. 

In the final two paragraphs, Mendez reconfirms the events in the narrative and 
offers a new vision of utopia through a direct (and highly uncharacteristic) exchange with 
the audience. First, he reaffirms that Aztlan, the desert utopia that his characters seek, 
does not exist. He calls it a death site “where the voices of those who have succumbed 
dwell” that also includes “petrified trees without songbirds and owls” as well as the 
agonizing “screams” of the oppressed (178). In its place, the author posits that a utopia is 
a space that exists within society. He asks, “Who has made you believe that you are 
lambs and beasts of burden?” a question designed to inspire Chicanos/as to realize they 


186 

need not exist merely as cheap labor that is exploited by the rich (178). “In this region,” 
he adds, referring to the borderland dystopia, “fight for the destiny of your children!” 
(Mendez 178). For Mendez, Aztlan is not a mythical homeland or an elusive place in the 
desert; utopia is a place where future generations “will not be willing to tolerate the kind 
of institutionalized ethnocentrism, racism, and class oppression to which Mexicans, 

Native Americans, and other Third World people are subjected” (Alurista 225). This new 
conceptualization of Aztlan notably differs from El Plan Espiritual that refers to a 
legendary homeland. The closing words in the novel represent Mendez’s engagement 
with the genre that figures a new utopia as the reformed society in a space once 
characterized as a dystopia. Thus he implants the poetics of utopianism within the 
geography of existing society. 

Mendez calls for massive changes within society by critiquing capitalism as a 
form of genocide to poor Chicanos/as. In Almanac of the Dead. Silko engages the 
conventions of the utopia and dystopia amid projections of space in a geopoetic 
representation similar to Mendez’s borderland dystopia. In Silko’s depiction of space, the 
borderlands are a chaotic wild zone where “destroyers” barricade themselves from others 
by building “closed systems” to protect their possessions and sangre pura. From this 
dystopia, Silko offers a glimpse of “One World, Many Tribes,” which is the name of the 
utopia and the title of the final section of the novel, in which characters are poised to 
achieve an idealized society. Native characters and their allies work together in the spirit 
of mestizo/a consciousness to actualize that utopia by reclaiming sacred Indian lands in 
the American Southwest and destroying the existing borderland dystopia. In this manner, 
geography and genre warn about borders that separate people from one another ethnic, 



187 

geographic, linguistic, and otherwise—thereby inhibiting the creation of a communal, 
egalitarian and humane world. 

Almanac of the Dead 

Almanac of the Dead is a novel about Native characters and their allies 
transgressing borders and reclaiming land seized by expansionists of the Old World in the 
homelands of the New World. The utopian dream of indigenous repossession of the 
land is predicted by the almanac of the dead of the book’s title, an ancient tribal prophecy 
that posits the disappearance of all “things European” (Silko n.p.). In Silko’s hands, the 
almanacs rejects the traditional notion that Old World communities might establish or 
discover utopias in the New World, a belief set forth in its literary antecedents of utopian 
writing. Instead she draws on aspects of utopian literature that posits a past as mythic and 
recoupable. Working within this literary convention, the almanacs in the novel state that 
the Aztec god who predicted the coming of the Europeans to the New World also 
predicted the disappearance of the selfsame people in the Americas. When the prophecy 
is realized, a utopia will be achieved through a “rebirth of humanity” (Silko 736). In 
contrast to the original literature of utopia which served as “colonist propaganda” 
inspiring Old World expeditions to America, Almanac of the Dead calls for the return of 
“things European” to the Old World (Knapp 21). Silko does not indicate specifically 
what constitutes “things European” or, by extension, “things Native.” In broad, 
theoretical terms, however, things European seem to include those constructs that block 
Indians from attaining their homelands. This might include the US-Mexico border; it 
would also include Anglo history, because that history valorizes the conquest and 
“civilizing” of Indians. In addition, things European likely include the existing values 




188 

and institutions of power in the borderland, such as capitalism, private property, class 
stratification, and competition. 

Recalling the notion of utopias as prelapsarian and communistic societies, Silko’s 
rendering makes pre-conquest America an edenic site where “Mother Earth embraced the 
souls of all who loved her. No fences or walls would stop them” (Silko 736). As this 
comment by the omniscient narrator suggests, private property will not exist in Silko’s 
utopia. More broadly, borders and barriers will not exist either, a concept that Silko 
articulates in the following 1998-interview: “Our human nature, our human spirit, wants 
no boundaries, and we are better beings, and we are less destructive and happier. We can 
be our best selves as a species, as beings with all the other living beings on this earth, we 
behave best and get along best without those division^" (Italics added; Arnold 10). 
Characters in Almanac of the Dead echo her sentiment. Calabazas, a Mexican smuggler, 
offers the best example when he states: 

We don’t believe in boundaries. Borders. Nothing like that. We are here 
thousands of years before the first whites. We are here before maps or quit claims. 
We know where we belong on this earth. We have always moved freely. North- 
south. East-west. We pay no attention to that isn’t real. Imaginary lines. 

Imaginary minutes and hours. Written law. We recognize none of that.... We 
don’t see any border. (Silko 216) 

According to the almanacs, when Quetzalcoatl’s prediction comes true, the Americas will 
return to its former utopian state, albeit with citizens more humble and wise for their 
experiences in the extant dystopia. 

In contrast to its portrayal of a homogeneous utopian past, the novel depicts the 
present as a dystopic borderland that chums with movement in which political strife. 



189 

economic instability, and violent encounter create a volatile and destabilized atmosphere. 
Streams of refugees from Guatemala, El Salvador, and Mexico travel north fleeing 
revolution and civil unrest. US military forces amassed on the border are stretched thin 
by the impossibility of defending a 2,000-mile frontier. Added to this, water resources in 
the US Southwest are running out and the US economy is on the edge of bankruptcy. 

What becomes increasingly evident in the text is that the US-Mexico border is a porous 
and permeable membrane ready to collapse. The US and Mexican federal governments 
never achieve more than tenuous control of the border, no matter how much money they 
invest in defending it. Their efforts grow increasingly feeble against the mounting 
pressure caused by massive migration and smuggling. 

Silko makes clear that this wild zone is a product of the egocentric values of the 
society that spawned it. To cite just a few examples in Almanac of the Dead , Beaufrey 
traffics in pornography and snuff films. Max Blue takes cool pride in his effectiveness as 
an assassin, and General J.’s favorite topics are castration, rape, sex, and blood. A prolific 
trade in sex film in the novel illustrates this concept. Beaufrey runs a profitable business 
on “dissection films” for which customers pay “hundreds even thousands of dollars” 
(Silko 103). The “steady, lucrative demand” increases so rapidly that the waiting list for 
his videotapes grows longer as the black market business expands (SilkolOS). Beaufrey 
also trades in human body parts. He kidnaps Seese’s baby, Monte, only to later 
dismember him for sadistic video viewing pleasure. Trigg offers another example of the 
commodification of human life.^* A small-time hustler who runs plasma centers in 
Tucson, he kills many of the donors in order to harvest their organs. Trigg sells them on a 
black medical market where there is demand for “fetal-brain material, human kidneys, 
hearts and lungs, corneas for eye transplants, and human skin for bum victims” (Silko 



190 

398). Trigg believes “biomaterial” to be so profitable that he considers it “the bonanza of 
the twenty-first century” (Silko 398). Medical theorist Ann Folwell Stanford underscores 
the way the novel functions as caution to a real world market in organ transplants: “With 
the specter of ethnic cleansing hovering over the world and with the paranoid policing of 
borders in the US and elsewhere, the commerce in human bodies has a menacing 
pragmatism—getting rid of certain (radically unstable) categories of people” (30). 

Using the labels of “destroyer,” “manipulator,” and “exploiter,” Silko defines 
morally bankrupt characters like Beaufrey and Trigg as individuals who “make the 
boundary lines and try to separate [people]” (Arnold 9, 26). In Silko’s rendering of space, 
destroyers barricade themselves from others as a way to protect their material interests in 
a chaotic dystopia. For example, Trigg steadily buys up Tucson slums pushing out other 
businesses while he plans the exclusive walled retirement community of Verde Canyon; 
Ferro fortifies his isolated ranch with electronic surveillance and guard dogs; Greenlee 
grows thick cactus gardens around a home with more weapons than a national armory; 
Leah Blue imagines a rich community of “Venice” isolated in the middle of a desert. As 
these examples suggest, Silko’s expression of space as dystopia offers geographic 
representations that critique the values of egoism and greed that arise from a primacy on 
material wealth and private property. She accomplishes this by drawing on a common 
motif in utopian literature that celebrates communal property and values that promote 
egalitarianism and equality. 

Where physical barriers sequester destroyers and their property from each other, 
they also serve as “psychological borders” (Anzaldiia n.p.). Chicana writer Gloria 
Anzaldua uses this term to describe the ways people separate themselves from personal 
space where human beings “edge” and “overlap” with others (n.p.). Silko depicts 


191 

figurative borders that are fueled by racism, narcissism, misogyny, and hatred in a world 
where destroyers shrink from human intimacy. Critic Janet St. Clair explains: " Almanac 
reveals an utterly amoral and atomized society in which each isolated member is 
indifferent to everything but the gratifications of his own enervated passions. He is 
connected to nothing” (141). Serlo is an excellent example of a man “connected to 
nothing.” He lives in the desolate llano outside Cartegena to protect himself from 
“swarms of brown and yellow human larvae called natives” (Silko 549, 5). His racism 
precludes general contact with other human beings who lack sangre pura like his own; he 
believes that in “strict biological order to the natural word... only sangre pura sufficed 
to command instinctive obedience from the masses” (Silko 549). In fact, his narcissism is 
so twisted that he refuses to have sexual relations with anyone, a fact that illustrates his 
extreme mortification of intimate personal space. His goal is to literally be connected to 
nothing which he hopes to achieve by launching the “Alternative Earth” unit, a space 
capsule that will permanently sever his ties with Earth. 

Silko reminds us that that destroyers’ pseudo-protective shells—figurative 
“psychological borders” that prevent human intimacy—^will always self-destruct 
(Anzaldua n.p.). Eventually, closed systems such as “Beaufrey’s games” turn 
cannibalistic.^^ Beaufrey keeps a menagerie of lovers sequestered in a glass penthouse 
high above the beaches of San Diego. His exclusive sex club thrives on endless love 
triangles like that of Seese-Eric-Beaufrey, Eric-Beaufrey-David, and Beaufrey-David- 
Serlo. His extreme narcissism, in which “he had always loved himself, only 
himself’(Silko 532), prevents him from forming genuine loving relationships (St. 
Clairl41-4). He manipulates his partners believing that “[o]thers do not fully exist” 
because he “existed more completely than any other human being he had ever met” 




192 


(Silko 533). Beaufrey usually kills the people he can not love in this parasitic 
environment. He casts off Seese for David and Eric, then supplies her with enough 
cocaine to overdose. Although Seese is tempted several times to overdose, ultimately she 
does not. She survives Beaufrey’s games by leaving him and moving away. However, 
Beaufrey’s other lovers are less fortunate. His sexual relations with David cause Eric to 
kill himself Later, David dies violently in a riding accident at the finca, an outcast to 
Beaufrey’s new liaisons with Serlo. Beaufrey then turns on Serlo, “the next source of 
cannibalistic satisfaction” (St. Clair 144). With the death of each player in Beaufrey’s 
games, Silko suggests, this closed system appears destined to destroy itself 

The novel is replete with other examples of implosions where the psychological 
borders of destroyers ultimately suffocate the very people the barriers are designed to 
insulate and protect.^® This occurs because of blind faith in technology, a theme 
introduced to the literature of utopia through Bacon’s New Atlantis, with its primacy on 
science and mechanical invention. In dystopian narratives. Brave New World (1932) 
popularized the theme through its depiction of a society that worships science and 
mechanization. Almanac of the Dead offers an excellent example in the way Menardo, a 
Mexican insurance salesman, uses technology to create psychological borders for others 
as well as himself Ignoring his dreams of death and placing hope in technology, 
Menardo’s distrust of others results in his own self-destruction (Stanford 35). Menardo 
sells insurance to the corrupt elite of Chiapas, who buy special policies “against all the 
unknowns stalking the human race,” backed by a 100% guarantee to cover “all losses, no 
matter the cause, including acts of God, mutinies, war, and revolution” (Silko 260-1). 
Menardo grows increasingly wealthy smuggling arms but soon realizes Universal 
Insurance is an illusion: he cannot prevent calamity—even his own death—no matter 



193 

how far-reaching the insurance coverage. Such thinking signals Menardo’s demise as he 
grows increasingly paranoid about being killed. At first, Menardo refuses to take off his 
bullet proof vest day or night. When an assassin’s bullet fails to kill him, he is fooled into 
a false sense of security as a “man invincible with the magic of technology” (Silko 503). 
He dies as a result of his own hubris when he orders the chauffeur, Tacho, to fire a 9mm 
automatic gun into his chest and the vest fails.^^ 

As the destroyers continue to try to protect themselves and their possession, Silko 
shows a growing number of Native characters realizing the immoral values prevalent in 
the dystopia, especially egoism and greed. In Silko’s rendering, these characters strive 
either to escape to a utopian land or rebuild the dystopic society. They do so because 
they foresee the eventual self-destruction of the borderlands as predicted by the almanac 
of the dead. Native characters and their allies also believe their society will ultimately 
collapse because it is inhabited by destroyers; according to this view, the dystopia is a 
closed-system predicated on values that will ultimately destroy an increasingly violent 
and chaotic society. Depicting this process, Silko engages a convention of dystopian 
writing in which individuals become aware of a societal “Lie” and begin to rebel against 
the dystopia (Morsonl26). 

In Almanac of the Dead, the best example of the lie is US history, a written 
record of past events that functions as a totalizing narrative valorizing Anglocentric 
discourse. In addition to depicting Natives as savages, this “master” narrative does not 
acknowledge that the US government stole tribal lands, a common theme of Native oral 
histories made clear by Silko in the novel. Official history subjugates the people striving 
to reclaim tribal lands because it denies them legitimacy associated with written 
chronicles of the past. A shared language about the past, specifically those living oral 


194 


traditions that articulate a people’s relationship to the land, empowers Natives and their 
allies to “rewrite parts of the fallacy that is ‘American’ history” (Holland 344). Unified 
by their belief that Anglo history is an illegitimate representation of the past, characters 
unite to create a utopia where they will own and occupy sacred lands and to destroy the 
false history on which the dystopia is based. The author thus uses the convention of the 
dystopic lie combined with a depiction of the borderland dystopia to create a geopoetic 
expression that shows how the chaos of a wild zone begets a space where alternative oral 
histories challenge monolithic written record. 

Silko demonstrates the ways in which individuals come to recognize societal 
lies—dystopian delusions—^through the character development of Sterling, a Laguna 
Indian. As a child. Sterling learns in Anglo Indian boarding schools that US history is a 
true depiction of past events. As an adult, however, that begins to change. When he is 
banished from his reservation in New Mexico, he decides to move to Tucson. He is 
excited about relocating because Tucson “had history” (Silko 29). Sterling divines such 
history from reading old issues of the Police Clazette . True Detective , and Reader’s 
Digest (Silko 29). However, throughout the course of the novel, he realizes that the 
profiles of Dillinger and Geronimo in the magazines are not true renditions. The stories 
both disappoint him and anger him. Ultimately, he recognizes that all written records— 
including those in history books he read as a child—are lies. Silko writes, “The 
magazines referred to a world Sterling had left forever, a world that was gone, that safe 
old world that had never really existed except on the pages of Reader’s Digest in articles 
reducing blood cholesterol, corny jokes, and patriotic anecdotes” (757). He later returns 
to his homeland and begins to recall the stories of his tribe’s origins. Sterling awaits the 





195 

creation of a utopia that will not be based on written, monolithic depictions of history, but 
will honor alternative, oral versions of the past that he knows to be true. 

The author illustrates the ways that oral histories such as that preserved by Old 
Gorgon, a Mexican businessman and smuggler, are dismissed by Anglo society which 
records its own (revised) versions of the past through written record. As a youth. Old 
Gorgon gets rich selling rotgut whiskey to US troops and Apaches at war along the 
border. He explains that “whorehouses and gambling halls . .. was all Tucson had been in 
the 1880s” (Silko 168). Such stories are denied by subsequent generations; the city’s 
founding families cover up their illicit past: “In only one generation government 
embezzlers, bootleggers, pimps, and murderers had become Tucson’s ‘fine old families’” 
(80). These white families opt for a historical veneer with an appearance of civility. Their 
revised view of the past also legitimizes their power as white noble conquerors of a wild 
frontier and portrays Indians as savages. Old Gorgon rails against “Tucson’s aristocracy” 
who were 

spawned by the whiskey bootleggers and whoremasters who had fattened off the 
five thousand US troops who had chased Geronimo and fifty Apaches for ten 
years. Ah, Tucson high society! With their pedestrian little fortunes skimmed off 
government supply contracts for army rations of weevil-infested commeal and 
wagonloads of spoiled meat. (Silko 645) 

Silko uses the Indian Wars in the novel to show a clear example of how different 
communities hold varying interpretations of history. Many characters advocate the idea 
that the Indian Wars are not over, an idea that challenges existing “historical fact.” Zeta 
explains clearly; “War had been declared the first day the Spaniards set foot on Native 
American soil, and the same war had been going on ever since: the war was for the 


196 

continents called the Americas” (Silko 133). Lakota lawyer-poet Wilson Weasel Tail 
recognizes that the Indian Wars never ended; in his poetry, for example, he summons 
“armies of warriors’ ghosts,” exclaims “We are at war,” and invokes the Ghost Dance to 
reunite with “beloved ancestors lost in the five-hundred-year war” (Silko 717, 715). 
Angelita tells her followers, “this is war, the war to retake the Americans and to free all 
the people enslaved” (Silko 532). Calabazas, too, claims that, ‘the war that had never 
ended,’ the war for the land” (Silko 178). Finally, this theme is made explicit on the 
text’s map, “The Indian Wars have never ended in the Americas” (n.p.). 

Natives and their allies challenge Anglo history by giving voice to alternative 
interpretations that work to re-connect people to their own stories. “Failure to give a 
regular and accurate accounting of a tribe’s historical relationship with its land base,” 
claims critic Christopher Norden, “is in many tribal cultures seen as prelude to social and 
ecological apocalypse” (102). Clinton (the “first black Indian” and a Vietnam vet) and 
Angelita (a Marxist guerrilla leader) try to re-establish those connections by literally re¬ 
writing history and re-publicizing it orally. In this act, Clinton and Angela are able to use 
history so it becomes a “self-determining factor in a people’s emancipation” (Holland 
348). Clinton and Angela make public a list of dates and events (742-46 and 527-530) 
that have been omitted from white history. They do so because they believe “the powers 
who controlled the United States didn’t want the people to know their history. If the 
people knew their history they would realize they must rise up” (Silko 431). Clinton also 
plans weekly radio addresses which he plans to broadcast after the Army of the Homeless 
captures radio stations because “he wanted black people to know all their history; he 
wanted to know all that had gone on before Africa” (Silko 416). Clinton adds, 
“[I]gnorance of the people’s history had been the white man’s best weapon” (Silko 742). 


197 

Harsh punishment befalls those characters in the novel who forget the value of the 
peoples’ histories. Angelita accuses one such character, Bartolomeo, a Cuban rebel who 
seemingly has “no use for indigenous history”; she adds, “Comrade Bartolomeo denies 
the holocaust of indigenous Americans! Seventy-two million people in 1500 reduced to 
ten million people by 1600! Comrade Bartolomeo is guilty! Guilty of crimes against 
history!” (Silko 531). Ultimately, the Marxist tribunal run by Angelita sentences 
Bartolomeo to death. In effect, he is killed because he refuses to recognize those stories 
that connect a people to its land and origins. 

Even as Silko attributes import to such stories, she goes beyond a call to make 
space for alternative histories. In her utopia, history is a palimpsest where stories are 
layered atop one another—much like the structure of the novel—^to create a multifaceted 
and inclusive record of the past. This is exemplified in the multiple, fractured identities of 
Geronimo in the novel that surface from the disjunction between Anglo journalists who 
insist on recording the demise of Geronimo for posterity and Old Mahawala’s assurance 
that the “real Geronimo” never surrendered. According to written history, Geronimo’s 
surrender at Skeleton Canyon is the historic marker signaling the end of the Indian Wars. 
Yet according to the oral history in the novel, the events at Skeleton Canyon were 
actually a joke by Old Pancakes, an Indian who poses as Geronimo. In one of the funniest 
stories of the novel, Silko tells us that Old Pancakes is just one of many “fake 
Geronimos” such as Wild Ledge, Red Clay, and Big Pine, each with his own story of 
resistance. This identity diffusion begets immeasurable “confusion among white people 
and their historians” intent on capturing the demise of the “ferocious criminal Geronimo” 
and declaring the historical pronouncement that the “territories [are] safe for white 
settlement” (129, 229).^^ Various photographs of different Geronimos, each meant to 



198 


record his surrender for historical purposes, add to the confusion. On a literal level, the 
multiple pictures of Old Pancakes, et. al, defy historians’ attempts to portray the real 
Geronimo. The stories of the multiple Geronimos create a layered, complex, and nuanced 
pictures of the past. According to oral tradition, there are many freedom fighters who 
strove to reclaim tribal lands, not a single, monolithic interpretation of the past as favored 
by Anglos. 

Employing the genre of utopian writing, Silko offers a geopoetical construction of 
space in which characters’ rebellions against written history become a form of resistance 
through language that arises in the space of a wild zone. First conceptualized by 
anthropologists Edwin and Shirley Ardener i n Perceiving Women (1975), the wild zone 
was contextualized as a “female-identified space” inaccessible by “dominant male- 
identified patriarchy” (252). In effect, the Ardeners hypothesize that women can and must 
speak men’s language (which is public and hegemonic), but men cannot understand 
women’s codes. That space of misunderstanding, defined by the Ardeners as 
“physiology-derived” and “stereotyped-derived,” provides a disjunctive place for 
women’s empowerment and resistance (Candelaria 249).^^ What makes the wild zone 
necessary, perhaps inevitable, to an understanding of Silko’s borderland is the novel’s 
construction of history as metanarrative rather than master narrative. The novel 
consciously dwells on this disjunction which parallels the dystopia/utopia contrast in the 
narrative. Native characters and their allies know Anglo history, but Anglos do not know 
Native history. Out of this space, a New World utopia will be bom. 

Much like Mendez’s conceptualization of Aztlan as a site where the voices of the 
poor will not be muted, Silko’s rendering of utopia is a place where alternate histories, 
oral and written, are valued equally. Conceptualizing the past as multiple enables Silko 


199 

to create a utopian landscape “from a reconfigured geography and historical record of the 
Americas” (Holland 345). For example, the histories written by Angelita, a Mexican 
Indian, and Clinton, an African American Indian, operate much like a dialogue. Their 
histories offer an inclusive, comprehensive understanding of the past that helps break 
down barriers between different oppressed minorities (Holland 346). Roy, Clinton’s 
white veteran buddy, offers another example. When Clinton’s ravings about white history 
get excessive, Roy feels “free to talk wild-talk right back at that crazy black fucker” 

(Silko 404). The vets may have completely different interpretations of the same event; 
they may recognize dates in history as significant for different reasons. Nonetheless, their 
varying interpretations do not cancel each other. Instead, they find solace in the fact that 
each man respects—or at least tolerates—^the other’s perceptions of the past. 

Articulating their stories enables freedom fighters like Angelita, Clinton, and Roy 
to beget increasingly stronger bonds through the realization that they share a past of 
resistance against a common foe—^the destroyers. Over the course of the novel, disparate 
tribes with different languages, cultures, and histories on both sides of the US-Mexico 
border rally around the prophecy of the almanacs of the dead. Silko engages the common 
motif of utopian fiction where, in this case, the almanacs expose Anglo history as a 
societal lie, revealing the delusions of the world in which they inhabit and inspiring them 
to battle for attainment of a utopian place. Calabazas tells us that Cochise inspired 
different tribes in the fight for their land: “he had reminded the people of the prophecies 
different tribes had. In each version one fact was clear; the world that the whites brought 
with them would not last. It would be swept away in a giant gust of wind” (Silko 23 5). 
Similarly, Angelita explains that the single-minded goal of the Marxist guerillas is to 
reclaim stolen land; “If they could agree on nothing else, they could all agree the land 


200 

was theirs. Tribal rivalries and even intervillage boundary disputes often focused on land 
lost to the European invaders. When they had taken back all of the lands of the 
indigenous people of the Americas, there would be plenty of space” (Silko 518). 
Representing a rainbow of tribal affiliations such as the Hopi, Yaquis, Apache, Plains, 
Mohawk, and Laguna, every Native character in the novel responds to the call to break 
borders set up by destroyers to keep tribes from unifying. 

Clinton, an African American veteran, is among the first to recognize the strength 
of their combined resistance: “Right then the magic had happened: great American and 
great African tribal cultures had come together to create a powerful consciousness within 
all people. All were welcome—everyone had been included” (Silko 416). Silko’s novel 
builds an increasingly complex web of interconnection between cultures, similar to the 
one Clinton describes, that culminates in the invocation of mestizo/a consciousness, 
which Anzaldua defines as “the possibility of uniting all that is separate” (79). She adds: 
This assembly is not one where severed or separated pieces merely come together. 
Nor is it a balancing of opposing powers. In attempting to work out a synthesis, 
the self has added a third element that is greater than the sum of its severed parts. 
The third element is a new consciousness—a mestiza consciousness—and 
through it is a source of intense pain, its energy comes from continual creative 
motion that keeps breaking down the unitary aspect of each new paradigm. (79- 
80) 

In Silko’s hands, the crystallization of such “powerful consciousness” is capable of 
dismantling ethnic borders as Mexican Indians, African Americans, and Koreans, for 
example, unite to achieve utopia. Shared histories synthesize into a “third element” that 
becomes a heterogeneous group of heroes working to establish a New World utopia in the 


201 


novel.The motley cast includes ecoterrorists; Marxist guerillas; prisoners in US jails, 
an army of homeless veterans; leaders of newly-independent African nations; Friends of 
the Indians” from Japan, Korea, Germany, Holland and Arab nations; as well as 
thousands of Mexican Indians and Mexicans on a spiritual pilgrimage to reclaim lands in 
the American Southwest. The powerful consciousness engendered by “straddling two or 
more cultures” gains unprecedented momentum in the final section of the novel 
(Anzaldua 80), aptly named “One World, Many Tribes,”^^ where the prophecy of the 
almanacs are on the verge of fruition. As if concurring with Silko’s fictional prophesies, 
Anzaldua remarks, “This land was Mexican once / was Indian always / and is. / And will 
be again” (91). 

Mestizo/a consciousness is powerful enough to transcend the US-Mexico border, 
an artificial barrier that separates Natives from their homelands. This is best illustrated 
by the spiritual pilgrimage of thousands of Mexican and Indian pilgrims, an “odd new 
mystical movement,” ready to march from Mexico to the US (Silko 709). Tacho, a 
Mexican spiritual leader, tells his followers at the Holistic Healers Convention that they 
can reclaim tribal lands simply by walking there. The march becomes a spiritual journey 
to an ancient tribal homeland, much like that in Mendez’s Pilgrims in Aztlan . However, 
in Silko’s version, utopia awaits the pilgrims gathering strength in numbers. The author 
writes that the travelers slowly awaken to truth that the almanacs reveal; that “things 
European” will disappear in the New World; “What was coming was relentless and 
inevitable; it might require five or ten years of great violence and conflict. It might 
require a hundred years of spirit voices and simple population growth, but the result 
would be the same; tribal people would retake the Americas; tribal people would retake 
ancestral land all over the world” (Silko 712). As more people join the pilgrimage, Silko 


202 

suggests their combined energy is powerful enough to surmount the obstacle that blocks 
their path homeward—the US-Mexico border. 

Mestizo/a consciousness is building strength throughout the Americas. While 
some pilgrims will march to the desert utopia, others plot to destroy the borderland 
dystopia. At the end of the novel, multiple conspiracy plots are on the brink of 
activating. These plans include firing a space laser, rioting among federal prisoners, 
launching spiritual pilgrimages, seizing radio stations, organizing a homeless army, and 
exerting diplomatic pressure and blowing up Glen Canyon Dam. Silko gives us the 
impression that the efforts to reclaim the land will either erupt simultaneously or spark 
one another. “When the time came, all these scattered crazies and their plans,” such as the 
Army of the Homeless fire base attacks, the Barefoot Hopi’s prison riots, ecowarrior 
bombings, “would complement and serve one another in the chaos to come” (Silko 755). 
Sterling, the Laguna Indian who slowly recognizes the lie of history over the course of 
the novel, returns to his native land in New Mexico. He knows that the almanacs will 
come true and a utopia will materialize. 

Silko’s engagement with a utopian literary tradition as well as her expression of 
the borderlands as dystopia space provide a geopoetic representation that serves as social 
criticism. The novel warns against borders—geopolitical, psychological, linguistic, and 
otherwise—^that divide rather than unite people. Like Mendez’s novel, Silko’s work 
critiques society by offering a window into a more humane world. Simultaneously, both 
works also caution that a world based on greed, materialism, and violence will ultimately 
destruct. The evil that characterizes the borderlands at the end of the twentieth century 
generates a borderland literature depicting chaos and malevolence. This literature also 
calls for the deconstruction of a geopolitical border that marked the beginning of US- 




203 

Mexico borderland literature over 150 years earlier. Significantly, Pilgrims in Aztlan and 
Almanac of the Dead suggest that borders and borderlands offer an important register of 
social change and upheaval. If one concurs with that assessment, geopoetics through its 
emphasis on genre and geography is a valuable model for studying cultural contact, 
conflict, and encounter in literary works set in borderland regions. 





NOTES 


^ For more information on the genre of utopian writing, see Artur Blaim’s Early E nglish 
Utopian Fiction (1984), No Place Else: Explorations in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction 
(1983), and F.E. and F.P. Manuel’s Utopian Thought in the Western World (1979). 

^ Two points warrant mention. First, I am referring to a utopian literature in its many 
forms (i.e., novel, dialogue, tract) to include works such as Plato’s The Republic of Plato 
(360BC), Tommaso Campanella’s City of the Sun (1623), Kurt Vonnegut’s Player Pia n o 
(1952), Ursula LeGuin’s The Left Hand of Darkness (1969). Within this tradition exists 
the dystopian literature in various forms to include, for example, Joseph Hall’s Mundus 
Alter et Idem [Another World vet the Same (160011. Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World 
(1923), George Orwell’s Nineteen Eightv-four (1949), and Animal Farm (1946). A 
recent popular culture depiction of a dystopia is The Postman (1997), a film staring, 
directed, and produced by Kevin Costner. For an extended list of literature on the utopia 
and dystopia, see www.nlc-bnc.ca/events/sci-fi/t3-le.htm (15 Jan 2000). Second, 
dystopias inevitably arise out of utopias because of the way these ideal constructs are 
posited with little moral ambiguity; in other words, utopian communities strive for pure 
and untainted existence, an impossible ideal for human citizens who are naturally flawed 
and imperfect beings. 

^ Interestingly, claims to sacred Native and Chicano/a homelands in Silko’s and 
Mendez’s texts distinguish the novels as Native American literature and Chicano/a 
literature, respectively. 

^ For biographical information on Mendez, see Bruce-Novoa’s Chicano Authors: Inquiry 


by Interview (1980), Gary D. Keller’s Miguel Mendez in Aztlan (1995), and the Gale 



Literary Database on Contemporary Authors” (see www^alenet,coiWs^^^^ entry 

for Mendez) (10 Jan 2000). 

^ In his autobiographical novel, Mendez also uses language in a manner that resonates 
with Bakhtinian theory. Bricks and Belles Ladders \Ledras v latrillos (1980)] describes 
language as a “river of words” with “linguistic streams adding to the swell and its mad 
dynamics” to evoke the image of border crossings at the Rio Grande/J?/o Bravo. Mendez 
adds; “Yet what could be more fascinating, more engrossing than to contemplate the wild 
unbound course of these rivers dragging all along, erasing what it chooses and imposing 
its own will on the landscape? It is one with all phenomena in that it abhors the static, 
no matter who bemoans that fact or might bemoan it in the foture. Yet those advocates of 
exclusivity—surely it cannot be mere coincidence that makes them also the guardians of 
privilege of power and riches—are seeing themselves outnumbered day-by-day by this 
unbounded growth of those same masses whose domain is but that of wretchedness (80). 
This pell-mell river of words “abhors the static” in a way that echoes Bakhtin’s idea of 
language as a dynamic system, yet takes it further by suggesting the inevitability of such 
streams to change the linguistic landscape. The unified masses in this context 
Mexicans, Chicanos, Indians, mestizo/as and “the poor from both countries”—replace the 
“guardians of privilege” by sheer numbers when, as is their destiny according to the 
quote, they will occupy a space where their words are heard and people are fed (Bruce- 
Novoa, “Mendez” 211). 

® Betrayal of the Indian soldiers by those who are traitorous to the ideals of the 
Revolution, hints Mendez, engenders the crime and corruption of present-day Mexico in 
the novel. Among other indictments, he writes, “The leaders [of the Revolution] grabbed 





up the bounty in a silent stmggle in which money and power were to be had. . People 
assassinated each other in betrayal and viciousness and with exterminatory zeal, where 
intrigue and astuteness sought an alliance with luck” (159). A similar theme is addressed 
in many novels, most relevant to this project is Carlos Puentes’s The Death of Artemio 
Cruz (1962). 

^ Two additional examples warrant mention. Kite, alias “Great Tolito,” offers another 
example. Kite was once a successful, wealthy comedian who has become an imbecilic 
and childlike beggar. In one scene. Kite is crying on the street. “Men wearing nice 
clothes” are kind to Kite—^until they engage in a conversation. The businessmen ask him 
who he is, but when Kite chooses not to answer, the well-dressed men conclude that Kite 
is “nothing but a bum, one of those useless men” (Mendez 128). Finally, LaMalquerida 
illustrates how the voices of the poor are muted, this time through indifference rather than 
hatred. When LaMalquerida tells the Mexican police her heart-wrenching story of being 
lured to the border and sold into prostitution, the investigators could not care less. 
Because she is a prostitute, they show no sympathy whatsoever. Mendez writes, “Za 
Malquerida started to sob convulsively with bitterness. The representatives of justice 
looked at each other. ‘We don’t see the coimection, ma’am . ..” (122). The police silence 
LaMalquerida by arresting her as an accomplice to a crime committed by her brother, a 
crime in which she had no part. 

* I would like to acknowledge that St. Clair’s article (see citation) on Silko’s novel 
informed my understanding of Mendez’s novel. I use the premise that she sets forth to 
interpret Almanac of the Dead (i.e., that characters are incapable of love) to explore 
dystopia in Pilgrims in Aztlan . 


^ On another occasion, Loreto tells Chalito a folktale about the marriage of the sun and 


moon. Loreto passes on a little of his wealth of oral tradition, a theme thoroughly 
explored by Chicano critics such as Juan Bruce-Novoa. Because he has written 
extensively on the tension between written and oral language in Pilgrims in Aztlan , I will 
not replicate that theme in this analysis. See “Righting the Oral Tradition” (1981) and 
“Miguel Mendez: Voices of Silence” (1986). 

As the example of Lencho suggests, both Mendez and Atwood critique patriarchal 
family structures. 

" If Lencho’s relationship to his family is dysfunctional, his place in greater society is 
too, in part because of his odd speech. “He did not express himself like most people,” 
Mendez writes, “He didn’t talk like the common people, the down-and-out and low-class 
people talk. He had taught himself with pretentious and ready-made sentences. His 
cliches were not extracts from great literature, but sentences repeated by generations of 
politicians and ass-licking journalists, blind in their imaginations” (74). Indeed, Lencho’s 
words consist mostly of malapropisms and as a result, he is often abused by the very 
society that he strives to emulate. 

In “Rabelais and His World,” Bakhtin explores the pre-Lenten festivals in the Middle 
Ages and early Renaissance to show, among other things, the way laughter and play 
function as safety valves in a potentially charged atmosphere. 

Mendez’s allusion to Jesus Christ also speaks to the connection between Catholicism 
and Mexican identity. 

See Aztlan: Essavs on the Chicano Homeland (1989) for a comprehensive source that 
includes the mythic, metaphorical, and literal interpretations of Aztlan as well as ihtPlan 


Espiritualde Aztldn. See especially Alurista’s chapter titled, “Myth, Identity, and 
Struggle in Three Chicano Novels by Anaya, Mendez, and Acosta” (219-241). 

For biographical information on Silko, see the Dictionary of Literary BioRraphy , 
volume 143 “American Novelists Since WWII” (3'** series) as well as the first full-length 
biography by Per Seyersted titled Leslie Marmon Silko (1980). 

Further yet, Silko suggests that the US, the most heavily armed nation in the world, has 
never been capable of defending, policing, and regulating its southern boundary with 
Mexico as her character, ex-CIA and hit man. Max Blue, testifies:“[w]hite men had never 
been able to control Tucson or the Mexican border” (357). Calabazas, a Mexican 
smuggler concurs, stating, “we carry a great many things back and forth. We don’t see 
any border. We have been here and this has continued thousands of years. We don’t stop. 
No one stops us” (Silko 216). In fact, fortifying the border fails to stop the drug and gun 
running, the occupation of most characters in the book. Finally, the novel portrays 
Apache war hero, Geronimo, crossing and re-crossing the border in his fight against 
Mexican and US soldiers. Silko’s rendering of the borderlands shows it to be a contested 
space across which people have been traveling unimpeded for years. 

The novel’s connection to actual events in Chiapas is also an excellent example. See 
Deborah Horvitz’s article in SAIL (1998) for details. 

For a more detailed look at Almanac of the Dead interpreted as a cautionary tale to the 
medical industry, see Ann Folwell Stanford’s article, “Human Debris.” 

Native theorist Paula Gunn Allen concurs in The Sacred Hoop (1986) writing that 
destroyers condemn themselves to a “living death” due to their separation fi'om other 
human beings and natural resources (118). 




Other closed systems that self-destruct are illustrated by the fate of Greenlee, Trigg, 
Leah Bleu, Zeta/Lecha’s father, and Ferro. 

Throughout the novel, Silko reiterates the point I have illustrated in the Beauffey and 
Menardo examples: that malevolent and egotistical values that sever relations between 
humans will ultimately collapse. For example, Alegria, Menardo’s wife, knows that “the 
system that starved and destroyed human beings for the profit of a few was a system that 
must fall from the sheer weight of the bodies of the dead” (Silko 307). Wilson Weasel 
Tail alternately accuses and warns the US government to return stolen tribal land or else: 
“Give back what you have stolen or else as a people you will continue your self- 
destruction” (Silko 725). It is such self-destruction of “things European” that the 
almanacs of the dead predict. 

For additional textual evidence, note that Wide Ledge states that “traces of other beings 
and other places preserved on paper became confused for even the white people” (Silko 
227). Also, Silko’s inclusion of many Geronimos in Almanac of the Dead evolves out of 
an earlier interest the author expresses in “A Geronimo Story” [in The Man to Send Rain 
Clouds (1974)]. For more information, see “Photography as Resistance in Almanac of the 
Dead ” by Eric Gary Anderson in American Indian Literature and the Southwest (1990) as 
well as the PBS Video titled, “Geronimo and the Apache Resistance” produced in the 
American Experience Series (vol. 11, 1988). 

The wild zone could be seen as related to alternate conceptions such as Du Bois’s idea 
of “double consciousness,” Freire’s theory of “bifrucated vision,” and Candelaria’s 
“multicultural wild zone” (Candelaria 251). 


^'‘Silko shows that malevolence as well as benevolence crosscuts ethnic lines. Like her 
heterogeneous heroes, she spreads malevolence equally to Anglos, African-Indians, 
Mexican Indians, and Native Americans. She does not cast any one group as uniformly 
angelic or evil. Drug and gun smugglers along the border include Border Indians such as 
Zeta and Ferro, Mexicans like Calabazas, and right wing Anglos like Greenlee. All are 
armed with high powered weapons, driven by profit motivates, and willing to do violence 
if necessary to protect their assets. Members of every ethnic group demonstrate a blatant 
disregard for human life by committing equally perverse, sadistic acts. One critic 
summarizes, “Part of the complexity of Almanac arises from Silko’s refusal to identity 
one group as completely evil, another as completely good” (Stanford 26-7). 

Those who work to break borders recognize their similarities with people of other races 
and classes. Sterling, a Laguna Indian like Silko, realizes that “people he had been used 
to calling ‘Mexicans’ were really remnants of different kinds of Indians. But what had 
remained of what was Indian was in appearance only—^the skin and the hair and the eyes. 

... They had lost contact with their tribes and their ancestors’ worlds ... Indians flung 
across the world forever separated from their tribes and from their ancestral lands” (Silko 
88). Clinton, an African American veteran of the Vietnam War, finds solidarity with 
Black Indians in Haiti. Bom in the US, Clinton also makes connections with people in 
Africa. The cultural blending represented by Sterling and Clinton appears throughout out 
the novel. Root, Lecha’s handicapped lover, looks white with blue eyes and light hair but 
is Mexican; Lecha is a Mexican Indian with what she calls Korean eyes; Menardo, a 
wealthy Mexican businessman, hides his Mexican Indian heritage. He disclaims his 



distinctively Indian features, for instance, lying that his nose was broken in a boxing 
match. 



CONCLUSION; 


GEOPOETIC REPRESENTATIONS IN THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY 

Borderland authors articulate their creative power through geopoetic 
representation—expressions of spatiality and engagement with literary conventions. 
Analyzing the relationship between the two elucidates the multiple ways in which 
characters respond to cultural encounter—acknowledging, resisting, and adapting—from 
the earliest border narratives to the present. This study begins with literature depicting the 
creation of the US-Mexico border and ends with literature calling for its deconstruction. 
The rubric encompassing the works I have analyzed, the US-Mexico border, has provided 
a means to better grasp processes of identity formation. The study of how these processes 
are represented in borderland literature leads to the cumulative effect suggesting a 
compelling relationship between genre and geography. That relationship is the way in 
which writers’ articulate literary expressions of cultural affiliations to space, place, and 
geography. 

Whether in the historical romance or the Western novel, the literature of the US- 
Mexico border describes a phenomenon which is both a metaphorical and geopolitical 
construction. In each of its literary manifestations, the border functions as an articulation 
of ideological difference, as a barrier generating cultural conflict and as a bridge 
promoting respect for cultural difference. However, previous scholars have failed to note 
the paradoxical characteristic of the border. The literary precursors of this study, Americo 
Paredes and Cecil Robinson articulate geopolitical representations of the border as a 
bridge or a barrier, rather than as both. When Paredes describes the border as a “symbol 
of separation,” the underlying tenet magnifies cultural difference between Mexico and the 



213 

US. In his creative and critical work, he conceptualizes the border as a physical obstacle 
between abutting nations that codifies difference through immigration checkpoints, 
border patrols, and electric fences. Conversely, Robinson highlights the paradigm of the 
border as a common place for unifying US and Mexican literary depictions of the region. 

More recent scholarship also fails to develop a comprehensive interpretation of 
the border as both an area of cultural resistance and amelioration. Post-colonial theorist 
Homi Bhabha alludes to borders as interactive spaces that span nations rather than 
separate them. He explains; “the boundary becomes the place from which something 
begins itspresencing ... ‘Always and ever differently the bridge escorts the lingering 
and hastening ways of men to and fro, so that they may get to the other banks . .. The 
bridge gathers as a passage that crosses’” (italics in original; 5). In contrast, border writer 
Gloria Anzaldua depicts the border as a barrier: “1,950 mile long open wound / dividing a 
pueblo, a culture, / running down the length of my body, / staking fence rods into my 
flesh” (2). 

Each claim is incomplete by itself; taken together, however, they reflect the rubric 
that surfaces in this project: literature that addresses borderland events and experiences 
necessarily shapes the geopolitical border as that which causes and contributes to cultural 
misunderstanding, yet facilitates an improved awareness and acknowledgement of 
cultural sensibilities in different communities. This way of perceiving the border opens 
up the layers of meaning informed by expressions of geography and poetics in literary 
worlds that are united and divided by the US-Mexico border and allows for interpretation 
that accounts for the seeming contradictory elements of borderland narratives. Examples 
from the novels in this study illustrate the paradoxical nature of the border as unifying 
and dividing. In Caballero. Gonzalez inscribes the border with competing negative and 



214 


positive characteristics through the artistic expression of space and an engagement with 
formulaic elements of historical romance. The novel provides a representation of the 
border as a geopolitical boundary between nations that reflects the conflicts and divisions 
between Mexican and Anglo communities inhabiting US territory. Gonzalez draws on the 
absolutist conventions of the historical romance, polarities of good and evil, to represent 
national territory and domiciles as spaces with little neutral ground. From the perspective 
of Mexican male characters, the newly imposed border severs their ties to Mexico and 
threatens to disempower them as Mexican landowners occupying US soil. Geopoetics in 
the novel also reveals the border as the medium for the romance quest; in other words, 
from the perspective of the female characters, the border is the catalyst that introduces 
them to their Anglo lovers. The resolution of conflict engages elements of the genre 
through the allegory of the lovers’ union that is achieved in marriages of Anglo men and 
Mexican women. These inter-cultural marriages reconcile the schism caused by the US- 
Mexico border and the Mexican American war. 

All the Pretty Horses is another example that illustrates the paradoxical metaphor 
of the border. McCarthy’s artistic rendering of landscape in the US and Mexico critiques 
the colonial legacy inscribed in the Western novel. On one hand, geopoetics presents the 
border as a gateway to the Old American West for John Grady Cole, a disinherited 
rancher who presumes to pursue his calling in Mexico. Drawing on elements of the 
Western novel, McCarthy characterizes the protagonist as a quintessential cowboy who 
can read the land or talk to horses equally well north or south of the border. On the other 
hand, the author uses of the code of the West, a common motif in the Western novel, 
coupled with a depiction of space in Mexico to show the border less a bridge to Cole’s 
future than an obstacle signifying a colonial past. What is significant about these 



215 


examples is that they suggest that the US-Mexico border is a critical foci for artistic 
expression. Indeed, writers, artists, and musicians are drawn to the border because of the 
ways it functions in dual manifestations, whether geopolitically or metaphorically 
constructed, revealing cultural difference yet begetting cultural understanding. 

Geopoetics amid Multiple Poetics 

The lens of geopoetics also contributes to an understanding of experience and 
encounter in the US-Mexico borderland through artistic genres not addressed in this 
volume. Short story, poetry, visual art, drama, film, and music that focus on the US- 
Mexico border are also interpretable through a critical approach that explores the 
connection of aesthetic form to expressions of space. For example, geopoetics may be 
effectively applied to the short story for the purpose of understanding character responses 
to cultural difference in the US-Mexico borderlands. “Economical, focused, and dense,” 
explains fiction writer Debra Spark, “short stories usually concentrate on a limited 
number of psyches and actions, often structuring themselves around a single event and 
aiming for a single emotional realization” (21). As this definition suggests, a writer’s 
portrayal of setting is compressed and compact for the purpose of achieving maximum 
impact on a short story’s single climax. Because geopoetics underscores spatiality, it is a 
method that may be effectively used to unpack such dense spatial images and 
geographical settings. In “The Iguana Killer” (1984), for example, Alberto Rios 
juxtaposes tightly-constructed depictions ofVillahermosa, Mexico and Nogales, US, to 
portray a “single emotional realization” in Sapito, an eight year old Mexican boy (Spark 
21). The author builds to the protagonist’s epiphany by distilling setting: Villahermosa is 
a “jungle tropics” associated with good deeds in the story, and Nogales is a city space 
associated with US commercialism (11). The boy’s epiphany is that altruism yields a 


216 

sense of self-satisfaction far more valuable than the attention he gets because of the two 
US-made products he owns, an “iguana killer” (i.e., a baseball bat) and a picture of snow. 
The story combines a focused rendering of towns in the US and Mexico as well as a 
single epiphany, an element of the short story in general and short bildungsroman in 
particular. Rios uses this combination of genre convention and town spaces to illustrate 
how a Mexican youth learns to reject US commercialism in a coming of age story. 

“Mac—American,” a short story by journalist and fiction writer John Reed, also 
demonstrates the importance of understanding setting and form in the short story. Reed’s 
work is set in barroom in Chihuahua City, Mexico where two Anglo men, surrounded by 
Mexicans, discuss their plans to return to the US. One of them, Mac, claims Anglos are 
superior to Mexicans. He berates Mexicans in the bar as dishonest, ignoble, and 
inhumane but, in Reed’s hands, these characteristics prove applicable only to Mac who 
boasts about secretly seducing his brother’s lover and playing the “greatest sport... of 
hunting niggers” (47). In the final line, ironically, Mac cannot wait to cross the border 
into the US to live among fellow virtuous people like himself Thus, Reed couples irony 
and the bar setting to show how Mac projects his own ignoble, racist behavior onto the 
Mexicans who surround him, rather than recognizing his own unethical behavior. As this 
example demonstrates, the border functions as a barrier from the perspective of Mac who 
seeks to return to his homeland; however, the border also serves as a bridge between the 
author and reader who jointly acknowledge the irony of Mac’s racism. 

The model of geopoetics might also be applied readily to Jack London’s rendering 
of space and use of genre convention in “Whose Business is to Live.” This short story is 
set in the Mexican towns of Tampico and Panuco during the Mexican Revolution. 

London represents these places as sites of intense anti-American sentiment. Amid shouts 


217 

of “Death to the Gringos,” US flag burning, and a general call to expulse Americans from 
Mexico, two male Anglo characters travel from Tampico to Panuco to rescue an 
American woman whom they both love. Because the plot involves men striving to prove 
their worthiness to a helpless female, the short story reinforces traditional gender roles. 
This shortfall not withstanding, London uses elements of drama, suspense, and danger to 
depict a daring escape narrative that ends when the group of American men and women 
leave Mexico safely, traversing the border to find US troops. Pairing the form of rescue 
narrative with the spaces of Tampico and Panuco generates an expression of characters’ 
determination to survive a situation when mob violence threatens their lives. 

The geopoetic model also applies to poetry, a literary form more “dense” than the 
short story. Poetry packs together the “image-making capacity” of language through 
concrete, sensory description (Guth 400). * Because of its sparse form, poetry compresses 
setting more so than the short story. Yet again, an approach that hones in on spatiality is 
capable of unpacking the condensed representations of space, place, and geography 
common in poetry. For instance, Gloria Anzaldua’s poem titled, “To Live in the 
Borderlands Means You,” represents the US-Mexico borderlands with competing 
characteristics, calling it, for example, both a safe “home” and a “battleground” (194-5). 
A site of multiple intersecting cultures, the borderland spaces in the poem are populated 
by a “new race” that combines the identities of the “hispam india negra espanold" (194- 
5). Anzaldua mixes English and Spanish throughout the poem to represent the 
borderlands as a space of linguistic hybridity. The poem also contains sensory detail, 
specifically appealing to taste and smell, in a depiction of borderlanders eating, for 
example, chile on their borscht or tortillas made of whole wheat (194-5). Combining 
bilingualism merged with cultural food choices and sensory detail with the geographical 


218 

spaces, the poet suggests that to survive in such a borderlands, one must be able to cross 
multiple cultural barriers, living “sin fronteras” [without borders] (195). As the border 
both separates and unites individuals from different cultures in Anzaldua’s poem, the 
borderlands becomes a social milieu conducive to hybrid aesthetics and identities. 

Not all poems represent space, place, or geography in such expressive manner. 

For such poems, a geopoetic approach nonetheless proves valuable, as evident in “The 
Other Alamo.” In this poem. Latino poet Martin Espada, articulates the theme of 
repeating cycles of economic exploitation. “The Other Alamo” appeals to aural and 
tactile sensation to construct images, both past and present, of capitalistic oppression in 
the gift shop of the Alamo, a Texas-Mexico cotton field, and at a “whites-only” 
segregated lunch counter. Espada depicts these spaces as borderland settings of racial 
conflict. Perhaps the most overt example is the Alamo, a site that resurrects memories of 
contested geography whose aftermath caused Anglo hatred of Mexicans and 
discrimination against Hispanics. The poet evokes sensory experience combined with the 
continuing, parallel images of commerce yesterday and today to criticize cycles of 
economic exploitation of Mexicans, Hispanics, Chicanos, whose ancestors once 
controlled this borderland geography and economy. 

Drama, a form closely related to poetry, provides not only text but staged 
production that lend themselves to a geopoetic approach (Guth 400). This approach is 
well suited to drama’s emphasis on scene, setting, and stage, as illustrated by the play, 
“Culture Clash in Bordertown.” Produced in 1998 at the San Diego Repertory Theater, 
the play offers a self-consciously cultural interpretation of cross border complexity 
(“Culture Clash” n.p.). Using interviews of local people in both San Diego and Tijuana, 
writers-actors Richard Montoya, Ricardo Salinas, and Herbert Siguenza claim the goal of 



219 

the play is to depict “cultures in opposition, and by opposing them bring them together” 
(“Culture Clash” n.p ). The play accomplishes this by, among other things, personifying 
the US and Mexico as lovers; in this depiction, the stage becomes a bedroom where the 
US and Mexico alternately feud and reconcile (“Culture Clash” n.p.). The dramatic 
conflict centers on marriage fraught with cultural weight (“Culture Clash” n.p ). 

Engaging a poetics of satire and comedy as well as a personification of geography, 
“Culture Clash in Bordertown” enforces the idea that because the physical location 
cannot change—^the border cannot be erased—^the US and Mexico must reconcile 
relations as peaceful partners in a binding relationship. This geopoetic expression once 
again demonstrates how the border functions as an oppositional metaphor of that which 
attracts and repels through the love-hate relationship among the partners personified in 
the play. 

Film is drama marketed, packaged, and commercialized as a medium capable of 
exercising broad, popular appeal to audiences around the world. An approach that 
evaluates aesthetic form and spatial depiction applies to the way that film is capable of 
globalizing and/or localizing dramatic experience. For example, film is capable of 
universalizing an immigrant experience by conveying, for example, the dangers of 
crossing international borders, regardless of immigrant identities or border locations. One 
such film, El Norte (\9%A\ dramatizes the journey of a brother and sister, Paco (David 
Villalpando) and Rosa (Zaide Silva Gutierrez), who flee political persecution in 
Guatemala. Viewers of such a film may translate the difficult experience of the 
Guatemalan protagonists to Cuban migrants fleeing their home nation or Moroccan 
migrants trying to reach Spain. While universalizing an experience, film is also capable 
of localizing it. Director Gregory Nava evokes sympathy for Guatemalan migrants as 



220 


they make the treacherous crossing near Tijuana only to see their American Dream turn 
nightmare. Acknowledging Diego Rivera’s notion that all art is political, film may be 
especially so in its ability to convey the oppressive circumstances of a people and border 
to an international audience. Because geopoetics explores the way screen writers and film 
directors select and shape space and engage convention, it is a salient method to 
understand both the localizing and globalizing manifestations of film. 

El Norte is a cinematic travel narrative that universalizes the dangers of the 
immigrant experience. After journeying thousands of miles through Mexico, Guatemalan 
migrants arrive in Tijuana only to discover that the border is fortified “like a war zone.” 
This portrayal of border spaces builds to Nava’s climactic scene showing Paco and 
Rosa’s struggle to cross the border through a rat-filled sewer pipe, an experience that 
Rosa ultimately does not survive. “When discussing immigrants,” one reviewer 
comments, “many times individuals dehumanize them and the film allows for viewers to 
understand and feel compassion for immigrants who have struggled both in their home 
country and in their new country” (“ El Norte ” n.p.). As this quote suggests and what 
geopoetic representation makes explicit is that this film evokes sympathy for Hispanic 
and Native immigrants in general, an appeal based on spatial portraits of the border and 
cinematic dramatization of transnational travel narrative. 

Lone Star (1996) is another film set on the US-Mexico border. Exploring spatial 
constructions of a local setting on the US-Mexico border reveals the objective of director 
John Sayles. His goal is to highlight ethnic conflict between Mexicans, African 
Americans, Anglos, and Hispanics so viewers become aware of profound cultural tension 
along the border. Set in the border town of Frontera, the murder mystery requires sheriff 
San Deeds (Chris Cooper) to uncover events that led to a crime fifty years ago. Sayles 



221 


works through the “narrative device of the thriller” which is particularly appropriate to 
the border town as a space of “heightened tension” (Turan n.p.). Conflicts among Anglos, 
Mexicans, Hispanics, and African Americans erupt over issues such as illegal 
immigration, assimilation, and history textbooks. Overcoming these conflicts ultimately 
shapes the way in which the mystery is solved. At the end of the film. Deeds identifies 
the killer in a dramatic climax in which the corrupt Anglo sheriff (Kris Kristofferson) is 
shot down by a fellow Anglo, his own white deputy. Because Frontera is constructed as a 
racialized and segregated space, Sayles achieves a surprise ending—viewers expect 
conflict between ethnic groups, rather than one Anglo shooting another. Thus, examining 
the combined elements of murder mystery, such as suspense, withholding of information, 
and danger, and an explication of space as highly segregated supports the value of a 
geopoetic approach to this genre. Such analysis explains how the film “peels back the 
layers of Frontera society to explore the complex interconnections” between Anglos, 
Mexicans, and African Americans in the localized setting of the border (Turan n.p.). 

The various artistic expressions evaluated thus far confirm the way that a model 
considering poetics and place is useful, necessary, and perhaps inevitable to a study of 
works focusing on the US-Mexico borderlands. The lens of geopoetics further elucidates 
how the border serves as a metaphor of both bridge and barrier. Two additional forms 
common to the borderlands warrant attention: the corrido and conjunto music. Because 
of their prevalence on the border, the corrido and conjunto must be evaluated using the 
model of geopoetics that focuses on place in particular. Just as this model proves useful 
to other poetics performed or exhibited, such as “Culture Clash” and La FronteralThe 
Border,” by extension, the corrido and conjunto engage space, place, and form in a way 
telling of borderland experience. 



222 

The corrido or Mexican ballad is a “narrative poem in Spanish set to music” 
(Griffith 22). The corrido is “one of the most important verbal folk art forms in the 
twentieth-century,” explains folklorist James Griffith, because it “reflects the point of 
view of the working [Mexican and Hispanic] people” (22). One of the most well-known 
examples is El Corrido de Greeorio Cortez, a ballad analyzed and popularized by 
Americo Paredes. El Corrido de Gresorio Cortez serves as an example of the corrido 
tradition, a living oral poetics, that constructs the characteristics of a border hero in 
particular and the traits of Mexican and Hispanic people in general, both in response to 
Anglo class and ethnic oppression. This is illustrated in the way the ballad engages the 
border, depicting it as the gateway to an accepting homeland when the hero rides south 
toward the US-Mexico border fleeing the Texas Rangers. Added to this spatial 
representation is a narrative about escape and resistance that uses elements of suspense, 
humor, comedy, and tall tale to show how Cortez repeatedly outsmarts the Anglo 
pursuers. This narrative aesthetic and spatial representation produces the image of folk 
hero: a brave, smart common man who refuses to be wrongly imprisoned. This border 
ballad is also a geopoetic representation that acknowledges institutionalized racism 
against Mexicans; Cortez is the everyman, in this case Mexicans, Chicanos, Hispanics, 
and perhaps other minorities, who assumes that he will be unjustly penalized in the US 
justice system.^ 

The corrido and conjunto (or “musica nortena”) share affinities as aural forms of 
folk tradition with working class origins; like the corrido, the conjunto is a form that 
might be understood through poetics and place. Understanding modem conjunto music is 
contingent on recognizing the origins of conjunto in the 1950s, its peak era in the US. At 
this time, urbanization and class stratification among Tejanos polarized the community 


into an assimilated middle-class and an unassimilated working class (Pena 5). The latter 
group rallied around conjunto music as a way to keep alive their hopes of returning to 
Mexico and to resist hegemonic forces of Anglo culture (Pena 1-15). Conjunto bands half 
a century ago created a sense of place, specifically a romanticized, rural past in Mexico, 
through two elements of the music, the accordion and lo ranchero. Because geopoetics 
hones in on these elements of aesthetic expression and the evocation of place, specifically 
a Mexican homeland, the model is useful to evaluating conjunto music. Compared to the 
bajo sexto (twelve-sting bass guitar), saxophone, contra/electric bass, and drums, other 
instruments of the conjunto, the accordion is significant symbol working class Mexican 
identity according to ethnographer Manuel Pena (3). Called “e/ instrumento del pueblo'' 
[instrument of the folk], the accordion sound of this era evoked “folk origins” in Mexico 
to a diasporic, poor community of Tejanos surrounded by Anglo culture in the US and 
snubbed by fellow Tejanos of higher class standing (Translated by Pena; 143; 38). The 
conjunto also recreated a sense of place among working class Tejanos because of its 
musical precedent, lo ranchero. Ranchero music, avers Pena, gave rise to “feelings of 
mexicanismo —momentary recreations of a simpler and romanticized folk heritage (11). 
Much like the paradoxical metaphor of the border, the conjunto united a working class 
community but also reinforced its alienation from Anglos and fellow Mexicans. While 
most conjunto is generally instrumental, Spanish lyrics of this music reinforced 
associations with the ranchero through highly sentimentalized folk traditions in rural 
Mexico. The reconstruction of place as well as the accordion and lo ranchero 
demonstrate the conjunto's symbolic significance as working-class music among a 
Tejano community in the 1950s that literally and figuratively wanted to return to Mexico. 



224 


Recent conjmto bands, such as Los Tigres del Norte, echo nostalgia for Mexico 
evident in the music of the 1950s with an important difference regarding place and form. 
Where the music of early Tejano bands offered hope of returning to Mexico, 
contemporary conjunto bands eulogize Mexico as a place to which they will never return. 
Also, whereas the early conjunto was primarily instrumental or sung in Spanish, modem 
conjunto often has bilingual lyrics. Geopoetics acknowledges, indeed emphasizes, the 
important relationship of geography to form, in this case to bilingualism, in the modem 
conjunto. Los Tigres, an undocumented conjunto band from northern Mexico living in 
San Jose, expresses immigrant fear of deportation and unfulfilled longing for Mexico 
through the rendering of place and bilingual lyrics in Jaula de Oro [Cage of Gold 
(1985)]. The song represents “beloved Mexico” as the place a Mexican father can “never 
forget” and “never return” to (qtd. in Saldivar, Border 4-5). In contrast, the US is 
figuratively the golden cage of the song’s title, a prison due to the father’s illegal status: 

“I almost never go out to the street. / I’m afraid I’ll be found and deported” (5). The 
architectural space suggested by the US as a metaphorical jailhouse highlights the anxiety 
of an undocumented worker feeling a panopticon of Anglo surveillance. Bilingualism 
also reinforces the contrasting sense of place between the US and Mexico. When the 
father’s son is asked in Spanish if he wants to live in Mexico, and the boy replies in 
English, “What are you talkin’ about Dad? I don’t want to go back to Mexico. No way. 
Dad” (4-5). In total, Los Tigres represent the border in this song as that which unites 
father and homeland, but separates father and son. 

Applied to multiple artforms, a critical methodology that makes explicit the 
relationship of spatial representations and genre conventions informs textual—^in the 
broadest sense of the term—depiction of cultural encounter in the US-Mexico 




225 


borderlands. In addition, the lens of geopoetics is suggestive of those broader 
possibilities between poetics and places that involve, as illustrated, cultural implications 
and associations among communities inhabiting the US-Mexico borderland. Beyond this 
borderland, geopoetics is a complex and nuanced model that may be modified to account 
for alternate geographies and other border writings. This modification involves 
expanding geopoetics to account for pre-national, tribal identifications in a global 
context. Such identifications involve sacred land claims and mythic pasts that challenge 
the imagined community of the nation. Theorizing geopoetics in this general manner 
yields a broader understanding of literary constructs that depict cultural difference, 
conflict, and encounter in multiple geographical settings. 

Geopoetics in a Global Context 

When modified to address issues of pre-nationalism, geopoetics is an approach 
that applies to literary forms set in, for example, Palestine, Germany, Europe, Africa, and 
India. It may be applied to works that include profound expressions of cultural difference 
much like those exhibited among Anglos, Mexicans, Border Indians, Chicanos, and 
Hispanics, as rendered in works examined in this volume. Addressing works in nations 
beyond the US-Mexico borderlands through an explicit focus on geography is a method 
useful to understanding cultural contact represented in literature set in multiple sites.^ A 
paradigm combining spatiality and poetics is a way to link borderland narratives to global 
literature. Three groups of authors—unassimilated individuals, diasporic transnationals, 
and travel writers—illustrate this point. These writers embrace prenational 
identifications in a way that proves geopoetics to be a comprehensive medium for 
understanding expressions of cultural difference in a global context. 


226 


Recognizing the differences between pre-national and national contexts shows 
how and why geopoetics might be reffamed to include works beyond the US-Mexico 
border. The concept of the nation as a modem imagined community is based on, among 
other things, particular constmcts of limitedness and history, boundaries and biographies 
(Anderson 1-7). According to global comparatist Benedict Anderson, nationhood 
emerges in the late eighteenth century with the advent of print culture and capitalism. 

The imagined community of the nation is defined as a “limited” entity: a nation is 
bounded by finite—^though elastic—borders that clearly delineate its territory from other 
nations (7). Also important to the concept of nationhood is that it has a historical, 
chronological biography with a specific start time. For instance, however it recognizes its 
pre-conquest or colonial past, Mexico as a nation “begins” with its independence from 
Spain in 1820. Anderson uses the analogy of nationhood and personhood to suggest that 
nations, like people, have specific birth dates or independence dates but they recreate, 
through print culture and capitalism, an infinite past and future to account for the identity 
of the nation. He writes, “As with modem persons, so it is with nations. Awareness of 
being imbedded in secular, serial time, with all its implications of continuity, yet of 
’’forgetting' the experience of this continuity —product of the mpture of the late 
eighteenth century—engenders the need for a narrative of‘identity’” (Italics added; 205). 

The two world cultural systems that predate nationalism include religious 
communities and dynastic realms (Anderson 9-46). These pre-national communities 
were organized according to strict hierarchical principles that placed God in a “high 
center,” followed by monarchies and a stratified class system (12-46). Thus organized 
vertically, pre-national civilization was “not boundary oriented”; instead, borders of 
religious or secular empire were porous, bleeding indistinctly into one another (Anderson 




227 

19-46). Another important characteristic of a pre-national world is the fact that time was 
not conceptualized chronologically. Instead, religious and secular rules alike posited 
themselves as an extension of an eternal, sacred past that extend infinitely back to a 
mythical time. 

Based on their relationship to land, pre-national communities are accurately 
conceptualized in a global context as “tribes.” Anthropologist James Clifford identifies 
tribes as a people who “stress continuity of habitation, aboriginality, and often a ‘natural’ 
or autochthonous connection to the land” (Routes 252).'* Tribes place a “premium on 
localism and rootedness” (253). Clifford argues that tribes challenge modem nation¬ 
states, particularly assimilationist ideologies of the nation, based on their relationship to 
land. Predating the national, tribes claim a “firstness” to the land (albeit a difficult claim 
to prove) by placing a premium on a sacred past and a spiritual connection to land (253). 
That connection is expressed through “nature, divinity, mother earth, and the ancestors” 
(Clifford, Routes 253). 

Whereas the nation is conceptualized with a specific modem, historical beginning 
marked in time, tribes rally around an imagined mythical past in which they rightfully 
occupied sacred homelands. Nations challenge tribal assertions for homeland by 
reconstructing time before their advent; since Benito Juarez, for example, the government 
of Mexico has reconstmcted the history of indigenous people long prior to national 
independence. Such efforts to extend time infinitely backwards reveal a paradox in the 
biography of a nation, what Anderson calls “forgetting the experience of continuity” in 
the aforementioned quote. The nation celebrates its independence as a time when it 
finally came to assert control over its own territory as a sovereign nation; however, this 
very act presupposes that other peoples inhabited or controlled the land prior to the birth 



228 


of the nation. Tribes use such a paradox to assert themselves as the other peoples who 
have a right to claim the land. 

Because tribes and nations claim land differently, unassimilated and assimilated 
writers depict cultural conflict over land acquisition and usurpation differently. 
Unassimilated writers represent battle over land as a struggle against the nation to retain 
and maintain a sense of tribal identity. Almanac of the Dead , for instance, represents 
Native America’s goal to reoccupy sacred land as the survival quest of a people. If the 
dystopia is not tom down and replaced by a society that acknowledges tribes, Silko seems 
to suggest, the nation will ultimately cause the genocide of Indians. Expanding the model 
of geopoetics to include both national and pre-national considerations makes it applicable 
in a global context. Modified thusly, a way of reading that considers both poetics and 
places reveals how assimilation affects authorial representations of cultural conflict in 
worlds beyond the US-Mexico borderlands. An author’s degree of assimilation in the 
nation directly influences her representation of cultural contact and conflict in all 
borderland areas. Jewish writers offer an example. 

The geographical borders of the West Bank are perhaps the boundaries most 
similar to the US-Mexico border in the world. Both border zones are highly militarized 
regions characterized by religious, language, and ideological differences. These two 
borderland regions are also marked as core/periphery nations or “first/third” worlds based 
on asymmetrical power dynamics within the context of both international socio-political 
organizations and national market share of globalized capitalism. Beyond these 
geographical considerations, the West Bank and US-Mexico borderland are inhabited by 
people with a long history of tribal conflict. Both border zones consist of communities 
claiming distinction from each other yet who share tribal claims of entitlement to specific 


229 


holy land according to a mythic past. As their novels suggest, authors in this volume 
depict Chicano, Mexican, Hispanic, and Indian characters claiming land based on an 
imagined historical past that predates the nation. The authors also depict nations like the 
US legitimizing their possession of national territory based on the biography of the 
imagined community. 

Unassimilated border writers address cultural difference in their writings because 
of national claims to land deny pre-national rights to the land. For example, Ruiz de 
Burton’s and Gonzalez’s work privileges pre-national rights to land over national rights 
to land; stated another way. The Squatter and the Don and Caballero assert the primacy 
and legitimacy o^ Californio and Tejano land claimants over US territorial rights in an era 
of intense nation building and consolidation. These authors represent cultural conflict 
over land division because they are highly marginalized individuals within the nation. As 
testimony to their unassimilated status, both Gonzalez and Ruiz de Burton identify with 
their Mexican cultural heritage strongly and publicly thought out their lives. Gonzalez 
also suspected that her manuscripts were rejected by major publishers because Caballero 
addresses a subject, the dispossession of Tejanos, not worthy of interest. Additional 
evidence that Ruiz de Burton was unassimilated was her economic standing; over her 
lifetime, she lost most of her land holdings to Anglo squatters and businesses, a life story 
that is reflected artistically in The Squatter and the Don . The status of these subaltern 
women as unassimilated authors is underscored by the fact that their work calls for social 
reform, highlighting conflict over the division, acquisition, and occupation of land. 

Unassimilated Jewish writers such as Isaac Singer, Amos Oz, or Primo Levi 
address similar cultural encounters in their writings. Singer offers endless detail of Jewish 
culture in conflict with opposing cultures. Such conflict is intensified in the work of Oz 



230 


and Levi, Holocaust memoirists who chronicle the genocide of a people and culture in 
WWII Nazi Germany. The point is that these unassimilated writers portray cultural 
difference in their work based on usurpation their homelands. Rather than identifying 
with the nation, these writers self-identify with a tribal culture based on an imagined 
mythic past whose claims to land predate the nation. Because of this, spatial 
representations in their writings of the world around them asserts primacy to a sacred 
homeland. Exploring these depictions of space—prenational conceptualizations of land 
claims—in conjunction with the conventions of their work, whether a memoir chronicling 
daily life, a testimony to racial injustice, or a narrative exposing anti-Semitism, makes 
geopoetics a model for understanding global cultural inscription. 

An exploration of genre and geography that accounts for the national and 
prenational also might be usefully applied to diasporic writers who depict geographies 
radically dissimilar to the US-Mexico borderlands. With this kind of application, 
geopoetics becomes a means of connecting borderland to global literature. This volume 
proposes, engages, and produces a way of approaching literature that depicts an intense 
degree of cultural conflict in the US-Mexico “border/lands,” the site where two nations 
physically abut. This abutment creates an area significantly influenced by the confluence 
of interaction among people from different cultures and communities. Thus, writers are 
drawn to this region where people, languages, histories, food, music, goods, and money 
flow across the 2,000-mile US-Mexico border, in part, due to access created by a shared 
land mass, (border checkpoints and immigration laws not withstanding). Expanding the 
model of geopoetics to consider the implications of prenational travel in general and 
diasporic travel in particular, the approach renders a way of engaging literature through 



231 

poetics and spaces that is useful to understanding cultural conflicts far removed from any 
geopolitical border. 

Again turning to a pre-national context, travel and diaspora is a human 
phenomenon that has been on going for centuries; “Practices of displacement emerge as 
constitutive of cultural meanings,” argues anthropologist James Clifford, “rather than as 
their simple transfer or extension” (2-3). Since the formation of the nation, borders have 
been codified, regulated, and policed in a manner unknown to eras prior to the 
eighteenth-century explosion of nationhood everywhere. To protect their limited, 
bounded territory, nations “require constant, often violent, maintenance” of borders 
(Clifford 9). What Clifford makes clear is that nations are a relatively recent 
phenomenon; prior to their advent in the late eighteenth century, people have always and 
everywhere traveled. Moreover, such travel in the era of religious communities and 
dynastic realms involved movement across indistinct, ill-defined borders. While people 
continue to travel in the epoch of the nation, a movement facilitated by modern 
transportation, the point is that borders, immigration laws, checkpoints, and other tools of 
the nation inhibits the travel of diasporic peoples and the literary genres they employ to 
record real and imagined homelands. 

Clifford asserts that diaspora—defined as the political struggle to define a local, 
distinctive community—is about “feeling global” (Routes 252-4).* This sentiment 
harkens to a prenational existence in which borders were crossed freely and easily. To 
survive within the nation while pending return to a homeland, diasporics simultaneously 
resist and adapt to the country and culture in which they live. Transnationals carve out a 
form of “flexible citizenship” that allows them to practice cultural systems of a homeland 
while also inhabiting a foreign nation (256-8). As Clifford points out, diasporics retain a 



232 

sense of homeland through “identification with world-historical cultural/political forces” 
in which they assert tribal identifications to a sacred land that predate the national (256). 
An expanded model of geopoetics might take advantage of the tribal affiliations of 
diasporics in its application to transnationals who may live far away from the geopolitical 
borders that frame their homeland by examining their strategies for inscribing their 
cultural longings and geographic realities. 

Within the context of diasporic writings, global geopoetics might be applied to 
any variety of geographies, whether island or urban, periphery or metropolis. Diasporic 
authors, like the aforementioned unassimilated writers, offer profound illustrations of 
cultural conflict. Global geopoetics might be fruitfully applied to such work even though 
there is not a contiguous shared landmass among abutting nations. To demonstrate my 
point, one cannot read Paule Marshall’s Brown Girl. Brownstones (1981), George 
Lamming’s Castle of Mv Skin (1953), or Maxine Hong Kingston’s Woman Warrior 
(1976) without recognizing the painful situation of the diasporic protagonists who must 
mediate and negotiate the spaces between the dominant culture in which they live and the 
homeland culture which they seek to understand or reinhabit. Home for such 
protagonists becomes a series of relay points, a spatiality on which geopoetics might 
capitalize. Such spatial elements in a diasporic work, combined with various poetics of 
male and female bildungsroman and memoir in the aforementioned examples, illustrates 
the usefulness of this model to exploring the cultural longing, inheritance, and eulogizing 
evident in the diasporic narrative. 

A global concept of geopoetics applies to yet another circumstance: travel 
narratives that function as an extension of colonialism. In the travel fiction assessed in 
this volume, I addressed the ways in which Harriet Doerr and Carlos Puentes offer a 



233 


response and critique to the US colonial legacy in their depictions of Anglo characters 
traveling in Mexico. While these characters travel across the US-Mexico border, an 
application of geopoetics need not be limited to crossing a “border/lands.” Joseph 
Conrad’s Heart of Darkness (1902) or E.M. Forster’s A Passage to India (1924) involve 
white travelers crossing borders far distant from their native England. Cultural conflict in 
such works is preeminent and, to a degree, explains why these texts have been taught in 
US classrooms for decades. Like Doerr and Fuentes, Conrad and Forster represent travel 
from a core nation to peripheral nation for overt colonialist purposes. Representing 
travelers’ misconception that values of the imagined community must be imposed on a 
seemingly tribal culture, these writers each expose the hegemonic ideology of the nation. 
Identifying such renderings of space in the context of genre conventions of travel writing 
yields a representation of colonialism in literature set beyond the borders of abutting 
nations. 

This study has explored depictions of cultural encounter in some of its many 
manifestations. Those include conflicts about the division, acquisition, and appropriation 
of land, the imposition of ethnocentric values in a foreign country, processes of adapting 
and resisting dominant cultures, and capitalistic values within existing society. From the 
imposition of the US-Mexico border in 1848 to the end of the twentieth century, the 
progressive development of authorial strategies to represent the US-Mexico borderlands 
reveals that character responses to cultural conflict arise out of geopoetics. The 
conception of the border as a paradoxical metaphor and the paradigm of geopoetics can 
be usefully applied to various artistic forms which inscribe the US-Mexico borderlands. 
Beyond the US-Mexico borderlands, a comprehensive model of geopoetics calls for 


comparative criticism of works depicting cultural conflict in a variety of geographies and 
borderlands. 


NOTES 


^ I acknowledge that short story, poetry, et. al. contain far more conventions of genre or 
more complex depictions of space than set forth in this discussion. In an effort to be 
concise, I present only those elements of genre or dimensions of spatiality that show how 
and why geopoetics applies to forms other than those discussed in previous chapters. 

^ The use of space in poetry, conjunto, and corrida is similar because, as is the case with 
the aforementioned examples, all three forms consist primarily of narrative set in specific 
locations. An approach such as geopoetics is useful and applicable to these poetics 
because geographic location is important to the themes of the works. Furthermore, 
geopoetics might be useful in understanding the connections between the corrida and 
bildungsroman. Again, these are forms in which setting is important. The corrida and 
bildungsroman each depict the development of a hero who experiences traumatic 
encounters in a highly racialized, tense geographical region from which he emerges 
stronger and wiser. That process is informed by a model elucidating spatiality and literary 
conventions. 

^ Rather than discussing the genre elements of each text presented, I limit this discussion 
to authors’ representation of space, place, and geography for two reasons. First, 
expanding the model of geopoetics to account for pre-national considerations affects 
authors’ relationship to land (i.e., how a diasporic writer strives to return to homelands 
for example) perhaps more than it affects the way an author uses genre elements (i.e., 
some formulaics of the bildungsroman, such as the coming of age theme, are universal). 
Second, within the three major groupings of writers cited, I use texts of different genres. 
For example, the diasporic narratives cited include memoir and bildungsroman, each a 



poetics with distinct elements of form. To identify and demonstrate all such elements 
represents a level of detail beyond the scope of this volume. 

Within the context of the nation, tribe is also understood relative to land ownership. For 
example, “tribe” developed in the US as a legal category identifying Indians who 
permanently settled on a tract of land (as opposed to migratory nomads). (Clifford, 

Routes 253). 

^ For a more detailed definition of diaspora, see William Saffan’s “Diasporas in Modem 


Societies” (1991). 





REFERENCES 


Alarcon, Daniel Francis Cooper. “The Aztec Palimpsest; Discursive Appropriations of 
Mexican Culture.” Diss. U of Minnesota, 1992. 

Alurista. “Myth, Identity and Struggle in Three Chicano Novels.” Aztlan; Essays on the 
Chicano Homeland . Ed. Rudolfo A. Anaya and Francisco Lomeli. Albuquerque; 

U of New Mexico P, 1989. 219-241. 

Alvarez, Roberto. “The Mexican-US Border . The Making of an Anthropology of 
Borderlands.” Annual Review of Anthropology 24 (1995); 447-70. 

Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities . Rev. ed. London; Verso Publishers, 1983. 
Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands/LaF>owtem; The 'HewMestiza . San Francisco; Aunt Lute 
Books. 1987. 

Aranda, Jose F. “Contradictory Impulses; Maria Amparo Ruiz de Burton, Resistance 
Theory, and the Politics of Chicano/a Studies.” American Literature 70.3 
(September 1998); 551-579. 

Arnold, Ellen. “Listening to the Spirits; An Interview with Leslie Marmon Silko.” 

Studies in American Indian Literatures 10.3 (Falll998); 1-33. 

Bakhtin, Mikhail. “Discourse in the Novel.” Literary Theory; An Anthology . Ed. Julie 
Rivkin and Michael Ryan. Massachusetts; Blackwell, 1998. 32-44. 

Barnes, Hugh. “Review of Stones .” London Review of Books 2 May 1985; 22-23. 
Bauman, Richard, ed. Introduction. Folklore and Culture on the Texas-Mexican Border. 
Texas . U of Texas P, 1993. ix-xxiii. 

Bell, Steven M. “Mexico.” Handbook of Latin American Literature . Comp. David Foster. 
New York; Garland Publishing, 1987. 329-404. 


238 

Bell, Vereen, “’Between the Wish and the Thing the World Lies Waiting.’” The Southern 
Review 28.4 (Autumn 1992): 920-27. 

Bhabha, Homi. The Location of Culture . New York: Routledge, 1994. 

—. “Signs Taken for Wonders: Questions of Ambivalence and Authority under a Tree 
Outside Delhi, May 1817.” ‘ Race.’ Writing, and Difference . Ed. Henry Louis 
Gates, Jr. Chicago: U of Chicago?, 1986. 163-184. 

Bienstock, Barry W. “Helen Hunt Jackson.” Dictionary of Literary Biography , vols. 42 
and 47. 2"*^ ed. 1991. 

Billington, Ray Allen. “The American Frontier.” Bevond the Frontier: Social Process and 
Cultural Change . Eds. Paul Bohannan and Fred Plog. New York: The Natural 
History P, 1967. 3-24. 

Blaim, Artur. Early English Utopian Fiction: A Study of Literary Genre . Lublin [sic]: 
Uniwersytet Marii Curie-Sklodowskiej, 1984. 

“Border Speak: Carlos Fuentes.” <www.txwesleyan.eduscoggins/world/projects/elboom/ 
carlo sfuentes.html> (2 Feb 1999). 

Bruce-Novoa, Juan D. “Miguel Mendez: Voices of Silence.” Contemporary Chicano 

Fiction: A Critical Survey . Ed. Vernon E. Lattin. New York: Bilingual VIEditorial 
Bilingiie, 1986. 206-214. 

—. “Righting the Oral Tradition.” 16.3 Denver Quarterly (1981): 78-86. 

Byers, John R. “The Indian Matter of Helen Hunt Jackson’s Ramona : From Fact to 
Fiction.” American Indian Quarterly 2.4 (Winter 1975-6): 331-346. 

Candelaria, Cordelia. “The ‘Wild Zone’ Thesis as Gloss in Chicana Literary Study.” 

Feminisms: An Anthology of Literary Theory and Criticism . Eds. Robyn Warhol 
and Diane Hemdle. 2”** edition. New Jersey: Rutgers UP, 1997. 248-56. 




239 

Cardenas, Lupe. “Growing Up Chicano—Crisis Time in Three Contemporary Chicano 

Novels.” Confluencia: Revista Hispanica de Cultura v Literatum . 3.1 (Fall 1987): 
129-136. 

Castellanos, Maria del Carmen Herrera. “£/ memaje ideoldgico en Grimo viejo ” Revista 
de la Universidad Veracruzana (Jul-Sep 1990): 131-9. 

Castillo, Debra. “Tongue in the Ear. Fuentes’s Grinko vieio '" Revista Canadiense de 
EstudiosHispdnicos 14.1 (October 1989): 35-49. 

Catacalos, Rosemary. “La Casa.” Discovering Literature: Fiction. Poetry, and Drama . 

Eds. Hans P. Guth and Gabriele L. Rico. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1993. 
501. 

Cheuse, Alan. “A Note on Landscape in All the Pretty Horses .” Southern Quarterly 30.4 
(Summer 1992): 140-2. 

Clifford, James. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century . 

Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1997. 

—, and George E. Marcus, eds. Writing Culture: The Poetics and Politics of 
Ethnography . Berkeley: U of California P, 1986 
Crawford, Kathleen. “Maria Amparo Ruiz de Burton: The General’s Lady.” Journal of 
San Diego History 30 (Summer 1984): 198-211. 

Creighton, Jane. “Bierce, Fuentes, and the Critique of Reading: A Study of Carlos 
Fuentes’s Old Gringo .” South Central Review 9.2 (Summer 1992): 65-79. 

“Culture Clash.” Culture Clash Homepage , < www.cultureclash.com/posada. html> (27 
Mar 2000). 

Davidson, Margaret Garcia. “Borders, Frontiers, and Mountains: Mapping the History of 
US Hispanic Literature.” Ed. Michael Kowalewski. Reading the West: New 





240 

Essays on the Literature of the American West . Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996. 
177-198. 

Dobie, J. Frank. “Helen Hunt Jackson and Ramona .” Southwest Review 44 (Spring 59): 
93-98. 

Doerr, Harriet. Stones for Ibarra. 1978. New York: Penguin, 1984. 

Donno, Daniel J. Introduction. The City of the Sun: A Poetical Dialogue . By Tommaso 
Campanella. Berkeley: U of California P, 1981. 1-21. 

Dorris, Michael. Introduction. Ramona: A Story . New York: Signet, 1988. v-xviii. 
“Dystopia: Cool Word of the Day on 14 Aug 1998.” <www.coolword.com/archive/ 
1998/08/14.html> (23 Jan 2000). 

Eisenhower, John S.D. So Far from God . New York: Random, 1989. 

Espada, Martin. “The Other Alamo.” Border Texts: Cultural Readings for Contemporary 
Writers . Ed. Randall Bass. New York: Houghton, 1999. 26-270. 

Fletcher, Angus. Allegory: The Theory of a Symbolic Mode . New York: Cornell 
University P, 1964. 

Flores, Lauro. “Chicano Autobiography: Culture, Ideology, and the Self” The Americas 
Review 18.2 (Summer 1990): 80-91. 

Frye, Northrop. “The Mythos of Summer; Romance.” Anatomy of Criticism . Princeton: 
Princeton UP, 1957. 186-205. 

Fuentes, Carlos. “Interview with Bill Moyers.” A World of Ideas . Public Broadcasting 
System Videos. Public Affairs Television. New York. 1989. 

—. Old Gringo . [Grwgojwe/oJ New York: Harper, 1985. 



241 


Galarza, Ernesto. Barrio Bov . Indiana: U of Notre Dame P, 1971. 

Garza-Falcon, Leticia Magda. Gente Decente . A Borderlands Response to the Rhetoric of 
Dominance . Austin; U of Texas P, 1998. 

Gates, Henry Louis, ed. “ Race.” Writing, and Cultural Difference . Chicago: U of Chicago 
P, 1986. 

Geertz, Clifford. “Common Sense as a Cultural System.” Local Knowledge: Further 

Essays in Interpretive Anthropology . New York: Basic Books, Inc., 1983. 73-93 

Gonzalez, John M. “Romancing Hegemony: Constructing Racialized Citizenship in 

Maria Amparo Ruiz de Burton’s The Squatter and the Don .” Recovering the US 
Hispanic Literary Heritage . Vol. II. Ed. Erlinda Gonzales-Berry and Chuck 
Tatum. Yion^ow:. Arte Publico P, 1996. 23-39. 

Gonzalez, Jovita, and Eve Raleigh. Caballero: A Historical Novel . 1930s. Eds. Jose E. 
Limon and Maria Cotera. College Station: Texas A&M UP, 1996. 

Grajeda, Rafael F. “Jose Antonio Villarreal and Richard Vasquez: The Novelist Against 
Himself” Identification and Analysis of Chicano Literature. Ed. Francisco 
Jimenez. New York: Bilingual P, 1979. 329-357. 

Griffith, James S. “The Arts of Mexican Americans.” Southern Arizona Folk Arts . 
Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1988. 12-59. 

Gunn, Drewey Wayne. “A Labyrinth of Mirrors; Literary Sources of Old Grineo/Griwgo 
v/e/o .” Revista de Estudios Hispdnicos 26 (1992); 61-79. 

Gupta, Akhil, and James Ferguson. Culture. Power, Place: Explorat ions in Critical 
Anthropology . Durham; Duke UP, 1997 

Guth, Hans P., and Gabriele L. Rico, eds. “Poetry.” Discovering Literature: Fiction, 
Poetry, and Drama . Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1993. 397-842. 



242 


Haas, Lisbeth. Conquests and Historical Identities in California. 1769-1936, Berkeley: U 
of California P, 1995. 

Hicks, D. Emily. Border Writing: The Multidimensional Text . Theory and History of 
Literature. Series. Vol. 80. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota?, 1991. 

Holland, Sharon P. “If You Know I Have a History, You Will Respect Me.” Callaloo 
17.1 (1994): 334-50. 

Hulbert, Ann. Rev. of Stones for Ibarra, by Harriet Doerr. New Republic 30 Jan 1984: 
40-1. 

Jackson, Helen Hunt. A Century of Dishonor . New York: Harper, 1881. 

—. Ramona: A Story . 1884. Los Angeles: Limited Edition Club, 1959. 

Jameson, Fredric. “On ‘Cultural Studies.’” Social Text 34 (1993): 17-52. 

Kearney, Michael. “The Local and the Global: The Anthropology of Globalization and 
Transnationalism.” Annual Review of Anthropology 24 (1995): 547-65. 

Kelly, Gary. “Romantic Novel.” Encyclopedia of the Novel . 2 vols. Ed. Paul Schellinger. 
Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1998. 

King, Rosemary A. “Border Crossings in the Mexican American War.” The Legacy of 
the Mexican and Spanish American Wars: Legal. Literary, and Historical 
Perspectives . Eds. Gary D. Keller and Cordelia Candelaria. Tempe: Bilingual 
P/Editorial Bilingiie, 2000. 63-86. 

Knapp, Jeffrey. An Empire Nowhere: England. America, and Literature From Utopia to 
The Tempest . Berkeley: U of California P, 1992. 

Knepper, B.G. “The Coming Race: Hell? Or Paradise Foretasted?” No Place Else: 

Explorations in Utopian and Dystopian Fiction . Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 


1983. 11-32. 


243 


Krauze, Enrique. “The Guerrilla Dandy.” The New Republic (27 Jun 1988); 28-38. 

—. Mexico: Biography of Power . 1997. Trans. Hank Heifetz. New York; Harper, 1998. 

Kreneck, Thomas H. “Recovering the ‘Lost’ Manuscripts of Jovita Gonzalez.” Texas 
Library Journal (Summer 1998): 76-79. 

Krupat, Arnold. The Voice in the Margin: Native American Literature and the Canon . 
Berkeley; U of California P, 1989. 

Leal, Luis. “In Search of Aztlan.” 16.3 Denver Quarterly (Fall 1981): 16-22. 

Limerick, Patricia Nelson. The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken past of the American 
West . New York; Norton, 1987. 

Limon, Jose E. Introduction. Caballero: A Historical Novel. College Station: Texas A&M 
UP, 1996. i-xxvi. 

—. Dancing with the Devil: Society and Cultural Poetics in Mexican-American South 
Texas. Wisconsin: U of Wisconsin P, 1994. 

—. “Mexicans, Foundational Fictions, and the United States: Caballero, a Late Border 
Romance.” Modem Language Quarterly 52:2 (June 1996); 341-353. 

London, Jack. “Whose Business is to Live.” Gringos in Mexico . Fort Worth; Texas 
Christian UP, 1988. 107-130. 

Luis-Brown, David. “’White Slaves’ and the ‘Arrogant M25ft'za’: Reconfiguring 

Whiteness in The Squatter and the Don and Ramona .” American Literature 69.4 
(December 1997): 813-39. 

Marsden, Michael T. “Helen Hunt Jackson: Docudramatist of the American Indian.” The 
Markham Review 10 (FallAVinter Combined Issue 1980-1); 15-19. 

Marti, Jose. “Section V; Introducion" Ramona: Novela americcma . Vol. VIII de Obr as. 
Completas . Pro. Alberto Ghiraldo. Madrid; n.p., n.d. 10-12. 



—. ‘'Nuestra America.” Obras Escogidas . Ed. Claudio Gillen, 1981. 117-137. 


—. “Our America.” Selected Writings of Jose Marti . Intro. Federico de Oniz. Trans. 

Juan de Oniz New York: Holt, 1954. 138-151. 

Martinez, Oscar. “The Border Phenomenon” and “Border Types.” Border People: Life 
and Society in the US-Mexico Borderlands . Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1994.1-140. 
—. Troublesome Border . Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1988. 

Martin, Mario. “Mexico.” Encyclopedia of Latin American Literature . Ed. Verity Smith. 

Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, 1997. 

Mathes, Valerie Sherer. “ Ramona. Its Successes and Failures.” Helen Hunt Jackson and 
her Indian Reform Legacy . Austin: U of Texas P, 1990. 76-94. 

McCarthy, Cormac. All the Pretty Horses . 1992. New York: Vintage Books, 1993. 
McLaren, Peter. “The Politics of Multicultural Resistance.” Multiculturalism: A Critical 
Reader . Ed. Dayid Theo Goldberg. Cambridge: Basil Blackwell, 1994. 62-69. 
Mendez, Miguel. “Ledrasy latrillos ” [“Bricks and Belles Ladders.”] New 

Chicana/Chicano Writing 2 . Ed. Charles M. Tatum. Tucson: U of Arizona P, 
1992. 30-81. 

—. Peregrinos de Aztldn. [Pilgrims of Az^/dn ] 1974. Trans. Dayid Foster. Tempe: 
Bilingual V!Editorial Bilingiie, 1992. 

Michaelson, Scott, and Dayid Johnson. Border Theory: The Limits of Cultural Politics . 

Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1997. 

Miller, Tom. On the Border . New York: Harper, 1981. 

Minden, Michael. “Bildungsroman.” New Encyclopedia of the Noyel . 1998 ed. 

Morris, Pam, ed. The Bakhtin Reader: Selected Writings of Bakhtin. Medyedey. and 
Voloshinoy . London: Arnold, 1994. 



245 


Morson, Gary Saul. “Utopia as Literary Genre.” The Boundaries of Genre . Austin: U of 
Texas P, 1981. 69-106. 

Monsivais, Carlos. Mexican Postcards . Ed/Trans/Intro. John Kraniauskas. London; 

Verso, 1997. 

Montejano, David. Anglos and Mexicans in the Making of Texas. 1836-1986 . Austin: U 
of Texas P, 1987. 

Murray, Frederic W. “The Dynamics of Inter-cultural Dissonance in Grinso viejo ."" 

Chasaui.Revista de literatura latinoamericam 19.1 (May 1990); 19-23. 

Myers, Inma Minoves, “Language and Style in Pocho .” The Bilingual Review/Ia Revista 
Bilin^ue 16.2-3 (May-Dec 1991): 180-187. 

Nash, Gerald D. “New Approaches to the American West.” Old West—New West: 

Centennial Essays . Ed Barbara H. Meldrum. Idaho: U of Idaho P, 1993. 15-27. 
Neville, Jill. “Getting Away From It All.” Times Literary Supplement 24 May 1985; 573. 
Norden, Christopher. “Ecological Restoration as Post-Colonial Ritual of Community in 
Three Native American Novels.” Study in American Indian Literatures 16.4 
(Winter 1994): 94-106. 

“ £/ Norte Movie Review.” < ww\v.inthe 80 s.com/movies/elnorte.shtinl > (27 Mar 2000). 

Nunez, Fernando Garcia. “La Frontera norte de mexico en Grimo vieso de Carlos 
Fuentes:^ Plural 17.198 (March 1988); 41-44. 

Oboler, Suzanne. “Hispanics in the United States: ‘We all Sing a Different Song.’” 

Ethnic Labels. Latino Lives . Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1995. 1-16. 

Olson, Kelli. “Helen Hunt Jackson.” Nineteenth-Century American Women Writers: A 
Bio-Biblioeraphical Critical Sourcebook . Ed. Denise D. Knight. Conn.; 
Greenwood P, 1997. 251-260. 




246 


Paredes, Americo. George Washington Gomez: A Mexicotexan Novel . 1930s. Houston. 
Arte Publico P, 1990. 

—. “The Problem of Identity in a Changing Culture: Popular Expressions of Culture 

Conflict along the Lower Rio Grande Border,” Folklore and Culture on the Texas- 
Mexican Border . Intro, and Ed. Richard Bauman. Texas: U of Texas P, 1993. 19- 
47. 

—. ‘ With His Pistol in His Hand’: A Border Ballad and its Hero . Austin: U of Texas P, 
1958. 

Parr, Carmen Salazar, and Genevieve M. Ramirez. “The Female Hero in Chicano 

Literature.” Beyond Stereotypes. Ed. Maria Herrera-Sobek. New York: Bilingual 
P, 1985. 47-60. 

Paz, Octavio. The Labyrinth of Solitude and Other Writings . 1949. Trans. Lysander 
Kemp, Yara Milos, Rachel Phillips Belash. New York. Grove P, 1972. 

—. “ReA^isions: Mural Painting.” Essays on Mexican Art. Trans. Helen Lane. New 
York: Harcourt, 1993. 113-168. 

Pena, Manuel. The Texas-Mexican Coniunto: A History of Working Class Music . Austin: 
U of Texas P, 1985. 

Perez, Hector. “Voicing Resistance on the Border: A Reading of Americo Paredes’s 
George Washington Gomez .” MELUS 23.1 (Spring 1998): 27-48. 

Pilkington, Tom. “Fate and Free Will on the American Frontier: Cormac McCarthy’s 
Western Fiction.” Western American Literature 27.4 (February 1993): 311-322. 
“Poetics.” Chambers Dictionary of Etymology . 1988 ed. 

Pratt, Mary Louise. Imperial Eves: Travel Writing and Transculturation . New York: 
Routledge, 1995. 




247 


—. “Scratches on the Face of the Country; or. What Mr. Barrow Saw in the Land of the 
Bushmen.” Critical Inquiry 12.1 (Autumn 1985): 119-143. 

“i?aza.” Diccionario del Esvanol Usual en Mexico . Ed. Luis Fernando Lara. D.F.; El 
Colegio de Mexico, 1996. 

—. Oxford English Dictionary . 2"“* ed. 1989. 

Reed, John. “Mac—American.” Daughter of the Revolution and Other Stories . 1927. Ed. 

Floyd Dell. Freeport: Books for Libraries P, 1970. 

Reesman, Jeanne Campbell. “The Jouissant Politics of Helen Hunt Jackson’s Ramo na: 

The Ground That Is ‘Mother’s Lap.’” Speaking the Other Self: American Women 
Writers . Athens: U of Georgia P, 1997. 27-38. 

Rios, Alberto. “The Iguana Killer.” The Iguana Killer: Twelve Stories of the Heart. 

Albuquerque: U of New Mexico P, 1984. 1-11. 

Robinson, Cecil. Mexico and the Hispanic Southwest in American Literature . Tucson: U 
of Arizona P, 1977. 

—. No Short Journeys: The Tntemlav of Cultures in the History a nd Literature of the 
Borderlands . Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1992. 

—. With the Ears of Strangers: The Mexican in American Literature. Tucson: U of 
Arizona P, 1963. 

Rodriquez, Manuel M. Martin. “Textual and Land Reclamations: The Cultural Reception 
of Early Chicana/o Literature.” Recovering the US Hispanic Literary H eritage. 2 
vols. Eds. Erlinda Gonzalez-Berry and Chuck Tatum. Houston: Arte Publico P, 
1996. 40-57. 

“Romance.” Dictionary of Concents in Literary Criticism and Theory . Ed. Wendell V. 
Harris. New York: Greenwood P, 1992. 



248 


Rosaldo, Renato. Culture and Truth: The Remaking of Social Analysis . Boston: Beacon 
P, 1989. 

—. “Politics, Patriarchs, and Laughter.” Cultural Critique 6 (Spring 1987): 65-86. 

Roy, Joaquin. “Genesisy evolucion de Grinso vieio .” War and Revolution in Hispanic 
Literature . Eds. Roy Boland and Alvin Kenwood. Melbourne: Voz Hispanica, 
1990. 63-77. 

Ruiz de Burton, Maria Amparo. The Squatter and the Don . 1885. Ed and Intro. Rosaura 
Sanchez and Beatrice Pita. Houston: Arte Publico P, 1992. 

Rutherford, John. “The Novel of the Mexican Revolution.” Ed. Roberto Gonzalez 
Eschevarria. The Cambridge History of Latin American Literature . Vol. HI. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996. 213-225. 

Said, Edward. “An Ideology of Difference.” ‘ Race.’ Writing, and Difference . Ed. Henry 
Louis Gates, Jr. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1986. 38-58. 

—. “Orientalism.” Literary Theory: An Anthology . Ed. Julie Rivkin and Michael Ryan. 
Massachusetts: Blackwell, 1998. 873-886. 

Saldivar, Jose David. Border Matters. Remapping American Cultural Studies . Berkeley: 
U of California P, 1997. 

Saldivar, Ramon. “The Borderlands of Culture: Americo Paredes’s George Washington 
Gomez and Chicano Literature at the End of the Twentieth Century.” American 
Literary History 5.2 (Summer 1993): 272-293. 

—. Chicano Narrative: The Dialectics of Difference . Wisconsin: U of Wisconsin P, 
1990. 

—. “Ideologies of the Self: Chicano Autobiography.” Diacritics: A Review of 
Contemporary Criticism 15.3 (Fall 1985): 25-34. 



249 


Samuels, Wilfred. “Liminality and the Search for Self” Minority Voices 5.1-2 (Spring- 
Fall 1981); 59-68. 

Sanchez, Rosaura, and Beatrice Pita. Introduction. The Squatter and the Don . 1885. 
Houston: Arte Publico P, 1992. 7-49. 

Schiller, Nina Click, Linda Basch, and Christina Blanc-Szanton. Towards a Transnational 
Perspective on Migration: Race. Class, and Nationalism Reconsidered . New 
York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1992. 

Shakespeare, William. “The Tragedy of Macbeth.” The Riverside Shakespeare . Ed. Harry 
Levin. Boston: Houghton, 1306-1343. 

Silko, Leslie Marmon. Almanac of the Dead . New York: Simon, 1991. 

—. Rev. of Stones for Ibarra, by Harriet Doerr. New York Times Book Review 8 Jan 
1984: 8. 

Simonson, Harold P. Bevond the Frontier: Writers. Western Regionalism, and a Sense of 
Place . Fort Worth: Texas Christian UP, 1989. 

Skidmore, Thomas E., and Peter H. Smith. Modem Latin America . New York, Oxford 
UP, 1984. 

Somoza, Oscar. “The Mexican Element in the Fiction of Miguel Mendez.” Trans. Leland 
H. Chambers. Denver Quarterly 17.1 (Spring 1982); 68-77. 

Sommer, Doris. Foundational Fictions: The National Romances o f Latin America. 
Berkeley: U of California P, 1991. 

Spark, Debra. “Aspects of the Short Novel.” The Writer’s Chronicle (Summer 1999); 21- 
8 . 

Spicer, Edward. Cycles of Conquest: The Impact of Spain. Mexico, and the Un ited States 
on the Indians of the Southwest: 1533-1960. Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1981. 




250 

Stanford, Ann Folwell. “’Human Debris’”: Border Politics, Body Parts, and the 

Reclamation of the Americas in Leslie Marmon Silko’s Almanac of the Dead .” 

16.1 Literature and Medicine (1997): 23-42. 

St. Clair, Janet. “Death of Love/Love of Death: Leslie Marmon Silko’s Almanac of the 
Dead .” Multi-ethnic Literature of the US 21.2 (Summer 1996): 141-156. 

Trevino, Gloria Velasquez. “Cultural Ambivalence in Early Chicana Literature.” 

European Perspectives in Hispanic Literature of the US . Ed. Genivieve Fabre. 
Houston: Publico P, 1988. 140-146. 

Turan, Kenneth. “Human Relations the Star of Sayles’ ‘Lone’ Mystery.” Los Ange les 
Times (21 June 1996). <http.www.hollywood.com/movies/lonestar/review/ 
Hollywood. htm]> (27 Mar 2000). 

Turner, Paul, trans. Introduction. Utopia . By Thomas More. New York: Penguin, 1965. 1- 
24. 

Turner, Victor. “Betwixt and Between: The Liminal Period in Rites of Passage.” The 
Forest of Symbols . Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1986. 93-111. 

—. “Variations on a Theme of Liminality.” Wav Marks in the Exploration of Symbols . 

Ed. Edith Turner. Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1992. 48-65. 

Valdes, Maria Elena de. “Carlos Fuentes and the Subversion of the Social Codes for 
Women.” The Shattered Mirror: Representations of Women in Mexican 
Literature. Austin: U of Texas P, 1998. 51-72. 

Van Delden, Maarten. Carlos Fuentes. Mexico, and Modernity . Nashville: Vanderbilt UP, 
1998. 

Velez-Ibanez, Carlos. Border Visions: Mexican Cultures of the Southwest United States . 
Tucson: U of Arizona P, 1997. 




251 

“Villarreal, Jose Antonio.” Chicano Literature: A Reference Guide . Eds. Julio A. 

Martinez and Francisco A. Lomeli. Westport: Greenwood P, 1985. 420-432. 

Villarreal, Jose Antonio. “Chicano Literature; Art and Politics from the Perspective of the 
Artist.” Identification and Analysis of Chicano Literature. Ed. Francisco Jimenez. 
New York; Bilingual P, 1979. 161-186. 

—. Interview with Juan Bruce-Novoa. Revista Chicano Riauena 4.2 (1976); 40-48. 

—. Pocho . 1959. New York; Anchor, 1970. 

Wallerstein, Immanuel. The Modem World System: Capitalist Agriculture and the 

Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century. Series Study 
in Social Discontinuity. New York: Academic P, 1974. 

Wenger, John. “Whose Story Is It? History and Fiction in Cormac McCarthy’s All the 
Pretty Horses .” Southern Quarterly 36.2 (Winter 1998); 103-110. 

Whitaker, Rosemary. “Helen Hunt Jackson.” Boise State Western Writers Series . 78 
(1987): 1-50. 

Williams, Raymond. “Golden Ages.” The Country and the City . New York: Oxford UP, 
1973. 35-45. 

Wilson, Thomas M, and Hastings Donnan, eds. Border Identities: Nation and State at 
International Frontiers. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1998. 

Woodward, Richard B. “Cormac McCarthy’s Venomous Fiction.” New York Times 
Magazine 19 Apr 1992: 28-36. 

Zinn, Howard. People’s History of the United States . 1980. New York: New P, 1997. 



