AD-A274 650 

IIIIIIIIII 


US ARMY CORPS DACW03-89-D-0100 

OF ENGINEERS ORDER 1 

LITRE ROCK DISTRICT _ 

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION AT 
MONTGOMERY POINT 
DESHA COUNTY, ARKANSAS 



BY 

W.J. BENNETT, Jr. 
BEVERLY WATKINS 
JOE DUNBAR 
and 

ROBERT BRINKMAN 



94-00886 



d'o* ieTS 

etoit autrefois le 
lllaoc JejTon^inJa. 
detruje par les Clu&cXa 


I'Ance percee 


1989 


DT1C 

ELECTE f% 
JAN 1019941 I 

E ** 



'$4 1 7 327 













3 PC37 CCCUM :MTATICN PAG: 

j d, jo1ic 'edcnr-ic :«'* ~r .'-s oiix*;on-:t *s *sis»* i:*c "■• ' ^«.r z*?r -*iocr‘e. -■'f-.^tr *;r ■ 

^ *' ? * •*:•'* .:•»* » •*.•■?£«. :*-c -wivt ifid ' a v n .■■: *-ct *:n ;r •-•■jr^aren >]' 

cciiircvcn .* —"r^v - .j.-m .c.' v *.*'s t .V nr nr:?* M*?jc<5wJf*2'S : *'vi'-j«. . ??—v? 

C ivrt !•*.:? .-■ -. 7 . jra’C.'? ;?jro^.:;r. 'oe'v*.-- '*?•.- ;* '■»*■■ 

•, * C *.'IC * .-j : 1 - - : J>*f Ztai' <. -. Ui*'. ai ^ ; ; ... ‘c 5 U *. ■•; A. 

_ 1989 _ ! FINAL 

1 . 77 Li J.'*C ::« i * - i 

Archeological Investigations at Montgomery Point 
Desha County, Arkansas 

j..curses;j'- 

Dr. W.JL Bennett, Jr. et. al. 


] 


r , */" w J *£Vf \* v ?•* 


.?.“ns *>f -—: - - • r*»j -3*3 .cur:** 
e - -.. *--»r j*tsc: '? • ■■ 



rcvicvir 


•V: •L'Oi.J 


DACW03-89-D- 
0100, Order 1 


Archeological Assessment* Inc 
P.0. Box 1631 

Nashville, Arkansas 71852 


AAI Report 
No. 167 


U. S. Army Engineer District, Little Rock 
ATTN: CESWL-PL-A 
P.0. Box 867 

Little Rock, Arkansas 72201-0867 


Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 



12. .la S'.'iUCT ::0-.vers:, 

As part of its planning process to develop alternative methods of improving access to 
the McClellan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation system through the White River Entrance 
channel the U.S. Army Engineer District, Little Rock, authorized an intensive 
cultural resource survey for the area known as Montgomery Point situated at the 
present confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers in Desha County, Arkansas. 

This effort combined an extensive geomorphologial reconstruction with cartographic 
and literature research. While the cartographic and literature research indicated 
that this region was the location of several Native American and Euro-American groups 
over the past several hundred years, the geomorphological investigations determined 
that the area had been extensively reworked by channel action during this same i 

period. Literature review failed to locate specific cultural features within the 
project area although the presence of buried shipwrecks cannot be discounted. Field! 
investigations were successful in documenting important aspects of this dynamic 
natural landscape but failed to note the presence of cultural resources. No further 
archeological investigations are recommended for the project area unless buried 
cultural remains are encountered during construction. 


14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Archeology Geomorphological Historic 

Cultural Resources Arkansas River White River 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

54 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 

OF REPORT 

OF THIS PAGE 

OF ABSTRACT 


Unclassified 

Unclassified 

Unclassified 

UL 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) 



Prescribed by AM Std 239-18 
298-102 


7JV 




























ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENTS REPORT No. 116 


Archeological Investigations at Montgomery Point 
Desha County, Arkansas 


OTB QUALITY INSPECTED 5 


by 

W. J. Bennett, Jr., Beverly Watkins, 
Joe Dunbar, and Robert Brinkmann 


Submitted to the 

U.S. Army Engineer District, Little Rock 
Little Rock, Arkansas 


[ Acceston For | 

NTIS CRA&I r]| 

DTIC TAB ft 

Unannounced □ 

Justification 


By 

Di: 



it ibution / 


Availability Codes 

Dtst 

Avail c 
Spe 

ind/or 

cial 


1989 









Abstract 


As part of its planning process to develop alternative methods of improving access to the McClellan-Kerr 
Arkansas River Navigation system through the White River Entrance channel the U.S. Army Engineer District, 
Little Rock, authorized an intensive cultural resource survey for the area known as Montgomery Point situated 
at the present confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers in Desha County, Arkansas. This effort combined 
an extensive geomorphological reconstruction with cartographic and literature research. While the cartographic 
and literature research indicated that this region was the location of several Native American and Euro-American 
groups over the past several hundred years, the geomorphological investigations determined that the area had 
been extensively reworked by channel action during this same period. Literature review failed to locate specific 
cultural features within the project area although the presence of buried shipwrecks cannot be discounted. Field 
investigations were successful in documenting important aspects of this dynamic natural landscape but failed to 
note the presence of cultural resources. No further archeological investigations are recommended for the project 
area unless buried cultural remains are encountered during construction. 





Table of Contents 


Abstract . 

List of Figures . 

Chapter 1. Introduction . 

Project Area Location and Description . . . . 
Project Goals and Orientation. 

Chapter 2. Summary of Investigations . 

The Literature Search . 

Geomorphic Reconstruction. 

Field Verification . 

Chapter 3. The Landscape . 

Geologic Setting. 

Thomas Nuttall’s Description . 

Environments of Deposition. 

Mapping Conventions. . 

Point Bar and Chutes and Bars. 

Abandoned channels. 

Abandoned Course and Crevasse Channel. 

Backswamp. 

Natural Levee. 

Terrace. 

Geomorphic Development of the Project Area 
Summary. 

Chapter 4. Historical Context . 

French and Spanish Occupation, 1680-1800 . . 

American Settlement, 1800-1840 . 

The Civil War, 1861-1865 . 

Steamboat Trade, 1865-1927 . 

Montgomery Point Steamboat Wrecks . 

Chapter 5. Summary and Recommendations. 

■S ummar y . 

American Settlement, 1800-1840. 

The Civil War, 1861-1865. 

Steamboat Trade, 1865-1927. 

20th Century Developments. 

Recommendations . 


u 

iv 


42 

43 


References Cited 


44 


S6S33 SSSSSSiSSSEECRE 00-4-4-4 CMH. 








































List of Figures 


Figure 1. Study Area . 1 

Figure 2. Project Schematics . 3 

Figure 3. Project Area . 4 

Figure 4. South Bank of White River ... 5 

Figure 5. Hardwood Forest; South Bank . 5 

Figure 6. Examination of Bankline Profile 1 . 8 

Figure 7. Hand Augering on North Bank. 8 

Figure 8. Soil Core Extraction . 9 

Figure 9. Examination of Soil Cores. 9 

Figure 10. Location of Profiles, Cores, and Probes .10 

Figure 11. Aerial View of the Project Area.14 

Figure 12. Generalized Diagram of Floodplain Environments .15 

Figure 13. Channel Changes ...19 

Figure 14. Landforms in the Study Area .20 

Figure 15. Profile on North Bank .21 

Figure 16. Portion of Delisle Map of 1702 . 26 

Figure 17. White River Channel: 1811 .28 

Figure 18. Montgomery Point: 1830 . 30 

Figure 19. White River Channel: 1864 . 32 

Figure 20. Portion cf Desha County: 1864 . 33 

Figure 21. Montgomery Point: 1879-1880 to 1928 . 35 

Figure 22. White River Channel: 1765 . 38 

Figure 23. Landforms in the Study Area .39 

Figure 24. White River Channels: 1765/1829-40 . 40 

Figure 25. White River Channels: 1829-40/1880-81 . 41 

Figure 26. White River Channels: 1880-81/1939 . 41 

Figure 27. White River Channels: 1939/1977 . 42 


































Archeological Investigations at Montgomery Point 
Desha County, Arkansas 


Chapter 1. Introduction 


As part of its management of the McCleilan-Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System the United States Army 
Engineer District, Little Rock (USAED.LR) has been considering alternative methods to improve access to the 
Navigation System from the Mississippi River. Of particular importance is the reduction of the impact of low 
water conditions in the White River Entrance Channel which constitutes the study area for this effort (Figure 1). 




Figure 1. Study Area. 


1 








During the preliminary planning stages numerous structural alternatives were evaluated. These included (1) 
improvements to the Mississippi River; (2) modification of the lower Arkansas River for navigation; (3) a canal 
from the White River to the Mississippi River; (4) a lock and dam on the White River; (5) contraction works; (6) 
a sediment trap; and (7) diversion of the Arkansas River through the Arkansas Post Canal Consideration of 
these various alternatives determined that the establishment of a lock and dam on the lower White River was the 
only viable solution to the low water problems on the White River Entrance Channel. 

There are three alternative configurations for a lock and dam on the lower White Riven Plan A (Lock and Dam 
with Sector Gates), Plan B (Lock and Dam with Miter Gates), and Plan C (Lock and Dam with Access Canal). 
A summary description of the alternative locks and dams is presented below. Figure 2 illustrates these alternatives. 

Plan A - This plan consists of a lock and dam in the White River Entrance Channel at mile 0.6. The dam consists 
of a fixed weir at elevation 112.0 feet, NG VD. This weir would also serve as a navigation pass. The lock chamber 
is 840 feet x 110 feet and the lock is sector gated. The structure in this plan would be contained entirely within 
the channel of the White River. 

Plan B - This plan consists of a lock and dam at the same location as Plan A. The lock chamber is a traditional 
600 feet x 110 feet size with miter gates. The dam is a gated structure that has hinged crest gates for pool control. 
When Mississippi River stages are high enough, the gates would be down allowing navigation to pass over the 
dam. As Mississippi River stages fall, the gates would be raised to form a pool and the lock would be used. 

Plan C - This plan consists of a dam similar to the dam in Plan B at mile 0.6 on the White River. This dam contains 
hinged crest gates. The lock would be located in a right bank man-made canal that connects the Mississippi River 
with the White River. The canal would be approximately 7,700 feet long with a bottom width of 300 feet and side 
slopes of 1 on 4. 

Each of these alternatives will involve impacts to the landscape in the area known as Montgomery Point. As part 
of planning procedures the USAED,LR requested that Archeological Assessments, Inc. (AAI), Nashville, 
Arkansas, conduct an intensive cultural resources survey to determine if significant cultural resources presently 
exist in the area of possible project impact. This work was authorized under Contract No. DACW03-89-R-0011, 
Order No. 01. This effort was aided considerably by the participation of the Geotechnical Laboratory, U.S. Army 
Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station (WES), Vicksburg, Mississippi. 

Project Area Location and Description 

In this report a distinction is made between the study area which is the general region surrounding the confluences 
of the White and Arkansas Rivers with the Mississippi River (Figure 1) and the project area which is the principal 
area of possible impact. The project area is restricted to portions of the south and north banks of the White River 
upstream from its confluence with the Mississippi River (Figure 3). Impacts will include the excavation of portions 
of both banks as well as the construction of an access road. 

The areas to be impacted are within the floodplains of the Arkansas, Mississippi, and White Rivers and are 
confined to landforms created by the dynamic action of these rivers. These landforms, as discussed at length 
below, are the result of both vertical and lateral accretion over the past several centuries. At the present time 
vegetation in the project area consists of a mature bottomland forest (Figures 4 and 5). 


2 




Montgomery Point Lock & Oam 
PtanC 



Figure 2. Project Alternatives. 







CONTOUR INTERVAL 3 f££T 
OATUM IS MEAN SEA LEVEL 










Figure 4. South Bank of White River. 



5 












Project Goals and Orientation 


The primary goal of the effort was to determine if significant cultural resources exist within the area of project 
impact. There were two factors of primary consideration in this effort. One was the knowledge that the study area 
had been subjected to extensive modification by the three dynamic fluvial systems in the region. Previous 
reconnaissance level geomorphological studies (Smith 1988; Smith and Breland 1989) had indicated that the 
landscape within the project area was extremely young. The second factor of importance was the knowledge that 
the region had been very important in the early European settlement of Arkansas and had been occupied by 
various Native American groups at the time of initial European exploration and settlement of the region. 

Given these two factors it was determined that the effort should combine a geomorphological reconstruction of 
the project area using previously gathered cartographic and photographic data as well as field investigations with 
an extensive literature review to determine the location of previously recorded Native American and early 
Euro-American settlements which might be present in the project area. 


6 






Chapter 2. Summary of Investigations 


Investigations consisted of a detailed literature and records search, a geomorphological reconstruction of the 
project area initially based on remotely sensed data, and field verification of the resultant geomorphic reconstruc¬ 
tion. 

The Literature Search 

Previous archeological investigations in the area have concentrated on documenting the late prehistoric and early 
Euro-American occupation and use of the region. The extensive late prehistoric archeological record observable 
along the Arkansas River near and upstream from Arkansas Post drew comment from Thomas Nuttall during 
his travels in 1819 (Nuttall 1980). Nuttall did not, however, report evidence for such late prehistoric sites in the 
vicinity of our project area. Other early investigations include the Bureau of Ethnology Mound Exploration 
Project which mapped the Menard Mounds (Thomas 1985) and the work of Clarence B. Moore (Moore 1908) 
and Warren K. Moorehead (Moorehead 1931) in the early part of the 20th Century. Work in the mid-20th Century 
included studies done by S. C. Dellinger, Curator of the University of Arkansas Museum (Dickinson and Dellinger 
1940), the extensive work of the Lower Mississippi Valley Survey (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin 1968; Phillips 1970), 
and James Ford’s excavations at the Menard site (Ford 1961). The University of Arkansas conducted investiga¬ 
tions related to the construction of the McClellan-Kerr Navigation system (Davis and Baker 1974; Scholtz 1971; 
Scholtz and Hoffman 1968). A number of projects have been undertaken at the site of Arkansas Post These 
include Holder (1957a; 1957b), Wilson (1966), Walker (1971), Martin (1977), and Westbury (1976). A summary 
discussion of these investigations is provided in Bennett, Breland, and Smith (1989). 

The only archeological investigations documented for the project area, however, relate to the reporting and 
subsequent search for a late prehistoric site registered as 3DE9 in the files of the Arkansas Archeological Survey. 
This site was reported by an avocational archeologist who donated a collection of ceramics to the Arkansas 
Archeological Survey from this site in 1967. No description of the site is given on the site form and only a vague 
locational reference is provided. The Arkansas Archeological Survey never verified the site location or descrip¬ 
tion. The general area indicated as the possible location of 3DE9 was examined by John Riggs and Don Hubsch 
of the USAED.LR on 3 August 1988. Intensive surface examination failed to discover any cultural materials. 
Bankline examination was prevented by erosion resistant materials along the bank face. A phone discussion with 
Burney McClurken, the Arkansas Archeological Survey Station Archeologist with whom the 3DE9 was first 
recorded, confirmed that he had no information on the location of this site, other than the reference to the north 
end of Big Island. Attempts to locate Mr. Rush, who reported the site, have been unsuccessful. 

A search of the cartographic resources for early European maps of the region at the Cammie G. Henry Research 
Center, Northwestern State University, Natchitoches, Louisiana, was undertaken by Aubra Lee. Lee reviewed 
over 500 maps and discovered over 40 large scale maps of the study area which were then examined to determine 
if cultural features which included Arkansas Post and major Native American villages depicted on these maps 
were located in our project area. The results of this search were negative. 

Archival and historical research were done by Beverly Watkins. In addition to reviewing the published historical 
literature for the area, she also used county, state, and federal records, newspapers, and other manuscript 
collections available at the Arkansas History Commission in Little Rock, and documents from The Huntington 
Library in San Marino, California. The results of her research are given in Chapter 4. 

Geomorphic Reconstruction 

Background research involved in the delineation of the project area’s landscape was undertaken by Joe Dunbar 
(WES). This involved the review of previous geomorphic investigations in the general area including (Kolb et al 
1968; Saucier 1967,1974; Smith 1979; Smith and Saucier 1971; Smith and Breland 1989). This activity also involved 
the analysis of aerial photographs taken during 1939,1958,1971, and 1988 as well as a variety of cartographic 
resources including the 1939 and 19771:62^00 Big Island Quadrangle sheets, and the 1:24,000scale Montgomery 







Point and Yancopin Quadrangles for 1977. Selection 
of the different time intervals for the comparison was 
based on the availability of historic maps and charts 
of the area. The identification of landforms and chan¬ 
nel migration was concentrated on the northern half 
of the Big Island 15-Minute Quadrangle Sheet which 
includes the Montgomery Point and Yancopin 7.5- 
Minute Quadrangle Sheets. 

Channel migration was mapped for the following time 
intervals: 1988 (U. S. Army Corps of Engineers 1988), 
1977 (U. S. Army Corps of Engineers 1977), 1939 
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1939), 1904 (U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers 1975), 1880-1881 (Fisk 
1944; based on early maps in files of Mississippi River 
Commission), 1829-1830 (U.S. Army Corps of En¬ 
gineers 1939), and 1765 (Fisk 1944). 

From this review it was possible to develop a detailed 
identification of various landforms in the study area 
and to construct a set of maps at the scale of 1:24,000 



Figure 7. Hand Augering on North Bank. 



Figure 6. Examination of Bankline Profile 1. 

depicting the location of the various channels at different 
time intervals since the middle of the 18th Century. 

Field Verification 

Field investigations were undertaken from 30 October 
through 3 November 1989. The Archeological 
Assessments’ field team was led by W. J. Bennett, Jr., and 
included Aubra Lee, John Northrip, William Isenberger, 
and Robert Bennett. This team was joined by project 
geologist Joe Dunbar of WES, and Robert Brinkmann of 
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee who served as 
consulting soils scientist. 

The intent of the effort was to determine whether surfaces 
existed in the area which could contain buried cultural 
deposits. Three tactics were employed; the cutting of 
bankline profiles (Figure 6), hand coring using a 1" Oak- 
field soil probe and a 4" hand bucket auger (Figure 7), and 
the extraction of solid soil cores using a truck-mounted 
Bull Soil Sampler which extracted soil cores 2" in diameter 


8 











Figure 8. Soil Core Extraction. 



Figure 9. Examination of Soil Cores. 

(Figures 8 and 9). Figure 10 illustrates the locations of the profiles, soil cores, and probes made with the 4" bucket 
auger. 

Three profiles were dug at appropriate locations in order to document the various components of the landforms 
to a depth greater than was possible with the coring devices. The profiles, two along the south bank of the While 
River as close as possible to its confluence with the Mississippi River, and one along a point bar ridge in the north 


9 















10 


Figure 10. Location of Profiles, Cores, and Probes. 









bank of the White River, provided a wider horizontal exposure of the various sediments than the cores could 
show. Because of the presence of riprap and woven concrete mattresses made it impossible to cut a h ankline 
profile along the bank of the Mississippi River or at the confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers. 

Coring on the south side of the White River began by extending a transect of three cores parallel to the White 
River. A fourth core in this transect. Core 13 (not shown in Figure 10), was taken near Mayhorn Bayou. Together 
these four cores provided a measure of the variability of the deposits and soil development adjacent to the White 
River. These, plus Profiles 1 and 2, provided a basic understanding of the nature of the landform. Cores 4-12 
were extracted to measure the variability of the landscape farther from the White River. 

These cores were also carefully examined for evidence of surfaces of stability or buried A horizons which would 
indicate surfaces on which cultural materials might be found.This was particularly relevant in relation to the 
possible location of site 3DE9. No evidence whatsoever was recovered in the cores to suggest the presence of 
any sort of surface stability necessary to support such a site. Even with this negative evidence, we examined surface 
exposures within the mapped site area. This was augmented by placing numerous 1" probes to a depth of 1 meter 
within this same area. The results were negative. Finally, discussions with the participants of a local hunting club 
found that none of them had ever discovered or heard reports of any pre-European cultural artifacts in the area. 


11 





Chapter 3. The Landscape 


Geologic Setting 

As indicated above the study area is located within the floodplains of the Arkansas, Mississippi, and White Rivers. 
The study area contains the present courses of the Arkansas, Mississippi, and White Rivers, former courses and 
channels of these river systems, and the fluvial sediments deposited by these river systems as they have migrated 
across their respective floodplains. The migration of these different fluvial systems during the Holocene (10,000 
years to present) has created a complex landscape which is marked by relict fluvial features and/or by abandoned 
floodplains or terraces. 

Detailed engineering geological studies have determined that throughout the early and middle Holocene, the 
Arkansas and White Rivers emptied into the Mississippi River upstream and downstream of their present 
positions (Saucier 1967; Kolb et al 1968; Smith 1979). Beginning in the latter part of the Holocene, the present 
meander belts of the Arkansas, White, and Mississippi Rivers migrated to their present locations. As part of the 
most recent meander belts of the Arkansas, Mississippi, and White Rivers it is estimated that the study area is 
less than 2^00 years old (Saucier 1974). Geomorphic mapping, historic bankline comparisons, and soils data 
evaluated during the course of this study indicate that the fluvial systems and sediments within the immediate 
project area are even younger. 

Thomas Nuttall’s Description 

The project area was visited by Thomas Nuttall in January, 1819, as part of his expedition sponsored by Academy 
of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia. His description of the lower White and Arkansas Rivers provides an eloquent 
introduction to the region. We pick up his narrative as he completes his journey down the Mississippi River and 
arrives at the mouth of the White River: 

Coming along the bend of the 71st island, we struck upon an enormous planter, or immoveable log, 
but again escaped without accident. About noon we landed at Mr. M’Lane’s, a house of entertainment. 

Here I was advised to proceed with my small cargo and flat-boat to the port of Osark, on the Arkansa, 
by the bayou, which communicates between the White and Arkansa rivers, in both of which it was now 
conjectured there was back-water from the Mississippi. (Nuttall 1980:71,72) 

After two interesting days at McLane’s Nuttall finally began his journey into the Arkansas Territory. 

15th] We continued with hard labour ascending White river to the bayou, in a direction of west to 
north-west, the bayou or cut-off continuing to the south-west. In this distance, there are no settlements, 
the land being overflowed by the back water of the Mississippi. We passed nearly through the bayou, 
in which there are four points of land and a half; the current carrying us almost three miles an hour 
towards the Arkansa, which it entered nearly at right angles, with a rapid current, and a channel filled 
with snags. The length of the bayou appears to be about eight or nine miles. 

16th] Leaving the bayou, we entered the Arkansas, which was very low, but still red and muddy from 
the freshets of the Canadian. Most of the larger streams which enter into it from the south, are charged 
with red and turbid water, while those of the north are clear. Every where I observed the chocolate or 
reddish brown clay of the salt formation, deposited by the southern freshets. The Arkansa had here a 
very gentle current, and was scarcely more than 200 yards wide, with its meanders on a small scale, 
similar to those of the Mississippi In consequence of the unrestrained do mini on of the inundation, no 
settlements yet appeared in this quarter.... (Nuttall 1980:76,77) 

The three last bends of the river, like the four first, tending by half circles to the north-west, are each 
about two and three miles in circuit. As in the Mississippi the current sets with the greatest force 
against the centre of the curves; the banks of which are nearly perpendicular, and subject to a perpetual 


12 




state of dislocation. In such situations we frequently see brakes of cane; while, on the opposite site, a 
naked beach of sand, thinly strewed with succulent and maritime plants, considerably wider than the 
river, appears to imitate the aridity of a desert, though contrasted at a little distance by skirting groves 
of willows and poplars. 

No other kind of soil appears than a friable loam, and the beds of red clay, which so strongly tinge the 
water at particular periods of inundation. The sand of the river appears to be in perpetual motion, 
drifting along at the beck of the current; its instability is indeed often dangerous to the cattle that 
happen to venture into the river, either to drink or traverse the stream... .(Nuttall 1980:77,78) 

No change, that I can remark, yet exists in the vegetation, and the scenery is almost destitute of every 
thing which is agreeable to human nature; nothing yet appears but one vast trackless wilderness of 
trees, a dead solemnity, where the human voice is never heard to echo, where not even ruins of the 
humblest kind recall its history to mind, or prove the past dominion of man. All is rude nature as it 
sprang into existence, still preserving its primeval type, its unreclaimed exuberance (Nuttall 1980:78) 

In any other direction from this settlement [Arkansas Post] the lands are totally overflowed in freshets 
as far as the Mississippi. On this side of the Arkansa, the floods cover the whole intermediate space 
to White river, a distance of 30 miles. Within this tract, cultivation can never take place without resource 
to the same industry, which has redeemed Holland from the ocean. The singular caprice of the river, 
as it accidentally seeks its way to the sea, meandering through its alluvial alley, is truly remarkable. The 
variation of its channel is almost incredible, and the action which it exercises over the destiny of the 
soil, can scarcely be conceived. After pursuing a given course for many ages, and slowly encroaching, 
it has, at length, in many instances cut through an isthmus, and thus abandoned perhaps a course of 
six or eight miles, in which the water stagnating, at length becomes totally insulated, and thus presents 
a lagoon or lake... .(Nuttall 1980:79,80) 

After an eventful stay of nearly a year Nuttall returned down stream toward New Orleans and makes these final 
observations as he leaves the Arkansas River: 

On the 19th, I bid farewell to Arkansas, and proceeded towards the Mississippi, in the barge of Mons. 
Notrebe, a merchant of this place, and the day following, without any material occurrence, arrived at 
the confluence of the Arkansa, a distance of about 60 miles. The bayou, through which I came in the 
spring, now ran with as much velocity towards White river, as it had done before into the Arkansa, its 
current and course depending entirely upon the relative elevation of the waters of the two rivers with 
which it communicates. The large island, thus produced, possesses extensive tracts of cane land, 
sufficiently elevated, as I am told, above inundation, as does also the opposite bank of the Arkansa. 
(Nuttall 1980:249) 

To summarize, Nuttall depicts our area as an often flooded wilderness generally inhospitable to human 
settlement. The aerial photograph taken in 1987 (Figure 11) depicts a similar setting. 

Environments of Deposition 

The following paragraphs describe in some detail the various elements of the fluvially-constructed landscape 
within the study area. The locations of these elements within the study area have been mapped onto the 
accompanying 7.5 Minute Quadrangle Sheets (Montgomery Point and Yancopin). Many of these features are 
illustrated schematically in Figure 12. 

Ma pping Conventions. The fluvial features identified on the geomorphic maps were formed by the Arkansas, 
Mississippi, and White Rivers. An attempt was made to distinguish the fluvial system responsible for the mapped 
feature as shown by the legends on the quadrangle sheets. The fluvial system responsible is identified by a letter 
(“A” for Arkansa? River, “M” for Mississippi River, and "W" for White) preceding the landform symbol In 
addition, historic (which in this case means later than 1765) fluvial features and deposits are identified on the 
geomorphic maps by the letter “H” preceding the system and landform symbol. Mapping has identified eight 






14 


Figure 11. Aerial View of the Project Area. 
















Figure 12. Generalized Diagram of Floodplain Environments. 








different environments of deposition in the study area. These environments are identified on the geomorphic 
maps by a landform symbol (“PB” for point bar, “CH” for abandoned channel, “CO” for abandoned course, 
“CC” for crevasse channel, “BS” for backswamp, “CB” for chutes and bars, “T” for terrace, and “TE” for eroded 
terrace). The different geomorphic environments present in the study area are individually described in more 
detail below. 

Point Bar and Chutes and Bars . Point bar deposits are by far the most common landscape elements in the study 
area. Point bar deposits are formed as a river migrates across its floodplain. River channels migrate across their 
floodplain by eroding the outside or concave bank and depositing a sandbar on the inside or convex bank. 
Commonly called lateral accretion, this is the process by which the stream reworks its valley, destroying previously 
constructed landforms and creating new ones. With time, the convex bar grows in size and the point bar is 
developed. Associated with the point bar are a series of arcuate ridges and swales. The ridges are formed by 
lateral channel movement and represent relict sandy lateral bars separated by low-lying swales. The swales are 
locations where fine grained sediments accumulate.Point bars are easily recognized by distinguishing charac¬ 
teristics shown on aerial photography and topographic maps. The primary characteristic that distinguishes the 
point bar environment from other environments is the well-developed ridge and swale topography as well as the 
numerous abandoned channels, most of which still receive stream flow during times of high water flow. 

Other common landscape features within the study area are the well-developed sandy bars along the main 
channel. These sandy landforms are identified on the geomorphic maps as chutes and bars. The major charac¬ 
teristic that distinguish chutes and bars from point bar is the absence of a fine-grained topstratum in the chutes 
and bars environment. The fine-grained topstratum is deposited by overbank deposition of sediment during high 
water flow periods. As the channel migrates away from the sandy bar and away from the high energy flow 
conditions that occur near the main channel, silts and clay are deposited upon the sandy bars forming topstratum 
deposits. 

Point bar deposits are as thick as the total depth of the river that forms them. These deposits fine upward from 
the maximum size of the river’s bedload (coarse sand and/or fine gravel) to fine grained soils (clay) at the surface. 
The basal or coarse grained portion of the point bar sequence, the substratum, is deposited by lateral accretion 
while the fine grained or upper portion of the point bar sequence, the topstratum, is deposited by overbank 
vertical accretion. 

Point bar deposits are approximately 40 meters (130 ft) thick at the proposed lock and dam site as shown by the 
cross-section and borings logged by the USAED.LR. Sediments as described in these borings identify a typical 
point bar sequence as grading upward from sand and gravel at the base, to silty sand, silt, and clay near ground 
surface. These deposits are usually variable horizontally, especially where ridge and swale topography is well 
developed or relict chutes (high water channel across the point bar neck) are present. 

Data recovered from borings also show that point bar deposits are separated into two distinct units based on 
grain sizes; a predominantly fine grained upper unit or point bar topstratum (silt and clay) deposited by vertical 
accretion, and a coarse grained lower unit or point bar substratum (silty sand and sari) deposited by lateral 
accretion. 

The thickness of the point bar topstratum at the proposed lock and dam site is variable, ranging from less than 
10 meters (30 ft) to approximately 19 meters (60 ft). The substratum in comparison with the topstratum is usually 
much thicker, generally greater than 15 meters (50 ft). 

Abandoned channels. Abandoned Channels are relict channel loops that are abandoned when the river cuts 
across its point bar. The cutoff produces an oxbow lake. The process by which the river abandons the loop occurs 
either gradually over an extended period of time as a neck cutoff or during a single flood event as a chute cutoff 
A chute is a high-water channel across the point bar neck. 

Abandoned channels are abundant throughout the study area, especially on the floodplain of the Arkansas River. 
There are fewer abandoned channels on the Montgomery Island Quadrangle because the Mississippi River has 










rapidly migrated laterally through this area in historic times rather than abandoning rh»nn*>l se gment* and/or 
courses. 

Filling of an abandoned channel in the study area is a rapid process (about 200 years or less) that is dominated 
initially by lateral accretion infilling (coarse grained deposits) when the channel is still hydraulically connected 
to the main course. After the main channel has migrated away from the abandoned segment, vertical accretion 
dominates with the transport and deposition of fine-grained sediment to the abandoned channel during times of 
high water flow. 

Abandoned channels and courses have different physical properties. Abandoned channels fill primarily by 
overbank deposition and vertical accretion. In general, abandoned channels generally contain more finer grained 
sediments than abandoned courses. Abandoned courses are usually filled by more coarse grained sediments. 

Abandoned Course an d Crevasse Channel. An abandoned course is a river channel that is abandoned in favor 
of a more hydraulically efficient course. An abandoned course forms when the river’s flow path is diverted to a 
new position on the river’s floodplain. This event usually is a gradual process and begins by a break or a “crevasse” 
in the river’s natural levee during flood stage. The crevasse forms a temporary channel or a crevasse channel that 
may over time develop into a more permanent channel. Eventually, the new channel diverts the majority of flow 
and the old channel progressively fills. Final abandonment begins as coarse sediment fills the abandoned channel 
segment immediately down stream from the point of diversion. Complete filling of the abandoned course occurs 
by overbank deposition and may take approximately one thousand years to fill completely. Bank migration data 
evaluated for this study indicates that filling is a rapid process which may occur in less than 200years. Abandoned 
courses in the project area are associated only with the Arkansas and White Rivers. 

Only three abandoned crevasse channels were identified on the geomorphic maps. One of these channels is 
located on the Montgomery Island quadrangle a short distance upstream from the proposed lock and dam site 
and is identified as Mayhorn Bayou on the topographic map. This crevasse channel is fairly recent and is an active 
feature during high water. The other two crevasse channels are abandoned and are located on the Yancopin 
quadrangle. These two channels drain onto the backswamp deposits in the southwest comer of the project area, 
occurring as breaks in abandoned channels. 

The abandoned courses in the study area are almost completely sediment filled; occurring as poorly drained 
swamps, as small underfit stream channels which eventually drain to the main channel, or as shallow lakes. 
Abandoned courses and abandoned crevasse channels are primarily sand filled, interbedded with clays and silts 
that grade into fine grained soils and organic sediments near the surface. 

Backswamp . Backswamps receive sediment during times of high water flow, when the natural levees are crested 
and suspended sediment in the flood waters is deposited in areas well removed from the main channel 
Backswamps are a minor environment in the study area, confined to the southwest comer of the Yancopin 
quadrangle. Backswamps are presently situated outside of the modem floodplain due to the construction of 
artificial levees. 

The principal geomorphic processes associated with this environment are vertical accretion of new sediment 
from annual flooding (presently not possible with the construction of levees), pedogenesis (soil formation), and 
bioturbation. Bioturbation is the churning and stirring of the underlying sediment by vegetation and organisms 
(Bates and Jackson 1980). 

Smith (1979) indicates that backswamp deposits in the study area overlie Pleistocene outwash plain deposits 
(coarse grained sediments deposited by glacial melt water) at a shallow depth. The backswamp deposits in the 
southwestern part of the Yancopin quadrangle were formed by Arkansas and Mississippi River flood flow. 

Natural Levee. Natural levee deposits were not mapped as a separate environment on the geomorphic maps 
because these deposits are present throughout the entire study area to some extent and mapping these deposits 
would confuse and detract from the topographic information on the base maps and identification of the 
underlying geomorphic features. Instead, natural levee deposits were mapped in combination with other 







environments as indicated on the geomorphic maps. However, natural levees are discussed separately in this 
report because they are the results of an important geomorphic process in the study area, especially as it affects 
cultural resources. 

Natural levees are vertical accretion deposits formed when the river overtops its banks during flood stage and 
sediment suspended in the flood flow is deposited adjacent to the channel The resulting landform is a low, 
wedge-shaped ridge decreasing in thickness away from the main channel Natural levee thickness is greatest at 
the river bank and decreases with distance from the river. Eventually, natural levee deposits merge with other 
floodplain deposits, usually with point bar or backswamp sediments. 

Silt and sand are the predominant sediments in natural levee deposits. Natural levee deposits generally contain 
few organic sediments because of oxidation. Soils are typically brown to reddish brown. Small calcareous nodules 
are frequently associated with the more developed natural levee deposits, formed as a result of ground water 
percolating through the permeable levee soils. Natural levee soils are generally well drained and have low water 
contents. 

The natural levee deposits in the proposed lock and dam area are considered to be quite recent. Geomorphic, 
pedogenic, and historic evidence indicates the natural levee sediments were deposited within the last 50 years. 
At the proposed lock and dam site, the recent natural levee sediments are approximately 1.5m thick near the 
White River channel and generally are composed of fine-grained loose sand and silt. At approximately300 meters 
from the White River channel, the coarse grained natural levee sediments merge with the surrounding point bar 
sediments. Geomorphic evidence and other subsurface data indicate that several different periods of active 
natural levee deposition have occurred within the study area as the various systems have migrated across their 
respective floodplains. 

Terrace. A terrace is an abandoned floodplain that is elevated above the present river’s floodplain. A terrace 
consists of a relatively flat or gently inclined surface that is bounded on one edge by a steeper descending slope 
and on the other edge by a steeper ascending slope (Bates and Jackson 1980). Terraces either border the modern 
floodplain or may be preserved as topographic islands or remnants within the modem floodplain. 

A terrace is present in the northwest comer of the Yancopin quadrangle. Where the terrace has been eroded by 
surface run-off, it is noted on the Yancopin geomorphic map by the symbol “TE”. The terrace mapped on the 
Yancopin quadrangle is a depositional terrace (i.e., composed of fluvial deposited sediments) formed by an 
ancestral Arkansas River. The mapped terrace is part of the Grand Prairie and is a Sangamon (300,000 to 80,000 
years before present) age landform. The Grand Prairie is a large scale physiographic feature in central Arkansas 
which is significantly higher than the surrounding topography. 

The formation of a depositional terrace occurs as a river downcuts into its floodplain and creates a new flood- 
plain at a lower elevation. The reasons for the stream downcutting into its floodplain may be the result of the 
natural geomorphic evolution of the stream system or it may be related to a change in climate, a change in base 
level, or a tectonic event (i.e., faulting or uplift). 

Geomorphic Development of the Project Area 

It is clear from the preceding analysis that the various landscape features within the study area have been created 
by the interaction of the very dynamic fluvial systems present in the area throughout the late Holocene. While 
there are doubtless many factors involved in this interaction it seems likely that the dominant process in 
developing the landscape in our project area has been the meandering activity of the Mississippi River. Changes 
in the channel of the Mississippi have caused both the Arkansas and White Rivers to adjust, sometimes 
dramatically, as they have sought to enter the larger stream. 

A comparison of the bankline changes for the Mississippi and White Rivers since the mid-18th Century illustrates 
how, for nearly two centuries (1765-1939), the White River has struggled to maintain an outlet to the Mississippi 
as the larger stream has meandered to the east (Figure 13). This process was largely responsible for the creation 
of the historic point bar deposits which dominate the landscape and was accompanied by the development of 







19 


Figure 13. Channel Changes. 






20 


Figure 14. Landforms in the Study Area. 






















Montgomery Island itself. Natural levee and slackwater deposits from the Mississippi, White, and Arkansas 
Rivers were also a part of this landscape development. In 1953, however, the Mississippi meandering which 
created Smith Point cut southward to truncate the White and removed a large portion of the landscape created 
by the White’s attempt to lengthen its channel. 


Figure 13 illustrates a period of nearly 200 years (pre-1765 to post-1939) during which the confluence of the White 
and Mississippi Rivers moved progressively eastward. This process, involving the development of point bars 
covered by both fine and coarse grained vertical accretion deposits, was largely responsible for the creation of 
the landscape which has come to be called Montgomery Point. These are the deposits mapped as HWPB on 
Figure 14 and compose most of the area potentially affected by project construction. These deposits post-date 
1765. South and west of the former bankline shown on Figure 14 the landscape is older although its age is in all 
likelihood still measured in centuries. During the middle of this century the Mississippi River channel, cutting 
down from the north, truncated the White River channel and established the confluence of these two streams 
several river miles to the west of its 19th and early 20th century position. Since that time the White River has 
continued to develop the point bar deposits which compose the north bank of the White River within our project 
area as well as to cut into older point bar and natural levee deposits on the south bank. 


While natural levee deposits have continued to be built on the south side of the river there seems to have been 
very little absolute accretion over the past 50 years as both the 1939 and 1977 topographic maps list the elevation 
of the area as between 150 and 155 feet. Deposition 
and scouring activity associated with flooding and 
erosion have, however, continued to alter the 
micro-topography of the landform. 

Field observation of soil profiles and cores reflect 
this dynamic situation. On the developing point 
bar north of the river the profiles and cores indi¬ 
cate almost no soil development whatsoever. In the 
core extracted from the bar adjacent to the current 
channel undecomposed leaves were recovered at 
a depth of 215cm. Figure 15 is a picture of a profile 
showing the multiplicity of coarse and fine grain 
lenses deposited. 

South of the river a series of two bankline profiles 
and thirteen soil cores documented a complex 
history of landform development. The following is 
the log of core 13, profiles 1 and 2, and cores 1,2, 
and 3 which taken together form an east-west tran¬ 
sect from Mayhom Bayou to the Mississippi River. 



Figure 15. Profile on North Bank. 



21 








Core 13 (na) 



I 


0- 120cm 


brownish yellow (10YR 6/6) sand; single grain structure; includes lenses of fine sand 
and silt; poorly developed A horizon at the surface (0-10cm) 


II 120-155cm dark gray (10YR 4/1) clay; blocky structure; few (10YR 4/6) mottles; day films; 

heavily bioturbated; has the characteristics of an AB horizon 


III 155-275cm dark gray (10YR 4/1) clay, coarsening with depth to a grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt; 
massive structure; abundant (10YR 5/6) mottles 


Profile 1 (47.229m; 154.95ft) 


I 0-150cm alternating dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) sand and dark brown (10YR 3/3) clay 

lenses and laminae; upper 80cm is sand; stratification lines visible; single grain struc¬ 
ture 

II 150-200cm dark brown (10YR 3/3) clay, some (7.5YR 5/6,10YR 5/2) mottles; weak columnar 

structure; highly bioturbated; unit fines upward; has the characteristics of an AB 
horizon 


ffl 200-235cm dark brown (10YR 3/3) clay with abundant (7.5YR 5/6,10YR 5/2) mottles; massive 

structure; highly bioturbated; unit fines upward 

IV 235-335cm grayish brown (10YR 5/2) silt; massive structure; common (5YR 4/4) mottles; highly 

bioturbated; charcoal films 



V 


335-380cm alternating bands of gray (10YR 5/1) and weak red (23YR 4/2) day, weak blocky 

structure; unit fines downward to montmorillinitic day common mottles; common 
desiccation cracks increasing with depth; bands of platy structure are associated 
with silty sand lenses; some day films at depth; has the characteristics of an A 
horizon 


VI 380-555cm dark gray (10YR 4/1) clay, abundant mottles; weak blocky structure; weak desic¬ 

cation cracks; abundant clay films ; common slickensides; has the characteristics of 
an AB horizon 

VII 555-635cm pale brown (10YR 6/3) silt; massive structure; abundant (7-5YR 4/4) mottles 

VIII 635-785cm pale brown (10YR 6/3) medium sand; single grain structure; unit sample with bucket 

auger at base of profile 


Profile 2 (47.057m; 154386ft) 


I 0-150cm alternating dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) sand and dark brown (10YR 3/3) day 

lenses and laminae; upper 80cm is sand; stratification lines visible; single grain struc¬ 
ture 

II 150-215cm dark brown (10YR 3/3) day blocky structure; common mottles; unit fines upward; 

has the characteristics of an AB horizon 



m 


215-390cm alternating bands of silt and fine sand with day lenses (10YR 5/2); common 

(73YR 4/4) mottles; stratification lines present; weakly bioturbated 


22 






IV 

390~480cm 

V 

480-500cm 

VI 

500-535cm 


gray (10YR S/1) day, massive structure; (7.5YR 4/4) mottles 

dark reddish brown (23YR 3/4) clay, possible Arkansas River deposit 

pay (10YR 5/1) clay, weak blocky structure; abundant mottles; translocation of day 
from upper clay zone; common desiccation cracks; has the characteristics of an AB 
horizon 


Core 1 (47.632m; 156.273 feet) 


I 

0-120cm 

n 

120-150cm 

m 

150-210cm 

rv 

210-250cm 

V 

250-290cm 

VI 

290-360cm 


light brown (7.5YR 6/4) fine sand; single grain structure; weakly laminated; few clay 
lenses 

dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) clay, blocky structure; common mottles; common clay films; 
has the characteristics of an AB horizon 

dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) silty day; abundant (7.5YR 4/6 and 5Y 5/1) mottles; 
massive structure; highly bioturbated 

dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) clay, strong blocky structure; common mottles; common clay 
skins; has the characteristics of an AB horizon 

dark brown (75YR 3/2) clay, massive 

dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) sand; single pain structure; common (10YR 3/6) 
mottles; unit fines upward to a fine sand 


Core 2 (46.510m; 152.592ft) 


I 0-30cm dark brown (7.5YR 4/4) fine sand; single pain structure; few mottles; some fine thin 

clay lenses 

II 30-40cm dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) clay, weak blocky/crumb structure; few mottles; has the 

characteristics of a buried A horizon 

III 40-85cm very dark payish brown (10YR 3/2) clay, weak blocky structure; common (5YR 4/4) 

mottles; common clay films; highly bioturbated; has the characteristics of an AB 
horizon 


IV 85-350cm yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) silt with silty clay at the top and bottom; common 

(10YR 4/6) mottles; heavily bioturbated; manganese staining present near base of 
core 


Core 3 (47.965m; 157365ft) 

I 0-10cm very dark payish brown (10YR 3/2) loam; crumb structure; A horizon 

dark brown (10YR 3/3) silty clay; weak blocky structure; thin clay films; some 
bioturbation 


n 


KMOcm 



in 

40-85cm 

IV 

85-105cm 

V 

105-2Q5cm 

VI 

205-225cm 

vn 

225-245cm 

vra 

245-360cm 


dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) fine sand; single grain structure 

dark brown (10YR 3/3) day; blocky structure; some clay films; has the characteris¬ 
tics of an AB horizon 

brown (10YR 3/3) silt; few (7.5YR 4/4) mottles; common bioturbation 

grayish brown (10YR 3/2) clay with 2 red (2^YR 3/6) clay laminae; possible Arkansas 
River deposit 

gray (10YR 3/1) day, weak blocky structure; highly bioturbated; has the character¬ 
istics of an AB horizon 

gray (10YR 3/1) clay, some silt lenses; massive structure; no clay films; few 
(7.5YR 4/4) mottles 


These profiles reveal a natural levee deposit composed primarily of sand with some clay lenses and laminae along 
the edge to a maximum observed depth of 130cm. Stratification lines are prominent within this unit. As expected 
this natural levee deposit decreases in thickness with distance from the White River. 

Below this natural levee deposit are a series of finer grained sediments which exhibit a fining upward sequence 
from silt to clay. Characteristically the profiles reveal a silty deposit capped by several tens of centimeters of clay. 
These deposits reflect the creation of point bars (the coarser sediments) which were subsequently covered by 
lower energy vertical accretion deposits as the stream channel moved farther away. Two cydes of this sort of 
deposition are shown in the upper portions of Profiles 1 and 2. Soil development within these deposits is generally 
very weak and they show signs of massive bioturbation. 

At three locations (Profiles 1 and 2 and Core 3) we observed thin lenses of red day. These distinctive sediments, 
observed elsewhere in the study area in eroded banklines, are interpreted as deposits from the Arkansas River. 
Such an interpretation is consistent with Nuttall’s description of the reddish, turbid current of that stream. 

In the deepest of the profiles. Profile 1, a massive sand deposit was detected below these finer grained sediments. 

Summary 

The observations reported above indicate that the landscape in the project area is of very recent age. On the 
north side of the river this age is doubtless measured in decades. Most of the landscape on the south side is less 
than 200 years old; created by the migration of the White River since the mid-18th Century and by overbank 
deposition from the White, Mississippi, and Arkansas Rivers. The most dramatic of these flooding episodes was 
undoubtedly the disastrous flood of 1927. At the height of the flood (April 1927) the gaging station at the mouth 
of the White River reported an elevation of over 170 feet. Our project area would have been at least 20 feet 
underwater. Based on the analysis of available cartographic data and field observations, our geomorphic 
reconstruction of the project area shows that any cultural resources present in the project area would have to be 
less than 200 years old. 







Chapter 4. Historical Context 


French and Spanish Occupation, 1680-1800 

Although the lands near the mouths of the Arkansas and White Rivers may have been visited by the DeSoto 
expedition in 1541-1543 (Hudson 1985), by Marquette and Jolliet in 1673, and by La Salle in 1682, it was the 
founding of Arkansas Post by De Tonti in 1686 that marked the beginning of a permanent European presence 
in the area. For the next 120 years the establishments on the Arkansas River would be a center for trade with the 
Quapaw and other Indians in the interior of Arkansas, as well as a haven of safety for trading convoys traveling 
the Mississippi River. 

De Tonti left men at the Quapaw village of Osotouy to establish a trading post. Given the proximity of this large 
Quapaw village, generally believed to have been on the edge of the Grand Prairie Terrace, and of three other 
villages nearby on the Mississippi River, the prospect for trade looked good (Figure 16). For a lengthy discussion 
of the possible locations of the Quapaw villages, see Phillips, Ford, and Griffin 1968:392-419; the possible 
relationship of the village of Tourima to the project area is discussed in Chapter 5. 

De Tonti hoped to develop his trading post into a settlement, and offered two tracts of land to Canadian 
missionaries to settle there, but his plans were overly optimistic. The missionaries did not come until 1698, and 
were unable to establish a permanent mission. By that time a drop in the price of beaver had caused the King to 
place a moratorium on the beaver trade south of Canada and forced the closing of the post on the Arkansas 
(Coleman 1987:12-16). 

The next enterprise in the area was the colony established in 1721 through the efforts of John Law. Law was a 
banker who formed a joint stock company in Paris to obtain a monopoly on trade in Louisiana with the intention 
of growing rich from the proceeds of locating trading colonies there. The Arkansas River was chosen as the 
location of the first colony because it was thought that it would provide a trading route to the mines of Spanish 
Mexico. Law went bankrupt at about the same time the colonists arrived in Arkansas. The location chosen for 
the colony was on Little Prairie near the former location of De Tonti’s post The colony did not prosper. By 1723 
only 41 colonists remained, and by 1727 the number had dropped to 30 (Arnold 1985:7-10). 

Even after the Law colony failed, settlers and traders remained in the area, although sometimes hardly enough 
to be called a settlement (Arnold 1985:222-224). In 1749 the population included 31 whites (men, women, and 
children), 14 slaves, three horses, 29 bulls and steers, 60 cows and 29 pigs. Also listed in the same census were 
the voyageurs trading on the Arkansas, White and St. Francis Rivers (Vaudreuil Papers, LO 200). 

Life at the post settled into a routine of trading expeditions, providing hospitality for passing convoys, and 
maintaining friendship with the Indians. It was not an easy life, however. Unfriendly relations between the Quapaw 
and the Chickasaw kept tensions high, and in 1749 the post itself was attacked by the Chickasaw (Coleman 
1987:33-40). Weather sometimes ruined crops of both the Indians and the French, leaving supplies short for the 
winter, and forcing the garrison to seek help from Natchez or New Orleans (Vaudreuil Papers, LO 410, LO 434). 
Reacting to pressures to provide better protection for convoys, and to defend itself better, the location of the 
post was changed several times, although it was always on the Arkansas River (Arnold 1985:4,212-217; Coleman 
1987:137-148). 

As part of the treaty at the end of the French and Indian War, Louisiana was given to Spain in 1763. Life at the 
post of Arkansas continued much as always. The population was described by one visitor as “ ’about 10 families 
in the neighborhood of the Indian Village, which has near 200 families,’ ” but by 1798 when the last Spanish census 
was taken the population had grown to 344 free persons and 56 slaves (Arnold 1985:224). The area was returned 
to French sovereignty in 1800, but came under French control only in 1803, just in time to be transferred to the 
United States. 


25 









*4 i^/t Mmau- 

' 9.U^ - - Hi*” 


^ir ~ 
^uL. 

< 9Hje 


3 

Z 

Z 



Figure 16. Portion of Delisle Map of 1702 (Northwestern Louisiana University, 
Map No. 1068, sheet 4 of 10). 








One event may have taken {dace which had a direct bearing on Montgomery Point. Several sources state that 
Francis D’Armand, a French trader, established a post at the mouth of White River in 1766 on the location that 
later became known as Montgomery Point (Pope 1895:62; Shinn 1908:25; Halliburton 1978:103). Arnold 
(1985:226, n. 10) notes, however, that he found no mention of D’Armand in the Spanish records. 

American Settlement, 1800-1840 

By the time the United States took control of the study area in 1804 the population of the District of Arkansas 
was 368. These people lived at Arkansas Post, in the settlement at the mouth of the St. Francis River, and in a 
few other scattered settlements up the Arkansas River generally within about 50 miles of the Mississippi River 
(Halliburton 1978:57). 

Zadoc Cramer in his 1811 edition of The Navigator (Figure 17) described the mouth of the White River as an 
excellent landing, but mentioned no facilities there (Cramer 1811:187). In fact the area along the Mississippi 
River from the St. Francis settlement to the mouth of the Yazoo River was known as such absolute wilderness 
that when the “New Orleans,” the first steamboat on the Mississippi River, passed through the area in December 
1811, she stopped at the St Francis settlement and loaded up with all the wood she could carry and with all the 
supplies that were available. Two days after leaving the St. Francis, the "New Orleans” reached the mouth of the 
Arkansas River where she again took on wood (Dohan 1981:160). 

At about the same time Robert Clary settled on the Mississippi River about 11/2 miles above the mouth of the 
White River. This property became a preemption right which he sold to Patrick Cassidy in 1812, who in turn sold 
the property to John McLean in 1821 (Arkansas County Deed Record D:28-29). 

Thomas Nuttall visited McLean’s settlement, which he described as a house of entertainment, in January 1819. 
It took him two days to reach the cutoff to the Arkansas River, and he remarked that there were no settlements 
in that area because the land was subject to overflow (Nuttall 1980:71-76). 

Arkansas was also visited in 1819 by Timothy Flint, a Presbyterian missionary who wandered the lower Mississippi 
River valley for ten years. Flint gave this description of the area: 

We were swept round by the strong current of the Mississippi in our keel-boat between two green 
islands covered with rushes and cottonwood trees, into a small bay which receives the waters of White 
River. This is all a region of deep and universal inundation. There was from six to ten feet of water 
over all the bottoms; and we had a wide display of that spectacle so common in the spring on the 
Mississippi—a dense forest of the largest trees, vocal with the song of birds, matted with every species 
of tangled vegetation, and harbouring [sic] in great numbers the turkey-buzzard, and some species of 
eagles; and all this vegetation apparently rising from the bosom of dark and discoloured [sic] waters. 

I have never seen a deeper forest except of evergreens. The channel of White River was distinguished 
by its current, the green colour of its waters, compared with the white waters of the Mississippi, and 
by an open channel, marked by willows in full foliage, which so nearly resembled the leaves of the 
peach-tree, that I asked one of the boatmen who was familiar with the country, what kind of tree it was, 
who answered with much solemnity, that it was the wild peach... .The current came down the river at 
the rate of three miles an hour. It seemed about three hundred and fifty yards in width, and at this time 
had fifty feet of water in depth. In ascending we were struck with the grandeur of the forest, the immense 
size of the trees, and their dark green foliage. The inundation extends itself almost indefinitely on all 
sides. It is late in the season before the floods recede; and fever, musquitoes [sic], alligators, serpents, 
bears, and now and then parties of hunting Indians, are the only tenants of these woods. 

The river received its name from the Indians, on account of its pellucid waters. They are in appearance 
rather green than white; and we could see the huge cat-fish gamboling in the waters, among multitudes 
of fishes of all classes. We eagerly threw them the hook and line; but the flooded streams and swamps 
offered them such an abundance of food, that we tried to tempt them with our bait in vain. We made 
our way up this opening in the dark forest between five and six miles, when we discovered a lateral 
opening to the left. We rowed into it, and at its mouth were whirled round by an eddy. Presently, to 


27 







28 









our astonishment, the current took us through the lateral opening, which was nearly at right angles 
with the course of the river, and had nearly the same width and appearance with the river itself. We 
continued to float on through this deep and inundated forest six or seven miles, when at right angles 
to our course we discovered another opening. It was the Arkansas, moving on with a majestic current 
of waters of the colour of Arnotto die [yellowish red] (Flint 1968:183-184). 

Although Flint passed Montgomery Point in 1819 and again in 1822, he makes no mention of it (Flint 1968:204, 

211 ). 

In 1819 William Montgomery operated a tavern at Arkansas Post. The territorial legislature met at Montgomery's 
tavern; a regiment of Arkansas militia held its muster there; elections were held there; and travelers, important 
and otherwise, boarded there (Martin 1977:5-6). All of these activities gave Montgomery important commercial 
and political contacts. In February 1821, Montgomery bought McLean’s preemption right and moved his 
establishment to the mouth of White River (Arkansas County Deed Record C:684; Bearss and Brown 1971:207). 
The property became an important transshipment point for freight and passengers transferring from large 
Mississippi River boats to smaller boats for the Arkansas and White Rivers, and vice-versa (Figure 18). 

As the time approached for Arkansas to become a state, the United States Congress gave the territory ten sections 
of land to be sold to pay for building a public building (what is now known as the Old State Capitol in Little Rock). 
The land in Sections 30 and 31 ofTownship 8 south, Range 1 east occupied by William Montgomery, roughly 195 
acres, was chosen as part of this ten section donation. The land was then deeded to Montgomery in January 1834, 
and a patent issued to him in May of the same year (Arkansas State Land Office, Original Entry Records, Book 
96:70; Arkansas County Deed Record F:24). 

Several vivid descriptions of Montgomery’s Point survive from this period. William F. Pope visited there in 1832. 
He mentions a hotel building set up on “hi gh brick pillars [with] wide verandas on all sides.” Equally important 
and impressive were the “two large log warehouses.. ibr storing freight destined for points along the Arkansas 
and White rivers” (Pope 1895:62). 

More detailed is the description of Cassandra Lockwood who spent 21 days at Montgomery’s Point in 1833 while 
waiting for a boat to take her up the Arkansas River to Dwight Mission: 

This place of landing is called Montgomery’s Point & is known to be the greatest sink of iniquity on all 
the shore of the Mississippi. But this is the only place where travelers can stop who leave the Miss, to 
go up the Arkansaw. Here is but one family & no other inhabitants are to be found for many miles in 
any direction. The landlord is a slaveholder & lives in a two-story log house, which is surrounded by 
numerous little cabins, occupied by his servants. When we arrived, we found nearly 100 persons waiting 
for a passage up the river, which was so low that no boat could ascend. 

When our hostess returned, we found her quite a lady in her own estimation & if finery in dress & 
profusion of ornaments constituted a lady, she was one. But she was not able to read even the alphabet 
Her principal employment and greatest happiness seemed to be in smoking a long pipe, which you 
would invariably see extended from her mouth, wherever you should meet her. One of her daughters 
was married at the age of 13 & became a widow at 19... Tier brother, 10 years old, was accustomed 
to stand by his father’s side to learn to gamble. Such is a specimen of the education of these children. 

Mrs. Lockwood had nothing kind or complimentary to say about the manners or lifestyle at Montgomery’s Point 
(Thoburn 1955:207-208). 

The General Land Office surveyed Township 8 south. Ranges 1 east and 1 west, and Township 9 south, Range 1 
west between 1837 and 1844. The surveyors recorded roads along the north (left) bank of the White River and 
the south (right) bank of the Arkansas River. Scattered fields were shown on both banks of the Arkansas River, 
the south bank of the White River, and the west bank of the Mississippi River (General Land Office Records, 
Fifth Principal Meridian Plat Maps). Much of the land was claimed as soon as it was offered for sale - some as 
preemption claims, some with Choctaw certificates, some as outright purchase. By whatever method, most of the 








Figure 18. Montgomery Point: 1830 (Arkansas History Commission, Map No. 269 . 












land in these three townships passed to private ownership in the 1840s (Arkansas State Land Office, Original 
Entry Record, Book 96:70-72,81-87). 

The period from 1800-1840$ is the time when Euro-American settlement made its first permanent impact on the 
study area. The facilities at Montgomery’s Point were outside the actual project area, but by the end of this time 
period there were many settlers along the banks of all three rivers. 

The Civil War, 1861-1865 

The coming of the Civil War focused the attention of both the Union and the Confederacy on the importance of 
the Mississippi River as a highway through the South. Part of the grand strategy of the Union was to gain control 
of the river, and thereby cut the lines of communication and supply between the eastern part of the Confederacy 
and the states of the Trans-Mississippi west. This control was not easily won, however, for the Confederacy also 
understood the importance of the river. 

One of the important battles in the struggle to control the Mississippi River was fought at Arkansas Post. The 
Confederates had established a base at Arkansas Post from which to raid Union shipping on the Mississippi In 
January 1863 Union forces attacked and captured the Post, gaining control of the mouths of both the Arkansas 
and the White Rivers (Bearss and Brown 1971:235-285; Coleman 1987:103-118). 

Two facilities grew up at the mouth of the White Riven an army camp and a freedmen’s camp. The army camp 
was much the same as earlier transshipment establishments. Troops and freight waited there while transferring 
from Mississippi River boats to those bound up the White River to the railroad at Duvall’s Bluff. Although the 
facilities were far from luxurious, the soldiers found the trip by steamboat a welcome relief from marching (Sperry 
n.d.:120-121). 

The second facility at the mouth of the White River was a camp for freedmen. As the Union army occupied the 
South, some slaves left their homes and followed the army. By 1864 many Union commanders were trying to deal 
with the large numbers of freedmen by establishing plantations or camps or by trying to provide other means for 
the freedmen to support themselves. The freedmen’s camp at the mouth of the White River was run by a 
contractor. With a total population of 203 in 1864, including 65 infirm adults and 43 children, most of the 95 
workers chopped or corded wood, presumably for steamboats. Most of these freedmen had come from 
Mississippi although some were from Arkansas and Alabama (Freedmen’s Bureau Records, entry370, “Registra¬ 
tion of Freed People at the Mouth of White River Ark, Feb. 1st 1864”). 

A map made in 1864 shows a road running along the north (left) bank of the White River to its mouth, so both 
of these camps were probably in that area (Figure 19). Another map made at about the same time shows scattered 
homes along the south bank of the Arkansas River, and dense settlement along Red Fork Bayou (Figure 20). 

Steamboat Trade, 1865-1927 

The entire history of Montgomery Point is tied to the systems of navigation and commerce on the Mississippi 
Arkansas, and White Rivers. Although the Mississippi River was a highway of trade from the beginning of the 
French period, it was not until after the United States purchased Louisiana, and free passage down the river to 
New Orleans was guaranteed that a real system of commerce developed. 

Be ginning with flatboats and keelboats, expanding during the steamboat era, and continuing into the mid-twen¬ 
tieth century the basic outline of this commercial system has changed little in almost two hundred years. 
Downbound boats were loaded with agricultural products or other natural resources; upbound boats carried 
merchandise or manufactured goods (passengers, of course, went both ways). This is a drastic over-simplification 
of a complex system, but now let us focus on how the larger system affected Montgomery Point. 

U ntil the railroads were built in the 1870s and 1880s, the only reasonable option for shipping agricultural products, 
especially cotton, was by boat. In the early years a farmer might build a flatboat, float his cargo to New Orleans, 
sell both his goods and his boat and walk home. But beginning as early as the 1820s steamboats became the major 





Mouth of 
Vhrte River 



32 






Figure 20. Portion of Desha County: 1864 (U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, RG 77:Z48). 

















mode of transportation for commerce. Three cities—St. Louis, Memphis, and New Orleans—provided the major 
markets for products from throughout the Mississippi valley. Both independent boats and shipping lines running 
a number of boats established trade routes between these cities and from these cities to points along the various 
tributaries of the Mississippi, including Little Rock, Pine Bluff, BatesviUe, and hundreds of small landings. 

Steamboat trade could reach the places along the Arkansas and White Rivers in either of two ways. A boat might 
run a direct trade, for example from Little Rock to Memphis; or one boat might carry the goods and passengers 
to an intermediate, connecting point to be transferred to another boat for the rest of the trip. Montgomery Point 
was just such a transshipment point, for interchanging people and freight from Mississippi River boats to those 
that traded up the Arkansas and White Rivers. (Napoleon, at the mouth of the Arkansas River, served the same 
purpose). 

Although this process is usually thought of as changing from a large boat to a smaller one, this was not necessarily 
the case. The distinction tended instead to be a commercial one of chosen trade routes and connections. The 
smallest boats were able to navigate the Mississippi; the largest boats could come up the Arkansas and the White, 
at least during high water. There were problems from time to time with the low water at the bar at the mouth of 
the White River (and at the cutoff near Montgomery Point) but this troubled all boats, not just the biggest. 

Steamboat trade into the Arkansas and White River valleys grew as the population grew. It was well established 
by the 1830s; suffered during the Civil War; and reached its peak between 1875 and 1900. Three hundred and 
twenty-three boats are known to have traded on either the Arkansas or White River. An additional twenty-one 
boats traded on both. Of this number 17% were in business before the Civil War; 13% were on the rivers during 
the Civil War; and 69% traded there after the war ended. These figures are not entirely accurate because they 
do not take into account any boats that may have been in business during more than one of these time periods. 
The figures do, however, show the general pattern ot the growth of this trade. 

By the 1870s trade began shifting away from the rivers to the railroads which could offer more reliable schedules 
and which were not as dependent on Mother Nature. At first railroads built from a river towi. into the interior 
parts of Arkansas to take advantage of the established steamboat trade. But as the rail net grew and connected 
large parts of eastern Arkansas with Little Rock and Memphis the demand for river transportation (and 
transshipment at Montgomery Point) declined. 

A letter written in 1875 describing a trip on the “Thompson Dean” between Memphis and New Orleans picking 
up cotton does not mention a stop at Montgomery Point in an extensive list of landings that includes “Laconia, 
Carsons, Waxhaw, White River, Terrene, Floryville, Riverton, Napoleon,..(Way 1983:453). The White River 
landing mentioned was at what is now called the “old mouth” of the river (Figure 21). 

River trade continued to serve small landings and plantations that were close to the rivers. The new trade that 
grew using barges and towboats was (and is) a direct trade that had no need for transshipment facilities. 

One other aspect of steamboat trade and navigation has also had an impact on the study area. Steamboats were 
fragile creatures. They sprang leaks, hit snags, exploded boilers, caught fire. They sank. If the wreck was not too 
destructive, if the water was not too deep, if the equipment was available, the boat or its cargo might be salvaged; 
but most of the time they were not. Records giving the locations of sinkings are notoriously inaccurate about the 
site of the wrecks because the information was often recorded days after the event when someone with authority 
reached the boat’s port of registration. Thus a boat reported wrecked at the mouth of White River might have 
sunk at the intersection of the White with the Mississippi, or where the cutoff near Montgomery Point entered 
the Mississippi, or in the Mississippi River either above or below the mouth of the White River or that cutoff, or 
in the White River several miles above its mouth. The following list is included to give some idea of the possibility 
of wrecks in the area. It is not intended to be an all-inclusive list, and it must be used with an appreciation for the 
vagueness of the locations. 


34 




Figure 21. Montgomery Point: 1879-1880 to 1928 (U. S. Army Corps of Engineers 1975). 



35 


















Montgomery Point Steamboat Wrecks 


Name 

Date 

Fort Smith 

1871; Oct 27 

Frontier City 

1861; Jan 4 

General Chas. H. Tomkins 

1891? (boat built 1878) 

Goldena 

1865; Dec 31 

I Go 

1864; June 12 

Linton 

1869; Oct 25 

Lizzie Gill 

1866; Jan (early) 

Mattie 

1867; May 14 

Mercury 

1867; Mar 13 

Red Wing 

1860; May 25 

Tom Morgan 

1877; Nov 10 

W. A. Caldwell 

1870; Dec 6 


Place 

1/2 mile below the foot of the cut off on White River 

head of Smith’s Cut-Off near the mouth of Arkan¬ 
sas River 

1/2 mile above mouth of White River 

in cut-off between Arkansas and White Rivers, 
wreck of Linton nearby 

burned at Arkansas Post 

head of cut-off between Arkansas and White Rivers 

at the mouth of White River 

snagged at Cut Off, AR—this is not the same boat 
as the New Mattie, sunk in 1900 

cut off between White and Arkansas Rivers in 50 
feet of water, 15 feet over top of roof 

snagged at Smith’s Cut-Off 

exploded at head of Scrubgrass Bend, seventeen 
miles above mouth of White River 

snagged in Caldwell’s Bend in cut-off between 
White and Arkansas Rivers 


All information taken from Way (1983). 

With the end of the steamboat era, Montgomery Point returned to a wild and uninhabited state, probably as early 
as 1900, certainly following the 1927 flood. Even though the people have gone, the Mississippi and White Rivers 
have continued to affect the study area. 

Throughout its history the area at the confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers was a part of a riverine 
trade system. From the time of the French voyageurs the area was recognized as a strategic location and a gateway 
to the interior. Established as a transshipment point, Montgomery Point became an integral part of the system 
linking the commercial cities of the Mississippi River with the cities, towns, and other communities of the 
Arkansas and White River valleys. It prospered for much of the nineteenth century, but its fortunes were tied to 
the river. When that trade adjusted to the competition of the railroads, the transshipment facilities became 
superfluous, but the river itself continued as a highway for trade and transportation. 


36 







Chapter 5. Summary and Recommendations 


Summary 

The preceding chapters have presented the results of our literature search and geomorphic reconstruction of the 
project area as well as our field investigations. The following discussion is a recapitulation of these findings as 
they relate to particular periods of the possible human use of the project area. This discussion is illustrated with 
maps which show the development of the landscape within the study area from 1765 to 1977. We begin this 
discussion with a consideration of possible Native American use of the project area. 

Native American Occupation of the Study and Project Area. There are two basic issues to consider regarding 
the possible existence of pre-Euro-American cultural remains within the project area. These are the location of 
the previously recorded site, 3DE9, and the locations of late 17th Century Quapaw sites referenced by French 
explorers. 

Ac rding to the accounts of late 18th Century French explorers, including Marquette and Jolliet, LaSalle, de 
Toad, and Joutel, there seem to have been four separate Quapaw villages situated in the general vicinity of the 
confluences of the Arkansas, White, and Mississippi Rivers. The location of these villages, in terms of 1951 
geography, was the subject of a detailed study made by Phillip Phillips (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin 1968:392-419). 
In this study Phillips used large scale geologic maps of the region developed by Harold Fisk in conjunction with 
a review of important secondary sources as well as primary documents. Phillips concluded this detailed review 
of the documentary evidence and geologic maps by stating 

The rather meager conclusions of this long inquiry can be set down briefly as follows: 

1) Osotouy is the Wallace Site (17-K-3) or very near it. 

2) Tourima is on Big Island either in the vicinity of Moore Lake or in the northeastern comer of the 
island. In either case, the chances of finding it, if it still easts, are remote. 

3) Tongigua is either on or near Montgomery Island or in the vicinity of Henrico, Arkansas, but in 
either case its chances of having survived are extremely slight. 

4) Kappa is either near Desha, Arkansas, or a few miles below Knowlton, Arkansas. In either case, 
there is a possibility that the site exists and may yet be found. (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin 1968:417,418) 

Of these four sites, the only one Phillips suggested as located on Big Island was Tourima, which was abandoned 
by 1700. Phillips’ best estimation for its location is several miles to the south and west of our project area but he 
lists as an alternative, though not favored choice, for its location the "northeastern comer of the island." For this 
reason we quote the conclusion of Phillips’ specific discussion of the location of Tourima which is based on a 
number of specific assumptions regarding Joutel’s accounts and Fisk’s geographic reconstruction. 

If the reasonableness of this postulation be granted, the first place to look for Tourima would be in the 
vicinity of Moore Lake and Knowlton Bayou, specifically along the outside bend of the prominent 
Stage 16 Mississippi meander at this point. We may infer that the mouth of Joutel’s Arkansas was on 
an outside bend, because on entering the Mississippi the Indian canoemen immediately crossed over 
to catch the slack water on the other side. According to Fisk’s plate 22, a considerable portion of the 
Stage 16 bankline in this vicinity can be traced, so there is a reasonable chance that the site still exists. 
When we talk about looking for it, however, we might as well admit to using the words in a figurative 
sense. Big Island is not the sort of place where archaeological sites are found, unless by accident 
Second choice, based on the later Stage 17 conditions, would also be on Big Island, in the bight of land 
between White River and Montgomery Island, not quite so hopeless perhaps, since there are a few, 
probably ephemeral, clearings shown on the Mississippi River Commission quadrangle in the vicinity. 






After bringing the reader through all this tiresome and possible unintelligible argument, we have to 
conclude sorrowfully that the chances of actually finding the site of Tourima are so remote as to be 
practically non-existent” (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin 1968:416). 

If we compare the location of the confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers in 1765 (Figure 22) with the 
landforms as shown on Figure 23 it is clear that the former bankline noted in Sections 1 and 2 on Figure 23 is that 
of the White River in 1765. Thus the landforms designated as HWPB to the northeast of this bankline must have 
been created at some time during the late 18th and/or early 19th Centuries. In fact, a comparison of the White 
River course in 1765 with that documented for the period 1829-1840 (Figure 24) clearly illustrates the creation 
of this landform (which is essentially that portion of our project area on Big Island; Figure 3) by the movement 
of the White River during this period. Since this landform was created primarily as a result of lateral accretion 
it cannot contain cultural materials (except those which may have been washed in by the river) older than the 
middle of the 18th Century. The recent age of this landscape determined by map analysis was completely 
supported by field observations. If the village of Tourima was located in this general vicinity it would have to be 
south and west of the 1765 bankline and thus out of our project area. 

Obviously this analysis has consequences for the location of 3DE9. Assuming that 3DE9 was occupied no later 
than 1700 (Tourima is reported to have been abandoned by that date; Figure 16) it cannot be situated at or near 
its present mapped location. 



38 























Figure 23. Landforms In the Study Area. 





















American Settlement. 1800-1840 . As Chapter 4 has indicated the confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers 
was an important location in the early Euro-American settlement of Arkansas. Beginning in the early 1800s there 
was a settlement at or near this confluence which offered travelers food and lodging, served as a supplier of wood 
and supplies to navigation, and functioned as a transshipment point for trade along the Arkansas and Mississippi 
Rivers. This location which became known as Montgomery’s Landing was, however, several miles east of our 
project area, as the Mississippi River had meandered to the east causing the White River to lengthen its channel 
to reach it (Figure 24). Thus the various facilities mentioned by travel accounts from the early 19th Century cannot 
be expected to be found in the project area. 


The Civil War. 1861-1865. The confluence of the White River with the Mississippi River was also an important 
location during the Civil War. As noted above both an army encampment and a freedmen’s camp were situated 
here. But during this period the Mississippi River had continued to move eastward placing such activities even 
further from the project area (Figure 25). 

Steamhoat Trade. 1865-1927 . By the early 20th Century the confluence of the White and Mississippi Rivers was 
no longer an important site for river traffic, as cargo shipment by rail had become an established and reliable 
means by which to transport goods within the region. What little activity may have been ongoing at or near the 
confluence of our two rivers was, however, even further away from our project area as shown in Figure 26. This 
situation was drastically changed in 1953 when the Mississippi River again meandered through our area, 
destroying all remains of the Montgomery L a n di n g (Figure 27). 


The only possible remains of this important aspect of the Euro-American settlement of the region which could 
exist within our project area would have been created by navigation disasters resulting in abandoned shipwrecks 
within the 18th and 19th Century White River channels. 



40 













Figure 25. White River Channels: 1829-40/1880-81 




















Ml 000 
3704400 


UTM GRID 



44 WOT 

3704000 


METERS 


Figure 27. White River Channels: 1939/1977 


We have considered several lines of evidence regarding the possibility of shipwrecks in the vicinity of our project 
area. There do exist reports of wrecks within the general area. While none of those reports place the location of 
specific wrecks in our project area these reports may not be entirely accurate and they are almost certainly not 
complete. 

While it is dear that we cannot completely discount the possibility of such remains in our project area it is 
important that we consider the data from three other sources. 

1) During the period of low water in the summer of 1988 the US Army Engineer Districts, Vicksburg and 
Memphis, separately conducted aerial surveys of the Mississippi River for the express purpose of locating 
evidence regarding possible shipwreck locations. Both of the surveys passed over our project area. Neither 
observed any indication of sunken vessels in the vicinity of our project area. 

2) Dredging operations in the White River channel since the opening of the McCIeUan-Kerr Arkansas River 
Navigation System have failed to encounter any evidence of sunken vessels in this portion of the channel. 

3) A series of deep (40m) borings conducted in support of the planning for this project also failed to encounter 
any evidence of deeply buried materials. 

20th Century Developments . As we indicated earlier Montgomery Point was largely uninhabited by the early 
20th Century. Flood waters inundated the area to considerable depth in 1927. The traders and the farmers have 
again been replaced by the hunters and fishermen. 


42 












References Cited 


Arkansas County 

Deed Records. Available on microfilm at the Arkansas History Commission, Little Rock, 
Arkansas. 

Arkansas History Commission 

Map Collection. Little Rock, Arkansas. 

Arkansas State Land Office 

Original Entry Records. Available on microfilm at the Arkansas History Commission, Little 
Rock, Arkansas. 

Arnold, Morris S. 

1985 Unequal Laws Unto A Savage Race: European Legal Traditions in Arkansas, 1686-1836. Univer¬ 

sity of Arkansas Press, Fayetteville, Arkansas. 

Bates, R. L. and J. A. Jackson 

1980 Glossary of Geology. American Geological Institute, Falls Church, Virginia. 

Bearss, Edwin C. and Lenard E. Brown 

1971 Arkansas Post National Memorial, Arkansas: Structural History, Post of Arkansas, 1804-1863, and 

Civil War Troop Movement Maps, January, 1863. Eastern Service Center, Office of History and 
Historic Architecture, National Park Service, Washington, D. C. 

Bennett, W. J., Jr., Phyllis Breland and Lawson Smith 

1989 Cultural Resources and Geomorphological Reconnaissance of the McGellan-Kerr Arkansas River 

Navigation System Pools 1 through 9. Archeological Assessments Report No. 79. Report sub¬ 
mitted to the U.S. Army Engineer District, Little Rock, Little Rock, Arkansas. 

Coleman, Roger E. 

1987 The Arkansas Post Story, Arkansas Post National Monument. Professional Papers No. 12, 

Division of History, Southwest Cultural Resources Center, Southwest Region, National Park 
Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico. 

Cramer, Zadoc 

1811 The Navigator. Cramer, Spear & Eichbaum, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 

Davis, Hester A., and Charles M. Baker 

1974 Emergency Survey and Testing in the Lower White River and Arkansas Post Canal Area. Arkansas 

Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 21, Fayetteville, Arkansas. 

Dickinson, Samuel D., and S. C. Dellinger 

1940 A Survey of the Historic Earthenware of the Lower Arkansas Valley. Texas Archeological and 
Paleontological Society Bulletin 12:76-96. Reprinted in The Arkansas Archeologist 4(4):9-18. 

Dohan, Mary Helen 

1981 Mr. Roosevelt’s Steamboat Dodd, Mead & Company, New York. 

Rsk, Harold N. 

1944 Geological Investigation of the Alluvial Valley of the Lower Mississippi River. War Department, 

Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army. Mississippi River Commission, Publication No. 52. 
Washington, D. C 








Flint, Timothy 

1968 Recollections of the Last Ten Years in the Valley of the Mississippi. Edited by George R. Brooks. 
Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, Illinois. 

Ford, James A. 

1961 Menard Site: The Quapaw Village of Osotouy on the Arkansas River. In Anthropological Papers 

of the American Museum of Natural History, VoL 48, Part 2. New York, New York. 

Freedmen’s Bureau Records 

Arkansas Held Office Records. National Archives, RG 105. Available on microfilm at the 
Arkansas History Commission, Little Rock, Arkansas. 

General Land Office 

Fifth Principal Meridian Plat Maps. Available on microfilm at the Arkansas History Commis¬ 
sion, Little Rock, Arkansas. 

Halliburton, W. H. 

1978 A Topographical Description and History of Arkansas County, Arkansas from 1541 to 1875. 
Reprint edition, Southern Historical Press, Easley, South Carolina. 

Holder, Preston 

1957a Archeological Held Research on the Problem of the Locations of Arkansas Post, 1686-1803, a 
Preliminary Report on Work in Progress at the Menard Mounds Site, Field Season: Fall, 1956 
Spring, 1957. Ms. submitted to the National Park Service, Region One, Richmond, Virginia. 

1957b Archeological Held Research on the Problem of the Locations of Arkansas Post, 1686-1803. 

Ms. submitted to the National Park Sendee, Region One, Richmond, Virginia. 

Kolb, C. R., et al. 

1968 Geological Investigation of the Yazoo Basin, Lower Mississippi Valley. Technical Report No. 3- 
480, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi 

Martin, Patrick E. 

1977 An Inquiry into the Locations and Characteristics of Jacob Brigpit’s Trading Post and William 

Montgomery’s Tavern. Research Series No. 11, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville, 
Arkansas. 

Moore, Clarence B. 

1908 Certain Mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi. P. C. Stockhasusen, Philadephia. 

Moorehead, Warren K. 

1931 Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut. 

Northwestern Louisiana University 

Map Collection, Cammie G. Henry Research Center, Natchitoches, Louisiana. 

NuttalL, Thomas 

1980 A Journal of Travels into the Arkansa Territory, During the Year 1819. Edited by Savoie 
Lottinville. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Oklahoma. 

Phillips, Philip 

1970 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin, Mississippi 1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody 

Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, No. 60. 


Phillips, Philip, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin 






1968 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 1940-1947. Papers of the Peabody 
Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol XXV, 1951. 
Reprint edition Kraus Reprint Corp., New York. 

Pope, Judge William F. 

1895 Early Days in Arkansas. Frederick W. Allsopp, little Rock, Arkansas. 

Saucier, Roger T. 

1967 Geological Investigation of the Boeuf-Tensas Basin, Lower Mississippi Valley. Technical Report 
No. 3-757, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Missis 
sippi 

1974 Quaternary Geology of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Research Series No. 6, Arkansas Ar¬ 

cheological Survey, Fayetteville, Arkansas. 

Scholtz, James A. 

1971 Investigations at the Roland Mound Site, 3AR30, Arkansas County, Arkansas, 1966. Ms. on file, 
National Park Service, Southeast Region and the University of Arkansas Museum, Fayetteville, 
Arkansas. 

Scholtz, James A., and Michael P. Hoffman 

1968 An Archeological Survey of the Arkansas River Navigation Projects in Arkansas. Ms. on file. 
University of Ar kans as Museum, Fayetteville, Arkansas. 

Shinn, Josiah H. 

1908 Pioneers and Makers of Arkansas. Genealogical and Historical Publishing Company, 

Washington, D. C. 


Smith, F. L. 

1979 Geological Investigation of the Yazoo Basin, Lower Mississippi Valley. Technical Report No. 3- 

480, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi 

Smith, Lawson M. 

1988 Geomorphological Reconnaissance of the Arkansas/White River Cutoff Containment Area. 

Geotechnical Laboratory, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Vick¬ 
sburg, Mississippi 

Smith, F. L., and R. T. Saucier 

1971 Geological Investigation of the Western Lowlands Area, Lower Mississippi Valley. Technical 

Report No. S-71-5, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, 
Mississippi 


Smith, L. M., and P. L. Breland 

1989 Geomorphic Reconnaissance of the Me Clellan -Kerr Arkansas River Navigation System. Project 

Report, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi 


Sperry, A. F. 

n.<L History of the 33rd Iowa Infantry Volunteer Regiment, 1863-6. Mills & Company, Des Moines, 
Iowa, 1866; Reprint edition. Rare Book Publishers, Pine Bluff, Arkansas. 


Thobum, Joseph B., annotator. 

1955 Letters of Cassandra Sawyer Lockwood: Dwight Mission, 1834. Chronicles of Oklahoma 33:202- 
237. 


Thomas, Cyrus 




1985 Report on the Mound Explorations of the Bureau of Ethnology. Reprinted. Smithsonian Institu¬ 

tion Press. Washington, D. C. Originally published 1894, Government Printing Office, 
Washington, D.C. 

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 

Civil Works Map File. Cartographic Archives, National Archives, Washington, D. C. 

1939 Big Island 15-Minute Quadrangle, Arkansas-Mississippi. U.S. Army Engineer District, Vicks¬ 
burg, Mississippi 

1975 Master Index: Upper and Lower Mississippi River Surveys for Period 1879-80 to 1928. Vol. 2, Mis¬ 
sissippi River Commission, Vicksburg, Mississippi. 

1977 Big Island 15-Minute Quadrangle, Arkansas-Mississippi. U.S. Army Engineer District, Vicks¬ 
burg, Mississippi. 

1988 1988Flood Control and Navigation Maps of the Mississippi River. 56th edition. Lower Missis¬ 
sippi Valley Division, Vicksburg, Mississippi 

1989 Montgomery Point Lock and Dam, Geotechnical Report: Appendix C Concept, Geotechnical 
Design Analysis. U. S. Army Engineer District, Little Rock, Arkansas. 

Vaudreuil Papers 

Papers of Pierre de Rigaud De Vaudreuil, The Huntington Library, San Marino, California. 
Walker, John W. 

1971 Excavation of the Arkansas Post Branch of the Bank of the State of Arkansas, Arkansas Post 
National Memorial. Ms. submitted to Southeast Archeological Center, National Park Service, 
Macon, Georgia. 

Way, Frederick, Jr., compiler. 

1983 Way’s Packet Directory, 1848-1983. Ohio University, Athens, Ohio. 

Westbury, William A. 

1976 Archeological Assessment of Arkansas Post. Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas. 
Wilson, Rex L. 

1966 Archeological Explorations at Arkansas Post, 1966. Ms. submitted to Southwest Archeological 
Center, National Park Service, Globe, Arizona. 






