iWitfW 


I 'A' I 


US Army Corps 
of Engineers 

Waterways Experiment 
Station 


Legacy Resource Management Program 

Native American Access 

to Reiigious and Sacred Sites 

on Department of Defense Instaiiations 

by Paul R. Nickens 

Environmental Laboratory 

Richard W. Stoffle, Diane Austin, Brian Fulfrost 
University of Arizona 



Approved For Public Release; Distribution Is Unlimited 


. » 


93-23||1 ^ ^ 


93 lO 5 024 


Prepared for Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
of Defense for the Environment 













The contents of this report are not to be used for advertising, 
publication, or promotional purposes. Citation of trade names 
does not constitute an offtcial endorsement or approval of the use 
of such commercial products. 


PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAHSK 





Legacy Resource 
Management Program 


Technical Report £1-93-15 
August 1993 


Native American Access 

to Reiigious and Sacred Sites 

on Department of Defense Instaiiations 

by Paul R. Nickens 

Environmental Laboratory 

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
Waterways Experiment Station 
3909 Halls Ferry Road 
Vicksburg, MS 39180-6199 

Richard W. Stoffle, Diane Austin. Brian Fulfrost 

Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology 
University of Arizona 
Tucson, AZ 85721 


Final report 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 


Prepared for U.S. Department of Defense 

Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
of Defense for the Environment 
Washington, DC 22202 









Waterways Experiment Station Cataloging>in*Publication Data 

Native American access to religious and sacred Site on Department of 
Defense installations / by Paul R. Nickens... [et al.]; prepared for U.S. 
Department of Defense, Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for the Environment. 

40 p.: ill.; 28 cm. — (Technical report; EL-93-15) 

Includes bibliographical references. 

1. Cultural property, Protection of — United States. 2. Indians of 
North America — Freedom of religion. 3. Natural areas — United 
States. 4. Sacred space. I. Nickens, Paul. II. United States. Office of 
the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Environment). III. U.S. 
Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station. IV. Legacy Resource 
Management Program. V. Title. VII. Series: Technical report (U.S. 
Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station); EL-93-15 

















Contents 


Preface.v 

1— Introduction.1 

Background .1 

Purpose and Objectives .2 

Organization of the Report.3 

2— Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues.4 

Definitions.4 

Access Issues and Sacred Sites.7 

Department of Defense Policies . 10 

3— Survey of CXirrent Native American Access Programs. 12 

Bibliographic Searches. 13 

Methods . 13 

Results . 13 

Telephone Contacts. 14 

Methods . 14 

Results . 14 

General Issues . 15 

Awareness. 15 

Priorities . 16 

Access to facilities . 17 

Level of Interaction with Native Groups . 18 

Level 1: Facilities with known sites but no interactions with 

Native American groups .20 

Level 2: Facilities with limited interactions with Native 

American groups .20 

Level 3: Facilities with sustained interactions with Native 
American groups not governed by sprecific tribal 

agreements or policies.21 

Level 4; Facilities with formal agreements/policies specific to 

Native American groups .22 

Special Topics .25 

Base realignment and closure.25 

Involvement with other government agencies.25 

Aircraft flyovers.26 


iii 






































Withdrawn lands.26 

Lands returned to Native American groups .27 

Summary.27 

4—Conclusions and Recommendations .28 

References .31 

Appendix A: Bibliographic Citations Regarding Native 

American Access to Military Installations .\1 

Appendix B; Telephone Survey Questionnaire.B1 

SF298 


iv 

















Preface 


The report herein was prepared as part of the Education, Public Awareness, 
and Outdoor Recreation Task Area of the Department of Defense Legacy 
Resource Management Program. The overall program is managed by the 
Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Environment. The 
Education, Public Awareness, and Outdoor Recreation Task Area is managed 
at the U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station (WES). 

Mr. Michael R. Waring, Stewardship Branch, Natural Resources Division 
(NRD), Environmental Laboratory (EL), WES, is the Task Area Manager, 

Dr. Paul R. Nickens, Resource Analysis Branch (RAB), NRD, EL, WES, 
and Dr. Richard W. Stoffle, Ms. Diane Austin, and Mr. Brian Fulfrost, Bureau 
of Applied Research in Anthropology, University of Arizona, coauthored the 
report. The work was completed under the general supervision of Mr. Roger 
Hamilton, Chief, RAB; Mr. J. L. Decell, Acting Chief, NRD; and Dr. John 
Harrison, Director, EL. 

At the time of publication of this report. Director of WES was Dr. Robert 
W. Whalin. Commander was COL Bruce K. Howard, EN. 

This report should be cited as follows: 

Nickens, P. R., Stoffle, R. W., Austin, D., and Fulfrost, B. 

(1993). “Native American access to religious and sacred sites on 
Department of Defense installations,” Technical Report EL-93-15, 

U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, 

MS. 














1 introduction 


Background 

In 1990, the Congress of the United States passed legislation establishing a 
“Legacy Resource Management Program” (LRMP) within the U.S. Department 
of Defense (DoD), Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the 
Environment. Subsequent funding of the program by Congress in 1991 ini¬ 
tiated a broad spectrum of activities designed to support and enhance DoD 
stewardship of significant and often irreplaceable natural and cultural resources 
found on some 25 miUion acres' managed by DoD in the United States. 

The LRMP was given nine legislative purposes designed to create better 
integration of resource conservation with the dynamic requirements of military 
missions (U.S. Department of Defense 1991). Among these, legislative pur¬ 
pose number eight calls for the LRMP to establish educational, public access, 
and recreational programs designed to increase public appreciation, awareness, 
and support for national environmental initiatives resulting from the overall 
program. To fulfill the mandate of this particular puipose, a task area entitled 
“Education, Public Awareness, and Recreation” was established and assigned 
to the U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station (WES). 

The goal of this task area is to achieve compliance with the specified 
LRMP legislative purpose by addressing the following objectives 
(U.S. Department of Defense 1991): 

a. Determine resources and activities requiring public access. 

b. Identify legal liabilities associated with providing access to such 
resources. 

c. Determine potential methods to minimize potential liability. 

d. Analyze effectiveness of current DoD public relations, 
education, and access programs. 


' To convert acres to square meters, multiply by 4,046,873. 


Chapter 1 Introduction 


1 









e. Develop a conceptual framework for enhancing understanding and 
appreciation of natural and cultural resources within DoD and by the 
general public. 


Purpose and Objectives 

Within the task area, resources or activities requiring public access are 
divided into three broad categories; 

a. Cultural resources (e.g., spiritual sites or burial grounds). 

b. Fish and wildlife (e.g., hunting, fishing, and management activities). 

c. Miscellaneous activities (e.g., grazing leases, timber activities, scientific 
study access, and recreational pursuits). Issues associated with most of 
these resources/activities, including Native American access to natural 
resources, are discussed in a report by Bumgardner (1992). For the 
purposes of this report. Native Americans include American Indians, 
Native Alaskans, and Native Hawaiians. 

This document focuses on access issues related to some particular cultural 
resources, specifically those that arc herein designated as “sacred sites” for 
present-day Native American groups. Other terms have been variously used to 
define these sites; e.g., “sites of cultural significance,” “traditional cultural 
properties,” and “sacred geography.” Usually, these places involve either 
practice of Native American religion, taking of natural resources, or traditional 
sacred resources. More often than not, all of these characteristics may apply to 
a particular resource or locality since Native American cultural practices are so 
interrelated that religious activities cannot easily be separated from subsistence, 
family life, or other individual or group behaviors. For the purposes of this 
report, N?.f''"* Americans inrlude American Indians, Native Alaskans, and 
Native Hawaiians. 

Concerns with the impacts of military activities on Native American sacred 
sites that may be located on DoD installations cannot be fully delineated at this 
time since none of the services has systematically identified and included such 
places in their cultural resources inventories. Many DoD military and admin 
istrative activities have the potential for creating impacts of one type or 
another upon sacred sites, including ground and aviation training, base/facility 
expansion, realignment or closure, and management practices of military 
lands. The issues related to access are reviewed in this report. 

The specific objectives guiding preparation of this report are as follows: 

a. Provide a definition of the types of sacred sites that are known to or 
may occur on DoD installations in the United States. 


2 


Chapter 1 Introduction 



b. Identify legal and other kinds of issues associated with Native Ameri¬ 
can access to these sites. 

c. Evaluate the status of current policies and procedures concerning Native 
American access to DoD installations, especially as they relate to sacred 
sites. 

d. Provide recommendations for increasing DoD awareness of the relevant 
issues in this area and for achieving more knowledgeable management 
and protection of such resources. 


Organization of the Report 

The body of the report is subdivided into three parts. Following the 
introduction, Chapter 2 examines the nature of Native American sacred sites 
and their place within the management of cultural resources on military lands. 
Issues related to access to these places are also examined, including the legal 
basis for allowing access. In addition, access to archaeological or certain cul¬ 
tural materials, to information regarding these materials, and to the consultation 
process governing the treatment of these materials is discussed. Chapter 3 
covers the results of a bibliographic search and telephone survey that was 
conducted to systematically assess current policies concerning Native American 
access to and consultation with DoD installations, with the focus being on 
access to sacred sites. Included in this discussion are some examples of for¬ 
malized agreements with native groups concerning access and consultation. 

The final section of the report offers recommendations, based on the findings, 
for increasing the level of awareness regarding these resources and for creating 
better management practices. 


Chapter 1 Introduction 


3 











2 Sacred Sites and Related 
Access Issues 


This chapter seeks to accomplish two results. The first is to review work¬ 
ing definitions of various terms having to do with those resources designated 
as “cultural,” working downward from a comprehensive definition to a more 
specific one that outlines the kinds of sites under discussion in this report. 

The second subject covered below is a brief review of the relevant issues con¬ 
cerning access to the resources and consultation processes in question. The 
aim of this section is to develop a context for managers to better understand 
the conceptual basis of sacred sites, especially from a Native American point 
of view, and to address the issues that managers will need to cope with in 
providing protection and preservation of such resources. 


Definitions 

The generic term “cultural resource” is used by different people in a variety 
of ways, depending on the professional interests of the user. For the purposes 
of this report, the definitions used by the Legacy Cultural Resources Task Area 
will be followed. These definitions, developed by the Department of the Army 
(DOA), are used for policy and compliance with the National Historic Pres¬ 
ervation Act (NHPA), the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the 
Archaeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA), the American Indian Reli¬ 
gious Freedom Act (AIRFA), the Native American Graves Protection and 
Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), and related public laws and Federal regulations. 

A complete review of the mandates of these acts and subsequent regulations, 
particularly as they pertain to agency consultation requirements with Native 
American Tribes, can be found in the Legacy report "Native American Consul¬ 
tation: A Review of Federal Agency Policies” (Briuer, Freezor-Stewart, and 
DesOrmeaux 1992), 

The DOA definition of cultural resources includes any real or personal 
property, record, or lifeway that falls into one of the following categories: 

(a) historic or prehistoric real property; (b) historic records; (c) historic per¬ 
sonal property; or (d) community resources and lifeways. It is the last 
category of cultural resources that is most critical for those resources 


4 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 







highlighted in this report. Community resources and lifeways are further 
defined as follows: 


Any resource to which a community, such as a neighborhood or Indian 
Tribe, or a community of interest, such as a preservation organization or 
veterans group, may ascribe cultural value. Such resources may include 
historic real or personal property, such as natural landscapes and cemeteries, 
or have references to real property, such as vistas or viewsteds which may 
help define a historic real property, or may have no real property reference, 
such as aspects of foUdife, cultural or religious practices, language, or 
traditions. 

Resources that are culturally significant to Native American groups have 
been termed in various ways. With reference to the NHPA, the Advisory 
Council on Historic Preservation has broadened “historic properties” to include 
what they have termed “traditional cultural properties.” These properties are 
eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places because of 
their association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that 
(a) are rooted in that community’s history, and (b) arc important in 
maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community (Parker and 
King 1990). One example of a traditional cultural property is a location asso¬ 
ciated with the traditional beliefs of a Native American group about its origins, 
its cultural history, or the nature of the world. Since the cultural practices of 
Native American groups are often intertwined with religious practices, proper¬ 
ties of religious importance are also included into this definition. Guidelines 
for evaluating and documenting traditional cultural properties are found in 
National Register Bulletin 38 (Parker and King 1990). Guidelines issued by 
the Advisory Council in 1985 define cultural values as “the contribution made 
by an historic property to an ongoing society or cultural system. ... (The guide¬ 
lines focus) on those properties, normally though not necessarily non- 
architectural, whose primary value springs from the role they play in maintain¬ 
ing the cultural integrity of a particular social group, usually a relatively small 
segment of the total national society, usually though not necessarily localized, 
often though not necessarily of ethnic minority heritage” (Advisory Council for 
Historic Preservation (ACHP) 1985: 3). 

NAGPRA deals with the ownership, protection, and repatriation of Native 
American “cultural items” that include not only human remains, but associated 
funerary objects, sacred objects, and cultural patrimony. “Sacred objects" are 
defined here as ceremonial objects required by religious leaders for the practice 
of Native American religion. “Cultural patrimony” means any object having 
ongoing historical, traditional, or cultural importance central to the Native 
American group or culture. 

Sacred places in Native American culture fall within this broadly defined 
framework of cultural resources and traditional cultural properties. As might 
be expected, the types and nature of sacred sites having significance to the 
different Native American groups throughout the country vary considerably. 
However, to identify the range of sites that may be included, the use of a 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 


5 









classificalion developed by Swan (1989) is insiruciive. His list includes the 
following major categories: 

a. Burial Grounds and Graves. For Native Americans, the deceased have 
a continuing relationship with the living. Therefore, grave sites are 
sacred because they represent a concrete linkage between the two 
worlds. 

b. Purification Sites Methods of purification for purity of mind, body, 
and spirit include practices such as bathing in special springs, fasting, 
prayer, undergoing sweating rituals, and other ceremonial forms. Cer¬ 
tain springs, rivers, and other sites are especially favored for purifica¬ 
tion rites. 

c. Healing Sites. Staying healthy and healing of illnesses is accomplished 
by many Native Americans through ceremony and ritual. It is generally 
felt that some types of healings are best done at certain sites. Accord¬ 
ing to Swan, these sites fall into three general categories: (a) springs or 
other bodies of water where the water, muds, mosses, and even rocks 
may be seen to possess hetding values; (b) ceremonial sites that are 
especially favorable for conducting certain healing ceremonies and 
rituals; and (c) mediational sites where people can go to absorb locally 
occurring energies, thereby restoring vitality to the participant. 

d. Special Flora an ’ Fauna Sites. Certain herbs or animals are vested 
with more power than others. The places where such items are 
obtained, sometimes through ritualized methods, are considered sacred. 

e. Quarries. Certain stones and minerals have special qualities for rituals 
or for manufacture of sacred items. 

/. Vision Questing and Dreaming Places. Native Americans travel to 
special places like caves or mountaintops seeking connections with spir¬ 
its through dreams and visions. Sometimes petroglyphs and other rock 
paintings may be found at these sites. 

g. Mythic and Legendary Sites. As.sociaiing certain places with various 
m)dhs and legends is used to teach and remind continuing generations 
of the important role that the myths play in the daily lives of the group. 

h. Temples and Shrines. Human-made structures or features arc con¬ 
structed for both personal ritual and group-organized art inspired by 
special places. 

i. Places of Spiritual Renewal. Thc.se are places, such as mountains, 
where Native Americans believe spiritual power is concentrated. 


6 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 










j. Astronomical Observatories. Certain natural or constructed features can 
be used by groups to chart the movements of the heavens. Such sites 
traditionally had a ritual purpose. 

k. Historical Sites. Places that are associated with important historical 
events help recall memories of the past and place events in the f -erall 
procession of human life on earth. 


Access Issues and Sacred Sites 


The history of Native American removal from dteir ancestral lands is a long 
and complicated one and need not be recounted here. Suffice it to say that 
virtually all recognized tribes lost all or most of their former homelands 
through a variety of ways: military defeats, sales, cessions, and theft. Much 
of this land today falls into the general category of government-managed lands, 
including about 25 million acres directly controlled by DoD. Individual mili¬ 
tary branches also have agreements with State and other Federal land manag¬ 
ing agencies to permit use of another estimated 15 million acres, primarily for 
military aviation training activities. 

The result of this historical sequence of events, which is characterized by 
the removal of Indians and their containment on reservations, has been the 
forced separation between Native groups and individuals and many or all of 
their sacred and traditional sites. A recent National Park Service report 
entitled “Keepers of the Treasures: Protecting Historic Properties and Cultural 
Traditions on Indian Lands” (Parker 1990) identified several important issues 
that arc relevant to this situation. First, many, if not most, traditional cultural 
properties important to Indian tribes are not on presently defined Indian lands. 
Second, the removal process itself created new places of cultural significance; 
for example, burial grounds or other historical sites along the removal routes. 
Third, many tribes today retain strong cultural ties to ancestral lands. Finally, 
many tribes believe that they must reconnect their people with these lands and 
culturally significant sites by physically returning temporarily, if not 
permanently. 

With regard to being able to gain access to sacred sites, it was first neces¬ 
sary to establish the legitimacy and nature of Native American religion. A 
critical stCi in this direction was the 1978 passage of AIRFA (Public Law 95- 
341), a joint resolution making explicit the guarantee of American Indian reli¬ 
gious rights under the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, The primary 
thrust of the act is as follows: 

henceforth it shall be the policy of the United States to protect and preserve 
for American Indians their inherent right of freedom to believe, express and 
exercise the traditional religions of the American Indian, Eskimo, Aleut, 
and Native Hawaiians, including but not limited to access to sites, use and 
possession of sacred objects, and the freedom to worship through ceremon¬ 
ials and traditional rites. 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 











The key phrase in terms of sacred sites is “access to sites.” 

Despite the good intentions of the U.S. Congress, ADRFA has had mixed 
success in providing religious freedoms to American Indians. Several excel¬ 
lent discussions on the subject appear in the recently published Handbook of 
American Indian Religious Freedom (Vecsey 1991; see also Deloria (1992)). 

In his prologue to that volume, the editor Vecsey notes that despite AIRFA 
and several subsequent court test cases, Indians today still find tl«ir religious 
practices endangered in the following situations: 

a. Degradation of geographical areas deemed sacred sites. 

b. Maltreatment of Indian burials, particularly bodily remains. 

c. Prohibition against capture, kill, and use of certain endangered or pro¬ 
tected species. 

d. Regulations regarding the collection, transport, and use of certain ritual 
plants (e.g., peyote). 

e. Alienation and display of religious artifacts. 

/. Prevsr.don of Indian rituals and behavior, particulariy in authoritarian 
institutions. 

To this list can be added the denial of access to sacred sites on public and 
military lands. 

In the nearly 15 years since passage of AIRFA, the Act has focused atten¬ 
tion both on the distinctive nature of Indian religions and on the lack of under¬ 
standing of Indian religious beliefs and practices, particularly on the part of 
land-managing agencies. However, during this period, vague wording on seve¬ 
ral issues in the Act have created resource protection difficulties for Native 
Americans and land managers alike. In recent years, bills have been intro¬ 
duced in Congress to amend AIRFA and insert stronger language concerning 
required consultation between Federal agencies and Native American tradi¬ 
tional or govenunental leaders when agencies engage in any activities that may 
disturb or alter the integrity of Native American religious or sacred places. To 
date, none of these proposed amendments have passed. 

Other acts, such as NEPA and ARPA, provide various means to protect and 
preserve sacred sites along with AIRFA; however, they do not provide specific 
provisions for obtaining access to those sites. As will be shown in the next 
section of the report, access that has been granted on military lands has primar¬ 
ily been granted through agreements between individual installations and local 
Native American groups. 

Hie recent enactment of NAGPRA (Public Law 101-601) provides for a 
different type of access to certain classes of cultural materials, namely, human 


8 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 








remains, associated funerary objects, unassociated funerary objects, sacred 
objects, and objects of cultural patrimony. Basically, the Act establishes 
Native American ownership or control over the above remains in many 
instances, regardless of current Federal agency land-management control. 

Among the various provisions created by NAGPRA is access to information 
on curated materials that can be judged to be culturally affiliated with a parti¬ 
cular Native American tribe or Native Hawaiian organization. NAGPRA also 
requires consultation with tribal government and Native Hawaiian organization 
officiais and traditional religious leaders regarding these materials. Consulta¬ 
tion with the affected Native American group will likely lead to repatriation of 
those remains covered by this Act and recovered prior to NAGPRA enactment. 
The Act also includes requirements for handling such cultural items in the 
postenactment period. NAGPRA is likely to generate future needs for onsite 
consultation between land managers and representatives of Native American 
groups as well as formal policies governing access to burial sites and materials. 

NHPA provides Native Americans access to the consultation process con¬ 
cerning the identification, evaluation, protection, and interpretation of historic 
properties. The 1992 amendments to tlK Act have significantly enhanced the 
role of Indian tribes and Native Hawaiian organizations in this process. The 
amendments specify that properties of traditional religious and cultural impor¬ 
tance to an Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization may be determined to 
be eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. Under 
Section 106, a Federal agency must consult with any Indian tribe or Native 
Hawaiian organization that attaches religious and cultural significance to such 
properties. In response to the 1992 Niff A amendments, a new policy state¬ 
ment, “Consultation with Native Americans Concerning Properties of Tradi¬ 
tional Religious and Cultural Importance,” was adopted by ACHP on June 11, 
1993. That policy provides explicit principles for application of the 
amendments, including particularly that Native American groups who ascribe 
cultural values to a property or area be “identified by culturally appropriate 
methods” and that participants in the Section 106 process should learn how to 
approach Native Americans in “culturally informed ways” (ACHP 1993: 3-4). 
Consultation with Native Americans must be conducted with sensitivity to 
cultural values, socioeconomic factors, and the administrative structure of the 
native group. Specific steps should be taken to address language differences 
and issues such as seasonal availability of Native American participants as 
weU. According to this policy. Native American groups not identified during 
the initial phases of the Section 106 process may legitimately request to be 
included later in the process. The Advisory Council’s policy statement also 
reaffirms the U.S. government’s commitment to maintaining confidentiality 
regarding cultural resources and slates that participants in the Section 106 
process “should seek only the information necessary for planning” (ACHP 
1993: 3). 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 


9 












Native Hawaiian organizations have been granted special status under both 
NAGPRA and the 1992 NHPA amendments. Native Hawaiian organizations 
include the Office of Hawaiian Affairs of the Slate of Hawaii, the Hui Malama 
I Na Kapuna O Hoawai’i Nei, and any other organization that serves and rep¬ 
resents the interests of Native Hawaiians with the purpose of providing 
services to Native Hawaiians and that has demonstrated expertise in aspects of 
historic preservation that are culturally significant to Native Hawaiians. As a 
result of this status and the concern of Native Hawaiians for all the lands in 
Hawaii, military personnel remain in regular contact with those organizations 
regarding all Navy and Marine CorjK lands. 


Department of Defense Policies 

There exists no systematic summary of Department of Defense policies 
regarding Native American access to military properties, cultural materials, or 
the consultation process. A review of Federal agency policies and guidance 
concerning Native American consultation has been completed by Briuer, 
Freezor-Stewart, and DesOrmeaux (1992). Among the branches of service in 
DoD, only the Air Force has developed written guidelines for the consultation 
process (U.S. Department of the Air Force 1991). 

Air Force Regulation AFR 126-7 provides specific guidance for Air Force 
bases to comply with the mandates found in AERFA, NEPA, ARPA, 
NAGPRA, and NHPA. The regulation recognizes the rights of Native Ameri¬ 
cans to have access to sacred sites on military lands under Air Force control. 

It directs the bases to identify Native American groups having historical ties to 
the military lands and to consult with them to determine the location and 
nature of sites of religious or cultural significance, as well as ways to avoid, 
mitigate, or minimize adverse effects on such sites. A number of contacts 
indicated that they were unaware of any culturally significant sites on their 
facility. The absence of sites on military installations may be due to the fact 
that the prehistoric and historic use of the area by Native Americans was 
limited, and therefore the number of sites is also limited. However, it is also 
possible that there has been very little or no research done on these facilities, 
and therefore military personnel arc simply unaware of any sites. 

While the Air Force regulation is a critical first step toward establishing 
adequate consultation with interested Native American groups, it must be 
remembered that the regulation was issued as “guidelines"; thus individual Air 
Force units may elect not to follow them. Consequently, it cannot be stated 
that access can be guaranteed in all cases. 

Nonetheless, several examples are already evident where these guidelines 
have been successfully implemented at Air Force installations. The Air Force 
regulations are not aR>licabIe to other military departments. As will be out¬ 
lined in the next chapter, however, there are also some success stories at other 
DoD installations, even though policy and guidelines are currently lacking. 


10 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 











Most of these examples, though, seem to be a function of the efforts of a few 
enlightened individuals. Clearly, better policy statements and guidelines are 
required, both for DoD and the individual branches of service. 


Chapter 2 Sacred Sites and Related Access Issues 







3 Survey of Current Native 
American Access 
Programs 


This chapter reviews the results of two separate but complementaiy 
investigations designed to assess the current status of Native American 
consultation on military lands, specifically as it relates to the access question. 
The studies were completed by personnel of the Bureau of Applied Research 
in Anthropology at the University of Arizona (Stoffle, Austin, and Fulfrost 
1992). 

Initially, computerized bibliographic searches were conducted to identify 
relevant published materials. The second task undertaken was telephone con¬ 
tact with a number of command centers and installations where issues of 
Native American access and consultation were known or thought to be of 
concern. The methods and results of these investigations are discussed below, 
including some examples of formal policies and procedures granting access by 
Indian tribes to specific installations and establishing formal consultation rela¬ 
tionships between military facilities and Native American groups. 

As a result of the telephone contacts, a number of issues emerged regarding 
interactions with native groups. Identified issues include those of general 
concern to all military facilities and those related to the level of interaction 
with tribes occurring at a particular location. These issues are also summa¬ 
rized in this chapter. 

The data collected as a result of both the bibliographic and the telephone 
survey of DoD installations should not be considered as being a comprehensive 
survey. The intent of the surveys was to begin identification of the extent of 
the issues and to specify the more salient ones. In this context, the process has 
been successful. 


12 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 











Bibliographic Searches 


Methods 

Bibliographic information regarding Native American access to DoD lands 
was obtained through searches of computerized databases, reviews of written 
documents, and personal communication with military personnel. Thougii 
direct contact with affected Native American groups was beyond the scope of 
this project, two national organizations, the National Congress of American 
Indians and the Native American Rights Fund, were contacted as well. Com¬ 
puterized searches were conducted through the GPO Catalog (Monthly Catalog 
of Government Publications) at the University of Arizona’s depository library 
and the Dialogue system of National Technical and Information Service and 
Monthly Catalog Publications at the University of Michigan’s government 
documents center. These searches uncovered few documents regarding Native 
American interaction with DoD facilities. Subject headings searched included 
the following: The Office of Technical Information, The Techttical Informa¬ 
tion Center, American Indians, Native Americans, Department of Defense, 
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine, and cultural resource management. 

In addition, searches of the Infotrac and GEAC computer system at the 
University of Arizona and the MIRLYN and WILSON systems at the Univer¬ 
sity of Michigan yielded no documents. Subject headings searched in tliese 
databases included the following: American Indians, Native Americans, 
Department of Defense, Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine, military, cultural 
resource, NHPA, and NAGPRA. Finally, a review of the documents identified 
through the literature search provided a few additional bibliographic references. 


Results 

Not unexpectedly, the bibliographic searches did not produce a lengthy list 
of published material relating to Native American access issues on DoD facili¬ 
ties. Only 13 citations were identified by the effort (Appendix A). 

Undoubtedly, other reports and documents exi.st that were not identified. 
However, a majority of the written documents addressing issues of Native 
American interactions with United States military installations apparently exists 
as special reports, historic preservation plans, or memoranda of understanding 
or agreement that are not accessible through a general documents search. This 
seems to be true not only for access issues but for Native American and mili¬ 
tary interactions in general. 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


13 





Telephone Contacts 


Methods 

Because the bibliographic searches turned up only a few documents pertain¬ 
ing to the issues ui. ler review, it was decided to personally contact command 
centers and individual facilities to obtain information about existing issues and 
agreements related to Native American access and consultation. The survey 
process generally involved contacting the appropriate office/individual at the 
various command centers for each of the services, followed by contacts with 
individual military facilities where issues of Native American access and con¬ 
sultation were believed to exist. A more comprehensive and random survey of 
individual Air Force bases was also conducted to gain additional information 
regarding these issues. A standardized survey instmment was used to record 
responses to the telephone inquiries (Appendix B). 

The overall methodology and listing of individual service installations con¬ 
tacted can be found in the report by Stoffle. Austin, and Fulfrost (1992). A 
summary of the number of bases contacted and of bases where contacts at 
those bases reported the presence of sites of concern to Native Americans is 
provided in Table 1. 


Results 

The telephone survey produced useful information regarding several issues 
of concern to military managers with respect to Native American consultation 
and access issues. It must be stressed, however, that the survey only commu¬ 
nicated with military personnel; potentially interested Native American tribes, 
organizations, or individuals were not contacted. It was felt that making con¬ 
tacts with Native American groups was premature at this time and is a task 
better left to the Legacy Native American Task Area. 

Of the facilities contacted, several indicated that access/consultation issues 
did exist, covering several types of cultural resource sites (Table 2). These 
types of sites reflect categories that were identified by the contacts at each 
facility. They include historical or archaeological (29), burial (23), sacred 
(12), botanical (6), and hunting (2) sites. The presence of sites of potential or 
actual interest to native groups has generated activity along these lines at most 
of the affected facilities. Within this category, several either have existing 
formal procedures for access or consultation or are in the process of develop¬ 
ing tribal contacts. The enacunent and implementation of new legislation, such 
as NAGPRA, will have a profound effect by increa.sing the level of interaction 
at many facilities. Many of the persons contacted indicated that these types of 
sites will require greater attention in the future. 


14 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 












r 

I 


Table 1 

Number of Bases Cont«:ted 

Bases 

Contacted 

Department 

Total 

Army 

Navy 

Air Force 

Marine 

Corps 

With known 
sites 

23 

8 

14 

3 

48 (62%) 

With no 
known sites 

2 

3 

23 

2 

30 (38%) 

Total 

25 (32%) 

11 (14%) 

37 (48%) 

5 (6%) 

78 (100%) 


Table 2 

Number of Military Facilities with Native American Issues 

Department with 
Jurisdiction over 

Site 

Type of SHe’ 

Historical/ 

Archaeologi¬ 

cal 

Burial 

Botanical 

Hunting 

Sacred 

Army (n = 23) 

15 

8 

5 

2 

7 

Navy (n = 8) 

3 

5 

0 

0 

2 

Air Force (n = 14) 

11 

7 

1 

0 

3 

Marine Corps (n = 3) 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

Total (n = 48) 

29 

23 

6 

2 

12 

' Some facilities have more than one type of site. 


Through the process of collecting information, a number of issues -^merged 
that were significant to military persotmel regarding interactions with native 
groups. These issues fall into three categories: (a) issues of general concern 
to all military facilities; (b) issues particular to the level of interaction with 
tribes, including access to military properties and to the consultation process; 
and (c) special topics, such as base realignment and closure and concern with 
aircraft flyovers. 


General Issues 

Awareness 

At many facilities, the subject of Native American interaction was unfamil¬ 
iar to most people other than the archaeologist or cultural resource officer. 
Telephone operators, public affairs officers, and persons in environmental 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native Amerioan Access Programs 


15 










management were frequently unable to identify the persons at their facility 
who would have responsibility for this information. Several persons believed 
they were the ones responsible for handling the dissemination of information 
or requests for access to the facility; nevertheless, they expressed uncertainty 
about how to respond to the questions they were asked. Also, although several 
public affairs officers stated that their office would be a point of contact for 
tribal members, there is no central or uniform point of contact from one facil¬ 
ity to another through which information about native access can be gathered. 
Several respondents remariced that they had never before had requests for this 
type of information. In addition, at several bases, the individuals were 
unaware of their service’s policy regarding native groups or of a larger struc¬ 
ture of which they were a part and to which they could turn for more informa¬ 
tion on this particular subject. Other than archaeologists or designated cultural 
resource managers, only two Air Force contacts mentioned any knowledge of 
recent communication from Air Force Commands regarding AIRFA or 
NAGPRA. 

Though a lack of awareness was common at bases without existing rela¬ 
tionships with tribes, this also proved to be a problem at some bases with 
extant agreements or documents that specifically addressed tribal interactions. 
Unless a named cultural resource manager could be located, the caller was 
often shuffled from office to office. This uncertainty among base personnel 
creates a potentially significant problem for tribal members who would contact 
a facility seeking information or access. 

Reasons identified for the lack of awareness include the high turnover rate 
and short time that many individuals had been in their positions. New 
employees generally knew nothing about the interactions occurring on their 
base. A standardized system of handling these issues within the military bran¬ 
ches of service would facilitate information transfer. 


Priorities 

Native American issues have not received much attention at many of the 
bases contacted. Native concerns have not been given priority among the 
competing demands facilities face. Several contacts remarked that their bases 
had been dealing extensively with hazardous wastes and related issues on 
which they have received pressure to address. They reported that under the 
existing circumstances, little attention had been given to interactions with 
native groups because of the absence of pressure in that direction. Some con¬ 
tacts indicated that they believe that military installations have tried to ignore 
the native issues as much as possible. They acknowledged past failures to take 
these issues into account or to contact tribes when it would have been appro¬ 
priate. One individual commented that native groups should be involved early 
in consultation activities, preferably before a proposed action when people are 
already upset. Several observed that military installations need to incorporate 
individuals sensitive to native concerns and familiar with the involved tribes 
who have prior experience working with native people rather than relying on 


16 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 





people who have no experience in this area. These observations arc consistent 
with the ACHP’s June 1993 policy statement that includes specifically that 
“communication with Native Americans should be initiated at the earliest 
stages of Section 106 process” (ACHP 1993: 2). and that Native Americans 
must be aH>roached in “culturally informed ways” (ACHP 1993: 3). A copy 
of that policy statement is provided in Stoffle, Austin, and Fulfrost (1992). 

A few facilities have had extensive involvement with native groups. Much 
of that has grown out of a trial and error approach to issues that have been 
raised by tribal members. Even where there is attention to native issues, 
though, most has been focused on archaeological sites and artifacts with little 
attention to consultation with tribes over other cultural resources. The few 
exceptions are discussed in greater detail under the next category of issues. 


Access to facilities 

Native Americans seek access to military facilities for a number of reasons. 
Two of the most commonly stated purposes are visits to sacred sites in order 
to conduct ceremonials and visits to harvest plant or animal resources. The 
policies and procedures regarding Native American access to DoD facilities are 
not uniform. Access has generally only been incorporated into formal agree¬ 
ments and policy statements where these issues have been a problem. Two 
Army bases, one naval station and one Air Force installation have particular 
policies to facilitate access by native people. For example, a memorandum of 
agreement (MOA) between the Commander Naval Weapons Center and the 
Coso Ad Hoc Committee of the Owens Valley Paiute-Shoshone Band of Indi¬ 
ans reserves eight weekends per year exclusively for visits by members of the 
Owens Valley Paiute-Shoshone Band of Indians and/or the Kern Valley Indian 
Community to Coso Hot Springs, located within the Naval Weapwns Center, 
China Lake, CA. 

Generally, contacts stated that Native American access issues that might 
arise would be handled through the facility’s general access policies applicable 
to all persons or dealt with informally. Native requests for access are handled 
through normal public relations procedures or in some cases through the 
museum director’s office. For example, an area of sand dunes that is consid¬ 
ered sacred by some Native Hawaiian people is located within naval property 
on Kauai. No foimal agreements provide for visitation by Native Hawaiian 
people, but the base has a fairly open access policy requiring only that visitors 
sign in at the gate. At Fort Wainwright in Alaska, where access to game har¬ 
vests has been an issue, procedures concerning access to hunting grounds are 
the same for any citizen, regardless of whether the citizen is a native with 
traditional subsistence ties to land on the facility. 

Some policies have become institutionalized but nevertheless remain 
informal. For example. Fort Huachuca allows Apache people to harvest nuts 
at the fort in what was described as a “traditional” agreement between the tribe 
and the base. Lack of formal procedures governing access appears to be 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


17 













typical for facilities where access to botanical, sacred, or other cultural sites 
have been issues. Also, access has been granted at many installations as a 
result of informal agreements associated with construction projects like the 
Army’s Facilities Construction Program of 1941 and 1942 during which many 
installations were built over burial sites. 

Some contacts reported that they had never received any specific requests 
for access even when there were culturally significant sites at their facility. 
There are several cases where native tribes have come on to the installations to 
investigate newly discovered archeological or cultural sites but have not 
specifically requested access to the sites. At some locations, there appears to 
be greater interest among anthropologists than native groups regarding cultur¬ 
ally significant sites. For example. Lone Rock at the Navy’s Bravo 20 Target 
Range in Nevada has been identified by anthropologists as a feature in Paiute 
mythology, but native groups have not contacted the naval offices with con¬ 
cerns. Formal contacts with the tribes in the region regarding their interest in 
the site are now beginning as part of an environmental assessment of the 
range. 

Level of interaction with Native Groups 

Access to military facilities is a particular area of concern for Native Amer¬ 
icans. However, interaction with DoD departments also involves access to 
infomtation about artifacts and archaeological resources discovered on military 
properties and consultation regarding those and other cultural resources. Most 
military facilities with sites of archeological or cultural significance to native 
peoples have no formal agreements or policies that specifically address Native 
American access or consultation. Interactions with Native Americans at these 
facilities are usually dealt with through normal public relations procedures or 
through informal, nonbinding agreements with native groups. For example. 
Fort Sam Houston will enter into consultation with any “interested parties’’ in 
order to comply with the requirements of Section 106 of the NHPA, but 
Native American groups receive the same treatment as other public groups 
with whom base personnel interact. Where consultation relationships exist, 
these are often included within procedures or policies related to environmental 
assessments (EAs), environmental impact statements (EISs), natural or cultural 
resource management plans (NRMPs, CRMPs), historic preservation plans 
(HPPs), or programmatic agreements (PAs) generated through the Section 106 
process of the NHPA. For example, Redstone Arsenal in Alabama has an 
MOA with the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) regarding the pro¬ 
tection and management of historic properties on the facility that indicates a 
need to consult with Native Amenean groups. This MOA was written in order 
to fulfill the facility’s requirements under Section 106 of the NHPA. 

Though memoranda of agreement regarding archaeological and historical 
sites exist at several facilities, they do not always require consultation nor arc 
they agreements with the affected native groups. Many of these agreements 

18 












incorporate native groups as “interested parties.” Other facilities, without 
MOAs or memoranda of understanding (MOUs). send informal letters of con¬ 
sultation to native grou{» regarding proposed projects or excavations. For 
example, White Sands Missile Range sent a letter of consultation to the 
Mescalero Apache Tribe as pan of an EIS for its Aerial Cable Test Capability 
Project. These formal agreements or informal letters of consultation arc 
usually completed in order to fulfill the requirements of NHPA, NAGPRA, 
AIRFA and other relevant laws. Such policies are not tribal-specific and do 
not recognize the particular interest of identified Native American groups to 
specific sacred sites. Therefore, for the purposes of this report, they are treated 
separately from the agreements and policies that are specific to particular 
Native American groups. 

Where Native American sacred sites are present at DoD facilities, there are 
also differences in the degree of interaction that personnel there have with 
native groups. The extent of interaction has been divided into four levels, as 
shown in Table 3. Facilities at Level One have had no interaction with Native 
American groups. Facilities have been included at Level Two if their interac¬ 
tions with tribal groups have been limited to informal meetings or minimal 
contact with native groups regarding cultural resources. Facilities have been 
included at Level Three if they have had sustained interactions with Native 
American groups, but they do not have formal policies or agreements specifi¬ 
cally with or naming those groups. Finally, facilities with formal agreements 


Table 3 

Number of Military Facilities Contacted with Known Sacred Sites 
by Level of Interaction with Native Groups and Department 

r 


Type of Site 

Level of Interaction 

Army 

Navy 

Air Force 

Marine 

Corps 

Tolai 

Level One 

6 

2 

2 

1 

11 (23%) 

Level Two 

5 

4 

7 

0 

16 (33%) 

Level Three 

7 

0 

3 

1 

11 (23%) 

Level Four 

5 

2 

2 

1 

10 (21%) 

Total 

23 (48%) 

8 (17%) 

14(29%) 

3 (6%) 

48 (100%) 

Note: 

Level One 
Level Two: 

Level Three: 

Level Four: 

Facilities with no interactions with Native American groups 

Facilities with limited interactions with Native American groups; such interac¬ 
tions are not governed by tnbal-specific policies, if any policies exist at all 

Facilities with sustained interactions with Native American groups, but no 
agreements or policies specifically with or naming those groups 

Facilities with formal agreements and policies that are specific to particular 

Native American groups. 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


19 








and policies that govern interactions with Native American groups and are spe¬ 
cific to those groups have been included at Level Four. 


Level 1: Facilities with known sites but no interactions with Native 
American groups 

Twenty-three percent of the facilities with known sites that were contacted 
have no interaction with Native American groups. Several of these have no 
mechanism for contacting tribes. Some of these contact archaeologists or 
SHPOs directly if they discover artifacts or sites. Contacts reported that they 
have curated artifacts not presently receiving attention or Indian mounds that 
they have agreed to leave undisturbed. At most facilities, there appears to 
have been little archaeological research done. These facilities generally have 
not completed the surveys of the land under their jurisdiction. It is anticipated 
that further research in this area will result in increased concern for consul¬ 
tation and access issues. In some cases, contacts reported that they had poli¬ 
cies that would lead them to treat Native Americans as “interested parties" in 
consultation, but they had never contacted native groups under those policies. 
The HPP for Redstone Arsenal in Alabama includes a requirement to consult 
with Native Americans when burials are discovered; however, they have not 
reached tltis consultation stage. 

Individuals at several facilities reported that they recognized the deficiencies 
in their existing programs, but did not have the resources to devote to improv¬ 
ing the situation. Several are waiting for a response to proposals they 
submitted as part of the Legacy demonstration program that would specifically 
address the archaeological or cultural resource issues at their facilities. One 
such proposal is the request for resources for the completion of surveys of the 
test and gaining ranges at Hill Air Force Base in Utah. 


Level 2: Facilities with limited interactions with Native American 
groups 

More than one-third of the facilities contacted had only limited interactions 
with Native American groups regarding known sacred sites. These interactions 
include informal meetings or isolated contact with native groups. Facilities 
with limited interactions may have developed MOAs or CRMPs that require 
the base to contact native groups regarding cultural resources, but they have 
not received any respon.ses nor have they attempted to initiate further interac¬ 
tion. For example. Fort Sam Houston in Texas sent out letters of consultation 
to Native American groups as part of the facility’s CRMP requirement to con¬ 
sult with “interested parties.” This stipulation was created in order to fulfill 
the consultation requirements of the NHPA. The base has never received any 
response from these consultation letters. 

Several facilities that have been slated for closure under the Base Realign¬ 
ment and Qo.sure (BRAC) procedures have di.scovercd sacred sites or artifacts 


20 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native Amencan Access Progra.'ns 




in the environmental impact studies required at all such facilities. In most 
cases, these facilities have had no prior interactions with Native American 
groups; but these have been identified and contacted, or efforts are underway 
to contact them as a result of those finds. 

A number of facilities are in the process of trying to improve communica¬ 
tion with identified native groups in their area. Contacts reported they had 
initiated some interaction or had intentions to send letters and hold meetings 
with tribal representatives. For example, the presence of cultural resources at 
the Goldwater Air Force Range under the jurisdiction of Luke Air Force Base 
(AFB) has led base personnel there to announce at a public forum the intention 
to try to incorporate Native American input into their cultural resource 
management planning. Input has not yet been solicited. 

At some facilities where sites exist, there are no regular interactions with 
tribes because no Native American groups have expressed interest in the area. 
According to the “Special Nevada Report" (U. S. Department of the Air Force, 
Navy, and Interior 1991: 2-85), “Nellis AFB officials have previously corre¬ 
sponded to Native Americans without reply.” Also, contacts at a few facilities 
felt that their attempts with either the tribes or umbrella organizations such as 
the Native American Heritage Commission (California) have been ignored. 
They have not received responses to requests for information or involvement. 
The lack of response requites further investigation. 

Some contacts expressed a need for clarification of the treaties presently in 
force with native groups and the current legal situations regarding who must be 
contaaed as required by Federal laws and regulations. In addition, concern 
was expressed over what to do and who to contact when facilities are located 
in areas with few remairving tribes or with groups that have not achieved Fed¬ 
eral government recognition. Several individuals requested copies of reports, 
examples of existing agreements, or other information to use as guidance in 
developing their Native American programs. (Note: Copies of existing 
MOAs, MOUs, and other agreements having to do with Native American 
access and consultation issues have been compiled and are included as appen¬ 
dices in Stoffle, Austin, and Fulfrost (1992)). 


Level 3: Facilities with sustained Interactions with Native American 
groups not governed by specific tribal agreements or policies 

Twenty-three percent of the facilities contacted have had more sustained 
interaction with Native American groups. These facilities have been involved 
with Native American groups on an ongoing basis regarding access, reburials, 
cultural resource assessments, etc. They have had multiple contacts with these 
groups as relevant issues have arisen at their facilities. Nevertheless, these 
facilities have no agreements or policies that are with or specific to particular 
Native American groups. For example, interactions with tribes at Mountain 
Home AFB are handled through that base’s contractor and include involvement 
since 1989 with the local Shoshone and Bannock tribes to fulfill NEPA 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


21 






requirements as well as recent contacts with the tribes regarding a proposed 
bombing range expansion. Recently, a liaison has been established at the base 
to interact with pereons at the Duck Valley Indian Reservation regarding air¬ 
craft flyovers. As another example. Fort Carson in Colorado has an MOA 
with SHPO and the ACHP regarding historic properties that requires consul¬ 
tation with “interested parties” including Native Americans. The facility has 
consulted with native groups on at least two occasions in order to fulfill its 
legal requirements under NHPA and NAGPRA. 

At some facilities, infonnal interactions take place with nearby non- 
recognized native groups. Contacts at some of these locations have indicated 
that they plan to seek out and establish contact with officially recognized tribes 
that have historical ties to the military properties but were relocated to other 
areas in the past. For example, personnel at Eglin AFB in Florida have infor¬ 
mal agreements with a local Native American group that is attempting to 
obtain Federal recognition but intend also to contact three Federally recognized 
tribes, including tribes now living outside Florida, for future consultation. 

Fort Sill in Oklahoma is in a unique situation because they have had exten¬ 
sive informal interactions with native groups but are only now in the process 
of developing formal agreements with specific Native American tribes. These 
formal agreements concern Native American access to and consultation over 
burial grounds located on the base. 


Level 4: Facilities with formal agreements/poiicies specific to 
Native American groups 

These facilities have developed either formal agreements with specific 
native groups regarding access or consultation, or they have formal agreements 
or policies that require consultation with specific native groups. Formal agree¬ 
ments between military facilities and native groups regarding archaeological, 
historical, or other cultural resources have generally taken the form of memo¬ 
randa of understanding or agreement. These agreements specify and describe 
tribal consultation procedures for the treatment of culturally significant proper¬ 
ties found on the facilities. When the agreement concerns human remains, 
issues of access to the reburial sites are often incorporated in these agreements. 

A few facilities have full Native American participation in consultation and 
the development of procedures to facilitate access. The policies at these facili¬ 
ties include MOAs, MOUs, HPPs, and agreements with individual tribal mem¬ 
bers and tribal councils. One such program is found at Vandenburg Air Force 
Base, CA, where a comprehensive program has developed over a 15-year 
period. The interaction involves the facility and the Santa Ynez Band of Mis¬ 
sion Indians, incorporating both representatives of the tribal council and indi¬ 
vidual tribal members. The report by Stoffle, Austin, and Fulfrost (1992) 
includes 23 documents generated over the years by this program. 


22 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 





Another example of extensive interaction between a military facility and 
Indian groups regarding access is Fort Lewis in Washington. This military 
base has a formal policy regarding Native American access to the facility. In 
addition to this Native American access policy, the base has an MOA with the 
Yakima tribe and an MOA with the Nisqually tribe regarding access to and use 
of lands on the facility and its accompanying training center. The base has 
also sent a letter of agreement to the Wanapum tribe that allows them access 
to the facility for purposes of hunting, fishing, gathering, and conduaing 
ceremonies. 

Four locations identified by Stoffle, Austin, and Fulfrost (1992) have agree¬ 
ments or policies with Native American groups that are specific to Native 
American access to military installations. These are as follows: 

a. Memorandum of Agreement between Commander, Naval Weapons 
Center and Owens Valley Paiute-Shoshone Band of Indians (signed 
1979). This agreement allows Native American access to the Coso Hot 
Springs, a Native American sacred site, under provisions of AIRFA and 
NHPA. The agreement stipulates the primacy of the military mission 
of the facility over granted access and limits the number of visits per 
year, the number of individuals, and the area into which access is 
allowed. 

b. Letter of Access to North Vandenberg Air Force Base (signed 1992). 
This letter granting access to a single female member of the Santa Ynez 
Band of Mission Indians allows access to collect plants for a 1-year 
period. The communication stipulates that more than a dozen candidate 
threatened and endangered plants (a list of the plants, including 
common and scientific names and habitat is attached to the letter) are 
not to be disturbed by the collecting activities. The letter also specifies 
that the collector will be asked to vacate the area if hazardous or 
security operations are occurring. 

c. Memorandum of Understanding among the Commanche Tribal Council, 
the American Indian Resource and Education Coalition, Inc., and the 
United States Army at Fort Hood, TX, on the use of Federal land for 
reburial of repatriated human remains (signed 1991). This MOU 
acknowledges that the Commanche Tribe historically controlled the 
central Texas area where Fort Hood is now situated and sets aside up to 
5 acres of the facility for the appropriate reburial of curated human 
remains. The cemetery will be located within a previously fenced 
parcel that contains the Leon River Medicine Wheel, a site that has 
significance in Native American religious practice. The cemetery is 
restricted to human remains that have been previously excavated and 
those derived from future archaeological contexts. The memorandum 
also allows Native American access to the Medicine Wheel site for 
religious ceremonies and, at the same time, allows for continued 
scientific study of the site, as long as such investigations are conducted 
in a sensitive manner consistent with the site’s religious significance. 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


23 







d. Memorandum of Agreement between the United States of America, 
Secretary of the Army, and the Nisqually Indian Community of the 
Nisqually Reservation (signed 1987). This agreement allows tl^ 
Nisqually Indian community access to about 150 acres of Fon Lewis, 
WA. in accordance with provisions of three treaties granting this native 
group fishing rights. The major result of the agreement will be con¬ 
struction and operation of a fish hatchery at the location, although it 
also provides continuance of existing tribal hunting and fishing rights. 
As part of the agreement, the Nisqually Community conveyed right, 
title, and interest to two tribal sacred sites. Lake Nisqually and a histor¬ 
ic tribal cemetery site that lie on Fort Lewis. The Tribe maintained that 
these sites occur on land that was reserved for them under Executive 
Order in 1857. The deed conveying these rights stipulates that the sites 
will revert to Tribal ownership whenever the United States ceases to 
use the land for military purposes. 

Where access has not yet become an issue, formal agreements or policies 
pertaining to specific Native American groups usually require consultation over 
cultural resources. Archaeological and ethnographic research is often con¬ 
ducted on militaiy facilities as part of EISs, CRMPs, HPPs, or even NRMPs in 
order to identify sites that are culturally significant to Native Americans. 

Some examples of existing formal agreements with specific Native American 
groups that address consultation issues are listed below. (Copies of these 
agreements can be found in the source document report by Stoffle, Austin, and 
Fulfrost (1992)) 

a. Memorandum of Understanding on Native American Human Skeletal 
Remains and Associated Artifacts Among the Naval Air Station, Fallon, 
Fallon Paiute-Shoshone Tribes, Nevada State Historic Preservation 
Officer, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Nevada State Museum 
(signed 1991). 

b. Memorandum of Agreement between Vandenberg Air Force Base, the 
Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians, and the Elders Council (signed 
1991). 

c. Memorandum of Agreement between St. Louis District, U.3. Army 
Corps of Engineers, and Naval Air Weapons Station, China Lake, Cali¬ 
fornia (signed 1992). 

Several facilities require consultation with native groups through stated 
consultation relationships found within CRMPs, MOAs, MOUs, or related 
documents. The Navajo Army Depot in Arizona has an MOA with SHPO 
requiring that its CRMP be prepared in consultation with a number of specific 
tribes. The Yuma Proving Grounds in Arizona has an MOA with SHPO and 
ACHP that also requires consultation with a number of specific tribes. 

Though many of the military facilities contacted acknowledged that little 
archaeological research had been completed at their locations, a few have done 


24 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Progr ims 













extensive woik. An example of a developed research program is that at Naval 
Air Weapons Station, China Lake, CA. As part of the program, meetings have 
been held with interested parties to discuss NAGPRA compliance, and a 
NAGPRA implementation plan and bibliography of archaeological and cultural 
resource surveys at the facility have been prepared. 


Special Topics 

Base realignment and closure 

BRAC procedures have caused many facilities to consult with native groups 
over issues of access or consultations in archaeological surveys, often for the 
first time. Environmental impact studies are underway at all facilities under¬ 
going or recommended for closure. Future research and consultation 
associated with programs like BRAC were cited as reasons why access issues 
arc expected to become more prevalent in the next few years. Examples 
include the interaction with the Narraganset Tribe and the Naval Battalion 
Center in Davisvill'’ RI, over burials discovered there and the MOA at the 
Yuma Proving Ground in Arizona that was proposed as part of BRAC con¬ 
struction and spelled out the facility’s obligations to concerned Native 
American tribes. 


involvement with other government agencies 

The activities at several facilities regarding archaeological or cultural 
resource projects have required the involvement of government agencies in 
addition to the military services. In some cases, the responsibility for tribal 
interaction has been left solely to the nonmilitary agency. Examples of inter¬ 
agency involvement include the activities regarding the bombing range expan¬ 
sion that involve the Air Force, the Bureau of Land Management, and the State 
of Idaho, the management of a Native Alaskan burial site on the Adak AFB 
property by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the interaction between 
Air Force facilities and the National Park Service at several locations. In 
addition, the need for expertise regarding cultural resource issues has led to an 
agreement assigning the U.S. Army Engineer District, Mobile, to act as the 
cultural resource advisors for Headquarters Marine Corps and an MOA 
between the U.S. Army Engineer District, St. Louis, and Naval Air Weapons 
Station, China Lake, for technical assistance in the inventory and evaluation of 
Federally owned and administered archaeological collections at that facility. 

Interactions between military installations and State agencies have generally 
involved the SHPO of the States in which the facilities are located. Within the 
Northern Division Naval Facilities Engineering Command, for example, naval 
interactions are with the SHPOs as governed by Executive Order 12372, 
“Intergovernmental Coordination of Federal Programs.” The SHPOs then 
contact the tribes as needed. Neither the Navy nor the Northern Division 
Command have entered into any agreements directly with the tribes for either 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


25 








the exchange of information or coordination of effons. Because of the exten¬ 
sive military activity within the State of Nevada, a comprehensive report, the 
"Special Nevada Report” (U.S. Departments of the Air Force, Navy, and 
Interior 1991), has been prepared there. The report contains a description of 
defense-related activities in the State as required by the Military Lands With¬ 
drawal Act of 1986. 


Aircraft flyovers 

High-speed, low-altitude military aviation training missions that fly close to 
the contour of the ground can have a significant impact on both natural and 
cultural resource management. Siehl (1991) provides an overview of the 
potential impacts to natural resources, many of which could also affect Native 
American hunting activities and associated religious values. Since military 
flyovers occur over large areas beyond military installation boundaries, the 
potential for widespread impacts of this sort are great. Flying missions can 
also lead to access restrictions on military lands for various types of sacred 
sites such as plant collecting areas or fasting/meditation places. An example of 
this type of restriction is found at Fallon Air Force Base in Nevada where 
Native American access to a highly significant curing rock involves both ham¬ 
pered access and disruption of ceremonies. The Department of the Air Force 
has examined this issue and has developed a draft report entitled "Effects on 
Native Americans Resulting From Noise Associated With Low Altitude Flying 
Operations.” The report will be made available from Air Force Headquarters 
in 1993. 


Withdrawn lands 

Nonmilitaiy land in four states of the United States has oeen used for mil¬ 
itary activities. To provide clear legal authority for military use of that land, 
the Military Lands Withdrawal Act was passed November 6, 1986. The with¬ 
drawn lands require special attention with regard to Native American concerns; 
several individuals at the military bases contacted referred specifically to the 
withdrawn lands under their jurisdiction. As required by the Act, by 1998, the 
Secretary of each concerned military department must publish a draft EIS, 
consistent with the requirements of NEPA, for any withdrawn lands for which 
that Secretary intends to seek continued or renewed withdrawal. The comple¬ 
tion of an EIS wiU require that the Secretary invite the participation in the 
scoping process of any affected Native American groups. Withdrawn lands 
with known sites of interest to Native Americans include the Bravo-20 Bomb¬ 
ing Range in Nevada, the Nellis Air Force Range in Nevada, the Barry M. 
Goldwater Air Force Range in Arizona, and the Fort Wainwright Maneuver 
Area in Alaska. 


26 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 














Lands returned to Native American groups 

Several military properties are being returned to States and subsequently to 
Native American groups. For example, the Kaho’olawe Training Area in the 
Hawaiian Islands is being turned over to the State of Hawaii. Similarly, Fort 
Richardson in the State of Alaska is on the list of bases facing possible clo¬ 
sure. Native corporations have top-filed on this land as pan of the Alaska 
Native Qaims Settlement Act (ANCSA). At closure, the base will probably be 
returned to these native groups. These property transfers may require special 
attention. 


Summary 

Based on the results of the bibliographic and telephone surveys conducted 
by the University of Arizona Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology, 
several issues can be identified. The subject of native interactions with mili¬ 
tary installations has not received much attention in either the published litera¬ 
ture or among military employees. There is a consequent lack of formalized 
policies and procedures regarding native access and consultation. It has 
become evident that there is a need for education and readily available inform¬ 
ation about archaeological, historical, and cultural resource issues for military 
personnel. There is also a need for formalized policies and procedures regard¬ 
ing these issues. 


Chapter 3 Survey of Current Native American Access Programs 


27 








4 Conclusions and 
Recommendations 


Meeting the needs for Native American access to traditional and sacred 
sites on military lands involves a complex set of issues and is a problem not 
easily resolved. On the military side, various necessary actions must be taken 
into account, including training mission requirements, both land and air, sche¬ 
duling, and security needs and other management concerns, such as recreation 
management of cultural and natural resources. 

At the same time, however, there must be recognition of tribal sovereignty 
and respect for tribal cultural values on the part of DoD. Native Americans 
have both a moral and legal right to religious practice, and it must be recog¬ 
nized that expression of this right involves many types of places and concepts 
that may be difficult for non-Indians to fully comprehend. Just like the mili¬ 
tary, Native American religious leaders are, at times, concerned about confi¬ 
dentiality regarding sacred sites and disclosure of intimate details concerning 
their religious and cultural beliefs and practices to total strangers. Further¬ 
more, most of the religious and sacred places associated with these traditional 
beliefs, as well as most of the ceremonies, take place outdoors. 

Several recommendations for understanding the access needs of Native 
Americans to religious and sacred sites on EX)D installations can be listed 
based on the foregoing discussion. While these can be enumerated specifically 
herein, in reality they should be considered in concert with the findings of both 
the Legacy Cultural Resources and Native American Task Areas in order to 
arrive at comprehensive interactions between DoD and all native groups. Such 
activities are also necessary to meet the specific mandates of various historic 
preservation laws, such as NHPA, AIRFA, and NAGPRA. 

The recommendations offered regarding Native American, Native Hawaiian, 
and Native Alaskan access to religious and sacred sites on DoD installations 
ate as follows: 

a. The first step in the process is recognition by the DoD of Native 
American groups’ rights. As noted earlier, the Air Force is the only 
branch of service with written guidelines for Native American consul¬ 
tation, although implementation of this guidance is optional at the 


28 


Chapter 4 Corwiusions and Recommendaticms 









installation level. Clearly, policy statements or regulations with imple¬ 
menting guidelines are essential at three levels: (a) at DoD, where a 
statement should be prepared by the Secretary of Defense; (b) at the 
service level, where each branch of the military should build on the 
Secretary’s policy statement with regard to its own mission and 
requirements; and (c) at the installation level, where the policy and 
procedures must be effectively implemented. 

b. The second step involves identification of the interested parties and 
their concerns. Each installation within the DoD framework r^eds to 
identify those native groups or individuals who have a legitimate inter¬ 
est in traditional sites on lands under its control or use. This may 
include both land within the military reservation boundaries and other 
lands, both public and private, that may be affected by E>oD actions. 

It has already been proposed within Legacy that computerized databases be 
develt^d for each installation for Native American consultation needs (Briuer 
and Hebler 1992). TTie database would be incorporated within a geographic 
information system format and include various types of data; for example, 
maps and infoimation on Federal lands, treaty rights and other legal 
considerations, maps and infoimation describing the evolution of tribal lands 
through history, and an electronic bulletin board. 

Development of such a database at both national and installation-specific 
levels is critical to future success in DoD/Native American consultations. The 
various data in the system will have to be derived not only from documentary 
sources, but also through effective interaction with the affected tribes as well. 

c. Once the affected parties are identified at the installation level, the next 
step is to achieve understanding on the issues on both sides. Programs 
to enhance awareness, education, and relations between military 
commanders/resource managers and affected Native American/ 
Hawaiian/Alaskan groups are essential to finding compatibility between 
the various values and needs. Without a doubt, some areas of conflict 
between military needs and native group concerns will arise. The diff¬ 
erences between military needs for security purposes and Native Ameri¬ 
can desires for religious confidentiality are an example of a potential 
access conflict of great significance. Training scheduling and ceremon¬ 
ial calendars is another example. In the end, effective training/ 
education programs will be necessary to sensitize each side to the 
other’s needs. 

d. Concurrent with the above programs, effective management practices 
for traditional and sacred properties must be developed within each 
branch of service and for each installation historic preservation pro¬ 
gram. It can be fairly stated at this time that virtually no DoD instal¬ 
lation or activity manages these types of resources in a completely 
effective manner. It must be noted, however, that good starts in this 
direaion can be found at some facilities, as discussed in the previous 


Chapter 4 Conclusions and Recommendations 


29 








chapter. DoD should undertake a major effort to improve and imple¬ 
ment its identification and management of such sites, along with boost¬ 
ing its interaction with native groups as part of the process. 


The telephone survey discussed in this report indicates a current lack uf 
policies and procedures and a lack of awareness of many of the central issues 
at the installation level. Military personnel are generally not aware of who 
should, or how to, handle situations related to access concerns. In addition, 
there are no established points of contact for concerned Native American 
organizations or individuals. Part of the education and effective management 
process will be to identify personnel at each installation who are knowledge¬ 
able about the issues and the procedures for addressing them. 

Proper identification of the resources present is paramount. It is just as 
necessary to firmly establish that native religious or sacred sites are not present 
at a given facility. It is not justifiable today to simply assume that just 
because an issue has not been raised, there are none in existence. This type of 
management attitude reflects the presence of a reactive management program. 
Such issues need to be fuUy identified, evaluated, and integrated into installa¬ 
tion management and planning . 

Completely acceptable procedures for proper identification and handling of 
Native American religious and sacred sites have yet to be developed. Cer¬ 
tainly, Native Americans themselves must be thoroughly involved in the pro¬ 
cess. It is not enough to simply rely on archaeologists, anthropologists, 
historians, or other non- Indian specialists. At the same time, military person¬ 
nel must be careful that all issues important to a given tribe are identified, not 
just those vital to selected factions or individuals. Proper site identification 
methodologies should be developed as part of the consultation leading to 
meaningfiil policy and procedure statements at the service and installation 
levels. In some cases, the methods may have to be region-, tribe-, or 
installation-specific, because of the types of issues. 

Once identified, religious and sacred sites on DoD lands must be managed 
in a manner that provides Native American access and use within the context 
of the military mission. While the military mission is critical, it should not be 
accepted without complete evaluation of the situation that it supersedes any 
other value. For example, is it absolutely necessary to conduct a given type of 
training at a specific locale on a particular date if a significant conflict with a 
Native American sacred place or scheduled ceremony is present? Consulta¬ 
tion and cooperative interaction will likely result in the realization that the 
needs of both groups can be met if the mutual concerns are understood and the 
land is effectively managed. It may be, for example, that once a sacred site is 
identified, a buffer zone may need to be established to enhance the preser¬ 
vation of the site, protect its sanctity, and allow ceremonies to take place 
uninterrupted. 


30 


Chapter 4 Conclusions and Recommendations 











References 


Advisory Council for Historic Preservation (ACHP). (1985). “Guidelines for 
consideration of traditional cultural values in historic preservation review,” 
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, Washington, DC. 

_. (1993). “Consultation with Native Americans concerning properties 

of traditional religious and cultural importance,” Advisory Council on Historic 

Preservation, Washington, DC. 

Briuer, F. L., Freezor-Stewart, B., and DesOrmeaux, N. A. (1992). “Native 
American consultation: A review of Federal agency policies," U.S. Army 
Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, MS. 

Briuer, F. L. and Hebler, G. A. (1992), “Directory for Native American con¬ 
sultation,” U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, 
MS. 

Bumgardner, W. H. (1992). “Education, public access, and outdoor recre¬ 
ation,” Report prepared for U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment 
Station, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS. 

Deloria, V. (1992). ‘Trouble in high places: Erosion of American Indian 
rights to religious freedom in the United States,” The State of Native Amer¬ 
ica: Genocide, colonization, and resistance. M. A. Jaimes, ed.. South End 
Press, Boston, MA, 267-290. 

Parker, P. L. (1990). “Keepers of the treasures: Protecting historic properties 
and cultural traditions on Indian lands,” U. S. Department of the Interior, 
National Park Service, Washington, DC. 

Parker, P. L. and King, T. F. (1990). “Guidelines for evaluating and docum¬ 
enting traditional cultural properties,” U.S. Department of the Interior, 
National Paik Service, National Register Bulletin 38, Washington. DC. 

Siehl, G. H. (1991). “Natural resource issues in national defense programs,” 
CRS Report for Congress 91-781 ENR, Congressional Research Service, 
The Library of Congress, Washington, DC. 


References 











Stoffle, R. W., Austin, D. and Fulfrost, B. (1992). “American Indian acccs.s 
to Department of Defense facilities: Source documents and bibliography," 
Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ. 

Swan, J. (1989). “Sacred sites: Cultural values and . magement issues,” 
International perspectives on cultural parks, proceedings of the first world 
corference, Mesa Verde National Park, CO, 1984. U. S. Department of the 
Interior, National Park Service, Washington, DC, 383-388. 

U.S. Department of the Air Force. (1991). “Natural resources: Historic 
preservation,” Regulation, AFR 126-7. 

U.S. Departments of the Air Force, Navy, and Interior. (1991). “Special 
Nevada report," Science Applications International Corporation, Desert 
Research Institute, Reno, NV. 

U.S. Department of Defense. (1991). “Report to Congress: Legacy Resource 
Management Program,” Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for the Envirorunent, Washington, DC. 

Vecsey, C., ed. (1991). Handbook of American Indian religious freedom. 
Crossroad Publishing Company, New York. 


32 


Referoncss 










r 


Appendix A 
Bibliographic Citations 
Regarding Native American 
Access to Military Installations 


Bard, James C, Colin I. Busby, and John M. Findlay. (1981). “A Cultural 
Resources Overview of the Carson and Humboldt Sinks, Nevada,” Report 
prepared for the U.S. Department of the Army and Western Division Naval 
Facilities Command, Basin Research Associates, Berkeley, CA. 

Bieder, Robert E. (1990). “A Brief Historical Survey of the Expropriation of 
American Indian Remains,” Native American Rights Fund, Boulder, CO. 

Carmichael, David L. (1989). “Native American Consultation in the Context 
of Air Force Program Planning,” Paper presented at the World Archeologi¬ 
cal Congress, First Inter-Congress Archeological Ethics and the Treatment 
of the Dead, Vermillion, SD. 

HDR Sciences. (1981a). “Environmental Characteristics of Alternative 
Designated Deployment Areas; Native Americans (Nevada/Utah).” ETR 

21, prepared for the U.S. Air Force, Norton Air Force Base, CA. 

HDR Sciences. (1981b). “Environmental Characteristics of Alternative Desig¬ 
nated Deployment Areas; Native Americans (Texas/New Mexico),” ETR 

22, prepared for the U.S. Air Force, Norton Air Force Base, CA. 

National Congress of American Indians. (1992). “A Resolution for Tribal 
Regulatory Authority Over Airspace,” Resolution No. DC-92-42, adopted 
by the Executive Council during the 49th Annual Convention, October 11- 
16, Crystal City, VA. 

Stoffle, Richard, Henry Dobyns, Michael Evans, and Omer Stewart. (1984). 
“Toyavita Piavuhuru Koroin (Canyon of the Mother Earth); Ethnohistory 
and Native American Religious Concerns in the Pinon Canyon Maneuver 
Area,” Report prepared for the U.S. Army, Fort Carson, CO, by the Univer¬ 
sity of Wisconsin-Parkside, Kenosha, WI. 


Appencfix A Bibliographic Citations 










Stoffle, Richard, David Halmo, and John Olmstead. (1989). “Paitu 

Nanasuagaindu Pahonupi (Three Sacred Valleys): An Assessment of Native 
American Cultural Resources Potentially Affected by Proposed U.S. Air 
Force Electronic Combat Test Capability Actions and Alternatives at the 
Utah Test and Training Range,” Report submitted to Science Applications 
International Cotporation, Las Vegas, NV, by the Institute for Social 
Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml. 

U.S. Departments of the Air Force. Navy, and Interior. (1991). “Special 
Nevada Report,” Report prepared by Science Applications International 
Corporation, Desert Research Institute, Reno, NV. 

U.S. Etepartment of the Air Force. (1985). “Conference on Reburial; Tran¬ 
script of the Peacekeeper MX Missile Reburial Conference,” Report pre¬ 
pared by American Indian Research Project, University of South Dakota, 
Vermillion, SD. 

U.S. Department of the Air Force. (1988). “Class II Survey and Testing of 
Cultural Resources at the Melrose Air Force Range, Curry and Roosevelt 
Counties, New Mexico,” Report prepared by Mariah Associates, Albuquer¬ 
que, NM. 

U.S. Department of the Air Force. (1991). “Cultural Resources Overview and 
Management Plan for Cheyenne Mountain Air Force Base, Colorado,” 
Report prepared by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN. 

U.S. Department of the Interior. (1982). “Survey, Testing, and Documenta¬ 
tion, Assembly and Offense Areas, Fort Irwin, California,” Addendum to 
Report of Intensive Survey Instrumented Range Assembly Area, Fort Irwin, 
California, prepared for the National Park Service, Interagency Archeologi¬ 
cal Services Division, San Francisco, CA, by Cornerstone Research, San 
Diego, CA, 


A2 


Appendx A Bibliographic Citations 





Appendix B 
Telephone Survey 
Questionnaire 


Contact Person__ 

Agency_ Phone_ 

Location __ 

Talked to_ Date_ 

1) Agency policy and procedures concerning Native American consultation 


2) Formal agreements such as MOAs or MOUs concerning the particular 
division/site and any Native American tribes 


Who with; 

What access is for: 


When agreement was made: 
Where for: 


3) Any regular interactions with Native American tribes (i.e., specific 
requests, programs) 


Appendix B Telephone Survey Questionnaire 


81 







4) Have Native American tribes ever contacted you about archaeology or to 
come visit the property (to hunt, gather, conduct ceremonies)? 


Who requested access: 
What access was for: 


When requested: 
Where for: 


5) Did any EIS, cultural resources plans, etc., yield recommendations about 
tribal access? 


Were these followed? How? 


B2 


Appendix B Telephone Survey Questionnaire 




REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

form Approved 

OM8 No 0704^188 

Pubik reporring burd^ fOr this coH«ct>on cl mformAtion »s estimAtcid to «Ker«g« t hCQt pet <«t<>onse. tnciuCin^ the time lo* reviewing iAsbunions, secreting existing <3«u sources 
gjthefing and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the coiiection of information Sersd comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of thn 
coitection of information, including suggestions tor r^uemg this burden to Washington weadquarters Services, Oirectorate for information Operatiorn and hepons, Jefferson 

Oavis f^hway. Suite >204. Adington. VA 22202-4302. and to the OHice of Management and tudget, Paperwork deduction Pr^ect (0704-0>M). Washington. DC 20S03 

1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank) 2. REPORT DATE 3 . REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED 

August 1993 Final report 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 

Native American Access to Religious and Sacred Sites on Department of 
Defense Installations 

5 . FUNDING NUMBERS 

6 . AUTHORIS) 

Paul R. Nickens, Richard W. Sioffle, Diane Austin, Brian Fulfrost 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S> AND ADORE SS(ES) 

U. S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, Environmental 

Laboratory, 3909 Halls Ferry Road, Vicksburg, MS 39180-6199; 

Bureau of Applied Research in Anthropology 

University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 

8 . PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 
REPORT NUMBER 

Technical Report 

EL-93-15 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAMC(S) AND AODRESSfES) 

U. S. Department of Defense 

Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Environment 
Washington, DC 22202 

10. SPONSORING/MONITORING 

AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 

11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

Available from National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161. 

12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 

Approved for public release: distribution is unlimited. 

IZb. DISTRIBUTION CODE 

13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words) 

This report summarizes the result of a literature and bibliographic review and telephone survey of Department of 
Defense (DoD) installations that focused on issues related to Native American access to religious and sacred sites 
located on DoD lands. The report briefly examines the nature of religious and sacred sites, the legal framework for 
allowing Native American access to these properties, and current DoD policies concerning access issues. The 
nationwide telephone survey yielded considerable information on current Native American access programs at DoD 
installations. Using these data, a recommendation is made for an approach that will result in a better understanding 
of Native American access needs by DoD personnel. 

14. SUBJECT TERMS 

Access Native Americans 

Department of Defense installations Sacred and religious sites 

15. NUMBER OF PAGES 

40 

16. PRICE CODE 

17. SECURITY aASSIFICATION 

Of REPORT 

UNCLASSIFIED 

18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

OF THIS PAGE 

UNCLASSIFIED 

19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 
OF ABSTRACT 

20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT 


NSN 7540-01-280-5500 Standard Form 298 (Rev 2 89) 




m 102 





























