DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 368 155 FL 021 404 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Spolsky, Bernard 

Testing the English of Foreign Students in 1930. 
Aug 93 

18p.; Paper presented at the Annual Language Testing 
Research Colloquium (15th, Cambridge, England, United 
Kingdom, August 2-8, 1993). 

Reports - Descriptive (141) — Speeches/Conference 
Papers (150) 



EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS College Entrance Examinations; Comparative Analysis; 

Educational History; ''^English (Second Language); 

Foreign Countries; ^Foreign Students; Higher 

Education; Immigrants; '^Language Tests; Test 

Construction; '^Testing; Testing Problems; ^^Test Use; 

United States History 
IDENTIFIERS ^^College Entrance Examination Board; Educational 

Testing Service; England; ''^University of Cambridge 

Local Exam Synd (England) 



ABSTRACT 

Tests of English for foreign students conducted by 
the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate (England) 
and the Educational Testing Service were recognized as equivalent, 
though different in form and approach, in the 1930s. The underlying 
goal of the Cambridge certificate of proficiency was control of the 
English curriculum of foreign schools. American tests were intended 
to plug a loophole in immigration law that allowed for visas outside 
the foreign student quota, and reliability was an important design 
criterion. The College Entrance Examination Board test prepared in 
1927-30 reflects the contemporary state of the art in language 
testing. It consisted of: four one-paragraph passages, varied in 
difficulty and focus, with true-false questions; a longer passage 
focusing on ideas; a direct dictation and reproduction from memory of 
a dictated passage; an oral test; and a 250-300 word composition. In 
its first year, the test was administered to 30 candidates in 8 
countries. Diminishing interest in studying in the United States 
during the Depression caused discontinuance. The Cambridge 
examinations, by contrast, were curriculum-oriented, modeled on a 
traditional native-speaker higher education syllabus, and did not 
incorporate psychometrics . They included sections on phonetics, 
English literature, and translation. Use expanded gradually but 
steadily, then declined during World War II. (MSE) 



V? AVc * * ^VVc * * * ^ Vc •ifi\i<i<i<'k'k'i\ ^ c "k-k^fi-k k -k k Vc Vc k k k it ^'c k k k kkkkkkkkkk k Vc Vc A * * Vc * * * * * ^ * * 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made ^'^ 

* from the original document. * 

i'<ki<kki<kki(i<kiikkki(kkkkiKkkkkki(kiKkkkkkickitky\kitki^^ 



ERIC 



Testing the English of foreign students in 1930 
Bernard Spolsky, Bar-flan University 



The tests of English for foreign students conducted by the 
University of Cambridge Local Examinations i«*d-and by the 
Educational Testing Service, Princeton, have come imder recent 
scrutiny in a major comparative study conducted by Lyle Bachman 
and others. It is interesting to note that earher versions of these 
examinations were recognized as equivalent in the 1930s; the New 
York State Department of Education was said to be willing to 
recognize the University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate 
Certificate of Proficiency in Enghsh or the College Board's Enghsh 
Examination (EETCS) as proof of Enghsh proficiency for Jewish doctors 
and lawyers seeking to escape persecution in Nazi Germany. 

Even in the 1930s, the examinations on each side of the Atlantic 
Ocean were different in form and approach. The Cambridge 
Certificate of Pi'oficiency examinations dated from 1913, and were 
considered innovative and almost non-academic in their desire to test 
language use rather than knowledge about language. Nonetheless, 
they remained untouched by the concern for psychometric rehabihty 
that had come to permeate American language testing after the end of 
the first world war. Their imderlying goal seemed to be control of the 
curriculum of selected foreign schools teaching Enghsh; they were 
thus part of the linguistic tmperiahsm that PhiUipson (1992) has 
described. 



us DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
I >ll« ^ (»i \ (!»,» at'oria' Mp«'a"' ^ nr^o im(tf(wompni 

EDUCATIONAL ^FSOUnC.tS INFORMATION 
CtNT^RiERICl 

his do( iifT>fr»t has tteer. fen'oducod ax 
M'co'vod t'o"^ pt»'snn Of 0»Qa'»i/ai'O'^ 
onginatiog .t 

Minof (hang«>s hay»« t>*«c"> macJp to imprOyo 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL MAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



Pointi, f^i vip^ (it oO'mons Slated in this dOC o 
iT\(iT\\ do not riO( PSSa'ily 'Pp'OSPnl Oflif.al 
Of Rl position Of policy 



TO THE t DUG AT ION A I. RKSOURCtS 
INFORMATIUN CtNTHR tERIC) ' 



. 2 

The American tests of English for foreign students, on the other 
hand, were intended to plug a loophole in the 1924 Immigration Act 
which allowed for visas outside the quotas for foreign students. 
Influenced by Carl Brigham, the College Entrance Examination Board 
was already learning to eschew curricular control in favor of 
rehability, and the examinations included a number of new-type true- 
false questions alongside open-ended integrative items. 

The CoUege Board Examination to Test Competence in the Enghsh 

Language 

The Enghsh Competence examination prepared by the CoUege 
Entrance Examination Board in 1930, probably the earhest test 
intended speciiically for Enghsh as a second language in tht United 
States, provides a good view of the state of the art in American 
language testing. [Saretsky, 1984 #1276]i hidirectly, psychomctrics 
had a part in creating the need for the test, which was intended to 
deal with a provision of the Immigration Act of 1924, the passage of 
which had been influenced by the evidence of eugenicists and 
psychometrists Hke Carl Brigham on the deleterious effects of 
permitting non-Nordic immigrants to contaminate the American gene 
pool. The Act permitted granting special visas to any foreign ahen 
whose only purpose was to study in the United States at a school, 
college or university approved by the Secretary of Labor. On receipt 
of a certificate of admission from such an institution, the local 



lAfter preparing an account of this test on the basis of pubhshed 
material, I was pleased to come across a short history of the test by 
the archivist of the Educational Testing Service, Gary D. Saretzky. 



ERLC 



3 



3 



American Consul was empowered to issue a student visa. The 
loophole was quickly spotted, cOiu the nxmiber of foreign appUcants 
seeking admission to US institutions grew rapidly. In 1926, the 
Commissioner General of Immigration wrote in a memorandum that: 
"The experience of the bm-eau in the past two and one-half 
years is to the effect that many non-quota immigrant students 
gain admission to the United States totally unfit, because of 
Insufficient knowledge of the Enghsh language.... THEREFORE, IT 
IS REQUESTED THAT ALL SCHOOLS INDICATE IN THE 
CERTDFICATE OF ADMISSION THE EXACT KNOWIEDGE OF THE 
ENGUSH LANGUAGE A STUDENT MUST HAVE BEFORE HE CAN BE 
ACCEPTED."2 

As a result, a number of requests were made to the College 
Board for a test to measure their knowledge of Enghsh. [College 
Entrance Examination Board, 1929 #1085] These were formahzed 
when in December 1927, the American Association of Collegiate 
Registrars adopted the following resolution: 

Whereas, it is required that a certificate of admission be 
furnished to a non-quota immigrant student prior to his 
admission to the United States, and difficulties have arisen both 
in defimng the exact knowledge of the Enghsh language 
required for admission and in determining the abihty of the 
student in this respect, 



2Excerpt included in the file of Enghsh Examination for Foreign 
Students, Educational Testing Service archives. 



ERIC 



4 



4 



Be it resolved that the American Association of Collegiate 
Registrars request the College Entrance Examination Board to 
consider the addition to their service of a special examination 
designed to test the ability of a foreign student in such use of 
the Enghsh language as is required for attendance by an 
American coUegiate institutions, and to offer this examination 
to prospective foreign students in connection with their regular 
June examination. 

In April 1928, the Board set up a commission 3 which reported 
seven months later that it would be desirable to have an examination 
to test "abihty to imderstand written English, to read Enghsh 
inteUigibly, to understand spoken Enghsh, and to express his 
thoughts inteUigibly in spoken Enghsh." The aural comprehension 
test should include "simple Enghsh prose read slowly" and "simple 
directions given conversationally." The report suggested that 
Instructors in Enghsh Departments were not the best qualified to 



3The commission was chaired by Professor Adam Leroy Jones, 
(director of admissions at Columbia University), and consisted of Dr 
Claude Fuess (English instructor at the Phillips Academy, J. Wilson 
Hobbs (Enghsh junior master at the Boston Pubhc Latin School), Ralph 
Minor (university examiner with the University of California), Dr 
Kenneth Murdock (assistant professor of Enghsh at Harvard 
University), David Robertson (assistant director of the American 
Council of Education) , Ira Smith (registrar of the University of 
Michigan), and Edwin Stevens, (registrar of the University of 
Washington). 



ERIC 



5 



5 



develop a test, because of their concern with correct grammar. New 
type tests might be suitable. The test should include passages of 
varyiQg difficulty and "with different subject matters;" the report 
should break down the resiilts by section. Such an examination was 
"financially feasible" but the candidates should bear its full cost. 

A second commission, appointed to plan the examination, 4 at 
first assumed that half the test would be oral-aural. A 1928 
memorandum by the commission assumed four parts, of equal 
weight: reading of coUege material, writing of coUege reports, 
understanding lectures and class discussions, and speaking weR 
enough to take part in class discussions. In April 1929, the committee 
presented a detailed outhne to the Board, which received a grant of 
S5000 from the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace to cover 
the costs. The specification of the examination were as follows: 

1. Four one-paragraph passages (about 150 words 
each); one of them narrative and simple, a second historical or 
topical or journahstic and more difficult, a third "of some 
critical weight on a matter of specific social import" and a 
fourth of scientific prose. The questions should be quite 



4 The membership of the second commission differed from the first 
in that Hobbs, Minor, Smith and Stevens were replaced by Professor 
Jack Crawford (Yale University), Professor Sophie Hait (WeUesley 
College), Professor Ada Snell (Mount Holyoke CoUege) and Professor 
Harrison Steeves (Columbia University), making it thus an essentially 
academic committee. 



ERIC 



6 



6 



straightforward, and coiild be answered with plus or minus 
(true-false) answers. 

2. A longer passage (about 400 words) perhaps from 
Mill or Lowell, dealing with "debatable or conditioned ideas," the 
questions to look for capacity to "isolate sahent ideas, and to 
deal critically with hypothetical and adversative statements and 
the hke." 

3. A direct dictation, and the reproduction from 
memory of a dictated passage. 

4. An oral test, with ten topics prepared for the 
examiner. The examiner was to report, using a three point scale 
for each (proficient, satisfactory, or unsatisfactory), on "fluency, 
responsiveness, rapidity, articulation, enunciation, command of 
construction, of connectives, usable vocabulary and the use of 
idiom; examiners should also report if the candidate appeared 
"diffident or shy." 

5. A 250-300 word composition to be written on a 
selected topic. 

Time should be given for revision; reports should be given for 
each part of the examination. The commission believed that the main 
value of the examination would be its diagnostic accuracy. "It is 
important to know the candidate's strength or weakness in knowledge 
of words, command of English construction, and grasp of the logic 
and continuity of English speech." There was no point in giving 
absolute percentage grades, but rather percentile standing by coimtry. 
This was beheved to be especially important for students whose 
language differed greatly from Enghsh, like Chinese or Japanese. 



ERLC 



7 



7 



Formal tests of spelling, grammar would give little evidence of the 
ability of a foreigner to carry on American college work. The reading 
passages of varying difficulties might show that candidates who did 
no express themselves with facihly might stiU be fitted for certain 
work, for instance at the graduate level. Therefore, it was thought 
advisable for the examination papers to be sent directly to the 
colleges. 

Preparing the the first examination scheduled for April 1930 
examination was not easy, and "no httle correspondence was 
necessary in order to secure the services of suitable persons in the 
administration and supervision of the examination." [College Entrance 
Examination Board, 1930 #1198]:8. Finally, help was received from a 
number of American ambassadors and consuls. Thirty candidates took 
the examination, which was judged to be "very carefully prepared and 
especiaUy weU planned" in 1930, and the work of most of them was 
said to have been "very creditable." Seven candidates were examined 
in China, eight in Belgium, four in each of Poland and Italy, three in 
Himgary, two in Germany, and one in each of Beirut and France. Six 
were women. Five candidates planned to go to Columbia University, 
three to each of Harvard, Stanford and Michigan. 

In the second year, 1931, the fee was $10 and 139 candidates 
were examined in seventeen countries. The largest group (82) was in 
Moscow, where engineering students were required by the Soviet 
Government to take the examination. [College Entrance Examination 
Board, 1931 #1059] The secretary of the American-Russian Chamber 
of Commerce, Spencer WiUiams, supervised the Moscow 
administration, with three assistants to help with the oral interview 



8 



8 



Williams reported that he had enjoyed the experience though it had 
been hard work. The candidates represented that "new class of 
technicians rising up for the proletariat" and had been spending 
twelve hours a day for five months to learn Enghsh. [Saretsky, 1984 
#1276]:3 The average for all candidates for the oral test was 85%, for 
the reading 77%, for the composition 56%. and for the dictation 47%. 
In 1932, the test was offered in 29 countries, but as a result of the 
world wide depression, only 30 candidates offered themselves at 
twelve centers. 

At the suggestion of the 1932 examiners, another commission^ 
was set up to revise the examination. It proposed the use of 
"indeterminate" as weU as true-false items and wanted to give broad 
classifications rather than scores, and to continue the stress on 
spoken Enghsh, A new description was approved for the 1933 
examination. [CoUege Entrance Examination Board, 1932 #1199]. Part 
1 was changed to consist of several passages with about 30 true-false 
and other questions testing imderstanding. For the second dictation, 
was allowed to take notes. The oral test was to be based on "ten or 
fifteen minutes of discussion or conversation." The revised 
examitiation showed the acceptance of the need for rehable items, 
but not at the cost of more face vahd assessment of what Carroll 
(1961) later called integrative skQls. 



5lt consisted of Professors Jones, Hansford, SneU and Steeves, joiaed 
by the associate secretary of the Board, Professor Carl Brigham of 
Princeton University. 



ERIC 



9 



9 



In any event, the examination did not survive the economic 
situation as the numbers of candidates continued to fall. In 1933, 17 
candidates took the examination; in 1934, 20. [CoUege Entrance 
Examination Board, 1934 #1061] The Secretary of the Board had 
written once again to colleges asking if the examination should be 
continued. In 1935, the funds were exhaustedfCollege Entrance 
Examination Board, 1935 #1062] In fact, the 1935 report admitted, the 
1933 questions had been carefully guarded and used again in 1934 
and 1935, but as they could not be used again, the examination was 
"at least temporarily" discontinued It was hoped that conditions 
would improve, but in fact they did not. 

In 1938, a Dr Heiorich Selver called the Board to ask about the 
Enghsh Examination. A school he had been associated with in Berlin 
offered courses in Enghsh for adults for German Jewish doctors and 
lawyers seeking to emigrate, the New York State Department of 
Education would recognize the University of Cambridge Local 
Examinations Syndicate Certificate of Proficiency in Enghsh or the 
College Board's Enghsh Examination (EETCS). As many of them 
wanted to come to the US, the American examination seemed more 
appropriate. He was told that it was no longer being given. It was not 
until after the war that interest in the test was rekindled. 

This account of the fir^t American institutional test in Enghsh for 
foreign students prefigures in mmiature the development of TOEFL. 
Some of the f eatm es that stand out in hindsight are the dependence 
on Foundation support (provided to start up the examination but 
lacking at the critical point), the intelhgence and wisdom of the 
original examination proposal, tempered by practical and institutional 



ERIC 



JO 



10 



reality, and the slowness of users to see the value of the test. The 
examination responded cautiously to the mounting pressure to 
including objective items in standardized examinations. This was in 
marked contrast to the testing of foreign students of Enghsh 
conducted by the University of Cambridge; another major difference 
between the American and the Enghsh test is that the former was (of 
necessity) quite curriculum-free and seen first and foremost as a 
proficiency examination. 

It is relevant to note that the purpose of this test was in fact 
pohtical and restrictive; its task was to enforce an immigration act 
whose purpose was to reverse the earher American openness. It was 
provided by a well-estabhshed testing agency in response to 
government request. Its ultimate ineffectiveness resulted not form 
any formal opposition, but to an imwillingness of government or 
foundations or prospective users to pay for what they thought was 
needed. 

The Cambridge Examinations in Enghsh for Foreigners 
The notion of rehabihty was much less influential in England 
than on the other side of the Atlantic. In spite of Cyril Burt's early 
support for the objective achievement test [Burt, 1921 #973] and the 
continuing growing acceptance of intelligence testing, traditional 
examining in England remained virtually imcontaminated by 
psychometric notions. This may be seen from the contemporary 
forms of the Cambridge tests in Enghsh for foreigners. 

Testing of the Enghsh of foreigners started much earher in 
England than in America. In fact, the University of Cambridge became 



ERIC 



II 



11 



involved in overseas testing within a few years of starting the Local 
Examinations, when in 1862, there was an inquiry from Trinidad to 
Cambridge. The first papers were sent out ("in sealed parcels to the 
Governor through the Colonial Office") in 1863, and ten candidates 
were examined. (Roach, 1971:146) Cambridge continued to develop 
its overseas examinations, and by 1898, Cambridge had 36 colonial 
centers and 1220 colonial candidates. (Roach, 1971:145). Its formal 
entry in testing the Enghsh of foreigners was not until 1913, when it 
instituted the examination for the Certificate of Proficiency in Enghsh, 
meant to be for "foreign students who sought proof of their practical 
knowledge of the language 'with a view to teaching it' in foreign 
schools."[Roach, 1945 #3601:34. Reflecting the growing interest in 
direct method teaching, which required of teachers "rehable 
command of the Irnguage for active classroom use" rather than 
academic or descriptive ability, it was however modeled on the 
traditional native speaker language syUabus, with the essay as the key 
feature. As weU as a paper in Phonetics, there was a hterature paper 
on a period studied in advanced classes in Enghsh secondary schools 
(Roach 1945:34). Another paper involved translation: the two 
languages regularly offered were French and German. 

The examination was smaU to start with, and offered only at one 
center, London, it "teetered along" with about 15 candidates a year. 
There was probably a pause in the activities of the certificate during 
the War, and its growth came after 1925 when John Roach first 
became involved. In 1925, John Roach was appointed Additional 
Assistant Secretary to the Syndicate, just before he took his second 
Tripos and quahfied for a degree in French and German. Roach, after 



ERIC 



12 



studying classics at school, had served as a professional soldier in the 
Indian Army from 1917 until 1922, with war-time service in the 
Middle East. At first, Nalder WiUiams, a Classicist, who was Secretary 
of the Syndicate, and Roach handled the final decisions on the award 
of grades for the English examination, "a hole-in-corner affair of 
fifteen minutes." [Roach, 1983 #1186]:5. In fact, WiUiams had charge 
of examiriing in Enghsh; Roach's area was "modern languages, 
geography and oddments" and as he later remarked, "it was not then 
reahzed that Enghsh was, for foreign candidates, a 'modern' 
language." The examination remaining so smaU, there may well have 
been discussions, Roach recollected, of closing it, but instead, full 
responsibility was handed to Roach, who prophesied that he would 
spread the examination round the world in ten years. By 1939, he 
later triumphantly noted, it was being offered in 30 countries. 

The growth and development of the examination was slow but 
steady. In 1926, translation papers were offered as a matter of coin:se 
in It ah an and Spanish as well as French and German. In 1930, a special 
hterature paper for foreign students was written. In 1932, the 
Phonetics paper was dropped, and centers other than London were 
added, with the result that the numbers of candidates started to rise 
rapidly. 



Table 1. Candidates for the Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency 
IQ Enghsh (Roach 1945:34) 



1931 


1932 


1933 


1934 


1935 


1936 


1937 


1938 


1939 


15 


33 


66 


140 


202 


278 


412 


675 


752 



13 



In 1935, the examinationji^was offered in December as well as in 
July, and there were centers at Cambridge, London, Edinburgh and 
Rome. In 1936, a paper in Economic and Commercial Knowledge^ was 
an alternative to the Enghsh Literature paper, and three levels of pass, 
Special Mention, Good, and Pass, were instituted. In 1935, the Board 
of Education gave official recognition to the examination. In 1936, it 
was offered at Rome, Naples, Hamburg, Paris and Holland, Sweden and 
Switzerland. In 1934, Roach (Roach, 1934 #1194] had proposed 
extending the notion of a Certificate of Proficiency by reintroducing 
(they had been offered from 1917-1922) examinations in languages 
other than Enghsh; he suggested such certificates in French, German, 
Spanish and Italian.. There was opposition from the British 
Association for Commercial and Industrial Education who thought 
that existing examinations offered by the London Chamber of 
Commerce and the Royal Society of Arts covered the area fully. Roach 
later called for national tests in foreign languages [Roach, 1977 
#1196]. 

The certificate received a major boost when in 1937 the 
University of Cambridge recognized it as "the equivalent of the 
standard of Enghsh required of all students, British or foreign, before 
entrance to the University." More and more centers were opened,^ 



^This syUabus was to written in consultation with the Head of the Day 
Department at the City of London CoUege. (Roach, 1934 #1194] 
7 In 1937, centers hsted included Dubhn, Paris, Berlin, Marburg, 
Hambm-g, Florence, Rome, Naples, Milan, Hilversum, Lausaime, Basle, 
Mahno, Helsinki, Budapest, Belgrade, Zagreb, Lyubljana, Sarejevo, 



14 



and translation papers offered for more and more languages.^. A new 
alternative to English Literature in 1938 was English Life and 
Institutions. The examination was offered five times in the year. 

With the growing demand for certification in Enghsh, Roach 
proposed the introduction of a new Lower Certificate of Enghsh. The 
newly estabhshed British Council, Roach (1983:6) later recalled, 
opposed this development, and sent a Colonel Sulhvan to see him at 
Sftanf; Roach was taken by SuUivan to Corpus Chrlsti College, where 
Spens, "arch bully and puller of wires" and probably a member of the 
British Council, attempted to browbeat him. Spens "had the guns" iQ 
England, as he was chairman of the School CouncLl;^ but Roach had 
support, he was sure, in the Foreign Office. He decided to continue 
with his plans for the Lower Certificate, but introduce it only at 
overseas centers, which he did in 1939. In 1943, it was also given at 
home centers for members of the AUied Forces. The Lower Certificate 
examination in June 1939 consisted of a dictation, a two-hour Enghsh 
composition and language paper, and a two hour hterature paper. 



Vienna, Gdynia, Warsaw, Bucharest, Athen3, Smyrna, Rabat, Beirut, 
Baghdad, Jerusalem, Shanghai, Oslo, Stockholm, Amiens, Bordeaux 
and Dakar. 

8 By 1938, translation papers were regularly set in Arabic, Chinese, 
Dutch, French, German, Greek, Hebrew, Itahan, Serbo-Croat, Spanish 
and Swedish, and other languages were available on request 
9When Roach came in, Spens was just signing the famous Spens 
report on British education. 

15 

ERIC 



15 



Candidates were required to write a letter of between 80 and 100 
words; there v/ere three alternative topics, the first being as follows: 
A letter of thanks for a present you have been given on 
your birthday. Say what other presents you were given and what 
you did that day. 

There were also three topics offered for the required 250-300 
word composition; one involved a narrative account of teaching a 
younger brother or sister to ride a bicycle, a second was a detailed 
description of a picture hanging in a house or a school, and the third 
was a description of what the candidate saw while waiting at a railway 
station for a missed train. This was followed by a short narrative; 
candidates were asked to give it a title, demonstrate knowledge of the 
meaning of six out of twelve underlined words, write a four sentence 
summary of the main points of the story, and rewrite in good Enghsh 
some sentences in Aboriginal pidgin in the story. The hterature 
questions (two out of four had to be chosen) were based on the 
prescribed texts, which were A Tale of Two Cities, The Oxford English 
Course: Reading Book Four, GuUtver in Lilliput, and Arms and the Man. 
There was also an oral examination. 

Just before the outbreak of World War H, then, the Cambridge 
Enghsh examinations reached a high point, with centers in 24 
overseas countries (Germany was omitted at the last minute) and 
twenty regular centers in Britain. In the last months before the War, 
Roach made visits to Belgium, Italy, France and Switzerland to 
estabhsh new centers. 

The close connection between Enghsh teaching and testing and 
the Foreign Office may be illustrated by a side-note on that trip by 

Er|c ^ 6 



16 



Roach ([Roach, 1989 #1193]): "Perhaps the most remarkable thing I 
wrote was a report that I wrote in French (it had been requested by 
the French InteUigence in Paris) on Mussolini's Italy. I wrote it in one 
evening at the end of a ten-day tour of Italy on the Syndicate's 
business at Christmas 1939, Italy still being semi-neutral. Professor 
Deseeignet of Reading said, 'The style is extremely good. It should be 
pubhshed at once.' Certainly not! Had I published, every Intelligence 
Service, including our own, would have said, 'He talks." AH that I 
gathered in Itahan (and in German from Polish refugees in my hotel) I 
transmuted that evening in French. It caused a stir in the French 
InteUigence, our Embassy in Paris, the Foreign Office. That was 
enough." The original report is in the hbrary of Magdalene College. 

With the War, there was a rapid decline, as so many foreign 
centers became inaccessible.^^ 

In the development of the Cambridge test, the issue of reUabihty 
that Edgeworth had raised in 1888 continued to be of only occasional 
interest, and the examinations remained imtouched by psychometric 



lOwtule inaccessible, the examinations appear to have been continued 
underground in enemy occupied territory. Roach [Roach, 1983 #1186] 
hsted several such cases: Sister Pauhne who Icept them going in Italy 
and sent in the scripts after the war for validation and the award of 
certificates, Mrs. Stansfield-Popovic of Belgrade who took the 
examinations into Civihan Internment Camp and forwarded the 
scripts through the Red Cross, and a nun in Brussels who continued 
the examinations in her convent "under the noses" of an occupying 
German unit. 



ERIC 



17 



17 



notions. One can see this by comparing the 1931 CoUege Board's 
examination, with its true-false questions, its concentration on 
language, and its lack of curricular concern, with the forms of the 
Cambridge papers described above, with their emphasis on 
curriculum, their inclusion of hterature, and their absolute rehance 
on subjective grading. The Cambridge examiners continued until 
quite recently to be more concerned about what to test (i.e., about 
curriculum) than about how to test it. 

But there were some people in England unhappy with this 
estabhshed view. Valentine[Valentine, 1932 #988] summarized 
several years of research into the rehability of various Enghsh 
examinations. Like Latham, he was disturbed by the "cramping" effect 
of examination syllabuses, but even more important for him was 
Edgeworth's questioning of their rehability. The most patent causes 
of unrehabHity were luck in being asked the right questions «md 
"adventitious variation" in the state of the candidate at the time of the 
examination. A second major sources was the instability of essay 
marking and the variability in and among examiners.Valentine found 
very httle relation between the way students were ordered on 
entrance exams and their school certificate examination results five 
years later. He remarked on the tendency to teach those things most 
easily examined: thus, composition in a foreign language, though less 
important than reading, made for easier discrimination and was more 
hkely to be examined. In spite of his and other studies, Enghsh 
practice continued to resist applying Edgeworth's findings. 



^8 



END 

-S. Dept. of Education 



Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement (OERI) 



ERIC 

Date Filmed 
August 16, 1994 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATiON: 



Title 












/ , t ^^ Ji4-/^f> 






CofDOrate Source 


PuDlicat on Dale 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



in order !o disspnninalp vv'dPl\ as pos^ihie t<moiy and s.gni' r mi! rT>.^«oridis 0* interes! loine educational communrty. documents 
announced .n the monl^tiy aoswaci |Ouinai 0* tht^ £ RIC '.ystt-n^ Rt.'sowco^. m C-duCcition (RIE) are uSuaily made avaiiaole to users 
•f^ m.cro'«cf">e 'epfoduct-'d paper copy ana electronic opi c.ji nvoui <j'»o sold *^1rough ine ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
«EORS) c Qi^et ERIC vt^ndo?'-. C-eoi! Q'vf^n iht> wuj'Cr- (,'■ i-'.icu oofumpni and i' reproduction release ts granted, one ot 
t^^e ^oiicvv.r^g no!-ces iS d"'H'd lo tf-'t* oocufTVMM 

:f pern-siss'on grijntpd 'o reprod.jce ir.r> 'Ot'i^ii'it'd dof tiiTitMi! pu^i'.c Check ONE o' the 'ollowmg options and Sign the release 
Delow 



Sample sticker to be affixed to document Sample sticker to be affixed to document J/lj^ 



Check here 

Permitting 

microtiche 

(4 x 6" Mm) 

paper copy 

electronic. 

and optical media 

reproduction 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



^^^^ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



PERMISSION TO RtPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 
COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) " 



or here 

Permitting 
reproduction 
m other than 
paper copy 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Sign Here, Please 



Documents will be processed a*: indicated p'ovided reproductior) quality permits If permission to reproduce is granted, but 
neither box is checked docum(?rits wil! De ptor.essed at Level i 



ERIC 



1 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce this document as 
indicated above Reproduction from the ERIC microhche or electronic/optical media by persons other than ERIC employees and its 
System contractors requires permission from the copyright holder Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators m response to discrete inquiries ' 


Signature' ' . - / r 


Position 


Printed Name * 


Organisation 


oar-llan University 
W100 Ramat Gan 
ISRAEL 


Tielephone Number 

( ) 


Dale 



OVtR 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 



P rem;! v.. , 1. 1- \i, ii 'f-u iiln- ■ ■ hoi t)i.ll ili'd U' I i^K . <)f il you wr.h ( , In m|»: ^Mi- ityijity o1 11 'i', fJOCurTif^nl from bnOlhef 

soijfk't' ph' puivxJr !ht' '«.«lii>vvini) mlofin.ilioi' !<■(). I'dinq |[^t: .jv/;iil-it>iliiy oi Ww il(j«.(ji!,< i:! <[ will not fjnnouncG a document 
unless it i;i tuil lu-lv .iv.nl.il'l»» .u^i ,\ doppiid«ii>l(* •mm j> < .in tx' s[i«'m<m'iJ (,fjn!f!i'<il' r. -.h'l.jlij ;il',o h*: rivware that ERIC selection 
C«iteii«i <Ui' -;.<.}i;i'ir;n!!lv Mt(»'»' '.IiuujimiI l(>r dix unuMi't, wtiu.li . ^jmikjI In- ui.icj*: uyjiuUnAi- linouqh EURS). 



Publishef/Dislnbutof 



Address 



Price Pof Copv 


Qu.jiilily Pnce 


IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 




■ (>Uu,:r thfiM Hie addressee pi^-^i^^ provide the appropriate 


Namp ci'v*: .-jori't" ■> '"ct "•;'':'''.'P'uducliO«t ngtils holder 




Nanne 




Adcrp^^ 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 


Send 1^51* '•■»' 'i'^Aifq I I^K/. ^'.I'Mniiqhovj'.n 

\ 

'\ '■ ■ 




If yfiU ;if'.' rT..ikiiifj ;m' iih',f>liM|p;(l ^orlI^l^)llllon |u 1 RK; you 


rn.jy r>-tiiiii this f()i<n (rjiuj Iho document being contiibuled) to 



ERIC Facility 
1301 PIccard Drivo, Sulto 300 
Rockvllle. Maryland ^0650-4305 
Telephone: (301) 258 5500 



