DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 450 099 



SP 039 773 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Lauer, Patricia A. 

Instructional Practices and Implementation Issues in 
Multiage Classrooms. 

Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning, Aurora, 
CO. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2000-08 
2000 - 12-00 
6 5p . 

RJ96006101 

Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning, 2550 
South Parker Road, Suite 500, Aurora, CO 80015; Tel: 
303-337-0990; Fax: 303-337-3005; E-mail: info@mcrel.org; Web 
site: http://www.mcrel.org. 

Reports - Research (143) 

MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Administrator Attitudes; Age Differences; Cross Age 
Teaching; ^Educational Change; Educational Research; 
Elementary Secondary Education; Heterogeneous Grouping; 
*Mixed Age Grouping; Multigraded Classes; *Nongraded 
Instructional Grouping; Planning; Teacher Attitudes; 

*Teacher Collaboration 
Looping (Teachers) 



ABSTRACT 



This report summarizes research literature on multiage 
classrooms, explaining how they operate, and describes a study of a 
low-performing, predominantly Native American school district which adopted 
multiage classrooms as its primary reform strategy. District teachers 
completed surveys about: planning; collaboration; student groupings and 
interactions; assessment; planning resources; preparedness; faculty 
development; perceptions about the effects of multiage classrooms and looping 
on student learning; opinions on advantages and disadvantages of multiage 
classrooms and looping; and suggestions for improving instruction and 
learning. Researchers observed 37 classrooms and interviewed principals and 
district administrators. They also collected data from a comparison school in 
a neighboring district that had successful multiage grouping. Teachers were 
dissatisfied with how multiaige classrooms were mandated by district 
administrators. The mandate created camps of teachers divided over the issue. 
Teachers tended to feel incompetent, requesting more training and 
development. Teachers mentioned needing more materials and resources for 
these classrooms. They did not feel prepared to teach multiage classes. 

Little time was devoted to teacher collaboration, though it was considered 
important. Strong support from principals was important. Administrators 
believed the multiage approach had potential for reform of instruction. Three 
appendixes present study letters, forms, and surveys. (Contains 32 
references.) (SM) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 450 099 



-5P 



Instructional Practices 
and Implementation Issues 
in Multiage Classrooms 



r i 



I 



(VO 

1* 

r*- 

<5- 

xO 

ERIC 




NTREL 



HI 




U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Instructional Practices 
and Implementation Issues 
in Multiage Classrooms 



REL Contract #96006101 
Deliverable 2000-08 



Submitted to 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 



Prepared by 
Patricia A. Lauer, Ph.D. 




Mid-continent Research for Education and learning 
2550 S. Parker Road, Suite 500 
Aurora, CO 80014 

(303) 337-0990 - (303) 337-3005 fax 
December 2000 




3 



mtEL 

Copyright © 2000 McREL 



To order a copy of Instructional Practices and Implementation Issues in Multiage Classrooms, 
contact McREL: 

Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning 

2550 S. Parker Road, Suite 500 

Aurora, CO 80015 

Phone: (303) 337-0990 

Fax: (303) 337-3005 

e-mail: info@mcrel.org 

Web site: http://www.mcrel.org 



This publication is based on work sponsored, wholly or in part, by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
(OERI), Department of Education, under Contract Number #RJ96006101. The content of this publication does not 
necessarily reflect the views of OERI, the Department, or any other agency of the U.S. Government. 

ERIC 



4 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS v 

PREFACE vi 

PRIOR RESEARCH AND PERSPECTIVES 1 

Features of Multiage Classrooms 1 

Research on the Effectiveness and Benefits of Multiage Classrooms 2 

Research on Multiage Implementation Issues 4 

Summary of Prior Research 5 

METHOD 6 

Design and Instruments 6 

Procedures and Participants 7 

RESULTS 9 

Classroom and Teacher Characteristics 9 

Classroom Practices 11 

Classroom Observation Results 15 

Implementation Issues 19 

Comparison School Results 21 

Summary of Results 22 

DISCUSSION 25 

Generalizability of Results 25 

Implications for Implementing Multiage Programs 25 

Nongradedness as a Reform Strategy 28 

Conclusions 30 



REFERENCES 



31 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



The author would like to thank several individuals who helped with the development and 
preparation of Instructional Practices and Implementation Issues in Multiage Classrooms. Especially 
deserving of thanks are Janet Claymore-Ross and the other members of the research design team who 
facilitated the study and Dorothy Aguilera who conducted the classroom observations and 
administrator interviews. Thanks are extended to the following persons at McREL who reviewed the 
document and provided informative suggestions and comments: Ravay Snow-Renner, Nancy 
Sanders, and Lou Cicchinelli. In addition, the author acknowledges the help provided by Mya Martin 
at McREL for document preparation and David Zimmerman for data analysis. Finally, the author 
expresses her sincere appreciation to all the teachers, administrators, and staff whose participation 
and assistance made the study possible. 



PREFACE 



In the current educational context of standards-based reform and high-stakes accountability, 
district leaders are eager to identify strategies that can increase student learning, particularly in those 
districts where the majority of students are low-performing on achievement tests. In such districts, 
there are many needs in both instruction and curriculum, and leaders often have difficulty deciding 
where to start. One reform in instruction that has received varying amounts of attention during the 
last 30 years is the nongraded school or multiage approach. The purposes of this report are (1) to 
summarize the research literature on multiage classrooms; (2) to describe a study of a 
low-performing school district which adopted multiage classrooms as its primary reform strategy; 
(3) to discuss the implications of the findings for implementing multiage programs, and (4) to inform 
educators and researchers about nongradedness as a reform strategy. The intended audience for this 
report is educational researchers, and school and district administrators who are interested in 
nongraded approaches to K-8 classroom instruction. 

The first section of the report provides an explanation of how multiage classrooms operate 
and describes research on the effects of using such an approach. The second section describes the 
method used for McREL’s study of multiage classrooms in one district in the Central Region; and 
the third section details the results that were obtained. In the fourth section, a discussion of the 
results and their implications is provided. 



O 

ERIC 



V 



7 



PRIOR RESEARCH AND PERSPECTIVES 



The multiage classroom is not a new concept in American education. Early schools usually 
consisted of one room where students' developmental stages ranged from early childhood through 
adolescence. In some rural parts of the United States, such schools are still in operation. What is new 
is the deliberate mixing of students of different ages in a classroom to obtain educational benefits 
which are not available in the single grade classrooms that currently predominate in American 
schools. An understanding of these benefits first requires an understanding of the approach. 

Features of Multiage Classrooms 

In a multiage classroom, children of different ages form one class which spans a minimum 
of two grade levels. The critical features are that instruction and curriculum are integrated, and 
cross-grade teaching is the norm (Lloyd, 1999). This contrasts with the multigrade or combination 
class in which students from two or more grades are each taught a separate grade-specific 
curriculum. “Nongraded” is the adjective given to multiage classrooms and to programs that do not 
recognize grade separation or organize educational activities by grades. For example, a nongraded 
primary program might have multiage classrooms that span grades one through three. A well known 
resource on this approach is Goodlad and Anderson's The Nongraded Elementary School ( 1987). The 
authors support multiage, nongraded schools as a way to reorganize instruction using vertical 
progression. This means that students move in a continuous upward progression without breaks for 
failure and class repetition. 

When describing multiage classrooms, some educators include other features in addition to 
the mixed age format. Pavan (1992) indicated that multiage classrooms generally involve a team of 
teachers who work with a team of students who are grouped in various ways depending on the task 
and on students’ interests and needs. Many multiage classrooms also participate in “looping a 
practice in which students stay together with the same teacher(s) for the length of the grades that the 
class spans (Kasten & Lolli, 1998). For example, in a looped multiage classroom covering grades 
three through five, students would stay with the same teacher(s) for three years. 

Kasten and Lolli (1998) commented that a classroom is multiage when it is a “single learning 
community that meets the academic, social, emotional, physical, and aesthetic needs of its members 
(p. 3). Thus, unlike combination or multigrade classes which usually are formed for administrative 
reasons such as overcrowding or low enrollments (Lodish, 1992), multiage classrooms are based on 
a particular philosophy about pedagogy. According to Anderson and Pavan (1993), who are 
champions of the approach, nongradedness includes the following aspects: 

• variability in instruction in response to students’ individual differences; 

• student learning that is designed to be both challenging and pleasurable; 

• nurturing of all spheres of a child’s development— cognitive, physical, aesthetic, 
social, emotional; 

• flexible and heterogenous student groupings; 

• student progression that is flexible and individually paced; 

both separate and integrated areas of curriculum with an emphasis on 
outcomes rather than content coverage; 



ERIC 



i 



• clearly defined outcomes but with varying times and paths used by students to 
reach the outcomes; 

• subordination of specific content learning to the understanding of major concepts 
and the development of learning skills; 

• holistic student assessment; 

• continuous diagnostic assessment primarily in relation to the student’s history 
and potential (rather than grade); and, 

• learning opportunities and instructional strategies that are teacher (rather than 
system) managed, (see pages 62-63) 

Thus, true multiage classrooms have many more features than just groups of students who 
are of different ages and from different grades. There are also implied beliefs by educators about 
student learning and effective pedagogical practices. As Goodlad and Anderson (1987) commented, 
“the nongraded school is the school we could have if insights from research on learning and human 
development were applied” (p. 225). 

Research on the Effectiveness and Benefits of Multiage Classrooms 

A review of research on multiage classrooms is complicated by the different ways that 
“multiage” has been operationalized and by the use of varying measurements. Nonetheless, there 
have been many studies which have compared the effectiveness of multiage classrooms with that of 
single grade classrooms as well as several reviews of these studies. Pavan (1992) reviewed 64 
research studies published between 1968 and 1990 that examined various nongraded programs. The 
author summarized the findings as follows: 

1 . Research studies comparing nongraded and graded schools provide a consistent 
pattern favoring nongradedness. 

2. The nongraded groups performed better (58% [of the studies]) or as well as 
(33%) the graded. 

3. On mental health and school attitudes, 52% of the studies indicated nongraded 
schools as better for students, 43% similar. Only 5% showed nongraded as worse 
than graded schools. 

4. The benefits to students of nongradedness increase as students have longer 
nongraded experiences. 

5. Blacks, boys, low socioeconomic level students, and underachievers benefit from 
a nongraded program, (p. 23) 

Other reviewers have supported the general conclusion that compared to students in single 
grade classrooms, students in multiage classrooms perform the same or better in academic areas, and 
also Pavan’s finding that they are consistently better in affective areas such as self-esteem (Miller, 
1989; Veenman, 1995). 

The benefits of multiage classrooms are related primarily to the way that instruction is 
organized. According to Stone (1998), vertical cross-grade student groupings in multiage classrooms 
provide both cognitive and emotional benefits. The author noted that compared to single grade 
classrooms, children in multiage classrooms are more likely to experience Piagetian (1976) cognitive 




2 9 



conflicts and Vygotsky’s (1978) zone of proximal development, both of which benefit learning. 
Stone also stated that socially, children have more opportunities for leadership, and the cooperative 
environment of a multiage classroom promotes emotional stability. 

Kasten and Lolli (1998) emphasized the following benefits from develop men tally appropriate 
practices in multiage classrooms, as demonstrated by research. Older, more advanced children reap 
cognitive benefits from cross-age tutoring. Younger children feel emotionally comfortable in 
multiage classrooms because the setting resembles a natural family structure where there is a mix 
of ages and opportunities for learning from modeling. Students can experience continuous progress 
without unnatural breaks for grade promotion or retention. In Kasten and Lolli ’s view, graded 
classrooms are the result of industrial thinking with its emphasis on uniformity rather than on what 
is developmentally appropriate. The authors contend that the use of grade levels in schools is 
perpetuated by publishers of grade-level materials which schools adopt as the curriculum rather than 
as tools for a curriculum (p. 7). 

Theilheimer (1993) stressed that children’s uneven cognitive and social development make 
the different levels in a multiage classroom adaptive. The author agreed with Stone (1998) that 
cognitive conflicts occur during problem solving when children of different ages interact, and these 
conflicts stimulate cognitive growth. Kommer (1999) also used a developmental perspective in 
arguing for multiage teams for the middle grades. Kommer cited evidence that older students enjoy 
developing leadership in such a setting. In addition, because mixed-age teams of students and their 
teachers stay together for the three-year span of middle school, there is a consistency which promotes 
positive student attitudes. This consistency is also a benefit of looping which many multiage 
classrooms practice. Looping is considered a developmentally appropriate practice which increases 
students’ confidence and improves parent-teacher relationships (Little & Dacus, 1999). 

Guiterrez and Slavin (1992) reviewed research on student achievement in nongraded 
elementary schools, but they suggested that the effects depended on the type of program. They found 
that the most positive effects occurred for simpler forms of nongrading such as cross-grade 
groupings for reading. Programs that were multiage and emphasized completely individualized 
instruction were not more beneficial than graded programs. In response to Pavan’s (1992) review, 
Slavin (1992) concluded that “nongraded organization can contribute to instructional effectiveness, 
but the curriculum and instructional methods used within a nongraded framework are as important 
as the school organization plan in determining the ultimate effects” (p. 24). 

In commenting on multiage research, McLauglin, Irvin, and Doda (1 999) pointed out that the 
subject areas of reading and language seem to benefit the most from nongradedness. Kasten and Lolli 
(1998) reported on research that included some qualitative measures of reading and writing (Kasten 
& Clarke, 1993). Compared to students in single grade classrooms, children in multiage classrooms 
had more positive attitudes toward recreational reading, were more articulate about books, and 
produced more complex writing samples. 

Other researchers of nongraded approaches have cautioned readers on the interpretation of 
findings. Lloyd (1999) suggested that multiage classrooms are favorable for gifted children because 
teachers are more likely to recognize diversity and provide developmentally appropriate learning 
opportunities. However, Lloyd acknowledged that it is not the grouping per se that is beneficial, but 




10 



rather that “teachers who are committed to such an organization are likely to change their way of 
teaching” (p. 197). Similarly, Osin and Lesgold (1996) indicated that it is difficult to separate 
multiage effects from the global changes in experiences that occur when a school adopts 
nongradedness in both philosophy and practice. 

Research on Multiage Implementation Issues 

In another discussion of mixed-age grouping, Lodish (1992) agreed that there are many 
benefits for students, but also cited the following disadvantages: 

• Teachers may have the tendency to provide fewer challenges for older 
compared to younger children. 

• Younger children may be frustrated by the gap between their work and that 
of older students. 

• Scheduling for students to work with individual teachers can be difficult. 

• Teachers need more time for instructional planning due to the wide range of 
students, (see p. 22) 

Thus, while there seem to be many benefits of nongraded schools and multiage classrooms, 
there also are challenges to implementing the approach as Lodish’s (1992) descriptions of 
disadvantages suggest. Miller (1 996) commented that implementing a multiage program is a journey 
in which participants must address teacher readiness, promote staff ownership, involve parents, and 
plan collaboratively. Miller stressed that teachers need both emotional and cognitive support for the 
changes in their instruction that mixed-age grouping will require. For Miller, the school principal 
is key in providing this support for teachers. By having his or her own strong vision about children’s 
learning, the principal can help create a positive school climate for changing to a multiage approach. 
The principal also must lead efforts to gamer parental and community support for the change. 

There are many practical issues to consider when implementing multiage classrooms. As 
Gaustad ( 1 995) described, teachers need a wider range of instructional strategies compared to what 
they need for single grade classrooms. They must be able to facilitate positive group interactions, to 
design different kinds of student learning groups, to work together with other teachers on a team, and 
to know many developmentally appropriate practices such as cooperative learning and thematic 
teaching. Gaustad also emphasized the role of the school principal who must support and empower 
teachers as they develop multiage practices. To do this effectively, the principal needs “sophisticated 
leadership and interpersonal skills” (p. 2). The principal especially must strive to maintain a sense 
of community within the school to avoid a division of teachers into camps of those for and against 
multiage practices. 

ERS Spectrum (1995) conducted teacher interviews to provide the perspectives of teachers 
who had implemented one multiage program. The teachers’ comments were summarized as follows: 

• Teachers need to prepare for the change, but it should be eased into without 
changing everything at once. 

• Multiage grouping is not an end in itself but rather a total instructional 
approach with the goal of meeting students’ individual learning needs. 



• Multiage grouping requires much teacher time and effort accompanied by 
administrative support. 

• Team teaching is essential, and it requires much work and time to be 
effective. 

• Not everything is new; many previously mastered instructional strategies are 
effective in multiage classrooms, (see p. 1 1) 

The teachers in this study also noted that they had planned for one year before switching to 
a multiage program, although others have suggested that at least two years should be devoted to 
planning (e.g., Surbeck, 1992). 

Summary of Prior Research 

As Anderson and Pavan (1993) indicated, there is much more to nongradedness than a 
reorganization of students and classrooms. Compared to single grade classrooms, the multiage 
approach is based on fundamentally different ways of viewing development and learning. For 
nongraded classrooms to be advantageous to students, teaching and administrative staff as well as 
parents must support this view. On the basis of research and writings on the benefits of 
nongradedness, school districts are turning to multiage approaches. But, as Gaustad (1994) 
emphasized, it is the instructional quality in multiage classrooms that is the key to success. 



METHOD 



This study evolved from a research partnership between Mid-continent Research for 
Education and Learning (McREL) and the Monroe School District (MSD). MSD (pseudonym) is 
located on an American Indian reservation in the Midwest. Almost all MSD students are Native 
American (99%) and of low socioeconomic status, with 75% eligible for federal ffee/reduced lunch 
benefits. The district serves approximately 1,100 students in four K— 8 schools with 96 teachers 
(including special education). 

At the time of the study, MSD was in its third year of implementation of multiage reform. 
Due to low student achievement (among the 10 lowest districts in the state), the district 
superintendent had mandated the change to multiage classrooms as a way to drastically reorganize 
instruction. Along with this change, teachers were asked to discontinue using student textbooks in 
their instruction due to the graded nature of these materials. At the end of the second year of 
implementation, district officials had questions about whether to continue multiage classrooms in 
the future. The principal and teachers at one of the four schools had been reluctant to change to 
multiage classrooms, and at the time of this study had already reverted to single grade classrooms. 
Although the study described in this report is primarily descriptive, the situation allowed a 
comparison of the two classroom approaches. However, any comparison is tempered by the fact that 
teachers were not randomly assigned to the type of classroom. 

Design and Instruments 

A district/McREL design team that was formed for the research partnership jointly planned 
the study. MSD members of the design team included four teachers, two principals, and the director 
of special education. The purposes of the design team study were to identify classroom practices that 
were occurring in the district and to obtain information on issues related to implementation of 
multiage classrooms. The study used three sources of data: a survey of teachers’ instructional 
practices, which was the primary data source; classroom observations; and, administrator interviews. 

The design team developed a teacher survey to measure how multiage practices were being 
implemented and to obtain teachers' perceptions of their classroom practices and multiage 
classrooms. Design team members first discussed the different components of instruction that should 
occur if the multiage approach is being fully implemented. To guide their discussion, the design team 
used Innovation Configuration Mapping (Hall & Hoard, 1987), an activity which facilitates the 
identification of essential components of an innovation and the variations in implementation that are 
possible for each component. Design team members then wrote survey questions that asked teachers 
about the presence of these components in their instruction. 

The resulting Instructional Practices Survey had 3 1 multi-part questions which asked teachers 
about time devoted to planning, degree of collaboration with other teachers, types of student 
groupings for instruction, types of student interactions, use of assessment techniques, resources used 
for planning instruction, perceptions of preparedness, staff development experiences, and perceptions 
about the effects of multiage classrooms and looping on student learning. There was also a question 
about the degree of multiage characteristics in the teacher’s classroom practices. This question was 
based on principles of nongradedness identified by Anderson and Pavan (1993). The instructional 



0 

ERIC 



6 



13 



Practices Survey concluded with open-ended questions which asked for teachers opinions about the 
advantages and disadvantages of multiage classrooms and looping and for suggestions for improving 
instruction and student learning in the district. (See Appendix A for the Instructional Practices 
Survey and the teacher consent form.) 

McREL staff wrote the protocols for the classroom observations and the administrator 
interviews. Both were designed to enhance the information collected from the Instructional Practices 
Survey. The classroom observation protocols addressed general features of the classroom, 
opportunities for student learning, curriculum and instruction, student interaction, and student 
assessment. The interview protocols asked administrators about classroom organization, professional 
development, improving teaching and learning, curriculum, instruction, standards, family and 
community, and tribal culture. (See Appendix B for the classroom observation protocol and 
Appendix C for the administrator interview protocols.) 

Procedures and Participants 

The sample of survey respondents was comprised of 76 MSD teachers. The sample included 
most of the classroom teachers in the district, and there was representation from each of the four 
schools. The author administered the Instructional Practices Survey to teachers at a group staff , 
meeting at each school. The four staff meetings were held over a three-day span in December, 1999. 
Each teacher completed an informed consent form which explained the purpose of the study and that 
individual results would be kept confidential. 

Multiage classrooms covered three-year grade spans: K— 2, 3—5, and 6—8. All the teachers in 
single grade classrooms were at a school in which the principal had decided to discontinue multiage 
classrooms. For statistical comparisons, teachers of single grade classrooms were grouped in the 
same grade spans as teachers of multiage classrooms. For example, single grade teachers for grades 
three, four, or five were grouped together because they were teaching similar ages of students as the 
teachers of multiage classrooms for grades 3-5. Special education teachers (12) and other certified 
staff such as counselors (15) also completed the survey but because many questions were 
inapplicable to these participants, their responses were included only for the analyses regarding staff 
development and for the open-ended questions. 

McREL staff conducted classroom observations in 37 classrooms, including in each grade 
level at each school. Teachers gave their consent to be observed after being informed about the 
purpose of the study and the observations and that individual data would be kept confidential. All 
the classroom observations were conducted over a five-day span in January, 2000. 

Six MSD principals and three district administrators, including the superintendent, were 
interviewed over a two-dayperiod in December, 1999. Interviewees gave their consent to participate 
after being informed about the purposes of the study and the interviews and that the interviews would 
be tape recorded. They also were informed that results would not attribute comments to specific 
individuals. 

For the final part of the study, data were collected from a comparison school in a neighboring 
school district. The MSD superintendent had visited this school and was impressed with how the 

er|c 7 14 



multiage approach was being implemented. The principal of the school was interviewed, and seven 
teachers of multiage classrooms at the school completed the Instructional Practices Survey. The 
purpose for including this school in the study was to provide additional information on 
implementation issues related to the multiage approach. Students in the comparison school are 85% 
white, 9% Native American, and 22% of the students are eligible for federal free/reduced lunch 
benefits. The school has a total of 26 teachers. 




8 15 



RESULTS 



The results are organized into four categories: classroom and teacher characteristics, 
classroom practices, implementation issues, and comparison school results. The primary source of 
data is the teacher Instructional Practices Survey. Most of the statistics reported are descriptive in 
nature. However, to determine the statistical significance of differences among teachers’ responses 
to the Instructional Practices Survey, Multivariate Analyses of Variance (MANOVA) were 
performed for categories of related questions on the survey. For all MANOVAs, the between- 
subjects variable was the teacher’s type of classroom (multiage or single grade) 1 . To simplify 
reporting of these results, only the probability levels are indicated for differences that are statistically 
significant. 

Classroom and Teacher Characteristics 

The information reported in this section is based on teachers’ responses to the Instructional 
Practices Survey. 

Classroom structure. Table 1 indicates the grade level and the classroom type for the sample 
of 76 MSD teachers who responded to the Instructional Practices Survey. (All the single-grade 
teachers were at one of the four schools in the district.) 

Table 1 

MSD Teacher Respondents to Instructional Practices Survey 



Classroom Type 


Grade Level 


Total 




K-2 


3-5 


6-8 




Single Grade 


5 


6 


6 


17 


Multiage 


26 


19 


14 


59 


Total 


31 


25 


20 


76 



In the sample of 76 regular teachers, 59 teachers reported being in a multiage teaching 
arrangement and 17 teachers reported teaching single grade classrooms. Approximately 67% of the 
respondents said they are looping with their students for either two or three years. With regard to 
participation in team teaching, teachers described their classrooms as single grade teaming ( n = 6), 
single grade not teaming (n = 1 1), multiage teaming ( n = 28), or multiage not teaming ( n = 31). 

Teacher characteristics. Respondents’ median number of years teaching experience was 
9.5 and the median number of years teaching in MSD was 3 years. Teachers in single grade 



'To determine whether effects of classroom type were related to student grade level, MANOVAs also 
included grade level as a between-subjects variable. However, there were no statistically significant interactions 
between classroom type and grade level obtained for any of the measures reported. Significant main effects of grade 
levels are indicated in the text. 

O 

ERIC 




classrooms had more years of teaching experience and had taught longer in the district (Ms = 17.73 
and 1 1.27) than teachers in multiage classrooms (Ms = 10.07 and 5.33), and the differences were 
statistically significant (both p < .03). 

Approximately 52% of the teachers reported having two hours or less for instructional 
planning per week during regular school hours, and 25% said they have 2-4 hours. Two-thirds have 
an hour or less for collaboration with other teachers during regular school hours. Outside of school, 
55% use five or more hours for instructional planning, and most (59%) reported no collaboration 
with teachers outside of regular school hours. Single grade teachers reported having more planning 
time during school (M= 4.26 hr, SD = 2.70) and using less planning time outside of school (M = 
5.15 hr, SD = 2.92) compared to multiage teachers (M = 2.47 hr, SD = 1.78 & M= 7.12 hr, SD = 
3.35, respectively). Despite the high amount of variability, these differences between single grade 
and multiage classrooms were statistically significant {p < .05). 



Teacher Preparedness 



w 

w 

a) 

c 

XD 

<D 

L. 

CD 

Q. 

a) 



o 

a) 

a) 

L. 

CD 

a) 

O 




Classroom Type 

(j^lsingle Grade 
Multiage 



Teaching Area 

Response Scale: 1=No Preparedness, 2=Some Preparedness 
3=Much Preparedness, 4=Great Deal of Preparedness 

Figure 1. Teacher perceptions of preparedness in content areas. 



When asked about feelings of preparedness concerning their knowledge and skills to teach 
in various areas (Figure 1), the majority of teachers indicated (on a 1-4 scale) only “some 
preparedness” to teach health (2.04), science (2.22), multiage classrooms (2.20), social studies 
(2.30), state math standards (2.45), state language arts standards (2.49), Native American students 
(2.50), and high poverty students (2.59). Single grade teachers reported a slightly higher mean 
perceived preparedness (2.50) than multiage teachers (2.24), but the difference was not statistically 
significant. 



O 

ERIC 



10 



17 




Classroom Practices 



Most of the results that relate to classroom practices are based on teachers’ responses to the 
Instructional Practices Survey. However, the last part of this section describes results from the 
classroom observations. 



Daily Instructional Activities 




Instructional Activity 

Figure 2. Teacher reports of percent of day in various instructional activities. 

Instructional activities. The mean percent of the day spent on various instructional activities 
(Figure 2) was reported by teachers as follows: one-on-one instruction, 1 6%; small groups organized 
by grade level 1 6%; small groups organized by skills level, 22%; independent work, 22%; and, large 
group mixed instruction, 29%. It should be noted that there was a large amount of variability among 
the answers reported by teachers to this question (mean SD = 1 5 .97). Compared to multiage teachers, 
single grade teachers reported more use of small groups organized by grade level and large mixed 
groups and less use of small groups organized by skills level. However, only the difference in using 
small groups by grade level was statistically significant (p < .04 ). In the grade level analysis, 
reported daily percentage of large group mixed instruction was twice as large for grades 6-8 as for 
grades K-2 and grades 3-5. This difference was statistically significant (p < .004). 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

u 18 



Interactive Student Learning Activities 




Response Scale: 1=AImost Never 2=Seldom 
3=Occasiona!ly 4=Frequently 5=AI most Always 



Figure 3. Distribution of interactive student learning activities. 



Student interaction. Figure 3 shows that the reported frequency of type of student 
interaction was highest for small group learning or partners, classroom projects, and cooperative 
learning, with average frequency ratings (on a 1-5 scale) of 3.84, 3.62, and 3.57 respectively. Single 
grade teachers reported more use of peer coaches or tutors and less use of learning centers than did 
multiage teachers, although the differences were not statistically significant. With regard to grade 
levels, teachers in lower grades reported significantly more use of learning centers than did teachers 
in higher grades (p < .02) 



19 

O 

ERLC 



12 



Teacher Use of Assessments 




Assessment Method 
Response Scale: 1=Almost Never, 2=Seldom, 

3=Occasionally, 4=Frequently, 5=Almost Always 

Figure 4. Teacher use of various assessment methods. 

Student assessment. The student assessment method shown in Figure 4 with the lowest 
mean reported frequency of use by all teacher respondents (on a 1—5 scale) was student self- 
assessment (M= 2.64). Portfolios had the highest reported use (M= 3.81). Single grade teachers 
reported more frequent use of tests and worksheets compared to multiage teachers, and both 
differences were statistically significant ( p < .04). In the grade level analysis, teachers in grades 6-8 
reported significantly more frequent use of worksheets and rubrics (both p < .01) than did teachers 
in the lower grades. 



Multiage Classroom Practices 



4.5 




Classroom Practices 

Response Scale: 1=Almost Never, 2=Seldom, 

3=Occasionally, 4=Frequently, 5=Almost Always 

Figure 5. Distribution of classroom practices. 

Multiage classroom practices. Figure 5 shows the frequency of selected classroom 
practices. Means for five of the nine items which asked about the frequency (on a 1-5 scale) of 
classroom practices associated with multiage classrooms ranged from 3 .6 to 4.0, “frequently.” These 
practices included individual learning sequences, multiple learning opportunities, variety of 
groupings, students assessed on an individual basis, and flexible grouping. Parent involvement, 
student-formulated goals, student choice, and flexible student advancement were answered as 
“occasionally” (2.61-3.28). Compared to multiage teachers, single grade teachers reported higher 
frequencies of flexible advancement and parent involvement, differences which were statistically 
significant (p < .001). Overall, single grade teachers reported higher frequencies of multiage 
practices (M= 3.61) than did multiage teachers (M= 3.36), but the difference was not statistically 
significant. 



21 

O 

ERIC 



14 



■ ■ 



f r\ 



4.5 

4.0 



>> 

o 

c 

<D 

cr 

<D 



3.5 ■ 
3.0 - 

2.5 c 



ro 2.0 « 

0 ) 

^ 1.5 1 



. 



ni«. 



i i r>r*4 , »*i * ^^jon 



om Type 

gle Grade 
Itiage 






\\ 

% 



% 



% 
















\ 



Resource 

Response Scale: 1=Almost Never, 2=Seldom, 
3=Occasionally, 4=Frequently, 5=Almost Always 

Figure 6. Teacher use of planning resources. 



Instructional resources. Figure 6 shows the frequency with which various resources are 
used to plan instruction. The resources with the highest reported frequency of use (on a 1-5 scale) 
were standards/benchmarks and content area resources (3.6 and 3.7, both between “occasionally” 
to “frequently”). Audiovisuals, staff development materials, and computer software were rated 
lowest in frequency of use (2.71-2.83). The largest differences between the classroom types were 
the higher reported use of teacher manuals and textbooks by single grade teachers compared to 
multiage teachers. Both differences were statistically significant (p < .001). 



Classroom Observation Results 



Due to the small sample size of single grade classrooms within grade levels (see Table 2) and 
because all the single grade classrooms were located at one school, observations are described in 
detail for the different grade levels, but only general descriptions are given for observations related 
to the type of classroom. There were 37 classrooms observed. Tables 3 through 7 indicate the 
percentages of the observations that were recorded in each category for each grade level. 





Table 2 

Classrooms Observed 





Grade Level 




Classroom Type 


K-2 


3-5 


6-8 


Total 


Single Grade 


3 


5 


10 


18 


Multiage 


5 


8 


6 


19 


Total 


8 


13 


16 


37 



Analysis of the observation data on teachers’ instruction provided in Table 3 showed that the 
most frequently observed instructional practice in the district was worksheets. There were more 
observations of worksheets in single grade classrooms than in multiage classrooms. 

Table 3 

Percent of Observations of Instructional Practices by Grade Level 



Instructional Practice 


Grade Level 


K-2 


3-5 


6-8 


Guided Reading 


22% 






Discussion 


9% 


4% 


15% 


Hands-On 


13% 


15% 


13% 


Worksheet 


13% 


33% 


30% 


Oral Review 


16% 


15% 


5% 


Computer 


13% 


15% 


8% 


Miscellaneous 3 


13% 


15% 


23% 


Lecture 


3% 


4% 


8% 


Total 


100% 


100% 


100% 



a Instructional practices observed fewer than four times were listed as miscellaneous, e.g., journaling, story boards, 
singing, artwork, learning centers. 



With regard to student groupings, findings from the observation data shown in Table 4 
revealed fewer small groups were being used in single grade classrooms compared to multiage 
classrooms. While there were clusters of desks in some single grade classrooms which suggested 
small group work, students at these desks were working independently. 




23 

.16 



Table 4 

Percent of Observations of Student Groupings by Grade Level 



Type of Student 
Group 


Grade Level 


K-2 


3-5 


6-8 


Large 


25% 


22% 


35% 


Small 


50% 


22% 


35% 


Independent Work 


25% 


19% 


30% 


Total 


100% 


100% 


100% 



As shown in Table 5, teacher facilitation was the most frequently observed interaction 
between teachers and students in grades K-2. When facilitating, teachers actively directed 
assignments and encouraged student-generated questions. When monitoring, teachers were checking 
student behaviors and student work. Teacher monitoring of students was the most frequently 
observed interaction between teachers and students in grades 6-8. Discipline-based interactions 
between teachers and students occurred more with monitoring interactions as well as the use of 
worksheets. 

Table 5 

Percent of Observations of Teacher-Student Interactions by Grade Level 



Teacher-Student 

Interaction 


Grade Level 


K-2 


3-5 


6-8 


Facilitation 


56% 


25% 


16% 


One-on-one 


25% 


26% 


18% 


Monitoring 


16% 


26% 


33% 


Total 


100% 


100% 


100% 



Table 6 indicates the amount of student interaction in observed classes. The levels of 
academic interaction were defined by the number of students interacting. Overall, there were low 
amounts of academic student interactions, particularly in grades K-2. More variability existed among 
classrooms in social interactions compared to academic interactions. Students in the higher grades 
socialized much more than did students in lower grades. Students in grades 3-5 interacted more in 
terms of academic work than did students in grades 6-8. 



Table 6 

Percent of Observations of Student Interactions 



Student Interactions 


Grade Level 


K-2 


3-5 


6-8 


Academic- low 3 




44% 


28% 


Academic- medium 


9% 






Academic- high 


22% 




13% 


Non-Academic Social 




7% 


30% 


None 


69% 


48% 


30% 


Total 


100% 


100% 


100% 



a Out of the total number of students in an observed class and depending on class size, 2-3 students interacting was 
categorized as low; 4-7 students interacting as medium; and 10 or more students interacting as high. 



Observed student participation in academic work is described as actively engaged, working, 
or passive (Table 7). Actively engaged students exhibited interest and fun when completing 
academic assignments. Working students were trying to complete assignments quickly so they could 
play at a nonacademic task. Passive students were idle. More students were observed working (60%) 
than were actively engaged (25%) in academic assignments, tasks, or activities. Nearly one-fourth 
of students in grades 6-8 were passive. 



Table 7 

Observations of Student Participation in Academic Work 



Student Participation 


Grade Level 


K-2 


3-5 


6-8 


Actively Engaged 


25% 


33% 


26% 


Working 


75% 


59% 


50% 


Passive 




7% 


23% 


Total 


100% 


100% 


100% 



Overall, observations indicated that multiage classrooms teachers facilitated more than 
teachers in single grade classrooms. There were more academic-based peer interactions when paired 
with instructional practices that included learning centers and hands-on learning activities. In 
general, there appeared to be higher levels of active engagement by students in academic learning 
when teachers were facilitating rather than monitoring instruction. 



3 

ERIC 



18 



25 



Implementation Issues 



The information presented in this section relates to teachers’ and administrators’ perceptions 
of the results of implementing multiage classrooms in MSD, the challenges that they encountered, 
and the staff development needs that exist. The data are based on teachers responses to the 
Instructional Practices Survey and on interviews with MSD administrators. 

Student improvement. The Instructional Practices Survey asked teachers who had one or 
more years experience in multiage classrooms to rate six items that were based on previously 
established desirable MSD Student Outcomes on a five-point scale from “no improvement” to “great 
improvement” since teaching multiage classrooms. There were 42 teachers who answered this 
question. Their mean rating was 2.65, between “very limited” to “some improvement.” Teachers who 
had practiced looping at MSD (n = 62) rated the same student outcomes with regard to teaching 
looped classes. The mean rating was 3.06, “some improvement.” 

Advantages and disadvantages of instructional practices. The most frequently 
mentioned advantages of multiage classrooms and the percentage of the responses to this question 
(total responses = 51) were students helping each other (71%), continuity of structure (16%), and 
student social comfort (14%). The most frequently mentioned disadvantages of multiage classrooms 
(total responses = 62) were too many differences across grade levels (34%), high preparation time 
(19%), lack of materials (13%), and not enough classroom staff (11%). The most frequently 
mentioned advantages of looping (total responses = 33) were knowing students’ strengths and 
weaknesses (64%) and the better quality of teacher-student relationships (36%). The most frequently 
mentioned disadvantages of looping (total responses = 30) were personality conflicts between 
teacher and student (43%), students’ lack of exposure to other teaching styles (30%), and the need 
to plan materials for more than one grade level (17%). 

Staff development. Of the 21 staff development topics listed on the survey, the mean 
number of topics that teachers reported attending was 11, and the mean reported value of the 
activities was 2.5 (between “some” and “much” value.) There were no differences between single 
grade and multiage teachers. The strongest need for additional professional development (based on 
45% or more of teachers indicating “definitely needed”) were in the areas of teaching multiage 
classrooms (62%), adapting curriculum in multiage classrooms (58%), writing instruction (52%), 
student motivation techniques (55%), computer skills training (54%), technology in the classroom 
(51%), reading instruction (49%), and Native American language/culture (49%). 

Improvement of teaching and learning. There were 98 total responses to suggestions for 
improving instruction and student learning in MSD. The most frequently mentioned suggestions and 
the percentages of total responses were as follows: more staff training and development for multiage 
and looping (28%); more materials including the use of textbooks (19%); restructuring the multiage 
approach so that kindergarten is a single grade and there are two (and not three) grades in multiage 
classrooms (15%); more preparation and planning time (12%); more attention to special 
education/pullout staffing (9%); and, teacher choice about multiage and/or looping (8%). 




19 26 



Administrator perspectives. Six principals and three district administrators were 
interviewed. To protect anonymity, all respondents are referred to as “administrators.” 

Administrators reported that the division among multiage and single grade teachers runs deep 
in the district. For the past three years, administrators have experienced pressure from veteran 
teachers (those who have taught longer in MSD) to support single grade classrooms and to 
discontinue the multiage approach. Teachers in one school convinced the administration to permit 
them to return to single grade classrooms. Only one school out of the four in the district has had no 
friction among teachers and administration over the multiage issue and that is because at this rural 
country school, multiage classrooms have been the norm. Administrators indicated that the number 
of teachers involved in team teaching has decreased in some schools because of the multiage division 
among teachers and unresolved personal conflicts. Most principals give teachers the choice of 
whether to team teach and support their efforts for incorporating team teaching into their classrooms. 

According to the administrators, a major barrier to the multiage approach was the lack of 
effort on the part of many teachers to change instructional practices. Several reported that the lack 
of sufficient training and the abrupt manner used to mandate multiage classrooms and to discontinue 
the use of textbooks in the classrooms are the roots of teacher resistance. A common concern among 
administrators was that the three-grade span in multiage classrooms was too great for even the most 
experienced and willing multiage teachers. 

Administrators reported that the schools and teachers were at many different stages and levels 
of multiage implementation and had varied needs depending on the situations in their schools and 
classrooms. They identified the following as struggles for teachers: 

• Three-grade span in multiage classrooms 

• Lack of curriculum resources 

• Lack of sufficient planning time 

• Discipline issues affecting classroom teaching 

• High number of special needs students and diverse student situations 

• Lack of collegiality among teachers 

• Low morale of teachers 

• Lack of common curriculum resources 

Administrators identified the following as district needs: 

• In-depth training for effective teaching practices 

• Sufficient planning time for teachers and administrators 

• Follow-up and continuity in teacher training programs 

• Sufficient resources for classrooms and teachers 

• Additional resources and training to offset the high number of students with 
emotional needs 

• Training for administrators to improve teacher evaluation 

Although administrators were being pressured by teachers on both sides of the debate, they 
generally supported the multiage approach because they had seen its potential in several classrooms. 



O 

ERIC 



20 



27 



With sufficient training and teacher effort, these administrators felt that a multiage program could 
be successful. However, they noted that the current number of multiage classrooms where teachers 
understood multiage practices and were teaching effectively was small. Thematic units were 
mentioned as exemplary of good teaching and learning practices in these classrooms. 

Comparison School Results 

The purpose of including the comparison school in this report was to examine responses to 
the Instructional Practices Survey by teachers in a multiage program that was experiencing success 
in a different school district. Although the primary goal was description of the resulting data, some 
statistical comparisons using MANOVAs were made between the sample of teachers at the 
comparison school who were all in multiage classes and team teaching ( n = 7), and the sample of 
teachers at MSD who were in multiage classes and team teaching ( n = 28). The following sections 
describe the main findings. 

Classroom and teacher characteristics. The comparison teachers’ multiage classes each 
covered a span of two grade levels, and all the teachers looped or were planning to loop so that 
students would stay with the same teacher and classmates for two years. The MSD multiage team 
teachers’ classes each covered a span of three grade levels, and 61% of the teachers were looping. 
The comparison teachers reported having significantly more weekly instructional planning time 
during regular school hours than did the MSD multiage team teachers ( M= 2.68, SD = 1 .11, p < .03). 

When asked about preparedness to teach in various areas, the majority of comparison 
teachers indicated (on a 1- 4 scale) “much preparedness” or a “great deal of preparedness” to teach 
all areas asked by the question. The comparison teachers’ rated their preparedness to teach 
significantly higher than the MSD multiage team teachers in all the content areas (all p < .03) and 
in multiage classrooms (p < .01). The comparison teachers’ overall mean perceived preparedness 
was 3.31 ( SD = .55), “much preparedness” which was statistically higher than the MSD multiage 
team teachers’ mean of 2.19 (SD = .57), “some preparedness” {p < .04). 

Classroom practices. The reported mean frequencies for the comparison teachers were high 
for all the types of student interaction listed in the survey which included peer coaches or tutors, 
cooperative learning, learning centers, classroom projects, and small group learning or partners. The 
mean rating (on a 1-5 scale) was 3.97 or “frequently,” and was significantly higher than that ofMSD 
multiage team teachers for which the mean rating was 3.52, between “occasionally” and “frequently” 
( p < .01). The comparison teachers reported significantly less use of worksheets and running records 
than the MSD multiage team teachers (both p < .03). The comparison teachers’ overall mean 
frequency of multiage classroom practices was 4.00 (SD = .39) or “frequently” which was 
significantly higher the MSD multiage team teachers’ mean of 3.36 or “occasionally” (SD = .11, p 
< .04). For planning instruction, comparison teachers reported that their most frequently used 
resource (on a 1-5 scale) was standards/benchmarks, which was unanimously reported as “almost 
always” used (M = 5.00). The comparison teachers reported significantly more use of this resource 
than the MSD multiage team teachers (p < .003) and also more use of computer software (p < .03). 

Implementation issues. The comparison teachers’ mean rating of student outcomes (on a 
1-5 scale) since teaching multiage classrooms was 3.55 (SD = .49), between “some improvement” 



to “much improvement.” This was significantly higher than the MSD multiage team teachers’ mean 
of 2.57, ( SD = 1.11) between “very limited improvement” to “some improvement” (p < .01). Data 
are not reported for student outcomes with regard to teaching looped classes because only two 
comparison teachers had been practicing looping for more than a year. 

Of the 21 staff development topics listed on the survey, the mean number of topics that 
comparison teachers reported attending was 1 4.57, and the mean reported value of the activities was 
3.06 (SD = 2.51), “much value.” While the two groups of teachers did not differ significantly in the 
average number of professional development activities, the comparison teachers rated the overall 
value of their professional development significantly higher than did the MSD multiage team 
teachers (p < .02). The MSD teachers’ reported mean value was 2.51 (SD = .53) between “some 
value” to “much value.” 

Prior to administering the Instructional Practices Survey to the comparison school teachers, 
the author conducted an informal interview with the school’s principal. In 1991 and 1992, the 
principal held voluntary study sessions on multiage classrooms, and in 1 993, a group of teachers at 
the school decided to try the approach. In the same year, the school began early student release on 
Wednesdays to provide time for staff development. The principal said there was an increase in 
student social skills and in student test scores associated with multiage classrooms which inspired 
the single grade teachers to improve as well. Yearly parent surveys indicate 95% satisfaction, and 
the multiage program has a waiting list. 

The principal stressed the importance of professional development for all teachers at the 
school, commenting that staying the same is not an option for any of the teachers. Recently, the 
school started teacher-driven study groups which meet bimonthly during release time. Teacher 
collaboration occurs through team and whole school planning on the afternoons not devoted to study 
groups. 



All teachers in the school are implementing literacy blocks. The school has worked at 
integrating curriculum, instruction, and assessment with content standards. Because the multiage 
teachers teach a two-year grade span and loop with their students, the curriculum is adjusted to fit 
into the two-year time span. The teachers initially tried a multiage span of three grades but found it 
too difficult to manage. 

Summary of Results 

This section provides a summary of the main findings integrated across the different sources 
of data. In accordance with the purposes of the study, the findings identify classroom practices that 
are occurring in MSD and provide information on issues related to implementation of multiage 
classrooms. 

• The majority of MSD teachers have two hours or less for individual and 
collaborative planning during regular school hours. This is less time for planning 
during school than reported by MSD single grade teachers and the comparison 
school multiage teachers. 

• Both single grade and multiage teachers MSD teachers rated themselves as 



O 

ERJC 



22 29 



somewhat prepared to teach the various content areas. The comparison multiage 
teachers rated their overall preparedness fairly high. 



ERIC 



Teachers of single grade classrooms and teachers of students in grades 6-8 
reported using more large mixed groups in their daily instruction compared to 
MSD teachers of multiage classes and MSD teachers of students in grades K-5. 

MSD teachers reported that all the types of interactions among students addressed 
by the survey occurred at least occasionally. However, classroom observations 
indicated low amounts of academic student interactions in observed classes, 
particularly in grades K-2. MSD multiage team teachers reported lower 
frequencies of student interaction than the comparison school multiage teachers. 

MSD teachers reported that their most frequently used student assessment 
method is portfolios; their least frequent method is student self-assessment. 
Single grade teachers reported more use of worksheets and tests than did teachers 
of multiage classrooms. According to classroom observations, worksheets was 
the most frequently observed instruction/assessment in the district. MSD 
multiage team teachers reported more use of worksheets and running records than 
the multiage teachers in the comparison school. 

MSD single grade teachers reported higher frequencies of multiage classroom 
practices than MSD multiage teachers (primarily for flexible student 
advancement and parent involvement). The comparison school multiage teachers 
reported higher frequencies than MSD multiage team teachers for flexible student 
advancement, opportunities for group work, and multiple learning opportunities. 
MSD multiage team teachers used the various classroom practices less than the 
comparison multiage teachers. 

MSD teachers’ most frequently used resources for planning instruction were 
content area resources and standards^enchmarks. The comparison school 
multiage teachers reported almost always using standards/benchmarks and 
frequently using content area resources. 

MSD multiage teachers reported limited improvements in student outcomes. The 
comparison school multiage teachers rated these same outcomes much higher for 
their students. 

The amount of staff development reported by teachers did not differ among 
groups. However, teachers in the comparison school rated their staff development 
activities as more valuable than did other teachers. 

MSD teachers were observed using instructional practices that involved 
monitoring of student work more than facilitating of student work, except in 
grades K-2 where the findings were reversed. Overall, MSD multiage teachers 
did more facilitating than single grade teachers. 




• Classroom observations indicated that more MSD students were simply working 
than were actively engaged in their academic work. Almost one-fourth of 
students observed in grades 6-8 were passive with regard to their academic work. 

• MSD administrators and teachers agreed on the need for more teacher planning 
time. Administrators identified morale and trust as issues among MSD teachers. 
They cited teacher dissatisfaction with the manner in which the multiage 
approach was implemented in the district. 

• The principal of the comparison school reported that the school’s multiage 
classrooms have been associated with improved student achievement and with 
parent satisfaction. Key differences between MSD multiage team teachers and 
comparison multiage teachers were that the comparison teachers had more years 
of multiage teaching experience, more access to planing time during school, 
greater perceptions of preparedness to teach content areas, higher frequencies of 
student interaction in their classrooms, more frequent use of 
standards/benchmarks to plan instruction, and a higher use of multiage classroom 
practices. 



31 

o 

ERIC 



24 



DISCUSSION 



This section presents a discussion of the implications of the study findings for implementing 
multiage programs and for the use of nongraded classrooms as a school reform strategy. 

Generalizabilitv of Results 



The findings from the study of instructional practices in MSD and the comparison school 
have several implications for successful implementation of multiage programs. However, first there 
should be a discussion about whether the results are generalizable. Prior teaching experience had an 
influence on the results that were obtained from the Instructional Practices Survey. The MSD single 
grade teachers had more teaching experience and had been in the district longer than MSD multiage 
teachers. (When MSD hired new teachers, often it was with the expectation that they would teach 
a multiage classroom.) Similarly, the comparison school multiage teachers had more teaching 
experience than the MSD multiage team teachers. Thus, the comparisons that were made in the study 
do not allow an evaluation of the effectiveness of classroom type (single grade or multiage). 
However, the descriptive results, in comparison with what previous research has shown about 
multiage classrooms, have implications for implementation. 

Another factor that affects generalizability concerns the amount of time that the multiage 
program has existed in MSD. The program was in its third year of implementation when the study 
was conducted. Due to the many changes in instruction that are needed when teachers switch from 
traditional classrooms to multiage, two years may not be enough time for successful implementation 
to occur (Surbeck, 1992). 

Finally, it is difficult to separate the effects of multiage classrooms from effects that occur 
when teachers, schools, and districts adopt the philosophy about learning and development that a 
multiage approach embraces. As described in the introduction to this report, Lloyd (1999) reminded 
researchers that instruction is the key to improved student learning and not the multiage structure per 

se. 



Implications for Implementing Multiage Programs 

With the above cautions in mind regarding the interpretation of results, what do the current 
findings tell educators and researchers about implementing multiage classrooms, and how do these 
findings relate to previous research? Results of this study are related to five implementation issues: 
(1) collaborative planning, (2) understanding the complex changes required, (3) support from 
principals (4) adequate resources, and (5) teacher collaboration. 

Collaborative planning. In response to the open-ended questions on the Instructional 
Practices Survey, MSD teachers expressed their dissatisfaction with the way that multiage 
classrooms were mandated by district administrators. MSD administrators had taken this stance as 
a way to effect immediate and drastic changes in the district in response to the urgent learning needs 
of students. However, it created dissatisfaction among teachers who then became informal members 
of “pro” and “con” camps, as district administrators described in interviews. Other research suggests 
that planning and obtaining buy-in from stakeholders are critical to implementing multiage programs. 



After studying multiage classrooms in Oregon in the early 1 990s, Miller ( 1 996) stated that “too many 
educators are implementing multiage classrooms and schools with insufficient forethought, planning, 
and participation of key stakeholders. I can think of no better way to destroy a potentially sound 
educational practice” (p. 12). Miller also described an urban district in the Midwest where teachers 
were having difficulty implementing multiage classrooms successfully as evidenced by student test 
scores. Similar to MSD, the change to multiage had been mandated with little teacher involvement 
in the decision and insufficient teacher preparation. 

Miller (1996) urged that districts or schools that are considering changing to multiage 
classrooms devote considerable time to planning and preparation. Surbeck (1992) suggested that at 
least two years be devoted to this process. The planning process must address changes that will be 
needed in structure such as scheduling and changes in instruction such as student groupings. 
However, first the culture and climate of the school with regard to nongradedness must be addressed. 
This means that all stakeholders need to be on board if the change to multiage is to be successful. 
The stakeholders include district administrators, principals, teachers, and parents (Miller, 1996). Of 
this group, probably the most important are the principals and the teachers. They are the ones who 
must communicate to parents the benefits of a multiage approach for their children. But for most 
principals and teachers, accepting the philosophy that underlies multiage practices means unlearning 
previously held notions about how children learn (Miller, 1994), and for this to occur, new skills and 
knowledge must be acquired (Gaustad, 1995). As a teacher in Kentucky’s mandated K— 3 multiage 
primary program commented, “from the very beginning, teachers who did not want to teach using 
the philosophy upon which the primary program was based found ways to circumvent teaching in 
a multiage classroom” (McGee, 2000, p. 69). 

Understanding the complex changes required. Underlying the need for adequate planning 
and preparation is the complexity of the changes that are required of educators who are adopting 
multiage approaches to instruction. In Gaustad’s (1995) study of multiage imp lementation, the author 
remarked that “perfunctory planning that ignores the magnitude and complexity of the change can 
produce disastrous results” (p. 8). Of course, all changes in education require careful consideration 
and time, but the degree of change required of teachers in multiage classrooms is considerable. Osin 
and Lesgold (1996) suggested that this high degree of change is the reason that more clear cut results 
favoring student learning in multiage programs have not been obtained. “We claim that the main 
reason for the low rate of success is that the teachers on whose shoulders (and heads) success is 
based, were assigned a mission impossible” (p. 639). The authors referred to the review by Gutierrez 
and Slavin ( 1 992) which found that results clearly favoring mixed-age instruction were found mainly 
for those instances which involved less complex changes, such as multiage instruction in one subject. 
The authors concluded by proposing the use of modem information systems and computer software 
to redesign traditional education approaches so that the change to multiage classrooms will be easier 
to manage and less complex. 

Miller (1996) reminded districts that “teachers can be overwhelmed by a plethora of changes 
mandated by administrators who are unmindful of the impact that such reform efforts have on 
classroom teachers” (p. 13). Miller emphasized that because changing to multiage instruction 
requires a “significant shift in classroom norms, major attention needs to focus on supporting the 
emotional as well as the cognitive changes occurring to those engaged in the innovation” (p. 15). 
Multiage teachers interviewed by ERS Spectrum ( 1 995) stated that an unexpected result of changing 



to multiage instruction was that teachers lost their feelings of competence. Teachers were afraid that 
they were not doing things right in their classrooms. Miller (1994) found that even veteran teachers 
experienced these feelings, sometime more so than newer teachers. MSD teachers expressed similar 
fears through their request for more training and staff development, which was the most frequently 
mentioned suggestion for improving instruction in the district. MSD administrators also referred to 
teachers’ needs for in-depth training on effective teaching practices. 

Support from principals. The needs of teachers is one reason why strong support from 
principals is important when districts and schools change to multiage classrooms. In a study of four 
Northwest elementary schools that were successfully implementing multiage education, Miller 
(1996) described the principals’ role in transforming the school environment so that it was open to 
change and growth. Specifically, the principals helped create learning communities that empowered 
teachers to question traditional instructional practices and assumptions about learning. Principals 
were willing to support teachers, for example, by finding resources for them and helping them 
prepare materials. Miller also noted that principals respected teachers’ developmental differences 
in learning new multiage instructional practices. Mandating the multiage approach in MSD may have 
made the formation of learning communities in the district more difficult. 

Gaustad (1995) stressed that principals of multiage schools must create a sense of community 
around the change to multiage instructional practices. Gaustad warned about the formation of 
subgroups who are for or against the approach. As mentioned previously, the change to multiage 
classrooms divided teachers in MSD. 

Adequate resources. MSD teachers expressed a need for more materials and resources for 
their multiage classrooms. As the Instructional Practices Survey indicated, MSD teachers in multiage 
classrooms did not tend to use textbooks or grade-level materials because of district policy. In 
general, the use of textbooks is a controversial issue when implementing multiage classrooms (W all, 
1 994). MSD district administrators felt that using traditional textbooks would reinforce the tendency 
to teach to separate grade levels in multiage classrooms. However, few classroom materials are 
available specifically for multiage programs. Generally, authentic learning experiences and thematic 
materials need to be substituted for standardized materials and traditional textbooks (Surbeck, 1 992). 
However, developing new materials and thematic units that can be used for different developmental 
levels takes time. 

Multiage MSD teachers indicated that they have less planning time during school hours than 
single grade MSD teachers and the comparison school multiage teachers. The teachers interviewed 
by ERS Spectrum (1995) stressed that multiage classrooms require extra planning time compared 
to traditional classrooms. Gaustad (1995) suggested that more staff, such as paraprofessionals, may 
need to be hired for multiage programs to increase teachers’ opportunities to prepare instruction. 

Professional development is a critical resource for implementing a multiage program. MSD 
teachers’ relatively low self-ratings of preparedness to teach the content areas and in multiage 
classrooms are indicative of their needs for additional training. The relatively low value that MSD 
teachers attached to previous staff development activities suggest the need for changes in content and 
delivery. As described in the introduction, teachers in multiage classrooms need to learn many new 
skills that are not required in single grade classrooms. The use of developmentally appropriate 



practices by multiage teachers requires that they understand child development and have the skills 
to use education strategies that support children’ various learning styles (Surbeck, 1992). They also 
need opportunities to observe other teachers who are successful at using these skills and to try them 
out in their own classrooms, followed by feedback (Gaustad, 1995). MSD started such training by 
having their multiage teachers observe the comparison school teachers. 

Teacher collaboration. Several researchers have stressed the need for collaboration among 
teachers of multiage classrooms (e.g., Surbeck, 1992, Gaustad, 1995). Teachers themselves have 
indicated that teaming is essential to successful multiage instruction (ERS Spectrum, 1995). Yet 
most teachers are not accustomed to collaborating, and single grade classrooms encourage teacher 
isolation. MSD administrators commented that trust among teachers is an issue in the district, yet 
little planning time is devoted to collaboration. According to Gaustad (1995), the principal of the 
multiage school must help create conditions that foster a sense of community among teachers and 
facilitate cooperation and positive interactions among members of teaching teams. Staff development 
on team building also can increase teachers’ collaborative skills (Lauer, Wilkerson, Goodwin, & 
Apthorp, in press). 

Nongradedness as a Reform Strategy 

MSD administrators mandated the change to multiage classrooms because of the potential 
for this approach to reform instruction in the district. Almost all MSD students are from an ethnic 
minority group and low socioeconomic background. As discussed in the introduction, instruction in 
multiage classrooms is designed to meet the individual developmental needs of students and also 
their learning styles which often are associated with cultural backgrounds. In this regard, multiage 
programs are aligned with the Learner-Centered Psychological Principles developed by the American 
Psychological Association and McREL (1993). The principles are based on the essential finding 
from research and practice that students learn best in an environment whose primary focus is the 
learner and the learning process. 

A multiage approach involves community and collaboration among both students and 
teachers. Within each MSD school, teachers and students are organized into families based on grade 
levels. The district designed this organization to support teaming among teachers. The family 
concept also was a way to create tiyospaye- an Indian word for family or community— within the 
schools because many MSD students’ own families are unstable. 

Thus, MSD’s reasons for restructuring classrooms into a multiage format were based on 
practices which research has shown to be psychologically and educationally effective. However, as 
a reform strategy, the switch to multiage classrooms requires complex changes, particularly of its 
teachers, in both philosophy and practice. These changes need extensive support and time to be 
effective, perhaps even as much as six years before changes in student learning can be documented 
by achievement tests (Surbeck, 1992). Thus, as a reform strategy, nongradedness is not a quick fix 
for low student achievement. 

Lessons from Kentucky. In 1992, the Kentucky Education Reform Act mandated the 
formation of K-3 multiage classes as one component of a new primary program for Kentucky school 
districts. In 1 997, Guskey and Lindle reported on the effects of Kentucky’s multiage classrooms. The 



O 

ERIC 



1 28 3 5 



authors stated that “since its mandated implementation in 1992, the multi-age/multi-grade attribute 
has remained the most controversial and most difficult for teachers. It is also the attribute teachers 
rate as least important and the one the fewest teachers would continue if given the choice (p. 2). In 
discussing the reasons for this result, the authors cited three problems based on an earlier report 
(Koretz, Barron, Mitchell, & Steecher, 1996): (1) developmental differences among students are 
magnified in multiage classrooms which intensifies teachers’ challenges to instruct effectively; (2) 
multiage grouping overwhelms teacher’s repertoire of instructional strategies and does not inspire 
them to create new ones; and, (3) multiage grouping causes teachers to become more concerned with 
classroom management rather than with the quality of students’ learning. 

Guskey and Lindle (1997) also expressed their concern that since the implementation of 
Kentucky’s primary program there has been an increase in the number of fourth-grade students who 
were classified as “exceptional.” This classification means that the students have learning difficulties 
and need special services. The authors stated that the increase in fourth-grade “exceptional” students 
is counter to the expectation that multiage primary teachers would be better able to identify 
individual learning problems and to help students develop strong skills before they reach fourth 
grade. 

Instruction is key. The examples from Kentucky and now MSD indicate that in today’s era 
of education accountability, nongraded strategies alone are unlikely to produce the kinds of quick 
improvements in student performance that school officials are looking for. However, it is clear that 
multiage approaches are developmentally sound and are aligned with the research on children s 
learning. The key appears to be the quality of instruction that is occurring within multiage 
classrooms. 

Guskey and Lindle (1 997) summarized this viewpoint [also discussed by Gaustad (1995) and 
Lloyd (1999)]: 

It is not how you group students for instruction, but what you do within those groups 
that is important to learning [italics in original]. Multi-grade classes do not 
guarantee high quality instruction for all students, and single grade classes do not 
prevent it. While some grouping practices are more conducive than others to the use 
of certain instructional activities, it requires preparation and professional judgment 
to know what strategies fit which grouping practices. The imposition of structural 
changes can have deleterious effects on teacher self-efficacy and confidence and thus 
affect student performance. Improvements in student learning are far more likely to 
result from efforts that help teachers provide better and higher quality instruction 
than from mere structural changes, (p. 10) 



The quality of instruction can help explain why MSD has yet to see positive effects on 
student performance due to multiage classrooms 2 . According to the findings of the MSD/McREL 



2 In analyses of MSD student achievement in language arts and mathematics from the year prior to the study, 
there were no statistically significant positive effects associated with multiage classrooms. 





design team study, MSD teachers feel inadequately prepared to teach content areas, have few 
instructional resources, have insufficient planning time, and are struggling to collaborate among 
themselves. Teachers’ reported frequencies of multiage practices in MSD multiage classrooms is 
relatively low. Classroom observations indicate that across the district teachers are relying on 
worksheets and monitoring rather than facilitating student learning. In short, the study indicates that 
present multiage classrooms in MSD have not yet resulted in the high quality instruction that is 
needed in nongraded programs, as described by Anderson and Pavan (1993). 

During the academic year following the completion of this study, MSD administrators made 
changes which have the potential to positively impact student learning and to raise student 
achievement scores. The superintendent allowed teachers to choose for themselves whether to teach 
in single grade or multiage classrooms. The district began to focus on content standards and the 
alignment of these with instruction and assessment. Teachers were given content-based classroom 
materials with which to work and more planning time. Principals were given professional 
development and guidance on how to be instructional leaders. Professional development for teachers 
emphasized the teaching of literacy. The district implemented a pilot literacy block, with the help 
of teachers from the comparison school and McREL technical assistance. The district has sent the 
message to its administrators and teachers that quality instruction is key. 

Conclusions 



The following conclusions integrate prior research with the results of the current study: 

• Multiage programs can be educationally and psychologically beneficial to 
students when they are combined with high quality instruction. 

• Multiage approaches require extensive changes in the philosophies and practices 
of most teachers and administrators. 

• Effective implementation of multiage programs requires (1) extensive planning 
and preparation that includes stakeholder input; (2) district understanding and 
support to help teachers make complex instructional changes; (3) support from 
administrators for the creation of learning communities, (4) adequate resources 
including classroom materials, planning time, and staff development; and, (5) 
teacher collaboration that is facilitated by principals. 

• Nongradedness is not a quick fix for low student achievement. 



( 



o 

ERIC 



30 



REFERENCES 



Anderson, R.H., & Pavan, B.N. (1993). Nongradedness: Helping it to happen. Lancaster, PA: 
Technomic Publishing. 

APA Task Force on Psychology in Education (1993, January). Learner-centered psychological 
principles: Guidelines for school redesign and reform. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association and the Mid-continent Regional Educational Laboratory. 

ERS Spectrum. (1995). Establishing a multiage program: Learning from Experience. An ERS 
interview with Robin Sweeney, Krista Olstead, and Bev Bryant. ERS Spectrum, 1 3 (2), 3-1 1 . 

Gaustad, J. (1994). Nongraded education: Overcoming obstacles to implementing the multiage 
classroom. OSSC Bulletin,, 38(3 & 4) [Special Issue], Eugene, OR: Oregon School 
Study Council. 

Gaustad, J. (1995). Implementing the multiage classroom. ERIC Digest, 97, ED381869. 

Goodlad, J. I., & Anderson, R. H. (1987). The nongraded elementary school. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 

Guiterrez, R., & Slavin, R. E. (1992). Achievement effects of nongraded elementary schools: A best 
evidence synthesis. Review of Educational Research, 62(4), 333-376. 

Guskey, T. R. & Lindle, J. C. (1997). Research on multi-age/multi-grade classes: Report to the 
Teaching and Learning Issues Group. Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 420915) 

Hall, G. E., & Hoard, S. M. (1987). Change in schools. New York: State University of New York 
Press. 

Kasten, W. C., & Clarke, B. K. (1993). The multi-age classroom: A family of learners. Katonah, 
NY : Owen. 

Kasten, W. C., & Lolli, E. M. (1998). Implementing multiage education: A practical guide to a 
promising future. Norwood, MA: Christopher-Gordon Publishers. 

Kommer, D. (1999). Is it time to revisit multiage teams in the middle grades? Middle School 
Journal, 30, 28-32. 

Koretz, D. M., Barron, S., Mitchell, K. J., & Steecher, B. M. (1996). Perceived effects of the 
Kentucky Instructional Results Information system (KIRIS). Santa Monica, CA: RAND. 

Lauer, P. A., Wilkerson, S. B., Goodwin, B., & Apthorp, H. S. (in press). School districts and 
research organizations: Partners for school improvement. In S. Mitchell (Ed.), Effective 
partnerships. Westport, CT: Praeger. 




3 38 



Little, T. S., & Dacus, N. B. (1999). Looping: Moving up with the class. Educational Leadership, 
57(1), 42-45. 

Lloyd, L. (1999). Multi-age classes and high ability students. Review of Educational Research, 
69(2), 187-212. 

Lodish, R. (1992). The pros and cons of mixed-age grouping. Principal, 71(5), 20-22. 

McGee, C. D. (2000). A multi-age/multi-ability primary classroom in action. In B. L. Whitford & 
K. Jones (Eds.), Accountability, assessment, and teacher commitment (pp. 49-70). Albany, 
NY: State University of New York Press. 

McLaughlin, H. J., Irvin, J. L., & Doda, N. M. (1999). Crossing the grade level gap: Research on 
multiage grouping. Middle School Journal, 30, 55-58. 

Miller, B. A. (1989). The multigrade classroom: A resource handbook for small rural schools. 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Education lab. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 320 719). 

Miller, B. A. (1996). A basic understanding of multiage grouping: Teacher readiness, planning, and 
parent involvement required for successful practice. The School Administrator, 53(1), 12-17. 

Miller, B. A. (1994). Children at the center: Implementing the multiage classroom. Portland, OR: 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Osin, L., & Lesgold, A. (1996). A proposal for the reengineering of the educational system. Review 
of Educational Research, 66(4), 621-656. 

Pavin, B.N. (1992). The benefits of nongraded schools. Educational Leadership, 50(2), 

22-25. 



Piaget, J. (1976). Symbolic play. In J. S. Bruner, A. Jolly, & K. Sylvia (Eds.), Play: Its role in 
development and evolution. New York: Basic Books. 

Slavin, R. E. (1992). The nongraded elementary school: Great potential, but keep it simple. 
Educational Leadership, 50(2), 24. 

Stone, S. J. (1998). Creating contexts for middle-age learning. Childhood Education, 74(4), 
234-236. 



Surbeck, E. (1992). Multi-age programs in primary grades: Are they educationally appropriate? 
Childhood Education, 69(1), 3-4. 



Theilheimer, R. (1993). Something for everyone: Benefits of mixed-age grouping for children, 
parents, and teachers. Young Children, 48(5), 82-87. 



ERIC 



32 



39 



Veenman, S. (1995). Cognitive and noncognitive effects of multigrade and multiage classes: A best- 
evidence synthesis. Review of Educational Research, 65(4), 319-381. 

V ygotsky, L. ( 1 978). Mind in society: The development of psychological processes. Cambridge, MA : 
Harvard University Press. 

Wall, B. (1994). Managing your multi-age classroom. Teaching K-8, 25(1), 68,72-73. 

American Association of School Administrators. (1992). The nongraded primary: Making 
schools fit children. Arlington, VA: Author. 

Additional Resources 



American Association of School Administrators. (1992). The nongraded primary: Making schools 
fit children. Arlington, VA: Author. 

Hovda, R. A., Kyle, D. W., & McIntyre, E. (Eds.). (1996). Creating nongraded K—3 classrooms: 
Teachers ’ stories and lessons learned. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 

Hunter, M. (1992). How to change to a nongraded school. Alexandria, VA: Association for 
Supervision and Curriculum Development. 

National Education Association. (1995). Multi-age classrooms. Washington, DC: Author. 

Stone, S. (1996). Creating the multi-age classroom. Glenview, IL: Good Year Books. 




33 



Appendix A 




Classroom Observation 



Name of School; 

Person Conducting Observation 
Beginning Time of Observation: 

General: 

1. How many students are in the class? What subject is being taught^ 



Name of District 

Classroom Grade 

Enrjjng Time of Observation: 



2. What seems to be the specific objective of the lesson(s)? What is it that students are being 
expected to learn or do? 



3. Describe what is on the walls of the classroom 



1/30/00 MultUge Study 

Protocol 



o 




42 



General (Continued) 



4. Estimate the number of classroom library (resource materials) books available to children. 
Describe the collection. 



5 What technology is available in the classroom (computers, listening posts, VCRs, 
televisions, etc.)? Describe any evidence that suggests how the technology is generally 
used? 



1 / 30/00 

Protocol 



Multiagc Study 



43 



Providing Opportunities for All Children to Achieve: We want to find evidence that the 
school is relentless about ensuring (hat each and every child will achieve high standards of 
academic achievement. " Every child" includes children receiving special education and 
bilingual education sendees, children who have exhibited behavior problems, and other 
children who tend to fall behind academically. We are looking for evidence that the school is 
organized in ways that reflect high academic expectations for every student. 



1 . Are all children seeming to understand what is being taught? If students are working 

independently or in groups, are all students or are all groups successfully demonstrating the 
desired knowledge or skill? Describe in detail 



2 If there are children or groups of children having difficulty, what kinds of assistance does 
the teacher provide? Does the teacher seem to know that these students are having 
difficulty? How does the teacher respond? 



3. How do students interact with each other during the lesson? Do students provide assistance 
to each other? If so, how? 



4. Describe the extent to which students are engaged in the lesson? Are students passively 
listening, are they actively working, or are they ofF-task? 



Multiagc Study 




imroo 

Protocol 



44 



Providing Opportunities for All Children to Achieve (continued) 

5. If children misbehave, how does the teacher handle the situation? 



6. Describe any special support 
who might have a disability, < 



at is offered to children who are not yet proficient in English, 
who otherwise might need special assistance 



1/30/00 

Protocol 



MultUgc Study 



4 ° 



Partnerships with Parents/Families/Com munities: We want to find evidence that the 
school is working actively to build strong relationships with families and community groups 
We want to find evidence that the school is reaching out to parents and community m ways that 
help create a sense of true 'partnership that is built on mutual respect and focused toward he 
common goal of improving student achievement. We want to find evidence that parents feel that 
they truly belong at the school and they multiple avenues for getting involved. 



1. Are any volunteers working in the classroom? If so, what are they doing? 



2 Describe how the teacher interacts with the volunteer(s)? Describe how the volunteer(s) 
interact with students 



3. If any parents come to visit the class during the observation, describe what happens How 
are the parents received? How does the teacher interact with the parents'? 



4. Is there anything in the classroom that gives an indication that parents visit the classroom or 
volunteer (e.g., a special place for volunteers or visitors, pictures of volunteers)? 



1 / 30/00 

Protocol 



Multitge Study 



6 



Curriculum and Instruction: We want to find evidence that curricula and instruction focus on 
high academic standards. We want to find evidence that teachers' pursue a variety of 
instructional strategies to help ensure that their students learn challenging skills. We want to 
find evidence that all students, regardless of how they are grouped for instruction. ha\>e access 
to challenging academic curricula. 



1 



During the lesson, list the most challenging questions or tasks to which students are 
expected to respond 



2. If students are grouped and are being taught different objectives, describe what each group 
is being taught, participation level, and how they are interacting 



3 Describe the instructional strategies the teacher uses during the lesson What does the 
teacher do to get students to learn the content or skills? 




100/00 

Protocol 



Multugc Sludy 



47 



Appendix B 




48 



Madison School District 
Design Team Study of Instructional Practices 
December 1999 



Dear MSD Teacher: 

The attached survey is part of the MSD Design Team’s Instructional Practices Study. The purposes 
of the study are: 

• to identify the instructional practices that are being used in MSD 

• to obtain feedback from MSD staff on the effectiveness of these instructional practices 

• to relate current instructional practices to student learning outcomes 

• to obtain input on needed staff development 

• to provide recommendations regarding district improvement plans 

The Instructional Practices Study will not be used in any way to evaluate personnel. Instead, the data 
will be used to inform only the five purposes stated above. The Design Team recognizes the 
sensitive nature of the data that are being collected and pledges to protect the confidentiality of all 
respondents. With regard to the Teacher Survey, it is necessary to connect teachers to their students. 
Therefore, each survey has been assigned an ID code which is stamped on the survey and on this 
cover sheet. Please sign the bottom of this sheet and give it to the survey administrator from 
McREL. The master list of teacher names and ID codes will be kept in a secure file at McREL and 
will not be shared with any other persons. The original completed surveys will be seen only by 
McREL data analysts. (It should be noted also that although demographic information is being 
collected on the Teacher Survey, reporting of results will be designed to avoid possible identification 
of respondents.) The survey will take approximately one hour to complete. 

Thank you for your participation in this important study which will give MSD teachers a voice in 
their district’s future. (We hope to have the results available to share with teachers in February.) 



Identification Code 

I agree to participate in the Teacher Survey of the MSD Instructional Practices Study. I have been 
informed about the purposes of the study and that the confidentiality of my responses will be 
protected. I understand that completing the survey will take approximately one hour. 



Name (Print) 

Name (Signature) 
Date 




49 



Page 1 of 9 



MSD/McREL Design Team Instructional Practices Study -Teacher Survey 

December 1999 

Instructions: Please read each question carefully. Answer all the questions and be complete in your 
answers. If you need additional room to write, use the back of page 9 and indicate the number of the 
question that you are answering. When you have finished your survey, please give it to the survey 
administrator from McREL. Thank you. 



{ Which of the following best describes your current classroom structure? Check one answer. 

(1) One teacher, one grade level 

(2) One teacher, two grade levels 

(3) One teacher, three grade levels 

(4) Team teaching, one grade level 

(5) Team teaching, two grade levels 

(6) Team teaching, three grade levels 

(7) Other (Please describe.) 



2. Are you looping with the students you currently teach? Check one answer. 

(1) No 

(2) Yes, I will have the same students for two years. 

(3) Yes, I will have the same students for three years. 

3. Write a number in each space to indicate how many students you currently are teaching 

(1) for the first time 

(2) for the second time 

(3) for the third time 

4. Which of the following best describes how you share teaching responsibilities with another teacher (s)? 
Check one answer. 

(1) There is no sharing of teaching responsibilities. 

(2) Two or more teachers teach different categories of subjects. 

(3) Two or three teachers teach all subjects. 

(4) All teachers teach all subjects. 

(5) Other (Please describe.) 



5. How many hours per week do you have for instructional planning time during regular school 

hours? 

6. Of the above, how many hours per week do you collaborate with other teachers in planning 

: jv*"uction? 

ERIC 50 



Page 2 of 9 



7. How many hours per week do you use for instructional planning time outside of regular school 
hours ? 



8. Of the above , how many hours per week do you collaborate with other teachers in planning 
instruction? 



9. To what degree does your 
MSD “family” participate in 
the following activities each 
week ? Make one check for 
each activity . 


Almost 

Never 


Seldom 


Occasionally 


Frequently 


Almost 

Always 


Planning of instruction 












Planning of student 
assessments 












Curriculum planning 












Sharing of information about 
students 












Sharing of information about 
teaching strategies 












Other (Please name and rate 
the frequency.) 













10. Out of the instructional day, what percent (on the average) do you instruct students in the following 
ways? (Note — your answers do not need to add to 100%.) 



% (1) One-on-one instruction 
% (2) Independent work 

% (3) Small group instruction organized by grade level 
% (4) Small group instruction organized by skills level 
% (5) Large group mixed instruction 
% (6) Small group mixed instruction 
% (7) Other {Please describe.) 



1 1 On the average, what percent of each day do students in your classroom interact with each other in 
learning activities related to instruction? (Check one answer.) 



O 



( 1 ) 0 - 20 % 

(2) 21-40% 

(3) 41-60% 

(4) 61-80% 

(5)81-100% 




51 



Page 3 of 9 



12. When the students you 
teach interact with each other, 
how often are they participating 
in the following learning 
activities? (Make one check for 
each activity) 


Almost 

Never 


Seldom 


Occasionally 


Frequently 


Almost 

Always 


Peer coaching or tutoring 












Cooperative learning 












Learning centers 












Classroom projects 












Small group learning or partners 












Other (Please name and rate 
the frequency.) 













13. How often do you use the 
following methods of student 
assessment? (Make one check 
for each method.) 


Almost 

Never 


Seldom 


Occasionally 


Frequently 


Almost 

Always 


worksheets 












tests 












demonstrations 












one-on-one conferencing 












rubrics 












running records 












portfolios 












student self-assessment 












other (Please name and rate the 
frequency.) 













O 

ERiC 



52 



Page 4 of 9 



14. How often is the 
following true of your 
instruction? (Make one check 
for each statement.) 


Almost 

Never 


Seldom 


Occasionally 


Frequently 


Almost 

Always 


Grouping and subgrouping of 
students are flexible. 












Sequences of learning are 
determined for individual 
students. 












Advancement, retention, and 
promotion procedures for 
students are flexible. 












There are opportunities for 
students to work with many 
groups of different sizes and 
that are formed for different 
purposes. 












Students formulate their own 
learning goals with guidance 
from their teachers. 












Students participate in their 
own learning through 
numerous opportunities for 
choices. 












Multiple learning alternatives 
are available to address 
different learning styles of 
students. 












Students’ work is assessed in 
terms of their past 
achievements and their own 
potentials. 












Parents are involved (either 
actively or indirectly) with 
the classroom community. 














53 



Page 5 of 9 



15. How often you use the 
following resources to plan your 
instruction? (Make one check 
for each resource .) 


Almost 

Never 


Seldom 


Occasionally 


Frequently 


Almost 

Always 


Content standards and 
benchmarks 












Teacher manuals 












Student textbooks 












Internet 












Computer software 












Content area resources 












Resources on teaching 
techniques 












Audiovisual resources 












Staff development materials 












Materials from conferences 












Other (Please name and rate the 
frequency.) 













16. To what degree do you feel prepared 
with the necessary skills and knowledge to 
teach the following? (Make one check for 
each category.) 


No 

Preparedness 


Some 

Preparedness 


Much 

Preparedness 


Great Deal of 
Preparedness 


State Language Arts Standards 










State Dakota Mathematics Standards 










MSD Health Standards 










Science 










Social Studies 










Native American students 










High poverty students 










In multiage classrooms 











ERjt 



54 



Page 6 of 9 



17. Listed below are topics of professional development activities, many of which have been offered to 
teachers in MSD. For each topic, please respond to questions A and B. (Note - if you participated in an 
activity, but not at MSD, you should circle Yes and answer question B .) 



Staff Development 
Topics 


A. Did you 
participate 
(Circle Yes 


? 

or No) 


B. If you participated, how effective was 

participation at enhancing your teaching skills? 
(Check one answer for each topic.) 








No 

Value 


Some 

Value 


Much 

Value 


Great 

Value 


Teaching in Multiage 
Classrooms 


Yes 


No 










Adapting Curriculum in 
Multiage Classrooms 


Yes 


No 










Content Standards 


Yes 


No 










Classroom 

Grading/Assessment 


Yes 


No 










Math Instruction 


Yes 


No 










Reading Instruction 


Yes 


No 










Writing Instruction 


Yes 


No 










Integrated Thematic Units 


Yes 


No 










Learning Centers 


Yes 


No 










Cooperative Learning 


Yes 


No 










Collaborative Teaming 


Yes 


No 










Team Building Techniques 


Yes 


No 










Differentiated Instruction 


Yes 


No 










Learner-Centered Practices 


Yes 


No 










Using Technology in the 
Classroom 


Yes 


No 










Computer Skills Training 


Yes 


No 










Lakota Language/Culture 


Yes 


No 










Multiple Intelligences 


Yes 


No 










Student Motivation 
Techniques 


Yes 


No 










Health 


Yes 


No 










Special Education 


Yes 


No 










Other (Please describe and 
indicate the value.) 


Yes 


No 











ERIC 



5 : 



Page 7 of 9 



18. Indicate your need for additional staff development on the following topics by rating each from 1 
(definitely not needed) to 4 (definitely needed). 

Teaching in Multiage Classrooms 

Adapting Curriculum in Multiage Classrooms 

Content Standards 

Classroom Grading/Assessment 

Math Instruction 

Reading Instruction 

Writing Instruction 

Integrated Thematic Units 

Learning Centers 

Cooperative Learning 

Collaborative Teaming 

Team Building Techniques 

Differentiated Instruction 

Learner-Centered Practices 

Using Technology in the Classroom 

Computer Skills Training 

Lakota Language/Culture 

Multiple Intelligences 

Student Motivation Techniques 

Health 

Special Education 

Other (Please Describe) 



19. How long have you been teaching multiage classrooms in MSD? 

none (If none, go to question #22.) 

first year of teaching a multiage classroom 

second year of teaching a multiage classroom 

third year of teaching a multiage classroom 

Other (Please explain.) 



20a. What are the advantages of multiage classrooms? 



20b. What are the disadvantages of multiage classrooms? 




5/6 



Page 8 of 9 



21. In general, what is the 
degree of improvement that 
you have seen in your students 
in the following areas since 
you started teaching a multiage 
classroom? 


No 

Improvement 


Very Limited 
Improvement 


Some 

Improvement 


Much 

Improvement 


Great 

Improvement 


student learning skills 












student motivation to learn 












student interpersonal 
relationships 












student respect for community 












student decision making 












student cultural understanding 













22. How long have you been looping in MSD? 

none (If none, go to question #24.) 

one year 

two years 

three years 

four or more years 

Other (Please explain.) 



23a. What are the advantages of looping? 



23b. What are the disadvantages of looping? 



O 

ERIC 



57 



Page 9 of 9 



24. In general, what is the 
degree of improvement that 
you have seen in your students 
in the following areas since 
you started looping? 


No 

Improvement 


Very Limited 
Improvement 


Some 

Improvement 


Much 

Improvement 


Great 

Improvement 


student learning skills 












student motivation to learn 












student interpersonal 
relationships 












student respect for community 












student decision making 












student cultural understanding 













Please answer the following demographic questions: 

25. Current position: Teacher Other Certified Staff 

Other (Please describe.) 

26. Number of years teaching experience: 

27. Number of years teaching in Monroe School District: 

28. Grade level(s) that you currently are teaching in 1999-2000: 

29. Grade level(s) that you taught last year in 1 998-1999 : 

30. Grade level(s) that you taught in 1997-1998: 



31. What are your suggestions for improving instruction and student learning in MSD? 




Appendix C 




59 



Monroe School District, South Dakota 
Design Team Study of Instructional Practices 
December 1999 



Dear MSD Administrator: 

The administrator interviews are part of the MSD Design Team’s Instructional Practices Study. The 
purposes of the study are: 

• to identify the instructional practices that are being used in MSD 

• to obtain feedback from MSD staff on the effectiveness of these instructional 
practices 

• to relate current instructional practices to student learning outcomes 

• to obtain input on needed staff development 

• to provide recommendations regarding district improvement plans 

The Instructional Practices Study will not be used in any way to evaluate personnel. Instead, the data 
will be used to inform only the five purposes stated above. The Design Team also recognizes the 
sensitive nature of the data that are being collected and pledges to protect the confidentiality of all 
respondents. Interviews will be tape recorded to enable consultants to provide an accurate analysis 
for the report. If at anytime you feel uncomfortable and you wish to stop the recording during this 
interview, please request this and we will respect your wishes. With regard to any sensitive data 
collected for this study, it will be kept in a secure file at McREL and will not be shared with any 
other persons. It should be noted also that although demographic information is being collected on 
teachers and administrators, report of results will be designed to avoid possible identification of 
respondents. The interview will take approximately one hour to complete. Please sign the bottom 
of this sheet and give it to Dorothy Aguilera, educational consultant, McREL. 

Thank you for your participation in this important study. We hope to have the results available to 
share with everyone in February. 



I agree to participate in the Interview for the MSD Instructional Practices Study. I have been 
informed about the purposes of the study and that the confidentiality of my responses will be 
protected. I understand that completing the survey will take approximately one hour. 



Name (Print) 

Name (Signature) 
Date 




60 



Administrator Interview 



Name of School: Name of District: 

Person Interviewed: Person Conducting Interview: 

Time of Interview Ending Time of Interview: 

G’-neral: 



1. How long have you been at the school district? 

2. Have there been any significant changes recently? What are those changes? 

3. What are your goals for this school year? How will you know if you have attained your goals? 

4. What are the district’s short term and long term plans for school improvement? 

Classroom Organization : These questions are designed to discover the number of teachers and schools 
who utilize looping, multiage and other structures in /4SD. 

1. Please describe the different ways teachers organize their classrooms? 



multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 



2. How well do you think teachers understand and practice effectively these organizational 
approaches? 

3. What percentage of schools are utilizing which types of approaches (multiage, looping, and 
family /pod) in the district? 



multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 


multiage 


looping 


family 



4. How often do principals observe in classrooms? 

5. How are teachers assessed? 



61 



1 2/14/99 



Multiage Study 



1 



Professional Development : 

1. What is the district doing to enhance the professional development of staff this year? 

2. What additional resources has the district provided to teachers and principals as incentives to 

incorporate new and alternative approaches in their classrooms? Such as planning time, 

professional development. 

3. What opportunities do teachers have to learn from each other? 

4. If I'm a new teacher in the district, what kinds of assistance can I expect to receive? 

6. What professional development needs do staff have that aren’t currently being met by the 
district? 

7. In terms of improving instruction and student learning (teaching and learning practices) are 
there any unique needs in schools? 

8. How effective has professional development been with improving teaching and learning 
practices at your school? 

Improving Teaching and Learning Practices; 

1. What teaching and learning practices are currently being utilized in your school/s? 

2. What are the most effective instructional practices used by teachers? 

3. What types of student assessment is the district using? 

4. What instructional practices have proved to solicit the best learning experiences for 
students? 

5. How much time do teachers spend each week for planning? 

Curriculum and Instruction, and Standards: 

1. How were decisions made about which reading materials and instructional strategies would 
be used at your school/district? What about assessments? 

2. How do you know if curricula and instructional strategies are working to help your students 
achieve your school/district goals? Should other classroom approaches be offered by the 
district at your school? What suggestions do you have? 

3. In what ways are students grouped for instruction based on academic ability? For instance, 
are students grouped by ability for reading instruction or are students who meet 
giftedAalented criteria given different curriculum? What parameters exist in the grouping in 
your school? Are there any differences in what each group is expected to achieve by the end 
of the year? 



62 



12/14/99 



Multiage Study 



2 



Principal Interview 



Name of School: Name of District: 

Person Interviewed: Person Conducting Interview: 

Time of Interview Ending Time of Interview: 

General: 

1. How many students are enrolled this year? Size of teaching staff? Turnover of staff ? 

2. How long have you been at this school? 

3. Have there been any significant changes at the school recently? What are those changes? 

4. What are your goals for this school year? How will you know if you have attained your goals? 

Classroom Organization : These questions are designed to discover the number of teachers and schools 
who utilize looping, multiage and other structures in M SD. 

1. Please describe the different ways teachers organize their classrooms in your school/s? 



grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multi age 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 



2. How well do you think teachers understand and practice effectively these organizational 
approaches? 

3. What percentage of classrooms are utilizing which types of approaches (multiage, looping, 
and family/pod) in your school? 



grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 


grade level 


multiage 


looping 


family 



4. How often do you observe in classrooms? 

Professional Development : 

1. What are you doing to enhance the professional development of your staff this year? 



irJc • ■' I! 3 

bStellS^/ 1 4 yQ 9 



Multiage Study 



1 



2. What additional resources has your school/district provided to teachers and principals as 
incentives to incorporate new and alternative approaches in their classrooms? Such as planning 
time, professional development. 

3. What opportunities do teachers have to learn from each other? 

4. If I'm a new teacher at this school, what kinds of assistance can I expect to receive? 

5. What professional development needs do your staff have that aren’t currently being met by 
the district? In terms of improving instruction and student learning (teaching and learning 
practices) are there any unique needs in your school? 

6. How effective has professional development been with improving teaching and learning 
practices at your school? 

Improving Teaching and Learning Practices: 

1. What teaching and learning practices are currently being utilized in your school/s? 

2. What are the most effective instructional practices used by teachers? 

3. What types of student assessment are you using at your school? 

4. How do you know they are making adequate academic improvement each year? 

5. What instructional practices have proved to solicit the best learning experiences for 
students? 

6. How much time do your teachers spend each week for planning? 

7. Do you request lessons plans from teachers? How often? Do teachers actually turn in 
their lesson plans as requested? 

Curriculum and Instruction, and Standards: 

1. How were decisions made about which reading materials and instructional strategies would 
be used at your school/district? What about assessments? 

2. How do you know if curricula and instructional strategies are working to help your students 
achieve your school/district goals? Should other classroom approaches be offered by the 
district at your school? What suggestions do you have? 

3. In what ways are students grouped for instruction based on academic ability? For instance, 
are students grouped by ability for reading instruction or are students who meet 
giftedAalented criteria given different curriculum? What parameters exist in the grouping in 
your school? Are there any differences in what each group is expected to achieve by the end 
of the year? 



12/14/9S 



Multiage Study 



2 



64 



4. In your opinion, what works best in your school for students? 

5. How do you assess teachers to determine if they are utilizing the best teaching and learning 
practices in their classrooms? 

6. How well are the curriculum and instructional practices meeting the standards in your 
school/s? 

7. What curriculum resources are available in your schools? Which resources do teachers most 
often use? 

8. How is technology being utilized in classroom instruction? 

9. What textbooks and resource materials are teachers currently using in your school? 

10. What percentage of teachers use worksheets in their classrooms? 

Families and Communities: 



1. What does parent involvement look like at your school? 

2. In what ways do community organizations, businesses, and agencies participate in your 
school/s? 

3. What are some strategies you’re currently using to initiate family and community 
involvement? 

4. Do you know what’s worked in the past? 

Tribal Culture 

1. What tribal affiliations are represented in your school community? 

2. How does tribal culture influence teaching and learning practices? Assessment? 

3. What are the cultural issues that most often surface in the school? 

4. Do teachers receive additional professional development specific to the tribal community they 
teach in? 

5. What is the relationship between the tribal office and schools? 

6 . Is there an educational office within the tribal government structure? 

7. What tribal representation is there on the school board? 

8. Does the tribe request any specific education be offered at the school such as language and 
cultural history? 

9. Is there anything else you would like to add? 



(i5 



LIS 



12/14/99 



' Multiage Study 



3 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASTS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket) form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




EFF-089 (9/97) 




