DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 427 325 

AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



-ABSTRACT 

high school English teachers adapt their own classroom lessons for teaching 
about genocide and intolerance. Beginning with guidelines developed by the 
National Council of teachers of English's Committee on Teaching about 
Genocide and Intolerance, the 16 essays present approaches to teaching 
various works as literature. Essays include: (1) "Struggling with the Meaning 

of Tolerance" (Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr.); (2) "After 

Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature" (Milton Kleg and Celia Bard) ; (3) 

"Noticing ’The Color Purple': Personalizing the Invisible" (Mari M. McLean 
and Christine M. Gibson); (4) "The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 
in Tan and Nunez" (Toming Jun Liu); (5) "Teaching Chinua Achebe ' s ’Things 
Fall Apart'” (Carol Danks) ; (6) "The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats 

Itself" (Bonnie R. Albertson) ; (7) "Teaching Conflict-Resolution Strategies 

through Multiethnic Literature" (Belinda Yun-Ying Louie and Douglas H. 

Louie) ; (8) "Young People Respond to the Elderly" (Leatrice B. Rabinsky) ; (9) 

"Peer Dialogue Journals: An Approach to Teaching Tolerance" (Kate Kessler); 
(10) "Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter" (Samuel Totten); (11) "Teaching the 
'Holodomor' (Ukraine Famine) : Issues of Language, Literary Pedagogy, and 
Learning" (Judith P. Robertson); (12) "Teaching about Women in 
Twentieth- Century Genocides" (Marjorie Bingham) ; (13) "Academic and 

Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust" (Sandra Stotsky) ; (14) 

"Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom: Hearing the Voices, 

Touching the History" (Grace M. Caporino) ; (15) "Incorporating Poetry into a 
Study of the Holocaust" (Samuel Totten); and (16) "It's Not Just What You 
Teach, But Who You Teach" (Sallie M. Fine) . In addition to general resources 
for teaching about genocide and intolerance, the book presents annotations of 
African American, Asian American, Chicano/Chicana, Native American, Gay and 
Lesbian, and Holocaust resources. (RS) 



CS 216 585 

Danks, Carol, Ed.; Rabinsky, Leatrice B., Ed. 

Teaching for a Tolerant World, Grades 9-12. Essays and 
Resources . 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, IL. 

ISBN- 0-8141-4296-6 
1999-00-00 

4 09p . ; A product of the NCTE Committee on Teaching about 
Genocide and Intolerance. 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. Kenyon 
Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096; Tel: 800-369-6283 (Toll Free); 
Fax: 217-328-3870; Web site: http://www.ncte.org (Stock No. 
42966-0015: $19.95 members, $26.95 nonmembers). 

Books (010) -- Guides - Non-Classroom (055) -- Reference 

Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC17 Plus Postage. 

American Indians; Annotated Bibliographies; Asian Americans; 
Blacks; Dialog Journals; * English Instruction; High Schools; 
Hispanic Americans; Homosexuality; Poetry; Resource 
Materials; *Social Discrimination; Teaching Methods 
African Americans; Genocide; *Holocaust; Homosexual 
Literature; *Tolerance 



The essays and resources in this book are designed to help 





To request a review copy, contact Lori Biancbini 
800-369-6283, ext. 3644; public_info@ncte.org 



Teaching for. a Tolerant World, Grades 9-12: Essays and Resources 



Edited by Carol Danks & Leatrice B. Rabinsky 
and the NCTE Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance 



Teaching for a Tolerant World, Grades 9-12: Essays and Resources is the first of three resources to. come from the 
Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance of the National Council of Teachers of English. Created 
in 1993, the committee was charged with developing and publishing teaching materials on the literature of genocide 
and intolerance,- including compilations of resources and suggestions for how to teacfr the subjects. In addition, they 
considered a variety of issues relating to intolerance and genocide, such as racism, sexism, ageism, ethnocentrism, 
and homophobia. The high school volume that they produced is co-edited by Carol Danks, chair of NCTE’s 
Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance, and Leatrice B. Rabinsky, a retired high school teacher 
and board member of the Ohio Council on Holocaust Education. 

The elementary volume, Teaching for a Tolerant World, Grades K—6: Essays and Resources, is due out in 
time for NCTE’s 1999 Annual Convention in Denver, and the middle school volume, Teaching for a Tolerant 
World, Grades 6—8: Essays and Resources, is slated to-be out in early 2000. • 

' All three volumes begin with “General Guidelines for Teaching about.Intolerance and Genocide.” A resource 
section specific to each book suggests videos, Web sites, books, organizations, etc., to aid teachers who wish to 
focus on a specific.group or historical event. The high school volume lists materials to teach tolerance in general 
as well as issues of tolerance related to African Americans, Asian; Americans, Chicanos/Chicanas, Native 
.Americans, Gays and Lesbians, arid the Holocaust. 

The book’s sixteen essays take up a wide variety of compelling issues. In “Struggling with the Meaning of 
Tolerance,” Caroline Heller and Joseph Hawkins Jr. draw on theorists to make the point that many teachers choose 
to avoid conflict by ignoring literature that touches on issues of genocide and intolerance. But Heller and Hawkins 



O 

ERIC 



National Council of Teachers of English 

A Professional Association of Educators in English Studies , Literacy, and Language Arts 

1 1 1 1 W. Kenyon Road ° Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 
Phone: 217-328-3870 ° Fax: 217-328-0977 
www.ncte.oVg ° public_info@hcte.org 




Teaching for a Tolerant World -2 

maintain that discussing this literature can improve classroom relations: “when taught well, with ample teacher 
education and preparation — only more positive human relations emerge.” • • 

Milton Kleg and Celia Bard offer some specific instructional suggestions in their chapter, “After Freedom: 
Jim Crow in Life and Literature.” These include looking for stigmas, change making, and putting authors oh trial. 
In another assignment, “students search for common threads among experiences of characters in different novels. 
For instance, could the actions of the ‘Ex-Colored Man’ and Emma Lou Morgan {The Blacker the Berry ) be 
connected by the thread of self-hate? Once these threads are identified, the students link their findings to the world 
of Jim Crow.” . 

In “Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust,” Sandra Stotsky questions the presentation 
of the Holocaust in literature classes, leading us to consider tough questions: “Is Anti-Semitism sufficiently stressed 
as a cause of the Holocaust?” “Are. appropriate (historical, structural, and phenomenological] distinctions made?” 
“Is the Holocaust trivialized by inappropriate comparisons?” “Does the study of the Holocaust lead to a study of 
contemporary Anti-Semitism?” “Are students given the relevant historical information they need?” and “What 
should students read besides accounts of the death of Jews?” - 

Carol Danks teaches high school English and journalism in Kent, Ohio. She is a board member of the Ohio Council 
on Holocaust Education and co-edited the state’s Holocaust curriculum entitled The Holocaust: Prejudice 
Unleashed. She created and helped implement a ninth-grade unit on literature of the Holocaust which is part of the 
high school’s curriculum. Active in Holocaust education for many years, she has published articles in both English 
and social studies journals. She has been recognized in Who’s Who of American Women and Who’s Who in 
American Education and was a Mandel Fellow for 1997-98 with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. 



Leatrice B. Rabinsky has been in the forefront of teaching, researching, and lecturing about the Holocaust for three 
decades. She recently retired . after thirty-one years, of teaching English in the Cleveland Heights-University Heights 
school system. She has organized and led seven Journeys of Conscience for students and survivors to the sites of 
the Holocaust in Europe and to Israel. A board member of the Ohio Council on Holocaust Education, she is also 
co-author of the state’s Holocaust curriculum. She has co-authored Journey of Conscience: Young People Respond 
to the Holocaust. She was a Mandel Fellow for 1996-97 with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and 
is recognized in Who’s Who Among American. Teachers. 



Teaching for a Tolerant World, Grades 9-12: Essays and Resources. Carol Danks & Leatrice B. Rabinsky, editors, 
and the NCTE Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance. 399 pages, soft cover. ISBN: 0-814L4296- 
6. Price: $26.95, non-NCTE members; $19.95, NCTE members. Audience: junior high and high school teachers, 
librarians, and teacher educators. Available from NCTE, 1 1 11 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096, 877-369- 
6283; orders@ncte.org; stock no. 42966-0015. 



3/99 

O 



ERIC 



rn 




fkS 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

® This document has been reproduced as 
• ' received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



b 



a 



(V 



crn 



U 



ran 



U w U \J U\jU VjUUU o 







GRADES 9-12 



om (oi nm. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



/In. flU jpiQ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




O 




Teaching for a Tolerant 
World, Grades 9-12 



0 



ERIC 



3 



[ 



] 



NCTE Editorial Board: Jacqueline Bryant, Kermit Campbell, Bobbi Fisher, 
Xin Liu Gale, Sarah Hudelson, Bill McBride, Gerald R. Oglan, Helen Poole, 
Karen Smith, Chair, ex officio, Peter Feely, ex officio 

NCTE Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance 

Carol Danks, Chair, Roosevelt High School, Kent, Ohio 
Marjorie Bingham, Hamline University, St. Paul, Minnesota 
Jean Boreen, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff 
Grace M. Caporino, Carmel High School, New York 
Galene Erickson, Valley View Middle School, Edina, Minnesota 

Joseph A. Hawkins, Montgomery County Public Schools, Rockville, 
Maryland 

David A. Haynes, National Board for Professional Teaching Standards 
Caroline Heller, University of Illinois at Chicago 
Claudia Katz, Highland Junior Fligh School, Libertyville, Illinois 
Thomas Klein, Bowling Green State University, Ohio 

Rochmanna Miller, Theodore Roosevelt High School, Los Angeles, 
California 

Sybil Milton, U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, D.C. 

Joan Peterson, St. Mary's College of California, Maroga 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky, Cleveland Heights, Ohio 

Becky L. Reimer, St. Mark's School, Salt Lake City, Utah 

Judith P. Robertson, University of Ottawa, Canada 

Rose A. Rudnitski, State University of New York, New Paltz 

Samuel Totten, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 

Carol Porter, NCTE Staff Liaison 




Teaching for a 
Tolerant World, 
Grades 9- 1 2 



Essays and Resources 



Carol Danks and Leatrice B. Rabinsky, Editors, 

and the Committee on Teaching about Genocide and 
Intolerance of the National Council of Teachers of English 



National Council of Teachers of English 

1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 



Staff Editor: Kurt Austin 
Interior Design: Doug Burnett 
Cover Design: Jenny Jensen Greenleaf 

NCTE Stock Number: 42966-3050 

©1999 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the 
teaching of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any 
particular point of view does not imply endorsement by the Executive 
Committee, the Board of Directors, or the membership at large, except in 
announcements of policy, where such endorsement is clearly specified. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Teaching for a tolerant world, grades 9-12: essays and resources / Carol 
Danks and Leatrice B. Rabinsky, editors, and the Committee on 
Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance of the National Council of 
Teachers of English, 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-8141-4296-6 (pbk.) 

1. Toleration — Study and teaching (Secondary) — United States. 

2. Prejudices — Study and teaching (Secondary) — United States. 

3. Discrimination — Study and teaching (Secondary) — United States. 

4. Genocide — Study and teaching (Secondary) — United States. 

I. Danks, Carol, 1945- . II. Rabinsky, Leatrice, 1927- . 

III. National Council of Teachers of English. Committee on Teaching 
about Genocide and Intolerance. 

HM276.T43 1999 
303.3'85'071273 — dc21 



98-47791 

CIP 



V 



Contents 



Preface vii 

Acknowledgments xiii 

General Guidelines for Teaching about Intolerance and 
Genocide 1 

Grace M. Caporino and Rose Rudnitski 

I. Teaching about Issues of Intolerance 



Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance 11 

Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 

After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 23 

Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 

Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 46 

Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson 

The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora in Tan 

and Nunez 58 

Toming Jun Liu 

Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart 76 

Carol Danks 

The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 89 

Bonnie R. Albertson 

Teaching Conflict-Resolution Strategies through 

Multiethnic Literature 102 

Belinda Yun-Ying Louie and Douglas H. Louie 

Young People Respond to the Elderly 111 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky 

Peer Dialogue Journals: An Approach to Teaching Tolerance 123 

Kate Kessler 



II. Teaching about Issues of Genocide 

Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter 141 

Samuel Totten 



O 

ERIC 



7 



: 



vi 



Contents 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine): Issues of 

Language, Literary Pedagogy, and Learning 152 

Judith P. Robertson 

Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 174 

Marjorie Bingham 

Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 194 
Sandra Stotsky 

Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom: Hearing 

the Voices, Touching the History 218 

Grace M. Caporino 

Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 235 

Samuel Totten 

It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 268 

Sallie M. Fine 



III. Resources for Teaching about Issues of Genocide 
and Intolerance 

General Resources for Teaching about Genocide and 



Intolerance 285 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky and Carol Danks 

African American Resources 289 

Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 

Asian American Resources 307 

Toming Jun Liu 

Chicano/Chicana Resources 317 

Rochmanna Miller 

Native American Resources 332 

Christine Marshall, Becky L. Reimer, and Jean Boreen 

Gay and Lesbian Resources 344 

Caroline E. Heller 

Holocaust Resources 356 

Joan F. Peterson 

Index 377 

Editors 393 



Contributors 



395 



VII 



Preface 



T he Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance was 
created from an NCTE resolution at the 1993 Annual Conven- 
tion in Pittsburgh. The group's charge stated: 

to develop and submit for publication materials on the literature of 
genocide and intolerance; to include in the materials components 
such as compilations of resources (e.g., bibliographies, visual media, 
lists of agencies and associations) and materials on how to teach 
pertinent literary works. 

While the original resolution submitted by eight NCTE members 
focused on teaching about the Holocaust, the NCTE Executive 
Committee expanded the resolution's scope to include a variety of 
issues relating to intolerance and genocide. The eighteen-member 
committee began its work at the 1994 Annual Convention in Orlando 
with Carol Danks as Chair. The committee presented a half-day 
workshop in San Diego in 1995 focusing on pedagogical strategies 
and materials for classroom use in addressing issues of intolerance 
and genocide. In addition, members developed a conceptual scheme 
for the three books in this series — one for elementary teachers, one 
for middle school teachers, and this volume for secondary teachers. 
Editors for each of the volumes served as committee members. 

Racism, sexism, agism, ethnocentrism, homophobia, xenopho- 
bia, genocidal politics, and militarism all find their way into Ameri- 
can culture; and thus, the attitudes connected with each find their 
way into the minds, if not the hearts, of American young people. 
While students may not be able to contribute directly to the end of 
xenophobia or genocidal politics or militarism, they most assuredly 
can contribute to the end of racism, sexism, agism, ethnocentrism, 
and homophobia. If we as teachers believe that prejudice is a learned 
behavior, then it is imperative that we work as teachers to reduce, if 
not eliminate, prejudices we find both in ourselves and in our stu- 
dents. The UN Declaration of Human Rights focuses on teaching and 
education as a means of reducing prejudice: 

. . . the General Assembly proclaims this Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, ... to the end that every individual and every organ 
of society . . . shall strive by teaching and education to promote 
respect for these rights and freedoms. . . .' 

This book is one helping hand for teachers who choose to walk that 
path. 



O 

ERIC 



9 



] 



viii 



Preface 



Understanding or at least being willing to accept the existence 
of "the other" lies at the heart of issues regarding tolerance. To be 
intolerant is to disallow the legitimacy of "the other's" attitudes, 
beliefs, and behaviors. Intolerance can manifest itself through verbal 
and nonverbal means and can be insidious because some intoler- 
ances are part of cultures. We certainly need to be intolerant of 
certain harmful and destructive behaviors, for example, and our 
society has elaborate police establishments to try and prevent actions 
the society deems criminal. However, our own cultural biases may 
include intolerance toward the religious, sexual, or political beliefs 
and practices of others even when they are not harmful or destruc- 
tive to the society. Often student voices within the classroom address 
these issues and pose questions. 

In one of Carol Danks's senior English classes, students had 
read Robert Herrick's "To the Virgins: To Make Much of Time." A 
young woman in the class was reminded of another poem by con- 
temporary poet Kat Snider Blackbird entitled "How to Get a Man." 
After the class discussion of the Herrick poem, the student read 
aloud Blackbird's poem, which quite explicitly presents the female 
narrator's thoughts and plans for getting a man. The eyes of one 
young man in the class grew wide and he asked in a voice filled with 
incredulity, "Do girls really think like that?" Upon being assured by 
the girls in the class that, "Yes, indeed, girls really do think like that," 
he grinned and said that he thought only guys had those thoughts. 
Now this young man was not intolerant of young women, but he 
had placed them in the category of "the other" on this dimension. 
The conjunction of two poems written nearly 350 years apart created 
for the male student a crack in the door separating himself from 
young women and opened a new connection for him. 

The editors of this book agree with Sharon Spencer who wrote: 

[Students must gain] an understanding of the relativity of their 
assumptions about other people and their cultures . . . [and attain] an 
enhanced awareness of what it means to be human in a world of 
superficial difference. . . . Unless this emotional identification takes 
place, the student will not truly experience a given literary work in a 
profound and complete way. 2 

Student voices are an integral part of the essays in this book. They 
challenge, question, contribute ideas and offer insightful critiques 
and opinions. Often, in classroom publications, students have ad- 
dressed the subjects of genocide and intolerance. Class members in 
Leatrice Rabinsky's senior English class responded to these topics. 
Judy confronted education about the Holocaust: 

Let us never again give apathy as our excuse. We have to make 
people aware that [humans] are capable of losing their morality and 



ERIC 




ix 



Preface 



humanity. Not only those who took an active part in the atrocities, 
but also the ones who did nothing to help their brothers fell victim to 
this disgrace . 3 

Becky wrote a plea for dispelling apathy: 

Upon learning of atrocities in our world today the most common 
reaction is either disbelief or remorse. After this short-lived reaction, 
we promptly forget the incident and go on with our daily lives. . . . 
We seem not to realize that all of us are important individuals who 
can and must let our voices be heard. ... It is time we open our 
hearts and ears and respond to the anguished cries of millions . 4 

The guidelines, articles, and resource sections in this book 
provide an array of ideas and strategies for secondary teachers to 
help their students gain an emotional identification with issues 
regarding intolerance and genocide. Each article addresses specific 
ways that literary works can be read both as literature and as 
thought pieces to help young people find that crack in the door that 
separates themselves from others. Neither the editors of this volume 
nor the authors of the articles would argue that a single piece of 
literature necessarily will make a person more tolerant or make them 
shed intolerances. Literature is not a panacea for the things which 
distance humans. However, literature can be a means for self-reflec- 
tion and through both self-reflection and consideration of "the 
other," intolerance can be reduced. Teachers who genuinely wish to 
help their students confront themselves in these ways should find a 
variety of options in the following articles. 

The General Guidelines were formulated by Grace Caporino 
and Rose Rudnitski, both committee members, with committee input 
and consensus. The suggestions and caveats are intended to help 
teachers approach these difficult issues with accuracy, sensitivity, 
and sound teaching practices. 

The articles in the section on Teaching about Issues of Intoler- 
ance focus on specific works of literature and/or pedagogies. Heller 
and Hawkins's "Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance" chal- 
lenges readers to think carefully about how one conceives of toler- 
ance. Kleg and Bard's "After Slavery: Jim Crow in Life and Litera- 
ture" introduces the teacher to historical information and literary 
works produced in the Jim Crow era, specifically focusing on works 
by Albion Tourgee, Joel Chandler Harris, Thomas Dixon Jr., Thomas 
Nelson Page, James Weldon Johnson, Wallace Thurman, George S. 
Schuyler, and Richard Wright. McLean and Gibson's "Noticing the 
Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible" addresses issues of ho- 
mophobia sometimes prompted by teaching that work. In "The 
Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora in Tan and Nunez," Liu 
focuses his attention on Amy Tan's The Joy Luck Club and Sigrid 




11 



X 



I I 

Preface 



Nunez's A Feather on the Breath of God as he explores issues relating to 
perceptions of the foreigner in the United States. Danks explores the 
impact of one culture introducing or imposing its beliefs and sys- 
tems on another culture in "Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Fall 
Apart." In "The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself," Albertson 
focuses on teaching strategies for The Crucible compared with the 
McCarthy Witch Hunts, the 1930s Scottsboro case, and other events. 
Conflict-resolution strategies are applied to situations in Linda 
Crew's novel Children of the River, and other multiethnic literature is 
suggested for this strategy in Louie and Louie's "Teaching Conflict- 
Resolution Strategies through Multiethnic Literature." Rabinsky's 
"Young People Respond to the Elderly" discusses students' relation- 
ships with older family members and aged survivors of the Holo- 
caust and explores the emotions of love, admiration, and trust as 
well as impatience and fear. Kessler's "Peer Dialogue Journals: An 
Approach to Teaching Tolerance" explores the use of this strategy for 
sensitizing students to their own prejudices and for teaching Anne 
Frank's Diary of a Young Girl and Elie Wiesel's Night. 

The Teaching about Issues of Genocide section begins with 
Totten's "Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter" in which he empha- 
sizes that students must be introduced to an accurate definition of 
"genocide" if they are to understand what does and does not consti- 
tute genocide. In "Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine): Issues 
of Language, Literary Pedagogy and Learning," Robertson explores 
some of the possibilities and problems of teaching secondary school 
students about genocide through the study of language used to 
describe the event. Bingham's "Teaching about Women in Twentieth 
Century Genocides" explores the experiences of women in the 
genocides of the Holocaust, in Armenia, and in Cambodia. Sandra 
Stotsky, in "Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holo- 
caust," discusses a variety of theoretical, historical, and pedagogical 
problems which she feels must be addressed when the Holocaust is 
taught. Caporino focuses on specific literary works including Art 
Spiegelman's Mans I, Ruth Minsky Sender's The Cage, Primo Levi's 
essay "The Gray Zone," Yehuda Nir's The Lost Childhood, and stories 
of Righteous Gentiles in "Teaching the Holocaust in the English 
Classroom: Hearing the Voices — Touching the History." Totten's 
"Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust" provides both 
extensive pedagogical suggestions and specific poems which can be 
used with secondary students. Fine shares her experiences with 
teaching generally disinterested students about the Holocaust in "It's 
Not What You Teach, but Who You Teach," using Rose Zar's In the 
Mouth of the Wolf, the poetry of I Never Saw Another Butterfly, and 
Milton Meltzer's Rescue: The Story of How Gentiles Saved Jews in the 
Holocaust. 




12 



xi 



Preface 



Notes 



o 

ERIC 



The Resources for Teaching about Issues of Intolerance and 
Genocide present a selection of books, videos, Web sites, organiza- 
tions, etc. which can aid teachers wishing to focus on a specific 
group or historical event. Specific materials and strategies are sug- 
gested for tolerance issues in general, as well as for issues related to 
African Americans, Asian Americans, Chicanos/ Chicanas, Native 
Americans, Gays and Lesbians, and the Holocaust. 



1. Gioseffi, Daniela, ed. On Prejudice: A Global Perspective. New York: 
Anchor Books Doubleday, 1993. 639. 

2. Spencer, Sharon. "Critical Thinking: Racism and Education in the 
U.S. Third World" in Gioseffi, Daniela, ed. On Prejudice: A Global Perspective. 
New York: Anchor Books Doubleday, 1993. 475-77. 

3. Goldman, Judy. "Times of the Holocaust, 1933-1945: No Excuse 
for Apathy," Cleveland, 1976. 4. 

4. Evans, Becky. Ibid. 22. 



13 



xiii 



Acknowledgments 



First, we would like to thank all of the contributors to this volume. 
Each is a busy professional, and we greatly appreciate their contribu- 
tions of expertise and time. The students whose voices are heard 
throughout the book have contributed their insights regarding issues 
of intolerance and genocide. The series of which this book is a part 
would not have been possible without the efforts of the members of 
the NCTE Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance. 
They provided invaluable input in the conceptualization of the 
series; truly without their efforts and insights this series and this 
volume would not have been possible. Committee members in- 
cluded Marjorie Bingham, Jean Boreen, Grace Caporino, Galene 
Erickson, Joseph Hawkins Jr., David Haynes, Caroline Heller, 
Claudia Katz, Thomas Klein, Rochmanna Miller, Sybil Milton, Joan 
Peterson, Becky Reimer, Judith Robertson, Rose Rudnitski, and 
Samuel Totten. In addition to serving as editors of this volume, 

Lea trice Rabinsky was also a committee member and Carol Danks 
served as chair. 

Leatrice Rabinsky is grateful to Marge Knaus, administrative 
assistant at Cleveland Heights High School, for valuable help with 
computerizing and proofing. The Kent City School District provided 
support for Carol Danks to attend the conventions where much 
committee work was done. Throughout the committee's existence, 
NCTE staff personnel provided guidance and support. For this we 
would like to thank Mario Welshons and especially our NCTE editor 
Pete Feely, who shepherded this volume through the publishing 
maze. 




14 



1 



General Guidelines 
for Teaching about 
Intolerance and 
Genocide 

Grace M. Caporino 

Carmel High School, Carmel, New York 

Rose Rudnitski 

State University of New York at New Paltz 
Rationale 

The opposite of goodness is not evil; it is indifference to evil 

Elie Wiesel 



Why Use Litera- 
ture, Language, 
and Composi- 
tion to Teach 
about Genocide 
and Intolerance 
in the English/ 
Language Arts 
Classroom? 



The NCTE Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance 
endeavors to acknowledge and affirm the role of the English and 
language arts teacher in developing curriculum for teaching about 
genocide and intolerance. Fundamental to this pedagogy is the need 
to examine the social and linguistic dynamics of intolerance and to 
promote tolerance and acceptance of other racial, religious, ethnic, 
and social groups. We salute our colleagues who take up the chal- 
lenge to engage students in the study of this complex topic. We 
advance the view that literature can be morally powerful, and 
through the refractory lens of discourse or of writing, we can help 
our students understand life as it should be. It is this discipline that 
reflects the human experience and moves individuals to act in the 
interest of the common good. In alluding to the potency of literature, 
Nel Noddings states. 

Not only does literature provide a possible starting point for critical 
thinking, it also gives a place to passion and to passionate commit- 
ment. . . . We have to feel something that prompts us to ask, "What 
are you going through?" and we have to feel something again when 
we hear the answer, if we are to respond appropriately. ( 161 ) 

We face a new century with the belief that English and language arts 
teachers perform a vital role by meeting the challenge of teaching 
about intolerance and genocide, and by evoking the requisite pas- 




15 



] 



2 



Grace M. Caporino and Rose Rudnitski 



sion in young people to reflect and to act in the interest of the com- 
mon good. 

History shows us that acts of intolerance can escalate and may, 
in extremity, culminate in genocide. Even in instances where escala- 
tion does not rise to the level of genocide, its harmful effects erode 
the principles of freedom and the inalienable rights of all people. 
Curriculum and instruction geared toward teaching acceptance and 
valuing others helps de-escalate the progression toward violence and 
helps to humanize rather than dehumanize targets of intolerance. 
Without dehumanization, genocide is impossible. With humaniza- 
tion, genocide is less likely. A fundamental principle of this commit- 
tee is that teaching about acceptance and value for others sensitizes 
students to events of intolerance and genocide. Reading, discussing, 
and writing about texts that deal with intolerance and genocide help 
students learn about human deeds of violence throughout history, 
and illumine parallels existing in human behaviors that make hatred 
and suffering possible today. Engaging with this material in these 
ways enables students to clarify and articulate their thoughts and 
feelings about intolerance. This pedagogy promotes the idea that 
suffering inflicted by humans on humans is not inevitable and that 
transformative behavior can be an expected outcome. These curricu- 
lar approaches foster attitudes that strengthen the fibers of a demo- 
cratic society and inspire in students an awareness of their essential 
roles as citizens in the global community. 

It is in the English/language arts classroom that students 
encounter linguistic and literary experiences that elevate and debase 
our humanity. It is through the medium of language that intolerance 
initially manifests itself. Language is used in propaganda and in 
influencing public opinion. It is basic to the development of values, 
the institution of laws, as well as the formation of public policy. Thus 
it has the potential to liberate or to imprison. The English teacher 
facilitates both an understanding of and a critical response to such 
language as it occurs in student surroundings and through the 
critical analysis of literature. The aim of the English classroom is to 
invite informed dialogue and reflection on language and literature so 
that students and teachers examine the ways persons and groups 
build respect for differences or contribute to the forces of hate. 



Curricular 

Premises 



Language has been used throughout history in the service of decep- 
tion, manipulation, and domination of individuals and groups. It can 
also be used by victims, advocates, and activists as a means of 
resistance, education, and liberation. 



Language thus functions as a social and historical medium that can 
limit or expand human possibility, depending on the way language 



] 



3 



[ 

General Guidelines 



is organized to mark, mythologize, or delimit what it means to be 
human. 

Literature goes beyond representing a culture or a period. It is 
universal, transcending time and place, and as such has a lasting, 
shaping influence on readers. 

Similarly, other media such as newspapers, films, art, and music can 
be used to influence human activity. They can also be used to exam- 
ine the context of a historical event and the factors that helped to 
shape it. 

Literature teaching therefore can be viewed as a transformative 
social practice through which students (along a developmental 
continuum from primary through secondary levels) can imagine 
how things could be otherwise and come to recognize that the 
possibility exists for a better world. 

Literature functions not only as aesthetic, but also as social dis- 
course. Texts play with meanings in a way that reflects and shapes 
cultural practices — and in many ways — represent the emotional and 
cultural memory of humankind. 

Emphasis is placed on nonfiction for the literary responses to geno- 
cide, as eyewitness accounts mediate student challenges to truthful- 
ness of events that by their nature are unbelievable. 

Literature engages the human character. It not only evokes a re- 
sponse, it also helps to illuminate history because it frequently serves 
as a response to it. Literature responds to this human record of 
history and evokes further responses in readers by bringing people 
to life and by putting a human face on the history. It also helps us to 
see what might be. 

Literature resonates, helping us to see and know ourselves. It often 
does more, but it should not do less. 

Through writing, students can analyze, refine, and clarify their own 
emotional responses to issues and engage in the critical reflection 
that leads to personal transformation. 

In other media, text and images are blended to create a similar effect. 
Analysis of linguistic and visual texts and subtexts in media study 
deepens students' understanding of the human condition at a given 
time. 



ERIC 



17 



4 



[ 



Grace M. Caporino and Rose Rudnitski 



Pedagogical 

Guidelines 



Our basic premise is that teacher judgment is central to this instruc- 
tion. It is only through systematic assessment and instruction that 
the teacher can determine what is appropriate for his or her students 
and what is not. These guidelines are offered in support of such 
assessment and instruction as suggestions for implementation based 
on the classroom teacher's professional judgment. Teacher discretion 
informs the application of these guidelines before, during, or after 
reading, writing, or discussion. Teacher judgment determines which 
guidelines are developmentally appropriate. Age appropriateness 
has less to do with chronological age than with the emotional readi- 
ness children demonstrate as evidenced by their questions and 
observations. 

Proposed stages of language arts instruction are given after 
each guideline, using the following key: 

B before 
D during 
A after 

Explore with students reasons for studying intolerance and geno- 
cide. Incorporating student initiatives and responses at the begin- 
ning of this study gives students ownership of the subject matter. B 
Begin teaching this topic with the belief that you will learn along 
with your students. B 

Ascertain what students know and what they do not know. B, D 

Determine what purpose you have in mind when selecting readings 
for a unit. Recognizing this purpose will provide rationale for stu- 
dents, parents, administrators, fellow teachers, etc. Before each 
assignment, set a purpose. Keep in mind that there are two levels of 
purpose setting: setting the purpose for choosing the work and 
setting the purpose for each individual activity. B 

Communicate with supervisors, colleagues, and parents throughout 
the unit. Be open to input from parents and the community. This is 
an opportunity to reach beyond the classroom. B, D, A 

When selecting texts, consider authenticity, literary merit, and age 
appropriateness. For age-appropriateness, readings with a youthful 
narrator voice or sensibility are generally more accessible works. 
Considerations of literary merit include: 

a. richness of detail in scenes and characterization 

b. existence of characters and situations with whom reader 
can identify 



] 



General Guidelines 



c. poetic, figurative, language; narrative organization, and 
descriptive density that evokes soulful response 

d. thematic, lyrical, and narrative power that stimulates the 
senses, provokes curiosity, and evokes the desire to learn 
more because the story works in qualifying ways on issues 
that resonate B, D 

Eyewitness accounts — i.e., survivor memoirs, or survivor fiction or 
nonfiction — that are of verifiable origin or authorship are of primary 
importance. B, D 

Less is more. Having students read fewer works deeply and 
thoughtfully, giving time for discussing and writing, is a preferable 
and more meaningful approach. D 

Accuracy and authenticity are not necessarily the same thing. An 
individual personal account or a memoir may be highly authentic, 
but the individual perspective could be limited. Helping students 
understand that large events are experienced and integrated in 
different ways reinforces the importance of their critical thinking and 
response skills. B, D, A 

Provide students access to different genres, voices, and primary 
documents, during the course of study. This provides students with 
a variety of perspectives and entry points to the content. B, D 

Define and redefine important terms — e.g., prejudice, stereotyping, 
blind obedience, genocide, racism, discrimination, antilocution, 
homophobia, persecution, anti-Semitism, and intolerance — as stu- 
dents build schemata and deepen their understanding. B, D, A 

Emphasize the universal patterns inherent in intolerance and in the 
paths to genocide. Some patterns that include characteristics that are 
thought to be possible precursors of acts of genocide are: 

a. antilocution 

b. scapegoating 

c. out-group considered outsider 

d. racist ideology 
(Frelick, 75-76) B, D, A 

Provide an accurate historical context in which to situate the litera- 
ture, the writing, the media, and the language study. B, D 

Teach about these issues and events with the resolve that education 
may prevent their recurrence if those who experience this education 
are willing to embrace their civic and moral responsibilities. B, D, A 



O 

ERIC 



19 



6 



Grace M. Caporino and Rose Rudnitski 



Recognize that student response — i.e. ( verbalization, dialogue — is an 
integral part of the pedagogy. B, D, A 

Avoid comparisons and ranking of pain which propose that any one 
group suffered more than another. D, A 

Connect issues of intolerance to both past and current North Ameri- 
can experiences. D, A 

Avoid simulations. When students imitate or recreate historical 
events such as the Middle Passage, selection, or deportation, they are 
susceptible to a false premise. The underlying assumption is that the 
shift from the cognitive to the experiential bridges a gap and brings 
students closer to knowing the event. Yet English and language arts 
teachers dwell in the land of words, and processing knowledge 
through verbal learning is a distinctive hallmark of our discipline 
with time-honored supremacy over the "make-believe" style of 
presentation. While reenactment and role-play may arise spontane- 
ously in the classroom, exploration through reading creates a deeper 
and more lasting learning experience. Further, the activity of simula- 
tion flies in the face of the research which shows that survivors of 
traumatic episodes of intolerance and genocide often grapple with 
their own choice of language to convey or to relive these events, as 
the nature of trauma is such that it shocks and numbs so much that it 
admits no reenactment. The experience of reading texts differs 
fundamentally from simulations which inject a "hands-on," sporty 
feel to a topic that is inherently serious. Student reading of selections 
and analyses of media responses with varying perspectives of events 
of intolerance and genocide can do more to facilitate understanding 
than reductive attempts at recreation or simulation. D 

The above guideline does not exclude the use of the genre of drama. 
Plays read aloud or enacted by students are appropriate pedagogical 
activities. Here, the guideline above on selecting text and literary 
merit applies. D 

Encourage students to reflect, orally and in writing, on what they 
have read or viewed so they can articulate for themselves and others 
what it means. D, A 

Emphasize critical thinking in discussions and activities. B, D, A 

Be prepared for any response. Responses may include grief, silence, 
outrage, depression, indifference, paralysis, and denial. These re- 
sponses signal the chance to deal with a teachable moment. D, A 



O 

ERIC 



20 



7 



~l 

General Guidelines 



Silence is an appropriate and honest response that deserves ac- 
knowledgment. D, A 

Analyze the ways that language is used to corrupt and subvert 
human rights and human dignity, and also the ways in which lan- 
guage can promote intolerance. Relate to euphemisms currently 
employed. D, A 

Analyze the roles of victim, murderer, perpetrator, resister, voyeur, 
collaborator, bystander, advocate, and rescuer/ activist, which evoke 
the question, "Which are we most likely to have become?" Empha- 
size that like all categories, these categories are not rigid and inflex- 
ible (Cynthia Ozick xi). B, D, A 

Refrain from simplifying the complex issues which arise from study- 
ing examples of intolerance and genocide. Human behavior is often 
complicated by historical and social forces. Beware of easy answers. 
Many questions raised have pedagogical merit in themselves and 
may not require definitive answers. D, A 

Differentiate gratuitous violence from deliberate violence. Students 
may have a desensitized view of violence because they have been 
exposed to so much in the media. Teacher response to typical stu- 
dent comments about images of brutality inherent in this study such 
as "pretty neat" or "ugh" are important. Such comments present a 
teachable moment and should not be ignored. D, A 

Provide closure, while at the same time understanding that knowl- 
edge of human suffering can open emotional wounds that do not 
close easily. A 

Help students take measure of what they have learned. D, A 



Our 

CommStmaot 



Teaching about genocide and intolerance is not easy. Perhaps that is 
why many of us avoid it. However, we are committed to bringing 
these concepts into the classroom precisely because they matter, 
despite their difficulty. It is a challenge to survive in this world as a 
whole human being with principles and integrity, especially when 
immersed in an environment rife with unprincipled, intolerant 
behavior. Incidents of intolerance and genocide are occurring with 
more frequency worldwide than at any other time in history. How 
we respond to these events is a measure of our own humanity. How 
we teach our children is another. Perhaps we can create a better 
world through our teaching. Perhaps we can stop just one intolerant 
act. That possibility is our inspiration. 



] 



8 



References 



o 

ERIC 



Grace M. Caporino and Rose Rudnitski 



Charny, Israel, and Alan Berger. Genocide: A Critical Bibliographic Review. 
New York: Facts on File Publications, 1988-1991. 

Frelick, Bill. "Teaching Genocide as a Contemporary Problem/' Social 
Science Record 24.2 (Fall 1987): 74-77. 

Noddings, Nel. "Ethics and the Imagination." A Light in Dark Times: Maxine 
Greene and the Unfinished Conversation. Ed. W. Ayers and J. Miller. 
New York: Teachers College Press, 1998. 

Ozick, Cynthia. "Prologue." Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the 
Holocaust . New York: Holmes & Meier, 1992. 



22 



I Teaching about Issues 
of Intolerance 



11 






Struggling with the 
Meaning of Tolerance 

Caroline E. Heller 

University of Illinois at Chicago 

Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 

Montgomery County Public Schools, Maryland 



F rom July 1992 through July 1993 the two of us worked together 
as Fellows for the Teaching Tolerance Project of the Southern 
Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Alabama. It has taken us 
several years to realize that our year-long southern sabbatical was 
truly a rare opportunity. Think about it. An entire year to wrestle 
with the concept of tolerance. 

When we left our fellowship year with the Teaching Tolerance 
Project, returning to our lives as teachers and researchers in 
Rockville, Maryland, and Chicago, Illinois, among the many lessons 
we learned, three big ones stood out. One, the country is full of 
outstanding examples of individuals and groups of individuals 
teaching tolerance. You can find these examples in single classrooms, 
in entire schools and larger school communities, and on occasion, in 
entire towns. In 1995, we co-authored an article about these marvel- 
ous examples in Teachers College Record. 

Two, teaching tolerance is a commitment to hard, at times 
highly emotional, work. It was very clear to us that those who are 
serious about teaching tolerance had arrived at their commitments 
not only knowing a great deal about learning, about pedagogy, and 
about their students, but also completely cognizant that their work 
was going to be hard, very hard. As one teacher told us, "This busi- 
ness of teaching tolerance is no walk in the park." These teachers 
also knew that more frequently than not, the whole concept of 
teaching tolerance in schools is still thought of as controversial work. 
Two separate 1997 Teacher Magazine cover stories reveal how even 
simple attempts to teach consciously, courageously, commitedly 
about "others" can turn schools and communities upside down with 
controversy and backlash. 1 

Three, those teaching tolerance constantly struggle with the 
meaning of tolerance themselves. No teacher we met who took her 
teaching mission seriously and who succeeded with her teaching 



12 



c 



Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 



mission sidestepped this personal struggle. Through meeting these 
teachers, we came to see this struggle as not only normal but neces- 
sary. For us, too, tolerance became something organic, to be compre- 
hended anew in each encounter with theories, with literature, with 
people, with communities, with ourselves. A new challenge to our 
own ever-changing conceptualization of the meaning of tolerance 
waited around each comer of our own work as writers and research- 
ers for the Teaching Tolerance Project. Take, for example, the time we 
received the following faxed message from an elected city official in 
Davenport, Iowa, upset about views of teaching tolerance that were 
expressed in articles published in the Teaching Tolerance magazine. 

Multiculturalism also teaches tolerance for and appreciation of all 
cultures and lifestyles. Does this mean our children must appreciate 
Communism? Fascism? Must our children be tolerant of the lifestyles 
of child molesters, drug dealers, rapists? 

It was easy to write off this fax as reactionary nonsense. However, 
we reconsidered and eventually departed from our straight-out-of- 
the-dictionary definition of tolerance that first appeared in the 
Teaching Tolerance magazine. It was naive to think that a pat dictio- 
nary definition of tolerance — "respecting the beliefs of others" — 
could stand up against critiques like the one from Davenport. 

In this essay, through a free-flowing discussion of the concept 
of tolerance, we recreate for readers our organic, growing definition 
of this complicated word. Along the way we again wrestle with why 
we believe the work of teaching tolerance is so difficult and what it 
might look like when individuals commit themselves to the work of 
understanding and teaching the meanings and the actions of toler- 
ance. 



Searching for 
Tolerance: 
Imagining 
Others 



Writing about the difficulty human beings have imagining other 
people, particularly other people who in fundamental ways are 
different from themselves, Elaine Scarry, a professor of English at 
Harvard University, observes. 

The human capacity to injure other people has always been much 
greater than its ability to imagine other people. Or perhaps we 
should say, the human capacity to injure other people is very great 
precisely because our capacity to imagine other people is very small. 
(103) 

If we are willing to accept this premise as a given, and we do — only 
fools would dispute a world history of injury to others — then the 
task before those committed to teaching tolerance, or those commit- 
ted to teaching about genocide and intolerance as vehicles for teach- 




25 



13 



Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance 



ing tolerance, is rather clear: Help one another imagine the other. 
Sounds simple. But just how do we imagine others? 

This book takes as its premise that just teaching about geno- 
cide and intolerance does not automatically lead to helping the 
students in our varied classrooms grow in their capacity to imagine 
others. Educators who are serious about their work must recognize 
this risk. Starting from the negative, the horrific, the shocking, the 
cruel, may well not get us any closer to imagining the essential 
human qualities of others. 

Consider the 1995 book Us and Them: A History of Intolerance in 
America, published by the Southern Poverty Law Center's Teaching 
Tolerance Project. This book contains fourteen chapters, each at- 
tempting to illuminate horrific things happening to innocent or 
oppressed people throughout the history of the United States. For 
example, one chapter, "Blankets for the Dead," retells the story of the 
infamous Trail of Tears. "A Rumbling in the Mines" makes the 
reader relive the horrors Chinese immigrants faced in nineteenth- 
century America. "Untamed Border" recalls the terror Mexican 
Americans suffered at the hands of the Texas Rangers. "A Rose for 
Charlie" chronicles the death of a gay man at the hands of hateful 
teens. 

On one level Us and Them expects readers to experience a 
personal, soul-searching catharsis when reading about acts of hatred 
toward groups and individuals. Both the author of the book and 
teachers who use it in their classrooms might imagine this cathartic 
state as a temporary one, replaced eventually by a more permanent, 
durable state of empathy on the part of the students who study and 
openly discuss the issues raised in the chapters in this book. Eventu- 
ally, a state of deeper tolerance might take hold, one might hope. A 
state of respect. A state of caring. 

We believe that this change process — from the uninformed to 
the informed to the progressively more tolerant, empathetic indi- 
vidual — is real. In fact, there is an ample body of research literature 
that supports this observation. 2 Nonetheless, this "expected" transi- 
tion process bothers us because we realize that it has obvious and 
serious limitations. 

For one thing, some people clearly are immune from "shock 
treatment." An experience with the "horrific" may not move some 
individuals in the direction we expect — toward tolerance. We believe 
this is possible even if those learning about the horrors of history are 
able to master the historical implications of these events. For ex- 
ample, an individual can tour the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum 
in Washington, D.C., and depart with a perfect understanding of 
how racism and anti-Semitism created the right conditions for the 



Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 



Holocaust. Obviously, mastering this connection is a good thing. 
Perhaps it is even a prerequisite for the personal journey to toler- 
ance. However, making these connections is no guarantee that the 
journey toward tolerance will be completed. 

Also, it has been our experience that educators themselves, not 
because of any planned agenda, frequently add to their students' 
sense of immunity from the "horrific." Take American slavery In 
many classrooms, when it is taught, it is the only black history 
discussed. This single-mindedness about black history being one 
only of oppression and horror has serious consequences for those 
planning to use this horrific event as part of some journey toward 
tolerance. Frankly, many students today do not wish to deal with 
this significant American institution. Many white students avoid 
discussions of slavery because they are tired of feeling guilty. In fact, 
many insist that there is absolutely no reason for guilt or shame. 
What teacher hasn't heard students respond to serious discussions of 
slavery with disclaimers alone? "My relatives didn't own slaves! 
Therefore I don't need to feel the implications of slavery in American 
society." Perhaps embedded in this plea is the declaration that, 
guiltless of actual wrongdoing ourselves, we should not be asked to 
imagine history and its consequences. We should not be asked to 
imagine the "other." And many black students often wish to avoid 
the subject too. They see that often the teaching of the institution of 
slavery is used to paint them into a fairly small box. "There's more to 
us than just slavery" And of course, they are so right. 

Several years ago when we sat down to interview a homeless 
black teenager about her struggle to stay in school, among the many 
revelations she shared with us, she offered us a glimpse into the 
restrictive box she experienced her teachers creating for students. 

What do your friends think about school? 

It's OK. 

Is it? 

I think high school is fun. I'm preparing for the future. Socializing 
with friends. It's OK. 

What's your favorite school subject? 

Math. 

Your least favorite? 

History. Because all the stuff I learn doesn't pertain to my future. If I 
was in black history class or something I was interested in, then it 
would be more important. 

Is there a black history class here? 

I take that next year. 




27 



] 



15 


Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance 


Fighting for 
Tolerance? 


Other history classes don't talk about blacks? 

If it pertains to black history, it's always only about slaves. 

Can you imagine trying to teach about slavery in a high school 
classroom with such clearly drawn lines in the sand — blacks in one 
corner, longing for a public discussion of their full, complex history 
as an American people; whites in another, longing to be absolved of 
the guilt of complicity; others unable to decide where they fit in? Is it 
at all possible to imagine others under such conditions? 

There is another viewpoint on why teachers, especially white 
ones, avoid discussing slavery and racism. Writing about anti-racist 
pedagogy, Henry Giroux points out that most whites avoid sensitive 
historical discussions because many whites believe that to teach anti- 
racism, they must renounce their whiteness. When given the choice, 
most whites will avoid this trauma. Frankly, when viewed under this 
light we see the avoidance by white teachers as understandable. 
However, Giroux goes on to suggest that this trauma is normal and 
can be used as a positive instructional force. (See Henry A. Giroux, 
"Rewriting the Discourse of Racial Identity: Towards a Pedagogy 
and Politics of Whiteness," Harvard Educational Review, Summer 
1997, pp. 285-320.) 

It is important to point out here that many classroom teachers 
intentionally avoid potential conflicts and hostilities by avoiding all 
literature that focuses on genocide and intolerance, all discussions of 
anything "horrific." The fact of the matter is, we are much more 
likely to find an absence of teaching about intolerance (literature and 
curriculum dealing with racism, for example) in American schools 
than we are to find bad teaching about intolerance. Educator and 
writer Herbert Kohl points out that many teachers believe that 
teaching about racism will in fact lead to a worsening of race rela- 
tions, and possibly, uncontrolled rage on the part of some students 
(39). He believes, however, that when taught compassionately, 
committedly, and honestly — in other words, when taught well, with 
ample teacher education and preparation — only more positive 
human relations emerge. 

"And so they had come," wrote the playwright Lorraine Hansberry 
in her classic To Be Young, Gifted, and Black, 

pouring out of the bowels of the ghetto, the children of the unquali- 
fied oppressed: the black working-class in their costumes of pegged 
pants and conked heads and tight skirts and almost knee-length 
sweaters and worst of all colored anklets, held up by rubber hands! 

Yes, they had come and they had fought. It had taken the Mayor 
and the visit of a famous movie star to get everyone's mind back on 
other things again. He had been terribly handsome and full of 



[ 



: 



16 



Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 



speeches on "tolerance" and had also given a lot of autographs. But 
she had been unimpressed. 

She never could forget one thing: They had fought back. (45) 

If nothing else, that disconcerting fax from Davenport, Iowa, men- 
tioned previously got us thinking seriously about the "respect" part 
of tolerance and how any of us really gains it from others in society. 
Don't we earn it? Don't we fight for it? Is there any other way in the 
United States? Of course there may be other ways, but we have 
gradually come to believe that all of us who believe in democracy 
end up fighting for tolerance. 

We are not advocating violence here. That's not the type of 
fighting we have in mind. Instead, we are talking about a process 
that achieves human respect through political struggles — struggles 
that result in social justice. Playwright Tony Kushner warns us in his 
1995 book Thinking About the Longstanding Problems of Virtue and 
Happiness that tolerance without social justice really isn't respect and 
therefore, really isn't tolerance. He notes, 

Tolerance has its uses, but not all of them are good. It seems to me 
that frequently when people are asked to tolerate one another, 
something is wrong that Tolerance will not fix. Tolerance as a virtue 
derives from the humanist notion that we are all, as the old saying 
goes, brothers under the skin; and in this bland, unobjectionable 
assertion is much that can be objected to . . . we aren't all "brothers." 
(42) 

Kushner, a gay man, further claims that when tolerance is seen this 
way, people in a democratic society run the risk of avoiding their 
duty to care about and care for their neighbors. Kushner writes, 

Ineffable benevolences like Tolerance are easily and tracelessly 
withdrawn. Civic peace is more secure when the law guarantees it. 
In other words, people seeking to rid their society of racism, ho- 
mophobia, anti-Semitism and misogyny must engage in political 
struggles. . . . People who are oppressed need to strive for power, 
which in a pluralistic democracy means they have to strive for civil 
rights, for legal protection, for enfranchisement. (43) 

Now, we admit that when we first began thinking about 
tolerance this way the prospect of chronic civic unrest scared us. But 
the more we considered Kushner 's words, the more we realized that 
there is no sane alternative to the cause he asserts. After all, the 
history of the United States proves Kushner right. The Civil Rights 
Movement, coming to its fullness in the fifties and sixties, is a case 
study. 

African Americans did not get the right to vote by appealing 
to whites to do the right thing. Historically, toward black people, 
whites rarely did the right thing because it was the morally correct 



O 

ERIC 



29 



[ 



17 



i 

Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance 



thing to do. The right to vote, along with other key civil rights — 
education, housing, health — came to be because blacks and others 
willingly engaged in political struggles for social justice. It is critical 
not to marginalize this perspective because the view that Kushner 
expresses — that tolerance is social justice, that it can be no less — is in 
fact a valued democratic ideal. Historian Vincent Harding, the 
author of Hope and History, supports this viewpoint: 

From the largest perspective, it [the Civil Rights Movement] demon- 
strates the ways of human solidarity in the face of oppression, the 
common hope which empowers people everywhere, the deep 
yearning for a democratic experience that is far more than periodic 
voting, but which searches diligently for the best possibilities — 
rather than the worst tendencies — within us all. The ties between 
Birmingham and Beijing, between Fannie Lou Hamer and the Berlin 
Wall, are central to that sense of the common ground on which our 
humanity is built. (7) 

Viewing tolerance as nothing less than social justice gets us 
away from settling for imagining others passively as a key to achiev- 
ing a more respectful, more caring society. It gets us away from the 
syrupy manifesto Rodney King put forth to the citizens of Los 
Angeles, California, in 1992 as fires in that city raged from the most 
destructive riots of the twentieth century. For us, "Can't we just all 
get along?" does not measure up to the task Kushner asserts, the task 
of imagining others in the fullest sense of achieving social justice. 

Just getting along — tolerating the "other" — is not what we and the 
other teachers who have contributed chapters to this book have in 
mind. Together we attempt to articulate an insistent resistance to this 
oversimplified meaning of tolerance. 

Educator Dwight Boyd considered Rodney King's appeal to 
get along, however well meant, as "groundless tolerance." Boyd 
writes. 

This perspective, which I call groundless tolerance, surfaces often in 
public discussion when real cultural difference threatens to disrupt 
the flow of comfortable discourse; it gets used as a piecemeal, 

"polite" way of defusing the tension and smoothing over disagree- 
ment with the moral equivalent of "warm-fuzzies." (617) 

There is nothing wrong with "good manners" — politeness, civility, 
courtesy, patience. Good manners are necessary. However, we agree 
fully with Boyd's observation that when faced with society's real 
problems, more is required than "good manners." Good manners 
alone do not take us very far — not far enough to imagine the other, 
not far enough to imagine social justice in the United States. 

During our year in Alabama we once attended a party given 
by a family we had come to know. An incident occurred there that 




30 



] 



18 



Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 



pushed us to ponder further what it means to "imagine the other." 

At this party, two people sat near us in intense conversation — a 
young man, perhaps eighteen years old, the son of the woman 
hosting the party; and an older man, in his 60s or 70s, who was an 
old friend of the host and her late husband, the young man's father. 
The young man was in tears for much of his conversation with the 
older man. The topic they discussed was the young man's anger 
with his late father, who we later found out had been a harsh man 
and very absent from the boy's life. The young man told the older 
one that he was paralyzed by his anger, so furious since his father's 
death that he could barely carry on with his own life. The older man 
spoke little, but listened intensely. In the end he said the words that 
we found so remarkable that we remember them still today. He told 
the boy to loan his anger at his dead father to him — to let him keep it 
for awhile. We particularly remember him telling the younger man 
that he would take good care of it and honor it; that if the young 
man let him carry his anger for awhile, it might free the young man 
to carry on with his life with more strength and compassion. We 
don't know what happened after that. We only know that the young 
man agreed. 

This memory is resurrected in us as we try to think carefully 
about the human traits we might need to emulate, even to cultivate, 
if we are truly to "imagine the other." What traits of heart and soul 
must be developed to walk in the shoes of another, to feel the joys, 
the burdens; even, as in the behavior of the older man toward the 
younger one, to be willing to carry those burdens for awhile in order 
to bring a measure of relief to the other? Perhaps we witnessed an 
act of good manners at an extreme. But we are more prone to believe 
that we witnessed a most basic act of imagining the other, and that if 
it were possible to illuminate this act further, we might come to the 
conclusion that in this act was an attempt to further the cause of 
social justice. 



An Essential 
Principle for 
imagining the 
Other 



The year that we lived in Montgomery, Alabama, as researchers and 
writers for the Teaching Tolerance Project, we both found it easy to 
say yes to participating on the family selection committee for the 
Montgomery branch of Habitat for Humanity because it represented 
a real opportunity for us to make ourselves practice what we preach 
to our children, family, friends, and anyone else willing to listen. If 
you are to know others, to imagine others, service to others is extremely 
important. The psychologist Kenneth B. Clark, commenting on what 
he felt it takes to create a nonviolent democratic society, once said 
that "Children [we would add "all of us''] must be helped to under- 
stand social values [we would add, for example, the full meaning of 



c 



] 



19 



Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance 



tolerance], not just by word, but by their conduct, such as responding 
positively to the needs of others" ( 38 ). 

Contrary to what some believe. Habitat for Humanity does not 
give away homes. Habitat for Humanity homes, well below market 
price, can be afforded by low-income families because of volunteer 
contributions of labor. The houses are earned through "sweat 
equity." And after hundreds of hours of volunteering on other 
Habitat for Humanity home-building sites, and on their own 
home-building site, new Habitat for Humanity home owners still 
face mortgage payments. 

But long before Habitat for Humanity volunteers begin build- 
ing homes, volunteers sort through hundreds of applications to 
determine which families will be able to meet the demands of the 
mortgage costs. Habitat home owners — now found in nearly every 
state — go through a selection process similar to what banks make 
more typical home buyers go through. Credit is checked and income 
is verified. 

Over the course of a year, we interviewed many families. At 
our monthly meetings to go over these families' applications to 
become home owners, the Family Selection Committee discussed the 
progress of many applicants. Between our face-to-face interviews 
and the monthly meetings, we started questioning what society had 
taught us about the poor. 

Most of the families we met and interviewed were headed by 
single mothers or fathers who worked in low-paying, unskilled jobs. 
Incomes were frequently supplemented by food stamps. Social 
Security payments for disabled children, or rent subsidies. None of 
the families, however, seemed to be profiting from their government 
subsidies. In fact, the notion that the poor profit from government 
subsidies grew increasingly ridiculous to us. We did not find anyone 
who enjoyed living in run-down public housing projects, anyone 
who did not work hard, often unbelievably hard, to provide for their 
families. 

The employment records of many applicants were impressive. 
Sticking with the same job without substantial wage increases for 
ten, fifteen, twenty straight years counts as impressive. In some 
situations, the feats seemed heroic. How many of us could manage 
raising four children on minimum wages for ten years? Most of the 
families we interviewed did manage this and more. 

We found some dysfunctional families; however, we mostly 
found good, highly functional people in dysfunctional economic 
circumstances — substandard housing, dead-end jobs, no health 
benefits, and a monthly cash flow with absolutely no room for either 
error or luxury. We mostly found good people several breaks away 
from what most non-poor people would accept as normal living. 



O 

ERIC 



32 



20 



Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 



And the break Habitat for Humanity provides — decent housing — 
was not a "free ride" either. It was simply something good neighbors 
tried to help other good neighbors achieve because the lives of these 
neighbors, in this case economically poor neighbors, mattered to 
them. 

Long-term community service is frequently impossible for 
some of us to participate in, but when possible it runs a great risk of 
being a genuine learning experience that challenges our ignorance, 
intolerance, and prejudice. It can also make us fighting mad. Perhaps 
mad enough to understand what Clark meant when he also said 
"Children [we would add, all of us] must be helped to understand that 
one cannot keep others down without staying down with them" 

(38). If we are serious about building tolerance, care, social justice — 
in short, democratic communities that care about and car e/or each 
other — we have got to understand this, and we have got to teach our 
students to understand this. 

Weeks after President Clinton proposed his 1997 race initia- 
tive, op-ed pages across the nation rang out with cynicism. Some of 
the cynics, however, were absolutely on the mark on one issue — it is 
time to move beyond just talking about racial intolerance and all 
forms of intolerance. We believe that one of the most effective means 
to move beyond the talking stage is community service — good old- 
fashioned doing. In his book An Aristocracy of Everyone, Rutgers 
educator Benjamin Barber makes a strong and passionate argument 
for the value of community service and its potential to eliminate 
racism and other forms of intolerance. He states, "An experiential 
learning process that includes both classroom learning and group 
work outside the classroom has the greatest likelihood of impacting 
on student ignorance, intolerance, and prejudice" (225). Programs 
like the Highlander Research and Education Center in New Market, 
Tennessee, and City Year in Boston, Massachusetts, are great ex- 
amples of what happens when young participants from racially 
diverse backgrounds come together to work on common problems 
such as voter registration drives, transportation projects for the 
elderly, food co-ops, housing renovation projects, or peer tutoring 
programs. What happens is not magic or automatic. However, the 
potential for understanding and imagining others is clearly en- 
hanced ten-fold when more than just talking is going on; when 
doing is going on; when senses, souls, and muscles come alive in 
working for others, in imagining others, in imagining social justice. 

In an editorial describing his study of well-known leaders "A 
Cognitive View of Leadership," Howard Gardner speaks of leader- 
ship as the quality of being able to tell others new stories about 
themselves. "The most powerful stories," he writes, "turn out to be 
ones about identity; stories that help individuals discover who they 




33 



21 



Notes 



References 



Struggling with the Meaning of Tolerance 



are, where they are coming from, where they are or should be 
headed." Then he adds, "A crucial element in the effectiveness of a 
story hinges on whether the leader 's own actions and way of life 
reinforce the themes of a story that he or she relates" (34). 

Gardner studied "big" leaders — Margaret Mead, J. Robert 
Oppenheimer, Pope John XXIII, Mahatma Gandhi, and others — 
whose new stories, indeed, changed the course of scholarship, 
science, and cultural and religious life. But his words could well 
describe "smaller" leaders — the man we met at the party in Mont- 
gomery; exceptional teachers, perhaps — teachers like those who 
introduce themselves and their ways of teaching tolerance in the 
coming chapters. Here are teachers who care deeply about their own 
and their students' capacities to imagine the other. Here are teachers 
who believe in the capacity of realistic and imaginative literature and 
imaginative teaching to help us to imagine other souls, other possi- 
bilities for civic enfranchisement and civic care. It is these teachers' 
visions of social justice and their commitments to "lending" these 
visions to their students, that breathes new hope — and with it, new 
stories of possibility — into those of us who care deeply about where 
we should be headed as a nation, about the fate of our society as one 
that can harbor and care for all of us, and about the fate of our 
children as caring beings. 



1. See David Hill, "Reel Lives," Teacher Magazine (May /June, 1997), 
pp. 18-21, and David Hill, "Sisters in Arms," Teacher Magazine (August/ 
September 1997), pp. 28-35. 

2. For example see James A. Banks and Cherry A. McGee Banks 
(eds.). Handbook of Research on Multicultural Education. New York: 
Macmillian Publishing, 1995. 



Barber, Benjamin R. An Aristocracy of Everyone: The Politics of Education and 
the Future of America. New York: Ballantine Books, 1992. 

Boyd, Dwight. "Dominance Concealed Through Diversity: Implications of 
Inadequate Perspectives on Cultural Pluralism." Harvard Educational 
Review 66.3 (Fall 1996): 609-30. 

Carnes, Jim. Us and Them: A History of Intolerance in America. Montgomery: 
Southern Poverty Law Center, 1995. 

Clark, Kenneth B. "The Toll of Psychic Violence." Newsweek 11 January 1993: 
38. 

Gardner, Howard. "A Cognitive View of Leadership." Education Week 13 
September 1995: 34-35. 



c 



3 



22 



Caroline E. Heller and Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 



Hansberry, Lorraine. To Be Young, Gifted and Black: Lorraine Hansberry in Her 
Own Words. New York: Vintage Books, 1995. 

Harding, Vincent. Hope and History: Why We Must Share the Story of the 
Movement. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1990. 

Kohl, Herbert. Should We Burn Babar: Essays on Childrens Literature and the 
Power of Stories. New York: The New Press, 1995. 

Kushner, Tony. Thinking About the Longstanding Problems of Virtue and 

Happiness: Essays, a Play, Two Poems and a Prayer. New York: Theatre 
Communications Group, 1995. 

Scarry, Elaine. 'The Difficulty of Imagining Other People." Tor Love of 

Country: Debating the Limits of Patriotism. Ed. Joshua Cohen. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1996. 



23 



I -r?' r- h'iH », j; y DT r 




Milton Kleg 

University of Colorado at Denver 

Celia Bard 

University of Colorado at Denver 



| engthy negotiations having failed. Major Anderson refused 
l to surrender the fort. At 3:20 a.m., he received a final 
message: 

Sir: 

By authority of Brigadier-General Beauregard, commanding the 
Provisional Forces of the Confederate States, we have the honor to 
notify you that he will open the fire of his batteries on Fort Sumter in 
one hour from this time. We have the honor to be, very respectfully, 
your obedient servants, 

James Chestnut, Jr., Aide-de-Camp 
Stephen D. Lee, Captain, C.S. Army, Aide-de-Camp 1 

It was 4:30 a.m., and a light rain blew in the wind over Charleston 
harbor. South Carolina. From the shore. Fort Sumter appeared as an 
apparition. Suddenly, over its parade ground, the first cannonball of 
the war exploded. That was on Friday, April 12, 1861. Although this 
initial battle resulted in no loss of life, what followed was a grueling 
war that ended four years later after the deaths of over five hundred 
thousand combatants. In the aftermath of the Civil War, some four 
million African Americans were legally emancipated. After freedom, 
however, there would be another century of political, social, and 
economic subjugation. In this context, a major character emerged on 
the American scene: a figure known as Jim Crow. 

The scars of slavery and the effects of Jim Crowism have left 
an indelible mark on black and white America. If future generations 



Copyright 1998 Milton Kleg 



o 

ERLC 



36 



24 



[ 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



are to resolve the problems of racial bitterness and bigotry, they need 
to understand how a nation became divided along racial lines. 

In this essay we briefly describe the development of Jim 
Crowism and then address literary works that reflect black-white 
relationships after freedom. In addition, we suggest how these works 
can be used in instruction. Because teachers may be unfamiliar with 
most of the novels and related works discussed, we hope this essay 
will open unexplored passages and provide a path for further inquiry. 



Jim Crow: 
An Overview 



Most people who are acquainted with Jim Crow know that the term 
refers to laws and ordinances designed to keep black Americans 
segregated from mainstream society. However, Jim Crowism was 
more than laws and ordinances. It was a cultural life-form designed to 
maintain two worlds, one white, one black. Periodically, these worlds 
would collide with devastating results (Kleg 8-18). Although Jim 
Crowism was most prominent in the South, racial enmity, discrimi- 
nation, and segregation were found throughout the entire country. 



Origins and 
Background 



The term Jim Crow was created by white performer Thomas D. Rice. 
In 1828, Rice, originator of American blackface minstrelsy, intro- 
duced his character in a song and dance routine. It is somewhat 
ironic that a fictional character designed to entertain audiences 
became the concept label for racial segregation in a form that was so 
horrendous and plagued an entire nation for more than half a cen- 
tury. Jim was a black character, and the term eventually referred to 
blacks. Saying "Jim Crow laws or ordinances" reflected another way 
of saying those that related to blacks. 

Following the Civil War, former Confederate states enacted 
Black Codes, laws to disenfranchise and subordinate recently freed 
African Americans. The codes practically recreated conditions of 
slave labor. Federal actions designed to abolish these codes and 
empower former slaves resulted in what white Southerners viewed 
as the evils of Reconstruction. Reconstruction attempted to place 
African Americans (former slaves) on an equal footing with whites. 
African Americans were placed in official positions, including 
elected positions in state government and in Congress. All of this 
was anathema to many southern whites, and this view found accep- 
tance throughout much of American society. 

By 1870, African Americans were legally regarded as having 
the same rights of citizenship as whites. During this time, the Ku 
Klux Klan and kindred organizations continued to terrorize those 
who sought to educate and assist former slaves. In addition to 
blacks, the targets of terrorist activity also included carpetbaggers. 
Unionists, teachers, and clergymen. Under President Ulysses S. 



25 



L I 

After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



Grant (1868-1876), the Klan was partially subdued by federal forces. 

After the election of President Rutherford B. Hayes, federal 
troops were removed from the South in 1877. The Reconstruction era 
came to an end and was followed by the period southern whites 
called the "Redemption": whites steadily took control of southern 
institutions and governments. Northern interest in assisting south- 
ern blacks faded. In addition. Supreme Court decisions essentially 
paved the way for Jim Crow laws. One of the most significant deci- 
sions was the Court's 1883 ruling that much of the Civil Rights Act of 
1875 was unconstitutional. 



Jim Crow and 
Segregation 



In Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), the Supreme Court upheld the right of 
Louisiana to maintain "separate but equal" facilities for whites and 
blacks. This decision paved the way for the bulk of Jim Crow laws 
designed to disenfranchise and segregate African Americans. The 
use of grandfather clauses and poll taxes in various southern states 
were used to prevent blacks from voting. 

In addition to segregated schools and neighborhoods, racial 
separation excluded blacks entirely from white establishments and 
facilities, or maintained separate black and white sections. Racially 
segregated establishments and facilities included restaurants, hotels, 
hospitals, theaters, movies, ticket-counter lines, parks, stadiums, 
public swimming pools, toilets, waiting rooms, barbershops, train 
cars, taxis, buses, jail cells, and nightclubs. Even churches were 
segregated or had segregated sections, and there were Jim Crow 
bibles as well. In Birmingham, Alabama, an ordinance prohibited 
whites and blacks from playing board games, such as checkers and 
dominoes, together (Woodward 97-118). 

Jim Crow laws also defined who was black and who was not. 
In Florida, a person was regarded as black if he or she had one great- 
great-grandparent who was black. In Arkansas, a person was consid- 
ered black if he or she appeared to have black features of some or 
any sort. Marriages between whites and nonwhites were prohibited 
throughout the South, border states, and most western states. As late 
as the 1950s, twenty-four states still prohibited interracial marriages 
(Kennedy 47-72). 

In the South, Jim Crow customs and behaviors emerged that, 
if violated, could spell doom for a black person. Social taboos 
included talking back to a white person or suggesting that a white 
person was lying. In his guide to the laws and customs of Jim 
Crow, Stetson Kennedy noted, "If you are nonwhite there are not 
many ways whereby you . . . can talk back to whites . . . and live" 
(217). 

Eventually, legislation, court rulings, and the efforts of civil 
rights advocates during the 1950s and 1960s led to the decline and 



O 

ERIC 



38 



[ 



26 Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 





fall of Jim Crow. Today, the legacy of Jim Crow lives on in the stereo- 
types and attitudes of a nation whose psyche is affixed to racialist 
conceptions. Having completed this brief history of Jim Crow, we are 
ready to examine some of the literature and related works that reflect 
the rise of racialism in post-Civil War America. 


Differing 

[Realities 


Literature often reflects, reinforces, or challenges the perceived social 
realities of a society. In some instances, literary works have even 
created these perceived realities that influence beliefs, feelings, and 
behaviors. This is especially true in the area of black-white relations 
following the Civil War. The perceived realities of southern and 
northern authors often conflicted with one another. Their major 
differences concentrated on issues of slavery, the nature and treat- 
ment of African Americans, the role of Northerners in the South, the 
Ku Klux Klan, and white southern culture. 


A Righteous 
Carpetbagger 


Among the early post-Civil War works regarding race relations in 
America were those by Albion W. Tourgee written at the close of 
Reconstruction. Following the war, Tourgee joined the ranks of 
carpetbaggers and relocated to Greensboro, North Carolina. From 
1868 to 1874, he served as a judge of the Superior Court, Seventh 
Judicial District of North Carolina. Following his judicial stint, 
Tourgee published three novels that provide a northern perspective 
of black-white relations in the South. Later, Tourgee served as coun- 
sel for Homer Plessy in Plessy v. Ferguson. Tourgee's brief on behalf 
of the plaintiff influenced Justice John Marshall Harlan to comment 
that "Our Constitution is color-blind and neither knows nor tolerates 
classes among citizens. In respect of civil rights, all citizens are equal 
before the law" (Plessy 559). More than half a century later, Harlan's 
dissenting opinion and his comments would be acknowledged in 
Brown v. Topeka Board of Education. 


Tangled Roots 


Tourgee's first novel, Toinette, was published in 1874 and again in 
1881 entitled A Royal Gentleman. The story involves a young southern 
gentleman, Geoffrey Hunter, and Toinette, a beautiful and highly 
intelligent slave girl of fourteen. At Geoffrey's request, Toinette is 
given to him by his father as a Christmas gift — a "pet" to be set free 
upon the elder Hunter's death. 

Geoffrey provides Toinette with an education, and as she 
matures into womanhood they become lovers. When war erupts, 
Geoffrey leaves for the fight; the two do not meet again until the 
close of war. Toinette, now free, locates her wounded former master 
in a northern hospital and nurses him back to health. Since Toinette 
is the child of a quadroon mother and white father, others at the 



27 



c 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



hospital take Toinette to be a white woman and refuse to believe 
Geoffrey's contention that she had been his chattel. To prove his 
point, Geoffrey asserts his previous master's role. Toinette immedi- 
ately responds in the servile manner of a slave. Ultimately, Geoffrey 
apologizes for his behavior. He suggests that they continue as lovers, 
but a more dignified Toinette will do so only if they are married — an 
unthinkable act for the southern gentleman. 

At least four items for reflection emerge from this novel. The 
first is Tourgee's belief that education is the key to equality and that 
blacks should be educated on the same plane as whites. Toinette's 
rapid educational development and her sense of morality and 
independence reflect this idea. 

Second, students can explore how the effects of a racial slave- 
master relationship were evidenced in future race relations after 
freedom. In their own ways, are not Toinette and Geoffrey both 
victims of slavery, the "Peculiar Institution"? What must be done for 
manumission to lead to equality? In addition, students and teachers 
might reflect on what the two main characters would have written 
about their lives some twenty years after the novel ends. In address- 
ing these issues as well as others, teachers and students can benefit 
by realizing just how great is the obstacle of racial bigotry. 

Third, Tourgee challenges the notion of a refined civilized 
South. He portrays the South as barbarous and psychologically 
vicious. This view is illustrated by Geoffrey's put-down of Toinette 
in the hospital and his equating Toinette with Leon, Geoffrey's dog. 
"He would dress this slave girl as a lady, and people should count it 
among the eccentricities . . . attributed to him. She and Leon should 
be his pets" (40). According to Theodore L. Gross (1963): 

The strength of A Royal Gentleman lies in Tourgee's ability to depict 
the attitudes and values of the slaves, the slaveholder, and the poor 
white. . . . Tourgee knew too well that as long as bitter enmity [after 
freedom] was permitted to exist between slave and master ... no real 
solution had been effected. The most difficult problem was under- 
standing the royal gentleman's mind; entrance into that foreign 
labyrinth was the first step toward an easing of racial tension. In A 
Fool's Errand . . . Tourgee will come to grips with precisely that 
problem. (47) 

Two subsequent works by Tourgee, A Fool's Errand and Bricks 
without Straw also deserve consideration in the study of American 
literature during the Reconstruction and Redemption periods. A 
Fool's Errand, a fictionalized autobiography of the author's life as a 
carpetbagger, became a bestseller. 



A Fool's Errand, first published in 1879, presents the carpetbagger in 
antithesis to the more popular views portrayed by Thomas Dixon Jr. 



28 



c 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



and Thomas Nelson Page (Gross, Tourgee 58). It is only in recent 
years that texts have portrayed carpetbaggers as a mix of the "good" 
and the "bad." 

In A Fool's Errand, Union veteran Comfort Servosse returns to a 
defeated South believing that he can help unify the nation and 
improve his economic and social status. In short order, he discovers 
a distinct civilization quite alien from his northern background. 
Servosse uncovers the tangled roots of black-white relations and the 
enmity of southern whites toward intrusive Northerners. 

In Tourgee's works, he periodically provides a political treatise 
or historical background related to the time and place of his story. In 
A Fool's Errand, he criticizes the federal government's Reconstruction 
acts designed to punish all Southerners regardless of their loyalties 
during the Civil War. In doing so, he speaks of their lack of under- 
standing of southern culture and the dire conditions created by the 
war. Yet, he addresses these Radical Republicans as the "Wise men" 
and Servosse, who has come to understand the South, is regarded as 
the "Fool." It is here that one might ask if Tourgee has reversed 
labels. For is not Servosse the wiser in his understanding of the 
South, and those in Washington the fools for acting vindictively and 
out of ignorance? Certainly, this question can be posed and dis- 
cussed by students. Furthermore, it can be debated as to whether or 
not Tourgee's protagonist really understands the southern mind. 

Much of the novel deals with outrages committed by the Ku 
Klux Klan against former slaves, carpetbaggers, and southern 
Unionists. One of the most dramatic episodes deals with a Klan plot 
to murder Judge Denton, who is being accompanied to his home by 
Servosse. Informed of the plot, Servosse's daughter, Lily, hastens on 
horseback to warn her father and the judge. By chance she encoun- 
ters the Klan members at a road crossing. Stealing away after 
wounding one of the Klansmen, she succeeds in saving the two men. 

In order to substantiate his portrayals of the Klan as an evil 
force, Tourgee wrote The Invisible Empire. This book is a nonfictional, 
graphic collection of Klan atrocities. The events described are based 
upon the Report of the Joint Select Committee to Inquire into the Condi- 
tion of Affairs in the Late Insurrectionary States (42nd Congress, 2nd 
Session, Senate Report No. 41, 1872). A Fool's Errand remains the only 
literary work describing the role of the carpetbagger by one who 
lived it. 

In HOC SigUO Vinces Following upon the heels of A Fool's Errand, Tourgee authored Bricks 

Without Straw in 1880. This novel describes the relationship between 
former slaves and white masters. The story begins with the birth and 
owner's naming of Nimbus, son of a house slave in 1840. Nimbus's 
mother, Lorency, manages to negotiate two silver dollars from her 




41 



29 



1 

After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



master for having yielded a fine, healthy son. (Contrary to popular 
misconception, slaves did engage in buying and selling, and they 
did receive passes permitting them to go to town for such activities.) 

The novel jumps to Nimbus as a young man and moves 
rapidly through his "taking up" with Lugena, daughter of a house 
slave. With the outbreak of war. Nimbus escapes to the Union lines, 
enlists in the Union army, and is assigned to the Massachusetts 
Colored Regiment (see the film Glory). At war's end, he returns to his 
former county. 

When Nimbus registers his marriage to Lugena, he finds it 
necessary to have a given and family name. Obtaining two names 
and the act of registering marriages symbolize the beginning of the 
journey to emancipation. Illiteracy and a lack of social skills serve as 
reminders of the degree to which slavery inhibited the majority of 
blacks. We are not speaking of house slaves, or of an exceptional 
personality such as Frederick Douglass. We are witnessing the 
emancipation of the many hundreds of thousands of field slaves 
whose world was often physically and psychologically restricted. 

The unfamiliarity of their new roles was compounded by resentment 
and disdain from former masters and their cohorts. 

This aspect of the novel provides an opportunity for students 
to examine and test their perceptions about first generation freed- 
men. Students might be asked to describe what they believe life was 
like after freedom. Then they could compare their responses with 
accounts described in such works as Gutman's The Black Family in 
Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925. This study contains a number of 
excerpts of first-person accounts. Special attention should be di- 
rected to chapters 9 and 10 in this work. Another source for compar- 
ing and analyzing impressions is Rabinowitz's Race Relations in the 
Urban South, 1865-1890 (see chapters 2, 5, and 10). After comparing 
personal impressions with the findings in these accounts, students 
might address the question of why their impressions were either 
correct or incorrect. 

As in the previous novels, Tourgee weaves historical back- 
ground into the story. In Bricks Without Straw, he describes the 
establishment of the Freedmen's Bureau. His description lays the 
foundation for a frenzied scene when the freedmen march unarmed 
and innocently in parade on the town of Melton to cast their first 
ballot. Among whites, however, it was rumored that blacks were 
coming to "kill all the white men, burn the town, and then ravish the 
white women" (152). The perceived notion of blacks on the move to 
plunder, murder, and rape is not a bizarre fantasy of the author. It 
was a real fear among southern whites during antebellum and post- 
war periods (see Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation in 
1838-1839). Throughout the Jim Crow period, numerous African 



[ 



30 



— i 

Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



Americans accused of or rumored to have ravished white women 
were lynched. Regarding such rumors, both students and teachers 
can examine the devastating role of rumors in black-white relations. 
(See William M. Tuttle Jr., Race Riot: Chicago in the Summer of 1919, 
chapters 1 and 2.) For a firsthand, albeit simulated, experience 
dealing with rumors, teachers might consider using the Rumor Clinic 
exercise available from the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith. 
This exercise, dealing with an African American in what appears to 
be a subway train, has proven highly successful in examining the 
distortions and effects of rumors. 

Tourgee's positive treatment of the Freedmen's Bureau and 
Northerners like Mollie Ainslie, a northern teacher, contrasts sharply 
with the works of southern apologists such as Claude G. Bowers's 
The Tragic Era (198-219). Bowers claims that "Immediately, the 
political parasites [carpetbaggers] and looters, scalawags, and scav- 
engers, knaves and fools, took possession of the State Governments, 
and entered upon the pillaging of the stricken people [southern 
whites]" (219). 

Through his characters, Tourgee stresses education as the most 
important element in resolving the division between the races. Eliab, 
Nimbus's friend from childhood, provides evidence for the assertion 
that African Americans can achieve the same intellectual level as 
whites. With the help of Mollie Ainslie, a Freedman Bureau teacher, 
Eliab learns to read and write and becomes a leader among local 
blacks. His presence as an educated black riles local whites and 
results in Klan violence. In the face of this violence, Eliab and Mollie 
leave for the North, and Nimbus flees toward Texas. In the North, 
Mollie helps Eliab to achieve a college education. 

In Tourgee's view, granting people freedom without providing 
them with opportunities for education is akin to giving people clay 
to make bricks but withholding the straw needed to sustain the 
bricks. The novel ends with an illustration of an opened spelling 
book with the inscription "In Hoc Signo Vinces" (521) — In this sign 
you shall conquer. 



Southern 

Perceptions 



While Tourgee and his works slipped from popular memory, the 
works of southern writers such as Thomas Dixon Jr. and Thomas 
Nelson Page emerged to shed an antithetical perspective of the 
Reconstruction and Redemption eras. An examination of their works 
may help explain why so many white Americans regarded African 
Americans with disdain and as innately inferior. It may also help 
explain the very negative perceptions regarding carpetbaggers. In 
addition, one might mention Joel Chandler Harris, who offers a less 
vitriolic assault upon intrusive Northerners than Dixon and Thomas. 



O 

ERIC 



43 



] 



31 


After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 


The Loathsome 

Carpetbagger 


Harris's Gabriel Tolliver concerns life in Shady Dale, Georgia, during 
Reconstruction. The novel centers on the growth and maturity of 
two white characters. Nan and Gabriel, from childhood to young 
adulthood. Their lives are abruptly disrupted by the defeat of the 
Confederacy and the introduction of a carpetbagger, Gilbert 
Hotchkiss. 

True to the southern perspective, Hotchkiss and his ilk are 
described as 

productive of isms as a fly is of maggots. . . . They succeeded in 
dedicating millions of human beings to misery and injustice, and 
warped the minds of the whites to such an extent that they thought it 
necessary to bring about peace and good order by various acute 
forms of injustice and lawlessness. (291) 

Hotchkiss stirs up former slaves and brings to bear their prejudices 
against whites. Most African Americans are portrayed as being 
childlike and easily influenced by the incitations of the carpetbagger. 

Whereas carpetbaggers are presented as loathsome trouble- 
makers, Harris's depiction of a Klan kindred group is mild and 
apologetic. The Knights of the White Camellia are merely good 
citizens nonviolently demonstrating and keeping blacks from getting 
out of hand. Both depictions are in stark contrast to Tourgee's treat- 
ments of carpetbaggers and the Klan. 

If one regards Harris's treatment of carpetbaggers and blacks 
as unfavorable, the works of Thomas Dixon Jr. are indescribable. 
Dixon's The Clansman is regarded as one of the most racist works in 
American literature. Its major contribution to racist attitudes is that it 
was the basis for the controversial film The Birth of a Nation. 


Ravaging Africans 


Accompanying the rise of racist thought in America at the turn of the 
century, it is no wonder that The Birth of a Nation was a box-office hit. 
The film played a major role in reviving the Ku Klux Klan. Neverthe- 
less, The Clansman is more exciting and interesting, albeit as racist, 
than the film version. 

Dixon's novel begins at the close of the Civil War and immedi- 
ately introduces two sets of siblings, one from the North and one 
from the South. Elsie, daughter of the hate-mongering radical Re- 
publican congressman Stoneman, and Ben Cameron, son of a refined 
southern physician, fall in love. Their siblings also fall in love with 
each other. The two couples become victims of northern radical rule 
instigated by Stoneman, whose designs include punishing southern 
whites and unleashing savage black rule on the South. African 
Americans are described in the most heinous ways from "onion- 
laden breath, mixed with perspiring African odour" (155) to being 
akin to savages and monkeys (249). The novel is historical fiction 



□ 



32 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



and thereby presents an interpretation of Reconstruction that con- 
trasts sharply with Tourgee's works. Tourgee exposes the Klan for its 
unconscionable acts of violence; Dixon describes the men in white 
linens as heroic. Indeed, Ben Cameron is a Klan leader, and with his 
followers he saves the South from the threat of ravaging blacks. The 
work's popularity, by way of the film version, had devastating 
effects on race relations and provided a moral uplifting to Jim 
Crowism. 

In using the novel, film, or both, the teacher should proceed 
with caution in preparing students for this experience. A basic 
strategy in preparing students for Dixon's work is to provide an 
advance organizer or overview. Students should be forewarned that 
the book is highly racist and that some sections may be offensive. 
Furthermore, the teacher should explain the importance of the work 
as it relates to understanding the beliefs and attitudes of white 
America at the turn of the century. Indeed, it has been estimated that 
one out of every ten American-born, white, Protestant men joined 
the Ku Klux Klan. It also is strongly suggested that the teacher show 
the film Ethnic Notions. This educational film provides a history of 
African American stereotyping and makes a good connection to The 
Birth of a Nation and to The Clansman. The educational edition of The 
Birth of a Nation is not recommended since it is limited to battle 
scenes and overlooks the main thrust of the story. 

In a somewhat different vein, Thomas Nelson Page indicts the 
North for its constant harangue against white supremacy in the 
South. A collection of his essays in The Old South include two that 
deserve consideration. Although other selections may be made by 
the teacher. Page's essays "Social Life before the War" and "The 
Negro Question" provide salient points for understanding an 
apologist's view of black-white relations and the gap between 
Northern and Southern perspectives. 

A Kittdev Like Tourgee, Page was an attorney, and his indictment of northern 

Civilization and support for slavery needs little elaboration in the essay "The Negro 

, , ,, q Question." This essay also describes the nature of African Americans 

vMnite bupretnacy from a racialist southern perspective. Another essay entitled "Social 

Life Before the War" provides the reader with glowing descriptions 
of the southern woman, gentleman or master, and loyal slaves such 
as the "mammy." Both of these essays may need to be presented in 
abridged fashion for the student to focus on the main points. There is 
no doubt that Page's works can be used to contrast the positions of 
Tourgee and others. 

According to Page, the old South "Christianized the negro race 
. . . impressed upon it the only civilization it has ever possessed. . . . 

It has maintained the supremacy of the Caucasian race, upon which 



0 

ERIC 



45 



33 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



all civilization seems now to depend ... it abounded in spiritual 
development" (185). For Dixon, white civilization was threatened by 
Africanization that would spawn a war for racial survival. The 
works of Dixon, D. W. Griffith (director and producer of The Birth of a 
Nation), and Page provided sinew for the concept of racial separation 
through exaggerated stereotypes that served to denigrate African 
Americans. 

The myth of white racial supremacy permeated the United 
States. While white racialism in the North was often ignored, the 
South became the whipping boy for the nation. This was no doubt 
related to the greater uniformity and extent of Jim Crow customs 
and laws that existed below the Mason-Dixon line. The early 
effects of Jim Crow in the South are described in Appointed, written 
by two black authors, Walter Stowers and William H. Anderson. 

African American Shortly after Bricks Without Straw was published in 1880, Jim Crow 
in the Land of WaS b e g innin g to emerge in the South. In 1881, a Tennessee law 
j. ^ required that African Americans be segregated from whites when 

Jim Grow traveling by rail. In 1890, the Supreme Court upheld the right of 

states to segregate public facilities along racial lines. It was against 
this backdrop that Stowers and Anderson wrote Appointed, the first 
black-authored novel to address the problem of Jim Crow. 

Appointed is the story of two northern friends, one white and 
the other "Afro-American" (35). Their northern sense of indepen- 
dence and their naivete of the southern folkways regarding black- 
white relationships leads to a disastrous encounter. 

Seth Stanley, a son of a white financier, and his dearest friend, 
John Saunders, an African American, decide to journey south. In 
doing so, they are met with one act of segregation and intimidation 
after another. Jim Crow laws regulating segregation in hotels, on 
steamers, and in churches provide a whirlwind of experiences for the 
two. As the novel nears its conclusion, both characters are anxious to 
return north, but a chance encounter with a white man results in a 
terrifying and deadly experience. John is arrested, beaten, and 
threatened by a lynch mob. The descriptions of these events, espe- 
cially the latter, are moving and realistic. 

This novel provides an excellent transition from the periods of 
Reconstruction and Redemption to Jim Crow at the dawn of the 
twentieth century. It also raises a fascinating question as to the 
perceptions of the authors regarding who is to be appointed to 
resolve the problems of racial injustice. Why is the white Seth 
Stanley appointed to carry on the fight? How does this compare with 
the emergence and evolution of black organizations and the posi- 
tions taken much later by black activists? 



0 

ERiC 



46 



c 



] 



34 Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 





From the novels discussed thus far, students and teachers 
might consider charting how different characters are portrayed and 
the issues with which they are confronted. This charting exercise can 
be extended as they examine the works of African American authors 
written in the throes of Jim Crow. 


Block Authors, 
Black Themes 


At the turn of the century Jim Crow laws and customs spread rap- 
idly throughout the South. The segregation and subjugation of 
blacks became more pronounced. American society had placed a 
premium on whiteness, and being black had no redeeming value; 
African Americans constituted a pariah caste. During this time black 
writers examined how black people coped with the ambiguities and 
indignities of being black and American. 

Among the most prominent issues addressed in African 
American literature were social positioning, passing, intraracial 
hatred, and self-hate. These issues were linked by the theme of 
identity, in which a "double" or dual consciousness existed within 
the black psyche. 


Two Minds, 
Two Worlds 


In 1903, W. E. B. Du Bois identified a "double consciousness" that 
evolved among black people as a protective shield against racial 
hatred (Du Bois 493). In The Souls of Black Folk: Essays and Sketches, 
Du Bois develops a concept of dualism that serves as a blueprint for 
understanding the novels of black authors in the early twentieth 
century. The African American was required to maintain a persona 
that fit the expectations of a superordinate white society, while 
denying his or her individuality. This dilemma created two para- 
mount questions for the African American: Who am I? What am I? 


Honor and Glory 
Deferred 


James Weldon Johnson's novel The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored 
Man (1912) is a work of fiction and not his personal autobiography. 
William L. Andrews, in his introduction to the novel, supports this 
contention and suggests that it may have been disguised as an 
autobiography to attract a wider white audience (xvi). Johnson's aim 
was to provide insight into the inner life of one man whose confron- 
tation with his racial heritage leads him to make a difficult choice 
about his identity. 

The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man describes the experi- 
ences of an anonymous narrator. As a young schoolboy, he discovers 
that he is black: 

. . . the principal came into our room and, after talking to the teacher, 
for some reason said: "I wish all of the white scholars to stand for a 
moment." I rose with the others. The teacher looked at me and, 



[ 



] 



35 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



calling my name, said: "You sit down for the present, and rise with 
the others." (10-11) 

When he returns home, his mother explains that she, though 
light-skinned, is black and his father white. Eventually the narrator 
embraces his black heritage and, upon graduating from high school, 
embarks on a journey to discover what it means to be black in 
America. His trip south takes him to Jacksonville, where he works as 
a cigar roller, then north to New York where he becomes a "Club 
habitue," gambling and honing his skills as a musician (75). 

While the narrator searches for his black roots, he examines 
the varieties of black life in its relation to white society. As someone 
who could easily pass for white, he perceives interracial antagonism 
as a matter of class rather than race. His experiences lead him to 
observe a disparity in the attitudes of northern and southern whites 
regarding blacks. He notes that northern whites "love the Negro in a 
sort of abstract way, as a race" but not as an individual. Southern 
whites "despise the Negro as a race" but have strong affection for 
certain individuals as long as they remain in their place (124-25). 

The protagonist perceives that the black man is forced to "take 
his outlook on all things, not from the viewpoint of a citizen, or a 
man, or even a human being, but from the viewpoint of a colored 
man" (14). With this awareness, the narrator sets out to bring "honor 
and glory to the Negro race" (63). His dream is to acquaint the world 
with the achievements of the black race, thereby disproving notions 
of racial inferiority. It will be a dream deferred. 

When the narrator witnesses the lynching of a black man in 
Macon, Georgia, he becomes so disturbed that he decides to return to 
New York as a white man. His "shame at being identified with a 
people that could ... be treated worse than animals" (139) justifies, 
he believes, his decision to "pass." In New York he marries a white 
woman who is initially unaware of his black heritage. As a white 
husband and father, the protagonist claims to be glad of his choice. 
Yet he is haunted by his unrealized dream to bring honor to the 
black race. He questions if he has not "sold his birthright for a mess 
of pottage" (154). Is his decision to pass cowardly or is it a justifiable 
act of self-preservation? Students might ask what forces prevail 
upon a person to defer his life's goal and deny the the essence of his 
being. 

A Bitter Berry "Whiter and whiter every generation." This is the motto of Emma 

Lou Morgan's family in Wallace Thurman's 1929 book The Blacker the 
Berry ... A Novel of Negro Life (12). Thurman addresses the theme of 
color snobbery among blacks with incisive wit in his gentle satire 
about Emma Lou, a girl much darker than the rest of her family. 



36 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



Emma Lou's family is so proud of their whiteness that her 
grandmother formed the "blue vein" society for Boise citizens of 
color, whose veins showed blue through their skin. In this semi- 
white world blacks are ridiculed and reviled. Thurman suggests that 
the pressure exerted by a color-conscious society creates a bias 
among black people that values light skin over dark. Although 
Emma Lou is ostracized by her family, she is also a snob. The effects 
of preferential treatment based on skin color often result in self-hate 
and disdain for one's own group. In accepting the bias by which she 
is rejected, Emma Lou unwittingly rejects herself. 

After a bitter experience at UCLA, where she is excluded by 
the light-skinned students, Emma Lou goes to New York. She finds 
work as a maid for a white actress playing a mulatto character, but 
Emma Lou refuses to work for the black understudy. When she 
becomes interested in joining the cast herself, she is turned down 
because her skin does not properly match the rest of the cast's. 

Emma Lou experiences many such instances of discrimination. 
Thurman's prose, however, is often deliberately ambiguous; he 
forces the reader to wonder how many of Emma Lou's suspicions 
are true and how many are the result of her extreme color-conscious- 
ness. 



Students might identify instances of discrimination or alleged 
discrimination as they appear throughout the story. Then the stu- 
dents can examine whether or not there is sufficient evidence to 
determine if these instances are real or imagined. For example, when 
Emma Lou attends a party and hears African Americans joking 
about being black, is Emma Lou's perception that they are referring 
to her a matter of oversensitivity or is her perception accurate? (See 
Part 4, "Rent Party.") Is it reasonable to suggest that blacks would 
discriminate against members of their own group? If so, why? 
Furthermore, such an activity may be used to lead students to 
explore instances of subtle or covert discrimination that are a major 
problem in today's society. 

Alva, a light-skinned black man who realizes that Emma Lou 
is lonely, exploits her sexually and financially. But Alva embodies 
Emma Lou's requirements for manliness and skin color. Eventually 
Alva tires of Emma Lou's obsession with skin color and breaks with 
her. It is not until Emma Lou is accepted into the light-skinned world 
of her friend Gwendolyn that she notices how deceiving were her 
notions of color snobbery. Emma Lou realizes that she cannot change 
her identity by associating with the "right sort" of people or by 
bleaching her skin. She becomes aware of the extent to which she has 
alienated herself from possible friendships and relationships. 

Emma Lou recognizes that she has been her own worst 
enemy, exercising the same discrimination against others that she 



: 



] 



37 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



has endured. She learns to accept the unchangeable reality of her 
skin color and, by accepting herself, Emma Lou begins to overcome 
her feelings of inferiority and self-hate. Emma Lou's insecurity and 
feelings of exclusion should easily lend themselves to exploration 
and discussion among secondary students. 

Black No More George S. Schuyler's Black No More: Being an Account of the Strange 

and Wonderful Workings of Science in the Land of the Free, A.D. 1933- 
1940 (1931) is a wicked satire that takes on the issues of racial preju- 
dice and turns them inside out. In this obscure tour de force, 
Schuyler describes a unique solution to the race problem in America. 

Dr. Junius Crookman discovers a way to turn black people 
white by inducing the pigment-destroying disease, vitiligo. For a 
mere fifty dollars, a black person can enter a Black-No-More, Incor- 
porated sanitarium and vanish three days later into white society. 
Because genetic structure is not altered, babies are still born black, 
but Crookman can fix them up right away in his chain of lying-in 
hospitals. Black banks collapse as thousands of people turn out to 
withdraw their money and take the treatment. "A lifetime of being 
Negroes in the United States had convinced them that there was 
great advantage in being white" (49). 

As blacks disappear, the foundations of black culture collapse. 
Churches, social clubs, businesses, and political organizations go 
under. The tenets of white supremacy crumble as well because there 
is no longer any reason for their existence. For those politicians, 
businesspeople, swindlers, profiteers, and citizens who benefit from 
racial segregation, the situation is a colossal disaster. 

Enter one Matthew Fisher, newly whitened, who, seeing his 
chance to make a fortune, ingratiates himself to Henry Givens, the 
Imperial Grand Wizard of the Knights of Nordica. Devoted to the 
maintenance of "white race integrity" (60), the Knights of Nordica is 
just the kind of organization that Matthew recognizes will grow and 
prosper in its efforts to keep racial boundaries from fading. He 
commences to play every side of the race question against the 
middle for profit. 

Because Matthew's graft depends upon the racial status quo, 
he bribes businessmen, buys politicians, exploits workers, and 
extorts cash from bosses to insure that the cash keeps rolling in. His 
primary target is, of course, Black-No-More, Incorporated, and his 
ultimate ambition is to become President of the United States. 

Schuyler deftly satirizes the bigotry and racial problems of the 
Jim Crow era. His convoluted plot, snappy, sarcastic dialogue, and 
devastating characterizations will appeal to secondary students. The 
novel lends itself easily to reading aloud and certain portions of it 
can be dramatized in the classroom. Its many satirical references and 



O 

ERLC 



50 



[ 



] 



38 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



implications can be introduced with humor and enthusiasm. The 
twisted plot and its unexpected conclusion provide a challenge to 
students and teachers alike. One way of dealing with the intricacies 
of the plot is to have students outline the flow of events. Students 
can be challenged to untangle the plot and identify the elements of 
satire within the novel. A more general issue to be addressed might 
be the role of humor in race and ethnic relations. Does it have a 
legitimate and positive role? If so, why? If not, why not? 

Rejecting Jim Crow I 11 African American literature the themes of identity and dual 

consciousness are perhaps nowhere more closely analyzed than in 
Richard Wright's autobiography. Black Boy (1945). Wright struggled 
with the extreme pressure of leading a double life where his intelli- 
gence, sense of humor, and desire to be a writer had to be hidden 
from white society. His intense hunger for knowledge and indepen- 
dence set Wright apart from his family and culture. Wright was 
unable to conform to the double standards of the Jim Crow South. 
Acutely aware of the effects of white hatred, he wrote, "Nothing 
challenged the totality of my personality so much as this pressure of 
hate and threat that stemmed from the invisible whites" (71). Wright 
also spoke candidly of the tension this pressure caused and how he 
had to learn to contain it within himself (195). He concluded that 
most blacks were not aware of their "special, separate, stunted way 
of life" (188). They had to close their minds and hearts to all that was 
prohibited by whites. 

Wright had difficulty employing the survival mechanisms of 
self-effacing gestures and behaviors of African Americans. These 
mechanisms served to mask their true motives and feelings. (Paul 
Laurence Dunbar's poem "We Wear the Mask," in Black Voices, 
provides a moving description of this dilemma.) Wright was unable 
to be anything other than himself, which infuriated whites. He 
declared that it was simply impossible for him to calculate, scheme, 
and dissemble as often as was necessary. 

The realities of Jim Crow are revealed as Wright recounts 
episodes of his early working life. Blacks were regarded as liars and 
thieves; they were often exploited and denigrated by bosses and co- 
workers. Wright tells of working in an optical business and looking 
forward to learning the trade. When a month passed and he still had 
not been shown how to grind lenses, he asked when he would be so 
instructed. His white co-workers immediately accused him of trying 
to "get smart" and "think . . . white," reminding him of his status as 
a "nigger" (180). The code of Jim Crow demanded that a black man 
never forget his place. 

Wright chafed under the paternalism of the Jim Crow South, 
where blacks were regarded as children. He also criticized those 




51 



39 



[ 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



Pride and 
Resistance 



blacks whose self-hatred was so entrenched that they demeaned 
themselves for a trifle, as did an elevator operator who allowed 
himself to be kicked for a quarter (55). Wright, as Du Bois before 
him, recognized that self-hatred was borne from a double conscious- 
ness. He noted with insight and compassion that 

the black man, responding to the same dreams as the white man, 
strove to bury within his heart his awareness of this difference 
because it made him lonely and afraid. ... So each part of his day 
would be consumed in a war with himself, a good part of his energy 
would be keeping control of his unruly emotions . . . continuously at 
war with reality. (253-54) 

For Wright, "Negro life was a sprawling land of unconscious 
suffering" and "psyche pain" (254). The psychological distance 
between blacks and whites, he believed, was the essential problem of 
racial antagonism. Wright's conclusion, like that of so many African 
Americans, was that he must put physical distance behind him in the 
South and head north, which symbolized the vision of freedom that 
he held (161). 

Wright died in 1960 when the civil rights movement was 
reaching its apex. His works and the works of others created a broad 
spectrum describing the attitudes and experiences of African Ameri- 
cans under Jim Crow. 

If one detects frustration and indignation in the works of black 
authors from about 1915, it should not come as a surprise. While Jim 
Crow in the South subjugated blacks and while violence, segrega- 
tion, and discrimination permeated much of the North, African 
Americans did not remain passive. Following 1915 and especially 
after the end of World War I, a number of African Americans began 
to assert themselves and to seek pride in their own race. This was 
especially true among black intellectuals. 

Two factors that played a major role in this development were 
the migration of blacks to the North and black participation in World 
War I. For many African Americans, the North symbolized freedom 
from Jim Crow and a greater opportunity to be truly free from 
oppression. Unfortunately, this was often not the case. As for return- 
ing black soldiers, one could only imagine their dismay that they 
were still regarded as "niggers" after serving their nation. Fighting 
for America was to be their gateway to equality and respect. Instead, 
in the words of Langston Hughes, they faced "the same old stupid 
plan of dog eat dog and of mighty crush the weak." (See "Let 
America Be America Again" in The Negro Caravan.) 

Black intellectuals touted pride in blackness and directed 
disdain and ridicule toward those African Americans who sought to 



[ 



] 



40 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



become as "white" as possible. This attitude is exemplifed by a 
number of works, including Schuyler's satiric Black No More. In 
addition, there arose a call for retaliation against the violence perpe- 
trated by whites against blacks. Claude McKay's poems "A Roman 
Holiday" and "If We Must Die" illustrate this call to militant defense. 
Although the intellectuals' position was not accepted by many 
blacks, it did create a diversity of perceptions and behaviors among 
African Americans. 

An exciting activity for learners would be to search newspa- 
pers (e.g.. The New York Tunes, Washington Post, Chicago Tribune, and 
local papers where archives are available in the library) between 
June and December of 1919 — the year of America's major "race 
wars." The information obtained from news accounts can be com- 
pared with the works of authors such as McKay. 

Too often accounts of victims and their oppressors portray the 
former as passive. For example, the general public often assumes 
that Jews and other victims of the Holocaust merely accepted their 
plight without resistance. Neither this nor a similar perception of 
African Americans during the Jim Crow period is accurate. When 
people perceive that they are able to resist oppression, sooner or 
later, when all else fails, they will do so. 



Instructional 

Suggestions 



After reviewing and selecting novels and related literature, teachers 
might consider instructional strategies designed for the study of Jim 
Crow and racism in America. A basic model and suggested activities 
are presented below. 

An instructional model designed to enhance learning about 
Jim Crow from a literary perspective should include three basic 
stages: (1) background information on the emergence of Jim Crow, 

(2) literary works, and (3) wrap-up and grounding. Within the model 
there can be extensions to any other topic. 

In this model, we suggest that teachers begin with a historical 
overview of Jim Crow. The most important feature should include a 
connection between the rise of racial separation and race relations in 
America today. While there are many ways to introduce the histori- 
cal setting, a rarely used approach is the counter-chronological. 
Basically, the teacher introduces a current topic. Students discuss and 
examine it in terms of the near and now. Then the teacher either 
slowly works back using a chronological chart or the teacher may 
jump back in time to the antebellum period. In race relations educa- 
tion, almost any major concept can be used to introduce the instruc- 
tion. For example, a teacher might ask, "What type of equality was 
Justice Harlan speaking of when he said, 'Our Constitution is color- 
blind'?" Followed with directed discussion, it should take very little 




53 



41 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



effort to move the students to a time when America not only had 
inequality, but a very crude form of slavery 

During the historical overview lesson, students should list the 
particulars of segregated life under Jim Crow. At the completion of 
the overview, each student should be asked to evaluate the impact of 
the items listed on both white and black populations. "If you were 
black (white), how would you be affected by Jim Crow? How would 
your world be different?" Through the use of directed discussion the 
teacher can guide the students 7 attention to those works selected for 
instructional purposes. 

During the second stage of the model, students may pursue 
some activities related to the readings. These activities are designed 
to supplement suggestions already made in the discussion of the 
novels. They are, by necessity, generic since not all of the novels 
suggested in the essay may be assigned. 

Looking for Stigmas. This activity requires students to identify 
experiences of characters in the novel and to relate these experiences 
to social, political, or economic stigmas resulting from them. The 
stigmatizing experience also might be connected to some Jim Crow 
custom or law. 

Change Making. Working in groups of two or three, each student is 
put in the role of an omnipotent force or being. He or she can change 
one and only one event or experience of a novel's character. Each 
student initiates the change and explains how it affects the outcome 
of the novel. The students review each other's papers and determine 
whether the change is viable and logical. 

Finding Common Threads. Students search for common threads 
among experiences of characters in different novels. For instance, 
could the actions of the "Ex-Colored Man" and Emma Lou Morgan 
(The Blacker the Berry) be connected by the thread of self-hate? Once 
these threads are identified, the students link their findings to the 
world of Jim Crow. 

Putting Authors on Trial. Students are assigned to one of five roles: 
judge (1), prosecution team (2 — 4), defendants (2-3), attorney for the 
defendants (2-3), jury members (7-9), witnesses (8-10). The authors 
of two to three novels have been accused of writing works that 
endanger the general welfare of the people. The witnesses for the 
prosecution and defense sides are characters from their novels. The 
year is 1919 — the year of the great race wars. The prosecution must 
establish its case based upon the following fictional law: 

It is prohibited for any person or persons to write or have published 

any book or work that defames, challenges, or criticizes the estab- 



O 

ERIC 



54 



42 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



Conclusions 



o 

ERLC 



lished rule of separate but equal, or whose words incite a person or 
persons to act violently or threaten the general welfare and peace of 
society. Punishment for violation of this law may not exceed twenty- 
five years in the federal penitentiary. 



Students should be encouraged to research the events of 1919 related 
to race relations in the United States. Reference to these cases and 
other literary works can be included in the case. Incidentally, the 
teacher should feel free to adapt an actual law or to create her or his 
own. 



The wrap-up and grounding stage asks for students and 
teachers to evaluate their learning experience in terms of present-day 
race relations. It is the time for reflection and linking to the real 
world. 



Because slavery was abolished at the end of the Civil War, one might 
think that African Americans should have achieved parity with 
mainstream American society. After all, some might argue, did not 
the bulk of European immigrants, who arrived at the turn of the 
century, overcome poverty and pull themselves up by their boot- 
straps within two or three generations? Although blacks were freed 
over 135 years ago, slavery was replaced by Jim Crowism that 
regulated blacks to a subordinate caste. It has been only one genera- 
tion since the demise of Jim Crow and the removal of explicit legal 
barriers. Furthermore, Jim Crowism created and reinforced an 
enduring bigotry that continues to manifest itself in acts of covert 
discrimination. An understanding of the rise and effects of Jim 
Crowism is essential if we are to understand and seek to resolve the 
basic issues of black-white relations today. 

This essay has introduced some of the missing pages of Ameri- 
can literature as it relates to the development of race relations in 
America — missing in the sense that they are seldom read or utilized. 
They are pages that may provide a better understanding of 
America's longest and most enduring conflict, a conflict that has 
stigmatized all of its citizens. 

The literary works presented above serve as a pivotal point for 
further exploration into Jim Crowism during the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries. 2 Teachers also might consider the works of 
Paulette Williams (Ntozake Shange), Zora Neale Hurston, Mildred 
D. Taylor, Eldridge Cleaver, Ralph Ellison, and James Baldwin, 
among others. An extremely useful resource for teachers is Master- 
pieces of African-American Literature (Magill, 1992) that provides 
descriptions, analyses, and themes of works by such authors. Three 
anthologies that also should prove helpful are The Negro Caravan 



55 



43 



Notes 



Table 1 . 



I 

After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



(Brown and Davis, 1969), Black Voices: An Anthology of Afro-American 
Literature (Chapman, 1968), and African American Literature: An 
Anthology of Nonfiction, Fiction, Poetry, and Drama (Worley and Perry, 
1993). Another valuable source of information may be the Center for 
Documentary Studies at Duke University. This center is relatively 
new, but should be an excellent source for first-person accounts of 
African American life under Jim Crow. 

As for Jim Crow, if one should ask who "he" was, the answer 
is not hard to find. Jim Crow was more than laws and ordinances, 
more than customs and rites of behavior, more than a cultural life- 
form. Jim Crow was America. 



1. Taken from The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official 
Records of the Union and Confederate Armies. Series I, Volume 1, Serial No. 1, 
p. 14. Washington, D. C.: Government Printing Office, 1880. 

2. With the exception of Appointed, the novels discussed in this essay 
may be available at public and university libraries. Below is a list of places 
where teachers might be able to order copies of some of these novels. 



Title 


Publisher 


A Royal Gentleman 


Irvington Publishers 
Lower Mill Road 
N. Stratford, NH 03590 
(603-922-5105) 


Bricks without 
Straw 


Irvington Publishers 


Invisible Empire 


Irvington Publishers 


A Fool's Errand 


Harvard University Press 
79 Garden Street 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
(800-448-2242) 


Appointed 


AMS Press 

56 E. 13th Street 

New York, NY 10003-4686 

(212-777-4700) 


Black No More 


Northeastern University Press 
360 Huntington Avenue 416 CP 
Boston, MA 02115 
(800-666-2211) 



3 



Milton Kleg and Celia Bard 



References Bickley, R. Bruce Jr., Karen L. Bickley, and Thomas H. English. Joel Chandler 

Harris. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1978. 

Bowers, Claude G. The Tragic Era: The Revolution After Lincoln. Cambridge, 
MA: Houghton Mifflin, 1929. 

Brown, Sterling A., Arthur P. Davis, and Ulysses Lee, eds. The Negro Cara- 
van. New York: Arno Press & New York Times, 1970. 

Chapman, Abraham, ed. Black Voices: An Anthology of Afro-American Litera- 
ture. New York: New American Library, 1968. 

Dixon, Thomas Jr. The Clansman. New York: Doubleday, Page & Company, 
1905. 

Du Bois, W. E. B. "The Souls of Black Folk: Of Our Spiritual Strivings." In 
Black Voices: An Anthology of Afro-American Literature, edited by 
Abraham Chapman. New York: New American Library, 1968. 

Griffith, D. W. The Birth of a Nation. 1915. 187 minutes. Kino On Video 
Edition. 

Gross, Theodore L. Albion W. Tourgee. New York: Twayne, 1963. 

. Thomas Nelson Page. New York: Twayne, 1967. 

Guttman, Herbert G. The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925. 
New York: Pantheon, 1976. 

Harris, Joel Chandler. Gabriel Tolliver. New York: McClure, Phillips & 
Company, 1902. 

Johnson, James Weldon. The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man. 1912. 

Reprint. Edited by William L. Andrews. New York: Penguin, 1990. 

Kemble, Frances Anne. Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation in 1838- 
1839. Athens, GA: The University of Georgia Press, 1984. 

Kennedy, Stetson. Jim Crow Guide : The Way It Was. Boca Raton, FL: Florida 
Atlantic University Press, 1990. 

Kleg, Milton. Hate Prejudice and Racism. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1993. 

Page, Thomas Nelson. The Old South: Essays Social and Political. Chautauqua, 
NY: The Chautauqua Press, 1919. 

Plessy v. Ferguson. 163 U.S. 537 (1896): Dissenting Opinion: Harlan, J. 552-63. 

Rabinowitz, Howard N. Race Relatiojts in the Urban South. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1978. 

Riggs, Marlon, dir. Ethnic Notions. California Newsreel, 1987. 

Schuyler, George S. Black No More: Being an Account of the Strange and 

Wonderful Workings of Science in the Land of the Free, A. D. 1933-1940. 
1931. Reprint. College Park, MD: McGrath, 1969. 

Stowers, Walter H., and William H. Anderson, (SANDA). Appointed. Detroit: 
Detroit Law Printing Company, 1894. 

Thurman, Wallace. The Blacker the Berry ... A Novel of Negro Life. 1929. 
Reprint. New York: Collier, 1970. 



0 

FRIC 



57 



45 



After Freedom: Jim Crow in Life and Literature 



Tourgee, Albion W. Toinette: A Tale of the South. New York: Fords, Howard & 
Hulbert, 1879. 

. A Fool's Errand. New York: Fords, Howard, & Hulbert, 1880. 

. Bricks Without Straw. New York: Fords, Howard, & Hulbert, 1880. 

. The Invisible Empire. New York: Fords, Howard, & Hulbert, 1883. 

Tuttle, William M. Jr. Race Riot: Chicago in the Red Summer of 1919. New York: 
Atheneum, 1970. 

Wright, Richard. Black Boy (American Hunger). 1945. Reprint. New York: The 
Library of America, 1984. 

Woodward, C. Vann. The Strange Career of Jim Crow. London: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1966. 

Worley, Demetrice A., and Jesse Perry Jr. African American Literature: An 

Anthology of Nonfiction, Fiction , Poetry , and Drama. Lincolnwood, IL: 
National Textbook Company, 1993. 



O 

ERIC 



5S 




Noticing The Color 
Purple: Personalizing 

the Invisible 

Mari M. McLean 

Columbus Public Schools, Columbus, Ohio 
Christine M. Gibson 

Columbus Public Schools, Columbus, Ohio 



Introduction: 
Educating for 
Diversity 



"God love all them feelings. That's some of the best stuff God did. 
God made it . . . [j]ust wanting to share a good thing. I think it pisses 
God off if you walk by the color purple in a field somewhere and 
don't notice it." Thus, Shug tries to explain to Celie, in Alice 
Walker's novel The Color Purple (1982), why their love for each other 
is not sinful. According to Shug, all of the diversity of creation is a 
gift from God that is to be noticed and appreciated and accepted. 

Celebrating the diversity found in the United States has been a 
theme in American society for some time now. In a literate and 
multicultural society such as ours, books are powerful vehicles for 
conveying images of diversity. Largely due to the impact of 
multicultural education and multicultural literature, teachers today 
are "increasingly recognizing the role of . . . literature in shaping 
attitudes ..." (Norton, "Language and Cognitive Development" 

103). 

Good multicultural literature is thought to provide both a 
mirror to validate a group's experiences and knowledge, and a 
window through which those experiences and knowledge can be 
viewed — and perhaps more important, understood — by "outsiders" 
(Cox and Galda). It provides an invaluable opportunity for teachers 
and students to glimpse the lives of "the Other," to know for a time 
what it feels like to be a member of a group that is not in the main- 
stream. Through literature, wrote one group of children's literature 
experts, the reader "will experience . . . other life styles; he may 
identify with others or find his own self-identity; he may observe 
from a different perspective; . . . [and] feel he belongs to one segment 
of all humanity" (Huck 4). 



47 



Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 



The Tolerated 
Intolerance 



Educators and theorists (c.f. Rosenblatt, Sims-Bishop, and Cox and 
Galda) advocate the use of literature as a means of heightening our 
awareness of others' perceptions and experiences, and of sensitizing 
us to our common humanity. As we become more sensitive to our 
commonalities, we also become more aware of the injustice, and of 
the danger and destructiveness, of intolerance. 

Teachers have been cautioned since the late '70s by 
multicultural educators such as Banks, Garcia, and Austin and 
Jenkins to avoid hurtful and hateful racial, ethnic, or gender slurs, to 
call for equality of opportunity and fair treatment, and to champion 
the right of all people to live in dignity. Yet even as we recognize the 
need to teach our students about tolerance, and to warn them about 
the damage intolerance can do to the fabric of a democratic society, 
one intolerance, homophobia, continues to be virulent in the United 
States. Despite this fact, many multicultural educators ignore it, and 
few teachers or students, as gay activist teacher Eric Rofes notes, feel 
comfortable, or safe, addressing it in classrooms. 

Homophobia remains largely unrecognized as a dangerously 
prejudiced attitude that contributes to institutionalized discrimina- 
tion and even violence against lesbian and gay Americans. Too many 
people, including some of those most emphatic in their stance 
against acts of discrimination and oppression, refuse to recognize or 
admit that homophobia in our schools can lead to discrimination 
against individual students and teachers. Multicultural educator 
Ricardo Garcia, for example, failed to include homophobia in a list of 
biases which, he says, must be eradicated from classrooms. How 
hypocritical to emphasize the importance of being sensitive to 
diversity and vigilant about intolerance, and then be selective about 
which groups merit tolerance and justice and which do not. 

The oppression of lesbians and gays "is usually the last op- 
pression to be mentioned, the last to be taken seriously, and the last 
to go. But it is extremely serious, sometimes to the point of being 
fatal" (Smith 7). Because of homophobia, gay and lesbian Americans 
continue to be the one segment in our society that can be victimized 
with relative impunity. Lesbians and gays are assaulted, brutalized, 
and even murdered while many Americans remain indifferent and a 
few give such actions their outright approval. Even when gays and 
lesbians are not victims of others' brutality, they may sometimes turn 
society's hatred on themselves: a study by the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services (1989) found that lesbian and gay 
teenagers attempt and accomplish suicide at a significantly higher 
rate than that of the teenage population generally. 



0 

ERIC 



60 



48 



Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson 



Overcoming 

intolerance: 

Theory into 
Practice 



The theoretical value of literature as a means to sensitize readers to 
the Other may be a popular idea among educators, but what are the 
practical implications of the theory, especially when it is applied to 
dealing with a specific and often deeply ingrained prejudice such as 
homophobia? In an article in the Journal of Reading, Wayne Otto 
proposed the value of using a specific piece of literature to blend the 
theory into practice. In his article, Otto described a graduate level 
course on issues in reading education in which he planned to include 
a discussion of teacher Roberta Hammett's (1992) attempts to incor- 
porate gay and lesbian literature into the twelfth-grade curriculum. 
Although the class, according to Otto, had been very thoughtful and 
talkative about a variety of issues such as race, class, and gender 
stereotyping and censorship in classrooms, when it came to discuss- 
ing the Hammitt article, the class "suddenly fell — not entirely si- 
lent — [but] let's say noticeably subdued” (494). Otto suggests that his 
usually talkative graduate students' reluctance to discuss the impor- 
tance of addressing and combating homophobia might be attributed 
to their lack of understanding about homosexuality, and the belief of 
most of them that they did not know any lesbians or gays personally. 

After the class, one of his students brought Otto a copy of 
Nancy Garden's Annie on My Mind (1982) and suggested he read it. 
Otto recognized, upon reading this "well told story of what happens 
when two teenage girls . . . begin to realize that they have feelings of 
love for each other" (494) that talking about an issue is not sufficient: 
Educating people about and sensitizing them to their prejudices and 
intolerance must involve giving the Other a face. In the perceived 
absence of real faces, Otto believes that a piece of literature can 
supply a "true and accurate picture" of those people and their 
experiences about which we think we have no knowledge. 

As with Otto's graduate students and, indeed, with many 
Americans, homosexuality remains the human condition that has no 
face. This is, of course, because the majority of gay and lesbian 
people can and must remain invisible in order to avoid rejection and 
persecution in a hostile society. Invisibility leads to the promulgation 
and continuation of distortions and lies that in the least are hurtful 
and at their worst ruin and destroy lives. Unfortunately for lesbian 
and gay teenagers, and for some of their teachers, ". . . the high 
school — the center of most adolescent life and culture — stands 
staunchly aloof and rigidly resistant to even a suggestion that any of 
its faculty or student body might be homosexual or that homosexu- 
als deserve anything but derision and scorn within its walls. High 
schools may be the most homophobic institutions in American 
society. . ."(Unks 5). 



ERiC 



61 



49 



: 



] 



Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 



Theory info 
Practice in an 
American 
Literature CSass 

Background 



Confronting deeply ingrained prejudices of any kind can be difficult 
for teachers, and confronting homophobia, the most "acceptable" 
prejudice, in one of the most homophobic institutions takes a great 
deal of determination and courage. The remainder of this article 
describes the way in which Chris, a public high school English 
teacher in Columbus, Ohio, actually practices Otto's suggestion, 
using literature to personalize homosexuality, to give gays and 
lesbians "a face," and to help students understand the injustices that 
go unaddressed because of homophobia. 

The class consisted of thirty-five eleventh graders enrolled in a 
required American Literature course. It reflected the makeup of the 
urban school, an almost even mix of white and black students from 
both low-income socioeconomic backgrounds and middle-class 
backgrounds. In addition, at least six of the students had personal 
knowledge about and experiences with lesbians, gays, or bisexuals. 

Chris, an English /language arts teacher of fifteen years, 
sincerely believes that literature is a viable means by which she can 
help her students move beyond their narrow frames of reference and 
broaden their perspectives on and appreciation for all aspects of the 
human condition. Chris attributes her own open-minded acceptance 
to her mother, who welcomed all varieties of people, including gays 
and lesbians, into their home, which she often referred to as "the 
United Nations." "My mom," said Chris, "taught me to be respectful 
of all people, and she taught me best by example. If she ever wit- 
nessed examples of prejudice or intolerance, she addressed them 
directly and firmly, making it very clear that such behavior wasn't 
acceptable. If I hear something in my classroom, if someone calls 
someone a nigger or a fag. I'm going to call them on that; I'm going 
to talk about it right there!" 

Still, as Chris readily admits. 

Talking can go in one ear and out the other, but with literature, it's 
more involved; it requires the reader's attention and thought. That's 
the power of literature. Stories provide a safe place in which to 
discuss one's own situation in terms of someone else. If a student is 
being abused, for instance, she may not feel safe to talk about herself, 
but she can talk about it in context of the story. And, she can even see 
that if a character, like Celie, can survive this, then she can survive. 
That's why I feel so strongly about literature and what it does for all 
of our children sitting in the classroom: black, white, gay, straight, 
agnostic, religious. 



| "Celie, after all the years of abuse and acceptance, finally realized that her fate 
| was never sealed. The life she lives is hers, and no one else will make choices for 
! her anymore. 

! Student journal j 



O 

UC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



62 



50 



Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson 



In order to ensure that her students "hear" the voices of all 
Americans, especially those marginalized ones, Chris often departs 
from the prescribed curriculum, supplementing it with novels and 
short stories by and about those whose writing and experiences are 
rarely included in the canon. Her overriding goal is to bring about "a 
heightened sensitivity to the needs of all people in American soci- 
ety" (Norton, Through Children's Eyes 502), and her eleventh-grade 
American Literature curriculum is truly representative of the variety 
of American life and culture. 

Concerns about justice and equity are part of nearly every 
discussion, as are discussions about how a person's perspectives are 
affected by his or her experiences. "I have an agenda," she says, 

and my agenda is to help students have respect for all people, so that 
all people are treated fairly. We talk about Native Americans, slavery, 
what happened to the Asian Americans who worked to build the 
railroads, the Appalachians in the mines, the Japanese Americans in 
the internment camps. It is my agenda to make them think about 
others. 

Choosing a Novel Alice Walker's The Color Purple is Chris's choice for an American 

novel whose characters (Celie and Shug) allow her students to 
"know" two people whose lives are improved and enhanced by the 
experience of lesbian love and commitment. By giving lesbianism a 
face through a piece of literature, Chris enables her students to 
discuss homosexuality and confront homophobia "safely" within the 
context of response and discussion. Because students get a glimpse 
of another perspective, they can talk about homosexuality and 
homophobia with more knowledge, understanding, and compassion 
than most of them had prior to reading this novel. "It is a way to talk 
about homophobia, and," she notes, "teenagers are especially ho- 
mophobic." 

Although Chris selected The Color Purple to be read by the 
class primarily as a means of personalizing homosexuality, she uses 
the novel in order to sensitize students to a number of other issues. 
She explained her reasons for choosing this book in an interview: 

There are some key things in the book that I wanted to address 
safely. I know there are some homophobic feelings, as well as 
teenagers dealing with their own sexuality, and I thought the book 
would provide an avenue where they could work out some of those 
issues. Then there's the subject of abuse. There are a lot of teenagers 
who are in abusive relationships or abusive homes; sexual and 
physical abuse. Certainly themes in the book are consistent with 
other themes we study in American Literature. The American 
Dream, for example; Celie pulls herself up by the bootstraps. And I 
liked the format, the letter writing. I think it's something many of the 



O 

ERIC 



63 



51 



Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 



kids haven't seen before in a book. Also, individual kids have read 
the book over the years and they've told me they liked it. That was a 
big factor. 

Chris recognizes that The Color Purple has a number of themes, and 
agrees that the heart of the story is Celie's personal growth and her 
achievement of self-respect and independence. However, she main- 
tains that Shug's love for Celie was "the catalyst for Celie's growth," 
and that, therefore, the theme of lesbian love is the heart of the story. 
Chris's view is upheld by Carl Dix (cited in Walker, The Same River 
Twice), who wrote of Celie's and Shug's relationship: "Celie's rela- 
tionship to Shug was central to her transformation. ... It was 
through getting to know Shug that Celie came alive (194). 



1 "Celie's relationship with Shug was a turning point in her life. ...Celie found 
i tremendous growth through her relationship with Shug . " 

Student journal 

Indeed, for those readers who might want to downplay the 
importance of the lesbian relationship in The Color Purple, there is 
Walker's own assertion that the sexual love between Shug and Celie 
was central to her book. Walker chronicles the filming of the novel in 
The Same River Twice (1996), noting she had to argue with the movie 
makers (who tried to downplay and even ignore the homoerotic 
relationship so explicit in the novel) to include "the kiss." "I regret," 
she writes, "that Shug and Celie don't have the erotic, sensuous 
relationship they deserve" (41). "It was important to me that Shug 
and Celie be portrayed [in the film] as the lovers they are. ... I knew 
that the passion of Celie and Shug's relationship would be sacrificed 
when, on the day 'the kiss' was shot, Quincy [Jones, the producer] 
reassured me that Steven [Spielberg, the director] had shot it 'five or 
six' different ways, all of them 'tasteful'" (219). 



A Pedagogical 
Approach 



Nearly all literature discussions in Chris's classrooms begin with 
responses that students record in their literature journals. Responses 
to a section of the novel vary in length, from a paragraph to one or 
two pages. The point of the response is to get some thought, no 
matter how brief, in writing where it can become a springboard for a 
more lengthy response, either in a class discussion or as part of an 
essay. 

The rule is that no one has to publicly share these responses, 
but it is understood that Chris will read them. She often responds in 
writing to students' questions, concerns, and ideas about a text 
raised in the journals, or uses the journal to continue part of a class 
discussion with certain students. She sometimes uses an anonymous 
student's written response to launch the next day's discussion. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



04 



52 



Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson 



Although no one has to share thoughts publicly, Chris's 
skillful ability to establish a learning community characterized by 
mutual trust and respect (as detailed in an earlier study by McLean) 
encourages students to risk openly expressing their honest ideas 
about texts, even when those ideas concern a controversial topic. 

"We talk about everything!" Chris says, and when observing Chris's 
class, one is struck by the way in which students listen respectfully 
to each other, and are able to debate without being sarcastic or cruel. 

Chris's "agenda" includes helping students to understand that 
one's experiences often define and explain the individual's beliefs 
and behaviors. But she admits she makes a conscious effort to 
broaden students' perspectives about the experiences of homosexual 
people in particular, since the uniqueness of their life experience is 
rarely understood by mainstream America. 

There are other things we do, other short stories that we use. When I 
taught Walt Whitman, I talked about him being homosexual. A 
student once said, "That was a little more information than we 
needed to know." And I said, "Oh, really? Haven't we talked all year 
about what the author brings to his or her writing? Do you think that 
the fact Whitman was a homosexual has anything to do with what 
he wrote? You can't separate the two; it's who he was." 



! "The point of Shag and Celie being intimate was an important one , one that 
i showed Celie how to become a woman, her own person . " j 

j Student journal j 

However, Chris is sensitive to her students, and does not 
"force" the theme of lesbian love when teaching The Color Purple . 
Rather, she lets the students initiate the topic, and, she says, "They 
always do!" Certainly, she encounters resistance to accepting homo- 
sexuality as part of the human condition. In most instances, Chris 
tries to get students to put themselves in the character's place. She 
frequently punctuates all literature discussions with rhetorical 
statements such as, "Think about that. Can you imagine what 
[character's name] must have felt in that situation?" 



"Shug unleashed emotions in Celie, and helped her overcome her weaknesses and \ 
stand up for herself Celie was a recognized person when she was with Shug/' 

Student journal ■ 



One very effective way in which this was done was in response to 
several students questioning how Celie could fall in love with a 
woman. "How could she do that?" they asked with some disgust. 
Seizing the opportunity, Chris got students to brainstorm a list of 
things Celie got from her relationship with men, and then asked 




65 



53 



i 

Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 



them to brainstorm a second list of things she got from her relation- 
ship with Shug. The resulting lists, created entirely by the class's 
efforts, were a contrast between negatives and positives. Pointing to 
all of the good things that happened to Celie once Shug came into 
her life, Chris asked simply, "Do you see any reason why Celie 
wouldn't have fallen in love with Shug?" She then went on to say, "It 
seems natural to me that there would be a relationship between Celie 
and Shug: Shug is the only person who Celie trusted, the only one 
who shows her kindness and respect." The tone of the class indi- 
cated that the lists had provided an entirely new perspective for 
most of the students. 



"Celie wanted to be strong, confident and independent like Shug. Shug gave her 
back some of the hope and self-worth that her stepfather and Albert had taken 
away from her . " 

Student journal 

Chris admits that there are some students who will not permit 
themselves to be open to a different perspective. Depending on the 
type of remark, or on the student involved, Chris responds in vari- 
ous ways. Often, within the context of the class discussion, Chris 
merely asks, "Have you had a bad experience? Did a gay person 
approach you? Why are you so homophobic?" In one instance, a 
student declared he would not read The Color Purple, saying em- 
phatically, "This is sick." In this instance, Chris talked to the student 
privately, encouraging him to finish the book before "making judg- 
ments." She urged him to consider the whole story, not just isolated 
incidents. The student did finish reading the book, but continued to 
maintain his homophobic view. However, even the most homopho- 
bic students, Chris notes, recognize that the story is about Celie's 
transformation as a result of Shug's love. They also never fail to 
credit Shug's love for Celie as pivotal to that transformation. "I'm so 
amazed. Even though they may 'ooh' and 'aah' about Celie's and 
Shug's relationship, still they are able to describe it for what it was; 
they are still insightful about how integral that was to Celie's 
growth." 



"Celie found her courage through Shug. She gave Celie back her sexuality, 
innocence, beauty, strength, and courage. She gave her the opportunity to leave 
Albert and Celie took it." 

Student journal 

Students also begin to appreciate how society's homophobia 
gets played out in some very subtle ways. This year, students begged 
Chris to see the film version of The Color Purple after they finished 



O 

ERIC 



BEST COPY AV AI LABLE' 



66 



54 



The Threat of 
Censorship 



o 

ERIC 



□ 

Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson 



the novel. "Right away, the students recognized that the movie had 
sanitized Celie's and Shug's relationship. We talked about why the 
film maker would do this, and they realized that people's homopho- 
bia might keep them from seeing the movie, and cut into the movie's 
profits." 

Chris has used Walker's novel for the past three years, and finds that 
"reading and discussing the book has always been a great experi- 
ence, for both the students and myself!" She admits that initially she 
was fearful of possible repercussions, and that she was "warned" by 
other teachers not to use it (primarily because of the lesbianism), 
although she knew of no one else in the district who taught it. Chris 
says she has asked teachers why they do not include the book in 
their curriculum, and the response is always that they are afraid of 
parents' complaints. 

Although Chris has had several parents talk with her person- 
ally about their concerns, only one parent has bypassed Chris and 
complained directly to the principal about the book, saying it should 
not even be permitted on an independent reading list, let alone read 
by an entire class. Those parents who have approached Chris have 
all cited the lesbian relationship as the source of their concerns and 
objections. To each parent, Chris carefully explains that her overrid- 
ing purpose is to help students recognize and eradicate sources of 
their own prejudices and intolerance. She asks parents to read the 
book and to return for a discussion with her or to recommend an 
alternative novel. Interestingly, in most of these cases, parents have 
come to Chris after the class has finished the book, which bears out 
Chris's belief that "kids know their parents, and if they think they 
won't approve, they don't let them know what they're reading in 
class." 

Part of Chris's ability to fend off objections and to continue 
using the novel comes from her strong personal and literary appre- 
ciation of The Color Purple. It is very important, she believes, for a 
teacher to feel deeply and be able to articulate her own response to a 
possibly controversial piece of literature so that she can defend its 
use with real conviction. When she first read the book, Chris's 
response was "intense." She remembers crying on the first page. 

There were so many parts that made me so sad for Celie. I was 
bothered so much by the violations she endured: her children being 
taken away; the mental and physical abuse; her ignorance: she didn't 
even know she was supposed to have an orgasm. I wondered if Alice 
Walker had experienced any of this. 

In fact, a strong point of the novel when dealing with those who 
criticize its use is its biographical aspects. Walker notes in The Same 



67 



55 



Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 



River Twice that Celie's and Mister's relationship is based on that of 
her grandparents, with whom Walker lived for a time. Walker's 
grandmother actually addressed her abusive husband (who loved 
another woman all of their married life) as "Mister." Celie's and 
Shug's relationship is based on Walker's own experiences as a 
bisexual, and on her "deep love of and reverence for women" (27). 



Summary 



The "formula" for teaching about homophobia appears simple: class 
discussions based on journal entries. In fact, it relies heavily on the 
complex combination of a teacher's courage, commitment, sensitiv- 
ity, and good judgment. Basically, Chris's approach to teaching about 
intolerance involves five practical and theoretical points: 



1 . Be sure that students recognize the importance from the first day 
of class of being alert to issues of justice and equity for all people, 
and of honoring differing perspectives. 

2. Frame discussions of difficult issues within the (safe) context of a 
piece of literature. 

3. Use daily response journals to help focus thinking, enabling ideas, 
questions, and concerns to emerge through writing. Use these as the 
basis for class discussion and/ or as a vehicle for dialoging with 
individual students through writing. 

4. Allow discussions about difficult issues to emerge from the 
students; do not force a topic. 

5. Save really difficult issues, such as homophobia, until later in the 
year when a sense of community has been established in the class- 
room. 



Conclusion) Chris'S commitment to including The Color Purple was strengthened 
greatly this year by three incidents. First, two lesbian parents from 
different families came to school to thank Chris for using this book, 
and for having the courage to discuss lesbianism and homophobia 
openly. Second, one of Chris's male students actually "came out" 
during one of the discussions, referring to himself as bisexual. Third, 
six of Chris's thirty-five students admitted to the class that they lived 
with a gay, lesbian, or bisexual parent, and all made clear their pride 
in and love for that parent. One popular male football player told the 
class that what defined his own culture — and positively influenced 
his values and who he is — was his mother's bisexuality. Chris felt 
the best about the students who openly and positively acknowl- 
edged their gay, lesbian, or bisexual parents to others because this 
personalized the Other more than any character in a book. 



0 

ERIC 



68 



56 



[ 



Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson 



The kids actually know their friend's parent; they know a gay 
person. Usually when they discuss homosexuality, it's always "out 
there" or it's "them" over there. Now they're talking openly about it 
and they start to think, "Well, yeah, she's gay, but that's Jerry's mom, 
and we know her. We know she's not a 'bad' person." 



Chris admits that because she makes her commitment to 
multiple perspectives, to tolerance, and to eradicating oppression so 
clear, it is likely that some students parrot back what they think she 
wants to hear. However, she feels that when an issue rarely gets 
addressed rationally, the act of a reasonable discussion in and of 
itself, which might open some minds, is what really counts. She 
believes that "the best thing" that has come from her efforts is that 
those students in her classroom who are lesbian or gay are hearing 
others talk in positive ways about homosexuals. Students, both 
straight and gay, now speak up on behalf of gays and lesbians, and 
confront students who make homophobic remarks. One female 
student demanded of a male student, "Why do you hate me so?'' 

The student protested that he didn't hate her, but she persisted: "Yes, 
you do. You just called me every name under the sun. How do you 
think I feel about that? How do you think I feel about you?" From 
that point on, the student has not been heard to make a homophobic 
remark. Chris thinks that the female student, by referring to herself, 
personalized homosexuality and forced her fellow student to rethink 
his attitude. 

Chris admits that teaching about homophobia is not easy or 
comfortable. 



It's still the touchy subject to bring up in your classroom. It's still the 
taboo; the subject to avoid. However, as my friends and students are 
affected, how can I not teach about this? I would be hypocritical not 
to. 

The world, Chris believes, will be a better place if we can all be less 
judgmental and more accepting of others. 



References Austin, Mary C., and Esther C. Jenkins. Promoting World Understanding 

through Literature. Littleton: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., 1983. 

Banks, James A. "Shaping the Future of Multicultural Education." Journal of 
Negro Education 48 (Summer 1979): 237-52. 

Cox, Susan, and Lee Galda. "Multicultural Literature: Mirrors and Win- 
dows on a Global Community." The Reading Teacher 43.8 (1990): 582- 
89. 

Garcia, Ricardo. "Countering Classroom Discrimination." Theory into 
Practice 23.2 (1984): 104-9. 



O 

ERIC 



69 



57 



c 



Noticing The Color Purple: Personalizing the Invisible 



. Teaching in a Pluralistic Society. New York: Harper and Row, 1982. 

Hammett, Roberta. "A Rationale and Unit Plan for Introducing Gay and 
Lesbian Literature into the Grade Twelve Curriculum." In Becoming 
Political: Readings and Writings in the Politics of Literacy Education. Ed. 
P. Shannon. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1992. 

Huck, Charlotte S., Susan I. Hepler, and Janet Hickman. Children's Literature 
in the Elementary School. 4th ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1987. 

McLean, Mari Margaret. The Plight of the At-Risk Teacher: Perceptions of 

Teaching and Learning in Urban High Schools. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. The Ohio State University, 1991. 

Norton, Donna E. "Language and Cognitive Development through 

Multicultural Literature." Childhood Education 62.2 (1985):103-8. 

. Through the Eyes of a Child. Columbus, OH: Merrill, 1987. 

Otto, Wayne. "The Gay Nineties." Journal of Reading 38.6 (1995): 492-95. 

Rofes, Eric. "Opening Up the Classroom Closet: Responding to the Educa- 
tional Needs of Gay and Lesbian Youth." Harvard Educational Review 
59.4 (1989): 444-53. 

Rosenblatt, Louise. Literature as Exploration. 4th ed. New York: Modern 
Language Association of America, 1983. 

Sims-Bishop, Rudine. "Extending Multicultural Understanding through 

Children's Books." In Children's Literature in the Reading Program. Ed. 
B. E. Cullinan. Newark, DE: International Reading Association, 1987. 

Smith, Barbara. "Homophobia: Why Bring It Up?" Interracial Books For 
Children Bulletin 14 (1983): 7-8. 

Unks, Gerald. "Thinking about the Gay Teen." The Gay Teen: Educational 
Practice and Theory for Lesbian , Gay, and Bisexual Adolescents. Ed. G. 
Unks. New York: Routledge, 1995. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Prevention and Interven- 
tions in Youth Suicide." Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Youth 
Suicide, vol. 3. Ed. Marcia R. Feinleib. Rockville, MD: United States 
Department of Health and Human Services, 1989. 

Walker, Alice. The Color Purple. New York: Washington Square Press, 1982. 

. The Same River Twice: Honoring the Difficult. New York: Scribner, 

1996. 



O 

ERIC 



s 



70 



58 



Affirmation of 
the Foreign 
and the Asian 
Diasporic 
Perspective 



The Foreigner at Home: 

Faces of Asian 
Diaspora in Tan 
and Nunez 



Toming Jun Liu 

California State University, Los Angeles 

[T]he question is again before us today as we confront an economic and political 
integration on the scale of the planet: shall we be, intimately and subjectively, able 
to live with the others, to live as others, without ostracism but also without 
leveling? The modification in the status of the foreigners that is imperative today 
leads one to reflect on our ability to accept new modalities of otherness. No "Na- 
tionality Code” would be practical without having that question slowly mature 
within each of us and for each of us. 



Just as there are different perceptions of the foreigner, there exist, 
philosophically speaking, negative and affirmative modalities of 
foreignness. Take the perceptions of the foreigner in the United 
States. In the sense that the foreigner is always just the newer immi- 
grant in a nation of immigrants, he or she is the typical American or 
ought to be. At different times in history, the foreigner is the Norwe- 
gian, the Irish, the Bohemian, the Italian, the Jew, the Chinese, the 
Mexican, and so on. That all Americans are foreigners can be consid- 
ered a great advantage: our own kind, as well as our different kinds, 
of foreignness promise a cultural richness yet to be fully realized. 
However, the foreigner is often hated and negated. When there is 
international tension, domestic conflict of interests, economic depres- 
sion, or simply a change in cultural environment, the newer immi- 
grant becomes a convenient target; foreignness is emphasized and 
equated with supposed un-Americanness. Sparked further by 
rhetorics of patriotism, negative feelings toward the foreigner now 
and then blaze into flames of violence. 

"Americanization" has, by and large, become antonymous 
with "foreignness" as it has become synonymous with "assimila- 
tion": how much the new immigrant accepts the new (American) 



Julia Rristeva, Strangers to Ourselves 



ERIC 




59 



i i 

The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



culture has somehow come to mean how much of the old (foreign) 
culture he or she must discard. Someone who stubbornly preserves 
native cultural traits is perceived to be not assimilable, hence "for- 
eign" in the negative sense. The same kinds of things, as John F. 
Kennedy points out in A Nation of Immigrants, are said at different 
times about different groups of newer immigrants: '"TheyTl never 
adjust [as some say]; they can't learn the language; they won't be 
absorbed'" (63). Implied is the creed that the further away their 
language is from English and the further away their cultural at- 
tributes are removed from those of the original European type, the 
more foreign they will be. By this criterion, the Chinese in the United 
States have been seen as more foreign than others and, as is the 
implication, more undesirably foreign. This perception has led to 
legislation such as the Exclusion Act and has encouraged popular 
anti-Chinese agitations. One such agitation, occurring in California 
in the early 1840s, was led by Denis Kerney who, ironically, was 
himself an immigrant from Ireland. 

Antagonism toward the foreigner exists elsewhere in the 
world. Responding to the apprehension of foreigners in France in 
recent years, Julia Kristeva wrote Strangers to Ourselves (1991). Her 
basic argument in the book is that we will not be able to appreciate 
the foreigner unless we can recognize the foreigner or stranger 
within ourselves. To make Kristeva's theory more pertinent to this 
essay, I suggest that the need to critique the negation of the foreigner 
as a modality is linked with the need to understand the affirmative 
modality of the foreigner: negating the foreigner in effect denies the 
foreignness that promises growth within oneself; affirming the 
foreigner affirms one's foreign (which is the yet-to-be-known) poten- 
tials. Familiarizing oneself with the foreign is often the same process 
as foreignizing the familiar. That, in short, is the theory on which my 
recommended strategies for teaching two Asian American novels 
will be based. 

Negation of the foreigner perhaps originates with something 
as small as a gaze toward the stranger, a gaze informed by a disinter- 
est or a mild disgust. When the clouded gaze fails to take note of the 
mark of displacement invariably imprinted on every foreigner 's face, 
how can the gazer find anything about his or her potential self on 
that face? 

Throughout human history, the idea that the foreign must be 
rejected has generated dark and evil deeds. The excluded foreigner 
today resembles the outcast from a clan, or the heathen to a religion 
in pre-modern societies. But there is one difference. The emphasis on 
national boundaries, which has become so much a part of the notion 
of the "modem," is today used more as the legitimate reason for 
excluding the foreigner. Most of the time, an alien means someone 



60 



Toming Jun Liu 



from another nation or from another national culture. Since national 
"loyalty" (an ingredient of the assimilation narrative) is generally 
expected, one's foreignness arouses not only suspicion but even 
"moral" indignation. In moments when nationalist sentiments run 
high — as the twentieth century has constantly witnessed — the 
foreigner becomes the enemy. Ordinarily, when he is needed as 
cheaper labor force, he may be tolerated as the indispensable enemy. 

To reverse intolerance of the foreigner, a small but important 
step is to take an interested look at the foreigner's face. Perhaps, 
then, an ambiguous mark on the foreigner 's face will be noted, the 
human story the mark signifies will be learned, and the foreigner 
residing within each of us will be remembered. Altruism aside, 
reading the face of the foreigner has educational value about the self. 
How we regard the face brings out the secret manner in which we 
face the world. Behind the interested look is already the realization 
that any "self" is never homogeneous, and that there are foreign 
aspects — those yet-to-be mastered potentials — within ourselves. The 
disinterested gaze is blind to possibility. 

For reasons discussed above, the ways in which we approach 
the various forms of foreignness of Asian immigrants as reflected in 
Asian American literature is a delicate issue. An American national- 
ist vision, if adopted as the sole framework for reading Asian Ameri- 
can literature, can prove limiting and counterproductive. Nationalist 
sentiments, as part of a mentality of Western superiority, lead at best 
to an admiration of the foreigner's exotic qualities. That admiration 
is narcissistic fantasy since it has no real concern with the real situa- 
tion of the foreigner. To counter this habitual force, reading Asian 
American literature should be consciously turned into a process of 
de-foreignizing the foreigner and re-foreignizing the self. "We" — 
supposing "we" unconsciously share the discourse of American 
cultural nationalism — must first be turned into a problem. Assimila- 
tion or Americanization must be understood as a natural-ized, rather 
than natural, discourse. More important, the foreign origins of 
Americans need to be remembered. All this means the need to 
incorporate into our reading, thinking, and learning a more global 
view, a view from which studies of ethnicity must include the 
transnational realities of migration, diaspora and displacement. 

I thus recommend strategies for secondary school teachers in 
teaching Amy Tan's The Joy Luck Club (1989) and Sigrid Nunez's A 
Feather on the Breath of God (1995) in a new framework: new because 
it is associated with a paradigm shift toward the diasporic in Asian 
American cultural studies. In other words the cultural productions 
of Asian ethnic groups in this country should be studied as part of 



O 

ERIC 



73 



[ 



] 



61 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



their global scattering and in connection with their transnational 
realities. The diasporic perspective supplements, as well as operates 
in tension with, the American domestic perspective. 1 With the 
diasporic perspective, our emphasis in the classroom will be on 
stories of geographical and cultural displacement that the foreigners' 
faces tell, on their experiences in the United States as well as their 
connections with conditions elsewhere in the world. The diasporic 
perspective is also a useful reminder that Americans are all foreign- 
ers. Indeed, the diasporic perspective in Asian American studies is 
new but not unfamiliar. The same argument that American culture is 
transnational and cosmopolitan in character has been made implic- 
itly or explicitly throughout American literary history. In the first 
decade of the twentieth century, Randolph Bourne, in his essay 
"Trans-National America" (1916), defended our foreignness against 
vulgar Americanization. In the same decade, Willa Cather, in My 
Antonia (1918), portrayed the un-assimilated Shimerdas and other 
Bohemians in terms of American frontier heroism. 

I have introduced the new framework into pilot activities in 
my own classrooms (at California State University, Los Angeles) and 
in two twelfth-grade English classes at Arcadia High and Roosevelt 
High in Southern California. 2 In practice, following this framework 
means, first, educating ourselves as teachers about the proper em- 
phasis in reading and teaching Tan's and Nunez's texts, which in 
turn results in rewarding discoveries of dimensions previously 
unknown or only vaguely felt in these texts as well as in Asian 
diasporic experiences. When guided toward de-foreignizing the 
foreigner, students also bring up forms of foreignness as they know 
them and learn to problematize certain assumptions, including some 
they themselves possess. 

Now a word on the selection of texts. I recommend teaching 
The Joy Luck Club before A Feather on the Breath of God. This combina- 
tion of texts can be part of a course on American ethnic literature or 
on learning about tolerance. Tan's novel, which is well accepted in 
American mainstream culture and which has been further popular- 
ized by its cinematic version, has the advantage of familiarity. Inso- 
far as the novel touches upon the international dimensions of Chi- 
nese immigrants, it is evocative of the diasporic. However, I also 
believe that Tan's novel does not probe the complex emotional and 
psychological landscapes of the diasporic and displaced as deeply as 
Nunez's novel does. Reading Nunez after Tan allows the process of 
de-foreignizing the foreigner to mature more gradually within each 
of us. 



O 

ERLC 



74 



62 



[ 



] 



Toming Jun Liu 



Strategies in 
Teaching The 
Joy Luck Club 

Metaphor/Theme/ 
Narrative Frame 



A main theme of The Joy Luck Club becomes evident once we identify, 
from the text and its context, "the foreigner at home" as a metaphor. 
The phrase may signify on at least three levels. 

I. As has been said, the newer immigrant in the United States 
is a foreigner who has come here in search of a new home. Due to 
discrimination, the foreigner at home does not always feel at home. 
"The foreigner at home" is in this sense an ironic description of the 
social and historical situations of some immigrants, including many 
Chinese immigrants. This first level of meaning is contextual to The 
Joy Luck Club. 

II. From the point of view of their daughters, who are Ameri- 
canized in varying degrees, the mothers (in the Woo, Hsu, Jong, and 
St. Clair families) look like foreigners at home (although, in their 
own ways, the daughters themselves also feel like foreigners at 
home). The mothers' speech patterns, behaviors, and life stories 
often strike the daughters as being peculiarly foreign. Insofar as a 
strong undercurrent of the novel is how the daughters initially see 
their mothers as foreigners and then learn to de-foreignize them, this 
second level of meaning of "the foreigner at home" is textual. 

III. The third level of meaning, also textual, is related to the 
novel's narrative frame. Structurally, all the episodic stories are 
placed within a frame consisting of the first episode "The Joy Luck 
Club" and the concluding episode "A Pair of Tickets." In the first 
episode, Jing-mei Woo's mother Suyuan has died; according to her 
husband, she was "killed by her own thoughts" (5). Jing-mei takes 
her mother's place at the mah jong table and is thus compelled to 
find out, among other things about her deceased mother, how the 
Joy Luck Club originates with her mother's Kweilin story in World 
War II in China. A circle is completed in the final episode, which 
gives "the foreigner at home" an ironic turn. Jing-mei, in China, 
finally understands what it feels like to be a foreigner. In her 
mother's and her sisters' homeland, she is returning home in the 
sense that she comes back as her mother, with her mother's wish and 
mission. But since she has been distancing herself from this home 
and its culture for a very long time, she is acutely conscious of being 
an American and is eager but tentative in trying out her newly 
discovered Chineseness. Interestingly, it is her awkwardness as a 
foreigner that enables her to understand better the pains of her 
mother's displacement. 

I, II, and III are not the actual order of things in a course of 
teaching. The teacher might want to begin with III and gradually 
add I and II when the class makes collective discoveries. She can 
introduce I more effectively if she supplements the reading of Tan's 
text with historical and theoretical materials. Level II will be dealt 




75 



63 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



with when the teacher tries to draw natural responses (an activity 
which I describe below). 

Identifying the narrative frame means identifying an intended 
thematic priority to which interpretations of the other episodes in 
the novel should be subjected. Because The Joy Luck Club is episodic, 
the teacher may assign any one story or a combination of stories. 
Sometimes, in this random selection, the teacher might uncon- 
sciously emphasize the more light-hearted humor of the novel over 
its serious concerns with the conditions and emotions of Chinese in 
diaspora. If "The Red Candle" is picked as the only assigned text 
and if what I call the de-foreignization process is not set into motion, 
the story's humor can be simplistically read as proof of the "strange- 
ness" of the Chinese culture and of the cultural superiority of the 
United States (in that Lindo Jong eventually escaped from the ar- 
ranged marriage in China and came to the United States). The 
humor, suggestive of the resourcefulness of a Chinese woman, is 
part of the Chinese culture. The humor is also proof of Jong's 
strength in having to cope with circumstances which have led to her 
life in diaspora. Later, in "Double Face," we learn how Lindo Jong 
passes on her Chinese humor to her daughter, this time about how to 
make use of the American system. As she says, "I taught her how 
American circumstances work. ... In America, nobody says you 
have to keep the circumstances somebody else gives you" (Tan 289). 
"The Red Candle" can be better taught in conjunction with "Double 
Face." 

Natural Responses Before the teacher leads the class in exploring the theme embodied in 

Drawn and the narrative frame, she might want to elicit some "natural" re- 

r . j sponses from her class. "What do you think of Jing-mei's (or Lena's 
Examined or Waverly's or Rose's) mother?" A simple question like this might 
invite plenty of answers. Often, epithets such as "eccentric," "nosey," 
and "funny" are used in commentaries. I would ask why they find 
the mother(s) "eccentric." These reasons are often cited: their poor 
English skills, their "peculiar" habits, and their "superstitious" 
customs. 

Such "natural" answers are always in fact natural-ized by a 
given cultural tradition. In this case, students' impressions of the 
mothers' eccentricity may have to do with two things: our students 
are closer to the daughters — especially when they were in their 
teens — in age, thinking habits, and cultural views; and the mothers' 
behaviors seem to our students embarrassingly not American 
enough. These are American or, rather, Americanized, feelings. 
Conversely, from the perspective of Chinese culture, it is also consid- 
ered "natural" that one's parents, grandparents, and elders possess 



] 



64 



Toming Jun Liu 



wisdom that the youngsters have yet to acquire. And this thinking, 
very Chinese, is assumed to be "natural" in Tan's novel. The teacher 
might want to point out to her class that their assumptions are about 
as "natural" as the mothers' Chinese assumptions. She might select 
from the many passages in the novel which demonstrate how a 
mother feels that the "inside" of her daughter's thinking is "Ameri- 
can-made" (289), and how a daughter, at first finding her mother 
eccentric, ultimately learns from the mother. Sometimes, even when 
the mother is outrageously wrong — as in Suyuan's insistence that 
her daughter take piano lessons from a music teacher who is deaf — 
the daughter still learns to appreciate the mother's strange ways as 
an expression of love. To ensure that this point is fully understood, I 
would quote from Jing-mei Woo: "My mother and I never really 
understood one another. We translated each other's meanings and I 
seemed to hear less than what was said, while my mother heard 
more. No doubt she told Auntie Lin I was going back to school to get 
a doctorate" (Tan 27). 

The more important task is to help students read and under- 
stand the diasporic feelings and displaced conditions of the Chinese 
mothers. If "American translation" is how we as Americans ap- 
proach these foreigners, our cultural translation must reflect our 
transnational sensitivity and must sincerely embrace the foreign. 
Otherwise, as Jing-mei says, we would "hear less than what was 
said," thus failing in the intended translation. 

At this point, I hand out a collage consisting of excerpts from 
Chapter 1 ("Toccata and Fugue for the Foreigner") of Julia Kristeva's 
Strangers to Ourselves (1M0), all on one page. Kristeva is known for 
her difficult style, but in this book and particularly in this chapter 
her style is passionately poetic, which I find very accessible and 
pedagogically rewarding. Kristeva's chapter has twenty-three sub- 
titles, and you can create a collage to fit your needs. I recommend 
combining phrases from four or five subtitles which can fit onto one 
page. The collage may look something like this: 

The Face of the Foreigner 

. . . the foreigner's face forces us to display the secret manner in 
which we face the world . . . the face that is so other bears the mark 
of a crossed threshold that irremediably imprints itself as peaceful- 
ness or anxiety. . . . But the insistent presence of a lining — good or 
evil, pleasing or death-bearing — disrupts the never regular image of 
his face and imprints upon it the ambiguous mark of a scar — his very 
own well-being. 

The Loss and the Challenge 

A secret wound, often unknown to himself, drives the foreigner to 
wandering. . . . 



O 

ERIC 



77 



65 



c 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



Suffering, Ebullience, and Mask 

The difficulties the foreigner will necessarily encounter — one mouth 
too many, incomprehensible speech, inappropriate behavior — 
wound him severely, but by flashes. . . . The foreigner is hypersensi- 
tive beneath his armor. . . . 



Meeting 

Meeting balances wandering. A crossroads of two othernesses, it 
welcomes the foreigner without tying him down, opening host to his 
visitor without committing him. . . . 

The Silence of Polyglot 

Not speaking one's mother tongue. Living with resonance and 
reasoning that are cut off from the body's nocturnal memory, from 
the bittersweet slumber of childhood. Bearing within oneself like a 
secret vault, or like a handicapped child. . . . You improve your 
ability with another instrument, as one expresses oneself with 
algebra or the violin. 

I would use the excerpts in the collage as prompts for in-depth 
discussion of both The Joy Luck Club and A Feather on the Breath of 
God. Although some phrases may describe one novel better than the 
other, I recommend that at this point the teacher and her class go 
over each subtitle and discuss what the phrases say and mean. Or, as 
a take-home assignment, the teacher can ask students to respond to 
one or more of the subtitles as they please. 

Such an assignment was given in the pilot activity. From 
written responses I have gathered from two twelfth-grade classes, I 
have learned about feelings and situations which complicate my 
own thinking on "the foreigner at home." In response to "The Si- 
lence of Polyglot," Jorge Betanzas (Roosevelt High) reported that 
parents and their children who share a language (Spanish) have 
some deep feelings toward one another. But because "their [the 
parents'] control of the English language is limited . . . you can't tell 
them about school or a book you really enjoyed because they won't 
be able to fully understand you. Besides, their culture is often left in 
the native country and they just won't accept another." In one sense, 
Jorge and his parents occupy the same foreign domain. In another 
sense, his acceptance of the American culture has led to a feeling that 
he and his parents are already foreigners to each other. This contra- 
dictory situation, as described by a Hispanic student, strikes me as 
the typical dilemma in The Joy Luck Club. 

I also find, in these responses, a great deal of sympathy shown 
toward the ambiguous mark of a scar on the foreigner's face, to his 
secret wound, to his poverty due to immigration, and to the mean- 
ings of his silence. Amazingly, almost all of the students who re- 
sponded speak of the foreigner in question with their own parents in 



] 



66 



[ 

Toming Jun Liu 



mind. If these responses are shared and explored further, the class 
will see, with appreciation, that some of the strange expressions on 
the part of the fictionalized Chinese mothers — such as buying and 
cooking crabs in "Best Quality" — are the kinds of cultural and 
linguistic instruments special to immigrants just like their parents. In 
that case, students should be invited to share anecdotes about their 
own families. 

Sometimes, after writing the word displacement on the board, I 
lead a discussion about how peoples from various national and 
cultural backgrounds are forced to leave their homelands and come 
to the United States or go to other places because of family situa- 
tions, wars, disintegrated domestic economies, and other accidents 
of history. This discussion, combined with another reading of the 
collage from Kristeva, should lead to a closer look at The Joy Luck 
Club. Looking at the collage, someone might mention that there is a 
chapter entitled "Scar." Or that the "secret wound" can be visible, as 
an observant daughter in the novel says: "In this picture you can see 
why my mother looks displaced. ... In this outfit she looks as if she 
were neither coming from nor going to someplace" (Tan 107). 

Once we start swimming in the river of foreignness, we soon 
feel the undercurrents connected with our own unconscious. A 
disagreement that occurred in Sally Abood's class at Arcadia High is 
worth mentioning for this reason. A student who emigrated from 
Taiwan with her family in recent years told the class how alienated 
she felt in the American culture. She said that at school she only felt 
comfortable with peers who, like herself, speak Chinese more than 
English. With this prelude, she suggested that American readers 
cannot understand how the Chinese mothers in the novel really feel. 
An African American student argued that non-Asian readers have 
no difficulty relating to the feelings in the novel. Her testimony is 
that when she read The Joy Luck Club some years ago for the first 
time, she felt that she was re-reading her favorite African American 
novel Roots. In writing this essay, it occurs to me that the two young 
friends have more in common than we realized at the time. The 
student from Taiwan has a valid point: unless we know how pain- 
fully alienated newer immigrants feel, we cannot understand the 
emotion of the novel. The other student does not in effect depart 
from this view. She suggests we are all foreign although we are 
foreign in different ways. 

To ensure that our intended seriousness is fully communi- 
cated, the teacher should ask the class to open the novel to the first 
episode and ask what we learn from it about the novel's title: The Joy 
Luck Club. Jing-mei tells us that "Joy Luck" has to do with her 
mother's Kweilin story, of which her mother has told her all the 
parts "except for the ending, which grew darker, casting long shad- 



0 

ERLC 



L, , 



79 



67 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



Role-Playing 
Jing-mei Woo 



ows into her life, and eventually into mine" (Tan 7). Thoughts en- 
tangled with the long shadow eventually killed the mother. Jing-mei, 
determined to fulfill her mother's wish, has to struggle with the 
shadow and walk out of it. With the Kweilin story understood, "joy" 
signifies the human spirit which triumphs over the bad luck in life. 
"Joy luck" is what transforms bad luck. 

At Sally's suggestion, her AP English class at Arcadia High role- 
played Jing-mei Woo in order to reenact "the foreigner at home" in 
its different meanings. A student gifted at dramatic improvisation 
volunteered, and the activity went well. We learned together to re- 
foreignize ourselves as a way to de-foreignize the foreigner. At the 
end of reenaction, we discussed if we could not have a few Jing- 
mei's and if we could not enter the role of Jing-mei at different times 
in her life. In what follows, I will suggest the steps to be taken and 
will combine questions actually asked in Sally's class with questions 
I think should be asked. 

First, we need a profile of Jing-mei. With "Jing-mei" sitting on 
a high stool, the class begins casually by asking her — and, in effect, 
all of us — what we know about this character. Bits of information 
add up: She is about thirty-six; her mother has just died; she does not 
know the deeper meaning of her mother's life and her culture; she 
plays only Jewish mah jong; and so on. Passages which help us 
understand her psychological conflicts can be selected and read 
aloud. For instance, Jing-mei, as a child, used to imagine that being 
transformed into Chinese is like becoming "a syndrome, a cluster of 
telltale Chinese behaviors"; she still has that old feeling as she enters 
China (306-7). Also, reading the first page of the novel, someone 
suggests that there is quite a bit of "Coca-Cola" in Jing-mei's system, 
at least before her mother's death (3). 

We start the questions. "Jing-mei" improvises answers. When 
she stumbles, we come to her aid. Some questions probe her complex 
feelings about her mother's death. "How do you feel now that your 
mother is dead?", "Do you feel welcome at the mahjong table?", and 
"What would you have done differently if she were alive?" Other 
questions can probe into the cultural and generational differences 
between the mother and the daughter: "How would your mother 
feel if you . . .(fill in the blank)?" Let the questions and answers flow. 
The teacher does not have to insist on textual accuracy. Improvising 
helps us get into the characters. Improvising is also likely to lead to 
the mixing of characters and details. This might seem somewhat 
comic to those of us who have read the novel more carefully, but the 
mixing is often creative and does not necessarily depart from the 
issues. "If you could get your wish from the Moon Lady, what would 
it be?" is that kind of creative question. Moon Lady, Chang-O, is part 



68 



— i 

Toming Jun Liu 



of a St. Clair story, but Moon Lady, from a well-known Chinese folk 
tale, is archetypal, signifying a woman's loneliness and her desire for 
freedom. If the class departs from the course intended by the teacher, 
she can always add her own questions to set things right. If needed, 
the teacher can, at the end of the role-playing, straighten out some 
errors that have occurred. 

Next — and this is the most important phase — we reenact Jing- 
mei as the foreigner in China. The questions should be provocative 
and even a little unsettling: "How do you feel about using your 
anglicized name 'June May' in China?" and "Are you ashamed that 
you did not know what your Chinese name — Jing-mei — meant until 
you were thirty-six years old?" 

The most thought-provoking question asked in Sally's class 
was, "How do you feel that you are a Chinese to the Americans and 
an American to the Chinese?" With this question, we try to under- 
stand how being diasporic means being doubly foreign; we discuss 
how Jing-mei feeling foreign in China actually helps her understand, 
in ways she did not know before, her mother's displacement. These 
questions are appropriate: "Now that you know what it is to be a 
foreigner, can you imagine how your mother has felt all these years 
away from China and not knowing the whereabouts of the twins?", 
"How do you think your mother felt when she had to leave the 
twins on the roadside?", "How did she feel whenever she looked at 
you but thought of your lost sisters?", and "How do you visualize 
your twin sisters?" Students become so absorbed in the exchanges 
that they forget Jing-mei is fictional or they are not. Their construc- 
tive criticism, suggested in the tones and in the questions, somehow 
brings back the spirit of Suyuan. 

I sometimes show students photos of Chinese refugees during 
World War II and ask them to identify Suyuan. Suyuan is, of course, 
both none of them and every one of them. 

It was suggested in Sally's class that students write a letter to 
Jing-mei Woo. I imagine that another kind of letter would be just as 
motivating: from Jing-mei to her mother. 



A Feather on 
the Breath of 
God and the 
Diasporic 



In a unit focused on "the foreigner at home," Nunez's novel can be 
more fruitfully taught following The Joy Luck Club. To see the connec- 
tions as well as differences between the two novels, "feather," an 
additional metaphor used by both Tan and Nunez, can be intro- 
duced. The collage from Kristeva's book, if used as an aid to reading 
Nunez's fiction, will speak with deeper resonances. I would also 
continue with strategies such as role-playing and supplemental 
readings. It is my experience that, with A Feather, students will feel 
more compelled to see the foreigner in a diasporic perspective and 



ERIC 



81 



69 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



Feathers and 
Foreigners 



o 

ERIC 



will attempt, if given guidance, to de-naturalize Americanization as 
a discourse. 

The first four stories in The Joy Luck Club are grouped under the title 
"Feathers from a Thousand Li Away." This title is introduced and 
explained in a legend-like story which concludes with a useful 
message: a daughter of Chinese descent who grew up in the United 
States needs to swallow a bit more sorrow than Coca-Cola to under- 
stand that the single feather comes from a swan that the mother once 
brought over from China, and as a token of her mother's memory, 
the feather has meanings far richer than it first seems. Nunez's 
novel, A Feather on the Breath of God, as the title reveals, similarly 
connects feathers with immigrants. 

However, a difference between Tan and Nunez in the use of a 
feather is just as significant. Tan's novel, if only in sporadic mo- 
ments, appeals to readers who would like to hear the superiority of 
Americanization being corroborated by an ethnic writer. Take the 
very swan from which the feather is plucked. At the time when the 
Chinese mother brought over the swan, 

the woman and the swan sailed across an ocean many thousands of 
li wide, stretching their necks toward America. On her journey she 
cooed to the swan: "In America I will have a daughter just like me. 
But over there nobody will say her worth is measured by the loud- 
ness of her husband's belch. Over there nobody will look down on 
her, because I will make her speak only perfect American English. 
And over there she will always be too full to swallow any sorrow! 
She will know my meaning, because I will give her this swan — a 
creature that became more than what was hoped for" (Tan 3). 

The complexity of the passage takes more space to analyze than 
allowed by the length of my essay. It suffices to point out one thing: 
the woman from China expresses a hope that she can achieve free- 
dom by escaping from Chinese patriarchal oppressions and by 
undergoing an Americanization process which includes learning to 
"speak perfect American English." This hope, of course, receives 
ironic development: the swan is pulled away by immigration offi- 
cials, and the daughter, when filled with Coca-Cola, cannot under- 
stand what the feather is all about until she begins to swallow some 
sorrow. As the novel's movement shows, sorrow swallowing for the 
daughter — to feel herself as the displaced foreigner her mother is — 
will prove to be more salutary. My suggested approach to The Joy 
Luck Club is based on an appreciation of these ironic turns. Yet, such 
built-in ironies cannot completely cancel out the message too eagerly 
expressed at the outset of the novel: that modem American culture is 
superior to modem Chinese culture in terms of gender equality (a 



82 



] 



70 



c 

Toming Jun Liu 



common but questionable assumption which shows inadequate 
knowledge of women's liberation movements in modern Chinese 
history), and that new immigrants, especially Chinese women, come 
here because they yearn for America and for Americanization. Such 
lingering effects in The Joy Luck Club are more like sugary residues 
from the Coca-Cola. 

A Feather on the Breath of God, which is more about un-assimila- 
tion, is free of such effects. The novel never lets us forget the sorrow 
and strength of people being displaced due to the forces of twenti- 
eth-century history. Several convincing portraits of "foreigners at 
home" are presented through a plot centering on the psychological 
journey of a woman growing up as the daughter of a Panamanian- 
Chinese- American father and a German- American mother. 

There are four chapters. Chapter One, "Chang," is about the 
narrator 's virtually silent father who, at death, leaves but a sketchy 
story about his life. Chang, hardly even joining his family in the 
living room, is a foreigner at home in the sense that foreignness 
become synonymous with alienation. His portrait emphasizes the 
untold sufferings of a diasporic person and his unknown past. 

Chapter Two, "Christa," is about the mother whom the daugh- 
ter places "under the sign of beauty, suffering, loss" (71). Christa, an 
immigrant from Germany, is not always at home in the home she has 
made in the United States. Her conflicting memories of a childhood 
in Germany retain unconscious traces of fascist indoctrination to 
which she was subjected as a child, her family's victimization in 
Nazi Germany, and also some of the best of German belles lettres she 
has read. 

Chapter Three, "A Feather on the Breath of God," tells about 
how the narrator learns the art of ballet. Ballet, an art form which at 
first seems distanced from life, turns out to be a lesson about how art 
must be immersed in sorrow and how a ballet dancer's delicate 
balance is needed for both art and life. 

Chapter Four, "Immigrant Love," tells about the narrator 
teaching English to Vadim, a Russian immigrant, and about her 
having an affair with him and finally discovering his disturbing past 
in Russia. The chapter is about many other things, including how the 
narrator psychologically tries to return to the father about whom she 
knows so little. 

Nunez's novel, which presents foreignness in various forms, 
removes the halo from the generally glorified discourse of American- 
ization. Christa, seasoned in life and well versed in literature, finds A 
Place in the Sun, the movie version of An American Tragedy, merely 
laughable: "God. What you Americans call a tragedy" (80). A differ- 
ent example is Vadim, who worships and quickly learns the Ameri- 
can ways. But his newly gained American know-how is the novel's 



O 

ERIC 



83 



71 



Imagining and 
Inventing Chang 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



mockery of the kind of Americanization which excludes "foreign- 
ness." With his American English improved, Vadim now works as a 
New York cab driver. But one of the things he learns and believes 
without any question is that " [foreigners, of course, are the easiest 
victims" (160). 

In Nunez, lives of immigrants are studied in their diasporic 
conditions, in their foreign — not Americanized — conditions. It is 
quite apt that these foreigners — people in diaspora — are likened to 
feathers blown hither and thither on the breath of God. Feather-like 
conditions are diasporic conditions: birthed from suffering, touched 
by the divine. '"How in God's name did I get here?' she [Christa] 
would ask, her head in her hands, truly bewildered; as if she had 
blown here like a feather" (72). Such a life is unbearably light, in 
Milan Kundera's tragic sense. It is also as light as the dancing steps 
of ballet — the featherlike quality is the result of painstaking work. 
Although "Coca-Cola" is the first word the narrator remembers 
learning as a child, she knows too much sorrow and pain to be an 
innocent Coca-Cola consumer — a main reason why the novel's 
vision is beyond American national boundaries. Her passion for 
understanding her parents' realities of displacement leads her to a 
weighty thought, summarized at the end of the novel: one must be 
"ravished" in order to understand anything at all (180). 

Even though I am more favorably inclined toward A Feather, I 
do not think that Nunez's novel is different from Tan's in kind. In 
my suggested course of learning, the two texts are complementary to 
each other. For the purpose of understanding the diasporic and 
critiquing Americanization as a discourse, the teacher can lead the 
class in exploring the similar and different meanings of the feather- 
like foreigners as discussed above. If your class includes students 
whose families are recent immigrants, asking them to provide their 
personal testimonies about the feather-like conditions of their fami- 
lies can prove to be the best way to de-foreignize them — as well as 
re-foreignize all of us — in connection with reading Nunez's text. 

Due to the intended emphasis of this chapter on Asian American 
literature, I will here, somewhat arbitrarily, focus more on Chang. In 
class, the investigation into the meanings of Chang as a "foreigner at 
home" can begin with this question: "Why is Chang so extremely 
silent in his own home?" 

That is a question concerning the novel as a whole, because 
finding what Chang's silence signifies is the driving force in the 
narrative. We can first consider a theory from Chang's wife. Christa 
suggests that the silence is "a cultural thing," namely, taciturnity is 
an Oriental trait. This theory is not without some big holes, consider- 
ing that the few times when Chang did speak Chinese he was very 



72 



c 



] 



Toming Jun Liu 



vocal. Chang did not die silently; he died speaking Chinese. A few 
counter theories can then be considered. 

Chang's silence is a silence in English, a language which is not his 
mother tongue. The silence is the "silence of polyglot." In Kristeva's 
words: "not speaking one's mother tongue. Living with resonance 
and reasoning that are cut off from the body's nocturnal memory, 
from the bittersweet slumber of childhood. Bearing within oneself 
like a secret vault, or like a handicapped child." When we try to 
piece together what little information there is about Chang, these 
words seem amazingly apt and accurate. 

His voicelessness is the language of suffering behind which hides his 
hypersensitivity. That, too, is a description in our collage: "one 
mouth too many, incomprehensible speech, inappropriate behavior" 
may also have wounded him. An accurate description of Chang. An 
accurate description of what many immigrants have to experience. 

That Chang's silence is explained as "a cultural thing" betrays 
Christa's lack of sensitivity to her husband, who apparently remains 
foreign to her until the end. "That's a cultural thing," in history, is 
too often an excuse for dismissing the foreigner. It is true that Christa 
does try to understand her husband's culture by borrowing for her 
children books about China, but she has not understood her 
husband's own language. If Christa cares for her husband, she does 
not seem to care enough. As Chang lay dying, "he cursed my mother 
and accused her of never having cared" (25). 

The daughter, caring more, is determined to find out, from the 
"fragments of Chinese" her father's death has left her with (25), 
what her father might have thought and said in that silence. She 
dismisses first the stereotypes: that Chinese write backwards, that 
Chinese are inscrutable, and so on. She remembers Chang's firm 
answer to these descriptions of the Chinese: "Chinese just like 
evvybody else" (6). She pieces together the language with which her 
father courted her mother. That language is not German but rather 
music, which can be and is recreated by the daughter re-arranging 
titles of Hank Williams records. To use Kristeva's idea and words 
("The Silence of Polyglot"), the daughter knows that her father had a 
secret instrument and she has taken the trouble to find it. Eventually, 
the daughter understands that if you love someone deeply enough 
you will have to speak that person's language. Eventually, she 
chooses to go to China to teach English and to learn Chinese. 

Chang has his weaknesses. Alienated, he is also alienating. The 
daughter's love for her father is felt as a hurt: there was never 




[ 



] 



73 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



enough fatherly love shown to the children; the father could play 
with children in a Chinese family so much more freely than he ever 
did with his own children. One of the thoughts the daughter enter- 
tains is that "we [the females] must always have been 'others'" to 
him (23). 

With these theories initially explored, the class will be con- 
vinced that the invention of Chang is intended in the novel, and they 
will feel encouraged to go on with the invention. For that purpose, 
the teacher can combine close reading of the novel, theorization of 
questions related to the foreigner (such as the collage from Kristeva), 
and supplementary readings from history. "The invention is a re- 
discovery," the teacher should add her words of wisdom, "of the 
foreigner within us." 

Still more can be obtained from a comparison of the collage 
with the novel. When asked to respond to the collage, most students 
in a selected group at Roosevelt High (in Rochmanna Miller's class) 
addressed the question of language or, rather, responded to "The 
Silence of Polyglot" as their favored prompt. Many of them came 
from Spanish-speaking families. Some expressed a pride in being 
able to speak the "beautiful Spanish." Others, like Freddy Garcia, 
expressed an irony: "I now take classes to speak the mother tongue 
[Spanish], but it is not the same as the one that my parents grew up 
with. . . . Deep down inside I think I do miss the old instrument." If 
your students speak only English, I imagine that you can still ask 
them to describe the feelings they have while learning to speak a 
foreign language. 

"What about his mark of scar? His secret wound? Where in the 
novel do we learn about that?" the teacher should insist. A good 
example is how the narrator remembers the only anecdote her father 
has ever shared with her. Chang lived the first ten years of his life in 
Shanghai. There, he had a dog. When he left Shanghai for Panama, 
the dog was brought to the dock to see him, and the dog began 
howling. "Dog no fool. He know I never be back" (14). The dog 
howling at the dock is the howling of Chang in silence, signifying his 
homesickness. 

The word Christa uses is heimweh which, she insists, is not 
translatable. If homesickness is what Chang and Christa have in 
common, then in many ways Chang's years in Shanghai are like 
Christa's in Germany. Home means, in both cases, youth. Home is a 
cultural identity which provides a sense of security. Home, in a 
century rife with wars and unrest, is filled with the horror of vio- 
lence. Home is a place that you cannot return to once you leave it. 
Home is where you want to return but are afraid to go. Home is 
possibly where you can no longer feel at home. Such are the existen- 
tial conditions of many in diaspora. But, ironically, with so much in 



O 

ERiC 



86 



] 



74 



Toming Jun Liu 



common, Chang and Christa never really understand each other's 
home culture. That realization adds a chilling sense to what we 
understand is "foreign." 

Cats and dogs allude to the existential conditions of the 
diasporic. Christa remembers that while she was in a school in Nazi 
Germany, a cat discovered by a nun was thrown into the furnace 
(45). This horrifying tale of a cat metaphorically captures the trauma 
that fascism inflicts on Christa. The cat's screaming in the furnace 
echoes the dog howling on the dock. The cat and the dog — Christa's 
childhood and Chang's — also remind us of Vadim beating his dog 
and drowning his kittens while in Russia. What is his secret wound? 
Why is his home even more uncanny? How do we de-foreignize this 
foreigner? 

After going over these things in the novel, the class can pick 
someone and role-play the daughter remembering her father, her 
mother, and her affair with Vadim. I would not recommend role- 
playing Chang because we can talk around silence but not in silence. 

Chang's stories can be connected to the larger pictures of 
history: "Grandfather Chang," Chang's father, is a Chinese merchant 
who settled in Panama. The Changs' settlement in Panama is a 
miniaturization of Chinese diaspora in Latin America. Since the 
nineteenth century, immigrants from China settled in many places 
throughout the Caribbean and Central and South America, some- 
times establishing communities and sometimes passing through to 
the United States. 

Chang was born in 1911 of "Grandfather Chang's" Panama- 
nian wife and was raised by his Chinese wife in Shanghai. Chang 
lived in Shanghai somewhere between 1911 (the year of his own 
birth and "birth of the Republic") and 1921 ("the year the Chinese 
Communist Party was founded") (6). Those were years of revolu- 
tions, wars, crises, and significant changes in China. What did Chang 
the child see? When Chang returned to Colon, "his mother was 
dead" (6-7). He has never really seen his own mother. 

No one can accuse Chang of not being patriotic. He served in 
the U.S. Army during World War II. It was in Germany at the end of 
the war that he met and married Christa. 

Photos about other Chinese in diaspora in those periods can be 
found. Historical cartoon pictures which demonized Chinese immi- 
grants can be used side by side for a fuller historical lesson. Some of 
these visual aids can be found in The Chinese American Family Album 
(1994) and in Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian 
Americans (1989), if you do not find everything you need in the 
library. 

So many faces, so many stories. Why do we read them? Per- 
haps, we should put the books down and take a good look at our 




87 



[ 



] 



75 



The Foreigner at Home: Faces of Asian Diaspora 



Notes 



References 



different faces in the room. Perhaps we will see the foreign in the 
familiar, and the familiar in the foreign. 



1. Sau-ling C. Wong, in "Denationalization Reconsidered: Asian 
American Cultural Criticism at a Theoretical Crossroads," carefully ex- 
plores the reasons for and the implications of a paradigm shift in Asian 
American cultural studies. The general trend, suggests Wong, is denational- 
ization which is manifested in three ways: the easing of cultural nationalist 
concerns; the growing permeability between Asian and Asian American; 
shifting from an American domestic perspective to a diasporic perspective. 
In line with Wong's argument, the use of "diaspora" in my essay implies 
the view that Asians — Chinese in particular — in the United States are an 
element of their global scattering. Etymologically, "diaspora" means 
dispersing or scattering of seeds. 

2. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Sally Abood of 
Arcadia High and her AP English class (especially Ann Ma, Catherine Ng, 
Elizabeth Park, Cindi Tanabe, Jun Tokeshi, Katya Calvo) and Rochmanna 
Miller at Roosevelt High and her students for their enthusiastic support for 
this project. The echoes of their voices, if not the direct quotation of their 
voices, are found in this essay. 



Bourne, Randolph. "Trans-National America." The Heath Anthology of 

American Literature. Volume 2. 2nd ed. Eds. Paul Lauter, et al. Lexing- 
ton, MA: Heath, 1994. 1732-43. 

Cather, Willa. My Antonia. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1918. 

Hoobler, Dorothy, and Thomas Hoobler. The Chinese American Family Album. 
Introduction by Bette Bao Lord. New York/Oxford: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1994. 

Kennedy, John F. A Nation of Immigrants. Introduction by Robert F. Kennedy. 
Revised and enlarged edition. New York: Harper & Row, 1986. 

Kristeva, Julia. Strangers to Ourselves. Trans. Leon S. Roudiez. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1991. 

Nunez, Sigrid. A Feather on the Breath of God. New York: HarperPerennial, 
1995. 

Takaki, Ronald. Strangers from a Different Shore : A History of Asian Americans. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1989. 

Tan, Amy. The Joy Luck Club. New York: Ivy Books, 1989. 



ERIC 




76 



Teaching Chinua 
Achebe’s Things 
Fall Apart 

Carol Danks 

Roosevelt High School, Kent, Ohio 

Turning and turning in the widening gyre 
The falcon cannot hear the falconer; 

Things fall apart; the center cannot hold; 

Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world , 

The blood-dimmed tide is loosed , and everywhere 
The ceremony of innocence is drowned; 

The best lack all conviction , while the worst 
Are full of passionate intensity. 

W. B. Yeats/The Second Coming" 



Y eats's view of the end of the Christian era after World War I 
provides the title for Chinua Achebe's novel Things Fall Apart. 
This look at the disintegration of the life of an Ibo man 
(Okonkwo) and the damage inflicted upon the Ibo culture by the 
introduction of Christianity and Western government provides 
fertile ground in which to ask ourselves as teachers and also to ask 
our students to wrestle with issues of tolerance. The dilemmas 
raised, especially regarding missionary work and colonization of an 
African country, take readers into areas which some teachers (and 
administrators) may be inclined to believe should be off-limits in 
schools. However, if there is any place in current American school 
curricula which provides opportunities to discuss such important 
questions, it is the English class. 

This essay looks at a novel which very directly addresses these 
sorts of questions. Three major points of focus will guide the discus- 
sion: (1) an exploration of thematic elements in the novel; (2) a 
consideration of Achebe's own comments on racism in Conrad's 
Heart of Darkness and his portrayal of whites in Things Fall Apart; and 
(3) a discussion of how teachers can use Achebe's novel to sensitize 
students to a different culture and to the negative impacts of one 
culture trying to dominate another. 



0 

ERIC 



89 



77 



Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart 



The dictionary defines tolerance as "the capacity for or practice 
of recognizing and respecting the opinions, practices, or behavior of 
others." While to tolerate may carry negative connotations of "putting 
up with" some idea or behavior, tolerance includes not only the 
recognition of but also the respecting of ideas and behaviors differ- 
ent from our own. Evidence ranging from the work of Gordon 
Allport to that of Samuel and Pearl Oliner to recent studies of Righ- 
teous Gentiles indicates that tolerant individuals tend to come from 
homes in which there was at least one individual who demonstrated 
acceptance of others. What children observed regarding the treat- 
ment of others was more important than what they were told about 
how to behave. 

As teachers, we realize that we are with students only a few 
hours a week and our influence may well be minuscule in the face of 
the student's home life and other out-of-school experiences. How- 
ever, as teachers, we also realize that one of our major purposes is to 
have some positive impact on our students' lives. Especially through 
the teaching of literature, we address issues concerning values, 
ethics, alternatives, potentials, and consequences. Our curricular 
choices for required readings indicate the direction and types of 
questions which will be discussed in our classrooms. 

The Advanced Placement 12 English classes which 1 teach in a 
public high school in a relatively small university town in northern 
Ohio experience a curriculum which includes literary works that 
raise human rights issues. In past years I have had students com- 
ment favorably that they thought my English class was more of a 
human rights course than strictly an English one. An AP student 
stated almost better than I could why I incorporate works dealing 
with issues of tolerance into the curriculum. Melissa wrote. 

Ignorance breeds hate and everything must be done to stop what has 
been happening since the founding of this country. Education is the 
key to stopping ignorance and reading novels that deal with 
another's suppression is one way of educating others. Thus, I find 
that Ceremony and Things Fall Apart do not make suppression redun- 
dant, but rather express in a way that can educate the ignorant and 
even the aware. 

Achebe's novel Things Fall Apart provides excellent reading in itself, 
and beyond that it affords opportunities for thoughtful reflection on 
a variety of issues related to respect and tolerance. 

As Yeats's poem indicates, things fall apart when the center 
cannot hold, when something occurs which keeps normalcy from 
being maintained. As events go out of control, things fall apart. So it 
is in Achebe's novel. The center of Okonkwo's life is damaged by 
pride; this pride disconnects him from a centeredness within his 



[ 



78 



1 

Carol Danks 



culture, and his life begins to fall apart. The center of Ibo religious 
practices is damaged by Christian missionaries. New beliefs and 
overt attempts to destroy old ones disconnect the people from their 
religious roots and separate families. The center of Ibo culture is 
damaged by the intrusion of the white government. New rules and 
rulers disconnect the people from their governing practices and 
culture and create a lack of order. 

If Melissa is correct and one way to educate students is to read 
novels, then what does Things Fall Apart provide for students? The 
novel is filled with information about the Ibo culture, a culture about 
which my Ohio students know little or nothing. Through the charac- 
ters' interactions we learn about things which are regarded highly in 
the culture: the art of conversation, the telling of proverbs, the value 
of personal achievement, and the requirement of emotional strength. 
We see that a man is valued for his own worth, not for his father's, 
and that to show affection is to appear weak. The norm is for a man 
to have a number of wives who all live in his compound and raise 
his children. This male-dominated society holds a strong belief in a 
personal god or chi; and echoing the ancient Greek concept of fate, "a 
man could not rise beyond the destiny of his chi" (Achebe, Things 
131). 

The novel paints a vivid picture of the clan's social and cul- 
tural values. A human head is seen as a great war trophy; and when 
a daughter of the tribe is murdered by a member of another clan, the 
punishment is war or the presentation "of a young man and a virgin 
as compensation" (11). The entrance of the young man Ikemefuna 
into Okonkwo' s family increases the conflicts and provides the 
reader with information regarding the clan's views on killing. 
Okonkwo ultimately and purposefully kills Ikemefuna, a male crime 
because it was intentional. However, because Ikemefuna is not a 
member of the clan, Okonkwo suffers no punishment. Later, 
Okonkwo unintentionally kills the son of a clansman, and this 
"female" crime is punishable by seven years of banishment because 
"it was a crime against the earth goddess to kill a clansman" (124). 

Ibo traditions and ideas regarding food seem strange to 
American students. Eating rituals hold an important place in Ibo 
culture as kola nut and palm oil ceremonies precede every important 
meeting. Once when "a tremendous sight, full of power and beauty" 
(56) covers half of the sky, everyone excitedly prays that this swarm 
of locusts will camp in their village; locusts were a gustatory deli- 
cacy. Yams, "the king of crops" (33), provide economic as well as 
physical sustenance. Yams imply manliness, and a man's greatness 
comes in part from his ability to feed his family on his harvest of 
yams. People believed that allowing children to eat eggs would 



[ 



] 



79 



Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart 



tempt them to steal. For students who eat little more than pizza and 
fast foods, such dining pleasures and customs seem very foreign 
indeed. 

Oracles, goddesses, and spirits reside alongside elders and 
other clansmen in the Ibo culture. The society is dominated by males, 
but the most common name for a child is Nneka, or "Mother is 
Supreme." While in exile in his mother's homeland, Okonkwo is 
asked about this phenomenon by a wise man. When Okonkwo has 
no answer, the elder explains. 

It's true that a child belongs to its father. But when a father beats his 
child, it seeks sympathy in its mother's hut. A man belongs to his 
fatherland when things are good and life is sweet. But when there is 
sorrow and bitterness he finds refuge in his motherland. Your 
mother is there to protect you. She is buried there. And that is why 
we say that mother is supreme. (134) 

Beliefs such as this may ring true with many young people who turn 
to their mothers for help in times of pain. This dimension serves as a 
bridge between our culture and the Ibo culture, bringing it closer to 
our own. 

Treatment of those different from the norm is quite severe in 
Ibo culture. Ogbanje childen, "wicked children who, when they died, 
entered their mothers' wombs to be born again" (77), are not 
mourned at their death but are mutilated by medicine men to per- 
suade them not to return. Ogbanje are dragged on the ground to the 
Evil Forest so they will 

think twice before coming again, unless it was one of the stubborn 
ones who returned, carrying the stamp of their mutilation — a 
missing finger or perhaps a dark line where the medicine man's 
razor had cut them. (79) 

Twins are put in earthenware pots and thrown away to die in 
the forest, their dying cries heard by people who walk nearby. 
Individuals suffering from certain "evil diseases, like leprosy and 
smallpox," are buried in the Evil Forest, a place "alive with sinister 
forces and powers of darkness" (148). These practices sound maca- 
bre and horrid to American students, yet they are presented as the 
norm and, thus, acceptable in Ibo culture. For at least one student, 
however, learning about the treatment of the ogbanje proved some- 
what positive. Kelly wrote, 

I do like reading many of these books as they allow me to view 
certain cultures in a new, more positive light. This was displayed as I 
understood without anger why the Ibo tribe killed twin babies in 
Things Fall Apart , which would have appalled me before reading the 
book. 



80 



i 

Carol Danks 



A key word here is understood. By accepting and understanding this 
new, and initially appalling information, Kelly gained more toler- 
ance for a tradition and practice very different from her own. 

Individual life is seen as valuable and important for people 
other than ogbanje, twins, and those with certain diseases. Life is seen 
as a "series of transition rites which brought [a person] nearer and 
nearer to his ancestors" (123). To deliberately interrupt this series of 
rites by suicide, however, was an abomination. As we learn at the 
end of the novel when Okonkwo commits suicide and his clansmen 
are with the white men by his body, "It [suicide] is an offense against 
the Earth, and a man who commits it will not be buried by his 
clansmen. His body is evil, and only strangers may touch it" (207). 

As the first third of the novel focuses solely on the Ibo culture 
without intervention from outside forces, the reader sees the culture 
as a complete whole. Information provides students with new ways 
of looking at Ibo customs, and as they become immersed in the 
world of the novel, even the strangest practices become more under- 
standable. As this familiarity helps breed understanding, a level of 
acceptance, or tolerance, for such differences may be created. Teach- 
ers need to help students understand the role of these practices 
within the society itself. Discussions can focus on such topics as why 
such practices exist at all and the potential benefits and dangers 
inherent in the practices. 

Part Two of the novel focuses on Okonkwo's life in exile in his 
mother 's land and on the incursion of white Christian missionaries 
into the area. Okonkwo's pride and stubborness prove to be his 
undoing as he chafes at serving seven years of punishment for 
killing a clansman. Two years into his exile, his good friend Obierika 
visits him and we learn that "the missionaries had come to 
Umuofia" (143). That simple statement opens another theme of the 
novel: beliefs and practices which are imposed from outside a cul- 
ture can create very detrimental effects. We learn much through the 
narrator's comments. The coming of the evangelists "was a source of 
great sorrow to the leaders of the clan, but many of them believed 
that the strange faith and the white man's god would not last" (143). 
Only the efulefu, or worthless, empty men, were joining this new 
religion. "Chielo, the priestess of Agbala, called the converts the 
excrement of the clan, and the new faith was a mad dog that had 
come to eat it up" (143). It is not long, however, before the sons of 
important clansmen have joined the new religion. Okonkwo loses 
his son Nwoye, and the priest of the snake cult loses his son Enoch. 
Teachers need to help students understand why the Ibo leaders 
would be so against these new beliefs, why they would believe that 
the "white man's god would not last," and why some Ibo clansmen 
would choose to join the new religion. Discussions on topics such as 



O 

ERLC 



S3 



81 



Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart 



these can help students begin to realize that there are no easy solu- 
tions when both sides believe only they are right. 

Part Three occurs upon Okonkwo's return to his village as the 
missionaries' work is becoming quite successful. We watch not only 
the disintegration of Okonkwo's life, but also the growing influence 
of the church and the white man's government. In many respects, 
the white men and their religion and government have "won" and, 
thereby, the Ibo have "lost." Focused discussions on why and how 
such transitions occurred and the ultimate impact on both whites 
and Ibo can help students come to a personal decision about the 
ethics of such behaviors. 

Achebe uses both narrator and character comments plus 
characterizations to convey his attitude toward the missionaries. The 
"impudent missionaries" (150) rescue twins and even build their 
church in the Evil Forest, the only plot of land the Ibo clan will give 
them. When the church is not cursed or destroyed, the Ibo are 
amazed. The whites brought this "lunatic religion," but also a "trad- 
ing store and for the first time palm-oil and kernel became things of 
great price, and much money flowed into Umuofia" (178). 

The characters of the missionaries provide a study in contrasts 
and suggest the possibility that Achebe does not see it as absolutely 
wrong for external religious practices to be presented to the Ibo. The 
first man, an interpreter named Mr. Kiaga, builds the first church, 
brings in converts, and stands firm in the face of clan opposition. The 
clan decides to ostracize the Christians, but their numbers continue 
to grow and a new missionary, Mr. Brown, comes regularly. He 
prevents the Christians from antagonizing the clan and "came to be 
respected even by the clan, because he trod softly on its faith" (178). 
Mr. Brown is willing to discuss his views and listen to the views of 
the Ibo, and they each learn from the other. He maintains a stance of 
tolerance toward the Ibo as his congregation grows and his status 
rises, but his physical health deteriorates and he is forced to leave. 

Mr. Brown embodies the potential for peaceful co-existence between 
the two groups. However, in his place comes Rev. James Smith, a 
much less tolerant man who condemns Brown's willingness to 
compromise. He urges on the more zealous converts, provoking 
unrest until the clan burns down the church as Smith tries to prevent 
them. How one spreads new ideas is as important as what one 
spreads. 

The physical destruction of the church brings in the District 
Commissioner because "the white man had not only brought a 
religion but also a government" (155). These men "were greatly 
hated in Umuofia because they were foreigners and also arrogant 
and high-handed" (174). The Ibo make fun of them with their ash- 
colored shorts and call them "ashy-Buttocks" (174). Six men, includ- 




94 



82 



Carol Danks 



ing Okonkwo, are taken prisoner and treated in a humiliating man- 
ner. The white officials, none of whom knows the local language, are 
portrayed as disobeying their superior as they mistreat and shave 
the heads of the prisoners. They plan to skim money from the fine 
which the clan must pay. Things are done in the name of the "queen, 
the most powerful ruler in the world" (194). 

Upon the prisoners' release, Okonkwo swears vengeance and 
the clan must decide whether or not to attack the whites (and thus, 
also, the clansmen who had joined with them). Achebe sums up the 
influence of the whites' religion and government in a speech by 
Okika. After rhetorically asking if all of the clansmen are present, 
Okika continues: 

They are not. . . . They have broken the clan and gone their several 
ways. We who are here this morning have remained true to our 
fathers, but our brothers have deserted us and joined a stranger to 
soil their fatherland. If we fight the stranger we shall hit our brothers 
and perhaps shed the blood of a clansman. But we must do it. Our 
fathers never dreamed of such a thing, they never killed their 
brothers. But a white man never came to them. So we must do what 
our fathers would never have done. . . . We must root out this evil. 
(203-4) 

On seeing the white officials, Okonkwo immediately leaves the 
gathering and beheads one of the men. Okonkwo's life has fallen 
apart beyond repair, and he then does the deed most abominable for 
his culture: he commits suicide. 

Achebe does not end the novel with the death of his protago- 
nist; he adds a kind of epilogue regarding the governmental intru- 
sions in the country. The District Commissioner, who "had toiled to 
bring civilization to different parts of Africa" (208) for many years, 
shows his complete coldness and sense of superiority to the Ibo 
people. The Commissioner sees Okonkwo's life as a story that 
"would make interesting reading" (208) in the book he is writing, 
but a story to which he might devote only a paragraph. It would be a 
relevant inclusion in his already entitled book. The Pacification of the 
Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger. 

Thus, the novel ends with many things falling apart. 
Okonkwo's life has been destroyed because of self-absorption, pride, 
fear, impetuous actions, and his personal chi. The Ibo culture has 
been severely cracked, if not completely shattered, because of the 
incursion of whites with their religion, their god, and their govern- 
ment of the queen's laws, because of the tribe's unwillingness to go 
against the invaders, and because of the intrafamily tensions created 
both naturally and by the whites. 

Ironies abound in the book. Okonkwo's relationship with his 
son ends up as his own did with his father; in both cases the son 



[ 



] 



83 



Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Foil Apart 



turns his back on the customs and beliefs of his father. The son 
Nwoze changes his name to Isaac and thus reverses the sacrificial 
call found in the Biblical story of Abraham and Isaac. The more 
Okonkwo tries to gain power and control over his life, the more 
other things control him. The Christian message of love and peace 
creates disruption and violence. The white man's attempt to pacify 
the Ibo (who were already pacific) turns everyone to violence. 

A novel such as this has some potential pitfalls when one 
approaches it in a classroom of predominantly white, Christian 
students. Missionary work, by its very nature, is intolerant of local 
beliefs; its goal is to convert other people, to replace indigenous 
beliefs with Christianity. Achebe suggests that the overwhelming 
impact of the missionaries' work was negative. They undermined 
local beliefs, split families, and encouraged converts to desecrate cult 
icons such as the sacred python. The missionaries exhibited some 
behaviors which someone outside the Ibo culture might consider 
positive: they rescued twins, showed that the Evil Forest was harm- 
less, and gave acceptance to outcasts. But each of these actions 
directly opposed the long-term beliefs of the Ibo people. In the 
portrayal of the religious leaders, one is tolerant and compromising 
with the Ibo while the other two most definitely are not. 

Achebe's depiction of the intruding governmental officials is 
entirely negative. Everything from the narrator's and characters' 
comments to the characters' actions point to an arrogant, lawless 
imposition of power by an outside force. Every governmental official 
is portrayed as insensitive, selfish, and ignorant of local language 
and customs. 

How does a teacher deal with such a one-sided depiction of 
one group of people, whites, in the case of Achebe's novel? In an 
article published in 1987 entitled "An Image of Africa: Racism in 
Conrad's Heart of Darkness," Achebe comments that some students 
wrote him regarding their reading of Things Fall Apart. One young 
man "was particularly happy to leam about the customs and super- 
stitions of an African tribe." Achebe had this response to the 
student's comment: 

The young fellow from Yonkers, perhaps partly on account of his age 
but I believe also for much deeper and more serious reasons, is 
obviously unaware that the life of his own tribesmen in Yonkers, 
New York, is full of odd customs and superstitions and, like every- 
body else in his culture, imagines that he needs a trip to Africa to 
encounter those things. (251) 

Just because the student was happy to learn about the Ibo tribe does 
not suggest that he is unaware of the customs of his own culture, 
though he might be. Rather, I believe it shows a willingness to learn 



O 

ERIC 



96 



84 



Carol Danks 



about cultures different from his own. The young man does not say 
that he was appalled to learn of the primitive and barbaric customs 
of an African tribe, simply that he was glad to learn about another 
culture. Given that Achebe begins his article about the racism in 
Conrad's Heart of Darkness with this anecdote, one must assume that 
he is saying that the young man from Yonkers is racist for being 
happy to learn about the Ibo customs. In fact, Achebe says that he 
proposes "to draw from these rather trivial encounters rather heavy 
conclusions ..." (251). 

Achebe continues in the article to argue that Western psychol- 
ogy feels a need "to set Africa up as a foil to Europe, as a place of 
negations at once remote and vaguely familiar, in comparison with 
which Europe's own state of spiritual grace will be manifest" (251- 
52). He contends that Conrad's portrayal of Africans in Heart of 
Darkness shows not just that the characters in the novel are racist, but 
that Conrad himself is "a thoroughgoing racist" (257). The African 
characters are drawn in such a way as to question their very human- 
ity because they are ill-defined characters who are allowed only to 
speak in dialects and who seem "grossly inadequate" (260). 

When we look closely at the one-sided portrayals and satire 
used in the depiction of whites in Things Fall Apart, we may wonder 
if Achebe himself is not being a racist. In fact, a number of my 
students commented on this and found it difficult to read the book. 
They had read Achebe's article on Heart of Darkness when we studied 
that novel and said that his words about racist portrayals of charac- 
ters rang in their ears as they read his characterizations of whites. 
They accused him of being guilty of the very thing of which he had 
accused Conrad. 

Perhaps sounding like the young man from Yonkers, my 
students were intrigued by the new knowledge about the beliefs and 
customs of the Ibo tribe. They found it hard to accept that throwing 
away twins or mutilating children could be "right" in their own 
scheme of thinking, but they grew to accept that within the culture in 
which these practices were done, the Ibo had consistent reasons for 
doing them. We must be careful in deciding how tolerant we are 
regarding practices which create harm for other humans in any 
society. My own consistency in believing that cultures should be able 
to practice their own traditions breaks down completely over the 
issue of female genital mutilation, or female circumcision. Even the 
language with which we name that procedure shows the negative 
light in which Western culture places it. Certainly, issues such as 
these generate lively discussion and debate among students who are 
seriously interested in grappling with the issues. I would contend 
that learning about another culture is precisely a way to try to 
increase tolerance in students, and while we need to be sure that 



ERIC 



97 



[ 



] 



85 



Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Foil Apart 



they are aware of the idiosyncracies of their own culture, to enjoy 
learning about another people is not intrinsically racist. 

The novel focuses in part on some of the complications sur- 
rounding any group going into any other culture to try to effect 
some sort of change. A student who had spent a marvelous summer 
in Ecuador working with the Amigos de las Americas program was 
quite shaken when she finished the book. She had always seen the 
work she did with Amigos as positive, as contributing to the benefit 
of the people in Ecuador. However, finishing Things Fall Apart made 
her seriously question why she had gone to Ecuador in the first 
place. Was she, too, a sort of interloper who had no business being 
there, trying to make changes which the local people did not want? 
Through numerous conversations with me and fellow classmates, 
she decided that the Amigos program is not intent on changing the 
people's beliefs and values, but rather is aimed at helping the people 
improve elementary aspects of their lives so they can live longer and 
healthier. 

Reactions regarding the impact of the missionaries were 
almost completely on the side of the Ibo. One of my students is the 
daughter of a conservative Christian minister. She came in one 
morning after finishing the book and was obviously upset; she had 
never thought about the negative impact that missionaries could 
have on a culture. She spoke about her feelings and uncertainties 
and left with the new realization that something she had accepted all 
her life as entirely good was not that way. This kind of realization 
could upset parents who do not want their children to question their 
beliefs. As teachers, we must be willing and prepared to open our 
students' eyes, but in ways that produce thoughtful inquiry about 
ideas rather than outright rejection of long-held ones. Another 
student is the step-daughter of a minister. Here is Stephanie's reac- 
tion to the presentation of Christians: 

Concerning Things Fall Apart, I was not offended by the negativity 
toward the white Christians because, though I am a white Christian, 

I agree that their actions in Things Fall Apart are destructive. I would 
not categorize an entire race just because of a few incidents, and do 
not expect Achebe to be negatively categorizing all white Christians 
in his book just because of the tragedy that happened to Okonkwo's 
tribe. 

However, some students do respond more negatively to such ex- 
treme portrayals of groups. Too much of what appears to be bashing 
a certain group can turn students off to the important issues. Erin 
commented on her reactions: 

I came into this unit knowing that white people had made many 
mistakes with other races in the past, and there are white groups 



86 



[ 



Carol Danks 



today that are still very intolerant. I didn't take books like Things Fall 
Apart or Ceremony personally, because I know I'm not racist, but 
nevertheless, I got the impression that white people are bad. Frankly, 
I didn't take the books as seriously as I should have because all I 
could see in them were the bad white people who destroy other 
races. 

Kelly felt stronger as she thought about her reaction to this 
type of strong, negative portrayal of whites. She wrote: 

I regret reading these books in that they often describe my race as 
being boring and sometimes evil. In all of the books I have read, 
whites are often displayed as the flat, selfish characters that have a 
direct or indirect hand in causing the demise of a certain culture. 

This may be true, but it does nothing for the self esteem of white 
students. We are handed no literature that makes us proud and 
content as a white person. I despise it when books glorify their race 
just because they have not always been treated fairly. 

These responses raise a warning flag to teachers as we teach 
literature which shows one race as a negative perpetrator of evils on 
another race or culture. Any attempt to engender attitudes of toler- 
ance must avoid stereotyping. However, the strong negative presen- 
tations of whites in Things Fall Apart appear to stereotype whites as 
insensitive, arrogant, selfish boors. Pity is not a part of tolerance, yet 
as we see the Ibo culture virtually destroyed in the book, we may 
come to feel pity for the people. Novels which boldly confront 
complex issues of human relations and power struggles provide 
great challenges for all readers, but especially for teachers who 
choose to confront these issues with their students. While we need to 
open our students' eyes to the realities of history and humankind, 
we must be careful not to instill guilt or resentment. Teaching toler- 
ance should involve opening eyes, hearts, and minds, not shutting 
them. Thus, teachers must be ever vigilant to students' reactions and 
comments, and while encouraging honest, forthright discussion, 
guide students to thoughtful understanding. 

The AP English 12 classes are small enough to be conducted in 
seminar format. Students are required to write responses to what 
they read, sometimes by chapters and other times as thought pieces 
after finishing the work. Responses are shared with other students in 
the class, and as students read, I walk around and skim the work 
over students' shoulders. This provides me with valuable insights 
into both problems and joys that students have encountered. These 
responses usually determine the discussion topics for the seminar 
session. 

A lovely and appropriate children's book which I use in 
conjunction with Things Fall Apart is The Distant Talking Drum: Poems 



] 



87 



Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart 



from Nigeria. The poems comment on a variety of things found in the 
novel, especially the importance of yams to the culture. The colorful, 
beautifully drawn pictures provide a visual entrance into a culture 
many students are encountering for the first time. We take class time 
to read some of the poems together and look carefully at the visual 
representations of the Nigerian people and their daily activities. 

Because the AP class is organized around the AP canon with 
readings of recognized literary merit and assessment based on the 
rigorous, national AP exam, challenging analytical writing assign- 
ments are given for each reading. Achebe's tone is an important 
element of the book, so I may ask students to write an essay showing 
how his tone is revealed. I often ask students to answer "so what" 
about a literary piece; so what that the author used this title or this 
format or this tone or this style? Thus, I sometimes ask them to write 
about the structure of Things Fall Apart, showing how the three-part 
division impacts both meaning and the effect on the reader. 

Do students see value in reading books which in addition to 
being "good literature" also address issues involving tolerance and 
intolerance? My students generally indicate that they do. One stu- 
dent, Steve, wrote: 

I see value in reading novels that address issues such as tolerance 
and persecution because they force home certain ideas on people 
that need to see them. No matter how slanted some points of view 
are in books, they are all of value in seeing the other side of things. 

Joe, another student, commented on this same issue when he said. 

We can't expect books, or any other single class of things, to com- 
pletely invert our attitudes, but any tiny way they can make us 
reevaluate ourselves is important. The most we can hope for is to be 
pulled slightly in one direction or the other little by little, but even 
that is a huge help. 

Books don't need to try to persuade us to be more accepting. 
Simply experiencing the views and values of others helps us, con- 
sciously or subconsiously, to increase our tolerance. 

Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart provides one means of letting 
American students experience the views and values of a culture 
quite different from their own. Most of our students will never have 
the opportunity to live in the multitude of societies and cultures 
around the world. However, through literary encounters with these 
people, they can look not only at cultures different from their own, 
but also at their own. In so doing and in addressing the complexities 
of these encounters, perhaps they will develop a center that can hold 
and things will not fall apart. 



O 

ERIC 



100 



88 



Carol Danks 



Works Cited 



o 

ERIC 



Achebe, Chinua. "An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's Heart of Dark- 
ness." Heart of Darkness: An Authoritative Text. Ed. Robert Kimbrough. 
New York: Norton, 1988. 251-62. 

. Things Fall Apart. New York: Doubleday, 1959. 

Allport, Gordon. The Nature of Prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1979. 

American Heritage Dictionary. Second College Edition. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Company, 1991. 

Block, Gay, and Malka Drucker. Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the 
Holocaust. New York: Holmes and Meier, 1992. 

Olaleye, Isaac. The Distant Talking Drum: Poems from Nigeria. Paintings by 
Frane Lessac. Honesdale, PA: Wordsong/St. Martin's Press, 1995. 

Oliner, Samuel, and Pearl M. Oliner. The Altruistic Personality. New York: 
Free Press, 1988. 



101 



89 



i 



The Salem Witch Trials: 
History Repeats Itself 

Bonnie R. Albertson 

Brandywine School District, Wilmington, Delaware 



W ith a little bit of historical, political, social, and economic 
background information, high school students of all levels 
can quickly become fascinated with the story of the seven- 
teenth-century Salem witch trials. Both my basic level and my 
honors juniors enjoy Arthur Miller's The Crucible, although I have 
found that basic students do better when we read the play aloud. To 
introduce the text, I use a host of supplementary materials, including 
Stephen Vincent Benet's essay "We Aren't Superstitious," as well as 
assorted videos on witchcraft in general and Salem in particular. 
During the course of our discussions about the Salem events, the 
question inevitably emerges from students: "How could those people 
have been so stupid as to believe a bunch of silly girls?" This is the 
so-called "teachable moment." After clarifying exactly who those 
people were — ordinary, law-abiding, "God-fearing" people who 
happened to live in a theocracy — I plant the seed that maybe what 
happened in Salem is not so different from what happens today all 
over the world and even in our own community. The most literal 
minded will protest that few "sensible" people fear witches today. At 
the same time, more astute students will already have associated 
these events with others they have read about or studied. 

At this point, students are ready to know more about Arthur 
Miller's involvement with the McCarthy trials. Advanced students 
can read independently Richard Watts's introduction to the Crucible 
text (Bantam version) in which Miller candidly states that he wrote 
the play because, like many other artists of that era, he was a victim 
of Senator Joseph McCarthy's communist witch hunt. Many other 
students will need teacher guidance when plodding through the 
rather cumbersome introductory text, and the parallels are not 
always immediately obvious to them. For one thing, students today 
can not fathom the idea of communist Russia being a huge threat to 
American security. But with a few reminders (I usually ask them 
how many James Bond movie villains were Russian) they can at least 
recognize, if not appreciate, how fearful Americans once were of 
"Russian spies" hiding around every corner during the Cold War. At 



O 

ERIC 



102 



] 



90 



Bonnie R. Albertson 



this point, I bring in secondary source material on the McCarthy Era 
which we read both as a class and independently. 

Recent editions of many anthologized versions of The Crucible 
now include supplementary and complementary material on the 
McCarthy hearings. For example, the 1997 edition of the Scott 
Foresman American Literature text includes a section on the 
McCarthy hearings as well as related historical and scientific mate- 
rial. In addition, McDougal Littell's Literature Connections series 
contains many related Crucible readings, including two historical 
essays. Two other print sources that have been particularly useful, 
not just for the McCarthy comparison but for the entire project, 
include the American Heritage series and the Purnell reference series. 
Twentieth Century. While neither of these sources is new, both are 
suitably challenging to average and above-average students while 
accessible, with teacher guidance, to below-average students. For the 
past two school years, I have been out of the classroom serving as a 
curriculum coordinator. The young teacher assuming my teaching 
responsibilities, Leslie Perry, used my Crucible materials and this 
article as the basis for her unit on The Crucible. Ms. Perry is a first- 
year teacher, but she was pleased with both the material and the 
results of this unit. Furthermore, she was able to add much to the 
richness of the material with current resources. Among these is an 
article titled "Why I Wrote The Crucible" by Arthur Miller, from the 
October 21 and 28, 1996, issue of The New Yorker, prompted by the 
new movie version of The Crucible. I am also happy to have included 
some of Ms. Perry's students' papers and students' comments in this 
article. 

To begin drawing the initial comparisons between 
McCarthyism and the Salem witch trials, I outline on the board how 
both witch hunts were occasioned by society's fear of the un- 
known — xenophobia (that is one vocabulary word students will 
continue to find uses for all year long). The seventeenth-century fear 
of the devil compares to the twentieth-century fear of communism 
because both societies felt threatened by outsiders. I then show how 
certain individuals took advantage of this fear in order to gain 
power (i.e., McCarthy hi m self and Salem's Reverend Parris and 
Judge Hathorne), and how subsequent individuals jumped on the 
bandwagon as a result of their greed (i.e., the accusers who wanted 
neighbors' land or who bore grudges in Salem as well as those who 
wanted power and/ or revenge in the McCarthy era). 

During this process, I find it necessary to remind students of 
several crucial points. First of all. The Crucible is fiction, albeit histori- 
cal fiction, while the Salem witch trials are history. I will often need 
to remind students that Miller's characters are, in his own words, 
based on compilations of characters created from historical docu- 



ERiC 



103 



[ 



] 



91 



The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 



merits. For example, students often want to find a McCarthy-era 
counterpart to the illicit love affair Miller developed between Proctor 
and Abigail in the dramatic retelling of the witch trials. Conse- 
quently, they must periodically refer to historical retellings such as 
Benet's essay. Second, we are trying to strike a balance with this 
project. I do not want to minimize complicated historical events by 
oversimplifying the causes and effects, yet I want the material to be 
manageable for students. Therefore, I remind them constantly that 
while entire books have been written about all of these incidents in 
our history, our job is to sift through the material to look for common 
elements such as xenophobia, political greed, mob behavior, etc. 

Soon the entire wall-length blackboard is filled with compara- 
tive data from the two incidents. We note key differences as well as 
similarities. For example, in Salem, nineteen people were hanged 
and Giles Cory was pressed to death; in the McCarthy era, careers 
were destroyed, but there were no court-mandated death sentences. 
Next I direct students to focus on the resolutions as well as both 
short- and long-term consequences of the two events. In Salem, the 
hysteria was over within a year of the initial accusations. Eventually, 
there were some formal apologies, retractions, and survivor compen- 
sations (less than six hundred pounds). Flowever, nearly three 
hundred years later the town still gains its notoriety as the witch 
capital of the United States. The "McCarthy era" flourished for 
nearly four years (and surely the "red scare" began long before 
McCarthy's rise to power and lasted throughout the so-called Cold 
War). While Senator McCarthy eventually fell from power, his 
politics certainly influenced both the Truman and the Eisenhower 
administrations. Time permitting, one can even do an in-depth 
comparison between, for example, the fates of John and Elizabeth 
Proctor and that of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were sentenced 
to death in the 1950s for supposedly passing information to Russia 
about the atomic bomb. The Rosenbergs were executed as spies 
despite controversy over the fairness of their trial. Although they 
were not part of the McCarthy hearings per se, many believe their 
conviction was, in part, a reaction typical of the widespread anti- 
Communist paranoia that McCarthy inspired. Following extensive 
discussions on our findings, students are launched on a research 
project to investigate other events in our history with parallels to 
Salem and/or McCarthy. 

Flow much assistance I provide depends on the level and 
motivation of the students. I do, however, provide everyone with a 
list of possible topics, and our librarian helps students find appropri- 
ate sources of information. I also remind students that their initial 
research efforts should focus on acquiring information on the follow- 
ing subtopics: 




104 



92 



Bonnie R. Albertson 



historical context and background of the event (political, ideologi- 
cal, religious, cultural, etc.) 

motivation of the instigators/accusers (greed — for money and/or 
power, revenge, etc.) 

primary method or process of persecution 
types of "evidence" used to persecute 

direct result(s) or immediate outcome(s) of the event (resolution as 
well as disposition of both the accused and the accusers) 

long term results (political or social changes; reparations or victim 
compensation; public denouncements, apologies, retractions, etc.) 



With my honors groups, the assignment is to write a traditional 
compare/ contrast essay, usually five-to-seven paragraphs long, 
connecting the researched event with those in seventeenth-century 
Salem. I give students approximately one week to complete the 
assignment outside of class. They have access to a sample outline 
and have had previous experience with composing extended com- 
pare/contrast essays as well as research experience. We also devote a 
day or two of class time to discussing what various students discov- 
ered in the course of their research. These students are generally 
astute enough to make the connections easily. For example, Andrew 
Higley began his final essay with the following statement: 



The American Nation is known for its tolerance and acceptance of 
foreign peoples; however, it has repeatedly fallen victim to a disease 
that can grip society in fear and hatred, and can motivate it to lash 
out, perhaps even violently, at those individuals or organizations 
within that society that may seem to be a threat to the existing 
balance of the community. The disease is xenophobia . . . 

However, with my below-average students, the project is always a 
short research paper — three to five pages, with a minimum of three 
sources, one of which must be from an electronic source (usually 
SIRS on CD-ROM). They also prepare an oral presentation compar- 
ing the two events. The timeline is entirely different, and it is this 
assignment that I will outline for readers who want the more in- 
depth study. 

The in-class study of the McCarthy trials not only piques 
student interest, it also serves as a model for their own research (I 
also offer a sample research paper on the Holocaust to serve as a 
possible model). In addition, I usually allow students to work in 
groups of three or four. This allows them to share information, but it 
is also necessary because there are a finite number of topics ame- 
nable to comparison with the witch trials. Research time usually 
takes at least a week of in-class library time, and then we spend 
nearly a week in class to begin composing the preliminary draft. 



93 



The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 



After this, the final paper takes many weeks to compose, type, 
revise, and edit. Students have up to Thanksgiving to turn in their 
completed drafts, although by that time we are doing other things 
and work on our drafts only one day per week in class. I would add 
that the final product produced by my basic level students is usually 
comparable in depth and quality to the research done independently 
by my other students, even though the basic students do not have 
the stylistic sophistication of their honors-level peers. 

While this research project is not intended to be a comprehen- 
sive analysis of complex historical incidents, I would like to provide 
readers with enough information to give an idea of each episode's 
potential. While there are undoubtedly many more possibilities, 
some of the events students have had the most success researching 
include the following: 

Perhaps the easiest assignment to compare with the witch hunts of 
Salem and McCarthy, and one that is easily accessible to basic level 
students, is the internment of Japanese Americans in World War II. 
Out of fear and ignorance, many Americans accused Japanese 
Americans of being spies although there was little evidence to 
support these suspicions. Simple transistor radios were considered 
instruments of espionage, in much the same way as owning a doll 
was proof of voodoo activities for the accused Salem witches. And, 
like the Puritans, the Japanese were imprisoned with no trial or due 
process. They lost all their property, personal as well as business, 
and were sent to live in horse stalls or similarly unsuitable shacks. 
Many died during the incarceration, and the damage to the spirit of 
the survivors was devastating. As Ms. Perry's student Daniel noted 
about long-term consequences of such events, "Afterwards, much is 
lost [by] the victims, but more so for the country. Although material 
objects can be supplanted, faith in the system cannot." Indeed, 
reparations were very slow in coming, and it was not until 1988, 
more than forty years later, that Congress allotted $60,000 each to 
survivors. It was two years later that Attorney General Dick 
Thornburg issued a formal apology to survivors and their ancestors. 
"Although remorse was shown for these actions," noted Deborah, 
another of Ms. Perry's students, "it was too late for those who had 
died and not enough for those whose lives had been forever changed 
by this course of events." 

Two titles that have helped guide students' initial research 
include the following: Chapter 5 from Barbara Rico and Sandra 
Mano's American Mosaic: Multicultural Readings In Context (Houghton 
Mifflin, 1991), and also the article called "Home Was a Horsestall" 
from the Teaching Tolerance publication Us and Them: A History of 
Intolerance in America by Jim Carnes (1995). Many students will want 



94 



1 

Bonnie R. Albertson 



to read Jeanne Houston's firsthand account of the internment. 
Farewell to Manzanar, or the novel by Sheila Garrigue, The Eternal 
Spring of Mr. Ito. Recently, I was also intrigued by reading of the 
internment from a Canadian survivor, Joy Kogawa, in her memoir 
Obasan. 

The Scottsboro case of the 1930s provides another easy comparison. 

It is a story which few high school history books record, and the 
students especially like this account. The story began in northern 
Alabama in 1931 when a group of nine black teens (various accounts 
give different numbers) had the misfortune to be traveling in a 
railroad car when they got into a fight with several white boys. The 
white boys got off the train and immediately went to the police who 
boarded the freight train at its next stop to "question" the black 
youths. Two white women, aged seventeen and twenty-one, who 
feared recrimination because they were not supposed to be on that 
train, accused the youths of rape. The subsequent trial has close 
parallels to the Salem trials. Again, there was no hard evidence 
against the black youths. In fact, a local doctor testified that neither 
of the women had any live sperm in them, and one of the women 
later recanted (the other was a known prostitute). In addition, one of 
the accused was crippled and nearly blinded by venereal disease 
while another was practically a child. Nonetheless, eight of the nine 
youths were found guilty by all-white juries in trials that lasted less 
than one day each. During one of the many appeals, a judge who 
overthrew the original verdict was actually impeached so that the 
original guilty verdict could be reinstated! It was not until 1976 that 
the last survivor was "pardoned." 

Like the Salem mothers who abhorred the idea of devils 
tarnishing their daughters, the idea of Alabama white women being 
touched by African Americans was impetus for mass hysteria in 
Scottsboro; only the National Guard could save the teens from the 
lynch mob. And like the incidents in Salem, the hysteria was vali- 
dated by the court system. Dennis, another of Ms. Perry's students, 
comments on this by saying that like the Salem victims, the 
"Scottsboro boys were also convicted . . . [because they] couldn't 
prove their innocence." He further notes that these are just two of 
many incidents in which "people have been wrongfully convicted 
because the judges let outside feelings like hate and revenge cloud 
their sense of judgment." My students also enjoy researching this 
topic when they learn that this was one of the principal events to 
spark the Civil Rights Movement of the late fifties and sixties. 

Once again, the publication American Heritage has an excellent 
article on this event written by Dan T. Carter (Vol. 19.6). The article is 
entitled "A Reasonable Doubt." Mr. Carter also wrote a book on the 




107 



] 



95 



The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 



subject titled Scottsboro: A Tragedy of the American South (1969). There 
is another book titled Stories of Scottsboro by James Goodman (1993) 
although we have only been able to access information from two 
book reviews of the work. 

While I have found the Scottsboro incident to be an easy topic 
for comparison with the witch trials, there are, of course, many other 
incidents involving African American victims of racial prejudice. The 
1923 destruction of the Florida town of Rosewood is another event 
that students find interesting. Again, Jim Carnes's Us and Them 
provides a good summary of this incident. 

The Cherokee Nation's expulsion from the desirable east coast in 
1838 makes another excellent subject for comparison with the witch 
trials. Because the Indians held land the white men wanted, the 
Cherokees were forced to relocate across states — a journey that took 
many months and cost many lives. The Cherokee Nation still lives in 
Oklahoma, having never regained any of its previous property. And 
as with the Japanese Americans, the damage to the Cherokee psyche 
was extensive. However, the most interesting part about researching 
the Trail of Tears is for students to read the government justification 
of the plan. Like the good ministers of Salem who perpetrated the 
myth of the devil existing within the bewitched, the U.S. government 
did a good job of instilling grave fear among whites toward the 
"savages" who were described as waiting in ambush to plunder and 
murder the fair white citizens. Like the witches whom Salem "Chris- 
tians" sought to punish for bringing the devil to their town, the 
Indians were also branded as heathens. Megan Dencker, one of Ms. 
Perry's juniors, notes, "During the Salem Witch Trials, it was those 
who did not attend church every Sunday who were [initially] 
charged. . . . Similarly, the Indians who resisted religion were perse- 
cuted. The settlers attempted to convert the Indians, but most Indi- 
ans would not convert to Christianity." As in Salem, prejudice was 
also fueled by greed, especially for property. Unlike Salem, however, 
almost one half million Cherokees died making the eight-month, 
eight-hundred-mile journey sanctioned by the Congress and the 
president of the United States. In fact, one of Ms. Perry's students, 
Charlie, specifically compares Andrew Jackson with Senator 
McCarthy: "The two men leading these separate horrors had much 
at stake." Unfortunately, the Trail of Tears was not the only Indian 
catastrophe, and capable students will have no difficulty finding 
other Native American Indian-related debacles. In fact, I often have 
honors students also read Arthur Koppitt's play Indians. The play- 
wright himself compares the planned and systematic destruction of 
the Native American Indian nation to the political justification for 
the Vietnam War. 



96 



Bonnie R. Albertson 



Two related sources I have had success with include "Blankets 
for the Dead" from Carnes's Us and Them, and Chapter 8 from the 
aforementioned Rico and Mano's Houghton Mifflin book American 

Mosaic. 

My basic level students have had success with all of the above topics 
and resources. However, the next group of topics makes more ab- 
stract connections to Salem and McCarthy. I have had many basic 
level students tackle these subjects successfully, but I would be more 
careful about recommending them without cautioning that they are 
more difficult for below-average students. 

The persecution of Chinese immigrants in the late nineteenth cen- 
tury is another example of intolerance based on an irrational fear of 
the other. It too was rooted in greed and anxiety as the white man 
began to fear the immigrants. Fearing economic hardship, whites 
looked for a scapegoat and found it in the Chinese who were all-too- 
willing to work in the gold mines, or build the railway system, for 
very little money or regard for personal safety. In the same way that 
Salemites reacted to the Barbados servant, Tituba, whites feared the 
Chinese because they were different — in appearance, custom, reli- 
gion, and language. One example of this intolerance would be that 
the Chinese laborers were sometimes dragged into court even 
though they had no idea what the English-speaking judges and 
lawyers were saying. 

Incidents of violence and government-supported persecution 
of the Chinese can be documented in many sources. Two I have used 
once again include Chapter 2 of the Houghton Mifflin publication 
American Mosaic, and in Carnes's Us and Them, the article "A Rum- 
bling in the Mines." This latter article also concludes with a page 
summarizing more recent incidents involving violence against 
Asians in our country. An interesting addition is Mark Twain's short 
tongue-in-cheek essay "The Disgraceful Persecution of a Boy", 
which rails against a California town for punishing a young child 
whose "only" crime was stoning a "Chinaman." 

The Sacco and Vanzetti Trial offers an example of American intoler- 
ance for those whose politics are not mainstream. In the 1920s, the 
Italian immigrants Nicola Sacco and Bartholomew Vanzetti were 
accused of murdering a guard during a robbery attempt. Despite a 
lack of evidence, the two were found guilty and sentenced to death 
by electrocution. Many felt their convictions were based more out of 
fear over the pair's anarchist views than out of any legal evidence. 

Upton Sinclair wrote a novel, Boston, about the case, and Edna 
St. Vincent Millay's poem "Justice Denied in Massachusetts" alludes 



ERiC 




109 



[ 



] 



97 



The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 



to both the Sacco /Vanzetti trial as well as the Salem witch trials. The 
Haymarket Riot (Chicago 1886) is another similar example of mass 
reaction based on a hysterical fear of anarchists. 

Every year students find new, less-publicized events with which to 
compare the Salem witch trials. One example is the story of Leo 
Frank, a Jewish factory superintendent who was found guilty of 
brutally murdering a thirteen-year-old girl who worked in the 
Atlanta pencil factory. The anti-Semitism in the South at this time 
(1913) was partially responsible for the guilty verdict that was based 
solely on the convoluted testimony of another suspect. Evidence was 
nearly non-existent; for example, supposed blood stains used to 
corroborate the story turned out to be red paint! However, when 
Frank's death sentence was commuted to life in prison, a local lynch 
mob kidnapped and hanged him. Sharon, one of Ms. Perry's juniors, 
comments, "In both cases, nobody ever found any hard evidence; 
mob hysteria simply took over." She concludes her paper by saying, 
"It seems unlikely that situations where people are accused of a 
crime without evidence is possible in this country. However, Leo 
Frank and McCarthyism demonstrate this fact only too well." 

Incidents of violence and discrimination against gays have captured 
much media attention recently, and depending on the political 
climate of your school district, you can encourage students to re- 
search such events. Often without prompting, students will bring up 
the discrimination against, and sometimes persecution of, people 
with AIDS. Again, people's irrational fears of contracting the disease 
are remarkably similar to those of parents who feared their daugh- 
ters would be possessed by witches — a mere three hundred years 
ago. Another of Ms. Perry's students, Anne, comments, "People, 
who say an event like the Salem witch trials will never be repeated in 
America's history, are blind to the fact that today, . . . individuals are 
still pointing fingers toward victims of the AIDS epidemic. Though 
many believe witchcraft hysteria to be one of the shameful things 
hidden in our past, the same merciless persecution of the innocent 
occurs in our society today due to the HIV virus." Later in this same 
paper, Anne furthers the comparison: "An accusation of witchcraft 
or an AIDS diagnosis provokes the loss of an individual's rights. 
Sentenced to hang, the presumed witches were immediately put to 
jail. . . . Ryan White, a teenager with AIDS, lost his right to go to 
school because of the disease." In addition to having students find 
material on Ryan White's struggle, students can also refer to the fall 
1994 issue of Teaching Tolerance for David Aronson's article "In the 
Schoolyard at Twilight." Another article, "A Rose For Charlie," once 
again from Carnes's Us and Them, could also provide an introduction 
for students. 



O 

ERIC 



no 



[ 



] 



98 



Bonnie R. Albertson 



Along with the aforementioned American Heritage and Twentieth 
Century series as well as the Houghton Mifflin title American Mosaic, 
the majority of our information comes from the publication Teaching 
Tolerance, which provides a wealth of material for my students, 
especially when they search for less well-known events. Anyone 
who is unfamiliar with this most valuable research should ask his or 
her librarian to subscribe to this free quarterly publication. More 
recently, our invaluable librarian. Sue Gooden, who is always look- 
ing for new material to help us with our research, showed me a copy 
of Jules Archer's Rage in the Streets. It, too, was full of information 
which I am sure my students will find invaluable the next time I do 
this project. 

Because I use this assignment in a U.S. literature course, I limit 
student research to U.S. history. Of course, suspending the geo- 
graphic limitations opens up many more possibilities. In fact, in 
other classes, I do the same assignment after reading Elie Wiesel's 
Night. Students research other genocides such as the ongoing 
struggle in Bosnia or the historic persecution of Armenians by the 
Turks. The concept of "ethnic cleansing" generates valuable discus- 
sion among students. Other possibilities for discussion include the 
racial struggles in South Africa or even various religious "inquisi- 
tions" throughout world history. 

Perhaps the best part of this activity comes when students give 
oral or group reports on their chosen historical debacle. Students 
return to their original research groups to prepare oral presentations 
which are really informal panel discussions that they organize and 
facilitate. I always ask students to keep notes on the oral presenta- 
tions that other groups make. I again remind them to organize their 
notes according to the subtopics discussed weeks earlier (historical 
context, motivation of the accusers, type of persecution, results, etc.). 
They know they will be held accountable for this information at a 
later date. In an unscheduled observation of Ms. Perry's class, which 
just happened to be one in which students were preparing these 
same oral reports, our district personnel supervisor participated in a 
group discussion in which students were discussing how best to 
present their material. One student turned to the observer, saying, 
"We've got all the background, now [we have] to come up with a 
creative idea of how to present it. . . . We want to show that times 
change but people don't. We may have a news show — 'Then and 
Now.'" 

Students learn from these presentations that, in fact, history 
has repeated itself over and over. They are actually quite surprised 
about this! And then some optimistic (or naive) student always 
opens the flood gates by stating something to the effect that "It's nice 
that we are more enlightened today and nothing like that could 



O 



111 



99 



i 

The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 



happen in our modern society/' Ensuing discussions are lively 
indeed! 

At the conclusion of these oral reports, I often choose to go 
back to the text of The Crucible , directing students to look again at 
Miller's overture: 

It [the Salem tragedy] is a paradox in whose grips we still live, and 
there is no prospect yet that we will discover its resolution. Simply, it 
was this: for good purposes, even high purposes, the people of 
Salem developed a theocracy, a combination of state and religious 
power whose function was to keep the community together, and to 
prevent any kind of disunity that might open it to destruction by 
material or ideological enemies. It was forged for a necessary pur- 
pose and accomplished that purpose. But all organization is and 
must be grounded on the idea of exclusion and prohibition, just as 
two objects cannot occupy the same space. . . . The witch hunt was a 
perverse manifestation of the panic which set in among all classes 
when the balance began to turn toward greater individual freedom. 

When one rises above the individual villainy displayed, one can 
only pity them all, just as we shall be pitied someday. It is still 
impossible for man to organize his social life without repressions, 
and the balance has yet to be struck between order and freedom. 

(Act I) 

Retrospectively, students can reread Miller's overture as the basis for 
reflection on the entire research project. 

When it is time for midterm exams (again, I always do this 
activity in the fall), I ask my basic students to write an essay compar- 
ing the Salem witch trials with an event other than the one they 
originally researched. For me, this assignment provides necessary 
feedback to convince me that they have really been able to generalize 
from their reading and research, as well as to compare and contrast. 
The final question on this exam directs them to reflect on what they 
have learned about humans — and their inhumanity to others. Again, 
their answers document for me the value of this assignment. Two 
years ago, Gabe concluded his essay exam by noting that "people 
must learn about these events so they know how to prevent them 
from reoccurring. These horrible events don't happen just to differ- 
ent people; these things can happen to anybody even you." Ronike 
finished with this comment: "Man is his own enemy. . . . We have to 
find our hearts once more and share it with our neighbors on this 
dying planet we dwell on. Only then will we achieve the longed for 
goal of peace." Finally, Jackie said, "If someone were to tell me that 
these things were happening earlier, I would never believe that a 
man could do this to someone of his own kind. Or that people 
allowed it to happen like it was OK." 




112 



100 



Bonnie R. Albertson 



References 



0 



Throughout the rest of the year, students make repeated 
references to "the Salem assignment." When my honors students 
read Thoreau's Walden, they are reminded of how we treat those 
whose politics are different. When we read Twain, the Colonel 
Sherburne scene from Huckleberry Finn reminds them about mob 
behavior. When we read Toni Morrison, they remember persecution 
based on intolerance for those of color. Even after students have left 
my classroom and our high school, they still remember Judge 
Hathorne, Senator McCarthy, and many others who succumbed to 
the disease of xenophobia. Our work with this assignment not only 
provides a rich research experience, it can truly help students gain a 
deeper understanding of intolerance. In a column from The New 
Yorker, Arthur Miller ponders how audiences will react to the new 
movie version of his drama: "I am not sure what The Crucible is 
telling people now, but I know that its paranoid center is still pump- 
ing out the same darkly attractive warning that it did in the fifties." 
Two years ago, a student handed me the following piece at the 
conclusion of this unit. I believe his reflection responds well to Mr. 
Miller's more recent query: 

Reflection on Arthur Miller's The Crucible 

Who am I to judge another by his morals? By what right do I perse- 
cute him because his skin or values differ from my own? How may I 
call my actions "just" when they in truth deceive my blackened heart 
and tainted mind; the reality that justification of my actions comes 
only from the desire that 1 may be looked upon with honor for 
"ridding the world of another blasphemous pagan?" 1 tell you true, if 
1 might call myself a hero for harming another with lies in order to 
improve my name, then 1 am, in truth, lower than the beasts that 
crawl upon their bellies, and feast upon debris. (Andy Abblitt, 1994) 



Archer, Jules. Rage in the Streets. San Diego: Browndeer Press, 1994. 

Aronson, D. "In the Schoolyard at Twilight." Teaching Tolerance. Montgom- 
ery: Southern Poverty Law Center, 1994. 

Benet, Stephen Vincent. "We Aren't Superstitious." American Literature. Ed. 
Donald T. Hollenbeck and Julie West Johnson. Evanston, IL: 
McDougal, Littell, 1984. 55-63. 

Carter, D. T. "A Reasonable Doubt." American Heritage 19.6 (1968): 40-43, 
95-101. 

Carnes, J. Us and Them: A History of Intolerance in America. Montgomery: 
Southern Poverty Law Center, 1995. 

Major, J. "McCarthy and the Communist Witch Hunts." Twentieth Century 
17 (1979): 2277-80. 



113 



101 



The Salem Witch Trials: History Repeats Itself 



Miller, Arthur. The Crucible. New York: Bantam, 1953. 

. "Why I Wrote The Crucible." The New Yorker 21 Oct. 1996: 158-64. 

Rico, Barbara Roche, and Sandra Mano. American Mosaic. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1991. 



ERfC 



114 



102 



Teaching Conflict- 
Resolution Strategies 
through Multiethnic 
Literature 

Belinda Yun-Ying Louie 

University of Washington, Tacoma 

Douglas H. Louie 

University of Washington, Tacoma 



G reen Valley High School is a comprehensive high school 

located on an eight-acre campus in the heart of downtown 
Green Valley, Washington. Green Valley is famous for its 
annual state fair, which draws over a million visitors from all over 
the state. The downtown area buzzes with long lines of traffic during 
the two weeks of state fair. In the vicinity of the fairground, residents 
sit outside their houses to collect parking fare from people who park 
in their front lawns. During the rest of the year, people come only to 
visit the antique shops along the main street. Local folks flock to the 
high school stadiums at nights to support high school ball games. 
Although Green Valley is adjacent to a metropolitan area with a 
diverse population, its population remains predominantly white 
despite the fact that it was the site of a Japanese American intern- 
ment camp during the Second World War. Green Valley High School 
reflects the town's demographics. Over 90 percent of its 1,600 stu- 
dent population is white, while the rest consists of African Ameri- 
cans, Asian Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics. 

Ms. Schmidt teaches English, social studies, and health to 
sophomores and juniors at Green Valley High School. Our graduate 
students introduced her to us because of our common interest in 
combating stereotypes and intolerance. Our understanding of her 
deepened as we had more conversations with her. She is very com- 
mitted to preparing her students to interact with people from diverse 
cultural backgrounds. She knows that her students, because of their 
very limited contact with ethnic minorities, tend to be ethnocentric. 



O 

ERIC 



115 



103 



i i 

Teaching Conflict-Resolution Strategies 



taking their own cultural values and behaviors as norms. If conflict 
occurs when interacting with people from other ethnic groups, her 
students may assert their ways as the proper ways to behave. 

The authors and Ms. Schmidt, therefore, designed a three-week 
integrated unit to help her students understand the diversity in 
conflict resolution strategies using a multiethnic story. In her health 
classes, Ms. Schmidt introduced a set of conflict resolution strategies 
based on the research of Johnson and Johnson to teach mental health. 
They advocate negotiation as the approach to resolve conflicts. There 
are six steps in negotiating resolutions of conflicts: 

1. jointly define the conflict 

2. exchange proposals and feelings 

3. reverse perspectives 

4. invent options for mutual benefit 

5. reach a wise agreement 

6. try, try again 

Johnson and Johnson also suggest that integrating conflict resolution 
with literature instruction will enhance student achievement because 
such instruction promotes the understanding of and insights into 
literature. When integrating with academic units, conflict resolution 
training will not interfere with or distract from academic learning by 
overloading students and competing for their attention. 

We build upon Johnson and Johnson's suggestion by adding 
the multicultural component. In this unit, we guide students to 
apply Johnson and Johnson in a nonmainstream community. 
Multicultural literature is used to provide the context for students to 
realize cultural diversity in conflict resolution strategies. Johnson 
and Johnson's strategy is shaped by the norm of mainstream North 
American culture, which emphasizes the significance of open, verbal 
communication. Gerry Philipsen states that the mainstream Ameri- 
can culture is preoccupied with the importance of using verbal 
communication to resolve interpersonal conflicts. This prevalent 
cultural norm condemns as less competent members of the commu- 
nity those who do not communicate their inner feelings. Students 
need to realize how misplaced is the mainstream conflict resolution 
strategy as suggested by Johnson and Johnson in an ethnic minority 
context. Without understanding the potential incompatibility, stu- 
dents often discriminate against an ethnic minority because they fail 
to act "properly." 

Together, the authors and Ms. Schmidt chose Linda Crew's 
novel Children of the River for Ms. Schmidt's junior class, which meets 
in a two-hour block on Mondays and Wednesdays. There are nine- 



] 



104 



c 

Belinda Yun-Ying Louie and Douglas H. Louie 



teen students in this class, eleven boys and eight girls. With the 
exception of one Samoan girl, all of them are white. Sundara, the 
seventeen-year-old protagonist of the novel, is a Cambodian refugee 
trying to adjust to her new life in the United States. Separated from 
her family in the war, she is staying with her aunt's family in Or- 
egon. The high school setting of the story provides a familiar sce- 
nario, enabling Ms. Schmidt's students to analyze the characters' 
ways of handling various situations. Best of all, Sundara faces a 
major conflict in dating, a problem with which many high school 
students can empathize. Sundara's family members object to her 
seeing a boy, even worse, a white boy. 

We want students first to identify the major conflicts in Chil- 
dren of the River. Then Ms. Schmidt guided students to discuss how 
they may apply Johnson and Johnson's strategy if similar conflicts 
happen in their lives. Students then analyzed the characters' feelings 
and motivations to identify the reasons behind their conflict resolu- 
tion approaches. We believe that allegedly strange behaviors of 
others will appear less strange if people understand the reasons 
behind the acts. In this unit, the goal is to increase students' aware- 
ness of diversity in conflict resolution strategies. 

Before introducing Children of the River, Ms. Schmidt showed 
the film The Killing Fields. In the film, Dith Pran, a translator, helps 
two foreign journalists covering the war in Cambodia. He is exiled to 
the labor camps in Cambodia's countryside, where he suffers four 
years of torture and starvation before escaping to Thailand. Ms. 
Schmidt guided her students as they discussed the impact of Cam- 
bodian genocide. Such understanding provides the background 
knowledge for students to read Children of the River. One of the 
authors (B.Y.L.) was the participant observer during all the instruc- 
tional sessions on exploring diversity. In the first week, the class 
spent time reading and summarizing main ideas of various sections 
of the book. Ms. Schmidt wanted to ensure that students understood 
the story. 



Conflict 

Identification 



In the second week, students identified Sundara's conflicts at home 
and at school. In their journals, students noted: 

A major conflict rests upon the huge cultural differences in marriage 
choosing traditions, Sundara's culture believes in family's arranging 
marriages. US culture says that you date and find your own partner. 
This turns into a crisis because it causes some major fights between 
Sundara and her aunt. Her aunt wants to stick to their heritage and 
traditional ways, but Sundara is so attracted to Jonathan. 

Sundara leaves her homeland in Phnom Penh because of the Khmer 
Rouge. She goes to Oregon to live out the rest of her life. She has a 



O 

tKJC 



117 



105 



Teaching Conflict-Resolution Strategies 



conflict. She doesn't want to be in America and misses her family. 
But they are all dead now. She also doesn't feel comfortable with the 
Cambodian way of life in America. I believe that Jonathan and 
Sundara being together is the crisis in the story. They are not sup- 
posed to see each other because of Sundara's elders who in Cambo- 
dian culture pick a husband for her. Also he is white. 

A conflict I find in the book is the attraction between Sundara and 
other people's ways of doing things at school. Teacher likes her 
poem and shares it with the whole class. Sundara does not think she 
should object to a teacher's decision. However, she does not want 
other people to know what she thinks and how she feels. 

It is against Sundara's culture and beliefs to date Jonathan. The 
conflict turns into crisis because they love each other. It turns into a 
crisis because where Sundara comes from the parents pick her love. 
Plus Jonathan is white and American. Even though Sundara likes 
him, she knows that she'd be in great trouble if she gets caught. 

Many students attribute Sundara's conflicts to her living in 
two worlds. The Cambodian world has clear attitudes about how a 
girl should behave in courtship and marriage. Sundara's family, 
especially her aunt, fiercely upholds such values as a way to protect 
Sundara. At school, Sundara lives in an American world. Her posi- 
tive response to Jonathan's interest in her forces her to choose be- 
tween the traditional way and the new American way in building a 
relationship. 



Application of 
Johnson and 
Johnson’s 
Conflict- 
Resolution 
Strategies 



Students had few problems identifying Sundara's crises. Ms. 

Schmidt wanted students to reflect upon the possibility of the Cam- 
bodian characters using Johnson and Johnson's open negotiation 
strategy. She posed some questions to guide students in their journal 
writing. How would students respond if students were in the story 
characters' situations? To what extent would they use Johnson and 
Johnson's strategy if they faced the characters' conflicts? Ms. 

Schmidt asked the students to bring journals to class. She encour- 
aged students to share their journal entries. Parental opposition to 
their dating is a passionate topic about which students are eager to 
share their opinions during classroom discussion. 

Teacher: How would you apply Johnson and Johnson's conflict 
resolution strategies if you were in Sundara's situation? 

Student 1: No matter what my parents say, if I like someone a lot, I 
would make my own choices and see that person. If it doesn't 
work then I'll learn from my mistakes. I would have the person 
come over to meet my parents and give my parents a chance. This 
is what the Johnsons say about "exchanging proposals and 
feelings." But it is hard for me to invent options for mutual 



0 




118 



106 



[ 



Belinda Yun-Ying Louie and Douglas H. Louie 



benefit in this situation. If my parents cannot deal with me being 
with a person of a different race or ethnic background, then they 
wouldn't see me. 

Student 2 : 1 will not be so rough with my parents. I would make sure 
that the girl means a lot to me and that I am not making any 
mistake. I would tell my parents my problem and see if they can 
help me with it . . . for my benefit. Maybe that is what "reaching a 
wise agreement" means. Because this is what I have been taught 
throughout my life. This is my way! 

Student 3: Yeah, but I don't want my parents to choose my friends for 
me. But I don't mind to tell them my proposals and feelings. They 
could tell me theirs too. 

Student 4: 1 would date whoever I like. I wouldn't care about my 
parents. To me, the conflict is resolved because I like her and she 
likes me. I would probably talk to my parents. If they get mad, 
it's too bad. It is not difficult for me to exchange proposals and 
feelings. But reversing perspectives? They should take my 
perspectives. 

Student 5: But it's not so simple. It would be a hard situation to 
choose between my culture and a very strong attraction. I would 
think long and hard to decide which was the most important 
thing, keeping my family happy, or my own happiness. Because I 
would want to make sure that I make the right choice. 

Student 6 : 1 would sit down with my parents and try to explain how I 
feel about that person. I think we need to let each other know our 
feelings. I have no problem taking the first two steps of Johnson 
and Johnson's way. And if everything fails, I'll just run away and 
elope with this person. This may be the most effective way to 
resolve the conflict. 

Student 7: Yes and no. I definitely would talk to my elders and try to 
tell them how good the person is and I really do love this person. 
I would still date this person even if it is considered wrong 
because maybe this person is the one that I suppose to spend the 
rest of my life with. I don't see why I should "invent options for 
mutual benefit." What benefits will my parents get if I give up 
that person? 

Student 8 : 1 can't really be so definite. I would be undecided, much 
like Sundara. I think in the end I'd tell my parents that this is a 
good guy and he comes from a good family. I'll plan a get to- 
gether so that both sides can learn to understand each other 
better. Maybe this is my way to "reverse perspectives." I would 
like to assure my family that I have made the right decision and I 
am happy with this person. 

Overall, students upheld the principle behind the Johnsons' strategy 
in open communication. Most of the students wanted their parents 
to understand their feelings and reasons, giving a chance to the 



O 



119 



107 


Teaching Conflict-Resolution Strategies 


Analysis of 
Characters’ 
Conflict- 
Resolution 
Strategies 


parents to change their minds. However, students refused to reverse 
perspectives or to invent options for mutual benefits. Primarily, 
students perceived that conflicts would not exist if parents did not 
object to their children's choices of dates. 

Ms. Schmidt asked some questions to prompt students when they 
analyzed characters' conflict-resolution strategies. How do charac- 
ters respond to the crisis? Why do characters respond to crisis in 
such a way? What is the result of the characters' action? Would the 
Johnsons' strategy work for Sundara and her family? Students' 
journal entries revealed that they began to understand how culture 
and beliefs have a strong influence on people's behaviors. They may 
not like the behaviors; yet they understand why characters react in 
their ways. 

Sundara tries to work around the crisis and avoid it , but she can't. 
It's against Sundara's culture and her family's beliefs to date a boy. 
Her elders are supposed to pick it for her. She hides her feelings and 
desire from her aunt. She hides her relationship with Jonathan from 
her family. I do not think she can negotiate with her family on 
dating. She will be considered "boy crazy" if she raises this topic. 

When her aunt finds out that Sundara is seeing an American boy, she 
is asmed [ashamed] of her, because to her its like disrespectful. 
Actually she is mad because anther Cambodian lady tells her that 
Sundara is walking with an American boy at school. She hates 
Sundara because she makes her lose face in front of her people. She 
keeps thinking that Sundara will be ruined by an American boy. So 
she has to stop Sundara. She thinks that if Sundara does not see the 
boy, then there is no problem. There is no need for negotiation. Her 
way to deal with the situation was to make sure that Sundara obeyed 
her. 

Sundara has a breakdown, which is somewhat good because she gets 
all of her feelings out. It's funny that when Sundara cries and cries, 
grandmother asks the dead baby's spirit not to punish her. At the 
end she suggests that Sundara doesn't remember anything. But 
Sundara does! She is embarrassed. She feels shy because now people 
know her private thoughts. I guess it is not right for Sundara to blast 
her feelings. They need to find a reason to cover up or to justify her 
behaviors. They cannot just tell their feelings and needs like we do. 
They have some indirect ways to explain to people what they think. 

In class, students argue about how Sundara and other charac- 
ters resolve their conflicts. 

Student 1: Sundara does not tell her aunt what happens so that her 
aunt won't get so upset with her. 



108 



_ I 

Belinda Yun-Ying Louie and Douglas H. Louie 



Student 2: She keeps avoiding the issue. She doesn't want to tell her 
family about her relationship with Jonathan. I don't think her 
family openly discusses feelings. They don't openly talk about 
whom they love, that kind of stuff. 

Student 3: At the beginning, I wonder where she is going. Does she 
think that things will get better if she just keeps everything to 
herself? How does she expect her aunt to change? Does she want 
to have a future with Jonathan? Then I realize that she will be 
disrespectful if she openly tells her aunt what she wants. Her 
aunt expects Sundara to obey her, not to negotiate or to tell her 
how she feels. 

Student 4 : 1 think she is very afraid and doesn't know what to do. She 
knows that she is not supposed to date, period. How could she 
tell her family that she is in love with an American boy? Her aunt 
does say that it is a shameful thing. On top of that, I don't think 
she has openly negotiated with her aunt before. Her family does 
not see the need to understand her perspectives. Children just 
need to obey their elders. Communication and exchanging 
perspectives are not . . . ready behaviors in her culture. 

Student 5: She does want her family to know what she thinks and 
how she feels. She just does not do it as openly, as quickly as we 
do when she has to communicate her thinking with other people. 
She is more calculated, more hesitant . . . just needs a bit more 
time. And she doesn't want to do until it is absolutely necessary. 

Student 6: They deal with each other, yes, I agree, in a slower pace 
and not so much "in your face." 

Student 7: The slow pace drives me crazy, just like Sundara is driving 
Jonathan crazy by taking her time to let her family know about 
him. Maybe I just need to know that people have different pace in 
resolving conflicts. They can bear the tension longer than I can. 

Student 8 : 1 don't know exactly what is the Cambodian way of 
dealing with conflict. I just sense it. I don't act like Sundara. She 
worries about what her family feels . . . she wants to resolve the 
conflict without hurting her family's feelings . . . without bringing 
attention to the conflicts. 

Students realize that open communication is not a highly 
valued behavior in the Cambodian community. Young people do not 
share their perspectives and assert their rights. Family obligations 
and traditional behaviors are more important than individual feel- 
ings and thoughts. Characters such as Sundara try to resolve the 
conflict by acting quietly to change the situation. In the Cambodian 
culture, open communication and explicit negotiation on guarded 
topics will only worsen the conflict, not resolve it. 

As the unit develops, students focused more on the characters' 
feelings and reasoning. They understood that Cambodian characters 



ERiC 



12 1 



] 



109 



Teaching Conflict-Resolution Strategies 



deal with conflicts in ways that are traditional and proper in their 
culture. Many students found it difficult to use the Cambodian 
approach. Nevertheless, they accepted the existence of conflict 
resolution strategies that, although different from their own, work 
for people in other cultural groups. 

A student wrote in his journal: 

What the Cambodian people went through to escape the 
communistfs] showed a lot of courage and determination. The war 
was so hard on so many people they had to completely change their 
way of living and even leave their babies behind so they would have 
a chance to survive. Some people lost their whole families and had to 
start a new life on their own in a strange country. I can understand 
that they don't want to change their ways of thinking and behaving. 
That's all they know. Whatever is happening in the new country may 
not make sense to them. When conflicts occur, it is easier to rely on 
ways that they are comfortable with to deal with the conflicts. 

Many students expressed their shock at the impact of war on 
the Cambodians. They began to understand how difficult it is for the 
Cambodians to settle in a new country. The more the students exam- 
ined the Cambodian characters' background, thinking, and action, 
the more they realized and accepted the differences between the 
characters and themselves. During class discussion, students repeat- 
edly emphasized that they could not take the characters' conflict 
resolution strategies. At the same time, they also found it inappropri- 
ate for the characters to practice Johnson and Johnson's strategy 
which advocates open communication. 



Conclusion when we launched this unit, we wanted to increase student aware- 
ness of other people's conflict resolution strategies through 
multiethnic literature. Using Children of the River, Ms. Schmidt 
guided students to discuss the application of American ways of 
conflict resolution as suggested by Johnson and Johnson in Cambo- 
dian characters' lives. Students realized the mismatch between the 
accepted American value of open communication and Cambodian 
reserved behaviors. Such awareness advanced their knowledge of 
diversity in conflict resolution strategies. This unit is a modest 
attempt to combat intolerance and discrimination. Students will 
continue to progress in their understanding when they read more 
examples of conflict resolution strategies in literature of ethnic 
minorities. Understanding diversity of conflict resolution strategies 
requires realization of diversity in people's thinking and behaving. 
Multiethnic literature provides a rich and engaging context for 
students to accomplish the task. 



O 

ERIC 



122 



no 


Belinda Yun-Yif^ Louie and Douglas H. Louie 


Note 


We want to express our heartfelt appreciation to the teacher and 
students who participated in this project. 


References 


Crew, Linda. Children of the River. New York: Delacorte, 1989. 

Johnson, David W., and Frank P. Johnson. Joining Together: Group Theory and 
Group Skills. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1991. 

Philipsen, Gerry. Speaking Culturally: Explorations in Social Communication. 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992. 


Multiethnic Literature 
for Studying Conflict- 
Resolution Strategies 


Castaneda, Omar S. Among the Volcanoes. New York: Dell Yearling, 1991. 
(Guatemalan) 

Against the traditional role, Isabel longs to go to school and become 
a teacher. 

Hale, Janet Campbell. The Owl's Song. New York: Bantam, 1991. (Native 
American) 

Billy White Hawk has to deal with hatred and prejudice in a high 
school away from his reservation. 

Ortiz Cofer, Judith. An Island Like You. New York: Puffin, 1995. (Puerto 
Rican American) 

Puerto Rican American young people face conflicts as they are 
caught between their heritage and their American surroundings. 

Taylor, Mildred. Let the Circle Be Unbroken. New York: Dial, 1981. (African 
American) 

The Logans stand to hold onto their land against Southern racism 
and strong pressure of taxes during the Depression. 

Yep, Laurence. The Star Fisher. New York: Morrow, 1991. (Chinese Ameri- 
can) 

Joan does not want to be the interpreter for her mother all the time. 



o 

ERIC 



123 



Ill 



Young People Respond 
to the Elderly 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky 

Do not cast us away in old age, 

When our strength gives out do not forsake us. 

Selichos, High Holy Day prayers 

We are not now that strength which in old days 
Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are — 

One equal temper of heroic hearts, 

Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will 
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield. 

Alfred Lord Tennyson, "Ulysses" 



M ost of my students at Cleveland Heights High School were 
lucky to have known all four of their grandparents. Many of 
them had great-grandparents still living. Responding to one 
of the literature assignments, John Steinbeck's "The Leader of the 
People," our junior English class members talked about their rela- 
tionships with the elderly members of their respective families. Some 
students enjoyed weekly visits to great-grandparents, listening to 
their stories about "the good old days." Others shared experiences 
with old neighbors who "are mean and cantankerous, telling us to 
keep off their property." All agreed that it would be very worthwhile 
and a fun project to interview their oldest relatives and even to 
approach those neighbors who had seemed forbidding. 

Preparation for the oral histories involved serious discussions 
about students' attitudes toward old people, readings of literary 
excerpts reflecting differing opinions about the aged, and creating 
guidelines for interviewing the elderly family members and neigh- 
bors. 

For some years, I had been collecting articles giving insights 
about older people. Many of these articles served as springboards for 
class discussions. Joe See, a local resident, talked about his own 
grandmother, in a poignant story in our local daily newspaper: 

It is her earliest memory. She was playing on the porch steps when 
her father hurried home from his job at the lumber yard bringing the 
news that the president had been shot. Even now she recalls her 
mother's crying out a disbelieving "No, George, that can't be right!" 



O 

ERIC 



124 



c 



: 



112 



Leatrice B. Rabinsky 



and later, on into the evening, adults stopping at the front walk, 
asking or offering the latest dispatches about the condition of 
President William McKinley. It was September, 1901 and my grand- 
mother was four years old. (5B) 

See reveals how his grandmother can tell the great-grandchildren 
about hearing Teddy Roosevelt speak, about the time women gained 
suffrage, about her doctor's "new red Maxwell," one of the few 
automobiles in the city. Encouraging readers to take advantage of 
this passing opportunity to relate to the elderly. See notes, "Instead 
of shunting older people to life's side, we should draw them to us 
and listen. They are among any community's uncounted assets. 
These people have the gift of memory." 

For columnist Lois Wyse, reaching for a box of treasured old 
photographs opened a storehouse of nostalgic memories about her 
relationship with her grandmother. "Grandma was a sturdy woman 
who wore her hair in a bun, made icebox cookies, and told me 
stories about her childhood in Cleveland. When I heard those tales 
of another era, I could have believed Grandma lived among the 
dinosaurs and apes" (291). Wyse reflects that a child who has a 
grandparent "has a softened view of the universe and knows that 
there is more to life than what we see, more than getting and gain- 
ing, winning and losing. There is a love that makes no demands." 

Thinking about grandparents and very old people who may 
be confused or very irritable would prove to be a challenge to the 
students. An article about Naomi Feil, trained in psychology and 
social work with older people, was valuable in preparing class 
members for the oral history project. 

Feil, the daughter of Julius and Helen Weil, director of the 
local Montefiore Home for the Aged, grew up among the elderly 
residents. Many were suffering from Alzheimer's disease or similar 
illnesses. The article poignantly describes how she and the other 
residents shared good times and sad memories. Feil said, "The very 
old disoriented people taught me. I learned that they have an intui- 
tive wisdom, a basic humanity that we all share." She cautions the 
reader: 

I grew up in a (old age) home, so I know how mean old people can 
be. The old lady is not really yelling at you; you remind her of 
someone from long ago. She's trying to resolve some unfinished 
business from the past at this final stage in her life. (7-H) 

Looking at old people with a jaundiced eye, however, did 
come up in class discussions. One student commented how stressful 
it was for his mother to care for a cranky grandmother who shared 
their home. Often, the student and his brothers became irritable 
when painful feelings were expressed. Family mealtimes were not 



ERIC 



125 



113 



Young People Respond to the Elderly 



always pleasant. It was important to acknowledge that impatience 
with the elderly is evident in literature that we would read. An 
excerpt from Shakespeare's As You Like It reinforced this point of 
view. Jaques, the sardonic character, presents his view of the seven 
ages of man. Most of the students were familiar with the opening 
lines of Jaques's message, "All the world's a stage, and all the men 
and women merely players." They did not know Jaques's bitterly 
sneering assessment of the aging process: 

The sixth age shifts 
Into the lean and slipper's pantaloon. 

With spectacles on nose and pouch on side. 

His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide 
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice. 

Turning again toward childish treble, pipes 
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all. 

That ends this strange eventful history. 

Is second childishness and mere oblivion. 

Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything. (2.7.33-42) 

Satire, however, is not the tone of Steinbeck's story "The Leader of 
the People," excerpted from his book of stories. The Red Pony. In the 
story, a letter arrives at the Tiflin ranch announcing the arrival that 
day of Mrs. Tiflin's father. Carl Tiflin reacts to the announcement 
with a stern look. Angry with her husband's frowns, Mrs. Tiflin 
chastises him. Carl Tiflin says that Grandfather talks and talks about 
only one thing. Jody, their young son, who has heard all of the 
stories, answers excitedly that, of course, he talks about Indians and 
crossing the plains. Jody's mother defends Grandfather's endless 
stories by saying that "he had led a wagon train clear across the 
plains to the coast, and when it was finished, his life was done. It 
was a big thing to do, but it didn't last long enough"(10-ll). She 
urges her husband to be patient. Jody is the one who goes to greet 
his Grandfather's arrival. Happy to tell his Grandfather about his 
mouse hunt in the hay stack, Jody is surprised when Grandfather 
compares the troops hunting Indians and shooting children to the 
mouse hunt. 

At the dinner table, chewing the steak reminds Grandfather of 
the tremendous hunger and huge appetites of those who crossed the 
plains with him. He repeats the stories so often told to the family, 
how he was the leader of the party and how he had to prevent them 
from slaughtering the team oxen for food. 

Carl is impatient, telling Grandfather that "Yes, we have heard 
the stories. Lots of times" (14). 

Young Jody is the one who ultimately listens to everything 
Grandfather tells. He even lies in bed and thinks about 



O 

ERIC 



126 



] 



Leatrice B. Rabinsky 



Grandfather's world of Indians and buffaloes that is gone forever. 

He bonds closely with Grandfather. He understands when Grandfa- 
ther says: 

It wasn't Indians that were important, nor adventures, nor even 
getting out here. It was a whole bunch of people made into one big 
crawling beast. And I was the head. It was westering and 
westering. (16) 

Jody senses Grandfather's emptiness as he mourns the end of 
that spirit of adventure, that westering has gone from the people 
because there was no place else to go. They had reached the ocean. 

Students recognized Jody's sensitivity to an old grandfather. 
Students could also relate to the impatience of Jody's parents with 
the endless stories of Grandfather, as most class members had 
experiences to share of hearing repetitious stories from their own 
grandparents and great-grandparents. After discussing how these 
stories would be lost forever unless they were recorded, students 
were ready to embark on the Oral History Project and presentation. 
See Figure 1 (page 117) for the guidelines sheet distributed to each 
student. 

As the time for the presentation of the completed oral history 
projects drew near, students began to bring in posters, composite 
pictures, videos, and slides. They were anxious to reserve bulletin 
board space to display their creative visuals. How proud the stu- 
dents were to share pictures of family members taken four, five, and 
six decades ago. We had to ask for school display cases in order to 
accommodate the great number of completed artistic visuals. What 
was even more impressive were the written documents and oral 
presentations of the interviews conducted by the students. Class 
members were riveted as their peers recounted stories of the past, 
family rituals and customs, modes of dress, entertainment, and food 
choices. 

Cleveland Heights High School has a multicultural and di- 
verse racial student body. It was fascinating to hear the responses of 
the different students to the experiences of their elderly relatives. 

Janet's grandmother was bom south of Seoul, Korea, in the 
early part of the century. She and her family had endured the harsh 
politics of foreign occupation forces. Despite the tragic loss of na- 
tional pride and the imposing routines of military drills and of 
learning a strange language, Janet's grandmother excelled in her 
studies. She was a basketball star in her high school girls' team. 

Soon, after an arranged marriage, her grandmother bore six children. 
Left a widow at an early age, Janet's grandmother came to America 
with her children. She struggled to see that they were educated. 
Janet's admiration and respect for her grandmother is evident. 
Learning English was difficult for her. 



[ 



] 



115 



Young People Respond to the Elderly 



I think that my grandmother is so amazing because even today, 
when she sees a word she doesn't know, she writes it down on the 
other side of a used paper and looks it up in the Korean- American 
dictionary. Then all day, she tries to memorize the word. As I inter- 
viewed my grandmother, I couldn't help feeling proud of her. She is 
so determined in all she does and lets no one stop her. 

Janet's grandmother recently celebrated her eightieth birthday. 
"Because of this project I had the opportunity to bond with my 
grandmother in a very special way," wrote Janet. 

Casey's grandmother was bom a black female in the deep 
South. Casey wrote: 

Despite the strikes already placed against her for being Black and 
female in America during the 1920's, she was successful in making 
the best of her life and the lives of her children. By having lived and 
survived through the Great Depression, World War II and the Civil 
Rights movement, she has seen the best and worst of America as it 
grows and matures. 

Casey's grandmother had great musical ability. She learned to play 
almost every instrument in the school band. Interested in politics 
and community work, Casey's grandmother has served on the 
boards of the Dallas Peace Center, Amnesty International, and the 
local United Nations Association. She was called back from retire- 
ment as a teacher to tutor students who had failed math and reading 
on the state academic tests. With her help all the seniors passed the 
test and everyone graduated. With pride, love, and respect, Casey 
noted, "In her younger days, all my grandmother had ever hoped 
for was to finish college and have a family. This she did, and in 
doing so, created a strong heritage for me to pass on through the 
generations." 

Many of the grandparents were children of the Depression. 
Andy wrote of his great-grandfather, who had been a successful shoe 
salesman before the Depression. Because of a poor investment in a 
large shipment of fancy shoes which had gone out of style, he was 
left with unwanted shoes. His store closed and he lost everything. 
Andy describes his grandfather's vivid memories of the "tough 
times," of coming home from school and finding a SOLD sign on the 
front lawn of his house . 15 

Rachel's grandmother was placed with her brother in an 
orphanage at the age of four after her father died. She endured a 
very strict regimen until age twelve when she was reunited with her 
mother. Despite hardships and Depression jobs paying three dollars 
per week for housework after school, Rachel's grandmother contin- 
ued to work for most of her life. She worked at the telephone com- 
pany, in a department store, and as a waitress. Now in her late 



0 



128 



] 



116 



Leatrice B. Rabinsky 



seventies, Rachel's grandmother volunteers at a thrift shop, has 
holiday dinners for her children and twelve grandchildren, and 
travels. Rachel concluded her interview with this admonition: 

It is important to take the time to listen to our elders because they 
have many interesting stories to share. It is also a good way to break 
the stereotypes people have of senior citizens and helps to bridge the 
generation gap. 

It was important to note the many positive and inspiring 
stories about elderly relatives as we concluded the Oral History 
presentations and the evaluation discussions. Many of the students 
had studied Homer's Odyssey in ninth grade, so it seemed appropri- 
ate to introduce them to Tennyson's poem "Ulysses." When Ulysses 
sails for home after the Trojan War, he angers Poseidon, the god of 
the sea, and must wander for ten more years. He reaches home a 
much older man. By then Telemachus, his son, has grown up and 
will have the "scepter and the isle." What next for Ulysses? 

Tennyson probes the dilemma of the aged. Ulysses cries out. 

Old age hath yet his honor and his toil. 

Death closes all; but something ere the end, 

Some work of noble note, may yet be done. 

Not unbecoming men that strove with gods. (50-53) 

Robert Browning's "Rabbi Ben Ezra" is another poem we read 
to reinforce the idea of productive years for the elderly. According to 
Browning, old age is the fruition of youth, the climax of life. Rabbi 
Ben Ezra proclaims 

Grow old along with me! 

The best is yet to be. 

The last of life, for which the first was made. 

Our times are in His hand 
Who saith, "A whole I planned. 

Youth shows but half; trust God; see all, 
nor be afraid." (1-7) 

Tenth-grade students in my English college prep class also 
interviewed family members about a bygone era. Their reports were 
enthusiastic. Wendy described her great-grandmother's life of 
hardship. "But on the lighter side," wrote Wendy, "she just turned 87 
and is still going strong. She is happy that she has lived long enough 
to see her grandkids, great grandkids, and great great grandkids." 
Thirty-one students contributed oral histories and compiled a jour- 
nal, complete with a page of pictures. They printed the material in 
the school computer lab. Each student and the family member 
interviewed received a copy of Back in the Daze, Oral History Project. 




129 



117 



i i 

Young People Respond to the Elderly 



Figure 1 . 

Guidelines for the 
Oral History Project 



Oral History Presentation 

" Groza old along with me, the best is yet to be." 

Robert Browning 

"To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield." 

Alfred Lord Tennyson 

Objectives 

1. Students will understand the great resource of recent history in the experi- 
ences of senior relatives and friends. 

2. Students will learn the techniques of personal interviews. 

3. Students will develop the art of communication with senior members of the 
community. 

4. Students will learn the fine art of storytelling, using written and oral skills. 

Directions 

1. Locate a senior relative, friend, or neighbor who has had fascinating, 
unusual, and/or interesting life experiences. 

2. Make an appointment for an interview. 

3. Explain the Oral History Project, noting the importance of making a written 
record of these experiences. 

4. In class, develop a series of appropriate questions to use during the 
interview. 

5. Record the interview on audiotape (or videotape). Take notes simultaneously. 

6. Let the interviewee tell any appropriate stories or anecdotes. 

7. Collect or borrow any pictures, writings, old newspaper clippings, or 
memorabilia for the final report. 

Completed Project 

1. Write the story of your interview. 

2. Identify the person, the relationship to you, the person's present occupation 
and location. 

3. Present an ORAL HISTORY to the class, telling the story. Use selections 
from the audio tape (or TV tape, if possible). Show artifacts, pictures and/or 
memorabilia in a creative fashion. 

4. Make this your best effort to date. 

5. The written story is due with the report. The Oral History presentation, 

complete with pictures and memorabilia, is due . 

Evaluation 

1. Using a special evaluation form, each class member will evaluate the 
individual Oral History presentation. Students will evaluate information, 
creativity, use of media and speech techniques, 

2. The teachers will grade the written story separately. 

3. The teacher will join with the class members in grading each Oral History 
presentation with the special evaluation form. 



o 

ERIC 



130 



118 



1 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky 



After thirty-one years in the Cleveland Heights-University 
Heights school system, I retired from full-time teaching. It really 
wasn't retiring, just changing venue. I have taught senior English AP 
and a course entitled Confronting the Holocaust to juniors and 
seniors at Fuchs Bet Sefer Mizrachi, a Jewish day school. Once again, 
the opportunity to interact with the elderly in our community of- 
fered a challenge to the students. 

Several survivors of the catastrophic period of World War II 
had spoken to our Confronting the Holocaust class. These survivors 
are the primary sources for information about life before the war, the 
Nazi occupation in their home towns, ghettoization and deporta- 
tions, death and survival in the concentration camps, the many 
forms of resistance, the Righteous Gentiles who were rescuers, 
liberation and life after the Holocaust. Many of the survivors are 
aged and find it difficult to open the floodgates of their memories. 

We were alerted to a recent phenomenon occurring in homes 
for the aged. Caregivers were reporting frightening reactions of the 
very aged Holocaust survivors to certain "trigger" situations. 
Menorah Park Center for the Aging had made a study of the situa- 
tions which may "trigger" a difficult memory for a survivor. Some of 
the "trigger" situations and the explanations follow: 

Trigger: Taking a shower 

Reason: In concentration camps, hundreds of thousands of people 
were told they were going to take a shower. They were stripped and 
made to enter rooms that looked like large shower rooms. After the 
doors were closed, poison gas, not water, came out of the spigots. 
Everyone who entered the shower rooms died there. 

Trigger: Family members leaving after visits, separation of any kind 
Reason: From 1933 to 1945, Jews were forcibly separated from 
friends, parents, children, siblings, spouses, and other relatives, most 
of whom they never saw again. They felt, and still feel, a terrible 
sense of abandonment. 

Trigger: People who speak harshly, loudly, handle individuals 
roughly or in a manner which uses force 

Reason: The guards and police in ghettos and concentration camps 
treated the Jews very roughly. They pushed, pulled, yelled, and 
forced the Jews to do many things and rarely spoke kindly. 

Trigger: Shots or needles 

Reason: Many Holocaust survivors have tattoos on their arms. In 
some concentration camps, people were no longer referred to by 
their name but by their number. Tattoos were made by pricking the 
skin with needles. 



er|c 



131 



119 



Young People Respond to the Elderly 



Trigger: Being shaved 

Reason: The heads of both male and female prisoners were often 
shaved when they entered the concentration camps. This was an- 
other form of humiliation and dehumanization. 

Trigger: Hiding or hoarding food, eating too fast 
Reason: Whether in the ghettoes or in concentration camps, food was 
scarce. When food was available, people sometimes rationed them- 
selves so there would be something left over in case they didn't get 
food again for a while. Some people stole food so they could bring it 
to their family members too weak to stand in the rationing lines. If 
someone was extremely hungry, they may have eaten the food they 
did receive, very fast. 

Students received printouts of the complete section, "Situa- 
tions That May Trigger a Memory for a Holocaust Survivor" from 
the publication Painful Memories (7-10). (A companion video accom- 
panies this publication.) We discussed each situation and related the 
"trigger" to our Holocaust studies. We soon learned that there were 
three survivors of the Holocaust in the different facilities of Menorah 
Park who would be capable and willing to share their wartime 
experiences with our students. We decided to ask the administration 
of Menorah Park for permission to create a video of these oral histo- 
ries. The video would be a remarkable resource for classroom stud- 
ies, as well as a treasure for the families of the survivors. Avi sug- 
gested the name "M'Dor L'Dor," Hebrew for "From Generation to 
Generation." 

In anticipation of our visits to Menorah Park, the guidelines 
shown in Figure 2 were distributed to each student and to the ad- 
ministration of Menorah Park. 

The three women at Menorah Park related completely differ- 
ent experiences. Joshua wrote his reactions to our meeting with the 
survivors. 

As they spoke, there were times when they became quite emotional. 
This emotion spread and it was as though it infected many of the 
students sitting and listening intently. There were times when I could 
not help but cry, especially when they described what they went 
through. The line which still stays with me and which became the 
subtitle for the video was, "Moses Never Came to Auschwitz." (Mrs. 
H., one of the survivors, uttered that line.) 

Aaron's response was a compassionate wish for the survivors: "I 
personally left the project stunned and somber, hoping that God will 
give these people some rest in their old age." 

"Meeting with the three Holocaust survivors created an unex- 
pected awareness of the happenings of the Holocaust," wrote Benjamin. 



[ 



120 



~i 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky 



"One of the survivors not only told stories with words, but her facial 
expressions explained the true horrors of what took place." 

"Even in old age," wrote David F., "they remembered dates, 
times and every instance. I have learned to appreciate many things 
from just listening to these unbelievable people." 

David S. summed up the oral history project: 

This experience personalized the Holocaust for me far more than any 
book or document possibly could. What these people went through 
must not go unnoticed. They gave our class the opportunity to 
ensure that the memory of all those who perished or survived will 
never be forgotten. To borrow the words we first heard from Mrs. H., 
"My dear children, now I can keep the promise I made to my sister, 
Regina, that I will make sure her story is told." 

It has been a valuable experience sharing the humanity of 
aged relatives, friends, and survivors of the Holocaust. Students 
respected and appreciated their inherent and intuitive wisdom. After 
the oral history interviews, students commented candidly about how 
they regarded the elderly. Here are some of their closing thoughts: 

Elderly people are those who were once my age. 

In spite of their age, elderly people are often more enthusiastic about 
life than young people are. 

The elderly are worthy of our respect. 

Elderly people are gentle, yet experienced far beyond other people. 
They are relaxed, peaceful, and caring. 

Elderly people are scary because they remind me that time never ceases. 

They are generally wiser than young people since they have lived 
through many of the same problems which we face today. 



O 

tKJC 



133 



121 



Young People Respond to the Elderly 



Figure 2. 

Guidelines for 
M'Dor L'Dor Project 



Name of Project 

M'DOR L'DOR — From Generation to Generation 
A Teaching Video — Oral Histories of Aging Holocaust Survivors 
Residents of Menorah Park Center for the Aging 

Main Parts of Project 

1. Learning chronology of the Holocaust through a study of documents of the 
Holocaust 

2. Field trip to Menorah Park, meeting with Community Relations Director 
and Nurse, who was a child Holocaust survivor 

3. Viewing video, "Painful Memories" and studying "triggers" to memories of 
aging Holocaust survivors 

4. Learning about interviewing Holocaust survivors — techniques for conduct- 
ing oral histories 

5. Second field trip — meeting with residents who will be interviewed 

6. Students conduct oral histories during released school time and after school 
hours. 

7. Student videographers video the interviews. 

8. Students narrate, edit, and complete the video project. 

Objectives of the Project 

1. Students will become sensitive to "triggers of memory" of aging Holocaust 
survivors. 

2. Students will learn of diverse Holocaust experiences of the aging survivors. 

3. Students will learn about the events of the Holocaust through various 
documents of the Holocaust. 

4. Students will establish friendships with the aging Holocaust survivors and 
will continue to visit with them. 

5. Students will learn the process of creating a video which will be appropriate 
for classroom use. 

Confronting the Holocaust 

M'Dor L'Dor — From Generation to Generation 

Painful Memories — Preparation of Oral Histories of Aging Holocaust Survivors 

1. Read the document "Situations That May Trigger a Memory for a Holocaust 
Survivor" very carefully. 

2. In anticipation of the first visit to Menorah Park Center for the Aging, 
prepare a set of friendly discussion topics to inspire conversation with the 
aging Holocaust survivor. Topics may include: 

• Decor of the resident's room 

• Activities in the Home, e.g., plant therapy, children in the Day Care, arts and crafts, 
synagogue services, music programs, other events at Menorah Park 

• Favorite foods 

• Resident's family members 

• Favorite TV programs 

• Current events 

• Books or magazines resident reads 

continued on next page 



122 Leatrice B. Rabinsky 



Figure 2. 

Continued 


3. Develop the first set of interview questions which you will use at a later 
meeting with the resident. Focus on "The World that Was," the resident's 
memory of his or her early life before World War II. You may consider: 

• Family members 

• Life cycle events 

• Religious observances 

• Childhood games 

• Synagogue services 

• Shabbat in your home 

• Favorite foods 

• School, yeshivah, cheder 

• Special people in your life 

4. We will discuss the topics and questions in class so that we may be well- 
prepared for our meetings with the residents of Menorah Park. We are truly 
privileged to embark on this very special endeavor. 


References 


Bensing, Karen McNally. "Teaching People to Talk to Elders." The Cleveland 
Plain Dealer. 7 Nov. 1993: 7-H. 

Browning, Robert. "Rabbi Ben Ezra." The Victorian Age. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc., 1954. 

Gross, Barbara. Painful Memories : Understanding the Special Needs of Aging 

Holocaust Survivors. Ed. Jesse Epstein. Cleveland, OH: Menorah Park 
Center for the Aging, 1994. 

See, Joe. "Treasures That Hlumine Our Past." The Cleveland Plain Dealer. 

5 April 1990: 5B. 

Selichos: The Complete Artscr oil Selichos. New York: Mesorah Publications, 
Ltd., 1992. 

Shakespeare, William. As You Like It. The Complete Works of William 

Shakespeare. New York: Garden City Publishing Co., 1936. 663-96. 

Steinbeck, John. "The Leader of the People." United States in Literature. 
Glenview: Scott, Foresman and Company, 1979. 9-18. 

Tennyson, Alfred Lord. "Ulysses." England in Literature. Glenview: Scott, 
Foresman and Company, 1982. 362. 

Wyse, Lois. "The Way We Are." Good Housekeeping. Oct. 1992: 291. 



123 



B 



Peer Dialogue Journals: 
An Approach to 
Teaching Tolerance 

Kate Kessler 

Chambersburg Senior High School, Chambersburg, Pennsylvania 



Carol, 

I don't think I've ever experienced prejudice, but I do know people 
call me an airhead because I have blonde hair and I'm a cheerleader. 
The other day at lunch someone was telling a blonde joke and I 
didn't get it. So immediately I was an airhead. They started making 
suction noises and asking if I needed filled up with some more air. I 
know they were kidding so I didn't say too much. But, hey, maybe 
that is a kind of prejudice. 

W/B, 

Kristy 

Kristy, 

Hey, woman! I hear you. I think it is a kind of prejudice! When I was 
in sixth grade everyone always picked on me because I was really 
fat. I didn't have friends and I felt like a loser. When I moved here I 
lost weight and became more popular. I thought that being fat was 
what had hurt the most before. But here I started picking on fat 
people like everyone had picked on me. When I realized what I was 
doing, that hurt worse than being picked on. Things turn around. 
When they do turn around, it isn't good to discriminate against what 
you used to be. If you do, that shows that you didn't learn anything 
and you deserve to go back and do it all over again. Sit with me at 
lunch? 

Carol 

These are the first entries from two tenth-grade students' peer 
dialogue journals. Kristy and Carol are responding to a journal 
prompt which asks, "Have you ever experienced prejudice? Where? 
When? How did it feel? What did you do?" Students are asked to 
respond to this and other prompts in preparation for reading two 
Holocaust works, Anne Frank's The Diary of a Young Girl and Elie 
Wiesel's Night. The consequences of prejudice against blonde and 







136 



124 



Kate Kessler 



overweight girls are a far cry from the consequences of prejudice that 
constituted the Holocaust, but I find that by encouraging students to 
explore their own experiences with and reactions to prejudice they 
become more likely to establish empathy and understanding with 
Holocaust victims like Anne Frank and Elie Wiesel. Though the 
Holocaust is in many ways distant for my students, developing 
empathy and understanding, or a sense of identification with its 
victims, seems to help students realize the depth of its destruction. 
Sharing this identification with a partner solidifies it. I emphasize 
that we can only approximate identification with Holocaust victims. 
Those of us who have not experienced the Holocaust cannot pre- 
sume to understand those who did. We can only, with respect and 
humility, attempt a human connection through a sense of identifica- 
tion. 

Elie Wiesel said in a recent Time magazine article that the 
Holocaust has become too cheaply popular, a fad without meaning. I 
believe a way to prevent this from happening as we teach the Holo- 
caust is to allow students to feel empathy with those who experi- 
enced it. As the writer Barbara Kingsolver puts it in High Tide in 
Tucson, there are truths we all know but can't make ourselves feel 
because they're too big and too familiar to penetrate our souls (233- 
34). But the narrator of the individual's story puts the reader inside 
another person's life and allows an identification and sense of 
empathy. 

Eleven years of teaching Holocaust literature have taught me 
some hard lessons. One of these lessons is that the horror of the 
Holocaust cannot be taught: students must learn it for themselves. 
One way for students to learn about the Holocaust is for them to 
develop a sense of identification with its victims through literature 
and to share that sense of identification with a partner. 



Introduction: 

Teaching 

Holocaust 

Literature 



I began teaching Holocaust literature through two works in our 
tenth-grade English curriculum: Elie Wiesel's Night and Anne 
Frank's The Diary of a Young Girl. I taught Diary and Night to my 
students but never felt that the horror of the Holocaust really got 
through to them. They were not learning where prejudice and 
intolerance could lead. I still heard them yelling "nigger" in the 
lunch courtyard and "spic" at football games. "Faggot" and "ho" (a 
derogatory term for girls, meaning "whore") were common in the 
hallways. My teaching wasn't effective enough. 

This particularly worried me because according to our local 
paper. The Public Opinion, hate crimes committed by juveniles in our 
state rose from 56 percent to 66 percent last year. Pennsylvania now 
has more hate crimes than any other state. Chambersburg Senior 



ERfC 



137 



125 



Peer Dialogue Journals 



High School in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, is a very large (gradu- 
ating classes average from 600 to 700) but rural school district. We 
work with many students. If I wanted the Holocaust unit to make a 
difference in their lives, if I wanted it to help decrease the number of 
hate crimes in our area, I needed to find a way to help students make 
a connection between the hate crimes perpetuated against the Jewish 
minority in Germany during the Holocaust and the hate crimes 
perpetuated against other minorities, here and now. 

I began searching for a teaching methodology that would 
allow the kind of firsthand learning experience that I was seeking for 
my students. My research uncovered a little-used methodology 
involving journals. "Peer dialogue journals," as I dubbed the meth- 
odology, are journals in which students write their reactions to 
literature to a peer. They differ from literature logs in that students 
choose partners with whom they will share reactions in an open, 
uncensored way. A student reads his or her partner's responses to 
literature and writes an immediate reply to the partner's response. 
Students in effect create a written conversation, a dialogue. I tried 
peer dialogue journals for the first time six years ago. 

My students' thoughtful responses and their resulting consid- 
erations of the nature of prejudice and intolerance convince me that 
peer dialogue journals are an avenue toward understanding where 
prejudice and intolerance originate, as well as where they can lead. 

Either with grant money or pocket money, I buy colorful 
notebooks and pens to begin our unit. When I pass them out, stu- 
dents know something different is about to happen. "These aren't 
those ugly blue things we always get!" I explain that every person in 
the room is unique, and every person will have a unique response to 
the works we are about to read. The notebooks and pens, different 
from the standard-issue blue, symbolize that being different can be 
OK. 

We begin with the journal prompt asking whether anyone in 
the room has ever experienced prejudice. Although some students 
squirm a bit, I have never had a student fail to relate an incident. Bill, 
with his dangling earring and fake leather jacket, relates how secu- 
rity guards at the mall harass him because of his age and appear- 
ance. Tony, who is black, relates how he and his family don't go to a 
certain restaurant in town because "they make you feel real uncom- 
fortable." 

Though we first share these responses as a class, I ask students 
how they would feel sharing them with just one person of their own 
choosing. Responses are almost unanimously favorable. "Can we 
write what we really mean?" students typically ask. This is a good 
question. It means, "Can we write what is meaningful for us, not 
pleasing to the teacher?" My answer is "Yes." I tell students I will 



O 

ERIC 



13.8 



[ 



126 



1 

Kate Kessler 



read their journals after we finish Diary and again after we read 
Night. I tell them I hope to see honest, thoughtful responses to what 
they are reading. By the time we begin our Holocaust unit, students 
know that I respect openness and honesty. They also know that I 
expect them to take assignments seriously. 

I see myself as facilitator and guide during our daily discus- 
sions of ideas generated from our reading and journal writing. I also 
write in students' journals, suggesting additional materials or alter- 
native ways of thinking about issues that arise. I may do mini- 
lessons with the class if I see patterns in journal responses that need 
to be addressed. Such mini-lessons are done without reference to 
individual journals because it is essential that privacy be preserved 
and thoughts be uncensored. 



Stereotyping: 
“How could 
this have 
happened?” 



During the first week of our three-week unit, we briefly discuss the 
historical background of the Holocaust, particularly the economic 
situation in Germany after World War I. Much more difficult to 
discuss is the social background: the urge to scapegoat and the 
prejudice that allowed the horror of an attempted genocide to take 
root. 

The social background of prejudice against the Jewish people 
goes back thousands of years. Using The Holocaust : A Teacher's Re- 
source , we discuss anti-Semitism from Haman to the Nuremburg 
Laws. We talk about how Jewish precepts sometimes conflicted with 
civil authorities and how Jewish lifestyle, fashion, and other prac- 
tices differed from commonly held ones, resulting in suspicion and 
disfavor. We talk about how such differences can lead to stereotypes 
and how stereotypes can lead to prejudice. 

To relate the background of stereotypes and prejudice against 
Jews in World War II to students' own lives, we explore causes of 
more modern, local stereotyping through a sentence completion 
exercise. The following are synthesized responses to the sentence 
completion exercise done by my all-white vocational technical 
students: 



Blondes are . . . sexy, fun, curvy, airheads, money-grabbing, dizzy. (I 
noticed the emphasis on sexual characteristics and asked students if 
they had in mind a male or female when responding. One hundred 
percent said they thought of a female.) 

People on welfare are . . . poor, bums, stupid, lazy, cheap, forgotten, 
speds (special education students), failures. 

Jews are . . . dark, weird, religious, rich, Israelites, dead. 

Blacks are . . . racists, strong, arrogant, pushy, prejudiced, slow- 
moving, lowest forms of life on earth, good fighters. 



O 

tKJC 



139 



127 



Peer Dialogue Journals 



Whites are . . . losing power, smart, sexy, cool, nice, superior. 

Teachers are . . . boring, decrepit, beady-eyed, too much like parents, 

mean, weird, authoritative, ugly, manipulative, bossy, and crabby. 

Obviously, my students have many stereotypes in place. As a class, 
we begin discussing the origins of stereotypes. We begin with a 
"safe" topic: teachers. Each year, stereotypes to the teacher sentence 
are less than complimentary. Students quickly apologize, "We don't 
mean you, Ms. Kessler!" Stereotypes, I explain, group individuals 
together. They encourage uncritical judgment. I used myself and 
teachers as a whole as an ice-breaking example to explore the origins 
of group stereotypes. 

Susan notes, "My biology teacher is a real pain. He never explains 
anything." The class nods in agreement. 

"Does this mean that all teachers are pains?" I ask. 

"No, but when we complained to our math teacher, she stood 
up for him instead of listening to us." 

"What does that mean?" I persist. 

"Well, it's like with the Rodney King beating. Other cops stood 
up for those cops who beat up Rodney King. If they were good cops, 
they would have condemned what those other cops did and said 
that they didn't support beating motorists. When they stood up for 
those guys, it makes me think they're just like them. Same with 
teachers." 

"Do you think that all cops or teachers support the 'bad guys'? 
Or is it easier to lump people together into groups rather than look at 
individual reactions?" We often spend the entire period discussing 
this one stereotype because it lays the groundwork for examining 
how other stereotypes develop. 

The following day, through the safety of dialoguing with self- 
chosen partners, students explore the origins of other stereotypes in 
their peer dialogue journals. They write to each other about their 
fears of those who are different, and about their limited exposure to 
minority groups. They also dialogue about media, family, and peer 
influences. 

When discussing the blonde stereotypes, for example, students 
usually note that their first thoughts often come from the media. TV 
commercials show beautiful, young, blonde women sashaying across 
the screen. When I notice similarities of stereotypes in their journals, 

I call the class together for more discussion. "They always use skinny 
blonde women to sell cars," according to Grant. "And they sure 
aren't promoting their IQs in those slinky dresses." The media is 
responsible for stereotypical portrayals of several minority groups. 
"Most black people are shown as comedians or basketball players," 
my vo-tech students note. 



O 

ERIC 



140 



[ 



128 



i 

Kate Kessler 



Though media stereotypes definitely affect student perception, 
I have found through years of reading student dialogue that family 
stereotypes and prejudices also have much influence. Alan, who 
responded with "niggers" to "Blacks are . . ." said his father would 
never let a black person into their house. He added, "My dad be- 
longs to the Moose because they don't let blacks in there." Family 
prejudices are a touchy subject and some parents don't want anyone 
examining them. I don't discuss family prejudices. I simply let 
students dialogue about them in their journals. 

I do facilitate class discussion because I believe that young 
people need to become consciously aware of where their prejudices 
originate. Otherwise, a negative experience with a person of a par- 
ticular culture, gender, race, or religion, viewed by a person already 
primed by stereotypes, can be taken as "proof" that their prejudice is 
valid. 

In addition to media and family influences, peer stereotypes 
and prejudices also influence students. Sharon said that for her, peer 
pressure was the strongest influence. "If I sat next to a sk8er [skate- 
boarder] at lunch, the next thing you know, they'd be calling me a 
skater, too." Rather than risk being stereotyped herself, Sharon 
identified with those doing the stereotyping. 

One way to help students become aware of and work through 
their own stereotypes and prejudices is to nonjudgmentally ac- 
knowledge them. Though we discuss the origins of stereotyping as a 
class, it is the dialoguing in their journals that brings out the most 
honest examination of the nature of stereotyping. According to an 
article in the Jewish Monthly, "of all the techniques employed [to 
recognize and address stereotyping], the most effective may be 
establishing the ground rules of trust and honest inquiry that will 
allow students the doubt, fear, and confusion that are natural re- 
sponses to this difficult topic" (39). 

As students examine the origins of stereotyping and prejudg- 
ing, I encourage them to brainstorm positive alternatives. They come 
up with good ideas: 

"Find the real story behind the rumor, look it up, check it out, 
ask someone who knows." Finding truth is a major first step toward 
alternatives to intolerance. 

"Ask yourself what you really think, what you really believe, 
what you really know. Listen inside." Self-understanding is another 
avenue toward resistance of prejudice. 

"Do what's right." This motto appears in our district's middle 
school corridors. It is more difficult than it sounds. Bobby, a vo-tech 
student, relates how at the mall it is cool, even mandatory, to hang 
with black guys. But at vo-tech, to talk to one of the few black stu- 
dents who attend that school almost guarantees ostracism by his 



141 



129 



Peer Dialogue Journals 



white peers. A positive alternative to stereotyping and prejudice, to 
do "what's right," is difficult in the face of such social pressure. 
According to Bobby, "I'm aware of it; I just have to go along with it." 
But what happens when both groups are together? Who do you 
hang with then? "I don't know. I make that decision when the time 
comes." 

Perhaps the best positive alternative to stereotyping and 
intolerance, but one of the most difficult, is to develop tolerance for 
differences we don't understand. Any minority group may have 
differences that a majority group may find difficult to understand. 
These differences are often the focus of stereotypes and prejudice. 

I point out that in Nazi Germany, for example, one of Hitler's 
first acts was to "cleanse" the country of homosexuals, then to 
present to the world the "fact" that Germany was comprised of only 
heterosexuals as evidence of its "strength." In our extremely ho- 
mophobic community, to call someone "gay" is the worst insult one 
can inflict. I tell students that every population contains homosexual 
people. They are a minority group. My students' overwhelming 
prejudice and intolerance against homosexual people make a good 
reference point for relating the prejudice and intolerance against 
Jews in Nazi Germany to the prejudice in their own lives. 

Students can see from reading Diary and Night where preju- 
dice and intolerance led during WWII; where can they lead here and 
now? Students ask, "How could this have happened? How could the 
Nazis have learned to hate so much that they would try to destroy 
an entire people?" How does such hatred get started? It is time to 
look at how our ideas and experiences affect us. 



Ideas and 
Experiences: 
“I know I have a 
lot of hostility.” 



Ideas and experiences are the foundation of peer dialogue journals. 
Students examine their ideas and experiences, fraught with prejudice 
though they may be, through their responses to Diary and Night. 
There, the horrors of the Holocaust are described through the eyes of 
Anne and Elie. Their experiences trigger responses that involve 
students' own prejudices. 

I followed Alan, for example, as he struggled between his 
prejudiced ideas and new ideas emerging between his own and his 
partner's reactions to what Anne and Elie went through. Early in our 
unit, I heard Alan mutter to his partner, "I hate every fuckin' nigger 
alive." I knew from previous experience that preaching only arouses 
defensiveness and closes dialogue. I restrained myself and let Alan 
and his partner examine their ideas for themselves. I have found that 
it is effective to allow insights about prejudice and intolerance to 
emerge slowly and naturally. This prevents defensiveness and allows 
students to be open to changing. By midway in our study, Alan 
began to examine his intolerance: 



O 

ERiC 



142 



[ 



] 



130 



Kate Kessler 



I have a lot of mixed feelings about this [referring to our class 
discussion on alternatives to intolerance] because I believe that 
everyone has a right to believe in what they wish but when it turns 
to violence I'm afraid I would have my guns loaded and be waiting 
by the window. I think that they [the Nazis] had no common goal 
other than to follow someone else. I also believe that most of these 
neo-Nazis do not even know what nazism was about. 

Students like Alan bring their ideas and experiences to the 
classroom whether we as teachers want them to or not. Ideas and 
experiences garnered in entirely local communities, as is the case 
with many of our students, can confine and limit students' percep- 
tions about minority groups. These limited perceptions prepare 
students for only the narrowest of social relationships. Examining 
their ideas and experiences, especially those which prejudge minor- 
ity groups, is a first step in renegotiating ties to a culturally narrow 
community. 

Alan, despite his enviable intelligence and contagious sense of 
humor, also brought with him to class a distinct prejudice against 
black people, the result of family and community prejudice. Early in 
his journal, Alan described his family's reaction to a racial fight at a 
local bar: "My dad and uncles are gonna go up to Path Valley this 
weekend and make the place Afro-free." When his partner asked 
who started the fight, Alan replied, "That don't matter. If a black boy 
was up there. I'd jump up there and pop him." As he wrote the entry, 
I watched Alan make the motion of loading and shooting a shotgun. 
Later, however, Alan shows glimmers of rethinking his prejudices: 

Chad, 

I have a lot of mixed feelings about this stuff. I know I have a lot of 
hostility and prejudice. But I really liked it when those Nazis said 
about everyone living in their own place. It makes sense. BTAM 
[Back to Africa Movement]. And the Kurds would be better off in 
their own separate country. 

Over and out, 

Alan. 

His partner responded, 

Alan, 

You talk like you agree with the Nazis. I think they are all wrong. 
This country used blacks very cruelly in colonial times. If those 
Nazis would be enslaved for one day they would probably have a 
whole different outlook. Why do people feel they can treat other 
humans badly? Elie and his family had as much right to live as 
Hitler. 

Over and out, 

Chad. 



0 

ERIC 



143 



: 



] 



131 



Peer Dialogue Journals 



After Alan read Chad's response, I observed him staring into space. 
When I asked if he was OK, he responded, "I'm just thinking." For 
students like Alan, thinking about past ideas and experiences involv- 
ing stereotyping and prejudging is a vital step toward change. 



Identification 
with Elie and 
Anne: “Putting 
myself in their 
place” 



Each year when I take students to the United States Holocaust 
Memorial Museum, they express disappointment that "Daniel's 
Story" — a walk-through exhibit showing the life of a boy named 
Daniel before and during the war — is a composite rather than the 
story of a real boy They want to identify with a real person. 

Anne and Elie are real people. Amne's diary was written when 
she was a teenager hiding from Nazis; Elie's work is a remembrance 
of his adolescent experiences in concentration camps. Both books are 
first-person accounts of Jewish youths living during the 1940s in the 
midst of World War II. Elie survived; Anne did not. 

Not surprisingly boys most often identify with Elie; girls most 
often identify with Ajxne. Boys often criticize Elie for not escaping; 
girls often give Anne advice for dealing with her parents and with 
Peter. Peer dialogue journals are rife with examples of identification 
with Anne and Elie. Scott and Tommy extended their identification 
with Elie to include other victims of the Holocaust: 



Putting myself in their place, I know I would be terrified. It would 
feel as if your world was crashing down around you. Dragged from 
your home, forced to march to a station, crammed into a cattle car, 
stripped of all that's your own, ending up in a death camp where 
you are either killed or live a dragged out existence, treated like a 
dog, herded from camp to camp, the smell of death hanging in the 
air, the rumors. If you were a twin, being held for studies. I don't 
know how I would survive. I don't know how I would feel. How 
would you feel? 

Tommy responded. 

If I was alone I would probably give up hope and let myself die. But 
if I was with some of my family I would have a reason to live and 
would hold on to life as long as possible for them. I know it would 
be real hard to keep myself from lashing out at the German troops. 
Even though I know I would probably be killed in the process, that 
little bit of hope would just burst out and I really wouldn't care. I 
would probably die anyway. I'm just glad we don't have to go 
through this today. 

Scott continued. 



Arriving at Auschwitz would be such a shock. Finally you are off the 
train and suddenly you realize that what you've been telling yourself 
isn't true. You've been telling yourself that you're just going to a 



[ 



132 



1 

Kate Kessler 



labor camp till the war is over. But then you see the chimneys and 
dump trucks and fire, and you smell the stench of burning bodies. 
You are shocked into reality. You are in a concentration camp. The 
rumors are true. You are separated from your family. You could very 
well become one of the 1,000 people murdered everyday. 

Tommy added. 

It would be like being hit in the face with a brick. I bet it made their 
hearts skip a beat or two. The tremendous fear that would come over 
you would make you sick. I would hate to be one of the German 
guards, seeing the faces of the Jews when they got off the train. They 
probably looked like they were already dead. I know that if I worked 
in one of the crematoriums and I came across a body of someone I 
knew I wouldn't be able to put it in the furnace. We can read about 
what happened and go to the Holocaust Museum but that still 
doesn't give us the feeling of pain and torture that was forced upon 
the Jews. Having to see your friends or family tortured and killed 
because their bodies couldn't go on anymore sends chills over me. I 
bet Elie is truly haunted because he couldn't answer his father in the 
end. I don't know how I could live with myself. 

Toward the end of his reading of Night , Scott wrote to Tommy, 

Finally! The end of the book and a question that has been bugging 
me through this whole ordeal: Where did Elie and other survivors go 
after they were liberated? They were miles away from their homes. 
There was no one left. Parents and brothers and sisters were all dead, 
and he had just been through the biggest tragedy in history. What 
did he do? Where did he go? 

Tommy replied. 

That is a very good question. I wonder how he got over the psycho- 
logical pain. It is probably very difficult to talk about but it is worse 
to keep it inside. It would build up. It would be an experience to talk 
to a Holocaust survivor and find out, in detail, how they escaped 
and how they survived through the rest of the war and afterwards. 

As we read Diary and Night , students use their dialogue 
journals to discuss the escalating consequences of prejudice perpe- 
trated on Jews: the isolation, persecution, dehumanization, and 
attempted genocide. 

Initially, the Holocaust and its horrors may appear to be 
distant to many students. But identification with Elie and Anne 
allows students to empathize with them. It closes the gap between 
there-and-then and here-and-now. Empathy with Holocaust victims 
allows students to begin to understand the agonies suffered when 
intolerance runs amok. While students often tell each other that they 
are so glad they didn't live there and then, because they are safe here 
and now, discussions of current political leaders like David Duke 



133 



e 



Peer Dialogue Journals 



and Pat Buchanan emerge, along with talk about local Ku Klux Klan 
rallies, and segregation at our school. Through their written conver- 
sations, students begin to realize they aren't as insulated as they may 
like to think. Susan, for example, wrote poignantly about Elie's 
separation from his mother and her empathy with other Nazi vic- 
tims: 



I could never be separated from my mother because she is all I have. 
But I could imagine being treated as a criminal because I was ar- 
rested twice for shoplifting and it has changed my life forever. Now I 
feel that I can survive with less. We need something to live for. If I 
were a Jew in a camp maybe that would mean standing up for what I 
believe in, maybe it would mean a piece of bread. A little food and 
love can go a long way. I can imagine being beaten because someone 
had a bad day. That's one reason my father is in jail. Maybe he is like 
the Kapos — just wanted someone to feel more pain. I feel bad for 
everyone involved with the Holocaust, the prisoners, the Kapos, but 
most of all the Nazis' mothers for having children like that. I feel 
sorry for Hitler's mother — trying to raise a son the right way only to 
have him turn out all wrong. 

Identification with Anne Frank and Elie Wiesel brings the 
Holocaust into a place of understanding for students. It allows them 
to empathize, sympathize, and feel outrage at what was done to 
innocent victims of extreme stereotyping and prejudice. By discuss- 
ing their identification, students can focus on the meanings of the 
Holocaust on a personal level. 



The Peer 
Dialogue 
Journal 
Experience: 
“What do you 
think?” 



Most students wrote very positively about dialoguing with their 
partners. In response to a feedback questionnaire, Lisa wrote, 

I thought writing back and forth to each other was the best experi- 
ence. You get to know what your partner thought. I've never done 
anything like this before. Kirsten expressed her true thoughts and 
feelings. It made the story more exciting to know how your partner 
felt. And if I didn't understand something she explained it to me. 

Written dialogue with peers shows students respecting as well 
as challenging each other's responses. By allowing students to 
choose their own partners, I intend to create a safe environment that 
fosters respect for responses to Diary and Night. According to Lisa, 

It helps to dialogue with a friend because you feel like you can write 
anything and still trust them. It lets you be free . . . you can let your 
true feelings show and be more open with someone you know. This 
gives us a feeling of trust because we have to trust our partner to 
respect our thoughts. 



O 

ERIC 



116 



134 



Kate Kessler 



Students need to feel comfortable taking risks before they can 
examine their past prejudices and generate new ideas. Even students 
who rarely enter into class discussions are able to express themselves 
in their journals to a respectful partner. While most students demon- 
strate respect for their partner's responses, entries also show stu- 
dents challenging each other. Sheldon, for example, responded to his 
partner's anti-Semitic comments about Anne Frank rather scath- 
ingly: 

Your reactions are those of a coward. It's easy to say nigger, spic, 
jewboy, etc. when you're with your white friends but what about 
actually facing a so-called minority and saying that? Maybe you're 
so absolute in your hatred that you would do just that but I don't 
think so. I have little respect for such prejudice. 

When Sheldon's partner responded to this challenge with a timid, 
"You're right," Sheldon responded more temperately in his next 
entry, "I'm not trying to be right, it's just my view of things. What do 
you think?" 

Grant and Jeremy engaged in a gentler challenge. In an tin- 
usual twist, as Grant puzzled over identification with those associ- 
ated with the Nazis, he wrote to his partner, 

Jeremy, 

I could never have done Dr. Mengele's job. To see young people at 
selection who are not strong enough for slave labor but who might 
have led productive lives, to send them to the crematories! And to 
force them to take off all their clothes and have their hair cut. The 
book said that in the piles of clothes there were brand new suits and 
old rags. I think the Germans wanted all Jews to feel inferior. Just 
knowing your mother and sister were no longer alive would make 
me so sick I couldn't work anymore. I could also never be a Kapo. To 
turn against your own people! 

His partner, Jeremy, challenged: 

I totally agree when you say that the people who participated in it 
and helped Hitler fulfill his dream were disgusting. But we weren't 
in their shoes and so we can't completely understand why they let it 
go on. Maybe they were forced or maybe all the propaganda got to 
them. They didn't look at Jews as humans which made it easier to 
kill them. We say now that we would never let it happen but we 
weren't there to go through it. 

Shared written responses to literature differ from other meth- 
ods of instruction because they encourage respect and trust, ele- 
ments necessary for self-examination and growth. They also differ 
from many methods of instruction because students actually chal- 
lenge each other to think for themselves. 



0 

ERJC 



14 7 



] 



135 



[ 

Peer Dialogue Journals 



Evidence of 
Learning: “We 
say now that we 
would never let 
it happen” 



Identification with Anne and Elie and examination of past ideas and 
experiences seem to happen automatically. And typical student 
responses to questionnaires verify that students are working hard: 
"You don't feel test pressure but you feel like you owe it to 
your partner to read it [Diary and Night] thoroughly." 

"If I was going to have a test on it, I would have tried to 
remember too much and would have got everything confused. I 
understand more of what I'm reading when it's done this way" 

But the questions I constantly ask are, do students change? Do 
they learn? Do they examine their prejudiced ideas as a result of 
sharing their identification with Anne and Elie? Not all students 
come to class with prejudice and not all leave without it. But in 
answer to my questions about change, toward the end of our unit, 
entries that reflect evidence of change and examination of prejudice 
often begin to appear: 

Carol, 

I feel that more people should speak up for themselves. We should 
leam to take up for one another and not to be taken over by some 
fanatics who think they know everything. I realize that there are a lot 
of problems in the world but everyone should try to work them out. 
Fighting isn't the answer. Things go too far. America was brought 
together by all kinds of people and it should stay that way. 

Kristy 

Kristy, 

I agree. People should take up for each other. Also, one race should 
not run a country because that's just not natural. Violence may seem 
like the answer but it's not. I wonder what kind of home life those 
nazis came from. Of course you can't blame their parents totally. But 
how a person is raised reflects the type of home life they had, 
usually. I know I wouldn't be where I am today without the help and 
guidance from my parents. 

Carol 

Students typically show surprise at what Holocaust victims suffered 
and outrage at the ideology that designed their suffering. They also 
begin to examine the underpinnings of how such ideologies gain a 
foothold in society. 

In Night , for example, Elie Wiesel describes the decree that all 
Jews must wear the yellow Star of David: 

The race toward death had begun. The first step: Jews would not be 
allowed to leave their houses for three days — on pain of death ... a 
Jew no longer had the right to keep in his house gold, jewels, or any 
objects of value . . . every Jew must wear the yellow star ... [to which 
his father replies], "The yellow star? Oh well, what of it? You don't 
die of it . . . (Poor Father! of what then did you die?). (8) 



O 

ERiC 



148 



] 



136 



Kate Kessler 



Jeremy wrote to his partner, 

Elie's father probably had second thoughts about what wearing the 
yellow star might mean. He didn't die of it but he sure received a lot 
of harassment because of it. Just imagine being Jewish in a crowd of 
nonjews, like a white in a crowd of blacks, a tekker (vocational 
technical student) in a crowd of preps. The yellow star would 
separate them like night and day In Nazi Germany you didn't have 
the twilight and dawn areas of racial intermingling like we do. You 
were either one or the other. But how a person could ignore someone 
who had been their friend, their boyfriend or girlfriend or best friend 
just because they now had to wear a yellow star is beyond me. 

Andy also shared with his partner, 

I think when the Nazis first invaded Sighet they were so nice the 
Jews should have suspected something. When a totally racist power 
like the Nazis start to take over, you need to get out of there. But at 
first, instead of being ruthless and merciless, they put on a good 
mask. They covered up who they really were. They were very good 
at psychology as they eased into people's homes. People didn't want 
to believe it until it was too late. If they were to revolt they would 
have had to have done it at the beginning while they still had 
strength and food. I would be scared and not moving! 

His partner, Jordan, responded: 

I think you have a good point. The Nazis certainly did use psychol- 
ogy. Look at the order they took away luxuries and rights. I agree, 
the Nazis made sure the Jews didn't panic at first until they already 
had all their money and means of transportation. They didn't have a 
chance because of the good front and the fact that they wanted to be 
reassured. The Nazis could take complete control. How could they 
comprehend that anything was going on and that anything would 
happen to them? I would be scared too! But how could the rest of the 
world not react? 

Each year, as we conclude our formal study of the Holocaust 
unit, we take a trip to the United States Holocaust Memorial Mu- 
seum. When we return to school I ask students to write responses to 
their experiences in the Museum. Jeff, sensitive and perceptive, 
responded, 

I found the Holocaust Museum to be powerful. Every picture I saw, 
every pair of shoes, reminded me that for every photograph and pair 
of shoes there went a name and a face. More importantly, with that 
face went a person. It was not the pictures of bodies that got to me; 
I'd seen them before. It was the piles of shoes. They bothered me so 
much. The thought that someone wore those shoes. It hurts me to 
think that so many human lives were simply terminated like spray- 
ing a house for bugs. 



O 

tKJC 



149 



] 



137 



Peer Dialogue Journals 



Walking through the Museum, I got to thinking, hey, if I was shot 
because I had a funky haircut or the wrong color of eyes, would the 
world even notice? So many tens, hundreds, thousands, millions . . . 
dead. Millions of nonaryan people killed. Even now how many 
people realize that for every one of those millions killed there went a 
face, a name, a personality? They had feelings. They had families. 
Maybe the lucky ones were those who died first. Can you imagine 
anyone except those who lived through it really grasping what it 
would be like to watch family and friends being slaughtered? 

Will anyone notice when I die? On one of the commemorative 
plaques I noticed a name — my name. Jeffrey. Another Jeffrey. One 
like me who had a face and a personality. How many Jeffries died? 
How many of them watched their families and friends die? For what 
reason? Religions? Race? Does this seem stupid to you? We all 
believe in the same God. So we differ on a few points. Does that give 
anyone the right to murder millions? The Museum brought me face 
to face with my own mortality. 

Of course the Germans needed a scapegoat to explain their 
failures. Blame the Jews! Blame any minority. We're not so different 
here and how. Why don't people take responsibility for their own 
faults and shortcomings? Is it so hard to admit when we are wrong? 
How many Jewish scientists were on the verge of discoveries when 
Hitler decided to label them inferior and destroy them? If Hitler had 
worked with the Jews instead of against them, we'd all be eating 
wienerschnitzel right now. 

I watched an old man sitting on a bench in the museum and I 
wondered: Is he a survivor? Is he a relative of someone who went 
through the Holocaust? Is he a former Nazi? I will never know. 

When I went home last night, I sat down to watch some good old 
MTV. They had a news special on about the neo-nazis, the racist 
skinheads, and hate rock. If people don't know what happened, they 
might think Hitler was right. They might want to do it again. People 
like that are all over the world. How can we be so blind? 



Conclusion 



On the last day of our Holocaust unit, Alan wrote a note to me that 
illustrates his evolution from unconscious prejudice to the beginning 
of conscious consideration: 



I like having time to read books like this. I'm not a fast reader but I 
do like to read something thoroughly so I get a full understanding of 
what the feelings were at the time. I am really enjoying the reading 
and writing we are doing. It is having more freedom than anywhere 
else in the entire school, like being in the US instead of the USSR. I'm 
enjoying having the time to sit down and read and write for once in 
my life. I'm also enjoying not having some teacher preach at me 
about right and wrong. I never thought much about this stuff before. 
Now I am thinking. Thank you very much. 



O 

ERiC 



150 



138 



References 



Kate Kessler 



According to Thomas Blatt, a Sobibor survivor who visited our 
school, "Anyone, under the right circumstances, can become a 
monster." Learning to examine prejudice and intolerance, learning 
about and implementing positive alternatives to them, so that they 
don't ever become monsters, are the outcomes I hope my students 
achieve through peer dialogue journals. 



Frank, Anne. Anne Frank: The Diary of a Young Girl. Trans. B. M. Mooyart. 
New York: Pocket Books, 1952. 

"House Panel to Take a Look at Hate Crimes." Public Opinion. 
Chambersburg, PA, 22 Oct. 1996: 4. 

Kingsolver, Barbara. "Jabberwocky." High Tide in Tucson. New York: 
HarperCollins, 1995. 

Philadelphia School District. The Holocaust: A Teacher's Resource. Philadel- 
phia: Philadelphia School District, 1977. 

"Teaching the Unteachable: Public Schools Teach the Holocaust." Jewish 
Monthly 106.8 (1992). 



Wiesel, Elie. Night. New York: Bantam Books, 1986. 
. "Verbatim." Time. 17 March 1997: 13. 



II Teaching about Issues of 
Genocide 



141 



Defining Genocide: 
Words Do Matter 

Samuel Totten 

University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 



A major concern of many scholars and activists in the field of 

genocide studies is that there is no overall consensus in regard 
to how the term genocide should be defined. This is a vitally 
significant issue, for without an agreed-upon definition combating 
genocide becomes just that much more difficult. 

Ever since Raphael Lemkin coined the term genocide in 1944, 
various scholars, activists, and governmental officials have been 
wrestling with the concept in an effort to develop something that is 
not so inclusive that it is meaningless, but not so exclusive that it 
denies protection to targeted groups of people. As a result, over the 
past forty-five years or so scholars have repeatedly recast the defini- 
tion of genocide in an attempt to either make it more workable, 
manageable, "analytically rigorous" (Chalk and Jonassohn 15), 
and/ or to fit within their concept or typology of genocide. At the 
same time, other terms have been coined in an effort to differentiate 
between the intent and scope of various types of crimes against 
humanity. Among these are ethnocide, cultural genocide, selective 
genocide, genocidal process, and genocidal massacres. Efforts by scholars 
to develop a theoretically sound and, at the same time, practical 
definition of genocide, continue to this day. 

Lemkin, a Polish Jewish emigre and a noted law professor at 
Yale and Duke Universities who waged a one-man crusade for 
establishment of an international convention against the perpetra- 
tion of genocide, formed the term genocide by combining the Greek 
genos (race, tribe) and the Latin cide (killing). In Axis Rule in Occupied 
Europe, Lemkin defined genocide in the following manner: 

Generally speaking, genocide does not necessarily mean the immedi- 
ate destruction of a nation, except when accomplished by mass 
killings of all members of a nation. It is intended rather to signify a 
coordinated plan of different actions aiming at the destruction of 
essential foundations of the life of national groups with the aim of 
annihilating the groups themselves. The objectives of such a plan 
would be the disintegration of the political and social institutions of 
culture, language, national feelings, religion, economic existence of 



O 

ERIC 



153 



142 



i 

Samuel Totten 



national groups and the destruction of the personal security, liberty, 
health, dignity, and even the lives of the individuals belonging to 
such groups. Genocide is directed against the national group as an 
entity, and the actions involved are directed at individuals, not in 
their individual capacity, but as members of the national groups . . . 
Genocide has two phases: one, destruction of the national pattern of 
the oppressed group; the other, the imposition of the national pattern 
of the oppressor. (79) 

In regard to Lemkin's definition. Chalk and Jonassohn have noted 
that, "Even nonlethal acts that undermined the liberty, dignity, and 
personal security of members of a group constituted genocide if they 
contributed to weakening the viability of the group. Under Lemkin's 
definition, acts of ethnocide — a term coined by the French after 
[World War II] to cover the destruction of a culture without the 
killing of its bearers — also qualified as genocide" (9). Those who 
have argued against the inclusion of ethnocide under the rubric of 
genocide suggest that there is a distinct difference between those 
situations in which people are outright slain and when aspects of a 
people's culture are destroyed. 

Following World War II and the annihilation by the Nazis and 
their collaborators of approximately six million Jews and five million 
other people such as the Gypsies, the mentally and physically dis- 
abled, Russian prisoners of war, Poles, and other Slavs, the United 
Nations adopted a resolution on December 9, 1946, calling for inter- 
national cooperation on the prevention and punishment of genocide. 
It was the terrible and systematic slaughter perpetrated by the Nazi 
regime that provoked the United Nations to formally recognize 
genocide as a crime in international law. 

From the outset, however, the development of the U.N. 
Genocide Convention was enmeshed in controversy. As Leo Kuper 
has written, nations with vastly different philosophies, cultures, and 
"historical experiences and sensitivities to human suffering" ( Preven- 
tion 10) presented various interpretations as to what constituted 
genocide, and argued in favor of a definition and wording in the 
Convention that fit their particular perspective(s). The arguments 
and counterarguments resulted in what can best be described as a 
"compromise definition." 

On December 11, 1946, the United Nations General Assembly 
passed this initial resolution: 

Genocide is a denial of the right of existence of entire human groups, 
as homicide is the denial of the right to live of individual human 
beings . . . Many instances of such crimes of genocide have occurred, 
when racial, religious, political, and other groups have been de- 
stroyed entirely or in part . . . 



O 

ERIC 



154 



] 



143 



Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter 



The General Assembly therefore, affirms that genocide is a crime 
under international law which the civilized world condemns, for the 
commission of which principals and accomplices — whether private 
individuals, public officials or statesmen, and whether the crime is 
committed on religious, racial, political or any other grounds — are 
punishable (Kuper, Political Use 23). 

Of the utmost significance here is that while this resolution "signifi- 
cantly narrowed Lemkin's definition of genocide by downplaying 
ethnocide as one of its components, ... at the same time, it broad- 
ened the definition by adding a new category of victims — 'political 
and other groups' — to Lemkin's list" (Chalk and Jonassohn 10). 

However, the Soviet Union, Poland, and other nations argued 
against the inclusion of political groups, claiming that their inclusion 
would not conform "with the scientific definition of genocide and 
would, in practice, distort the perspective in which the crime should 
be viewed and impair the efficacy of the Convention" (Kuper, Politi- 
cal Use 25). The Soviets feared that if political groups were protected 
under the Convention then the Soviet Union could be found cul- 
pable for the millions of people it murdered due to their political 
beliefs. The Poles also asserted that "the inclusion of provisions 
relating to political groups, which because of their mutability and 
lack of distinguishing characteristics did not lend themselves to 
definition, would weaken and blur the whole Convention (Kuper, 
Political Use 26). 

The upshot is that political and social groups were excluded 
from the Convention. The sagacity of excluding such groups has 
been questioned, and in some cases outright criticized, by numerous 
scholars. Others, however, believe that the exclusion of political 
groups from the Convention was a sound move. For example, 
Lawrence LeBlanc supports the exclusion of political groups because 
of the "'difficulty inherent in selecting criteria for determining what 
constitutes a political group/ their instability over time, the right of 
the state to protect itself, and the potential misuses of genocide- 
labeling of antagonists in war and political conflict" (292-94). (For a 
more detailed discussion of the debate surrounding the U.N. Con- 
vention on Genocide, see the chapter entitled "The Genocide Con- 
vention" in Leo Kuper 's (1981) Genocide, pp. 19-39.) 

On December 9, 1948, the Convention on Genocide was ap- 
proved by the General Assembly of the United Nations. The Con- 
vention on Genocide defines genocide as follows: 

In the present Convention, genocide means any of the following acts 
committed with the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, 
ethnical, racial or religious group, as such: 

a. Killing members of the group; 

b. Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the group; 





144 



Samuel Totten 



c. Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calcu- 
lated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in 
part; 

d. Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the 
group; 

e. Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group. 

As Kuper perspicaciously notes, "The Genocide Convention . . . 
draws no distinction between types of genocide, because it seeks to 
define the elements they share in common: it differentiates only the 
means" (Prevention 150). 

Frank Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn, a historian and sociologist, 
respectively, have written a solid critique of some of the key con- 
cerns scholars have with the United Nations' definition of genocide. 
In addition to addressing the exclusion of political and social groups, 
they also note that "it makes no distinction between violence in- 
tended to annihilate a group and nonlethal attacks on members of a 
group. 'Killing members of the group' and 'deliberately inflicting . . . 
conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in 
whole or in part' are commingled in the definition with causing 
'mental harm to members of the group' and 'forcibly transferring 
children of the group to another group'" (11). Here, again, of course, 
is the issue as to whether or not ethnocide should be subsumed 
under the larger definition of genocide. 

In his role as Special Rapporteur to the United Nations Sub- 
Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of 
Minorities, Ben Whitaker made a number of key recommendations 
regarding changes that he and others think need to be implemented 
- in order to strengthen the Genocide Convention's definition of 
genocide. It is their hope that such changes will ultimately 
strengthen the efforts of intervention and prevention when genocide 
rears its ugly face. These changes include but are not limited to re- 
consideration by the U.N. as to whether cultural ethnocide should be 
included under the Genocide Convention (17); re-consideration by 
the U.N. as to the possibility of including political and other groups 
under the Genocide Convention or "in the absence of consensus [the 
inclusion of] this provision in an additional optional protocol" (19); 
and, at the end of Article II of the Convention the addition of such 
words as "In any of the above conduct, a conscious act or acts of 
advertent omission may be as culpable as an act of commission" (20). 
As Whitaker stated earlier in the report, "In certain cases, calculated 
neglect or negligence may be sufficient to destroy a designated 
group wholly or partially through, for instance, famine or disease" 
(20). (For a more thorough discussion of these points and others see 
Whitaker's (1985) Revised and Updated Report on the Question of the 
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.) 



er|c 



156 



145 



Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter 



c 



Revised and/or 
New Definitions 
of Genocide 



In a major study of the U.N. Convention on Genocide ( The Crime of 
State), Pieter N. Drost, a Dutch law professor, was extremely critical 
that political and other groups were excluded from the U.N. defini- 
tion of genocide. He argued that the following definition replace the 
latter one: [genocide constitutes] "the deliberate destruction of 
physical life of individual human beings by reason of their member- 
ship of any human collectivity as such" (2:125). 

In 1974, Vahakn Dadrian was the first sociologist to put forth a 
new definition of genocide: "Genocide is the successful attempt by a 
dominant group, vested with formal authority and/or with prepon- 
derant access to the overall resources of power, to reduce by coercion 
or lethal violence the number of a minority group whose ultimate 
extermination is held desirable and useful and whose respective 
vulnerability is a major factor contributing to the decision for geno- 
cide" (123). In regard to Dadrian's "definition," Helen Fein, a soci- 
ologist, has commented that "Here explanation has usurped defini- 
tion; furthermore, it is not clear what is to be observed and classed as 
genocide except that the perpetrator is a representative of the domi- 
nant group and the victims are a minority group. This elementary 
distinction was later outmoded by the Khmer Rouge genocide in 
Kampuchea" (13). 

In 1980 Irving Horowitz, a sociologist and political scientist, 
published Taking Lives: Genocide and State Power, wherein he argues 
that genocide is a totalitarian method for gaining national solidarity. 
His suggestion for revising the U.N.'s definition is as follows: 
"Genocide is herein defined as a structural and systematic destruc- 
tion of innocent people by a state bureaucratic apparatus" (17). 

In 1985 Israel Charny, a psychologist, developed what he calls 
a humanistic definition of genocide: "The wanton murder of human 
beings on the basis of any identity whatsoever that they share — 
national, ethnic, racial, religious, political, geographical, ideological" 
(4). Some have argued that this definition is much too broad to be of 
use in scholarly research and analysis; others, however, agree with 
Charny that there is a need to focus attention on the need to protect 
all victim groups. 

After developing a number of preliminary and working 
definitions of genocide from the late 1970s on, Fein has settled — for 
the time being at least — with the following "sociological" definition: 
"Genocide is sustained purposeful action by a perpetrator to physi- 
cally destroy a collectivity directly or indirectly, through interdiction 
of the biological and social reproduction of group members, sus- 
tained regardless of the surrender or lack of threat offered by the 
victim" ( Sociological Perspective 24). Fein comments that her use of the 
phrase "sustained purposeful action" would exclude single massa- 
cres, pogroms, [and] accidental deaths. 



[ 



] 



146 



Samuel Totten 



After examining all of the above definitions and typologies as 
well as others. Chalk and Jonassohn rejected them and developed 
their own definition and typology. Their definition is as follows: 
"Genocide is a form of one-sided mass killing in which a state or 
other authority intends to destroy a group, as that group and mem- 
bership in it are defined by the perpetrator" (23). As for the rationale 
for their definition, they state that "We have rejected the UN defini- 
tion as well as others proposed because we want to confine our field 
of study to extreme cases. Thus, we hope that the term ethnocide will 
come into wider use for those cases in which a group disappears 
without mass killing. The suppression of a culture, a language, a 
religion, and so on is a phenomenon that is analytically different 
from the physical extermination of a group" (23). 

While Fein applauds the wealth of case studies researched by 
Chalk and Jonassohn, she has difficulty with some aspects of their 
definition. For example, she finds the phrase "a state or other author- 
ity" too limiting a description of a perpetrator. 

In 1991 Charny delivered a paper entitled "A Proposal of a 
New Encompassing Definition of Genocide: Including New Legal 
Categories of Accomplices to Genocide, and Genocide as a Result of 
Ecological Destruction and Abuse" at the first Raphael Lemkin 
Symposium on Genocide at Yale University Law School in which he 
presented a new "generic definition" of genocide and a series of 
subcategories. His "generic definition" is as follows: "Mass killing of 
substantial numbers of human beings, when not in the course of 
military action against the military forces of an avowed enemy, 
under conditions of the essential defenselessness and helplessness of 
the victims" (Charny, "Proposal" 18). In making an argument for 
such a definition, he says: "I propose that at all times our first loyalty 
be to honoring the significance of the lives of all human beings. Let 
us take all of the human race as our basic communality . . . How sad 
and corrupt we become if our scholarly definition of genocide 
cannot encompass events where hundreds of thousands and millions 
of human beings lie in the graves of humanity's obvious genocidal 
cruelty!" (19). Such a definition would include "any cases of mass 
murders of any human beings, of whatever racial, national, ethnic, 
biological, cultural, religious, political definitions, or totally mixed 
groupings of any and all of the above" (18). 

As the field of genocide studies continues to grow, new and 
clearer distinctions are bound to be made in regard to that which 
does and does not constitute genocide. At the same time, various 
scholars are bound to disagree over what constitutes a reasonable 
approach to such issues. For instance, quite recently Charny cau- 
tioned against "obsessive definitionalism" ("Proposal" 6), while Fein 
issued a concern about the concept of genocide becoming a 



O 

ERIC 



15S 



147 



[ 



Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter 



"superblanket of generalized compassion" ("Life Integrity Viola- 
tions" 8). Regardless of different perspectives, all the scholars men- 
tioned in this essay are searching for ways to understand and pre- 
vent genocide. As Charny states, "one can look with some satisfac- 
tion on the increasing emergence of scholarship and scientific study 
of genocide as a process whose origins and lawful development can 
be tracked with some measure of understanding and also predict- 
ability, and therefore one may also dare begin to think of possibilities 
for some day preventing genocide" ("Intervention and Prevention" 
1). 

If humanity is to develop sound — and more important — 
workable conventions and genocide warning systems in order to 
stave off genocide, then scholars, activists, governmental officials, et 
al. need to come to a general consensus in regard to how genocide 
should be defined. Until this is done, the debate over definitional 
issues is bound to interfere with efforts of intervention and preven- 
tion. 



Misuse of the 
Term by the 
GeoeroD PubBic, 
Activists of 
Various Causes, 
and the Press 



Disturbingly, the misuse of the term genocide is rampant. It is often 
misused and abused on a regular basis by various groups that want 
to draw dramatic attention to their plight. Concomitantly, as Jack 
Nusan Porter, a sociologist, has noted: "Since 'genocide' has become 
such a powerful catch-word, it is often used in political and cultural 
rhetoric" (9). 

Among the more outlandish examples of the misuse of the 
term/ concept of genocide are President Reagan's policy on AIDS 
research, and thus the insinuation that he was purposely "targeting" 
homosexuals; the Israelis' actions against the Palestinians during the 
Intifada; "government policies letting one race adopt the children of 
another" (Simon 3); the practice of birth control and abortions 
among Third World people (Porter 9); rampant drug availability, use, 
and sales in the inner cities of the United States; and the rate of 
abortions in the United States. Recently, during NATO air attacks on 
Bosnian Serb military targets in 1995, "Russia charged that the Serbs 
were facing 'genocide' from the West" (Associated Press A5). When 
genocide is used in such a loose and irresponsible manner, not only 
does it distort the true meaning of the term, but it diminishes and 
minimizes those actions that are truly genocidal in nature. Such 
misuse and over-use of the term may also contribute to inuring some 
to the horror of the reality of genocide. 

It is also worth noting that some school curricula on the 
Holocaust and genocide have a tendency to incorrectly define geno- 
cide. For example, in The Holocaust: A North Carolina Teacher's Re- 
source by Linda Scher and A Study Guide on the Holocaust by the 



O 

ERIC 



153 



] 



148 



Samuel Totten 



Georgia Commission on the Holocaust, genocide is defined in the 
following way: "Term created after World War II to describe the 
systematic murder of an entire political, cultural, or religious group 
. . ." (109 and 7, respectively). The major problem here is the use of 
the term entire. The most technically correct definitions include such 
wording as "in whole or in part." By using "or in part," it prevents 
genociders from making the disingenuous claim that since some 
members of the targeted group were not killed, genocide was not 
committed. The definition in the aforementioned works also neglects 
to include key groups that are protected under the U.N. Convention 
on Genocide: national, ethnical, racial. 

In the Connecticut State Department of Education's resource 
guide Human Rights: The Struggle for Freedom, Dignity and Equality, 
the following definition of genocide is used: "The word 'genocide' 
originally meant the total destruction of a national group as the 
result of some intentional policy. The meaning of the term genocide 
has now been broadened to include all official [that is, carried out by 
a recognized government] actions to harm, in whole or in part, 
various types of human groups" (15). Under this definition virtually 
any civil or human rights infraction committed by the government 
would constitute genocide. This is a classic case of watering the term 
down to where it becomes meaningless. 

In order for students to gain a true understanding as to what 
does and does not constitute genocide, the definition to which 
students are introduced must be accurate. When this is not done, 
students may be apt to perceive genocide as being synonymous with 
"murder," "massacres," "pogroms," or some other violent and 
deadly situation. While each of the latter is a serious offense, none of 
them constitutes genocide. 



Incorporating 
Issues of 
Genocide into 
Literature Units 
and Programs: 
Some Concerns 
and Precautions 



There are several concerns and precautions that teachers should 
consider when incorporating issues of genocide into their literature 
units and programs. Among the most significant are the following: 

Use such terms as Holocaust, holocaust, genocide, massacres, pogroms, 
with accuracy and care. Provide students with correct and complete 
definitions of each as well as examples of each in order to help them 
differentiate between the various types of infractions. 

Select and use pieces that truly focus on genocide and not a situation 
that constitutes a different type of human rights infraction. (Obvi- 
ously, if a teacher wishes to focus on other aspects of human rights 
violations, that is legitimate; the key here is not to "pass something 
off" as genocide when it is clearly not "genocidal" in nature.) 



O 

ERIC 



160 



149 



Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter 



Select and use pieces that highlight a significant aspect of the geno- 
cidal act. 

Select literature that portrays the genocidal act in an accurate man- 
ner. 

Avoid literature that romanticizes any aspect of a genocidal situa- 
tion. 

Avoid literature that provides a simplistic view/perspective of the 
genocidal situation. 

Provide the students with a solid and accurate historical overview of 
the genocide under study. This can be easily quickly and accurately 
done by showing a noted film on the genocide under study and/ or 
having the students read and discuss a key article or essay on the 
genocide prior to discussing a piece of literature. 

Select literary works that constitute outstanding pieces of literature. 

Avoid pieces of literature that contain gratuitous violence. 

For additional concerns, caveats, and advice see Guidelines for Teach- 
ing the Holocaust (Parsons and Totten, 1993) issued by the United 
States Holocaust Memorial Museum. While these guidelines, as the 
title suggests, focus exclusively on the Holocaust, many of the 
caveats and suggestions are equally germane to other genocides. 



References Associated Press. "NATO Strikes Again, Russians Decry Attacks." North- 
west Arkansas Times 13 Sept. 1995: A5. 

Chalk, Frank, and Kurt Jonassohn. The History and Sociology of Genocide: 

Analyses and Case Studies . New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press, 1990. 

Chamy, Israel W., ed. Genocide: A Critical Bibliographic Review. London: 
Mansell, 1988. 

. "Genocide, the Ultimate Human Rights Problem." Ed. Samuel 

Totten. Spec, issue of Social Education 49.6 (1985): 448-52. 

. "Intervention and Prevention of Genocide." Genocide: A Critical 

Bibliographic Review. Ed. Israel W. Charny. London: Mansell, 1988. 20- 
38. 

. "A Proposal of a New Encompassing Definition of Genocide: 

Including New Legal Categories of Accomplices to Genocide, and 
Genocide as a Result of Ecological Destruction and Abuse." Raphael 
Lemkin Symposium on Genocide. Yale University Law School. Feb. 
1991. 





] 



150 



[ 

Samuel Totten 



. "The Study of Genocide." Genocide: A Critical Bibliographic Review. 

Ed. Israel W. Chamy. New York: Facts on File, 1988. 1-19. 

Connecticut State Department of Education. Human Rights: The Struggle for 
Freedom, Dignity and Equality. Hartford, CT: Author, 1987. 

Dadrian, Vahakn N. "The Structural Functional Components of Genocide: A 
Victimological Approach to the Armenian Case." Victimology. Ed. 
Israel Drapkin and Emilio Viano. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 
1974. 123-35. 

Drost, Pieter. The Crime of State. Vol. 2. Leyden: A. W. Sythoff, 1959. 

Fein, Helen. "Genocide: Life Integrity Violations and Other Causes of Mass 
Death: The Case for Discrimination — A Reply to Israel Charny's 
Critique." Internet on The Holocaust and Genocide 30/31 (1991): 7-8. 

. "Genocide: A Sociological Perspective." Current Sociologxi 38.1 

(1990): 1-126. 

Georgia Commission on the Holocaust. A Study Guide on the Holocaust. 
Atlanta, GA: Author, 1994. 

Horowitz, Irving Louis. Taking Lives: Genocide and State Power. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1980. 

Kuper, Leo. Genocide: Its Political Use in the Twentieth Century. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1981. 

. The Prevention of Genocide. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 

1985. 

LeBlanc, Lawrence J. "The United Nations Genocide Convention and 

Political Groups: Should the United States Propose an Amendment?" 
Yale Journal of International Law 13.2 (1988): 268-94. 

Lemkin, Raphael. Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occupation, Analysis 
of Government, and Proposals for Redress. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie 
Foundation for International Peace, 1944. [Reprint, New York: 
Howard Fertig, 1973.] 

Parsons, William S., and Samuel Totten. Guidelines for Teaching About the 
Holocaust. Washington, D.C.: United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum, 1993. 

Porter, Jack Nusan. "Introduction." Genocide and Human Rights: A Global 

Anthology. Ed. Jack Nusan Porter. Washington, D.C.: University Press 
of America, 1982. 2-32. 

Scher, Linda, ed. The Holocaust: A North Carolina Teacher's Resource. Raleigh, 
NC: North Carolina Council on the Holocaust and North Carolina 
Department of Public Instruction, 1989. 

Simon, Thomas. "Grading Harms: Giving Genocide Its Due." International 
Conference on Genocide. University of Nebraska at Lincoln. April 
1995. 



162 



[ 



] 



151 



Defining Genocide: Words Do Matter 



Smith, Roger W. "Human Destructiveness and Politics: The Twentieth 
Century as an Age of Genocide." Genocide and the Modern Age : 
Etiology and Case Studies of Mass Death. Ed. Isidor Walliman and 
Michael N. Dobkowski. New York: Greenwood Press, 1987. 21-39. 

Whitaker, B. Revised and Updated Report on the Question of the Prevention and 
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. New York: United Nations 
Economic and Social Council. E/CN.4/Sub. 2/1985/6, 2 July 1985. 






163 



152 



Teaching the 
Holodomor (Ukraine 
Famine): Issues of 
Language, Literary 
Pedagogy, and 
Learning 

Judith P. Robertson 

University of Ottawa, Canada 



Introduction This chapter explores some of the possibilities and problems of 

teaching English studies secondary school students about genocide 
through the study of language used to describe the event. The ideas 
presented should be viewed as exploratory and designed to stimu- 
late further discussion among teachers about ways in which lan- 
guage analysis may employed in literature classrooms that aim to 
foster student learning about textual forms and genocide. The focus 
is on Eastern Europe during the Stalin era, during which a catastro- 
phe of incalculable proportions known as the Holodomor occurred. 
The term Holodomor comes from the Ukrainian language, and trans- 
lates into English as holodo meaning "hungry" or "famine" and mor 
meaning "plague" or "pestilence." This chapter presents a brief 



Acknowledgments are due to the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Awards Commit- 
tee (the Michael and Daria Kowalsky Endowment fund at the University of Alberta, 
Canada) for support in researching and writing this paper. Grateful acknowledg- 
ment also goes to the Research Fund of the Faculty of Education, University of 
Ottawa, Canada, and to Janet Steele for her assistance in locating historical materi- 
als. Thanks to Rt. Rev. Archimandriet Father Andriy Partykevich of Boston, and to 
the editors of this volume, Carol Danks and Leatrice Rabinsky, for their helpful 
comments on an earlier draft of this paper. I dedicate this paper to Christa and 
Denis (Dobroshinsky) Robertson. May their loving spirits survive as living testi- 
mony to the memory and hope of Ukrainian people. 




164 



153 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



background to the event, including particular precursors that may be 
said to distinguish the Holodomor as an example of mass human 
rights violations that some identify as a genocide. The discussion 
strives to grasp some implications of textual evidence about the 
Holodomor for English Studies education. For example, what is the 
role of discourse in human rights violations? How can students learn 
about how language helps to produce and sustain genocide through 
involvement in learning activities that focus on written and oral 
evidence about the Famine? In the attempt to make the massive 
suffering of the Holodomor accessible to student imagination, the 
chapter presents historical forms of evidence from speeches, newspa- 
per and eyewitness accounts, legal documents, narrative writing, 
and testimonies. The exploratory structure of the discussion under- 
scores the difficulties that teachers need to anticipate as students 
struggle to come to terms with evidence of monumental human 
suffering. 



Is the Ukraine 
Famine a 
Genocide? 



In 1932-33 a man-made famine of staggering proportions in Ukraine 1 
resulted in the starvation and death of millions of people. Data on 
the actual scope of human suffering caused by the Famine are con- 
flicting. In Execution by Hunger (1985), Miron Dolot (who lived 
through the experience as a child) writes that "five to seven million 
Ukrainians starved during that terrible year" (vii). Historian John 
Mace similarly puts the figure between 5.2 million and 7.1 million 
(141). In Ukraine: A History (1988), Orest Subtelny argues that Soviet 
statistics for the period are notoriously unreliable (because officials 
displeased with the results of the 1937 census that revealed shock- 
ingly high mortality rates falsified records), and that estimates place 
the death toll in Ukraine between three and six million (415). Robert 
Conquest, whose Harvest ofSorroiv (1986) makes an eloquent case for 
understanding the tragedy as genocide, estimates the numbers of 
dead at seven million (306). 

Remembering the Famine is clearly a difficult matter. This has 
to do not only with conflicting information about the scale of the 
disaster, but also because accounts that do exist present information 
of mind-boggling horror. "Stalin's treatment of [the Famine of] 1932- 
33 set new standards for state-sanctioned brutality . . . associated 
with deportation . . . suicide . . . hunger . . . exile . . . the effects of 
long journeys undertaken in unventilated, unheated and over- 
crowded freight trucks . . . disease . . . despair . . . insanity and 
suicide" (Merridale 4-5). Merridale (a historian) reflects on the 
huge difficulty of grappling with knowledge of so many perished 
millions: "Figures of this scale defy attempts to picture the reality 
which they catalogue" (4). 



O 

ERIC 



165 



] 



154 



Judith R Robertson 



Obstacles to comprehension exist as well because of restricted 
access to demographic documents within Russia 2 today. Like many 
of the worst disasters of the Soviet era, the total number of deaths 
were officially ignored or denied at the time. The measure of loss 
during Famine years was played down, despite letters and petitions 
that poured across Stalin's desk from starving villagers, and even 
sympathetic commentary from local secret police living in afflicted 
regions (Dolot; Conquest; Merridale). It is difficult to reckon the 
impact and effects of so much anguish, denial, silence, and loss on 
public consciousness and commemoration today 3 . 

Notwithstanding the absence of official commemoration of the 
atrocity, there exists a growing archive of work that provides indis- 
putable historical evidence that the Famine did occur, that it was 
facilitated by human design, and that it exacted a monumental toll in 
terms of victims who perished of starvation. Problematically, how- 
ever, North American students and teachers know little about the 
event. This is not surprising given the general disregard of the 
Western media during the Famine years. Nor is it surprising given 
the fierce political struggles that persist to this day to make knowl- 
edge and recollection of the Famine taboo within popular memory of 
even the Ukrainian people. 

In 1985, an International Commission on the Ukraine Famine 
was established by the United States Congress, "in order to (1) 
expand the world's knowledge of the Famine; and (2) provide the 
American public with a better understanding of the Soviet system by 
revealing the Soviet role in organizing the Famine" (Kuromiya 230). 4 
The Commission's findings, issued in its Report to the United States 
Congress in 1988, leave little doubt about the importance of including 
the Ukraine Famine in work that seeks to educate about mass viola- 
tions of human rights. However, left unresolved in the Final Report of 
the International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932-33 Famine in the 
Ukraine (1990) was the question of whether or not the Ukraine 
Famine coincides with the terms of genocide. 

In terms of the scope and premeditated nature of the brutaliza- 
tion inflicted on particular groups of people throughout and follow- 
ing its short duration, the Famine appears to correspond with the 
terms of genocide. The Commission was unanimous in finding the 
existence of a famine situation in Ukraine during 1932 and 1933 that 
claimed the lives of at least 7.5 million people. It identified causes of 
the Famine as (a) the grain procurements, (b) collectivization (the 
abolition of private property in land, and the concentration of re- 
maining peasantry in "collective" farms under Bolshevik Party 
control), (c) dekulakization (the killing or deportations to the Arctic 
millions of kulaks or peasant farmers who were believed to be well 
off and recalcitrant to the Party's plans), and (d) denationalization 



155 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



Background to 
the Famine 



o 

ERIC 



(the wide-ranging attack on Ukrainian cultural and intellectual 
centers and leaders). The Commission reasoned that the Famine was 
man-made in the sense that its origin lies in human behaviour. 
However, in its conclusion, the Commission majority did not believe that 
the famine was systematically organized to crush the Ukrainian nation once 
and for all. In a dissenting opinion, Sundberg concluded that the 
Famine was covered by intent. Thus, the differing opinions of Com- 
mission jurists leave officially unresolved the question of whether 
the Famine coincides with the terms of genocide as identified in the 
Genocide Convention. 5 

Notwithstanding the Commission's conclusions, it is impor- 
tant to note that the term genocide is used by many historians and 
educators in their attempts to represent and interpret the event. (See, 
for example. Conquest, Slavutych, California State Board of Educa- 
tion, and New York State Education Department). For the purposes 
of representing the Ukraine Famine in secondary school English 
studies curricula, two points seem key to the discussion of how to 
apprehend the tragedy. The first point pertains to the need to ac- 
knowledge, listen to, and learn from survivors and witnesses of the 
Famine. A community's ability to integrate its dehumanizing experi- 
ence into a narrative of self-representation is one important act in 
reclaiming its lost humanity. From this perspective, it is important to 
take direction from the communities most affected (i.e., Ukrainian 
survivors, their families, and witnesses) who represent the event as 
the Holodomor. To honour this term in education demonstrates 
acknowledgement, recognition, and an ethical commitment to carry 
testimony about the event forward, collectively. The second point 
has to do with the provisional and emergent state of knowledge and 
official memory about the Famine. Because "the Stalinist system was 
adept at destroying the tools of public memory" (Merridale 12), 
proof of Stalin's intentionality to commit mass murder continues to 
be a focus of unresolved debate. Accordingly, the question of educa- 
tors' naming of the Famine as a genocide must continue to take 
direction by paying close attention to knowledge of the event as it 
continues to emerge and change in the face of new information and 
interpretations , 6 



The Ukraine Famine came about as a result of a series of events that 
may be briefly characterized as follows: 

— the desire of the leaders of the new regime of the USSR (Stalin, 
Molotov, and Kaganovich) to establish the Soviet nation as a viable 
economic power on the world stage during the 1930s; 



167 



156 



c 



Judith P Robertson 



— the use of terrorism arid social repression to achieve the goal of 
economic viability through the meeting of grain quotas for interna- 
tional export; 

— the forced collectivization of land and property, including the 
resettlement of nomadic workers and peasants throughout 
Kazakhstan, the North Caucasus, and Ukraine beginning in 1930, 
and the forced extraction of agricultural produce from the rural 
population imposed by Moscow during 1932-33; 

— the quelling of nationalistic components of Ukrainian society 
under the sovereignty of the USSR, and the use of Ukrainian people 
themselves, directly supervised by commissions sent from Moscow, 
to carry out and to enforce grain removals in their own land, on 
penalties punishable by death and deportation; 

— the subsequent mass starvation of millions of men, women, and 
children, brought on by a catastrophic lack of food, seed, plant and 
animal life, and a depletion of the physical and spiritual resources 
required for the maintenance of life. 



How Does the 
Ukraine Famine 
Relate to Other 
Genocides? 



Study of the Ukraine Famine should be part of education about 
human rights violations. When incorporated into secondary school 
English studies and history classrooms, discussion should focus not 
only on how the Famine relates to other human rights violations of 
the twentieth century, but what factors or conditions may be identi- 
fied as forerunners to events of mass destruction. Student explora- 
tions should also focus on ways in which Ukrainian people today are 
reclaiming their knowledge and memory of the event (through 
stories, newspaper accounts, and public debates among citizens) in 
ways that allow for public mourning, acknowledgment, and the 
building of a future. 

While the conditions that resulted in the Ukraine Famine were 
unique in terms of particular historical, social, and cultural determi- 
nants, factors do exist that have validity for helping students observe 
some common forerunners to mass human rights violations. Stu- 
dents should be taught to identify these factors for the simple reason 
that the painful task of witnessing and understanding, in diminished 
form, the precursors of large-scale suffering is necessary if their 
consequences are ever to be overcome. In italic print below are listed 
some conditions that may be identified as forerunners to mass 
human rights abuses. Teachers need to work with students to dis- 
cuss, question, and explore these conditions. 

The Famine in Ukraine came about as a result of the deliberate 
attempt of a totalitarian government to destroy in part or in whole an 




168 



] 



157 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



ethnic community that had existed as a segment of the government's own 
society (Melson 156). The Famine qualifies for definition as a human 
rights violation on the basis of the deliberate disposition of its perpetra- 
tors to dominate Ukrainians living in the Ukraine SSR (especially the 
peasant farmers or kulaks, who resisted collectivization efforts) to the point 
of massive death, and the terrorist means put into play to bring about the 
systematic submission of these people. The Ukraine Famine demon- 
strates some basic similarities with other instances of mass murder, 
such as the Armenian genocide. For example, like the Armenian 
genocide, the Ukrainian Famine was perpetrated after the fall of an old 
regime (i.e., Czarist rule in the pre-Revolutionary Russian Empire). It 
occurred during the reign of a revolutionary movement (i.e., the Bolshe- 
vik Party of the newly formed USSR). And it was motivated by an 
ideology of social, political, and cultural transformation. As in the case of 
the Armenian genocide (1915-18), the victims were a territorial ethnic 
group intent on the struggle for national and cultural independence (from 
Bolshevik rule). The methods of massacre included forced deporta- 
tions and starvation. 

Teachers who include the Ukraine Famine in a literary study 
of human rights violations should help students by means of direct 
instruction and analysis to distinguish how it relates to other geno- 
cides, including the Holocaust. These relations are important to 
study, but not because they furnish the means for comparing the 
equivalence or relative effects of extreme suffering. When mass 
violations of human rights occur, the losses are immeasurable in 
moral or epistemological terms. Rather, the pedagogical justification 
for teaching how human rights violations relate to one another is to 
help students learn to identify the precursors to genocide, in order 
that their consequences may be acknowledged and overcome. 

In the case of the Holocaust, racism, anti-Semitism, and death 
camps resulted in the mass murder of Jews and others. In the Ukraine 
Famine, Soviet desire for economic viability and power, land seizure and 
grain procurements, and deportation, massacre, and starvation resulted in 
the murder of Ukrainians. Thus, it was through the use of excessive 
state-sanctioned brute force motivated by ideologies of power, ethnic 
hatred, supremacy, profit, and the denial of the sanctity of human 
life that both governments violated citizens in order to achieve 
particular ends. Moreover, while the perpetrators of mass violence 
organized their excesses of power in different ways and for different 
reasons, one principle of constancy was to ensure the collaboration 
and collusion of "ordinary citizens." However passive and unwilling 
some citizens were (in Nazi Germany and the USSR, respectively) to 
assist in brutality sanctioned from above, it is the case that most 
citizens bear some responsibility for collusion during times of mass 
murder. Systematic uses of terror, military suppression, sanction. 



ERIC 



169 



158 



Judith P Robertson 



persuasion, reward, censorship, suspension of due processes of law, 
denial, and the quelling of dissent were used to produce willing or 
unwilling collaboration. In terms of the implications of this difficult 
idea for education about genocide, one focus of classroom attention 
needs to be on the human capacity for collusion and denial during 
times of great social distress. By discussing with students some of 
the ways in which intimidation produces complicity, the reality of 
the anguish it causes in both victims and perpetrators, and the 
ethical possibilities of resistance, teachers can help to effect social 
vigilance and transformation. Survival in the modern world must 
take this form of an unending confrontation with the returning 
violence of the past (Caruth 69). As the above discussion helps make 
clear, such unending confrontation can occur only through learning 
experiences that help students collectively to recount, to grieve, to 
question, and belatedly to remember human rights violations in 
ways that struggle with them on both common and specific grounds. 



Literary Study of 
the Ukraine 
Famine 



Language is the English studies educator's concern. Knowledge of 
the conditions that distinguish human rights violations can occur in 
English studies education through a curricular focus on "ordinary 
language" as an enabling force or condition distinguishable in root 
causes of intolerance and genocide. By making language analysis the 
object of study in learning about the Ukraine Famine, students begin 
to understand how language relates to power in social life. Signifi- 
cantly, these relations are not confined to a "safe" or "finished" 
historical past, but rather, they are ongoing, common, sweeping, 
problematic, and still productive for human relations and quality of 
life in the present. Language has framing and shaping powers 
discernible in analyses of writing. In what follows, excerpts are 
provided from speeches, newspaper accounts, legal documents, 
narrative writing, and testimony about the Ukraine Famine. Sugges- 
tions are offered for how such textual forms may be used to foster 
critical reflection in students about how language functions as a 
"blunt instrument" in human rights violations (Whiteson). 

Language analysis as a means of learning about genocide is 
not simple or straightforward, because it is in the nature of language 
itself to communicate at various and often contradictory levels. It is 
not only what language appears to say that can determine its mean- 
ings, but rather what language omits from saying. Moreover, ques- 
tions of intentionality in language need to be addressed by making 
distinctions about language that is produced in one complex set of 
historical and political realities and read in another. By implication, 
language analysis in learning about the Ukraine Famine needs to 
reflect on these tensions: First, that historical documents should be 



O 

ERIC 



170 



159 



c 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



read in order to interpret not only what they appear to say in par- 
ticular historical instances, but also for what such texts neglect, 
render silent, or forget to say. Second, the analysis of words pro- 
duced in specific contexts should help students explain ways in 
which language was made to serve abuses of power, through such 
organizing structures as narrative or story forms and figures of 
speech. Third, student analysis of the shaping force of "ordinary 
language" must also remember that language is essentially creative 
material that can be made continually to shape new intentions, new 
understandings, and new forms of social voice. Through expressive 
forms of response to documents they are collectively working 
through, students can experience how living together in community 
involves being vigilant about language uses and using ordinary 
words humanely as instruments of care in the acts of daily living. 



Questions of 
Narrative and 

the Holodomor 



Students need classroom opportunities to confront, talk, and write 
about what is strange or problematic in stories or accounts of the 
Ukraine Famine. Classroom discussions can focus on what psycho- 
logical or social functions stories serve, and how stories written 
during times of social crisis help readers to find order or imagine 
order within accounts of what is happening. Teachers must help 
students to see that narrative accounts of social happenings serve 
less as transparent communications of reality or truth than as distur- 
bances that require explanation, contextualization, and interpretation 
(Greenblatt 3). 

A brief example serves to demonstrate this point. Several years 
ago Canadians celebrated the success of astronaut Dr. Roberta 
Bondar as she completed the first momentous journey of a Canadian 
woman into outer space. The event was commemorated in a three- 
inch boldface headline in a local newspaper as "Housekeeper in 
Space." The headline was accompanied by a large black-and-white 
photograph depicting the smiling physicist in a round of domestic 
activity (complete with a feather duster), cleaning house aboard the 
spacecraft. The media example serves as a simple departure point for 
urgent thinking about how structures of narrative (i.e., about house- 
keeping, public worth, and gender in the example provided) help to 
determine what readers can know or imagine about unprecedented 
events as they happen. 

Teachers can introduce issues pertaining to media representa- 
tions of violence by asking students the following questions: What 
are the intentions of writers as they represent historical events? What 
influences journalists to represent events in particular ways? What 
power relations influence why and how particular people (of differ- 
ent genders, ethnic types, ages, religions, or sexualities) get repre- 



O 

ERIC 



trl 



160 



c 



Judith P Robertson 



sented as being capable of certain things? Why do particular words 
and images (i.e., housekeeper ) affect (i.e., enlarge or diminish) how 
meanings get made about individuals? What is the enabling social 
and emotional effect of the "disturbances" that ripple through a 
population of readers when stories that attempt to shape under- 
standings in particular ways refuse to get taken up as "true," "defini- 
tive," or "transparent" in their meanings? 

Accounts of the Ukraine Famine similarly reveal uses of 
language whose "disturbances" may be investigated, and whose 
intentions may be questioned. J. E. Mace reports that well into the 
1980s, Soviet leaders denounced commemorations of the Ukraine 
Famine and attempts to narrativize it as a "Bourgeois falsification" of 
history (121). A Soviet Ukrainian representative to the United Na- 
tions described the "alleged famine" as a "slander" and a "lie" 
created by Ukrainian Nazi collaborators. 7 In 1987 the Communist 
Party of Canada published a book denouncing the Famine as a 
"myth" adopted by American imperialism as part of its psychologi- 
cal warfare against socialism (Tottle). These examples of social 
struggle over the rights of individuals to narrate the Famine as an 
actual occurrence cause learners to think about why such struggles 
exist, and what problems they signal for public understanding. If a 
story is a way of doing things with words, then what ways of being 
are enabled or constrained when stories that should be told are not 
or cannot be? 

By focusing on examples like these, students will see that 
stories are places in which the reigning assumptions of a given 
culture can be criticized (Lentricchia and McLaughlin 69). Given the 
radical potential of the organized press to counter the "official" 
construction of knowledge about world events, the actions of West- 
ern newspapers and news correspondents during the Ukrainian 
crisis furnish a place for sober reflection for North American stu- 
dents studying in today's classrooms. The work of Malcolm 
Muggeridge, an English correspondent writing in the May 1933 issue 
of the Fortnightly Review, serves as an exemplary exception to jour- 
nalist silence: 

During my recent visit to Ukraine I had a glimpse of the fight that is 
waged by the Soviet government against the peasants. The battle- 
ground is all littered up with ruin, as in a real war. The work of 
destruction goes on. On one side of it there are millions of peasants 
with hunger pangs in their bodies, and on the other side, soldiers . . . 
who carry out the orders that are coming from the proletarian 
dictatorship. They have attacked the country like a huge cloud of 
hungry locusts and have plundered it of all its food. They have shot 
down or deported thousands of peasants, thus destroying villages 
altogether. They have transformed the most fertile country of the 
world (Ukraine) into a desert (quoted in T. S. 328). 



ERIC 



172 



161 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



Classroom discussions that focus on this example of news 
reportage should not focus on the intrinsic personality type of the 
writer or the peculiarities of his national history. Rather, important 
questions have to do with how the writer manages to make a cogent 
representation of social crisis, the conditions in which the victims are 
shown to be collectively oppressed, and the very motivations and 
circumstances that made possible Muggeridge's struggle to publicize 
the story. By paying close attention to the actual words used by 
Muggeridge to convey atrocity (i.e., verbs like plundered , shot down, 
deported, transformed, and images like "a huge cloud of angry lo- 
custs"), students will discern that Muggeridge appeals to readers at 
the level of moral and intellectual outrage against the policies and 
actions of a state that would regulate food distribution to the point of 
mass starvation. By virtue of narrating the scene of disaster in terms 
that reach out and touch readers' capacity for imagining human 
indifference, cowardice, moral detachment, and cruelty, 
Muggeridge's representation of the event stands as exemplary. 

The simple fact, however, is that accurate reporting of the 
event did not make it into most major Western newspapers. For 
example, 

A controversy grew up in correspondence columns of a well-known 
British Liberal newspaper in the summer of 1933 as to whether there 
had been a famine in Russia [sic]; about two-thirds of the participants 
were sure that nothing of that kind had occurred (Serbyn 96). 

The Commission on the Ukraine Famine reported to Congress in 
1988 that, "During the Famine certain members of the American 
press corps cooperated with the Soviet Government to deny the 
existence of the Ukrainian Famine" (Kuromiya 231). Similar painful 
examples of collusion and moral disregard can be found in the 
Canadian experience, as demonstrated by the following editorial of 
the Montreal Gazette: "It stated frankly that the Canadian people, 
who were 'not lacking in sympathy either sentimental or practical', 
did not dare to send money or food to a country whom it could not 
trust and whose name 'stinks in the nostrils'" (Balawyder 8). 

Students should engage in small group work to try to identify 
what circumstances prevailed to condition such widely varied 
journalistic responses to the Famine. Teachers need to provide direct 
instruction by pointing out that the Famine was a difficult subject to 
report for several reasons. Asking students to remember what else 
was happening in the world during 1932-33 helps make the lesson 
clear. For example, as a news story the Famine had to compete with 
other newsworthy events such as the Great Depression, the Japanese 
expansion into China, and the Nazi seizure of power in Germany. 
Additionally, however, there was the pressing issue of government 



162 



i ~n 

Judith P Robertson 



censorship and penalty. For economic and political reasons, Soviet 
authorities wanted no foreign publicity of the catastrophe. Foreign 
correspondents were made to submit their reports to rigid censor- 
ship or leave the country. Forms of pressure used against foreign 
correspondents included the non-renewal of residence permits, 
pressure on newspapers to recall "unfriendly" journalists, and 
control over the Soviet translators assigned to foreign correspon- 
dents (Serbyn 94-95). Thus, a basic learning for students is that — to 
the extent that writers are allowed free entry into and expression 
about afflicted areas — fuller pictures of catastrophes and possibilities 
for timely collective humanitarian response become possible. As a 
point of further inquiry, students should examine journalistic ac- 
counts of contemporary social crises in countries around the world. 
They can explore what relations exist between the state and the press 
in countries around the world today (for example, in Rwanda and 
Bosnia, and even in countries ostensibly "untouched" by civil disas- 
ters, such as Canada and the United States), and how media control 
and dissemination of knowledge (in both afflicted and unafflicted 
territories) influence what is known and what responses are possible 
by world citizens. 

In helping students to gain insight into how texts shape hu- 
man understanding of world events, teachers should provide vari- 
ous historical forms of record about the Holodomor. For example, 
religious publications during the Famine helped to shape knowledge 
of and action against it. Some religious publications appealed di- 
rectly to citizens for humanitarian response to the crisis. For ex- 
ample, in the early 1930s, Catholic weeklies like The Tablet kept up an 
unremitting battle against the Soviet Union: "More men, women and 
children have lately starved to death in Russia [sic] than there are in 
all Portugal," The Tablet wrote on September 16, 1933. On the other 
hand, some Catholic publications were ambiguous. A careful analy- 
sis of the language used to frame the meaning of the event for 
Catholic readers points to significant difficulties. Consider the 
following translation of the final segment of a statement made by the 
Ukrainian Catholic bishops in 1933: 

And you, our suffering, starved, and dying brethren, invoke the 
merciful God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Cmel is your suffering: 
accept it for the sake of your own sins and for those of [our] entire 
nation and, together with Jesus Christ, say 'Thy will be done, O 
Father in heaven! A death that is accepted is a holy sacrifice that, 
united with the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, will bring the Kingdom to 
you and salvation to our people' (Krawchuk 61). 8 

It is discouragingly easy to stumble into crude judgments in a dis- 
cussion of segments like the one presented above. When working 



O 

ERIC 



174 



163 



c 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



with historical evidence produced in another context, readers need 
to work hard to complicate "common sense" assumptions about 
what seems naively self-evident (by virtue of historical hindsight) in 
the representations. Classroom instruction may be strengthened by 
asking students to imagine how writing (as in the excerpt above) 
reveals certain intentions to change society for the better. Such 
intentions in turn are not fixed by the events of 1932-33, but are 
principles capable of extension to developments that could not be 
anticipated at the time. 

At the same time, students need to question the relations that 
existed between the Catholic church and the Soviet state during the 
Famine. Again, teachers need to provide information through direct 
instruction. For example, historical circumstances did, in fact, forbid 
the practice of Catholicism in the Ukraine under Soviet totalitarian- 
ism. In the early 1930s, "Moscow . . . declared a five year plan for the 
extirpation of religion." Not only was religious observance strictly 
forbidden, but public funerary and mourning rites were also sus- 
pended (Merridale). Given this crisis, how could the Church struggle 
to maintain a hold on the spiritual imagination of Ukrainian Catholic 
people — and how is this struggle articulated through the words of 
the bishops' protest? When language is used in times of social and 
psychological crisis, how does that language always contain silences, 
struggles, and representations that may appear to be incoherent by 
very virtue of the fact that writers are attempting to assimilate or 
depict what is, in fact, an unassimilable experience (i.e., massive 
suffering, fear, and death)? In what ways might the bishops' protest 
be read simultaneously as a statement, on the one hand, of the 
Church's revulsion and hatred for the horror of mass murder, and, 
on the other hand, the intolerability for Catholic leaders of the notion 
of death without salvation or divine redemption? Given their theo- 
logical frame and political predicament, does the bishops' longing 
for martyrdom and redemption of the people make sense? 

As well, students need to think about how the words that 
organize the Catholic bishops' protest (i.e., "accept your suffering," 
"holy sacrifice," "our sins") did little to arrest the consequences of 
the disaster at hand, because the compressed analogy was one of 
divine offering and redemption — a bitter victory for the hungry and 
the dead. The experience of learning about the collusion of Christian 
leaders in events surrounding genocide are likely to cause distress 
for some learners. It is important for teachers to anticipate that the 
effects of learning about the relationship between language and 
abuses of power will produce conflict for learners, insofar as ex- 
amples may cause some to confront deeply held, previously 
unexamined ideals about democratic or religious institutions. 



[ 



165 



i 

Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



Questions of 
Method in the 
Critical Reading 
of Historical 
Texts 



Discourse, 
Power, Social 
Abuse, and 
Vigilance 



The above discussion highlights an idea elaborated by Dominick 
LaCapra. LaCapra presents the notion of the importance of working 
through ideas in a manner that addresses itself to texts as social 
practices whose effects are not always articulated, and sometimes 
openly resisted and repressed. LaCapra addresses the issue of the 
educational value of teaching students to read texts and artifacts as 
historical and sociopolitical problems: 

One should also try to indicate precisely how historiographical 
studies and debates might profit from closer, more critical attention 
to rhetorical and textual matters and to the kinds of theory that 
provide perspective on these matters. Here, as elsewhere, one needs 
a translation between disciplines and areas of culture. . . . [Learners 
should] attempt to understand the relations among [texts, readers, 
and contexts] in tensely interactive terms. (5) 

In the course of the following pages, some methods are suggested by 
which teachers may engage the "tensely interactive terms" of read- 
ing historical texts in literature classrooms that seek to educate about 
human rights violations. "Tensely interactive terms" means reading 
texts in ways that complicate and make visible the multiple forces 
that determine how texts get produced, distributed, and read. It also 
means distinguishing between one's understanding of these texts in 
the present, and comprehending the constraints that existed during 
times of social crisis that made such vision impossible to achieve at 
the time. The following section looks at how "canonized," or offi- 
cially authorized, texts were able to influence how people thought 
about mass murder during the Holodomor. LaCapra signals the 
importance of understanding "canonization critically as a historical 
process through which texts are made (however problematically) to 
serve hegemonic interests both in ways they invite and in ways they 
resist more or less compellingly" (6). Some Soviet government 
documents produced during the Famine reinforced extreme or brutal 
ideological needs and desires. At the same time, they were able to 
present what LaCapra calls, "a more or less distorted image of 
utopia." Examination of these texts (some examples follow below) 
can help students see how cultural artifacts (such as speeches or 
government documents) affect social stereotypes in ways that pose 
significant and ongoing problems for social life. 



The concept of discourse (from literary theory) describes how lan- 
guage can be used by those in power to make certain occurrences 
seem functional and natural. Discourse assists in the exercise of 
power by making actions appear natural and self-evident. In the 
example of Roberta Bondar presented earlier, the discourse of 
"women as housekeepers" helps to organize the lens through which 



ER|c 



177 



[ 



] 



166 



Judith P Robertson 



a female scientist's work in outer space is trivialized as domestic 
routine. Discourse wages its appeal to readers, viewers, and listeners 
through petitioning a belief in necessity and normalcy. The following 
excerpts provide occasions for studying how the official use of 
discourse by Soviet men in power helped to sustain the idea that the 
Ukrainian people were exaggerating their plight of starvation at 
great economic and moral cost to the greater good of the nation, and 
that they were guilty of crimes against the state by virtue of not 
complying to "natural" rule and progress. 

A speech by Molotov before party activists in 1932 about the 
Ukraine Famine offered the following reflection on the crisis: "The 
work had to be done regardless of how many lives it may cost. There 
is no room either for softness or sentimentality" (Haliy 208). Two 
years later, in his address at the seventeenth congress of the Commu- 
nist Party, Stalin characterized Ukrainian losses as follows: "The 
important thing lies in that an atmosphere of disease of exceptional 
distrust is spreading. . . . The cattle branch of agriculture was most 
deeply affected by this reorganizational period" (Haliy 212). 
Khatayevich, another party official, stated, 

Throw out all your bourgeois humanitarianisms on the garbage pile 
and act as Bolsheviks. Destroy kulak agents wherever they raise their 
heads. The kulaks, as well as the middle-class peasants and paupers 
do not give up their wheat. Your task is to get it by any and all 
means. You must squeeze it out of them. Do not be afraid to employ 
the most extreme methods. (Haliy 208) 

Yet another Soviet official's speech stated, "The masses of collectives 
went through a good schooling this year. The school was quite cruel 
to some" (published in Pravda, 24 June 1933; cited in Haliy 212). 

Classroom literary investigation into recorded speeches of the 
period should focus on questions of how the language at work 
masked specific links to the power and desire of individuals to 
destroy others by acting inflexibly and in concert. Accordingly, 
students may ask what mythic desires can be discerned in the move- 
ment of language of those in power to criminalize or dehumanize 
the hunger of workers who refuse to give up their wheat. How does 
figurative language such as "cruel schooling" wage its effect by 
transferring the meaning of starvation and want to another word 
(i.e., school = a sanctioned institution of learning), to suggest an 
"honorable" category of meaning? Stalin misrepresents the scale of 
loss by focusing on a "disease of exceptional distrust" and losses of 
cattle. "A desire to deny even the basic humanity of alleged crimi- 
nals was reflected in their depiction in the press as spiders, rats, pigs, 
vultures, dogs, hyenas. Their human bodies, several million of them 
over the whole Soviet period, simply disappeared" (Merridale 5). 




178 



167 



[ 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



What do such actions and representations appeal to and threaten in 
people's minds, and what gets left unspoken and unspeakable? 

Using another analytical tool, literary theorists designate the 
* term apostrophe to describe a linguistic turn of events that causes an 
imaginative moment in which the object (i.e., the starving kulak) 
shares the human ability to respond to official discourse. Students 
working with the above examples can explore ways in which the 
central figure of the tragedy (the silent kulak) is imaginatively ren- 
dered into an inferior other, whose peaceful acquiescence must be 
squeezed (i.e., forced or driven) in order to make way for the essen- 
tial unfolding of the all-knowing demigod's will. 

Classroom work on figurative language should focus on how 
the communicative agency of language surpasses the intentions of 
writers and speakers. Accordingly, it is because meaning antedates 
the use of words in context that whole cultures make sense of experi- 
ence conveyed through such metaphors as "the disease of excep- 
tional distrust," "garbage pile," and "cruel school." Language is part 
of the fabric of social and political life. Because of its strategic role in 
perception, language must be shaped to serve the needs of dominant 
groups. In the above excerpts from the speeches of political leaders, 
language provided a conceptual grid, or a system of values through 
which listeners could experience reality. But the meanings derived 
depended on biases and value systems already built into language. 
The point of such analyses for students in the present is that we put 
cultural biases and cliches into play whenever we communicate, 
unless we constantly attend to the power of language. The pedagogi- 
cal justification for focusing on figures of speech in this critical way 
is that it places verbal representations at the center of attention, 
teaching that language plays a central role in the enforcement of all 
forms of power and possibility (Lentricchia and McLaughlin 189). 

Comparative examples of the political force of language can be 
witnessed in the following excerpts from the writing of Ivan Drach 9 , 
excerpted from his 1993 address at the International Academic 
Conference on the Famine of 1932-33 in Ukraine: 

There is now documentary evidence that almost one third of our 
peasants were killed sixty years ago simply because they were and 
wanted to remain Ukrainians. But, Ukrainians ended up in the most 
terrible situation: the Ukrainian stock was consistently rooted out in 
cannibalistic style and at the same time it was diabolically forbidden 
not only to count those murdered but even to keep the very memory 
of them. (6) 

In literary theory, metonymy refers to associations that readers have 
of words when these words appear in specific verbal contexts. Social 
situations of extreme organized murder evolve, in part, because the 



ERiC 



179 



] 



168 



Judith P Robertson 



perpetrators of mass murder represent the victims as less than 
human, i.e., through words that associate humans with pathogens or 
beasts. Such language, used in particular contexts, establishes the 
metonymic categories available to the users o/ language to imagine self 
and others. In the passage quoted above, the poet Drach uses some 
words not unlike those used by Stalin and others. But Drach's words 
turn the "necessity" and "normalcy" of such discourse on its head, 
by brushing its intentions against the grain of human anguish and 
moral outrage. This is to say that if the Ukrainian people figure as 
"stock" (like animals), who are "rooted out" (rummaged and de- 
stroyed) in cannibalistic (barbarous) style, the metonymic associa- 
tions of such words now convey the impression of people hunted as 
for the sake of voracious and morally reprehensible appetite. The 
writer's images convey gross excesses of consumption, of a dominat- 
ing force that expresses inhuman intentionality. Not only does Drach 
describe the rooting out of hungry people for murder, but those 
remaining are diabolically forbidden (e.g., by profane rather than 
sacred edict) to ignore their losses of dead (by not reckoning with 
them) and then to forget them by not being allowed to "weigh" their 
ruin in memory. The point of such focused attention on words and 
context is to help students grapple with how common figures of 
speech are open to mindful and powerful purpose by anyone who 
has access to "ordinary" linguistic capital. 



Testimony and 
the Dilemmas of 
Teaching about 
Genocide 



The discussion now turns to unresolved difficulties and tasks for 
continued reflection for teaching about language, literature, and 
human rights violations. Before doing so, a brief review of points 
made throughout this paper is in order. This chapter argues that 
English studies education about the Holodomor should focus on the 
historical conditions that led to it, through a study and interpretation 
of narrative (political, media, religious, and testimonial) texts. An 
effort must be made to distinguish how the discursive conditions 
leading to the Ukraine Famine compare and contrast with accounts 
of other human rights violations. In root causes of intolerance and 
genocide, the submission of ethnic, territorial, and religious groups 
is occasioned through uses of "ordinary language" in specific con- 
texts. These contexts need to be examined and interpreted for their 
unique and general qualities as learners struggle to identify how 
relations between power and knowledge are ongoing in the modern 
world. An important focus for study of the Ukraine Famine is that 
discourse is a field of power and peril. In the ongoing battle for 
knowledge and human rights, teachers and students need to listen to 
words that "cry out," and to answer them with care. 



[ 



] 



169 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



Before undertaking to teach students about worlds of hurt 
through story, educators need to anticipate some significant difficul- 
ties they will encounter along the way For example, classroom 
readers may respond to difficult knowledge about the human condi- 
tion by showing signs of emotional regression, social divisiveness, 
psychological paralysis, or debilitating grief (see, for example, 
Felman and Laub; Avni; Simon and Armitage-Simon; and 
Robertson). The knowledge that genocides unfold within general 
conditions of betrayal and absence of coordinated rescue or relief 
may cause learners unwittingly to seek repose in myths of salvation 
or redemption (Britzman, in press; Linen thal). Students and teachers 
may frame their thinking around social catastrophes in ways that 
stray from the most valuable and necessary social and moral under- 
standings (Dawidowitz). The grievous lack of clear and defensible 
pedagogical guidelines for classroom teachers teaching about 
trauma (which this volume sets out, in part, to repair) is cause for 
continued vigilance in genocide and intolerance education (see, also, 
Robertson, in press). 

The following example provides a test case for thinking about 
the dilemmas teachers must meet head on in efforts to educate about 
horror. In Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in Literature, Psychoanalysis, 
and History by Shoshana Felman and Dori Laub, educator Shoshana 
Felman relates an affecting story about the trials of literary learning. 
She recounts her experience of teaching a university class in which 
testimonial literary texts were used in conjunction with the viewing 
of videotaped and autobiographical accounts of Holocaust survi- 
vors: 



all of a sudden, [the class] finds itself entirely at a loss, uprooted and 
disoriented, and profoundly shaken in its anchoring world views 
and in its commonly held life-perspectives, (xvi) 

Felman and Laub make the important point that "listening to ex- 
treme limit experiences — entails its hazards," and that reading and 
viewing in classrooms can "suddenly — without a warning — shake 
up one's whole grip on one's experience and one's life" (xvii). The 
vicissitudes of teaching about genocide imply preparing oneself to 
make way for crises in learning. But how can teachers do this in 
ways that support the making of insight? 

Felman continues. 

As far as the great literary subjects are concerned, teaching must 
itself be viewed not merely as transmitting, but as accessing: as 
accessing crisis or the critical dimension which, I will propose, is 
inherent in the literary subjects. Each great subject has a turning 
point contained within it, and that turning point has to be met. The 



] 



170 



: 

Judith P Robertson 



question for the teacher is, then, on the one hand, how to access, how 
not to foreclose the crisis, and, on the other hand, how to contain it, 
how much crisis can the class sustain (54). 

As lovers of words, and as lovers of the healing fiber that words 
make possible in the world, English studies teachers are well situ- 
ated to commit themselves to this ethic of risk: to contain knowledge 
about intolerance and genocide in matters of literary schooling. This 
chapter suggests some ways in which narratives, discourses, and 
testimonies of the Ukraine Famine may be embodied in English 
studies curricula. As we continue to define ways to teach about mass 
violations of human rights, let us not simply transmit the literary 
texts of social memory, but access them with students (by collectively 
being wakeful to their multiple unknowns). And let us undertake 
this journey of vigilance together, not in order to foreclose the ensu- 
ing crises in learning (by terminating our own and others' existential 
appointments with difficulty), but in order to find ways to contain 
such struggles (by receiving the anguish that texts offer and by 
resolving to carry the disorienting knowledge of human relations for 
all time). 



Notes l. In many ways 1932-33 is a complex and difficult time in a difficult 

geographical area of Eastern Europe. When I write about Ukraine during 
these years, it should be noted that the entire ethnic groups of Ukrainians 
were not living in one state. Almost half of Ukraine during this time was 
under Polish, not Soviet rule. The Soviet totalitarian regime at this time is 
referred to as the Russian Empire, the Provisional government, or the USSR. 
In my representation of the event and in my uses of terminology, I have 
followed the practices established by major historians and theorists (quoted 
throughout the chapter) who write about the event. 

2. Figures pertaining to deaths caused by the Famine are kept in the 
Russian State Archive of the Economy (RGAE), fond 1562, opis 329, delo 
107 (report to the Central State Statistical Administration on the calculation 
of losses in 1932-33. See Merridale, pp. 16-17. 

3. In this regard, works by Ukrainian writers such as Lidiya 
Kovalenko and Volodymyr Manyak stand "as a monument to the persis- 
tence of memory against official denial" by publishing over one thousand 
eyewitness accounts of the Famine (Mace 143^4). 

4. Educators interested in obtaining Reports of the Commission for 
use in the classroom may do so by contacting the organizations listed in 
References at the end of this chapter. 

5. The Convention on Genocide was approved by the United 
Nations Assembly on December 9, 1948. The Convention came about 
because of the desire for international penal jurisdiction of international 
tribunals for the judgment of crimes against humanity, and the need to 



3 



182 



171 



Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



catalogue them in an international penal code. The Convention identifies as 
genocide those crimes undertaken "with the aim of destroying totally or 
partially national communities or those of a religious, racial, or political 
kind . . ( International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932-33 Famine in the 
Ukraine: The Final Report 18). The debate over naming the Ukraine Famine 
as a genocide is presented in the Report (1-9 and 16-18). 

6. For further reading about the historical context of the Ukraine 
Famine, teachers should consult especially Dolot, Conquest, and Subtelny. 
In addition, they may wish to view Harvest of Despair (1996), a videotape 
produced and distributed by the Ukrainian Canadian Research and Devel- 
opment Centre (see References for purchasing information). The videotape 
contains graphic film footage of eyewitness documentary and testimony, as 
well as information about the historical conditions leading up to the 
disaster. Because of the visual explicitness of images of mass murder, 
starvation, and cannibalism, the videotape should be used advisedly in 
classrooms. 

7. See United Nations General Assembly, Thirty-Eighth Session, A/ 
C,3/38/SR 17 for October 19, 1983. This incident is recounted in Mace (p. 
121 ). 

8. The statement of the Ukrainian Catholic bishops in 1933 was 
published under the heading "Ukraina v peredsmertnykh sudorohakh" in 
the newspaper Nyva in Lviv, August 1933, pp. 281-82. Krawchuk (pp. 59- 
62) reports that the protest found its way to Western Europe. 

9. Ivan Drach, a poet, was the founder of the Popular Movement of 
Ukraine and the first Secretary of the Kyiv branch of the Writers' Union of 
Ukraine. See Drach, page 3. 



References Avni, O. "Beyond Psychoanalysis: Elie Weisel's Night in Historical Perspec- 
tive." Auschwitz and After: Race , Culture and "the Jewish Question" in 
France. Ed. Lawrence D. Kritzman. New York: Routledge, 1995. 203- 
18. 

Balawyder, A. "Canada and the Famine in Soviet Russia and the Ukraine 
(1921-23)." New Review 4.17 (1964): 1-9. 

Britzman, D. P. Lost Subjects, Contested Objects: Toward a Psychoanalytic Theory 
of Learning. New York: SUNY Press, 1998. 

California State Board of Education. Model Curriculum for Human Rights and 
Genocide. Appendix B — The Ukrainian Genocide. Sacramento: California 
State Department of Education, 1988. 

Carynnyk, M., L. Luciuk, and B. S. Kordan, eds. The Foreign Office and the 

Famine , British Documents on the Ukraine and the Great Famine of 1932- 
33. Kingston, Ontario: Limestone Press, 1988. 

Caruth, Cathy. Unclaimed Experience: Trauma , Narrative, and History. Balti- 
more: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996. 






183 



172 



Judith P Robertson 



Conquest, Robert. The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror- 
Famine. London: Arrow, 1988. 

Dawidowitz, L. "How They Teach the Holocaust." Commentary 90.6 (Dec. 
1990): 25-32. 

Des Pres, T. The Survivor : An Anatomy of Life in the Death Camps. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1980. 

Dolot, M. Execution by Hunger: The Hidden Holocaust. New York: Norton, 
1985. 

Drach, I. "Will Russia Repent?" Ukrainian Review 40.4 (1993): 3-12. 

First Interim Report of Meetings and Hearings of and before the Commission on 
the Ukrainian Famine, Held in 1986. Washington, DC.: United States 
Government Printing Office, 1987. 

Felman, Shoshana, and Dori Laub. Testimony: Crises of Witnessing in Litera- 
ture, Psychoanalysis, and History. London: Routledge, 1992. 

Greenblatt, Stephen J. Learning to Curse: Essays in Early Modern Culture. New 
York: Routledge, 1990. 

Haliy, M. "The 25th Anniversary of the Great Famine in Ukraine." Ukrainian 
Quarterly 4.1 (1958): 204-14. 

Harvest of Despair. Prod. Ukrainian Canadian Research and Documentation 
Centre, 1996. Available from UCRDC, 620 Spadina Avenue, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M5S 2H4. 

International Commission of Inquiry into the 1932-33 Famine in the Ukraine: The 
Final Report. Toronto: Documentation Office, 1990. For copies of the 
report write to 555 Burnhamthorpe Road, Penthouse A, Toronto, 
Ontario, M9C 2Y3, Canada. 

Kovalenko, L., and V. Manyak, eds. 33-yi holod: Narodna Knyha-Memoriyal 
(People's Book of Memory). Kyiv: Radianskyi Pysmennyk, 1991. 

Krawchuk, A. "Protesting against the Famine: The Statement of the Ukrai- 
nian Catholic Bishops in 1933." } our naf of Ukrainian Studies 8.2 (1983): 
59-62. 

Kuromiya, H. "Review of the Reports of Meetings and Hearings of and 

before the Commission on the Ukrainian Famine, Held in 1986 and 
1987." Harvard Ukrainian Studies 15.1 (1989): 230-32. 

LaCapra, Dominick. Representing the Holocaust : History, Theory, Trauma. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994. 

Lentricchia, Frank, and Thomas McLaughlin, eds. Critical Literary Terms for 
Literary Study. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. 

Linenthal, Edward Tabor. Preserving Memory: The Struggle to Create America's 
Holocaust Museum. New York: Penguin, 1995. 

Mace, J. E. "How Ukraine Was Permitted to Remember." Ukramian Quar- 
terly 49.2 (1993): 121-51. 



O 



184 



c 



173 



i 

Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine Famine) 



Melson, R. "Paradigms of Genocide: The Holocaust, the Armenian Geno- 
cide, and Contemporary Mass Destructions." Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science 548 (1996): 156-68. 

Merridale, C. "Death and Memory in Modem Russia." History Workshop 
Journal 42 (Autumn 1996): 1-18. 

New York State Education Department. Case Studies , Persecution/ Genocide. 
The Human Rights Series , Volume 3. Albany: New York State Educa- 
tion Department, 1986. Copies of this curriculum document may be 
obtained by writing the New York State Education Department, 
Publications Sales Desk, 3rd Floor, Education Bldg., Albany, New 
York, 12234. Phone 518-474-3806. 

Report to Congress: Commission on the Ukraine Famine. Washington, DC.: 
United States Government Printing Office, 1988. 

Robertson, Judith P. "Teaching about Worlds of Hurt through Encounters 
with Literature: Some Pedagogical Reflections." Language Arts 74.6 
(1997): 457-66. 

, ed. (in press). Teaching for a Tolerant World , Grades K-6: Essays and 

Resources. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

Second Interim Report of Meetings and Hearings of and before the Commission on 
the Ukrainian Famine , Held in 1987. Washington, D.C.: United States 
Government Printing Office, 1988. 

Serbyn, R. "British Public Opinion and the Famine in the Ukraine." The New 
Review : A journal of East European History 8.3 (1968): 89-101. 

Simon, R., and W. Armitage-Simon. "Teaching Risky Stories: Remembering 
Mass Destruction through Children's Literature." English Quarterly 
28.1 (1995): 27-31. 

Slavutych, Y. "The Famine of 1932-33 in the Ukrainian Literature Abroad." 
Ukrainian Quarterly 49 .2 (1993): 165-83. 

Subtelny, O. Ukraine: A History. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1988. 

T. S. "Soviet Genocide of the Ukrainian People." Ukrainian Quarterly 4.4 
(1948): 325-38. 

Tal, K. Worlds of Hurt: Reading the Literatures of Trauma. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press, 1996. 

Toronto Arts Group for Human Rights, ed. The Writer and Human Rights. 
Toronto: Lester and Orpen Dennys, 1993. 

Tottle, D. Fraud , Famine and Fascism : The Ukrainian Genocide My th from Hitler 
to Harvard. Toronto: Progress Books, 1987. 

Whiteson, L. "The Word as a Blunt Instrument." The Writer and Human 

Rights. Ed. Toronto Arts Group for Human Rights. Toronto: Lester 
and Orpen Dennys, 1983. 39^12. 







174 



Teaching about 
Women in Twentieth- 
Century Genocides 

Marjorie Bingham 

Minnetonka, Minnesota 



L iterature in the twentieth century is haunted by war and geno- 
cide. The historical landscape is pockmarked with the names of 
places linked by massive death and literary account — Barbusse's 
Verdun, Sassoon's Paschendelle, Wiesel's Auschwitz, Camus's 
occupied France, Anne Frank's Amsterdam, and Hershey's 
Hiroshima. But in many of these writings, women play silent roles, 
and it is only recently that historians and literary critics have begun 
to look at the roles of women in the violence of war and genocide. 
Joan Ringleheim (1984, 1985), Sybil Milton (1984), Charlotte Delbo 
(1990), and others have done pioneering work on women in the 
Holocaust that has opened up new considerations. As Myrna 
Goldenberg has said about the Holocaust, the "hell was the same for 
women and men, but the horrors were different" (Rittner and Roth 
3). Recent books like Rittner and Roth's Different Voices: Women of the 
Holocaust, (1993) the Eibeshitzs' two-volume Women in the Holocaust 
(1993), and Linden's Making Stories, Making Selves: Feminist Reflections 
on the Holocaust (1993) seek to address past omissions of studies of 
women. But most of these works are concerned with Jewish women 
in the Holocaust and do not deal with other genocides. Less work 
has been done on gender in the Armenian, Cambodian, and other 
genocides of the twentieth century. The primary purpose of this 
essay is to suggest how teachers might deal with women in the three 
best-documented genocides of the twentieth century, in Armenia, 
1915-19; Nazi-occupied Europe, 1933-45; and Cambodia, 1975-80. 
Such analysis, it is hoped, will help students understand how com- 
plex these major events have been and what skill, courage, and 
compassion have been part of women's lives. 

Before beginning, however, I would like to explain about the 
suggested sources in this essay. Most will be nonfiction, memoirs 
written for a general audience. This is not to say that fine fictional 
sources are not available. One of my teaching colleagues, Mim 



0 

ERIC 



IS O’ 



[ 



] 



175 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



Kagol, has built a highly successful writing assignment about the 
Cambodian genocide. Using Linda Crew's Children of the River 
(1989), Kagol asks her ninth-grade classes to continue the main 
characters' stories. Franz Werfel's The Forty Days of Musa Dagh (1953) 
is a classic novel about the Armenian resistance to genocide. Fic- 
tional works on the Holocaust, like Kerr's When Hitler Stole Pink 
Rabbit (1971) and Baylis-White's Sheltering Rebecca (1989) are useful 
for introducing the Holocaust to younger readers. But with the 
controversies swirling around these genocides — the disclaimers of 
the events even having occurred — the role of witness lends an 
important authority to the text. Further, women's voices have often 
been neglected or even re-invented, as in Styron's Sophie's Choice. 
Their own accounts have not been fully explored. 

Yet there are many sources available, particularly on women in 
the Holocaust. A bibliography prepared for a teacher workshop we 
gave at the Upper Midwest Women's History Center in Minnesota, 
for example, included nearly three hundred sources on women in 
the Holocaust and Resistance, largely memoirs. Perhaps most impor- 
tant about these nonfictional accounts is that they signal to students 
that dealing with genocide requires respect for the lines between art 
and reality, between how' an author wishes to resolve characters' 
lives and what life did to individual, real women. The Warsaw 
Ghetto diarist Abraham Lewin remembered what one woman had 
told him about his descriptions of ghetto life: there "can be no 
words, no images, no embellishment, . . . just cold, hard facts" (26). 
Though memory, over time, may shape those "facts," nevertheless, 
memoirs provide viewpoints and concerns, like gender issues, 
overlooked by even the best of our novelists and only now being 
recognized by scholars. This essay, then, will try to suggest six ways 
of using nonfictional accounts of the Armenian, World War II, and 
Cambodian genocides. 



Women’s 
Diverse Roles 



The first point to make about these genocides is that women were 
more than just victims. In order to understand the real human loss of 
these events, students need to see women as complex individuals of 
varying circumstance. In a series of books Susan Gross and I wrote 
on women in world cultures, we used a model based on the idea of 
"cultural universals" — politics, social conditions, aesthetics, econom- 
ics, education, and religion — to tell about the diversity of women's 
lives. We tried the same model in workshops on the Holocaust, 
focusing on the Warsaw Ghetto as an entry point. Even in that 
restricted world, women continued their lives as entrepreneurs, 
poets, doctors, resisters, teachers, and mothers. A lesson developed 
from these sessions included the art work of Halina Olomucki 



O 

ERIC 



I¥7 



176 



c 



Marjorie Bingham 



(Costanza 120-22), Yuri Suhl's account of Niuta Terteboim's resis- 
tance work (167), the poems of Luba Krugman Gurdus (undated), 
and excerpts from Dr. Adina Szwajger's I Remember Nothing More: 

The Warsaw Children's Hospital and Jewish Resistance (1990). 

This lesson calls for dividing the class into six groups, each to 
analyze one of the cultural universals. The object of the lesson is to 
develop a one-paragraph thesis about the role of women in the 
Warsaw Ghetto. Each group is given a packet of two or three sources 
on the topic. The aesthetic packet, for example, contained 
Olomucke's drawings and Gurdus' s poetry. Each group then reports 
back to the class on the thesis they have developed, reading their 
own answer to the question, "What were women's roles in the 
Warsaw Ghetto?" After each group has reported, the teacher then 
leads a discussion in which a class paragraph is developed. The 
purpose of the assignment, besides the knowledge gained, is to have 
students see how parts of a subject may be combined to form a larger 
thesis. Students who participate in this assignment often want all 
their group's information included and vie for what seems impor- 
tant in the "class" thesis. Should the poet be mentioned at the begin- 
ning of the paragraph because her poems are still read? Or should 
the resistance leader be nearer the top? Students come to understand 
that placement and emphasis are matters of judgment. For better 
students, this may seem rather matter-of-fact. But for struggling 
students, the dialogue in groups and in the wider class discussion 
gives them insight into the decisions made for inclusion or exclusion 
of material. Though works like The Diary of Anne Frank make us 
understand the terrible loss of an individual, it is also important to 
see, in assignments that stress the variety of women's lives, the range 
of loss, of insight and courage. 

While sources on the diversity of women's lives in Armenian 
and Cambodian sources are more difficult to obtain, several narra- 
tives are particularly valuable for looking at women's lives. Teachers 
may wish to select descriptions of women's activities as midwives, 
sheep tenders, and skilled embroiderers in Villa and Matossian's 
Armenian Village Life Before 1914 (1982). The last chapters of Arlene 
Avakian's Lion Woman's Legacy: An Armenian- American Memoir (1992) 
relate the many activities her grandmother pursued to ensure the 
family survival, from sewing burlap bags to confronting Turkish 
officials. In the bitter aftermath of more killings in the siege of 
Marash in 1920, Stanley Kerr was eyewitness to the Armenian 
nurses, directors of hospitals and orphanages, seamstresses, and 
resisters, accounts of whom appear in his book The Lions of Marash 
(1973). 

Two works about Cambodia also are good because women's 
roles are made apparent. Joan Criddle and Teeda Butt Mam's To 




18 3 



177 


Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 


Genocide and 
Gender 
Difference 


Destroy You Is No Loss: The Odyssey of a Cambodian Family (1987) 
includes struggling mothers, Khmer Rouge female soldiers, women's 
work crews, nurses, and traders. Haing Ngor's A Cambodian Odyssey 
(1987) confirms his early statement, "I am a man with an affinity for 
women," by describing the lives of women around him, whether old 
women struggling to maintain their family's Buddhist principles or 
the problems of teenage girls faced with forced political marriages. 
Teachers, then, may create lessons with excerpts organized around a 
place or specific time from a variety of sources or choose one work 
that carries the weight of diversity within it. 

Another way of handling diversity is a lesson I have used only 
with Advanced Placement students. In this assignment on point of 
view, students are given brief descriptions of three women who 
wrote of their experiences in the Warsaw Ghetto. One, Janina 
Bauman, did not join the Resistance; another, Vladka Meed, was a 
Resistance member working outside the Ghetto passing as a Chris- 
tian Pole; and a third, Zivia Lubetkin, was a Resistance leader, a 
highly political Zionist. Dividing the class into groups, I gave each 
group an excerpt from one of the writers. The passages themselves 
were not particularly revealing of their authors' activities, so stu- 
dents had to look at the way in which events were described to see if 
they could figure out the author. Selections were chosen from Janina 
Bauman's Winter in the Morning: A Young Girl's Life in the Warsaw 
Ghetto and Beyond: 1939-45 (1985), Vladka Meed's On Both Sides of the 
Wall (1977), and Zivia Lubetkin's In the Days of Destruction and Revolt 
(1981). Generally students could most easily identify Lubetkin as the 
resistance leader because of her use of "we" throughout and her 
generalized descriptions of what everyone seemed to be doing. 
Bauman's prose tended to stress "I," and groups were able to notice 
that events described centered mainly on daily events as they af- 
fected her. The groups analyzing Meed had the most trouble because 
it seemed her prose both involved an "I" observer but also gave 
other information. "It just seems like regular writing to me," one 
student remarked. But after the assignment, I think most students 
understood that women may also differ in the way in which they tell 
their memoirs, based on their political points of view. The important 
point is that one life cannot stand for all and that students need to 
read about more than women marching anonymously to death 
trains. 

Though men and women went through many of the same experi- 
ences, they often differed in the ways in which they faced genocidal 
practices. It seems likely, from Joan Ringleheim's research (1985), 
that more women than men were killed in the Holocaust. Men were 




ttt 



178 



Marjorie Bingham 



more likely to have escaped to the East, to be seen as usable labor, 
and to have opportunities for resistance. Further, it was more often 
mothers who went with their children to the trains (Kalib 153). Sulia 
Rubin's experience was probably exceptional, but she remembers, "I 
did not see one man sacrifice himself and go to the grave with his 
children" (Tec, Defiance 168). Despite Nazi regulations on "interra- 
cial" rape, women were also more subject to sexual abuse. Biological 
differences meant that pregnancy was an additional burden for 
women, indeed, a death sentence if in a concentration camp. 

In the Armenian genocide, however, there may have been 
some advantages for women. Armenian men and boys over age 
twelve were frequently taken to be killed immediately, while women 
were forced on long marches to desolate locations. Sexual abuse was 
present; however, in some cases — whether through lust or pity — it 
took the form of forcing Armenian women to become wives of Turks 
or Kurds. In the Cambodian genocide, women survived at a rate 
higher than males. Ben Kiernan's estimate is that about 10 percent of 
Cambodian males were killed as opposed to 3 percent of the women 
(i Genocide and Democracy 67). Disease and terrible conditions, how- 
ever, may have brought the percentage closer. Also, particularly in 
targeted groups, killings were higher, as Chinese-Cambodians died 
at a rate of about 50 percent. (Kiernan, Pol Pot Regime 295). If a 
woman were a member of a non-Khmer ethnic group, light skinned, 
city resident, Buddhist, and educated, her chances of survival were 
probably less than a dark-skinned, non-religious, Khmer peasant 
male (Criddle and Mam 57). In other words, the Cambodian geno- 
cide was one that included elements of social class, political belief, 
ethnic background, and religious commitment that were more 
complex than the more ethnically determined genocides of Armenia 
and the Holocaust. 

But in all three cases, gender differences were present. In all 
three rape was an issue, though in Cambodia and the Holocaust the 
ideology of the dominant power was that rape was unacceptable. 
Nazi racial policy gave lip service to "racial purity," but that did not 
prevent Ukrainian and Latvian guards from raping women prison- 
ers. The notorious "Doll's House" at Auschwitz also illustrates the 
use of forced brothels, though sources on this issue are sparse and 
guarded. Jehoshua Eibeshitz, in collecting sources for his Women in 
the Holocaust, omits an interview of a woman who had lived through 
Nazi prostitution. In his introduction to his book, he explains that he 
just could not use her words: "How could I print the unprintable?" 
(viii). However, there is evidence that particularly in 1942-43, as the 
Nazis recognized the need for prisoner labor, they began to use 
brothels as "rewards" for more production (Schoppmann 21). Heinz 



O 

ERLC 



190 



179 



[ 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



Heger, in his book The Men with the Pink Triangle, described the 
Jewish and Gypsy women who "volunteered" from Ravensbruck to 
become prostitutes at Flossenberg prison. They were promised their 
release from the concentration camps after six months of service. 
Their fate, after the six months, was to be sent to the extermination 
camp at Auschwitz and replaced by a new group of victims (98-99). 
Cambodian Khmer Rouge policy, on the other hand, was puritanical 
regarding sex — even to the point of killing nonmarried lovers. 
Cambodian accounts suggest that rape was not a major issue unless 
the woman was characterized as an enemy of the state. Then ac- 
counts describe terribly brutal rapes that end with killing (Criddle 
and Mam 156). In the Armenian genocide, rape was frequent, with 
many accounts describing the taking away of women or seeing the 
violated bodies (Davis 80-83). 

Pregnancy, from the accounts, was little respected in these 
genocides. Though Armenian and Cambodian women might not 
have been specifically selected for destruction, as they were in the 
Holocaust, nevertheless they were forced to the roads and to work 
despite their pregnancies. In contrast to the Holocaust, however, 
there might be hope for the survival of small children. Turkish and 
Kurdish families were, in some cases, willing to take children for 
adoption from Armenian mothers, and the Khmer Rouge planned to 
have special camps where children could be raised separately from 
the "contamination" of their families. In both genocides, girls were 
generally seen as less threatening than an older boy. 

Teaching about the differences in treatment of women and 
men may present some problems for teachers. Until recently. Holo- 
caust scholars seemed reluctant to deal with gender issues, perhaps 
for fear of further division in already controversial subject matter or 
perhaps out of respect for the privacy of survivors. As one Israeli 
scholar told me about the issue, "They all wound up on the trains." 
But new scholarship and an increased willingness for survivors to 
speak out more openly has meant recognition of issues of rape, 
abortion, pregnancy, and menstruation. The point is not to make one 
sex more of a victim than the other — each individual died an indi- 
vidual — but to understand that gender, as well as ethnicity, social 
class, and other distinctions, shaped people's fate. 

Several works deal with these differences in ways that would 
be helpful to students. Holocaust memoirs written in the 1980s and 
1990s are likely to discuss women's lives more frankly. In Rena 
Kornreich Gelissen's Rena's Promise (1995), for example, issues like 
menstruation and lesbian advances receive mention. The new edi- 
tion of The Diary of Anne Frank (1995) is also an indication that sub- 
jects concerning sexuality, passed over in the 1950s, can now be more 



O 

ERLC 



191 



180 



[ 



] 



Marjorie Bingham 



openly addressed. Claudia Schoppmann's Days of Masquerades: Life 
Stories of Lesbians During the Third Reich (1996) explains the triple 
burden some women faced, as Jews, women, and homosexuals. 

For studies of Cambodia, Molyda Szymusiak's The Stones Cry 
Out: A Cambodian Childhood 1975-80 (1986) is good at suggesting the 
ways in which the Khmer regime broke down women's self-image — 
from their hair length to clothes to love of their mothers — in at- 
tempts at making them "Daughters of Pol Pot," ready to accept 
forced marriage to Khmer soldiers. 

For study of what happened to Armenian women after the 
execution of their men, accounts of foreign diplomats present a 
major source. Though diplomatic sources are rarely used in English 
classes, they present a style of writing useful for students to know. 
The skill is to consult a variety of accounts and to distill these into a 
seemingly objective, clear statement. The focus of such a writing 
assignment would be to analyze how foreign diplomats, confronted 
with the Armenian disaster, tried to sort out emotions to provide a 
suitable blend of "diplomatic" objectivity with a concern for action. 
Students then would be asked to do a similar assignment; writing 
first an emotional reaction to an event, then a "cooler" paragraph, 
and finally, a restrained report. At each stage students should con- 
sider the gains and losses from such changes. The diplomatic ac- 
counts from the Armenian genocide are available; those of the 
American Consul in Aleppo, J. B. Jackson, are particularly vivid. In a 
series of June 1915 documents, his gathering of sources, his own 
dismay, and his final "objective" report can be seen (Sarafian Vol. I). 
To see how his reports and those of others were used, students might 
also wish to look at Ambassador Henry Morgenthau's 1918 sum- 
mary in a more public report. Though the details of the mutilations 
and the specifics of individual women's plights are lost, a sense of 
outrage, couched in increasingly formal language, remains. Students 
may reflect on why these changes occur and on the problems of 
being forceful and still restrained in language (and perhaps why 
Armenians are still retaliating with assassinations of Turkish offi- 
cials, particularly diplomats whom they see as covering up the 
genocide in abstract declarations). But what these diplomatic docu- 
ments do offer, as well, are devastating accounts of the suffering of 
Armenian women. 



Women as 
Threat 



Though all of these genocides were terrible, women were seen as 
different sorts of threats to the dominant regime. In the Holocaust, 
Jewish and Gypsy women were considered a major threat to German 
supposed racial purity. The "taint" of Jewish or Gypsy blood was 
seen as polluting, thus all the laws on mixed blood, then segregation 
and finally elimination. This view meant that women, as bearers of 



192 



181 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



children, were a serious biological threat, preventing planned extinc- 
tion of "tainted" races. Therefore, no mercy should be applied. 
Though the Armenian genocide also saw thousands of women killed 
or dying from harsh conditions, they were generally seen as a na- 
tionalistic threat, not a biological one. In Cambodia, the threat was of 
belonging to one of the "Three Mountains": (1) those associated with 
previous governments (army, religious leaders, intellectuals, politi- 
cians); (2) capitalists; and/or (3) "Targe" landowners. 

Both in the Armenian and Cambodian genocides there was, 
then, a possibility of "conversion" to the dominant regime. The 
strong grandmother in Lion Woman's Legacy, for example, survives 
because of her conversion from Christianity to Islam. For most 
Armenian women, this would have been a terrible violation of their 
faith, and many died preserving their religion. Even those who tried 
to convert, especially males, were not assured they would be saved. 
But young women and girls were generally accepted for conversion. 
In Cambodia, "New People" (those who had lived a city life) were 
highly suspect. Through her work in the fields or acceptance of 
Khmer marriage, however, a woman might survive. If she were 
young, hid her background, and followed the rules, she might 
become one of "Pol Pot's Daughters." But since these conversions 
usually meant abandonment of their families, women in both Arme- 
nian and Cambodian genocides generally shared their people's fate. 

Teeda Butt Mam in To Destroy You Is No Loss explains the 
lengths to which she went to avoid Khmer Rouge marriage and the 
hardships she endured to remain with her family. Since Mam goes 
into the complexities of the possibilities of her decision about forced 
marriage, this section of her book would make a good basis for a 
writing assignment on outlining choices and determining possible 
results. Here the question given to students would be, "Given Mam's 
situations, should she agree to a forced marriage?" As students read 
the section, they can create an outline of the major points (more food, 
more "patriotic" appearance, less pressure, easier work in forced 
marriage versus mismatched educational levels, following a hated 
government, no romantic interest, hope for a different future in 
staying single). Then, with a partner, pairs of students would report 
back to the class on the choice they would see as the author's "best 
bet." But while some Cambodian women had some degree of choice, 
Jewish and Gypsy women in the Holocaust did not even have such 
terrible options. 



Testimony and 
Gender 
Difference 



Women's and men's testimonies differ both in viewpoint and subject 
matter. Historians, like John Farragher in Men and Women on the 
Overland Trail (1979), have pointed out that men in diaries tend to 
notice what they and other men do, but women record both men's 



O 

ERIC 



193 



182 



i 

Marjorie Bingham 



and women's activities. Something of the same might be said about 
some of the male memoirs of the Holocaust. Meager meals appear 
without accounts of the scrounging efforts of women to obtain food 
for their families. Women's memoirs are more likely to depict the 
efforts their mothers made in holding families together. Further, one 
has a sense in some of the male diaries and memoirs that the inabil- 
ity to protect women and children made the authors unable to 
confront vivid description. Abraham Lewin's A Cup of Tears: A Diary 
of the Warsaw Ghetto (1988) does mention female friends. But as the 
diary proceeds, again and again come one-line entries: "They seized 
mothers and children"; "There was a round-up of women factory 
workers"; "Women were seized" (61, 149, 157). Surely there was 
more to describe, but he probably did not have the heart to do it. 

An extreme statement about the conflict in men's minds about 
the protection of women can be seen in the diary of Calel 
Perechodnik, "Am I a Murderer?" Testament of a Jewish Ghetto Police- 
man, written in 1943 (1996). He states, "I ask the whole democratic 
world to avenge our women and children . . . We Jewish men are not 
worthy of being avenged. We were killed through our fault and not 
on a field of glory" (xxi). Though he is haunted continually by his 
taking of his own wife to the train going to Treblinka, she neverthe- 
less remains a shadowy figure in the book. Some Jewish men, of 
course, were partisans and fought against the Germans. Shalom 
Yoran's memoir The Defiant describes his activities as revenge for his 
mother's death. She appears as a major force in his book, praised 
particularly for her linguistic and social skills which helped to save 
her sons. But his description of his partisan days define women as 
mainly staying in camp, "cooking, washing, mending" (143). Later, 
in a vivid account of a horrific partisan attack and escape through 
the swamps, Yoran may startle the reader with his brief mention of 
several women who shared and survived the ordeal. However, we 
miss women's accounts which describe these events even though 
they too were part of them. Further, women and men were often 
segregated by the prevailing regimes. In Nazi concentration camps 
like Auschwitz, there were separate areas for men and women. 
Ravensbruck, a concentration camp primarily for women, had the 
notorious reputation of being one of the worst of the camps, particu- 
larly for the sterilization and typhus experiments practiced there. Of 
the 132,000 women imprisoned in Ravensbruck, only 3,500 were left 
in 1945 (Rittner and Roth 8). In Cambodia, work crews segregated by 
age and gender were assigned to break up family relationships. For 
the Armenians, the killing of males meant that women, accustomed 
to family life and support, were forced to the roads with primarily 
remnants of their past. Without understanding these segregated 
worlds, we cannot see what these years entailed. 



O 

ERIC 



194 



] 



183 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



In considering the sources to be used, then, teachers need to 
have a balance of viewpoints. Some men, like Haing Ngor, a former 
gynecologist, do pay attention to women, as in his A Cambodian 
Odyssey. Stanley Kerr's account of the Armenians at Marash is also 
filled with references to women, perhaps because his future wife was 
there to help him with insights and contacts. But since women's 
issues have been overlooked in dealing with genocides, it is impor- 
tant that women's own viewpoints be represented. Collections like 
the two-volume Women in the Holocaust are readily available and act 
to counterbalance the reliance on Wiesel, Levi, and other male 
writers, particularly those writing before the 1980s. 



Women’s Lives 
after Genocide 



Survivors' lives after genocide might often take different paths 
according to gender. In one sense, the genocides were not over after 
the killings but had terrible aftermaths. In each of these three geno- 
cides, women had to face further possibilities of rape and other 
gender issues. For those women in concentration camps liberated on 
the Eastern front, there was the possibility of rape from Russian 
soldiers. Cambodian women, relatively safe from rape by Khmer 
Rouge forces, were not so from invading Vietnamese troops or Thai 
exploiters on the refugee trail and in holding camps. Armenian 
women were held in Turkish families even after World War I was 
over. After the terrible exodus of 1915-16, Armenians faced more 
massacres in 1919-20 as Allied troops pulled out when the Turks 
fought against their occupation. The immediate aftermath of these 
genocides, in other words, often continued women's plight. 

Even as people rebuilt their lives, they continued to face 
gender issues related to genocidal issues. For men, it was important 
to rebuild a family in the sense of settling in a secure location and 
achieving economic stability. For women, too, families were impor- 
tant, and many worried about producing healthy children after the 
trauma of the camps. Sterilization experiments meant that, for some 
women, children were an impossibility. For other women, there was 
an unwelcome possibility of pregnancy as a result of rape. Men seem 
to have played a greater role in revenge organizations. Though 
women did act as liaisons in revenge organizations, like Yeranuhi 
Davidian in the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, generally men 
did the actual killing (Alexander 42). But both men and women 
worked to create strong community interest in preserving historical 
records. 

For several reasons, it is important to have readings that 
discuss those who survived these genocides. One reason is to under- 
stand that the issues raised by these genocides are not "over." Arme- 
nian men still engage in terrorist activities against the Turks; Khmer 



] 



184 



Marjorie Bingham 



troops still control parts of Cambodia; anti-Semitism is still a force in 
modern life. But another reason is for students to understand the 
courage it takes to survive, and to understand that some, like the 
Italian writer Primo Levi, become overwhelmed by that challenge 
even as their work survives. 

Generally, I found in my teaching that if I could take the story 
of the author up to the present, students understood more about 
how these genocides related to their own lives and were less likely to 
view the events as merely aberrations, rather like science fiction 
stories of impossible events. Therefore, works might be selected with 
an eye toward whether or not the author tells what happened after 
the genocide, a sort of "coming down" to a world more readily 
understood. The power of including the aftermath became apparent 
to me as a teacher after listening to my students' reactions in after- 
class, one-on-one discussions. Several students took the occasion to 
speak of the terrible things in their own lives, rape or family deaths. 
Knowing that an individual could go on to live a strong, purposeful 
life, they felt reassured about their own. This seemed particularly 
important for young women who had gone through sexual abuse. 

Teachers can either choose sources that bring lives up to the 
present or choose the narratives of individuals whose biographies 
might be researched. One of the Holocaust narratives that is particu- 
larly helpful in seeing how a person not merely survives but com- 
mits herself to living is Gerda Weissmann Klein's All But My Life. A 
revised edition (1995) of Klein's book is a good source not only for 
the vivid descriptions but also for her attention to women's subjects. 
Further, the range of her involvement gives a wider picture of the 
Holocaust than some of the memoirs of survivors in hidden circum- 
stances. But it is particularly her stress on her later community 
activities which explain her statement about survival being both a 
"privilege and a burden" (247). A few new autobiographies, like 
Erna Rubinstein's After the Holocaust: The Long Road to Freedom (1995), 
illustrate the recognition that "the aftermath was another form of 
survival" (1995). 

Student research assignments, like checking bibliographical 
and biographical references, could also focus on women who wrote 
their stories and then went on to make more history. Zivia Lubetkin, 
for example, wrote In the Days of Destruction and Revolt (1981), a 
Zionist account of her activities in the Warsaw Ghetto resistance. But 
students might also want to read about her later activities as one of 
the founders of the Ghetto Fighters Kibbutz in Israel and her work 
with the Palmuch (forerunner of the Israeli army). Another partici- 
pant in the Warsaw resistance was Vladka Meed, whose memoir On 
Both Sides of the Wall (1977) tells of her life posing as a Gentile to aid 



185 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



Jews in the ghetto. Meed has since become the recipient of many 
awards for her work in Holocaust education. 

The recognition of the importance of what happened beyond 
the immediate time frame of genocide is reflected in other works as 
well. In Donald and Loma Miller's book Survivors: An Oral History of 
the Armenian Genocide (1993), chapter five ("Experience of Women 
and Children") delineates what women went through in the geno- 
cide. But later chapters also describe their lives afterward and their 
desire to have their stories told. As one woman told the interviewers, 
"We talk about these things because our hearts have burned" (157). 
Elizabeth Becker's When the War Was Over: The Voices of Cambodian 
Revolution and Its People (1986) provides information on how people 
now see that era, particularly women more highly ranked politically. 
Both these books, however, use their own categories for the analysis 
and may be less helpful for student readings than Usha Welaratna's 
Beyond the Killing Fields: Voices of Nine Cambodian Survivors in America 
(1993). Here the individual flow of the story becomes clearer in 
separate oral histories, though Welaratna's organization of including 
similar points is still apparent. A useful writing assignment for such 
readings is asking students to reflect on sayings about difficulties, for 
example, "What actually does not break you, will make you stron- 
ger." Not all these oral histories will suggest that this is the case. But 
such assignments do offer opportunities for students to reflect on 
adversity in their own lives. I noticed, for example, one student had 
put the above saying in large letters on her folder as a sort of decora- 
tion. 

But students do not need to rely just on printed works to find 
out what lives were led after the genocides. Our school has a TV 
studio which can feed into the local cable system. The language arts 
department sponsored a series of interviews with community people 
as the theme of many nationalities in our city and school. Students 
did oral interviews, including ones with Holocaust survivors and 
Cambodian immigrants. Students were chosen by classmates as able 
interviewers, but the class helped to make up suitable questions for 
their assigned person. After these questions were developed, the 
student interviewers met with social studies teachers to evaluate the 
questions as to their historical suitability. The process of deciding 
which questions to ask, especially on such violent events, helped 
students evaluate the difference between "shock journalism" and 
responsible community building. We tried to focus at least a third of 
the questions on the person's life today so that he or she would not 
be seen as frozen in a terrible past. 

Student reaction to this series of programs was especially 
positive. Not only did they feel "on stage" for the whole community, 



O 

ERiC 



197 



186 



□ 

Marjorie Bingham 



but they began to see their colleagues and neighbors as bearers of 
important stories. Community response to the programming was 
also positive. But the questions were carefully chosen and partici- 
pants did have a chance to see the questions before the talk. Because 
the program was taped, there was also a chance for editing and 
teacher review. 

While not all interviews with survivors need be television 
productions, classroom visits, too, need similar preparation and 
thought to be effective, particularly on women's issues. Generally, I 
provide readings and encourage students to prepare questions on 
gender that allow for open-ended answers but do not force sensitive 
issues. For example, a student asked one Holocaust survivor if she 
saw much difference in her labor camp compared to the men's. She 
explained how segregated the women were but then went on to 
describe how sorry she was that she did not know the proper 
prayers to say for the dead since she had not had a Jewish male's 
education. That issue had not been raised in our reading, but an 
open-ended question allowed her to shape her individual response. 

“Other” Women "Other" women — those not targeted — also play a part in our under- 

standing of genocide. No story of the victims of these genocides is 
complete without the stories of the women who stood in the same 
spatial time. Women acted in different roles in these genocides, but 
in none were they the originators of the plans or the major execu- 
tioners of them. There were, however, women who participated in 
the killings and the abuse. Many of the Nazi women guards at the 
women's concentration camp at Ravensbruck were sadistic. Female 
Khmer Rouge troops were demanding of women work parties, and 
nurses were so inadequately trained that they did little good. 

Though Pol Pot's first wife, Khieu Ponnary, had a mental breakdown 
during the Cambodian genocide, her sister, Khieu Thirith, took over 
"women's issues" and publicly defended Khmer Rouge policies. 
Turkish and Kurdish women did not hold any official positions in 
the regime, but did participate in throwing rocks at Armenians 
struggling to exile and pillaged their goods as they went. 

But there were also other women who showed compassion 
and courage. Anne Frank's story is not complete without that of the 
Dutch woman who supported her, told in Miep Gies's The Attic: The 
Hiding of Anne Frank (1987). Theodore Thomas's book Women Against 
Hitler: Christian Resistance in the Third Reich (1995) and specific ac- 
counts such as Eva Fogelman's Conscience and Courage: Rescuers of the 
Jews During the Holocaust (1994) describe the risks women took to act 
against genocide. 

An assignment which deals with the women in the Christian 
Resistance uses the work of Marga Musa. She was one of the first of 



ERIC 



198 



187 



i =1 

Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



the Confessing Protestant Church (anti-Nazi) to speak out against 
the persecution of the Jews. Her 1935 document stated themes that 
only later become part of Martin Niemoller's views that "First they 
came for the Communists, but I didn't speak up because I wasn't a 
Communist . A useful excerpt from her work "The Status of the 
German Non- Aryan" is found in Thomas's book. The point of this 
assignment is to trace Musa's arguments to support her point, "The 
Church makes it bitterly difficult for us to defend her" regarding the 
Jews (Thomas 40). The selection is not very easy to read, so students 
should be grouped together to arrive at their conclusions about her 
criticisms. Then the group should give a one-paragraph summary of 
her main points using the phrase "The Church ..." as the opening 
statement. 

There are two main purposes of this assignment: (1) to illus- 
trate a brave woman's theological resistance to Nazi policy; and (2) 
to have students distill arguments into simpler statements. Students 
with reading difficulties will have trouble with the sophisticated 
language, but with group and teacher assistance on the assignment, 
they too can get to the final points in their paragraph. As one student 
said, "Not only didn't I know there were German women who cared 
enough to say anything, I didn't know they even had women church 
leaders!" 

Armenian women were hidden and given food also by women 
of conscience. For some Turkish women, watching the exiled col- 
umns marching by and not being able to help went against their 
beliefs of Islamic charity. The government passed regulations against 
even giving bread as violation of evacuation orders. In some cases, 
recognizing the terrible fate ahead, Turkish and Kurdish women 
took children from Armenian mothers so that at least the children 
might survive. 

A group of women who particularly took part in trying to aid 
the Armenians were foreign missionaries and nurses in Turkey, some 
of whom were killed or died in epidemics, nursing or caring for 
refugees. Though these books are out of print, Mabel Elliott's Begin- 
ning Again at Ararat (1924) and Mary Caroline Holmes's Between the 
Lines in Asia Minor (1923) deserve reprinting and may be obtained 
through interlibrary loan for photocopying. Both women were part 
of relief efforts, and they describe vividly the plight of Armenian 
women. Almost all the memoirs of the era, male or female, point to 
some women who tried to stand in the way of the genocide. For 
Abraham Hartunian in Neither to Laugh, Nor to Weep: A Memoir of the 
Armenian Genocide (1968), it was a Miss Shattack; for Ephraim 
Jemazian in Judgment Unto Truth: Witnessing the Armenia Genocide 
(1990), it was Danish women missionaries. Of these works, Elliott's 





188 



Marjorie Bingham 



Conclusion 



ERIC 



Beginning Again at Ararat gives the greatest sense of the participation 
of women, foreign and Armenian, in trying to save a culture. 

Teachers may wish to draw excerpts from the book, particu- 
larly the early chapters describing the forced marches. Because many 
of the women involved as missionaries were Americans (the United 
States was not yet at war with Turkey in 1915, so U.S. relief missions 
could continue), such works may also give a sense of how the United 
States interacted with that genocide and how active American 
women were in world events even at the turn of the century. 

Cambodian society, on the other hand, was much more iso- 
lated during the Khmer Rouge regime. Foreigners had been urged to 
leave Cambodia, and those left were likely to be executed. Even 
supposed allies, like the Vietnamese and Chinese diplomats, were 
isolated from the genocide of the countryside (Kiernan 162-63). But 
even within the Khmer Rouge, there were women willing to save the 
"New People." Haing Ngor's life was saved partially because his 
sister had been befriended by one of the women soldiers with more 
access to food. Peasant women, the "Old People," who were more 
trusted by the regime, also supplied food to the suffering "New 
People" and tried to teach them survival skills, like rice polishing. 
Village women, despite Khmer restrictions, kept Buddhist rituals in 
secret or overlooked those who did. Though Pol Pot's regime 
stressed only loyalty to the government, some women did what they 
could to help victims. There is some evidence to suggest that women 
were more likely to aid victims than were men in these genocides, 
perhaps because they could identify more with the under-group. But 
compassion was shown by some men as well. The very least that 
might be said is that because of the male-dominated governments 
and perceived "women's roles," women were rarely the ones doing 
the actual killing. 



For teachers trying to put these six points and all the rest of the 
complexities of teaching about genocide together, the task must seem 
daunting. The temptation is to pick a few favorite pieces to stand for 
all. If pressed for sources currently in print and descriptive of 
women's issues, I would probably pick the Millers' Survivors and 
David Kherdian's The Road from Home: The Story of an Armenian Girl 
for Armenia; Adina Szwajger's I Remember Nothing More, the 
Eibeshitzs' two-volume Women in the Holocaust, Germaine Tillion's 
Ravensbruck: An Eye Witness Account of a Woman's Concentration Camp, 
and Rittner and Roth's Different Voices for the Holocaust; Criddle's 
and Mam's To Destroy You Is No Loss and Molyda Szymusiak's The 
Stones Cry Out: A Cambodian Childhood for Cambodia. 



200 



189 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



Student assignments, however, should reflect some of that 
complexity instead of being based on one film or novel, or an excerpt 
or two. This may require sending groups off for different assign- 
ments or having each student read from a different memoir but with 
centrally focused questions. In giving each student different mem- 
oirs, I have used the following questions to focus discussion: 

1. Who represents the moral center of the memoir? The immoral? 
(While this may sound relatively easy, students are often sur- 
prised to find that Poles who preyed on Jews, for example, may 
receive more negative attention than even the Germans.) 

2. Do the issues of gender, nationality, and age seem to make real 
differences in the events described? 

3. Does the author write with a "single" or "double" point of view? 
(Is there a sense of the author "looking back" or is the story told 
as if the author were contemporary to the events being de- 
scribed?) 

4. Are categories of individuals seen as "backdrop" and others more 
"fleshed out"? Do there seem to be reasons for these differences 
in treatment? (Since, for example, most of the survivors tend not 
to be the elderly or very young, how are these groups seen?) 

5. Why pay attention to this autobiography? 

While there are certainly many other questions that might be used, I 
have found that a few questions (four or five) are easier for students 
to keep in mind as they read. Further, the discussions afterward tend 
to be more focused. Though not all the questions use the term gender 
or seem to focus on women, they are questions that easily point to 
these issues. For example, students will often respond to #5 on 
paying attention with some thoughtful comments on the general 
validity of women's experiences. For this assignment, a circle discus- 
sion with each student adding from individual books widens and 
confirms the Holocaust evidence on women's lives. 

Another way of handling multiple sources is to provide 
assignments which give insight into teacher decisions on selecting 
materials. For regular classes, I have asked students to develop a 
one-day "lesson" from a source on women and genocide. They may 
select the source from a list of readings. I also provide them with the 
basic requirements of a lesson — a purpose, audience identification, 
plan of procedure, materials to be used, concluding discussion or 
activity, and evaluation. In pairs or groups, students then select a 
short excerpt they decide is particularly valuable and build a brief 
lesson around it. Some of the best of the "lessons" are then taught to 
the class. For Advanced Placement classes I have asked students in 
groups to develop their own unit on the topic of the Holocaust. 
Though I give them some requirements — like gender issues being a 



190 



Marjorie Bingham 



part of the unit — students may go in a variety of directions. One 
group included a computer-generated "tour" of a concentration 
camp. Presenting this to the class, the group initiated quite a discus- 
sion about whether the tour sanitized the events and distanced 
viewers. Personally, I shared such student concerns, but the group 
defended its project as opening a discussion on the claustrophobic 
architectural design of the concentration camps. Another group, 
trying to show a purpose for their unit, did a survey of two high 
schools which illustrated a remarkable ignorance of the Holocaust. 
(The survey eventually made it to the school board because students 
felt more should be taught.) In other words, this assignment led to 
activities I had not anticipated. But it also allowed students to 
grapple with the issues in creative and diverse ways using a variety 
of sources. 

For teachers who wish to use current data and Internet 
sources, an assignment which utilizes media center research skills is 
to compare one of the contemporary "ethnic cleansing" conflicts 
with past genocides. The New York Times has produced substantial 
articles on Bosnia and Rwanda that deal with women's issues like 
rape, unwanted pregnancy, shame, and suicide. Students may access 
these references by computer links. Our expository writing classes 
often require papers which bridge time frames as a way of making 
analyses not readily found in student "banks" of previously written 
term papers. Thus, asking students to analyze women's fate in the 
Bosnian conflict with that in the Armenian invites original possibili- 
ties. It also suggests to students that there are ongoing issues in 
ethnic hate. 

To provide some sort of limit to all these complex questions, 
teachers may wish to select materials that focus on one ghetto, like 
the assignment mentioned on the Warsaw Ghetto, or on one area of 
the country. Ruth Schwertfeger's Women ofTheresienstadt: Voices from 
a Concentration Camp (1989) shows how poetry and memoir can look 
at one particular, though exceptional, camp. If time is limited, differ- 
ent groups in class may analyze various topics, with some reading 
historical analysis of gender, some the memoirs, others the "after- 
math," and still others looking at art and literature from the era. A 
major point I found helpful with students is that these events are not 
going to be completely understood, not only for the violence that 
occurred, but also for the complexity. No teacher can hope to make 
these irrational genocides rational. But together, teacher and student 
can explore parts of them with the voices from the past, women's 
and men's, to help us. 



ERIC 



202 



c 



] 



191 


Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 


References 


Alexander, Edward. A Crime of Vengeance. New York: Free Press, 1991. 

Baumann, Janina. Winter in the Morning: A Young Girl's Life in the Warsaw 
Ghetto and Beyond , 1939-1945. New York: Free Press, 1986. 

Becker, Elizabeth. When the War Was Over: The Voices of Cambodian Revolution 
and Its People. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986. 

Costanza, Mary. The Living Witness: Art in the Concentration Camps and 
Ghetto. New York: Free Press, 1982. 

Crew, Linda. Children of the River. New York: Del 1, 1989. 

Criddle, Joan, and Teeda Butt Mam. To Destroy You Is No Loss: The Odyssey of 
a Cambodian Family. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1987. 

Davis, Leslie H. The Slaughterhouse Province: An American Diplomat's Report 
on the Armenian Genocide , 1915-1917. New Rochelle, NY: Aristide D. 
Caratzas, 1989. 

Delbo, Charlotte. Days and Memory. Marlboro, MA: Marlboro Press, 1990. 

. None of Us Will Return. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968. 

Eibeshitz, Jehoshua, and Anna Eilenberg-Eibeshitz. Women in the Holocaust , 
Volumes I and II. Brooklyn, NY: Remember Press, 1993. 

Elliott, Mabel Evelyn. Beginning Again at Ararat. New York: Fleming Revel, 
1924. 

Fogelman, Eva. Conscience and Courage: Rescuers of the Jews During the 
Holocaust. New York: Anchor Books, 1994. 

Gelissen, Rena. Rena's Promise. Boston: Beacon Press, 1995. 

Gurdus, Luba Klugman. Painful Echoes: Poems of the Holocaust. New York: 
Holocaust Library, 1985. 

Hartunian, Abraham. Neither to Laugh Nor to Weep: A Memoir of the Armenian 
Genocide. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968. 

Heger, Heinz. The Men with the Pink Triangle. Boston: Alyson, 1994. 

Holmes, Mary Caroline. Between the Lines in Asia Minor. New York: Fleming 
Revel, 1923. 

Jernazian, Ephraim. Judgment Unto Truth : Witnessing the Armenian Genocide. 
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1990. 

Kalib, Goldie Szachter. The Last Selection: A Child's Journey Through the 
Holocaust. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1991. 

Kerr, Stanley. Lions ofMarash: Personal Experiences with American Near East 
Relief 1919-1922. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1973. 

Kherdian, David. The Road from Home: The Story of an Armenian Girl. New 
York: Greenwillow Books, 1979. 

Kieman, Ben, ed. Genocide and Democracy in Cambodia. New Haven: Yale 
University Center for Southeast Asian Studies, 1993. 

. The Pol Pot Regime: Race , Power and Genocide in Cambodia Under the 

Khmer Rouge, 1975-79. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1996. 



192 



Marjorie Bingham 



Klein, Gerda Weissmann. All But My Life. New York: Hill and Wang, 1995. 

Lewin, Abraham. A Cup of Tears: A Diary of the Warsaw Ghetto. Ed. Antony 
Polonsky. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988. 

Linden, R. Ruth. Making Stories , Making Selves: Feminist Reflections on the 
Holocaust. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1993. 

Lubetkin, Zivia. In the Days of Destruction and Revolt. Israel: Hakibbutz 
Hameuchad Publishing, 1981. 

Meed, Vladka. On Both Sides of the Wall. New York: Holocaust Library, 1979. 

Miller, Donald, and Lorna Touryan Miller. Survivors: An Oral History of the 
Armenian Genocide. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993. 

Milton, Sybil. "Women and the Holocaust — The Case of German and 

German-Jewish Women." When Biology Became Destiny. Ed. Renate 
Bridenthal et al. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1984. 

Morgenthau, Henry. Ambassador Morgenthau's Story. Garden City, NJ: 
Doubleday, Page, 1918. 

Ngor, Haing. A Cambodian Odyssey. New York: Macmillan, 1987. 

Perechodnik, Calel. "Am I a Murderer?" Testament of a Jewish Ghetto Police- 
man. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996. 

Ringelheim, Joan. "The Unethical and Unspeakable — Women and the 

Holocaust." Simon Wisenthal Center Annual. Chappaquau, NY: Rossel 
Books, 1984. 

. "Women and the Holocaust: A Reconsideration of Research," Signs 

10.4 (1985): 741-61. 

Rittner, Carol, and John K. Roth, eds. Different Voices: Women and the Holo- 
caust. New York: Paragon House, 1993. 

Rosenberg, Blanca. To Tell at Last: Survival Under False Identity , 1941-45. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993. 

Sarafian, Ara, ed. The United States Official Documents on the Armenian 

Genocide , Volumes I, II, and III. Watertown, CT: Armenian Review, 
1993, 1994, 1995. 

Schoppmann, Claudia. Days of Masquerade: Life Stories of Lesbians During the 
Third Reich. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996. 

Schwertfeger, Ruth. Women ofTheresienstadt: Voices from a Concentration 
Camp. New York: Berg, 1989. 

Suhl, Yuri. They Fought Back : The Story of the Jewish Resistance in Nazi Europe. 
New York: Crown, 1967. 

Szwajger, Adina Blady. I Remember Nothing More: The Warsaw Children's 
Hospital and the Jewish Resistance. New York: Pantheon, 1991. 

Szymusiak, Molyda. The Stones Cry Out: A Cambodian Childhood 1975-1980. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1986. 



O 



20 4 



193 



Teaching about Women in Twentieth-Century Genocides 



Tec, Nechama. Defiance: The Bielski Partisans. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1993. 

. When Light Pierced the Darkness. New York: Oxford University Press, 

1986. 

Thomas, Theodore. Women Against Hitler: Christian Resistance in the Third 
Reich. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1995. 

Tillion, Germaine. Ravensbruck: An Eye Witness Account of a Woman's Concen- 
tration Camp. Garden City, NJ: Anchor Press, 1975. 

Welaratna, Usha. Beyond the Killing Fields: Voices of Nine Cambodian Survivors 
in America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1993. 

Yoran, Shalom. The Defiant: A True Story. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996. 



194 



Academic and 
Pedagogical Issues 
in Teaching the 
Holocaust 

Sandra Stotsky 

Harvard Graduate School of Education 
and Boston University School of Education 



A s most English language arts teachers are by now aware, 

social and political criteria increasingly guide the construction 
of literature programs in the schools. They not only guide the 
choice of literary works that students read in the English class and 
the connections students are encouraged to see among them, they 
also motivate the use of non-literary selections as well, often but not 
always primary source documents. This volume is but one reflection 
of this reorientation of the literature curriculum. As stated in the 
resolution at the 1994 Annual Convention of the National Council of 
Teachers of English sponsoring the development of this volume, the 
purpose is to help teachers use literature on "genocide and intoler- 
ance" to counter the "destructive forces of intolerance and bigotry," 
in this country and elsewhere. But a shift from the use of literary 
criteria to the use of social and political criteria in the construction of 
literature curricula for the purpose of advancing a moralizing peda- 
gogy does not come without serious costs. Such a shift raises many 
academic and pedagogical issues for which English language arts 
teachers are unprepared by professional background and training. 
This is particularly the case with respect to the study of the Holo- 
caust. English language arts teachers may inadvertently stumble 
across a number of academic and pedagogical minefields in teaching 



I am grateful to Steven Katz, Professor and Director of Judaic Studies at Boston 
University; Michael Kort, Professor of Social Science at Boston University; and 
Ronni Gordon Stillman and David Stillman of Philadelphia for a close reading of an 
earlier version of this esssay. I remain responsible, of course, for everything I have 
written in this essay. 





] 



195 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



Holocaust literature, whether on their own or in conjunction with 
history or social studies teachers. These minefields are, for the most 
part, a result of the academic debates now taking place among those 
scholars who specialize in the Holocaust. 

In one debate, conflicting interpretations of its causes have 
been put forth. In the other, scholars have sparred over its unique- 
ness as a historical phenomenon. In addition, the pedagogy sur- 
rounding the study of the Holocaust in the schools has itself been 
severely criticized. These differences in interpretation about its major 
causes and its contemporary significance have serious implications 
for the curricular context in which a study of Holocaust literature is 
placed and for the lessons, if any, that English language arts teachers 
ask students to draw. Yet, because the parties to these debates and 
the authors of these critical comments on the teaching of the Holo- 
caust are for the most part historians, most English teachers are 
unlikely to be aware of the academic and pedagogical pitfalls in 
including a study of the Holocaust as part of their literature pro- 
grams today. 

English teachers need to understand the substance of these 
debates and what is at stake in them. It is not simply a matter of 
giving students a specific name — anti-Semitism — for what almost all 
scholars agree is one root cause of the Holocaust (even if they choose 
not to agree that it is its essential motivating element). Nor is it 
simply a matter of informing them of the latest theory about why 
negative feelings toward the Jews in one country at one point in time 
culminated in a still incomprehensible act of genocide unprec- 
edented in intent and design. It is also a matter of making sure 
students understand that there are multiple academic perspectives 
on the Holocaust as a historical phenomenon and how the larger 
social and political context for these academic debates influences 
what they are asked to learn. 

My own interest in these academic debates and in the peda- 
gogy surrounding the study of the Holocaust in the schools began 
several years ago at the time I was examining how Jews as a people 
were portrayed in elementary school reading textbooks and second- 
ary school literature anthologies in preparation for a seminar I gave 
at Hebrew College in Brookline in 1994. That survey raised a number 
of academic and moral issues that are fully explained in my essay in 
the February 1996 issue of English Journal. In order to understand 
better the context for these issues, I decided to learn more about the 
academic debates among historians themselves and the contents of 
the Holocaust curricula used in the schools. I am grateful to the 
editors of this volume for the opportunity to lay out for the readers 
the academic and pedagogical issues raised in and by these debates 
and these curricula. I fully share the view of historian Lucy 



196 



Sandra Stotsky 



Dawidowicz, author of The War against the Jews 1933-1945, that the 
Holocaust should be taught with integrity and without political 
exploitation, whether in English or history classes. 



Th© Cause or The wor ^ scholarship at the center of the current debate about the 
icae Iko Holocaust, both in this country and in Germany itself, is Daniel 
^auses Of in© Goldhagen's Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the 
Holocaust Holocaust, published in 1996. As is frequently pointed out, 

Goldhagen is the son of a Holocaust survivor. What is the thrust of 
his book? As Goldhagen himself explains in a counterresponse to 
several critics published in a December 1996 issue of The New Repub- 
lic, the purpose of his book is to show that "the German perpetrators 
were ordinary Germans coming from all social backgrounds . . 
that the number was large, not small, and that "these ordinary 
Germans were . . . willing, even eager executioners of the Jewish 
people, including Jewish children" (37). He attributes their motiva- 
tion not to a general, run-of-the-mill European anti-Semitism but to 
an "eliminationist" anti-Semitism that was specific to German 
culture. At the core of this model of anti-Semitism, Goldhagen 
explains, was the notion that "Jews and Jewish power had to be 
eliminated somehow if Germany was to be secure and to prosper." 
By making elimination of the Jews "necessary and just," this model 
of anti-Semitism motivated even ordinary Germans to kill the Jews 
not only without a twinge of conscience but indeed with "torturing, 
boasting, taking photographs, and celebrating" when circumstances 
allowed extermination as a means of "elimination." In essence, 
Goldhagen is postulating, as he states, "No Germans, no Holocaust." 

As Jonathan Mahler, a reporter for Forward, points out, 
Goldhagen's critics accuse him of dismissing the vast scholarship 
that has come before him and of offering a simplistic explanation for 
a phenomenon that has defied completely satisfying explanations for 
fifty years. Why do critics think his explanation is simplistic? What 
other theories have scholars proposed? In one critical review of 
Goldhagen's book, in an April 1996 issue of The New Republic, histo- 
rian Omer Bartov lays out the range of theories that have been 
advocated over the years, noting that no one of them "seems to 
encompass the phenomenon as a whole" (32). According to his 
analysis, some scholars, chiefly Germans, proposed that the Ger- 
mans had followed a "special path" in its national history, taking a 
different turn in the latter part of the nineteenth century from such 
other Western societies as Britain and France and developing 
"unique and pernicious traits," reflected in their political, economic, 
and social institutions, that were at the root of Nazism's coming to 
power. Bartov points out that this theory was finally rejected. He 



O 



208 



] 



197 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



does not say why but David Gress, a historian participating in a 
symposium on modern Germany notes that the critics of this theory 
recognized that its advocates wanted to inflict a "moralizing peda- 
gogy" on West Germany to "cripple West German democratic self- 
confidence and self-assertion in the present, and to detract attention 
from a sober and proper understanding of the past . . ." (539). 

The theory proposed by "mainly Marxist" scholars, Bartov 
remarks, saw the Holocaust as one feature of European fascism, 
which was in turn seen as a product of capitalism. On the other 
hand, he continues, another group of scholars, of whom Hannah 
Arendt was the most prominent, saw the totalitarian state, best 
represented by both Hitler's Germany and Stalin's Soviet Union, as a 
precondition for genocide, a theory that disallows capitalism or 
European fascism as the chief cause of the Holocaust. Bartov then 
goes on to point out that still other scholars have argued that the 
source of the Holocaust was the Christian European tradition of anti- 
Semitism, assigning a central role to a "pernicious anti-Jewish imag- 
ery, theology and demagoguery, dating back to the Middle Ages and 
greatly enhanced by the pseudo-scientific discourse of social- 
darwinism and eugenics in the modern era" (32). Those holding this 
view, according to Bartov, have been "Jewish historians." Yet other 
scholars such as Lucy Dawidowicz and Gerald Fleming, who, as 
Bartov explains, represent what has been called the "intentionalist" 
school, placed Hitler at the center of the debate, arguing that he had 
always intended to murder the Jews and merely waited for the right 
moment to carry out the Final Solution. Finally, in contrast to the 
intentionalist school was the "functional" school, arguing for "cumu- 
lative radicalization" as the explanatory factor, a process in which 
competing bureaucratic agencies offered more and more extreme 
solutions to a problem for which mass murder had not been the 
original policy of choice. 

Bartov judges Goldhagen's work as a "powerful case for a 
version of one of the oldest, most traditional, and in recent years 
largely discredited interpretations of the Holocaust" (34). Indeed, 
Bartov admits that anti-Semitism in its "traditional and modern, 
racist forms" is a "crucial" condition of the Holocaust and that it has 
been underemphasized in recent mainstream scholarship. He agrees 
that the demonization of the Jews over the centuries played a "sig- 
nificant role in their barbarous treatment by individual Germans, as 
well as in legitimizing their persecution and ultimate mass murder 
for much of the German population" (34). Yet, he believes that 
ordinary men were turned into murderers less by their ideology than 
by "circumstances" and their "acclimatization to murder by repeated 
involvement in it." Bartov is interested in the role of modern science 
in the "industrial killing" that took place in the Holocaust, arguing 



198 



Sandra Stotsky 



c 



for a probing look at what in "our culture" made the "concept of 
transforming humanity by means of eugenic and racial cleansing 
seem so practical and rational" (38). He concludes his critique of 
Goldhagen's book by claiming that to see an eliminationist anti- 
Semitism as the root cause of the Holocaust is to make study of the 
Holocaust irrelevant to our times. Later on, in a response to 
Goldhagen's counterresponse to Bartov's original review of his book, 
in a February 1997 issue of The New Republic, Bartov goes so far as to 
characterize Goldhagen's views as reflecting "common prejudices 
about the role of anti-Semitism and the peculiarities of German 
history in the Holocaust" (4). 

In his first reply to Bartov and other critics in The New Republic, 
Goldhagen agrees that "no adequate explanation for the Holocaust 
can be monocausal" and that "many factors contributed to creating 
the conditions necessary for the Holocaust to be possible and to be 
realized" (42). His central concern, he repeats several times, is the 
motivational element of the Holocaust — to explain why perpetrators 
"uncoerced, chose to mock, degrade, torture and kill other people, 
and to celebrate and memorialize their deeds." In his view, his critics 
seem to want to maintain that "most Germans were immune to 
eliminationist anti-Semitism, that the anti-Semitism did not substan- 
tially influence Germans' attitudes toward the persecution of the 
Jews, and that the anti-Semitism had little to do with the perpetra- 
tors' actions" (45). Yet, as he points out, Germany was a country 
where "for generations there was a vast outpouring of institutionally 
supported eliminationist anti-Semitism, with virtually no institution- 
ally supported positive public image of Jews available." He also 
notes that "many in Germany shared this view of Jews and that their 
beliefs informed what they were willing to tolerate and to do when 
called upon by the Nazi regime" (45). In his reply in a February 1997 
issue of The New Republic to critical comments on his first reply, 
Goldhagen correctly describes Bartov's characterization of his views 
(as "common [anti-German] prejudices") as a clear "ad hominem" 
attack (5), noting that his critics were avoiding a discussion of the 
details of "perpetrator" motivation that he had set forth in his book. 



The Uniqueness 
of the Holocaust 



The spectacle of an academic debate degenerating into an attempt to 
discredit the motives of scholars whose academic views are an 
obstacle to a different interpretation can be seen even more clearly in 
the debate about the uniqueness of the Holocaust. This debate has 
been going on for many years, but it attracted renewed attention 
because of the controversy that erupted between two contributors 
during the publication process of a collection of essays entitled Is the 
Holocaust Unique? Perspectives in Comparative Genocide, edited by Alan 



[ 



199 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



Rosenbaum. As reported by Christopher Shea in The Chronicle of 
Higher Education, Steven Katz, a professor of Jewish thought and 
history, threatened to withdraw from the project when he saw the 
galleys and found another contributor, David Stannard, a professor 
of American studies, arguing that Katz was "the moral equivalent of 
a Holocaust denier because he rejected the idea that people other 
than Jews had experienced true genocide." The book was eventually 
published with these and other ad hominem characterizations intact, 
even though Katz was given an assurance by Rosenbaum that they 
were inappropriate and would be excised. We look briefly at the 
contents of the book as Shea describes them to see what its contribu- 
tors have to say about comparative genocide as well as each other. 

The essays in Rosenbaum's book compare Hitler's Final 
Solution with the mass murder of Armenians in 1915, the starvation 
of Ukrainian peasants in the early 1930s during Stalin's forced 
collectivization. Hitler 's campaign against Gypsies, slavery in the 
American South, and the deadly epidemics among the indigenous 
people in the Americas after contact with the European explorers 
and colonists. In his own essay, Katz, the author of The Holocaust in 
Historical Context, provides evidence to support his explanation of 
how the treatment of the indigenous peoples in the Americas, the 
famine in the Ukraine, and the killings in Armenia differed in struc- 
ture or magnitude from the Holocaust. He also explains that he is 
not making moral comparisons because it is not possible to compare 
the suffering of peoples involved in mass murder, noting that in 
many cases the number of victims in other mass tragedies is far 
greater than in the Holocaust. He points out that most of the native 
Indians who died (a far larger number than that of the Jews during 
the Holocaust) did so from diseases spread unwittingly by the 
Europeans, that the 20 percent death rate in the Ukraine was not 
comparable to the death rate in the Holocaust, and that the Turks, 
while murdering hundreds of thousands of Armenians, sought to 
drive the Armenians out of northeast Turkey and to destroy Arme- 
nian nationalism and the threat it represented to Turkey, not to 
annihilate all Armenians in Turkey. His points are supported in an 
essay by Barbara Green, a political scientist, who argues that Stalin's 
chief goal in the Ukraine and elsewhere was collectivization, not 
murder, and in an essay by Seymour Drescher, a historian, who 
argues that as evil as slavery was, the system depended on keeping 
its victims alive. 

Those in opposition to Katz's points. Shea reports, argue that 
the "uniqueness theory is an attempt by Jewish scholars to claim a 
special kind of victimhood for Jews, and Jews alone" (7), a claim 
Katz has explicitly denied in his writings. In his essay, Vahakn 
Dadrian, a sociologist of Armenian background, claims that the 








] 



200 



Sandra Stotsky 



Armenian genocide "mirrors the Holocaust in all but the sheer 
number of dead and the technological proficiency of the murderers" 
(7). Implying that he has risen above self-interest, he claims that 
concentrating on either the Armenian genocide or the Holocaust has 
"very limited value." He wants comparative studies of many geno- 
cides in order to discern "patterns" and to "generalize." The basic 
problem, he believes, is that "some scholars are actually resentful 
that Armenian scholars dare to compare the Armenian genocide to 
the Holocaust" (7). His charge of ethnic resentment as the motivating 
factor in maintaining the uniqueness theory is echoed in an essay by 
Ian Hancock, a professor of English and linguistics. He claims that 
the lack of scholarship on Gypsy victims of the Holocaust is "due, in 
part, to efforts by some scholars to maintain the uniqueness of what 
happened to the Jews" (12). 

According to Shea, the "most scorching critique of the unique- 
ness of the Holocaust" comes from Stannard himself, who has 
detailed the fate of the indigenous peoples of the Americas "from the 
beginning of colonization to the present" in a book of his own, 
American Holocaust (12). In his essay, Stannard characterizes the effort 
of those who maintain the uniqueness of the "Jewish genocide" as a 
"self-serving masquerade" and charges Katz with looking at other 
genocides "with the sole purpose of minimizing them" (12). 

Stannard goes even further in his attack on Katz, charging in an 
interview with the reporter that "by hanging on to all these finely 
tuned technicalities, and insisting on the priority of this one event, it 
[Katz's work] serves to legitimize the killing of other people" (12). 

How an insistence on the uniqueness of the Holocaust "legiti- 
mizes" other murders is not at all clear. What is clear is that we are 
faced with a very strange situation today. The motives of Jewish 
scholars who write about the Holocaust are apparently fairer game 
as the object of critical academic attention than the motives of the 
Germans who murdered the Jews. In one debate, a Jewish scholar 
who seeks to revitalize the theory that anti-Semitism was the crucial 
motivating element in the Holocaust is disparaged for holding 
"common prejudices" against the Germans. This effort to denigrate 
the worth of Goldhagen's book (and possibly to distract attention 
from its thrust) is like imputing anti-white prejudice to a black 
scholar who assigns a central role to white racism in an explanation 
of southern slavery. In the other debate, Jewish scholars who seek to 
make phenomenological distinctions and to retain the integrity of 
the terminology coined by a Jew to describe the fate of the European 
Jews in World War II are attacked as resentful, duplicitous, legalistic, 
stubborn, mean-hearted, and indifferent to the suffering of others, 
even though Katz in particular discusses the suffering of all victims 
with respect and without moral comparisons. Indeed, in a foreword 



eric 



212 



201 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



to Rosenbaum's collection of essays, Israel W. Chamy, a psychologist 
and executive director of the Institute on the Holocaust and Geno- 
cide in Jerusalem, writes that "some of the essays are valuable only 
in demonstrating the ugliness of much scholarship on comparative 
genocide" (7). Too many parts of the book, he asserts, "are spun from 
the same cloth of all-or-nothing, ideologically driven thinking, 
prejudice, arrogance or degradation, and posturing for power" (7), 
although he does not cite specific examples as support for his views. 

An ad hominem attack on Jewish scholars and other Jewish 
writers for insisting on the centrality of anti-Semitism in the Holo- 
caust and on the use of the study of the Holocaust to address con- 
temporary anti-Semitism (an issue I will address below) can be 
found even in the writing of those who describe themselves as 
concerned with ethics. In an article in a quarterly newsletter from the 
Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy, Lawrence A. Blum, a 
professor of philosophy and member of the Center for Ethics and 
Social Policy, sets up a straw man and uses distortion in an attempt 
to discredit it. Claiming that those who want Holocaust curricula to 
address anti-Semitism want it addressed "exclusively" (a demand no 
one has made), he implies that they lack "a willingness to appreciate 
the sufferings of others." Further, he implies that in wanting to see 
the "Holocaust as a Jewish tragedy," they display a "possessiveness 
about a tragedy that affected millions of non-Jews as well" (16). 
Apparently, Jews are uncaring and selfish to insist that Jews were the 
chief victims of the Final Solution. In his eyes, they are guilty of 
trying to have a "monopoly on suffering." 

What these critics are doing in their own work, or supporting 
in others' work, is making use of the Holocaust for contemporary 
political purposes. In Gress's words, we see a "political use made of 
the past to constrain political choice in the present" (535). It is an 
inherent feature of a moralizing pedagogy designed to induce 
endless "public apology and public humility about the past." The 
problem for the critics is that the Holocaust is not an integral part of 
the American past; it is part of the European past. In order to make 
political use of it elsewhere, one must obliterate or blur certain 
distinctions in order to generalize from it. And one must redefine or 
expand the scope of the terminology that refers to it. Thus, those 
(chiefly) Jewish scholars who stand in the way of others who want to 
appropriate the terminology of the Holocaust and the moral horror 
associated with it for intensifying American guilt about the fate of 
the Indians, slavery, and the continuing vestiges of white racism, and 
for debunking science, rational thinking, and the core of Western 
values, must be personally discredited if their ideas and their evi- 
dence are not easy to discredit. 







13 



] 



202 



Sandra Stotsky 



I do not want to imply that Goldhagen's work is beyond 
legitimate criticism. It has been criticized by many historians, includ- 
ing Jewish ones. Robert Wistrich, for example, writing in the July 
1996 issue of Commentary, explains why he believes that Goldhagen 
has not presented "a persuasive case that [anti-Semitism] was what 
primarily or exclusively motivated ordinary Germans" (31). In other 
words, a critic does not need to resort to an ad hominem attack in 
attempting to convince others that Goldhagen's thesis is flawed. 
However, Wistrich does believe that Goldhagen's work helps pro- 
vide "an important counterweight to the tendency in some recent 
historical writing on the Holocaust to downplay the role of anti- 
Semitism itself," noting the work of another historian, John Weiss, 
who "discerningly points out that while German citizens openly 
dissented from specific Nazi policies they disliked — the euthanasia 
program, the removal of crucifixes from schools, Nazi party corrup- 
tion, etc. — they were virtually silent about the treatment of the Jews 
. . ." (31). 

Nor do I want to imply that one cannot condemn other mass 
murders or slavery or the fate of the indigenous inhabitants of the 
Americas in equally strong terms. The point is that one can condemn 
all of them without distorting crucial aspects of the Holocaust or 
blurring historical, phenomenological, and structural distinctions. To 
repeat what Goldhagen has stated, "no adequate explanation for the 
Holocaust can be monocausal" and "many factors contributed to 
creating the conditions necessary for the Holocaust to be possible 
and to be realized" (42). The Holocaust was a complex event and 
scholars continue to examine the adequacy of the explanations 
offered for it. Further, while some scholars believe it is possible to 
discern patterns in these various mass catastrophes and to draw 
generalizations, other scholars believe that it is not possible or useful 
to draw broad generalizations about their causes and that each grew 
out of a very different set of conditions. English language arts teach- 
ers should know that scholars profoundly disagree about the very 
definition of genocide as well as the validity of generalizations about 
the causes of these various mass catastrophes. They should also 
know that it is not necessary to revise the causes of the Holocaust or 
to appropriate its terminology in order to moralize about other 
catastrophes. 



Why These 
Academic 
Disputes Matter 



Why should these academic disputes about the causes and unique- 
ness of the Holocaust matter to English language arts teachers? They 
matter because what is driving them has already influenced the 
context in which the literature about the Holocaust is placed and the 
lessons which students are to learn from studying its literature. The 



] 



c 

203 Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



desire to use the Holocaust for political purposes has affected the 
contents of pre-college curriculum materials, in the social studies 
and English class. We look first at the influence of these debates on 
Holocaust curricula. 



The Historical 
Context for the 
Holocaust in Cur- 
rent Holocaust 
Curricula 



Concerns about the context in which the Holocaust is now placed in 
the schools have been raised by Lucy Dawidowicz in the last essay 
she wrote before her death, and by Deborah Lipstadt, a professor of 
modern Jewish and Holocaust studies. One concern is the lack of 
appropriate historical background. In her critique of twenty-five 
Holocaust curricula used in American schools, Dawidowicz found 
that fifteen of the twenty-five never suggest that "anti-Semitism had 
a history before Hitler," and of those that do, "barely a handful 
present coherent historical accounts, however brief" (26). The most 
serious failure, she deemed, was the omission of the history of anti- 
Semitism as a matter of public policy over the centuries and its roots 
in Christian doctrine. But she also found curricula that failed "prop- 
erly to place the events of the Holocaust in the context of World War II" 
by not citing the belief of U.S. government and military officials that 
"the only way to stop the murder of the Jews was to defeat Hitler on 
the battlefield" (27). 

A different concern about the context in which the Holocaust 
is placed is the chief focus of Lipstadt's critique of one particular 
curriculum. Facing History and Ourselves (FHAO), a critique pub- 
lished in The New Republic in a March 1995 issue. Indeed, Lipstadt 
states explicitly that her "discomfort" with this curriculum is mostly 
"with the context into which [the Holocaust] is placed" (27). FHAO's 
concerted effort in its 1994 teacher manual to "bring the Holocaust 
into the orbit of the students' experiences" by connecting it to "rac- 
ism and violence in America — though not contemporary anti- 
Semitism" is not for her a way to make history relevant but to distort 
it. As she points out, "no teacher using this material can help but 
draw the historically fallacious parallel between Weimar Germany 
and contemporary America" (27). As a historian, not only is she 
critical of FHAO's efforts to insinuate this analogy, she also sees little 
to be learned intellectually from FHAO's efforts to link the Holo- 
caust to Hiroshima, Nagasaki, the My Lai Massacre, or the mass 
murders in Cambodia, Laos, Tibet, and Rwanda as other examples of 
"mass destruction." As a historian, she is interested in making 
careful distinctions, not careless or misleading generalizations. As 
was the case for Goldhagen, an important issue for her in studying 
the Holocaust is "what was at the root of the genocidal efforts" (27). 

Both Dawidowicz and Lipstadt express deep misgivings about 
the lessons they see drawn from a study of the Holocaust in the 
curricula they examined. Although almost all of the twenty-five 



] 



204 



Sandra Stotsky 



guides Dawidowicz looked at "try to instill respect for racial, reli- 
gious, and cultural differences, and to foster a commitment to demo- 
cratic values" (27), she found only a "bare handful" that discussed 
the sanctity of human life — from her perspective, the most important 
moral lesson to be drawn from studying the Holocaust. Most focus 
on "individual responsibility" as against "obedience to authority" as 
the key to moral behavior, a concept and a contrast she considers of 
dubious value. As she points out, why would any democratic society 
want to encourage disrespect for legal or moral authority and ask 
students to see obedience to the law as a negative trait? She also 
questions whether it is desirable to teach American children to use 
"their conscience" to distinguish between right and wrong, that is, to 
decide on their own what is a just or an unjust law. Consciences vary 
among people, she explains, and are not always moral. As we know, 
people who have murdered doctors or others working in abortion 
clinics have claimed they were following their consciences. 

Lipstadt's criticism of the implications FHAO wants students 
to draw from a study of the Holocaust flows from her concern about 
the context it provides students in both its 1982 and 1994 teacher 
guides. Although she acknowledges that she wants students in her 
own courses on the Holocaust to become more sensitive to ethnic 
and religious hatred, more aware that "little" prejudices can be 
transformed into far more serious ones, and more willing to speak 
out about injustice when they confront it, she opposes the use of 
"specious arguments" to draw connections between anti-Semitism 
and other forms of intolerance. Teachers, she concludes, must avoid 
sending the message that in its essence the Holocaust "is just one in a 
long string of inhumanities and that every ethnic slur has in it the 
seeds of a Holocaust" (29). Instead, she suggests, teachers must help 
students see the distinctions among different forms of intolerance. 



The Context for the 
Holocaust in 
Current Literature 
Anthologies 



The context in which literature about the Holocaust is taught in 
secondary school literature anthologies also shows the effects of the 
debates at the academic level. In McDougal, LittelTs 1994 Language 
and Literature for grade 8, Anne Frank's story is followed by a story 
about a black mother and her daughter who are humiliated by a 
white welfare worker. In Scott Foresman's 1991 America Reads, 

Classic edition for grade 8, Anne Frank's story is preceded by 
Yoshiko Uchida's short story, "The Bracelet," describing how she and 
her family were taken to an internment camp for Japanese Ameri- 
cans during World War II. 1 An analogy between the events portrayed 
in these contiguous selections is clearly implied. Yet, in neither 
anthology are students explicitly asked to discuss their enormous 
differences as historical phenomena, a clear moral lapse on the part 
of the editors. 



O 

ERIC 



216 



] 



205 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



On the other hand, two other anthologies show us appropriate 
literary contexts for Anne Frank's story. The 1989 McDougal, Littell 
grade 8 anthology uses an excerpt from the diary as an example of 
autobiography and then groups it with an essay by Helen Keller, an 
excerpt from Of Men and Mountains by William O. Douglas and "The 
Rose-Beetle Man" by Gerald Durrell. These are then followed by 
several biographical pieces, including one by Carl Sandburg about 
Lincoln and an excerpt from John Gunther's Death Be Not Proud, all 
of which provide a broad context highlighting individual faith, 
strength of will, and courage in achieving personal or social goals 
despite extraordinary physical or intellectual challenge — if not the 
specter of death itself. In the 1993 Holt, Rinehart and Winston grade 
8 anthology, the play about Anne Frank is grouped with Carl 
Foreman's script for .High Noon, a dramatic work that also empha- 
sizes individual courage and integrity in the context of a community 
that has failed to take a moral stance. The literary contexts in these 
two groups of anthologies clearly show us the difference between 
the use of literary criteria and the use of social and political criteria 
in constructing a literature program. 



Pedagogical 
Issues for 
English 
Language Arts 
Teachers 



The current academic debates on the causes and defining features of 
the Holocaust as well as the criticism of many of the Holocaust 
curricula now in the schools raise a number of questions for English 
language arts teachers to consider before using Holocaust literature 
for the moral education of their students. Some of these issues are 
raised explicitly in what these various scholars have to say on the 
topic, others are implied. All bear careful consideration, but not just 
because the Holocaust is such a profoundly depressing and horrify- 
ing historical event to study They also warrant thoughtful delibera- 
tion for a very different reason — the utter lack of disinterested 
research on the effects on young students of studying about the 
Holocaust. 

It is stunning that educators have chosen to promote the 
teaching of an extremely difficult topic in the schools (because of its 
horrifying details and its religious roots), not as such a topic would 
be addressed as part of a course in European history or in a work of 
literature, but as part of an effort to advance their students' moral 
education. This is a highly problematic decision because there are no 
published studies whatsoever providing evidence that studying the 
Holocaust does in fact make students more tolerant of religious and 
ethnic differences. Nor is there a stitch of evidence that such study 
increases their sensitivity to the anti-Semitic stereotypes that have 
long been a staple in many cultures and that still emerge in the 
media and elsewhere to this very day. It is even more stunning that 




‘j 



17 



[ 



206 



□ 

Sandra Stotsky 



many state legislatures have mandated study of the Holocaust in the 
school curriculum, sometimes from grade 1 on, without any impar- 
tial evidence to confirm the benefits expected from such a mandate. 
Such research would be crucially important for assuring us that 
teaching about the Holocaust in the schools does not have unin- 
tended negative effects on any particular groups of students. I would 
like to think that an exposure to the details of the Holocaust would 
cause students to ponder the sources of the barbaric behavior of the 
Nazis, "ordinary" Germans, and various Eastern European people 
toward the Jews as well as the sources of the indifference of other- 
wise decent people, there and in the West, to their plight. I would 
also like to think that exposure would sensitize students to the 
nature of anti-Semitic stereotypes wherever they emerge today, 
whether from the Right or the Left. But in the absence of any impar- 
tial research on the effects on young students of teaching about the 
Holocaust, it behooves teachers to think about six issues raised by 
the current academic debates on the Holocaust and the criticisms of 
current Holocaust pedagogy as they plan or evaluate their unit of 
study on the Holocaust. 



1. Is Anti-Semitism 
Sufficiently 
Stressed as a Cause 
of the Holocaust? 



At first blush, it may seem absurd to worry about whether anti- 
Semitism is being slighted as a cause, if not the cause, of the Holo- 
caust, as no discussion of the Holocaust has ever failed to note that 
Jews were among its victims. But anti-Semitism as a cause can be 
slighted simply by avoiding use of the term itself. Dawidowicz 
discerned three ways in which anti-Semitism was de-emphasized as 
a cause of the Holocaust in the twenty-five curricula she examined. 
One common way was by "camouflaging" anti-Semitism under such 
euphemisms as bigotry, prejudice, or scapegoating. Today the euphe- 
misms include racism and violence. Nevertheless, all these terms are 
inadequate substitutes for anti-Semitism and, as Dawidowicz sug- 
gests, serve as a way to ignore its distinctive nature and history. 
English teachers, because they tend to be sensitive to word choice to 
begin with, may well sense that prejudice and bigotry as terms are not 
equal to anti-Semitism in their capacity to evoke the pathology 
lurking in the specific term. And racism is a confusing and often 
misleading term today because many academics, for political pur- 
poses, have arbitrarily limited its meaning to refer to the prejudicial 
attitudes of white people toward "people of color." 

Anti-Semitism can be viewed as a form of racism if racism is 
understood as the prejudicial attitudes of one social group toward 
another, whether or not there are differences in color. But despite this 
more scholarly definition of racism, such terms as racism or prejudice 
are often used in educational contexts today that exclude any refer- 
ence to the long history of negative cultural images of the Jews 



O 

EMC 



213 



207 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



predating the racial overlay of the nineteenth century. Moreover, 
their use often seems to lead to appallingly ignorant or absurd 
assertions. For example, in an ABCNewsInteractive videodisc en- 
titled Historic America: Electronic Field Trips (1997), a chapter on the 
U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum (which is itself out of place in a 
work on "historic America") locates the origins of the Holocaust in 
the 1800s and never uses the term anti-Semitism, referring only to 
"anti-Jewish sentiment" ( Teacher’s Guide 54) toward an "alien race" 
(Teacher's Guide 69). In addition, the teacher guide encourages stu- 
dents to view this chapter in the context of chapters on Frederick 
Douglass's home and the women's rights convention at Seneca Falls 
and to note that "prejudice is based entirely on superficial differ- 
ences" of "skin color" and "gender." This material shows not only 
how the origins of the Holocaust can be distorted when curriculum 
writers avoid use of a term with clear historical resonance, but also 
how the Holocaust can be utterly trivialized by efforts to make it 
relevant to American history. 

Anti-Semitism can also be diminished as a cause of the Holo- 
caust by increasing attention to those victim groups the Nazis never 
intended to wipe out. As Dawidowicz observes, despite their incar- 
ceration in the concentration camps, there is no historical evidence 
that the Nazis intended to exterminate the Jehovah's Witnesses, 
homosexuals, and such social deviants as beggars, vagrants, and 
prostitutes as groups. Moreover, the Final Solution was not aimed at 
the Gypsies even though a large number of them were murdered 
too. Lipstadt points out that Nazi racial policy toward them was 
ambivalent — some were imprisoned, some annihilated, some left 
unmolested. Finally, anti-Semitism can be de-emphasized by the 
very attempt to group the Holocaust with other examples of mass 
destruction or mass intolerance. Lipstadt notes that by presenting 
the mass murders in Cambodia, Laos, Tibet, and Rwanda as "ex- 
amples of the same phenomenon," FHAO contradicts its earlier 
claim that the Holocaust is unique and makes it easy to forget that 
the roots of these catastrophes are distinctly different. One does not 
need to subscribe to Goldhagen's thesis to make sure students 
understand the name and nature of the specific pathology that 
paved the way for the Holocaust. 

2. Are Appropriate The failure to make appropriate historical, structural, and phenom- 

Distinctions Made? en °l°gi ca l distinctions often follows upon the attempt to group the 

Holocaust with, in Lipstadt's words "all manner of inhumanities and 
injustices" (27). The intention to wipe out as a matter of official 
government policy every man, woman, and child of one group of 
people for no demonstrable gain, territorially or politically, is not 
equivalent in intention or design to the other events with which it is 



208 



Sandra Stotsky 



frequently compared. It is not equivalent to, for example, the two-to- 
three year internment of about one hundred thousand Japanese 
Americans on the West Coast by the United States and Canada 
during World War II, or the bombing of Hiroshima to end the war in 
the Pacific (with a death toll of about 150,000, 20,000 of whom were 
Korean slave laborers), or the enslavement of many hundreds of 
thousands of Africans in the South for almost 250 years. While 
slavery remains a profound deprivation of human rights (it contin- 
ues in the Sudan and Mauritania, for example), it was and is not 
identical to murder. Moreover, the bombing of Hiroshima (and 
Nagasaki), whether or not one agrees with the decision to do so, was 
justified by a Democratic president as a way to prevent huge losses 
of life and did cause less loss of life than the earlier firebombings of 
Tokyo. Nor is it at all clear that the internment policy was necessarily 
motivated only or chiefly by "racial prejudice," since Japanese 
Americans living in Hawaii and in other regions of the United States 
were not interned. Indeed, an appropriate question for students to 
explore is the extent to which the internment policy was motivated 
by racial prejudice at the time and why most Japanese Americans 
were released well before the war ended. Nor were the Japanese 
Americans the only people to be interned; about six thousand Italian 
and German nationals were also interned during the war. 2 The legal 
violation was depriving those Japanese Americans who were Ameri- 
can citizens of their constitutional rights. 

I personally experienced the failure of several English teachers 
to make appropriate distinctions at a session of the New England 
Association of Teachers of English in October 1994. In an invited talk, 
I criticized the growing tendency by literature teachers and literature 
anthologies to use literature about the Holocaust for implying 
similarities between Nazi concentration camps and the internment 
camps for the Japanese Americans during World War II. 

In the question and answer period following my talk, several 
teachers in the audience expressed great concern about my remarks. 
They believed their students should see "the essential similarities" 
between Nazi concentration camps and the internment camps for 
Japanese Americans and felt that any discussion of differences 
would be "a whitewash." 

But shouldn't students see a difference, I suggested, between 
an experience in which people left a confinement alive and in good 
health and one in which they left in the form of smoke and ashes? 
More important, I added, shouldn't they consider why there were 
differences and how our political principles and institutions might 
account for them? 

Showing some annoyance at my questions, these teachers 
professed that they did not see the differences as significant. They 



O 

ERIC 



220 



[ 



] 



209 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



further noted that they included information on the experiences of 
the indigenous peoples of the Americas and encouraged their stu- 
dents to see similarities between Nazi concentration camps and 
America's "concentration camps" for Native Americans, and be- 
tween the European Holocaust and the "Holocaust" perpetrated by 
European explorers and settlers on these peoples through the intro- 
duction of deadly contagious diseases. 

These teachers had a particular point of view about Americans 
that they wanted to inculcate in their students and did not want their 
students' judgments colored by any ambiguity. I don't know 
whether they were aware of the closed nature of their "teaching" 
process and of the ethical line they had crossed in using the tragic 
history of a particular people for ends that had nothing to do with 
that people. But they were clearly building into their teaching mate- 
rial as givens or assumptions the very issues that their students 
should have been openly critiquing. These teachers were, in effect, 
manipulating the outcome of student thinking so that it reflected 
their point of view and glossing over the critical distinctions that an 
academic study of any phenomenon should bring out. 



3. Is the Holocaust 
Trivialized by 
Inappropriate 
Comparisons? 



The Holocaust was an act of mass murder. By definition murder is 
deliberate. As all historians agree, its specific features cannot be fully 
appreciated without making comparisons with other mass murders 
in history. One academic argument has been over how one labels 
these other mass murders. The United Nations Convention on 
Genocide has one definition of genocide. Some historians like Steven 
Katz believe it is too broad because it includes the partial murder of 
a group of people, thus allowing the term to be used when the 
perpetrator of the mass murder let some of the members of the 
group live and may have done so deliberately. "Intent" and "total- 
ity" are key concepts in his definition. Whether or not English 
language arts teachers wish to abide by his definition, students 
should be made aware of it. And whether or not they wish to accept 
"totality" as a defining feature of genocide, the critical structural 
distinction is that the deaths of the members of the group were 
planned; they were not accidental, unintended, or an unfortunate 
by-product of a democracy's effort to win a war. This means that 
comparisons of the Holocaust with the mass murders in Cambodia, 
Tibet, Rwanda, or Bosnia are not inappropriate so long as teachers 
do the appropriate research and preparation for class discussion to 
make clear the different antecedents motivating the murders. 

Most scholars agree that the Armenian genocide is probably 
the genocide most similar to the Holocaust. But if history and En- 
glish language arts teachers wish to compare concentration camps, 
they could help their students understand the profound similarities 



] 



210 



[ 

Sandra Stotsky 



between the two most influential "evil empires" in the twentieth 
century by providing literature on the gulag, considered by many to 
be the closest equivalent to the Nazi concentration camp. Although 
the gulags were forced labor camps, not death camps, both were 
massive instruments of terror that have received much literary as 
well as political attention. Moreover, some of the literature on the 
Soviet terror would enable teachers to make a clear link to the Holo- 
caust, as Stalin, too, had murderous intentions toward the Jews, and 
in the years after World War II. Writing in a February 1997 issue of 
The New Republic, Ruth Wisse, a professor of Yiddish and Compara- 
tive Literature, views a new book. The Bones of Berdichev: The Life and 
Fate of Vasily Grossman by John and Carol Garrard, as providing the 
"ideal link between the Soviet terror and the Nazi terror" (39). She 
speculates that "had Stalin not died on March 5, 1953, Grossman 
would have been murdered in the Lubyanka Prison, sharing the fate 
of most other prominent Jewish artists and writers." A comparison of 
the Nazi terror and the Soviet terror would also enable English 
teachers to use literary selections that are considered masterpieces 
(e.g., the novels or short stories by Solzhenitsyn and Grossman 
himself). I particularly recommend Grossman's Forever Flowing. It is 
not a long novel, and two of its chapters (13 and 14), which deal with 
a young Russian woman's life and death in the gulag and the liqui- 
dation of the kulaks, are on a par with the work of a Tolstoy, 
Dostoyevsky, or Pasternak. 



4. Does the Study 
of the Holocaust 
Lead to a Study of 
Contemporary 
Anti-Semitism? 



Why do we want students to learn about the Holocaust? What 
lessons does its study contain for American students today? The 
intention of this volume is clear: to help teachers use literature on 
genocide and intolerance to counter the "destructive forces of intol- 
erance and bigotry," in this country and elsewhere. What forces of 
intolerance and bigotry should a study of the Holocaust be expected 
to counter? Logically, one might expect it to be used to address the 
roots of the Holocaust — anti-Semitism. However, as Lipstadt discov- 
ered in her analysis of the teacher manual for FHAO, the most 
popular Holocaust curriculum in this country, contemporary anti- 
Semitism is the only form of intolerance that students are not asked 
to examine. My own examination of the many activities in which 
FHAO engages confirms its lack of attention to contemporary mani- 
festations of the very pathology that led to the Holocaust. Its current 
focus is on violence-prevention, but the violence it is concerned with 
does not seem to include violence to Jews, physical or verbal, in this 
country or elsewhere. And expressions of hatred toward Jews appear 
regularly, here and in other parts of the world. 

It is true that there is no daily physical violence to Jews in this 
country, so far as I know. But it is not true that anti-Semitism is 



[ 



] 



211 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



unknown in American public life. As I pointed out in my essay in 
English Journal, there are several virulent sources of anti-Semitism in 
American life today They include Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of 
Islam as well as right-wing militia groups and Lyndon LaRouche's 
followers. (And one must remember that I wrote that essay long 
before Farrakhan 's performance during the Million Man March.) The 
problem for many teachers is obvious: these groups constitute a truly 
multicultural array of anti-Semites, something that a good part of the 
academic world has decreed cannot exist by definition . 3 Neverthe- 
less, intellectual honesty and a concern for a healthy civic life should 
compel English teachers to show students why vigilance about 
expressions of anti-Semitism is needed here as well as elsewhere, 
and to note the continuing existence of this pathology where it has 
appeared. 

Of more relevance to the English language arts teacher, I 
believe, is the larger question of cultural sterotypes. Here is what the 
literature teacher is best trained to deal with. As Goldhagen's book 
emphasizes, German anti-Semitism needs to be seen in the context of 
a long tradition of hostile cultural images of the Jew. The Jew had 
been demonized in the very fabric of German public culture for 
centuries, with no positive images available. If the Holocaust is to 
help students understand anything about religious or racial preju- 
dice, they must pay more attention to the major sources that fuel 
anti-Semitism than to the outpourings of fringe or crackpot groups, 
however appalling their propaganda may be. What are the common 
public images today of the person who can be unmistakably identi- 
fied as a Jew? (And in this country, that person is most apt to be the 
devout Jew because he wears a skull cap.) These images, whether in 
the media or in current fiction or nonfiction, include not only those 
of American Jews but also those of Israelis, and of the religious Jew 
in Israel in particular. Are they favorable or not? How do they 
compare with the images that fed into the murderous fantasies of 
those Germans and non-Germans who carried out the Holocaust? I 
do not see how the English language arts teacher can justify a study 
of Holocaust literature in the classroom for the purpose of combat- 
ting prejudice and bigotry unless one of the first lessons based on it 
includes consideration of the power of cultural stereotypes in shap- 
ing people's attitudes and behaviors and an exploration of the 
contemporary images of those who are identifiable as Jews, here and 
elsewhere. 

Exploitation of the Holocaust for contemporary political 
purposes can also be avoided by helping students explore why the 
Holocaust did not happen elsewhere. What forces may have pre- 
vented mass murder of the Jews elsewhere? Dawidowicz addresses 
that question in discussing the failure of the curricula she examined 




2*3 



212 



C 



Sandra Stotsky 



to distinguish between "individual behavior and state policies." 
Noting that many of them asked students whether "it" could happen 
in this country, with some even answering "yes," she judges as the 
deeper problem the failure to "instruct students in the fundamental 
differences between, on the one side, our pluralist democracy and 
constitutional government, ruled by law, and, on the other side, the 
authoritarian or totalitarian governments of Europe that legitimated 
discrimination against and persecution of Jews" (28-29). I was better 
able to appreciate Dawidowicz's point when I was in Lithuania 
during the week of September 20, 1994. That very week the Prime 
Minister of Lithuania formally apologized to the people of Israel on 
behalf of the Lithuanian people and a now independent Lithuanian 
government for the murder of the Jews in that country in the early 
1940s, admitting for the first time that more Jews may have been 
murdered by Lithuanians than by the Nazis. Why was that so? In 
part, because there was no rule of law in the country for several 
months (I was told) between the time the Soviet troops had pulled 
out and the Nazis moved in. Armed gangs roamed through Jewish 
neighborhoods with impunity, murdering the defenseless inhabit- 
ants in unorganized spurts of violence. The political lesson to learn 
from a study of the Holocaust is that bigotry does not easily turn 
into violence when a rule of law based firmly on individual rights is 
observed and enforced. 



5. Are Students 
Given the 
Relevant Historical 
Information They 
Need? 



To understand why the Jews were the chief intended victims of the 
Nazi death factories, there are certain basic questions students ought 
to discuss. These were questions I myself asked when I first learned 
about the Holocaust years ago, and the answers to them are as 
relevant today as they were then. 

First, students need to know why the Jews were without a 
homeland. Why were they seen as an alien race? Why did they have 
no place to flee? Why were they at the complete mercy of the people 
among whom they lived? Where did they come from if they had no 
place of their own in Europe? They did not emerge from thin air 
during the Middle Ages (indeed, they had been living in parts of 
Germany since 300 C.E.). Yet many Holocaust curriculum guides do 
not explain why they were in Europe to begin with, as well as in 
other countries in the world. Some information about the destruction 
of the Second Temple in Jerusalem in 70 C.E. and the Diaspora is 
necessary. The two most detailed accounts for middle grade students 
I have found appear in Globe Fearon's The Holocaust (199 7) 4 and 
Glencoe's Life Unworthy of Life (1991). 5 

Second, students need to know that the Jews had been demon- 
ized and persecuted before the Middle Ages and exactly why. Stu- 
dents should learn about the religious roots of anti-Semitism and its 



O 

ERLC 



] 



213 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



effects on what Jews could do, what they could or could not own, 
how they dressed, where they lived, and what they spoke in order to 
understand the racial overlay in the nineteenth century Again, the 
two Holocaust curricula noted above provide information on these 
issues. 

Third, students need to know why most of the European Jews 
were in Eastern Europe, not Western European countries, why the 
largest number of Jews in Europe before World War II lived in 
Poland, and why few countries were willing to accept Jewish refu- 
gees. It is useful for students to learn how attitudes toward the Jews 
often shifted in different countries over the course of Jewish history. 

Fourth, the first lesson students need to ponder after studying 
the Holocaust is what the remaining Jewish communities in the 
world themselves learned from the Holocaust. The lack of interest in 
many Holocaust curricula about the post-Holocaust attitudes of the 
Jews themselves is a curious omission at a time when "multiple 
perspectives" are urged. The link between the Holocaust and the 
rebirth of the state of Israel needs to be made clear to students. Two 
lessons for students that address this link well are in Globe Fearon's 
The Holocaust (1997) and Ruth Ann Cooper's "From Holocaust to 
Hope," a middle school teaching guide for a Holocaust unit pre- 
pared for the Tulsa Public Schools, 1995-96. Cooper provides this 
lesson explicitly "to relate the lessons of the Holocaust to contempo- 
rary world situations." Students should also learn why most survi- 
vors did not want to return to their home countries in Eastern Eu- 
rope at the end of World War II and what happened to many who 
did return. 



6. What Should 
Students Read 
Besides Accounts 
of the Death of 
the Jews? 



Students who are asked to read about the death of the Jews should 
also be asked to read about the life of the Jews. By this I do not refer 
to the literature about the life of the Jews whose communities and 
culture were consumed in the Holocaust. The stories of Isaac 
Bashevis Singer and Sholem Aleichem belong in a well-rounded 
literature curriculum. But a study of the Holocaust should be 
complemented by at least one piece of literature that is set in the 
context of a living Jewish community, identifiable as such. No other 
group in America today would accept a literature curriculum that 
implied that it was a dead culture, and there is no reason why that 
implication should emerge from a study of the Holocaust. In my 
article in English Journal, I supplied a list of titles of literary works 
and films that can address this problem, and teachers should feel 
free to go beyond that short list. 

More fundamental than a literary work that portrays live Jews 
positively are selections from the Hebrew Bible. Many English 
teachers (as well as parents and other citizens) may think that it is a 







214 Sandra Stotsky 



Summary and 
Concluding 
Remarks 


violation of the separation of church and state to teach the Old or 
New Testament as literature, but it is not. This is made clear by 
Marie Wachlin in a comprehensive report on the place of the Bible in 
public high school literature programs in the February 1997 issue of 
Research in the Teaching of English. In fact, the curriculum framework 
for the English language arts approved by the Massachusetts Board 
of Education in January 1997 contains a suggested reading list that 
recommends, among many other titles, selections from the Bible at 
all grade levels. 6 It does so because the Bible has been one of the 
major influences on the literature of the Western world, serving as a 
greater source of literary allusions than any other work of literature. 
It is thus completely appropriate from a literary perspective for 
English language arts teachers to include selections from the Hebrew 
Bible as part of a Holocaust unit. 

In this essay I have elaborated upon six pedagogical issues that I 
believe English language arts teachers should consider in preparing 
to use Holocaust literature to address "intolerance and bigotry," in 
this country and elsewhere. Teachers should ask themselves (1) Does 
the literature unit emphasize anti-Semitism as a cause of the Holo- 
caust?; (2) Does the unit provide all relevant historical information?; 

(3) Does the unit make appropriate historical and structural distinc- 
tions, that is, does it indicate what is unique about the Holocaust?; 

(4) Does the unit draw on appropriate comparisons to bring out 
these distinctions?; (5) Does the unit address contemporary anti- 
Semitism, here and elsewhere, as the first lesson of Holocaust 
study?; and (6) What other literary works are included to show the 
Jews as a living cultural group and to help students understand the 
basis for their identity as a people? 

As all those educated in the West know, the moral code formu- 
lated by the ancient Israelites is one of the foundations of our civili- 
zation. It is therefore unscrupulous to use the Holocaust to discredit 
Western Civilization. Both Hitler and Stalin attacked religion and 
Judeo-Christian morality in particular as a way of justifying their 
mass murders. Both their ideologies represent a suspension of the 
moral code of Western Civilization with the supreme value it places 
on individual human life. In this connection, one should also take 
note of yet another mass catastrophe of the twentieth century whose 
details have just come to light. Jasper Becker's Hungry Ghosts pro- 
vides the first substantive account of the deaths of thirty million 
Chinese in famines deliberately caused by Mao in the 1960s. 

From this perspective, teachers might well ask what moral 
teachings are developing, or can develop, our students' consciences 
today. In a world where the ten commandments are despised or, as 


> 

[C 


.C 226 



215 



Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



Lucy Dawidowicz wryly noted, cannot be mentioned in an Ameri- 
can public school in a unit on moral education because (she was 
told) that would violate the separation of church and state, what 
guidelines can there be for moral behavior? In what can the sanctity 
of individual human life be based if not in a divinely sanctioned 
moral code or in the notion of natural rights that arose from the 
Enlightenment, another milestone in Western Civilization? 

If the study of the Holocaust is now to take place in the En- 
glish language arts class as part of our students' moral education, 
then it is even more meaningful from this perspective for teachers to 
include readings from the Hebrew Bible. A growing number of 
students in this country do not know who the Jews are as a people. 
They do not know what the Jews contributed to world civilization 
and history, what it is they wrote that formed the basis for their 
identity. At the high school level, the Book of Job is one selection that 
is appropriate for the profound moral issues it raises. But to fully 
appreciate the tragic irony of the Jews' long history of persecution 
and martyrdom in the West, students should also read the Ten 
Commandments. They should all learn that the Holocaust was 
directed against the very people who gave the world a moral code 
that contained as one of its ten commandments "Thou Shalt Not 
Murder." 



Not©$ 1* Scott Foresman does not bracket the two selections together in the 

same thematic unit. Uchida's story is the final one in a unit on the short 
story. The very next unit is on drama, and the first selection is the play 
based on Anne Frank's diary, followed by a selection on the resistance 
movement in France during the Nazi occupation, which is an appropriate 
companion to the Anne Frank play. 

2. See, for example, Peter Irons, Justice at War. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1983, page 24. 

3. The influence of this arbitrary definition was visible in the first 
printout of the 1994 FHAO teacher manual. It contained material that 
actually rationalized Louis Farrakhan's behavior, never mentioning that he 
vilifies the Jews. After Deborah Lipstadt expressed her outrage at this 
passage in her essay in The New Republic, the page was taken out of the 
remaining copies of that first edition and a new page inserted. However, the 
authors neglected to remove Farrakhan's name from the index. It is still 
there even though the page it refers to contains nothing on him. 

4. The Holocaust, Globe Fearon Historical Case Studies, Globe Fearon 
Educational Publisher, a division of Simon and Schuster, Upper Saddle 
River, New Jersey, 1997. Consists of a paperback student textbook (126 
pages) and a teacher guide containing lesson plans and activity pages for 
students. 



0 



[ 



216 



i 

Sandra Stotsky 



5. A Holocaust Curriculum: Life Unworthy of Life, An 18-Lesson Instruc- 

tional Unit by Sidney M. Bolkosky, Betty Ellias, and David Harris, Glencoe 
Publishing Co., 1991. Consists of a student textbook in loose-leaf binder 
(318 pages), a teacher guide, and a videotape of interviews with Holocaust 
survivors. ^ 

6. The Massachusetts English Language Arts Curriculum Framework , 
Accepted Version, February 1997. See Appendix A. A copy of this document 
can be obtained from the Massachusetts Department of Education, 350 
Main Street, Malden, MA 02148. This document was overwhelmingly 
approved by English language arts teachers in the state. On evaluation 
forms sent back to the department, two-thirds expressed agreement or 
strong agreement with this suggested core reading list. 



References ABCNewsInteractive, Historic America: Electronic Field Trips. Teacher's 

Guide. Westerville, OH: Glencoe /McGraw-Hill, 1997. 

Bartov, Omer. " Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the 

Holocaust by Daniel Jonah Goldhagen." The New Republic 29 April 
1996: 32-38. 

. Letter to the Editor. The New Republic 10 February 1997: 4. 

Becker, Jasper. Hungry Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine. New York: Free Press, 
1996. 

Blum, Lawrence A. "The Holocaust and Moral Education." Report from the 
Institute for Philosophy & Public Policy. Vol. 15, Nos. 2 and 3. School of 
Public Affairs, University of Maryland, 1995. 12-16. 

Cooper, Ruth Ann. "From Holocaust to Hope:" A Middle School Teaching Guide 
for a Holocaust Unit. Tulsa Public Schools, Oklahoma, 1995-96. 

Dawidowicz, Lucy. "How They Teach the Holocaust." Commentary 90.6 
(December 1990): 25-32. 

. The War Against the Jews 1933-1945. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 

Winston, 1975. 

Goldhagen, Daniel Jonas. Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and 
the Holocaust. New York: Knopf, 1996. 

. "Motives, Causes, and Alibis: A Reply to My Critics." The New 

Republic 23 December 1996: 37-45. 

. Reply to Letters to the Editor. The New Republic 10 February 1997: 5. 

Gress, David. "Political Uses of the Past." Partisan Review 62.4 (1995): 527- 
44. 

Grossman, Vasily. Forever Flowing. Trans. Thomas Whitney. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1972. 

Katz, Steven. The Holocaust in Historical Context. Vol. 1. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1994. 



] 



[ 

217 Academic and Pedagogical Issues in Teaching the Holocaust 



Lipstadt, Deborah E. "Not Facing History: How Not to Teach the Holo- 
caust." The New Republic 6 March 1995: 26-29. 

Mahler, Jonathan. "Goldhagen's Germany: A Tumult Appears Through the 
Keyhole." Forward 19 April 1996: 9. 

Rosenbaum, Alan, ed. Is the Holocaust Unique? Perspectives on Comparative 
Genocide. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996. 

Shea, Christopher. "Debating the Uniqueness of the Holocaust." Chronicle of 
Higher Education 31 May 1996: A7-8. 

Stannard, David. American Holocaust. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1992. 

Stotsky, Sandra. "Is the Holocaust the Chief Contribution of the Jewish 
People to World Civilization and History?: A Survey of Leading 
Literature Anthologies and Reading Instructional Textbooks." English 
Journal 85.2 (February 1996): 52-59. 

Wachlin, Marie G. "The Place of the Bible in Public High School Literature 
Programs." Research in the Teaching of English 31.1 (February 1997): 7- 
50. 

Weiss, John. Ideology of Death. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1996. 

Wisse, Ruth. "By Their Own Hands: How the Jews of Russia Outwitted 
Themselves to Death." The New Republic 3 February 1997: 34-43. 

Wistrich, Robert. "Helping Hitler." Commentary 102.1 (July 1996): 27-31. 



218 



a 



Teaching the 
Holocaust in the 
English Classroom: 
Hearing the Voices, 
Touching the History 

Grace M. Caporino 

Carmel High School, Carmel, New York 



F acing students who have witnessed media episodes of ethnic 
cleansing in Bosnia, genocide in Rwanda, and subsequent 
criminal war tribunals inspires teachers to promote human 
rights by teaching students that this genocidal bloodletting is not 
inevitable. As humanities teachers we recognize the opportunity to 
instill in students some profound universal precepts which form the 
core of what society recognizes as human rights and human wrongs. 
As we seek to advance the progress of human society, we try to share 
with students the consequences of humankind's history of prejudice 
and hatred. Indeed, lessons can be drawn from past genocides, and 
teaching these lessons affirms the position that students who study 
the paradigmatic genocide of the Holocaust are challenged to look 
beyond themselves and take a stand against bigotry, intolerance, and 
genocide. 

The Holocaust offers singular lessons for teaching about state- 
sponsored genocide, about human rights abuses, and about the need 
for promoting active, participatory citizenship and civic responsibil- 
ity. Because extensive documentation exists on the Holocaust and the 
genre of its literary response is prolific, it is an apt subject for inter- 
disciplinary study in the English classroom. As English teachers, we 
have a vast array of high quality age-appropriate literature and film 
on the Holocaust to draw upon. 

All educators may benefit from the vast resources available 
through the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washing- 
ton, D.C. Teachers may telephone the Museum at 202-488-0400 to 
obtain information on their special exhibits. The Museum's Resource 



O 

ERIC 



230 



219 



c 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



Center for Educators offers a wealth of information and materials 
including materials developed by the Museum, lesson plans and 
curricula drawn from national sources, literature, and a vast array of 
audiovisual materials obtainable nationwide. In addition, its staff 
will assist teachers in identifying resources available in local areas, 
which include organizations, current activities, and individuals, all 
of which support Holocaust educators. The materials in the Resource 
Center are available for preview and research during visits to the 
Museum, and the Resource Center staff are eager to assist educators 
with questions. They can be reached at 202-488-6186. 

The Museum offers several publications to educators, often 
free of charge. One such publication. Teaching About the Holocaust: A 
Resource Book for Educators, is a useful compendium for any class- 
room teacher. This volume, updated periodically, is an asset to both 
the novice and experienced teacher as it contains adequate material 
for initiating Holocaust lessons. The museum also makes available a 
series of pamphlets on related Holocaust topics, including Resis- 
tance, The Handicapped, The Poles, Homosexuals, and Sinti and 
Roma, and Jehovah's Witnesses. 

Another useful teaching tool is the Museum's Artifact Poster 
Set and Teacher Guide. The poster set features a series of full-color 
pictures representing various Holocaust themes, including Lost 
Childhoods, Locating the Victim, Resistance, and Loss of Identity. 
The accompanying Teacher Guide offers background information on 
the posters with pedagogical guides for presenting lessons on the 
posters. These include Suggestions for Further Reading, Opening 
Questions for Classroom Discussion, a Bibliography, a Glossary of 
Terms, and other pertinent data. 

In addition, the Museum publication. Teaching About the 
Holocaust, features a chronology with a historical outline which can 
frame Holocaust literature and also contextualize the literary re- 
sponses flowing from the history. These literary responses include 
novels, memoirs, drama, poetry, diaries, and journals. When intro- 
ducing a unit on Holocaust literature, I like to review the history 
with a Holocaust Chronology. By grafting representational voices 
and images of literature on to the twelve-year historical timeline, the 
years 1933 through 1945, the human story is unveiled against the 
background of historical forces that shaped the Holocaust. 

To fuse history with the literature, I use the chronology written 
by Stephen Feinberg, published in the journal Social Education. Using 
copies of the chronology, I highlight significant events for students. 
Nineteen thirty-three was a pivotal year in Germany's campaign to 
annihilate European Jews. We examine the incremental steps toward 
the Final Solution which began in Germany. Although forces in the 



O 

ERIC 



231 



220 



Grace M. Caporino 



nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were contributing factors. 
Hitler's victory in 1933 in the German elections was a turning point. 
The Kristallnacht pogrom and annexation of Austria are contextualized 
against the background of Hitler's invasion of Poland in 1939, and 
students begin to see how these events were pivotal in the Nazi 
conquest of Europe and the destruction of the Jews. 

The invasion of Poland also frames many Holocaust mem- 
oirs — some of which my students read. Familiarity with the chronol- 
ogy helps students merge the survivor voices in the literature with 
the unfolding history. Through the literary responses, students 
establish a human claim on the history, and the enormous numbers 
of Hitler's Final Solution trickle down to individuals — those who 
perpetrated it as well as those who witnessed and survived it. 

The genre of Holocaust literature covers a broad spectrum of 
literary responses, including writings by witnesses, works known as 
survivor literature, other works written by children of survivors, and 
finally, the writings of nonwitnesses whose imagined works include 
novels, drama, and poetry. My general preference for teaching the 
Holocaust is survivor writings or second-generation writings. The 
former are voices of those who lived the unimaginable. Their words 
dictate a compelling reality and present students with true, intro- 
spective stories by people forced to respond to catastrophe and to 
evil. The latter give another perspective in that second-generation 
narratives focus on the impact of the Holocaust on the parent/ 
survivor and the ways in which that impact shapes their children. 

As so much of our English curriculum draws upon fiction, in 
teaching the Holocaust I believe a certain moral authority derives 
from the writings of survivors and this authority resonates with 
students whose lives are permeated with the fictive contrivances of 
Hollywood and television. When young people engage with the 
works by survivors, they are entering the domain of the witness. Just 
as primary source documents in the discipline of history represent 
authenticity, survivor writings in literature present the voices of 
witnesses. When taught along with appropriate historical docu- 
ments, these pairings convey authentic survivor voices which en- 
large the history and validate the literature. Another approach is to 
pair survivor writings with primary source documents, some of 
which are referenced here. This encourages students to look deeper 
into the patterns that shaped this history. 

As part of the genre of Holocaust literature, second-generation 
literature offers another perspective on the Holocaust, a perspective 
which Alvin Rosenfeld describes as "the type that is written by . . . 
the kinds of survivors, those who were never there but know more 
than the outlines of the place" (19). One such work is the graphic 
novel Maus I by Art Spiegelman (I define a graphic novel as a self- 




[ 



] 



221 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



contained story which combines text and art into an articulate plot). 
Teachers who decide to teach this work will find students drawn to 
Spiegelman's technique of depicting his family's experience in the 
Holocaust in an illustrated comic book by portraying Jews as mice, 
Nazis as cats, and the Poles as pigs. This work is a gradual revelation 
of the tortured relationship between a son and his survivor-father, 
whose need to unburden his Holocaust agony impels his son to seek 
refuge from it. That children hear distinctive echoes of their parents' 
lives — echoes which may reverberate and provoke their own an- 
guish, is the center of this graphic novel and one which our students 
can relate to. Spiegelman's father's Holocaust story (which becomes 
Spiegelman's story) is told against the background of the familiar 
theme of the parent/ child conflict, which adds to the accessibility of 
this work. I use a simple study guide and find that the work practi- 
cally teaches itself. Some themes which emerge from Maus I are as 
follows: 

A gradual revelation of a tortured relationship between a son and his 
father, a Holocaust survivor. 

The parallel paths of anguish — that of husband and wife and that of 
second-generation Artie and his father, Vladek. 

The son's need for the refuge of fantasy juxtaposed against his 
father's need to unburden his agony. 

The ongoing horror of the Holocaust for survivors or for their chil- 
dren. 

Analogies between Artie's conflict and our students' lives, which 
may be weighed down with parental conflict, highlight a lesser 
theme but illuminate and emphasize the larger themes of this Holo- 
caust narrative of hiding and surviving in Poland. Study guide 
questions which may be used as springboards for discussion include 

1. Why did Spiegelman choose a cartoon mode to tell his story? 

2. Find two examples where Vladek seems to punish Artie for his 
youthful innocence and begrudge him life experiences which have 
spared Artie from Holocaust horrors. 

3. Several times during this comic, Artie stands up to his father. 

What happens that leads him to do this? Give two examples. 

4. Betrayal in the Holocaust occurs frequently in Artie's memoir. 

Give two examples of betrayal situations. 

5. Survival for Vladek or Anja was often simply a case of luck. Cite 
two examples where luck saved them during the Holocaust. 



O 

ERiC 



233 



[ 



] 



222 



Grace M. Caporino 



6. Art Spiegelman interviews his father and listens to his Holocaust 
experiences. Do these talks create a bond or barrier between 
them? 

That Spiegelman's graphic novel instructs about the Holocaust as it 
intersects with the second-generation writer's life, and simulta- 
neously with our students' lives, makes it a worthy addition to 
Holocaust units. 

When exploring strategies for infusing Holocaust literature, I 
have found that choosing works reflecting adolescent sensibilities in 
the narrative voice assures high interest. A Holocaust memoir which 
engages students and which lends itself to pairing with primary 
documents while presenting the adolescent narrative voice is The 
Cage by Ruth Minsky Sender. This memoir relates the author's 
deportation with her family from the Lodz Ghetto in Poland to the 
death camp at Auschwitz. Riva recounts the end of her family's 
contented life after the German invasion when formerly fond Polish 
Christian neighbors turned on them, seizing furnishings and belong- 
ings, and later became eager witnesses to their persecution. After her 
widowed mother is deported, the children are in sixteen-year-old 
Riva's care, and she assumes the role of protector for her young 
brothers. Her description of the Jewish men, women, and children — 
a population of 180,000 herded and trapped in the Lodz Ghetto — 
depicts the desperation faced by Riva and her younger brothers. 

Riva expends all her energy to keep her family together so they can 
escape the daily lists of deportation posted in the ghetto. But despite 
her valiant efforts, she and her brothers are deported to Auschwitz. 

In teaching this memoir, I have the students compare it with a 
historical document. Sender tells how the ghetto Jews — lacking food, 
shelter, jobs, and medical care — eventually marched in protest to the 
headquarters of the Judenrat, the Jewish council appointed by the 
Germans to govern daily existence. She elaborates on the results of 
their demands to the ghetto's own "well-organized government 
under the dictatorship of Chaim Rumkowski, a man hungry for 
power and wealth" (25). To help students fuse Sender's memoir with 
the history, I introduce a document, "Rumkowski's Address at the 
Time of the Deportation of the Children from the Lodz Ghetto, 
September 4, 1942," from a text entitled Documents on the Holocaust. 

I explain to students that Rumkowski, having assumed control of 
Lodz ghetto, knew in 1942 that Jews were being murdered in death 
camps. He hoped that by obeying Nazi orders to deport some Jews, 
he could save many more. Forced to arbitrate how to meet the 
quotas required by the Nazis, he decided to sacrifice others and to 
choose who should live and who should die. He decided that the 
first to be deported must be the elderly and children. Reading 



0 

ERiC 



234 



c 



] 



223 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



Rumkowski's statement to students heightens the immediacy and 
gravity: 

Yesterday, in the course of the day, I was given the order [by Nazis] 
to send away more than 20,000 Jews from the ghetto, and if I did 
not — "we will do it ourselves." The question arose: "Should we have 
accepted this and carried it out ourselves, or left it to others?" But as 
we were guided not by the thought: "how many will be lost?" but 
"how many can be saved?" we arrived at the conclusion — those 
closest to me at work, that is, and myself — that however difficult it 
was going to be, we must take upon ourselves the carrying out of 
this decree. (283) 

As he continues his appeal, Rumkowski importunes the people of 
the ghetto: "I must carry out this difficult and bloody operation, I 
must cut off limbs in order to save the body! I must take away 
children, and if I do not, others too will be taken . . ."(129). The 
horrific reality of choices made in an environment of powerlessness, 
where children and elderly are sent first to the crematorium as 
selections to delay deportation and save additional lives, is chilling 
for students to ponder. It further underscores the terror which Riva 
and her brothers faced daily in the Lodz Ghetto. Left on their own to 
survive in the world of the Holocaust, the children are defenseless 
against the Nazis and now against Rumkowski who has assumed 
the task of regulating the Nazi machinery of deportation. His words 
draw students into the scene of dread which confronted children 
during the Holocaust and it allows them to evaluate ways in which 
the Judenrat carried out Nazi orders while attempting to soften 
them. 

I have had lively class discussions by asking students, "Did 
Rumkowski do the right thing?" This question forces them to wrestle 
with the complex moral dilemmas that existed during the Holocaust. 
I have been astounded by the depth of feeling and thought from 
students grappling with this question. Some classes have said they 
are in complete accord with Rumkowski, as the situation was des- 
perate and he acted to save lives. But one particular class of an 
animated cross section of students, studying a semester-long elective 
on the Holocaust, erupted in contentious discussion on this question. 
For a full thirty minutes I was a referee, speaking from the sidelines, 
as students debated the matter. From Bill, I heard, "Rumkowski had 
no choice because the Nazis would simply have assumed command 
and taken over and deported everyone at once — giving no one a 
chance to survive." 

Then Katherine added, "How can we judge this man — we 
weren't there." 

"But Riva and others like her were even more vulnerable 
because of this decree," said John. 



[ 



224 



i 

Grace M.Caporino 



"You can't look at this history and say what you would have 
done. The Nazis were in control and we are discussing this some 
fifty years later in the context of a democracy, sheltered in our class- 
room — Rumkowski thought he was saving lives," Joe shouted at 
everyone. 

Now the whole class was drawn into the conflict — voices were 
clamoring to be heard and hands were waving in the air. I recog- 
nized Sean, a serious, subtle thinker, who spoke slowly to the class: 
"Rumkowski was wrong. He should have refused to work with the 
Nazis. It is better to die standing than to live on your knees. He 
compromised by issuing this decree." There was a hushed pause in 
the discussion and then other voices agreed with Sean, denouncing 
Rumkowski's decree. 

The bell signaled the end of class, but the arguing continued as 
students rose from their seats to leave. Joe, his voice rising, tried to 
make Sean and others see Rumkowski's point of view. Scheduling 
further discussion for the next day, I looked up from my desk to see 
Joe, now visibly frustrated, saying, "These guys just don't get it — in 
the ghetto everyone was starving and frightened. What may seem 
rational and reasonable to us today cannot compare to the mental 
states of people starving and demoralized — defenseless against 
deportation and death. Rumkowski had to decide in the context of 
the horror of the Holocaust." Pausing, he told me, "I'd like to show 
them that they don't know what they are talking about when they 
condemn Rumkowski. I want to come into class tomorrow with 
Paul. We'll wait until the bell has rung and class has started. We'll 
dress in mock Nazi shirts with the swastika symbols and we'll carry 
nightsticks." Then he explained that he wanted to stage an Aktion, 
(the rampaging operation conducted by military police which was 
directed against Jews in the ghetto to gather those designated for 
deportation and killing). He wanted his fellow classmates to relate to 
the desperation, the intimidation, and helplessness that prevailed in 
the ghetto, and maybe he could help them see that "they are making 
this thing a lot simpler than it really was." 

For teachers, moving students to this stage of critical thinking 
to discover meaning — here shaded in grays — leads them away from 
facile assumptions. Ideally we want students to examine the com- 
plex issues that arise from Holocaust readings, and we want to lead 
them to see the relationship of the parts to the whole. Joe's proposal 
gave me pause: Should I let him stage the Aktion, to make his point 
and inadvertently suggest to students that they have actually partici- 
pated in the Holocaust horror, albeit in a small way? I purposefully 
avoid simulations in teaching the Holocaust as I believe this peda- 
gogy undermines my objectives. I prefer not to compromise the 
integrity of the text or the film lest students believe that an activity of 



O 

tKJC 



236 



225 



[ 



i 

Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



imagining oneself in the Holocaust can recreate the experience or 
possibly in any way be equivalent to the serious study of it. But there 
are times when an activity is appropriate, and I made a split-second 
call based on the class chemistry, the momentum of the lesson, and 
my wish to remain flexible. Fundamental to my pedagogy is the 
practice of incorporating student response into lessons, and it 
seemed fitting that Joe be given his chance to role-play his argument. 
Joe told me that he felt some students had not fully responded to the 
text and documents, nor to dilemmas faced by Jews targeted for 
death. He felt they had to see Rumkowski's dilemma even though it 
ultimately posed grave consequences for Riva and her brothers. I 
also felt that Joe's staging could quell the dissension provoked by 
my question, and it could help me move the class to closure on the 
reading. I had planned to show some scenes from Schindler's List, one 
of which portrayed an Aktion in the Krakow Ghetto, and hoped that 
Joe's dramatization would help me segue into lesson closure. 

The following day Joe and his friend Paul came to class a few min- 
utes late. Wearing dark shirts and armbands, they switched off the 
lights at the door and began yelling "Aktion," as they waved night- 
sticks. Shouting and rapping sticks, they pulled up peers and or- 
dered them to stand up. Student faces reflected momentary surprise 
as Joe and Paul sent selected students to the back of the room. After 
about thirty seconds, Joe's classmates caught on to the fact that he 
was staging the point of the argument that he had previously made 
rhetorically. I let him proceed for about a minute and then, as 
planned, Joe started to explain why he had staged the Aktion: "Some 
of you sat here and condemned Rumkowski, but as the Nazi ap- 
pointed elder of Lodz, he knew that everybody in the Lodz Ghetto 
was going to die. His plan for the ghetto inhabitants was the only 
way he knew to save lives. I don't see how we can judge him. I asked 
our teacher if I could have a minute to dramatize my point, and I 
thank you for listening." 

Joe had his moment with his peers, who now relaxed and 
eased back into their seats, waiting for me to speak. Now that it was 
my turn to pull together lesson strands, I began by repeating my 
original question on Rumkowski. I asked the class to see that decid- 
ing on one right answer was not as important as recognizing that 
during the Holocaust choices were made which defy logic beyond 
the Holocaust universe. And the fact that our class could not reach 
an accord on Rumkowski's decision is less important than our 
raising and reckoning with dilemmas inherent in the question. In 
attempting to grasp this history, I reminded students that we need to 
avoid imposing neat judgments on behavior of ghetto or concentra- 
tion camp victims, lest we simplify circumstances complicated by 
terror and traumatic upheaval. Further, I reminded them that it is 



c 



226 



~i 

Grace M. Caporino 



only through careful study of the Holocaust, the documents, the 
literary responses and the history, that we could hope to arrive at a 
stage of uncommon astonishment at the resilience of the victims and 
at the diabolical evil of the perpetrators. On the learning continuum 
of Holocaust study, questions are more important than the answers, 
and debates are stopping points along the journey. Sharing Joe's 
dramatization, I reminded students, should not lead us to believe we 
have experienced the horrific reality of Riva and others facing depor- 
tation in the ghetto. If anything it should inspire further study of 
primary source documents and eyewitness accounts. This way we 
would not yield to weak and easy conclusions about the ways in 
which the Nazis drew some of their victims into their murderous 
schemes. 

To expand on the text of The Cage, I show students a book of 
photos taken by Mendel Grossman, a photographer who recorded 
the images of anguish and atrocity in the Lodz Ghetto. The docu- 
mentary photographs compiled in With a Camera in the Ghetto help 
students visualize the plight of Riva and her brothers as well as the 
fate of ghetto prisoners everywhere. There are images of squalid 
living quarters, bread lines, of hearses carrying dead bodies, and 
perhaps the most searing of all are two photos of women. One 
depicts a woman awaiting deportation, pressing a tormented face 
against a fence, and the other portrays a poignant leave-taking as a 
mother says goodbye to her children right before deportation. These 
photos will enhance the value of the printed text for students of the 
'90s who are deft at interpreting images. Rumkowski — who appears 
in one photo — my students discover, was sent to his death at 
Auschwitz, along with most remaining ghetto inhabitants in August 
of 1944 — some five months before the Soviet army liberated 870 
survivors of the Lodz Ghetto, including Riva and her brothers. 

Having taken this journey into the Lodz Ghetto through the 
voices of Riva and Rumkowski, students begin to see how the poison 
of Nazi evil influenced some to yield to the enemy in ghettos and 
camps by appeasing Nazis and seizing personal power in hope of 
survival. Students in grades 11 and 12 approach this dialectic with 
maturity and reasoned intelligence, even though they may disagree 
with each other as they attempt to make sense of the events. One of 
my responsibilities when teaching the Holocaust is to reassure 
students that this subject matter is difficult — that studying it is like 
being on an emotional roller coaster — evoking sadness, disrupting 
our certainties, questioning our interpretations, and certainly 
prompting the resolve of "never again." Reminding students that 
Holocaust scholars themselves cannot agree on interpretations of the 
complex dilemmas posed by this history may lessen their discom- 
fort. 



227 



[ 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



To help students develop a balanced perspective on many 
questions raised about survivors, I have used an excerpt from Primo 
Levi's memoir which offers resolution to student concerns about 
victim behavior. A survivor of Auschwitz, Primo Levi writes about 
behavior he witnessed in the death camp in a remarkable essay 
entitled "The Gray Zone." In this essay in his memoir. The Drowned 
and The Saved, Levi indicts the totalitarian system devised by the 
Nazis and shuns any judgment of those who may have been cor- 
rupted by the system. He states, "It is a judgment that we would like 
to entrust only to those who found themselves in similar circum- 
stances and had the opportunity to test for themselves what it means 
to act in a state of coercion," further adding, "I would lightheartedly 
absolve all those whose concurrence in the guilt was minimal and 
for whom coercion was of the highest degree" (44). 

Reading Primo Levi's comment to the class helps students see 
that some aspects of the odious Final Solution reside in the realm of 
Primo Levi's "gray zone." Indeed, studying the Holocaust leaves us 
with questions — questions which serve as early warning systems for 
students whose moral compasses may well shape the twenty-first 
century. Further, the questions which arise from Holocaust study 
remind students that their voices matter as free citizens in a global 
society. 

In searching for a way to help students reach beyond their 
own immediate worlds and relate to Holocaust readings, I have 
delineated five thematic categories which can frame readings and 
can help them understand the interactions of the different categories. 
I outline these categories as victim, perpetrator, bystander, collabora- 
tor, and rescuer. I write student responses on the board as their 
generic definitions for categories help them recognize how the roles 
relate to the genre of Holocaust literature. Different works lend 
themselves to exploration of the categories, and an example of this is 
the poem "Riddle" by William Heyen, where the roles of perpetra- 
tors, collaborators, and bystanders are investigated. In Heyen's 
poem a speaker sketches a scenario of deportation and extermina- 
tion, and in simple diction the poem examines the culpability of the 
ordinary masses who facilitated the Holocaust machinery. The 
speaker's repeated question "Who killed the Jews?" is a refrain 
which gives way to repeated denials from perpetrators, collabora- 
tors, and bystanders (such as a typist, an engineer) — all of whom 
evade any personal responsibility for their role in genocide. 

Reading the poem is a way for students to psychologically penetrate 
the Holocaust universe. Absorbing the experience of the poetic 
persona gives the students a window into historical events and puts 
them in touch with this history. A particularly effective way of 
presenting the poem is to have individual students read the specific 




239 



[ 



] 



228 



Grace M. Caporino 



denials, i.e., by the typist, engineer, etc., so that the varied classroom 
voices represent individual denials of culpability. A follow-up exer- 
cise to this poem is to divide the class into small groups and have 
them research the roles of different historical figures in the poem. 
Then they can write a response to the denials of the individual 
perpetrators, collaborators, and bystanders, e.g., Eichmann and 
Speer. The exercise can be followed by writing a question on the 
board: "How does this history relate to the individual in society, and 
what does it have to do with me?" The question telescopes the 
enormity of the numbers of perpetrators, bystanders, and collabora- 
tors by examining individual acts which made genocide possible. It 
also places the student at the center of history by vicariously evoking 
the individual moral choices which must be made in all societies. 
Reflection on the categories and moral choices implicit in the poem's 
delineation helps students recognize their responsibilities as indi- 
viduals. 

There is one memoir that is so evocative for high school 
students that I choose it as a first reading for a Holocaust elective. I 
have had the strongest response from students to the memoir The 
Lost Childhood by Yehuda Nir. This work portrays a Jewish child's 
disintegrating life in occupied Poland; a child narrator's sensibility 
recounts escape and a hair-raising journey with his mother and 
sister. Nine-year-old Yehuda Nir's story begins in Lvov. After his 
father's arrest, Yehuda, along with his mother and his sister, must 
share their requisitioned apartment with a German SA officer. Even- 
tually herded into the ghetto in Lvov, they are able to avoid deporta- 
tion by escaping with forged papers. Disguising their identities, they 
flee to Warsaw and assume Gentile identities in a city where ano- 
nymity helps them elude detection. Yehuda escapes several danger- 
ously close calls only with sheer nerve and chameleon-like changes 
as his fellow Jews are being deported daily from Warsaw. He writes 
of dyeing his hair, concealing his circumcision, wearing a Hitler 
Youth uniform — all attempts to hide and survive in occupied Po- 
land. The German liquidation of Poland's Jewish population is well 
documented, and teachers can draw upon any number of historical 
resources to frame the literature. For example, Goring's order to 
Heydrich where he uses the term Final Solution for the first time is 
documented by historian, Yehuda Bauer in A History of the Holocaust. 

I hereby commission you to carry out all necessary preparations with 
regard to organizational, substantive, and financial viewpoints for a 
total solution of the Jewish question in the German sphere of influ- 
ence in Europe. ... I further commission you to submit to me 
promptly an overall plan showing the preliminary organizational, 
substantive, and financial measure for the execution of the intended 
final solution of the Jewish question. (201) 



229 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



Although this order was issued in July of 1941, it was not until six 
months later at the Wannsee Conference in Berlin, in January of 1942, 
when the method of annihilating Jews in Poland and Western Eu- 
rope was devised and organized. 

At his war crimes trial in Jerusalem, Adolph Eichmann com- 
mented on his task of carrying out the Final Solution: 

I did not take on the job as a senseless exercise. It gave me uncom- 
mon joy, I found it fascinating to have to deal with these matters . . . 
My job was to catch these enemies and transport them to their 
destination ... I lived in this stuff, otherwise I would have remained 
only an assistant, a cog, something soulless ... To be frank with you, 
had we killed all of them, the 10.3 million, I would be happy and say, 
Alright [sic], we managed to destroy an enemy. (207) 

Presenting excerpts from Bauer's text along with Yehuda Nir's 
memoir helps students appreciate the enormity of the demonic evil 
unleashed in the Holocaust and the harrowing dangers which 
Yehuda and his family faced in a daily struggle to stay alive in 
Poland. As one student wrote in a response journal, 

This work gave me a sense of the danger, the despair and hopeless- 
ness these people must have felt. To know you were a Jew and were 
unable to escape what was going to happen, and then to endure the 
anxiety of waiting for the expected worse to come under Nazi 
measures must have been horrible. 

When the class was asked to write a letter recounting their personal 
responses to the author, Yehuda Nir, one student wrote: 

Your memoir was one of the most moving books that I have ever 
read. The events of the Holocaust, while shocking, have always 
seemed like a distant part of history to me. Suddenly, reading your 
memoir, I saw the same events through the eyes of a real person — 
someone who it seemed that I could relate to. Somehow this made 
the Holocaust not only much more real, but much more scary. 

Students asked to communicate with an author of a survivor 
memoir will frequently be revelatory, writing feelings that normally 
would not surface in the classroom. One quiet young woman in class 
wrote, 

I dyed my hair to change my appearance for personal satisfaction, 
but you had to dye yours in order to survive. Kids today will pur- 
chase a fake ID in order to show that they are older for their own 
advancement and to be able to do things that they normally 
wouldn't be able to do, but you had to get a fake ID in order to save 
your life. 

Another young man with an indifferent attitude about meeting 
academic responsibilites was moved to write. 



O 

EKLC 



241 



[ 



] 



230 



Grace M. Caporino 



I truly admire you. You survived your experiences with some close 
calls and have also learned to deal with it. This is where you get my 
respect. How do you manage to keep a kind heart? Do you force a 
sense of humor? You're awesome! 

Young readers cannot help but feel the truth, the pain, and the sheer 
force of will to survive Holocaust treachery in Yehuda Nir's memoir. 
When asked to write their thoughts in a letter to the author, they are 
unrestrained in passionate praise of it: 

I have just finished reading your memoir. The Lost Childhood, and I 
don't know if this will mean much to you, but I know that I will 
never forget this book for as long as I live. The reason your book was 
so interesting was because you honestly put your feelings behind it 
. . . Your feelings toward your family, your feelings toward the 
Germans, your feelings about the Poles, and your feelings about 
women were told through the eyes of a teen, and being a teen, I 
could relate to your feelings. 

Adolescents recoil from all they deem to be insincere. In a world 
which asks them to surrender youthful conceits to life's harsher 
realities, they are hungry for stories that are honest and clear in 
delineating justice and injustice. They need resolve and examples of 
truth and courage to help them internalize moral standards. Satisfac- 
tion of these needs often occurs through reading Holocaust memoirs. 
One graduating senior told Nir, "While reading your book, I felt the 
will to survive that you and your family possessed. I praise you for 
such courage and for your will to prevail. I only hope I can be as 
strong in my life." 

Yehuda Nir is a practicing psychiatrist in Manhattan. He also 
teaches at Cornell University Medical College, but he makes time to 
travel around the country speaking to young people about his 
Holocaust experience. Letters addressed to him will receive a re- 
sponse if mailed to Yehuda Nir, M.D., 903 Park Avenue, New York, 
NY 10021. When addressing my students, he spared himself no 
emotion as his eyes glazed over in recounting his anguished years of 
hiding from Germans in occupied Poland. He is a compelling 
speaker to whom young people are drawn. After reading his mem- 
oir, my students were riveted to his presence because in him they see 
raw courage. They see the force of truth in an experience where good 
and evil were not in dispute. They hear a man who rose above a 
childhood that defies imagination, who now stands before them as a 
psychiatrist exhorting them to "make your lives count for some- 
thing." In their own world where the insecurities of a shifting moral 
ground can confuse young people. Dr. Nir's presence and writings 
offer them moral certainty and a role model for transcendence. "I am 
a messenger," he tells them. "A million and a half Jewish children 



ERIC 



242 



[ 



] 



231 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



were killed in the Holocaust, and I am here to bear witness to their 
story and mine." 

Beyond this, Yehuda Nir's memoir is representative of a genre 
which helps students develop a human perspective of a world where 
tyranny prevailed and democratic values and institutions were 
destroyed. By focusing on eyewitness accounts — both contempora- 
neous and post-Holocaust writings — students can examine the 
gradual expropriation experienced by Jews and the incremental 
steps that targeted them for persecution and genocide. Once seeds 
are planted, young people can draw lessons from this study which 
we hope will inoculate them against the poisons of prejudice and 
indifference. 

Studying the Holocaust is a study of choices: the deliberate 
choices of perpetrators, the choices shunned by bystanders, the 
choices embraced by collaborators, and the hollow choices of victims 
helpless against a fate meted out to them. Yet there is another group 
of individuals — all too few — who had the rare moral courage to 
make the choice to help. They are those described by Cynthia Ozick 
in the text Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the Holocaust by Gay 
Block and Malka Drucker. Honoring the singularity of their courage 
and the affirmation of the human spirit, Ozick finds rescuer behavior 
remarkable: 

This is the category of those astounding souls who refused to stand 
by as their neighbors were being hauled away to the killing sites. 
They were willing to see, to judge, to decide. Not only did they not 
avert their eyes — they set out to rescue. They are Catholic and 
Protestant. They are urban and rural; educated and uneducated; 
sophisticated and simple; they include nuns and Socialists. And 
whatever they did, they did at the risk of their lives, (xiv) 

Ozick's essay is the Prologue to a collection of photos of rescuers and 
short sketches describing the heroic acts by ordinary people whose 
distinguished behavior is a worthy model for all who study the 
Holocaust — indeed for all who care about civilization. The volume 
contains brief narratives of 105 rescuers from ten countries who tell 
stories of how they responded to brutal barbarism; in simple lan- 
guage these rescuers tell what motivated them to make these 
choices. Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the Holocaust is a book 
which should rightfully have a place in all school libraries. Its format 
of large photos of rescuers followed by brief essays categorized by 
countries is of high interest to young people. One of the better 
known rescuers featured in this collection is Irene Opdyke, a Polish 
Catholic. 

A popular speaker, Irene has told her story to many young 
audiences. She is also one of four subjects interviewed in the docu- 



ERjfc 



243 



232 



Grace M. Caporino 



mentary The Courage To Care, produced by Sister Carol Rittner, 
R.S.M., and Sondra Myers. Irene's courage has earned her a place of 
honor as one of the Righteous Among the Nations at Yad Vashem, 
Jerusalem's Holocaust Museum. Ignoring the risk of death for Poles 
who helped Jews, Irene saved eighteen Jews by hiding them in the 
house where she worked as a maid. Her job for a German major in a 
house requisitioned by Germans in Poland required duties attendant 
to running the household. One day, while discharging her duties she 
had an experience which would serve as an epiphany: 

One day I was running an errand and I found myself in the ghetto. 
There were all kinds of people, pregnant women, children screaming 
"Mama, Mama!" Then I saw a woman with an infant in her arms. 
With one movement of his hand, the SS man pulled the baby away 
and threw it to the ground. I could not understand. But later on I 
realized that God gave us free will to be good or bad. So I asked God 
for forgiveness and said if the opportunity arrived I would help 
these people. (192) 

She then narrates her reaction when a Jewish couple she is hiding tell 
her they are going to give up their expected baby, as the noise of the 
crying would endanger everyone. Pleading, she asks, "Ida, please, 
wait, don't do anything. We'll see — you'll be free" (195). She saves 
her charges even though she is caught by the Nazi major in the act of 
saving them. Eventually, the couple have the baby as the Russians 
liberate Poland. Irene says, "That was my payment for whatever hell 
I went through — seeing that little boy. His name was Roman Heller" 
(195). 

I have given students a writing assignment to do after we read 
and discuss Irene's narrative. I ask them to vary the perspective of 
Irene's story. By taking on a different narrative voice, that of the little 
boy born in hiding, I ask them to write of the rescue from his point of 
view. Writing in the first person narrative, they are asked to imagine 
the account of Irene's rescue from Roman Heller's point of view. I 
ask them to base their account on what the adult, who was a hidden 
child, has learned of his rescue from his parents and from others 
hidden by Irene. This imagined point of view asks students to enter 
the persona of the child who was saved. This technique allows 
students to ponder the consciousness of both the parents and the 
child who owe their existence to Irene's courage. In challenging 
students to generate this narrative, the project enjoins both their 
creative and altruistic impulses to retell Irene's story from another 
point of view. Students so challenged have commented, "It was 
possible to make choices during the Holocaust. More lives could 
have been saved. Irene did it even as she worked for a German 
major." It is from these stories of rescuers that students, having 
witnessed the very worst of human depravity in Holocaust readings. 



] 



233 



Teaching the Holocaust in the English Classroom 



can draw inspiration to aspire to higher and more noble instincts. 
They see that the paths to genocide were not unavoidable, because 
rescuers, though rare, refused to remain indifferent. 

Much attention has been given lately to this category of indi- 
viduals in the Holocaust, and in commenting on her research on 
Holocaust rescuers, Eva Fogelman in Conscience & Courage , has 
written 

Beyond a personal mission to record individual instances of moral 
courage during an immoral time, my book has a broader goal. I want 
to give altruism back its good name. It is not a concept with which 
people are very comfortable or about which they know very much. 
Altruistically inclined people are seen as weaklings, as "do-gooders." 
Psychoanalysts dismiss the act of rescue as narcissism overlaid with 
rescue fantasies, or they assign it unconscious defenses such as the 
need for power or the need to be loved, (xix) 

Fogelman's research reminds us of why we want our students to 
read accounts of Holocaust rescuers. Having immersed students in 
the hell of the Holocaust universe, I hope that they will see reflec- 
tions in themselves of the ordinary people who rescued Jews during 
the Holocaust. Many students comment on how the refusal of rescu- 
ers to remain indifferent changed the history for the fortunate few. 

By providing these role models, we are also taking the stand that this 
history was not inevitable and it is from rescue narratives that 
students will see this for themselves. We also hope they will develop 
a heartfelt respect for small acts of goodness that are, after all, one 
end of a continuum — the end of which must surely be the supreme 
acts of courage which rescuers demonstrated in the Holocaust. In 
reading about the brave acts of goodness of the righteous rescuers, 
though they pale against the crushing evil of the Holocaust, teachers 
offer students models to counter the prevailing glib attitudes toward 
being our "brother's keepers." 



Conclusion There exists a wealth of writing on the Holocaust, but the singularity 
of its literary response is that this genre touches students on emo- 
tional, spiritual, and intellectual levels, and these insights broaden 
their historical perspectives. It is for teachers to decide what they can 
best teach — given their grade level, time constraints, and budgetary 
considerations, but one certainty emerges: Inundating students with 
facts, dates, names, locations, or a barrage of horrific images causes 
shutdown, or worse, oversimplification which belies the complexity 
of the Holocaust. The evocative voices in age-appropriate literary 
responses to the Holocaust, contextualized with a chronology of the 
history, help students comprehend the human experiences in this 
complex history. And in a particular fashion, the literature of survi- 



O 

ERIC 



245 



[ 



234 



~i 

Grace M. Caporino 



vor voices gives students a unique window through which to view 
the experiences of those who lived this history. Literary responses 
can provoke students to ponder some profound truths about human 
nature and their responsibilities as citizens in a democracy Implicit 
in the literary response is the conception that art touches the soul in 
ways that data and sheer horror do not. The journey students and 
teachers embark upon in Holocaust study can create a shift in the 
moral compass and expand the moral landscape. Because the topic 
engages young people who are so sensitive to injustice, the issues 
arising from Holocaust study will evoke critical thinking about 
hatred, about indifference, and about the paths to genocide — ulti- 
mately challenging young people to claim a more just world in the 
twenty-first century 



References Arad, Yitzhak, Israel Gutman, and Abraham Margaliot, eds. Documents on 

the Holocaust, ferusalem: Yad Vashem, 1981. 

Artifact Poster Set Teacher Guide. Washington, DC: United States Holocaust 
Memorial Museum, 1993. 

Bauer, Yehuda. A History of the Holocaust. New York: Franklin Watts, 1982. 

Block, Gay, and Malka Drucker. Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the 
Holocaust. New York: Holmes & Meier, 1992. 

The Courage to Care. Exec. Prod. Sister Carol Rittner, R.S.M. and Sondra 
Meyers. United Way, 1986. 

Feinberg, Stephen. "Holocaust Chronology." Social Education 59.6 (October 
1995): C7, C8. 

Fogelman, Eva. Conscience and Courage: Rescuers of Jews During the Holocaust. 
New York: Anchor Books, 1994. 

Grossman, Mendel. With a Camera in the Ghetto. Lohame HaGeta'ot, Israel: 
Ghetto Fighters' House and Hakibbutz Hameuchad Publishing 
House, 1970. 

Heyen, William. "Riddle." Holocaust Poetry. Ed. Hilda Schiff . New York: St. 
Martin's Press, 1995. 

Levi, Primo. The Drowned and the Saved. New York: Vintage Books, 1989. 

Nir, Yehuda. The Lost Childhood: A Memoir. San Diego: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1989. 

Rosenfeld, Alvin H. A Double Dying: Reflections On Holocaust Literature. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1980. 

Sender, Ruth Minsky. The Cage. New York: Macmillan, 1986. 

Spiegelman, Art. Maus I. New York: Pantheon, 1991. 

Teaching About the Holocaust: A Resource Book for Educators. Washington, DC: 
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, 1995. 



ERiC 



246 



Incorporating Poetry 
into a Study of the 
Holocaust 



Samuel Totten 

University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 



he most finely wrought poetry has the power to penetrate as 



deeply into the mysteries of being and the multifaceted aspects 



of life as anything language has to offer. Likewise, the finest 
poems on the Holocaust have the power to begin to penetrate the 
horror and the "unbelievable" nature of the event for those of us 
who are so far removed from the reality of it. 

While the historical trends that contributed to the Holocaust 
are well-known, and while we readily recognize that it was men who 
were not insane but rather committed to a perverted ideology caught 
up in a maelstrom of hate, prejudice, virulent anti-Semitism and 
racism, and the herd mentality who carried it out, it is still excruciat- 
ingly difficult to truly understand how one group of people could so 
brutalize another. Just as the brutality of the genocide of the Jews, 
the Gypsies, and others makes one ponder long and hard the "face" 
of humanity, the most powerful Holocaust poetry prods one to 
ponder long and hard the ugly face of genocide, including the 
human and inhuman proportions of it. For many, poetry about the 
Holocaust will cause them to feel as if their "whole body [is] so cold 
no fire can ever warm [them]," and/ or "as if the top of their head 
were taken off" (Emily Dickinson quoted in Thrall, Hibbard, and 
Holman 366). 

As with any resource and/or pedagogical approach, incorpo- 
rating poetry into a study of the Holocaust must be done with ample 
care and thought, especially if the result is to be revelatory rather 
than forgettable or meaningless. With an eye toward accomplishing 
the former, this essay will (1) highlight rationale issues as they relate 
to the inclusion of poetry in a study of the Holocaust, (2) offer sug- 




Copyright 1998 by Samuel Totten. For permission to use the work in any form, 
please contact Dr. Samuel Totten. 



[ 



] 



236 



Samuel Totten 



gestions vis-a-vis the selection of poetry, and (3) delineate teaching 
and learning activities effective in engaging students' minds and hearts. 



Rationales Prior to incorporating poetry into a study of the Holocaust, one must 
initially ask, "Why even include poetry in a study of the Holocaust?" 
Not to posit such a question runs the risk of incorporating the poetry 
into the study in a perfunctory manner and/ or in a way that is bereft 
of any real power or meaning. 

Before examining some major rationales for including poetry 
in a study of the Holocaust, it is worth examining some of the con- 
cerns that have been raised in regard to poetry about the Holocaust. 

In his book of essays Art from the Ashes: An Anthology of Holo- 
caust Literature (1995), Lawrence Langer has noted that "Not entirely 
unjustly have some commentators feared that the aesthetic styliza- 
tion of the Holocaust experience, especially condensed expression of 
verse, might violate the inner (and outer) incoherence of the event, 
casting it into a mold too pleasing or too formal" (555). One of the 
first individuals to voice such a concern was Theodor Adorno, who 
asserted, in response to the poetry of Paul Celan, that "After 
Auschwitz, to write a poem is barbaric" (quoted in Felstiner 1986, 
255). What Adorno really meant by this oft-repeated and oft-misin- 
terpreted statement is clearly spelled out by John Felstiner: "Adorno's 
stricture ha[d] to do with the pleasures of representation, question- 
ing whether and how to represent aesthetically the Nazi genocide, 
how to make present again the human experience of it" (1992, 242). 
Corroborating that point, Sidra DeKoven Ezrahi asserts that 

Rarely . . . does one find any acknowledgment of the complexity of 
Adorno's position within the context of his philosophy of aesthetics 
or the dynamics of his own re-readings of Celan. Rarely is it ac- 
knowledged that Adorno returned to "Auschwitz" again and again, 
refining and restating and qualifying his original statement in subse- 
quent essays, probing but never quite resolving the contradictions 
that most of his readers tend to ignore altogether, that "the abun- 
dance of real suffering tolerates no forgetting . . . [that] this suffering 
. . . demands the continued existence of art [even as] . . . it prohibits 
it. It is now virtually in art alone that suffering can still find its own 
voice, consolation, without immediately being betrayed by it. ( 260 ) 

The most serious poets who have written poetry on the Holo- 
caust seem to have wrestled — either consciously or unconsciously — 
with sentiments similar to Adorno's, for they have attempted to use 
language in new and unique ways for the express purpose of forging 
something out of the catastrophe of the Holocaust that would force 
those who read it to, at a minimum, not forget what happened. 
Conversely, those individuals who have treated the Holocaust as 
simply another event in history (e.g., not acknowledging its unique- 



O 

ERIC 



248 



237 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



ness or how it constitutes a caesura in the history of humanity) and/ 
or use it as a metaphor for their own or society's ills have committed 
the transgression to which Adorno alludes. Theirs is a poetry that 
often trivializes the Holocaust or attempts to create something of 
"beauty" out of an event that is horrific and almost ineffable. 

Some have commented on the problem of translating a poem 
from one language to another or "from one language family to 
another, as from Hungarian (Finno-Ugrian) to English (Indo-Euro- 
pean)" (Young 549). While there are many difficulties in translating 
poetry due to "the subtlety of poetic rhythms, rhyme, connotations, 
allusions, and idiom" and that "[a] gap always remains, an incom- 
plete closure between the original poem and the translation" (Young 
549), it is also true that there are enough poems available for use 
with middle level, junior high, and high school students that have 
retained a certain power and eloquence despite their translation. 

And while something important may have been lost in translation, 
the essence of the poems is still strong enough to evoke in students a 
"deep" understanding of various facets of the Holocaust: the injus- 
tice, the brutality, the horror, the abject sense of loss experienced by 
the victims, and much more. As a translator of Abba Kovner's poems 
noted, "If we do not know the Bible, and the words cannot resound 
for us in the original context, if we do not know all the details of 
Kovner's own life, so that we cannot use these private experiences to 
enlarge our understanding of his historical and personal poems, the 
poetry stills speaks to us. For Kovner's language and symbolism are 
not exclusively private. Ashes, walls, hopeless wars . . . belong to a 
world we recognize" (Kaufman 22). The same is true of many other 
poets and poems vis-a-vis the Holocaust. 

The main focus concerning the incorporation of poetry into a 
study of the Holocaust should be on learning as much as possible 
about the Holocaust through such poetry; and in doing so, coming to 
a greater appreciation and understanding as to what that event 
meant to the people suffering through it as well as the myriad 
ramifications that it has for those of us living today and in the future. 

As for the rationale for incorporating poetry into a study of the 
Holocaust, some of the many arguments that the author and others 
have developed are as follows: 

"Poetry encourages us to view the human and natural scene with a 
fresh eye, uncontaminated by the cliches of customary speech" 
(Langer 558). 

Poetry can provide a means of entry into the study of historical 
periods and events — not to replace the study of the history but to 
engage the students' interest and to pique their curiosity. Concomi- 



O 

ERLC 



249 



[ 



238 



~i 

Samuel Totten 



tantly, much of the poetry on the Holocaust alludes to key aspects 
(incidents, events, personages) of the Holocaust. 

"Literature [in this case poetry] can serve as a springboard for 
analysis" of the whys, hows, whens, and whats of the Holocaust 
(Henry Friedlander 541). 

Poetry is an extremely powerful vehicle with which to engage 
students in thought-provoking exercises that can, with careful 
analysis and assistance from the teacher, elucidate various aspects of 
the Holocaust. 

Poetry combines the unique aspects of the cognitive and the affective 
domains. The combination of the two, if taught in a powerful man- 
ner, have a tendency to burrow into one's mind and heart. 

The brevity of many pieces of Holocaust poetry is ideal for teachers 
faced with a packed curriculum and/or serious time constraints. 

Poetry provides a means to move beyond abstractions. More specifi- 
cally, the "Holocaust cannot remain an abstraction to those who read 
the literature. It becomes infinitely more than historical facts, theo- 
ries, speculations. It becomes the experience of individuals — of 
victims, perpetrators, bystanders. It becomes a crushing personal 
event in individual lives. One feels the tragedy; one is moved to 
anger, indignation, compassion" (Teichman 615). 

There are, of course, many other fine rationales for incorporating 
poetry into a study of the Holocaust. Working in conjunction with 
colleagues and/or their students, teachers can generate other key 
reasons for including Holocaust poetry into their school programs. 



Selecting 
and Using 
Holocaust- 
related Poetry 



As previously mentioned, teachers and students need to carefully 
select the Holocaust poetry that they are going to use in the class- 
room. For example, if a piece is either too difficult, simplistic, boring, 
or unrelated to the themes of the history that the students are study- 
ing, then the study of the poem may result in naught. Ultimately, it is 
the teacher's responsibility to use resources and learning activities 
that are appropriate, challenging, and thought-provoking. High- 
lighted in this section are key ideas, caveats, and concerns that 
teachers should consider when selecting Holocaust poetry for use in 
the classroom. 



Students need to be prepared to read the poetry. At a minimum, they 
need to have a general understanding of what the Holocaust was 
(the whys, whats, wheres, whens, and hows). They also need to be 



[ 



] 



239 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



cognizant of the significance of key allusions (e.g., Kristallnacht, the 
purpose of the yellow stars, the facts behind trains /railroad cars) 
that appear in the poems they are to read. Likewise, the poem may 
need to be contexutalized for them, particularly if the author is 
relating a personal experience and/or if the piece is related to a 
particular theme or event (the latter concern, of course, could also 
constitute part of the analysis that the students are expected to 
conduct). Without a historical context, a study is bereft of purpose. 
Put another way, if students are to even begin to understand the 
poetry's relationship to the history, then this contextualization is 
absolutely essential. 

Poems need to be appropriate to the developmental level (e.g., 
cognitive, reading ability, maturity) of one's students. In this regard 
the poetry selected should not be overly simplistic or overly ab- 
struse; contain language that is inappropriate (e.g., packed with too 
many unfamiliar or arcane words and terminology to the point 
where students will be overwhelmed; or, depending on the setting in 
which one teaches, not include any profanity or at the very least, any 
gratuitous profanity); and should not "assault [the students] with 
images of horror for which they are unprepared " (italics added) (U.S. 
Holocaust Memorial Museum 6). 

Poetry about the Holocaust is an ideal way to highlight a particular 
topic (e.g., resistance), issue (e.g., emigration of fleeing refugees), 
theme (e.g., loss), or an event (e.g., Kristallnacht). When selecting 
such poetry it is imperative that a teacher select that poetry which 
addresses such concerns in the most powerful and thought-provok- 
ing way. 

Teachers should avoid turning the study of the poetry into a typical 
exercise of exegesis for the purpose of teaching students to detect 
literary conventions and/or master methods of literary analysis. To 
exclusively carry out such a study is to diminish the significance of 
the piece with respect to its relation to the Holocaust. It also may 
turn the study into a sterile academic exercise bereft of real meaning 
for the students. (See the next bulleted item for a discussion of when 
and how the study of literary conventions might be used to 
strengthen the study of the Holocaust.) 

In order to teach students how and why poets use literary conven- 
tions for the purpose of conveying the uniqueness of the Holocaust, 
a study of irony, understatement, inverted symbolism, shocking 
juxtapositions, and surrealistic, incongruous, or fantastic images can 
be enlightening. Again, though, the key, is to continue to focus on the 
people, historical incidents, and events of the Holocaust as opposed 



[ 



] 



240 



Samuel Totten 



to turning it into a literary study for the sheer purpose of teaching 
literary conventions. 

Students should not be overwhelmed with a large number of pieces 
of poetry; rather they should focus on a limited number of pieces 
that will stick with them. Here the adage "less is more" is a sound 
rule to follow. 

A wealth of outstanding poems exist that address a wide array 
of Holocaust themes and topics. Many are ideal for use in the class- 
room. There are poems by those who wrote poetry during the Holo- 
caust years (in the forests, ghettos, concentration camps, and even 
the death camps), by survivors of the Holocaust who wrote in the 
aftermath of that tragedy, and by Jews and non-Jews who either did 
not live in Europe during that period and/ or were not even alive. In 
regard to the first group, Nobel laureate and Holocaust survivor Elie 
Wiesel (1970) has written 

Poems, litanies, plays: to write them Jews went without sleep, 
bartered their food for pencils and papers. They gambled with their 
fate. They risked their lives. No matter. They went on fitting together 
words and symbols. An instant before perishing in Auschwitz, 
Bialistok, in Buna, dying men described their agony . . . There was 
then a veritable passion to testify for the future, against death and 
oblivion, a passion conveyed by every possible means of expression. 
(39) 

In the same vein, Frieda Aaron notes that 

Astonishing as it may be, literary activity was vital and widespread 
in the ghettos, in hiding, among the partisans, on the "Aryan" side, 
and even in some of the concentration camps. Indeed, after waves of 
mass deportations to death centers, those who temporarily hugged 
life in the various places feverishly turned to writing. Spontaneous 
literary activity not only continued but actually increased when one 
would expect language to evaporate, to turn to ashes in the confla- 
gration of gas chambers and crematoria. 

. . . Although the writers availed themselves of the entire spec- 
trum of literary genres, the most popular one was poetry. That this 
poetry is probably the richest of the Holocaust literature should not 
be surprising. For poetry — perhaps because it provides, more often 
than any other literary genre, the most precise correlatives for states 
of consciousness — was the first vehicle of reaction against Nazi 
barbarism. Moreover, the poets, writing from "the heart of dark- 
ness," reflect an immediacy of experience that is untainted by the 
remembering process of memory. Nothing but total recall could 
unveil the truth articulated in this body of literature. ("Poetry in the 
Holocaust Dominion" 120, 121) 



O 

ERIC 



252 



241 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



Some poems are easy to understand, but many poems are 
difficult to understand because they are packed with allusions and 
symbols. The latter need not be avoided, but prior to introducing 
them into the classroom, teachers need to make sure that their 
students have the cognitive abilities, reading skills, and knowledge 
bases to analyze and ultimately understand such poetry 

With so much poetry available, only those pieces that this 
author has found particularly useful for classrooms at the secondary 
level will be highlighted. Each poem selected has been chosen for 
one or more of the following reasons: it is extremely thought-provok- 
ing, it highlights a theme that teachers are likely to explore with their 
students, its focus is such that it is capable of "capturing" both a 
student's mind and heart, and it is, for one or more reasons (e.g., its 
language, images, theme), likely to stay with one long after one has 
read it. Many of the poems contain fairly simple language, allusions 
that are not arcane, and readily accessible ideas and points. They 
also contain imagery, for the most part, that is bereft of horrific 
images and scenes. What follows, of course, is a mere sampling of 
what is available. There are sure to be dozens, if not scores, of other 
poems that teachers would find interesting and worthwhile to 
include in their lesson/ units on the Holocaust. 

The poems that the author has found to be readily accessible 
and of greatest interest to most students in grades 9 through 12 are 
"Riddle" by William Heyen, "The Little Boy with His Hands Up" by 
Yala Korwin, "There Were Those" by Susan Dambroff, "Written in 
Pencil in the Sealed Railway Car" by Dan Pagis, and some of the 
many poems included in ... I Never Saw Another Butterfly: Children's 
Drawings and Poems from Terezin Concentration Camp, 1942-1944 
edited by Hana Volavkova. Particularly powerful among the latter 
poems are "Terezin" by Mif, "The Butterfly," "Fear," "Untitled," 

"The Garden," and "Homesick." (See Appendix A for a list of poems 
that are ideal for use with more advanced students, and Appendix B 
for a list of poems that are suggested for use with advanced place- 
ment students.) 

Prior to reading and studying the Terezin poems, students 
need to study the facts of life and death in Terezin. Then and only 
then can they begin to fully appreciate the sense of anxiety, longing, 
want, sadness, hope against hope, loss, and unintended irony that 
come through so clearly in these poems. They need to know, for 
example, that 

[w]hile at the camp [the children] were forced to work from eighty to 
one hundred hours per week, with those over fourteen years of age 
working the same hours and type of work as the adults. From 
Terezin they were shipped further east to the death camps, usually 



] 



242 



Samuel Totten 



Auschwitz. Of the fifteen thousand children under the age of fifteen 

who were sent to the camp, only one hundred survived. (Young 553) 

Without such knowledge, many of the poems may sound like they 
are about poverty-stricken areas found in many cities (e.g.. New 
York, Detroit, Los Angeles, Lahore, Delhi, Bangkok, Mexico City) 
throughout the world. 

A particularly popular poem with educators who teach the 
Holocaust is Maurice Ogden's "The Hangman." While not about the 
Holocaust per se, it is an interesting resource for examining certain 
issues (e.g., bystanders, choices people make and don't make, indi- 
vidual responsibility, social responsibility) that get to the heart of 
many concerns vis-a-vis the Holocaust. 

In concluding this section, a caveat needs to be made in regard 
to those pieces of poetry or songs that use the Holocaust as a meta- 
phor for one's personal ills, are in poor taste, draw false analogies 
between the Holocaust and certain other injustices, and/or simply 
constitute kitsch: Such pieces (e.g., Sylvia Plath's "Lady Lazarus" 
and "Daddy," "Aaron Kurtz's "Behold the Sea," the Boomtown Rats' 
"I Never Loved Eva Braun," and Lenny Bruce's "My Name is Adolf 
Eichmann," all of which have found their way into certain Holocaust 
curricula) do little to nothing to further a student's understanding of 
the Holocaust. Indeed, most of them are more likely to provide 
students with a skewed view of the Holocaust or pass the Holocaust 
off as simply another "ailment" among many found in society. Over 
and above that, their wording (e.g., "cute" rhymes, mocking voices, 
and flippant tone) may seduce students into thinking that the Holo- 
caust was no more serious than those issues their favorite musicians 
and bands sing about in their songs today. A simple rule of thumb is 
to avoid them; and instead, use those poems that are truly thought- 
provoking, well-wrought and, most important, specifically deal with 
significant aspects of the Holocaust. 



Teaching and 
Learning 
Activities 



Prior to selecting the poetry and teaching/ learning activities, teach- 
ers need to decide what their objective is for the Holocaust study: Is 
the goal to provide an overview of the Holocaust period (1933- 
1945)? Is it to provide an examination as to how prejudice, racism, 
virulent anti-Semitism, and discrimination can lead to genocide? Or, 
is the goal to focus on a single but major aspect of the Holocaust 
(e.g., the role of bystanders)? If teachers are going to successfully 
incorporate poems into a study for the purpose of elucidating vari- 
ous aspects of the Holocaust, then it is absolutely imperative that 
they establish clear goals and objectives, and then select appropriate 
poetic resources. 



erJc 



254 



243 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



Some of the more powerful teaching and learning activities 
that the author has used, observed, and/ or read about are high- 
lighted below. These are a mere fraction of the activities that others 
have designed or that can be designed. Teachers can modify these 
activities in various ways to make them more useful and engaging 
for their own students. 1 

1. Reader-Response Theory. One of the most effective and thought- 
provoking ways to engage students in a study of literature is 
through the use of "reader-response theory." This is a process that, 
unlike many traditional methods of literary study, honors the stu- 
dents' backgrounds, diverse experiences, and unique insights and 
perspectives. As Louise Rosenblatt, a pioneer in the field of reader- 
response theory, has noted, the reader should not be perceived as a 
"blank tape registering a ready-made message. He[should be] 
actively involved in building up a poem for himself out of his re- 
sponses to the text" (quoted in Sheridan 804). Reader-response 
theory, then, is in counterpoint to those who perceive literary works 
as having a single, "correct" meaning, and/ or that only certain 
"authorities" (e.g., scholars and literary critics) have the tools to 
ascertain the "true" meaning of a work. 

Further explaining reader-response theory, O'Neill has written 

that 



Basically, reader response theory differs most radically from previ- 
ous theories about teaching literature in the degree of emphasis 
placed on the reader's response to an interpretation of the text ... In 
reader response theory, the text's meaning is considered to reside in 
the 'transaction' between the reader and the text, not from the text 
alone. 

... In practice, reader response theory considers very carefully 
how students respond intellectually and emotionally to the text . . . 
By validating students' responses, teachers can spark a lively discus- 
sion from which a careful literary analysis will flow. 

. . . Rather than beginning with a discussion of symbolism or 
metaphor, for example, teachers should allow an exploration of these 
aspects to develop from students' own observations about the work. 

. . . the emphasis on getting students to respond to the literature 
doesn't mean that any response is as good as another. Students are 
continuously urged to return to the text to find validation for their 
views. (7, 8) 

The key is to provide the students with an opportunity to 
begin to examine literature from their own unique perspective, 
without imposing either the teacher's or a critic's interpretation on 
them. (For a thorough and enlightening discussion of reader-re- 
sponse theory methodology, see Alan C. Purves, Theresa Rogers, and 




2o5 



2 44 



[ 



Samuel Totten 



Anna O. Soter's How Porcupines Make Love III: Readers, Texts, Cultures 
in the Response-Based Literature Classroom. White Plains, NY: 

Longman. For a discussion of an actual activity that uses reader- 
response theory to assist students in the examination of a poem on 
the Holocaust, see Samuel Totten's (1997) "Incorporating Poetry into 
a Study of the Holocaust via Reader-Response Theory.") 

2. Reflective Journals. Students can keep reflective journals through- 
out the study of the Holocaust as a means to examine and ponder 
the significance of their new knowledge. For example, students 
could be asked to reflect on the meaning that a poem has for them, 
note and comment on any new knowledge and/or insights about the 
Holocaust they have gleaned from the poetry, posit questions they 
have about a poem (e.g., an allusion, foreign word, a phrase, a line), 
discuss what they liked or disliked about the poem and why, note 
whether it is a poem they will be likely to remember or not and why, 
or record a line or image that particularly stood out for them and 
explain why. The teacher might also use comments by critics to raise 
issues for the students to address in their journals — e.g., the poet's 
use of inverted symbolism or allusions or irony or parody, or the 
poet's background and how the poem alludes to and/or elucidates 
that — or the teacher could quote a critic in regard to the meaning of a 
poem. There are unlimited ways to use such a journal. The only 
limitation is a teacher's and his or her students' imagination. 

Journals can also serve as a means of two-way communication 
for the teacher and student. While reading a student's journal, the 
teacher could posit questions for the student to address in the next 
set of entries. Likewise, the students could raise questions /issues 
they want the teacher to address. 

It is imperative that clear and well-structured guidelines be 
provided to the students (e.g., how they should go about writing a 
reflective journal, the need for depth over coverage, the need to 
avoid simply reiterating what one has read versus that of comment- 
ing on one's new insights/perspectives). If the latter is not done, 
then more often than not the journals will become perfunctory 
exercises of little to no value to the student, and a drain on the 
teacher who has to read them. 

3. Establishing a Historical Context. In order to provide a historical 
context for the poetry that is to be read, analyzed, and discussed, 
teachers at all levels and in all disciplines could have their students 
read key articles /essays on key topics, subjects, and issues. In addi- 
tion to selecting pieces from major historians (e.g., Yehuda Bauer, 
Christopher Browning, Lucy Dawidowicz, Martin Gilbert, Raul 
Hilberg, Sybil Milton), they could select articles from books espe- 
cially written for use with students, e.g., David Altschuler's Hitler's 




2 56 



] 



245 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



War Against the Jews — The Holocaust: A Young Reader’s Version of the 
War Against the Jews, 1933-1945 by Lucy S. Dawidowicz, Seymour 
Rossel's The Holocaust: The World and the Jews, 1933-1945, and Bea 
Stad tier's The Holocaust: A History of Courage and Resistance. 

Thus, for example, a teacher whose students read poems in . . . 
I Never Saw Another Butterfly: Children's Drawings and Poems from 
Terezin Concentration Camp, 1942-1944 could have the class first read, 
study, and discuss the chapter entitled "A 'Model' Concentration 
Camp: Theresienstadt" in Bea Stadtler's (1994) The Holocaust: A 
History of Courage and Resistance. 

Unless teachers use a poem as an anticipatory set or for some 
other sound pedagogical reason, they should have their students 
first read and discuss the history and then bring in the poetry. In this 
way the students will acquire a historical context for the poetry and 
be much more likely to appreciate and understand the poetry's 
themes, allusions, use of irony and parody, etc. 

4. Personal Responses to Lines in a Poem with a Follow-Up Dis- 
cussion. A useful and easy method to begin a discussion of a poem is 
to have the students do the following: 

1. Read the poem, write down the line(s) that they find most power- 
ful, and succinctly provide an explanation as to why they found 
the line(s) so powerful; 

2. Re-read the poem and write down the line(s) that they either don't 
understand or find a bit confusing; 

3. Re-read the poem and, in one to three sentences, write down 
either what they most like or dislike about the poem, what they 
perceive the poem is about and/or the meaning the poem has for 
them. 

From there, a teacher can open up a general and introductory exami- 
nation of the poem. It should go without saying that to repeatedly use 
such a method is both boring for students and pedagogically un- 
sound. 

5. Using Individual Poems as an Introduction to a Lesson. Indi- 
vidual poems can be used as an introduction or anticipatory set to a 
lesson on a particular topic (e.g., life in the ghettos, deportations, 
mass murder), theme (e.g., "bystanding," loss, remembrance) or a 
unit of study. For example, when focusing on the issue of remem- 
brance and/or the ramifications that the Holocaust has for those 
living today, a teacher might introduce Yuri Shul's "The Permanent 
Delegate." Or, if a teacher wishes to focus on the issue of culpability 
or denial, he or she might introduce William Heyen's "Riddle." On 
the other hand, if a teacher wishes to drive home the point that 



ERIC 



257 



[ 



] 



246 



Samuel Totten 



individuals were behind the statistics (e.g., the six million who 
perished), he or she may wish to design a learning activity around 
Herman Taube's "A Single Hair." A discussion of a poem can raise a 
host of issues that the students can pursue and revisit during their 
study of the actual history of the Holocaust period. 

6. Grouping Poems around a Particular Topic or Theme. In light of 
the wealth of poetry available on so many different aspects of the 
Holocaust, a teacher could select groups of poems that address and 
illuminate certain topics or themes (e.g., ostracism; the ever-increas- 
ing discrimination faced by the Jews from 1933 onward; life and 
death in the ghettos, forests, and concentration camps; the bystander 
syndrome; hope against hope; the "choiceless choices," or those 
situations where there is no real choice because either ends in trag- 
edy; resistance; loss; mourning; the aftermath of the Holocaust) to 
complement the historical study. In this way, the literature can serve 
as entry points into an examination and discussion of key ideas as 
well as a "springboard for analysis" (Friedlander 541). Ideally, the 
poems and their themes could be interwoven throughout the study 
in order to assist the students in being more reflective about what 
they are reading, discussing, and studying. 

7. Focusing on the Fate of Children via Poetry Written by Children 
during the Holocaust. During a study of the Holocaust that draws 
particular attention to the fate of child victims (i.e., over a million 
and a half children perished at the hands of the Nazis), the students 
could study poems that children wrote while incarcerated in 
Theresienstadt. (See Hana Volavkova's [1993] ... I Never Saw Another 
Butterfly: Children's Drawings and Poems from Terezin Concentration 
Camp, 1942-1944.) The poems could be used in conjunction with 
diary excerpts written by children during the period and/or other 
types of first-person accounts in which individuals relate what they 
experienced as children during the Holocaust period. 

8. Studying Poems by Victims and/or Survivors. A special study 
could be conducted of the poetry that was written about various 
facets of the Holocaust by those who actually experienced the 
events. More specifically, the students could be introduced to poetry 
that was actually written during the Holocaust years as well as that 
which was written in the aftermath of the Holocaust by survivors. 

As Henryk Grynberg has written, "the quickest reaction" to the 
genocide "came in poetry; first of all from the Polish-Jewish poets 
who wrote while locked in the ghettos and isolated in their hideouts 
before the annihilation of the ghettos and the so-called final solu- 
tion" (quoted in Aaron, Bearing the Unbearable 1). Information about 
the poets' lives could be introduced by the teacher or researched by 



[ 



] 



247 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



the students in order to gain a greater understanding of the poets 
and their poetry. (Note: An excellent place to begin a search for 
biographical information on various poets' lives is Langer's Art from 
the Ashes: A Holocaust Anthology. Other useful sources are introduc- 
tions to a poet's collected works and critical essays on a poet's 
poetry.) Among the poets that might be considered for such a study 
are Jozef Bau, Paul Celan, Yitzhak Katzenelson, Abba Kovner, Nelly 
Sachs, Hanna Senesh, Abraham Sutzkever, Wladyslaw Szlengel. 

9. Exploring and Reacting to Gripping Images and Phrases. An 

engaging way to assist students to begin to understand how differ- 
ent poets have attempted to illustrate and convey the "reality" of the 
Holocaust as well as how they, paradoxically, have attempted to 
address its ineffability is to have students focus on the gripping 
images and extraordinary phrases that poets have used — many of 
which are likely to "stick in the mind" long after the study is over. 

A thought-provoking activity along this line is to have the 
students, individually or as a class, keep a running chart (preferably 
on large sheets of butcher paper which can be taped to a wall in the 
classroom) of the various lines, phrases, and images that they come 
across that stand out for them and/ or make them see the Holocaust 
with "different eyes." Across from the listing, they can briefly com- 
ment on their perception of the image or phrase and how it has 
assisted them to begin to see the Holocaust in a new and unique 
way. Class discussion could revolve around the delineation of such 
information. 

10. Ascertaining Why People Wrote Poetry during the Holocaust. 

People wrote poetry for different reasons during the Holocaust 
period — to produce art as a form of resistance, to break out of their 
forced isolation and to assert their humanity, to commemorate the 
victims, to serve as a form of remembrance, to document what was 
taking place, to constitute a unique form of testimony, etc. As Holo- 
caust survivor and noted author Elie Wiesel has asserted, "If the 
Greeks invented tragedy, the Romans the epistle, and the Renais- 
sance the sonnet, our generation invented a new literature, that of 
testimony. We have all been witnesses and we all feel we have to 
bear testimony for the future. And that became an obsession, the 
single most powerful obsession that permeated all the lies, all the 
dreams, all the work of those people. One minute before they died 
they thought that was what they had to do" (39). 

Students could read biographical and critical essays about 
poets who have written poetry about the Holocaust and select 
quotes by them (the poets) in regard to their reasons for doing so. 
Students could then design posters to post around the room that 
include the quotes and their source. These quotes could be used 



O 

ERIC 



& D d 



] 



248 



Samuel Totten 



during the study of the Holocaust to revisit such issues as resistance, 
remembrance, lamentation, and other poetic purposes (e.g., an 
affirmation of life, a cry for help, testimony, "moral and cultural 
sustenance" (Aaron, "Poetry in the Holocaust Dominion" 129) as 
well as to delve into why and how people attempted to respond to 
such an overwhelming catastrophe such as the Holocaust. 

Alternatively, students could convey their findings in any 
other format they wish, e.g., essay, mural, or poem. 

11. Examining the Concept of the Shrinking World of the Jews. In 

order to explore the idea of the "shrinking universe" of the Jews as 
the Nazis perpetrated their crimes, teachers could use Wladyslaw 
Szlengel's powerful poem "Things" (which is included in Frieda W. 
Aaron's Bearing the Unbearable: Yiddish and Polish Poetry in the Ghettos 
and Concentration Camps and is a poem that focuses on the "contrac- 
tion of the history of the Warsaw ghetto") in conjunction with the 
following statement by Elie Wiesel: "The Nazis' aim was to make the 
Jewish universe shrink — from town to neighborhood, from neigh- 
borhood to street, from street to house, from house to room, from 
room to garret, from garret to cattle car, from cattle car to gas cham- 
ber. And they did the same to the individual — separated from his or 
her community, then from his or her family, then from his or her 
identity, eventually becoming a work permit, then a number, until 
the number itself was turned into ashes" ("All Was Lost" 1). If used 
with care, the tripartite use of the history, Szlengel's poem, and 
Wiesel's statement are capable of providing students with a power- 
ful view of what the Jews faced. (Note: Another poem that would be 
ideal for use with this activity is Abraham Sutzkever's "The Teacher 
Mire.") 

12. Combining a Poem with a Poster of a Museum Artifact. A way 

to help students begin to understand both, paradoxically, the deper- 
sonalization as well as the personal nature of the Holocaust is to 
combine a reading of Abraham Sutzkever's "A Cartload of Shoes" 
with a photograph or poster of the piles of shoes left behind by the 
victims of the Nazis. For a powerful translation of Sutzkever's poem, 
see Frieda W. Aaron's Bearing the Unbearable: Yiddish and Polish Poetry 
in the Ghettos and Concentration Camps, pp. 55-56. 

The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's Education 
Department has designed a set of posters based on artifacts included 
in the Museum's permanent exhibit, and among these is a poster of 
victims' shoes. A teaching guide with ideas on how to incorporate 
the posters into a study of the Holocaust accompanies the poster 
series. The poster on the shoes and the suggested teaching activities 
ideally complement the above exercise. For additional information 



O 

ERIC 



260 



] 



249 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



on the Poster Set, write to Museum Shop, U.S. Holocaust Memorial 
Museum, 100 Raoul Wallenberg Place S.W., Washington, DC 20024. 

13. Combining a Photograph and Poetry on the Same Topic vis-a- 
vis the Holocaust. After the teacher locates the famous photograph 
of a young boy with his hands up as the Nazis round up the people 
imprisoned in the Warsaw Ghetto, he or she should photocopy the 
photograph and make it into an overhead. While viewing the over- 
head, the students should be given the following directions (which 
could be typed on a handout and given to each student so each can 
proceed at his or her own pace): 

1. Describe in as much detail as you can what you see in the photo- 
graph by jotting down phrases or sentences; and, 

2. Once you have described the photograph in as much detail as 
possible, in a sentence or two explain in writing what you think is 
taking place in the photograph. 

Once all of the students have completed task number two, a small 
group and/or a class discussion could be conducted. Sources that 
include the aforementioned photograph are Barbara Rogasky's 
Smoke and Ashes: The Story of the Holocaust (p. 188) and Seymour 
Rossel's The Holocaust: The World and the Jews, 1933-1945 (pp. 13 and 
15). 

Upon completion of the discussion of the photograph, each 
student should be given a copy of a poem entitled "The Little Boy 
with His Hands Up" by Yala Korwin. (Note: The poem is available, 
among other places, in Charles Fishman (Ed.) Blood to Remember: 
American Poets on the Holocaust , pp. 54-55). The teacher or a student 
should read the poem. Upon the completion of the reading the 
students should take part in a reader-response activity; and in doing 
so, students can refer back to their initial reaction to the photograph. 

Finally, the teacher could give a mini-lecture on the situation 
that was captured in the photograph, providing the students with 
details from historical and first-person accounts that would add to 
the students' understanding of the situation. 

14. Addressing the Issue of Reparations via "Draft of a Repara- 
tions Agreement" by Dan Pagis. Following a reader-response 
theory activity on Dan Pagis's poem entitled "Draft of a Reparations 
Agreement," the class could research /examine (1) the purpose 
reparations generally serve and (2) the arguments that have ensued 
in Israel over accepting reparations from Germany for the crimes 
against humanity it committed during the Holocaust years. A discus- 
sion could then ensue over (3) the students' own positions in regard 
to reparations regarding the Holocaust and the reasoning behind 




; . . 1 



] 



250 



Samuel Totten 



such positions; as well as (4) the attitude reflected in the poem in 
regard to the issue of reparations. (For a thought-provoking discus- 
sion of the issue of reparations as well as Pagis's poem, see the 
chapter entitled "Israel" in Albert H. Friedlander's Riders towards the 
Dawn: From Holocaust to Hope, pp. 223-253.) 

15. Responding to a Poem via an Artistic Response. Students could 
respond to a poem on the Holocaust that most deeply touched them 
by creating a piece of art (oil painting, watercolor, pastel drawing, 
pen and ink drawing, charcoal drawing, a mobile, sculpture, photo- 
graphs, a mural). 

Alternately, after handing out a particularly powerful poem to 
each of the students (e.g., William Heyen's "Riddle"), the teacher or 
a student could read the poem out loud. Then, without further 
discussion (though the student could refer to the poem and re-read it 
as many times as he or she wishes), each student could create a piece 
of art (e.g., a drawing, a painting, a collage, a piece of sculpture, 
mobile, etc.) in response to the poem. Upon completion of the art- 
work, each student could write a short response explaining why he 
or she created what he or she did, including a statement of the 
poem's meaning. Students could also address how their work eluci- 
dates the poem. Finally, the teacher could conduct a class discussion 
about the poem and, when appropriate, have the students introduce 
and discuss their individual pieces of art. As a final activity, the 
students could create a new piece of artwork based on their new 
insights. Again, they could write a short response to what they have 
created, and add an extended response as to how their initial cre- 
ation differs from their second and why. 

16. Using the Poem "The Hangman" in Conjunction with the 
"Hangman" Video to Examine Key Issues Relevant to the Holo- 
caust. As mentioned earlier, many curricula and teacher guides on 
the Holocaust include Maurice Ogden's poem "The Hangman." As a 
result, numerous activities have been designed by teachers and 
others to use with the poem. For example, the Facing History and 
Ourselves Foundation (1994), has designed the following questions 
and activities for use with it: 

1. What choices were open to the townspeople when the Hangman 
arrived? By the time he had finished his work in the town? Was 
there a way to stop the Hangman? If so, how? If not, why not? 

2. How does the poem relate to Germany in the 1930s? To society 
today? 

3. In 1933, Martin Niemoller, a leader of the Confessing Church, 
voted for the Nazi party. By 1938, he was in a concentration camp. 
After the war, he is believed to have said, "In Germany, the Nazis 



0 

ERIC 



262 



251 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



came for the Communists, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't 
a Communist. Then they came for the Jews, and I didn't speak up 
because I wasn't a Jew. Then they came for the trade unionists, 
and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a trade unionist. Then they 
came for the Catholics, and I didn't speak up because I was a 
Protestant. Then they came for me, and by that time there was no 
one left to speak for me." How is the point Niemoller makes 
similar to the one Maurice Ogden makes in "The Hangman"? 

4. "The Hangman" is also available on video from the Facing 
History Resource Center (16 Hurd Road, Brookline, MA 02146). 
Teachers who have used the film have stated a need to show it 
several times to allow their students time to identify the various 
symbols and reflect on their meaning. After seeing it, think about 
why the filmmaker turned the animated people into paper dolls. 
Why did the shadow grow on the courthouse wall? Why did the 
gallows-tree take root? (206-7). 

Note: For a different and much more detailed approach to using 
"The Hangman," see South Carolina Voices: Lessons from the Holo- 
caust, which is available from the South Carolina Department of 
Education, South Carolina Council on the Holocaust, 1429 Senate 
St., Room 801, Columbia, SC 29201. What is particularly interest- 
ing about the South Carolina approach is that it uses excerpts 
from actual newspaper articles published in the mid- to late 1930s 
concerning Nazi activities.) 

17. Responding to One's Newfound Knowledge about the Holo- 
caust via Poetry. Following an in-depth study of the history of the 
Holocaust (in which students read primary and secondary docu- 
ments, study various types of literary responses, view films, listen to 
guest speakers and/or view tapes of survivors), students could 
create poetry to express their thoughts, feelings, and new insights. 

18. Using Poetry as an Alternative Means of Reflection and/or 
Assessment. Continuing with the activity suggested in number 17, 
instead of having students keep journals or taking quizzes on a daily 
basis, allow those students who wish to do so to create a poem 
exploring their newfound insights and/or feelings about the Holo- 
caust. Such an activity could serve as a powerful and unique closure 
activity to a lesson(s) and/or sections of a unit. 

19. Critiquing Holocaust Poems Written by Those Who Did Not 
Personally Experience the Holocaust. Those students who have 
engaged in a fairly thorough study of the Holocaust can use their 
newfound knowledge of the history to critically examine the themes, 
content, and style of the poems written by those who did not person- 
ally experience the Holocaust. For example, students could be asked 
to critique the strengths and weaknesses of a poem like "Yellow 
Starred" by Sister Mary Philip deCamara (the poem is included in 




d b 3 



252 



Samuel Totten 



Charles Fishman (Ed.), Blood to Remember: American Poets on the 
Holocaust). Among the issues that might be raised are the following: 
What is the author trying to convey through her use of the literary 
device of synecdoche? Is this an effective device or not? Explain. 
What are the strengths and the weaknesses of using synecdoche to 
"get at" the heart of the Holocaust? Select classic examples from the 
poem and provide an explanation for each of your points. Why does 
the author use Anne Frank's name as opposed to that of another 
victim's? In light of the focus of Anne Frank's diary and the point at 
which it ends, is there anything problematic in using Anne Frank's 
name in this poem? What is the "danger" and/or misnomer of using 
Hitler as the single perpetrator of the Holocaust? Explain your 
answer. All of these questions should simply be used as "starter" 
questions in order to examine key issues surrounding the signifi- 
cance of the history of the Holocaust and the ramifications it has for 
contemporary society. 

20. Conducting an In-Depth Study of a Holocaust Poet's Life. 

Require students to conduct an in-depth study of a Jewish poet (a 
victim or survivor of the Holocaust) in order to examine how his or 
her life influenced his or her poetry (e.g., subject matter, themes, 
images, allusions, motifs, symbols). The students could be required 
to read at least one biography of the poet, a select number of poems 
(the teacher could require that certain poems be read but also allow 
the students to select a number on their own), and three to five key 
critical essays on the poetry. Through such a study students may 
begin to appreciate what certain individuals experienced during the 
Holocaust years, how they responded as individuals and artists, and 
how their art was influenced by the events they lived through. 
Among the poets students might consider are Paul Celan, Abba 
Kovner, Nelly Sachs, Hanna Senesh, Abraham Sutzkever, and Elie 
Wiesel (though Wiesel is primarily a novelist and essayist, he has 
written a major poem entitled "Ani Maamin"). (For a more detailed 
discussion of this project, see Samuel Totten's "Examining the Holo- 
caust through the Lives and Literary Works of Victims and Survi- 
vors" in Samuel Totten (Ed.), Teaching Holocaust Literature.) 

21. Developing an Anthology of Poetry on the Holocaust. Different 
groups of students could develop their own anthology of poetry, 
photocopying key works they wish to include, developing their own 
artwork to accompany the volume (or using copies of the art created 
during and/or following the Holocaust years), and writing up 
connecting information (introductions, etc.) between the pieces. The 
students, along with the teacher, could develop a set of criteria for 
selecting those works to be included in the anthology. The anthology 



ERIC 



264 



253 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



could be bound and included in a class or school library for use by 
other students. 

22. Studying Inverted Symbolism in Poetry. An excellent way to 
help students understand and appreciate how various authors have 
attempted to come to grips with an event that has often been 
deemed "unbelievable," "unspeakable," "ineffable," "incomprehen- 
sible," "inexpressible," and "beyond imagination" is to have them 
study the use of inverted symbolism in Holocaust poetry. By draw- 
ing the students' attention to the use of inverted symbolism, it may 
also assist them to begin to understand how the Holocaust "turned 
the world upside down." A useful activity in this regard is to have 
the students, as a class, keep a running chart (preferably on large 
sheets of butcher paper which can be taped to a wall in the class- 
room) of the various instances of inverted symbolism that they come 
across in the works they read. Across from the listing of the symbol, 
they can comment on (1) the traditional or typical use of the symbol, 
(2) the way in which the author used the symbol, and (3) the purpose 
for the author's use of the inverted symbol. As the list grows, the 
students will begin to gain a more holistic view of the use of such 
literary devices. Periodically, class discussions could focus on the 
information on the list. 

23. Examining the Use of Language. When undertaking a study of 
the Holocaust, it is useful for students to focus on the issue of lan- 
guage, particularly the need to "strive for precision of language" 
(Parsons and Totten 3). An early and important lesson is how 
people's use and understanding of language today (including the 
use of such common terms as "train" or "hunger," for example) does 
not parallel the reality of what the victims of the Nazis experienced. 

For example, when young people think of the term train, they 
generally think of a line of coaches with comfortable seats, large 
windows, a dining car, etc. However, during the Holocaust period, 
the trains used to transport the Jews to the concentration and death 
camps were boxcars without seats, toilets, air conditioning, or heat- 
ing, and into which people were stuffed and left until they arrived at 
their destination (many of the people may have perished due to 
suffocation, heart attacks, and other physical crises). In speaking of 
her unit on Jane Yolen's The Devil's Arithmetic, Vicki Zack comments 
on her young (fifth grade) students' reaction to the Jews' deporta- 
tions: "They [the students] asked why the people did not look out 
the windows and how people could suffocate in a train. For the 
children the word train evoked common, everyday images; indeed 
who would believe that humans would be transported in cattle cars 
and later branded" (45). 



254 



Samuel Totten 



On a related note. Parsons and Totten point out that 

Words that describe human behavior often have multiple meanings. 
Resistance, for example, usually refers to a physical act of armed 
revolt. During the Holocaust, it also meant partisan activism that 
ranged from smuggling messages, food, and weapons to actual 
military engagement. But, resistance also embraced willful disobedi- 
ence: continuing to practice religious and cultural traditions in 
defiance of the rules; crafting fine art, music and poetry inside 
ghettos and concentration camps. For many, simply maintaining the 
will to remain alive in the face of abject brutality was the surest act of 
spiritual resistance. (4) 

Students should be provided with the opportunity to compare and 
contrast their use of common terms (e.g., starvation, trains, resistance, 
camps, resettlement) with the way the Nazis used them. An effective 
way to do this is to have the students, at the outset of the lesson or 
during the course of the lesson, define (individually) in their own 
words and in writing such terms as hunger, starvation, evacuation, 
resistance. As the class moves through a unit on Holocaust poetry (or, 
ideally, an integrated study of history and literature), a chart (made 
of butcher paper) could be kept and posted at the front of the room 
that delineates the vast and radical differences of such usage. 

This is also the ideal place to introduce the concept of euphe- 
mism (e.g., "resettlement" instead of "deportation"; "emigration" 
instead of "expulsion"; "evacuation" instead of "deportation"; 
"special treatment" for the gassing of people, and "Final Solution" 
for the annihilation of every Jew on the face of the earth), and the 
distinction between figurative and literal language. 

24. Addressing Adorno's Quote. At the conclusion of a study of the 
Holocaust in which Holocaust poetry played an integral part, the 
students could respond in writing to Theodor Adorno's quote "After 
Auschwitz, to write a poem is barbaric." A class discussion of this 
issue could serve as one of the culminating activities. 

25. Concluding Activity. As a concluding activity to a lesson or unit, 
students could examine the assertions made by various individuals 
regarding Holocaust literature, including poetry. (See examples 
below.) Each student could select a quote and then write a short 
piece or an essay in which he or she agrees or disagrees with the 
quote and provides a solid rationale for his or her answer. The 
students should select and quote poetry they have read to undergird 
their arguments. 

After Auschwitz, poetry can no longer be written. — T. W. Adomo 





r 



] 



255 


Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 


Conclusion 


There is no such thing as Holocaust literature — there cannot be. 
Auschwitz negates all theories and doctrines, to lock it into a phi- 
losophy is to restrict it. To substitute words, any words, for it is to 
distort it. A Holocaust literature? The term is a contradiction. 

— Elie Wiesel 

In spite of all the movies, plays, novels [and poetry] about the 
Holocaust, it remains a mystery, the most terrifying of all times. 

— Elie Wiesel 

The Holocaust is a sacred realm. One cannot enter this realm without 
realizing that only those who were there can know. But the outsider 
can come close to the gates. 

— Elie Wiesel 

Studying poetry of the Holocaust is a unique and powerful way to 
begin plumbing the depths of that horrific tragedy. In its own inimi- 
table way, it is capable of rendering a distinct perspective into hu- 
man experience. 

While solely studying Holocaust poetry is an inadequate 
method to gain a clear and thorough understanding of the 
Holocaust's overall impact, by combining a study of poetry with the 
study of primary and secondary documents, films, discussion, and 
listening to guest speakers (e.g., survivors, liberators, historians, and 
others), students are able to glean unique insights into a period of 
history that continues to (and probably always will) baffle the hu- 
man mind and spirit. 


Note 


1. For additional ideas regarding the use of literature in a study of 
the Holocaust, see Totten's "Using Literature to Teach about the Holocaust" 
in The Journal of Holocaust Education 5.1 (Summer 1996): 14-48. 


References 


Aaron, Frieda W. Bearing the Unbearable: Yiddish and Polish Poetry in the 

Ghettos and Concentration Camps. Albany: State University of New 
York Press, 1990. 

. Poetry in the Holocaust Dominion." Perspectives on the Holocaust. 
Ed. Randolph L. Braham. Boston and London: Kluwer-Nijhoff 
Publishing, 1983. 119-31. 

Danks, Carol. "Using Holocaust Short Stories and Poetry in the Social 
Studies Classroom." Ed. Samuel Totten, Stephen Feinberg, and 
Milton Kleg. Spec, issue of Social Education 59.6 (1995): 358-61. 

Ezrahi, Sidra DeKoven. By Words Alone: The Holocaust in Literature. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1982. 



256 



Samuel Totten 



Ezrahi, Sidra DeKoven. "The Grave in the Air': Unbound Metaphors in 
Post-Holocaust Poetry." Probing the Limits of Representation: Nazism 
and the 'Final Solution. ' Ed. Saul Friedlander. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1992. 259-76. 

Facing History and Ourselves National Foundation. Facing History and 
Ourselves: Holocaust and Human Behavior. Brookline, MA: Author, 

1994. 

Felstiner, John. "Paul Celan's 'Todesfuge'." Holocaust and Genocide Studies: 

An International Journal 1.2 (1986): 249-64. 

. "Translating Paul Celan's 'Todesfuge': Rhythm and Repetition as 

Metaphor." Probing the Limits of Representation: Nazism and the " Final 
Solution." Ed. Saul Friedlander. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1992. 240-58. 

Friedlander, Henry. "Toward a Methodology of Teaching About the Holo- 
caust." Teachers College Record 80.3 (1979): 519-42. 

Hamburger, Michael. The Truth of Poetry: Tensions in Modern Poetry from 
Baudelaire to the 1960's. New York: Methuen, 1982. 

Kaufman, Shirley. "Introduction." My Little Sister and Selected Poems 1965- 
1985. Abba Kovner. Oberlin, OH: Oberlin College, 1986. 13-24. 

Kovner, Abba. A Canopy in the Desert. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh 
Press, 1973. 

Langer, Lawrence. Art from the Ashes: An Anthology of Holocaust Literature. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 

Levi, Primo. Collected Poems ofPrimo Levi. London: Faber and Faber, 1988. 

O'Neill, John. "Rewriting the Book on Literature: Changes Sought in How 
Literature Is Taught, What Students Read." ASCD Curriculum Update 
(June 1994): 7-8. 

Parsons, William S., and Samuel Totten. Guidelines for Teaching About the 
Holocaust. Washington, DC: United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum, 1994. 

Sheridan, Daniel. "Changing Business as Usual: Reader Response in the 
Classroom." College English 53.7 (1991): 804-14. 

Teichman, Milton. "Literature of Agony and Triumph: An Encounter with 
the Holocaust." College English 37.6 (1976): 613-18. 

Thrall, William Flint, Addison Hibbard, and C. Hugh Holman. A Handbook 
to Literature. New York: The Odyssey Press, 1960. 

Totten, Samuel. "The Use of First-Person Accounts in Teaching About the 
Holocaust." The British Journal of Holocaust Education 3.2 (1994): 160- 
83. 

. '"Written in Pencil in the Sealed Railway-Car': Incorporating Poetry 

into a Study of the Holocaust via Reader-Response Theory." Teaching 
Holocaust Literature. Ed. Samuel Totten. Needham Heights, MA: 

Allyn and Bacon. Forthcoming. 



2G3 



o 



] 



257 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



Wiesel, Elie. "All Was Lost, Yet Something Was Preserved." The New York 
Times Book Reviezv 19 August, 1984: 1, 23. 

. "Readings." One Generation After. New York: Random House, 1970. 

Young, Gloria. "The Poetry of the Holocaust." Holocaust Literature: A 
Handbook of Critical, Historical, and Literary Writings. Ed. Saul S. 
Friedman. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993. 547-74. 



AppOndiX A The following poems may find an appreciative readership among the more 
advanced students: "Draft of a Reparations Agreement" by Dan Pagis, 
"Testimony" by Dan Pagis, "Europe, Late" by Dan Pagis, "Autobiography" 
by Dan Pagis, "There Were Those"* by Susan Dambroff, "1945"* by Bernard 
S. Mikofsky, "Babi Yar" by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, "For Our Dead"* by 
Marilynn Talal, "The Survivor" by Tadeusz Rozewicz, "Pigtail," by Tadeusz 
Rozewicz, "Why I Write about the Holocaust"* by Gary Pacernick, "Survi- 
vors"* by Mary Sarton, "Burnt Pearls" and "Smoke of Jewish Children" by 
Abraham Sutzkever, "The Permanent Delegate" by Yuri Shul, "A Dead 
Child Speaks" and "O the Night of the Weeping Children!" by Nelly Sachs, 
"I Have Never Been Here Before" by Jacob Glatstein, "A Single Hair" by 
Herman Taube, "Terezin" by Hanus Hachenberg, "Say This City Has Ten 
Million Souls," by W. H. Auden, "Digging"* by Frank Finale, "AD"* by 
Kenneth Fearing, "Memories of December"* by Gizela Spunberg, "Shema" 
by Primo Levi, "Yellow Starred"* by Sister Mary Philip de Camara, "A Few 
More Things about the Holocaust"* by Leatrice H. Lifshitz, "Yahrzeit"* by 
Miriam Kessler, "Tattoo"* by Gregg Shapiro, and "Roses and the Grave"* 
by Vera Weislitz, "It's High Time"** by Wladyslaw Szlengel, "Hospital"** 
by Jozef Bau, "A Cartload of Shoes"** by Abraham Sutzkever, "The Teacher 
Mire"** by Abraham Sutzkever, "Things"** by Wladyslaw Szlengel. 

While most of the poems marked with a single asterisk (*) have 
appeared in separate collections and/ or journals, all are contained in 
Charles Fishman (Ed.), Blood to Remember: American Poets on the Holocaust. 
Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1991. Those poems marked with a 
double asterisk (**) all appear in Frieda W. Aaron's Bearing the Unbearable: 
Yiddish and Polish Poetry in the Ghettos and Concentration Camps. Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1990. 



Appendix B Teachers who teach advanced placement students may also wish to con- 
sider Paul Celan's "Todesfuge." While extremely complex, Celan's poem is 
also extremely powerful and thought-provoking. Other poems that ad- 
vanced placement students may find interesting and/or challenging are 
"XXXVIII"* by Derek Walcott, "The Hindenburg"* by Van K. Brock, "There 
Is One Synagogue Extant in Kiev"* by Yaacov Luria, "Miserere"* by 
William Pillin, and "The Tailor"* by Patricia Garfinkel. 



O 

ERIC 



269 



258 



Samuel Totten 



A Select Annotated Bibliography on Holocaust Poetry 

Note: In light of the vast number of poems available, individual 
poems have purposely not been included here. Readers should 
consult the bibliographies listed below for information regarding 
individual works. 



Bibliographies 



Cargas, Harry James, ed. The Holocaust: An Annotated Bibliography. 
Chicago: American Library Association, 1985. 196 pp. 

This bibliography includes a brief but useful section on poetry 
(pp. 148-50). It lists and annotates ten key books of poems. 



Edelheit, Abraham J. and Hershel Edelheit, eds. Bibliography on 
Holocaust Literature. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1986. 
842 pp. 

This massive bibliography contains a section entitled "The 
Holocaust and the Literary Imagination." 



Edelheit, Abraham J. and Hershel Edelheit, eds. Bibliography on 

Holocaust Literature. Supplement. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1990. 684pp. 

This volume includes a brief but useful section on poetry (pp. 
432-35). It includes a listing of books of poetry, individual 
poems, and critical essays on pieces of poetry. 



Szonyi, David M., ed. The Holocaust: Annotated Bibliography and 
Resource Guide. New York: KTAV Publishing House, 1985. 

396 pp. 

Includes a short section entitled "Poetry" (pp. 173-76) under 
the general heading "Literature of the Holocaust: A Select 
Bibliography." 



United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Annotated Bibliography. 
Washington, DC: Author, 1994. 

Specially designed for use by educators, this bibliography 
includes annotations of highly engaging and high quality 
poetry, short stories, and novels as well as other types of 
works. 



Poems/Poetry 

Collections 



Ausubel, Nathan, and Maryann Ausubel, eds. A Treasury of Jewish 
Poetry. New York: Crown, 1957. 471 pp. 

This anthology includes a number of powerful poems on the 



ERIC 



270 



] 



259 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



Holocaust, including those by Ephim Fogel ("Shipment to 
Maidanek") and Hirsh Glik ("We Survive!"). 

Borenstein, Emily. Night of the Broken Glass: Poems of the Holocaust. 
Mason, TX: Timberline Press, 1981. 83 pp. 

Written by a woman who had relatives murdered in the 
Holocaust, the poems in this book are categorized under three 
main headings: (1) I Must Tell the Story, (2) May It Never Be 
Forgotten, and (3) Psalm of Hope. 

Celan, Paul. Selected Poems. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1972. 

108 pp. 

This volume includes Celan's "Todesfuge." 

Fishman, Charles, ed. Blood to Remember: American Poets on the Holo- 
caust. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1991. 426 pp. 

This volume contains 256 poems — many of which are quite 
powerful — by 191 poets, some of whom are survivors of the 
Holocaust. 

Fishman, Charles. (In press.) On Broken Branches: World Poets on the 

Holocaust. 

Edited by the individual who edited Blood to Remember: Ameri- 
can Poets on the Holocaust, this book promises to be a thought- 
provoking and valuable addition to the field. 

Heyen, William. Erika: Poems of the Holocaust. New York: The Van- 
guard Press, 1984. 128 pp. 

This collection, which includes Heyen's "The Swastika Po- 
ems," contains a number of haunting and thought-provoking 
poems (including "Riddle") that would be ideal for use with 
upper middle school /junior high and secondary level stu- 
dents. Earlier editions of this volume were published under 
the title Swastika Poems. Heyen's father emigrated to the 
United States from Germany in 1928, but his two brothers 
remained in Germany, where they fought and died for Nazi 
Germany in World War II. In addition to addressing the 
horrific nature of the Holocaust, many of the poems also 
reflect the anguish that the latter situation caused both 
Heyen's father and himself. 

Howe, Irving, and Eliezer Greenberg, eds. A Treasury of Yiddish 
Poetry. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1969. 378 pp. 




u i 



i 

JL 



260 



I 

Samuel Totten 



This volume of modern Yiddish poetry contains numerous 
important poems on the Holocaust. 

Katzenelson, Yitzhak. The Song of the Murdered Jewish People. Haifa, 
Israel: Ghetto Fighters House, 1980. 133 pp. 

Originally published in 1945, a year after the murder of 
Katzenelson in the gas chambers of Auschwitz, this book of 
poetry is comprised of fifteen cantos that lament the murder of 
the Warsaw Jews. The scenes and events (Aktions, deporta- 
tions, the agonizing decisions made by the Judenrat, the fate of 
the children) described in the poems were well known by 
Katzenelson as he was a member of the Warsaw Ghetto. 

Kovner, Abba. A Canopy in the Desert: Selected Poems. Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1973. 222 pp. 

This volume includes such poems as "My Little Sister," "A 
Parting from the South," and "A Canopy in the Desert." All, in 
various ways and to different degrees, address the tragedy of 
the Holocaust by a poet/ survivor who was the leader of the 
Vilna Ghetto resistance group, the United Partisan Organiza- 
tion. The introductory essay by poet/ translator Shirley 
Kaufman is both interesting and informative. 

Kovner, Abba. My Little Sister and Selected Poems 1965-1985. Oberlin, 
OH: Oberlin College, 1986. 159 pp. 

This volume contains Kovner's major poem sequence on the 
Holocaust, "My Little Sister," as well as other pieces that 
address various aspects of the Holocaust. The short introduc- 
tory essay by poet/translator Shirley Kaufman is very infor- 
mative. 

Langer, Lawrence. Art from the Ashes: An Anthology of Holocaust 

Literature. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 694 pp. 

This is a valuable collection of literary works edited by a noted 
commentator on Holocaust literature. It is divided into six 
parts: (I) "The Way It Was" (as Langer notes: "This section 
begins with some vivid reports of what happened and ends 
with efforts by Auschwitz survivors, such as Elie Wiesel, 

Primo Levi, Jean Amery, and Charlotte Delbo, to assess the 
meaning of these events." p. 12); (II) "Journals and Diaries"; 
(III) "Fiction"; (IV) "Drama"; (V) "Poetry"; and (VI) "Painters 
of Terezin." Each section includes a short but informative 
introduction by Langer. 



261 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



Leftwich, Joseph, ed. The Golden Peacock: A Worldwide Treasury of 
Yiddish Poetry. New York: Thomas Y. Yoseloff, 1961. 722 pp. 

This major anthology of Yiddish poetry translated into English 
contains numerous poems about the Holocaust. 

Levi, Primo. Shema: Collected Poems of Primo Levi. London: The 
Menard Press, 1976. 56 pp. 

These poems by the noted Jewish Italian author who fought 
with a band of partisans until he was captured by the Nazis 
present vivid images of life and death in Nazi-occupied Eu- 
rope. 

Ogden, Maurice (n.d.). "The Hangman." 

This poem is included in a number of Holocaust curricula and 
curriculum guides, including Facing History and Ourselves 
National Foundation's Facing History and Ourselves: Holocaust 
and Human Behavior. Brookline, MA: Author, 1994. 

Pagis, Dan. Variable Directions: The Selected Poetry of Dan Pagis. San 
Francisco: North Point Press, 1989. 153 pp. 

This volume includes a number of powerful poems (including 
"Written in Pencil in the Sealed Railway-Car," "Europe, Late," 
"Testimony," and "Draft of a Reparations Agreement") about 
different aspects of the Holocaust. 

Rozewicz, Tadeusz. They Came to See a Poet. London: Anvil Press 
Poetry, 1991. 

This collection contains such poems as "The Survivor," "Pig- 
tail," and others that are either about certain aspects of the 
Holocaust or informed by it. The volume includes an informa- 
tive introductory essay about Rosewicz and his poetry. 

Sachs, Nelly. O The Chimneys. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 
1967. 387 pp. 

This collection, by a German Jewish survivor of the Holocaust 
(who fled to Sweden in 1940) and a Nobel prize recipient for 
literature, includes a wealth of poetry whose focus and themes 
are the Holocaust. 

Sachs, Nelly. The Seeker, and Other Poems. New York: Farrar, Straus & 
Giroux, 1970. 399 pp. 

These poems by Nelly Sachs, who fled Germany in 1940 and 



ERIC 



273 



c 



] 



262 



Samuel Totten 



was later the recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature, ad- 
dress various aspects of the Holocaust. 

Schiff, Hilda, ed. Holocaust Poetry. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1995. 
234 pp. 

This volume includes a wide selection of Holocaust poetry by 
authors from around the globe (including those who perished 
under Nazi rule, survivors, and others). Curiously, some of the 
works included are actually statements by noted figures (e.g., 
Niemoller and Wiesel, for example) rather than poetry, per se. 

Sutzkever, A. A. Sutzkever: Selected Prose and Poetry. Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, 1991. 433 pp. 

Written by a survivor of the Holocaust and a poet who has 
been referred to as Israel's foremost Yiddish poet, this volume 
includes numerous powerful and haunting poems about 
various aspects of the Holocaust. 

Teichman, Milton, and Sharon Leder. Truth and Lamentation: Stories 
and Poems on the Holocaust. Urbana and Chicago: University of 
Illinois Press, 1994. 526 pp. 

This volume includes two sections entitled "Poems" — one 
under the heading "Transmitting Truths" (212-309), and one 
under the heading "Lamentation" (408-92). It includes poems 
by such individuals as Paul Celan, Charlotte Delbo, Uri Zvi 
Greenberg, William Heyen, Yitzhak Katzenelson, Primo Levi, 
Dan Pagis, Miklos Radnoti, and Abraham Sutzkever. 

Volavkova, Hana. ... I Never Saw Another Butterfly: Children's Draw- 
ings and Poems from Terezin Concentration Camp, 1942-1944. 

New York: Schocken Books, 1993. 106 pp. 

The poems and drawings in this volume were created by 
children incarcerated at Theresienstadt. A note at the end of 
the volume reports that of the 15,000 children under the age of 
fifteen who passed through Terezin, "only 100 came back." As 
mentioned in the body of the above essay, prior to reading 
these poems, students need to have learned about the facts of 
life and death in Terezin; then and only then will they be able 
to begin to fully appreciate the sense of anxiety, longing, want, 
sadness, hope against hope, loss, and unintended irony that 
clearly come through in these poems. 

Whitman, Ruth. The Testing of Hanna Senesh. Detroit: Wayne State 
University Press, 1986. 115 pp. 



263 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



In this book of poetry Whitman "explores the last nine months 
of Hanna's dramatic mission as a British emissary behind 
enemy lines in Nazi Europe" (p. 13) (from the essay, "Histori- 
cal Background," by Livia Rothkirchen, that serves as the 
preface to the volume). 



Films 



Pedagogical 
Essays on 
Incorporating 
Poetry into a 
Study of the 
Holocaust 



"The Hangman." (12 minutes, color. Available from Contemporary 
Films/McGraw Hill, Princeton Rd., Hightstown, NJ 08520 
and Facing History and Ourselves Foundation, 16 Hurd Road, 
Brookline, MA 02146). 

This film, which is based on a poem written by Maurice 
Ogden, relates a parable in which the citizens of a town are 
hanged, one by one, by a stranger who has built a gallows in 
the town square. Hanging after hanging is met by one ratio- 
nalization after another by the people. This is an excellent film 
to use in conjunction with the poem of the same title. Librarian 
Margaret Drew (1982) has noted that "The [film's] theme is 
complex and rich in symbolism; [and in light of that,] it should 
probably be shown more than once to be effective with stu- 
dents, but it can be an excellent film for discussion with good 
teacher preparation" (p. 78). 



Danks, Carol. "Using Holocaust Stories and Poetry in the Social 
Studies Classroom." Social Education (a special issue on the 
Holocaust edited by Samuel Totten, Stephen Feinberg and 
Milton Kleg) 59.6 (October 1995): 358-61 . 

Initially, the author addresses caveats and guidelines in regard 
to incorporating short stories and poetry into a study of the 
Holocaust, and then proceeds to delineate a number of useful 
teaching activities. 

Meisel, Esther. "'I Don't Want to Be a Bystander': Literature and the 
Holocaust." English Journal 71.5(September 1982): 40-44. 

Very briefly discusses the use of two poems: Nelly Sachs's 
"The Chorus of the Rescued," and Ka-Tzetnik's 
" Wiedergutmachung. " 

Totten, Samuel (forthcoming). "Incorporating Poetry into a Study of 
the Holocaust via Reader-Response Theory." The Social Studies. 

This piece highlights the way the author conducted a reader- 
response activity around Dan Pagis's poem "Written in Pencil 
in the Sealed Railway-Car." Student responses are included 
and succinctly commented upon. 



264 



[ 



Samuel Totten 



Genera! Essays/ 
Criticism 



ERIC 



Aaron, Frieda W. Bearing the Unbearable: Yiddish and Polish Poetry in 
the Ghettos and Concentration Camps. Albany: State University 
of New York Press, 1990. 242 pp. 

A highly praised pioneering study of Yiddish and Polish- 
Jewish concentration camp and ghetto poetry It includes 
numerous poems in Yiddish and Polish as well as their English 
translations. 

Aaron, Frieda W. "Poetry in the Holocaust Dominion." In Randolph 
L. Braham (Ed.), Perspectives on the Holocaust, pp. 119-31. 
Boston and London: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publishing, 1983. 

An insightful essay on various aspects of Holocaust poetry. 

The titles of some of the many sections of the essay provide a 
sense of the breadth of the essay: "Role of the Poet in the 
Landscape of Death," "Poetics of Confrontation with the 
Annus Mundi," "Constriction of Language and Image," 

"Crisis of Faith in the Trauma of History," and "Poetics of 
Testimony." 

Alexander, Edward. The Resonance of Dust: Essays on Holocaust Litera- 
ture and Jewish Fate. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 
1979. 256 pp. 

This volume includes a chapter on the poetry of Nelly Sachs 
and Abba Kovner ("Holocaust and Rebirth: Moshe Flinker, 
Nelly Sachs, and Abba Kovner"), and a section on Yiddish 
Holocaust poetry (which primarily focuses on the poetry of 
Jacob Glatstein and Aaron Zeitlin) in a chapter entitled "The 
Holocaust and the God of Israel." 

Cargas, Harry James. "The Holocaust in Fiction." In Saul S. Fried- 
man (Ed.) Holocaust Literature: A Handbook of Critical, Historical, 
and Literary Writings, pp. 533-46. Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press, 1993. 

This essay includes brief commentary on the works of Emily 
Borenstein ( Night of the Broken Glass), Albrecht Haushofer 
(Moabit Sonnets), William Heyen (Erika: Poems of the Holocaust), 
Charles Reznikoff ( Holocaust ), W. D. Snodgrass (The Fiihrer 
Bunker), and Elie Wiesel (Ani Maamin), among others who 
have produced works on the Holocaust. 

Ezrahi, Sidra DeKoven. By Words Alone: The Holocaust in Literature. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982. 262 pp. 

While this volume (which basically constitutes a literary 



276 



265 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



history of the Holocaust) primarily focuses on prose works, 
Ezrahi also addresses the poetry of both major and minor 
poets (Paul Celan, Irving Feldman, Uri Zvi Greenberg, Itzhak 
Katzenelson, Randall Jarrell, Denise Levertov, Abba Kovner, 
Dan Pagis, Sylvia Plath, Tadeusz Rozewicz, Nelly Sachs, 
Abraham Sutzkever). 

Ezrahi, Sidra DeKoven. "Conversation in the Cemetery: Dan Pagis 
and the Prosaics of Memory" In Geoffrey H. Hartman (Ed.) 
Holocaust Remembrance: The Shapes of Memory, pp. 121-33. 
Oxford, England and Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 
1994. 

A fascinating and instructive essay in which Ezrahi discusses, 
analyzes, and wrestles with the question "How are we to read 
the poet of undeciphered riddles and uncharted mazes, who in 
his last writing provides maps and compasses, a whole new 
syntax to restructure the inscriptions of memory?" 

Ezrahi, Sidra DeKoven. "'The Grave in the Air': Unbound Meta- 
phors in Post-Holocaust Poetry." In Saul Friedlander's (Ed.) 
Probing the Limits of Representation: Nazism and the " Final Solu- 
tion," pp. 259-76. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1992. 

A fascinating essay that primarily addresses various facets of 
Celan's "Todesfuge." Ezrahi also briefly discusses Pagis's 
"Written in Pencil in the Sealed Railway-Car." 

Felstiner, John. "Paul Celan's Todesfuge." Holocaust and Genocide 
Studies: An International Journal 1.2: 249-64, 1996. 

A critical and thought-provoking essay about one of the most 
powerful poems on the Holocaust. 

Felstiner, John. "Translating Paul Celan's 'Todesfuge': Rhythm and 
Repetition as Metaphor." In Saul Friedlander (Ed.) Probing the 
Limits of Representation: Nazism and the " Final Solution," pp. 
240-258. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992. 

An insightful and informative essay that discusses how 
Celan's language was a valiant attempt to convey the "rup- 
ture" that the Holocaust constituted in the history of human- 
ity, the brouhaha that erupted over his poem when another 
poet charged Celan with plagiarism, and an analysis of the 
poem in which Felstiner examines how and why Celan wrote 
the poem as he did. The essay concludes with the full text of 
"Todesfuge" in German and English. 



266 



i i 

Samuel Totten 



Friedlander, Albert H. Riders Towards the Dawn: From Holocaust to 
Hope. New York: Continuum, 1994. 328 pp. 

In addition to briefly addressing the poetry of Primo Levi, Dan 
Pagis, Uri Greenberg, Else Lasker-Schueler, Yehuda Amichai, 
and Abba Kovner, Friedlander dedicates a chapter ("A Differ- 
ent Language: The World of the Poets") to the examination of 
the poetry of Paul Celan, Nelly Sachs, and Erich Fried. 

Langer, Lawrence L. Admitting the Holocaust: Collected Essays. New 
York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. 202 pp. 

This well-written and highly readable collection of essays 
addresses a wide array of issues vis-a-vis the Holocaust. While 
numerous chapters focus solely or almost solely on fiction 
rather than on poetry, many of the points Langer makes about 
the use of language are equally germane to poetry. 

Langer, Lawrence. The Age of Atrocity: Death in Modern Literature. 
Boston: Beacon Press, 1978. 256 pp. 

Contains a chapter entitled "Charlotte Delbo and a Heart of 
Ashes," which addresses, in part, the poems incorporated into 
Delbo's prose works. Langer states that "Interspersed through 
her three volumes, juxtaposed with the prose vignettes, are 
groups of poems that condense her main themes into incanta- 
tions of remorse, alienation, and inconsolable loss" (pp. 225- 
26). 

Langer, Lawrence. The Holocaust and the Literary Imagination. New 
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1975. 300 pp. 

A pioneering and valuable work on the aesthetics of Holocaust 
literature. Among the poets Langer discusses in this volume 
are Paul Celan and Nelly Sachs. 

Langer, Lawrence. Versions of Survival: The Holocaust and Human 
Spirit. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1982. 

267 pp. 

A penetrating examination of various researchers' and survi- 
vor-authors/ poets' views as to what it is to be human in the 
aftermath of the Holocaust. Chapter Four focuses, in part, on 
the work of poet Nelly Sachs. 

Roskies, David G. Against the Apocalypse: Responses to Catastrophe in 
Modern Jewish Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1984. 374 pp. 



[ 



] 



267 



Incorporating Poetry into a Study of the Holocaust 



This volume includes an informative essay on the life and 
poetry of Abraham Sutzkever. 

Rosenfeld, Alvin H. A Double Dying: Reflections on Holocaust Litera- 
ture. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press, 1980. 

210 pp. 

A valuable work on Holocaust literature, it includes insightful 
commentary on the works of such poets as Paul Celan, Jacob 
Glatstein, Uri Zvi Greenberg, Yitzhak Katzenelson, Dan Pagis, 
Nelly Sachs, and Sylvia Plath. 

Young, Gloria. "The Poetry of the Holocaust." In Saul S. Friedman 
(Ed.) Holocaust Literature: A Handbook of Critical, Historical, and 
Literary Writings, pp. 547-74. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 
1993. 

An insightful bibliographic essay that is divided into three 
major sections: "Poets Who Did Not Survive," "Poets Who 
Survived," and "Others." 



It’s Not Just What 
You Teach, But Who 
You Teach 

Sallie M. Fine 

Charles F. Brush High School, Lyndhurst, Ohio 



A s the only Jewish teacher at a high school whose student 

population is 99 percent non-Jewish and predominantly of 
German descent, teaching Holocaust literature has been an 
enormous challenge. When I began creating my Holocaust curricu- 
lum during my first year at Woodridge High School in Peninsula, 
Ohio, I had no idea of the surprises I would encounter and the range 
of emotion I would experience. 

The first time I taught this unit, I found myself to be somewhat 
giddy with the interest my students demonstrated. After I had spent 
two rough quarters with my not-necessarily-college-bound seniors, 
we had finally started to connect during our third grading period 
together. Before the start of class one day, early in the third quarter, I 
noticed a student reading Elie Wiesel's Night. I spoke with her briefly 
about the work and learned that it was an assignment for her read- 
ing class. After class, that same student approached my desk, and, in 
a barely audible voice, asked, "Miss Fine, these things didn't really 
happen — did they?" I was shocked that an eighteen-year-old, sec- 
ond-semester senior only weeks away from joining the adult world 
did not understand the magnitude of perhaps the darkest years of 
the twentieth century. That evening I decided to teach the subject of 
the Holocaust. 

Virtually every lesson I taught during my first year in the 
classroom was an experiment, and pulling together this Holocaust 
unit was no different. When I set out to accomplish the task, I had no 
idea what materials I would use or how long I would spend on the 
subject. Since I had not yet planned the final six weeks of the fourth 
grading period, it seemed to me that six weeks would be a perfect 
amount of time for this project. 

Floundering for material, I headed for a local bookstore whose 
staff had proven extraordinarily helpful in the past. I asked for 
nonfiction books that could hold the attention of my more advanced 



] 



269 



It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 



students yet would be accessible to my lower-level readers. In spite 
of the narrow parameters I had set, I soon found myself with an 
armload of books to choose from and no real idea how to proceed. 
All I really knew when I left the bookstore that evening was that the 
central book of this unit would be Rose Zar's In the Mouth of the Wolf. 

Zar's story began when she was approximately the same age 
as most of my seniors. At her father's insistence, she and her brother 
escaped from their Polish ghetto. Following the advice of a good 
Samaritan who hid them for a night — one Jew might survive on the run, 
but never two — Zar and her brother separated shortly after their 
escape. Zar's life on the run ended when, using her false papers, she 
landed a job as nanny and housekeeper for the family of an SS 
commandant. Zar spent the remaining years of the war proving true 
her father's philosophy, the safest place to hide when you are in danger is 
in the mouth of the wolf. Rose Zar's story is one of survival which, in 
fact, became the theme for the unit. 

With the help of a friend whose background was in social 
psychology, I created almost a week's worth of activities to steer the 
students toward the topics that would eventually arise through the 
literature and films I had selected. The activities described below 
served as the anticipatory set, a more in-depth exploration of human 
behavior and morality during a time when civility had been replaced 
with atrocity. The first activity in the unit is a "moral inventory." 

Each student receives a handout with ten declarative statements 
such as the following: 

It is ethical to perform medical experiments on prisoners. 

It is ethical to perform medical experiments on prisoners of war. 

If a member of my family commits a crime, it is my responsibility to 
notify the police. 

It is my duty as a citizen to hate anyone that our president declares 
an enemy of our country. 

I would die for my family or my country. 

I would choose to save myself for sure rather than risk my life by 
trying to also save both myself and my family. 

All of the statements on the inventory relate in some way to the 
Holocaust. The students are asked to read each statement and re- 
spond by checking one of two boxes, "Agree" or "Disagree." What 
follows is a very animated, emotionally charged class discussion that 
typically lasts two days as each statement is reviewed. My role, of 
course, is to play devil's advocate, along with referee and fact police. 



O 

ERIC 



281 



270 



] 



Sallie M. Fine 



since the facts are often distorted by emotion and the effort to prove 
a point. Students seem particularly invested in the statements related 
to the treatment of prisoners. Many feel that no punishment is too 
harsh and that most prisoners are treated far too well. Students often 
believe that prisoners should have no access to television, exercise 
facilities, or educational opportunities. Depending on the crime for 
which the prisoner has been convicted, many feel that medical 
experimentation is perfectly appropriate. A frequently heard com- 
ment is, "Why experiment on innocent animals when there are 
murderers and rapists taking up space in overcrowded jails?" These 
remarks always surprise me, especially given the number of stu- 
dents who have either served time themselves or currently have a 
friend or family member in prison. 

In facilitating this discussion, I try to keep references to the 
Holocaust to a minimum so as not to influence students' reactions 
and responses to the week's remaining activities. The success of this 
first activity is largely dependent on the willingness of students to 
participate and the level to which they are willing to disagree with 
each other. Fortunately, my students usually welcome any opportu- 
nity to voice their opinions and make their presence known. 

The next "warm-up" is a class brainstorming activity on the 
word survival. Again, I do not mention the Holocaust so as not to 
influence or intimidate the class. The idea is to get them thinking 
about the broad spectrum of the human experience. Students must 
list on the blackboard the various types of events that people sur- 
vive. Once those topics have been exhausted, I ask students to 
brainstorm survival techniques. What does it take for one to survive 
the items they have listed on the board, such as sexual abuse, earth- 
quakes, cancer, and so on? The remainder of the period is spent with 
each student writing a journal describing the most serious thing he 
or she has survived to date, how they survived, and how they are 
different because of the experience. Not surprisingly, the most 
common event described is divorce. Yet divorce is relatively benign 
compared to the stories of abuse and drug and alcohol addiction. In 
describing an abortion from two years earlier. Shannon writes, "I 
believed I was so in love with [the baby's father] . I dated him for 
eight months before I lost everything. ... I lost my innocence, my 
heart, and the respect of my family. I lost my "friends" and I lost my 
child. . . . Afterward, I started using drugs and alcohol. I hated 
myself." 

While Shannon is haunted by the child she still mourns, 
Shunda relives the memory of witnessing her brother's murder: "My 
mom told me to sit in the car with my sister . . . my brother and the 
guy walked up to each other. I was sitting in the car looking and the 
guy just pulled out a gun and just shot my brother. I remember that I 



O 

ERIC 



282 



[ 



] 



271 



It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 



didn't cry because I didn't really know what it meant. As time went 
on and I got older, I realized that my brother was killed and he is not 
coming back." 

My students are not strangers to tragedy, and I have learned 
that it is critical not to underestimate their pain. The goal in teaching 
them about the Holocaust is not to belittle their experiences or to set 
up a competition of who has suffered the most. One of my goals is to 
help students learn to what extent people have been made to suffer 
and how they manage to survive. 

Following the journal on survival, I present to the class a 
hypothetical situation adapted from an early chapter of In the Mouth 
of the Wolf. I ask the students to imagine that they are awakened in 
the middle of the night and told that they must leave home immedi- 
ately. They will be traveling alone, and do not know how long they 
will be gone. Their objective is not to be found. Other than the 
clothes they are wearing, what three things will they take to aid 
them in their survival? As a sign of the times, I have always had to 
explain that cars, money-machine cards, and checkbooks are not 
practical: again, I remind them, they do not want their whereabouts 
discovered. For homework they are to choose their three items and 
bring them to class the next day with a written rationale for each 
object. Almost every student includes one thing that can be used as a 
weapon and one thing of sentimental value: jewelry, pictures, letters, 
and bibles are among the most common. The personal items offer the 
opportunity to discuss the different means for emotional and physi- 
cal survival. Sadly, many of my students have, at one time, run away 
from home or have given it such serious consideration that each year 
fewer and fewer of the parameters are truly hypothetical. 

The third year I taught this unit, I added a lesson using onto- 
logical questions. After explaining the word itself, I give students a 
list of several such questions I had seen in NCTE's Ideas Plus: Book 
Twelve. As an "in-class-finish-for-homework" assignment, I ask the 
students to respond to the questions "Is a person basically alone or is 
he or she an integral member of society?" and "Do I have free will or 
am I controlled by fate?" and a third question of their own choosing. 

The next class period is used to discuss the required questions 
as well as the topic of choice. Perhaps it is not surprising that stu- 
dents who enjoy popularity and active social lives believe strongly 
that the individual is an integral member of society, while those who 
are on the outside looking in often write a convincing argument for 
being basically alone. Also not surprising is that many more students 
who feel their presence counts are willing to participate in the 
discussion than those who feel left out. There are those, of course, 
who feel ostracized not by their peers but by the adult world. These 
students are more than willing to defend the argument that a person 



272 



Sallie M. Fine 



is basically alone. Regardless of their point of view, this question 
elicits a passionate response, such as the one Bryce provides: 

In the make up of the society in which we dwell, a person is truly 
alone. When they die, society in general keeps on working. Nothing 
will change without that one person. Sure society is bleeding from 
this death, but it will just wear a band aid to cover up the wound. 

The business that the person worked at will just find a replacement. 
The family will just cover up the pain by moving on. The empty desk 
at school will just be filled by another pupil. Not showing up one 
day or one year will not affect other's lives. They will still go on 
doing what they have always done, not paying attention to the 
change in numbers. The world will still spin in the same direction. . . . 
We are truly alone in society. We do not have any effect on other 
people's lives. 

I have found that the best way to handle this topic is to refer to the 
law of physics that states that for every action there is a reaction. 
When we apply human experience to that law, even the most cynical 
people begin to see that their presence in society is significant on 
some level. 

The second question regarding fate and free will also leads to 
an interesting and often heated discussion. It seems impossible to 
keep G-d out of this debate, and regardless of on which side the 
students take a stand, they are passionate about their position. Our 
student body typically come from families with a strong religious 
identity. Whether or not they agree with the idea of fate, most of my 
students seem to associate fate with a superior being. Those who 
side with the idea of fate over free will see the students on the 
opposite side as rejecting G-d. Those who argue for free will seem 
unwilling to accept a lack of control over their lives. And then there 
are those, like Ally, who just can't separate the two. "We all have a 
purpose. Something we must accomplish in life. In the end our fate 
is the winner. Everything in our life has been predetermined . . . We 
can't, however, sit back and let fate control us. We must make our 
choices in order for fate to be fulfilled." 

This discussion is the prelude for reading a modem short story 
by Lisa Blaushild titled "Witness" in which the narrator describes 
life in a major city (presumably New York) and discusses how 
hardened people (herself included) have become used to the con- 
stant acts of violence that surround them. The language of this story 
is as violent and offensive as the subject matter itself. Although I 
would never use this story with students under the age of seventeen, 
it offers a good opportunity to discuss language and word choice 
with more mature students. What is our impression of a character 
who curses in the way that this main character curses? What do we 
learn about her simply through her use of expletives? The story itself 



] 



273 



It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 



illustrates how a society deteriorates when everyone minds his or 
her own business to the point of not calling the police when the 
screams of a woman being murdered can be heard by all. I ask the 
class, as they read this story, to consider the responsibility of each 
member of society toward one another, especially in light of their 
responses to the question, "Is a person basically alone or is he or she 
an integral member of society?" 

Another new addition during the third year, to what was once 
a week's worth of pre-reading activities, is the video "Shelter Boy." 
Prior to watching this twenty-minute video, we brainstorm the word 
victim. What does it mean to be a victim? Whom do we consider 
victims? Of what circumstances are people victims? How does 
society look upon victims? Then we watch the video, which tracks 
an elementary school boy whose family was left homeless when a 
tornado destroyed their home. The film shows the boy at the shelter 
where his family now lives and focuses on the abuse he endures 
from his classmates at school, who torture him relentlessly when 
they learn that he is homeless. The film serves a double purpose in 
educating my students about the homeless as well as complement- 
ing our discussion of victims and victimization. Never one to miss a 
journal opportunity, I ask students to write about an experience from 
their own lives in which they saw themselves as the victim. The 
journal entries are primarily for personal reflection. I find that if 
students have the opportunity to apply a topic to their own lives, our 
class discussions are much richer and students are more likely to 
give careful consideration to the subject. 

As the final activity, we read the story of "The Good Samari- 
tan" from the Gospel of Luke. We discuss the biblical story, and then 
the students are assigned to write about a time when they either 
served as a good Samaritan or benefited from the actions of a good 
Samaritan. 

While these readings, discussions, and journals are time 
consuming, I feel that it is time well spent. All of the activities relate 
not only to the Holocaust but also to the everyday lives and worlds 
of all of our students. Upon completion of this segment of the unit, I 
am ready to introduce the Holocaust. 

Although the U.S. history curriculum that most students take 
as juniors includes a small section on the Holocaust, most of my 
students know very little about this period of modern history. To fill 
the gap somewhat, after the "warm-up" activities I lecture for one 
class period on Adolf Hitler's rise to political power in Germany and 
the events leading up to the Holocaust. I believe it is also critical for 
students to understand that anti-Semitism did not begin (or end) 
with Adolf Hitler, so I include a brief overview of anti-Semitism as 
well. Using a time line that includes examples of anti-Semitic writ- 




V J 



J 



274 



1 

Sallie M. Fine 



ings that predate Hitler, major events in Hitler's life that led to his 
declaration of power following Hindenburg's death, and Germany's 
economic history between World War I and World War II, I review 
information with the class that they should have learned in social 
studies. 

Finally, we are ready to read a wide variety of materials I have 
collected over the past few years. I require the students to find the 
threads of everything we have done for the last several classes in the 
warp and weft of everything we do over the next several weeks. As a 
class we compile a list of the topics we covered and the students 
copy this list into their notebooks. Their assignment is to keep track 
of these subjects as they arise in the forthcoming material. 

Using excerpts from Ina R. Friedman's book The Other Victims 
as the beginning text, I divide the class into small groups and assign 
each group a chapter to study, review, and teach to the rest of the 
class. The groups are given a specific set of questions to which they 
must find the answers. After completing the questionnaire, they 
must develop the information into a presentation given to the stu- 
dents in the other groups. The questions I have them answer direct 
them to information I feel it is important for all of the students to 
understand. 

I have chosen chapters on the Gypsies, the Christian clergy, 
and the Jehovah's Witnesses. I begin with these selections for selfish 
reasons: while it is true that Jews were certainly not the only victims 
of the Holocaust, I want to immediately acknowledge these victims 
in my own classroom. It's easy for students to say that I teach the 
Holocaust only because I am a Jew. By emphasizing the other vic- 
tims, I hope to help my non-Jewish students to realize that the 
Holocaust is not only Jewish history, but is something that deserves 
the attention and study of people from all religions and cultures. In 
short, I do not want to give them the opportunity to dismiss this unit 
as "someone else's problem from a long time ago." 

Once we complete the selections from The Other Victims, I 
introduce Zar's memoir. In the Mouth of the Wolf. Zar's story 
chronicles her survival of the Holocaust, during which she passed as 
Aryan and served as the nanny in the home of an SS commandant. 
At the time the book begins, she is not much older than my seniors, 
and I use this commonality to help the students understand how 
quickly teenagers were expected to grow up during the war and the 
very adult decisions that had to be made if one were to have any 
hope of survival. Since the population I teach is not typically moti- 
vated to read, it is my practice to give daily reading-check quizzes 
during the study of a major work. The number of perfect scores and 
detailed answers told me that the class was not only reading but was 
completely absorbed in the material. While reading the book. 



] 



275 



It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 



students were required to keep a journal in which they were to 
respond to specific passages. Although I led the class discussions, 
wrote and graded the quizzes, and assigned the journal topics, it 
seemed as though the book virtually taught itself. While Zar's 
testimony is not graphic, her tone is urgent and leaves the students 
breathless after every narrow escape. I keep copies of The Pictorial 
History of the Holocaust, The World Must Know, and In the Warsaw 
Ghetto: Summer 1941 in my room for students to examine whenever 
they have some free time. After studying the photographs in these 
books, the class has a strong visual image of what Rose Zar is up 
against. Both my more advanced students and my more challenged 
readers find Zar's book easy to read and impossible to put down. 

The book ends at the conclusion of the war, and I find this the 
perfect time to show the film depicting Simon Wiesenthal's story, 
"Murderers Among Us." The movie helps to show how the events of 
the Holocaust forever changed the lives of those who survived, and 
it poses the painful questions "Why did I survive?" and "For what 
did I survive?" The movie also illustrates that, while people may 
have survived the same tragedy, their reactions to that tragedy may 
vary widely. While Wiesenthal was clearly determined never to 
forget, he was also determined never to let the world forget. His 
wife, on the other hand, is depicted as a survivor who wants to let 
the past stay in the past and does not even want to discuss the 
painful truth with their only child. 

... 1 Never Saw Another Butterfly is a collection of poetry and 
drawings by children assigned to the Terezin camp. While I recog- 
nized this book as a valuable teaching tool, it was not until the third 
year I taught this curriculum that I figured out a way to use it effec- 
tively. I use selected poems from this volume to generate the follow- 
ing creative writing project. Students are assigned to groups of three. 
After reading the poems from their packet, each group is to choose 
one poem that they find particularly meaningful. From the tone and 
content of that poem, they are to create a series of diary entries that 
poem's author could have written. The entries are to demonstrate 
what my students have learned about the day-to-day existence of a 
concentration camp prisoner from a child's point of view. Some 
examples: 

Dear Diary, 

I don't know how long I have been in this awful place, but it seems 
like forever. The bitter cold of these winters seems to be a ghost 
sucking the life out of me. There is hardly any food. I am so weak . . . 
I can hardly walk, never mind the grueling work we must do. . . . 



ERIC 



276 



Sallie M. Fine 



Dear Diary, 

We played house today. I was the mommy. This made us sad because 
we miss our real mommy and daddy. ... A lot of kids can't play 
because they are too sick or too sad. Our stomachs hurt so badly 
because there's not much food. I wish I could be with my family 
again . . . 

The diaries are evaluated on content as well as presentation. Several 
groups turned in entries on yellowed paper with burn holes, or on 
rags. Some even designed a capsule that presumably helped to hide 
and preserve the writings. The opportunity to create through art and 
design offered a much-needed break after weeks of reading and 
watching accounts of devastation and destruction. 

In bringing the unit to a close, I assign groups of students 
selected chapters to read from Milton Meltzer's book Rescue: The 
Story of How Gentiles Saved Jews in the Holocaust. I conclude the unit 
with these readings for two reasons: they offer my students hope for 
our society after studying the darkest side of humanity, and they 
demonstrate the power of the individual to stand up for what is 
right regardless of the consequences. The students read, review, and 
teach each other these chapters in the same way that we began our 
study with the Holocaust's non-Jewish victims. We complete the 
section on the righteous Gentiles by watching Schindler's List. 

Schindler's List is an invaluable tool in the classroom, particu- 
larly because Steven Spielberg introduces Oskar Schindler as any- 
thing but a hero. Before showing the film, I explain to my students 
that what they will see is the transformation of a womanizing, self- 
absorbed con artist into a self-sacrificing humanitarian. I ask my 
students to watch carefully for the transformation and to be pre- 
pared to write about it for homework. I also explain to them that 
when I first saw the film in the theater, I was disappointed with 
Spielberg for including more than one bedroom scene. At first 
viewing, I thought the nudity would prevent me from showing the 
movie in class without censoring those scenes. After careful consid- 
eration, however, I came to see a lesson in these scenes as well. I ask 
my students to consider why Spielberg chose to include sex scenes in 
a film whose focus is anything but romantic. They are to include 
their theories in the response journal assigned for homework. 

The movie certainly holds their attention, and there are always 
a slew of questions asked during our "intermission" and after the 
viewing is completed. There is frequent confusion regarding 
Schindler's early dealings with the Nazis as well as the scenes where 
he is trying to raise capital for his factory through Jewish backing. 
Through trial and error, I learned to explain those early scenes before 



277 



It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 



we begin the film. Despite the length of the film, students are atten- 
tive throughout and fascinated by the closing scene at Schindler's 
grave. It is always interesting to return to the "pre-viewing" ques- 
tions regarding Schindler's transformation and the relevance of the 
bedroom scenes. While there are a variety of answers regarding his 
metamorphosis, classes consistently agree that a romantic encounter 
is the luxury of those who are free and for whom life remains un- 
changed. The sharp contrast between the rich lives of the Nazis and 
the desperate existence of the Jews leaves our audience with a 
passionate disgust. 

The real challenge in showing Schindler's List is the time factor. 

I wasn't sure that I could justify spending five consecutive days 
watching a film, but, more important, I felt that the integrity of the 
film would be compromised by breaking after every fifty minutes of 
viewing. With high absenteeism, there was little guarantee that every 
student would even see the whole movie. After pleading my case to 
my building principal, I was allowed to design an "in-school" field 
trip. My seniors were excused from their morning classes, and we set 
up shop in the bandroom so that there was room for everyone. We 
took one ten-minute break for students to grab lunch from the 
cafeteria and stretch, and then we resumed our viewing session. 

Most students only missed two classes out of their regular day — far 
fewer than the number missed for an out-of-school field trip — and 
almost all of my students were present. 

While the readings, journals, and films I used in class pro- 
vided weeks of lessons and discussions for my students, nothing 
matched the opportunity my classes had during the third year of this 
unit when Mr. Jacob Hennenberg agreed to join us as a guest 
speaker. Hennenberg, a historian who resides in a suburb of Cleve- 
land, survived seven labor camps. He brings to his audience living 
history, artifacts including his star of David from his uniform, and 
the numbers tattooed on his forearm. There is little I can say that can 
compare to the words and reactions of his audience. 

Dear Mr. Hennenberg, 

You made a great impression on the students of Woodridge High 
School. Before you spoke, some of my peers said, "I don't want to 
hear a Jew. Why do we have to listen to a Jew talk in school?" But 
after you told your story, those same people did nothing but praise 
you. I am telling you this because your story does have an impact 
and needs to be told. 

Dear Mr. Hennenberg, 

We have been studying the Holocaust and have read about the 
people and the camps. Personally, hearing about your life and your 
experiences made a much larger impression on me than reading. 



278 



Sallie M. Fine 



For my students, Jacob Hennenberg brought history to life. For me, 
Jacob Hennenberg reminded me that it is up to the next generation 
to keep these stories alive. 

The last step is to return to the topics covered in the first 
week(s) of pre-reading activities. Using everything we have studied 
(books, poetry, movies, testimonies), the students are asked to find 
specific examples of medical experimentation, survival, actions of a 
good Samaritan, etc. I like to split the class into groups of two or 
three so that everyone has an opportunity to review and discuss the 
material. There is so much material at this point that it seems almost 
too much for students to process individually. When this task is 
accomplished, the pairings or groups report to the rest of the class 
which examples they have chosen. This offers another overview of 
the material before the students are assigned their final paper. 

The formal essay which concludes this unit is to review the 
ontological questions discussed weeks earlier. Students are asked to 
choose either the question pertaining to the individual's place in 
society or the question of fate or free will as the subject of their essay. 
Using several examples from our previous weeks of Holocaust 
study, the student is asked to support his or her point of view. It is 
interesting for students to re-read their original journals written in 
response to these questions to see whether or not their point of view 
has changed based on this unit. 

The evolution of this unit has gone far beyond the develop- 
ment of a curriculum; it has served as an important aid in my profes- 
sional and personal development. During the first year I taught the 
unit, most of my students were enthusiastic and seemed to thrive on 
our philosophical discussions of morality and ethics, but there were 
a few who grumbled. Most of these negative comments were di- 
rected at me personally, yet not made to me directly. These students 
felt that I taught this unit only because of my religion and that we 
spent too much time on it. Perhaps it is more than a coincidence that 
most of these students were also in jeopardy of not graduating due 
to their failing grades in English. 

By the time I was ready to begin the Holocaust unit during my 
second year at Woodridge, I had collected enough material and 
developed enough projects and assignments to last a full nine-week 
grading period. Unfortunately, the warmth and depth of soul that 
characterized the previous year's seniors eluded most of the Class of 
'94. While there were a few students (mostly girls) who took the 
lessons and projects seriously, the majority were eager to make a joke 
out of almost every aspect of the unit. I couldn't figure out a way to 
detach myself from the situation. Every snide remark, every giggle, 
every sidelong glance made me self-conscious to the point of distrac- 
tion. Had this behavior been atypical up until this particular unit, I 



279 



[ 



i 

It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 



might concede to being oversensitive. I had hoped, however, that in 
the final hours of their high school career these students would rise 
to the occasion and gain some insight as to how the actions and 
inaction of others deeply impact the world in which we live. Disap- 
pointed and defeated, I decided not to teach Holocaust literature 
again. I made this decision after concluding that I had given it my 
best shot but was teaching a population that simply wasn't receptive 
to the topic. 

In spite of my decision to abandon my curriculum, I enrolled 
in a summer course at Cleveland State University entitled "Teaching 
the Holocaust." During the week I attended class, I was stunned by 
the questions and responses of my classmates. Most of the students 
were current educators who knew virtually nothing about the 
Holocaust. One teacher asked, "If Judaism isn't a race, then what is 
it?" To which the professor patiently replied, "Judaism is a religion." 

This course was a turning point for me. I realized that I had a 
personal commitment, and perhaps an obligation, to teaching the 
Holocaust. The time had come for me to shed my "new teacher" 
skin, toughen up and forge ahead. I had previously taught the unit 
during the fourth quarter, when most seniors are not at their best. 
The students who usually find themselves in my class are often the 
same students who push their graduation requirements to the 
eleventh hour. Academic trouble or not, however, the final weeks of 
high school bring high anxiety for all concerned. I realized that there 
was no reason to save the Holocaust unit for the end of the year, so I 
made a bargain with myself: I decided to try the unit once more, but 
to teach it in the second quarter rather than the fourth. I would try it 
once more and then decide whether or not it was worth the pain. 

Every experienced teacher I know has told me that the third 
year is the charm, and for this curriculum that was true. Part of the 
charm, to be sure, had to do with the Class of '95. They were interest- 
ing and interested in the work at hand. Their questions, reactions, 
and responses fueled my passion and dedication to teaching, and 
especially to teaching the Holocaust. It is the Class of '95 that I credit 
with the burst of creativity which inspired many of the projects 
outlined earlier in this piece. 

With my renewed spirit also comes anxiety. While the previ- 
ous year's class may have been open and receptive, the current year 
brings an entirely new group of students with its own personality 
and set of idiosyncrasies. My comfort level remains tenuous when I 
remember the young man who told me that it was as distasteful to 
him to learn about the Holocaust from a Jewish teacher as it would 
be to learn about Malcolm X from an African American teacher. 



O 

ERIC 



291 



280 



[ 



Sallie M. Fine 



Fortunately, this comment was first made to his non-Jewish counse- 
lor and repeated to me in the presence of the same counselor. I say 
"fortunately" because, while this sort of bigotry has become an 
annual event in my life, it was the first time that one of my col- 
leagues served as a witness. I have often felt that my concerns were 
trivialized, and while they may remain unaddressed, at least the 
administration cannot say that the negative sentiment exists only in 
my imagination. The other positive aspect of this hurtful encounter 
was that, while I know that this student was not expressing an 
original sentiment, it was the first time in my teaching that I had the 
opportunity to address that point of view directly. Finally, it rein- 
forces how important it is for me to continue teaching the literature 
of the Holocaust. 

What I force myself to remember is that our students are not 
finished products when they leave our classrooms. If I were held 
accountable today for everything I said or thought thirteen years 
ago, I would be in trouble, too. Along those lines, I was recently 
reminded that as educators we do not always know what impact our 
words of today will have tomorrow. That lesson came in the form of 
the following letter from a former student of mine who is now 
enrolled at Kent State University: 

By teaching us about the Holocaust and spending so much time on 
it, 1 learned more than I ever had . . . You brought it right to me, set it 
in front of me and allowed me to leam. At the time I thought you 
were crazy for spending weeks on this, but now I realize that be- 
cause in some ways it was part of you, it was important to you for 
us, the students, to know it all . . . you showed us a side of history 
that is often times overlooked. 

I never would have guessed that this particular young woman 
would one day take the time to write some of the kindest and most 
encouraging words I had ever read. If these lessons touched her, 
than perhaps it is safe to assume that others who resisted the topic 
learned as well. 

Am I glad I tried one more time to teach a topic that is so 
difficult and emotionally charged under the best of circumstances? 
Absolutely. Was every student enthusiastic, supportive, interested, 
and open-minded? Certainly not. What I have learned, however, is 
that no matter what I teach, there will always be some students who 
will react negatively. Regardless of the negative reactions of some, I 
can be sure that no student leaving my class need ever again ask, 
"These things didn't really happen — did they?" 



3 



281 


It's Not Just What You Teach, But Who You Teach 


References 


Arad, Yitzhak, ed. The Pictorial History of the Holocaust. New York: 

Macmillan Publishing Company, 1990. 

Berenbaum, Michael. The World Must Know. Boston: Little, Brown & Com- 
pany, 1993. 

Blaushild, Lisa. "Witness." Life Studies: A Thematic Reader. Ed. David 
Cavitch. 3rd ed. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989. 555-58. 

Friedman, Ina R. The Other Victims: First-Person Stories ofNon-Jezos Persecuted 
by the Nazis. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1990. 

Georg, Willy. In the Warsaw Ghetto: Summer 1941. Ed. Rebecca Busselle. New 
York: Aperture, 1993. 

Marks, Jane. The Hidden Children. New York: Ballantine, 1993. 

May, Herbert G., and Bruce M. Metzger, eds. The Holy Bible. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1962. 

Meltzer, Milton. Rescue: The Story of How Gentiles Saved the Jews in the 
Holocaust. New York: Harper Trophy, 1988. 

Murderers among Us: The Simon Wiesenthal Story. Dir. Brian Gibson. With Ben 
Kingsley. Home Box Office Productions, 1989. 

Paymar, Jim. "Shelter Boy." The Reporters. New York: Fox Productions, 1989. 

Ryan, Michael G., ed. IDEAS Plus: A Collection of Practical Teaching Ideas, 

Book Twelve. Urbana: National Council of Teachers of English, 1994. 
29. 

Schindler's List. Dir. Steven Spielberg. With Liam Neeson and Ben Kingsley. 
Universal /Amblin Productions, 1994. 

Volavkova, Hana, ed I Never Saw Another Butterfly. New York: Schocken 

Books, 1978. 

Wiesel, Elie. Night. New York: Bantam Books, 1960. 

Zar, Rose. In the Mouth of the Wolf Philadelphia: The Jewish Publication 
Society, 1983. 



Resources for Teaching 
about Issues of Genocide 
and Intolerance 



General Resources 
for Teaching about 
Genocide and 
Intolerance 

Compiled by Leatrice B. Rabinsky and Carol Danks 



H elping students recognize their biases and prejudices and 
guiding them to become more tolerant are extraordinary 
challenges for teachers. Helping students understand the 
reasons genocides have been perpetrated over and over during the 
history of humankind and working with students to create positive 
actions and attitudes which might prevent future genocides create 
additional demanding roles for teachers. The following books, 
journals, and organizations may provide teachers with a broad range 
of helpful resources. 

Allport, Gordon W. The Nature of Prejudice. New York: Anti-Defama- 
tion League of B'nai B'rith, 1986. (out of print) 

Angelou, Maya. On the Pulse of Morning. New York: Random House, 
1993. 

This inspirational poem, commissioned for President Clinton's 
inauguration, places responsibility for our future on all Ameri- 
cans' shoulders. 

Duvall, Lynn. Respecting Our Differences: A Guide to Getting Along in a 
Changing World. Minneapolis: Free Spirit, 1994. 

Young people from across the country talk about how they are 
unlearning prejudice in their schools and communities. 

Emery, Francenia L. That's Me! That’s You! That's Us!: Select Current 
Multicultural Books for Children and Young Adults Presenting 
Positive, Empowering Images. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Fran's Book 
House, 1994. 



L 



] 



286 



Leatrice B. Rabinsky and Carol Danks 



This extensive annotated list of fiction and nonfiction is ar- 
ranged according to appropriate age categories and coded by 
cultural group and subject. 

Hoose, Philip M. It's Our World, Too!: Stories of Young People Who are 
Making a Difference. Boston: Little, Brown, 1993. 

A rich collection of empowering stories. 

Kuklin, Susan. Speaking Out: Teenagers Take on Race, Sex, and Identity. 
New York: Putnam, 1993. 

Young people address issues of gender, race, class, sexual 
orientation, and stature. 

Langone, John. Spreading Poison: A Book about Racism and Prejudice. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1993. 

Various groups examine how racial, gender, and religious 
discrimination affect our lives. 

Muse, Daphne. Prejudice: Stories about Hate, Ignorance, Revelation, and 
Transformation. New York: Hyperion Books for Children, 1995. 

A collection of stories on these topics. 

Rethinking Schools Resources for Equity and Social Justice 

Booklets address a variety of educational issues relating to 
rethinking classrooms. Catalogue available from Rethinking 
Schools, 1001 E. Keefe Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53212-9805. 

Rochman, Hazel. Against Borders: Promoting Books for a Multicultural 
World. Chicago: American Library Association/Booklist 
Publications, 1993. 

An annotated bibliography that includes books on racism, 
sexism, anti-Semitism, homophobia, and classism. 

Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. The Disuniting of America. Knoxville, TN: 
Whittle Direct Books, 1991. 

Schlesinger argues that unless a common purpose begins to 
bind people together, hostilities and ethnicities will break us 
apart. 

Selznick, Gertrude Jaeger, and Stephen Steinberg. The Tenacity of 
Prejudice, Anti-Semitism in Contemporary America. New York: 
Harper and Row, 1969. 



[ 



] 



287 



General Resources 



Teaching Tolerance. Southern Poverty Law Center. 400 Washington 
Ave., Montgomery, AL 36104 

Free magazines for educators interested in grappling with 
teaching tolerance through their classrooms. 

West, Cornel. Race Matters. Boston: Beacon Press, 1993. 

West addresses a variety of issues confronting Blacks and Whites, 
conservatives and liberals concerning key issues in America. 

Wistrich, Robert S. Antisemitism: the Longest Hatred. New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1991. 



Sources for 
Materials on 
Teaching about 
Genocide and 
Intolerance 



The Southern Poverty Law Center 
400 Washington Avenue 
Montgomery, AL 36104 

Provides excellent teaching materials including Teaching 
Tolerance magazine and The Shadow of Hate, which includes a 
video and publication entitled Us and Them: A History of 
Intolerance in America. All of the materials are free to teachers. 



Facing History and Ourselves 
16 Hurd Road 
Brookline, MA 02146 
(617) 232-1595 

Provides teacher training and support plus materials for 
examining racism, prejudice, and anti-Semitism. 

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 
100 Raoul Wallenberg Place, SW 
Washington, DC 20024-2150 
(202) 488-0407 

Provides teacher training and support plus the museum and 
bookstore. 



MELUS 

Society for the Study of the Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United 

States 

Newsletter: 

News Notes 
Dr. Shirley Lumpkin 
Department of English 
Marshall University 
Huntington, WV 25755 



O 

ERIC 



297 



288 



I 

Leatrice B. Rabinsky and Carol Danks 



Membership information: 

Prof. Arlene Elder 
Treasurer of MELUS 
Department of English 
University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, OH 45221 

Endeavors to expand the definition of American literature 
through the study and teaching of Latino American, Native 
American, African American, Asian and Pacific American, and 
ethnically specific European American literary works, their 
authors, and their cultural contexts. 

Heath Anthology of American Literature Newsletter 

DC Heath & Company 

125 Spring Street 

Lexington, MA 02173 

(800) 235-3565 

Provides information and materials for including multicultural 
literature in new and already existing courses. 

Rethinking Schools 
1001 E. Keefe Avenue 
Milwaukee, WI 53212 
(414) 964-9646 

Provides a quarterly journal which focuses on grassroots 
school reform and teaching for equity and justice. Subscrip- 
tions: one year, $12.50; two years, $20. 

Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith 
834 United Nations Plaza 
New York, NY 10017 
(212) 490-2525 

Provides information, publications, and audiovisual materials, 
especially relating to anti-Semitism and hate groups. 

Simon Wiesenthal Center 
9760 W. Pico Blvd. 

Los Angeles, C A 90035 
(310) 553-9036 

Provides a journal for contributors which focuses on anti- 
Semitism and hate crimes. 



erJc 



29 S 



289 



African American 
Resources 

Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. 

Montgomery County Public Schools, Maryland 

Glenda K. Valentine 

Teaching Tolerance Magazine 



W ith the exception of the Harlem Renaissance (1919-1940), it 
is extremely difficult to find another time in U.S. history 
when the depth and breadth of African American resources 
is greater than it is today. 1 The choices of quality books and litera- 
ture, software, and film seem endless. When one adds to the mix the 
growing number of outstanding Internet and online electronic 
resources available to educators, attempts to keep up seem impos- 
sible. One thing is certain about the latter group of resources: as their 
sophistication grows, it almost seems possible to believe the 
cyberspace hype that one can find anything on the Web. 

Any time someone is handed the task of recommending 
resources, choices are made. The choices we made center around 
three issues: 

One, since this book is about teaching tolerance, we thought it 
critical that readers read a few pieces on tolerance. Occasionally, it is 
necessary to ponder a subject matter before diving in. Also, we 
believe our specific resource recommendations on African Ameri- 
cans are framed within the concept of teaching tolerance. 2 

Two, there are many organizations prepared to assist educators in 
teaching tolerance, and we encourage educators to seek out the 
advice of experts when the need is there. This, too, is necessary. 
Others have gone before us, and we would be foolish not to take the 
marked trail. 

Finally, we leave readers with our "best of the best list" of resources 
covering curriculum guides, organizations, journals and magazines, 
software and Internet resources, film, and literature. Our best list 
comes out of our professional relationship with the Teaching Toler- 
ance Project in Montgomery, Alabama. 




293 



290 


Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 


Readings on 
Tolerance for 
Teachers 


Finding provocative, well-thought-out articles, essays, and books on 
tolerance is a lot easier than it used to be. In fact, it is not uncommon 
for such books to climb the bestseller lists and stay there. Take for 
example the recent success of books such as Hillary Rodham 
Clinton's It Takes a Village: And Other Lessons Children Teach Us or 
William Bennett's The Book of Virtues. 3 

Teaching about genocide and intolerance is an extremely 
difficult moral undertaking. We believe the readings recommended 
here do an outstanding job of grounding educators in the meaning of 
tolerance. Once again, we implore readers not to skip over these 
readings. Teaching about genocide and intolerance cannot occur in a 
vacuum. Educators must understand the moral implications and 
consequences of bringing such lessons into their classrooms and 
school buildings. 

Ayers, William, and Patricia Ford, eds. City Kids, City Teachers: 

Reports from the Front Row. New York: The New Press, 1996. 

A marvelous collection of essays written by front-line educa- 
tors who dare us to see urban kids, especially the racial mi- 
norities, in their true light. 

Banks, James, and Cherry McGee Banks, eds. Handbook of Research on 
Multicultural Education. New York: Macmillan, 1995. 

According to James Banks and Cherry McGee Banks, "The 
main purpose of this Handbook is to assemble in one volume 
the major research and scholarship related to multicultural 
education that has developed since the field emerged in the 
1960s and 1970s." The Handbook does a remarkable job of 
relating theory to research, and research to practice. 

Beauboeuf-Lafontant, Tamara, and D. Smith Augustine, eds. Facing 
Racism in Education. Cambridge: Harvard Educational Review, 
1996. Facing Racism in Education, a reprint of a series of previ- 
ously published articles, offers educators a variety of sugges- 
tions and tools for battling racism. The role of racism in educa- 
tion is examined through scholarly research papers, poetry, 
music, and personal accounts. 

Boyd, Dwight. "Dominance Concealed through Diversity: Implica- 
tions of Inadequate Perspectives on Cultural Pluralism." 
Harvard Educational Review 66.3 (1996): 609-30. 

Boyd offers an extremely interesting scholarly discussion on 
the issue of "groundless tolerance." Boyd makes us realize that 



] 



291 



African American Resources 



a commitment to tolerance cannot be a mindless or casual 
decision. 

Bullard, Sara. Teaching Tolerance: Raising Open-Minded, Empathetic 
Children. New York, Doubleday, 1996. 

Teaching Tolerance: Raising Open-Minded, Empathetic Children 
helps all adults who care for children understand how chil- 
dren learn prejudice and how they can be guided toward 
tolerance. The book, written by the founding editor of Teaching 
Tolerance magazine, balances theory and reflection with practi- 
cal advice and a long list of resources. 

Cohen, Joshua, and Martha Nussbaum, eds. For Love of Country: 
Debating the Limits of Patriotism. Boston: Beacon Press, 1996. 

This collection of essays written by some of the world's most 
prominent intellectuals challenges our thinking about what it 
means to be a citizen of the world. Elaine Scarry's essay, "The 
Difficulty of Imagining Other People," makes the reader face 
some incredibly difficult questions about how we judge the 
worth of other humans. 

Delpit, Lisa. Other People's Children: Cultural Conflict in the Classroom. 
New York: The New Press, 1995. 

This book courageously confronts the dilemmas caused by 
changing cultural demographics in our classrooms. Lisa Delpit 
uses evocative essays to discuss how preconceived stereo- 
types, assumptions, and expectations continue to build educa- 
tional barriers between white teachers and students of color. 

Fine, Michelle, et al., eds. Off White: Readings on Race, Power, and 
Society. New York: Routledge, 1997. 

Off White is a collection of scholarly essays that approaches 
multicultural issues from a "white racialization process." 

Every white teacher teaching in America should read this 
book. 

Franklin, John Hope. The Color Line: Legacy For the Twenty-First 
Century. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1993. 

One of America's most distinguished historians takes an 
uncompromising look at racism in American today and, at the 
same time, gives each of us new hope and direction. 



0 

FRIC 



301 



292 



Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 



Gates, Henry Louis, and Cornel West. The Future of Race. New York: 
Knopf, 1996. 

As we head into the twenty-first century. Gates and West, two 
of the country's best-known African American scholars, offer 
us a sobering assessment of what it means to be an African 
American in America. 

Gioseffi, Daniela, ed. On Prejudice: A Global Perspective. New York: 
Anchor Books, 1993. 

It is hard to find another collection of writings on prejudice 
and intolerance more complete than this volume. 

Harding, Vincent. Hope and History: Why We Must Share the Story of 
the Movement. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1990. 

This marvelous book sets the civil rights movement in its 
proper context as a struggle to expand American democracy. 

Heller, Carol, and Joseph A. Hawkins. "Teaching Tolerance: Notes 
from the Front Line." Teachers College Record 95.3 (1994): 337- 
68. 

This article surveys school and community-based programs 
teaching tolerance. It also discusses various definitions of 
tolerance for school settings. 

Kohl, Herbert. Should We Burn Babar?: Essays on Children's Literature 
and the Power of Stories. New York: The New Press, 1995. 

Teachers planning to teach the story of Rosa Parks must read 
Kohl's essay, "The Story of Rosa Parks and the Montgomery 
Bus Boycott Revisited." Kohl offers brilliant suggestions on 
how to teach this important history the right way 

Kohn, Alfie. "How Not to Teach Values: A Critical Look at Character 
Education." Phi Delta Kappan 78.6 (1997): 428-39. 

Teaching tolerance is a large part of efforts across the nation to 
teach character development in school children. Kohn takes a 
critical look at what not to do when designing such programs 
for young children. 

Kushner, Tony. Thinking About the Longstanding Problems of Virtue and 
Happiness. New York: Theatre Communications Group, 1995. 

Best known for his award-winning Broadway play Angels in 
America, playwright Tony Kushner shows off his writing 
diversity in this book with some thought-provoking essays. 



0 



302 



] 



293 



African American Resources 



"Some Questions About Tolerance" is a must-read for any 
person about to embark on an understanding of tolerance. 

Wolff, Robert Paul, Barrington Moore, and Herbert Marcuse. A 
Critique of Pure Tolerance. Boston: Beacon Press, 1965. 

This simple collection of three essays explores the philosophi- 
cal foundations of tolerance. 



Organizations 



Those seeking information about African Americans have a variety 
of organizations to turn to for assistance, including organizations 
such as the National Association for Multicultural Education, the 
National Coalition of Education Activists, Rethinking Schools, 
Teaching Tolerance, The National Conference, and Network of 
Educators on the Americas. Many organizations produce specific 
teaching materials on African Americans, and some are prepared to 
go further by actually producing tailor-made reading lists or provid- 
ing teachers and other educators with hands-on training opportuni- 
ties through specially designed institutes or annual conferences. In 
addition, some organizations such as NAME and The National 
Conference have state affiliates prepared to assist educators locally 
with their special needs. 



National Association for Multicultural Education (NAME) 

1511 K Street NW, Suite 430 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 628-NAME 

National organization offers a wealth of information about 
African Americans and other racial and ethnic groups. Also 
publishes a regular journal. Multicultural Education, which 
features a regular resource column for teachers. 

National Black Child Development Institute 
1023 15th Street NW, Suite 600 
Washington, DC 20005 
(800) 556-2234 

NBCDI publishes a variety of pamphlets and magazines that 
are full of useful information on a variety of topics, including 
parenting and child health care. 

National Coalition of Education Activists 
PO. Box 405 
Rosendale, NY 12472 
(914) 658-8115 




303 



[ 



294 



— i 

Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 



NCEA provides information and referrals on a wide range of 
issues such as tracking and multicultural and anti-racist 
education. 

Network of Educators on the Americas 
1118 22nd Street NW 
Washington, DC 20037 
(202) 429-0137 

Produces a regular catalog of K-12 resources on multicultural 
education. Many of its teaching guides, especially the Carib- 
bean series, are extremely inexpensive. 

Poverty & Race Research Action Council 
1711 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 207 
Washington, DC 20009 
(202) 387-9887 

Regularly published newsletter Poverty and Race is full of 
timely issues that affect African Americans and other racial 
minorities. 

Rethinking Schools 
1001 E. Keefe Avenue 
Milwaukee, WI 53212 
(414) 964-9646 

Best known for its publication Rethinking Schools; however, this 
organization also acts as a clearinghouse and hot line for 
teachers seeking information on minority youngsters. 

State 4-H Office 
114 Ag Hall 

University of Nebraska 
Lincoln, NE 68583-0700 
(402) 472-9009 

The 4-H curriculum Many Paces, One People presents detailed 
lesson plans and activities that explore stereotyping, cross- 
cultural problem-solving, and "building differences." 

Teaching Tolerance 
The Southern Poverty Law Center 
400 Washington Avenue 
Montgomery, AL 36104 
(334) 264-0286 

Publishes twice-yearly magazine of educational resources and 
ideas for promoting respect for diversity, free to teachers. Free 



295 



African American Resources 



teaching kits. The Shadow of Hate and America's Civil Rights 
Movement, cover significant African American historical 
events. 

The National Conference 
71 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1100 
New York, NY 10003 
(212) 206-0006 

The National Conference, founded in 1927 as The National 
Conference of Christians and Jews, is a human relations 
organization dedicated to fighting bias, bigotry, and racism in 
America. Teaching guides (e.g.. Actions Speak Louder: A Skills- 
Based Curriculum for Building Inclusion) are used in schools 
throughout the country. 



Journals and 
Magazines 



There are a considerable number of scholarly journals and maga- 
zines which educators should turn to for assistance in identifying 
resources and materials on African Americans. Many of the periodi- 
cals listed below focus exclusively on African Americans. 



Black Issues in Higher Education. Cox, Matthews & Associates. (703) 
385-2981. 



Multicultural Education. National Association for Multicultural 
Education Caddo Gap Press. (805) 750-9978. 

Multicultural Review. Greenwood Publishing Group. (203) 226-3571. 

Race, Gender, & Class: An Interdisciplinary & Multicultural Journal. 
Queens College CUNY. (718) 997-3070. 

Rethinking Schools: An Urban Educational Journal. Rethinking Schools. 
(414) 964-7220. 

Skipping Stones: A Multicultural Children's Quarterly. Skipping Stones. 
(503) 342-4956. 

Teaching Tolerance. Southern Poverty Law Center. (334) 264-0286. 

The Black Scholar (also known as the Journal of Black Studies and 
Research). Black World Foundation. (510) 547-6633. 

The Journal of Black Psychology. Association of Black Psychologists 
Sage Periodical Press. (805) 499-0721. 

The Journal of Negro Education. Howard University Press. (202) 806-8120. 



0 

ERIC 



305 



296 



[ 



Worthy Web 

Sites 



Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 



Between June 1996 and January 1997, the number of Internet Web 
sites worldwide nearly tripled in number, moving from 230,000 sites 
to nearly 700,000 sites. 4 With this kind of growth it is impossible to 
cover all the possibilities here, and no attempt is made to do so. 
Educators not using the Internet in a search for relevant resources 
and materials on African Americans are missing out on a lot. What 
follows is a sample of what is out there in cyberspace. Most of the 
sites are loaded with relevant links and bookmarks to other African 
American Web sites. 



African American History and Culture 

http:/ / www.scils.rutgers.edu/ special/kay/afro.html 

African American Historic Texts On-line 

http:/ / curryedschool.Virginia.EDU/go/multicultural/sites/ 
aframdocs.html 



African American Newspapers 
http:/ / www.afroam.org/ 



Afronet 

http:/ / www.afronet.com/ 



American Slave Narratives 

http://xroads.virginia.edu/ -HYPER/ wpa/wpahome.html 



Black Entertainment Television 

http:/ / www.betnetworks.com/newhome.html 



Black History Bonanza of Bookmarks for Classroom Teachers 
http:/ / www.mcps.kl2.md.us/ curriculum/socialstd/ 
African_Am_bookmarks.html 



Black World Today 

http:/ / www. tbwt.com/index2.htm 



Britannica Online Guide to Black History 
http:/ /blackhistory. eb.com/ 



Ethnic Studies at the University of Southern California 

http:/ /www.usc.edu/Library/Ref/Ethnic/index.html 

Harvard University W. E. B. Du Bois Institute for Afro-American 
Research 

http: / / web-dubois.fas.harvard.edu / 



[ 



] 



297 



African American Resources 



Library of Congress Resource Guide for the Study of Black History 
and Culture 

http:/ / www.loc.gov/exhibits/ african/intro.html 

Martin Luther King Jr. Papers Project at Stanford University 
http : / / www-leland.stanford.edu / group /King / 

NAACP Online 

http:/ / www.naacp.org/ 

National Black Child Development Institute 
http:/ / www.nbcdi.org/ 

Rethinking Schools 

http:/ / www. rethinkingschool.org 



The Universal Black Pages 

http:/ /www. ubp.com/ 



University of Virginia Multicultural Pavilion 

http:/ /curry.edschool. Virginia.EDU/ go /multicultural/ 



U.S. Census Black Facts 

http : / / www. thuban. com / census / index .htm 1 



Computer 

Software 



Some may see it as a stretch, but somewhere in the very near future, 
with the aid of every conceivable technology — artificial intelligence, 
interactive computers, virtual reality, hypermedia — the following 
classroom scenario may become common in schools. 



A classroom somewhere in the USA. Teacher: Good morning class. Here is 
next month's world history assignment: Write a 3,000-word newspaper 
article comparing the freedom movements led by Martin Luther King Jr. in 
the United States and Nelson Mandela in South Africa. Major emphasis 
should be placed on the tactics both used to achieve voting rights for their 
people. Your article must be based on the following activities: 

(1) interviews with Martin Luther King Jr. and Nelson Mandela; 

(2) interviews with three of King's and Mandela's co-workers; 

(3) shadowing King a year prior to the 1963 March on Washington, 
D.C.; 

(4) shadowing Mandela on his 1994 presidential election campaign. 

One more thing, class. Your completed article must appear on the school's 
network by the last day of next month. No excuses! No paper copies! 



O 

ERIC 



307 



298 



Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 



Surely, if today's virtual reality technology, as primitive as it is, can 
make us believe we are actually driving a car, flying an airplane, or 
playing a game of one-on-one basketball, then the possibility of 
conducting a simple face-to-face interview with King or Mandela is a 
sure thing. 

Today's computer technology cannot deliver face-to-face 
interviews with important historical figures 5 ; however, current 
computer software titles offer quite a few creative solutions for 
teaching tolerance, exploring other cultures, or exploring important 
U.S. historical events such as the mass migration of southern blacks 
to the industrial North and the civil rights movement. Recom- 
mended grade levels appear in parenthesis (e.g., K-8 or Grade 6 and 
up). 

The American People: Fabric of a Nation. National Geographic Society. 
(202) 828-5664. 

National Geographic's claim that its interactive videodisc 
series The American People "brings textbooks (and your stu- 
dents) to life" is not just idle promotional talk. The series does 
a thorough job of dealing with important social and historical 
issues such as immigration, slavery, the Ku Klux Klan, racism, 
civil rights, and religious freedom. 

History of the Blues. QUEUE, Inc. (800) 232-2224. 

This CD-ROM program traces the African roots of the blues 
(including chants and field hollers) and explores the many 
different musical styles associated with the blues. 

Eyes on the Prize Part 1, 1954-65. Public Broadcasting Service. (800) 
344-3337. 

The award-winning film series on the civil rights movement 
has been converted to videodisc. The videodisc version is 
packed with materials that add greater depth and context to 
the video, including photographs, profiles of people and 
organizations, documents, charts and graphs, music, news, 
and advertising of the period. 

Struggle for Justice. Scholastic, Inc. (800) 325-6149. 

The history of the disenfranchised African Americans, Native 
Americans, Latinos, women and immigrants is told in compre- 
hensive detail in this two-volume, interactive videodisc. 



] 



299 



African American Resources 



Annotated 

Guides 



Curriculum 

Guides 



Black American History: Slavery to Civil Rights. QUEUE, Inc. (800) 232- 



This CD-ROM is divided into eight twenty-minute segments 
that include the Colonial Period, the Civil War, Reconstruction, 
the Harlem Renaissance, and Black Protest Movements. 

Cultural Reporter. Tom Snyder Productions. (800) 342-0236. 

This interdisciplinary kit sends students into their communi- 
ties to investigate, document, and better appreciate the diver- 
sity of the areas in which they live. 

Annotated guides are extremely useful because they provide teach- 
ers with specific book and literature recommendations. A number of 
annotated guides worth considering in a search for quality African 
American materials follows. Most guides are updated periodically, 
so no specific publication dates are noted; however, a telephone 
number for either the publisher or organization responsible for the 
guide is listed. Guide to Multicultural Resources; Our Family, Our 
Friends, Our World ; and The African-American Experience: An HBJ 
Resource Guide for the Multicultural Classroom are highly recom- 
mended. 

Guide to Multicultural Resources. Fort Atkinson, WI: Highsmith Press. 
(800) 558-2110. 

Journey Home. Rochelle Park (NJ): The Peoples Publishing Group. 
(800) 822-1080. 

Our Family, Our Friends, Our World: An Annotated Guide to Significant 
Multicultural Books for Children and Teenagers. New Providence 
(NJ): R. R. Bowker Company. (800) 521-8110. 

The African-American Experience: An HBJ Resource Guide for the 

Multicultural Classroom. Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
(800) CALL-HBJ. 

The Spirit of Excellence Resource Guides. Washington, DC: National 
Black Child Development Institute. (202) 387-1281. 

The marvelous thing about curriculum guides is not only do they 
generally list resources, but they also take a sample of resources and 
demonstrate specific instructional guidelines on how to teach those 
materials. Since many guides are updated periodically, no specific 
publication dates are noted; however, a telephone number for either 



2224. 



ERIC 




c 



] 



300 


Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 


Documentary 

Films 


the publisher or organization responsible for the guide is listed. 
Recommended grade levels appear in parentheses along with a 
keyword designating topic coverage (e.g.. Grade 6 and up; civil 
rights movement). 

America's Civil Rights Movement. Montgomery, AL: Teaching Toler- 
ance. (334) 264-0286. 

America's Original Sin: A Study Guide on White Racism. Washington, 
DC: Sojourners. (800) 714-7474. 

Freedom's Unfinished Revolution. New York: The New Press. (800) 233- 
4830. 

In the Shadow of the Great White Way: Images from the Black Theatre 
(Teacher's Guide). Hartford, CT: Aetna. (203) 273-2843. 

Malcolm X in Context: A Study Guide to the Man and His Times. New 
York: PACE. (212) 274-1324. 

Based on teaching the book The Autobiography of Malcolm X by Alex 
Haley 

Nat Turner's Slave Revolt 1831. Amawalk, NY: Jackdaw Publications. 
(800) 789-0022. 

Planning and Organizing for Multicultural Instruction. Menlo Park: 
Alternative Publishing Group. (800) 447-2226. 

Rethinking Our Classrooms: Teaching for Equity and Justice. Milwaukee, 
WI: Rethinking Schools. (414) 964-9646. 

Teaching about Haiti. Washington, DC: Network of Educators on the 
Americas. (202) 429-0137. 

Tolerance for Diversity of Beliefs. Boulder, CO: Social Science Education 
Consortium. (303) 492-8154. 

On occasion, a particular book or an instructional kit or a film simply 
overwhelms us in that we immediately recognize the value of the 
materials for teaching important lessons on racial and cultural 
harmony or tolerance. While every medium has its impact, it is film 
that seems to make a lasting impression. Clearly, the realistic nature 
of films, as well as their immediacy, has everything to do with their 
potential to overwhelm. 



[ 



] 



301 



African American Resources 



Teachers searching for films on African Americans have a 
variety of outstanding places to turn. What follows is a brief list of 
our favorite documentary film distributors. Most of the distributors 
listed below have sizable collections of films on African American 
culture and history. In many cases, films are accompanied by lesson 
plans, teacher guides, and supplemental materials and readings. 

No attempt is made here to pick Hollywood-produced com- 
mercial films. We believe that the well-known, critically acclaimed 
commercial films need no real endorsement. Films such as A Raisin 
in the Sun (1961), Sounder (1972), Roots (1977), The Color Purple (1985), 
Glory (1989), The Long Walk Home (1990), Malcolm X (1992), Once 
Upon a Time When We Were Colored (1995), Ghosts of Mississippi (1996), 
Rosewood (1997), and Amistad (1997) have a place in the classroom, 
and where appropriate we see value in showing these films. We do, 
however, offer one warning: Hollywood films sometimes stray from 
important historical facts. Take for example the Civil War film Glory. 
In the Hollywood version the all-black Massachusetts 54th Regi- 
ment, one of the first regiments of black soldiers recruited for the 
Union army, is made up of ex-slaves. In reality, the regiment's men 
were free men. In fact, many of the men were skilled and literate. 
The actual letters of one of these soldiers, twenty-six-year-old sea- 
man James Henry Gooding, are recommended reading, and are 
found in the 1991 book On the Altar of Freedom: A Black Soldier's Civil 
War Letters from the Front. 6 

California Newsreel 
149 Ninth Street 
San Francisco, CA 94103 
(415) 621-6196 

Carousel Film and Video 
260 Fifth Avenue, Suite 405 
New York, NY 10001 
(212) 683-1660 

Cinema Guild 
1697 Broadway 
New York, NY 10019-5904 
(800) 723-5522 

First Run/Icarus 
153 Waverly Place 
New York, NY 10014 
(800) 876-1710 





] 



302 



Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 



Georgia Humanities Council 
50 Hurt Plaza S.E., Suite 440 
Atlanta, GA 30303-2936 
(404) 523-6220 

Knowledge Unlimited 
P.O. Box 52 
Madison, WI 53701 
(800) 356-2303 

Media Projects 
5215 Homer Street 
Dallas, TX 75206 
(214) 826-3863 

Public Broadcasting Service Video 
1320 Braddock Place 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
(800) 344-3337 

Teaching Tolerance 
400 Washington Avenue 
Montgomery, AL 36104 
(334) 264-0286 

Women Made Movies 
462 Broadway, Suite 500-F 
New York, NY 10013 
(212) 925-0606 



Awesome 

Anthologies 



One expeditious way to cover the rich tradition of African American 
literature is to turn to anthologies. Certainly, anthologies do not 
survey all works, and in many cases the anthologies only print a 
selection of a particular work; nonetheless, they stand out as a great 
resource for those in search of quality poetry, plays, short stories, 
essays, and novels. Teachers also can turn to many anthologies for 
their critical analyses of particular bodies of work. Practically all of 
the anthologies listed below assist readers in understanding the 
importance of the work presented. 



Abrahams, Roger D., ed. African Folktales: Traditional Stories of the 
Black World. Selected and Retold. New York: Pantheon Books, 
1983. 



Adedjouma, Davida, ed. The Palm of My Heart: Poetry by African 
American Children. New York: Lee & Low, 1996. 



ERIC 



312 



303 



African American Resources 



Asante, Molefi Kete, and Abu S. Abarry, eds. African Intellectual 
Heritage: A Book of Sources. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press, 1996. 

Belton, Don, ed. Speak My Name: Black Men on Masculinity and the 
American Dream. Boston, Beacon Press, 1996. 

Courlander, Harold, ed. A Treasury of Afro-American Folklore. New 
York: Marlowe & Co., 1996. 

Cunard, Nancy, ed. Negro: An Anthology. New York: Continuum, 
1996. 

Elam, Harry J., and Robert Alexander, eds. Colored Contradictions: An 
Anthology of Contemporary African-American Plays. New York: 
Plume, 1996. 

Evans, Mari, ed. Black Women Writers (1950-1980): A Critical Evalua- 
tion. New York: An Anchor Book, 1984. 

Gates, Henry Louis, and Nellie Y. McKay, eds. The Norton Anthology 
of African American Literature. New York: W. W. Norton & 
Company, 1997. 

Gillan, Maria M., and Jennifer Gillan, eds. Unsettling America: An 
Anthology of Contemporary Multicultural Poetry. New York: 
Penguin Books, 1994. 

Killens, John Oliver, and Jerry Ward, eds. Black Southern Voices: An 
Anthology of Fiction, Poetry, Drama, Nonfiction, and Critical 
Essays. New York: Meridian, 1992. 

Lewis, David L., ed. The Portable Harlem Renaissance Reader. New 
York: Penguin Books, 1994. 

Long, Richard, and Eugenia Collier, eds. Afro-American Writing: An 
Anthology of Prose & Poetry. University Park, PA: The Pennsyl- 
vania State University Press, 1985. 

Mullane, Deirdre, ed. Crossing the Danger Water: 300 Years of African 
American Writing. New York: An Anchor Book, 1993. 

Rowell, Charles, ed. The Ancestral House: The Black Short Story in the 
Americas and Europe. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1995. 

Stokes, Geoffrey, ed. The Village Voice Anthology (1956-1980): Twenty- 
five Years of Writing from The Village Voice. New York: William 
Morrow & Co., 1996. 



O 



313 



304 


Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 


Books and 
Literature 


It is impossible to offer readers here an exhaustive list of all available 
African American literature; however, it is possible to offer readings 
which fall into three general time periods: the Middle Passage/ 
Slavery/Civil War Years; Reconstruction /Jim Crow Years; and Civil 
Rights Era. Even here we make no attempt to cover everything. 
There are, however, recent attempts to be entirely inclusive. For 
example, readers certainly are encouraged to turn to the 1997 Norton 
Anthology of African American Literature for a lesson in comprehen- 
siveness. Clearly, every English teacher who wishes to teach about 
. African Americans should have this outstanding collection on his or 
her desk. 


The Middle 
Passage/Slavery/ 
Civil War Years 


Adams, Virginia M., ed. On the Altar of Freedom: A Black Soldier's Civil 
War Letters from the Front. Amherst: The University of Massa- 
chusetts Press, 1991. 

Bontemps, Ama. Black Thunder: Gabriel's Revolt Virginia 1800. Boston: 
Beacon Press, 1992. 

Douglass, Frederick. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass: An 
American Slave, Written by Flimself. Boston: Bedford Books, 

1993. 

McKissack, Patricia. The Dark-Thirty: Southern Tales of the Supernatu- 
ral. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992. 

Rawick, George P. The American Slave: A Composite Autobiography 
(Parts 1 and 2). Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 
Inc., 1972. 

A sample of narratives is online at http:/ / xroads.virginia.edu/ 
-HYPER/ wpa / wpahome.html/ . 

Rutberg, Becky. Mary Lincoln's Dressmaker: Elizabeth Keckley's Remark- 
able Rise from Slave to White House Confidante. New York: 

Walker & Co., 1995. 

Sullivan, George. Slave Ship: The Story of the Henrietta Marie. New 
York: Cobblehill Books, 1994. 


Reconstruction/ 
Jim Crow Years 


Carnes, Jim. Us and Them: A History on Intolerance in America. Cary, 
NY: Oxford University Press, 1996. 

Haskins, James. The Scottsboro Boys. New York: Holt, 1994. 

Hughes, Langston. The Dream Keeper and Other Poems. New York: 
Knopf, 1994. 


ERIC 


314 



305 



African American Resources 



Hurston, Zora Neale. Their Eyes Were Watching God. New York: 
HarperPerennial, 1990. 

Katz, William L. Black Women of the Old West. Columbus, OH: Simon 
& Schuster, 1995. 

Ritter, Lawrence S. Leagues Apart: The Men & Times of the Negro 
Baseball Leagues. New York: Morrow Junior Books, 1995. 

Schlissel, Lillian. Black Frontiers: A History of African American Heroes 
in the Old West. New York: Simon & Schuster for Young Readers, 
1995. 

Washington, Booker T. Up from Slavery. In The Norton Anthology of 
African American Literature. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 
1997. 

Wright, Richard. Black Boy. New York: Harper & Row, 1937. (Grades 
8 and up) 

Civil Rights Era Archer, Jules. They Had A Dream: The Civil Rights Struggle from 

Frederick Douglass to Marcus Garvey to Martin Luther King, Jr., & 
Malcolm X. New York: Viking Children's Books, 1993. 

Bond, Julian, ed. Gonna Sit at the Welcome Table. New York: American 
Heritage /Custom Publishing, 1996. 

Branch, Taylor. Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954-63. 
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988. 

Curry, Constance. Silver Rights. New York: Workman Publishing, 
1995. 

Egerton, John. Speak Nou> against the Day: The Generation before the 
Civil Rights Movement in the South. Chapel Hill, NC: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1995. 

Levine, Ellen. Freedom's Children: Young Civil Rights Activists Tell Their 
Own Stories. New York: The Putman & Grosset Group, 1993. 

Rowan, Carl T. Dream Makers, Dream Breakers: The World of Justice 
Thurgood Marshall. Boston: Little, Brown, 1993. 

Washington, James, ed. A Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and 
Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1986. 



306 



Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. and Glenda K. Valentine 



NotOS 1. Just to keep up one must resort to a variety of reference books. For 

example, take the recent publication of The Oxford Companion to African 
American Literature (edited by William L. Andrews, Frances S. Foster, and 
Trudier Harris. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997). Currently, the Du 
Bois Institute at Harvard University is in the process of putting together an 
Encyclopedia Africana. 

2. There are many definitions of tolerance, and our recommended 
readings explore the concept thoroughly. A discussion of how we define the 
concept is best captured in the following article: Heller, Carol, and Joseph 
A. Hawkins, "Teaching Tolerance: Notes from the Front Line," Teachers 
College Record 95 (Spring 1994): 337-68. 

3. Bennett's success extends beyond his 1993 The Book of Virtues. His 
other "virtue" books — The Book of Virtues for Young People: A Treasury of Great 
Moral Stories and The Moral Compass: Stories for a Life's Journey — have also 
sold well. 

4. Clifford Lynch, "Searching the Internet," Scientific American 276 
(March 1997): 53. 

5. This limitation, however, is about to end. For example, during 
Black History Month, February 1997, Scholastic, Inc. allowed school chil- 
dren across the country to interview Rosa Parks live online. One can visit 
Scholastic at http://scholastic.com. 

6. Adams, Virginia M., ed. On the Altar of Freedom: A Black Soldier's 
Civil War Letters from the Front. Amherst: The University of Massachusetts 
Press, 1991. 




0 




Asian American 
Resources 

Toming Jun Liu 

California State University, Los Angeles 



T he recent popularity of Asian American studies is reflected in a 
rapidly growing number of titles in fiction, poetry, biography, 
film, cultural and literary criticism, and electronic resources. It is 
a daunting task to choose a few references that will best suit educa- 
tors' needs in teaching tolerance as related to Asian American issues. 
We have therefore followed certain criteria. 

One, from the legal, cultural, and social practices which excluded 
Asian immigrants, we learn that such intolerance in the past has 
something to do with the discourse of Americanization or assimila- 
tion. Thus, teaching tolerance related to Asian American issues 
requires an understanding of Asian Americans' experiences and 
identity-formation in the diasporic perspective, a perspective which 
brings the global and the intercultural into Asian ethnic studies. To 
help educators who wish to pursue this question, we select a small 
list of basic theoretical readings representing different dimensions of 
the Asian diaspora. In researching writings other than these theoreti- 
cal essays, we also find an increasing number of new titles taking the 
Asian diasporic perspective; this finding is reflected in our other 
selections. 

Two, Asian Americans, far from being a homogeneous group, repre- 
sent a large variety of cultures; the cultures within a single group — 
for example, the Chinese — are also multifarious. Although our list 
cannot fully represent the rich diversity of Asian America, we try to 
include references about a range of cultural and experiential differ- 
ences. 

Three, a significant portion of Asian American literature is available 
in biography, memoir, and other prose narratives. We select and 
include such references because there are some powerful testimoni- 
als against intolerance. 

Four, journals, magazines, Web sites, films, electronic resources, and 
other sources of information are recommended so that educators can 



] 



308 



Toming Jun Liu 



keep abreast with developments in Asian American studies. A few 
organizations, with their addresses, are listed for the information of 
educators interested in seeking further assistance and advice. 



Bhabha, Homi. "Postcolonial Criticism." Redrawing the Boundaries: 
The Transformation of English and American Literary Studies. Ed. 
Stephen Greenblatt and Giles Gunn. New York: MLA Press, 
1992. 437-65. 

The first section of Bhabha's essay, entitled "The Survival of 
Culture," summarizes the general tasks for the postcolonial 
project and some of the common contingencies; the essay 
helps educators understand why there is a need to expand the 
international dimensions of American ethnic literature. 

Hune, Shirley, Hyung-chan Kim, Stephen S. Fugita, and Amy Ling, 
eds. Asian Americans: Comparative and Global Perspectives. 
Pullman: Washington State University Press, 1991. 

A rich resource book on issues related to the experience and 
theory of Asian diaspora. Essays are arranged under four 
headings: "Comparing Old and New Area Studies," "Histori- 
cal Aspects," "Contemporary Asian American Issues," and 
"Literature and Art in Comparative and Global Perspectives." 

Radhakrishnan, R. "Is the Ethnic 'Authentic' in the Diaspora?" 

Diasporic Mediations: Between Home and Location. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1996. 203-14. 

The author, a critic from India, begins this essay with a ques- 
tion from his eleven-year-old son: "Am I Indian or American?" 
In his reflections on the "ethnicity" of the diasporic, the author 
in turn asks, among other questions, "If the Asian is to be 
Americanized, will the American submit to Asianization? Will 
there be a reciprocity of influence whereby American identity 
itself will be seen as a form of openness to the many ingredi- 
ents that constitute it, or will 'Americanness' function merely 
as a category of marketplace pluralism?" 

Tu, Wei-ming, ed. The Living Tree: The Changing Meaning of Being 
Chinese Today. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1994. 

Most of the eleven contributors are scholars in Chinese stud- 
ies. But this collection of essays reconsiders the traditional 
disciplinary separation of Chinese studies from Chinese 
American studies. Tu Wei-ming's idea of "cultural China" 
enhances the conception of Chinese diaspora. 



Theoretical 
Readings on 
Asian Diaspora 
for Teachers 



c 



] 



309 



Asian American Resources 



Wong, Sau-ling C. "Denationalization Reconsidered: Asian American 
Cultural Criticism at a Theoretical Crossroads." Amerasia 
Journal 21.1 & 2 (1995): 1-27. 

A lucid presentation of the need to shift toward the diasporic 
in Asian American cultural studies. Exploring the international 
dimensions of Asian America and reviewing recent changes in 
the modes of living among Asian immigrants, Wong argues 
against American cultural nationalism as a horizon. 



Social History Gillenkirk, Jeff, and James Motlow. Bitter Melon: Inside America's Last 

Rural Chinese Town. Berkeley, CA: Heyday, 1993. 

A collection of moving oral histories and stunning photo- 
graphs involving the town of Locke, California, the last rural 
Chinese town in America. Suitable reading for secondary 
school students. 

Hoobler, Dorothy, and Thomas Hoobler. The Chinese American Family 
Album. Introduction by Bette Bao Lord. New York and Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1994. 

A book of familial and historical photographs, cartoon pic- 
tures, and short introductory essays about Chinese immigrants 
in different historical periods, arranged under six headings: 
"The Middle Kingdom," "Voyage to America," "Arrival in the 
Land of the Flowering Flag," "A New Life," "Putting Down 
Roots," and "Part of America." 

Kennedy, John F. A Nation of Immigrants. Introduced by Robert F. 
Kennedy. New York: Harper & Row, 1964. 

An authoritative — and, in a sense, official — account of dis- 
criminatory treatments of many ethnic groups in the history of 
the United States. The book confirms the foreign origins of 
most Americans. 

Takaki, Ronald. Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian 
Americans. Boston: Little, Brown, 1989. 

An excellent reference book in Asian American history. One of 
the themes is that discrimination against Asians is often based 
on an exaggeration of them as unassimilable strangers. 



Documentary 

Films/Videos 



The following titles and more on Asian Pacific Americans can be 
ordered by contacting: 



O 

ERLC 



319 



310 



Toming Jun Liu 



NAATA/CrossCurrent Media 
346 Ninth St., 2nd Floor 
San Francisco, CA 94103 
(415) 552-9550 
(415) 863-7428 (FAX) 

Catalogue available online: http://www.lib.berkeley.edu/ 
MRC / NAATACAT.html 

Carved in Silence. Producer: Felicia Lowe. 1988. 

After the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, potential Chinese 
immigrants suffered detainment and vigorous interrogation 
for up to three years on Angel Island. The title of this docu- 
mentary refers to poetry written in Chinese carved by Chinese 
detainees on the walls of prison cells. 

In No One's Shadow. Producer: Naomi De Castro. 1988. 

An important overview of the second largest Asian ethnic 
group in the United States: Filipino Americans. The film 
recounts Filipino American history from the 1900s to the 
present, telling of many contributions they have made in the 
fields of agriculture, arts, and politics. 

Sa-I-Gu: From Korean Women's Perspectives. Producer: Christine Choy 
etc. 1993. 

The LA riots in 1992 underscored the voicelessness and invis- 
ibility of Korean Americans. This video provides a perspective 
essential to discussions on the L.A. riots, ethnic relations, and 
racism in the United States. 

The Color of Honor. Producer: Lord Ding. 1988. 

A collective of the Japanese American experience in World War 
II. The film features the most decorated military unit in U.S. 
history, and the thousands who challenged the constitutional- 
ity of the internment camps. 

The Price You Pay. Producer: Christine Keyser. 1988. 

A film about South East Asian immigrants. Never before has 
such a large immigrant group come to this country from a 
region where the United States waged and lost a war. This film 
explores the cultural heritage of the Vietnamese, Laotian, and 
Khmer people, and conveys the pain and frustration of re- 
settlement. 




O O 



0 



311 



[ 



Asian American Resources 



Literary 

Anthologies 



Biography and 
Memoir 



o 

ERIC 



Hagedom, Jessica, ed. Charlie Chan Is Dead: An Anthology of Contem- 
porary Asian American Fiction. New York: Penguin, 1993. 

An anthology of short fiction and excerpts from longer fiction 
by well-known writers such as Toshio Moris and Diana Chang 
and emerging writers from Asian ethnic communities. 

Hongo, Garrett, ed. The Open Boat: Poems from Asian America. New 
York: Anchor-Doubleday, 1993. 

Thirty-one poets representing a broad range of perspectives in 
Asian America. 

Hongo, Garrett. Under Western Eyes: Personal Essays from Asian 
America. New York: Anchor-Doubleday, 1995. 

Autobiographical essays that link personal experiences with 
larger social issues such as assimilation, sexuality, family, 
language. 

Lim-Hing, Sharon, ed. The Very Inside: An Anthology of Writing by 
Asian and Pacific Islander Lesbian and Bisexual Women. Toronto: 
Sister Vision, 1994. 

These political and erotic writings — prose, poetry, inter- 
views — have an international and diasporic emphasis as the 
authors trace their origins in Asian countries. 

Watanabe, Sylvia, and Carol Bruchae, eds. Into the Fire: Asian Ameri- 
can Prose. Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield Review, 1996. 

A collection of prose with a global and diasporic perspective. 
Introductions, biographies, and photographs accompany the 
contributions. 

Women of South Asian Descent Collective, eds. Our Feet Walk the Sky: 
Women of the South Asian Diaspora. San Francisco: Aunt Lute 
Books, 1993. 

Over a hundred selections in autobiography, poetry, fiction, 
and literary and film reviews by more than sixty contributors. 



Hong, Maria, ed. Growing Up Asian American. Afterword by Stephen 
H. Sumida. New York: Morrow, 1993. 

Narratives, fictional and nonfictional, by thirty-two Asian 
American writers. The anthology is thematically divided into 
three parts: "First Memories," "The Beginnings of Identity," 
and "Growing Up." 



32 



1 . 



312 



c 



Toming Jun Liu 



Lee, Li- Young. The Winged Seed: A Remembrance. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1995. 

This autobiography by an accomplished Chinese Indonesian 
poet chronicles his father's imprisonment by Sukarno, his 
family's flight from Indonesia to Hong Kong, and the family's 
settlement in the United States. 

Minatoya, Lydia. Talking to the High Monks in the Snow. New York: 
HarperCollins, 1993. 

Minatoya, a Japanese American teaching at a United States 
military base in Okinawa, describes her life in Boston and her 
parents' loyalty to the nation that interned them. 

White-Parks, Annette. Sui Sin Far/Edith Maude Eaton: A Literary 
Biography. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995. 

Edith Eaton (pseudonym Sui Sin Far) is one of the earliest 
Asian American fiction writers. She published short stories 
and essays contesting stereotypes of Asian diaspora in North 
America. This is the first full-length literary biography of Sui 
Sin Far. 



FiCtiOn Chang, Diana. The Frontiers of Love. 1956. Intro. Shirley Geol-lin Lim. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1993. 

Chang's first novel, republished, focuses on three Eurasians in 
a cosmopolitan and colonized space in 1945, namely Japanese- 
occupied Shanghai, and reveals the complex historical and 
cultural forces which shape identity. 

Far, Sui Sin [Edith Eaton]. "Mrs. Spring Fragrance" and Other Writings. 
Ed. Amy Ling and Annette White-Parks. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1995. 

Originally written in the late 1880s and early 1900s, this collec- 
tion of short fiction and nonfiction addresses questions related 
to Chinese and mixed-race Americans. 

Gonzalez, N. V. M. " The Bread of Salt" and Other Stories. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press, 1993. 

A collection of sixteen stories which examine, often through 
the eyes of young people, the history of colonization in the 
Philippines and emigration to the United States. 



[ 



] 



313 



Asian American Resources 



Jen, Gish. Typical American. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1991. 

A novel which mocks the American dream through the Ameri- 
can experience of a man born and raised in China. 

Kogawa, Joy. Obasan. Boston: Godine, 1982. 

A historical novel synthesizing recollection, letters, journals, 
and historical documents into a powerful expression of poetry. 
The novel, from the perspective of Naomi Nakane, a thirty-six- 
year-old schoolteacher, unfolds as a story of recovered 
memory about the loss of property by Japanese Canadians, 
their imprisonment during the war, and deportation to Japan 
after the war. 

Lee, Chang-Rae. Native Speaker. New York: Riverhead Books, 1995. 

An Asian American version of Invisible Man. Assigned to spy 
on a hopeful in the New York City mayor's race, a Korean 
American detective instead turns to detective work about his 
own identity. Park looks at American culture as an outsider 
and also feels alienated from his native culture. 

Mukherjee, Bharati. Holder of the World. New York: Knopf, 1993. 

Living with her Indian computer-scientist boyfriend in Cam- 
bridge, Massachusetts, a thirty-year-old researcher stumbles 
upon an account of an affair between one of her Puritan 
ancestors and an Indian raja. 

Nunez, Sigrid. A Feather on the Breath of God. New York: 
HarperPerennial, 1995. 

Nunez's first novel is about a woman growing up as the 
daughter of a Chinese-Panamanian father and German 
mother, witnessing her immigrant parents suffering from 
sentences of twentieth-century history and from discords due 
to their own prejudices. 

Tan, Amy. The Joy Luck Club. New York: Ivy, 1989. 

This novel tells about the diasporic conditions of four Chinese 
women and their American-born daughters. Each mother's 
journey is continued by her daughter, but not without some 
intergenerational and intercultural conflicts. 



] 



314 TomingJunLiu 





Uyemoto, Holly. Go. New York: Dutton, 1995. 

The narrator, a twenty-year-old woman diagnosed with manic 
depression, recounts old family stories and uncovers causes of 
her family's troubles going back to the internment experience. 

Wong, Shawn. American Knees. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. 

A love story about a Chinese American man and a half-Japa- 
nese American woman, comically illustrating Asian American 
culture and history. 


Literary 

Criticism 


Kim, Elaine. Asian American Literature: An Introduction to the Writings 
and their Social Context. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 
1982. 

One of the earliest criticisms on Asian American literatures. 
Authoritative and informative. 

Lim, Shirley G., and Amy Ling. Reading the Literatures of Asian 
America. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992. 

Twenty essays organized under four parts: "Ambivalent 
Identities," "Race and Gender," "Borders and Boundaries," 
and "Representations and Self-Representations." 

Ling, Amy. Between Worlds: Women Writers of Chinese Ancestry. New 
York: Pergamon, 1990. 

A comprehensive review of women writers of Chinese ances- 
try from Sui Sin Far to Maxine Hong Kingston. 


Information 
on Books 


explanAsian: The Official Newsletter of The Asian American Writers' 
Workshop. Tel: (212) 228-6718. 

Krach, Maywan Shen. Asian American Literature: A Thematic Resource 
for K-12. Arcadia, CA: Shen's Books and Supplies, 1994. Tel: 
(800)456-6660. 


Journals and 
Magazines 


A. Magazine: Inside Asian America 

An informative popular magazine. (212) 925-2123. 

Ameriasia Journal 

An interdisciplinary journal which offers perspectives on 
history, social issues, literature, and culture. 



[ 



] 



315 



Asian American Resources 



Asian American Studies Center 
405 Hillgard Ave., UCLA 
Los Angeles, CA 90028 
(213) 825-2968 

Asian American Policy Review 

With analyses of political, cultural, and economic issues 
confronting Asian Pacific Americans. 

John F. Kennedy School of Government 
Harvard University 
79 John F. Kennedy St., T 269 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
(617) 495-1311 

Bridge: Asian American Perspective 

Forum for Asian American issues, literature, arts, and information. 
Asian Cine Vision, Inc. 

32 E. Broadway 
New York, NY 10002 
(212) 925-8685 

Chinese America, History and Perspectives 

A journal by Chinese Historical Society of America and Asian 
American Studies Department of San Francisco State University. 
650 Commercial Street 
San Francisco, CA 94111 
(415) 391-1188 



Organizations 



National Association of Americans of Asian Indian Descent (NAAAID) 
c/ o Dr. Ahmed Kutty 
3511 47th Ave. 

Kearney, NE 68847-1666 

Organization of Chinese American Women (OCAW) 

1300 N. St. NW, Suite 100 
Washington, DC 20005 
Contact: Pauline W. Tsui, Exec. Director 
(202) 638-0330 



Asian American Curriculum Project 

PO. Box 1587 

234 Main Street 

San Mateo, CA 94401 

(415) 343-9408 




a c tz 



316 



Useful Web Sites 



i i 

Toming Jun Liu 



Association for Chinese Community Affairs 
http://www.superprism.net/ acca/ 

Chinese Historical and Cultural Project 
http:/ / www. chcp.org/ index.html 

Summary: The CHCP's mission is to promote and preserve 
Chinese and Chinese American history and culture. 

Chinese American Librarians Association 
http : / / library.fgcu.edu /cala / 

South Asian Diaspora 

http:/ / www.lib.berkeley.edu/SSEAL/SouthAsia/ 
diaspora.html 

Summary: Archive of the South Asian Diaspora Bibliographic 
Guides, Essays, and Electronic Resources. 



317 



Chicano/Chicana 

Resources 



Rochmanna Miller 

Roosevelt High School, Los Angeles, California 



his bibliography has been broken into three sections: (1) Affir- 



mation, Resistance, and Transformation; (2) La Chicana: Gender 



Issues; and (3) Favorite Works to Teach about Chicano/Chicana 
Culture. These areas provide different focal points for integration of 
Chicano/Chicana literature into an English curriculum. 

For the overall exploration of tolerance and intolerance of all 
cultures, I would highly recommend workshops of Facing History 
and Ourselves, where Chicano works and other multicultural works 
are integrated into studies of stereotypes, scapegoating, "the other," 
cultural identity, eugenics, small steps to violence and genocide, and 
ways we may understand each other across cultures more deeply. In 
many middle and high schools in Los Angeles (and across the 
nation) this curriculum is being used in conjunction with 
multicultural studies to ward off the misunderstandings and igno- 
rance of other groups that fed into the eruption of the Los Angeles 
Riots in 1992. 

As an organizing device for exploring Chicano/Chicana 
literature, I would suggest three focal areas: (1) Identity, (2) Intoler- 
ance, and (3) Crossing Bridges. These are useful categories for cross- 
referencing with comparative studies of other multicultural litera- 
ture. When I explore Chicano/Chicana cultural identity, I have 
found the themes running through The House on Mango Street by 
Sandra Cisneros particularly useful. The Actos (short plays on 
Chicano issues — see Luis Valdez in bibliography) by Teatro 
Campesino are useful to probe the impact of racism on Chicano/ 
Chicana identity. I particularly like "Los Vendidos" in its exploration 
of stereotypes of Mexican Americans. The works of Gary Soto are 
also poignant in their memoirs of growing up Chicano. His "Look- 
ing for Work" is a wonderful probing of how he compared TV white 
families of the fifties and early sixties with his own. La Vida Loca by 
Luis Rodriguez explores the forces that can build into joining gangs. 
"Fear" by Gary Soto also explores how one can be shaped into a 
bully when one is bullied by society in oppression. 




ERIC 




] 



318 



Rochmanna Miller 



When one is exploring intolerance and Mexican Americans, it 
can be useful to read historical studies of the Zoot Suit Riots of the 
forties, to explore stereotypes in film, to examine the false studies of 
Latinos in eugenics (and to examine the impact on labor and the 
tracking movement of schools). Stephen J. Gould's The Mismeasure of 
Man is useful in exploring cultures harmed by supposedly scientific 
studies and measures. Stories such as "Like Mexicans" by Gary Soto 
aid in Crossing Bridges. His story describes how he was warned not 
to date someone Japanese, then learned that his date was just "like 
Mexicans." Testimonies describing experiences with being judged 
and judging others in the Facing History and Ourselves text aid in 
discussion of how through ignorance we can misunderstand "the 
other." When we discover the points of similiarity we have with 
other cultures, we realize how in so many ways we are just like 
"them." 

There is the problem with Chicano studies and literature, as 
with other multicultural studies and literature, of where this curricu- 
lum fits in the entire cultural spectrum of American studies. How do 
you make all groups inclusive? How do you avoid microscopically 
looking at only one group's experience with intolerance and one 
group's definition of identity? Indeed, one cultural group should be 
covered deeply, but it is important to see the wide spectrum of 
intolerance. The issue of which group/ groups to choose and how to 
place a group's experience in context raises important questions to 
be discussed by teachers and students. 

However, I am drawn to the project of Sue Anderson and 
Marie Collins that culminated in a curricular project at UCLA 
funded by the American Council of Learned Societies entitled "Affir- 
mation, Resistance, and Transformation." The two teachers in history 
and literature approached the traditional U.S. curriculum and asked, 
"Whose history do we teach? Is ours exclusively a "winner's his- 
tory"? They applied this perspective to shaping a unit for an elev- 
enth-grade Humanitas (interdisciplinary) class on Chicanos in the 
1960s and 1970s. In this unit, students explore (according to Ander- 
son and Collins in a curricular paper on "Affirmation, Resistance, 
and Transformation") "ways in which Chicano art and literature 
have been influenced by specific historical events, as well as politi- 
cal, social, and cultural phenomena" (Anderson and Collins 3). They 
also explore "the degree to which the culture, the political and social 
institutions have been shaped by Chicano artists, activists, and 
literary figures." They worked from the idea of a "political genera- 
tion" or an "historical generation" formed by "its members' re- 
sponses ideological and political — to a particular set of shared 
experiences" (4). Within each historical generation "units form which 
display distinctly different political and ideological postures" (4). For 



[ 



319 



i 

Chicano/Chicana Resources 



instance, there are the shared experiences of Vietnam, being raised in 
the Communist "threat," the Baby Boom, responses to the Black civil 
rights movement, student youth movement, Chicano and American 
Indian movements of the '60s and 70s generation. How did each one 
of these groups respond? 

The last sections of the bibliography will add some favorite 
works of a teacher who is Chicana (works she feels aid in discussing 
identity within a predominantly Chicano/Chicana school). 



Affirmation, 
Resistance, and 
Transformation 



Compiled by Sue Anderson, Roosevelt High School, Los Angeles, 
California, and Marie Collins, principal at Mary Star of the Sea 
Elementary School, San Pedro, California from their UCLA Project 
"Affirmation, Resistance, and Transformation," June 14, 1993, which 
was funded by the American Council of Learned Societies. 



Acuna, Rudolfo. Occupied America: A History ofChicanos. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1988. 

Chapter 9, "Goodbye America: The Chicano in the 1960s," and 
Chapter 10, "The Age of the Brokers: The New Hispanics," aid 
in exploration of Chicanos reshaping cultural identity in the 
1960s and 1970s. 



Acuna, Rudolfo. A Community Under Siege: A Chronicle ofChicanos 
East of the Los Angeles River 1945-1975. Chicano Studies Re- 
search Center Publications, UCLA, 1984. 

This book provides a good history of struggles and battles that 
built up to the "rumblings in the barrio" protests of the '60s 
and 70s over lack of equal rights in "The Chronicle" section. 
Part II, "The Community Bulletin Boards," probes articles in 
community papers Civic Center Sun 1937-1942, Eastside Sun 
1945-1975, and the Belvedere Citizen 1934-1972. 

Anaya, Rudolfo. The Legend of la Llorona. Berkeley: Tonatiuh-Quinto 
Sol, 1984. 

This work is useful in its recreation of la Llorona, or wailing 
woman myth, which is told over many generations, with 
many versions and storytellers. It includes Anaya's story of la 
Llorona as being also Malinche, connected with the Spanish 
conquistadores and Cortez, who was also the first convert to 
Catholicism. This work can be cross-referenced with the Greek 
myths of Oedipus and Medea (as suggested by Anderson and 
Collins) proving Joseph Campbell's observation in Historical 
Atlas of the World: the "human race evolved in the way of a 
single life." Anderson and Collins state that the exploration of 



O 

ERIC 







3 



320 



Rochmanna Miller 



Malinche is a chance to explore the particulars of El Mestizo/ 
La Raza — the merging of Indian and Spanish culture. In their 
curricular work, Anderson and Collins state "By studying 
symbols — like Llorona, Malinche, and the Virgen de 
Guadalupe — over time it is possible to begin to understand 
how they serve to affirm the Chicano culture, express a tradi- 
tion of resistance, and reflect the transformation of a people in 
what Gloria Anzaldua (Chicana writer) calls a 'juncture of 
cultures.'" 

Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands/La Frontera. San Francisco: Aunt Lute 
Books, 1987. 

See description of this text under the entry for Miller in the 
gender issues section of this bibliography. 

Augenbraum, Harold, and Ilan Stavans, eds. Growing Up Latino. 

New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1993. 

The themes of "Imagining the Family," "Gringolandia," and 
"Songs of Self Discovery," organize the text. The work in- 
cludes "Moths" by Helena Maria Viramontes and a story 
entitled "The Day the Cisco Kid Shot John Wayne" (under 
"Gringolandia"), Sandra Cisneros's "The Monkey Garden," 
and excerpts from Richard Rodriguez's "Aria" as well as 
Rudolfo Anaya's "The Apple Orchard" under "Self Discov- 
ery." 

Candelaria, Cordelia. "La Malinche Feminist Prototype" Frontiers 
5.12 (1980): 1-6. 

Examines La Malinche from a feminist perspective. 

Cisneros, Sandra. Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories. New York: 
Random House, 1991. 

"Corridos" in Heath Anthology of American Literature, Vol. 2, edited by 
Paul Lauter et al. Lexington, MA: Heath, 1990. 

The Corrido is an expressive literary form of the Mexican 
American Southwest with much history and social commen- 
tary. Anderson and Collins suggest using these works as a 
means of having students write their own "corridos." An 
example (suggested to them by Lynne Culp and Mike Jackson 
of ACLS/UCLA) would be to do one on the Hunger Strike for 
Chicano Studies that occurred at UCLA in 1991. One could 




Q 

KJ O 



IQ 



[ 



] 



321 



Chicano/Chicana Resources 



take the Chicano Moratorium against the Vietnam War as 
another possibility. Students could also read "The Spiritual 
Plan of Aztlan" produced by the National Chicano Youth 
Liberation Center, Denver, 1969, about the East L.A. walkouts 
for better schools in 1968 (the "Blowouts") for corridos writ- 
ing. Students in other parts of the country might apply the 
form to an event in the history of their community (e.g., Kent 
State riots in Kent, Ohio, in 1970). 

Del Castillo, Adelaida R., ed. Between Borders: Essays on hA.exica.na/ 
Chicana History. Los Angeles: Floricanto Press, 1990. 

Theoretical issues in this work: (1) Chicana History; (2) Meth- 
ods and Sources Oral History; (3) Work Experience and Labor 
Division; (4) Gender, Patriarchy, and Feminism. Also explores 
women's movement in Yucatan, Mexico, in 1916. 

Del Castillo, Richard Griswold, et al., eds. Chicano Art : Resistance and 
Affirmation, 1965-1985. Los Angeles: UCLA, 1990. 

Works from the Los Angeles Wight Gallery at UCLA, display- 
ing art of politics and civil rights from the exhibition. 

Gonzalez, Ray, ed. After Aztlan: Latino Poets of the '90s. Boston: David 
R. Godine Publishers, 1992. 

Herrera-Sobek, Maria. The Mexican Corrido: A Feminist Analysis. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990. 

Contents include the Good Mother Archetype, the Terrible 
Mother Archetype, Soldier Archetype, Mother Archetype . . . 
images that form and reform in the Corrido. 

Munoz, Carlos Jr. Youth, Identity, Power: The Chicano Movement. New 
York: Verso, 1989. 

Chapter 2, "The Militant Challenge: The Chicano Generation," 
is useful. 

Soto, Gary, ed. Pieces of the Heart: New Chicano Fiction. San Francisco: 
Chronicle Books, 1993. 

A compilation of works by new Chicano writers. Includes 
selections "One Holy Night" by Sandra Cisneros, "Holly- 
wood" by Dagoberto Gilb, and "The Jumping Bean" by Hel- 
ena Maria Viramontes. 



O 

ERIC 



331 



c 



] 



322 



Rochmanna Miller 



Valdez, Luis. Luis Valdez's Early Work — Ados, Bernabe, and 
Pensamiento. Houston, TX: Arte Publico Press, 1990. 

Includes notes on Chicano theater, Actos (one-act plays of 
Teatro Campesino), Los Vendidos, Las Dos Caras del 
Patroncito (about exploitation of the farmworkers). No Saco 
Nada de Escuela (school discrimination), works about Viet- 
nam and philosophical poetry about Mayan thought and 
cosmology in reference to the cultural, religious, and political 
circumstances of Chicanos past and present. 

Valdez, Luis. Zoot Suit and Other Plays. Houston, TX: Arte Publico 
Press, 1992. 

Contains Actos and Los Vendidos, Zoot Suit, Bandido, and I Don't 
Have to Show You No Stinking Badges. 

Valdez, Luis, and Tony Curiel (with El Teatro Campesino). 
(Videocassette). San Juan Bautista, CA: 1985. 

Documents the activities of El Teatro Campesino's first twenty 
years (1965-1985); archival footage and excerpts of plays. 

White, Richard. It's Your Misfortune and None of My Own: A New 

History of the American West. Norman: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1991. 



Other Sources 
Suggested in the 
Anderson and 
Collins Project 



Videos: "Ballad of Gregoro Cortez"; "Zoot Suit"; "La Bamba" 

Time magazine article 

Edward James Olmos. 11 July 1988. 

Discusses comparisons with East coast Ellis Island and West 
Coast Boyle Heights where he grew up. 



Some Suggested (1) Panel: Meet the Press with figures studied (example — panel 
Activities discussion with La Llorona and Gloria Anzaldua) 

(2) Create a guide to the murals of East Los Angeles (students in 
other parts of the country could explore a guide to murals in other 
WPA projects, or the murals of Diego Rivera which were all over the 
country during the Depression and a little after, as well as public art 
murals in their community) 

(3) Write a paper about Chicano heroes of today 

(4) Write a paper on what should be included as a reading in a text 
for an American Studies course — what would you pick, whose 
history should enter the canon, and why? 



323 



Chicano/Chicana Resources 



La Chicana— 
Gender Issues 



Compiled by Rochmanria Miller. Based on research compiled at the 
University of California, Irvine, "Bridging the Gaps" Program, 
Summer 1995. 



Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands/La Frontera. San Francisco: Aunt Lute 
Books, 1987. 

Anzaldua's text has been called a "mestizaje: a postmodernist 
mixture of autobiography, historical document, and poetry 
collection" that "like the people whose lives it chronicles, 
resists genre boundaries as well as geopolitical borders" by 
critic Sonia Saldivar-Hull in "Feminism on the Border: From 
Gender to Geopolitics." Chicana feminists point to a need to 
break away from aspects of their culture that urge them to stay 
at home, serve men, be silent, be obedient. Anzaldua has 
written of her own experience, "I argued, I talked back. I was 
quite a bigmouth. I was indifferent to many of my culture's 
values. I did not let men push me around. I was not good or 
obedient" ( Borderlands ). Anzaldua believes in the "new Mes- 
tiza" who breaks from her own macho, often homophobic 
culture. The "new Mestiza" is "caught between 'los 
intersticios' — the spaces between the different worlds she 
inhabits" ( Borderlands ). 

Cisneros, Sandra. The House on Mango Street. New York: Vintage 
Books, 1989. 

This text, which is read in classrooms from the sixth grade 
through college, provides for excellent examination of la 
Mestiza, Chicana feminist consciousness. Critic Sonia Saldivar- 
Hull states, "Males make the rules and laws, women transmit 
them." In Mango Street, one can see patriarchy, women held 
down, silence, women marginalized, but at the same time the 
feminine magic of writing that will rewrite this history 
through creativity and magic. Points of contact with the white 
world appear in the section "Those Who Don't" in which there 
is a description of fear of "the other" when white or brown 
enter each other's neighborhoods, and how "all brown, all 
around we are safe" (28). The sections "A House of My Own" 
and "Mango Says Goodbye Sometimes" reflect the search for 
self, the cultural identity, and bringing of this all back to the 
community. 

Howe, Florence. Tradition and Talents of Women. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1991. 

Contains criticism and literary selections of a variety of 



324 



Rochmanna Miller 



multicultural women authors while also looking at their 
position in feminist thought. Critic Sonia Saldivar-Hull's 
"Feminism on the Border: From Gender to Geopolitics" is 
included. 

Lucero-Trujillo, Christine. "The Dilemma of the Modern Chicana 
Artist and Critic." The Woman That I Am: The Literature of 
Contemporary Women of Color. Ed. Soyini Madison. New York: 
St. Martin's Press, 1994. 

Discusses the issues of Chicana artists and critics needing to 
distinguish and separate their needs from the Chicano move- 
ment — to deal with some of the symbolic figures of La 
Malinche, Tonantzin (the Aztec goddess of fertility), and La 
Virgen de Guadalupe in feminist viewpoints. Trujillo points to 
some of the concerns of Chicana s held down by church and 
state patriarchy, male Chicanismo, and Chicano editors who 
deny Chicana voice. 

Saldivar-Hull, Sonia. "Feminism on the Border: From Gender to 
Geopolitics." Tradition and the Talents of Women. Ed. Florence 
Flowe. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1991. 

Discusses Anzaldua, Cisneros, "new Mestiza," Flelena 
Viramontes, as well as the distinction between the aims of 
Chicana feminism and the feminism of Europeans and Anglo 
Americans. Chicana feminists must take on other issues of race 
and ethnicity and capitalist exploitation. Chicana writers do 
not write of privileged moments, but rather of being in the 
borderlands, oppressed and exploited in the borders, trapped 
in ghettos. Saldivar-Hull refers to the work of Flelena 
Viramontes, who in her story "Cariboo Cafe" describes a 
character's need to get a "toilet of one's own." Such economic 
deprivation differs from Virginia Woolf's more privileged plea 
for "a room of one's own" to write in. Saldivar-FIull describes 
how the Chicana writer must write about the impact of racism, 
about how her autobiographies reflect the history of exploita- 
tion and her alienation in society because of her class. Regard- 
ing "Los Atrevasados" — the outsiders Gloria Anzaldua dis- 
cusses — Saldivar-FIull explores how Anzaldua writes about 
"the squint eyed, the perverse, the queer, the troublesome. The 
mongrol, the mulatto, the half breed, the half dead," infusing 
power in those made invisible and denigrated by the power 
structures of the dominant culture. 




] 



325 



Chicano/Chicana Resources 



Other Suggested 
Works to Explore 
in the Realm of 
Gender and 
Chicano/Chicana 
Studies 



Bruce-Novoa. RetroSpace: Collected Essays on Chicano Literature Theory 
and History. Houston, TX: Arte Publico Press, 1990. 

Fifteen essays by Bruce-Novoa over fifteen years. Includes 
subjects of "Freedom of Expression," "Hispanic Literatures," 
"Chicano Literature Product — 1960-1980," "Chicanos in 
Mexican Lit," "Space of Chicano Lit," "Chicano Space in 
Cultural Criticism and Production." 



Calderon, Hector, and Jose David Saldivar. Criticism in the Border- 
lands: Studies in Chicano Literature, Culture, and Ideology. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1991. 

Mexican American authors, history, criticism, and border 
issues in four parts: (1) institutional studies and literary canon; 
(2) representation of Chicano/Chicana subject; (3) genre, 
ideology, history; (4) aesthetics of the border. 

Herrera-Sobek, Maria. Beyond Stereotypes: Critical Analysis ofChicana 
Literature. Binghamton, NY: Bilingual Press, 1985. 

Includes prose of Francisco Lomeli, "Chicana novelists in the 
process of creating fictive voices," "The Female Hero in 
Chicano Literature," essays on humor, and the "I" in Chicana 
poetry. 

Herrera-Sobek, Maria, Alicia Gaspar de Alba, and Demetria 

Martinez. Three Times a Woman: Chicana Poetry. Tempe, AZ: 
Bilingual Review Press, 1989. 

Three Chicana poets: Gaspar de Alba (paradox, politics, 
psychosexuality), Sobek (Naked Moon /Luna Desnuda — keeps 
alive dead memories — reorders lives and events blown away), 
and Martinez (sensitive poems). 

Herrera-Sobek, Maria, and Helena Maria Viramontes. Chicana Cre- 
ativity and Criticism: Charting New Frontiers in American Litera- 
ture. Houston, TX: Arte Publico Press, 1988. 

Women authors and criticism. 



Favorite Works 
to Teach about 
Chicano/ 
Chicana Culture 



Anaya, Rudolfo A. Heart of Aztlan. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1988. 

"The Albuquerque barrio portrayed in this vivid novel of post- 
war New Mexico is a place where urban and rural, political 
and religious realities co-exist, collide, and combine. The 
magic realism for which Anaya is well known combines with 



9 



335 



326 



Rochmanna Miller 



an emphatic portrayal of the plight of workers dispossessed of 
their heritage and struggling to survive in an alien culture" 
(description from the back cover). 

Chicano Communications Center. 450 Ahos del Pueblo Chicano: 450 
Years of Chicano History in Pictures. Albuquerque: Chicano 
Communications Center, 1976. 

Columbo, Gary, Robert Cullen, and Bonnie Lisle. Rereading America: 
Cultural Contexts for Critical Thinking and Writing. Boston: 
Bedford Books of St. Martin's Press, 1995. 3rd ed. 

This text, often used on the college level, is rich in 
multicultural stories and essays under such themes as "The 
Myth of Education" (includes an excerpt from Richard 
Rodriguez's "Achievement of Desire" and from Inez 
Hernandez Avila's "Para Teresa"); "The Myth of Family" (one 
excerpt is "Looking for Work" by Gary Soto); "The Myth of 
Gender" (Judith Ortiz Cofer's "Story of my Body" is one 
selection); "The Myth of the Melting Pot" (Vincent Parrillo 
"The Causes of Prejudice" is one selection). "Slaves, Monsters, 
and Others" by Ed Guerrero also discusses anxieties of for- 
eigners and immigrants reflected in film — "La Conciencia de 
la Mestiza/ Towards a New Consciousness"; Gloria Anzaldua 
also appears in this section. Other chapter categories include 
"The Myth of Opportunity, Freedom, Progress." 

Daniels, Roger, and Spencer C. Olin. Racism in California: A Reader in 
the History of Oppression. New York: Macmillan, 1972. 

Explores California race relations in a variety of essays. 

Fontes, Montserrat. Dreams of the Centaur. New York: Norton, 1996. 

In Ana Castillo's words, "A novel about the fierce Yaqui's 
struggle for their land, their ways, and their dignity, told here 
with sensitivity, skill, and a passionate honesty" (back cover). 

Fontes, Montserrat. First Confession. New York: Norton, 1991. 

"Mexican American writer Fontes tells a startling tale of the 
clashes between men and women, rich and poor, Mexican and 
American, in this dark story of life just south of the Texas 
border" (back cover). An excellent work to explore the overall 
theme of "borders." 



] 



327 Chicano/Chicana Resources 



Bibliography of 
Multicultural 
Literature 


Lippard, Lucy R. Mixed Blessings: New Art in a Multicultural America. 
New York: Pantheon, 1990. 

Very contemporary images of multicultural art with many 
examples of Chicana/Chicano artists. Images and text. 

Oliver, Eileen Iscoff. Crossing the Mainstream: Multicultural Perspec- 
tives in Teaching Literature. Urbana: National Council of Teach- 
ers of English, 1994. 

This is an excellent source for examining both thematic and 
chronological approaches to the teaching of multicultural 
literature. There is also an extended bibliography for a variety 
of cultures under the heading "Brainstorming a Canon." 

Samora, Julian, and Patricia Vandel Simon. A History of Mexican 
American People. South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame 
Press, 1993. 

A concise review of Mexican American history. 

Tatum, Charles M. Mexican American Literature. Orlando, FL: 

Harcourt Brace, 1990. 

A comprehensive selection of a variety of genre of literary 
works. 

Tatum, Charles M. New Chicana/Chicano Writing, Vols. 1, 2, 3. Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press, 1992/1993. 

Each volume has a comprehensive selection of prose and 
poetry reflecting the dynamism of known and unknown 
authors. 

West, John O. Mexican American Folklore. Little Rock, AR: August 
House, 1988. 

Legends, songs, festivals, proverbs, crafts, tales of saints, 
revolutionaries, and more. 

Compiled by Kristin Botello, Roosevelt High School 

Alvarez, Julia. How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents. New York: 
Plume, 1992. 

Anaya, Rudolfo. Bless Me, Ultima. Berkeley, CA: Tonatiuh-Quinto Sol, 
1972. 

This is a great novel to use with tenth, eleventh, or twelfth 


ERIC 


337 



328 



Rochmanna Miller 



graders. It is the story of Antonio, a young boy, and his myste- 
rious and inspiring spiritual guide. Ultima. Ultima is a 
curandera, a healer, who battles evil in her struggle to help 
Antonio discover his own destiny. Set in New Mexico, the 
story helps students to understand the meaning of faith, 
strength, and self-determination. It exposes them to Mexican 
American culture, particularly in New Mexico, and helps them 
to believe in magic again, the magic that exists in their own 
hearts. 

Anaya, Rudolfo. Heart of Aztlan. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1988. 

This novel is very effective with eleventh and twelfth graders. 
Its theme is a bit more complex than that of Bless Me, Ultima, 
but its story is more accessible to urban Chicano and/or non- 
Latino teenagers. It is the story of a Mexican family who 
moves to a barrio. In this barrio the family experiences new 
conflicts. The father, Clemente, faces new challenges as he tries 
to raise his children in a new and threatening environment. 

The theme revolves around the father's quest for manhood 
and a sense of self-worth and the entire community's revolu- 
tion against oppression and injustice. 

Castillo, Ana. My Father Was a Toltec. Novato, CA: West End Press, 
1988. 

Poetry such as "The Toltec," "La Heredera," and "Ixtqcihuatl 
Died in Vain." 

Castillo, Ana. Sapogonia. Tempe, AZ: Bilingual Press, 1990. 

Brings to life a place in the Americas where all mestizos reside 
regardless of nationality, individual background, or legal 
residential status, or because of all these (book description). 
The theme is brought out in the persona of a narrator who 
relishes his background as conquistador and also agonizes as 
the one who is conquered — symbolized by his relationship 
with an unconquerable woman. 

Castillo, Ana. So Far from God. New York: Viking Press, 1985. 

Jimenez, Carlos. The Mexican American Heritage. Oakland, CA: TQS 
Publications, 1994. 

Not a novel, this textbook of sorts teaches the history of 
Mexico from pre-Columbian times to the present. It is acces- 
sible to high school-age readers. My students find it to be very 



O 

ERIC 



3j3 



329 



[ 



Chicano/Chicana Resources 



interesting and they truly appreciate the opportunity to learn 
the history of their own culture. I teach this book in parts, in 
conjunction with novels, stories, and poems. Rain of Gold (see 
below) coincides almost exactly with chapters 4 and 5 of this 
book. 

Rodriguez, Luis. Always Running: Gang Days in L.A. New York: 

Simon and Schuster, 1993. 

This works wonders with inner-city students, who are experi- 
encing some. of the same struggles that Rodriguez describes in 
the work. It is the true story of his own life as a young man. 

For many students, it is the first work of this length they have 
completed. A couple of parts are a bit risque, but overall the 
students approach the book with respect for the author's 
experiences. While reading the life story, they explore the 
themes of personal choice, actions, and consequences and self- 
determination. 

Villasenor, Victor. Rain of Gold. New York: Dell, 1991. 

This tremendously successful novel (even at the length of five 
hundred plus pages) tells a story that students can't seem to 
get enough of. It is accessible reading, and the story is a genu- 
ine outgrowth of the oral tradition of the corridos of Mexican 
culture. Villasenor tells the story of his own family, the 
struggles of his parents and children and young adults, both in 
Mexico and in the United States. It is full of adventure, humor, 
and romance, and ultimately illustrates the themes of identity, 
self-expression, and appreciation for one's heritage. 

Villasenor, Victor. Wild Steps of Heaven. New York: Delacorte Press, 
1996. 

This novel is a continuation of Rain of Gold. It is rather a 
prequel to the other novel that tells the story of Juan 
Salvador's older brother, Jose, in Mexico during the Revolu- 
tion of 1910. It is much shorter than Rain of Gold but is as 
enjoyable to read and as accessible. 

Viramontes, Helena Maria. The Moths and Other Stones. Houston, TX: 
Arte Publico Press, 1995. 

Includes stories such as "The Moths," "Cariboo Cafe," "The 
Broken Web," "Snapshots," and "Birthday." 



330 



Rochmanna Miller 



Young Adult 
Selections 
Chicano/Latino 
Literature 



Compiled by Ruben Martinez, Martinez Books and Art Gallery, 200 
North Main Street, Santa Ana, CA 92701, phone: (714) 973-7900. 

The following young adult books may be useful for some secondary 
students. 

Bernardo, Anilu. Jumping Off to Freedom. Houston, TX: Pinata Books, 
1986. Explores the lives of Cuban teenagers coming into the 
United States. 



Bernardo, Anilu. Sweet 15. Houston, TX: Arte Publico Press, 1996. 

Traditionally in Mexican culture, a Quincinera is a celebration 
of womanhood at the age of 15. Stephanie approaches this in 
the gloom of her father's recent death. She goes ahead with the 
festivities. The story focuses on the psychological process of 
cherishing the past and present of traditional and contempo- 
rary Hispanic male and female roles and family rituals. 

Bertrand, Diane Gonzales. Alicia's Treasure. Houston, TX: Pinata 
Books, 1996. 

Celebration of Latino culture in a magical fun-filled journey to 
the seashore. 

Carbon, Laurie M., and Cynthia C. Ventura, eds. Where Angels Glide 
at Dawn. New York: HarperCollins, 1990. 

Latin American short stories on a variety of themes with an 
introduction from Isabelle Allende. 

Castaneda, Omar. Imagining Isabel. New York: Penguin, 1984. 

A 16-year-old receives a letter from the government stating 
that it will be necessary to leave. Probes fears of losing touch 
with Guatemalan traditions /Mayan culture. 

Florada, Alma. Where the Flame Trees Bloom. New York: Rigby, 1994. 

Eleven stories for young readers from students in the United 
States of many cultures: Cuban, U.S. Caribbean, Puerto Rican. 

Fuego, Laura del. Maravilla. Los Angeles: Floricanto Press, 1989. 

Focuses on lessons learned while growing up in the Barrio 
neighborhood. 



L 



331 



Chicano/Chicana Resources 



Garcia, Leonel. I Can Hear the Cow Bells Ring. Houston, TX: Arte 
Publico, 1994. 

About the processes of growing up and dreaming. 

Moore, Nicolasa. Nilda. Houston, TX: Arte Publico, 1986. 

Growing up in New York City. 

Soto, Gary. Baseball in April and Other Stories. New York: Harcourt 
Brace, 1990. 

Male coming of age stories. 

Soto, Gary. Crazy Weekend. New York: Scholastic, 1996. 

Two guys take off on a journey through Fresno. 

Soto, Gary. Living Up the Street. New York: Laurel Leaf Books, 1985. 
About growing up in Fresno in the Barrio. 

Soto, Gary. Novio Boy (drama). New York: Harcourt Brace, 1997. 

Boy meets girl who is an older 11th grader. 

Soto, Gary. Off and Running. New York: Delacorte Press, 1996. 

Two girls and two boys are running in a tight race for class 
president. 

Soto, Gary. Pacific Crossing. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1992. 

Lincoln Mendoza and Tony Contreras learn about Japanese 
culture in travels to Japan. 

Soto, Gary. The Skirt. New York: Yearling, 1992. 

Explores issues of identity and ethnic origins through search 
for lost folklorico skirt passed down through generations. 

Velasquez, Gloria. Tommie Stands Alone. Houston, TX: Pinata Books, 
1995. 

Explores student realizing and coming to terms with his 
homosexuality and identity. 



332 



Books and Films 



General 

References 



o 

ERIC 



Native American 
Resources 

Christine Marshall 

Northern Arizona University 

Becky L. Reimer 

Rowland Hall — St. Mark's School, Salt Lake City 

Jean Boreen 

Northern Arizona University 



Compiled by Christine Marshall, Northern Arizona University 

These are the two fundamental texts necessary for designing a 

curriculum in Native American literature: 

Allen, Paula Gunn, ed. Studies in American Indian Literature: Critical 
Essays and Course Designs. New York: Modern Language 
Association, 1983. 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown. American Indian Literatures: An Introduc- 
tion, Bibliographic Review, and Selected Bibliography. New York: 
Modem Language Association, 1990. 

Berkhofer, Robert F. Jr. The White Man's Indian: Images of the American 
Indian from Columbus to the Present. New York: Knopf, 1978; 
New York: Vintage, 1979. 

Brown, Dee. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the 
American West. New York: Holt, 1971; New York: Bantam, 1972. 

Deloria, Vine Jr., ed. (Sioux). American Indian Policy in the Twentieth 
Century. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985. 

Deloria, Vine Jr. Behind the Trail of Broken Treaties: An Indian Declara- 
tion of Independence. 1974. Austin: University of Texas Press, 
1985. 

Deloria, Vine Jr., and Clifford M. Lytle. American Indians, American 
Justice. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983. 



3-12 



333 



Native American Resources 



Dockstader, Frederick J. (Oneida). Great North American Indians: 

Profiles in Life and Leadership. New York: Van Nostrand, 1977. 

Drinnon, Richard. Facing West: The Metaphysics of Indian-Hating and 
Empire-Building. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1980; New York: NAL, 1980. 

Driver, Harold E. Indians of North America. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1969. 

Harvey, Karen D., and Lisa D. Harjo. Indian Country: A History of 
Native People in America. Golden, CO: North American Press, 
1994. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B. American Indian Stereotypes in the World of 
Children: A Reader and Bibliography. Metuchen, NT: Scarecrow 
Press, 1982. 

Jaimes, M. A., ed. The State of Native America: Genocide, Colonization, 
and Resistance. Boston: South End Press, 1992. 

Nabokov, Peter, ed. Native American Testimony: An Anthology of Indian 
and White Relations: First Encounter to Dispossession. New York: 
Crowell, 1978; Harper, 1979. 

Primarily oratory. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Scale, eds. Books Without Bias: Through 
Indian Eyes. Berkeley, CA: Oyate, 1988. 

Slotkin, Richard. Regeneration through Violence: The Mythology of the 
American Frontier, 1600-1860. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan 
University Press, 1973. 

Spicer, Edward H. Cycles of Conquest: The Impact of Spain, Mexico, and 
the United States on the Indians of the Southivest, 1533-1960. 
Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1962. 

Stensland, Anna Less, ed. Literature By and About the American Indian: 
An Annotated Bibliography. Urbana: National Council of Teach- 
ers of English, 1979. 

Thornton, Russell (Cherokee). American Indian Holocaust and Survival: 
A Population History Since 1492. Norman: University of Okla- 
homa Press, 1987. 

Wright, Ronald. Stolen Continents: The Americas through Indian Eyes 
Since 1492. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992. 



0 



343 



334 



: 



334 


Christine Marshall, Becky L. Reimer, and Jean Boreen 


Biographies/ 

Autobiographies 


Teachers may wish to select a biography from a local tribe. 

Aaseng, Nathan. Navajo Code Talkers. New York: Walker and Co., 

1992. 

A little-known aspect of World War II is told here as Navajo 
Indian soldiers created the one code (using the Navajo lan- 
guage) that the Japanese were unable to break. 

Apes, William (Pequot). "A Son of the Forest: The Experience of 

William Apes, a Native of the Forest." In On Our Own Ground: 
The Complete Writings of William Apes, A Pequot. Ed. Barry 
O'Connell. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992. 

This work also includes four other interesting essays by Apes, 
all of which are protests of white treatment of the New En- 
gland tribes. Especially interesting are "Indian Nullification of 
the Unconstitutional Laws of Massachusetts Relative to the 
Marshpee Tribe" and "Eulogy on King Philip." 

Black Elk (Sioux). Black Elk Speaks. Ed. John Neihardt. 1932. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1979; New York: Washington 
Square, 1972. 

Blowsnake, Sam (Winnebago). The Autobiography of a Winnebago. Ed. 
Paul Radin. 1926. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1983. 

Chona, Maria (Tohono O'Odham). Autobiography of a Papago Woman. 
Ed. Ruth Underhill. Memoirs of the American Anthropological 
Association 46 (1936). New York: Holt, 1979. 

Eastman, Charles (Sioux). From the Deep Woods to Civilization. 1916. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1977. 

Eastman was not exposed to white civilization until he was 
approximately fifteen years old. He went on to become the 
first, or one of the first. Native American physicians. He was 
the physician on site in South Dakota during the massacre at 
Wounded Knee. Well-written, engaging, and short. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene, ed. Native Heritage: Personal Accounts by Ameri- 
can Indians 1790 to the Present. New York: Macmillan, 1995. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B., and Beverly R. Singer, eds. Rising Voices: 

Writings of Young Native Americans. New York: Scribners, 1992. 

Young Native Americans write about identity, family, ritual, 
ceremony, and other topics. 


ERIC 


344 



[ 



] 



335 



Native American Resources 



John Stands in Timber (Cheyenne). Cheyenne Memories. Ed. Margot 
Liberty. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1967. 

Left Handed (Navajo). Left Handed, Son of Old Man Hat. Ed. Walter 
Dyk. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1938. 

Mountain Wolf Woman (Winnebago). Mountain Wolf Woman, Sister of 
Crashing Thunder. Ed. Nancy O. Lurie. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press, 1961. 

Riley, Patricia, ed. Growing up Native American: An Anthology. New 
York: Morrow, 1993. 

Sekaquaptewa, Helen (Hopi). Me and Mine: The Life Story of Helen 
Sekaquaptewa. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1969. 

Sewid, James (Kwakiutl). Guests Never Leave Hungry: The Autobiogra- 
phy of James Sewid, a Kwakiutl Indian. Ed. James P. Spradley. 
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1969. 

Standing Bear, Luther (Sioux). My Indian Boyhood, by Chief Luther 
Standing Bear, Who Was the Boy Ota K'te (Plenty Kill). Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1988. 

Vanderwerth, W. C., ed. Indian Oratory: Famous Speeches by Noted 

Indian Chieftains. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971. 

Winnemucca Hopkins, Sarah (Paiute). Life Among the Paiutes: Their 

Wrongs and Claims. 1883. Reno: University of Nevada Press, 1994. 



Fiction Although there are many more examples of Native American litera- 
ture, the following selections contain clear demonstrations of geno- 
cide and intolerance. 

Allen, Paula Gunn (Laguna /Sioux), ed. Spider Woman's Granddaugh- 
ters: Traditional Tales and Contemporary Writing by Native Ameri- 
can Women. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1989. 

Excellent anthology. See especially E. Pauline Johnson's "As It 
Was in the Beginning." 

Glancy, Diane. Pushing the Bear: A Novel of the Trail of Tears. San 
Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace and Company, 1996. 

This novel in diary form tells the tale of the Trail of Tears from 
the vantage points of a Cherokee husband and wife plus many 
others — Cherokees, Whites, soldiers, missionaries. 



336 



c 



Christine Marshall, Becky L. Reimer, and Jean Boreen 



Johnson, Pauline (Mohawk). Legends of Vancouver. Kingston, Ontario: 
Quarry Press, 1991. 

This little volume provides two approaches: the author has 
recorded authentic Squamish legends, but also critiques the 
effects of white civilization on native life. 

Ortiz, Simon J. (Acoma), ed. Earth Power Coming: Short Fiction in 
Native American Literature. Tsaile, AZ: Navajo Community 
College Press, 1983. 

An anthology of contemporary fiction. 

Qualey, Martha. Revolutions of the Heart. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1993. 

When arguments about her Native American boyfriend alien- 
ate Cory and her bigoted older brother, Cory tries to believe 
her mother's saying, "Change a heart, you change the world." 
One heart at a time seems too slow to overcome so much 
misunderstanding. 

Silko, Leslie (Laguna). Storyteller. New York: Arcade, 1981. 

Quite simply, the best. Stories, poems, reminiscences, photo- 
graphs. Stories from the oral tradition as well as contemporary 
observations. A great read. 

Welch, James (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre). Fools Crow. New York: Pen- 
guin, 1986. 

Historical fiction. An engaging story of a young Native Ameri- 
can at the time of early contact with the whites. 



Films and 
Videotapes 



Evers, Larry, prod.; Denny Carr, dir. Words and Place: Native Literature 
from the American Southwest. Norman Ross, 1995. Broadway, 
New York, NY 10023. 

This excellent series includes Navajo, Yaqui, Apache, Hopi, 
Laguna, and other storytellers and singers. Available with 
transcripts, which include teaching guides and suggested 
background reading. 



Hilbert, Vi (Lushootseed), exec, prod.; Crisca Bierwert, prod.; and 
Pila Laronel, dir. Sharing Legends at Upper Skagit. Lushootseed 
Research, 10832 Des Moines Dr. S., Seattle, WA 98168. 

Elders from seven tribes tell stories at the Upper Skagit Tribal 
Center in 1985. 



337 



Native American Resources 



Masayesva, Victor (Hopi). Itam Hakim Hopiit. IS Productions. P. O. 

Box 747, Hotevilla, AZ 86030. 

Ross Macaya tells stories about Hopi emergence and migration 
as well as the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. Hopi with English 
voiceover. 



Resources for 
Books, Book 
Reviews, Essays, 
and Other 
Materials by 
Native American 
Authors 



Compiled by Becky Reimer, Rowland Hall — St. Mark's School, Salt 
Lake City 

Canyon Records and Indian Arts 
4143 North 16th Street 
Phoenix, AZ 85016 

The D'Arcy McNickle Center for the History of the American Indian 
The Newberry Library 
60 West Walton 
Chicago, IL 60610 

This Center sponsors a yearly summer institute for secondary 
and tribal college teachers on Native American literature. 



Daybreak Star Press 
P. O. Box 99100 
Seattle, WA 98199 



Eagle Wing Press, Inc. 

P. O. Box 579 
Monaugatuck, CT 06770 

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum 
1071 Lifth Avenue 
New York, NY 10128 

Ask about the exhibit America: Invention and the book Un- 
settled Objects 

Honor, Inc. 

(Honor Our Neighbors' Origins and Rights) 

2647 North Stowell Ave. 

Milwaukee, WI 53211 



Indian Historian Press 
1493 Masonic Ave. 

San Lrancisco, CA 94117 



O 

ERIC 



7 



\ 



] 



338 



Christine Marshall, Becky L. Reimer, and Jean Boreen 



Native American Authors 
The Greenfield Review Literary Center 
2 Middle Grove Road 
P. O. Box 308 

Greenfield Center, NY 12833 

Native American Public Broadcasting Consortium 
P. O. Box 83111 
Lincoln, NE 68501 

Recognized as the authoritative national resource for authen- 
tic, culturally educational and entertaining programming by 
and about Native Americans. 

Navajo Tribal Museum 
P O. Box 308 
Window Rock, AZ 86515 

National Museum of Natural History 
Smithsonian Institution 
Washington, DC 20560 
Several bibliographies. 

Oyate 

2702 Mathews St. 

Berkeley, CA 94702 

Rethinking Schools 
1001 E. Keefe Ave. 

Milwaukee, WI 53212 

Teaching Tolerance 

The Southern Poverty Law Center 

400 Washington Ave. 

Montgomery, AL 36104 



Native American 
Publications 



Akwesasne Notes 
Box 196 

Mohawk Nation 
Rooseveltown, NY 13683-0196 



The Circle 

1530 E. Franklin Ave. 
Minneapolis, MN 55404 




313 



339 



Native American Resources 



Cultural Democracy 
Alliance for Cultural Democracy 
Box 7591 

Minneapolis, MN 55407 

Cultural Survival Quarterly 
53-A Church St. 

Cambridge, MA 01238 

Daybreak 
P. O. Box 98 

Highland, MD 20777-0098 

huracan 
Box 7591 

Minneapolis, MN 55407 

Indigenous Women 
Box 174 

Lake Elmo, MN 55042 

Native Nations 
175 5th Ave. Suite 2245 
New York, NY 11010 

Native Peoples 
Media Concepts Group 
5333 N. 7th St. Suite C-224 
Phoenix, AZ 85014 

Northeast Indian Quarterly 
American Indian Program 
300 Caldwell Hall 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY 14853 

Whispering Wind Magazine 
8009 Wales St. 

New Orleans, LA 70126 

Web Sites Compiled by Jean Boreen, Northern Arizona University 

North American Native Authors Catalogs 
http://www.nativeauthors.com/search/topic-search.html 

Excellent resource for those looking for authors by tribal 
affiliation. 



O 

ERIC 



3.49 



340 



Christine Marshall, Becky L. Reimer, and Jean Boreen 



Poetry of the Modern American Indian 

http:/ /hanksville.phast.umass.edu/indpoem.html 



Poetry written by Native Americans in the American South- 
west; some of the poems are presented in both English and in 
the poets' native languages (Navajo, O'Odham). Individual 
poems are often accompanied by author narratives. Very 
useful in lesson planning. 



Native American Activist Resources on the Internet 

http:/ /hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/indices/Naactivist.html 

Just as the title suggests, this site is devoted to current issues of 
intolerance, ignorance, prejudice, activism in the world today. 
Excellent site to show students that prejudice and intolerance 
are unfortunately active in the present. 

Native American Organizations on the Net 

http:/ /hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/indices/Naorg.html 

One of the most comprehensive listings of Native American 
organizations available on the Internet. Links to the named 
organizations provide easy access for teachers and students 
interested in exploring issues related to individual tribes/ 
nations. 



Society and Culture of Native American Tribes, Nations, and Bands 
http : / / www. yahoo, com / Society _and_Culture / 

Cultures_and_G roups/ 

Cultures/Native_American/Tribes_National_and_Bands/ 

(insert the name of the specific Native American Tribe or Nation for 
which you want information; for example, <Bands/ 
passamaquoddy / ) 

Interesting group of sites that allow teacher and students to 
explore a number of Native American groups. Typically 
offered is information about the history, language, current 
status, etc. of each group. 

Digital Librarian: A Librarian's Choice of the Best of Web: 

Native American Resources 

http:/ / www.servtech.com/ public/ mvail/nativeamericans.html 

An exhaustive consideration of Web sites that consider every- 
thing from the history of various nations/ tribes to sites that 
discuss current issues important to specific Native American 
groups around the country. 



341 



Native American Resources 



Native American Sites 

http://www.pitt.edu/ ~lmitten/indians.html 

This site provides access to homepages of individual Native 
Americans and Nations and to other sites in order to provide 
accurate information about American Indians. Organized by 
categories, this site is another that will allow teachers and their 
students ready access to a large number of excellent resources. 

Native American Indian Resources 

http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/ ~isk/ mainmenu.html#mainmenutop 

Another excellent collection of resources for teachers and 
students. Those interested in learning a native language will 
find this site exceptionally helpful as it provides a thorough 
listing of languages as well as the universities who teach/ 
support language instruction. 

NativeNet 

http:/ /niikaan.fdl.cc.mn.us//natnet 

As noted on its site, NativeNet hopes to foster dialogue and 
understanding of indigenous people around the world. A wide 
number of mailing lists and archival sites makes this page 
interesting and unusual for those researching native peoples. 

The United States Senate Committee on Indian Affairs — chaired by 
Ben Nighthorse Campbell 
http:/ /www.senate.gov/ ~scia/ 

For those wondering about the politics surrounding Native 
American peoples /nations, this site offers information about 
the Committee on Indian Affairs and its recent committee 
work/legislative agenda. Also provides links to other govern- 
mental bodies that provide support or information on Indian 
Affairs. 

Native Media Resource Center 

http:/ / www.wco.com/ -berryhp / nmrc.html 

This site focuses on Native American media resources and has 
a stated purpose of helping interested parties become more 
familiar with Native-owned and -operated public radio sta- 
tions and media organizations and publications. 





[ 



: 



342 



Christine Marshall, Becky L. Reimer, and Jean Boreen 



Native American Documents Project 
http:/ /www.csusm.edu/projects/nadp/ 

This project is working to make documents about the history 
of federal policy concerning native peoples more easily avail- 
able. Although the site is in a fledgling form to some degree, 
reports dating from 1871 to approximately 1915 concerning 
Indian policy, allotment data, and the Rogue River War and 
Siletz Reservation are available and interesting as primary 
sources. 

The National Museum of the American Indian at the Smithsonian 
http:/ / www. si .edu / cgi-bin / nav.cgi 

An excellent online resource for those who don't have access 
to the actual museum. Information, overviews and photo- 
graphs of current and permanent exhibitions, archival infor- 
mation, publications and recordings. Native American cultural 
sites, and so on are easily found on this site. The site also links 
the interested to other events — cultural and traditional — 
occurring around the country. 

The Heard Museum: Native Cultures and Art 
http:/ / www.heard.org/index.htm 

The philosophy of the Heard Museum is to promote apprecia- 
tion and respect for Native people and their cultural heritage. 
This site underscores their mission well, and additionally 
provides materials teachers will find useful as they prepare 
their own units on Native Americans. 

Native American Links 
http://www.flash.net/~vicjoli5/23.htm 

This site matches its title exactly, and for those teachers who 
need resources quickly, this site provides them. 

Native American Navigator 

http://www.ilt.columbia.edu/kl2/naha/nanav.html 

This site is actually an interface for geographical, historical, 
topical, and keyword-based student inquiry on topics related 
to Native American history and culture in the United States. 
Clickable maps and two special archives created specifically 
for K-12 students using the Internet for classroom projects or 
collaborative work are highlights of this site. 



v V i 






35 ^ 



343 



Native American Resources 



Tribal People's Resources 

http: / / www.nucleus.com/ 4worlds / tribal.htm 

Not just another site with great links, the Tribal People's 
Resources has a special section on Native American-themed 
books that have Resources for Teachers. 

First Amendment Center 

http: / / www.fac.org / publicat/ trahant/ contents.htm 

"Pictures of Our Nobler Selves" — report by Mark N. Trahant 
of the contributions made by Native Americans to the news 
media. 



0 

ERIC 



353 



344 



Gay and Lesbian 
Resources 

Caroline E. Heller 

University of Illinois, Chicago 



F or too long we dared not speak its name. Now, too often, people 
speak it and then lie, making monsters where there are only men 
and women. This puts an enormous responsibility on the leaders 
of this country. Trickle-down homophobia cannot exist if they speak 
out, loud and clear, for the rights of all people. If they speak the 
name, and pronounce it right. Call it gay. Call it human." 1 

Former New York Times Op-ed columnist Anna Quindlen wrote 
these words just days before the 1992 presidential election. Quindlen 
intended them for the ears and consciences of then-President Bush 
and candidate Clinton, and they were prompted by the firebomb 
murders of a young woman named Hattie Mae Cohens, who was 
black and lesbian, and a young man named Brian Mock, who was 
white and gay, in the home they shared in Salem, Oregon. Ms. 
Cohens and Mr. Mock were murdered during the heat of the na- 
tional debate surrounding Oregon's Ballot Measure 9, in which the 
people of Oregon were poised to decide whether or not to amend 
their state constitution to officially classify homosexuality, in Mea- 
sure 9's words, as "abnormal, wrong, unnatural, and perverse." 
Quindlen expressed shame and outrage that through months of 
election campaigning, during which both Bush and Clinton had 
expressed commitments to other civil rights issues, neither had 
uttered one word of opposition to Measure 9, perhaps the most 
hateful anti-civil rights measure on any state or national ballot in 
many years. Quindlen, speaking eloquently and for many others 
without a public platform to voice outrage, suggested a direct rela- 
tionship between the silence of national leaders to the hateful mes- 
sage of Ballot Measure 9 and the firebomb murders of Hattie Mae 
Cohens and Brian Mock. "Silence is not good enough," Quindlen 
writes. "Silence gives consent — to the bigotry, the bashing and 
ultimately the firebombings." 

Perhaps the last bastion of "socially acceptable" hate and 
bigotry in the United States is that which exists toward gay and 
lesbian citizens. Indeed, other forms of bigotry and intolerance still 
exist, but most civilized people have learned that hateful expressions 



O 

ERIC 



354 



345 



Gay and Lesbian Resources 



Professional 
Readings for 
Teachers on 
Gay and 
Lesbian Issues 



toward others because of their race, ethnic identity, or gender will, in 
thoughtful company, be directly challenged. More often, however, 
expressions of intolerance toward gays and lesbians go unchal- 
lenged. While few national politicians seem morally equipped or 
ethically willing to summon the courage to take public stands 
against homophobia, public and private school teachers throughout 
the United States are increasingly rising to the occasion — many 
considering it their duty as teachers to help their students to combat 
homophobia in themselves and in their country by helping them to 
see and appreciate the humanity of gay and lesbian citizens. While 
ten years ago, teachers had little help toward this goal, today there 
are many thoughtful, exemplary resources to help teachers to better 
understand gay and lesbian issues, and to also equip their students 
with such understanding as well. Here, in addition to many of the 
listings in Hawkins and Valentine's general readings on tolerance, 
are some of these resources. 

A Bibliography: Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education compiled by Tracy 
Phariss. 1996. Available from The Teachers' Group of Colo- 
rado, POB 280346, Lakewood, CO 80228-0346. 

Phariss has compiled one of the best available resource lists for 
teachers. 

American Friends Service Committee 
1501 Cherry Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19102 

AFS is taking a lead in creating resources to help teachers 
understand gay and lesbian issues. Bridges of Respect: Creating 
Support for Lesbian and Gay Youth: A Resource Guide from the 
American Friends Service Committee, by Katherine Whitlock, 
is outstanding. 

"Gays: Fireworks, Freedom." Newsweek 26 June 1994. 

A piercing, brilliant editorial about homophobia by Tony 
Kushner, whose play Angels in America received the Pulitzer 
Prize. 

Harbeck, Karen. Gay and Lesbian Educators: Personal Freedoms, Public 
Constraints. Malden, MA: Amethyst Press, 1997. 

Another comprehensive look at gay issues in American 
schools. Harbeck takes a historical perspective and offers 
comprehensive information on legal issues. 




0 



346 



Caroline E. Heller 



Harbeck, Karen, ed. Coming Out of the Classroom Closet: Gay and 
Lesbian Students, Teachers, and Curriculum. New York: 
Harrington Park Press, 1992. 

A thoughtful guide discussing the challenges encountered by 
gay and lesbian students and teachers, as well as curriculum 
ideas. 

Harvard Educational Review 
Gutman Library, Suite 349 
6 Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
(617) 495-3432 

Harvard Educational Review, one of the most prestigious educa- 
tional journals in the country, devoted its Summer 1996 issue 
to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People and Educa- 
tion, with a particularly hopeful and helpful interview with 
Harvard scholar Cornel West. 

Koerner, Mari, and Patricia Hulsebosch. "Preparing Teachers to 
Work with Children of Gay and Lesbian Parents." Journal of 
Teacher Education 47.5 (1996): 347-54. 

An absolutely first-rate article on this subject, with an exten- 
sive, helpful bibliography. 

LeVay, Simon. The Sexual Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/A 

Bradford Book, 1994. Also, Hamer, Dean, and Peter Copeland. 
The Science of Desire: The Search for the Gay Gene and the Biology 
of Behavior. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. 

Both are readable, current, and compassionate accounts of 
science's attempt to understand human sexuality. 

Phi Delta Kappan 
408 N. Union 
P. O. Box 789 
Bloomington, IN 47402 

The October 1994 issue of PDK contains an informative, 
provocative, and humane article by teacher John D. Anderson, 
from the Stratford, Connecticut, Public School System, entitled 
"School Climate for Gay and Lesbian Students and Staff 
Members." 



[ 



347 



i 

Gay and Lesbian Resources 



Project 10 Handbook: Addressing Lesbian and Gay Issues in Our Schools. 
Los Angeles: Friends of Project 10, Inc., 1991. 

A highly informative guide to teachers interested in gay and 
lesbian issues, available from the first on-site school organiza- 
tion for gay and lesbian youth. Available from Friends of 
Project 10, Fairfax High School, 7850 Melrose Ave., Los Ange- 
les, CA 90046. (818) 441-3382. 

Sears, James T., ed. Growing up Gay in the South: Race, Gender, and 
Journeys of the Spirit. New York: Harrington Park Press, 1991. 

An inspiring look at the anguish felt by so many young gay 
men and women. 

Sears, James T., and Walter L. Williams, eds. Overcoming Heterosexism 
and Homophobia: Strategies that Work. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1997. 

The most complete and current book to address these issues. 
Available through Web site: http:/ /hawaii. conterra.com/ 
jsears/homotab.htm or through Columbia University Press. 

Theory into Practice journal 
College of Education 
The Ohio State University 
146 Arps Hall 

1945 N. High Street, Columbus, OH 43210 

The Summer 1994 issue of TIP, still available by mail, includes 
a marvelous article, "The Silent Minority: Rethinking Our 
Commitment to Gay and Lesbian Youth" by Virginia Uribe, 
the founder of Project 10, a nationally acclaimed support 
group for gay and lesbian teens in Los Angeles. Written for 
and to teachers, it includes an extensive bibliography of its 
own covering a range of gay and lesbian issues. 

Walling, Donovan, ed. Open Lives, Safe Schools: Addressing Gay and 
Lesbian Issues in Education. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa 
Educational Foundation, 1996. 

A comprehensive, thoughtful overview of gay and lesbian 
issues, looking particularly at professional issues and curricu- 
lar concerns. 



O 

ERIC 



357 



[ 



348 



Caroline E. Heller 



More Popular 
Literature to 
Help Teachers 
Better 
Understand 
Challenges that 
Face Gays and 
Lesbians 



Aarons, Leroy. Prayers for Bobby: A Mother's Coming to Terms with the 
Suicide of Her Gay Son. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 1996. 

The biography of Mary Griffith, the mother of Bobby Griffith, 
whose suicide as a young man turned his mother into a gay 
rights activist. 

Allison, Dorothy. Bastard out of Carolina. New York: Plume, 1992. 

Allison, Dorothy. Skin: Talking about Sex, Class, and Literature. Ithaca: 
Firebrand Books, 1994. 

Allison, Dorothy. Two or Three Things I Know for Sure. New York: 
Plume, 1995. 

These and anything else by Dorothy Allison. Allison is not 
everyone's cup of tea, for she tells it like it is, powerfully and 
without mincing words. But her writing is generous, humane, 
and very humorous. 



Andrews, Nancy. Family: A Portrait of Gay and Lesbian America. 

San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994. 

A photo-essay anthology of families of gays and lesbians. 

Baldwin, James. Giovanni's Room. New York: Dial Press, 1956. 

This and anything else by the great James Baldwin, whose 
journey as a black gay artist permeates his work. 

Griffin, Susan. The Eros of Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday, 1995. 

Helm, Scott. Mysterious Skin. New York: HarperCollins, 1995. 

Beautifully written and hopeful story of a young man's 
struggle toward self-acceptance. 

Johnson, Fenton. Scissors, Paper, Rock. New York: Washington Square 
Press, 1993. 



Johnson, Fenton. Geography of the Heart: A Memoir. New York: 
Scribner, 1996. 

These and anything else by Fenton Johnson. 

Kushner, Tony. "Be Thou More Sheltering: An AIDS Prayer." Think- 
ing about the Longstanding Problems of Virtue and Happiness. 
New York: Theatre Communications Group, Inc., 1995. 

A powerful prayer. 



: 



349 



c 

Gay and Lesbian Resources 



Lorde, Audre. Sister Outsider. Freedom, CA: The Crossing Press, 

1984. 

This and anything else by the late poet and essayist Audre 
Lorde. 

Merrill, James. A Different Person: A Memoir. New York: Knopf, 1993. 
This and anything else by the late poet James Merrill. 

Monette, Paul. Becoming a Man: Haifa Life Story. New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1992. 

Monette, Paul. Borrowed Time: An AIDS Memoir. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1988. 

Monette, Paul. Love Alone. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988. 

These books and anything else by the late writer Paul Monette 
that you can get your hands on! Monette was one of the first 
writers to chronicle the depth of personal loss from the AIDS 
epidemic. 

Peck, Dale. Martin and John. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1993. 

An astonishing first novel by Peck about flight from a ho- 
mophobic father, and coming into one's own identity against 
great odds. 

Rich, Adrienne. On Lies, Secrets, and Silence. New York: Norton, 1979. 
This and anything else by poet Adrienne Rich. 

Segrest, Mab. Memoir of a Race Traitor. Boston: South End Press, 1994. 

A powerful memoir of a white southern girl discovering her 
lesbianism. A testimony by this political activist, both a gay 
rights activist and an activist against racial bigotry in the 
South, that political alliances can exist across differences. 

Shilts, Randy. Conduct Unbecoming: Gays and Lesbians in the U.S. 
Military. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1994. 

A journalistic tour de force. 

Trillin, Calvin. Remembering Denny. New York: Warner Books, 1993. 

A loving chronicle of a gay man's quiet road toward suicide by 
his Yale classmate. 



ERIC 



359 



350 



Caroline E. Heller 



The above is but a small sampling of literature that addresses the 
lives of gays and lesbians in a profound, sensitive, insightful way. 
For further information on fine literature, contact: 

Gay Men's Press 1-800-243-0138 

Tricycle Press 1-800-841-2665 

Women's Press Interlink Publishers 1-800-238-5465. 



Books and 
Literature for 
Children 



Many children's books that deal with tolerance and the feeling of 
being different are perfectly appropriate for helping children and 
young people to understand the particular struggles for acceptance 
that gays and lesbians experience. Books for younger children can 
sometimes be very effective in dealing with sensitive issues like 
these with older students. Thus, even though these books are osten- 
sibly for younger students, they may prove helpful in addressing 
gender and sexuality issues. The resources section of the Teaching 
Tolerance magazine of the Teaching Tolerance Project listed in 
Hawkins and Valentine's listing of resources also lists many such 
books. 



Alden, Joan. A Boy's Best Friend. Boston: Alyson Wonderland Press, 
1992. 

A dog leads the way to showing a little boy with lesbian 
parents that there's nothing bad about being different. 

Bibliography of Books for Our Children Living in Lesbian and Gay Fami- 
lies. Available from Gay and Lesbian Parents Coalition Interna- 
tional, PO. Box 50360, Washington, DC 20091, (202) 583-8029. 

De Paola, Tomie. Oliver Button Is a Sissy. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 
Jovanovich, 1979. (K-4) 

A lovely story about standing up to peer pressure. 

Elwin, Rosamund, and Michelle Paulse Asha. Mums. Toronto: 
Women's Press, 1990. (K-5) 

About a loving teacher's process of helping her students 
accept an African American classmate with two moms. 

Heron, Ann, and Meredith Maran. How Would You Feel If Your Dad 
Was Gay? Boston: Alyson Wonderland Press, 1991. (1-5) 

A brother and sister discuss the pluses and minuses of letting 
their friends know that their father is gay. 



O 

ERLC 



3 uO 



351 



Gay and Lesbian Resources 



Jenness, Aylette. Families: A Celebration of Diversity, Commitment, and 
Love. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990. (K-6) 

A loving portrait of all sorts of families, including families 
headed by gay and lesbian parents. 

Johnson-Calvo, Sarita. A Beach Party with Alexis. Boston: Alyson 
Wonderland Press, 1991. (K-3) 

An enchanting coloring book about a family outing that 
includes gay and lesbian parents. 

Mack, Bruce. Jesse's Dream Skirt. Chapel Hill, NC: Lollipop Power 
Books, 1979. (K-4) 

A little boy's love of dressing up in a multicolored skirt 
propels a daycare teacher to lead her children in discussions of 
gender roles. 

McCauslin, Mark. Facts about Lesbian and Gay Rights. New York: 
Crestwood House, 1992. (5-6) 

An insightful account of the gay and lesbian human rights 
movement. 

Rees, David. Milkman's On His Way. London: Gay Men's Press, 1982. 
(5-6) 

A young boy begins to accept himself as gay, and his non-gay 
friends stick by him. 

Rench, Janice. Understanding Sexual Identity: A Book for Gay Teens and 
Their Friends. Minneapolis: Lemer Publications Company, 

1990. (6-12) 

A supportive, insightful book about sexuality and its myths. 

Rofes, Eric. Kids' Book of Divorce: By, For, and About Kids. New York: 
Random House, 1981. (K-6) 

A comprehensive, sensitive book about coping with divorce, 
with a lovely section called "Loving Your Gay Parent." 

Snyder, Anne, and Louis Pelletier. The Truth about Alex. New York: 
New American Library, 1981. (5-9) 

The story of a high school friendship, peer pressure, and, for 
one character, the struggle to come out and be accepted. 



erJc 



361 



[ 



] 



352 Caroline E. Heller 



Organizations 
Devoted to Gay 
and Lesbian 
Issues 


Valentine, John. The Duke Who Outlawed felly Beans and Other Stories. 
Boston: Alyson Wonderland Press, 1991. (3-6) 

A lovely collection of stories that includes lesbian and gay 
parents but does not explicitly focus on issues of gay and 
lesbian families. 

Valentine, John. Daddy's Machine. Boston: Alyson Publications, 1991. 
(K— 4) 

Two sisters with two moms, and the father figure who joins 
their family. 

Wickens, Elaine. Anna Day and the O-Ring. Boston: Alyson Wonder- 
land Press, 1994. (K-4) 

A simple story about a little boy's parents helping their son 
put up a tent. The little boy's parents happen to be two moms. 

Willhoite, Michael. Daddy's Roommate. Boston: Alyson Wonderland 
Press, 1990. (2^1) 

Deals with divorce and the new loving relationship of a young 
boy's father. 

Willhoite, Michael. The Entertainer. Boston: Alyson Wonderland 
Press, 1992. (1-5) 

The star is a child of lesbian parents who loves magic. 

Willhoite, Michael. Uncle What-is-it Is Coming to Visit. Boston: Alyson 
Wonderland Press, 1993. (3-6) 

Children coming to understand and accept their uncle and his 
love for another man. 

Zolotow, Charlie. William's Doll. New York: Harper & Row, 1972. 
(K-3) 

William loves dolls, an affection his grandmother understands 
but that his father struggles to understand. 

The Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Teachers Network (GLSTN). 

GLSTN organizes conferences and provides leadership train- 
ing, staff development, and a wide range of helpful resources. 
GLSTN 122 W. 26th St. Suite 1100, New York, NY 10011 (212) 
727-0135. There are local chapters throughout the United 
States. 


3 

LC 


n$G2 



353 



Gay and Lesbian Resources 



Journals and 
Magazines 



Worthy 
Web Sites 



Curriculum 

Guides 



o 

ERIC 



Parents, Families, and Friends of Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG). 

PFLAG, with chapters in cities and communities throughout 
the United States, has a variety of resources available to teach- 
ers and parents. PFLAG National Office, 1101 14th St. NW, 
Suite 1030, Washington, DC 20005. (202) 638-4200. 



Empathy: An Interdisciplinary Journal for Persons Working to End Op- 
pression on the Basis of Sexual Identities. Edited by James T. 

Sears. To order subscription, write Gay and Lesbian Research 
Project (GLARP), Empathy, P. O. Box 5085, Columbia, SC 
29250. 

Public Education Regarding Sexual Orientation Issues (PERSON) 
http:/ / www.youth.org/loco/PERSONProject/ 

A comprehensive Web site focused on gay issues in schools. 

Women's Educational Media 
http://www.womedia.org/ 

A Web site focused on updates on the pioneering films on 
education, parenting, and gays and lesbians produced by this 
production company. 

National Gay and Lesbian Task Force 
http://www.ngltf.org/ 

A comprehensive Web site focused on news affecting gays and 
lesbians. 

The Teachers' Group: Gay and Lesbian Educators of Colorado 
http:/ /www. youth.org/loco/PERSONProject/Resources/ 
Bibliography / contents .html 

This chapter of GLSTN has established a comprehensive, 
invaluable Web site of resources for educators concerned with 
gay and lesbian issues. 

Bullyproof: A Teacher's Guide on Teasing and Bullying for Use with 4th 
and 5th Grade Students is one of the few anti-bias curricula 
addressing sexual orientation-related bullying head-on. 

Flirting or Hurting? A Teacher's Guide on Student to Student Sexual 
Harassment in Grades 6-12 is an interactive curriculum that 
helps teachers address these issues with older students. 




354 



~i 

Caroline E. Heller 



Both guides are available from the Center for Research on 
Women, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA 02181. (617) 283-2500. 

A Guide to Leading Introductory Workshops on Homophobia. 

A guide for teachers interested in exploring homophobia in 
their classrooms and schools from The Campaign to End 
Homophobia, R O. Box 438316, Chicago, IL 60643-8316. 

Breaking the Classroom Silence: A Curriculum about Lesbian and Gay 
Human Rights by Dave Donahue and Meg Satterthwaite. 

A curriculum addressing lesbian and gay rights issues in the 
context of Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Includes 
student-led activities. Available from Amnesty International 
USA, 53 West Jackson, Rm. 1162, Chicago, IL 60604. (312) 427- 
2060. 

Looking at Gay and Lesbian Literature by Arthur Lipkin, Harvard 
Graduate School of Education. 

This is a lovely compilation of activities and questions to be 
used in conjunction with writings by gay and lesbian literary 
figures. 



Films and 
Videos 



Choosing Children. Dir. by Debra Chasnoff and Kim Klausner. Focuses 
on lesbians becoming parents. Also available from Women's 
Educational Media. 



Families Come Out. Available from 21st Century News, Inc., and also 
with a discussion guide, this film focuses on families sharing 
their experiences of having gay family members. 

Gay Youth by Pam Walton. A lovely, sensitive, affirming film about 
gay and lesbian teenagers. Available through Educational 
Video, Box 391025, Mountain View, CA 94039. (415) 960-3414. 

It's Elementary: Talking about Gay Issues in School. This film, the first 

ever to help elementary school teachers think sensitively about 
gay and lesbian issues, includes interviews with teachers and 
footage of classrooms where teachers help their students to 
understand gay and lesbian issues. Directed by Academy 
Award-winning director Debra Chasnoff; 78 minutes long. 
Available from Women's Educational Media, 2180 Bryant 
Street, #203, San Francisco, CA 94110; (415) 641-4632. A first- 
rate resource. 





[ 



355 



i 

Gay and Lesbian Resources 



Love Makes a Family. A sensitive, informative look at gay and lesbian 
families and their children. Available through Family Diversity 
Projects, Inc., P. O. Box 1209, Amherst, MA 01004-1209. 

Teaching Respect for All. An hour-long video with Kevin Jennings, the 
director of the national Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Teachers 
Network (GLSTN), who presents a fine workshop called 
"Homophobia 101." Another fine video. Available from 
GLSTN Publications Department, 122 W. 26th St., Suite 1100, 
New York, NY 10011. (212) 727-0254. 

Teens Speak Out. Teenagers talk about gay identity, dealing with 
homophobia, and coming out. A discussion guide is also 
available. From 21st Century News, Inc., P. O. Box 42286, 
Tucson, AZ 85733. (602) 327-9555. 

When Democracy Works by Catherine Saalfield. An in-depth examina- 
tion of the radical right's anti-gay, anti-immigration, and anti- 
affirmative action campaigns. Available by calling (212) 330- 
8220. 

Who's Afraid of Project 10? 

Project 10 was the first high school program in the nation that 
attempted to address the needs of gay and lesbian students. 
This film offers interviews with students, parents, community 
officials, as well as with Project 10's founder, Virginia Uribe. 
Available from Friends of Project 10, Inc., 7850 Melrose Av- 
enue, Los Angeles, CA 90046. (818) 441-3382. 



Note 1. From Anna Quindlen's column entitled "Putting Hatred to a 

Vote/' The New York Times 29 October 1992. 



356 



Holocaust Resources 

Joan F. Peterson 

Saint Mary's College of California 



S cholarship on the Holocaust grows exponentially with every 
passing year as new evidence continues to appear regarding an 
event often called unfathomable. It is the consequent task of 
teachers to make understood that which can be comprehended. 
Though the number of materials available is burdensome, there are 
excellent resources, both textual and electronic, which teachers can 
consult. Holocaust issues, due to their proximity to our own time 
and the moral and ethical dilemmas they represent, are sensitive 
issues to teach. The following points are offered as a guide for 
walking students through this dark time. 

Teachers need to have a clear purpose or intention in mind before 
beginning. What do you want your students to know from this 
course of study? How will you bring them there? Be aware of what 
you can observe and evaluate and what you cannot. 

An accurate presentation of Holocaust history is central to the 
teaching of it. There is a progression of historical and anti-Semitic 
events that led to the Holocaust that must be chronicled so that 
students do not see this as a freak incident that could never happen 
again. 

A firm historical framework mitigates against generalization. Gener- 
alizing simplifies both the event and the teaching of the event. 
History is diminished by simple words and phrases, like 
"scapegoating," when such words are used to stand in for complex 
ideas. 

The Holocaust occurred within a context. It is important to establish 
a clear frame for any piece of history or literature so that its presenta- 
tion does not appear to be ahistorical. 

Students need to distinguish between memoirs and fiction. Even 
though the line between them can be somewhat blurred by how one 
remembers events and by the prose used for description, memoirs of 
the Holocaust are still seen as an important part of "witnessing." 

One might even discuss with students when fiction is appropriate 
and why in the context of the Holocaust. 



357 



Holocaust Resources 



It is important to clearly define and discuss all definitions and terms. 

Close attention to language and the way language is used in writings 
about the Holocaust is valuable. The language of testimony is differ- 
ent from the language used to record events, which is different from 
the language used to propagandize. Primary sources, poetry, essays, 
memoirs, films, and electronic text all have their own unique lan- 
guage colorations and can be revealed in the English classroom. 
Students can benefit from a consideration of how different media 
affect response as well as deliver message. 

An understanding of students' prior knowledge about the Holocaust, 
as well as what students want to learn, is important. Teachers should 
guard against repeating lessons and books with which students are 
already familiar. A bored student can become a dismissive one. 

Provide ample opportunities for students to analyze, synthesize, and 
reflect upon what they are learning through discussion and writing. 

Prepare students ahead of time for discomfort and for ambiguity. 
Some students may find parts of Holocaust study too difficult and 
too disturbing and need release from viewing a film or finishing a 
story or discussion. At times, there may be no ready answers or even 
any answers at all. This kind of ensuing struggle is seen as part of 
studying the Holocaust. 

Silence, in response to the Holocaust, is sometimes appropriate; 
indeed, it is sometimes the only honest response. 

Avoid simulations and "games" that attempt to replicate Holocaust 
events. These are destined to trivialize and simplify something that 
even eyewitnesses cannot adequately describe. By the same token, 
stay away from "if you were there" kinds of questions. No one can 
possibly answer this adequately — nor should one have to. 

In order to better prepare students for a difficult discussion, have 
them brainstorm ideas individually or in groups beforehand. 

Ask tough questions that require critical and interpretive thinking. 
"Why" and "how" questions that ask for speculations based on fact 
and what we know to be true in human nature raise the level of 
discourse. Questions that merely repeat what has been read lower 
the level of discourse and of interest. 

Encourage students to speak to older people about the events of the 
Holocaust. 



358 



Joan F. Peterson 



Curriculum 
Guides and 
Resources 



Holocaust survivors provide riveting and moving classroom experi- 
ences for students. 

Teachers who have limited time to teach the Holocaust might con- 
sider using parts of longer videotapes. 

Students benefit when they are made aware of what they don't know 
as well as of what they do. For students who show interest, further 
study of the Holocaust on one's own can be encouraged by teachers. 

Curricular resources for teaching the Holocaust have been devel- 
oped by organizations, states, and individuals. The following are 
representative of the guides available. 

Anne Frank in Historical Perspective. 

Martyr's Memorial and Museum of the Holocaust of the Jewish 
Federation Council of Greater Los Angeles 
6505 Wilshire Blvd. 

Los Angeles, CA 90048-4906 

Provides an overview of Anne Frank situated within the 
context of the Holocaust and its aftermath. Includes sugges- 
tions for teaching the diary and a bibliography. 

A Resource Book for Educators: Teaching about the Holocaust. 

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 
100 Raoul Wallenberg Place, SW 
Washington, DC 20024-2150 

This outstanding text gives methodological guidelines for 
teaching about the Holocaust and annotated bibliographies of 
texts and videotapes followed by a historical summary. Also 
recommended are pamphlets for educators, particularly those 
titled The Handicapped, Jehovah's Witness, Sinti and Roma, 
The Poles, Homosexuals, and Resistance. 

Life Unworthy of Life: An 18-Lesson Instructional Unit on the Holocaust. 

Sidney M. Bolkosky 

Center for the Study of the Child 

914 Lincoln Avenue 

Ann Arbor, MI 48104-3525 

Very structured lesson plans begin with "Questions of Per- 
sonal Responsibility" and end with "Consequences and 
Implications." Includes classroom activities, time line, com- 
parison/ contrast questions, glossary terms, readings, accom- 
panying videotapes. 




0 



] 



359 



Holocaust Resources 



A Guide to the Film Schindler's List. 

Facing History and Ourselves 
16 Hurd Road 
Brookline, MA 02146 

An excellent resource for the film. Includes pre-view sections, 
questions,original source materials, selections from the book, 
and critical reviews. 

Holocaust and Human Behavior 
Facing History and Ourselves 
16 Hurd Road 
Brookline, MA 02146 

Over five hundred pages in length, this resource book empha- 
sizes democratic participation and includes history, readings, 
original sources, and pre-reading sections. Questions and 
connections to students' lives are presented. 

"Never Again, I Hope, The Holocaust." 

Washington State Holocaust Education Resource Center 
2031 Third Avenue 
Seattle, WA 98121 

Oral history videotape and teacher's guide. Materials both 
guide and augment the video. Nine Holocaust survivors give 
their testimonies. Includes overhead transparencies of maps, 
statistics, photos, and drawings. 

The Holocaust: Prejudice Unleashed. Leatrice Rabinsky and Carol Danks, eds. 

Ohio Council on Holocaust Education 

Satterfield Hall 

Kent State University 

Kent, OH 44242 

Ten units appropriate for English or history classrooms. 
Includes background mini-lectures, historical documents, 
literary pieces, vocabulary, student activities, annotated 
videography, and bibliography. 

South Carolina Voices: Lessons from the Holocaust 
South Carolina Department of Education 
Council on the Holocaust 
1429 Senate Street 
Room 801 

Columbia, SC 29201 

Eleven teaching lessons with handouts that include primary 



c 



360 



I 

Joan F. Peterson 



source documents, interviews, maps, newspaper accounts, 
excerpts from speeches. Provides lesson plans, overviews, and 
"extend" sections to further student exploration. 

The End of Innocence: Anne Trank and the Holocaust. 

International Center for Holocaust Studies 
Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith 
New York, NY 10017 

Excerpts from the diaries lead to background information and 
are followed by questions for lessons and reflection. Includes 
twenty-three short readings for further study. 

The Holocaust: The World and the Jews. Seymour Rossel. 

Behrman House, Inc. 

235 Watchung Ave. 

West Orange, NJ 07052 

A strong supplement for teachers, broken into History, Why 
the Jews, Resistance, Rescue, and Justice. Many photographs, 
very accessible. Each section ends with a brief review and 
includes issues and questions. 

The International School For Holocaust Studies, Yad Vashem. 

P. O. Box 3477 
Jerusalem, 91034, Israel 

Outstanding resources and curriculum guides available, 
particularly Holocaust Source Materials and Articles, and The 
Jew in Nazi Ideology. To Bear Witness is an educational kit 
containing twenty posters depicting the Holocaust. 



BOOkS Qnd To ensure historical accuracy and to situate stories within an appro- 
I itornti iro n priate context, English teachers must become history teachers too 
LITerUTUlO On when teaching the Holocaust. The bibliography that follows pro- 
file Holocaust vides a variety of works from both nonfiction and fiction. Each of the 

texts contains a particular viewpoint and voice that afford a rich 
mine for examination. The language used in these works ranges 
from expressions of horror and grief to longing and objectified 
distance. The word and genre choices authors make to articulate 
such a difficult subject can lead to fruitful exploration. The great 
themes of literature are found in these works and they lend them- 
selves well to the pedagogical strategies implicit in the teaching of 
English. 

Books selected are represented within the categories of history, 
memoir, fiction, poetry, biography, and anthology. In addition, an 



er|c 



3 70 



361 



Holocaust Resources 



attempt has been made to include books on the subjects of hidden 
children, women, Nazi racial theory, and resisters and rescuers. 
These books are readily accessible to secondary students. Issues 
about family and loss, despair and betrayal are close to adolescents 
who have a great thirst to know about the world, even in its darkest 
and most horrific form. 

Books were chosen for their historical and literary excellence 
and for their appeal to secondary students. These texts reflect a 
variety of voices and perspectives. Appropriate grade levels are 
noted. Many are stories about children or teenagers and families and 
provide immediate accessibility. Though they reflect only a very 
small number of the books available to students, they are a way for 
teachers to begin building a curriculum, a library, an approach. 

Allen, William S. The Nazi Seizure of Power: The Experience of a Single 
German Town , 1922-1945. New York: Franklin Watts, 1984. 

A detailed description of what actually took place in an ordi- 
nary German town, with special emphasis on events between 
1930 and 1935. Interviews with leaders of the period as well as 
townspeople effectively portray how the Nazi party suc- 
ceeded. This is a very readable, historical account. Grades 11- 
12 . 

Appelfeld, Aharon. To the Land of the Cattails. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1986. 

A mother and her adolescent son set off on a train journey 
across Eastern Europe to find the land of her birth. In this 
rather dreamlike book, the mother is deported and the boy 
follows in search of her. Grades 9-12. 

Auerbacher, Inge. 1 Am a Star: Child of the Holocaust. New York: 

Simon & Schuster, 1986. 

Though written for younger, middle school readers, this book 
makes a fine companion to 1 Never Saw Another Butterfly. It 
weaves a child's story of survival at Terezin with photographs, 
art work, and poems simply and movingly recorded. Grades 
9-12. 

Bachrach, Susan D. Tell Them We Remember: The Story of the Holocaust. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1994. 

Filled with short, succinct narratives, including a historical 
overview, personal stories, many photographs, and maps. 
Provides an excellent introduction and resource to the Holo- 
caust. Grades 9-12. 



371 



o 



[ 



] 



362 



Joan F. Peterson 



Bauer, Yehuda. A History of the Holocaust. New York: Franklin Watts, 
1982. 

An extremely readable history text that examines a range of 
Holocaust topics including Jewish life. World War I, Poland, 
Ghettos, and Resistance and Rescue. An excellent resource. 
Grades 9-12. 

Bauer, Yehuda, and Nathan Rotenstreich, eds. The Holocaust as 
Historical Experience. New York: Holmes and Meier, 1981. 

A book of distinguished essays by leading Holocaust scholars 
blends personal accounts and analytical inquiry. Contains 
background, witnesses and case studies, and the Jewish 
response. Provides teachers with a framework for approaching 
the Holocaust. 

Berenbaum, Michael. The World Must Know: The History of the Holo- 
caust as Told in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1993. 

A powerful compilation of black-and-white and color photo- 
graphs and text. Documents a wide range of Holocaust history 
and experience while providing emotional impact. This would 
be a valuable classroom resource for students. Grades 9-12. 

Berenbaum, Michael. Witness to the Holocaust. New York: 
HarperCollins, 1997. 

An excellent collection of primary source materials. These 
short documents, including laws, telegrams, eyewitness 
accounts, proclamations, protocols, and reports will provide 
teachers and students with important historical grounding. 

Bierman, John. Righteous Gentile: The Story of Raoul Wallenberg, Miss- 
ing Hero of the Holocaust. New York: Viking, 1981. 

The true-life mystery story of the man who saved thousands of 
Hungarian Jews, his arrest by Russian liberators, and subse- 
quent disappearance into the Gulag Archipelago. Grades 9-12. 

Block, Gay, and Malka Drucker. Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in 
the Holocaust. New York: Holmes & Meier Publishers, 1992. 

A marvelous book of photographs and text written in the 
words of the rescuers themselves. Provides stories of courage 
and love in the face of devastation. Grades 9-12. 



O 

ERIC 



372 



363 



I 

Holocaust Resources 



Boas, Jacob. We Are Witnesses: Five Diaries of Teenagers Who Died in the 
Holocaust. New York: Henry Holt, 1995. 

The stories of five teenagers, including Anne Frank, are inter- 
spersed with diary entries. The tragedy they see and the 
impending doom they feel are reflected through an adolescent 
point of view. Teenagers will connect with these personal 
stories. Grades 9-12. 

Borowski, Tadeusz. This Way for the Gas, Ladies and Gentlemen. New 
York: Penguin Books, 1976. 

Short, horrific stories told with detachment, chronicle daily 
horrors of camp life while revealing bitter truths. For mature 
readers. Grades 11-12. 

Browning, Christopher R. Ordinary Men: Reserve Battalion 101 and the 
Final Solution in Poland. New York: HarperCollins, 1992. 

A chilling analysis of how five hundred "ordinary" men who 
shot 38,000 Polish Jews and deported 45,000 more over the 
course of sixteen months managed to do so. The text draws 
upon post-war interviews of members of the battalion. Teacher 
resource. 

Celan, Paul. Poems of Paul Celan. Trans. Michael Hamburger. New 
York: Persea Books, 1980. 

The Holocaust poems of a great poet. An important resource. 
Grades 9-12. 

Conot, Robert E. Justice at Nuremberg. New York: Carroll and Graf, 
1984. 

This detailed account of the trial and of the issues of the trial is 
told in lively and absorbing prose. Grades 9-12. 

Dawidowicz, Lucy. The War Against the Jews, 1933-1945. New York: 
Bantam, 1986. 

A definitive work that explores anti-Semitism, legislation, the 
SS, camps, ghettos, and Jewish behavior in crises. A valuable 
appendix includes the fate of Jews by country. Grades 11-12. 

Dawidowicz, Lucy. A Holocaust Reader. New York: Behrman House, 
1976. 

A collection of documents, most quite short, delineating events 
leading to "The Final Solution." Laws, instructions, orders. 



O 

ERLC 



373 



364 



1 

Joan F. Peterson 



diary entries, summons and testaments provide a fascinating 
compilation of primary source materials. Grades 10-12. 

Delbo, Charlotte. None of Us Will Return. Boston: Beacon Press, 1968. 

In this beautifully written and haunting work, the writer tells 
of her survival at Auschwitz. An emotional and poetic render- 
ing of loss. For mature readers. Grades 11-12. 

Eichengreen, Lucille. From Ashes to Life: My Memories of the Holocaust. 
San Francisco: Mercury House, Inc., 1994. 

From Ghetto to Camp to Liberation to Life after Auschwitz, 
this memoir tells the harrowing story of a young Jewish girl in 
spare, eloquent prose. A fine companion to Wiesel's Night. 
Grades 9-12. 

Fisch, Robert O. Light from the Yellow Star: A Lesson of Love from the 
Holocaust. New York: Oliver Press, 1996. 

This remarkable book combines short poetic and concrete 
descriptions of the author's painful experiences with arresting 
painted images. That love can overcome hate is the final 
message of this very accessible text. Grades 7-12. 

Fishman, Charles, ed. Blood to Remember: American Poets on the Holo- 
caust. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1991. 

A large and interesting assemblage of hard-to-find poems from 
both known and unknown American poets. 

Frank, Anne. The Diary of a Young Girl: The Definitive Edition. New 
York: Doubleday, 1995. 

Widely read and loved, Anne's voice is inimitable. Her trials 
and ultimate death personalize the loss of millions for adoles- 
cents. Grades 9-12. 

Frankl, Vicktor E. Man's Search for Meaning. New York: Washington 
Square Press, 1984. 

Frankl explores philosophical and psychological implications 
of camp life with great humanity. A fine reflective and specula- 
tive work from a survivor. Grades 10-12. 

Gies, Miep. Anne Frank Remembered: The Story of the Woman Who 

Helped to Hide the Frank Family. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1988. 




374 



365 



1 

Holocaust Resources 



Simply and honestly written, this is the true story of Miep's 
relationship with the Franks and with the events of the diary 
Grades 9-12. 

Gilbert, Martin. Atlas of the Holocaust. New York: Morrow, 1993. 

The history of atrocity depicted through 316 maps. The maps 
create a unique and powerful visual representation covering 
all phases of the Holocaust. An exceptional resource. Grades 
9-12. 

Hillesum, Etty. An Interrupted Life. New York: Pantheon Books, 1983. 

The adult counterpart to Anne Frank, a young woman reveals 
her reflective inner life in Amsterdam before her deportation 
and subsequent death in Auschwitz. Loves, friendships, 
books, and daily observations are movingly chronicled. For 
mature readers. Grades 11-12. 

Katsh, Abraham I., trans. Scroll of Agony: The Warsaw Diary of Chaim 
A. Kaplan. New York: Collier Books, 1973. 

A fascinating and horrible disclosure of exactly what life was 
like in the Warsaw Ghetto. This diary also exposes how the 
Nazis used the ghetto for purposes of propaganda. Grades 10- 
12. 

Klein, Gerda. All But My Life. New York: Hill and Wang, 1995. 

A compassionate and inspiring memoir of a teenage girl's 
ordeal. This open account attests to the endurance of the 
human spirit and presents a life-affirming message. Grades 9- 
12. 

Landau, Ronnie S. The Nazi Holocaust. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1994. 

A readable historical overview, particularly for high school 
students. Distinguished from similar texts by short but astute 
summaries that explain history while providing moral and 
ethical dimensions of issues. Grades 9-12. 

Laqueur, Walter. The Terrible Secret: An Investigation into the Suppres- 
sion of Information about Hitler's "Final Solution.'' London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1980. 

An account of how Western nations refused to believe the 
mounting evidence about the murder of Jews during the war. 
Both interesting and well written. Grades 9-12. 



375 



[ 



] 



366 



Joan F. Peterson 



Levi, Primo. Survival in Auschwitz. New York: Macmillan, 1987. 

Bears witness to the enormity of Auschwitz with sensitivity 
and intelligence. An unforgettable voice. For mature students. 
Grades 11-12. 

Lifton, Robert Jay. The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killing and the Psycholog]/ 
of Genocide. New York: Basic Books, 1986. 

Chronicles and explores sterilization, euthanasia, Auschwitz 
doctors and medical experiments, and the psychology of 
genocide. The author interviewed doctors and survivors for 
years before writing this book. A fine resource. Grades 10-12. 

Loshitzky, Yosefa, ed. Spielberg's Holocaust: Critical Perspectives on 

Schindler's List. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997. 

An interesting collection of essays that address both strengths 
and limitations of the film as well as issues such as memory, 
popular representation, and national identity. An excellent 
teacher resource. 

Marks, Jane. The Hidden Children: The Secret Survivors of the Holocaust. 
New York: Ballantine, 1993. 

Twenty-three adult survivors share their memories as hidden 
children and their adjustment after the war. These are per- 
sonal, interesting, and very accessible. Grades 9-12. 

Mosse, George. Nazi Culture: A Documentary History. New York: 
Schocken, 1981. 

A collection of original source documents that could be very 
successfully used in the classroom. Includes selections from 
speeches, newspapers, diaries, and literature. A valuable 
resource. Grades 10-12. 

Owings, Alison. Frauen: German Women Recall the Third Reich. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1993. 

Twenty-nine non-Jewish German women speak about their 
experiences during The Third Reich. This is an interesting 
collection of interviews from voices previously unheard. Their 
responses are unpredictable, fascinating, and run the spectrum 
from Nazi sympathizers to helpless spectators. Grades 10-12. 

Ozick, Cynthia. "The Shawl." New York: Knopf, 1990. 

A devastating short, short story, told from the point of view of 
a woman who hides her starving baby in a concentration camp 



ERIC 




[ 



] 



367 



Holocaust Resources 



only to see it murdered before her eyes. Masterfully written. 
For mature readers. Grades 11-12. 

Plant, Richard. The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War against Homosexuals. 
New York: Henry Holt, 1986. 

Chronicles the fate of homosexuals in Nazi Germany through 
diaries and letters. An accessible and interesting account. 
Grades 11-12. 

Proctor, Robert N. Racial Hygiene: Medicine under the Nazis. Cam- 
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988. 

A well-researched and readable account of Nazi racial hygiene 
laws and attitudes about Jews. Investigates how science and 
medicine became politicized and transformed. An excellent 
resource. Grades 10-12. 

Richter, Hans Peter. Friedrich. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
1970. 

A provocative and easy-to-read novel about two German boys 
who are best friends; one is Jewish, the other is German. We 
watch what happens to Friedrich and his friend as Hitler 
comes to power. Grades 9-10. 

Ringelblum, Emmanuel. Notes from the Warsaw Ghetto. Trans. Jacob 
Sloan. New York: McGraw-Hill Books, 1958. 

The notes and diaries of a Jewish historian who recorded 
everything he observed in the ghetto. Grades 10-12. 

Rittner, Carol, and John K. Roth, eds. Different Voices: Women and the 
Holocaust. New York: Paragon House, 1993. 

Strong female voices make this a moving and valuable addi- 
tion for understanding what happened and to whom it hap- 
pened. Mixes eyewitness accounts with philosophical and 
reflective essays. Grades 9-12. 

Rittner, Carol, R.S.M., and Sondra Myers, eds. The Courage to Care: 
Rescuers of Jews during the Holocaust. New York: New York 
University Press, 1986. 

From the award-winning film, this volume contains photos 
and moving and inspiring interviews with rescuers and 
survivors. Addresses why these people chose to endanger 
their own lives rather than passively comply. Grades 9-12. 



ERIC 




368 



Joan F. Peterson 



Scholl, Inge. The White Rose: Munich, 1942-43. Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press, 1983. 



The true story of six German university students who founded 
a resistance movement and were indicted for treason and 
sentenced to death by the Nazis. Grades 9-12. 



Spiegelman, Art. Maus [Vols. I & II] New York: Pantheon, 1991. 

Nazis are portrayed as cats and Jews as mice in these unortho- 
dox and arresting comic strips. The author works through the 
true story of his parents in Auschwitz, their life in America, 
and the traumatic impact their experiences have had on him 
with irony. Grades 9-12. 



Tec, Nechama. Dry Tears: The Story of a Lost Childhood. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1982. 

An eleven-year-old girl learns to pass as a Christian among 
anti-Semites in Poland. Written with power and restraint, this 
memoir is a strong coming-of-age story. Grades 9-12. 

Vegh, Claudine. I Didn't Say Goodbye: Interviews with Children of the 
Holocaust. New York: E.P Dutton, 1984. 

Unforgettable interviews with twenty-eight French children of 
parents who lost their lives in the Holocaust. These are very 
moving, readable accounts about the experience of loss for 
children. Grades 9-12. 



Vishniac, Roman. Polish Jews: A Pictorial Record. 5th ed. New York: 
Schocken Books, 1975. 

A wonderful small collection of photographs of Polish Jews 
from the year 1938. Includes introductory essay. Grades 9-12. 

Volavkova, Hana, ed. I Never Saw Another Butterfly: Children's Draw- 
ings and Poems from Terezin Concentration Camp 1942-1944. New 
York: Schocken, 1993. 

This moving and beautiful collection of drawings and poems 
show how children imagined and portrayed life in the Terezin 
children's camp. Poignant and unforgettable. Grades 9-12. 

Wiesel, Elie. Night. New York: Bantam, 1960. 

Stands beside The Diary of Anne Frank as a definitive book for 
adolescent understanding of the Holocaust. A fourteen-year- 
old boy's deportation and camp experiences create an indel- 
ible emotional experience for readers. Grades 9-12. 



O 

ERLC 



[ 



] 



369 



Holocaust Resources 



Wyman, David. The Abandonment of the Jews: America and the Holo- 
caust , 1941-1945. New York: Pantheon, 1986. 

A provocative discussion about how much was known and 
acted upon by the United States government. An indictment of 
Congress and President Roosevelt, immigration quotas, some 
American Zionist leaders. Grades 11-12. 

Yahil, Leni. The Holocaust: The Fate of European Jewry , 1932-1945. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 

An exceptionally comprehensive and readable historical study 
that includes quotations from primary sources and witnesses. 
An excellent resource. Grades 10-12. 



Anthologies 



Eliach, Yaffa. Hasidic Tales of the Holocaust. New York: Vintage Books, 
1988. 

A moving compilation of eighty-nine brief tales taken from the 
testimony of survivors of Hasidic communities. A mix of true 
stories and legends that are imaginative and compelling. 
Grades 9-12. 



Fishman, Charles, ed. Blood to Remember: American Poets on the Holo- 
caust. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1991. 

A large and interesting assemblage of hard-to-find poems from 
both known and unknown American poets. 

Friedlander, Albert H. Out of the Whirlwind: A Reader of Holocaust 
Literature. New York: Schocken, 1989. 

An important collection of Holocaust fiction and nonfiction. 
Selections include memoirs, fiction, and essays on the Holo- 
caust. Grades 9-12. 



Fuchs, Elinor, ed. Plays of the Holocaust: An International Anthology. 
New York: Theater Communications Group, 1987. 

Various plays from different nations. Includes a bibliography. 
Grades 9-12. 



Glatstein, Jacob. Anthology of Holocaust Literature. New York: Ath- 
eneum, 1968. 

Outstanding compilation of vignettes, stories, and memories 
about occupation, ghettos, children, death camps, resistance. 






379 



370 



[ 



Joan F. Peterson 



Journals 



Videotapes 



and non-Jews. Many originally in Yiddish, many translated 
from other countries. Grades 9-12. 

Langer, Lawrence L., ed. Art from the Ashes. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1995. 

An excellent collection of first-person accounts, journals, 
fiction, drama, and poetry. Teacher resource and grades 9-12. 

Schiff, Hilda, ed. Holocaust Poetry. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1995. 

A fine collection of 119 poems by poets who lived and/or died 
during the Holocaust and poets not directly involved. Grades 
9-12. 



Teichman, Milton, and Sharon Leder, eds. Truth and Lamentation: 
Stories and Poems on the Holocaust. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1994. 

An international collection of poetry and short fiction of 
outstanding literary merit. Divided into two sections: Trans- 
mitting Truths and Lamentations. Grades 9-12. 

Dimensions: A Journal of Holocaust Studies 
New York: Anti-Defamation League 

Holocaust and Genocide Studies 
New York: Oxford University Press 

The Journal of Holocaust Education 
London: Frank Cass Publishers 



Photos and videos are powerful teaching tools when used with 
sensitivity and respect for the images portrayed and for the students 
who view them. Highly recommended are the superb guidelines for 
using videos created by the United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum. Offered below is a short selection of the many fine videos 
available on the Holocaust. 

America and the Holocaust: Deceit and Indifference. PBS Video. 

This film examines America's response to wartime news 
reports that several million Jews had been murdered by the 
Nazis. Interviews, archival footage, documents, and photos are 
used to show America's inaction. Grades 11-12. 60 minutes. 



c 



] 



371 



Holocaust Resources 



Auschwitz: If You Cried, You Died. Impact America Foundation. 

Two men return to Auschwitz with their families after having 
survived the camp as teenagers and movingly recount their 
experiences. Grades 9-12. 28 minutes. 

Camera of My Family: Four Generations in Germany, 1845-1945. Zenger 
Video. 

One German-Jewish woman presents her search for family 
roots through photographs and narrative. Grades 9-12. 20 
minutes. 

The Courage to Care. Zenger Video. 

Interviews with six Christian rescuers and Jewish survivors. 
Examines the courageous stance rescuers took in the face of 
Nazi tyranny. Grades 9-12. 28 minutes. 

E lie Wiesel: Facing Hate. PBS. 

A Bill Moyers interview about hatred and the Holocaust with 
Elie Wiesel. Grades 9-12. 60 minutes. 

Faces of the Enemy. Quest Productions. 

Interviews a Vietnam War veteran, members of a far-right 
defense league, and an anti-Communist, among others, to 
explore how such groups justify their actions. Grades 11-12. 58 
minutes. 

The Hangman. Melrose Productions. 

An animated film of Maurice Ogden's poem. The town stands 
by while people are hanged one by one. Grades 9-12. 12 
minutes. 

Heil Hitler! Confessions of a Hitler Youth. Zenger Video. 

A former member of the Hitler Youth organization recounts 
his experiences with documentary footage. Grades 9-12. 30 
minutes. 

Lest We Forget: A History of the Holocaust. CD-ROM, Logos Research 
Systems. 

Interactive CD-ROM containing archival film footage, histori- 
cal speeches, graphics, an original soundtrack, and five hun- 
dred photographs. 




381 



372 



Joan F. Peterson 



Night and Fog. Zenger Video. 



Artistically juxtaposes graphic scene of Holocaust atrocities 
with contemporary scenes. One of the most powerful films 
available about the Holocaust. In French with English sub- 
titles. For mature students. Grades 11-12. 32 minutes. 



Not in Our Town. California Working Group. 

The true story of how thousands of Billings, Montana, resi- 
dents hung paper chanukiot in their windows. They did this to 
protest the brick thrown by white supremacists through a 
window of a Jewish boy who had displayed a chanukiah. 
Grades 9-12. 30 minutes. 



Schindler’s List. Zenger Video. 

The story of Oskar Schindler, who saved more than a thousand 
Jews from deportation. Teachers should be cautioned that this 
long film may be well-known by some students. For mature 
students. Grades 10-12. 3 hours, 17 minutes. 

Shoah. Available through most video stores and libraries. 

Powerful presentation of interviews with survivors, perpetra- 
tors, and bystanders. Though the film is too long for classroom 
use, it can be shown in part. The companion text, Shoah: An 
Oral History of the Holocaust by Claude Lanzmann, contains the 
complete text of the film. Grades 11-12. 9 hours. 

The Master Race. Films for the Humanities. 

Shows Nazi concept of racial superiority, focusing on the 1936 
Olympic Games, Mein Kampf, Nuremberg Laws, Goebbels, and 
German Youth. Grades 9-12. 20 minutes. 

The Warsaw Ghetto. Zenger Video. 

Shows original film footage of the ghetto and describes how 
the Nazis used the films for propaganda. Traces the history 
from beginning to uprising to end. Grades 9-12. 51 minutes. 

The Wave. Zenger Video. 

Dramatization of true story of a California high school teacher 
who set up a classroom experiment to show how the desire to 
conform could lead to something like Nazism. Grades 9-12. 46 
minutes. 



373 Holocaust Resources 





We Must Never Forget: The Story of the Holocaust. Knowledge Unlim- 
ited. 

An overview of the Nazi rise to power combined with memo- 
ries of a woman who survived the Holocaust. Grades 10-12. 35 
minutes. 

With gratitude to Adrian Schrek, Educational Specialist of the Holo- 
caust Center of Northern California, for her assistance. 


Catalogues 


Catalogues can be ordered from the following organizations for 
Holocaust videos, posters, CD-ROMs, texts, and teaching materials. 
Holocaust centers and organizations also loan films. 

ADL Materials Library 
22-D Hollywood Avenue 
Dept. HM97 
Ho-Ho-Kus, NJ 07423 

Resource Center for Educators 
U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum 
100 Raoul Wallenberg Place, SW 
Washington, DC 20024-2150 

The Jewish Video Catalog 

The Wiesenthal Center/Museum of Tolerance 

9786 West Pico Boulevard 

Los Angeles, CA 90035-4701 

Social Studies School Service 

10200 Jefferson Boulevard, P.O. Box 802 

Culver City, CA 90232-0802 


Web Sites 


Holocaust Web sites provide resource materials and personal contact 
via e-mail with Holocaust survivors, teachers, and scholars. The 
groups and organizations listed are dedicated to supporting and 
furthering Holocaust education. The following represent some of the 
excellent sites available. 

Institutions and Organizations 
http://www.ushmm.org/research/library.html 

Library of printed materials on the Holocaust and its historical 
context. 



374 



i~ — i 

Joan F. Peterson 



Museum of Tolerance 

http:/ / www.wiesenthal.com/ mot/ 

The Holocaust: A Tragic Legacy 
http:/ /hyperior.advanced.org/12663 

Responses to the Holocaust: A Hypermedia Archive for the Humanities 
http:/ / www.bitlink.com/ ~rsl/ responses/ 

The Washington Social Studies Site 
http://www.learningspace.org/socialstudies/ 

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 
http:/ /www.ushmm.org/ 



Private 

Holocaust 

Resources 



B. J. Swartz's Holocaust Resources 

http : / / arginine.umdnj.edu/ -swartz /holocaust. html 

Cybrary of the Holocaust 
http:/ / remember.org/ 



David Dickerson's Holocaust Page 
http://www.igc.org/ ddickerson/holocaust.html 



Education ... A Legacy Forum 

http:/ / remember.org/ educate/ index.html 



Facing History and Ourselves 
http:/ / www.facing.org/ 

Holocaust Studies Center, Bronx High School of Science 
http:/ / www.bxscience.edu/orgs/holocaust/index2.html 

Holocaust Studies — Social Studies School Service, Culver City, CA 
http:/ / www.socialstudies.com/holo.html 



Holocaust Translations by Kenneth Kronenberg 
http:/ / www.tiac.net/users/kkrone/holcaust.htm 



L'Chaim 

http : / / www.charm.net/~rbennett/rchaim.html 



Links to other Holocaust Sites 

http : / / www. csuchico.edu / cmas / syllabi /edelman / 
Holl53.1inks.html 



375 



Holocaust Resources 



Holocaust 
Centers and 
Resources 



Literature of the Holocaust 

http://www.english.upenn.edu/ -afilreis/Holocaust/holhome.html 
Remembering the Holocaust 

http:/ /www. vicnet.net.au/ -aragorn/holocaus.htm 

Virtual Jerusalem's Holocaust Pages 

http:/ / www.virtual.co.il/ education/holocaust/ 

Holocaust centers, museums, institutes, foundations, and libraries 
are located in major cities in most states. Their services include 
workshops, speakers, tours, curriculum development, books, materi- 
als, videos, posters, and grants. Other organizations have developed 
learning materials for teaching the Holocaust. The United States 
Holocaust Memorial Museum is a particularly rich resource of 
materials for teachers. 

Association of Holocaust Organizations 

http:/ / www.ushmm.org/ uia-bin/ uia_list/ sites. 1st 

Facing History and Ourselves 
e-mail: Cathy@facing.org 

Steven Spielberg's Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation 
http:/ / www.vhf.org/ 

Social Studies School Service 
e-mail: SSSService@AOL.COM 

The International School For Holocaust Studies, Yad Vashem 
http:/ / www.yad-vashem.org.il/Scoll_E.htm 

The Nizkor Project 

http: / / www2.ca.nizkor.org/index.html 

Simon Wiesenthal Center 
http:/ / www.wiesenthal.com 

Resource Center for Educators: United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum 

education@ushmm.org 




385 



377 



B 



Index 



4-H Office, address of, 294 
Aaron, Frieda, 248, 264 

on Holocaust literature, 240 
Aarons, Leroy, 348 
Aaseng, Nathan, 334 
Abandonment of the Jews , The 
(Wyman), 368 
Abarry, Abu S., 303 
Abblitt, Andy, 100 
Abood, Sally, 66 
Abrahams, Roger D., 302 
"Academic and Pedagogical Issues in 
Teaching the Holocaust" 

(Stotsky), x 

accounts, eyewitness, 5 
accuracy, 5 
Achebe, Chinua, 

on Africa as a foil, 84 
on customs, 83 
activities, 

related to readings, 41 
related to videos, 41 
Actos, The (Teatro Campesino), 317 
Acuna, Rudolfo, 319 
Adams, Virginia M., 304 
Adedjouma, Davida, 302 
ADL Materials Library, address of, 373 
Admitting the Holocaust (Langer), 266 
Adorno, Theodor, 254 

on Holocaust poetry, 236 
"Affirmation, Resistance, and 

Transformation" (Anderson and 
Collins), 318 

African-American Experience, The, 299 
African American Historic Texts On- 
line, Internet site of, 296 
African American History and 
Culture, Internet site of, 296 
African-American Literature (Worley 
and Perry), 43 

African American Newspapers, 
Internet site of, 296 
African Folktales (Abrahams), 302 
African Intellectual Heritage (Asante 
and Abarry), 303 
Afro-American Writing (Long and 
Collier), 303 



Afronet, Internet site of, 296 
After Aztlan (Gonzalez), 321 
"After Slavery" (Kleg and Bard), ix 
After the Holocaust (Rubinstein), 184 
Against Borders (Rochman), 286 
Against the Apocalypse (Roskies), 266 
Age of Atrocity, The (Langer), 266 
AIDS, 97 

Ainslie, Mollie, 30 
Aktion, role play of, 224-25 
Akwesasne Notes, address of, 338 
Alba, Alicia Gaspar de, 325 
Albertson, Bonnie R., x 
Alden, Joan, 350 
Aleichem, Sholem, 213 
Alexander, Robert, 303 
Alicia's Treasure (Bertrand), 330 
aliens, 59-60 

All But My Life (Klein), 184, 365 

Allen, Paula Gunn, 332, 335 

Allen, William S., 361 

Allison, Dorothy, 348 

Allport, Gordon, 77, 285 

altruism, 233 

Altschuler, David, 244 

Alvarez, Julia, 327 

Always Running (Rodriguez), 329 

"Am I a Murderer?" (Perechodnik), 182 

A. Magazine, 314 

Ameriasia Journal, address of, 314-15 
America and the Holocaust (PBS), 370 
American Friends Service Commit- 
tee, address of, 345 
American Heritage, 90 
American Holocaust (Stannard), 200 
American Indian Holocaust and 
Survival (Thornton), 333 
American Indian Literatures (Ruoff), 332 
American Indian Policy in the Twentieth 
Century (Deloria), 332 
American Indians, American Justice 
(Deloria and Lytle), 332 
American Indian Stereotypes in the World 
of Children (Hirschfelder), 333 
American Knees (Wong), 314 
American Mosaic (Rico and Mano), 
93,96 



American People (National Geo- 
graphic Society), 298 
American Slave , The, (Rawick), 304 
American Slave Narratives, Internet 
site of, 296 

America Reads (Foresman), 204 
America's Civil Rights Movement, 300 
America's Original Sin, 300 
Amigos de las Americas, 85 
Among the Volcanoes (Castaneda), 110 
Anaya, Rudolfo A., 319, 325, 327, 328 
Ancestral House, The (Rowell), 303 
Anderson, Sue, 318, 319 
Anderson, William H., 33 
Andrews, Nancy, 348 
Andrews, William L., 34 
Angelou, Maya, 285 
anger, story of young man paralyzed 
by, 17-18 

"Ani Maamin" (Wiesel), 252 
Anna Day and the O-Ring (Wickens), 
352 

Anne Frank in Historical Perspective, 358 
Anne Frank Remembered (Gies), 364 
Annie on My Mind (Garden), 48 
Annotated Bibliography (United States 
Holocaust Memorial Museum), 
258 

annotated guides, 299 
Anthology of Holocaust Literature 
(Glatstein), 369 

Anti-Defamation League of B'nai 
B'rith, address of, 288 
Antisemitism (Westrich), 287 
anti-Semitism, 195, 197, 203, 210, 
273-74 

de-emphasis of term, 206-7 
Anzaldua, Gloria, 320, 323, 324 
Apes, William, 334 
apostrophe, 167 
Appelfeld, Aharon, 361 
Appointed (Stowers and Anderson), 
33, 43 

Archer, Jules, 98, 305 
Arendt, Hannah, 197 
Aristocracy of Everyone, An (Barber), 

20 



0 

ERIC 



386 



] 



378 



Index 



Armenian Village Life Before 1914 (Villa 
and Matossian), 176 
Aronson, David, 97 
Art from the Ashes (Langer), 236, 247, 
260, 370 

Asante, Molefi Kete, 303 
Asian American Curriculum Project, 
address of, 315 

Asian American Literature (Kim), 314 
Asian American Literature (Krach), 

314 

Asian American Policy Review , address 
of, 315 

Asian Americans (Hune, Kim, Fugita, 
and Ling), 308 
Asian biography, 311-12 
Asian diaspora, 308 
Asian fiction, 312 
Asian literary criticism, 314 
Asian social history, 309 
assignments, writing, 185 
Association for Chinese Community 
Affairs, Internet site of, 315 
Association of Holocaust Organiza- 
tions, Internet site of, 375 
A. Sutzkever (Sutzkever), 262 
As You Like It (Shakespeare), 113 
Atlas of the Holocaust (Gilbert), 365 
Attic , The (Gies), 186 
attitudes, post-Holocaust, 213 
Auerbacher, Inge, 361 
Augenbraum, Harold, 320 
Augustine, D. Smith, 290 
Auschwitz (Impact America Founda- 
tion), 371 

Auschwitz, 178, 182 
authenticity, 5 

Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man 
(Johnson), 34-35 
Autobiography of a Papago Woman 
(Chona), 334 

Autobiography of a Winnebago , The 
(Blowsnake), 334 
Avakian, Arlene, 176 
Axis Rule in Occupied Europe 
(Lemkin), 141 
Ayers, William, 290 



Bachrach, Susan D., 361 
Back in the Daze , 116 
Baldwin, James, 42, 348 
Banks, Cherry McGee, 21 n 2, 290 
Banks, James, 21 n 2, 290 



Barber, Benjamin, on community 
service, 20 
Bard, Celia, ix 
Bartov, Omer, 

on cause of Holocaust, 196-98 
response to Goldhagen, 197-98 
Baseball in April and Other Stories 
(Soto), 331 

Bastard out of Carolina (Allison), 348 
Bau, Jozef, 247 
Bauer, Yehuda, 228-29, 362 
Bauman, Janina, 177 
Baylis- White, Mary, 175 
Beach Party with Alexis , A (Johnson- 
Calvo), 351 

Bearing the Unbearable (Aaron), 248, 264 
Beauboeuf-Lafontant, Tamara, 290 
Becker, Elizabeth, 185 
Becker, Jasper, 214 
Becoming a Man (Monette), 349 
Beginning Again at Ararat (Elliott), 
187-88 

Behind the Trail of Broken Treaties 
(Deloria), 332 

Behrman House, Inc., address of, 360 

Belton, Don, 303 

Benet, Stephen Vincent, 89, 91 

Bennett, William, 290, 306 n 3 

Berenbaum, Michael, 362 

Berkhofer, Robert F. Jr., 332 

Bernardo, Anilu, 330 

Bertrand, Diane Gonzales, 330 

Betanzas, Jorge, 65 

"Be Thou More Sheltering" 

(Kushner), 348 

Between Borders (Del Castillo), 321 
Between the Lines in Asia Minor 
(Holmes), 187 
Between Worlds (Ling), 314 
Beyond Stereotypes (Herrera-Sobek), 
325 

Beyond the Killing Fields (Welaratna), 
185 

Bhabha, Homi, 308 
Bible, as literature, 214 
Bibliography of Books for Our Children 
Living in Lesbian and Gay Families 
(Gay and Lesbian Parents 
Coalition), 350 

Bibliography on Holocaust Literature 
(Edelheit and Edelheit), 258 
Bierman, John, 362 
Bingham, Marjorie, x 
Birth of a Nation , The, 31-32 



Bitter Melon (Gillenkirk and Motlow), 
309 

B. J. Swartz's Holocaust Resources, 
Internet site of, 374 
Black American History (QUEUE), 299 
Blackbird, Kat Snider, viii 
Black Boy (Wright), 38-39, 305 
Black Codes, 24 
Black Elk, 334 

Black Elk Speaks (Black Elk), 334 
Black Entertainment Television, 
Internet site of, 296 
Blacker the Berry ... A Novel of Negro 
Life, The (Thurman), 35-36 
Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 
The (Gutman), 29 
Black Frontiers (Schlissel), 305 
Black History Bonanza of Bookmarks 
for Classroom Teachers, Internet 
site of, 296 

Black Issues in Higher Education, 295 
Black No More (Schuyler), 37-38, 43 
Black Scholar, The, 295 
Black Southern Voices (Killens and 
Ward), 303 

Black Thunder (Bontemps), 304 
Black Voices (Chapman), 38, 43 
Black Women of the Old West (Katz), 305 
Black Women Writers (Evans), 303 
Black World Today, Internet site of, 
296 

"Blankets for the Dead" (Carnes), 96 
Bless Me, Ultima (Anaya), 327 
Block, Gay, 362 

Blood to Remember (Fishman), 249, 

259, 364, 369 
Blowsnake, Sam, 334 
Blum, Lawrence A., 201 
Boas, Jacob, 363 
Bond, Julian, 304 
Bondar, Roberta, 159, 165-66 
Bones of Berdichev, The (Garrard), 210 
Bontemps, Ama, 304 
Book of Job, 215 

Book of Virtues, The (Bennett), 290 
Books Without Bias (Slapin and Scale), 
333 

Borderlands/La Frontera (Anzaldua), 
320, 323 

Borowski, Tadeusz, 363 ^ 

Borrowed Time (Monette), 349 
Boston (Sinclair), 96 
Bourne, Randolph, 61 
Bowers, Claude G., 30 





379 



I 

Index 



Boyd, Dwight, 290 

on groundless tolerance, 17 
Boy's Best Friend , A (Alden), 350 
Branch, Taylor, 305 
Breaking the Classroom Silence 
(Donahue and Satterth waite), 
354 

Bricks Without Straw (Tourgee), 27, 
28-29, 33, 43 
Bridge , address of, 315 
Britannica Online Guide to Black 
History, Internet site of, 296 
Brown, Dee, 332 
Browning, Christopher R., 363 
Browning, Robert, 116 
Brown v. Topeka Board of Education, 26 
Bruce, Lenny, 242 
Bruce-Novoa, 325 
Buchanan, Pat, 132-33 
Bullard, Sara, 291 
Bullyproof 353 

Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee 
(Brown), 332 

By Words Alone (Ezrahi), 264 



Cage , The (Sender), 222, 226 
Calderon, Hector, 325 
California Newsreel, address of, 301 
Cambodian Odyssey, A (Ngor), 177, 183 
Camera of My Family (Zenger Video), 
371 

Cameron, Ben, 32 
Candelaria, Cordelia, 320 
Canopy in the Desert, A (Kovner), 260 
Canyon Records and Indian Arts, 
address of, 337 
Caporino, Grace M., ix, x 
Carbon, Laurie M., 330 
Cargas, Harry James, 258, 264 
Carnes, Jim, 93, 95, 304 
Carousel Film and Video, address of, 
301 

carpetbaggers, 27-28, 30-31 
Carr, Denny, 336 
Carter, Dan T., 94-95 
"Cartload of Shoes, A" (Sutzkever), 248 
Caruth, Cathy, on voice of narrative, 
164 

Carved in Silence (Lowe), 310 
Castaneda, Omar, 110, 330 
Castillo, Ana, 328 
Cather, Willa, 61 

Catholicism, under Soviet rule, 163 



Celan, Paul, 236, 247, 259, 363 
Celie, 46, 52 

Center for Documentary Studies at 
Duke University, 43 
Center for the Study of the Child, 
address of, 358 
Chalk, Frank, 144 
on genocide, 146 
Chang, 71-74 
Chang, Diana, 312 
Charlie Chan Is Dead (Hagedom), 311 
Charny, Israel, 201 

on genocide, 145, 146 
Cherokee Nation, 95 
Cheyenne Memories (John Stand in 
Timber), 335 

Chicana Creativity and Criticism 

(Herrera-Sobek and Viramontes), 
325 

Chicano Art (Del Castillo and 
Griswold), 321 

Chicano Communications Center, 
address of, 326 

Children of the River (Crew), 103, 175 
Chinese America , History and Perspec- 
tives, address of, 315 
Chinese American Family Album, The 
(Hoobler and Hoobler), 74, 309 
Chinese American Librarians 

Association, Internet site of, 315 
Chinese Historical and Cultural 
Project, Internet site of, 315 
Chona, Maria, 334 
Choosing Children (Chasnoff and 
Klausner), 354 

Cinema Guild, address of, 301 
Circle, The, address of, 338 
Cisneros, Sandra, 317, 320, 323, 324 
City Kids, City Teachers (Ayers and 
Ford), 290 
City Year, 20 

Civil Rights Act of 1875, 25 

Civil Rights era, 305 

Civil Rights Movement, 16-17, 94 

Civil War, 23 

Civil War years, 304 

Clansman, The (Dixon), 31 

Clark, Kenneth B., 18 

on keeping others down, 20 
on social values, 18-19 
Cleaver, Eld ridge, 42 
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 290 
Clinton, William ]., 20 
closure, 7 



"Cognitive View of Leadership, A" 
(Gardner), 20 
Cohen, Joshua, 291 
Cohens, Hattie Mae, 344 
collectivization, 154 
Collier, Eugenia, 303 
Collins, Marie, 318,319 
collusion, 158 

in genocide, 163 
in mass murder, 157 
in Ukrainian Famine, 161 
colonization, 76, 83 
Colored Contradicitons (Elam and 
Alexander), 303 
Color Line, The (Franklin), 291 
Color of Honor, The (Ding), 310 
Color Purple, The (Walker), 46, 50 
Columbo, Gary, 326 
Coming Out of the Classroom Closet 
(Harbeck), 346 

Committee on Teaching about 

Genocide and Intolerance, vii, 1 
communication, 108 
communism, 89, 90 
Community Under Siege, A (Acuna), 
319 

computer software, 297-99 
concentration camps, 118, 210 
Conduct Unbecoming (Shilts), 349 
Confessing Protestant Chruch, 187 
conflict-resolution strategies, 103, 107 
Conot, Robert E., 363 
Conquest, Robert, 153 
Conrad, Joseph, 84 
Conscience & Courage (Fogelman), 
186,233 
contexts, 168 
historical, 5 

Convention on Genocide, The, 170 n 5 
"Conversation in the Cemetery" 
(Ezrahi), 265 
Cooper, Ruth Ann, 213 
"Corridos" (Lauter), 320 
Cory, Giles, 91 

Courage to Care, The (Rittner and 
Myers), 232, 367 

Courage to Care, The (Zenger), 371 
Courlander, Harold, 303 
Crazy Weekend (Soto), 331 
Crew, Linda, x, 103, 175 
Criddle, Joan, 176-77 
critical thinking, 6 

Criticism in the Borderlands (Calderon 
and Saldivar), 325 




388 .. 



380 



i 

Index 



Critique of Pure Tolerance , A (Wolff, 
Moore, and Marcuse), 293 
Crookman, Junius, 37 
Crossing the Danger Water (Mullane), 
303 

Crossing the Mainstream (Oliver), 327 
Crucible , The (Miller), 89, 99 
Cullen, Robert, 326 
cultural artifacts, 165 
Cultural Democracy, address of, 339 
cultural genocide, 141 
Cultural Reporter (Tom Snyder 
Productions), 299 

Cultural Survival Quarterly, address 
of, 339 

cultural universals, 175 
Cunard, Nancy, 303 
Cup of Tears, A (Lewin), 182 
Curiel, Tony, 322 
curriculum guides, 299-300 
Curry, Constance, 305 
Cybrary of the Holocaust, Internet 
site of, 374 

Cycles of Conquest (Spicer), 333 



Daddy's Machine (Valentine), 352 
Daddy's Roommate (Willhoite), 352 
Dadrian, Vahakn, 199 
on genocide, 145 
Dambroff, Susan, 241 
Daniels, Roger, 326 
Danks, Carol, x 

D'Arcy McNickle Center for the 
History of the American Indian, 
address of, 337 

Dark-Thirty, The (McKissack), 304 
David Dickerson's Holocaust Page, 
Internet site of, 374 
Davidian, Yeranuhi, 183 
Dawidowicz, Lucy, 195-96, 197, 203, 
211-12, 215, 363 

on de-emphasis of anti-Semitism, 
206 

Daybreak, address of, 339 
Daybreak Star Press, address of, 337 
Days of Masquerades (Schoppmann), 
180 

Death Be Not Proud (Gunther), 205 
Defiant, The (Yoran), 182 
"Defining Genocide" (Totten), x 
de-foreignizing the foreigner, 60 
dekulakization, 154 
Delbo, Charlotte, 174, 364 



Del Castillo, Adelaida R., 321 
Deloria, Vine Jr., 332 
Delpit, Lisa, 291 

denationalization, 75 n 1, 154-55 
"Denationalization Reconsidered" 
(Wong), 75 n 1, 309 
De Paola, Tomie, 350 
Depression, The, 115 
Devil's Arithmetic, The (Yolen), 253 
diaries, difference between male and 
female, 182 

Diary of Anne Frank, The (Frank), 176, 
179 

Diary of a Young Girl, The (Frank), 123, 
364 

diaspora, 68-69, 71, 212 
diasporic perspective, 61, 68-69 
Dickinson, Emily, 235 
Different Person, A (Merrill), 349 
Different Voices (Rittner and Roth), 

174, 188,367 

Digital Librarian, Internet site of, 

340 

"Dilemma of the Modem Chicana 
Artist and Critic, The" (Lucero- 
Trujillo), 324 
Dimensions, 370 
discourse, 165-68 
discrimination, 36 
"Disgraceful Persecution of a Boy, 
The" (Twain), 96 
displacement, 66 

Distant Talking Drum, The (Olaleye), 
86-87 

Disuniting of America, The (Schlesinger), 
286 

diversity, 46 

writing assignment on, 177 
Dix, Carl, 51 

Dixon, Thomas Jr., 27-28, 30-31 
Dockstader, Frederick ]., 333 
documentary films, 300-302 
documents, primary source, 220 
Documents on the Holocaust (Arad, 
Gutman, and Margaliot), 222 
Doll's House, 178 
Dolot, Miron, 153 
"Dominance Concealed through 
Diversity" (Boyd), 290 
double consciousness, 34 
Double Dying, A (Rosenfeld), 267 
Douglas, William O., 205 
Douglass, Frederick, 29, 304 
Drach, Ivan, 167, 171 n 9 



"Draft of a Reparations Agreement" 
(Pagis), 249 
drama, 6 

Dream Keeper and Other Poems, The 
(Hughes), 304 

Dream Makers, Dream Breakers 
(Rowan), 305 
Dream Skirt (Mack), 351 
Dreams of the Centaur (Fontes), 326 
Drescher, Seymour, 199 
Drew, Margaret, on "The Hangman" 
(Ogden), 263 
Drinnon, Richard, 333 
Driver, Harold E., 333 
Drost, Pieter N., on genocide, 145 
Drowned and the Saved, The (Levi), 227 
Drucker, Malka, 362 
Dry Tears (Tec), 368 
Du Bois, W. E. B., 34 
Duke, David, 132-33 
Duke Who Outlawed ]elly Beans and 
Other Stories, The (Valentine), 352 
Dunbar, Paul Laurence, 38 
Durrell, Gerald, 205 
Duvall, Lynn, 285 



Eagle Wing Press, address of, 337 
Earth Power Coming (Ortiz), 336 
Eastman, Charles, 334 
Edelheit, Abraham ]., 258 
Edelheit, Hershel, 258 
education, 

key to equality, 27 
key to stopping ignorance, 77 
race relations, 40 
Education ... A Legacy Forum, 
Internet site of, 374 
Egerton, John, 305 
Eibeshitz, Jehoshua, 174, 178 
Eichengreen, Lucille, 364 
Eichmann, Adolph, testimony at trial, 
229 

Eilenberg-Eibeshitz, Anna, 174 
Elam, Harry J., 303 
Eliach, Yaffa, 369 
Elie Wiesel (PBS), 371 
Elliott, Mabel, 187-88 
Ellison, Ralph, 42 
Elwin, Rosagmnd, 350 
Emery, Francenia L., 285 
Empathy, address of, 353 
End of Innocence, The, 360 
English classroom, aim of, 2 





381 



Index 



Enlightenment, 215 
Entertainer, The (Willhoite), 352 
Erika (Heyen), 259 

Eros of Everyday Life, The (Griffin), 348 
Eternal Spring of Mr. I to, The 
(Garrigue), 94 
ethnic cleansing, 98 
Ethnic Notions (Riggs), 32 
Ethnic Studies at the University of 
Southern California, Internet site 
of, 296 

ethnocide, 141, 144, 146 
definition of, 142 
Evans, Becky, ix 
Evans, Mari, 303 
Evers, Larry, 336 

"Examining the Holocaust through 
the Lives and Literary Works of 
Victims and Survivors" (Totten), 
252 

Exclusion Act, 59 

Execution by Hunger (Dolot), 153 

exegesis, 239 

explan Asian, 314 

Eyes on the Prize Part 1 (PBS), 298 
Ezrahi, Sidra DeKoven, 264, 265 
on Adomo, 236 



Faces of the Enemy (Quest Produc- 
tions), 371 

Facing History and Ourselves, 203-4, 
210, 215 n 3, 250, 317 
address of, 287, 359 
e-mail address, 375 
Internet site of, 374 
Facing History Resource Center, 
address of, 251 
Facing Racism in Education 
(Beauboeuf-Lafontant and 
Augustine), 290 
Facing West (Drinnon), 333 
Facts about Lesbian and Gay Rights 
(McCauslin), 351 
Families (Jenness), 351 
Families Come Out, 354 
Family (Andrews), 348 
family, influence of, 128 
Far, Sui Sin, 312 

Farewell to Manzanar (Houston), 94 
Farragher, John, 181 
Farrakhan, Louis, 211 
fathers, 79 
"Fear" (Soto), 317 



fear, of the other, 96 
Feather on the Breath of God, A 
(Nunez), 60-61, 68-74, 313 
Feil, Naomi, 111-12 
Fein, Helen, on genocide, 145 
Feinberg, Stephen, 219 
Felman, Shoshana, on accessing 
crisis, 169-70 
Felstiner, John, 265 
on Adomo, 236 
FHAO. See Facing History and 
Ourselves 

Final Solution, 197, 199, 207, 219-20 
Goring's order on, 228 
Fine, Michelle, 291 
Fine, Sallie M., x 

First Amendment Center, Internet 
site of, 343 

First Confession (Fontes), 326 
First Run/Icarus, address of, 301 
Fisch, Robert O., 364 
Fisher, Matthew, 37 
Fishman, Charles, 364, 369 
Fleming, Gerald, 197 
Flirting or Hurting?, 353 
Florada, Alma, 330 
Fogelman, Eva, 186 
on altruism, 233 
Fontes, Montserrat, 326 
Fools Crow (Welch), 336 
Fool's Errand, A (Tourgee), 27-28, 43 
Ford, Patricia, 290 
foreigner at home, 62, 65 
"Foreigner at Home, The" (Liu), ix 
foreigners, negation of, 59 
foreignness, forms of, 60 
Foreman, Carl, 205 
Forever Flowing (Grossman), 210 
For Love of Country (Cohen and 
Nussbaum), 291 
Fort Sumter, 23 

Forty Days of Musa Dagh, The (Werfel), 
175 

Frank, Anne, 123, 205, 364 
Frank, Leo, 97 
Frankl, Victor E., 364 
Franklin, John Hope, 291 
Frauen (Owings), 366 
Freedmen's Bureau, 29, 30 
Freedom's Children (Levine), 305 
Freedom's Unfinished Revolution, 300 
Friedlander, Albert H., 250, 266, 369 
Friedlander, Henry, 238, 246 
Friedrich (Richter), 367 



Friends of Project 10, address of, 347 
From Aches to Life (Eichengreen), 364 
"From Holocaust to Hope" (Cooper), 
213 

From the Deep Woods to Civilization 
(Eastman), 334 

Frontiers of Love, The (Chang), 312 
Fuchs, Elinor, 369 
Fuego, Laura del, 330 
Future of Race, The (West), 292 



Gabriel Tolliver (Harris), 31 
Garcia, Freddy, on bilingualism, 73 
Garcia, Leonel, 331 
Garcia, Ricardo, 47 
Garden, Nancy, 48 
Gardner, Howard, on stories, 20-21 
Garrigue, Sheila, 94 
Gates, Henry Louis, 292, 303 
Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Teachers 
Network, address of, 352 
gay and lesbian, 

curriculum guides, 353-54 
films and videos, 354-55 
organizations, 352-53 
Gay and Lesbian Educators (Harbeck), 
345 

Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education 
(Phariss), a bibliography, 345 
Gay Men's Press, telephone number 
of, 350 

"Gays" (Newsweek), 345 
Gay Youth (Walton), 354 
Gelissen, Komreich, 179 
gender issues, bibliography of works 
regarding, 323-25 
genocidal massacres, 141 
genocidal process, 141 
genocide, 209 

aftermaths of, 183 
Armenian, 178, 200, 209 
Cambodian, 178 
cautions when teaching, 148-49 
concerns about definitions, 144 
meaning of, 141 
misuse of term, 147 
U.N. definition of, 143^4 
United Nations General Assembly 
resolution on, 142^13 
genocide studies, 141 
genres, 5 

Geography of the Heart (Johnson), 

348 





[ 



: 



382 



Index 



Georgia Humanities Council, address 
of, 302 

Gerrard, Carol, 210 
Gerrard, John, 210 
Gibson, Christine M., ix 
on intolerance, 49 
on The Color Purple (Walker), 50 
on Walt Whitman, 52 
Gies, Miep, 186, 364 
Gilbert, Martin, 365 
Gillan, Jennifer, 303 
Gillan, Maria M., 303 
Gillenkirk, Jeff, 309 
Gioseffi, Daniela, 292 
Giovanni's Room (Baldwin), 348 
Giroux, Henry, 15 
Givens, Henry, 37 
Glancy, Diane, 335 
Glatstein, Jacob, 369 
Go (Uyemoto), 314 
Goldenberg, Myrna, on the Holo- 
caust, 174 

Golden Peacock , The (Leftwich), 261 
Goldhagen, Daniel, 211 

counterresponse to Bartov, 198 
on the Holocaust, 196 
Gonna Sit at the Welcome Table (Bond), 
305 

Gonzalez, N.V.M., 312 
Gonzalez, Ray, 321 
Gooden, Sue, 98 
Gooding, James Henry, 301 
Goodman, James, 95 
"Good Samaritan, The" (Gospel of 
Luke), 273 

Gould, Stephen J., 318 
"Grave in the Air, The" (Ezrahi), 265 
"Gray Zone, The" (Levi), 227 
Great North American Indians 
(Dockstader), 333 
Green, Barbara, 199 
Green Valley High School, 102 
Gress, David, 197 
Griffin, Susan, 348 
Griffith, D. W., 33 
Griswold, Richard, 321 
Gross, Susan, 175 

Gross, Theodore L., on Tourgee, 27 
Grossman, Mendel, 226 
Growing Up Asian American (Hong), 
311 

Growing up Gay in the South (Sears), 347 
Growing Up Latino (Augenbraum and 
Stavans), 320 



Growing up Native American (Riley), 335 
Grynberg, Henryk, 246 
Guests Never Leave Hungry (Sewid), 335 
Guide to Leading Introductory Work- 
shops on Homophobia , A, 354 
Guide to Multicultural Resources , 299 
Guide to the Film Schindler's List , 359 
gulag, 210 
Gunther, John, 205 
Gurdus, Luba Krugman, 176 
Gutman, Herbert G., 29 



Habitat for Humanity, 19-20 
Hale, Janet Campbell, 110 
Hammett, Roberta, 48 
Hancock, Ian, 200 

Handbook of Research on Multicultural 
Education (Banks and Banks), 290 
"Hangman, The" (Melrose Produc- 
tions), 263, 371 

"Hangman, The" (Ogden), 242, 261 
classroom activities for, 250-51 
Hansberry, Lorraine, 15 
Harbeck, Karen, 345, 346 
Harding, Vincent, 17, 292 
Harjo, Lisa D., 333 
Harlan, John Marshall, on constitu- 
tion as color-blind, 26 
Harlem Renaissance, 289 
Harris, Joel Chandler, 30 
Hartunian, Abraham, 187 
Harvard Educational Review , address 
of, 346 

Harvard University W. E. B. Du Bois 
Institute for Afro-American 
research, Internet site of, 296 
Harvest of Despair (Ukrainian 

Canadian Research and Develop- 
ment Centre), 171 n 6 
Harvest of Sorrow (Conquest), 153 
Harvey, Karen D., 333 
Hasidic Tales of the Holocaust (Eliach), 
369 

Haskins, James, 304 
hate crimes, 124 
Hawkins, Joseph A. Jr., ix, 292 
Haymarket Riot, 97 
Heard Museum: Native Cultures and 
Art, Internet site of, 342 
Heart ofAztlan (Anaya), 325, 328 
Heart of Darkness (Conrad), 84 
Heath Anthology of American Litera- 
ture Newsletter, address of, 288 



Heger, Heinz, 178-79 
Heil Hitler (Zenger Video), 371 
Heller, Carol, 292 
Heller, Caroline, ix 
Heller, Roman, 232 
Helm, Scott, 348 
Hennenberg, Jacob, 277-78 
Heron, Ann, 350 
Herrera-Sobek, Maria, 321, 325 
Herrick, Robert, viii 
Heyen, William, 227, 241, 259 
Hidden Children , The (Marks), 366 
High Holy Day prayers. 111 
Highlander Research and Education 
Center, 20 

High Noon (Foreman), 205 

High Tide in Tucson (Kingsolver), 124 

Higley, Andrew, 92 

Hilbert, Vi, 336 

Hill, David, 21 n 1 

Hillesum, Etty, 365 

Hirschfelder, Arlene, 333, 334 

historical context, 5, 244 

Historic America 

(ABCNewsInteractive), 207 
History of Mexican American People , A 
(Samora and Simon), 327 
History of the Blues (QUEUE), 298 
History of the Holocaust , A (Bauer), 

228, 362 

Hitler, Adolf, 129 
Hitler's War Against the Jews — the 
Holocaust (Altschuler), 244-45 
Hitler's Willing Executioners 
(Goldhagen), 196 
HIV, 97 

Holder of the World (Mukherjee), 313 
Holmes, Mary Caroline, 187 
Holocaust, viii-ix, 118, 169, 174 
attitudes after, 213 
catalogues, 373 
centers, 375 
curriculum guides, 358 
debates concerning, 195 
goals when teaching, 242-43 
importance of context, 356 
interviews with survivors, 119-20 
issues raised by debates on, 206-14 
learning activities, 273-78 
links to Internet sites, 374 
in literature anthologies, 204-5 
literature on, 360-69 
preliminary learning activities, 
269-73 




c 



383 



i 

Index 



preparing students to learn 
about, 357 

reasons for writing about, 247 
rescuers, 231 

research on teaching, 205-6 
studies, 119 

trivialization by inappropriate 
comparisons, 209-10 
victims, empathy with, 132 
videos, 370-73 
Web sites, 373-75 
Holocaust, The (Cargas), 258 
Holocaust, The (Globe Fearon Educa- 
tional Publishers), 212, 213, 215 n 4 
Holocaust, The (Rabinsky and Danks), 
359 

Holocaust, The (Rossel), 245, 360 
Holocaust, The, (Scher), 147 
Holocaust, The (Stadtler), 245 
Holocaust, The (Szonyi), 258 
Holocaust, The (Yahil), 369 
Holocaust, The, Internet site of, 374 
Holocaust and Genocide Studies, 370 
Holocaust and Human Behavior, 359 
Holocaust and the Literary Imagination, 
The (Langer), 266 

Holocaust as Historical Experience, The 
(Bauer and Rotenstreich), 362 
Holocaust Chronology, 219 
Holocaust curricula, 203-4 
Holocaust Curriculum, A (Bolkosky, 
Ellias, and Harris), 212, 216 n 5 
"Holocaust in Fiction, The," (Cargas), 
264 

Holocaust in Historical Context, The 
(Katz), 199 

Holocaust Memorial Museum, 131, 
218 

Holocaust Poetry (Schiff), 262, 370 
Holocaust poetry, 

for advanced placement students, 
257 

for advanced students, 257 
arguments for teaching, 237-38 
bibliography on, 258-67 
preparing students to read, 

238-39 

Holocaust Reader, A (Dawidowicz), 363 
Holocaust Studies, Internet site of, 

374 

Holocaust Studies Center, Internet 
site of, 374 

Holocaust Translations by Kenneth 
Kronenberg, Internet site of, 374 



Holodomor, 

cause of, 156-57 
definition of, 152-53 
home, 73-74 

"Home Was a Horsestall" (Carnes), 93 
homophobia, ix, 47-49, 129, 344 
formula for teaching about, 55 
homosexuality, 50 

books for children on, 350-52 
Hongo, Garrett, 311 
Honor, Inc., address of, 337 
Hoobler, Dorothy, 309 
Hoobler, Thomas, 309 
Hoose, Philip M., 286 
Hope and History (Harding), 17, 292 
Horowitz, Irving, on genocide, 145 
Hotchkiss, Gilbert, 31 
House on Mango Street, The (Cisneros), 
317,323 

Houston, Jeanne, 94 
Howe, Florence, 323 
"How Not to Teach Values" (Kohn), 
292 

How Porcupines Make Love III (Soter), 
244 

How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents 
(Alvarez), 327 

"How to Get a Man" (Blackbird), viii 
How Would You Feel If Your Dad Was 
Gay? (Heron), 350 
Huckleberry Finn (Twain), 100 
Hughes, Langston, 304 
on respect for blacks, 39 
Hulsebosch, Patricia, 346 
Human Rights (Connecticut State 
Department of Education), 148 
human rights violations, 157 
Hungry Ghosts (Becker), 214 
Hunter, Geoffrey, 26-27 
huracan, address of, 339 
Hurston, Zora Neale, 42, 305 



I Am a Star (Auerbacher), 361 
Ibo culture, 78-79, 80-81 
I Can Hear the Cozv Bells Ring (Garcia), 
331 

Ideas Plus (NCTE), 271 
I Didn't Say Goodbye (Vegh), 368 
"I Don't Want to Be a Bystander" 
(Meisel), 263 

"If We Must Die" (McKay), 40 
ignorance, breeds hate, 77 
Ikemefuna, 78 



"Image of Africa, An" (Achebe), 83 
Imagining Isabel (Castaneda), 330 
imagining the other, 13, 18 
improvisation, 67 

"Incorporating Poetry into a Study of 
the Holocaust" (Totten), x 
"Incorporating Poetry into a Study of 
the Holocaust via Reader 
Response Theory" (Totten), 263 
Indian Country (Harvey and Harjo), 
333 

Indian Historian Press, address of, 337 
btdian Oratory (Vanderwerth), 335 
Indians (Koppitt), 95 
bzdians of North America (Driver), 333 
Indigenous Women, address of, 339 
I Never Saw Another Butterfly 

(Volavkova), 241, 262, 275, 368 
In No One's Shadow (De Castro), 310 
Institutions and Organizations, 
Internet site of, 373 
International Center for Holocaust 
Studies, address of, 360 
International Commission on the 
Ukraine Famine, 154 
International School for Holocaust 
Studies, Yad Vashem, 
address of, 360 
Internet site of, 375 
Interrupted Life, An (Hillesum), 365 
interview with a homeless black 
teenager, 14-15 

In the Days of Destruction and Revolt 
(Lubetkin), 177, 184 
In the Mouth of the Wolf (Zar), 269, 274 
"In the Schoolyard at Twilight" 
(Aronson), 97 

In the Shadow of the Great White Way, 
300 

In the Warsaw Ghetto (Georg), 275 
intolerance, 47 
acts of, 2 
reversal of, 60 

Into the Fire (Watanabe and Bruchae), 
311 

Invisible Empire, The (Tourgee), 28, 43 
I Remember Nothing More (Szwajger), 
176,188 

ironies, in Things Fall Apart (Achebe), 
82-83 

Irons, Peter, 215 n 2 
Island Like You, An (Ortiz Cofer), 110 
"Is the Ethnic 'Authentic' in the 
diaspora?" (Radhakrishnan), 308 



384 



~ i 

Index 



Is the Holocaust Unique? (Rosenbaum), 
198-99 

Itam Hakim Hopiit (Masayesva), 337 
It's Elementary , 354 
"It's Not What You Teach, but Who 
You Teach" (Fine), x 
It's Our World, Too! (Hoose), 286 
It's Your Misfortune and None of My 
Own (White), 322 
It Takes a Village (Clinton), 290 



Jackson, Andrew, 95 
Jackson, J. B., 180 
Jaimes, M. A., 333 

Japanese Americans, internment of, 
93, 102, 208 
Jen, Gish, 313 
Jenness, Aylette, 351 
Jemazian, Ephraim, 187 
Jewish Video Catalog, address for, 373 
Jews, teaching history of, 212-13 
Jim Crow, 25 

Jim Crowism, 32, 42, 304-5 
definition of, 24 
Jimenez, Carlos, 328 
Johnson, David W., 103 
Johnson, Fenton, 348 
Johnson, Frank R, 103 
Johnson, James Weldon, 34 
Johnson, Pauline, 336 
Johnson-Calvo, Sarita, 351 
John Stands in Timber, 335 
Jonassohn, Kurt, 144 
on genocide, 146 

Journal of Black Studies and Research, 
The, 295 

Journal of Holocaust Education, The, 370 
Journal of Negro Education, The, 295 
Journal of Reading, 48 
journals, 51, 55 

peer dialogue, 129 
definition of, 125 
reflective, 244 
Journey Home, 299 
Joy Luck Club, The (Tan), 60, 69, 313 
dilemma in, 65 
strategies in teaching, 62-68 
Judgment Unto Truth (Jemazian), 187 
Jumping Off to Freedom (Bernardo), 330 
Justice at Nuremberg (Conot), 363 
Justice at War (Irons), 215 n 2 
"Justice Denied in Massachusetts" 
(Millay), 96-97 



Kagol, Mim, 174-75 
Katsh, Abraham L, 365 
Katz, Steven, 199, 209 
Katz, William L., 305 
Katzenelson, Yitzhak, 247, 260 
Keller, Helen, 205 
Kennedy, John F., 309 
on foreigners, 59 
Kennedy, Stetson, 25 
Kerney, Denis, 59 
Kerr, Judith, 175 
Kerr, Stanley, 176 
Kessler, Kate, x 
Khatayevich, on kulaks, 166 
Kherdian, David, 188 
Khieu Ponnary, 186 
Khieu Thirith, 186 
Kids' Book of Divorce (Rolfes), 351 
Kieman, Ben, 178 
Killens, John Oliver, 303 
Killing Fields, The, 104 
Kim, Elaine, 314 
King, Rodney, manifesto of, 17 
Kingsolver, Barbara, 124 
Kleg, Milton, ix 

Klein, Gerda Weissmann, 184, 365 

Knights of the White Camelia, 31 

Knowledge Unlimited, address of, 302 

Koemer, Mari, 346 

Kogawa, Joy, 94, 313 

Kohl, Herbert, 15, 292 

Kohn, Alfie, 292 

Koppitt, Arthur, 95 

Korwin, Yala, 241 

Kovalenko, Lidiya, 170 n 3 

Kovner, Abba, 237, 247, 260 

Krach, Maywan Shen, 314 

Kristeva, Julia, 58, 59 

Kuklin, Susan, 286 

Ku Klux Klan, 24, 28, 31, 133 

kulaks, 210 

Kuper, Leo, 

on the Genocide convention, 144 
on U.N. Genocide convention, 142 
Kurtz, Aaron, 242 
Kushner, Tony, 292, 348 
on tolerance, 16 



LaCapra, Dominick, on relations 
among texts, readers, and 
contexts, 165 

"La Malinche Feminist Prototype" 
(Candelaria), 320 



Landau, Ronnie A., 365 
Langer, Lawrence L., 236, 237, 260, 
266, 370 

Langone, John, 286 
language, 7 

as an enabling force, 158 
political force of, 167 
in propaganda, 2 
uses of, 2-3, 253-54, 272 
language analysis, 158-59 
Language and Literature (McDougal 
and Littell), 204 

language arts instruction, stages of, 4 
Laqueur, Walter, 365 
LaRouche, Lyndon, 211 
Laub, Dori, 169 
La Vida Loca (Rodriguez), 317 
L'Chaim, Internet site of, 374 
"Leader of the People, The" 
(Steinbeck), 111, 113-14 
Leagues Apart (Ritter), 305 
learning, 

about trauma, 164 
crises in, 169 

learning activities, Holocaust, 269-73, 
273-78 

LeBlanc, Lawrence, on genocide and 
political groups, 143 
Leder, Sharon, 370 
Lee, Chang-Rae, 313 
Left Handed, 335 

Left Handed, Son of Old Man Hat (Left 
Handed), 335 
Leftwich, Joseph, 261 
Legend of la Llorona, The (Anaya), 319 
Legends of Vancouver (Johnson), 336 
Lemkin, Raphael, on genocide, 141 
Lest We Forget (Logos Research 
Systems), 371 

Let the Circle Be Unbroken (Taylor), 110 
Levi, Primo, 184, 227, 261, 366 
Levine, Ellen, 305 
Lewin, Abraham, 175, 182 
Lewis, David L., 303 
Library of Congress Resource Guide 
for the Study of Black History 
and Culture, Internet site of, 297 
Life Among the Paiutes (Winnemucca 
Hopkins), 335 

Life Unworthy of Life (Bolkosky, Ellias 
and Harris), 212, 216 n 5, 358 
Lifton, Robert Jay, 366 
Light from the Yellow Star (Fisch), 364 
"Like Mexicans" (Soto), 318 



[ 



385 



i 

Index 



Lim, Shirley G., 314 
Linden, R. Ruth, 174 
Ling, Amy, 314 
linguistic capital, 168 
Links to other Holocaust Sites, 
Internet site of, 374 
Lions ofMarash, The (Kerr), 176 
Lion Womans Legacy (Avakian), 176, 
181 

Lippard, Lucy R., 327 
Lipstadt, Deborah, 203, 207, 210, 215 
n 3 

Lisle, Bonnie, 326 

literary merit, considerations of, 4-5 
literature, 

effect on social reality, 26 
means for self-reflection, ix 
moral power of, 1 
multicultural, 46, 103, 327 
teaching of, 3 

Literature By and About the American 
Indian (Stensland), 333 
Literature of the Holocaust, Internet 
site of, 375 

"Little Boy with His Hands Up" 
(Korwin), 241, 249 
Liu, Toming Jun, ix 
vita of, 383 

Living Up the Street (Soto), 331 
Lodz Ghetto, 222-23, 226 
Long, Richard, 303 
Looking at Gay and Lesbian Literature 
(Lipkin), 354 

"Looking for Work" (Soto), 317 
Lorde, Audre, 349 
Loshitzky, Yosefa, 366 
Lost Childhood , The (Nir), 228 
Louie, Belinda Yun-Ying, x 
Louie, Douglas H., x 
Love Alone (Monette), 349 
Love Makes a Family, 355 
Lubetkin, Zivia, 177, 184 
Lucero-Trujillo, Christine, 324 
Luis Valdez's Early Work (Valdez), 322 
Lynch, Clifford, 306 n 4 
Lytle, Clifford M., 332 



Mace, John E., 153 

on the Holodomor, 160 
Mack, Bruce, 351 
Mahler, Jonathan, 196 
Making Stories, Making Selves (Linden), 
174 



Malcolm X in Context, 300 
Man, Teeda Butt, 176-77 
manners, 17 
Mano, Sandra, 93 

Mans Search for Meaning (Frankl), 364 
Many a k, Volodymyr, 170 n 3 
Mao Tse-dong, 214 
Maran, Meredith, 350 
Maravilla (Fuego), 330 
Marcuse, Herbert, 293 
Marks, Jane, 366 
marriages, interracial, 25 
Martin and John (Peck), 349 
Martinez, Demetria, 325 
Martin Luther King Jr. Papers Project 
at Stanford University, Internet 
site of, 297 

Martyr's Memorial and Museum of 
the Holocaust of the Jewish 
Federation Council of Greater 
Los Angeles, address of, 358 
Mary Lincoln's Dressmaker (Rutberg), 
304 

Masayesva, Victor, 337 
Masterpieces of African-American 
Literature (Magill), 42 
Master Race, The (Films for Humani- 
ties), 372 

Maus (Spiegelman), 220-21, 368 

questions for discussion of, 221-22 
McCarthy, Joseph, 89, 95 
McCarthy hearings, 89, 90 
McCarthyism, 90, 97 
McCauslin, Mark, 351 
McKay, Claude, 40 
McKay, Nellie Y, 303 
McKissack, Patricia, 304 
McLean, Mari M., ix 
vita of, 383 

Me and Mine (Sekaquaptewa), 335 
Media Projects, address of, 302 
Meed, Vladka, 177, 184 
Meltzer, Milton, 276 
MELUS. See Society for the Study of 
the Multi-Ethnic Literature of the 
United States 

Memoir of a Race Traitor (Segrest), 349 
memory, public, 155, 156 
Men and Women on the Overland Trail 
(Farragher), 181 
Men with the Pink Triangle, The 
(Heger), 179 
Merridale, C., 153 

on the Holodomor, 166 



Merrill, James, 349 
metonymic categories, 168 
metonymy, 167 

Mexican American Folklore (West), 327 
Mexican American Heritage, The 
(Jimenez), 328 

Mexican American Literature (Tatum), 
327 

Mexican Corrido, The (Herrera-Sobek), 
321 

Milkman's On His Way (Rees), 351 
Millay, Edna St. Vincent, 96 
Miller, Arthur, 89, 90 

on movie of The Crucible, 100 
on Salem, 99 
Miller, Donald, 185 
Miller, Lorna, 185 
Milton, Sybil, 174 
Minatoya, Lydia, 312 
Mismeasure of Man, The (Gould), 318 
missionaries, 83, 85 
Mixed Blessings (Lippard), 327 
Mock, Brian, 344 

"'Model' Concentration Camp, A" 
(Stadtler), 245 

Molotov, Vyacheslav Mikhailovich, 
166 

Monette, Paul, 349 
Moore, Barrington, 293 
Moore, Nicolasa, 331 
Morgan, Emma Lou, 35 
Morgenthau, Henry, 180 
Morrison, Toni, 100 
Mosse, George, 366 
mothers, 79 

Moths and Other Stories, The 
(Viramontes), 329 
Motlow, James, 309 
Mountain Wolf Woman, 335 
Mountain Wolf Woman, Sister of 

Crashing Thunder (Mountain Wolf 
Woman), 335 

"Mrs. Spring Fragrance" and Other 
Writings (Far), 312 
Muggeridge, Malcolm, 160 
Mukherjee, Bharati, 313 
Mullane, Deirdre, 303 
Multicultural Education, 295 
multicultural literature, 103, 327 
Multicultural Review, 295 
Mums (Elwin), 350 
Munoz, Carlos Jr., 321 
"Murderers Among Us" 

(Wiesenthal), 275 



386 



c 



Index 



Musa, Marga, 186-87 
Muse, Daphne, 286 
Museum of Tolerance, Internet site 
of, 374 

My Antonia (Cather), 61 
Myers, Sondra, 232, 367 
My Father Was a Toltec (Castillo), 328 
My Indian Boyhood (Standing Bear), 
335 

My Little Sister and Selected Poems 
(Kovner), 260 

Mysterious Skin (Helm), 348 
myth, wailing woman, 319 



NAACP Online, Internet site of, 297 
Nabokov, Peter, 333 
NAME. See National Association for 
Multicultural Education 
Nan, 31 

Narrative of the Life of Frederick 
Douglass (Douglass), 304 
National Association for 

Multicultural Education, address 
of, 293 

National Association of Americans of 
Asian Indian Descent, address of, 
315 

National Black Child Development 
Institute, 
address of, 293 
Internet site of, 297 
National Coalition of Education 
Activists, address of, 293-94 
National Conference, The, address of, 
295 

National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force, Internet site of, 353 
nationalism, cultural, 60 
National Museum of Natural History, 
address of, 338 

National Museum of the American 
Indian at the Smithsonian, 
Internet site of, 342 
Nation of Immigrants, A (Kennedy), 

59, 309 

Nation of Islam, 211 
Native American, 

biographies, 334-35 
fiction, 335-36 
films, 336-37 

Native American Activist Resources 
on the Internet, Internet site of, 
340 



o 




Native American Authors, address 
of, 338 

Native American Documents Project, 
Internet site of, 342 
Native American Indian Resources, 
341 

Native American Links, Internet site 
of, 342 

Native American Navigator, Internet 
site of, 342 

Native American Organizations on 
the Net, Internet site of, 340 
Native American Public Broadcasting 
Consortium, address of, 338 
Native American Sites, Internet site 
of, 341 

Native American Testimony (Nabokov), 
333 

Native Heritage (Hirschfelder), 334 
Native Media Resource Center, 
Internet site of, 341 
Native Nations, address of, 339 
NativeNet, Internet site of, 341 
Native Peoples, address of, 339 
Native Speaker (Lee), 313 
Nat Turner's Slave Revolt , 300 
Nature of Prejudice, The (Allport), 285 
Navajo Code Talkers (Aaseng), 334 
Navajo Tribal Museum, address of, 
338 

Nazi Culture (Mosse), 366 
Nazi Doctors, The (Lifton), 366 
Nazi Germany, 129 
Nazi Holocaust , The (Landau), 365 
Nazis, 142 

Nazi Seizure of Power, The (Allen), 361 
Negor (Cunard), 303 
negotiation, 108 
negotiation strategies, 103, 105 
Negro Caravan, The (Brown and 
Davis), 42^13 

"Negro Question, The" (Page), 32 
Neither to Laugh, Nor to Weep 
(Hartunian), 187 
Network of Educators on the 
Americas, address of, 294 
"Never Again, I Hope, The Holo- 
caust," 359 

Nezv Chicana/Chicano Writing (Tatum), 
327 

Ngor, Haing, 177, 183, 188 
Niemoller, Martin, 187, 250-51 
Night (Wiesel), 98, 123, 369 
Night and Fog (Zenger Video), 372 



"Night of the Broken Glass" 
(Borenstein), 259 
Nilda (Moore), 331 
Nimbus, 28-30 
Nir, Yehuda, 228-29 

mailing address of, 230 
Nizkor Project, The, Internet site of, 
375 

Noddings, Nel, on literature as 
critical thinking, 1 
None of Us Will Return (Delbo), 364 
North American Native Authors 
Catalogs, Internet site of, 339 
Northeast Indian Quarterly, address 
of, 339 

Norton Anthology of African America 
Literature (Gates and McKay), 303 
Notes from the Warsaw Ghetto 
(Ringelblum), 367 

"Noticing The Color Purple" (McLean 
and Gibson), ix 

Not in Our Town (California Working 
Group), 372 
Novio Boy (Soto), 331 
Nunez, Sigrid, 60, 313 
Nussbaum, Martha, 291 



Obasan (Kogawa), 94, 313 
Occupied America (Acuna), 319 
Off and Running (Soto), 331 
Off White (Fine, etal), 291 
Of Men and Mountains (Douglas), 205 
ogbanje, 79 

Ogden, Maurice, 242, 250, 261 
Ohio Council on Holocaust Educa- 
tion, address of, 359 
Okonkwo, 78-81 
Old South, The (Page), 32 
Olin, Spencer C., 326 
Oliner, Pearl, 77 
Oliner, Samuel, 77 
Oliver, Eileen Iscoff, 327 
Oliver Button Is a Sissy (De Paola), 350 
Olmos, Edward James, 322 
Olomucki, Halina, 175-76 
On Both Sides of the Wall (Meed), 177, 
184-85 

On Broken Branches (Fishman), 259 
O'Neill, John, on reader-response 
theory, 243 

On Lies, Secrets, and Silence (Rich), 349 
On Our Own Ground (Apes), 334 
On Prejudice (Gioseffi), 292 



L 



39 5 



387 



Index 



On the Altar of Freedom (Adams), 301, 
304 

On the Pulse of Morning (Angelou), 285 
Opdyke, Irene, 231-32 
Open Boat , The (Hongo), 311 
Open Lives , Safe Schools (Walling), 347 
Oral History Project, 114 
Ordinary Men (Browning), 363 
Oregon's Ballot Measure 9, 344 
Organization of Chinese American 
Women, address of, 315 
organizations, gay and lesbian, 352-53 
Ortiz, Simon J., 336 
Ortiz Cofer, Judith, 110 
O The Chimneys (Sachs), 261 
otherness, 58 

Other People's Children (Delpit), 291 
Other Victims , The (Friedman), 274 
Otto, Wayne, 48 

Our Family , Our Friend , Our World , 

299 

Our Feet Walk the Sky (women of 
South Asian Descent Collective), 
311 

Out of the Whirlwind (Friedlander), 

369 

Overcoming Heterosexism and 

Homophobia (Sears and Williams), 
347 

Owings, Alison, 366 
Owl's Song , The (Hale), 110 
Oyate, address of, 338 
Ozick, Cynthia, 366 

on Holocaust rescuers, 231 



Pacific Crossing (Soto), 331 
Page, Thomas Nelson, 28, 30, 32-33 
Pagis, Dan, 241, 249, 257, 261 
Palm of My Heart , The (Adedjouma), 
302 

Parents, Families, and Friends of 
Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG), 
address of, 353 

Parsons, William S., on uses of 
language, 254 

Parting the Waters (Branch), 305 
Pasternak, Boris, on writing about 
suffering, 164 
patriarchal oppression, 69 
"Paul Celan's Rodesfuge" (Felstiner), 
265 

Paulse, Michelle, 350 
Peck, Dale, 349 



pedagogy, 

guidelines of, 4-7 
issues of, 205-6 

"Peer Dialogue Journals" (Kessler), x 
Pelletier, Louis, 351 
Perechodnik, Calel, 182 
"Permanent Delegate, The" (Shul), 
245 

Perry, Leslie, 90 

Phi Delta Kappan, address of, 346 
Philipsen, Gerry, 103 
Pictorial History of the Holocaust , The 
(Arad), 275 

"Pictures of Our Nobler Selves" 
(Trahant), 343 

Pieces of the Heart (Soto), 321 
Pink Triangle , The (Plant), 367 
Planning and Organizing for 
Multicultural Instruction , 300 
Plant, Richard, 367 
Plath, Sylvia, 242 
Plays of the Holocaust (Fuchs), 369 
Plessy v. Ferguson , 25, 26 
Poems of Paul Celan (Celan), 363 
"Poetry in the Holocaust Dominion" 
(Aaron), 264 

"Poetry of the Holocaust, The" 
(Young), 267 

Poetry of the Modern American 
Indian, Internet site of, 340 
Poland, 143 

Polish Jews (Vishniac), 368 
political criteria, in literature pro- 
grams, 194 
political struggles, 16 
Pol Pot, 186, 188 

Portable Harlem Renaissance Reader *, 

The (Lewis), 303 

"Postcolonial Criticism" (Bhabha), 308 
post-Holocaust attitudes, 213 
Poverty & Race Research Action 
Council, address of, 294 
Prayers for Bobby (Aarons), 348 
Prejudice (Muse), 286 
prejudice, vii, 37 

story of student with, 130 
teacher reaction to, 129 
"Preparing Teachers to Work with 
Children of Gay and Lesbian 
Parents" (Koerner and 
Hulsebosch), 346 
Price You Pay , The (Keyser), 310 
primary documents, 5 
Proctor, Elizabeth, 91 



Proctor, John, 91 
Proctor, Robert N., 367 
Project 10 Handbook , 347 
propaganda, 2 
prostitutes, 179 

Public Broadcasting Service Video, 
address of, 302 

Public Education Regarding Sexual 
Orientation Issues, Internet site 
of, 353 

public memory, 155 
Public Opinion , The , 124 
purpose, 4 
Purves, Alan C., 243 
Pushing the Bear (Glancy), 335 



Qualey, Martha, 336 

Quindlen, Anna, on homophobia, 344 



"Rabbi Ben Ezra" (Browning), 116 
Rabinowitz, Howard N., 29 
Rabinsky, Lea trice B., viii, x 
Race , Gender , & Class , 295 
Race Matters (West), 287 
race relations education, 40 
Race Relations in the Urban South 
(Rabinowitz), 29 
Race Riot (Tuttle), 30 
Racial Hygiene (Proctor), 367 
racism, 84 

Racism in California (Daniels and 
Olin), 326 

Rage in the Streets (Archer), 98 
Rain of Gold (Villasenor), 329 
rape, 179 
Ravensbruck, 182 
Rawick, George P, 304 
reader-response theory, 243-44 
reading, value in, 87 
Reading the Literatures of Asian 
America (Lim and Ling), 314 
"Reasonable Doubt, A" (Carter), 94 
Reconstruction, 24-25, 28, 32, 304 
reenactment, 6 
Rees, David, 351 
reflection, 6 

re-foreignizing the self, 60 
Regeneration through Violence 
(Slotkin), 333 
Reimer, Becky, vita of, 384 
relationships, slave and master, 27 
Remembering Denny (Trillin), 349 






396 



c 



388 



i 

Index 



Remembering the Holocaust, Internet 
site of, 375 

Rena's Promise (Gelissen), 179 
Rench, Janice, 351 

Report of the Joint Select Committee to 
Inquire into the Condition of Affairs 
in the Late Insurrectionary States , 

28 

Rereading America (Columbo, Cullen, 
and Lisle), 326 
Rescue (Meltzer), 276 
Rescuers (Block and Drucker), 231, 362 
research papers, 92-93 
Resonance of Dust, The (Alexander), 264 
Resource Book for Educators, A (United 
States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum), 358 

Resource Center for Educators, 373 
Internet site of, 375 
Respecting Our Differences (Duvall), 
285 

Responses to the Holocaust, Internet 
site of, 374 

Rethinking Our Classrooms, 300 
Rethinking Schools, 295 
Rethinking Schools, 

address of, 288, 294, 338 
Internet site of, 297 
Rethinking Schools Resources for Equity 
and Social Justice, 286 
RetroSpace (Bruce-Novoa), 325 
Revolutions of the Heart (Qualey), 336 
Rice, Thomas D., 24 
Rich, Adrienne, 349 
Richter, Hans Peter, 367 
Rico, Barbara, 93 
"Riddle" (Heyen), 227, 241, 245 
Riders towards the Dawn (Friedlander), 
250, 266 

Righteous Among the Nations at Yad 
Vashem, 232 

Righteous Gentile (Bier man), 362 
Righteous Gentiles, 118 
Riley, Patricia, 335 
Ringelblum, Emmanuel, 367 
Ringleheim, Joan, 174, 177 
Rising Voices (Hi rschf elder and 
Singer), 334 

Ritter, Lawrence S., 305 
Rittner, Carol, 174, 232, 367 
Road from Home, The (Kherdian), 188 
Rochman, Hazel, 286 
Rodriguez, Luis, 317, 329 
Rofes, Eric, 47, 351 



Rogasky, Barbara, 249 
Rogers, Theresa, 243 
role playing, 6, 67-68 
of Aktion, 224-25 
"Roman Holiday, A" (McKay), 40 
"Rose-Beetle Man, The" (Durrell), 205 
"Rose For Charlie, A" (Carnes), 97 
Rosenbaum, Alan, 198-99 
Rosenberg, Ethel, 91 
Rosenberg, Julius, 91 
Rosenblatt, Louise, 243 
Rosenfeld, Alvin H., 220, 267 
Roskies, David G., 266 
Rossel, Seymour, 245 
Rotenstreich, Nathan, 362 
Roth, John K., 174, 367 
Rowan, Carl T., 305 
Rowell, Charles, 303 
Royal Gentleman, A, (Tourgee), 26, 43 
Rozewicz, Tadeusz, 261 
Rubin, Sulia, 178 
Rubinstein, Erna, 184 
Rudnitski, Rose, ix 

"Rumbling in the Mines, A" (Carnes), 
96 

Rumkowski, Chaim, 222-26 
Rumor Clinic (Anti-Defamation 
League), 30 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown, 332 
Rutberg, Becky, 304 



Sa-I-Gu (Choy), 310 
Sacco, Nicola, 96 
Sacco and Vanzetti Trial, 96-97 
Sachs, Nelly, 247, 261 
Saldivar, Jose David, 325 
Saldivar-Hull, Sonia, 324 
"Salem Witch Trials, The" 
(Albertson), x 

Same River Twice, The (Walker), 51, 
54-55 

Samora, Julian, 327 
Sandburg, Carl, 205 
Sapagonia (Castillo), 328 
Saunders, John, 33 
Scale, Doris, 333 
scapegoating, 356 

Scarry, Elaine, on human capacity to 
injure others, 12 
Scher, Linda, 147 
Schiff, Hilda, 370 
Schindler's List (Spielberg), 276 
Schindler's List (Zenger Video), 372 



Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr., 286 
Schlissel, Lillian, 305 
Scholl, Inge, 368 
Schoppmann, Claudia, 180 
Schuyler, George S., 37, 40 
Schwertfeger, Ruth, 190 
Scissors, Paper, Rock (Johnson), 348 
Scottsboro (Carter), 95 
Scottsboro Boys, The (Haskins), 304 
Scottsboro case, 94 
Scroll of Agony (Katsh), 365 
"Searching the Internet" (Lynch), 306 
n 4 

Sears, James T., 347 
"Second Coming, The" (Yeats), 76 
See, Joe, on his grandmother, 111-12 
Seeker, and Other Poems, The (Sachs), 
261 

Segregation, 25-26 
Segrest, Mab, 349 
Sekaquaptewa, Helen, 335 
Selected Poems (Celan), 259 
selective genocide, 141 
Selichos, 111 

Selznick, Gertrude Jaeger, 286 
seminar format, 86 
Sender, Ruth Minsky, 222 
Senesh, Hanna, 247 
sentence completion exercises, 126 
service, 18, 20 
Servosse, Comfort, 28 
Sewid, James, 335 
Shakespeare, William, 113 
Shange, Ntozake, 42 
Sharing Legends at Upper Skagit 
(Hilbert), 336 
"Shawl, The" (Ozick), 366 
Shea, Christopher, 199 
"Shelter Boy" (Paymar), 273 
Sheltering Rebecca (Baylis- White), 175 
Shema (Levi), 261 
Shilts, Randy, 349 
Shoah, 372 

Should We Burn Babar? (Kohl), 292 
Shug, 46, 52 
Shul, Yuri, 245 
silence, as a response, 7, 357 
silence of polyglot, 72 
Silko, Leslie Marmon, 336 
Silver Rights (Curry), 305 
Simon, Patricia Vandel, 327 
Simon Wiesenthal Center, 
address of, 288 
Internet site of, 375 



] 



389 



Index 



simulations, 6 
Sinclair, Upton, 96 
Singer, Beverly R., 334 
Singer, Isaac Bashevis, 213 
“Single Hair, A" (Taube), 246 
Sister Outsider (Lorde), 349 
Skin (Allison), 348 
Skipping Stones, 295 
Skirt, The (Soto), 331 
Slapin, Beverly, 333 
slavery, 14, 208, 304 
Slave Ship (Sullivan), 304 
Slotkin, Richard, 333 
Smith, Barbara, on oppression, 47 
Smoke and Ashes (Rogasky), 249 
Snyder, Anne, 351 
social justice, 16-17 
"Social Life before the War" (Page), 32 
Social Studies School Service, address 
of, 373 

Social Studies School Service, e-mail 
address, 375 
social voice, 159 
Society and Culture of Native 
American Tribes, Nations, and 
Bands, Internet site of, 340 
Society for the Study of the Multi- 
Ethnic Literature of the United 
States, 287 

So Far from God (Castillo), 328 
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 
address of, 337 

"Some Questions About Tolerance" 
(Kushner), 293 

Song of the Murdered Jewish People, The 
(Katzenelson), 260 
"Son of the Forest, A" (Apes), 334 
Sophie's Choice (Styron), 175 
Soter, Anna O., 244 
Soto, Gary, 317-18, 321, 331 
Soids of Black Folk (Du Bois), 34 
sources, diplomatic, 180 
South, notion of a refined, 27 
South Asian Diaspora, Internet site 
of, 315 

South Carolina Department of 
Education Council on the 
Holocaust, address of, 359 
South Carolina Voices, 359 
Southern Poverty Law Center, 
address of, 294, 338 
Soviet Union, 143 
Speaking Out (Kuklin), 286 
Speak My Name (Belton), 303 



Speak Nozv against the Day (Egerton), 
305 

Spencer, Sharon, on students 
understanding, viii 
Spicer, Edward H., 333 
Spider Woman's Granddaughters 
(Allen), 335 

Spiegelman, Art, 220, 368 
Spielberg's Holocaust (Loshitzky), 366 
Spirit of Excellence Resource Guides, 

The, 299 

Spreading Poison (Langone), 286 
Stalin, Joseph, 166, 210 
Standing Bear, Luther, 335 
Stanley, Seth, 33 
Stannard, David, 199, 200 
Star Fisher, The (Yep), 110 
State of Native America, The (Jaimes), 333 
Stavans, Ilan, 320 
Steinbeck, John, 111, 113 
Steinberg, Stephen, 286 
Stensland, Anna Less, 333 
stereotyping, 86, 116, 126-29 
social, 165 
stereotypes, 211 

Steven Spielberg's Survivors of the 
Shoah Visual History Founda- 
tion, Internet site of, 375 
Stokes, Geoffrey, 303 
Stolen Continents (Wright), 333 
Stones Cry Out, The (Szymusiak), 180, 
188 

Stories of Scottsboro (Goodman), 95 
Storyteller (Silko), 336 
Stotsky, Sandra, x 
Stowers, Walter, 33 
Stranger from a Different Shore 
(Takaki), 74, 309 

Strangers to Ourselves (Kristeva), 58, 
59 

making collage from, 64-65 
Struggle for Justice (Scholastic), 298 
"Struggling with the Meaning of 
Tolerance" (Heller and Hawkins), 
ix 

students, 

bring experiences to the class- 
room, 130 

as citizens in the global commu- 
nity, 2 

need to feel comfortable taking 
risks, 134 

response to difficult knowledge, 
169 



Studies in American Indian Literature 
(Allen), 332 

Study Guide on the Holocaust, A 
(Georgia Commission on the 
Holocaust), 147 
Styron, William, 175 
Subtelny, Orest, 153 
Suhl, Yuri, 176 

Sui Sin Far /Edith Maude Eaton (White- 
Parks), 312 
Sullivan, George, 304 
Sundara, 104-5, 107-9 
Survival in Auschzvitz (Levi), 366 
Survivors (Miller), 185, 188 
Sutzkever, Abraham, 247, 248, 262 
"Swastika Poems, The" (Heyen), 259 
Sweet 15 (Bernardo), 330 
Szlengel, Wladyslaw, 247, 248 
Szwajger, Adina, 176, 188 
Szymusiak, Molyda, 180 



Tablet, The, 162 
Takaki, Ronald, 309 
Taking Lives (Horowitz), 145 
Talking to the High Monks in the Snozv 
(Minatoya), 312 
Tan, Amy, 60, 69, 313 
Tatum, Charles M., 327 
Taylor, Mildred D., 42, 110 
Teacher Magazine, 11 
"Teacher Mire, The" (Sutzkever), 248 
Teachers' Group, The, Internet site of, 
353 

teaching, about genocide and 
intolerance, 7 
Teaching about Haiti, 300 
Teaching about the Holocaust (United 
States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum), 219 

"Teaching about Women in Twenti- 
eth Century Genocides" 
(Bingham), x 

"Teaching Chinua Achebe's Things 
Fall Apart" (Danks), x 
"Teaching Conflict-Resolution 
Strategies through Multiethnic 
Literature" (Louie and Louie), x 
Teaching Respect for All, 355 
"Teaching the Holocaust in the 

English Classroom" (Caporino), x 
"Teaching the Holodomor (Ukraine 
Famine)" (Robertson), x 
Teaching Tolerance (Bullard), 291 



o 

ERJC 



398 



] 



390 



[ 

Index 



"Teaching Tolerance" (Heller and 
Hawkins), 292 

Teaching Tolerance (Southern Poverty 
Law Center), 287, 295, 302, 338 
Teaching Tolerance, 98 
teaching tolerance, formula for, 55 
Teaching Tolerance Project, 11-12 
Tec, Nechama, 368 
Teens Speak Out, 355 
Teichman, Milton, 370 
Tell Them We Remember (Bachrach), 361 
Tenacity of Prejudice, The (Selznick and 
Steinberg), 286 

Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 111, 116 
"Terezin" (Mif), 241 
Terrible Secret, The (Laqueur), 365 
Terteboim, Niuta, 176 
Testament of Hope, A (Washington), 305 
Testimony (Felman and Laub), 169 
Testing of Hanna Senesh, The (Whitman), 
262 
texts, 

experience of reading, 6 
as memory, 3 
selection of, 4 
as social memory, 170 
That's Me! That's You! That's Us! 
(Emery), 285 

"The Bracelet" (Uchida), 204 
"The Bread of Salt" and Other Stories 
(Gonzalez), 312 
Their Eyes Were Watching God 
(Hurston), 305 

Theory in Practice, address of, 347 
"There Were Those" (Dambroff), 241 
They Came to See a Poet (Rozewicz), 261 
They Had a Dream (Archer), 305 
"Things" (Szlengel), 248 
Things Fall Apart (Achebe), 76-87 
Thinking about the Longstanding 
Problems of Virtue and Happiness 
(Kushner), 16, 292 
This Way for the Gas, Ladies and 
Gentlemen (Borowski), 363 
Thomas, Theodore, 186 
Thoreau, Henry David, 100 
Thornburg, Dick, 93 
Thornton, Russell, 333 
Three Times a Woman (Herrera-Sobek, 
Alba, and Martinez), 325 
Thurman, Wallace, 35 
Tiflin, Carl, 113 
To Be Young, Gifted, and Black 
(Hansberry), 15 



To Destroy You Is No Loss (Criddle and 
Mam), 177, 181, 188 
Toinette (Tourgee), 26 
Toinette, 26-27 
tolerance, vii, 16, 80 

definition of, 77, 306 n 2 
increasing, 87 
Internet site of, 16, 80 
meaning of, 11-12 
as social justice, 17 
Tolerance for Diversity of Beliefs, 300 
Tommie Stands Alone (Velasquez), 

331 
tone, 87 

To the Land of the Cattails (Appelfeld), 
361 

"To the Virgins" (Herrick), viii 
Totten, Samuel, x 

on uses of language, 254 
Tourgee, Albion W., 26-30 
Tradition and the Talents of Women 
(Howe), 323 

Tragic Era, The (Bowers), 30 
Trahant, Mark N., 343 
Trail of Tears, 95 

"Translating Paul Celan's Todesfuge'" 
(Felstiner), 265 

"Trans-National America" (Bourne), 
61 

trauma, 

learning about, 164 
teaching about, 169 
Treasury of Afro-American Folklore 
(Courlander), 303 

Treasury ofjezvish Poetry, A (Ausubel 
and Ausubel), 258 
Treasury of Yiddish Poetry, A (Howe 
and Greenberg), 259 
Tree Living, The (Tu), 308 
Tribal People's Resources, Internet 
site of, 343 

Tricycle Press, telephone number of, 
350 

Trillin, Calvin, 349 
Truth about Alex, The (Snyder and 
Pelletier), 351 

Truth and Lamentation (Teichman and 
Leder), 262, 370 
Tuttle, William M. Jr., 30 
Twain, Mark, 96, 100 
Twentieth Century, 90 
Tzvo or Three Things I Knozv for Sure 
(Allison), 348 
Typical American (Jen), 313 



Uchida, Yoshiko, 204 
Ukraine (Subtelny), 153 
"Ulysses" (Tennyson), 111, 116 
Uncle What-is-it Is Coming to Visit 
(Willhoite), 352 

UN Declaration of Human Rights, vii 
understanding, importance of, 80 
Understanding Sexual Identity (Rench), 
351 

Under Western Eyes (Hongo), 311 
United Nations General Assembly, 
resolution on genocide, 142-43 
U.S. Census Black Facts, Internet site 
of, 297 

United States Holocaust Memorial 
Museum, 131, 218-19 
address of, 249, 287, 358 
Internet site of, 374 
United States Senate Committee on 
Indian Affairs, Internet site of, 341 
Universal Black Pages, The, Internet 
site of, 297 

University of Virginia Multicultural 
Pavilion, Internet site of, 297 
Unks, Gerald, on homophobia, 48 
Unsettling America (Gillan and 
Gillan), 303 

Up from Slavery (Washington), 305 
Us and Them (Carnes), 93, 95, 304 
Us and Them (Southern Poverty Law 
Center), 13 

"Using Holocaust Stories and Poetry 
in the Social Studies Classroom" 
(Danks), 263 
Uyemoto, Holly, 314 



Valdez, Luis, 322 
Valentine, Glenda K., vita of, 385 
Valentine, John, 352 
Vanderwerth, W. C., 335 
Vanzetti, Bartholomew, 96 
Vegh, Claudine, 368 
Velasquez, Gloria, 331 
Ventura, Cynthia C., 330 
verbal learning, 6 
Versions of Survival (Langer), 266 
Very Inside, The (Lim-Hing), 311 
Village Voice Anthology, The (Stokes), 
303 

Villasenor, Victor, 329 
violence, 7, 32 

Viramontes, Helena Maria, 324, 325, 
329 




3-90 



391 



c 



Index 



Virtual Jerusalem's Holocaust Pages, 
Internet site of, 375 
Vishniac, Roman, 368 
voices, 5 

Volavkova, Hana, 262, 368 



Wachlin, Marie, 214 
wailing woman myth, 319 
Walden (Thoreau), 100 
Walker, Alice, 46, 50 
Walling, Donovan, 347 
War against the Jews, The 
(Dawidowicz), 196, 363 
Ward, Jerry, 303 
War of the Rebellion, The, 43 n 1 
Warsaw Ghetto, lesson on, 176 
Warsazv Ghetto, The (Zenger Video), 
372 

Washington, Booker T., 305 
Washington, James, 305 
Washington Social Studies Site, The, 
Internet site of, 374 
Washington State Holocaust Educa- 
tion Resource Center, address of, 
359 

Watts, Richard, 89 
Wave, The (Zenger Video), 372 
"We Aren't Superstitious" (Benet), 89 
We Are Witnesses (Boas), 363 
Weiss, John, 202 
Welaratna, Usha, 185 
Welch, James, 336 
We Must Never Forget (Knowledge 
Unlimited), 373 
Werfel, Franz, 175 
West, Cornel, 287, 292 
West, John O., 327 
Western Civilization, moral code of, 
214 

"We Wear the Mask" (Dunbar), 38 
When Democracy Works (Saalfield), 
355 

When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit (Kerr), 
175 

When the War Was Over (Becker), 185 
Where Angels Glide at Dawn (Carbon 
and Ventura), 330 

Where the Flame Trees Bloom (Flora da), 
330 

Whispering Wind Magazine, address 
of, 339 

Whitaker, Ben, on genocide, 144 
White, Richard, 322 



o 




White, Ryan, 97 

White Man's Indian, The (Berkhofer), 
332 

White-Parks, Anette, 312 
white racial supremacy, myth of, 33 
White Rose, The (Scholl), 368 
Whitman, Ruth, 262 
Whitman, Walt, 52 
Who's Afraid of Project 10? , 355 
"Why I Wrote The Crucible " (Miller), 
90 

Wickens, Elaine, 352 
Wiesel, Elie, 98, 123, 369 

on Holocaust literature, 240, 255 
on Holocaust testimony, 247 
on indifference, 1 
on Nazis' aim, 248 
on the Holocaust, 124 
Wiesenthal, Simon, 275 
Wiesenthal Center/Museum of 
Tolerance, The, address of, 373 
Wild Steps of Heaven (Villasenor), 329 
Willhoite, Michael, 352 
Williams, Paulette, 42 
Williams, Walter L., 347 
William's Doll (Zolotow), 352 
Winged Seed, The (Lee), 312 
Winnemucca Hopkins, Sarah, 335 
Winter in the Morning (Bauman), 177 
Wisse, Ruth, 210 
Wistrich, Robert S., 287 
on Goldhagen, 202 
With a Camera in the Ghetto 
(Grossman), 226 
"Witness" (Blaushild), 272 
Witness to the Holocaust (Berenbaum), 
362 

Wolff, Robert Paul, 293 
Woman Hollering Creek and Other 
Stories (Cisneros), 320 
Women Against Hitler (Thomas), 186 
Women in the Holocaust (Eibeshitz and 
Eilenberg-Eibeshitz), 174, 178, 

183, 188 

Women Made Movies, address of, 

302 

Women of Theresienstadt 
(Schwertfeger), 190 
Women's Educational Media, 

Internet site of, 353 
Women's Press Interlink Publishers, 
telephone number of, 350 
Wong, Sau-ling C., 75 n 1, 309 
Wong, Shawn, 314 



400 



Woo, Jing-mei, 67-68 
Words and Place (Evers), 336 
World Must Know, The (Berenbaum), 
275, 362 
World War I, 39 
World War II, 142, 208 
Wright, Richard, 38-39, 305 
Wright, Ronald, 333 
writing assignments, 

on choices and results, 181 
on diversity, 177 
on Musa's arguments, 187 
on Warsaw Ghetto, 176 
using Internet, 190 
"Written in Pencil in the Sealed 
Railway Car" (Pagis), 241 
Wyman, David, 368 
Wyse, Lois, on her grandma, 111-12 



xenophobia, 90 



Yad Vashem, 

address of, 360 
Internet site of, 375 
Yahil, Leni, 369 
Yeats, W. B., 76 

"Yellow Starred" (deCamara), 251 
Yep, Laurence, 110 
Yolen, Jane, 253 
Yoran, Shalom, 182 
Young, Gloria, 267 
"Young People Respond to the 
Elderly" (Rabinsky), x 
Youth, Identity, Power (Munoz), 321 



Zar, Rose, 269, 275 

Zolotow, Charlie, 352 

Zoot Suit and Other Plays (Valdez), 322 

Zoot Suit Riots, 318 



393 



wmh-A 



Editors 




Carol Danks, a secondary teacher for over 
twenty years, teaches high school English 
and journalism in Kent, Ohio. She is a board 
member of the Ohio Council on Holocaust 
Education and co-edited the state's Holocaust 
curriculum entitled The Holocaust: Prejudice 
Unleashed. She created and helped implement 
a ninth-grade unit on literature of the Holo- 
caust which is part of the high school's 
curriculum. Active in Holocaust education 
for many years, she has published articles in 
both English and social studies journals and 
participates nationally in workshops on 
teaching about the Holocaust. She has been 
recognized in Who's Who of American Women 
and Who's Who in American Education. A 
Mandel Fellow for 1997-98 with the United 
States Holocaust Memorial Museum, she also 
chaired NCTE's Committee on Teaching 
about Genocide and Intolerance. 




Leatrice B. Rabinsky has been in the fore- 
front of teaching, researching, and lecturing 
about the Holocaust for three decades. She 
recently retired after thirty-one years of 
teaching English in the Cleveland Heights- 
University Heights school system, the last 
twenty-five years at Cleveland Heights High 
School. She has organized and led seven 
Journeys of Conscience for students and 
survivors to the sites of the Holocaust in 
Europe and to Israel. A board member of the 
Ohio Council on Holocaust Education, she is 
also co-editor of the Ohio curriculum, The 
Holocaust: Prejudice Unleashed. She has co- 
authored Journey of Conscience: Young People 
Respond to the Holocaust. She was a Mandel 
Fellow for 1996-97 with the United States 
Holocaust Memorial Museum. Active in her 
community, Rabinsky co-chaired the Yom 
HaShoa V'HaGvura citywide Holocaust 
commemoration events for 1997 and 1998. 
She was honored with the Women Who Dare 




401 



394 



Editors 



c 



award by the National Council of Jewish Women, designated a Woman of 
Valor by American Magen David, the 1997 Gemstone Award by the Junior 
League of Cleveland, the New Life award by the Kol Israel Foundation, and 
is recognized in Who's Who Among American Teachers. Rab insky received her 
B.A., M.A., and Ph.D. degrees from Case Western Reserve University. She is 
a member of NCTE's Committee on Teaching about Genocide and Intoler- 



395 



Contributors 



Bonnie R. Albertson currently teaches English at Concord High School in 
Wilmington, Delaware. She served as the K-12 English language arts 
Curriculum Coordinator for the Brandywine School District as well 
as having worked at various grade levels in both private and public 
schools in the Wilmington area. She is also an adjunct instructor at 
the University of Delaware, where she teaches a language arts course 
for preservice teachers. She worked with the Delaware Department 
of Education composing the curriculum standards for Delaware 
public schools, serves on the state steering committee for writing 
assessment, and is currently the lead educator for the tenth-grade 
state reading assessment. She has a master's degree in rhetoric and 
composition from West Chester University in West Chester, Pennsyl- 
vania. 

Celia Bard, who holds certification as a secondary English teacher and a 

master's degree in English Education, teaches at Notre Dame School 
in Denver. She is also a poet with an active interest in social issues. 

Marjorie Bingham's primary teaching career was at St. Louis Park High 
School, Minnesota, where she taught American and European 
history and humanities. She is co-author of the series "Women in 
World Cultures" and a founder of the Upper Midwest Women's 
History Center. Currently, she is adjunct professor at Hamline 
University. As an NEH Teacher /Scholar, she focused on Turkish 
history. She also has been a participant of the Jewish Labor Holo- 
caust Summer Seminar and subsequent meetings. 

Jean Boreen is assistant professor of English education at Northern Arizona 
University in Flagstaff. Besides supervising student teachers, she 
teaches methods, whole language, and adolescent literature courses. 
Boreen is also the student advisor for the NCTE NAU Student 
Affiliate. 

Grace M. Caporino has taught English for twenty-four years at Carmel 

High School in Carmel, New York. She has served as an educational 
consultant to the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum and to the 
College Board. In 1991 she was awarded the 1991 Regents of the 
State University of New York, Louis Yavner Award for Teaching 
about the Holocaust and Human Rights. She has been named to 
Who's Who Among America's Teachers and to Who's Who of American 
Women. She is a member of the NCTE Committee on Teaching about 
Genocide and Intolerance. Caporino has been the recipient of several 
grants including those funded by the National Endowment for the 
Humanities, which funded her program "Holocaust Perspectives: 
The Word and The Image," in 1989 and again in 1995. She is listed in 



ERIC 




3 



396 



Contributors 



Who's Who in America 1998 and is a Mandel Fellow for 1998-99 with 
the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. 

Sallie M. Fine, an Ohio native, completed her undergraduate work in 

philosophy and the history of mathematics at St. John's College in 
Annapolis, Maryland, where she stayed on as Assistant Director of 
Admissions. In 1989 she became the Paidiea coordinator. for 
Mortimer Adler Institute in Chicago, Illinois. During that time she 
designed and implemented an extracurricular program for inner-city 
high school students focusing on the study of literature, philosophy, 
and writing through the Socratic method. Fine received a master's 
degree in education from John Carroll University in Cleveland and 
taught high school English in the Woodridge Local School District in 
Peninsula, Ohio, until 1997. She now teaches English at Charles F. 
Brush High School in Lyndhurst, Ohio. 

Joseph A. Hawkins Jr. received his B.A. from Boston University and his 
M.A. from Howard University. After earning his B.A., he joined the 
Peace Corps and served as a teacher in Africa. After receiving his 
graduate degree, he worked as an instructor at Howard University. 
He worked for the Montgomery County Public Schools (Maryland) 
from 1979 to 1998. As an evaluation specialist, he managed research 
projects covering a wide variety of topics. Hawkins is now a senior 
research scientist at Pelavin Research Center at the American Insti- 
tutes for Research in Washington, D.C. His research writings have 
appeared in Teacher Magazine, Education Week, Teachers College Record, 
Teaching Tolerance Magazine, Journal of Reading, and the College Board 
Review. Hawkins spends his free time in a variety of community 
service activities. Currently, he sits on the Board of Directors of 
TransCen, a county nonprofit organization that helps adults with 
disabilities find employment. He also served on the county's Child 
Care Commission. For many years, he wrote a column — "HawkTalk" 
— for the Montgomery Journal. 

Caroline E. Heller is on the faculty of the College of Education and English 
Department at the University of Illinois at Chicago. She has taught at 
several grade levels and was a writer for the Teaching Tolerance 
Project of the Southern Poverty Law Center. Her research focuses on 
how people, particularly the elderly and poor, utilize literacy to 
make sense of their lives, and on how the social workings of out-of- 
school learning settings can broaden and inform conceptions of 
teaching and learning in school. 

Kate Kessler teaches high school English in Pennsylvania. Born into a 

military family, she attended high school in Augsburg, Germany, and 
graduated from Shippensburg University with a B.S. in psychology 
and an M.A. in English. Her Ph.D. in English from Indiana Univer- 
sity of Pennsylvania focused on student reactions to Holocaust 
literature. Her current educational goal is to teach tolerance through 
raising students' emotional IQs through reflective reading and writing. 



397 



Contributors 



Milton Kleg is professor of social science education and sociology at the 

University of Colorado at Denver, and Director of the Center for the 
Study of Ethnic and Racial Violence. His most recent book is Hate 
Prejudice and Racism. 

Toming Jun Liu is assistant professor in the English Department, California 
State University, Los Angeles, where he teaches courses in American 
and world modern literature, including Asian American literature. 
Bom and raised in Xi'an, China, Liu came to the United States in 
1981 as a translator for the United Nations Secretariat. His education 
includes B.A. in English (Xi'an), a British Council Scholarship 
(England), United Nations post-graduate certificate in translation 
(Beijing), and an M.A. and Ph.D. in English from University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst. He has published essays on Faulkner, 
American modern literature, Asian Diaspora, Asian American 
literature, and translation theory. His published works of translation 
include short stories by Chinese Diaspora writer MuXin (Chinese 
into English) and William Faulkner's Light in August (English into 
Chinese). He lives with his wife and son in Arcadia, California. 

Belinda Yun-Ying Louie, is associate professor in the Education Program at 
the University of Washington, Tacoma. Her scholarly interest is in 
developing interdisciplinary studies using literature, especially in 
promoting multicultural understanding. She has contributed to The 
Reading Teacher , Journal of Reading, English Journal, and other publica- 
tions. She was a team member of the Young Adults' Choices (IRA) 
and the Notable Books Committee (NCTE). 

Douglas H. Louie, is clinical assistant professor at the University of Wash- 
ington, Tacoma. His scholarly interest is in enhancing health knowl- 
edge among teachers, students, and his patients. He has initiated a 
series of conflict resolution projects in classrooms to promote the 
well-being of mental health among school-aged children. 

Christine Marshall received her Ph.D. in English literature, with a specialty 
in Native American literature, from the University of Arizona in 
1997. She works with many Native American students in her capac- 
ity as the premedical adviser at Northern Arizona University, where 
she teaches a course in Native American literature "for fun." 

Mari M. McLean and Christine M. Gibson are veteran teachers of twenty- 
eight years and sixteen years respectively, and have been colleagues 
at the same Columbus (Ohio) high school for ten years. They have a 
shared interest in helping students become aware of prejudice and 
intolerance, accepting of our common humanity, and sensitive to the 
need for promoting justice and equity in a diverse society. Gibson is 
chair of the English Department and is actively involved with 
numerous building and district committees working to improve 
literacy education and multiculturalism. McLean is adjunct faculty in 
the College of Education of the Ohio State University. 




398 



Contributors 



Rochmanna Miller has taught at Roosevelt High School in Los Angeles 
since 1980. She has worked with the Humanitas interdisciplinary 
program as both a teacher and a trainer in the Roosevelt Training 
Center, has served as a Mentor Teacher, and has worked with Facing 
History and Ourselves in the development of curriculum to combat 
racism. In addition to serving on the NCTE Committee on Teaching 
about Genocide and Intolerance, she has been involved with the 
development of various media literacy projects and projects integrat- 
ing arts into English curriculum. In addition to NEH and other 
grants, Miller received the Perryman Award for Excellence in Multi- 
Cultural Education. She teaches part time at California State Univer- 
sity, Los Angeles, and works in a program at the University of 
California at Irvine called "Bridging the Gaps/' 

Joan Peterson teaches in the School of Education at Saint Mary's College of 
California. She teaches graduate courses in Secondary Education and 
the Master's of Education Program, and undergraduate courses in 
the Collegiate Seminar Program. She has presented papers recently 
to the Annual Scholar's Conference on the Holocaust and the 
Churches and the American Educational Research Association. Her 
writing and research interests include the Holocaust, English studies, 
metaphorical language and college work, teachers in fiction, colonial 
education, and poetry. Her poem "Probable Loss" was published in 
Christianity and Literature . She is a member of the NCTE Committee 
on Teaching about Genocide and Intolerance. 

Becky Reimer has served on the NCTE Committee on Teaching about 

Genocide and Intolerance for three years. One of her special interests 
includes Native American literature. She is a co-author of 
C.U.L.T.U.R.E., a book of cross-cultural literature-based lessons for 
kindergarten through high school. The book received the NCTE 
Affiliate Award in 1995. She also has authored several articles and 
presented at various national conferences. Currently, she is the 
assistant principal of the Lower School at Rowland Hall-St. Mark's 
School in Salt Lake City. 

Judith P. Robertson has taught children's literature, cultural studies, and 
critical theory at the Faculty of Education, University of Ottawa, 
Canada. She has published in the Canadian Journal of Education, 
Canadian Children's Literature, Taboo: A Journal of Culture and Education, 
Language Arts, and Re-reading English. She is the editor of Teaching for 
a Tolerant World, Grades K-6 : Essays and Resources, forthcoming from 
NCTE. She is currently writing her second book. Cinema and the 
Politics of Desire in Teacher Education (forthcoming, SUNY Press). 

Rose Rudnitski is Chair of the Department of Elementary Education and 
Presiding Officer of the Faculty of the State University of New York 
at New Paltz. After teaching for eighteen years, she earned a doctor- 
ate in education from Columbia University in 1991. Since then her 
scholarship has focused on the history of education, social justice, 
and gifted education. The co-author of the textbook Integrated 



O 



406 



399 



1 

Contributors 



Teaching Methods and author of many articles in the field, Rudnitski is 
the editor of the middle school volume in this series. She also serves 
on the editorial review boards of The Gifted Child Quarterly and 
Roeper Review. 

Sandra Stotsky is a research associate at the Harvard Graduate School of 
Education and the Boston University School of Education. She 
annually directs a summer institute at HGSE on civic education, 
supported by the Lincoln and Therese Filene Foundation. She also 
works with educators in Eastern Europe on the content and peda- 
gogy for civic education in their public schools. From 1991 to 1996, 
she served as editor of Research in the Teaching of English. She was co- 
chair of a committee appointed by the Massachusetts Commissioner 
of Education to prepare the final version of the state's English 
language arts and reading standards and currently serves as a 
member of the committee developing statewide assessments based 
on these standards. Her most recent work is a monograph, commis- 
sioned by the Thomas B. Fordham Foundation, appraising the 
English language arts/reading standards documents in twenty-eight 
states. 

Samuel Totten is professor of curriculum and instruction at the University 
of Arkansas, Fayetteville. Prior to entering academia, he taught 
English in Australia, Israel, California, and Washington, D.C. Totten 
is a member of the Council of the Institute on the Holocaust and 
Genocide (Jerusalem, Israel) and an Associate of the Centre for 
Comparative Genocide Studies (Sydney, New South Wales, Austra- 
lia). He is the compiler of First-Person Accounts of Genocide Acts 
Committed in the Twentieth Century: An Annotated Bibliography (1991). 
He is also the co-editor of Century of Genocide: Eyewitness Accounts 
and Critical Views (1997), Social Issues in the English Classroom (1992), 
and Social Issues and Service at the Middle Level (1995). Currently, he is 
in the process of co-editing two new books on the Holocaust: Teach- 
ing about the Holocaust: Critical Essays and Teaching Holocaust Literature 
in Secondary Schools. 

Glenda K. Valentine is Associate Director of the Teaching Tolerance Project 
of the Southern Poverty Law Center in Montgomery, Alabama. A 
native of Riverside, California, and an alumna of California State 
University, Sacramento, she holds a B.A. in Organizational Commu- 
nications and an M.S. in Counseling and Human Development. She 
is an experienced trainer and diversity facilitator and a member of 
the American Society for Training and Development, the American 
Counseling Association, and the Association for Multicultural 
Counseling and Development. Valentine conducts diversity work- 
shops for educators across the country and specializes in creating a 
comfortable, non threatening environment in which individuals can 
speak openly about difficult diversity issues. She has written several 
articles and most recently wrote the introduction to Of Many Colors: 
Portraits of Multiracial Families. 






407 



This book was typeset in Palatino and Avant Garde by Electronic Imaging. 
Typefaces used on the cover were Gill Sans and Gill Sans Bold Extra Condensed. 
The book was printed by Versa Press. 



ERiC 



408 



“If we as teachers believe that prejudice is a learned behavior, 
then it is imperative that we work as teachers to reduce, if not eliminate, 
prejudices we find both in ourselves and in our students ” 

— DANKS AND RabINSKY, Preface 



1 — — J he valuable essays and resources In this 
book will help high school English teach- 
J ers adapt their own classroom lessons 
for teaching about genocide and intolerance. 
Beginning with guidelines developed by NCTE’s 
Committee on Teaching about Genocide and 
Intolerance, Danks and Rabinsky present six- 
teen inspirational and provocative 
essays by teachers who reflect 
on their classroom experi- 
ences, probing challenging 
issues; these essays pre- 
sent approaches to 
teaching various works as 
literature and as a means 
“to help young people find 
that crack in the door that 
separates them from others” 

As such, student voices also play 
a large role in these essays. 

Part I, Teaching about Issues of Intolerance, 
explores such diverse topics as novels produced 
during the Jim Crow era, the Salem witch trials 
and other “witch hunts,” uses of multiethnic lit- 
erature in conflict resolution, and peer dialogue 



journals. Part II, Teaching about Issues of 
Genocide, begins with an essay that examines 
various definitions of the word genocide , and then 
presents several essays on teaching about the 
Holocaust as well as about genocides less fre- 
quently discussed, such as the Ukraine Famine of 
1932-33 and the killing fields of Cambodia. 

Part III offers invaluable lists of 
resources — including orga- 
nizations, books, essays, 
films, CD-ROM programs, 
and Web sites — under 
headings including African 
American, Asian American, 
Chicano/Chicana, Native 
American, Gay and Lesbian, 
and the Holocaust. The 
lists are annotated in order 
to help teachers choose those 
materials that best suit the needs of 
their students. 

In our rapidly shrinking world, mutual 
respect becomes more crucial every day. Teaching 
for a Tolerant World, Grades 9-12 will help teach- 
ers build bridges of understanding. 





(§®qodo@ 0D co^Soq^BeCo 

0 0 0 Q (^CS6Xo) 

SO@®O°D®0§ 

mm-mm 20 




[ 409 ] 



ISBN 0-8141-4296-6 




9 780814 142967 



90000 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



EQic] 



NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket) form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




EFF-089 (9/97) 




