DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 406 693 



CS 215 831 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



PUB TYPE 



IDENTIFIERS 



Buckley, J. F. 

Teaching the Puritan Captivity Narrative: A History of the 
American Hero. 

Mar 96 

2 4p . ; Revised version of a paper presented at the Annual 
Meeting of the Conference on College Composition and 
Communication (47th, Milwaukee, WI, March 27-30, 1996). 
Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) -- Speeches/Meeting 

Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indians; *Class Activities; Community Attitudes; 

* Females; Higher Education; Literary Criticism; *Literary 
Genres; Literature Appreciation; * Puritans; *United States 
Literature 

Heroes; *Narrative Text; Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



How educators teach and talk about the Puritans tends to 



promulgate a view of them that does not exist in all their texts. From the 
beginning of the Puritans 1 arrival in 1630 in New England until Cotton 
Mather’s 1702 publication "Magnalia Christi Americana," there are literary 
treatments of the idealism and the hardship constituting Puritan life that 
are surprisingly "antisocial," that are critical of the normative community. 
This is especially true of the uniquely American genre, the captivity 
narrative- - specif ically that written by early New England women. "Having 
students see these captivity narratives as socially challenging entails 
having them consider these women writers as acting like today's queer 
performers, if not like today's transvestites, when they create the 'American 
hero.’" One instructor who teaches the captivity narrative begins, as 
follows: (1) notes that English 290 class starts with a showing of "The Last 

of the Mohicans, " which allows students to start the course reading while 
helping them agree on a present-day representation of the American hero; (2) 
has students bring in pictures of those who dress as "the other sex, " 
preparing them to: (3) discusses the differences between transvestitism and 

cross-dressing; and (4) reads "very brief" sections of a psychiatric manual 
describing "transvestic fetishism." Next they read the Puritan Mary 
Rowlandson's 1676 "Narrative of the Captivity and Restoration" and the Quaker 
Elizabeth Hanson's 1724 account of her captivity. With this approach students 
become better informed about early American women and Native Americans and 
their role in making a country. "They also see the interconnections among the 
supposedly antisocial, such as the queer, the transvestite, the 
cross-dresser, and the heterosexist American hero." Students come to see how 
accepted norms are often at odds with what society purports to value. 
(Contains 11 notes.) (NKA) 

★★★★★★★★★★★★★★**★*****★★★★★*******************★★*★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★************* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



J. F. Buckley 



m 

'O 

so 

o 



£ 



ro 

oo 

u 




Teaching the Puritan Captivity Narrative: 

A History of the American Hero 
It rarely fails. The first day of English 290 at The Ohio State 
University-Mansfield (Colonial and U.S. Literature to 1865). Greeting a 
section I call “Puritan Literature” are a lot of quizzical looks, a few 
pained expressions, and even, once in a while, from the more well-read, 
recent high-school graduate, some occasional grousing. “They were all so 
boring,” and “There was no individuality,” are often the apparently 
unanimous sentiments. Those few students who have been taught some 
Puritan literature apparently agree with the majority who have but heard 
about these early settlers. Why? Because, I believe, how we teach and 
how we talk about the Puritans tend to promulgate a view of them that 
does not exist in all their texts. 

In truth, from the time of John Winthrop’s arrival on the Arbella in 
1630 to Cotton Mather’s 1702 publication of Magnalia Christi Americana, 
there are literary treatments of the idealism and the hardship 
constituting Puritan life that are surprisingly “antisocial,” that are 
critical of the normative community. Especially is this so with the 
uniquely American genre, the captivity narrative— and specifically the 
narrative of capture written by early New England women. These women 

U.S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION , 

1 / CENTER (ERIC) | 

1 W This document has been reproduced as 

received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J - f * 



tt 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



go so far as to create the lone American individual who heroically 
wanders a “natural” world outside of and in a reaction to the white, 



2 



Eurocentric patriarchy, 1 the lone American individual who later comes to 

reflect “so resonantly masculine a voice.” 2 

Having students see the early woman’s captivity narrative as 
antisocial, as socially challenging, entails having them consider these 
New England women writers as acting like today’s queer performers, if 
not like today’s transvestites, when they create “the American hero.” To 
accomplish this, I start teaching the Puritan captivity narrative as 
follows: 

1. Note that my English 290 class starts with a showing of 
Twentieth Century Fox’s 1992 version of The Last of the Mohicans. This 
allows students to start their course reading while helping them agree on 
a present-day representation of the American hero. 

2. I have students bring in pictures of those who dress as “the other 
sex,” or in “what signifies the other sex” in today’s America. This works 
well as a research assignment because photos of cross-dressers and 
transvestites are not generally readily available in popular magazines, 
forcing students to use the Web along with such library tools as InfoTrac. 




3 



3 

And they almost always bring to class the most outrageous example, the 
person easily seen as playing two gender roles. 

3. This leads nicely to a discussion of the differences between 
transvestism and cross-dressing, and between “passing” and acting queer. 
The political differences, for example, become quite clear when, say, 
students see a picture of the cross-dresser who parades the East Village 
in dress and high heels while still wearing a beard. 

4. We now read very brief sections of the American Psychiatric 
Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV, 
which describes “transvestic fetishism” as a paraphiliac desire of a, 
generally male, cross-dressing subject for the object he creates by 
putting on the objects, actions, and situations of the woman in ways that 

correct anxiety and contribute to a sense of calm. 3 I am here establishing 

that society devalues the person who takes on objects, actions, situations 
of “the other,” and I am establishing that society needs to encode all “its” 
selves. 

Now I return to American literature and “the earliest full-length 
account to be published as a book . . . containing] all the structural 
elements that eventually characterized the captivity narrative”: The 
Narrative of the Captivity and Restoration, written by a woman, Mary 

o 

ERLC 



4 



4 



Rowlandson. 4 After reading the orthodox Puritan Mary Rowlandson's 

account of her 1676 captivity, we read the unregenerate Puritan Hannah 
Dustan's account of her 1697 captivity , then the pacifist Quaker Elizabeth 

Hanson's account of her 1724 captivity. 5 These provide students not only 

with a representative view of the Puritan woman’s captivity narrative 
from its beginning to what is considered its last appearance. Students 
also see how this captive woman uses the “Indian.” Rowlandson, Dustan, 
and Hanson, writing in the face of patriarchal pressures, pressures that 
still exist, present a performance of self unlike male authors such as the 
well-known Quentin Stockwell and John Williams. Although all captives 
saw “the ideals of [their] civilization” theologically and socially 

challenged by the Indian, 6 the Puritan woman articulates her plight via the 
secular, the bodily, the Indian, the female. What she embodies is a new 
idealized self. 7 

My point is to emphasize that the Puritan woman’s narrative of 
captivity is an acting out of the antisocial, the Indian. This early woman 
“radically and explicitly” performs her perception of her self in socially 

challenging ways. 8 For example, in The Second Remove, Rowlandson may 
attribute her life to “the wonderful power of God,” but she makes it clear 

o 

ERLC 



5 



5 



that she and the Indians arise and travel on “having no Christian ... to 
comfort or help,” having no comfort, in fact, save “a little fire, and a few 
boughs behind” her (R 327). She travels as does James Fenimore Cooper’s 

Hawkeye. 9 (Or rather Hawkeye will travel as does she.) When the Indians 

plunder various objects in order to survive, Rowlandson uses what has 
passed through their hands to philosophize her situation and bolster her 
orthodox Puritanism: "One of the Indians . . . brought some plunder . . . and 
asked me if I would have a Bible .... I was glad of it" (R 330). The 
Calvinist society’s normative touchstone, the Bible, first becomes Indian 
“plunder.” In fact, only as Indianized pillage does Rowlandson have access 
to it. With it she spiritualizes, validates, emphasizes what is Indian. Not 
only does she philosophize; she obtains reasoning and justification for 
biding her time, for not attempting escape: “Wait on the Lord” (331). She 
reasons as does Hawkeye when he plans that Cora and Alice be captured; 
however, unlike Hawkeye who slips downstream to safety, Rowlandson 
thinks as the self-sufficient hero from within the dangers of her 
captivity-acts the more heroic. 

The Indianized Bible further allows Rowlandson to condemn “the 
English” who fail to cross the Baquag River, as do the Indians with “old 




and young, some sick, and some lame”: “Oh, that my people had hearkened 



6 



to me, ... I should soon have subdued their enemies” (334). However, the 
Indian whom Rowlandson values “subdues” the normative English by using 
antisocial nature, by plunging deeper into anti-Calvinist wilderness. When 
she later cites Proverbs 27:7, calling raw horse liver “sweet” as she eats 
“with the blood about [her] mouth” (335), she is obviously hungry. Yet it 
cannot be ignored that she esteems the Indian object. Instead of calling 
on her Calvinist God for spiritual solace, she spiritualizes the lowly 
object that solaces her body. 

At this point I again have my class bring in pictures. It is important 
that students, not I, provide such proof because it establishes the general 
applicability of my assertion that the self is signified, can be resignified, 
and is always performed. (Although the teacher must, of course, be 
prepared.) For example, in the past I have asked that students bring in 
“pictures of AIDS,” forcing them to interpret my request. Without fail 
this meant pictures of young men, often men in such “gay AIDS 
organizations as ACT-UP.” Students generally look first in the most 
familiar magazines; so, our culture’s most prevalent normal signifiers of 
selfhood are easily found and their cultural currency confirmed. 

We discuss how images of sexuality change, or are re-coded for 
various reasons in various situations. The cross-dresser or transvestite 




7 



7 

seen as “sick” by DSM IV easily becomes the “cause” of another disease: 
AIDS. The Bible, seen as Calvinism’s source of normative validation, 
easily becomes a validation of the antisocial. All this becoming depends 
on how we all “act.” 

As a class we discuss how and why all these resignifications have 
both positive and negative values depending on which community’s norms 
validate and idealize the self doing the valuing. 

I now come back to American literature. Rowlandson’s use of Indian 
objects obviously means engaging in Indian activities. Upon returning to 
her community and family, she invokes the Calvinist ideal of chastity to 
establish herself as still deserving of membership in the white 
community: 

I have been in the midst of those roaring lions, and savage 
bears, that feared neither God, nor man, nor the devil, by night 
and day, alone and in company: sleeping all sorts together, and 
yet not one of them ever offered me the least abuse of 
unchastity to me, in word or action. (R 361) 

For all her Puritanism Rowlandson is espousing what are and have long 
been the values of the Native American. Warriors, especially in 
seventeenth-century New England, before corruption by the white man's 




8 

methods of war, almost never raped female captives. They often adopted 
them instead into their families, and never violated the incest taboo. 

While rape of female captives became more an actuality in the later 
nineteenth century in southwestern United States, hence more a literary 
norm in captivity narratives from that time and place, it is unrecorded in 
the time of Rowlandson (Derounian-Stodola 3-4, 125-130). 

Although Dustan, as Mather reports, is not so long a captive as is 
Rowlandson, she too encodes new signifiers for her self, performs, with 
the aid of Indian objects and activities, a new individuality. On April 30, 
before she reaches the Indian town where she would be “stript, and 
scourg’d,” Dustan convinces her nurse, and an English youth captured from 
Worcester, to join her in escaping. She violently determines her own 
destiny, her own new identity: "furnishing themselves with hatchets for 
the purpose, they struck such home [sic] blows upon the heads of their 
sleeping oppressors, that” they killed ten whom they also then scalped 
( MCA 636). Dustan, like Hawkeye, is capable of wielding Indian weapons, 
is, like Hawkeye, a solitary hero when she defines her own resistance and 
her own, new self through individual action. Mather tries to downplay this 
individualism as being like the biblical Jael who cannot meet Sisera 
equally in open combat and so must resort to cunning and what is supposed 

o 

ERIC 



9 



9 



to be a woman’s weapon: a tent peg. Dustan, however, empowers her self 
with the male’s weapon, while the Indian acts in a manner similar to how 
the white woman is pictured at the start of captivity narratives: “at their 
feet they bow’d, they fell; where they bow’d, there they fell down dead” 

( MCA 636). By next using an Indian knife to scalp, Dustan completes her 
usurpation of the patriarchal domains of both the male Indian and the male 
Puritan who deal in scalps for money and for political suasion. As a 
consequence, Dustan is rewarded with individuation and material gain. 

Like Hawkeye, the heroic American male who will follow in her footsteps, 
she is the lone agent valorized by the community whose norms she 
ostensibly rejects in fighting for those norms. 

Hanson, like Rowlandson, does not so directly effect her escape with 
Indian objects and actions, but there is nonetheless a performance of a 
new self. She finds empowering an individuating mode of action wherein 
her own body acts both naturally and Indian: “traveling very hard . . . 
through sundry rivers, brooks, and swamps,” when all about her are 
seeking food, when all the Indians and captives are at the mercy of nature 
and the luck of the hunt, she actually creates, without a male, through her 
own body, the ability to nurture new life. In a natural community of Indian 
women that she unites around her breasts, Hanson embodies an identity 




10 



that resists not only the elements of the natural world which threaten her 
and her child. She enacts a self who is resilient to the male Indian 
“master” who would have her believe he will kill her child. Even in the 
Anglophile community where she might be expected to explain what uses 
the other, the Indian, has made or might have made of her body--as 
Rowlandson must do— no male appears to have power over Hanson. In fact, 
no male dares presume to excuse her actions-as Mather does with Dustan. 
Instead, Hanson discusses her Indianized body and its efficacy in the self- 
confident, individualistic style of the natural woman acting the Indian, a 
voice Hawkeye will echo when telling other whites of his natural power 
and ability. 

At this point, using clips of videos I rent and preset to start at a 
specific scene, I have my class compare the self performed by these three 
women in their writing to the sexist images of women in western and 
action films. We discuss, for example, why Dirty Harry leads his female 
colleague by the hand when they are being fired at, even though she 
eventually saves his life by sacrificing her own. We discuss, for example, 
how and why Shane is the outdoor, natural, stoic hero while the woman 
who cooks, cleans, and frets looks at him and is looked at by him through a 
window framed by another man-her husband. 



1 1 

Not only do students easily see that these early Puritan women are 
performing an alternative to such feminized roles; they notice how later- 
day writers have coopted that self for the male. 

But of equal value to reconsidering the captivity narrative, students 
also see that those outrageous cross-dressers whose pictures they earlier 
brought to class occupy, through their performances, a role both social and 
antisocial, like “our American hero.” Both combine in socially challenging 
ways, the normal and the abnormal-that is the new self. 

Returning to Puritan literature, we note that not only are Indian 
objects and activities part of the woman’s originating performance of the 
American hero. She also uses the situations of the Indian. Rowlandson 
lists at the close of her narrative five instances where Native Americans, 
in a hopeless situation, espouse more clearly than British or Puritans that 
which she most idealizes: 

I cannot but remember how the Indians derided the slowness, 
and dullness of the English army .... as I went along with 
them, they asked me when I thought the English would come . . . 

. Thus did they scoff at us. (R 358) 

The new, individualistic, heroic self grows from Rowlandson’s desire to 




be seen as Indian-like: 



1 2 

the English army with new supplies . . . came to the Baquag 
river . . . that river should be impassible to the English. I can 
but admire to see the . . . heathen ... go in great numbers over, 
but the English must stop. (R 358-359) 

The situations are the same: a state of war and the need to cross the 
Baquag River. But added to the Indians’ situation of war and suffering is 
the necessity of caring for their old and infirmed at all times and in all 
places. Just as Rowlandson reconfigures heroism in terms of Indianness, 
just as Hanson reconfigures motherhood in terms of Indianness, just as 
Dustan reconfigures American individualism in terms of Indianness, just 
as Hawkeye and later-day heros defend the normative community in terms 
of Indianness, so too does the Indian nurture the communal with individual 
courage: 

they made a stop, and chose some of their stoutest men, and 
sent them back to hold the English army . . . whilst the rest . . . 
marched on furiously, with their old, and with their young: 
some carried their old decrepit mothers, some carried one, and 
some another. (R 332-3) 

Rowlandson does not fail to also make clear that the Indian suffers 
as much as she does, is no better off, in truth. King Philip attacks 




13 



Lancaster and other towns. But he is unable to directly confront either 
the English army or the army of Massachusetts and Connecticut and must 
constantly remove, as Rowlandson tells us by the ordering of her 
narrative. In The Fifth Remove, she says, “[t]he occasion (as I thought) of 
their moving at this time, was, the English army, it being near and 
following them: for they went, as if they had gone for their lives" (R 332). 
In The Sixth Remove she says that "they set their wigwams on fire, and 
went away" (R 334). "It was their usual manner to remove, when they had 
done any mischief, lest they should be found out" (R 354). “[L]ike Jehu, 
they marched on furiously" (R 332). Just as Dustan and Hanson also make 
note of the Indians’ constant move away from an oppressive, normative, 
white society, American literature and film are rife with lone, heroic 
males, like Hawkeye, constantly on the move toward the wilderness, away 
from the normative society that would constrain them. 

Dustan and Hanson further reveal the similarities between their 
situation and the Indian’s. Like the Indian, they are cut off from their 
originary system of meaning and validation, forced "to reconcile the 
contradictions between" their changing world and their "traditional 

mythology of . . . social order." 10 Like the Indian, they can only stoically 
and desperately resist. Puritan and Quaker females and their Indian 



1 4 

captors furthermore share a pressure to change philosophies and at times 
even forms of religious worship. The Pequot and other New England 
nations were forced from their native religions as well as from their 
native regions. Dustan is forced to pray three times daily as a Catholic: 
“Indeed, these idolaters were, like the rest of their whiter brethren, 
persecutors" ( MCA 635). So, too, is Hanson forced to confront a 

philosophy and way of life she fears. 11 The captive white woman, the 

Indian captor, and the emerging frontiers(man) of American literature and 
film are all threatened by a tenuous reality. They exist only within and 
only as a consequence of the area where the social meets and creates the 
antisocial: the frontier. 

By again showing clips of old westerns or action films such as Shane 
and newer ones such as, say, Blade Runner, students can see that although 
the character of the lone hero is represented as stoic and fleetingly 
romantic, “he” is very much a permanent fixture in our literature. 
Furthermore, students see that in the hands of the early New England 
woman writer this self is not so tenuous as the male hero but is instead a 
lasting social force, is the creator of a thread in American literature. 
Cooper’s 1826 Hawkeye possesses an “acuteness of organs, that would be 
scarcely conceivable to a man in a less natural state”; and, “[h]is . . . every 

o 

ERLC 



15 



nerve and muscle appeals] strung and indurated, by unremitted exposure 
and toil”; his attire is “a summer cap, of skins .... a knife in a girdle of 
wampum .... moccasins ... a pair of buckskin leggings .... [a] pouch and 
horn . . . [and] a rifle of great length” ( The Last of the Mohicans 328, 327, 
29). He is the lone male who stoically, silently, naturally embodies self- 
conviction and self-sufficiency fighting for the white community’s norms. 
Yet he must ever move away from normalizing society if he is to remain 
the heroic self. So, too, for example, are the police(men) in ABC’s NYPD 
Blue whose effectiveness must remain hidden from the normal, the social 
authority. I ask my students to see this mobile, rootless, stoic, loner who 
succeeds because of a “natural,” more “antisocial,” skill as a direct 
descendent of the seventeenth-century women, the woman who does not 
move away but comes back to alter normative society by writing her 
narrative there. 

I also ask my students how often any of these individuated selves 
are denied complete acceptance by the society they defend, the society 
whose values they fret over. How often is the individual, like the 
seventeenth-century woman, forced to reconcile inconsistencies between 
a changing world and an established belief system that seems no longer 
appropriate to the time and place? 



It is glaringly ironic — it should be glaring to students--that the 
white Hawkeye, the frontiers(man) who is valued for his Indian ways, 
feels no kinship with those he emulates. It is especially ironic--sadly 
ironic--that few male characters in or authors and readers of American 
fiction are conscious of the depth of their reliance on the Indian and the 
woman who create the ideal now called masculine. For the female— not 
the male-gives voice to, starts the enigma of, performs the original of 
characters such as Daniel Boone and Davey Crockett and the Hollywood 
cowboy. 

With my approach to the Puritan captivity narrative I believe 
students are not only more informed about early American women and 
Native Americans and their role in making a country. They also see more 
clearly the interconnections among the supposedly antisocial, such as the 
queer, the transvestite, the cross-dresser, and the heterosexist American 
hero. Students come to see that accepted norms are often at odds with 
what societies purport to value. How, I want them to question, can 
antisocial interpretations of gender, antisocial approaches to love, 
antisocial descriptions of the self be mental disorders or social 
disruptions if the most idealized American is born of such performances? 
Whatever students answer, they never again see the Puritans as boring or 



lacking in individuality. 




Notes 



1 8 



1. These early colonists did not consider themselves American; rather, 
they argued to be treated as Englishmen. See Richard Middleton, Colonial 
America: A History, 1607-1760 (Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1992): 157. 

“America” of course includes Canada, Mexico, Central America, and 
South America. Still, however incorrectly, it is an identification claimed 
by United States residents in many ways: the canon of “American 
literature,” being “an American.” Perry Miller, in “Shaping of American 
Character,” Nature’s Nation (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press, 1967): 3, 
argues that one becomes an American. 

2. Tara Fitzpatrick, in "The Figure of Captivity: The Cultural Work of 
the Puritan Captivity Narrative," American Literary History 3 (1991): 20, 
notes that the woman’s captivity narrative works as a critique 
illuminating social contradictions in early New England and the need for a 
national identity to transcend them. I agree but add that the woman does 
specific things that the male captive does not and does them through her 
use of what is “Indian.” Further citations of this work will be 




parenthetical. 



1 9 

3. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, vol. 4 
(Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 1994) 493, 526, 530- 
1 . 

4. Kathryn Zabelle Derounian-Stodola and James Arthur Levernier, The 
Indian Captivity Narrative 1550-1900 (New York: Twayne Publishers, 

1993) 94. 

5. Rowlandson’s narrative is taken from Richard Slotkin and James K. 
Folsom, So Dreadful a Judgment: Puritan Responses to King Philip's War, 
1676-1677, eds. Richard Slotkin and James K. Folsom (Middletown, 
Connecticut: Wesleyan University Press, 1978): 315-369. Hannah Dustan’s 
narrative is taken from Cotton Mather, Magnalia Christi Americana (1702; 
rpt. Hartford, CT: Silas Andrus & Son, 1853): 634-6. Elizabeth Hanson’s 
narrative is taken from Alden T. Vaughan and Edward W. Clark, eds., 

Puritans Among the Indians: Accounts of Captivity and Redemption, 1676- 
1724 (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press, 1981) 229-244. The narratives 
of Quentin Stockwell and John Williams are also taken from Vaughan and 
Clark. All further citations of all these narratives will be cited 
parenthetically. 




20 



20 



6. See Annette Kolodny, "Among the Indians: The Uses of Captivity,” The 
New York Times Book Review (January 31, 1993): 26. Richard Slotkin, in 
Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the American Frontier, 
1600-1860 (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan U P, 1973), notes that many 
seventeenth-century settlers "dismissed the few Indians present as 
having little claim to humanity and less to the land" (38). 

7. Regarding the similarity of captivity narratives, see Kathryn Zabelle 
Derounian-Stodola and James Arthur Levernier, The Indian Captivity 
Narrative, 1550-1900. Derounian-Stodola and Levernier say that 
Rowlandson's narrative "contained all the structural elements that 
eventually characterized the captivity narrative" (94). Also see 
Christopher Castiglia's Bound and Determined for a discussion of how 
captivity narratives are dissimilar (16-40). Note, however, that I am not 
claiming uncritically "that captivity accounts conform to a consistent 
pattern” (Castiglia 24); I instead make a distinction between the 
narratives written by men and those by women, arguing that woman- 
authored captivity narratives perform, in various wavs , antisocial 
combinations of “Indian” and “female.” 




21 



21 



8. See Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Tendencies (Durham: Duke University 
Press, 1993): 9. Sedgwick refers to “queer” as that which expresses 
itself. 

I enlarge on Sedgwick’s description of queer performance to include 
the Puritan woman whose writing expresses a desire to become more like 
the Native American--a naturally powerful individual. See also J. F. 
Buckley, Desire, The Self, The Social Critic: The Rise of Queer 
Performance Within the Demise of Transcendentalism (Selinsgrove, PA: 
Susquehanna University Press, 1997): 13-33. In the introduction to my 
book, I discuss how performance of “antisocial” desire can be a social 
critique that is an act in which the signs for differing selves are united in 
performance. 

9. James Fenimore Cooper, The Last of the Mohicans, eds. James A 
Sappenfield and E.N. Feltskog, The Writings of James Fenimore Cooper, ed. 
James Franklin Beard (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1983). 
All further references to The Last of the Mohicans will be cited 
parenthetically from this text. It is important to note that up to and 
throughout the nineteenth century American literature almost always 




22 



22 



genders the Romantic hero male. 

Cooper wrote The Leatherstocking Tales in the following order: The 
Pioneers (1823), The Last of the Mohicans (1826), The Prairie (1827), The 
Pathfinder (1840), The Deerslayer (1841). However, the order of plot 
sequence following Natty Bumppo’s life is The Deerslayer (1841), The Last 
of the Mohicans (1826), The Pathfinder (1840), The Pioneers (1823), The 
Prairie (1827). 

10. See Slotkin and Folsom page 6 for a discussion of how “events are 
processed by the consciousness of [Puritan] historians and participant- 
reporters" during King Philip's War (5). 

1 1 . According to Slotkin and Folsom, in So Dreadful A Judgment, the 
Calvinist community of New England sponsored “Indian missions” in “an 
effort to acculturate the Indians to English ways as well as to convert 
them. . . . Whatever the proportion of missionary fervor to realpolitik in 
the motivation behind the missions, they constituted an incursion into the 
very heart of tribal or band organization” (27). The Puritans, for cultural 
and religious reasons, never forgot that much of Indian society 
“corresponded to their notions of Satan and witches.” See also William S. 




23 



23 



Simmons, “Cultural Bias in the New England Puritans’ Perception of 
Indians,” William and Mary Quarterly 38 (1981): 61-2, 71. This image 
took its most venomous form with the start of hostilities leading to King 
Philip’s War. Once “the human symbol of the New World,” the Indian was 
re-interpreted to symbolize the consequences of the Puritan community’s 
sin, backsliding, and covenant breaking (See Slotkin and Folsom, 38). 




24 



(Li & L^fc'b / 

Would you like to put your paper in ERIC? Please send us a clean, dark copy! 



Jglgk 




1 


U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 


ERIC 








REPRODUCTION RELEASE 




(Specific Document) 





I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: Paper presented at the 1996 Annual 4C's Convention (Milwaukee) 

Author(s): J.F. Buckley L/ U ' i “' '* 






Corporate Source: 



Publication Date: 

March 27-30, 1996 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 




Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4" x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


\0 




\Z 


Jr 

CP 




J 









TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4" x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here-* 

please 




*7 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. " 

i 

t — 'i 


Signature: / / 




Printed Name/Position/Title: 

J.F. Buckley Assistant Professor 


Srg ^TzatioiVA^ Departmi 

The Ohio State Univ^ri: 
339 Ovalwood Hall 
1680 University Drive 
Mansfield, Ohio 44906 


^nt of English 
sity-Mansf ield 


Telephone: 

(419) 755-4281 


Fax- 

(419) 755-4367 


E-Mail Address: 
buckley . l@osu.edu 


Date: 

July 2, 1996 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: 



Name: 



Address: 



V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 




Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 


ERIC/REC 
2805 E. Tenth Street 
Smith Research Center, 150 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47408 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 



- ER I C P roc e s sfn g - ond Rcfcronco Facil i t y 
1 301 -Pt ecord Dr i vo, Suito 100 ~ 
R o ekvil l O) M a ry l and 20050 - 43 06 

Te lepho n e : 301 - 2S0 - 55 0O' 

FA X +- 30 1 - 018 - 36 Q 5 - 
■ To ll Tre e : C00 - 7 99- 3742 

o.mnii- adcfac@ioete4r§ev 



O /96/96) 

ERJC 



