DOCUMENT RESUME 



FL 020 988 

Friesen, John W.; And Others 

The Stoney Indian Language Projects 

Jun 89 

10p»; In: Reyhner, Jon, Ed* Effective Language 
Education Practices and Native Language Survival. 
Proceedings of the Annual International Native 
American Language Issues Institute (9th, Billings, 
Montana, June 8-9, 1989); see ED 342 512* 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Reports - 
Descriptive (141) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage* 

-'American Indian Languages; Books; Childrens 
Literature; Foreign Countries; Legends; '''Orthographic 
Symbols; Romanization; '^Written Language 
Alberta; '''Assiniboine; -'Assiniboine (Tribe) ; "Stoney 
Indian Language Project AB 



Efforts by Canada Natives to put their languages into 
standard written formats and to use Native languages with their 
children are discussed in this review of the Stoney Indian Language 
Project* The Stoney community is centered at Morley, Alberta 
(Canada), and the population of the three bands— Bear's Paw, Chiniki, 
and Goodstoney~is nearly 2,700* The tribe is a member of the 
Assiniboine branch of the Siouan language family* In 1965, the Stoney 
Tribal Council entered into an agreement with the Summer Institute of 
Linguistics to develop a writing system for the Stoney language, and 
a standard alphabet was devised following the Roman orthography 
tradition* The first stage of the Stone Language Project resulted in 
the preparation of six books for both adults and children, as well as 
a videotape version of one of them for use with third graders* Each 
of the Stoney legends in the booklets was told by an Elder and the 
accompanying illustrations are by Stoney artists* These activities 
and additional work on legends are described* Contains 15 references. 
(LB) 



ED 354 769 

AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



^ Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document * 



4 



-PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



U.S. OePARTMENTOF EDUCATION 

Orttce o< EOocattOnaJ Research and improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

HTh.s aocumenj has been fcp^oduced as 
received from me person or organization 

OngmatinQ it 

r Minor Changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



Points of view or opinions stated m thisdocu- 
ment do not necessarily represer^t o^fiCiat 

OERl POS'liOn Of POl'CV 



The Stoney Indian Language Project 



]o\in W, Friesen 
Clarice Kootenay 
Duane Mark 



The recent surge of interest in the teaching of heritage 
lan.juages may be linked to a new understanding of and 
appreciation for Canada's multicultural policy, namely that 
cultural diversity is to be encouraged. As a result the 
ethnocultural communities — other than English and French 
whose lifestyles and languages are protected by the Canadian 
Constitution — have risen to the occasion and emphasized 
heritage language teaching as a means by which to encourage 
the perpetuation of traditional cultural lifestyles. 

Classic ways to accomplish this goal have included 1) 
ecological separation, such as the Hutterites have always 
practiced; 2) endogamy, which implies that the selection of 
marriage partners be limited to the ranks of the ethnocultural 
group in question; 3) education, usually through the 
establishment of a parochial school system; 4) institutional 
completeness, implying that children are predominantly 
socialized through agencies managed by the respective ethnic 
group; and 5) language teaching (Anderson & Frideres, 1981; 
Backeland & Frideres, 1977; Breton, 1979). In addition, the 
factors of ingroup "opening" and "closing" must be 
considered, namely, the ways and means by which an 
ethnocultural group allows, limits or encourages integration 
with the dominant monoculture. For example, complete 
opening is not desirable because it leads to total assimilation 
and loss of identity. Good closing has to do with the 
maintenance of group boundaries and subsystems which help 



' BEST copy flV/!ll«eLE 



STONEY INDIAN LANGUAGE PROJECT V 



members reinforce strong ethnic values (Comeau & Driedger, 
1978). 

The situation of the Aboriginal peoples is in many ways 
quite different from that of either the Charter nations or 
Canada or the immigrant peoples. Historically, they possess 
the right of first occupancy. Geographically, they have 
occupied a different continent from that of the invaders who 
have manufactured the nation's multicultural policies. 
Culturally, they have maintained a unique stance of 
respecting the balance of nature with technological advance 
being assigned a subordinate or corollary status. In economic 
terms, they occupy the lower levels of income groups in 
Canada making it difficult for them to wield a significant 
power base. Legally, they are the object of^special laws which 
identify them as a group and set them apart from the larger 
society (Berry, 1981). 

Aboriginal peoples hold in common with other 
Canadians the concept that language and culture are 
inextricably bound together. However, the process of 
achieving or maintaining a functional level of language 
useage is complex. This is particularly true of cultures that 
have traditionally relied on oral tradition for there is no 
traditional "body of literature" to build on. This also makes 
any attempt to "get back to the basics" for language 
identification difficult, even though that procedure should be 
possible at any given point. Language is, after all, a living 
phenomenon. In Native cultures, where the role of Elders 
has been significant, it has also become necessary to identify 
parallel and supportive means by which to enhance language 
useage (Medicine, 1987). 

Native languages have been rapidly changing over the 
last two decades. Where once the Native language was the 
vehicle by which to transmit Indian values and respect, it has 
at least been partially replaced by English. It is important to 
learn English in order to attain the language skills and 
concepts essential to surviving in the dominant monoculture. 
However, many Indian leaders believe that the traditional 
Indian culture can only survive if Native languages are 
perpetuated (Manitoba, 1985). 

3 



32 EFFECTIVE LANGUAGE EDUCATION PRACTICES 



Background to the Stoney Project 

The Stoney community is centered at Morley, Alberta. 
The population of the three bands. Bear's Paw, Chiniki, and 
Goodstoney, is nearly twenty-seven hundred. The tribe is a 
member of the Assiniboine branch of the Siouan language 
family, and its major sources of income are cattle ranching, 
lumber, tourism, and oil and gas leasing. A new K-12 grade 
school costing 6.6 million dollars was opened in the fall of 
1985 with an enrollment of just over three hundred children. 

In 1965, the Stoney Tribal Council entered into an 
agreement with the Summer Institute of Linguistics to 
develop a writing system for the Stoney language. After 
several experiments, a standard alphabet was devised 
following the Roman orthography tradition (Harbeck, 1973). 

In December, 1968, the Stoney Band opted for self- 
government. The members of the three bands of the Stoney 
tribe gathered solemnly to select a fifteen member group of 
councilors and chiefs who would steer their people to self- 
government. They faced the challenge with mixed feelings 
except for unanimity in the realization that the Stonies must 
restore their shattered society to its once proud status (Snow, 
1977). One of the means to accomplish this rc .toration was an 
oral history program started in 1970. Using tape recorders, 
program workers interviewed tribal Elders and collected 
hundreds of hours of information about Stoney history, 
philosophy, and moral teaching. In 1972 the program was 
reorganized as the Stoney Cultural Education Program 
(S.C.E.P.). It was planned, implemented, and operated under 
the direction of the Stoney Tribal Council and concentrated on 
people development, that is, to encourage Stoney youth to 
enhance their individual abilities (Harbeck, 1973). The 
materials produced by the program would replace harmful 
school curricula that omitted any reference to the Indian 
heritage. It would also help the Stoi.ey children to learn 
history from an Indian point of view and assist in passing on 
the traditions of Stoney culture. 

S.C.E.P. began with a surge of enthusiasm and 
publications, but after a few years the budget cuts familiar to 
all Native educators and leaders began. The present project 



STONEY INDIAN LANGUAGE PROJECT 33 



was initiated as a means of reviving aspects of S.C.E«P., and the 
first publications are new editions of those works. 

Laying the ground-work 

The initiation of new programs in any community 
involves community approval and some kind of needs 
assessment. The fact that the Stoney language is rapidly 
changing to incorporate many dominant monocultural 
concepts has been a concern for more than a decade. Even 
though the Stoney tribe has been successful in warding off 
many outside influences over the generations, it is not 
possible to maintain complete isolation. In fact, the Stoney 
people have faced a very severe challenge from outside 
influences, Morley particularly, since the reserve is so close to 
the City of Calgary. 

The mandate of the original S.C.E.P. Program was 
carried over into the first phase of the new endeavor since an 
updating and reprinting of the earlier materials was the first 
goal. The project team has also kept in close contact with 
members of the Stoney Education Authority, a body which has 
responsibility for all educational activities on the reserve. In 
addition, an informal list of Elders has been made, and 
different Elders arc sought out for information and advice 
with regard to identifying and recording Indian le^-^ends and 
practice. One working document, produced by an Elder, is 
titled, "How to Behave in Stoney Country," and it will be 
published as an accompanying guide to the new curriculum 
materials. 

It is envisaged that the future stages of the current 
project may follow the plan devised by the Blackfoot people 
east of Calgary. Their program has included a formal com- 
munity survey of needs, the development and utilization of a 
Blackfoot language proficiency test, the formulation of a three- 
level language curriculum program, and the start of a 
language teacher inservice course. Blackfoot educators have 
also concluded that language teacher qualifications do not 
necessarily imply the attainment of a university degree. 
Familiarity with the language is the basic criterion, and 



34 EFFECTIVE LANGUAGE EDUCATION PRACTICES 



respectable methodological procedures may be attained via 
inservicing. 

The first stage of the Stoney Language Project has seen 
the preparation of six books (completed or ready for 
production) in both English and Stoney. The books include: 

1. Ceremonial Indian Costumes (A Stoney Coloring 
Book). 

2 Little Bear Goes on Summer Holidays (A light- 
hearted children's book about a cute bear who 
engages in a variety of Stoney outdoor activities), 

a The Blind Man and the Loon (A teaching legend 
with a lesson about the behavior of a hard-hearted 
wife towards her blind husband). 

4 The Trickster (fktomni) and the Bear (A humorous 
story about a legendary supernatural creature in 
Stoney tradition). 

5. Origin of the Winter Season (The story of winter's 
beginning). 

6. Sandhill Crane and Mr, Winter (The day when the 
Sandhill Crane chased away Mr. Winter and 
brought spring). 

The project team has also produced an eight minute 
videotape version of The Blind Man and the Loon which has 
been piloted in the local Morley Community School. The 
book of the same title has been used with the videotape in 
third grade. They were piloted by the late Darren Poucette, a 
Stoney teacher and a graduate of the University of Calgary. It 
is hoped that additional videotape? of other legends will be 
produced during the second stage of the project. 

Each of the Stoney legends in the published booklets was 
told by an Elder, and the accompanying illustrations are by 
Stoney artists. As the project moves into its second stage, care 
i5 being taken to identify new or "rare" legends and to search 
for new artists. The initial publication of the legend books in a 
plastic, spiral-bound form was limited to a sufficient number 
for the pilot teaching project. Future editions in a more 



STONEY INDIAN LANGUAGE PROJECT 35 



permanent form are planned. Naturally, there will always be 
a few errors to correct in future editions. 

As the end of the Twentieth Century nears, it becomes 
more and more obvious that our Globe is shrinking in size. 
This makes it more essential that cultural learnings be shared 
between peoples. The reasoning of the project team in this 
regard is to make Stoney materials available in both English 
and Stoney so that outsiders may learn about Stoney ways. 
Also, with the intensity of prejudice and discrimination that 
still lingers in Alberta, it is also felt that the availability of 
reliable information about the Stoney way of life can only 
serve to alleviate misunderstandings and promote under- 
standing and acceptance. 

Vicissitudes and learnings 

The accumulation and publication of Indian legends is a 
rich learning experience, and this project has been no 
exception. In the first instance, there are a number of things to 
be learned about legends in Stoney culture. For example, 
there are two kinds of legends, those employed for the 
purpose of teaching moral or historical lessons and those told 
purely for amusement. The trickster or iktomm stories are 
usually told for enjoyment. At present, the team is working 
on another Trickster story about a mouse pow-wow 
discovered by the Trickster as it is celebrated in the skull of a 
dead animal. It is really quite intriguing. The Blind Man and 
the Loon, on the other hand, is a teaching legend. It has a 
moral to the story. It deals with the relations between a 
husband and wife and their regard for each other. (It is 
interesting to note that most Indian tribes have a similar 
story). 

While the team was producing the videotape for the 
legend, some concern arose about releasing an English 
language version. It was feared that the story might be 
misunderstood by non-Natives. After all, the legeiid contains 
what might be viewed as a violent scene where the woman's 
breasts are cut off as punishment for her cruelty to her blind 
husband. Would outsiders view this scene as standard 
behavior among the Stoneys? Was cruelty an acceptable form 



J 



36 EFFECTIVE LANGUAGE EDUCATION PRACTICES 

of punishment? One way out of the dilemma is to remind 
ourselves that every culture has an element of cruelty in its 
folklore. Bible stories, Aesop's fables, and a host of fairy tales 
relate endless accounts of people being put to death with 
never a worry. With this consideration, the videotape was 
completed. 

Another very sensitive matter that came to light during 
the project pertains to the ownership of legends. In Stoney 
tradition, any particular version of a legend belongs to the 
storyteller. Thus the editors of these legends regard their role 
as recorders and translators only. They have been careful not 
to change the intent or meaning of any of the legends. 
However, in the oral tradition, changes in the story-line were 
accepted and expected. In this project that time-honored 
tradition was avoided since the process here was to print, not 
to tell, legends. Added to this is the importance of recognizing 
that probing into the content of legends is a very sensitive 
activity. After all, the legends represent the arena of sacred 
teachings among the Stoneys. This fact requires that the 
various dimensions of the project be conducted with 
appropriate respect. 

Another of the challenging features of this project had 
to do with the nature of the language itself In the Stoney 
community, expressions and syllabic emphases vary from one 
band to another, and even from one family to another. 
Because of this the translators sometimes found it necessary to 
"talk out" an apparent difference with a view to settling for 
one of the available options of writing a particular word or 
expression. Thus the process of "cooperative compromise" 
was much adhered to by project team members. 

In conclusion, the challenge and privilege of working in 
the language domain offers many advantages. Not the least of 
these are a greater familiarity with those who know the 
language best (Elders) and the gleaning of insights into Stoney 
culture. It may be presumptuous at this point, but it is 
possible '-hat this project may also assist the goal of preserving 
and enhancing the Stoney way of life. That possibility adds a 
special dimension of importance to the undertaking. 

W. 



STONEY INDIAN LANGUAGE PROJECT 37 

References and suggestions for f xirther reading 

Anderson, Alan B., & Fridercs, James S. {19S1), Ethnicity in Canada: 
Theoretical Perspectives. Toronto: Butterworth. 

Anthony, Robert J. (1980). An Educational Perspective on Native 
Language Literacy. Canadian journal of Anthropology, l{2), 
219-227. 

Backleland, Lucille &, Frideres, J.S. (1977). French Canadians in 
Manitoba: Elites and Ideologies. In Jean Leonard Elliott (Ed.), 
Immigrant Groups, Scarborough, Ontario: Prentice-Hall of 
Canada. 

Berry, John W. (1981). Native People in the Larger Society. In Robert 
C. Gardner & Rudolf Kalin (Eds.), A Canadian Social 
Psychology of Ethnic Relations (pp. 214-320). Toronto: 
Methuen. 

Burnaby, Barbara J. (1984). English and 'Native Languages: 
Integration, not Conapetition. Canadian journal of Education, 
mi), 7-13. 

Breton, Raymond. (1979). Ethnic Stratification Viewed from Three 
Theoretical Perspectives. In James E. Curtis and William G. 
Scott (Eds.), Social Stratification: Canada (pp. 271-293). 
Toronto: Prentice-Hall. 
Comeau, Larry R. & Driedger, Leo. (1978). Ethnic Opening and 
Closing in an Open System: A Canadian Example. Social 
Forces, 57(2), 604-606. 
Evans, Peter J. A. (1988). Written Assessment in the Northwest 
Territories and the Problems faced by Native Students. English 
Quarterly, 21 19-28. 
Fricsen, John W. (1985). Language and Cultural Maintenance: Not a 
Simple Matter. Contact, 4W, 11-16. 

. (1987). Language and Cultural Survival: A Myriad of Choices. 

In Freda Ahenakew & Shirley Fredccn (Eds.), Our Languages: 
Our Survival (Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Conference 
on Native American Language Issues, pp. 83-102). Saskatoon: 
Saskatchewan Indian Language Institute. 
Harbeck, Warren A. (1973). The Stoncy Cultural Education Program. 
A paper read to the northern cross-cultural education 
symposium: needs and resources. Fairbanks, AK: University 
of Alaska. 




38 EFFECTIVE LANGUAGE EDUCATION PRACTICES 



Manitoba Association for Native Languages. (1985). Native Language 

and Education Liaison Program, Appendix "A". Winnipeg: 

Frontier School Division. 
McEachern, William Ross. (1988). Materials Development for Native 

Language Programs. Canadian Journal for Native Education, 

15(1), 39-42. 

Medicine, Beatrice. (1987). My Elders Tell Me. In jean Barman, 
Yvonne Herbert, & Don McCaskill (Eds.), Indian Education in 
Canada: The Challenge (pp. 142-152). Vancouver: University of 
British Columbia. 

Toohey, Kathleen. (1985). English as a Second Language for Native 
Canadians. Canadian Journal of Education, 20(3), 275-293. 



