DOCUMEirr resume 

ED 326 880 CS 212 593 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

/ 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Schullstrom, Faith Z., Corap. 

Expanding the Canon: Bridges to Understanding. 

Articles from "English Journal," 1987-89. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, 

111. 

ISBN-0-8141-1647-7 

90 

85p. 

National Council of Teachers of English r llli Kenyon 
Rd., Urbana, IL 61801 (Stock No. 16477-3020? $5.95 
members, $7.95 nonmembers). 

Collected Works - General (020) — Guides - Classroom 
Use - Guides (For Teachers) (052) — 

MF01/PC04 Pius Postage. 

Class Activities; Classroom Techniques; Cultural 
Context; ^English Instruction; Literary Genres; 
^Literature Appreciation; ^Multicultural Education; 
Secondary Education 
English Journal; *Literary Canon 



ABSTRACT 

This book is a collection of articles originally 
printed in "English Journal," the secondary section membership 
journal of the National Council of Teachers of English. The articles 
selected for the book tap a rich vein of multi ultural literature, 
including works by African Americains, Native kaericans, women, and 
authors from outside North Ameri-'ra and Europe. The selections span 
many genres, including young adul novels, popular fiction, science 
fiction, and classl-^al fiction. Each article presents practical 
sr.ggestions for incorporating these works into the secondary 
classroom, thus broadening the cultural perspective of students and 
teachers aliXe. The articles and their authors are as follows: (1) 
"YA Novels in the AP Classroom: Crutcher Meets Camus" (Patricia 
Spencer); (2) "Family Constellations: Teaching Dave Etter*s 
'Brother'" (Barbara Totherow) ; (3) "Teaching Critical Analysis 
Writing Using Stephen King's 'Danse Macabre'" (Michael Bagg) ; (4) 
"Gypsies, Jews, and *The Merchant of Venice'" (Thomas McKendy); v5) 
"hidings and Revelations: Robert Hayden's 'The Whipping'" (Linda 
Wyman) ; (6) Imaginary Gardens, Real Toads: Wallace's 'Ungainly 
Things'" (Elizabeth D. Nelms and Ben F. Nelms) ; (7) "Opulence to 
Decadence: 'The Outsiders' and 'Less Than Zero'" (Ellen A. Seay) ; (8) 
"Foreign Affairs: Contact Literature in English" (Michael Spooner) ; 
(9) "Celebrating the Black Female Self: Zora Neale Hurston's American 
ClaijSic" (Julie Roemer); (10) "Neighborhoods: Maya Angelou's 'Harlem 
Hopscotch'" (Sister J. Eleanor Mayar, IHM); (11) "An Afrocentric 
Approach to Literature: Putting the Pieces Back Together" (Eileen 
Oliver); (12) "'Old Man Coyote Makes the World': Using Native 
American Tales" (Francis E. Kazemek and others); and (13) "Text and 
Context: Teaching Native American Literature" (Diane Long Hoeveler) . 
(SR) 



Expanding the Canon: 
Bridges to Understanding 

Articles from Eng lish Journal, 1987-89 
Selected bv Faith Z. Schullstrom 




« "PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS . 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY ^ 
— ivoet 4 
is 



ERLC 



s ^ 

!! 

MTO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES |J 
^ INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." ^ 



U.S. DEPARTMENT or eOUCATION 

Office cA EducatK>nai Research and improvement I 

ZTIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION i 

CENTER <ERIC) | 

(Jocumeni has been reproduced a$ I 

teceived from (he oersort or organrzalion j 
originating it 

O Mmor Changes have been made to im,;:'o\e 
reproduction quality 



• Points ot View or opinions stated irxhisdocu- 
men! do not necessarily represent official 
OERl position or poficy 



I 



Expanding the Canon: 
Bridges to Understanding 



Articles from 

English Journal, 1987-89 



Selected by 

Faith Z. Schullstrom 



National Council of Teachers of English 
1111 Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801 



ERIC 



Staff Editor: Tim Bryant 



Clover Design: Michael J. Geu 

Interior Design: Tom Kovacs for TGK Design 

NOTE Stock Number 16477-3020 

© 1990 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching 
of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point of 
view does not imply endorsement by the Executive G)mmittee, the Board of 
Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of policy, 
where such endorsement is clearly specified. 



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Expanding the canon : bridges to understanding : articles from 
English journal, 1987-89 / selected by Faith Z. Schullstrom. 
p. cm. 
ISBN 0-8141-1647-7 

1. American literature— Sludy and teaching (Secondary) 2. English 
literature— Study and teaching (Secondary) 3. Canon (Literature) 
I. SchuUsUom, Faith Z. 11. National Council of Teachers of English. 
III. English journal. 
PS41.E97 1991 

807'.r273-dc20 90-23543 

CIP 



4 



Contents 



Preface v 

1. YA Novels in the AP Classroom: Crutcher Meets Camus 1 
Patricia Spencer 

2 Family Constellations: Teacliing Dave Etter's "Brother" 6 
Barbara Totherow 

3. Teaching Critical Analysis Writing Using Stephen 

King's Dame Maca bre 13 
Michael Begg 

4. Gypsies, Jews, and The Merchant of Venice 18 

Thomas McKendy 

5. Hidings and Revelations: Robert Hayden's 

"The Whipping" 22 
Linda Wyman 

6. Imaginary Gardens, Real Toads: Wallace's 

"Ungainly Things" 26 
EHzabetn D. Nelms and Ben F. Nelms 

7. Opulence to Decadence: The Outsiders and 

Less Than Zero 32 
Ellen A. Seay 

8. Foreign Aflairs: Contact Literature in English 38 

Michael Spooner 

9. Celebrating the Black Female Self: Zora Neale Hurston s 
American Classic 45 

Julie Roemer 

10. Neighborhoods: Maya Angelou's "Harlem Hopscotch" 50 

Sister J. iileanor Mayar, IHM 



111 



ERIC 



iv 



Contents 



11. An Afrocenlric Approach to Litemture: Puuing the Pieces 
back Together 54 

Eileen Oliver 

12. "Old Man Coyote Makes the World": Using 

Native American Tales ^2 
Francis E. Kazemek, Muriel Radebaugh, and Pat Rigg 

13. Text and Context: Teaching Native American Literature 69 

Diane Long Hoeveler 



ERLC 



6 



Preface 



Expanding the Canon: Bridges to Understanding is a collection of 
articles originally printed in English Journal, the secondary section 
membership journal of the National Council of Teachers of English 
(NCTE). The articles seiected for this book tap a rich vein of multicul- 
tural literature, including works by African Americans, Native Ameri- 
cans women, and authors from outside of North America and Europe. 
The' selections span many genres, including Young Adult Novels, 
Popular Fiction, Science Fiction, and Classical Fiction. Each article 
presents practical suggestions for incorporating these works into the 
secondary classroom, thus broadening the cultural pfr.<:pective of 
students and teachers alike. 

This book also serves as an excellent introduction to the i roiessional 
resources available to NCTE members. The Council promotes the 
development of literacy through the learning and teaching of English 
and the related arts and sciences of la-iguage. Membership is available 
to teachers and administrators at all levels, and to all others who are 
interested in the promotion of literacy through the teaching of English 
and the language arts. For membership information, write to: NCTE. 
1111 Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801. 



ft 
( 



1 YA Novels in the AP Classroom: 
Crutcher Meets Camus 



Patricia Spencer 

**Our next assignment, No Exit, it's not more of the same philosophy, 
is it?" a seventeen-year-old senior queries disgustedly. 
"Why do you ask?" 

**I just can't get involved, but we have to read another, huh?" 
Lethargically, she picks up the Jean-Paul Sartre play, exiting as a 
second group of bright, college-bound, advanced-placement stu- 
dents enter. 

Another discussion. Dutiful analysis. Insightful, detached com- 
ments. Probing, I search to help students find significance in an AP 
English unit on philosophy in literature. Instead, characters like 
Meursault, Marie, Estelle, Garcin, and Inez appear as alien as the 
philosophy of estrangement. As this class picks up copies of No Exit, an 
aloof athlete q:rabs a book from the shelf below. "Why don't we read 
something contemporary?" He holds up a copy of Chris Crulcher's 
Running Loose, Laughing, he eyes the cover kis and does a dramatic 
reading of the title kicker: "For Louie the only way to make it is his 
way." 

I pause: it's worth a try. 

"Forget No Exit tonight Take a copy of Running Loose and enjoy." 

Discovering the existential elements and heroes in modern adoles- 
cent literature has been a needed addition to an advanced-placement 
English course. Naturally, the "classics" are not abandoned (Meursault 
goes on trial annually), but now the unit has the vitality of teenage 
existentialists who, even in the last quarter of the twentieth century, are 
searching for individuality and identity, who pose questions, find 
conundrums, and validate insecurities casually disguised by designer 
jeans, lip gloss, or football jerseys. 

Adolescent literature offers both novels and short stories with 
existential elements. The novels The Crazy Horse Electric Game (1987, 
New York: I 11) and Running Loose (1983, New York: Dell) by Chris 
Crutcher contain male protagonists who face personal adversity: in 

I 



ERLC 



8 



9 



Expanding the Canon 



Crazy Horse, Willie Weaver, an athlete crippled in a freak water-skiing 
accident, struggles for physical and emotional recovery: in Running 
Loose, Louie Banks, a football player ostracized by school and 
community when he opposes an unethical coach, aeals with the sudden 
death of his girlfriend. Norma Howe's Gorf, the Universe and Hot 
Fudge Sundaes (1984, Boston: Houghior.) portrays Alfie, a gifted 
adolescent female, coping with hei sister's death, parents' divorce, and 
hei own religious doi'Lts. All three novels illustrate various aspects of 
ihat nebulous philosophy explored by Jean-Paul Sartve: 

Man can couni on no one bui himsdf: he is alone, abandoned on 
carih in ihe midsi of his infiniic responsibiliiies, wiihout hHp, wiih 
no oiher aim ilian ihe one he scis himself, v»iili no oiher desiiny 
ihan ihe one he forges for himself on ihis eanh. (1964, "Sanre and 
Exisicniialism," Life 6 Nov.: 86-1 12, (87]) 

Sartre's words icflect basic characteristics cf the literary existential 
world and hero. 

Alienation 

After the accident, seemingly abandoned in his bitterness by girlfriend, 
paients, and teammates, Willie Weaver in Crazy Horse is indeed alone. 
The tourageous bus trip from Idaho to Oakland separates hiin from 
those on whom he might depend. Physically disabled and emotionally 
crushed, Willie .:ppears an alien in an unfamiliar world, the basketball 
court and baseball diamond no lon^., welcome him. His own body is 
foreign to him: "His gait is uneven; right side jogging, left side 
following— dragging. . . . Nothing about it feels athletic, noihing 
pleasing" (5'1). 

In a reading journal, a student comments, "As a wrestler, I know 
what it meaiib to be in tune with my body. I feel Willie's pain; I live in 
fear of injury. I would lose my whole identity." 

Estrangement invades the life of Louie Banks in Running Loose 
when he takes a stand against his football coach .nd principal. 
Unwilling to play dirty ball, Louie is labeled a "nigger lover" and 
"wussy** and loses his position on the team and the oppor!.unit> to 
participiitc in any team sports. Quick to point out a less obvious 
alienation, another student nicntions how alone Louie is in peisonal 
mourning, surely utheis mouin Becky, but grief is personal, as Louie 
demonstrates in his outburst at the funeral: 

He [God] doesn'i move in sirange and mysterious ways. He docsii'i 
move ai alll He siis up there on his fai bun and leis guys like you 



ERLC 



9 



y/1 Novels in the AP Classroom 



3 



[the niinisicr]carii a living making excises for all ilicroiieii things 
thai happen. Or maybe He does something low-down every once in 
a while so He can gel a bunch of us together, scared and on our 
knees. Hell with Him! (136-37) 

Students also note the general air of individuality in Crutcher's 
characterization of Louie: ''he doesn't follow the crowd in anything/* 
In God, the Universe and Hot Fudge Sundaes, Alfie, too, is alone 
after Francic's death: the nurse leaves, Alfie*s father moves out, and 
her mother, a bcrn-again Christiai? widi fundamentalist beliefs, re- 
treats to a Bible-study group. Alone, Aifie tackles some of the questions 
that plagued both Socrates and Sartre, weighing the forces of faith 
and leason. 



Chaos 

*7ust when I start believing I have some control, that I can take charge, 
instead of my parents running my life, I start to see that I really have no 
control,*' concludes one student, the day following the schoolyard 
slaughter in Stockton, California. In his reading-journal eiury, he 
explores Louie Banks's situation: 'The randomnessof events i^ evident. 
Without reason or justification, Becky dies. Funny word: accideiu. Life 
is an accident of chance Louie must face. Me, too." Similarly, Willie 
Weaver in Crazy Horse loses his physical identity in a freak water-skiing 
episode, pushing himself too far, expecting superhuman powers which 
do not rcsu'.e him. One moment lu**s tne baseball champion, later the 
cnppled ex-athlete.Thecxistentialpremiseofa universe inch ,os raises 
the question of external control: is there a God who allows this to 
happen? hi Hot Fudge Aifie struggles: "I'm having trouble trying to 
figure out why an all-powciful God would cieate a person like Francie 
just to make her suffer and die" ( 1 42). Latei , she drifts "into that i tninge 
intejlude between wakefulness and sleep,** tiding to picture Frai cie in 
an afterlife. "She couldn't be alive anu here one minute, and then just 
gone forever, the next" (147). During an unsuccessful trip to rctiieve a 
lost crucifix in the family's former home, Aifie witnesses her lack of 
control. A ne\v condominium stands where she'd hoped to find the cross 
in a closet drawer of an oldci home, the permanently misplaced crucifix 
works as a symbol of Alfie's lost beliefs. 

Aatudentjouinal entry on /{liHHmgLooie picks up this idea "Louie 
tries to pi^y about Becky's death, but he feels abandoned. Maybe no 
aiiswei is an answer, but Louie doesn't accept it." Toward the end of 
chapter 12, Louie says, 



10 



4 



Expandmg (he Canon 



rf tlicre's a good reason, then you owe ine an explanation, so let's 

have it After I figured I'd given Lord God Almighty plenty of 

time to answer and He didn't, I walked over to the pickup and 
dragged my granddad's old double-bitted ax out of tlie bed and 
came back and biDught that tree to the ground. ... It must have 
taken me forty-five minutes, but I stood there blasting away and 
screaming, "Is this yours? How do you like it?" (127) 

The absurdity of death prompu brutal responses from these adolescent 
philosophers. 

Commitment 

All of this would be unbearably depressing ii it werv. noi for the idea of 
the existential choice: to find individual meaning in this chaos. In 
discussion, students describe Louie's existential engagement: "Right 
from the start, Louie seeni.s able to forge his own path; his principles 
come from within. Whe'her he's de;9Jtng with Boomer, Coach Led- 
necky, or even Becky, he's firm, striving to make Ins -^v,.! sense of the 
situation." Another almost interrupts, "And take a look at how he 
teaches, well, pretty »^>uch the depth of despair after Becky's death. He 
could have coi.:inued sinking, but he attempts to pui ihings together. I 
really think he finds out more of who he is when he commits to track." 

Students sharing ideas on The Crazy Horse Electric Game are soon 
comparing Willie Weaver's situation to Meursaull in Albert Ginius's 
The Straiigcr: "Neither character commits until he's imprisoned: 
Mcursault in actual confinement and Willie a prisoner in his own 
disabled body." Another student extends the comparison: 

Or di J you notice how the scene between Willie and his fi. her on 
the racquetball court parallels No Exit} Tliey are torturing each 
other and themselves in confinement. Willie doesn't start recovery 
until lie breaks away, takes his own path toward meaning. 

An advanced-placement student devours an adolescent novel in a 
single evening; change of pace, ease, and interest level provide new 
accessibility to the difficult, cold philosophy of existentialism. Ah 
though YA novels serve as better catalysts for extensive, in-depih 
philosophical comparisons, young-adult short stories are viable alter- 
natives when time or materials may be problematic. Loio Ruby's 
"Justice," from Arriving at a Place You Never Left (1977, New York: 
Dial) provides a rival for Meursault's cool, detachea trial demeanor. 
Jonah, fourteen, has murdered his ^ather to prevent further abuse of a 
younger brother; dispassionate composure, sensory detail, and tone 




YA Novels in theAP Classroom 



5 



echo Gimus. In 'Trophy," from Barbara Girion's collection, A Very 
Brief Season {198^, New York: Scribner's). Sf.acey, a high-school studeiu 
who has attended five schools in three years, lives on the fringe, an aI'*M) 
without involvement; Indifferently she collects trophies of discarded 
relationships, which students compare to the Meursault-Marie affair. 

Adclescenl literature in an advanced-pJaceineiu classroom connects 
classics to the present. Even ihose students who read Nietzsche on their 
own find relevance and pleasure in sharing the lives of fellow teenagers 
Louie. Willie, or Alfie. If the purpose of a unit on philosophy in 
lit( ature is lo ask students to think more deeply about life, death, and 
iheir place in ihe universe, then this succeeds: perfuncto.y discussions 
dissipate. Personal, passionate, probing exchanges vitali:e litemry 
discourse. Existeiuial eng-agement in AP English . . . thanks :o an 
unusual comparative approach. 

From English Journal, November 1089, H- fO 




J2 



2 Family Constellations: 
Teaching Dave Etter's "Brother" 




Barbara Toiherow 



Brother 

This is Halloween nighi, Andy. 
The ghosts and goblins are going about, 
costumed kids with their tricks and treats, 
with their sacks full of candy and apples. 
But Tm here, drinking from a pint of Antique, 
the bourbon with the train on the label, 
and gazing down at your moonlit headstone: 

Quentin Andrew Ficklin 
1949-1974 

A cold wind is pouring stiff leaves 

through the tall tree of heaven. 

I smell frost and pine needles and weeds. 

Oh, I feel sort of stupid coming to this place, 

and, yes, a little phony, too. 

Still, I do like these country graveyards. 

They are always so full of crazy names 

and sad angels with broken wings. 

Listen, no one blames me for shooting you, boy. 

Just an acciden:. they say. 

It can happen, will happen, does happen. 

Not that thai changes things, of course. 

Well, Andy, brothers we were, sure, 

but ne^er^ ever friends, I guess. 

And, if anything, being drunk and sentimental, 

that's what devils me good tonight. 

Hey, we sold your law books last week, 

and we got a pretty fair price for them, 

considering they were so be^** up and all. 

We hope the stamps and conib will go next. 

You won't care, will you, Andy? 

Boy, the other news isn't much. 

Poor Bernice has got pimples real bad 

and stays in her room day after day, 

plunking, just plunking your blues guitar. 

Dad is grouchy and is growing a beard. 



f O 



Family Constellattons 



7 



Mom is silent as a slab of cheese. 
Bui this, this is v/hai you should know: 
I aim to hunt only with ioud strangers now. 
Bang. Veil. Shout. Pheasants! Bang. Bang. 
Brother, the Courthouse dock strike^ ten. 
I'm fixing to move- avay in your old boots. 
They fit, boy They^e my new drinking boots. 
The bottle's empty, A\i gone. Drunk up, 
Tm going, I'm walking, I'm running. 
Lord, Lord, the restless, relentless moon 
stalks me through a death of black corn.* 

—Dave Etter 

Studying literature about family almost always seems to work, though 
I'm not sure why. Close to three-fourths of my high-school students 
coPiie from anything but traditional families "^h*- , 're in single-parent 
or second-family homes, and most of them seem to have such a complex 
of full-, half-, and step-siblings that even they wonder how they keep it 
all straight. It would seem an impossibility to find works that capture 
any kind of universal family experience, but, strangely, it's not. Maybe 
it's actually because of these very real complications of modern life 
that every time we read a story or poem about family conflict, everyone 
sits up. There's something inherently intriguing here. Maybe the kids 
from broken or second families are simply trying to find their own 
center of gravity. Maybe that's what kids even from traditional families 
need. Whatever it is, teenagers are willing to read, write, and talk about 
their own and literary families, even when other topics set.-i to leave 
them cold. 

As part of a thematic unit on family, my "average-down" contempo- 
rary literature class focuses for a lime on brother/sister relationships. 
There are three works about brothers I find especially fun to teach. One 
is a short story, "The Stone Boy" by Gina Berriault (1972), about a 
young boy who accidentally shoots his older brother. In shock, Arnold 
continues on to the garden to pick peas for an hour instead of racing 
home to confess the horror to his parents. As a result, he is ostracized 
by his family and neighbors for his apparent— and suspicious— lack 
of emotion. 

The other two works are poems. Harley Elliot's "Brothers Together 
in V'inler" shows an argument "about something one of us has or has 
not done" that flares into sudden violence as one boy takes a punch at 
his brother (1975, lines 7-9), The speaker's shocked final line, **and our 
faces are like mirrors" (27), reveals the stark intimacy only siblings can 

•"Brother," by Dave Etter, Copyright © 1983, From AUtance, llltuots. Spoon River 
Poetry Press. Reprinted by permission of ilie autlior. 



8 



Expanding the Canon 



ever truly share. The third piece, Dave Etter's "Brother" (1976) 
continues this sharp focus on the themes of guilt and the love/hate 
complexity of almost any sibling relationship. 

I love teaching Etter's poem. Right from the start, it's wonderful for 
often unmotivated kids with little self-confidence when it comes to 
reading poetry. To be^In with, there's a clear, identifiable speaker. 
Since that's the first thing my students know they should look for, 
it's ce that this one is immediately obvious. It's even nicer that I 
don't have to convince them the author is not necessarily speaking 
for himself. Someone in class always catches the family ni^me on 
the tombstone, and they clearly see that the writer does assume a 
separate persona. 

Next, the inteniled listener of a poem is often ambiguous; maybe it's 
the reader, or maybe the speaker is talking to himself. The vagueness of 
the task can make identifying the listener frustrating, especially for the 
"mastery** learner who likes regularity and predictability. But even the 
least intuitive students know exactly who i .alking to whom in this 
poem,diid they can move on to the dramatic .. .^aiion with confidence. 

Setting is easy, too. The time is stated directly in line 1, and by line 7 
^ve know the speaker is in the cemetery. Students easily find the clues 
that set the mood for this eerie, moonlit night of ghosts and goblins, and 
again, the mastery students, who rely on their senses for information, 
are told almost bluntly \vhat the speaker sees, smells, feels, hears, and 
tastes. The details are concrete and plentiful, and I only have to sit bc^ck 
and listen as they move from setting to action, piecing together what 's 
happening, what did happen, what's going to happen at the end. 

This concreteness keeps them on track past the literal level and 
through the more difficult steps of analysis, and yet it's not just the less 
concrete, more intuuivc thinkers who can h. idle all the possibilities of 
motivation: Why is the speaker hi.r-? Why is he drinking? Why is he 
moving away, and \vhere is he going? They catch the significance of the 
action taking place on All Hallow^ Eve, and they can talk about the 
ways we all are haunted by our own ghosts. But when I toss out the 
Freudian idea that there may be no such thing as an accident, most of 
them balk. "Of course it was an accident!" 

So their next tasks send them to the text for ci jse reading that involves 
both sensing and intuiting skills and requires them to use both logic 
and emotion: Find evidence to "prove" that the speaker may have felt 
real resentment toward his brother, that the accident was at least partly 
intended. Then on another sheet of paper, find evidence to prove the 
shooting was completely accidental and the speaker is truly grief- 
stricken. The "involvement" learners do this best wi:h a partner or in 



15 



Family Consieli itions 



9 



small groups. Tve had four work together in mini-debaie teams, each 
pair looking for textual support to defend one thesis. 

This close reading forces them to deal with subtleties of tone and tone 
change: When does the speaker sound flippant, nonchalant? At what 
points docs he become suddenly intense? When does the be irbon seem 
to be slurring his voice? How ca:i we tell? Though the students who rely 
on their feelings and intuitions to absorb information and reach 
conclusions have an easier time with this kind of thinking, there's still 
enough of the concrete here tc keep the logical thinkers and those who 
depend on their senses involved. They can handle sleuthing like this 
within the poem, and they find convmcing evidence for both sides. 

Beyond the wonderfu. ly ambiguous question of guilt, there arecfher 
intriguing questions. Again, the involvement thinkers, who learn best 
by relating everything to thei^ own lives, are especially good at 
speculating about the family dynamics at work here: What are the roles 
and personalities of these family members? What were they before the 
accident? What might happen if this kind of tragedy happened to your 
own family? The creative thinkers, mosi able to see subtle connections, 
enjoy the drinking imagery. They see the irony of the "sad angels with 
broken wings" (line J?) and the implicaiions of the Courthouse clock 
sounding the hour. 

In context with the of her two works we study, the poem takes on 
added richness. The speaker's regret that he and his brother were "nevei , 
ever friends'* (23) echoes a passage in "The Stone Boy" when the sheriff 
asks young Arnold if he and his brother had been "good friends." 
Arnold is puzzled: "What did he mean— good friends? Eugie was his 
brother. That was different from a friend. . . . Eugie had had a way of 
looking at hi.n, slyly and mockingly and yet confidentially, that had 
summed up how they both felt about being brothers. Arnold had 
wanted to be with Eugie more than with anybody else but he couldn't 
say they had been p;ood friends" (6 1 ). This point of comparison is a good 
jumping off place for journal writing oi discussion. To what extent arc 
you and your brother or sister friends? In what ways are you the opposite 
of good friends? The writing allows them both to ex{.*orc their own 
experience and get even closer to the experience of these two works. 

In the same stor , Arnold go<.<i out on the day of his brother's funeral 
to take care of a job that "had been Eugie's" (66), and he seems 
startlingly older than the innocent nine-year old he is in the beginning. 
In "Brother," the speaker takes over his dead brother's boots— fills his 
shoes, so to speak. "They fit, boy, ' he says cockily. "They're my new 
drinking boots" (line 42). This passage always seems to spark a good 
discussion that tics in with the guilt debate. Do brothers and sisters 





10 



Expanding the Canon 



somtnow want to take over their siblings* lolcs? Pew students will admit 
to this, but most acknowledge envy of the freedom and autonomy that 
older brothers and sisters have, and mai ly profess complete disgust with 
the "obvious** way their parents baby their younger siblings. At this 
point, I give them some psychological buckground. 

Psychologists Rudolf Dreik^rs and Loren Grey (1970) talk about tl. 
'•family constellation** in which bii th o der, sex of the child, and the age 
differences between the children ha\oan enormous effect on personality 
development. "Personality differences between siblings,*' they state, 
•are more often the result of their competitive stiiving than of heredity 
or other factors*' (11). As they discuss the possible roles within this 
family constellation, Dreikurs and Grey note that "when the oldest 
child achieves competence in a certain are.*, the second child \n ill rarely 
attempt to rivd him in this area unless he feels he can overtake him or 
become better** (12). In this light, m> students find n interesting that 
both Arnold in *The Stone Boy*' and the speaker of "Brotl^er" move 
into their brothers* territories only after these latter twoa^e dead. Andy*s 
brother e\en tells him casually. Hey, we sold youi lawbooks last week, 
/ . . w We hope the stamps and coins will go next** (26, 29). Is there secret 
satisfaction that .ill the belongings, perhaps even the brothers memory, 
are being eliminated? 

Even more dramatically interesting to the stu*^ ml> are psychologist 
Haim Ginott*s comments on brother, sisiei conflict. I usually read them 
parts of the chapter on **Jealousy** from Ginott*s Between Parent and 
Child (1955), in which he flatly states that even if it is not overtly 
a|.parent, sibling rivalry is a pan of every family, **JealOv'sy, envy, and 
rivalry,** he says, '*will inevitably be there** (146). This envy originates, 
he claims, in '•an ir*'ant*s desire to be his mother*sonly *d arly beloved.* 
This desire is so posses, tve that it tolerates no rivals. When brothers and 
sisters arrive, th:? child competes with them fo) \\\Qex limve loveof both 
parents" (152). 

These psychological theories suggest some inierv iting answers to 
explain why family literature is so intriguing to children in nontradi- 
iional. second famihos, wiUi their ov*^n complex ''constellations** of 
full-, half-, and step-siblings. But these theories also offer all kinds of 
interesting questions as we discuss our three works on brothers: Have 
Eugie*s and Andy's deaths allowed theii brothers to shed inferior self- 
images and as ume a higher status in their fairilies, if only in their own 
eyes? If a young man can take over his brother*s boots, has he then 
managed to eliminate this rival for his parents* exclusiv^e love? 



17 



Family Constellations 



II 



Harlcy Elliot s poem, ''Brothers Together in Winter," emphasizes 
this overt rivalry fai more than either of the other two works and seems 
to give credence to &niott*s theories, especially when the speaker says 
matter-of-factly, ''Yes, we are going/ to kill each other this time/ once 
and for alT' (lines 5-7). But the speaker's shocked final line, as his 
brother's clenched fist shears by his chin, "and our faces are like 
mirrors" (27), adds a new dimension. Do we just see our own jealousy 
and anger reflected in the face of a brother oi sister, or is a sibling the 
closest thing we have to self? Do Arnold in "Tiie Stone Boy*' and the 
speaker in "Brothei" agonize just over their bi others' deaths and theii 
own guilt, or has earh lost a part of himself, as well? 

Students who are supposedly "average-down" can handle this kind 
of philosophical thinking, and they bring surprising honesty and 
sophistication to the discussion. Again, the vomplexities of modern 
family life |x;rhaps give today's teenagers a mu h moie experienced 
^iew of family relationships than those of us from simpler, more 
tradition:?l family backgrounds can ever know. 

In conjuhrtion with Berriault's story and Elliot's poem, "Brother" 
becomes a complex, multi-leveled study. Even without the parallels and 
connections with these other works, however, the reading experience of 
a poem like "Brother" is a rich one for high-school students It creates 
its own echoes, like the ripples expanding outward when a stone is 
dropped int) a pond. Readers, esp.^ially teenagers, remember it long 
after diey \clvc it. 

Maybe what I like best about teaching this poem, though, is thac it's 
alw ays successful. My often uninterested students like the puem and aic 
willing to woik with it. There's drama here, and there's depth that is 
accessible. The kinds of questions I'm tiying to teach them to biing to 
an^ poem are the ones that get clear answers here. It's a confidence- 
booster, the kind of puem that makes them willing to try leading poetiy 
again— even on their own. 

Works Cited 

BernauU,Gina. 1972. "TheSioncBoy." The Family. Ed. Ha Beaie Haupi, 
Lilla Heston, Joy Liitell, and Sarah Soloiaroff. E\ansion. McDougal, 55-67. 

Dreikurs, Rudolf, iiid Loren Grey. 1970. A Purent's Guide to Child Discipline. 
New York: Hawthorn. 

Klliot, Harlcy. 1975. "Brothers Together in Winter." In Touch. New York: 
Harcouri, 79. 



J8 



12 



Expanding the Canon 



Euer, Dave. 1976. "Bioiher." Literature Lives! (Blue Level). Ed. Hannah Beaie 
Haupi, Lilla Hesion, Joy Liiiell, and Sarah Soloiaroff. Evanston: McDou- 
gal, 496-97. 

Ginou, Haim G. 1965. Between Parent and Child. New York: Avon, 145-57. 



From English Journal, November 1988, 78-81 



19 



3 Teaching Critical Analysis Writing 
Using Stephen King's 
Danse Macabre 



Michael Begg 

Too often, Vxti quebiioned by my eleventh grade honors composition 
students about the purpose of learning various writing techniques. 
Sure, they understand and master the use of definition, comparison/ 
contrast, cause/effect, etc., in a simple five-paragraph essay. But outside 
of the classroom setting, they find little use for writing. And it's 
important to encourage students to extend themsehes beyond the 
simple structure or format that composition teachers stress. A critical 
analysis paper can be a worthwhile assignment that can offer students 
the opportunities to apply writing to their everyday interests. 

What seems to interest most teenagers is fasi ion, music, television 
and movies, and sports. It is sometimes hard for them to judge the 
quality involved in some of these areas. As a result, some fall into the 
fa^s and trends of fashion and music, look up to only those sports 
fi\ ares who have leen widely publicized, and watch television shows 
and movies that appeal to them at a level that fails to challenge them 
intellectually. As teachers, especially composition teachers, it's impor- 
tant for us to develop students' critical skills, and writing is an excellent 
means for analysis. 

In searching for a topic area of high interest for my students to writo 
about critically, I ran across Stephen King's Danse Macabre. Mistakenly 
placed on many bookstores' sheb es with the author's works of fiction, 
it ij an excellent model of critical analysis writing. King explores the 
horror genre ('^ovies, television, fiction) and attempts to explain why 
audiences find it so appealing. He analyzes many films, always with a 
ciitical eye. What encouraged me to choose this book for my classes to 
read, besides the obvious attraction teenagers have for horror, was a 
short passage in the; second chapter; 

I've tried here lo delineate some of the differences between science 
ficiion and horror, science fiction and fantasy, terror and horror, 
horror and revulsion, more by example than by definition. All of 
which is very well, but perhaps we ought to examine the emotion of 



13 




20 



14 



Expanding the Canon 



horror a Kllle more closely— not in terms of definilion but in terms 
of effect. What docs horror do? Why do people want to be horrified 
. . . why do they pay to be horrified? Why an Exorcist} A Jaws? 
An Alien} 

But before we talk about why people crave the effect, maybe we 
ought to spend a little time thinking about components— and if we 
do not choose to define horror itself, we can at least examine the 
elements and perhaps draw some conclusions from them. 

Perhaps without realizing it. King has explained to the reader his 
intention to analyze by using the simple writing techniques of 
comparison/contrast, example, definilion, and cau*^** **ffeci. With this 
in mind, Danse Macabre became the primary source of the critical 
analysis paper assignment— a culmination of all the techniques und 
strategies that the composition students have learned. 

To begin, students vr de use of videotapes of the major films Kin^ 
discusses in his book. Each student was assigned to watch three films 
similar in theme. No more than three students were assigned to the same 
group of films. The films and the writing topics varied. From the dozens 
of areas that King explores, the topics included some like 

The Abominable Dr. Phtbes, The Tomb of Ligeia, and The Body 
Snatcher: The horror films that derive their best effects from the fear 
of dying. 

The Hunchback of Notre Dame{m% Werewolf of London {m5), 
the Elephant Man: Thu* horror film as an mvitation to indulge in 
deviant an ti -social h^havior by proxy. 

The Thing froTH Another World (1951), The Day the Earth Stood 
Still f and Invasion of the Body Snatchers: Science fiction films 
reflecting political fears rather than supernatural fears. 

The F/y (1958), The Omega Man, Dr. Cyclops: Horror films with a 
technological subtext— those films that suggest that we have been 
betrayed by our own machines and processes of mass production. 

The Fly (1958), Cat People (m2), and The Man with the X-Ray 
Eyes: The modern American horror film and how it exploits the 
real fears of normal people. 

Plan 9 from Outer Space, Attack of the 50 Ft. Woman, and The 
Little Shop of Horrors; The horror movie as junk food— why have 
there been so many bad horror films? 

The Ghostbreakets (1940, he Haunting, and The Changeling: 
The primal haunted house story— how its subtext addresses our 
more concrete* fears, whether they sorltii, economic, cultural, or 
political. 

The Mumm^ (1932), The Mummy (1959) and i Picture of 
Dorian Gra) . Horror films depicting the mythic fairy tale of man's 
quest for immortality and its inevitable fight with hun< iuity. 



21 



Teaching Cnncci Analysis Writing 



Frankenstein (T*^!), The Bride of Franken.nein, i\m\ The Curse of 
Franke7istein \ 1957): Lxploring the Frankenstein mytli— liumanity 
as an insufficient god. 

Psycho, The Birds, Frenzy: Alfred Hitchcock— master of suspense. 
Putting tlie audience's world in chaos. 

The Raven (1935), The Black Cat (1934), and The Body Sfiaicher. 
Horrific Imaginings: Boris Karloff and Behi Lugosi— masters of 
Macabre. 

Dracula (1931), The Wolfman, and Frankenstein (1931): The 
monsters representing our lusher conapts of evil in the modern 
horror story— the vampire, the werewoK, and the thing without 
a nan)e. 

Oiiu the films had been seen, there were a series of guidelines for the 
student follow in critically analyzing their three films. They 
incluai,^ 

1. The writer must base his or her analysis on the ideas discussed in 
Danse Macabre. 

2. Research is required. A minimum of three sources from the 
library is necessary. (School librarians compiled a reserve list for 
this assignment.) 

3. The wiiter must consciously make use of the variety of writing 
techniques we have studied, just as Stephen King does in Dafise 
Macabre. Definition, comixiri son /contrast, process, cause/ef- 
fect, classifioition, and argumentation can all be used effect ive< 
ly. Even the narrative technique can be put to good use; King 
uses it m his chapter entitled "An Annoying Autobiographi- 
cal Pause." /' 

4. Within the paper the writer must briefly provide a synopsis of 
the plot of eacli film. Briefly is the key word; the paper is not a 
simple retelling of their stories. 

5. The writer must make use of specific scenes and/or lines of 
dialog from the films to illustrate and support ideas. When 
referiing to a particular aspect of the film, the person responsible 
should be attributed. For example, all aspects involving the 
visual storytellinrj would be attributed to the director. Matters 
concerning the /actual story events/plots would be attributed to 
the screenwriter, etc. li Is important to refer to the production 
credits and cast that is included in a variety of the books on the 
library*s leserve list. 

6. After analyzing specific aspects that the topic demands, the 
writer .nust present a final judgment, a ciiticism of each film. 
Does it succeed within the horror genre? 

7. Befoie turning in the actual ijaper, each group will make an oral 
piesentation to the class. Tlie presentations will lefiect all of the 
information gathered within the above guidelines. (Fve suggest- 





16 



Expanding (he Canon 



cd 10 my students to watch Sisk A and EbertAt (he Movies to get 
an idea of how to make their presentations.) 
8. The paper lo be turned in would include a title page, an outline 
page, a formal copy of the body of the paper, a footnote page, and 
a bibliography. 

In the presentations and papers, it was obvious that students had 
begun to sharpen their critical skills. Many felt that they would not have 
appreciated these old films if they had not examined their subtexts. The 
students came away from the viewings with more weighing on their 
minds than just the simple enicriainmeni value of each film. For 
example, one whose topic dealt with Boris Karloff and Bela Lugosi in 
The Raven, The Black Cat, and The Body Snatcher observed how the 
presentation of the speech patterns and dialog of ilie two stars suggested 
genuinely frightening connotations. One who wrote on The Fly, The 
Omega Man, and Dr. Cyclops concluded that ''lechno-horror" films 
cffct^vciy create fear when they show that it is not humans or machines 
which bring about tragedy— but the combination of the two. And 
finally , asiudcni commenting on The Hunchback of Notre Dame noted 
that it is an atypical horror film. 

It is one that is unusual because we watch as the cliaractcrs 
experience terror, but we experience little of it ourselves. In this 
manner, the fears that we share in common with the character, are 
released, making us feel better. 

From the discussions generated by the presentations, it became clear 
to everyone that horror films do not necessarily netJ special effects, 
gross makeup, or buckets of blood. Many agreed that the treuvls in recent 
horror films (such as Friday the 13th and other ''slasher mo/ies" and 
Alien and "gross-out movies" like it) portiay evil as something < xternal. 
They felt that they were not as effective as those films w'lich su^,gest that 
evil rests in humanity. Why else, some concluded, wi uld Hollywood 
choose to remake horror classics like Invasion of the Body Snatchers, 
The Thing, Invaders From Mars, Cat People, It! The Terror From 
Beyond Space (remade as Alien), and The Fly? They can also see that the 
lemakes often fail in creating horror by attempting to update the stuiics 
with special effects. 

As a result of their intensive writing assignment, students became 
aware of how to apply writing techniques to theii own interests. Soon 
after, many attempted to analyze albums of rock groups, some wanted to 
do an analysis of clothing styles, others even attempted to critically 
ovei view the teams participating in the summei's upcoming Goodwill 



no 



Teaching Critical Analysis Writing 



17 



Games. In any case, all were sure not to make iheir judgments until they 
had performed a satisfactory analysis. 

Bibliography 

Here is a partial list of some of the best reference books on horror films: 

Cohen, Daniel. Horror in the Movies, New York: Clarion, 1982. 
Cohen. Daniel. Horror Movies, New York: Gallery Books, 1984. 
Everson, William. CU^ acs of the Horror Film, Secaucus, New Jersey: Citadel, 
1974. 

Frank. Alan. The Horror Ftlrn Handbook. New York: Barnes and Noble. 1982. 

King, Stephen. Danse Macabre. New York: Berkley, 1981. 

Moore, Darrell. The Best, Worst, and Most Unusual Horror Films. Skokie, 

Illinois: Publications International Limited, 1983. 
Schoell, William. Stay Out of the Shower. New York: Dember Books, 1985, 
Sirick, Philip. Sciettce Fiction Movies. London: Octopus Books, 1976. 
Weldon, Michael. The Psyc.hotronic Encyclopedia of Film. New York: Ballan- 

line, 1983. 

Frori English Journal, March 1987, 72-74 



4 Gypsies, Jews, and 
Tke Merchant of Venice 



Thomas McKciidy 

For many years The MerJicnt of Venice was as miicli a pan of liigh- 
school education in North America as algebra, football, or tlie teaching 
of grammar. Recently, however, many teachers, parents, and others 
have had serious second thoughts about the play. They worry that 
Shakespeare's distorted preseiuatioii of Jews may create or reinforce 
stereotypes immature minds aud thai these stereotypes may seem to 
be endorsed by the reputation of Shakespeare or the autliorily of the 
schno? and teacher. In 1986, for example, a scries of incidents involving 
name-calling, anti Semitic graffiti, and the throwing of coins at Jewish 
students led the Waterloo, Ontario, school board to withdraw the play 
from the ninth-grade curriculum. Writing in the loronto Globe and 
Mail, Gunthcr Plant (July 22, 1986, A7) and Michele Landsberg (July 
26, 1^86, A2) have argued convincingly that, gninted the wealth of 
literature available for teaching, The M reliant of I'euice should nui be 
taught before grade eleven or tvielve. 

Even teachers of older students, however, need to think carefully 
about how to present the play. Although such students are j.r.sumably 
impervious to simple stereotypes, they often have much to learn about 
prejudice. A careful look at Shakespeare's prejudices and their roots can 
teach studefil not only about historiwal attitudes but about their own 
unacknowledged assumptions as well. 

Many college student* have already studied The Merchant of Venice 
in high school. Unfortunately, my students report that the issue of anti- 
Semitism in the play has been generally overshadowed in th.e classroom 
by questions of plot, character, irony, and the like. When the issue is 
raised at all, discussion usually focuses on Slylock's defense of his 
humanity: "Hath not a Jew eyes? . . , If you prick us do we not bleed?" 
(Ill.i). As proof that Shakespeare was, in fact, a warm hi man being who 
repudiated the cruel behavior of his characters, this sj^eech is usually 
considered sufficient— or, occasionally, insufficient, i^uch treatment 
neither acknowledges the seriousness of Shakespeare's distortions nor 



IS 



Gypsies, Jcios, and Tlir Mcrcli.iiii of Venice 



19 



<idcquatcl> cxpl.iiiibliou .111 utiicrui&c humane and coiiipasbioii.iu man 
conic! cicatc such an odious iniwrcprc^cntation. In gcncial, students u '10 
liavc though l about the issue at all consider Sh.ikeivj.raie either .1 simj)le 
bigot or a kinriof harmless antique, a quaint ])ortra>cr of attitudes no 
longer taken very seriously. 

Of course, u'tither of these virw b deals u ith the ai.uul complexities of 
history or of modern prejudice. One way o( highlighting these 
complexities before students begin reading the ])l. ^ to look ai their 
own culture's attiiudes towards gyj>sies. 

Gypsies have a number of imfwrtant similaiities to Elizabethan 
Jews. Traditionall). they ha\eno homeland, ii\ii , as outsiders in most 
societies of the western uoild. Like the Jews, the> weie singled out for 
extennination b> the Na/is, and hence prejudice agaisiSt g>psies has 
bcrn a source of iuimenst suffering in the twentieth ccntui>— a fact 
viitually iu)known among non-Jewish students, Moreo\ei, Jews and 
Gentilesalikeare likely loholdafairl) complex set of steieot>]K-s about 
g>psies that ha\e not been modified by discussion and consciousness 
raising as some of theii other prejudices ma> have been. For example* 
most of them use tde verb "to g>p" (probabl> a deri\.itive of **g>psy'* 
according to the O.t'.W. and Webster's Third) as synonyn\ f c r "to 
cheat,*' althou^'h most would be shocked b> siinilai use of the \eib "to 
jew/* a usage that is sull common enough to be included in mosi 
unabi idged dictiouaiics. Finally the students' stereotypes of gypsies aic 
usually noi so strong or so emotionally roc rd in their own expciiciiccs 
and fcais as to inhibit self-examination. 

hi any crise, before beginning to study The .^^Tc/ifln/ of Veuiic, 
students can he asked to jot do\ n in fi\e 01 ten nuuutese\ciy thing the) 
know or have heard abom gypsies. 

Predictably, their "\nowledge" includes a niniiber of toinmon 
stereotypes. In m> studeuis* e>es, gypsies are hot tcmpncd and caii-fiec. 
the) ha\e laige families and tra\cl fiom place to place in cara\ans. 
cheating the unwar> and stealing their children, gypsies wear loosi 
fining clothes \\\x\\ lots of biacelets and eariings, the> play the violin 
ami read fortiuies Irom crystal balls or cards, there is alwa>s a king. 

Now feu of n)y students are naive enough to belie\e that this set of 
descriptions {nc . nts an accuiate \iew of what actual g> plies aie like, 
although there are occasson.d claims of f.ictn.d .ictui.icy. *"They 
sometinu\s steal babies. (That's true. It happened to m\ great- 
grandmother in Romania. Fin not joking!)" MtiSi of the students 
acknowledge that theii views are steieot'pes, d!..wn largely from 
childien s books, ])opulai ino\ies, and teleMsioii commercials. Onl> a 
feu arr awaie of e\ei having seen a g>psy, and \iituall> nom havee\e» 





20 



Expanding the Canon 



talked to gypsies. They co not know what language gypsies speak, what 
religion they practice, or what foods they eat. 

The fact is, however, that stereotypes do not simply evaporate once 
.hey are identified. The images in our heads may affect oui behavior and 
our attitudes even when we recognize that those images are inaccurate. 
I ask my students to imagine themselves or their friends writing a story 
or a television script in which one of the characters is a gypsy. It is 
possible, I suppose, that the gypsy character will be a neurosurgeon, a 
police chief, or an English teacher. But I doubt it. Similarly, if the script 
included a fortune teller, I suspect that that character would more likely 
be a gypsy than a German, an Australian, or a Japanese, 

The point of all this, of course, is that my students' views of gypsies 
resemble in many ways the kinds of views Shakespeare probably had 
about Jews, He had most likely never seen nor spoken with a Jew. The 
few Jews living in England in his day probably were converts to 
Christianity ar therefore, like Jessica in the play, not "really" Jews. 
He would have known that Jews on the continent were often money- 
lenders, a profession closed to Christians because of religious laws 
against lending money at interest, and that these moneylenders were 
despised as usurers. Jews for Shakespeare, like gypsies for my students, 
were a somewhat exotic and largely unknown people. They were 
perhaps an abstraction to him, and as such he was probably no more 
hostile to them than my students are to gypsies. 

None of this, however, precluded Shakespeare from including an 
offensive and degrading picture of a Jew when he needed a two- 
dimensional villain for his play. In fact, Shylock's Jewishness was 
particularly appropriate to Shakespeare's purposes because it served as 
a sort of shorthand for a cluster of notions about mercy and justice 
derived from the way Elizabethans interpreted the Bible. To the 
Elizabethans, a Jew was a sort of imperfect Christian who had embraced 
only half of God's message, the Old Testament. The Old Testament, in 
turn, represented the covenant of justice, law, and vengeance rather 
than the new covenant of mercy, forgiveness, and love suggested by the 
Sermon on the Mount. 

This Elizabethan perception of the Jews of the Old Testament sets up 
the major theme of The Merchant of Venice, the opposition of mercy 
and justice, as personified in the characters of Portia and Shy lock. That 
Shylock is legalistic ^nd unforgiving is not central to the moral vision 
ui the play, certainly no attempt is made to focus on his repentance or 
reform after the trial. That Antonio, Bassanio, and Gratiano arc equally 
legalistic and unforgiving, however, is absolutely central. They ought 
to embody Christian values, but in fact they seem no more v irtuous than 



ERLC 



Gypsies, Jews, and The Merchant of Venice 



21 



>oung men usually are. E\en Antonio, often praised for his friendship 
and generosity, in fact lends money only to his friends. Do not even tax 
collectors do the same? 

Specifically, the Christian men in The Merchan of Venice do not 
embody Christian mercy and forgiveness, as Shy lock well knows. "And 
if you wrong us, shall we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we 

will resemble you in that The villainy you teach me, I will execute" 

(III, i). At the trial, they accept Shylock's terms of reference, and when 
the law is on their side, they enforce the law. The Duke offers pardon but 
threatens to recant it unless Shy lock accepts Antonio's conditions. 
Bassanio and Gratiano do not at all understand Portia s message about 
the quality of mercy until they, too, find themselves in need of lo\v and 
forgiveness for their broken vows about the rings in Act V. 

By making Shy lock a Jew, Shakespeare is able to dr lop this theme 
efficiently and powerfully for his Elizabethan Christian audience in a 
way he could not do if Shy lock belonged to some other despised group, 
perhaps the Irish or even the gypsies. Shakespeare does not have to 
develop Shy lock's character in much detail, because he is able to use the 
stereotype of the vengeful Jew. Because the tension between law, justice, 
and re\engc on the one hand and love, mercy, and forgiveness on the 
other is a central, if morcsubtk, theme in much of Shakespeare's mature 
work (Measure for Measure, King Lear, The Tempest, The Winter's 
Tale), this play is a particularly useful introduction to Shakespeare. 

In teaching The Merchant of Venice, we must make clear thai 
Shakespeare seems to ha\ e shaied the prejudices of his time and culture, 
apparently without the reflection or self-examination that we would 
expect from any sensitive person in our time and culture. If our students 
realize that they, too, may harbor such unexamined biases, about 
gypsies for example, that realization may lead them to a greater 
understanding of the weaknesses of other* — Shakespeare would have 
approved — and to a more sensitive awareness of their own shortcom- 
ings, even when not conscious or malicious. 

Nevertheless, students must not be lef' o think that such biases . I 
stereotypes, conscious or not, are trivial ur tolerable (though they ma^ 
be forgivable). In oui own cuitury, such casual stereotypes have almost 
cert nly smoothed the way for more vicious prejudices, for the 
persecution and slaughter of Jews, gypsies, and others, Shakespeare was 
not a twentieth-century anti-Semite in period costume, but those of us 
who teach his plays must take responsibility for seeing that his message 
of mercy is neither misinterpreted as a rationale for anti-Semitism nor 
hidden from view by our guilt for our own quite different sins. 

From English Journal, November 1988, 24-^26 




r r. 



5 Hidings and Revelations: 
Robert Hayden's 
'The Whipping" 



Linda Wyman 



The Wliipping 

The old woman across the way 

is whipping the boy again 
and shouting lo the neighborhood 

lier goodness and his wrongs. 

Wildly he crashes through elephant ears, 

pleads in dusty zinnias, 
while she in spite of crippling fat 

pursues and corners him. 

She strikes and strikes the shrilly circling 

boy till the stick breaks 
in her hand. His tears are rainy weather 

to woundlike memories: 

My head gripped in bony vise 

of knees, the writhing struggle 
to wrench free, the blows, the fear 

worse than blows that hateful 

Words would bring, the face that I 

no longer knew or loved . . . 
Well, it is over now, it is over, 

and the boy sobs in his room. 

And the woman leans muttering against 

a tree, exhausted, purged— 
avenged in part for lifelong hidings 

she has had to bear.* 

—Robert Hayden 

"This is a poem about reality,** someone almost always says, and no one 
with whom I've ever read Robert Hayden's "The Whipping" has ever 
said otherwise. 

•"The Whipping" is reprinted from ColUcied Poemx of Robert Ha>ueii, Edited by 
Frederick Glaysher, by permission of Livcright Publishing Gjrporaiion. Copyright ^ 
1985 by Erma Hayden. 



22 



HidiJigs and Revelations 



23 



Students* immediate ideniificaiion and sympathy are with the boy 
who is getting .he whipping. There are often some nervous, survivor- 
proud laughs at "again," and I have only to ask what kinds of things a 
person giving a whipping ever says about "her goodness and his 
wrongs" to discover that everyone in the room can answer: 

I cook, I clean . . . and you act like a heathen. 
After all Tve done for you, look how you behave. . , . 
I've tried to teach you right from wrong. . . , 
I've worked my fingers to the bone for you. . . . 

Tin only doing this for your own good 

I'm whipping you because I love you. 

We arc clearly in familiar territory. 

The language of "The Whipping" is as accessible as the experience 
depicted in its first stanzas. If the poem is read in a group, there is no 
need for a dictionary. When I read it iccently with two classes of students 
in remedial Lnglish and with several small groups of advanced 
students, there was always someone who knew the meaning of whatever 
word was unfamiliar to another. "What's a vise?" "You know, that 
thing in a woodworking shop. " The questioner, watching the respond- 
ent's miming hands, nods: "Oh. That thing you turn." What are 
zinnias? Oh— those bright flowers that grow all summer. Elephant ears? 
Oh: that's what those big leaves are called. Purged? "You know [with 
laughter], like when you eed a big dose." The ugliness and terror of 
lines five through ten communicate themselves unerringly: almost 
everyone can identify wildly, crashes, pleads, corners, and shrilly as 
V »rds whichexpress panic, and students nod their understanding when 
lirian remarks that "the mobility of L'.e extraordinarily fat woman" ia in 
itself terrifying. 

Typically, students have no problems in reading the poem until line 
eleven: "His tears are rauiy weather/to woundlike memories." Those 
who have difficulty have not been aware, until this point, of the poem's 
thi* d character, the speaker onlooker. ("I thought that was just the poet 
talking," someone explains.) A question about the implications of 
"across the way," in line one, is usually enough to establish the presence 
of the per S9n watching the whipping. Students offer questions to help 
classmates for whom this line is still unclear. "How does rainy weather 
make yoi/ feel?" they ask. "What kind ofmood does it put yow in?" Well 
then, they reason, if "his tears" make "rainy weather," it is not 
surprising that an outpouring of "woundlike memories" should 
follow. That the memories are those of the speaker/onlooker is 



ERIC 




24 



Expanding the Canon 



confirmed, of couise, by My at the beginning of stanza four. ("There's 
only one person in this poem who could say 'My.' ") 

The "woundlike memories" evoke murmurs of recollection. If the 
readers have not actually had their heads "gripped in bony vise of 
knees" (and one tells that he has), they all remember — or feel that they 
remember— the writhing, the blows, the hateful words, the fearsomely 
changed faces. The ellipsis and the resumption of present tense make 
clear that the speaker's memories have receded. Someone asks, "Why 
does he say twice that 'it is over'?" I reply, "How many things are over?" 

When both the dreadful whipping and the painful memories are 
"over," the Iai:guage of the poem eases off, the and- joined clauses 
suggesting the restoration of an order, however grim. Cheryll and Rusty 
point out that tht poem's freniii.d movement stops when the old woman 
is ''purged," and we, like her, are ready to "lean against a tree." 
Exhausted, in the last stanza, applies as w^ll to persons reading the 
poem as to those who are in it. If I ask abcut the meaning of hidings, 
however, we discover that our most intense discussion is yet to come. 

Usually, students say that hidings refers to those experiences in the 
woman's life which she has kept secret, and certainly there is no denying 
the word's associations with to hide. When I ask, however, if "hidings" 
are what my students call things that they have hidden or kept secret, no 
one ever says that this is the case. "How have y ou heard the word?" I ask. 
"Have you ever heard anything called 'a hiding'?" Often there is 
someone who has hearu it: I'll tan your hide for that. I'll give you a 
hiding you won't forget. The discovery that a hiding is a whipping 
brings a surge of response. The recursiveness of child abuse is, after all, 
a phenomenon to which our attention has often been called ui recent 
years. Students often are ready to believe that "the old woman" whips 
the boy because she has been beaten as a child— until someone notices 
lifelong: "for lifelong hidings she has had to bear." Once students take 
in the implications of "lifelong," they begin to comprehend Hayden's 
stunning, poem-unifying metaphor. The old woman has "taken a 
beating" all her life. This poem has three victims — not one, as we'd 
supposed in the opening stanza, or two as we'd learned in the third. 

Realizing that the cycle of pain is much larger than we had thought 
sends us back through the poem again and leads us to discover fhat we 
know much more than we believed we had known. We wonder what 
kinds of beatings the old woman has taken. Quite possibly she was 
wh ipped as a child, we agree. Ann points out that for an elderly, terribly 
fat person to have charge of a young boy could in itself be a punishing 
experience. CYes, he's young! An older kid wouldn't be so hysterical— 
and, besides, he couldget away!") Someone notices dusty in line six and 



Hidings and Revelations 



25 



suggests thai the old woman is having to fight to have any flowers at 
all — her yard, at any rate, is a far cry from that field of purple flowers in 
The Color Purple. That zinnias and elephant ears will g ow under Irss 
than optimal gardening conditions points both to tKc old woman's 
determination to have something besides pain in her life and to the odds 
against hei doing so. Rusty and Ann relate the woman's being avenged 
"in part" to her whipping the boy "again"; she is never completely 
avenged. Corey observes that both the speaker and the old woman have 
''internal scars"; the memories, after all, are wfound-like. The boy is 
hearing "hateful words" such as the speaker remembers, Matthew 
realizes that whereas the woman's way to deal with her hidings has 
been to whip the boy, the speakci's way may well have been to write 
the poem. 

Is this poem about child abuse? I ask. My students are adamant: No. 
Though Chery 11 has called our attention repeatedly to the fierce energy 
i.i the poem, and though most of us have cringed at the image of the 
woman's striking and strikinj u.itil the stick breaks, no one believes 
that the whipping has occurred "for no reason at all" or that the boy's 
wounds will require medical attention, Foi most of the students with 
whom I read the poem, child abuse entails a certain hideous wanton- 
ness: "You know," one of hem says, "you be in the bed and vour mother 
come home and beat up oi.v. ^, ' Noneof us minimizes r!ie savagery of 
the bo>'s whipping, but by extending our sympathies to the onlooker 
and finally to the old woman, Hayden has made it impossible for us to 
feel that any hot-line that we might call could provide the relief diat is 
needed here. 

"This poem is about how people really feel," Joyce says, Louvenia 
adds passionately, "My mama— that lady lo\es me to death, but she 
whips inc. Things are awful." Things are awful, and leading Robert 
Hayden's "The Whipping' Vts us glimpse why that is so. 

Frotn English Journal, March 1988, 82-84 



32 



6 Imaginary Gardens, Real Toads: 
Wallace's ''Ungainly Things'' 



Elizabeth D. Nelms and Ben F. Nelms 

Ungainly Things 

A regular country toad— pebbly, 
squat, 

shadow-green 

as the shade of the spruces 
in the garden 

he came from— rode 

to Paris in a hatbox 
to Lautrec*s 

studio (skylights 

on the skies of Paris); 
ate 

cutworms from a box, 

hopped 

occasionally 

among the furniture and easels, 

while the clumsy little painter 
studied 

him in charcoal 

until he was beautiful. 
One day 

he found his way 

down stairs toward the world 
again, 

into the streets of Montmartre, 

and, missing him, the painter-dwarf 
followed, 

peering among cobbles 

laughed at, searching 
until long past dark 

the length of the Avenue Frochot, 



O Q 



Imagitiary Gardens, Real Toads 



'1 



over and over, 

for ilie fisied, marble -eyed 
fellow 

no one would ever sec again 
except 

in sketches that make ungainly iliiiigs beautiful.* 

— Robeit Wallace 

Students still come to us with a number of misconccpliunb about poetry. 
They think it is about pretty things— flowers, trees, sunsets, love, God, 
and nature. We like to share poems with them that show poets finding 
their subjects among ordinary and mundane realities. Like Marianne 
Moore, we 1 i ke to th i nk of poems as "i magi nary gardens w i th real toads 
in them.'* Students think poetry should sound a certain way— rhyme, 
alliteration, and a thumping good rhythm, ta-dum, ta-dum, ta-dum. 
Wc like to share poems in whidi the sound effects are subtler, which 
counterpoint line to syntax. But, most important, students think poems 
are difficult, fraught with unfamiliar words, curious sentence inver- 
sions, and ''hidden" meanings. We like to share poems that are fairly 
direct, which require at the most an ordinary dictionary and/or desk 
uuyclopedia to decipher meaning. We like to show them poems that 
allow them to work out meaning for themselves, that don*t require them 
to rely on us. Such a poem is Robert Wallace's "Ungainly Things." Its 
title, its subject, and its theme all celebrate the potential glory of 
misshapen, common, unlovely realities. We present this poem to high- 
school students so that they make that discovery for themselves. (Except 
where indicated, all the quoted comments come from sophomores in a 
regular track— not honors!) On first reading, th^' poem could make 
them fly for cover. What? No rhyme? A poem about an ugly old toad? 
What's with these crazy lines? They don't match Since the poem may 
jar iheir sensibilities, we prepaie :hem for the content as the poet 
probably expected his readers to be prepared. We write the name 
^Toulouse" on the board and ask if anyone associates another name 
with it. If no one responds, we scrawl *'Lautrec" up beside the first 
name. The class begins to brainstorm, with the teacher writing down 
every association, both wild and on-target: artist, French, ugly, de 
formed, alcoholic, drugs, sex, Moulin Rouge, dancing girls, hollow 
cane, dead, Paris, depressed, famous, "too loose," After about five 
minutes— sometimes a probing question helps generate a bit more 
(' Artist— of what?")— the board is filled. But to move toward clarity, we 
have students get in small groups and note five specific questions they 

•••Unghiiily Things" fiom Vftgatnly Thugs, ^ 1968 by Robert Wallace. 



28 



Exparuiirig the Canou 



would like ^.iiswcrcd about TouloubC'Lauirec. They libi ones like the 
following: Who was this man? \Vh> was he famous? When did he live? 
What exactly did he paint? Was he sexually involved? How ugly was he? 

At this point, students are given access to a cart which we have filled 
with simple refeience books from the library. Each group chooses a 
dictionary, encyclopedia, oi an lefexence book and, for the next seven 
minutes, tries to find answers to as many questions as they can. They 
also jotdown an> oihci inteiesting infuiniation they find, they find out 
a lot in just se\en minutes. Passages are read which describe the artist- 
dwarf, misshapen by an accident in youth. Misinformation is cleared 
up, and they begin to feel well-informed and interested. (Wc don*t know 
whether Toulouse-Umtrec is in E. D. Hirsch's book of essentia! 
knowledge oi not, but we do know that se\en miiuites with readily 
available I eference books tan piuvidt the kind of backgiound infoiina 
tion that liteiate persons biing to their reading. That*s tht point of this 
excicise. You don't have to know everything to read knuwkdgeably , 
you can *iook it up.") 

This introduction takes about twenty -fi\e uiinutts, and the pace has 
been lively. Finally, a fev» pi ints of L<uitrec'sposteisaie displayed Now 
students aie ready foi the leading of the poem. After a quick check to see 
that they have a sense of the meaning of uJi^ainly, we read the poem 
aloud twice. The poem is piojectec' on an overhead, or students au 
given copic.**as we lead. Then they u ite for ten minutes, exploi ing theii 
immediate lesponses to the poem, some hesitating, making false-staits, 
but most rapidly filling a page. Because v\e have only llfty minutes, the 
period ends at this point. 

The next class peiiod begins with the sharing of papeis oi ideas 
which suifaced in the ten-minute writings. No tc hei is needed to 
deciphei the "meaning" of the poem, foi students teach one another, 
;cenfoicing initial iinpicssions, extruding uiideistaiiding, challenging 
vague OI off-b^se notions. They read passages from theii fiee wiitings. 

Whenever I read a poem, I alwa>s think the autlioi is trying to tell 
iiK sometlung using soinetliing else. 

—Amy 

Anaitist is able to catch people's e)e*» to make them \ook at a sunple 
little toad, an < iiimal wliich no one pays iniich atteiuion to. 

An artist helps open people's ejesso tlie> can sceToiilousc-l^iutrec 
once painted his bedroom. Nothing was reall) special about it. h 
had a bed, a chair, and a desk and some pictures on the wall. I still 
liked the painting though, because it wasiolorful and well done. If 




hnagirxry Gardens, Real Toads 



29 



I painted my bedroom, it would be boring and would not hold 
anyone's interest. But his room did. 



Of course, not all siudcnis *'iunc in" to any one poem, buiof the more 
than 150 to whom we have presented this poem this year, only eleven 
have expressed indifference oi distaste. Many of them relate to Lautrec 
on the basis of their own experiences: 

I think this poet was also talking about the feeling we all gel 
sometimes of being bizarre. The poem changes your mood depend- 
inijon i!0w it is read. If you lead it with a soft voice, you can almost 
fee! the hurt of being lost and laughed at. If you read it in just a 
rvgi lar voice with an I-don*t-care attitude, it*s really a cruel poem. 
No one likes to be laughed at. 



I know the artist was laughed at because Tm not even half that ugly 
and I get made hm of all the time. 

—Unsigned sophomore paper 

I empathize with this g^":itle, caring man through Robert Wallace*s 
poem. I feel somewhat eruilty for the taunting he must have endured 
although I am nci responsible for it. To think that this aitist had 
only his lithographs to speak to the outside world for him. 



Jocelyn writes, "It*s interesting to see how people show theii artistic 
ability through the stiangest things." The poet himself made tiut \er> 
point in an introduction to the poem. "A good subject," he says, 
"stumbled on at the right moment, becomes a way of expressing oui 
ideas and feelings. It can release, shape, focus them, as we might not be 
able to do directly. Often enough, it will even reveal ideas and feelings 
we weren't aware of having" (Wallace 146). 

A new admiration for the artist and poet is kindled as the students feel 
the impact of the message. 

The artist saw thnigs differently dian many other people, but he did 
all he could to make others see the beauty in all things, even 
ungainly things. I admire people v/ho can do that. 



As we read this next paper, we aie reminded of Coleiidge s haunted 
marinei, who roamed the eaith, seaiching foi someone who uoidd 
listen to his message: 



Shannon 



— Stacey 



— Lon, senior 



— Ti acy 





30 



Expanding the Cation 



When I read about the people laughing and siari ig ai him like he 
had *Mosi it/* I ieali7e that this is the way a lot of people react when 
ihey don't understand or agree with what they see, hear, or read. 

—Amy 

These students, who shouted wild guesses across the room just the day 
before, have a new awareness of the artist. Just as Toulouse-Lautrec 
immortalized the toad, Robert Wallace helped them feel that they knew 
the artist. 

There is a trace of cruelty in this poem when the poet talks of 
Toulouse-Lautrec being laughed at and ridiculed by others. This 
makes me feel soriy for this unique little man. 

To me this poem is sad and really makes me understand about 
Toulouse-Lautrec's life. If I'd never done any reading on this man 
and icad this |K>em, I think Td know a lot about him. I feel as if I 
know him without knowing him. 

— Angi 

We agree with tluj> student that the poem may not need our careful 
groundwork, but other students voice this comment: *if we hadn't 
talked about the artist before this poem, it would have made no sense 
at all." 

What we provide as teacheis is a trusting atmosphere and an open 
foium in whivh ineas can flomish and questions can be asked, a gift of 
tune and « bit ol information, and an impetus encouraging students lo 
woik jt deciphering the code themselves. As their understanding 
deepens, one sees an almost cocky look which says in so many words, 
"Hey, we get it and no one had to tell us the answer." 

1 think this poem is making some kind of < omparison to a toad and 
Toulouse- Luitrec in that they both arc ugly to ordinar) eyes but art 
makes them beautiful. 

-Wendy 

I think this poem was written in metaphor with the toad actually 
reptesenting Toulouse-Liutiec, who was also ungainly, yet his 
work on canvas was beautiful like the toad in charcoal. So, 
although he didn't paint hiinbelf beautifully, his paintings show 
the beauty in other things, which reflect back onto tliis crippled 
jxiinter. 

—Eric 

The French artist is made beautiful in this poem. They are .ather an 
ungainly pair, Toulouse-Lautrec and that toad. 

—David, senior 



o K1 



Imaginary Gardens, Real Toads 31 

Ab tcachcis, we confirm tlicii emerging inbigliu b> conti ibuting this 
account by the poet of how he stumbled xipon his subject in the 
following story about Toulouse-Lautrec. 

A fi icnd sent him in a hat box, horn L'l&le Adam, a large toad which 
hopped about his apartment for days, becoming <|uitea pet. At last 
it csc«.|/ed into tlic "wildci ness" of the rue Qmhiincourt (Montmar- 
< ^quarter, in Paris). Touloiise-Lautieca far nioieaffectionatcand 
soh-heaitcd man than soin,' biographeis have reprcH'nted him, was 
desolate. When the rumour c^ime later that the toad had been seen 
on the Avenue Krochot, he spent hours seaiching fo: him— the 
length of that sticrt! (l^umec, A Bestiaiy, in Wt»!»»ice M8) 

The poet goes on to conunent; "I retold the story. It was a wa> of 
e\pi esslnj; in> ft-eling about the beauty in the oi dinai ) , \\ hicli w e all too 
easily accept as dull aiul boiiiig, an I about theiole '^1 ait in helping us 
to lecapttire simple wundeu But in writing ihe poem I discovered 
something I didn't kium I was thinking, about the lole of the artist. 
There is only one toad in the poem, but the title is phnaP' (Wallace 1 16). 
01 coinsc. the students ha\e already picked up on all these "meanings/* 
but they enjoy hearing how the poet "discovered" what lu meant. We 
cont I de oin discussion by posting on the bulletin boai^ tuo sketches 
by Launec, juxtaposed, a sclf-poitiait caiicatuie and the squatty toad. 

Students ha\e found scleral leal toads in this imaginary garden, and 
have come to appreciate them. We hope that, no matter what we do to 
piesent poet ai tists to our students, we u ill do so in a uay that the poet 
iUtist uill not be lejectedbut uehomedasa friend u ho helps us see moic 
clearl>, as one who makes even "ungainly things" beautiful. 

Work Cited 

Wallace. Roheii. IVritint:^ Poems, Hoston: Little, Blown, 1982. 
From Fjiglish Journal, yfl»»flr)' ^^SS. 9^-97 





7 Opulence to Decadence: 

The Outsiders and Less Than Zero 



Ellen A. Scay 

"The times, tl cy are a-changin'." Bob Dylan sang it back in the 1960s, 
and it wab a partitularly applicable inesbagc in those turbulent times. 
Adolescent literature has ridden the crest of change in the last twenty 
yearb. just like adult fiction. Fiction for juveniles no longer gives us 
\irginal Sally worrying abou? whether or not John will give her his 
class ring at the senior proir. It was fun and it was mindless, and 
certainly several generations n boys and girls were not harmed by what 
they read. Life in gencial wa wonderful if you worked hard, studied 
hard, and drank your milk. T! le rewards of these endeavors were a good 
job, a good spouse, nice chila en, a frame house, a dog. and a paneled 
station wagon. What more could any nice, young, white, middle-class 
Anieriani teenager want? 

What i>ey wanted, eventually » ^^as reality. And they got it. Of course, 
there are those u ho will aigue ihat they ha\ c gotten too much, too soon. 
BuJ, unquestionably, adolescent fiction has caught up uith the adult 
demand for truth in literature. 

What still \aries isn't so much the telling, but what is being told. 
Surely S. E. Hinton's adolescent classic The Outsiders (New York: 
Viking, 1 967; has as much to say about the inherent good in teens as Bret 
Easton Ellis" recently published Less Than Zero (New York. Simon and 
Schuster, 1985) has to say about all that is bad. While The Outsiders h 
uplifting and positixe despite tiagic occurrences, the nihilistic Less 
Than 'l^ro offers only the truth of th. .k» hope, no solution Southern 
California teens of the late 1980s. Despiu .vast differences belueen the 
book»>, both ha\c been controversial in their own times and both are 
eerily effective and moving in their own ways. 

Briefly , *iexo chronicles the reentry of Clay, a freshman at a small Iv y 
League college, into the fast-paced Cilifornia lifestyle he has left 
behind. Clay spends his Christinas \ac4tion recxpeiicncinji this lifestyle 
and examining his place in it. 



Opulcjice to Decadence 



33 



On ihc surface, ihorc scenib to be Hlllc in Lomnion bciwccn iho two 
books. The Outsider:, was wriucn iwciuy ycarsagob) ihcnsixiccn year- 
old S. E. Himon. h dcaU wiih ihc split beiwccn ihc high school social 
. isscs in Tulsa. Oklilioina. Less Thau Zero, wriucii b> twciny-> car-old 
Ellis, ihcn a Bcnningion College undcrgraduaas lakes place in 1986. 
Zero, which is rapidly t^alhering a cull follow ing, deals w ith ilu puisuii 
of something, anything, inraningful by the eighteen- and nineteen- 
year-old childien of the idly rich of Los Angeles and surrounding 
affluent areas. The main characters In The Outsid'^rs are poor and on 
the lower end of the financial and social scale, while :hci: counterparts 
in Less Than Zero define the top of that same scale. 1 lie "greasers" in 
Hinto>)*s nu\el ha\e noihing but thcii pride and their desiics. Their 
enemies are the ""Socs." the financially wcll-oh icens who li\e on the 
other side of low n and toiinent them as a pastime. EIHs's characteis ha\e 
all ihaiuiji lould financially dcsiic. the best cais. ihehesi bais, the best 
clothes, the best music, the best drugs. Their enemies aren*t ilu poor— 
ihey are iheinbclves. 

Boih stoiies deal with \iolence, but it is a different kind of \iolence. 
Ill The Outsiders, Ponyboy and Johnny fiee into the countiy when 
Johnh) stabs and kills Bob in self-defense. The ine\iiable gang fight is 
set up to settle the scoie. The characters in Hinton*s novel deal in 
vai ious lc"\elsof physical \ iolcnce to compensate for their lack of things, 
lack of respect, lack of money, lack of siaiure, lack of a visibly bright 
future. They fight in dieir \ariuKiS ways. Two^Bii s pride and joy is a 
fancy black-handled switchblade, Steve and Darry arc both into 
bui Iding iheii phy siijues. Tin; Shtpard and his gang slash tius and beat 
up people foi the hell of it, and Dallas rolls drunks, fights, and in the 
end, dies aftei slicking up a sioie in fuisiraiion and rage. The message 
in wine way seems to be that those who livv i)y \ iolcnce will die by it in 
the same degree. 

But while iiolcna- in The Outsulers is intensely real in its physical 
manifesiaiions. the \ iolcnce in Less Than Zero, although not physical, 
is ecjually devastating. Ue are used to dealing with \ iolcnce as a 
physical concept, beatings, shootings, stabbings, or olhei bodily 
damage. But what about the \ Iolcnce toui./s mind? Sitiningly. in the 
lwcni> years between the two novels, the ..oJ':nce has turned inwaid. 

T c menial \ iolcnce of /-Wi Thau Z^ro occurs for a v,u icly of icasons. 
W^.c i is iiuesiionable is whctliei it oct uis because of outside influences 
oi whcihei the chaiactcrs, in thcii search foi e.xcitcincni and stinuila 
tion, do it to ihcinscKcs. The main character. Clay, foiccs himself in 
horioi and fasu'natioii to watih his childhood friend, Julian, willingly 



34 



Expanding (he Canon 



commit a number of homosexual acts for money. Society generally 
views homosexuality negatively as something of a perversion. Yet 
Clay's quest for excitement has led him to cast aside societal mores, and 
he enters into a horror world, a counter world to what society sees as 
normal. He sleeps with an acquaintance, Griffin, and is seemingly 
unaffected by the incident. He snorts an abundance of cocaine and 
attends parties where his friends arc in some way or another messed up. 
Their problems have no nr ning for him, and his )"e is equally 
meaningless to his friends. They don't question him about anything 
other than surface matters unless he appears to be breaking out of the 
qucst-for-desirc mold that they all live in. 

All this contributes to a collapse within Clay's mind. Everything 
around him is opulent, and yet decadent, with outside influences no 
doubt contributing to his downfall. The cocaine, the fancy cars, the 
beautiful and rich males and females, the free sex, and the endless 
supply of money that can purchase all of the above are the weapons that 
he turns upon himself. In the midst of absolute riches, he can find 
nothing worth thinking about or working for. The opulence does its 
V iolcnce upon him in that he becomes ^ .,of the mindless. Apparently, 
this is the only way he can save himself. 

Bui ultimately, he does have control. In the end, his abuse of all 
around him is his o^vn choice. The v iolence that results within his mind 
kills part of him, just as surely as the policeman's bullet kills Dalla^ 
Winston. The two of them are alike in thai the violence done to them 
comes from outside factors. And yet both of them willingly brought it 
upon themselves in a desperate effort to gain control, in some way, of 
their lives. 

While the differences between these two books are obvious, there are 
many subtle ways that they are alike. Both deal with an unwanted 
(action of society. The greasers are loved by no one bul their own and are 
generally feared and despised. While abusing them and beating thein 
up, the Socs fear the greasers, as do the nurses in the hospital and the 
newspapermen who cover Johnny and Ponyboy's story. While theother 
factions of society reject the greasers, the rejection of the teens in Less 
Than Zero is a bit more subliminal. Author Ellis never comes out and 
says that they are hated, or despised. If anything, they are probably 
idolized by the less fortunate who wish they were as well off. 

Yet the rejection and the labeling of these characters as an unwanted 
faction of society is there. It is not the other characters in the story who 
do the rejecting, it is the reader. We rejecl them as worthless because of 
their self-absorption. We reject them because of the almost non human 
way that they deal with each other «?nd the world. Their lack of feelings 



opulence to Decadence 



35 



and emotions repels us. And we are particularly critical of ihem because 
they have everything; the world is an open door, and they have all of the 
keys. Yet they wallow in their pettiness and never use the opportunities 
that they have had handed to them to do anything that could be called 
ethically worthwhile. 

There is a marked absence of parenting as we know it in both The 
Outsiders and Less Than Zero, In Hinton's novel, the parents are 
apparently dead, nonexistent, or not around. But Darry acts as a sort of 
parent for Ponyboy and Soda after their parents are killed in an auto 
accident. He sacrifices college opportunities so that he may work and 
keep what is left of his family together. He monitors Ponyboy's reading 
material and is constantly on him about his schoolwork. He sets cu' fews 
and even tries to get Soda and Ponyboy to eat right. Yet Darry is not the 
parent If anything, he is the model of what most teenagers want: a 
parent who is both strict and understanding. He exhibits parental ways, 
yet he is a friend as well. By most teenagers' standards, parents cannot 
be friends. 

In Less Than Zero there are parents, but for all practical purposes, 
there might as well not be any. Their function in the lives of their 
children seems to be limited to providing the necessities of life: food, 
shelter, cable TV. They are consumed in their own lives and what 
attention they pay to their children is almost perfunctory. Clay' ^er 
asks him what he wants for Christmas: how about renewing his 
subscription to Variety} As a substituJt for real conversation, these 
parents buy their children material things because they believe this is all 
that is demanded or required of them. One of Clay's friends, Kim, never 
seems to know where her mother is and finds out by reading the gossip 
columns in some of the trade rags. She isn't overly concerned; she only 
wants to know so that she will be able to answer the question when 
someone asks her. 

Both of these books are striking examples of adolescent literature and 
the extivmes to which it has gone. Both tell effective and haunting 
stories. Both make points that are well taken and succeed in opening our 
eyes. But the similarities end there. 

Hinton's novel contains no sex, no graphic physical violence, and no 
br.d or offensive language. Yet the novel was a success without those 
elements and is considered a minor teenage classic. The time in which 
It was written may have dictated that these elements not be contained in 
the book; but even so, it really doesn't need them to succeed. Adding sex, 
gore and bad language would have changed the scope and tone of The 
Outsiders and probably would have focused unnecessary attention on 
those aspects. If anything, their inclusion in the story may have taken 



ERLC 



42 



36 



Expanding the Canon 



dway from it. In the same way, taking out the sex, gore, and language in 
Less Than i- o would have severely diminished the message. It is 
devastating because of the dealings with those very things, and the 
characters are what they are because of their de^p involvement in all of 
these. Their dealings with the dark side of life are what make them, and 
the story, what it is. 

What can be learned from Less Than Zero far outweighs the 
inclusion of sex, violence, homosexuality, drug abuse, and all the 
other dark elements that make up the book. Few readers want to 
experience the anguish of Clay, trapped in an exclusive Alice in 
Wonderland setting. What they want to do is wish that he could see 
beyond his gilded cage and take advantage of the opportunities that he 
has. They learn by example what is good and what is bad. There will be 
a few students who will wish that they had a Jag, all the coke in the 
world, great clothes, and sex with whomever and whenever they want. 
After all, we've all been taught to work to be rich and if we do so, the 
rewards will be ours. But th^ise who read further will find that the payoff 
isnot without a price. The piit^e isone's soul, and, for Clay, the payment 
is due. 

The Hinton book is a classic because it deals with the basic tenets of 
Jic human spirit, good and evil. While society frowns upon Ponyboy, 
Dallas, and the rest of the greasers, we as readers see that they have much 
to offer that is positive. Compared to Clay and his cohorts, Ponyboy and 
the greasers have much. The> havt a brotherhood, a unity amongst their 
own for whi<„h they are willing to fight. They take care of and are 
concerned about each other. They are willing to make sacrifices. Dallas 
gives Johnn> and Pony a gun, even though it could mean jail for him. 
He takv^ the heat from the police and spends a night in jail so that the 
police will look elsewhere for the fugitives. Darry gives up his dreams of 
college to support his brothers. Dallas, although unable tc express it, 
wants Johnny to have a better life than he did. He doesn't want Johnny 
to be hurt by the world and become as hardened to it as he has. 

The spirituality olLess Than Zero is equally unifying, but only in a 
surface way. All of the people around Clay are bound by a like desire to 
push life to the edge in a blind search for anything vaguely interesting. 
They depend on each other for drugs, sex, gossip, and rides home. 
However, this common bond isn't anything that an> are willing, like 
Dallas and Darry in The Outsiders, to fight for. Their concerns center 
around their own problems and never seem lo extend to their friends. 
Nowhere in the book is this bet.er displayed than in a scene where Clay 
and Kim seek out an anorexic friend at Kim's New Year's Eve party and 
find her distntught an.l shooting up heroin in Kim's back bedroom. 



opulence to Decadence 



37 



Instead of trying: to save her by talking her out of it, they sit b> and 
watch, spellbound, -vvhilt- she plays drug roulette. 

The sacrifices that Clay and his friends are willing to make have little 
to do with caring about their fellow humans. As a matter of fact, they 
almost fall to the level of human sacrifices, as shown by their actions 
and lackadaisical attitude towards others. Clay finds Rip and Spin 
amusing themselves by having sex with a twelve-year-old girl who has 
sold herself to them in exchange for drugs. While Clay watches in 
horror and fascination. Spin shoots her up and then has sex with her. 
No one seems to care, including the apparently willing victim, who lies 
there throughout in a drug-induced stupor. 

What Hinton wants to say in The Outsiders far transcends the 
realistic actions of the characters. For this reason, the novel is timeless. 
In ihx' same sense, Les:^ Than Zero could be symbolic of an isolated 
element of teenage society. The violence, gore, and sex are necessary 
because of their direct influenre upon the characters. 

W.e are fortunate to live in a society where teenagers can be exposed 
to all facets ot life through literature. Some would vehemently disagree, 
and perhaps they have valid points. Is it necessary for students to read 
about the almost evil, alm.ost diabolical lifestyles of Clay and his 
fiiends? The questions that educators and parents alike need to ask are 
not whether it is necessary, but whether the situations exist. If they do, 
then teens have the light to read about them. And in so doing, maybe 
learn a lesson. 

From English Journal, October 1987, 69-72 



ERLC 



44 



8 Foreign Affairs: 
Contact Literature in English 



Michael Spooner 



We cannot wriie like the English. ... We cannot write only as 

Indians Our method of expression therefore has to be a dialect 

which will some day prove to be as distinctive and colorful as the 
Irish and the American. 



English is now a world language. Linguists have compared the role of 
modern English to the Latin of the Late Roman Empire and to the 
historic importance of Sanskrit throughout tht South Asian subconti- 
nent. At first largely through the (often unwelcome) agency of the 
British Empire, and more recently tluough the influence of industry, 
aviation, the information age, and attendant technologies. English has 
come to play a significant role in cultures in which it is not indigenous. 
These cultures include India and the rest of South Asia,. East anr. West 
Africa, the Caribbean, the Philippines, many Asian countries, and, 
arguably, American and Canadian Indian nations. 

As English becomes institutionalized in nations that do not share its 
Western cultural traditions, the language is broadening. Contact with 
non-Western cultures and languages calls English into service to 
express a new array of linguistic and cultural functions. The English 
produced in new contexts naturally takes on the "flavor'* of its 
surroundings, delivering a blend of native and Western linguistic 
features, semantic and pragmatic qualities, literary heritages, and 
the like. 

Biaj B. Kachru has analyzed the relationships among the "Eng- 
lishes" of what he calls the "Inner Circle" (native Eiiglish cultures) and 
the "Outer Circle'* (non-native English cultures). Since the latter 
varieties of English— called nativized— are produced by the contact 
between the language, the culture, and surrounding languages, so the 
literatures ^^ritten in those varieties are often called "contact litera- 
tures." (The term is also applied to creative writing in nativized varieties 
of other languages— African French, for example.) 



—Raja Rao (viii) 



38 



ERIC 




Foreign Affairs 



39 



Contact literature in English is of considerable interest, then, to a 
number of academic disciplines, including sociolinguistics, compara- 
tive literature, semiotics, reader -response theory, and ESL. These works 
also provide a trove of material for the mainstream English classroom. 
For many English teachers, however, contact literature poses a number 
of questions. 

Is It Credible Literature? 

It's more than a question of taste. Linguists, teachers, general readers, 
and skeptics alike wonder if it is truly possible in a given language 
adequately to represent the experience, thought, or discourse style of a 
culture not native to that language. Ronald Blaber briefly but carefully 
uncovers thesemiotic ground that undt ics this question. 

Drawing on the terminology of semioticians Lotman and Eco, 
Blaber describes the special predicament of the creative writer in a 
second language. To get at a central issue in the writing of contact 
literature, Blaber distinguishes between (1) the personal or cultural 
content of a text, and (2) the conventions of language—syntdx, lexicon, 
and so forth (i.e., the formal dimension through which that content is 
presented). 

The formal dimension provides information in terms of what 
Loiman calls a "primary modeling system," while the cultural dimen- 
sion—philosophy, attitudes, aesthetics — constitutes a "secondar mod- 
cling system." These systems merge within the text to give a work its 
meaning. InLotman's view, thcf rimary system (formal) dominates the 
secondary system (cultural); thus, writers of cont«ir.t literature inevitably 
frustrate themselves, trapped (though by choice) within a language that 
is alien to their culture. "Essentially," Blaber says, "this is a variation of 
the Whorf-Sapir hypothesis." 

More than a matter of taste, then, the question addresses the viability 
of contact literature from a scmiotic perspective. Won't such literature 
be ineffective since so much of the non-English culture will be 
inexpressible in English? 

To this, the writers answer a resounding "no. " Chinua Achebe, noted 
Nigerian poet and fictionist, says this: 

I feel the English language will be able lo carry iht weight of my 
experience. Bui it will liave to be a new English, still in full 
communion witli its ancestral home, but altered to suit its new 
African suj^roundings. . , . Tlie price a world language must be 
prepared lo pay is submission to many different kinds of use. (82) 



ERLC 



40 



Expanding the Canon 



K. S. Narayana Rao agrees: 

Expressions in the original language acquire a new sense in 
English, or what is perfectly sensible in one language becomes 
illogical when put in another. For the Indian writing in English, 
the challenge is to bend it to suit the needs to convey Indian 
sensibility. (160) 

In other words, these wriieis turn the semioiic objection on its head. 
They suggest that the cultural material (Loiman's secondary modeling 
system) will stretch or reshape the expressive possibilities of the 
language (primary modeling sysiein). One need only remember the 
variations in the English used by native speakers— compare the 
American ^vilh the Irish— to see this is plausible. 

Is This Really English? 

One of the most imporidni current issues in US education as noted by 
the NCTE Commission oi. the English Language is the misunderstand- 
ing and mistrust of languaji*" variation by teachers as well as the public 
(Schustei). The impetus behind the "English Only" movement and 
much of the back-to-basics energy of education reformers seems to 
spring from a confidence that v;hat we call "Standard English" is 
somehow above (he reach of variation. 

However, a glance at the history of English in America, even simply 
at historical documents, reminds us that Uie dialect called standard has 
changed markedly over time. "Fourscore and seven years," for example, 
became a conspicuously nonstandard construction rfiit" a mere genera- 
tion or two. Even among speakers of grammatically "standard" English 
today, neologisms ("prioritize"), slang ("yuPP>c")' loan words 
fiom other languages ("cassette") invade the American lexicon regular- 
ly. And cf course, regional pronunciations in America compete for 
acceptance and prestige. Comparing American usage, lexicon, and 
"accent** with Canadian, Australian, English, and Irish reveals what a 
wide range of variation is tolerable among native speakers of a single 
language. 

Once we acknowledge that variation is a constant feature of 
"standard" dialects, A'e can more easily see the rationale for Raja Rao's 
point of view in the epigraph to this article. This perspective allows us 
(1) to admit the English that Americans write is as much a product of 
language contact, physical environment, history, and development as 
any other variety of English, and (2) lO approach the newer varieties of 
uritien English— like Indian and African English--wiih the interest 



ERLC 



4? 



Foreign Affairs 



41 



and respect ^vc actuid established varieties— like Irish and American 
English. 

The Sound nf English 

Then thef*^lice inspector saunters up to the Skefflingtoii gate, and 
he opens it and one coolie and two coolies and three coolies come 
out, their faces dark as mops and their blue skin black under the 
clouded heavens, and perspiration flows down their bodies and 
their eyes seem fixed to the earth— one coolie a. id two coolies and 
three coolies and four and five come out, their eyes fixed to the earth, 
their stomachs black and clammy and bulging, and they march 
toward the toddy booth; and then suddenly more coolies come out, 
more and more and more like clogged bullocks, (Rao 137) 

According to S. N. Sridhar, when Rao sets out to bend English to 
convey Indian sensibility in this kind of passage, he creates an almos 
endless chain of coordinations. The result is a very effective facsimile of 
the ''breathless*' cadences ol Kannada, a South Asian ! nguage which 
typically multiplies participial clauses. 

Authors use other devices as \vell to convey in English the sound and 
flavor of ihei^ native culture, Sridhar lists the following common 
examples from Indian English writers: 

the verbless sentence-''*T>on\ touch. Not completely dry yet." 
(Narayan) 

the subjectless sentence— '**VJhcn a man says T love you' it sounds 
mechanical, . . , Perhaps credible in Western society, but sounds 
silly in ours." (Narayan) 

questions without mvmiOH— "Brother, you arc with me?" (R. 
Rao) 

left and right dislocation—' And he can sing too, can Jayaramach 
ar," (R. Rao) 

Kachru details olhei cxpciiments in style and discouisc which likewise 
transform English to ucate the sensibility of othei non English, "Oulei 
Circle" cultures. 

How Does It Work in the Classroom? 

Since wi iters of contact literature necessarily draw from a double 
repertoire of lil-jrary tiaditions, a ciitical approach that accommodates 
only Western tradition \vould not be productive in the classroom. 



ERLC 



•12 



Expanding the Canoti 



Edwin Thumboo details a theoretical perspective which accounts for 
both the non-English and the English (i.e., Western) literary "ecology." 
Each, he says, 'lias powciful traditions marked by particular linguistic, 
liteiaiy, and aesthetic preoccupations," and he argues that the connec- 
tions between the two need to be addressed. 

As the writer's native culture "bends" the formal coi /entions of 
Western English, it also lequires readers to bend their expectations of 
both what is toleiable formally and what is predictable culturally in 
English. Jill Ma> suggests that a good wa> to start in the classroom is to 
discuss the culture which will be encountered in the literature. Par- 
ticular attention lo students* linguistic and cultural biases is warranted, 
including possible pictcstiiig of cultuial know ledge, class discussion of 
customs, history, myths, and languages within the culture. 

The cxpeiiencc of reading tontact literature for the fiist time can 
seem quite an exotic one, both linguisticall> and culturally, eliciting 
impoitant exploiatory responses fiom students. For this reason, a 
pedagog) giounded in reader-iesponsc theor> oi tranaactional criticism 
seems especially useful. Probst maintains that debate focusing on 
discuveiing tlu "light" conclusion is not appropriate in the literature 
classroom. Ii.-stead, he says, teacheis face a challenging but rewarding 
task: "encouraging students to articulate responses, examine thei) 
oiii^ins in the texi and in o. lei expeiiences, reflect upon thcni, and 

anaiy/e them Discussions should encourage students not to win but 

to clarify and refine." 

The rise uf contact literature in English provides an opporiunit> to 
study in a unique way the literary efforts of international writers, and at 
the same time lo observe the \ital process of language change. This 
change is of special irucicst to English teachers and students, since it is 
our language wc are observing, and since the development it undergoes 
will make it a more sensitive and authentic vehicle for creative 
expression of consciousness in non- Western cultures. 

For more information on contact literature, consult the ERIC 
database usmg the descriptors Literature Appreciation, Nonstandard 
Dralects, World Literature, African Literature, American hidian Liter - 
aturcSucrolinguistits, Literature Programs, Curriculum Enrichment. 

Works Cited 

Ailiebis Ctunna. ' The African Writer and the English Linguagc." Morning 
Yet on Cf cation Day. New York: Anchor, 1976. 



Foreign Affairs 



48 



Blabcr, Ronald L. "The More Wc Read. Coiiiaci Literature and tlie Reader." 

Cultural Reflections, Papers from the Project Contact Literature in Cross 

National Perspective, Ed. Paul Sliarrad. Honolulu: Hawaii U, 1981. 
kachru, Bnij B. "The Bilingual 5 Crcativ it>. Dibcoursal and StylLstic Strategics 

111 Contact Literatures in English/* S/nrfiw in the Linguistic Scunres, 13.2 

(1983): 37-5.5. 

. "Standards, Codification, and Sociol'iiguislic Realism. The English 

Uniguage in the Outer Circle.*' English m the World, Ed. Randolph Quirk 
niul Henry Widdowson. Gunbridge: Cambridge UP, 198.*). 

Ma> , Jill. "To Think Anew. Native Amei ican Indian Literature and Children's 
Attitudes." The Reading Teacher, 36.8 (1983): 790-94. 

Narayan, R. K. The Painter of Sig7ts, New York: Viking, 1976. 

Probst, Robert. Transaitional Tlioor> in the Teaching of Liteiatuic." ERIC 
Digest. 1987. 

Rao, K.S. N*ira>ana. " Ihc UntiaiislatedTranslationand Aesthetic Consequen 
CCS. Indi.ni Fiction in English.*' Expression Communication and Experi 
ence, Ed. R. G. Poppeiwell. London. The Modern Himianitics Research 
Association, 1973. 

Rao, Raja. Katithapura, London: 0.\ford UP, 1943. 

Sduisier, Chailes, and others. "Trends and Issues in English ';istiiution, 

1987-Seven Suimnaries." CS 210 417 
Sridhar.S. N. "Non-native English Literatuies. Context and Rele\ance." The 

Other Tongue: Eughsh Across Cultures, Ed Biaj B. Kacbru. 0.\ford. 

Pergainoii Institute of English, 1982. 
Thunit >o, Edwin. * Tuni Peispecli\cs and iMulti Eiosystiins. Ti.idition foi a 

Commonwealth Writer." World Englishes, 4.2 (198.5): 213-22. 



Getting Started: Readin{;s in Conine* Literature 

Listed below are some examples of contact litCMtuic. Any of tlicst tiilcs 
might sen c as d good starting point fur teachers 01 sliuients. Publisher 
information is for the most recent paperback edition. 

Achebe, Chinna. (Nigeria) Things Fall Apart, New York; Eawcell, 
1978. 

The tragedy of Okoiikwo, iin I bo tribesman, who is trapped 
between the tiaditional \alues of his tribe and tlu loming of w bite 
Christian missionaries. 

Anand, Mnik Raj. Hndia) Untouchable, New York: Ind.-U.S Inc., 
1983. 

One (lay in Mie life of Bakha, a street sweeper and member of India's 
lowest caste. 



44 



Expanding the Canon 



Naipaul, V, S. (Trinidad) A House Jot Mr. Biswas. New York; 
Random, 1984. 

The life story of one Mr. Biswas that is both a portrait of an 
"ordinary" man and a rich evocation of the people and places 
Trinidad, 

Narayan, R. K. (India) Under the Banyan Tree and Other Stories. 
New York: Penguin, 1985. 

A selection of Narayan 's stories f:oni the last forty years, populated 
v/ith a motley cast of characters and written with great gnice and 
v/it, Narayan *s tales have been compared to those of Dickens and O. 
Heniy, 

Ndebele, Njal 'o. (South Africa) Fools and Other Stories, New 
York: Readers International, 1986. 

Stories of life in South Af.ica's black townships, mosr of which 
focus on children or adolescents. Ndebele is one of the important 
new wi iters emerging from South Africa, 

Soyinka, Wole. (Nigeria) /I Ac; The Years of Childhood. New York, 
Random, 1983. 

An autobiography of the Nobel Pri/e-winning Nigerian's fiist 
eleven years thai piovides a vi\id picture of growing up in a small 
town in western Nigeria in me 1930s. 

From English Journal, November 1987, -^5-48 



5i 



9 Celebrating the Black Female Self: 
Zola Neale Hurston's 



American Classic 



Julie Rocincr 

Alice Walker tells a sioiy about the lime Zola Neale Hurslon aliended a 
parly honoriiig the retipienis of a young playwrighis' award (1979, / 
Love Myself When I Am Laughing . . . , Old Wesibury, NY: Feminisi). 
Hurslon, at lhai liine .i rcteni Barnard graduate, had received second 
prize for her first published work, a play entitled Color Struck. She 
ariivcd at the reception fashio.iably late, paused dramatically in the 
doorway, tossed her scarf around her throat, and sang out at the top of 
her voice, '*Cb!or-r-r Str-r-ruck!!" 

Twelve years later, in 1937, Hurston published Their Eyes Were 
Watching God (1978, Urbana; U of iPinois P), a novel grounded in this 
same celebration of the self— specifically, of the black female self. The 
hero, Janic Mae Crawford, is a young black woman living in the post- 
World War I rural South. Her long, and ultimately successful, struggle 
foi hei authentic self compels hei to confront and overcome a i,auntlei 
of limiting expectations o£ "Whui a woman oughta be and to do" 
(Hurston 3 1 ). Hurston structures Janie's story as a classic hero's quest, 
transciibed to the feminine. Janic's geography is principally an innei 
one; the obstacies in her path are the loud voices of others which drown 
out the soimd of her own inner voice. 

The Importance of Reading Female 

Judith Fetterley (1978, The Resisting Reader, A Fertiinist Approach to 
American Fiction, Bloomington. Indiana UP) has f 'nted out that 
reading only from the canon of traditional classics jf English and 
American literature may maneuver a young woman into identifying 
against herself— oi into adopting a "male" perspective about women 
characters. Equally disturbing is Tillie Olsen's suggestion (1978, 
Silences, New York. Delta- Seymour Lav;rence) that, failing to see hei 
uuii experiences— both inner and outer — reflected accurately in litera 

i5 



46 



Expanding the Canon 



turc, a young woman ma> begin lo senj>c that there is someihing wrong 
wiih her experiences. If she has been inclined lo write, she may lose 
confidence that she has something of value to say and remain silent. 

Believing these things, largely because they shed much lighl on my 
own experience, I approached teachinj^, hoping to give better than I had 
received. I cherished among my goals increasing the sensitivity of 
my students to gender issues in literature and offering them— both 
young women and men— central images of women that are both real 
and positive. 

As a first-year teacher, I had the exceptional lurk to receive the 
support of my department in pioneering Their Eyes Were Watching 
God in my tollege-prep, junior English tlassei*. At the end of that year, 
our di^sti icladded the no\cl to the list of leeoinmcnded core books for the 
elcvenih grade. Their Eyes Were Watching God is uniquely well suited 
foi the high-sehool eurrieuluni. Its eompelling thematic concerns 
1 ivcf.-J my studeiiib' attention, Huiiion'b stunning nan-ation and poetic 
rciuleiing of bouthein blaek speech --freshed their liteniry eyes and 
heaits, and her complex but aeeessible b^mbolit structure offered them 
ample oppoituniiy for challenging interpiv-tivc work. 

The Search for Far Horizon 

Janie Mae Ciawfoid's Nann> is an ex-sla\e who preaches "a greai 
.senium about colored women sittin' on high" as the desirable alterna 
uvetoher own use asa "work-ox and abiood sow"(Hurston 31), Nanny 
senses her appioaehiiig death and forces sixteen > ear old Janie into a 
loveless inaiiiage to a man u ith some economic means but no poetry in 
his soul. Janie, howevei, has already experienced the first stirrings of 
jcxual and spiritual desire. 

She was stretched on her back beneath the pear tree soakuig in the 
alio chant of the \isiting bees, the gold of the sun and ihe panting 
brc-aih of tl.c bree/e when the inaudible voice of it all onne to her. 
She saw a dust-bearing bee sink into the sanctum of a bloom: the 
iliousand sister-c-lyxes arch to meet the love embrace and the 
astatic shiver of the tree from root to tiniest branch creaming in 
cver> blossom .nul frothing with delight. So this was a marriage! 
She lud been summoned to behold revelation. Then Janie fell a 
pain remorseless sw ect that left her limp and languid. (I lursion 21) 

Jaiilt quickl> realr/es that hei husband "deseciatts the pear tree," and 
after the death of hei Nanny, she takes hei Tirsl opportunity to run for 
far horizon. 




Cdcbratmg the Black Female Self 



Unfortuiuitcly, her lickci to riuc is Jo(l> Stiuks. .1 man with .imbilions 
to be the first black mayor of the lirsi all-black town, who has \vv) 
licfiniie ideab about "Mrs. Ma>oi Starks" and her role. He baiters Jaiiie 
against the lock of hei prix ileges, forces hei to cover her luxuriant hair, 
and forbids hci 10 jartitip.ite 111 the comnuinit) slor) telling sessions 
The first time he strikes lier, Janie 

sunxl u lici e he left her for uiniicasural 1 iiiic and ilioiiglii. Slu- m w)d 
there uiiiil sonu-ihing fell off ilie shelf inside her. Then slie went 
inside tliere to see what ii was. h w s her image of Jody luiubled 
down and sliaiiered. . . , She had uo ino* • blossom/ openings 
dusting |K)llen over her man, .leiiher an> glistening young fruit 
wliere ilie \m:\h used to be. She found that slie had a liosi of 

ihouglus she bad nevei let Jody know about She liad an inside 

.iiul <m outside now and ,Nuddenly she knew bow not to mix '.ikmi. 
(HufMon 1 13) 

Jaiue's a\\.neness of du rift between hei innei and outer li\es leads 
hci to hei gieatest spiiiludl challenge— how to reconcile the two and 
live an authentic life, not the life prescribed for her by otheis. 
paiticuhii ly hei huibands. Aflei Jod>\s death, it appeals that Janie may 
have he.ileil the 1 ift anil hain-d to live for herself. To ihi disma> nf her 
coiuinunit). she niairies Veigible "Tea Cike" Woods, a man consider 
ah!v younger, darker, and poorer than she. 

Colorism Blights the Pear Tree 

hi many wa>s, Janie and Tea Cake\ ulationship is a bieathtaking 
ex<impk uf Janie's icvelation undei the pear liec* sensual. pla>ful, 
nuttually eniichsng. riie> lca\i Liion\ ilie, lia\i 1 ilccp into the Floiida 
Kverglades. and make iheii li\ing picking beans in a wild, feitile 
enviionment known .is the Muck. Here Janie lets hei hair flow, 
wi!ling!v duns u\eialls to woik beside Tea Cike in the fields, and tells 
stoiies at cominunit) gatheiiiigs. hi fact, the power of janie and Tea 
Cike'slmeaiul loniance m.ikrs Huibton'ssubsecpieni naiiati\c choins 
extremely piovoGitive and underscores her daring. 

Janie isanuilau.i. Betausi slu places i ) much iiiipoitance in inner 
icalities, her long, wa\> hail and coffee and cre.nn complexion mattri 
httle to hei. Tlie> aie consisteiitl), however, st.indards h) whit!* -illiei 
pi^)ple judge her. On the iNhick, Janie meets iNhs. Turner, who 
articulates this standnid. 

All tan'i snnid bhick niggers. Ah doii*t blame de while folks from 
liaijir Vai caube ah cnfi siand Vin saahself. >iber iliing, Ah liaies 





48 



Expanding the Cano7i 



luh see folks lak me and you mixed up wid "em. Us oughia class off 
.... If ii wuzn'i for so many black folks it wouldn't be no race 
problem. De white folks would take us in wid 'em. De black ones is 
holdin' us back. (Hurston 210) 

Janie is baffled by this inierndiizsd race haired— or colorism— but 
Tea Gikt is infected. With no provocation in her behavior— in fact, to 
the contrary — he becomes increasingly insecure about Janic's love for 
him. Why, in his twisted reasoning, would a light black woman choose 
a dark black man? When Mrs. Turner's light-skinned brother visits the 
Muck, Tea Cake beats J nie to reassure himself in possession. A painful 
exchange betu ecn Tea Cake and a friend follows in which they compare 
the relative human merits of a **high time woman" (light-skinned) and 
a "rusty black woman" (dark-skinned). 

'Tea Ciike, you sho is a kucky man," Sop de Bottom icld him. "Uh 
person can i>ee every place you hit her. Ah bet sue never raised her 
hand tub hit yuh back, i.eilher. Take some uh dese ol' rusty black 
w omen and de> w ould fight > uh all night long and next da> nobody 
couldn't tell you ever hit *em." (Hurston 219) 

About this expel ience Jaiiie maintains an eloquent silence. Eventually, 
a fatal fever snaps Tea Cake's mind. His jealousy overwhelms him, and 
he fires his shotgun at Janic. She must shoot him in self defense or die, 
a victim of his colorist stereotyping and lack of belief in hei inner truth. 
She chooses to live. 

At her trial, Janic's only weapon in her own defense is her now- 
stiong voice, articulating hei tiut self. She succeeds in representing hei 
"inside** in ihe "outside" woild and is acquitted. Back at home, she 
ix-'iatcb her whole story to hei best friend Phoeby, encourages Ph.oeby to 
I e peat hei stoiy to the community, and urges everyone to live from the 
inside out. Now alone, although still sensual and self-a .sured, ^he 
wraps herself in her memories, and Phoeby hurries off into the 
gathering darkness. 

Reading and Writing beyond the Ending 

In a literature — and a woild— in v\hich women are oftcu Jiawn (and 
drawn in I; by the fantasies of others, Janie's fierce and lo% ing choice for 
herself is both a shock and an inspiration. The implications can 
reverbeiate for d.iys in a classroom— oi a life. Some of my students 
icbi lied. They simply refused to read oi wiitcbeyonu the "happily-ever- 
after" ending of Jaoie and Tea Cake's love affair and ignored the last 



Celebrating ihi Black Female Self 49 

crucial sequences of the novel. Concluding her essay on the develop- 
ment of Janie's sexuality, Megan writes, 

I am happy that Janie finally found Tea Cake and happiness. Tea 
Gike was Janie's fulfillment mentally and spiritually. I hope one 
day that 1 will find a man who will satisfy all of my mcds. 

Or from Jeff, 

I foL the novel a splendid look at the real world from the eyes of 
a woman. Janie found fulfillment with a liberal-minded man. 

Girrie, however, was able to conclude. 

As the themes of growing maturity and the desire to find love 
develop, Janie is engaged in three marriages. She learns a little more 
widi each one. The third reodlts in her own personal satisfaction, 
even after the death of her husband. Janie gains the self-knowledge 
she needs to find happiness widiin herself. 

Shannon examined the use of the pear tree as a symbol of i..Kual and 
spiritual fulfillment. 

Unfortunately, Janie's pear tree does not give her sweet fruit 
forever, h actually witliersand dries up with the death of Tea Gike. 
But Janie has already figured out how u live for herself, and despite 
Tea Cake's death she will forever have an inner peace concerning 
the pear tree. 

Andy wiote, 

(Janie] is determined to be her own master. Her decisions and 
choices completely defy die images ... for die ordinary black 
woman to follow. Her reoudiation of the images leads to the 
creiition of a human being. 

Erin projected Hurslon- and I believe herself— into JtUiie's struggle. 

Zora must have identified \\ illi the struggles Janie lived through. By 
seeing the struggle on paper Zora w as able to identify and deal w ith 
them in her own life. 

That the impassioned journey of a black woman through love and 
heartbreak toward self-definition can result in saident writing and 
thinking like this is, for me, the source of deep gratification and hope. 
Beyond imparting a sheer love of the words themselves, I hope that 
reading Their Eyes Were Watching God and "seeing the struggle on 
paper** will stretch my students' own horizons of possibility. 

From English Journal, November 1989, 70-72 



ERIC 



10 Neighborhoods: Maya Angelou's 
''Harlem Hopscotch'' 



Sister J. Eleanor Mayer, IHM 



Harlem Hopscotch 

One foot down, then hop! It's hot. 

Good things for 'he ones that's got. 
Another jump, now to the left. 

Everybody for hisself. 

In the air, now both feet down. 

Since you black, don't stick around. 
Food is gone, the rent is due. 

Curse and cry and then jump two. 

All the people out of work. 

Hold for three, then twist and jerk. 
Cross the line, they count you out. 

That's what's hopping's all about. 

Both feet flat, the game is done. 
They think I lost. I think I won » 

—Maya Angelou 

The first time my class and I encountered "Harlem Hopscotch" it was 
totally by accident. We were viewing a videocassette of the series Bill 
Moyers had done on Creativity for public television, in which he 
interviewed Maya Angelou as his first subject. Toward the end of the 
segment, Angelou visited a classroom of upper elementary or junior- 
high students to talk with them about success— her actual and their 
potential achievement of it. At the end of the sharing, she recited 
(although her presentation is so much more drama than recital) the 
poem "Harlem Hopscotch," transforming the last line into "They say 
you lost. I think you won." 

'^he tape ended. My classroom full of senior track-one, upper-Main- 
Line gi^ls sat at first in perfect stillness. Finally, one girl broke the quiet, 



• Harlem Hopscotch," by Maya Angelou. Reprinted by permission of Hiri Music, 
Inc. c/o G.W. Purcell Assoc., 964 2nd Ave., New York, NY 10022. 

50 




Neighborhoods 



51 



"We have a few minutes, Sister. Just play the part with the poem back 
again. Let us see it/* Her request became unanimous. So I replayed and 
we rewatched. 

It took me almost a month of library searching and reading of 
Aiigelou's anthologies to find the text of "Harlem Hopscotch," b^u I 
knew the discovery would be worth the looking. Never had I een 
students take so naturally to a poem or the rendition of one. 

The day I brought the ropy in, the class recognized it immediately. 
''It*s the poem from the movie,*' one girl said with the air of opening a 
Christmas present. "Where did you find it?" asked another. I told them 
of my library journeys, of the help I had received from reference 
librarians, and m> readings in Angelou's life and works. Then we began 
to enter into the world of "Harlem Hopscotch.'* At first volunteers read 
it. Several tried to recapture the enthusiasm, the rhythm that Angelou 
had delivered on the fiun. One girl, Ellen— always the enthusiast- 
asked if a group could work up a "rap" for the next day. I told them to 
go for it and they did, with choral movement andgesture that would put 
a modern Sophocles to shame. 

After the many interpretive readings, we talked about the poem as a 
whole. First, I asked, "What is it about?" "h's about a neighborhood," 
said Luci, "the black inner city of New York." Had any of them ever 
been there? It seemed many had and had stories to tell. One narrated her 
brother*s experience around Columbia University , of stripped tires, and 
great neighbors, of being taunted with names like "Mayonnaise" from 
upper story windows. Christine told of getting lost in the area and of a 
policeman*s telling her and her friend to lock the doors and not stop 
even for red lights Some compared it to the areas around inner-city 
Philadelphia with which they were more familiar. A few ri'-ounted 
fright stoiies— lateat night, lost and alone, suirnunded by boardcd-up 
or burned-out buildings. Others shared good experiences — help re- 
ceived when they had a flat, directions given, college friends who knew 
really great people who lived in the^e "Larlems"dnd looked out for each 
other and for "those who belonged." 

Then Heather said, "But I don't think this poem is just about a 
neighborhood. It's about life ... all levels of life." That led us to the 
conr ^pt of the extended meiaphor, the simple Lhildhood play iianslated 
into the comple. xmc of life. So we started to analy/.e ii, lo take note ol 
the steps in the hopscotch -^c what they meant for .:s. We asked, 
"Why did Angelou use the wordsshe did?" Sheila found the word "hot" 
in the first line very evocative. She described the small child she 
imagined playing the game on summer *s siz/ling streets with bare feet 
slapping against the asphalt, the only way to surv ive in such conditions 



ERLC 



58 



52 



Expanding the Canon 



is to move. Is that how Angelou was cautioning her reader? was warning 
us? Another girl saw the **hof" as capturing the emotion of the game. 
**You Start playing and you 'le into it. It doesn't matter that your nother 
is sitting on an old mattress in the corner of the steps or that your baby 
brother has nothing on but a diaper. You're playing and it is great." Is 
the game meant as an escape? 

Wc watched the directions the moves traced. In line three why hop to 
the left? Much discussion stirred around this one word. One girl 
mentioned that the normal, the expected move is to the right. In a world 
where a person is trapped— by poverty, by the expectations of others— 
a person has to take the unexpected tarn to win. Another brought up the 
connotations of Mi^sinister in Latin— and its modern associations 
with radical movements. She connected this to the following line (line 
4) that stresses individualism. To win, to move out, sometimes the 
extreme might be necessary. Most loved the ending with its paradoxical 
twist— especially remembering Angelou's revision of it for ihe students 
in the video. 

Other elements of poetry that entered into our discussion included 
form, language, and rhythm. It hadn't occurred to me, veteran English 
teacher and poetry analyzer, that Angelou was working from the 
traditional sonnet format until Megan noted it, ^ ailing from the left- 
hand corner of the room, "Isn't this a sort of sonnet? I know that it's not 
in iambic pentameter, but then it is supposed to be modern. It even has 
the Shakespearean couplet ending." That moved us to examir what 
rh\ thm it did follow. The pattern would have been difficult to trace had 
it not been for our having heard Angelou say it herself. 

"I remember," recalled Halle, "she used the movement of the game 
Itself. When she wanted to give the feel of coming down, as in line one, 
the word came down. The same thing happens at the beginning of 
stanza two." Another voice added that in stanza three when the 
deliberate pause in the game and life are marked (lines 9-10). a slowing 
seems to occur. 'Why? How does it happen?" I asked. 'The first line of 
that stanza draws the movement out with the word 'people' and the 
phrase out of work,' and then the next line picks up the pace again— 
especially when you hit the sound words 'twist' an ! 'jerk,'" a student 
ventured. 

That ended the day's class and our analysis of the poem as it related 
to the life experiences of the people in the poem— in their words, their 
world, their rhythm and their images, but it did not end our experience 
with the poem. At the opening of the next day's work, we spent ten 
minutes free writing on how "Harlem Hopscotch" spoke to each of us. 
When they finished, those students who wanted to shared their 



Neighborhoods 



53 



reflections. Kara opened by relating her current adventures of applying 
to college. The boxco on the hopscotch square she equated with college 
choices, some mostly dreams, others more realizable goals. She wrote, 
**Thc final two lines represent my acceptance and the waiting being 
finally over. Maybe my destination isn't the most prestigious university, 
maybe to some it doesn't ocem like much. But, I know that Tve made it 
to the top with what I've been given." 

Another girl shared an extremely personal experience of moving 
fro' affluence to **serious economic changes" due to parental sickness 
anu family problems. She saw herself moving through "Harlem 
Hopscotch" like the jinnper: "I have, like the player in that poem, 
worked through the disabilities, the setbacks and I know that I'm better 
for it. I have concluded that like the player and like May a Angelou, I can 
take what life gives me and rise above it." 

Other sharings involved expectations that come from teachers, 
family, self, the loss of a loved one, family separations, and daily hurts. 
The events and feelings were as different as each student, but on one 
point they all agreed. Lisa summarized it for them all. "I love this poem. 
It is so real." 

We arc still not quite done with **Harlem Hopscotch." We have 
begun a creative m(>de1ing, using the idea of a childhood experience as 
an extended metap*ior for our own poems. Ideas so far range from 
making mud pies, to holding hands crossing the street, to bedtime 
stories. All these they arc j.«fallcling to life experiences. I can hardly 
wait to read them. 

From English Journal, September 1988, 86-88 



ERLC 



11 An Afrocentric Approach to 
Literature: Putting the Pieces 
Back Together 



Eileen Oliver 



Recently, I observed the instruction of two preservice teachers in their 
respective college-bound, racially mixed senior English classes. One 
teacher was working over Wordsworth's 'Tines Composed a Few Miles 
above Tintern Abbey" while her languishing students sat politely, took 
notes appropriatel), and were distracted easily as the minutes dragged. 
Their instructor, noting the apathy, worked harder, poring over theme 
ana mood, tone and imagery, ironing outeach word and phrase for her 
passive audience. 

Across the hall, the other fledgling teacher was orchestrating an 
analytic reading of the West African "lion and rabbit" legend. Students 
excitedly pointed out the signifying forms that they recognized from 
familiar "rap" pieces. They easily picked out images and pointed to 
metaphoric elements. Finally, their teacher led them to a "required" 
poem from the text which they analyzed with great enthusiasm, first 
from an Afrocei.tric point of view and then from the n.ore familiar 
Eurocentric perspective. 

The lesson objectives for these two classes were similar; yel one was 
working and one was not. The first teacher utilized a traditional 
approach, The second teacher was attempting to develop in her students 
an awareness of the poetic conventions of a different tradition. She then 
cor.ipared these principles to the criteria used almost exclusively in our 
Western culture and demonstrated the differences in evaluation when 
using different criteria. 

When we ulk of making connections and enric h\n^ all students with 
the language and literature of all cultures, we should be well past the 
question of "why." We've already fought that battle a number of times, 
a number of ways. Incorporating a variety of ethnocentric positions and 
traditions of literature into the curriculum is noi Gorriething we do as a 
humanitarian gesture oi as a fulfillment of department, school, or 
distiict mandate. We do it because true literacy is multicuUural and 
because it works. 

54 



ERLC 

hminniiinrrTiaaa 



6i 



An Afroceniric Approach to Lherature 



Wc know that interest levels, identification, and relevance head the 
hsiof motivation and achievement in uterature and that students de- 
velop more positive attitudes about themselves and about school when 
they am relate to what they read (Hornburger 1985). In her challenge to 
speech, language, and composition teachers, Geneva Smitherman- 
Donaldson (1987) points to alarming dropout rates and declining 
literacy and achievement levels, especialh in communities with higii 
minority populations, hi light of these shc^^king statistics, it is time to 
stop focusing on Jess meaningful atomistic measures and evaluations 
and to move away from our almost exclusive use of a Eurocentric per- 
spective when teaching literature and the language arts. We must begin 
to address tbe real needs of our students— from minority and dominant 
cultures— ana jdopt realistic, workable strategies to teach them. 

As for the question concerning the mainstream' g of ethni'' litera- 
ture versus its treatment in separate courses, both choices are correct. 
Students often stud> Shakespeare or Chaucer or Romanticism, and the 
like in survey classes and also pursue these aicas of speciaii^tion in 
more concentrated classes. Accordingly, great literature written by 
minority writers should be taught as great literature, and ethnic 
literatures can also be taught in "special studies" (Robinson 1985). For 
example, while James Baldwin should always be considered a major 
writer in any co»itemporary American literature course, his works can 
also be studiea more thoroughly in classes covering black literature, 
ethnic literature, or James Baldwin's Mterature. 

"The black experience" has as mu^h a place in the history of this 
country as the rise of the working class, the development of the two- 
party system, or the US involvement in the world wars. The problem, 
then, is not that ethnic concerns are not in the mainstream of our 
country *s identity; it is, instead^ that wc have denied these issues for so 
long that they have been lost in our curriculum! To present accurate 
information to oui students, we must acknowledge these deficiencies in 
background and put the material back where it belongs! 

In The Afroceniric Idea, Molefi Asante (1987) argues against the 
Eurocentric ideology "that masquerades as a universal philosophy, 
linguistics, psychology, education, anthropology, and history ' He 
suggests "taking the globe and turning it over so that we see all the 
possibilities of a world where Africa, for example, is subject and not 
object . . (3). This proposes a particularly interesting conceptual 
perspective for English teachers trained primarily in Western, not 
world, view. 

Curriculum plarmers muot recognize that black studies, indeed all 
ethnic studies, are interdist iplinary and should be incorporated into all 



ERJC R2 



56 



Expanding the Canon 



areas of learning, Asanie points out thai the "inability of the majority 
... to think beyond Eurocentric ideals" has long been a hindrance to the 
study of hiacks ir. history. Excluding; an Ellington from a music course, 
a Du Bois from history, or a Fanon or King from »>hilosophy reflects an 
exclusivity which deprives us of a true picture in each discipline (58). 
Bypassing the Black Power movement of tlie sixties which gave the 
impetus for so many other causes and self-discoveries in the modern 
world gives us and oui students a false perception of reality (Asante 
1987; Bennett 1986; Smitherman-Donaldson 1987). 

In "Western Civilization," we do not teach the Egyptian The 
Coming Forth by Day as the precursor and model for the writers of the 
Torah, the Koran, and oossibly the Bhagavad-Gita, Nor do our history 
books represent the Egyptian and Nubian civilizations as .ormulators 
of Greek and Roman thought (Asantc 1987), These examples belie the 
xenophobic perspective which all but eliminates a multicultural 
approach to history and literature. 

The Study of Black Literature 

Accon g to Darwin Turner (1985), black writers were almost all 
ignored the first sixty-five years of this century, and even now, since 
"minority relevance" and "cultural awareness ' have become credible 
goals, English teachers often treat ethnic literature in gen :ral, simplis- 
tic terms. Still not considered true art, most criticism of black literature 
is devoted to a discussion of the "message" (O'Brien cited in Cook 1985), 
instead of style, characterization, form, and the like. Writers are 
categorized as "black writers," and major artists are often "lumped 
together" with student and other novice writers. Excellent works like 
Wright's Native Son and Hansberry*s Raisin in the Sun Lecoine 
inaccurate symbols of the total black experience. Teachers sometimes 
choose popular adolescent literature which deals ^vrth social problems 
encountered by black youth. But these books dc a always develop the 
issues clearly or portray the characters fairl>, thus leaving readers with 
less than favorable impressions and little positive gain from the 
experience (Kiah 1985), 

In asking the question "How do we exploit the power of literature to 
clarify and expand the world of the reader?" Cook ( 1 985) reminds us that 
"creating relevance" is our most important tool. Turner posits that the 
"universal life experience" »"s not cjnfined to whites wrth European 
ancestry. Black students are not just interested in reading "black issues." 
The themes in Romeo and Juliet, The Scarlet Letter, and other 



An Afrocentric Approach to Literature 



frequently taught ^'classics'* have relevance to all students if taught 
properly. And many of the themes in black literature which also have 
universal relcvanccbhouldbe taught in the same vva>. Represents three 
suggestions for the selection and evaluation of black literature; 

1. Readings should not be restricted to celebrity biographies. 

2. Readcis should try to sec through the eyes of the author. 

3. Works should be evaluated carefully with an understanding of 
the v'alues of the tradition. 

A!> teachers of language and literature, we ought to be aware of speech 
acts, such as sounding and the Dozens in black English, because 
acknowledgment of black language **as a legitimate system" facilitates 
flucnc> in studeius with the figurati\e and literaiy forms of what 
Sm ithei man Donaldson calls the "language of w ider communication,** 
and "is a positive way of in\i ting overlap between school activities and 
home^alues'* (Fan and Daniels 1986, 55). The role of alliteration and 
repetition in sermons and oratories helps to create the symbolic quest 
for freedom and trad.':ional images of social statements i.< what many 
lefer to in "the black referent." The "styling" and rhythmic codes that 
Asante speaks of are exemplified in the orations of Martin Luther King, 
Jr., and Malcolm X. In "Literature and Black Children," Hornhurgei 
offeis a number of ways to enhance "creative reading" and critical 
thinking th*^ough discussions of and debates on literature-based ques- 
tions at several different levels. 

Stanford and Amin's Black Literature for High School Studeuts 
(1978) is an excellent source for high-school teachers. Besides a 
historical survey which dates back to pre-Civ il War wi iteis, the authois 
treat traditions, goals, andobjecti\es as well as adolescent litciatureand 
biography. Units are provided in the slave narrative and autobiogia- 
phy, poetry, and the short story. Examples of die connection of black 
literature to human relationships, my thsand legends, piose nonfiction, 
composition, and role-playing are also presented. 

Implementing the Black Aesthetic 

When looking at literature, English teachers and their students must 
use appropriate instruments by which to judge. For example, when 
analyzing Oedipus, ciitics emplo the classical definition— the birth- 
right, the hubris, the action —of the tragic hero. We must also learn and 
teach our students to judge the characters created by black artists who 
come from Afrocentric traditions, not by Euioccntric models but from 



ERLC 



58 



Expandiuf; the Canon 



the styles and characierisiics which most represent their wo.ks. In 
describing "other ways of knowing/* Asante shows that the Western 
conceptions ot thought— rationality, objectivity, progress— are inade- 
ciiiate for understanding the Afrocentric thinker who 

understands that the interrelationship of knowledge with cosmol- 
ogy, society, religion, medicine, and traditions stands alongside the 
intenittivc metaphors of discourse as principal means of achieving 
a measure of knowledge about experience. The Afrocentric insists 
on steering the minds of readers .uid listeners in the direction of 
intellectual wholeness. (1G4) 

A developing awareness of the black aesthetic requires a sensitivity to 
the cultural chaiacter of the ihetoric. the haunting communication 
styles of "epic memory,'* the racial ethos of the oral traditions which 
have survived through oppression (Asante 1987; Cobb 1985). If the 
despair from oppression becomes a dominant theme, it is not an 
aestheiiL weakness because it contradicts the American ideal of opti- 
mism (Turner 1985). 

"NoTwno** and the Lyrical Attitude 

Forbidden to learn to i^adui write, \ocal communication becomes the 
central medium foi the African in America, and "nommo,** in African 
discourse "the generative and piodut tive power of the spoken word," 
establishes the ancestral oral traditions on American soil. 

Thesti uctural codes of lyrical quality, voice, and indirection present 
an Afro-American approach to language most consonant with narra- 
tion. The public orator and the preacher employ these devices in their 
speeches, eliciting call-response patterns, "talk-backs/* hand claps of 
affirmation. Examples from the orations of King, Brown, Jackson, and 
the like, as well as from characters drawn from the literary works of 
Baldwin, Wright, Jones, and the like, demonstrate these characteristics. 
Asaiiteiises James Wcldon Johnson's 'The Creation" to illustrate these 
devices. 

Indirection and Narrative Sequencing 

Besides lyrical patterns and voice, "indirection" is used by speakers to 
arouse curiosity, suspense, and emotion. Building "deductively," the 
or«ior s.allfully "stalks the issues," speaking circuitously, slowly 
leading up to the staitment. Contrary to the Eurocentric approach, the 
use of indirection in this di-.ourse tradition is valued as a test of 
rhetorical talent. 



er|c f:5' 



An Afrocentric Approach to Literature 



59 



Narrative sequencing offers teachers an excel lent method for making 
connections from the text to the audience. This strategy is the 
elaboration of the tale which links it to the lives of the listeners. Those 
of us who believe that we can link up great literary works with our 
students* piior knowledge can cosily capitalize on this technique, hi his 
discussion of the black folk sermon, Cook offers a number of good 
sources to use for this exercise. 

SudicisJH and PersonaU'^rn 

'In tune with the rhy thm of the universe," says Asante, one who aspires 
to thcsudiL ideal moves in time with others— in the perpetual pursuit 
of harmony. 

There is no end to diis challenge of becoming a person because 
diere is no end lo seeking harmony . . . you become More human as 
die master of your own powers, l>*.4t always in die midst of others. 
(185-86) 

Based on this sudicism, per&onalism involves the coir.mitment to 
harmony within the person. This Afrocentric approach enables the 
person to become * the marker, the tagger for what is real." Thus, the 
Zu3u causes his heart to stop lor several minutes, the Asante or the 
Yoruba walks on fire without burning or plants a sword into the earth 
which caimot be removed, and this "acti\ ated energy" is understood as 
the sudic creation of ''person.'* 

An awareness of these principles allov.s us to understand better the 
legends and uaditions of this culture where all that really matters ii the 
person and his or her "oneness" with the other dimensions. Thus the 
symbols, the meanings of life, ihx place of the person with respect to the 
universe must be seen inad'ff:^rcnt perspective and must be appreciated 
differently in our literature. 

Mythology 

African-American mythology usually takes place in an indefinite time 
frame (unless it is historical, e.g., the story of Harriet Tubman) and 
relates the triumphs and victories of its heroes and heroines. The 
person, not nature, has control o\er the circumstances. It is the person*s 
mission to o\ercome obstacles in the name of peace, lo\e, and harmony. 
The my th Joj^ical character **Shine" is portrayed as a symbol of hope 
and self-discovery in the face of chaos. Historical characters like Harriet 
Tubman and mythic figures like John Henry represent the individual 
meeting crisis with courage, challenge with strength (Asante 1987). 




60 



Expatidiug the Canon 



Stanford and Amin's chapici on black myth and legend is paiiiculaily 
helpful for use in the classroom. 

Dra7na 

To exclude Afi.> American playwrights from curricula leads to the 
erroneous conclusion that blacks have contributed little to the 
developiiicni of the Americpji thc^atcr. . . . A fro* American drama . . . 
must be jK^rformeil . . . presented as liteniuirc, as z viable teaching 
siiategy,as a motivator for . . . self'concept . . . for oral interpretat'on 
... for attaining information and education about the Afro* 
Aineriam eN'xrience. (Robinson 1985, 315) 

Illustiating classioom acti\ itics using such notable pla)5 as Blanch's 
A Medal for Willie and Peterson's Take a Giant Step, Robinson 
disciibes a numbci of teaching strategics from improving reading 
thiuugh leader's tlicatie to understanding one's own stiui^glc and needs 
by impiovisatioii and lole playing. Like the othei liteiai) genres, Afro- 
Ameiicaii drama must be pan of mainstream cuiricula and treated in 
speciall) designated couises of study. Sii>cc there is crJen no distance 
beiucen actors and audience in black American theatre (Asantc 1987) 
and because the issues are both Affocentiic and uni\eisal, the stud) of 
diama becomes an iinpoitant tool in teaching liteiatuic ami one which 
has, heretofore, been limited. 

Conclusion 

Implicit in .he teaching of English is the desire to show students the 
uisdom, rhe pleasuies, and tlu coinfoits of litcratuie, and the ability to 
expiess one's own feelings and ideas thiough the wiitten « .d spoken 
word. Because we have been educated in a tradition which assumes 
cxclusi\e rights, it is becoming more and i.ioie apparent r'lat wc aie 
piecluding a great man) successful cxpeiienccs foi oui stuJents and 
ourselves. If we can take Molcfi Asante's advice and extend our 
knowledge of the uni^eISC by adapting a Aorldview, kvc vvill be bet' 
able to \alue ait foims of all cultuies by understanding w!iat makes 
them precious. 

Il is curious that the Euioccntric modvls fiom which we have long 
ago learned to judge have dominated western thought and value and 
"culture" and currently lay claim to possess "the stuff that cultural 
literacy is made of." 

Where we happen to be born, and when, largely determines the 
culture we acquire. The family, the neighborhood, the region, and 



1 / 




An Afwccntrlc Approach to Literature 



61 



the nation can aii make a difference. Initiaiiv, \vc have iittic contro! 
over the language we Icarn to s|>cak, the concepts and stereotypes we 
acquire, the religion w»e accept, the gestures and expressions that 
amuse or reassure us, or the behavior that offends or pleases. 
Furthermore, we tenc^ to assume that our way is the besi way. 
(Bennett 1986, 8) 

Because of our culture's xenophobic deficic«'-ies, ov system of 
education— our schools, oi teachers, our curricula— lacks knu.vlcdgc, 
and Our students suffct as a result. In \ icw of the rising dropout rates and 
die poor achievement of those who remain in school, we must act 
quickly and dramaiicall) to expand uur perceptions to include the 
world in its entirety and put all of its pieces back into the picture. 



Asante, Molcfi Kete. 1987. The Afrucerttru Idea, Pliiladtlphia. Temple TP. 
Heiinctt, Christine I. 1986. Cumprehemwe Multuttltural Educatwu. Theur^ 

and Practice, Boston: Allyn, 
Ck)bb, Martha K. 1985. "From Oral to Written. Origins of a Black Literary 

Tradition." Tapping Potential, English and Language Art^ lor the Black 

Learner, Ed. Charlotte K. Brooks. Urbnna: NCTE. 
Cook, WiPiam W. 1985. *'Tlie Afro-American G, ' Tapping Potential; 

Ktt(^lish and Language Arts for the Black Learner, £o. CharloUe K. Brooks. 

UrlKiiK^: NCTE. 

I'arr, Mauta, and Harvey Daniels. 1986, Language Diversity and Writing 

Instruction, l^rbana: NCTE. 
Ilornburgei, Jane. 1985. "Liiciaturc and Black Children.' Tapping Potential 

English and Language Arts for the Black Learner, Ed, Charlotte K, Brooks. 

Urbai^a: NCTE. 

Kiah, Rosalie Black. 1985. "The "iilaek Teenager in Young Adult No\els by 
Auu» J Winning Authr's." Tapping Potential, English and Language Arts 
for the Black Learner, td. Charlotte K. Brooks. UrLana: NCTE. 

Robinsuu, Edward A. 1985. "Afru American Drama in Eduuitiun. An Insuut 
tional Strategy." Tapping Potential, English and Language Arts for the 
Black Learner, Ed. Charlotte K. Brooks. Uibana: NCFE. 

Smitherman Dunaldsun, Geneva. 1987. * Tuuarda Natiunal Public Folic) on 
Liuiguage." College English -19.1: 29-35. 

Stanford, Baibara Dodds, and Karima Amin. 1978. Black Literature fur Htgh 
School Students, Urbana: NCTI . 

Turner, Darwin T. 1985. *'Black Experience, Black Literature, Black Students, 
and the English Classroom." Tapping Potential. English arid Language 
Arts for the Black Learner, Ed. Charlotte K. Brook: Urbanis; NCTE. 

From English Journal, September 1988, -19^53 



. veiled 



ERIC 




12 "Old Man Coyote Makes the 
World'': Using Native 
American Tales 



Francis E. Kazcmck, Muriel Radebaugh, and Pat Rigg 

Who !S Old Man Coyote? In Native American folklore, Coyote is many 
things: 

He made the Indians. ... He gave all the people different names and 

taught them different languages He taught the people how to 

eat and how to hunt the buffalo and catch eagles He taught 

them now to dance. Sometimes he made mistakes, and even though 
he was wise and powerful, he did many foolish things. But that was 
his way. 

Coyote like to play tricks Sometimes he would go too far with 

some trick and get someone killed. . . . Another way he got in trouble 
was trying to do v/hat som.one else did. This is how he came to be 

called Imitator Coyote was ugly too. The girls did not like him. 

But he was smart Coyote got the girls when he wanted. (Lopez, 

1977, pp. 179-80) 

A Proviso 

Coyote tales come from an oral tradition, and as such they are grounded 
in specific cultural contexts. We are not Native Americans; we do not 
come from cultures with long and continuous oral traditions. We are 
white, middle-class academics rooted deeply within a print culture. 
Because we are not Native Americans, we make no pretense that we 
understand Coyote tales as Native Americans do. As contemporary poet 
Gary Snyder says about his own reading of Coyote tales, "I'm only 
reading Coyote as I can, namely twentieth century. West Coast white 
American. How the Native American people themselves actually i \w 
Coyote, actually used it, is another question . . /' (1977, p. 85). We do 
believe, however, that even with our limited understanding we can use 
Coyote tales for enjoyment and learning in the classroom. 

62 



er|c r3 



Using Native American Tales 



63 



Old Man Coyote 

Erdoes and Ortiz (1984y contend that Coyote ultimatel> represents the 
primordial creativity that exists in all of us. Snyder (1977) says that 
Coyote is a symbol of the American West and reflects an interaction 
between Myth and a Sense of Place, ki its greatest, the results of this 
creativity can be found in stories, poems, paintings, and music. 
However, Coyoualso re;jresents the elements that well up in all of us 
and lead to many imaginative creations that spring from all of us on a 
daily basis, creations of which we are usually unaware— jokes, meta- 
phors, rhymes, witty asides, and variations to popular songs that we 
sing to ourselves. The important thing about Coyote, as Snyder (1977) 
observes, is that such creation is wedded to a particular place. Coyote 
reflects the Xdti\e Americans' creative spirit rooted in their dedication 
to and their love of the land. 

Most importantly, ue believe that Coyote is a symbol of psycholog 
leal and moral complexity. He does nut represent a simplistic dualism 
which attempts to separate the world into such dichotomies as gooti and 
bad or black and white. Coyote can be helpful, compassionate, 
intelligent and responsible, and, as Erdoes and Ortiz (1984; observe, at 
other times he is irresponsible, lecherous, a rebel, a breaker of taboos, an 
archetype of unrestrained spontaneity. Like the Oriental notion of y in 
and yang. Coyote symbolizes the integrally related capabilities for good 
and ill and for creation and stagnation inherent in all people. Coyote 
K brought fire to humanity^ but he also brought death inlo :he world. 

In sum. Coyote is like all of us. Like us in our worst moments, he 
at times selfish and mean-spirited. Like us in our better moments, he is 
at times selfless and compassionate. Like us. Coyote is sometimes dull 
and plodding, bui at other timeo he is inspired and creative. Like us. 
Coyote is both humorous and serious, both a braggart and self-effacing, 
both a generous gift-giver and a stingy hoarder. He is, like us, a 
contradiction. 

Coyote and Early Adolescence 

As a figure of moral and psychological complexity. Coyote is especially 
af^propriate for the middle school and junior high school classroo»n. 
Early adolescence is a time of fomplexit) and change. Young people 
discover through abstract reasoning that the world isanfiiiitely more 
complex dud wonderful than they realized, blacks and tvhites merge 



ERIC 




64 



Expanding the Canon 



into varying shades of gray. Likewise, young people begin to experience 
physiological and emotional changes that at limes cause them to leap 
with joy in sweet, spontaneous growth while at other times causing 
them to despair over the strange and frightening things that are 
happening to them and over which they seem to have no control. And 
as they work with adults and each oth.r in different situations, in 
various ways reflecting the ambiguous nature of reality, they form and 
t.st their own moral systems. And this developing sen^e of morality is 
highly complex in actual use. 

Coyote not only represents the complexity and contradictions of the 
world but also, by his very nature, embodies the characteristics of young 
people. Indeed, Coyote is an excellent symbol for the young. He is 
energetic and can be both witty and dull, arrogant at one moment and 
painfully shy the next. Coyote is fun-!oving, irreverent, crude, overtly 
oexucil, irresponsible, and unpredictable. Anyone who has worked with 
janior higli students knows that these characteristics equally desciibe 
seventh and eighth graders. Coyote is also capable of sensitivity, hard 
work, dedication, kindness, and selflessness, and, again, anyone who 
has seen junior high school kids work long and intently (.a a project 
which they as a whole group are e.xcited about knows that these 
characteristics also describe seventh and eighth graders. 

Thus, we believe that Coyote tales offer middle and junior higj 
school teachers and students opportunities not only to explore the 
character of Coyote but also to explore a Native American view of the 
world. This view tends to be different and more complex and whole 
than that which we find in a West rn European tradition. This /u//^r 
vision relates all things in the universe to one another, inves!s all 
ihings— both living and non-living— with some kind of awareness and 
worth, and offers opportunities for junior high students to explore their 
place m the world and their relationships to other peop\, animals, and 
things. 

Coyote in the Classroom 

We wdl briefly suggest five activities which use Coyo.e talti to promote 
cooperative language use in small group settings make something 
with language. 

Coyote Tales and Reading 

Coyote tales can be a catalyst for reading other Coyote tales and Native 
American myths and legends (we list a few books for teachers and 



ERLC 



71 



Using Native American Tales 



6J> 



students in the bibliography). Because Coyote tales are usually short 
and fun to read, they allow even the most reluctant or inefficient readers 
to read successfully and to share what they've read. One easy way to do 
this istohavcthe students pair upand tell each other about what they've 
read. The value of students* talking to their classmates about their 
reading in relaxed situations cannot be underestimated. Retelling 
allows students not only to recall what they've read but to r.flect upon 
it and to reorder it mentally, synthesizing what they und>:rstand from 
the reading with their own thoughts and feelings. And cf course, paired 
retelling often stimulates students to read more books, because they 
want to read the story they've just heard retold by a friend. 

As Lopez (1977) points out. Coyote tales ma; differ from tribe to tribe, 
but they all share certain universal characteristics. Thus, students can 
read, for example, different versions of how Coyote made humans and 
compare ^nd contrast vhe various aspects of these tales. Such discussion 
and analysis allows students to develop not only a o<^nse of story 
structure for particular kinds of tales but also allov s them to focus on 
aspects of life that seem to be most l-nportant to Native Americans. 

And, of course. Coyote tales should lead to readingand sharing other 
works about and by Native Americans (see Stensland, 1979). More 
universally. Coyote tales can serve as abridge to tales from around the 
world. Students and teachers can explore the many guises in which the 
archetypal figure of trickster-imitator appears. Among Native Ameri- 
cans, the trickster appears as Raven, Hare, Badger, Bear, and Bluejay, 
among others. In Africa, he is Anansi tlie spider and Old Man Jackal. In 
Western Europe he is usually Fox and sometimes Wolf. Southern Black 
American folk taks have Brer Rabbit as the trickster character. And 
ther'! are elements of the trickster in such human tall-tale fi\^.ires as 
Mike Fink and Pecos Bill (who, by the way, was raised by a pack of 
coyotes). It is also fun to explore with students contemporary guises in 
which the trickster appears. Superhero comic books offer many 
possibilities here with such "flawed" superheroes as Hulk, Swamp- 
thing, Manthing, and so forth, all of these figures have the power to 
transform themselves in various ways and, like , ^,ote, possess both 
positive and negative character istirs. 

Coyote Tales and Writing 

Once stuc^cnts are familiar with the basic characteristics of Coyote and 
the structure of Coyote tales, they can v-ieate their own Mies. At the 
beginning, such writing could be done a whole-class project with ;he 
teacher taking an active role. Later, small groups can collaborate lu 




79 



66 



Expanding the Canon 



create tales. Finally, students can create individual Coyote stories, 
exploring and expressing their own ideas about Coyote. With all these 
writing activities, teachers may want to use other it^ms for discussion in 
addition u the Coyote tales themselves. "Roadrunner and Wiley 
Coyote" cartoons offer students an opportunity to discuss why and how 
the figure of Coyote has been perverted in the white mass media. 
Conversely, the wonderful Coyote paintings of contemporary artist 
Harry Fonseca can serve as a catalyst for examining why and how this 
artist has incorporated Coyote into his art and worldview. 

Many Coyote talej are why tales which explore how something came 
to be; for e' ample, **How Coyote Brought Fire to the People,** **How 
Coyote Made Human Beings,** and **How Coyote Got His Cunning.** 
Such why or pourquoi tales are universal. Folklore and literature from 
around the world contain stories of how things came lobe the way they 
are. Thus, Coyote tales can also lead to the writing of why tales about 
things in the students' everyday lives. 

Coyote and Storytelling 

Coyote tales come from an oral tradition, they were told for specific 
rcas >ns in specific situations. One of the best ways for .students to begin 
to get ail idea of the richness of an oral tradition is to have them tell 
Coyote tales to one another in small groups a., ,o younger students in 
other classrooms. If we want students to express themselves clearly with 
imagination, wit, intelligence, and conviction, then Coyote tales, eithei 
.hose students have read or written, offer excellent opportunities. 

Similar ly, students can tell their own or other pourquoi tales to peers 
or younger children. It is important for students to explore differences 
between spoken and written language ana to understand they are not 
the same thi-ig. Students who read, write, anJ tell why tales will 
rccogni/e that different forms of language arc not interchangeable and 
that each has its own special capacity and apabilitie-. for expression. 

Coyote and Creative Dramatics 

One language activity too often absent from middle school and junioi 
high classrooms is creative dramatics. S'udents may occasionally 
perform plays which they have spent an inordinate amount of time 
rehearsing; but thr^t activity does not allow for spontaneous — and 
regular— use of rule takii.g, body movement, dialogue, and imaginative 
u^e of found props and the environment. Since Coyote tales are full of 
action and are also relatively short, ihey lend themselves well to 
diamatic interpretation. Siudentsin small groups can read their own or 




Using Native American Tales 



67 



other Coyote tales and prepare to perform the tale before their p^ers or 
students. Such re-visioniiig of a work from one language form to 
another not only allows students to see how one language mode relates 
to another but also fosters group cooperation and language collabora- 
tion in the classroom. 

Coyote Tales and Singing 

Native Americans use chants to tell their stories, something that e\eii 
the most off-key linger can do. And since chanting is done as a group 
activity , it allows even ohy or reticent students to participate in this form 
uf poetry . Even students who hate poetry can come to enjoy it through 
participating in an oral performance involving \olu4iie, pitch, rhyme, 
and rhythm. 

We iggest that, as with writing, chaining begin as a whole-claos 
acti^ ity with the teachei playing *;n integral role. Aftei readinga ^ .ote 
tale, the class can brainstorm elements of the story that seem to lUu^i 
iniponant. The class can then focus on lines that seem to best express 
divrse elements. With the teacher's help at first, the class can ly around 
with ways to put together these lines into a rhythmical chant. After a 
little practice, the class can perform the pliant Tor another cL*ss oi group 
of younger children. 

In one of the coyote tales about the creation of the world. Coyote is told 
L; the Great Spirit to go out and begin his woik. "Coyote was glad. He 
wentrightout and began his woik. This is the way it was with him. He 
went out to make things light'' (Lopez, 1977, p. 3). We hupe that with 
the aid of Coyote tiles, reading and language teachers can go out and 
make things right with their students by uaing materials and a^ Mvities 
that are whole, \v'orthwhile, and fun. 

References 

Baylor, liyrd. And It h Still That Way. New- York: Scribner, 1976. 

de Wit, Dorothy (ed.>. The Talkirig Stune, An Anthology of Xatwe Amcruan 

Talcs and Legends. New York: Greenwillow, 1979. 
Erdocs, Richard and Alfi>nsu Onutcds. k American Indian Myths and Legends. 

New York: Pantheon, 1981. 
Hayes, Joe. Coyote and Xatwe American Folk Tales Retold by Joe Hayes. 

Mariposa Publishing, 1983. 
High water, Jamake. Anpao, An American Indian Odyssey. (Especia*. ".\npao 

and Coyoic. Farting Boy Tale/* pp. 151-58). New York, Harper and Row, 

1977. 



68 



Expanding the Canon 



Hodges, Margaret. The Fire Bringer, A PaiuU Indian Legend. Boston. Little, 
Brown, 1972. 

Tones, Hettie. Coyote Tales. \e\\ York. Holt, Rinehar», and Winston, 1974. 
Lopez, Barry Holstun. Giving Birth to Thunder, Sleeping with His Daughter, 

Coyote Builds North America. Slieed Andre> and McMeel, 1^77. 
Rauui, Paul. The Trickster: A Study in American Indian Mythology. New 

York: Schocken, 19/2. 
Ramsey, Jarold (ed.). Coyote Kos Going There. Indian Literature of the Oregon 

Countrs'. Seattle: University of \V; shington Piess, i977. 
Robinson, Gad A. and Douglas Ilill. Coyote the Trickster. Crane Rursak, 1976. 
Snyder, Gary. 'The Incredible Survival of Co>oit'* in The Old Wcys. Six Essays 

by Gary Snyder. San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1977. 
Stensland, Anna Lt.. Literature by and about the American Indian. An 

Annotated Bibliography. Urbana, Illinois: NCTI^E, 1979. 
Thumpson. Stith (ed.). Tales of the North Arfieruan Indians. Bloomington. 

Indiana University Press, 1966. 

From English Journal, February 1987, 100-103 



ERIC 



75 



13 Text and Context: 

Teaching Native American 
Literature 



Diane Long Hocveler 

Silence is a major value in Native American culture, for silence is the 
token 01 c eptancc, the symbol of peace and serenity, and the outward 
expression of harmony between the human and natural worlds. The 
result of thib tradition of silence, however, is a limited written record, a 
limited number of texts produced by Native Americans themselves. 
This situation allowed the Anglo to step into the void and speak for 
Native Americans themselves, oi more accurately, to claim to speak as 
their "interpreteis." The implication that white culture drew from the 
lack of a written language in any of the Native American tribes was that 
these people had nothing ^f value to say to themselves or to others. It 
was not until the past twenty years that Native Americans have begun to 
produce their own literary works written in English with an eye toward 
communicating with the American population as a whole. Until the 
publication of Scott Momaday's House Made of Dawn (1968), the 
general population h d not heard actual Native Americans speak in 
their o^vn voices— the white culture had been speaking for them. 
During the past twenty years, however, there has been a veritable 
explosion of texts coming from ihe Native American community, and 
we now have a substanual corpus to use in teaching contemporary 
Native American literature. 

The Unit: Themes for Reading and Writing 

I teach contemporary Native American literature a^ a six-week unit in a 
secondary course entitled American Ethnic Literature. Although there 
are several anthologies of Native American literature, my choice as 
' best" for the high school student is The American Indian Speaks (Ed, 
John R, Milton, 1970, Vermillion, SD: U of South Dakota P). The 
major value of this anthology lies in its diversity of selections— poem?, 
essays and short stones all written by N^ Ive Americans themselves, 

69 



ERLC 

hnimiimrrTiTiiii 



70 



Expa7iding the Canon 



There arc also essays on Indian art, dance, and music, all of which give 
the student some necessary theoretical background on how Indian art 
differs from and muat be evaluated by different criteria from white ' 
Anglo art. The othci major strength of the collection ^tem^ froia its 
contemporaneity— its works are written within the last tv ciay years and 
opeak to the curient situation of the Native American community . yet 
thcv retain their resemblance to the oral literary traditions of Native 
American tribal < ultures. 

I would not be perfectly honest about the experience of teaching 
Native American literature if I did not state that my students begin the 
course with negativestcreotypesabout'*Indians" andextremely limited 
histoiical know ledge about the actual treatm^-nt of Native Amei icans in 
tliii> country. Theii attitudes and jiceptions have been sh Aped bv John 
Wayne movies, tcle\ision programs, and a popular culture that has 
depicted ihc "Indians" as bluodihirsty savages who specialized in 
slaiigl<,tn'ng innocent women and chiiJicn. Rather than start with a 
lecture .hat debunks these attitudes, however, I let the literature speak 
for itself. What emerges from the first group of poems— written by 
Simon Ortiz, Norman H. Russell, and James Welch— is their over- 
whelming, .j^spect for nature as divine. This theme becomes the topic of 
the students' first essay. With tJiis hat kground firmly in place, then, it 
become:^ much easiei for studcias to undeistand the basic value conflict 
between the white and Nati,(' American cultures. They can see it spelled 
out in 1 rank Waters's essay "Two Views of Nature: White and Indian," 
and they can begin to understand hov. these two views set the stage lor 
the disaster that was played out throughout the nineteenth century 
across the western plains. 

The second idea we explore concerns the theme of survival ?s 
expressed in t'^^^ literature. The corruption of traditional values and thj 
assault on the Indian family are exploied most forcefully and poignant 
ly in "Woman Singing" by Simon Ortiz as well as in the poems of 
Ronald Rogers and Donna \\ nitew ing. Students are asked to use these 
aorkstoanswei the follow ing questions. What do today's Indian^have 
to do * J survive in a white-dominaied culture? How has the "white 
n.an" corrupted Ind.an values and traditions? How do Indians feel 
about this situation? What are some of the contradictions between 
Indian traditions and the reality of life in contemporary America'. At 
this point in the anthology an^ the course, students a.e often o\er- 
whehiied with a sense of pessimism and hopelessness at the plight of 
Indians in contemporary American society, which is why the nexluait 
is a welcome relief and concludes ihe course on a more positive note. 



S i 



Teaching Native American Literature 



71 



The major einpliasis of the last leadings in the aiuholog) and the 
topic of the last assigned f*ssa> focus on the power of hidian traditions, 
the 'ue of the **old ways," and the rele\ance of Indian tiibal practices 
a igious beliefs for the N^^tivc American today. Works such as *'Day 
with laya," "The Turquoise Beads," **My Indian Name/' **Clearing in 
the Valley," and "The Promised Visit" all develop a similar theme; how 
contemporary Indians can redeem theii ethnic ideiitii> b> pieser\ii»g 
the ancient and sacred traditions of Native American cultuie. But 
paser^ing and defending this heiitage is no eas> task, and the poems at 
the conclusion of the anthology express some of the difficulties inheicni 
in that effort. The displacement of !he urbanized K iaii is tragically 
expressed in Biuce Ignacio's "Lost/ while a«e isolation and friendless- 
nc'ss of the Indian find ultciancc iit Loyal Shegonee*s ''Loneliness" and 
Rosey Garcia s "Then and Now/' Kay C Benneu makes the \yo\\\i that 
Native Americans s( nehow, miiaculo.,sly, ha\e managed to survi^e 
and preserve theii traditions on the rcsei\ation, but that the ultimate 
^^hite weapon against Indian cultuie— welfare— m**; succeed finally in 
wiping out the last vestiges of that caiefully nurtured life (see hei 
"Letter to the Editor," Milton 171-72). The challenge confronting 
Native Ameiicans today is not leally significantly differeiu fioin what it 
has been si:, iC the mid-lSOOs. Preserving one's dignity aiid heiiiagt has 
been the challenge of eveiy ethnic gioup in America. The tragic fact is 
that thelndians—like the European Jews— have had to suiv ive a v iitual 
attempt at genocide in the process of preserving ihcii tiaditions. And all 
of this to a laige extent c^n be tiaced to bifuicat J perceptions of the 
land as sacred oi the land as commodity. That basic dichotomy betw een 
Indian and white values underlies and to a laige extent precipitated the 
crisis and the continuing dilemma. 

Individual Projects 

I assign one individual project that U'cjuires the students to lead one 
authoi in depth oi ic^earch a topic in Indian history, art, music, or 
culture. The assignment of this project has produced some alna^ing 
results, for in the ery actofreseaichingonr topic in depth the students 
uncovci more than they could ever discovei within the confines of the 
classroom. One particularly insightful project was on Indian food as 
symbol in literature and life, with suppleincntaiy dcinonsrrations and 
tastings in class. Another interesting project was an analysis of Indian 
legends and m)thologies, with demonstrations on symbols in Indian 
blankets, pottery , and sand paintings (purchased by the student's family 



ERIC 



78 



72 



Expanding the Canon 



on vacations to New Mexico). Students have also scheduled a film such 
as "North American Indian Legends" (1973, Phoenix Films; also 
available in videotape) as a visual accompaniment to their oral 
presentations. This film, featuring the original legends of Indians in 
threedifferent geographical regions, provides an effective illustration of 
how legends express both cultural and spiritual values as well as 
explanations of natural events.- Another student, a virtual expert on 
contemporary music, presented an extremely informative discussion of 
current popu'ar music by Native Americans. He started with Buffy 
Sainte-Marie but went much beyond her in analyzing the themes and 
concerns of Indian protest music today. Othei students chose one 
particular tribe and researched the life, language, food, clothing, and 
religious and oral traditions unique to that group. The students focused 
on how the geographical surroundii.i^s influenced the tribe's adapta- 
tion and traditions, then presented their findings in a panel discussion 
in which each student was an "expert'' on that particular tribe. 

Finally, several students chose to read works by major contemporary 
Native Americans writing today— James Welch, Vine Deloria, N. Scott 
Momaday, Leslie Silko, and Patty Harjo. Novels like Winter in the 
Blood, The Death of Jim Loney, House Made of Dawn, and Ceremony 
all hold a strong appeal foi my students. The alienation in these novels 
speaks directly to the alienation that these adolescents feel, and they 
identify strongly with the protagonist* oi these works. The major lesson 
diey learn, however, is that coiueinporai> Native / merican literature 
has to be read as imaginative art in its own right, and that it can be 
evaluated ultimately by the standards applied to all literature. When 
they write about their personal and tribal experiences. Native Ameri- 
cans are creating imagistic and symbolic worlds, literary visions of 
truth, not simply political, historical, oi sociological tracts. their 
final exam in the course, students write on the universal themes 
developed in Native American literature. They ha\e come to realize that 
we arc all strangeis, outsiders within a cultuie that we all experience as 
alien to ourselves. In identifying with the Indian dilemma, m> students 
learn that we all share basic human emotions and needs for a life of 
dignity, harmony, peace, and acceptance. 

Resources 

T lie other crucial resource:) that enrich the educational experience of my 
students are audiovisual materials, lie Id nips, and guest lectureis. I will 
outline here some of the laiger themes these resources develop and 



79 



Teaching Native Air^ncan Literature 



73 



Miggcst when and how ihc> would be appropiialc to use. Our initial 
focus is on the characlerisiui Mid specific history of Native American 
literature, and in conjunction with this theme I show the two-part 
finnstrip American hidian Literature" (1980, Films for the Humani- 
ties). These filmstrips contrast the usual white \ iew of the hidiini to the 
more recent depiction presented by Native Americans themselves. ' 
distribute a worksheet I hji\e made lo accompany this filmsiripand ask 
the students to list in parallel columns the stereotypes about hidians 
that whije culture has propagated in contrast to the way hidians \ 
themselves. This initial exercise helps the students to fcnmulate the 
differences between white and hidian \alues, while at the same time it 
forces them to unuvtMand the roJe whites h*.\e played in distorting the 
image of the hidian. Anothei iw^o pait fiinistrip that can be used in 
identical fashion is "We Aic hidians. American hidian Literature" 
vl973, Guidance Associates). This fiinistrip presents traditional hidian 
^aUles and symbols on the first tape and shows their desecration by 
white society on the second tape. 

The second theme we address in the unit is the history of Manifest 
Destiny and its role in altering the hidians* way of life. Students are 
geneially familiar with this idea from their American history course, 
but in this class we look at Manifest Destiny from the hidians* 
peispectivc, which, of couise, changes e\er> thing. I begin by showing 
"The North American hidian. Treaties Made, Treaties Broken" (film 
and \2de0tape, 1970, CUM Films), which e* plorcs in depth the history 
of one treaty, the 185 1 Treaty of Medicine Creek signed by the hidians 
of Washington state. The >econd film that continues the liistoiical saga 
is entitled *The Noith American hidian. How the West Was Won and 
Honor Lost" (film and \id';otaj^, 1970, CRM Films), using paintings, 
iiewspajjer accounts, and pliotogiaplis to tell the story of the breaking 
of treaties, the lenioval of the Indians hom the land, and the Tr^il of 
Tears. Two other films that contrast with each other are *'Cust;i. The 
Ameiican Surge Westward" (1965, McGraw-Hill) and Will Ffght No 
More Forever; The Story of Chief Joseph" (1975, McGraw-Hill), hi 
these two films we sec an impouant eonuast in leadership styles as well 
as another \eisioii of ihe white hidian \alue conflict. Another film 
which depicts the hii ory of the white and hidian conflict in a \eiy 
person.tl way h Little Big Man (a\ailableon \ ideotape), starring Dustin 
Hoffman. Students pai ticulai 1\ enjoy this fi Im and often choose to 1 ead 
the book by Thomas Bciger on which the film is based. The final film 
in the histuiical series, entitled "The North American hidian. Lament 
of theReser\ation"(1970, McGrawHill;, is narrated by Marlon Biando 
and powerfully depicts the r*- ults of Manifest Destiny . we see what it is 



ERIC 




71 



Expanding the Canon 



like to li\ t on d Sioux i csci vaiion in South Dakota toda> . The suicide rate 
among >oung Sioux teenagers is particulaily tiagic and con\e>s to in> 
students the dcsixration of the >oung Indian in a diicvt and eff'xtivc niannci 

The fihns on hidian history lend themselves to a number of 
inteicsling activities. Students enjoy going to the libiaiy and usii.j^ the 
miciofilmed collection of the New York Tiincs to see how tl>at 
newspaper presented the events that led, foi instance, to tlie 1877 
conflict between the VS Ainiy and the Ne/ Peices. I have also assigned 
jouinal writings in uhich students take the role of an Indian or \^hitc 
v;vuiinesstoabattU oi treaty meeting. Keeping an imaginary diar- or 
^\liting Ictteis to a friend in the East requires students to project 
themselves into the past and ideiuify with distant historical events. 

The next theme ue de\elop is the struggle for sur\ival and the role 
legends and myths ha\c played in keeping Indian tiaditions ali\e. Tu 
supplement this unit I show "The Amciican Indian Speaks" (\ideo- 
tape, 1973, liiuyclopuedia Hiitannica), which illustrates several \iew 
points on the stiugglc for sur\i\al while vi\idly 'lepicting scenes of 
lonteiup'jiaiy Indian life and pioblems. A \ide*/tape which nicely 
lomplements this theme is entitled **Hupi Songs jf the Fourth Woild/' 
a 38-nunute color exploiation of life on the major Hopi rcser\ations 
today ifilm and videotape, Ff reio. New Day films, also available as a 
30-inmutc \ideo,apc:>. This film pio\ides a detaiU 1 examination of the 
food, li\ ing conditions, ti ibal i ituals, and ai I of tlu Hopi tiibe. Indians 
ha\c always turned to their cultuit and legends to understand their 
lives, aud to demonstrate how this is still done I show ''American 
Indians. Yesterday and Today'* (1981, Filmfair Communications). In 
this film spokesmen and women from their distinctly different tribt tell 
the sioiic uf theii people and explain ho4\ their religious beliefs ha\e 
enabled them to perse\eie in the face of tremendous oppression. To 
make this unit mure immediaie to my students I construct an aiialogous 
srtuaiiori for them. I ask them to imagine and then write aboirt what 
theii lives would be liJ^*- if we were invaded by an alien race with a 
radically different cUi.uie, religion, language, and go\ernmcnl. Stu 
dents often choose to imagine arr extiatcrrestiial alien in\asion or one 
by the Russians, and they depict Uiemsel\es clinging to their "old ways'* 
as the only means they have of maintaining their original identities. 

The final audio\isual unit I plan utilized the recent film The 
Emerald Fu/est, a\ailable on \ideoiape. This extremely pov erful film 
shows that white culture is now desecrating and exterminating Uic 
Indiarr tribes of South America, specifically those which have li\ed in 



Tcachms Native /Unerican Literature 



75 



harmony with ii.ituic for ihoiisaiu^s of >cars in Hia/.il. In this fihu a 
yoii!ig vhiic bo>, son of an Aincric .n engineer, is kidnapped by an 
indian tribe and raised as the son of the irib'* o chief. After years of 
searching, the father finds hit. sun, but the boy, now considered b> the 
Indians to be a man, has no wish to retmn to white society. In fact, at 
fihn^s end he is made chief of his tiibc upon the death of the Lidian 
father. This hi icf summary of tht fihii cannot do justice 'o its beauty, 
complexity, 01 ihepowci it exeits ovc-i itsxieueis. Showing tliC fihu is 
a \eiy effective way to conchule the course, foi The Emerald Forest 
makes dcai that the polity of Manifest Destiny continues today, 
displacing the Indians of South America, tht latest \ictims of greed and 
the comineiciali/ation of natuie. The film always eli^^its lively class 
didCu.%:»ion and debate^ and one <cchnii|uc 1 ha\e found successful is to 
ha\'. students I o'e-pl.v cilhti the fathei oi un.or to take turns debating 
piu oi LOW pui>itionSon tlu basic question, is it justifiable todcsMoy tht 
Biazilian Kiin foiest in oulci to build loads, villages, and dams in the 
name of "civili/atioir'? 

The final lesouice I have used to bring the course alive for my 
students is lo pl.m iiM trips aii^ to bring in guest speakers, 'Uicr of 
which I realize may be possible in cvc.y geographiciil loc. I have 
taken students to Chicago's Natural History Muscinii, whici* liuuses 
one of the world's Lngest collections of Indian artifacts and displays. 
Entire \illages from \arious geographical octtings are reconstructed 
hcH-, and experts are ax.illable to lead the students through the errli- ^ 
wing. Visits have also beerr scheduled to the Indian collection at 
Milwaukee's Public Museum, parlicularlv when a special touring 
exhibii on Indian ar. was available Guest speaker^ ha . also beon 
invrted from the local Indian Cultural Center. I specifically want to 
contrast the nmscuin displays, which tend to put the Irrdian mrdcr glass 
as <i dead objeei, lo the living guest Si^caker, who lets the students kr.uw 
that Indians arc .dive .md str uggling to pr cserxe their cultUK and \alues 
Mr the midst or an urban environment. 

Teaching Nati\e American nteralurt has been <is nruch a positive 
growth c.\pcrience for me as a teacher as I know it has been for my 
students. We are no longer tryirsg to speak for the N*iti\c Americans, we 
are simply lettirrg ourstUes hear them. \Vv art humbled and shamed by 
the story they tell of their history, but wc are also inspired by the \ ision 
of rrature ihey still tenaciously possess. We arc in\olvcd in their 
struggle, if only in being better informed. 





76 



Expanding the Canon 



Sources for Films Cited 

Britannica Training and Development, Britannica Center, 310 S. Michigan 
Ave., 6th Floor, Chicago, IL 60604. (800) 354-9862, or in Illinois (312) 347- 
7400 

CRM Films, 2233 Faraday Ave., Suue F, Carlsbad, CA 92008. (619) 431-9800 
Ferrero/New Day Films, 121 West 27th St., No, 902, New York, NY 10001.(212) 
645-8210 

Filmfair, 10621 Magnolia Blvd., North Hollywood, CA 91601. (813) 985-0214 
Films for the Humanities, P.O. Box 2053, Princeton, NJ 08540. (800) 257-5126 
Guidance Associates, Communications Park, Box 3000, Mt. Kisco, NY 105i9 
(800) 431-1242 

McGraw-Hill films cited in this article are no longer available. 

Phoenix Films, 468 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 1C016 (212) 684-5910 



Backgrount Reading 

One cannot simply «.cach Nati\e American literature as if the genre began in 
1968. If you are like most traditionally trained English teachers, you are 
probably not conversant with Native American h .ature, I know I was not. 
Approaching the field in order to teach i' can be a viaunting prospect, simply 
beuiuse there i& a wealth of fairly specialized material that is quite foreign to the 
.verage English teacher. Anyone preparin,^ lo ttach a cou, se or unit on Native 
American literature should begin with a careful reading cl a few very helpful 
studies that provide valuable background for teacher^. Paula Gunn Allen's 
Studies in American Indian Literature, Critical Essays and Course Designs 
(1983, MLA), Abraham Chapman's Litera .^e of the American Indians. Views 
and Interpretations (1975, NAL), .»nd Brian Swann's Smuothijig the Ground. 
Essays on Native American Oral Literature (1983, U of California P). 

Once one is confident chom one's own preparation, then one mu^. bvj^in by 
providing students w ith the necessary background lo the field, and this is or.ly 
gained by suidying the traditional Indian oral nairatives, the oratory and oral 
poetry, and the first works by Indians done during the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries. An overview foi students can besi be provided by using any 
one of several valuable texts ot anthologies of Indian literature including 
Margol Atrov's American Indian Prose and Poetry (1962, Gipricorn), John 
Bierhost, In the Trail of the Wuid (1971, Farrar), Natalie Curtis, The Indians' 
Book(\96^, Dover), and Dennis Tedlock. Finding the Center (\912, Dial). In the 
case of the oral narrativr s and poetry , one has to point out to i>tudents that these 
works have survi.td onl, because whites, primarily anthropologists, went out 
into the field and transcribed the cosmologies and poems. One haa to realize, 
also, that most Indian writings produced before 1968 are what is known u5 
'*told-to" autobiographies. Those Indians who did write themselves v^ore 
almo5i 5olcly converts to Christianity, products of Christian educations, writing 
for the explicit purpose of converting oth^r Indians. 



Teaching Native American Literature ' ' 

Myth and legend are the other major areas of Indian tradition with which 
siud iiitsshould be familiar before lhe> begin a study oi contemporary literature. 
The best introductions to Indian mythologies can be found in Andrew Wiget's 
Native American Literature (1985, Twayne) and his Critical Essays on Native 
A^.tencan Literature (1985, G. K. Hall). His works provide the historical, 
religious, and cultural background that students need to set the contemporary 
works in the fullest possible context. By analyzing the origin myths, legends, 
and oral traditions as fully as possible, students will be able to see the vital 
conrinuum that exists between past and present versions of Indian writing. 



From English Journal, September 1988, 20-24 




ERIC 



National CouncU of Teachere of English 
1111 Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801 

ISBN 0-8141-1647-7 



r.5 



