DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 405 



SO 035 102 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Old Elk, Arlene; Stoklas, Jackie 
After the Rain: Animals. 

Heard Museum, Phoenix, AZ . 

2001 - 00-00 

64p.; For related units, see SO 035 097-101. 

Heard Museum, 2301 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004- 
1323. Tel: 602-252-8344; e-mail: education0heard.org. For 
full text : http : // www. heard. org/ rain/ animals /animals . pdf . 
Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Animals; Art Activities; Community Resources; ^Cultural 
Context; Educational Facilities; ^Integrated Curriculum; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Arts; Mathematics; 
^Museums; Primary Education; Primary Sources; Sciences; Skill 
Development; Student Educational Objectives; ^Thematic 
Approach 

Native Americans; *Rain; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT • . ^ 

The Heard Museum (Phoenix, Arizona) has developed and updated 
an integrated curriculum for use in grades, K-3. The goals for this curriculum 
are to: (1)’ share museum resources with schools; (2) promote cross-cultural 

understanding, through a focus on rain, a universal requirement for life; (3) 
help students understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modern world; (4) develop an awareness 
of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature, and customs of the 
native people of the greater southwest; and (5) use culturally specific 
materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially as they 
relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. The curriculum may be used 
in any order. This unit contains: (1) art prints of artifacts in the Heard 

Museum collection related to rain; (2) specific cultural information and 
materials relating to a particular Native American tribe or nation featured 
through the art prints this cultural information is the basis for some of the 
lessons in mathematics, science, and language skills; (3) mathematics lessons 
with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing; (4) science lessons, 
usually hands-on. or observational units; (5) language skills, including 
reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary, and poetry skills; and 
(6) art projects. (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 478 



J 








After the Rain: 



Heard Museum 
2301 North Central Avenue 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004-1323 



http://www.heard.orai/raiir8/rain pdf main.html 



Updated 2001 



(N 

O 

to 

m 

o 



permission TO REPRODUCE AND 
t disseminate THIS MATERIAL HAS 

BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
j ^ INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

V. 

f 



o: 

GO 



BKSt COP? AVAIUBK 



9 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

^ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 






• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 



Introduction 



The Heard Museum has developed this integrated curriculum for use in schools in grades K 
through 3. The overriding goals for this program are to: 

• 1 . Share museum resources with schools; 

• 2. Promote cross-cultural understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement 
for life on earth; 

• 3. Help students to understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modem world; 

• 4. Develop an awareness of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature and 
customs of the native peoples of the Greater Southwest; 

• 5. Use culturally specific materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially 
as they relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. 

This curriculum is divided into six units that can be used in any order. 

Each unit contains; 

• 1. Art Prints of artifacts in the Heard Museum collection related to rain. While these 
prints are used for art history and aesthetics lessons, these artifacts are also used to begin 
lessons in math, science and language skills. 

• 2. Specific cultural information and materials relating to a particular Native American 
tribe or nation featured through the art prints. This information includes a map, text from 
the RAIN exhibit applicable to the people, and other information of special interest to 
children. This cultural information is the basis for some of the lessons in math, science 
and language skills. 

• 3. Math lessons with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing. 

• 4. Science lessons, usually hands-on or observational units. 

• 5. Language skills, including reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary and 
poetry skills. 

• 6. Art projects 



This K-3 curriculum was developed teachers by Arlene Old Elk (Dine') and Jackie Stoklas 
during a year-long residency at the Heard Museum, made possible by the Lila Wallace-Readers 
Digest Museum Accessibility Fund. Additional information was developed by the Heard 
Museum Education Department staff 



O 

ERIC 



3 



Rain 



The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rain shadow cast by mountain 
ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy seasons: summer and 
winter. Often, summer rains are brief and highly localized, as clouds suddenly boil up from the 
south in the afternoon and early evening. Winter storms come from the Pacific Ocean and may 
arrive in waves, soaking the ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between 
these two seasons are dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until 
the next rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, praying for the 
blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative expressions. Many expressions of 
rain and water focus on rain's connection to making life and growth possible. Expressions may 
be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. Some are intended to be 
temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or the pigments of a sand painting. 
Other expressions take the form of music, song, oratory, poetry, and prayer. 

For all of the cultures in this exhibit, rain has deep meanings that reflect a culture's imique 
experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far from the stereotype of the 
"Indian Rain Dance", or feeble jokes suggesting a superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a whole and 
have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. Some of the forms 
change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come from rain into their lives and the 
world remains unchanged. 





Cloud Birds 



A 

R 

T 

S 



Activity: Students will illustrate a 
book. 




Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"First Man Naming the Birds and 
Animals" by Tse Ye Mu [Romando 
Vigil] (San Ildefonso). Review the 
different birds that are shown in the 
picture. Talk about how high the 
different birds can fly. 




Outcomes: 

1) The students will create a book they can read, which they have illustrated. 
Materials: 

• "Birds from the Clouds", Copies of "Birds from the Clouds" pages (1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7) for each student, drawing materials 

Procedure: 

1) Read the story "Birds from the Clouds" with the students. 

2) After the children have heard the story, ask them what they think the birds 
might look like. Ask them if the birds change in appearance after they have eaten 
ever 5 dhing out of the Taos River. What do they look like after they have eaten up 
the Picuris River? 

3) After discussion and visualization, have the students illustrate their stories. 

4) Share the illustrations with the entire class. 



Assessment: 

1) Did the students understand and visualize this story? 

2) Did the students order the events of the story? 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




er|c 



6 




o 

ERIC 



i. 



7 




o 

ERIC 



V. 



8 



flew down. 



H 4-< 

H (ji 



w 

u 
<v 

I a 



CD 



H rt 

o> >. 

<U 

4 — > 

o 






H ^ 

G oc 
CD a 



>^ a; 
a; si 

■S 



t/o 
tin 3 




:9 



they drank up all the water. 



o 

ERIC 



And they drank up all the water. 



•S -C 
2 ^ 




11 



could. 



■d ^ ^ 

d u: P 

« c« C -rt 
<L) > op 3 

s I g-8 
1 ® S 8 

Oi CD y 
W > d 




^ C/3 C^ Jh 

% 

5 -a ‘C 

c ^ -S ^ 

I 



er|c 



12 



and there they stayed. 




Working With Clay 



Activity: Students will make two 
projects using clay. 

Focus Activity: Look at the Zuni Jar by 
Jennie Laate (Zimi). Carefully examine 
the frog that has been applied to the 
surface of the pot. Discuss how the pot 
and the frog were made separately and 
then the frog was attached to the pot. 

Outcomes: 

• Students will make pottery using 
two different techniques. 



Vocabulary: 

• coils, temper 
Materials: 

• 20 shallow dishes in which to start pots, 20 scrapers, 20 smooth stones for 
polishing, clay for each child, small containers of water. 

Procedure: 

1) Discuss how the clay the students will be using comes from a store and that the 
processing of the clay is already done for them. 

2) Mime with the children how they are going to make the coils. Then give each 
child a dish, a scraper and some clay. 

3) Have students make a thick "tortilla" of clay to form the base of their pots. Set 
the "tortillas" in the dishes. 

4) Have students build up the sides of their pots by making coils and adding them 
to the bases. Remind the children to put a small amount of water between the bases 
and the new coils. 

5) Finish smoothing the exterior of the pots with their scrapers. Again, they might 
use a little water to smooth the surface. 




13 



BEST COPYAVAIUBLE 



6) Set aside the pots to dry. 

7) Give each child a little more clay to make an animal. Animals will not be made 
with coils, but rather by sculpting or pinching. 

8) Make sure children realize that they are using two different clay-working 
techniques. 

9) If they wish, children can apply their animals to the surfaces of their pots. If you 
are going to polish your pots, do not apply the animals until after the polishing is 
completed. 

10) To polish the pots, wait until the pots are fairly dry (in Arizona, this could be 
as soon as overnight). Give each child a stone and a very small quantity of water. 

11) With the fingers, wipe a small amount of water on the pots. The water should 
soak into the surface of the pots immediately. (Too much water will melt the pots. 
Wetting the polishing stones instead of the pots will dig pieces off the surface of 
the pots.) With dry polishing stones, rub the surfaces of the pots, which should be 
slightly dampened. The surfaces will turn a different color and will become very 
smooth. 

12) After polishing is completed, students might polish their animals before 
applying them to the surfaces of their pots with a little clay. 

13) If you have the facilities, you might fire the pottery. If the students want to fire 
the pots themselves, here's one way to do it: 

After a BBQ, when the coals have burned down, put your completely dry pot in 
the coals and cover the pots with the warm coals. Let it stay overnight. In the 
morning, when the coals have turned to ash and are cold, take the pots out of the 
ashes. If there were no flaws and if the pot was completely dry, you will have a 
fired pot. NOTE: This is a low-firing (that is, low temperature) method. The pot 
will not hold water. 

Assessment: 

1) Did the students imitate the methods Maria used in the video to make their pots? 

2) Did the students understand they were using two different techniques? 



14 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Split-Twig Figure 



Activity; Students will each make an 
animal figure. 




Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"First Man Naming the Birds and 



Animals" by Tse Ye Mu [Romando 
Vigil] (San Ildefonso). Notice that 



first man is a hunter. Ask children to 
locate and name the two animals that 
are not birds in this picture. Which 



would be easier to kill with a bow ll| ^ ‘ Jj 

like First Man is carrying? ^ 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will each make an animal by following instructions and using 
considerable manual dexterity. 

Vocabulary: 

• archaeologist, cache, split-twig 
Materials: 

• instruction sheet, 30-inch wire for each student (wrapped craft wire, telephone 
wire or garden wire for attaching plants to trellis). 

Background: 

Tiny animals made of willow twigs were left in caves high in the walls of the Grand 
Canyon. Some figures are plump, others are thin. Some are as big as eight inches in 
length; others as small as one inch! Some have tiny horns on their heads. Others were 
found that have twigs — like miniature spears — piercing their bodies. The 
archeologists who have studied these animal figures, called "split-twig figurines", 
believe that they were made by members of an ancient people called the Desert 
Culture. Small groups of these people roamed the desert regions of western North 
America. They lived by hunting game and gathering the wild plants in their 
environment. It is thought that the tiny animal figures were associated with the prayers 
of hunters seeking a successful hunt. 



^ BEST COPY AVAILABII 



• Researchers first discovered the split-twig figurines in 1933 near a side canyon 
of the North Rim of the Grand Canyon. Since that time, other caches of similar 
figures have been found in Arizona, Nevada and California. The animals were 
made fi'om cottonwood or willow twigs that were split, then bent or wrapped to 
make the legs, body and head. 

Procedure: 

• See the 10-step instruction sheet and diagrams on the following page. 
Assessment: 

1) Did the students follow instructions? 

2) Did the students demonstrate manual dexterity? 



16 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Make your own Split-twig animal 




Rain in Life 



"Rain IS life" comments Gary Roybal of San Ildefonso Pueblo. The region of the 
upper Rio Grande has been a major residence center since at least A.D. 1 100. Today, 
16 pueblos are in the area. Jemez Pueblo educator and historian Joe Sando describes it 
as being in the "heart" of New Mexico. But it is a comparatively dry region where 
water is a highly prized commodity. 



Average Annual Inches of Rainfall 



2.0 

1.5 

1.0 

0.5 

0.0 




T 1 1 ~ ~T 1 ~ '1 T 1 1 r~ 

Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. 



H Pueblo Average Annual Rainfall Statistics 



Rain in Ceremony 

Knowledge of many of the summer ceremonies directly related to rain is restricted. 
However, even in the more public ceremonies, themes of rain, clouds, rainbows and 
water serpents are evident. Bob Chavez of Cochiti Pueblo has said, 

...clouds are always employed in the ceremonial songs. And the formations of the 
earth, the mountains, the hills, the rivers, the vegetation, all that is employed in the 
songs, the ceremonial songs. 



Expressions of Rain 

According to Jose Rey Toledo of Jemez Pueblo, 

Since the Pueblo world was based upon the rain culture, items expressive of rain and 
moisture were painted on the vessels: dragonflies or toads or frogs or butterflies or 
tad poles and the like; or clouds themselves in their various shapes and forms, wind 
blown clouds, or clouds pouring a lot of water, symbolically painted. 

Expressions of rain also occur in ceremonial clothing. Kilts have cloud designs and 
some have water animals. The white sash, which has a long, flowing fringe that moves 
like liquid, is generally referred to as a "rain" sash. In some ceremonies, dancers' heads 
are crowned with clouds in the form of stepped headdresses. 



1 8 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







The People of the Rio Grande Pueblos 

We have lived upon this land from days beyond history's records, far past any living 
memory, deep into the time of legend. The story of my people and the story of this 
place are one story. No man can think of us without thinking of this place. We are 
always joined together. 



These words were spoken by a man from Taos Pueblo, the northernmost of the 19 
Pueblos which are located in northern New Mexico. We call these people Pueblo 
Indians, as if they were all a single people. In fact, they do have some similar ways: 
their lifestyle, philosophy and basic economy are shared. But each Pueblo maintains a 
distinctive and unique identity. Characteristics such as language, religious feasts and 
rules of descent (some follow the father's line, others follow the mother's side of the 
family) are different. It is probably accurate to think of each Pueblo as an independent 
nation that shares some cultural practices with its neighbors. 




The people do not think of themselves as "Pueblo". The term was applied to them by 
the Spanish, who found the people living in villages or towns. The Europeans and later 
the Americans were impressed with these peoples who lived in stone and adobe 
permanent homes and who were farmers. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




The Ancient Pueblo Peoples 



The present day Pueblo people as well as the archaeologists believe that the ancestors 
of the Puebloans were the "ancient ones", who lived on the Colorado Plateau for 1,500 
years. Today, we can see evidence of thousands of ancient sites. Some villages were 
very small. Others, like Mesa Verde in Colorado or Chaco Canyon in New Mexico, 
were huge, containing hundreds of rooms and probably housing thousands of people at 
some point in their history. 

Later called Anasazi by the Navajo (Dine), they were farmers, growing com, beans, 
squash, cotton, tobacco and a variety of other herbs. Men hunted animals for meat. 

The only domesticated animals were the dog and the turkey. They were master 
farmers even in arid areas. Some Anasazi farmers practiced irrigation and water 
storage. For most of their history, they were able to produce enough food and they had 
to use large storage pits to hold their surplus grain. 

The ancient Pueblo people traded widely. Chaco Canyon is thought to be the center of 
a large trading network that managed goods from the southern parts of Mexico, the 
coast of California and from as far east as the banks of the Mississippi River. Shell, 
turquoise, copper bells and tinklers, feathers and parrots were all items that moved 
throughout the Greater Southwest. They made distinctive black-on-white pottery, 
which was regionally specific. One way to know that the ancient Pueblo people traded 
widely is that the pottery types are found dispersed throughout the area. 

Sometime around the years A.D. 1275-1300, most sites on the Colorado Plateau were 
abandoned. Some sites appear to archaeologists as if the people planned to return; the 
food storage pits and jars were left behind. It appears that the area was experiencing a 
severe drought, which began about A.D. 1200. After so much dryness, the farmers 
finally had to move to areas with more water. It is during this time that we see many 
new villages being built along the Rio Grande, where the water was still flowing. 

The Impact of the Europeans on the 
People of the Pueblos 

Most of the Pueblos were initially visited by Coronado in 1540. The explorer expected 
to find gold and other wealth and was ruthless in his demands for food, shelter and 
information from the Pueblos. Disgusted, he left the area in the spring of 1 542, empty- 
handed. The Pueblo peoples were left in shock after the brutality of his two-year visit. 
Many of Coronado's men were upset by the treatment shown to the native people. 



20 



BEST COPY AVAILABLF 




The Spanish returned to the Rio Grande Valley in 1581 . They reported visiting 57 
Pueblos. The people displayed generosity, but clearly hoped that the Spanish would go 
back to Mexico and leave them alone. One hundred years of concerted effort by the 
Spanish priests and soldiers to Christianize the people and to collect tribute led to the 
Pueblo Revolt of 1680. All the Pueblos and many of the poorer Spanish citizens rose 
up and drove out the Spanish from the Rio Grande Valley. The Revolt was successful 
for 12 years. When the Spanish returned, there were more Spanish families than 
soldiers or priests who entered the area. 

The Spanish introduced many new animals and foods to the area: sheep, horses, cattle, 
pigs, a variety of fruit trees and melons. They also brought new technology: the plow 
and metalworking, for example. But they also brought European diseases such as 
smallpox, measles and chicken pox. Some researchers estimate that these 
communicable diseases wiped out between 50% to 90% of the Pueblo population 
within the first 100 years of contact. 



The Pueblo people survived the Spanish and became a part of Mexico when that 
country declared its independence in 1821. In 1846, they came under the jurisdiction 
of the United States. The Americans exercised a very repressive policy toward native 
peoples, determined to force them to become just like "white men". Some Pueblo 
people feel that they have suffered more under the hands of the United States than 
under Spain or Mexico: the Boarding Schools initiated by the U.S. at the end of the 
last century took children from parents, punished people for speaking their language, 
told children that their parents were backward and that traditional culture was foolish. 

Yet just as the government was trying to force Pueblo people into the melting pot. 
American businesses of tourism and the cinema were romanticizing the Pueblos. 
Anthropologists "discovered" the Pueblo people and swarmed into the villages to 
study and collect. Some of these scholars were accepted into the Pueblo community 
completely and were entrusted with religious secrets. The publishing and collecting of 
this kind of information and associated material is still requested today. 



Through this 500 years of outsider interference, the Pueblo people have retained much 
of their traditional way of life. The people have learned to balance the old ways while 
moving with the new. Some families, for example, may live in an adobe home but 
work at the research center at Los Alamos. Because of the efforts of some 
anthropologists at the Museum of New Mexico and School of American Research, 
there was a great interest generated in traditional arts, especially pottery, which has 
brought economic security to many families. The Indian School at Santa Fe employed 
several teachers who fostered the artistic talent of Pueblo children. One woman, 
Dorothy Duim, encouraged many children to draw and paint and many of the most 



The Pueblos Persist 



The Pueblos 




2 1 BEST COPY AVAILAB' 





famous Pueblo artists of the early 20th century were students in her classes. The 
Indian School is now the Institute of American Indian Arts in Santa Fe. Many Native 
American students still attend the school and study art. 



The number of Pueblos has been drastically reduced: in 1581 there were 57 Pueblos 
and today there are 19. They are: 

Acoma: This Pueblo is sometimes called "Sky City" because of its location on top of a 
mesa. It, along with the Hopi villages, is one of the places where people have 
continuously lived for the longest time. 

Laguna: This is a Pueblo that was founded after the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. Laguna 
and Acoma are both west of the Rio Grande Valley. 

Isleta: This village was named "Little Island" by the Spanish. It is south of present- 
day Albuquerque, New Mexico. 

Sandia: The name for this Pueblo means "watermelon" in Spanish and refers to the 
shape of the mountains in the area. 

San Felipe: Saint's names were given to the Pueblos by the Spanish. The people have 
their own name for their village in their native language. 

Santa Ana: Today, this Pueblo is well-known for straw mosaic inlay work, introduced 
by the Spanish, as well as for pottery and textiles. 

Zia: The sun design on the state flag of New Mexico was taken from a Zia water jar in 
the collections of the Museum of New Mexico. 

Jemez: The name of the Pueblo (pronounced "HAY-miss") is the spelling used by the 
Spanish for the word the people use for themselves and means "people". When the 
Pueblo of Pecos was abandoned in 1838, the people moved to Jemez Pueblo. 

Santo Domingo: This large village is the home of many jewelers who make heishi 
(HE-shee), which are strands of fine shell beads. This Pueblo is very large and is 
especially well-known for the Com dance held on August 4, when hundreds of 
dancers fill the plaza for this religious celebration. 

Cochiti: The potters of this Pueblo are famous for making figurines. Helen Cordero 
was the first potter to make the storyteller figures: an adult with many small children 
sitting on the arms and lap. 

Tesuque: This village was very important during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. Two 
runners fi’om Tesuque (the-SUE-key) who were carrying the plans for the Revolt were 
captured. The chiefs of Tesuque then changed the date of the rebellion fi’om August 13 
to August 10. The first blood shed during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 was shed at 
Tesuque. 



22 



best COPY AVAlUai ^ 



Pojoaque: This is one of the smallest of the Pueblos. For many years , the 
Government didn't even acknowledge that there were any Pojoaque (pah-WAH-key) 
people. In the 1930s, the people finally were acknowledged and received their land 
grant. 

Nambe: This small village (pronounced NAHM-bay) was the first to receive federal 
assistance for building houses. The federal officials insisted on a "modem American" 
design which looks out-of-place in the Pueblo. Later, the Government changed its 
regulations and began funding houses that looked more like the New Mexican adobe 
style. 

San Ildefonso: This Pueblo is famous for the black pottery made popular by Maria 
and Julian Martinez. The black pottery is made from red-brown clay that turns black 
when the pots are smothered with dung during the firing process. 

Santa Clara: The potters of this Pueblo also make black pottery. Often a bear paw 
design is impressed near the rim of vessels made at Santa Clara. 

San Juan: This Pueblo is across the river from the site of the first Spanish capitol in 
New Mexico in 1598. The capitol was moved to Santa Fe in 1609. It was a leader from 
San Juan Pueblo named Pope who organized the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. 

Picuris: Picuris Pueblo was the last of the villages "discovered" by the Spanish. The 
name is an adaptation of the native word meaning "those who paint". 

Taos: This village is made up of two multi-storied dwellings, one on each side of the 
Taos River. These two divisions, which are architecturally seen in Taos, are found in 
most Pueblos. These two divisions take turns sponsoring events in the village and 
taking responsibility for many tasks. 

Zuni: The Pueblo of Zuni is not in the Rio Grande Valley, but rather near the border 
between Arizona and New Mexico. When the Spanish first came to this area, the 
people lived in six villages. The people call themselves A:shiwi. 

Today, visitors are welcome at most Pueblos, except on important religious occasions 
when the roads are closed. Many tourists visit this area of northern New Mexico to 
buy pottery, baskets, jewelry and textiles directly from the Native American artists. 
Some celebrations and dances are open to the general public, but visitors must show 
respect for the ceremonies. 



23 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



The Play's the Thing 

Activity: Students will present a play. 

Focus Activity: Look at the animals in all the art prints (Mojave Toad Canteen). 
Notice especially that none are angry or threatening. Discuss the calmness and dignity 
displayed by each animal. Have the children talk about these "personalities". Ask them 
to compare these animals with their pets in temperament. 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will gain experience in reading. 

2) Students will gain experience in public speaking. 

3) Students will gain experience in creating a character. 

Materials: 

six scripts of "A Good Deed Is Always Repaid By Evil" for the actors. 

Procedure: 

1 . Select six students to do the oral reading of the play. 

2. Ask the actors to read their scripts and discuss their characters with the other 
actors. 

3. Have the actors present the play to the class. 

4. As a class, discuss the characters in the play. Talk about how the actors might 
change their presentation to make the play better. 

5. Select six new students to present the play. 

Assessment: 



• Do the students understand what they were reading? 

• Did the students understand what they were hearing? 

• Did the second presentation show a greater understanding of the story and the 
characters? 

Extension: 



• As an art project, students could make props or masks-on-a-stick for the play. 



24 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



A Good Deed is Always Repaid by Evil 
From the Yoeme 






Narrator Man Horse 



Turtle Dog Coyote 



Man: What are you doing here, Turtle! 

Turtle: The river flooded and I swam and swam and swam. Then I got tired 
and fell asleep. 

Man: But that doesn't explain how you got way up here in the trees so far 
away from the river. 

Turtle: While I was sleeping, the river went back down. Could you please 
carry me to the river? I'm tired of walking and it's a long way. 

Narrator: The man picked the huge turtle up and carried him on his 
shoulders to the edge of the river. He started to put him in the water. 

Turtle: Oh, please take me to where it's deeper. 

Man: Okay, a little deeper. 

Narrator: The man walked into the river up to his knees and started to put 
the huge turtle into the water. 

Turtle: Please take me to where it is deeper still. 

Man: Okay, a little deeper. 

Narrator: The man walked into the water until the water was up to his 
waist. He started to put the huge turtle into the water. 






BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Turtle: Please take me to where the water is even deeper. 

Narrator: The man walked into the water until it was up to his neck. Again, 
he started to put the huge turtle in the water. 

Turtle: Please take me in where it is even deeper still. 

Man: I can't! This is far enough! 

Turtle: If you can't, you can't. I'll just have to eat you here. 

Man: Eat me! After I just carried you all the way fi'om the trees to the river, 
you want to eat me?! 

Turtle: Of course. Everyone knows a good deed is always repaid by evil. 

Man: Everyone doesn't know that! I don't know that! Ask someone. There's 
a dog. Ask him. 

Turtle: (Yelling) Dog, isn't it true that a good deed is always repaid by evil? 
Dog: Why? 

Turtle: Because this man carried me from the mountain to the river and now 
I want to eat him. 

Dog: So eat him. 

Man: No! Ask someone else. There's a horse. Ask him. 

Turtle: (Y elling) Horse, isn't it true that a good deed is always repaid by 
evil? 

Horse: Why? 

Turtle: Because this man carried me from the moimtain to the river and now 
I want to eat him. 

Horse: So eat him. 

Man: No! No! Ask someone else. There's a coyote. Ask him. 

Turtle: (Yelling) Coyote, isn't it true that a good deed is always repaid by 
evil? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Coyote: What? Come closer. I can't hear you. 

Narrator: The man and the turtle went to where the water was waist high. 
Turtle: (Yelling) Isn't it true that a good deed is always repaid by evil? 
Coyote: What? Come closer. I can't hear you. 

Narrator: The man and the turtle went to where the water was ankle deep. 
Turtle: Isn't it true that a good deed is always repaid by evil? 

Coyote: Why? 

Turtle: Because this man carried me from the mountain to the river and now 
I want to eat him. 

Coyote: (Talking to man) I don't understand. What did you do? 

Man: I found this turtle way up there between the trees. He was tired, so I 
carried him to the river and now he wants to eat me. 

Coyote: I still don't understand. Show me how you carried him. 

Narrator: The man picked up the huge turtle and put him on his shoulders. 

Man: See. I put him on my shoulders like this. 

Coyote: Okay. I see. But where did you find him? 

Man: (Pointing) Way up there between those trees. 

Coyote: I don't understand. Show me where you found him. 

Narrator: Coyote and the man, with the huge turtle still on his shoulders, 
walked up to the trees where the man found the turtle. 

Man: Here. This is where I found him. 

Coyote: I still don't understand. Put him down exactly where you found him. 
Narrator: The man put the turtle down between the trees. 



27 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Coyote: This is where you found him? Exactly here? 

Man: Yes. Right here. 

Coyote: Then leave him here and he can't repay your kindness with evil. 
Man: A very good idea, Coyote. Thank you. 

Narrator: The man walked away laughing. When he looked back he saw the 
coyote licking his lips and drooling as he watched the angry turtle walking 
slowly toward the river. The man laughed even harder. 



28 



best COPY AVAILABLE 





Extra! Extra! Read All About It! 



Activity: Students will write a 
newspaper report about an event. 

Focus Activity: Look at the print 
of the Buffalo Dance Kilt by the 
unknown artist from Jemez Pueblo, 

Review the responsibilities of the 
snake or avaynu shown on the kilt. 

Many times animals are shown to 
perform important deeds for the 
benefit of humans. Ask your students to tell of any stories they know about when an 
animal helped a person. 

Materials: 

• "A Sign of Bravery", paper, pencils 
Outcomes: 

1 . Students will order and summarize events in a story. 

Procedure: 

1. Read "A Sign of Bravery" to the class. 

2. Work with the students to order the events of the story. 

3. Have students work in pairs to write their stories as newspaper articles. Suggest 
that they might add some direct quotes from the mother or the turkey. 

4. Encourage students to write interesting headlines for their stories. 

5. Have the students share their work. 

Assessment: 




• Were the students able to understand the story? 

• Could the students order the events of the story? 

Extension: 

• Have the students illustrate their stories. 



29 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




A Sign of Bravery 

A Pueblo Tale 



You may have noticed that the tips of turkeys' tails are a foamy white. 
That wasn't always so. Many lifetimes ago, in an ancient village, there 
was a terrible storm and flood waters began to grow. The people were 
terribly frightened and raced to safety. 

A mother carrying her twin babies went running with the others, hurrying 
to reach high ground ahead of the water. She tried to climb the steep cliff 
holding both babies, but it was very difficult. She laid one baby gently on 
a narrow ridge and climbed even more quickly to take the other one to 
safety. 

When she reached the top of the cliff, she turned and looked back at her 
baby lying quietly on the ledge. She knew she didn't have the strength to 
return for her child before the white, roaring waters reached him. 

The mother began to scream. She cried for help, asking everyone to save 
her baby. She prayed for the safety of her small child. 

Finally, a turkey heard the mother's cries. She looked at the angry waters 
below and saw how close they were to the tiny infant. 

A tree branch hung over the ledge where the baby lay. The turkey jumped 
down on the branch and rushed over to the infant. She scooped the child 
up under her wing. As she ran back across the branch, it bobbed up and 
down, dipping the turkey's tail feathers in the white foam. That is why all 
turkeys tail feathers are white today. 

When we see the white tips of the turkey's tail feathers we remember how 
many lifetimes ago turkey's bravery saved the baby from drowning in a 
terrible flood. 



3:0 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Writing a Letter 

Activity: Students will write a letter 
telling about an event that has happened. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print of 
the Toad Canteen by Mojave artist 
Annie Fields. Look at his mouth. Doesn't 
it look like he is getting ready to tell us 
something? Discuss with the children 
how some animals communicate with 
humans, especially dogs, cats, birds, 
porpoises, etc.. 

Outcomes: 

• 1 . Students will write letters. 

Materials: 

• "Sandal Soup", paper, pencils 
Procedure: 

1. Read the story "Sandal Soup" to the class. 

2. Discuss the events of the story. 

3. Divide the class into three groups. 

4. Have each group write a letter to a cousin — maybe Mojave Toad! 

5. One group should write the letter as Coyote would write the story; the second 
group should write the tale as Quail would tell it; and the third group should write 
the events as Mrs. Coyote would tell it. 

6. Have students compare their letters and stories. 

Assessment: 

• Did students comprehend what they were hearing? 

• Could students recall the events of the story? 

• Did the students present different points of view in their letters? 




31 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Sandal Soup 

from the Mojave 

A Quail without feathers looks ugly to another Quail, but looks beautiful 
to a hungry Coyote. 

When Coyote saw Quail, he jumped on him and pulled out all of his 
feathers. Then he ordered him to go to Mrs. Coyote and tell her to fix 
quail soup for lunch. 

Of course. Quail wanted to escape, but Coyote kept watching. Without 
feathers, he couldn't fly. If he ran away. Coyote would just catch him 
again. What should he do? 

Quail worried as he trudged up to Coyote's door. Then he had an idea. He 
smiled as he walked in. 

"Mrs. Coyote", he said. "Mr. Coyote said to tell you he wants sandal soup 
for lunch". 

"Sandal soup?!", she replied. "Surely not sandal soup from his new 
sandals, the deer skin sandals he just finished making yesterday!". 

"Yes those", said Quail grinning. It felt good to get even with Coyote for 
pulling out his feathers. 

"Well, what is he thinking?", asked Coyote. But she filled the pot with 
water and put a pinch of salt and some fresh vegetables before she added 
the brand new sandals. 

When Quail was sure Coyote was gone, he said good-bye to Mrs. Coyote 
and hurried away as fast as he could. 

Quail ran on his little legs to a spring to get a drink of water and to hide in 
the tall grasses. When he got there, the spring was dry and the grasses 
were dead. 

With a sigh. Quail hurried on to another spring. It had been a long dry 
spell and this spring was dry too. 

Quail was really tired, but he knew Coyote would find him in the dry 
grasses, so he'd better not rest. 



32 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Big, Bigger, Biggest... 

Activity: Students compare decimals and 
arrange them in order. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print of the 
Black-on-black pottery by Margaret 
Tafoya (Santa Clara), Teresita Naranjo 
(Santa Clara), Rose Gonzales (San 
Ildefonso) and Joseph Lonewolf (Santa 
Clara). Discuss the relative size of the pots. 

Outcomes: 

• 1. Students will gain experience 

working with decimals. 

Materials: pencils, copy of the worksheet 
for each student 




Procedure: 

1. Review with students how to compare decimals. First, line up the decimal 
points. Then, encourage the students to read each decimal starting at the left: the 
first greater digit reveals the greater decimal . 

2. Hand out the worksheet and ask students to work through the first problem with 
you. 

3. Ask students to complete the worksheet. 

4. Have the students correct their work with you. 



Assessment: 

1. Did the student correctly order the decimals? 

2. Could the students create decimals in the correct range? 



33 BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 





Give It A Spin 



Activity:Using a spinner, students 
determine the probability of landing 
on the Zimi Rain Bird or the Zia Rain 
Bird. 








Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"First Man Naming the Birds and 



Animals" by Tse Ye Mu [Romando 
Vigil] (San Ildefonso). Point out to 
the students that there are many more 
birds than animals in this painting. 



This probably indicates to us that the -- 

artist wants us to know how important birds are to the people of the pueblo. 

Also, look at the two graphic pages showing the Zia Rain Bird and the Zimi Rain Bird. 
Outcomes: 

1 . Students will discover that there is an even probability that either bird will be 
selected. 

2. Students will work on their number skills from one to ten. 

Vocabulary: sometimes, never, always, probability, outcome 
Materials: 

15 even probability spirmers [Note: Make sure the spinners used for this 
exercise have two Zia Rain Birds and two Zuni Rain Birds], copy of the 
worksheet for each set of students using a spiimer. 

Materials: "Rainstorm" print 

Procedure: 

1 . Have children predict the numbers of times the spinners will land on each bird. 

2. Each child should take a turn spirming. Every outcome should be recorded on 
the worksheet. 

3. After 10 spins, students respond to the questions on the worksheet. 

4. Discuss and compare results. 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



34 




Assessment: 

• 1. Did students' predictions demonstrate an understanding of the sums to 10? 

• 2. Were students able to use the data to form a probability statement? 



Extension: 

o 1 . Ask students what would have to happen to enable them to make an 
accurate prediction? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



35 




BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 




Name 



Date 



Predicting Clouds 



Predict: If you take 10 tunis* how many times will you get each bird? 




How many? j J How many? 



Write a number sentence to show the difference. 



What happened sometimes? 





What always happened? 



What never happened? 



Write what you learned on the back of this paper. 



O 

ERIC 



3,7 



liiiiilM 



A New Spin 

Activity:Using a spinner, students 
experience a situation where one 
outcome is three times more likely 
than another. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"First Man Naming the Birds and 
Animals by Tse Ye Mu [Romando 
Vigil] (San Ildefonso). Point out to 
the students that there are many more 
birds than animals in this painting. 

Ask the students which they think 
they would be more likely to see: one of the seven birds or one of the two animals? 
Why? 

Also, look at the two graphic pages showing the Zia Rain Bird and the Zimi Rain Bird. 
Outcomes: 

1 . Students will gain experience in imderstanding situations where there are two 
possible outcomes, but where one is more likely than the other. 

Vocabulary: possible, probable, outcome, likely 

Materials: 9 probability spinners favoring Zia Birds, 1 1 probability spiimers favoring 
Zimi Rain Birds, a worksheet for each of the students using a spiimer. 

Procedure: 

1 . Have children predict the numbers of times the spinners will land on each bird. 

2. Each child should take a turn spiiming. Every outcome should be recorded on 
the worksheet. 

3. After 10 spins, students respond to the questions on the worksheet. 

4. Discuss and compare results. 

Assessment: 

1. Did students demonstrate an imderstanding of the sums to 10? 

2. Did students understand why their results were different? 




38 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



9 probability spinners favoring Zia Birds 





11 probability spinners favoring Zuni Rain Birds 





40 




Name 



Date 



Predicting Clouds 



Predict: If you take iO Minis, how many times will you get each bird? 




Take ten turns and chart your results below. 




Write a number sentence to show the difference. 



What happened sometimes? 



What always happened? 



What never happened? 



Write what you learned on the back of this paper. 



Concentration and Counting 

Activity: Students play the game concentration and count up their scores. 

Focus Activity: Look at all six of the art prints. Ask the students to find two of the 
same designs among the prints. Help them see the water serpents, toads, turtles and 
terraced cloud designs. 

Outcomes: 

1. Students will improve their observation and memory skills. 

2. Students will practice counting to 32. 

Materials: set of 32 game cards 
Procedure: 

1 . Divide students into five groups and give each group a set of playing cards. 

2. Ask students to shuffle the cards and then place cards, one by one, face down on 
the groimd in rows of six cards. 

3. Students take turned turning two cards face up. If the cards match, the player 
keeps the cards and tries again. 

4. Each student plays imtil all the cards are paired. The student with the most cards 
wins the game. 

Assessment: 

1 . Did the students coimt up their scores easily? 

2. Did the students demonstrate good visual memory? 



42 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





43 



Piiiu two copies <A' this sheet to play the Match and Count ganic. 
Cut out the cords using a paper cutter at the trim lines. 






How Many Stamps? 



Activity: Students use various 
stamps to measure distances. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art 
print of the Buffalo Dance Kilt by 
an unknown artist from the Pueblo 
of Jemez. The bottom edge of the 
kilt has two kinds of cloud designs. 

Discuss how the artist had to decide 
how many clouds would fit along 
the hem of the kilt and how big the clouds needed to be. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will work with the concepts of length, width and perimeter. 

2. Students will practice counting and addition. 

Materials: 20 stamps, 5 stamp pads, paper in various sizes 
Procedure: 

1. Have the students count the number of spirals in each sash. 

2. Students should write down the number of spirals in each sash. 

3. Discuss why each sash has a different number of spirals, even though the sashes 
are the same length in the print. 

4. Have the students add up the total number of spirals in the sashes. 

Assessment: 

1. Do the students see the contrast between the two colors making up the spiral? 
Extension: 

1. Have the students count how many sashes use red, use blue and use white. 




44 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




0 . 0 :: 





Zuni Jar 





Artist:Jennie Laate 

CulturerPueblo of Zuni 

Size: Height 9 1 1/16"; Diameter 13 7/8" 

Media:Clay, paint 
Date: 1983 
Description: 

Frog - Frogs are thought of as the "children of the rainmakers" by the Zuni. Frogs are 
used to represent rain in the fall. 

Butterfly - Butterflies represent the rains in the summer. 

Snake (water serpent) - The Zimi call this water serpent Kolowisi. It lives in 
imdergroimd sprmgs and protects them. 

Scalloped band on the bottom - The parallel lines show that this border is filled with 
rain. 



bestcopyavailari r 

45 




Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - thick, thin, wide narrow, parallel, curving, broken 
Shape - organic, rounded, three-dimensional 
Color - polychrome (more than two colors) 

Space - two-dimensional, three-dimensional, surface, between, above, imder (Notice 
that the bowl has three different areas of design, the top with the Kolowisi, the body 
with the frog and the butterfly, and the bottom with the continuous rain border.) 

Texture - surface, matte 

Art Principles: 

Concept - Repetition 

Discuss the AB pattern that goes aroimd the bowl. 

Cultural Context: 

Jennie Laate is an art teacher at Zuni High School. She teaches her students to make 
pottery in the traditional styles of Zuni Pueblo. Today, Zimi potters create pottery 
using the designs and techniques of their ancestors, reflecting the past but not copying 
it. 

Mrs. Laate has combined the symbol for rain (frogs), summer rain (butterflies) and 
protecting water (Kolowisi). This shows how important rain is at Zimi. 

The frog appears to be going toward the mouth of the jar and the water in the jar. 
Animals on pottery moving toward water were made by prehistoric potters as well. 

Images for Comparison: 

Black-on-black Pottery 

Buffalo Dance Kilt 

Questions for Comparison: 

The water serpent is a part of Zimi, Hopi and Pueblo cultures. At Hopi it is called 
Avanyu. At Zuni it is called Kolowisi. The name by which it is called in the Pueblos 
depends on the language spoken at that Pueblo. 



46 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Look at the heads of the water serpents. How are they the same? How are they 
different? 

Which water serpent looks happiest? Why? 

Which water serpent looks the most serious? Why? 

Which water serpent looks the scariest? Why? 

Which water serpent looks the most life-like? Why? 



■17 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 






Black-on-Black Pottery 




Artists:Margaret Tafoya, Teresita Naranjo, Rose Gonzales, Joseph Lonewolf 

Cultures: Santa Clara Pueblo (Margaret Tafoya, Teresita Naranjo and Joseph 
Lonewolf) and San Ildefonso Pueblo (Rose Gonzales) 

Size: 

Diameter 37 5/8"; Depth 17 13/16" 

Diameter 3 7/16"; Depth 9 7/16" 

Diameter 4 15/16"; Depth 8 7/16" 

Diameter4 1/16"; Depth 4 1/16" 

Media:Clay 

Date: 1960s 

Catalog Number: 

NA-SW-SC-AlO-52 

NA-SW-SC-AlO-25 

NA-SW-SC-AlO-54 

NA-SW-SC-AlO-39 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

48 







Description: 

The tallest water jar was made by Margaret Tafoya. The snake-like figure that 
encircles it is an Avanyu, the spirit of water in the Santa Clara Pueblo. 

The smaller water jar with ihe Avanyu was made by Rose Gonzales of the San 
Ildefonso Pueblo. 

The water jar with the bear paw was made by Teresita Naranjo. The bear paw is a 
good luck symbol. It is said that a bear led the people of Santa Clara to water during a 
drought. By using the bear paw design, the potter is asking for rain and everlasting life 
for the Santa Clara people. 

The smallest water jar is a seed jar by Joseph Lonewolf of Santa Clara. Feather 
designs are barely visible on it. 

Cultural Context: 

The four artists who made these jars represent many years of pottery making at Santa 
Clara Pueblo and San Ildefonso Pueblo. The largest jar was made by Margaret Tafoya. 
In the 1 920s, when she began making pottery to sell, it was a long trip from Santa 
Clara Pueblo to Taos or Santa Fe in order to sell her pottery. 

In 1926, the Fred Harvey Company began bringing travelers to Espafiola, New 
Mexico, which is near Santa Clara Pueblo. The travelers were interested in buying 
Native American artwork. Espahola was an easy walk for Mrs. Tafoya and the other 
Santa Clara potters. Someone always told the potters ahead of time when a train was 
coming, and the artists met the tourists with their pottery displayed for sale. 

In the 1930s, it became more common for people to own cars and many started 
traveling in New Mexico. This meant that the Santa Clara potters were able to sell 
pottery to even more people. Santa Clara and San Ildefonso pottery continues to be 
popular today and potters like Joseph Lonewolf continue to make potter in the same 
way. 

In order to get the beautiful black finish on the jars, potters polish the jars with a 
smooth stone. The clay of the jar is still slightly damp during polishing. After the jar is 
polished and completely dry, it is put into a pit for firing. The smoke from the fire is 
trapped in the pit with the jar. This is called"smothering the fire" and no open flames 
are permitted. The fire is thus very smoky and the carbon from the smoke is forced 
into the clay, creating the black finish. 

Cultural Response: 

Joseph Lonewolf said: "I believe that those old ones are my guides and mentors still, 
showing me in my dreams and visions how to use the old Mimbres designs in new 
ways, just as they direct my hands and heart when I work those envisioned symbols 
into my pots". 



4S 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




"First Man Naming the Birds and 

Animals" 







Artist: Tse Ye Mu (Romando Vigil) 

Culture: Pueblo of San Ildefonso, New Mexico 
Size: Height 21 9/16"; Width 29" 

Media: Watercolor paper 
Date: c. 1940 

Catalog Number: 3309-285 
Description: 

Sun - The sun is above everything. 

First Man - With hand extended, First Man is calling to the animals. 



50 



best copy available 



The following birds are flying the highest in the sky: 

Crow - The crow is considered by many to be the most intelligent of birds. It has a 
complicated language of its own and can learn to count to three or four. Ravens are 
larger, but look very similar. Crows live in many habitats but are often found near 
water. They are 16 to 20 inches long. They eat almost anything. 

Duck - There are many kinds of ducks. The mallard is a kind of duck found along the 
Rio Grande. They eat plants and small animals at the bottom of shallow water in 
marshy areas. As they eat, you often see only their tails out of the water. Mallards are 
16 to 24 inches long. 

Hawk - This bird appears to be a member of the hawk family. Included in this family 
are vultures, falcons and eagles. Members of the hawk family have strong talons 
(claws) and strong beaks. These are used for tearing meat. The golden eagle is seen in 
the Rio Grande region. They are 30 to 41 inches long with a wingspan of 7 1/2 feet. 
They eat squirrels, prairie dogs and rabbits. They can even kill a deer, but cannot carry 
one back to their nests to eat. 

The next three birds are flying closer to the ground: 

Flycatcher - This bird is shaped like a flycatcher. Flycatchers are 4 to 7 1/2 inches 
long. They eat insects, lizards and baby animals. These birds are quarrelsome, so many 
animals seem to avoid them. Flycatchers are found most often near water. 

Rock Dove - This bird resembles a rock dove. Another name for the rock dove is 
pigeon. The rock dove is 1 1 to 15 1/2 inches long. They may be seen in the clouds 
during the summer. They have soothing voices unlike the whitewing dove, which 
sounds rude. When the saguaro is ripe, these birds often look as if they are wearing 
lipstick because of the saguaro fruit they eat. 

Hummingbird - Hummingbirds are only 3 to 4 inches long. They eat nectar, tree sap, 
insects and spiders. They use the silk from spider webs to tie their nests together. The 
mother feeds her babies by putting the food in her beak and then putting her long beak 
down the baby's throat. 

The last three animals are ones that live on the ground: 

Buffalo - Sometimes people are surprised to recall that the buffalo was a very 
important food for the Pueblo people of New Mexico. Men would hunt the buffalo on 
the plains of what is today eastern New Mexico. Many pueblos have a Buffalo Dance, 
which is usually done in the winter months. 

Deer - The deer was an important source of food, hide for clothing and bone and 
sinew for tools. Many Pueblo people also have Deer Dances in the winter to honor this 
an im als. 



BESTCOPVAVAILABLE 



Turkey - The turkey was a domesticated animals of the ancient Pueblo people, the 
ancestors of the Pueblo Indian people. The bird was used for food, but the feathers 
were also important. 

Art Elements: 

Line - natural (organic), straight, curved 

Shape - Direct students to look from side-to-side and top-to-bottom to see how Tse Ye 
Mu used his space successfully. 

Color - neutral, warm, cool 

Texture - soft, velvety, bumpy 

Art Principles: 

Concept - Emphasis 

Discuss the actual sizes of the animals illustrated in this painting and the size they 
appear to be. What kind of message does this give the viewer about the value of each 
animal to Mr. Vigil? 

Cultural Context: 



Name Poem 

My name sounds like a 
dragon 
munching 
my face. 

My name sounds like a 
dinosaur 
yelling 
at someone. 

My name sounds like a 
car 

crashing 
into a building. 

I hate it when someone 
makes fun of my name. 



52 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




This poem was written by a second grader named Norberto Fernandez. He was 
learning to speak English and writing in English was hard for him, but he had 
something to say. Norberto's new friends weren't really making fun of his name, but 
the English voices saying it sounded strange to his ear — not like his friends in his old 
high school in Mexico. 

Names are very important. They are usually the first gift a baby is given. Who gives 
the name and how the name is chosen is different in different cultures. Even the time 
when a name is given is different to different people. Sometimes a baby has a name 
before it is bom, sometimes the name is given at a special ceremony -- a naming 
ceremony or christening. 

The man who painted this painting has two names. The name given him by his tribe 
was Tse Ye Mu. The name he used away from his tribe was Romando Vigil. It is not 
unusual for Native Americans to have two names. This tradition began in the past, 
when Native Americans began working with Euro-Americans. Sometimes it happened 
because two names were needed for legal papers, but usually it began when Native 
American children started going to school. Sometimes, because their Native American 
name was long or difficult to say or because the school administrators thought English 
or Spanish names were better. Native Americans were given new names. 

According to Native American artist Roger McKiimey, Native Americans have a 
choice now about which name to use. Many artists are comfortable with their English 
or Spanish names, but choose their art to be known by their Native American names. 

Just as names are important to people, they are also important to groups of people. 
When the Europeans first came to what today is southern Arizona, they got confused. 
They asked, "Who lived in these old cities?". They were told "Hohokam". The Spanish 
thought that was a name, but it is instead the way that the Tohono O' odham say 
"Those who are gone". 

The O'odham too have had confusion over their name. Until recently, many people 
called them the Papago. But the word "Papago" comes from a word the Spaniards used 
when they talked about them. In about 1 986, the people called Papago went to court 
and asked to be called by their correct name - Tohono O'odham. 

Today, other tribes are considering asking that they always be called by the name they 
know as their own. In the future, we may no longer say Navajo, but Dind. We may say 
Inde, not Apache; A:shiwi, not Zuni; and Yoeme, not Yaqui. 



S3 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Buffalo Dance Kilt 




Artist: Unknown 
CuiturerPueblo of Jemez 
Size: Height 25", Width 47 1/16" 

Media: Cotton, paint, feather, metal tinklers 
Date:Priorto 1979 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-JZ-I-10 
Description: 

Snake - The Water Serpent is a traditional water symbol among the Pueblo people. It 
is responsible for rain and lightning and, if not treated with respect, can cause floods 
and earthquakes. 

Clouds - This kilt shows both terraced (stepped) clouds and rounded clouds. 
Rectangles - Rectangles mark the water serpent's body. 

Feathers - Feathers are often cloud symbols. 

Metal - The tinklers on the bottom of the kilt sound like rain as the dancer moves. 



54 



BEST COPY AVAILABl E 




Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curve, straight, horizontal, vertical, short, long 
Shape - rectangle, arch, organic, natural, regular 
Color - primary, secondary 

Space - two-dimensional, below, above (Discuss the artist's use of space by looking 
side-to-side and top-to-bottom.) 

Texture - surface, real, soft, velvety 

Description of Art Principles: 

Concept - Balance 

Cultural Context: 

This kilt is worn during Buffalo Dances. These dances are performed in winter. While 
the number of dancers, their outfits and the dance is different in each Pueblo, Buffalo 
Dances at every Pueblo are prayers for snow and good hxmting. 

Images for Comparison: 

Zxmi Jar by Jennie Laate 

Black-on-black Pottery by Margaret Tafoya, et al 
Questions for Comparison: 

The water serpent is a part of Zxmi, Hopi and Pueblo cultures. At Hopi it is called 
Avanyu. At Zuni it is called Kolowisi. The name by which it is called in the Pueblos 
depends on the language spoken at that Pueblo. 

Look at the heads of the water serpents. How are they the same? How are they 
different? 

Which water serpent looks happiest? Why? 

Which water serpent looks the most serious? Why? 

Which water serpent looks the scariest? Why? 

Which water serpent looks the most life-like? Why? 



55 



BEST COPY AVAUjABi b 



Turtle Plagues 







Artist:Unknown 

Culture:Hopi 

Size:Diameter 12 3/4"; Diameter 5 5/16" 

Media :Natural fibers 
Date: 1980s 

Catalogue Number:RB-3; RB-6 
Description: 

Turtles - The artists have coiled the turtle shells so that they stand out from the 
plaque. Turtles have important association with water because they are found in and 
around bodies of water. 

Spots - The spots on both turtles emphasis the spiral caused by the coil basket-making 
technique. 



5B 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




aa 




Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curved, diagonal, spiral, even, broken, dashed 

Shape - round, symmetrical, natural, living 

Color - warm, neutral 

Space - centered, surroimding, border 

Texture - regular, actual, bumpy 

Art Principles: 

Concept; Balance 
Cultural Context: 

If you look at the bottom of streams and ponds around Hopi, you might see the snout 
of a Sonoran mud turtle. These turtles snuggle into the mud and wait for something 
they can eat to swim past them. They eat insects, crustaceans, snails, fish, frogs and 
some plants. The Sonoran mud turtle is small (only 1 1/2 to 3 1/2 inches long). It has a 
dark green oval shell. 

Turtles have important association with water at Hopi. Hopi artists draw them on 
pottery, embroider them into clothes and weave them into flat baskets. 

Images for Comparison: 

• Mojave Toad Canteen 
Questions for Comparison: 

• These animals all represent rain. Why? 

• Which animals look the most lifelike? Why? 

• If you were going to make an animal canteen out of clay, what animal would 
you make? Why? 



57 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Artist: Annie Fields 
CuIturerMojave 

Size: Height 2 1 1/16"; Length 5 5/16'; Width 4 3/16" 

Media:Clay, paint 
Date: 1964 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-MH-18 
Description: 

Toad - Notice the lines and dots that give texture to the toad. Figures like this may 
have been made in the past for children's toys. When the tourists began to come to 
Arizona, the artists made items like this to sell to them. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Vocabulary for Discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curved, thick, thin 
Shape - curved, rounded, hollow 
Color - warm, neutral, earth tones 

Space - Discuss the use of space top-to-bottom and side-to-side 
Texture - natural, implied 
Art Principle: 

Concept - Contrast 
Cultural Context: 

If you dig into the dry desert ground where the Mojave live, you might find a 
spadefoot toad. There are thousands of these two inch long animals below the ground. 
If you find one, it will barely be breathing. It won't have eaten or taken a drink since 
the last heavy rain. It will simply be waiting. Waiting for rain. 

When it rains so hard that there are puddles on the ground, the spadefoot toads will 
come out. They will eat and drink. The females will lay eggs in the large puddles. The 
eggs will quickly become tadpoles. The tadpoles will quickly become spadefoot toads. 
They have to be quick because when the puddles dry, they need to dig a hole and go 
backwards into the ground. 

The spadefoot toad might have to stay in the ground waiting for rain for a year. It 
might have to wait five or six years. This tiny animal spends most of its life waiting 
for rain. 

Image for Comparison: 

Turtle Plaques 
Questions for Comparison: 

These animals all represent rain. Why? 

Which animals look the most lifelike? Why? 

If you were going to make an animal canteen out of clay, what animal would you 
make? Why? 



59 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Getting To Know You 

Activity: Students become familiar with the attributes and differences among birds, 
mammals, amphibians and reptiles. 

Focus ActivityrPrint and display all of the art prints for use in this activity. 

Outcomes: 

1 ) Students will become familiar with the physical characteristics that define a 
bird, mammal, amphibian and reptile. 

2) Students will be able to connect these attributes to animals they see. 

Vocabulary: reptile, amphibian, mammal, warm-blooded, cold-blooded 

Materials: All six of the art prints, charts: "What is a bird?", "What is a mammal?", 
"What is an amphibian?", "What is a reptile?". 

Procedure: 

1) Look at each art print. Have a student select an animal from one of the art prints 
and say something about that animal, using the information on the "What is a ...?" 
charts. 

2) Repeat this exercise with other students, until most of the animals in the art 
prints have been selected. 

3) Repeat this exercise on several other days until the students have become very 
familiar with the physical attributes defining birds, mammals, amphibians and 
reptiles. 

4) After the students are comfortable with the information, play a guessing game 
similar to "I spy..." using the art prints. One student, for example, might begin by 
secretly selecting the turkey in "First Man Naming the Birds and Animals" by Tse 
Ye Mu [Romando Vigil] (San Ildefonso). The student says: "I spy something that 
has a beak." Students guess a bird. Then the student might go on to "spy" colors, 
nesting habits or some other attributes of the turkey until the rest of the class 
guesses which art print is the one in question. 

Assessment: 

• Have the students begun to recognize the physical differences among different 
types of animals? 



60 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



A bird is an animal 
that has feathers. 

1 1 is warm- blooded, 
hatches from an egg, 
and has a backbone. 

1 1 has a beak, two 
legs and two wings. 



A mammal is an animal 
whose babies are fed 
with milk from the 
mother's body. 

1 1 has a backbone and a 
well- developed brain. 

A mammal has fur or 
hair and it is warm- 
blooded. 



An amphibian is an 
animal that usually 
lives part of its life in 
water and part of its 
life on land. 

It is cold-blooded and 
has a backbone. 

Most amphibians have 
smooth, moist skin 
and no scales. 



A reptile is an animal 
that has dry, rough, 
scaly skin. It has 
lungs for brea thing. 

A reptile is cold- 
blooded and has a 
backbone. 

Most reptiles hatch 
from eggs. 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 




I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: ~ SO 



Title; 

After the Rain; Animals 




Author(s): 




Arlene Old Elk and Jackie Stoklas 


Publication Date; 
2001 


Corporate Source; 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced In the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Educat'on (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and 
electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction 
release Is grant^, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample stickar shown below will be 
affix^ to an Level 1 documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 


The sample sticker shown below win be 
affixed to an Level 2B documents 


PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
microfiche; AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 










\e/ 












TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 




Level 2A 
\ 



Level 2B 
\ 



Check tiers for Lovell rotease. permitting reproduction 
and dtssamination in micra(iche or other ERIC archival 
me^ (e.g.. etocbonic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction Check hero for Level 2B reteass. permitting reproduction 

and dissemination in microfiche and in el ec tr o n ic media for and dissemination In micrafiche only 

ERIC archivai ooOection subscrttiert only 



Documents wfil be processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce b granted, but no box b checked, documents wOi be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here, 

please 




I hereby grant to the Educathnai Resources Information Center (ERiC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this 
document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and 
its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for nonirrofit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




Printed Nam( 

4a//V 



litionniUe: 












E-MaD Address; i i Date; / _ y 



E-MaD Address; 



TaJ^k>oec/.OQ I 



^ 3 - 



(Over) 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

if permission to reproduce is not grsnted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the svsilebility of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless It is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 

Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 




However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution. to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: ^ 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
4483-A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland -20706 

Telephone: 301-552.4200 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-552-4700 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfacility.org 



EKLC 

(pjgy 2/2001) 



