DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 481 435 



CS 512 133 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Reese, Debbie 

Native Americans Today. 

MarcoPolo Education Foundation.; National Council of Teachers of 
English, Urbana, IL.; International Reading Association, Newark, DE . 
2002-12-06 
lip. 

Managing Editor, ReadWriteThink, International Reading Association, 
800 Barksdale Rd., P.O. Box 8139, Newark, DE 19714-8139. E-mail: 
comments@readwritethink.org. For full text: 
http : / /www. readwritethink . org/ lessons . 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; ^American Indian Studies; American Indians; 
Childrens Literature; ^Discussion (Teaching Technique); Educational 
Objectives; Elementary Education; Evaluation Methods; ^Internet; 
Lesson Plans; Reading Instruction; Small Group Instruction; *Student 
Motivation 



ABSTRACT 



children's nonfiction books and 
substantive information about 
50-minute session, students 
knowledge of Native Americans; 
information from Internet Web 



Through this lesson, teachers can use 
the Internet to help their students develop accurate, 

Native American people in the present day. During one 
will: participate in critical discussions about their 
work cooperatively in small groups; access and gather 
sites about Native Americans; and share information with others through discussion. 
The instructional plan, lists of resources, student assessment/reflection activities, 
and a list of National Council of Teachers of English/International Reading 
Association (NCTE/IRA) Standards addressed in the lesson are included. A present-day 
Native American book list and an ERIC Digest, "Teaching Young Children about Native 
Americans" (Debbie Reese) , are attached. (PM) 



o 

ERIC 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 481 435 



http://www. readwritethink.org/lessons/lesson_view_printer_friendly. asp?id=63 



Native Americans Today 



Author 

Debbie Reese 
Urbana, Illinois 

Grade Band 

3-5 

Estimated Lesson Time 

One 50-minute session 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

X H- IfuJm 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

H 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Overview 

Many people think that Native Americans are a vanished people— that they 
do not exist in the present day. 

Using this lesson plan, teachers can use photo essays to introduce students 
to Native children and their families, thereby countering the idea that Native 
people no longer exist. 



From Theory to Practice 

Bishop, Rudine Sims. 1997 "Selecting Literature for a Multicultural Curriculum." In Using Multiethnic 
Literature in the K-8 Classroom. Norwood, MA: Christopher-Gordon Publishers, Inc. Pp. 1-20. 

Bishop identified five functions of multicultural literature: 

1. provide knowledge or information 

2. expand how students view the world by offering varying perspectives 

3. promote or develop an appreciation for diversity 

4. give rise to critical inquiry 

5. illuminate human experience. 




This lesson uses literature to provide children with knowledge and information about 
present-day Native Americans. With this knowledge and information, children will be 
introduced to different perspectives on family and community, and they will have an 
informed knowledge base from which to critique stereotypical representations of Native 
people in their textbooks, literature, television programs, videos, and movies. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Seale, Doris. 1992. Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for 

Children. Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

This collection of articles and annotated citations on Native American books for children can 
provide useful background information as well as additional texts that students might 
examine in class. 



Student Objectives 






(N 




9 



best copy AVA/Ui 



http://www.readwritethink.org/lessons/lesson_view jrinter_friendly.asp?id=63 



Students will 

• participate in critical discussions about their knowledge of Native Americans. 

• work cooperatively in small groups. 

• access and gather information from Internet Web sites about Native Americans. 

• share information with others through discussion. 



Resources 

• Present-Day Native American Book List 

• Teaching Young Children about Native Americans Web Site 

• Indian Country Today Web Site 

• US Native American Data from Census 2000 

• "I" Is Not for Indian: The Portrayal of Native Americans in Books for Young People. 

• Native American Sites 



Instructional Plan 

Resources 

1. Books from the attached Present-Dav Native American Book List that show present-day Native 
Americans. 

2. Internet Web sites and Internet access. 



Preparation 

1. Select a collection of texts from the book list that show present-day Native Americans. 

2. To familiarize yourself with Native American culture, spend time at the Lisa Mitten's Web site of 
Native American Sites . The site is quite extensive and filled with carefully selected links to sites 
with accurate and useful information about Native Americans. 

3. Specifically, go to these pages, linked to the site: 

Teaching Young Children about Native Americans 

"I" Is Not for Indian: The Portrayal of Native Americans in Books for Young People 
US Native American Data from Census 2000 



Instruction and Activities 

1. Introduction. 

Begin by writing "Native American," "American Indian," and "Indian" on the board. Introduce each 
term, and briefly describe its usage (see "Teaching Youno Children about Native Americans" for a 
brief discussion). 

2. Brainstorming session. 

Engage students in a brainstorming session during which they share all they know about Native 
Americans. Create lists of their comments on the board. 

3. Small group activity. 



http://www.readwritethink.org/lessons/lesson_view_printer_fri endly.asp?id=63 



Divide the students into small groups and give each group one or two of the books from the book 
list. Ask them to compare what they generated in the brainstorming list with what they see in the 
books. 

4. Small group activity (Optional). 

If you have Internet access in your classroom, have students explore the images and information 
at the Internet sites listed above. 

5. Class discussion. 

Solicit general comments from the groups regarding their discussions. Move to soliciting specific 
examples of how their prior knowledge was affirmed or challenged by the material they found in 
the books. Students could use the interactive Venn diagram tool to map out their findings. 



Extensions 

1. Students can visit Internet Web sites developed by people of the tribes featured in the books on 
the book list to learn more about the tribe. 

2. Students can locate works of fiction about the tribes featured in the books on the book list, 
comparing and contrasting the ways the information in the two books are similar or different. They 
can apply information they gather from the Web sites to their comparison of the two books. 

3. Encourage students to read the online version of Indian Country Today. , the leading Native 
American publication in the United States. By reading this publication, students can gain an 
appreciation for topics of interest or concern to Native people today. Students could create a Venn 
diagram comparing the information that they find in Indian Country Today with the information in 
the New York Times or USA Today. 

4. Invite students to write to publishers, asking for fictionalized works about Native American children 
in modern day settings. 



Web Resources 

Native American Sites 

http://www.nativeculture.com/lisamitten/indians.html 

This Web site of Native American Sites, collected by Lisa Mitten, is quite extensive and filled with 
carefully selected links to sites with accurate and useful information about Native Americans 



Student Assessment/ Reflections 

1. Observe student interactions as they communicate with each other about as they go through the 
activities. 

2. Engage students in conversations about what they have learned through this lesson. 



NCTE/IRA Standards 

1 - Students read a wide range of print and nonprint texts to build an understanding of texts, of 
themselves, and of the cultures of the United States and the world; to acquire new information; to 
respond to the needs and demands of society and the workplace; and for personal fulfillment. 
Among these texts are fiction and nonfiction, classic and contemporary works. 

2 - Students read a wide range of literature from many periods in many genres to build an 
understanding of the many dimensions (e.g., philosophical, ethical, aesthetic) of human 
experience. 



http://www.readwritethink.org/lessons/lesson_view_printer_friendly.asp7id-63 



3 - Students apply a wide range of strategies to comprehend, interpret, evaluate, and appreciate 
texts. They draw on their prior experience, their interactions with other readers and writers, their 
knowledge of word meaning and of other texts, their word identification strategies, and their 
understanding of textual features (e.g., sound-letter correspondence, sentence structure, context, 
graphics). 

5 - Students employ a wide range of strategies as they write and use different writing process 
elements appropriately to communicate with different audiences for a variety of purposes. 

6 - Students apply knowledge of language structure, language conventions (e.g., spelling and 
punctuation), media techniques, figurative language, and genre to create, critique, and discuss 
print and nonprint texts. 

7 - Students conduct research on issues and interests by generating ideas and questions, and by 
posing problems. They gather, evaluate, and synthesize data from a variety of sources (e.g., print 
and nonprint texts, artifacts, people) to communicate their discoveries in ways that suit their 
purpose and audience. 



readwritethink 

KCXE marcopolo 

Copyright 2002-2003, IRA/NCTE. All rights reserved. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



erJc 



5 



Present-Day Native American Book List 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Buffalo Days.Photographs by Lawrence Migdale. Holiday 
House, 1997. ISBN: 0823413276. 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Pueblo Storyteller. Photographs by Lawrence Migdale. 
Holiday House; 1991. ISBN: 0823408647. 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Totem Pole. Photographs by Lawrence Migdale. Holiday 
House; 1990. ISBN: 0823408094. 

King, Sandra. Shannon: An Ojibway Dancer. Photographs by Catherine Whipple. 
First Avenue Editions; 1993. ISBN: 0822596431. 

Mercredi, Morningstar. Fort Chipewyan Homecoming: A Journey to Native 
Canada. Illustrated by Darren McNally. Lerner Publications Company; 1996. 
ISBN: 082252659X. 

Peters, Russell. Clambake: A Wampanoag Tradition. Photographs by John 
Madama. Lerner Publications Company; 1992. ISBN: 0822526514. 

Rendon, Marcie R. Powwow Summer: A Family Celebrates the Circle of Life. 
Photographs by Cheryl Walsh Bellville. Carolrhoda Books; 1996. ASIN: 
0876149867. 

Roessel, Monty. Drumbeat. ..Heartbeat: A Celebration of the Powwow. 
Photographs by Susan Braine. Lerner Publications Company; 1995. ISBN: 
08225971 IX. 

Roessel, Monty. Kinaalda: A Navajo Girl Grows Up. Lerner Publications 
Company; 1993. ISBN: 0822526557. 

Roessel, Monty. Songs from the Loom: A Navajo Girl Learns to Weave. Lerner 
Publications Company; 1995. ISBN: 0822526573 

Rose, Lavera. Grandchildren of the Lakota. Photographs by Cheryl Walsh 
Bellville. Carolrhoda Books; 1998. ASIN: 15750527. 

Swentzell, Rina. Children of Clay: A Family of Pueblo Potters. Photographs by Bill 
Steen (Photographer). Lerner Publications Company; 1992. ISBN: 0822526549. 

Wittstock, Laura Waterman. Ininatig's Gift of Sugar: Traditional Native 
Sugarmaking. Photographs by Dale Kakkak. Lerner Publications Company; 

1993. ISBN: 0822526530. 




http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1996/reese96.html 





Clearinghouse on Elementary 
znd Ezrly Childhood Education 




t&nfinl tans EetacTa Crta 



ERIC/EECE Publications — Digests 



Teaching Young Children about Native Americans 

Debbie Reese 

EDO-PS-96-3 

May 1996 



Young children's conceptions of Native Americans often develop out of media portrayals and classroom role 
playing of the events of the First Thanksgiving. The conception of Native Americans gained from such early 
exposure is both inaccurate and potentially damaging to others. For example, a visitor to a child care center heard 
a four-year-old saying, "Indians aren't people. They're all dead." This child had already acquired an inaccurate view 
of Native Americans, even though her classmates were children of many cultures, including a Native American 
child. 

Derman-Sparks (19891 asserts that by failing to challenge existing biases we allow children to adopt attitudes 
based on inaccuracies. Her book is a guide for developing curriculum materials that reflect cultural diversity. This 
digest seeks to build on this effort by focusing on teaching children in early childhood classrooms about Native 
Americans. Note that this digest, though it uses the term "Native American," recognizes and respects the common 
use of the term "American Indian" to describe the indigenous people of North America. While it is most accurate to 
use the tribal name when speaking of a specific tribe, there is no definitive preference for the use of "Native 
American" or "American Indian" among tribes or in the general literature. 

Stereotypes Children See 

Most young children are familiar with stereotypes of the Native American. Stereotypes are perpetuated by 
television, movies, and children's literature when they depict Native Americans negatively, as uncivilized, simple, 
superstitious, blood-thirsty savages, or positively, as romanticized heroes living in harmony with nature (Grant & 
Gillespie. 1992 1. The Disney Company presents both images in its films for children. For example, in the film Peter 
Pan, Princess Tiger Lily's father represents the negative stereotype as he holds Wendy's brothers hostage, while 
in the film Pocahontas, Pocahontas represents the positive stereotype who respects the earth and communicates 
with the trees and animals. 

Many popular children's authors unwittingly perpetuate stereotypes. Richard Scarry's books frequently contain 
illustrations of animals dressed in buckskin and feathers, while Maurice Sendak's alphabet book includes an 
alligator dressed as an Indian. Both authors present a dehumanized image, in which anyone or anything can 
become Native American simply by putting on certain clothes. Ten Little Rabbits, although beautifully illustrated, 
dehumanizes Native Americans by turning them into objects for counting. Brother Eagle, Sister Sky (Harris. 1993 1 
contains a speech delivered by Chief Seattle of the Squamish tribe in the northwestern United States. However, 
Susan Jeffers' illustrations are of the Plains Indians, and include fringed buckskin clothes and teepees, rather than 



0 



7 



BEST COPY AVAflABli 



http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1996/reese96.html 



Squamish clothing and homes. 

An Accurate Picture of Native Americans in the 1990s 

Native Americans make up less than one percent of the total U.S. population but represent half the languages and 
cultures in the nation. The term "Native American" includes over 500 different groups and reflects great diversity of 
geographic location, language, socioeconomic conditions, school experience, and retention of traditional spiritual 
and cultural practices. However, most of the commercially prepared teaching materials available present a 
generalized image of Native American people with little or no regard for differences that exist from tribe to tribe. 

Teaching Suggestions 

When teachers engage young children in project work, teachers should choose concrete topics in order to enable 
children to draw on their own understanding. In teaching about Native Americans, the most relevant, interactive 
experience would be to have Native American children in the classroom. Such experience makes feasible 
implementing anti-bias curriculum suggestions. Teachers may want to implement the project approach ( Katz & 
Chard. 1989 1. as it will allow children to carry on an in-depth investigation of a culture they have direct experience 
with. In these situations, teachers may prepare themselves for working with Native American families by engaging 
in what Emberton (19941 calls "cultural homework": reading current information about the families' tribe, tribal 
history, and traditional recreational and spiritual activities; and learning the correct pronunciation of personal 
names. 

Positive Strategies 

A number of positive strategies can be used in classrooms, regardless of whether Native American children are 
members of the class. 

1 . Provide knowledge about contemporary Native Americans to balance historical information. Teaching about 
Native Americans exclusively from a historical perspective may perpetuate the idea that they exist only in 
the past. 

2. Prepare units about specific tribes, rather than units about "Native Americans." For example, develop a unit 
about the people of Nambe Pueblo, the Turtle Mountain Chippewa, the Potawotami. Ideally, choose a tribe 
with a historical or contemporary role in the local community. Such a unit will provide children with culturally 
specific knowledge (pertaining to a single group) rather than overgeneralized stereotypes. 

3. Locate and use books that show contemporary children of all colors engaged in their usual, daily activities 
playing basketball, riding bicycles as well as traditional activities. Make the books easily accessible to 
children throughout the school year. Three excellent titles on the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico are: Pueblo 
Storyteller, by Diane Hoyt- Goldsmith; Pueblo Boy: Growing Up in Two Worlds, by Marcia Keegan; and 
Children of Clay, by Rina Swentzell. 

4. Obtain posters that show Native American children in contemporary contexts, especially when teaching 
younger elementary children. When selecting historical posters for use with older children, make certain that 
the posters are culturally authentic and that you know enough about the tribe depicted to share authentic 
information with your students. 

5. Use "persona" dolls (dolls with different skin colors) in the dramatic play area of the classroom on a daily 
basis. Dress them in the same clothing (t-shirts, jeans) children in the United States typically wear and bring 
out special clothing (for example, manta, shawl, moccasins, turquoise jewelry for Pueblo girls) for dolls only 
on special days. 




3 



http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1996/reese96.html 



6. Cook ethnic foods but be careful not to imply that all members of a particular group eat a specific food. 

7. Be specific about which tribes use particular items, when discussing cultural artifacts (such as clothing or 
housing) and traditional foods. The Plains tribes use feathered headdresses, for example, but not all other 
tribes use them. 

8. Critique a Thanksgiving poster depicting the traditional, stereotyped pilgrim and Indian figures, especially 
when teaching older elementary school children. Take care to select a picture that most children are familiar 
with, such as those shown on grocery bags or holiday greeting cards. Critically analyze the poster, noting 
the many tribes the artist has combined into one general image that fails to provide accurate information 
about any single tribe (Stutzman. 1993 1. 

9. At Thanksgiving, shift the focus away from reenacting the "First Thanksgiving." Instead, focus on items 
children can be thankful for in their own lives, and on their families' celebrations of Thanksgiving at home. 

Besides using these strategies in their classrooms, teachers need to educate themselves. MacCann (1993 ) notes 
that stereotyping is not always obvious to people surrounded by mainstream culture. Numerous guidelines have 
been prepared to aid in the selection of materials that work against stereotypes (for example, see Slapin and Seale 
[1993]). 

Practices to Avoid 

Avoid using over-generalized books, curriculum guides, and lesson plans; and teaching kits with a "Native 
American" theme. Although the goal of these materials is to teach about other cultures in positive ways, most of 
the materials group Native Americans too broadly. When seeking out materials, look for those which focus on a 
single tribe. 

Avoid the "tourist curriculum" as described by Derman- Sparks. This kind of curriculum teaches predominantly 
through celebrations and seasonal holidays, and through traditional food and artifacts. It teaches in isolated units 
rather than in an integrated way and emphasizes exotic differences, focusing on specific events rather than on 
daily life. 

Avoid presenting sacred activities in trivial ways. In early childhood classrooms, for example, a popular activity 
involves children in making headbands with feathers, even though feathers are highly religious articles for some 
tribes. By way of example, consider how a devout Catholic might feel about children making a chalice out of paper 
cups and glitter. 

Avoid introducing the topic of Native Americans on Columbus Day or at Thanksgiving. Doing so perpetuates the 
idea that Native Americans do not exist in the present. 

Conclusion 

Much remains to be done to counter stereotypes of Native Americans learned by young children in our society. 
Teachers must provide accurate instruction not only about history but also about the contemporary lives of Native 
Americans. 



Debbie Reese is a Pueblo Indian who studies and works in the field of early childhood education. 



http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1996/reese96.html 



For More Information 

Derman-Sparks, Louise. (1989). Anti-Bias Curriculum: Tools for Empowering Young Children. Washington, DC: 
National Association for the Education of Young Children. ED 305 135 . 

Emberton, S. (1994). Do Your Cultural Homework. Editorial. National Center for Family Literacy Newsletter 6:(3, 
Fall): 5-6. 

Grant, Agnes, and LaVina Gillespie. (1992). Using Literature by American Indians and Alaska Natives in 
Secondary Schools. ERIC Digest. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 
ED 348 201 . 

Harris, V. (1993). From the Margin to the Center of Curricula: Multicultural Children's Literature. In B. Spodek, and 
O.N. Saracho (Eds.), Language and Literacy in Early Childhood Education. New York: Teachers College Press. 
ED 370 698 . 

Katz, L.G., and S.C. Chard. (1989). Engaging Children's Minds: The Project Approach. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

McCann, D. (1993). Native Americans in Books for the Young. In V. Harris, (Ed.), Teaching Multicultural Literature 
in Grades K-8. Norwood, MA: Christopher Gordon Publishers. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale. (1992). Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children. 
Philadelphia: New Society Publishers. E D 344 21 1 . 

Stutzman, Esther. (1993). American Indian Stereotypes: The Truth Behind the Hype. An Indian Education 
Curriculum Unit. Coos Bay, OR: Coos County Indian Education Coordination Program. ED 364 396 . 



This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. 
Department of Education. The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies • 
of OERI or the Department of Education. 



References identified with an ED (ERIC document), EJ (ERIC journal), or PS number are cited in the ERIC 
database. Most documents are available in ERIC microfiche collections at more than 1,000 locations worldwide 
(see http://www.ed.Qov/Proarams/EROD/ ). They can also be ordered through EDRS: 800-443-ERIC or online at 
http://www.edrs.com/Webstore/Express.cfm . Journal articles are available from the original journal, interlibrary loan 
services, or article reproduction clearinghouses such as Ingenta (800-296-2221). 

ERIC Digests are in the public domain and may be freely reproduced. 

This project has been funded at least in part with Federal funds from the U.S. Department of Education, Office of 
Educational Research and Improvement, under contract number ED-99-CO-0020. The content of this publication 
does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the U.S. Department of Education, nor does mention of trade 
names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. 



Return to: Home | Publications | Digests 

Click Here to return to the Digests main page 




10 



http://ericeece.org/pubs/digests/1996/reese96.html 



B ERIC/EECE is funded by the U.S. Department of Education 

and is located at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaiqn 
Children's Research Center; 51 Gerty Drive; Champaign, IL 61820-7469 
Phone: 217/333-1386 or 800/583-4135; Fax: 217/333-3767 
ERIC/EECE Web Address: http://ericeece.org 
Send comments to the ERIC/EECE Webmaster. 




11 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



ERIC 

Educational Resources Inlormotios Center 



NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 



X 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 



This document is Federally- funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 



EFF-089 (1/2003) 




