DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 351 164 



RC 018 841 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Bold Warrior, Sheman 

For the Adsinistrator: Realities for the Native 
Aserican and Education. 
Apr 92 

14p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association (San 
Francisro, CA, April 20-24, 1992). 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

^Acculturation; American Indian Culture; *A»erican 
Indian Education; ^American Indian History; Cultural 
Differtixces; Cultural Pluralism; Educational Change; 
Educational History; ^Educational Strategies; 
Elementary Secondary Education; ^Federal Indian 
Relationship; Multicultural Education; ''^Racial 
Discrimination 
Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

For historical, cultural and sociological reasons, 
the American Indian's own perspective has been missing from the 
discussion on Indian education. Historically, White American 
government, education, literature, and entertainment have all played 
roles in the annihilation of Native communities and cultures. As 
children, Midwestern Indians born approximately between 1895 and 1920 
were taken from their families and put into special federal schools. 
For them, and for many of their descendants, elements of White 
culture was seen as oppressive and untrustworthy. With fear, 
illiteracy, and poverty, American Indians rejected the dominate White 
society and its education institution. The idea of education was 
never foreign to Native Americans, however. Education enabled them to 
live very well in their own world. To Indians, education is a very 
personal means of promoting their societal and personal survival, not 
by greed, but by selflessness, generosity, and courage. White 
educational strategies have increasingly alienated Native Americans. 
New demographics suggest that public education might benefit if 
Native American and other cultures were better accommodated. Racist 
policies of assimilation must be replaced by education that comes to 
terms with Native Americans. Instead of changing the people to fit 
the system, it is time to change the system to fit the people. 
(TES) *^ *^ 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document. ^ 



FOR THE ADMINISTRATOR: 
Realities for the Native Ameriean and Education 



Sherman Bold Warrior, Doctoral Student 
Department of Curriculum and Instruction 
302 Gundersen Hall 
Oklahoma State University 
Stillwater, OK 74078 
(405) 744-7125 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCtS 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.S. OtNUVTIMMT or EOUCATtON 

Ot*K9 of Educ«Hor«i Wntarth f Iwipfoxiwnt 

EDUplTIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTlR (ERIQ 



r Thi« <tocum«n| hci Mn rtp(oduc«d M 
r«c«nr«0 from th« p«rM>n o* orQAnitatKHi 
originating it 
□ Minoi c^f no«l have b*«n m«<l« to tmpro«« 
r«f>rotfuctton Qu«iitv 

• PQtntiof vitworopimoniitft»dinthi«docu> 
m«nl <fc> not n«cf Uarrfy r«0f*Mnt o(t»c>al 
OERI pMilion Of ooKv 



O 

V 
ERIC 



Presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association 

San Francisco, California 
April, 1992 



BEST COPY AVAHIBIE 



Abstract 

Historically, Native Americans, like other cultural 
minorities, have either declined to participate in public 
education or. if they do, it is only for the first eight or ten 
grades and then they drop out of the educational system. This 
paper examines the lack of educational attainment and persistence 
among Native Americans from an historical/ cultural/sociological 
perspective . 



FOR THE ADMINISTRATOR: 
REALITIES FOR THE NATIVE AMERICAN AND EDUCATION 

When we speak of minority education, specifically education 
for Native Ainericans\ we are speaking of a void, a great grey 
area, of theories not tried or proven. We could review volumes 
on all types of education, teacher competency, testing, test 
results, tracking and so on. However, the researcher will soon 
discover that there is very little written about Indian education 
from the Indian perspective by cultural Indians. 

Why is this so? For a more comprehensive answer to this and 
other problems associated with Indian education, it is necessary 
to look at this problem from the historical/ 
cultural/sociological perspective. This point of view may 
clarify and provide direction for administrators faced with the 
challenge of educating Native American youth. 
THE MAKING OF AMERICA 

With the coming of the European of the North American 
continent the culture and circumstances of the various Indian 
nations were changed forever. For the Indian nations, there was 
incessant warfare because of the relentless push of the European 
toward the West. Land and gold in the land were reason enough to 
began a federal policy of genocide in which whole nations of 
Native Americans were killed out. Following close behind .vas 
alcohol and diseases for which there were not even names much 
less any form of defense. 

' In this writing the words Native American, American Indian 
and Indian are used interchangeably. 



Atkinson, Mortan and Derald (1983) report that on the 
arrival of the European on the shores of the North American 
continent, there were approximately three million Native 
Americans but this number has since been lowered to six hundred 
thousand. Statistically, the annihilation of this large a part 
of the population constitutes a greater instance of genocide than 
what Nazi Germany did to the Jews. 

From approximately 1850 to 1900, there exists a great amount 
of written history on the Native American. During this time the 
culture and civilizations of the Native Americans were almost 
completely destroyed, and also out of this time came many of the 
stories, beliefs and myths which surround the Indian, in the mind 
of the non-Indian, to this day. In American literature, 
education and entertainment, the Indian is always the menace, the 
shadow lurking in the darkness (Brown, 1970). 

By 1890, the military defeat of the various Indian nations 
was complete. Each nation was assigned a small parcel of land on 
which to live. By the turn of the century each nation had almost 
completely disintegrated. The Indian youth at this time were 
decimated by the three greatest problems associated with their 
forced removal from their homelands and destruction of their 
culture: disease, poverty and alcohol. 

From the federal level down to the individual # white 
America's attitude toward Native Americans has been guided by 
little other than movies made in Hollywood. With their homelands 
taken away, the Indians were confined to a small parcel of land 
under the strict racist policy of the federal government. This 



land was called a reservation from which the Indian could not 
leave. The penalty for freedom from the reservation was death. 
White Americans refused to see the Indian as a human being 
until the trial of Standing Bear, a Ponca leader, in 1879 
(Jackson, 1964) • Even so, the Indian volunteered for the First 
World War by the thousands and because of their military service, 
were declared citizens of the United States in 1924, 

Between 1860 and 1934, the United States government followed 
a deliberate and active attempt to destroy what remained of the 
Indian culture and finally assimilate them into the "main stream" 
of American society. 

In Oklahoma, beside military defeat, the greatest blow to 
the Indian was the implementation of the Dawes Act of 1887, This 
enforced the partitioning of the small reservations into 160 acre 
parcels to be given to each individual Indian, This anticipated 
the end to the traditional culture because the Indian had no 
concept of private ownership of real estate. This only served to 
legalize the theft of what remained of the Indian lands, 
RDUCATIOM A.q CULTUR AL GENOCIDE 

Throughout this period of time, the white people were seen 
as an enemy, an oppressor, someone to be distrusted, hated and 
avoided. Anything of their culture was to be rejected, this 
included education. 

It is unfortunate that the concept of formal education was 
presented in the fashion that it was. Agents of the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs came unannounced to the home of each Indian family 
and forcibly removed (kidnapped) all Indian children of school 



age. They were taken to Chilocco Indian School, north of 
Newkirk, Oklahoma, Haskell Institute at Lawrence, Kansas, or to 
Carlisle Indian School at Carlisle, Pennsylvania. 

The first people to come out of this setting are the 
grandparents and great -grandparents of Indian youth in junior 
high and senior high school today. These are the generations 
born between approximately 1895 and 1920, who began school not 
speaking English, were forced to be separated from their families 
for nine months out of the year, were forced into the extreme 
poverty of the reservations, were forced to learn to cope with 
racism, disease, alcohol, a shortened life span and all other 
ills which effect the very poor. 

The following generation, roughly those born after 1935 to 
1950 also began life learning to speak their native language and 
inheriting all the fears, anxieties, weaknesses, illiteracy, 
poverty and so forth which were experienced by their mothers and 
fathers. Especially harmful to their economic well-being was 
their aversion to formal education because of their basic 
misunderstanding of its function within the dominate society, as 
well as their rejection of the dominate society itself. 
DEMOGRAPHICS 

This brings us to the present generation of Indian youth 
with which the present administrator must contend. The present 
population pattern is such that Oklahoma has the largest 
population of Native Americans followed by California and 
Arizona. Occupying the bottom of the socio-economic ladder, the 
current generation is only slightly better off financially than 




-6- 



the preceding generation, but the understanding of the need for 
formal education is largely missing. 
NEED OF RELEV;^NT EDUCATION 

All societies from the beginning of time realized the need 
to provide some form of education for their youth. Plato, in his 
first book of the Republic, emphasized education and recommended 
that it include both body and mind (Kaplan, 1965) . In his 
"Critique of Pure Reason, Kant maintains that it is of utmost 
importance to understand the nature of the knowledge we are 
learning. That is, what is its origin and what is its purpose 
(Weldon, 1958)? Kemp (1985) believes that the educator should be 
aware of a number of things about the learner, namely, 
characteristics, conditions, needs, objectives, styles and 
systems designs. 

McNickle (1973) points out that the "education" of the 
Native American has been an ongoing process since the year 1609, 
and despite all efforts has thus far been pretty much of a 
failure. But, for untold generations. Native Americans have also 
provided their youth with an education. Though this was not an 
education in the same sense as the Western mind perceived it, it 
was an education in that it provided the Native American with the 
means whereby they could survive quite well in the world in which 
they lived. 

For instance, the American Medical Association acknowledges 
that the Native American can heal where medical science cannot. 
The Native American used and had knowledge of medicines which 
pre-dated penicillin, used a birth control formula whose active 



-7- 8 



ingredient was a spermicide and learned to heal tuberculosis as 
well as rabies. Erodes {1972a) points out that the Sioux 
Medicine man and teacher. Lame Deer, emphasizes that learning 
must come from within, and that it is not something which is 
forced on one from without. 

The Native American sees learning (education) as something 
which is highly personal. Things which are learned are learned 
because they are relevant and having meaning to the person 
learning them. Erodes (1972b) again points out that Indian youth 
are encouraged to learn things which are relevant to them, not by 
someone they have never seen before in a cold alien setting, but 
are encouraged to learn from their relatives and others who are 
emotionally and psychologically close to them. The knowledge 
which they are expected to learn has value in that its use and 
relevance is immediate and understood It is not something that 
has no immediate value, no immediate use, not understood, and 
will only be used years in the future. 

The educational system espoused by ie Native American has 
been likened by Llewellyn and Hoebel (1973) to the ancient Roman 
Cursus Honorum. This is, the good in each individual was made 
evident, not by force of law, but by force of cultural tradition. 
Education was seen as a means of allowing and promoting societal 
and cultural survival, not by greed, materialism or personal 
gain, but rather that the individual is rewarded for a life which 
exemplifies honor, self lessnes^s , courage, generosity and all 
other characteristics which society defines as good. 
NEED FOR CHANGE 



These concepts tie in or are directly applicable to 
educational principles espoused and expounded by Schubert (1986) 
who states that "curriculum should be defined as growth 
experiences that lead to a continuous reconceptualization of 
culture, individuals and groups'* (p. 50) . Are the White 
educational experiences of National Americans or their own 
cultural experiences more akin to this perspective? Could it be 
that the strategies used today in our schools increasingly 
alienate the Native American in stead of align them with public 
education? 

Change is needed and Dobson, Dobson and Koetting (1985) 
further describe the ways in which education may move: 

Humankind is potentially good. Truth is an individual 
matter, learning occurs when the information encountered 
takes on personal meaning. Learning occurs by transaction 
and interaction. Representative language is: being, 
desires, process, democratic, freedom, feedback, 
fulfillment, experience, diversity, perception, potential, 
harmony, personal order, self-direction... (p. 37) 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

It is time that educators take a close and serious look at 
the state of education and the direction it is taking. By the 
year 2017, America will be predominantly non-white. Public 
education is facing a very serious problem in the coming change 
of demographics and it must assume a dynamic stance to 
accommodate the many different cultures which make up the 
American society. 



-9- 10 



Administrators must possess multi -cultural awareness if they 
are to relate effectively to the changing demographics* 
Education must come to terms with the Native American if the 
Native American is to accept education • Thus far, Indian 
students have been only victimized by a racist policy ()C 
assimilation (Reyhner & Eder, 1990) in virtually all areas of 
their lives. This includes not only religion (LotUin, 1989), but 
goes as far as government and economic developmenL (Snipp, 1990) . 
The American Indian is the poorest, most studied and lea^t 
understood of minorities. 

The Indian student is generally aware of t Iihbh problems and 
inconsistencies. Their respoiiGe has heen t lip highest dropout 
rate, the highest alcohol /drug abuse rate, Lhe highest suicide 
rate and lowest employment rate. But fox ail this, Red Horse, 
Johnson and Winer (1989) report thai "very littJe Is known or 
written about its extent or impact on Indian conuiiunities" (p. 
267). It is safe to say that: Ihis statement can also be applied 
to Indian education. 

The only way to counter this problem is to change education 
itself. White America has been trying to change the Native 
American into a white person since 1609; this effort has failed 
completely. It is time to stop trying to change the person to 
fit the system, it is time to change the system to fit the 
person. Current educational techniques offer various means 
whereby the administrator can afford to provide not only Native 
Americans, but all minorities a greater depth and latitude in 
obtaining an education. 



-10- J 2 



SUMMARY 

Research has shown that Native Americans have furiously 
resisted assimilation or being brought into the **main stream** of 
the American "melting pot." They have steadfastly maintained 
their separate cultural identity and in doing so share no 
heritage or historical ties, except for war, with white America. 
Indeed, the educational system tv^aches them that they are the 
enemy of the American way of lite and that aJl good, just and 
honorable things come from the white man, his way of life and his 
religion. The educational system teaches (hat Mie Indian way of 
life, the Indian concept of what is good, honor al)le, just and 
godly are invalid, wrong and are in fact Bomethlinj to loe asliamed 
of. Research cited in this article ilJustrate the inherent and 
profound error in this philosophy, which the American educational 
system espouses and perpetuates. 

There are enough good people in administrative and 
government positions for the system to be changed positively. 
The only problem is the amount of time remaining to us. 



■11- 12 



References 

Atkinson, D. R., Mortan, G., & Derald, W. S. (1983). CQUnselinq 
Am^riran mi nnrih ies ; A croP « rnlhural nerspective. Dubuque, 

lA: W. C. Brown Publishers. 
Brown, D. (1970). Burv mv hearh at: Wounded Knee. New York: 

Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Dobson, R. L., Dobson, J. E., & Koetting, J. R. (1985). LQQk i tiq 

at. talking about, and 1 '-vi na wihh children. New York: 

University Press of America. 
Erodes, R. (1972a) . Lame Deer r Seeker of visions. New York: 

Simon & Schuster. 
Erodes, R. (1972b). The sun d ance people. New York: Alfred A. 

Knopf Publishers. 
Jackson, K. H. (1964) . A centurv nf dishonor. Minneapolis, MN: 

Ross & Hains, Inc. 
Kaplan, J. D. (1965) . Dialogues nf Plato. New York: Washington 

Square Press. 

Kemp, J. E. (1985). The instructional design process. New York: 
Harper & Row. 

Llewellyn, K. N., & Hoebel, A. (1973). The Chevenne wav. Norman, 

OK: University of Oklahoma Press. 
Loftin, J. D. (1989) . Anglo-American jurisprudence and the 

Native American tribal quest for religious freedom. American 

Indian Culture and Research Journal. H, 1-52. 
McNickle, D. (1973). Native Ame rican tribalism. New York: 

Oxford University Press. 



-12- 

13 



Red Horse, J., Johnson, T., & Weiner, D. (1989). Coinmentary s 
Cultural perspectives on research among American Indians. 
American Indian Cultural and Research Journal. ii(3-4), 
267-271. 

Reyhner, J., & Eder, J. (1990). A history of Indian education. 
American Indian Cultural and Research Journal. 14(4), 
119-122. 

Schubert, W. H. (1986). Curriculu m, perspective, paradicnm and 

possibilities . New York: MacMillian Publishers. 
Snipp, C. M. (1990) . Public policy impacts on American Indian 

economic development . American Indian Cultural and Research 

Journal . 11(1), 143-147. 
Weldon, T. D. (1958) . Kanf s critique o f pure reason. New York: 

Oxford Press . 



-13- 



