DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 343 766 



RC 018 625 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Brown, Gerald L. 

Reading and Language Arts Curricula in Elementary and 
Secondary Education for American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. 

Department of Education, Washington, DC. Indian 
Nations At RisK Taslc Force. 
91 

36p.; In: Indian Nations At Risk Task Force 
Commissioned Papers. See RC 018 612. 
Information Analyses (070) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; * American Indian Education; American 
Indians; ^Bilingual Education; Educational 
Strategies; Elementary Secondary Education; English 
(Second Language); Language Acquisition; ^^Language 
Arts; ^Reading Instruction; ^Second Language 
Instruction; Second Language Learning; ^Teaching 
Methods 



ABSTRACT 

Native students rank far below norms in reading, 
language arts, and language arts related subjects. This paper reviews 
the literature to address strategic plans for reading and language 
arts curricula for Native students. An overview is presented of 
theories of first and second language acquisition and learning, 
stages of language development, and the influence of the learning 
environment. Second language instruction framed in current theory 
includes the comprehension, communicative, holistic or integrated, 
anr; natural approaches. Instruction and student evaluation are 
described for the total physical response method. Content-based 
instructional approaches and thR relationship between academic 
competency and second language (English) competency are discussed, 
including: the academic needs of Native students; the importance of 
the nature of the text, the nature of the reader, and the interaction 
between text and reader in reading instruction for Native students; 
major impediments facing Native students as they learn to read in 
English; and methods of overcoming these impediments. Also discussed 
are the language experience approach and its effectiveness with 
Native students, adapting the basal reader, integrating the language 
arts, and the whole language approach. Specific instructional 
strategies that have proven effective for Native students are 
offered: analyzing the language complexity of the learning task; 
providing contextual cues; peer interaction and cooperative learning 
experiences; modifying lessons or providing alternative activities 
for limited English proficient students; incorporating comprehension 
checks; * ing preview and review techniques; making the text 
compreh^i.wible; and adapting content. This paper contains 44 
references. (SV) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
^ from the original document. 



CO 



r 



ERIC 



Reading and Language Arts Curricula in 
Elementary and Secondary Education for 
American Indians and Alaska Natives 



Gerald "Jerry^' Brown 
Interface Network, Inc, 



Introduction 

American Indians and Alaska Natives are the 
most educationally disadvantaged of all 
Americans, with the highest dropout rate among 
all minorities. Little progress has been made 
toward meeting the educational needs of this 
group. The shortage of information about 
American Indian and Alaska Native students 
presents problems in determining what types of 
educational practices work best among these 
groups. 

A cursory review of the literature regarding 
Native stud' *t achievement indicates that this 
population ranks far below the norm in reading, 
language arts, and language arts related 
categories (e.g., science, mathematics, social 
studies, etc.) (Brown, 1986). Basic to this problem 
is the reality that many Native students are not 
successfully accessing the language so essential for 
being successful in American academia. In other 
words, they have not been successful in developing 
an rdequate cognitive aca'^emic language 
proficiency (CALPs). Since traditional American 
education is textbook driven and requires high 
levels of cognitive academic language proficiency, 
the educational establishment does not appear to 
be very effective in providing Native students with 
the necessary cognitive academic language 
proficiency (Fox 1987, 1988, 1990). 

It appears necessary to start at a very basic 
level in addressing strategic plans for reading and 
language arts curricula in elementary and secon- 
dary education for Native students. It has been 
well established that not only are many teachers 
of Native students not prepared to adequately 
teach such students, but there is very little oppor- 
tunity for them to find the necessary training and 
education. With this in mind, this paper will follow 
an evolutionary approach of starting with lan- 
guage acquisition and work its way to content area 
language arts — leading to the development of 
cognitive academic language proficiency (CALPs). 



u s OCMRTMf NT OF EDUCATION 

Ofticf 61 Educ<tion«i (^iiMtch ind improvtmant 

EOUCATlONAi. RESOURCES iNFORMArON 
. CFNTeR(ERlQ 

j/vyi% tfocumt. Ml b«rn t«ptoduced tt 
r roc«iv*d trom the d«< on or oro«nt|tt(On 

oriQintttng i| 
C Minor chtngf s htve be«n mid« 10 imorovf 

reproOucKon quiiily 

• Potnll 0( vt«« Of ODinioni itited m Ihit dOCu- 
mani do not necemriiy reprtteni oKtcttl 
OEPi pOKliOn Of poitcy 



At appropriate points, current efforts in Native 
education will be used as examples of what can 
been done to implement effective practices at 
various stages of language development (INAR 
Task Force hearingSi 1990). The process and the 
approaches recommended are applicable to the 
maintenance and development of the Native Ian* 
guage as well as the English language. Alsoi spe- 
cial attention needs to be given in using these tools 
to transition Native students from their home Ian* 
guage (whether it be a Native language or '^Reser- 
vation" or "tillage English") to achieve English in 
a dignified and a psychologically and educationally 
sound manner. 

This paper is the result of an ongoing effort to 
keep current with the literature and research on 
reading and language arts and special efforts to 
identify exemplary American Indian and Alaska 
Native educational programs that are meeting the 
needs of Native students in reaching educational 
parity. As requested in the initial charge by the 
INAR Task Force, the research and literature will 
be presented in solution form rather than a state- 
ment of a problem. 

Language Acquisition 

Three questions will be given primary con- 
sideration under the topic of language acquisition: 

How do Children Acquire Their 
First Language? 

It is useful to examine briefly some of the 
theories that seek to explain the language acquisi- 
tion process of children. These theories have 
helped to provide a framework on which current 
theories of second language acqxxisition are based. 
This discussion is divided into the following com- 
ponents: 

Language Acquisition Theory 

Using language to communicate is a natural 
consequence of being human. Almost all children 



iEsi m mum 



India .IS Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



who speak are oxposed to language regardless of 
the environment in which they are raised. When 
children acquire thoir language, they produce the 
grammar of thai lantnuage, which is a finite system 
of rules: phonological (tine sounds of a language), 
morphological (the structure of words), syntactic 
(the relationship among words in an utterance), 
and semantic (the meaning of words). No one 
teaches them these rules; no one tells them to form 
a sentence by adding a verb phrase to a noun 
phrase. The rules are learned unconsciously as 
children acquire their language. A number of 
theories have evolved to explain how children ac- 
quire language. 

The behaviorist view supports that a child is 
reinforced positively or negatively in response to 
various stimuli. For example, a mother will most 
likely provide a positive reinforcement in response 
to her infant saying •'ma-ma." On the other hand, 
a i^ositive response to ''ma-ma'' is less likely when 
the child is three or four, as reinforcement becomes 
progressively more dependent on how closely the 
child's language matches adult speech. Thus, the 
reinforcement theory hypothesizes that children 
are conditioned to speak correctly by being nega* 
tively reinforced for "errors" and positively rein- 
forced for "correct" usage. In this context, language 
acquisition is viewed as a result of an innate 
general learning capacity plus an environment 
that shapes the child's behavior. The behaviorist 
view, however, does not explain how children are 
able to manipulate language to make unique and 
novel utterances. 

The innatist view that emerged during the 
1960s offers a theory that attempts such an ex- 
planation: Noam Chomsky presents the strong 
version of the innatist's point of view that main- 
tains that every child is bom with universals of 
linguistic structure "wired in." According to 
Chomsky, children pick up the rules of their lan- 
guage in such an efficient way as to suggost that 
theirbrains are programmedfor language learning 
or that they have some kind of innate lan^niage 
that allows them to know what a possible language 
looks like. The child then makes guesses or 
hypotheses as to the rules that underlie the pat* 
terns. Chomsky suggests that this innate language 
acquisition device allows children to make increas- 
ingly complex theories about the rules of their 
language (Chomsky, 1965). 

This strong position was modified in the 1970s. 
While still giving recognition to the substantial 
role of innate contribution to language acquisition, 
many innatists now define the innate component 
not as a body of unconscious "Icnowledge" about the 
structure of human language, but rather as a "sub* 



stantial innate cognitive potential for processing 
human language, so as to derive its structure'' 
(Lindfors, 1980). Rather than possessing advance 
information, children are bom with processing 
abilities that enable them to find out about lan- 
guage and to analyze data(Derwing, 1971; Slobin, 
1973). The grammatical system is not given as 
innate knowledge, but when these processing 
capacities are applied to the speech Uiey hear, 
diildren have the innate means to construct a 
grammar of their native language (Slobin, 1973). 

Whether or not a child is programmed with a 
full set of linguistic universals, as Chomsky sug- 
gests, or if (s)he comes equipped with special in- 
nate abilities for processing linguistic data, the 
child is likely to end up with the same set of 
linguistic universals that allows for progressive 
language development. 

Stages of Language Development 

It is clear that a child does not leam a language 
'^all-at-once.'' Language is acquired in stages of 
increasing complexity with each stage more closely 
approximating the grammar of the adult language. 
Observations of children in different language 
areas of the world reveal that the stages are very 
similar and possibly universal. 

Children demonstrate comprehension of the 
language long before their first utterance. A child 
responds correctly to such commands as ^Pick up 
the bair or "Toint to your nose" or "Get the book" 
without being able to produce these uttenmces. 
Sometime after their first year children begin to 
produce single words. At this point, they have 
learned that sounds are related to meaning These 
first words are usually linked with the child's own 
action or desire for action. For example, ^p** for 
Tick me up** or ''Carry me,** and single words such 
as ''dog" or "juice" convey desires or basic needs. 
Because children at this stage can comprehend 
much more than they cf^n produce themselves, it is 
not possible to determine the extent of the 
knowledge of the grammar that the child possesses 
merely by observing or noting speech production. 

Around the end of the second year, children 
begin to produce two-word utterances such as 
"Mommy book." When a child starts stringing 
more than two words together, the nv ^ber of 
words can vary. Words used are usually th^je that 
carry the main messagOi or the "content" words. 
Because it often sounds like a Western Union mes- 
sage, these utterances are called telegraphic 
speech: "No sit there" or "Cat stand up table" 
(Brown, 1973). 

Table 1 summarizes the development of Ian* 
guage in children from four months to six years of 
age. 



ERLC 



2 3 



Reading and .Language Arts 



Influence of the Environment 

If human communication is innate, what dif- 
ference does environment make? Children must 
be exposed to speech in order for speech to develop. 
A child will not learn unleso there are models 
around from which (s)he can learn. Children must 
receive language input from their caretakers and 
other speakfirs of the language. Caretakers adapt 
their language in order to accomplish meaningful 
communication with the child. They use shorter, 
simpler sentences than in adult communication. 
They rely heavily on concrete, contextual support; 
they often repeat and exaggerate intonation. The 
content of caretaker speech to young children tends 
to focus heavily on the here and now, and on 
activities presented in the environment as they 
interact. For example: 

Child: Mommy eat juice. 

Caretaker: Yes, Mommy is drink* 
ing juice. 

Child: Billy juice. 

Caretaker: You want some juice? 

• Child: Yeah, Billy firsty. 

Caretaker: You're thirsty, hmmm? 
Well, here's sowe juice for you. 

The caretaker responds to the meaning and not. 
the form of the child's communication. The child is 
not corrected in his or her efforts to r^ommunicate. 
There is no explicit instruction of language rules. 
Even if we could teach grammar to children, there 
is no evidence that it would significantly improve 
the rate of their acquisition or their communication 
skills. A child's language acquisition is an uncon- 
scious process; the child is not aware of the rules 
(s)he possesses. 

Children are active participants in the process 
of acquiring language. Their cognitive and lan- 
guage development is a strongly interactive 
process that depends not only on specific linguistic 
and cognitive mechanisms, but also on their par- 
ticipation in a rich linguistic environment that is 
attuned to their communicative needs. In con- 
clusion, current first language acquisition theory 
supports the following beliefs about children's lan- 
guage learning. 

• The whole of language is greater than the 
sum of its parts. 

• Language learning in not the result of 
having mastered tiny, discrete "skills'* or 
"habits." 

• Language use begins with a function and 
then involves experimenting with the lan- 



guage forms necessaiy to fulfill that func- 
tion. 

^ Willingness to accept approximations (er* 
rors) is essential to the processes which 
accompany language learning. Given time 
and opportunity, the child's immature 
forms will drop out and be replaced by 
conventional ones. 

• The language to which young language 
learners are exposed is always meaningful 
and in a context which makes some kind of 
sense. 

Program Example 

Current trends in early childhood education 
programs are to nurture the language experiences 
between child and caretaker by giving caretakers 
education, encouragement, and support to 
facilitate the natural evaluation of the child's lan- 
guage in a wholesome environment. Headstart and 
Early Childhood Home Visitor Programs are doing 
a lot in oral language development in Native and 
second languages. 

What is the Relationship Between 
First (Li) and Second (L2) 
Language Acquisition? 

Second language acquisition theorists have 
gained important insight and direction for re- 
search from studies in first language acquisition. 
Current perspectives on second language teaching 
have evolved from theories that have integrated 
models of how a child learns his or her first lan- 
guage. Specifically, three topics will be explored in 
response to the above question: 

Second Language Acquisition 
Theory ' 

Research conducted during the last 20 years 
supports that there are many similarities between 
first and second language acquisition. For ex* 
ample, children and second language speakers use 
shorter utterances composed of heavy content 
items first, and slowly progress to longer and more 
syntactically complex utterances. Second language 
learners frequently overgeneralize as do first lan- 
guage learners, regularizing the exception forms in 
the language, e.g., *'goed,'"1aked.'' In addition, the 
same characteristics of a successful first language 
learning environment have been identified as 
present in the language learning environment of 
those students who have successfully mastered the 
second language. Language in a meaningful con- 



Indians Nations At Rirk: Solutions for the 19908 



text, focusses on meaning and a low-anxiety learn- 
ing environment 

Krashen ( 1982) has developed a model of second 
language acquisition that has greatly influenced 
second language teaching methodologies in recent 
years. In support of the similarities between first 
and second language acquisition, he theorizes that 
acquisition is a subconscious process by which one 
develops linguistic ability through exposure and 
interaction with the language. Krashen makes a 
distinction between acquisition and learning. 
Learning a language, on the other hand, is the 
result of conscious attention given to the rules and 
forms of the language. He suggests that conscious 
learning has a very limited function in language 
performance, that is to say, our formal knowledge 
of a second langu age, the rules we have learned in 
class and from texts, is not responsible for fluency. 
What is responsible for ultimate fluency is receiv- 
ing messages (input) that are comprehensible or in 
a comprehensible context in an environment which 
promotes low anxiety levels, low -risk and non-cor- 
rective participation, similar to that in which 
children acquire their first language. 

Krashen hypothesizes that language is ac- 
quired by understanding input (i) that is a little 
beyond a person's current level of acquired com- 
petence (-f 1). This accounts for what Krashen calls 
the silent period in informal second language ac- 
quisition. This is a period of time when the acquirer 
may say very little but is building up competence 
by active listening via comprehensible input (i^-l), 
a prerequisite^ that tri^ers the whole process of 
second language acquisition: the message must be 
understood before acquisition can take place. 
When the message is understood, then structures 
that are a little beyond the current level of com- 
petence of the learner are ready to be acquired. 

Socio-Affective Factors in L2 
Development 

Second language learners are greatly in- 
fluenced by attitudes they have developed toward 
the second language and its speakers. If the 
learner is highly motivated to learn the second 
language and actively seeks interaction with na- 
tive speakers, (s)he is likely to experience greater 
success in acquiring the second language. 
Krashen's Affective Filter Hypothesis states that 
there are affective variables related to second lan- 
guage acquisition. A low filter means that the 
learner is more "open" to the input, allowing the 
input to be more easily internalized. A high filter 
suggests attitudes lhat will inhibit the acquisition 
process. Learners who are motivated to learn the 
second language and who have a high self-ima^e 



have been identified as more successful acquirers 
of the second language. In addition, this hypothesis 
supports the notion that the best environment, for 
second language acquisition is one which promotes 
low-anxiety levels in a non-corrective, low-risk 
climate, similar to that in which children acquire 
their first language. 

The Second Langrua^e Environment 

The language that learners hear and see 
around them is very important to the acquisition 
process (Krashen, 1982). Four qualifying features 
are identified: 

• Naturalness of the environment. This is 
the degree to which the focus of com- 
munication is on content and not form. 

• The learner's role in communication. 
Studies support that one-way (learner lis- 
tens but does not respond verbally) and 
restricted two-way communication 
(learner listens and responds, but the 
response is usually nonverbal or in the 
native language) benefit the acquisition 
process. Also, delaying oral practice or ob- 
serving a "silent period" until learners are 
ready to speak in the new language is 
considered to be more productive to the 
acquisition process. 

• Availability of concrete referents. These 
are subjects, events, or activities thvi can 
be seen, heard, or felt while they are being 
talked about. 

• Target language models. The acquisition of 
the second language is affected by the 
learner's choice of model. Research sup- 
ports that learners would prefer to speak 
with peers over teachers, peers over 
parents, and members of one's own ethnic 
group over nonmembers. 

Program Example 

Bilingual programs and Indian education 
programs throughout the country are utilizing* 
second language acquisition techniques that ad- 
dress socio-affective factors and the qualifying fea- 
tures of a second language environment. 

What is the Distinction Between 
Language Learning and Language 
Acquisition? 

As a result of current directions in second lan- 
guage acquisition theory, consideration has been 
given to the distinction between the two modes of 
gaining competence in a second language: Ian- 



4 5 



Reading and Language Arts 

guage learning and language acquisition. As dis- 
cussed above, Krashen suggests that these are two 
independent systems for developing competence in 
a second language. The differences between these 
two modes will now be defined along with a brief 
discussion of the role of fonnal language instruc- 
tion in an academic setting. 

Language Learning 

Language learning is formal knowledge about 
a language; explicit knowled^r^ of rules and struc- 
ture that is taught in English classes. In a lan- 
guage learning environment, there is a conscious 
effort on the part of the learner to know the lan- 
guage, to be able to describe the rules governing its 
use, to commit these rules to memory, and finally, 
to apply them in order to generate grammatically 
correct utterances. An example of this is thb con- 
scious learning of the parts of speech such as noim, 
verb, pronoun, and the conscious analysis of the 
rules that control their order in a sentence (subject, 
verb, adjective: He is tall). The learner is 
presented with the linguistic features (the gram* 
mar) of the target language. Control of each of 
these features is considered important and iewed 
as fundamental to the learner's language 
capability. Language components are often iso- 
lated as a skill for deliberate study and practice in 
a language lesson. Error correction, deliberate at- 
tention to the structure of the language, and 
repeated practice of common language forms are 
all consistent \^ith the instructional focus of a 
•learning^ environment 

Language Acquisition 

An acquisition-oriented language environment 
supports the belief that language evolves slowly 
throufrh a series of proficiency stages very similar 
to how children learn their first language. At each 
stage, the learner/acquirer interacts with com- 
prehensible language-use situations. The result is 
that language forms are internalized unconscious- 

ly. 

Children... are not necessarily aware that 
they are acquiring language, they are only 
aware that they are communicating. The 
results of language acquisition, acquired lin- 
guistic competence, an? also unconscious. 
(Krashen. Tenrell. 1983) 

Krashen suggests that language acquisition is 
the **naturar way to develop linguistic ability. In 
an acquisition environment, language develop- 
ment resembles natural language progression and 
results from actual meaningful use in an environ* 
ment that is low-anxiety and comfortable to the 
learner. At all times, the emphaais of instruction 
is on communication and meaning. 

ERLC 



• The Acquisition-Learning Distinc- 
tion 

• Acquisition 

- Similar to children's first language 

""Picking up** a language 

Subconscious 

Implicit knowledge 

^ Learning 

Formal knowledge of a language 
acquisition 

""Knowing about" a language 
Conscious 

Explicit knowledge (Krashen, 
1981) 

Acquisition, therefore, is the unconscious foi- 
mulation of grammatical principles, while learning 
is the conscious, cognitive-based study of gram- 
mar. In the past, most language classrooms were 
focused on grammar-based approaches that em- 
phasized explanation rather than acquisition. Ex* 
amples of such approaches included the 
grammar-translation method and the audio-lin- 
gual approach. In recent times, however, the trend 
has changed more toward the use of approaches 
that facilitate acquisition of the second language 
such as the Natural Approach and Total Physical 
Response (TPR), both of which will be discussed 
later. 

The Role of Formal Language 
Instruction 

It is important to note that the most current 
research in second language development supports 
the view that acquisition and learning are both 
important to the process of gaining competence in 
a second language. As Native children become 
more involved in the educational system and en- 
vironment, they must be prepared to undertake 
academic tasks, the success of which is largely 
dependent upon formal instruction in the English 
language. Instruction must be given in developing 
competence in reading and writing, for example. In 
addition, attention musc be given to vocabulary 
development because research has shown that it 
has a direct relationship to students' academic 
achievement in reading and in content areas 
(Saville-Troike, 1984). 

Many current studies (Long, 1983) have .shown 
that formal language instruction often benefits 
older English as a second language (ESL) learners 
because of their advanced cognitive development. 
There are many researchers in the field who 




Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



strongly feel that learning about the grammar of a 
second language can enhance the acquisition 
process. Perhaps, as McLaughhn (1987) suggests, 
"Mt may be more fruitful to admit that correction 
and grammar teaching can help stimulate change 
and can lead to a different state in the acquisition 
process. Rather than looking on grammar teaching 
merely as a way of improving the monitoring 
abilities of the learner, it seems reasonable to see 
correction and grammar teaching as providing a 
short cut for learners. This is not to subscribe to 
language teaching methods that rely heavily on 
grammar teaching. But it does suggest that there 
is a role for correction and grammar teaching in 
language instruction.** 

While activities may be more limited in their 
use with beginning students and in the develop- 
ment of communicative competence, many in the 
field feel that learning and acquisition are trans- 
ferable systems that can work together to reinforce 
one another (Higgs, 1985; Bailystok, 1978). 

Program Example 

In an effort to increase self-esteem and foster a 
positive self-image many schools with Native stu- 
dents have ascribed to a non-corrective/acquisi- 
tion approach to language arts. Transitioning from 
a'lhome'' language to academic English is difficult 
enough without the constant stress of being cor- 
rected in pronunciation or grammatical usage. 

Current Perspective on 
Second Language Instruction 

Some of the instructional perspectives that 
have evolved out of consideration given to current 
second language acquisition theory are as follows. 

What is the Comprehension 
Approach? 

Recent investigation in theoretical linguistics 
and child language acquisition, as well as ex- 
perimentation in second language instruction indi- 
cate the primary role of comprehension in the 
acquisition of language. Teaching rules to lan- 
guage students has been a standard teaching prac* 
tice. In recent times, however, the belief that 
students can acquire a second language in essen- 
tially the same way as they acquired their first 
lanp^age has motivated language researchers to 
develop instructional formats that model this first 
language acquisition process. Great emphasis is 
placed on initial listening activities. The students 
hear sentences in the second language for which 
the meaning is clearly indicated through actions or 



pictures. The umbrella term for this instnictional 
system is the Comprehension Approach. This ap- 
proach is based upon the beUef that conversational 
fluency will develop as a result of first learning to 
understand the second language. 

Defimtion of the Comprehension 
Approach 

There is a common set of beliefs that defines the 
Comprehension Approach: 

^ Language rules are most easily and ac- 
curately acquired by inference. 

• Language acquisition is primarily an im- 
plicit process. 

• Language acquisition is viewed as non- 
linear. 

• Speaking will develop given sufficient com- 
prehension training. 

• The instructional focus is on teaching 
meaning through comprehension ac- 
tivities in a relaxed, stress-free environ- 
ment. 

• Comprehension is a teaching routine 
through which students are sys!;ematically 
exposed to the sentences in the second lan- 
guage. 

• Language production is not taught directly 
through drills, forced imitation, or model- 
ing. 

• Language use is encouraged by providing 
interesting andmotivatingcommunicative 
interactions. 

• Understanding a language is the primary 
channel through which language is ac- 
quired. (Winitz, 1981) 

Importance of Meaning in the 
Comprehension Approach 

This approach places highest priority on the 
students experiencing the meaningfulness of the 
linguistic input presented in the classroom. Com- 
prehension and production are viewed as active 
piocesses thatguide the students to an internaliza- 
tion of the phonological, syntact7c, and semantic 
systems of the second language. Language learn- 
ing is seen as a problem-solving process through 
which the learners figure out how the language 
works on the basis of meaningful utterances that 
they hear or see. 



7 

6 



Reading and Language Arts 

Example of Comprehension 
Methodology 

Total Physical Responsi^ (TPR) is a methodol- 
ogy that has incorporated many of the tenets of the 
Comprehension Approach. TPR provides meaning- 
ful input via commands that the student performs 
with his or her body (e.g., "Walk to the board**) 
during which time the student is not expected to 
produce utterances in the second language. 

What is Communicative Language 
Teaching? 

The Communicative Approach incorporates 
many of ^.he tenets of the Comprehension Approach 
but is more extensive. It supports an interactive, 
communicative view of language development. 

The Communicative Approach stresses ac- 
tivities that place emphasis on learning language 
appropriate to a given social situation. It main- 
tains that in order to be communicatively com- 
petent, the student needs to have knowledge of the 
linguistic forms, meanings, and functions of lan- 
guage. Students mustbf' guided to choose the most 
appropriate forms of communication given the so- 
cial context. It is the social context of the com- 
municative event that gives meaning to the 
utterance. Some assumptions of this approach are: 

• Children learn language as a medium of 
communication rather than as a cur- 
riculum subject with sets of isolated topics, 
facts, or skills. Language proficiency is 
defined as a speaker's successful ac- 
complishment of his or her communicative 
intentions across a wide variety of social 
settings. 

• Becoming a successful communicator in 
the second language is synonymous with 
becoming "niterate" in that language. Lis- 
tening, speaking, reading, and writing are 
best developed simultaneously. 

• Children learn how to communicate suc- 
cessfully through purposeful interaction in 
the second language environment and in a 
wide variety of contexts. 

• Children's second language development 
is a holistic process. Children use all their 
available resources: linguistic, non-lin- 
guistic, internal (cognitive affective), and 
external (social, environmental) to become 
successful second language com- 
municators. 

• Children's second language development 
is facilitated by a comfortable classroom 



atmosphere in which the focus is on the 
meaning of the utterances rather than on 
the form used to say tbem. Errors are 
viewed as a normal part of the acquisition 
process. 

^ Communicative abilities depend not so 
much on the time spent in rehearsing 
grammatical patterns, but rather on the 
opportunities given to interpret, express, 
and negotiate meaning real-life situa- 
tions. (Savignon, 1983) 

The Communicative Approach defines "com* 
petence" as the ability to flmction in an authentic 
communicative situation setting. It supports the 
belief that an analysis of the leamer^s needs and 
interests provides the most effective basis for 
materials development. True communication is a 
purposeful use of authentic materials. 

What is the Holistic or Integrated 
Perspective on Language Learning? 

The Holistic Approach to language learning is 
based on specific convictions about how and when 
students learn best. Many of the ideas discussed 
above are very similar to the holistic perspective. 
This perspective can perhaps be more appropriate- 
ly identified as a philosophy of learning in general. 
While it has been discussed specifically in the 
literature in the context of language and literacy 
development, many educators feel it can apply to 
any learning. This philosophy incorporates the fol- 
lowing key theoretical assumptions: 

Individuals learn best when: 

• They are supported by other learners. 

• They are invited to take risks. 

• Their learning environment provides 
safety nets to sustain them through failure 
as well as success. 

• They are personally involved in decisions 
about their own leaining. 

• They are encouraged tx) take an active role 
in the leaniing process. 

• What they learn is meaningful to them. 

• They want to Itam. 

• They enjoy learning. 

Instructional Implications 

These assumptions provide the foundation 
around which much current second language in- 
struction is being designed. This instruction in* 
eludes activities that: 

• Present language as a whole believing that 
the whole of language is greater than the 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for tiie 1990s 



sum of its parts. Language is never ap- 
proached as something to be broken down 
and taught as tinyi discrete '^skills" or 
habits'* to be developed. 

* Generate comprehensible, interesting, and 
useful classroom language, i.e., "real" Ian- 
guage, recognizing that this kind of lan- 
guage is most helpful to students in their 
language development. 

* Develop language as part of a broader 
process of meaning-making development. 
This is accomplished by integrating the 
processes of listening, speaking, reading 
and writing, and believing that the 
development of one process supports the 
development of the others. 

* Recognize that the new language learner 
brings a variety of resources to use in their 
second language development, including a 
diversity of prior native language and cul- 
tural experiences. 

* Use the second language in many different 
settings, with a wide variety of people and 
for a wide variety of purposes. 

* Facilitate a comfortable environment: one 
that values, encourages, and celebrates ef 
forts to use the language; that focuses 
primarily on the meaning and intention of 
the utterances and mes:;age5 rather than 
on their form; and that treats errors as a 
normal part of becoming an increasingly 
more proficient language user. (Enright, 
McCloskey, 1988) 

Program Example 

It is important to focus at this point on why it 
is necessary to understand second language ac- 
quisition for Native students. In those instances 
where students only speak a Native language and 
do not speak English, it is obvious why. However, 
it is not so obvious if it appears that students are 
speaking "sub-standard" English. In reality, it is 
possible that these students are not speaking '"sub- 
standard" English, but are speaking ''Indian- 
English" (Leap, 1982). In other words, the words 
may be English, but the grammar may be from the 
tribal language used in the home or community. 
The tendency in dealing with a "sub-standard" 
version of English is to "correct" it. As stated above, 
it is recommended that correcting be k( pt to a 
minimum. 

There are many schools that use the Com- 
prehension and Com.munitive Approaches for all 
students, but in those cases where there are non- 



Enghsh speaking or Indian-English speaking, it is 
neces&ary to use these approaches. 

The Natural Approach to 
Second Language Teaching 

The Natural Approach is a teaching methodol- 
ogy that has come to receive enthusiastic support 
by ESL instructors in recent years. 

What is the Natural Approach? 

The chief aim of the Natural Approach is to 
focus on the meanings of genuine communications 
in an atmosphere that brings anxiety down to a 
minimum. It is an instructional strategy used with 
beginning langiiage students and has the goal of 
helping them to become intermediate students 
(Krashen and Terrell, 1983). The Natural Ap- 
proach believes that: 

• Comprehension precedes production. 

* Students can internalize language struc- 
tures without producing them. 

• Oral responses will occur when the student 
is ready to make them. 

* Students will display greater development 
in comprehension skills, as well as in 
speaking activities, if an atmosphere exists 
in the classroom that allows and en- 
courages a wide "threshold of error" at al 
times. Correction, where it occurs, is ir - 
direct through expansion or reiteration. 

Example: Student: "Bey play dog." 

Teacher: '^es, the boy is playing 
with the dog." 

Natural Approach instructors believe that the 
purpose of the classroom is for acquisition ac* 
tivities that allow for the development of com* 
municative abilities through natural acquisition 
processes. Acquisition does not happen through 
traditional grammar exercises or drills because 
these actiidties provide no opportunity for mean- 
ingful communication. This is why the curriculum 
of a Natural Approach classroom consists of com- 
munication goals. Fur example, a goal might be to 
talk about what the students did over the weekend. 
In the activities that are used to achieve a par- 
ticular goal, the necessary tools (vocabulary and 
structure) are supplied. However, the ''focus of the 
students during the activity must be maintained 
on the semantic content (in this case, the 'veekcnd 
activities), not the grammatical form (here, past 
tense)" (Krashen and Terrell, 1983). 



ERIC 



8 9 



Reading and Language Arts 



What are the Stages of the Natural 
Approach? 

The Natural Approach identifies three stages of 
development in language acquisition* 

Comprehension 

This is the period of time when students ''tune 
in" to the new language, getting a sense of the way 
it sounds and fits together. It corresponds to what 
Krashen has labeled "the silent period." During 
this time, the student is learning how to make 
intelligent guesses* 

Early Speech Production 

The transition to this stage occurs afler stu- 
dents have developed a passive vocabulary of about 
500 words. Typical responses will be yes/no in reply 
to a simple question: ''Is this a pineapple?* or 
identification of items that have been introduced 
several times: ''What is this? What color are the 
grapes?" 

Speech Emergence 

At this stage, the sentences that the students 
produce become longer, more complex, and include 
a wider range of vocabulary. Students are able to 
speak in complete sentences and engage in 
dialogue and discussion. 

What are Teaching Strategies and 
Activities Appropriate to Each 
Stage? 

Comprehension 

Using Total Physical Response (TPR) 
TPR is an instructional approach that has been 
identified as very effective at the comprehension 
stage of the Natural Approach. TPR requires active 
physical involvement on the part of the learner in 
response to commands, such as ''Stand up," "^alk 
to the desk," and "Turn on the light." Commands 
are used to manipulate the orientation, location, 
and locomotion of the learner's entire body, and 
become increasingly more complex and novel as 
the learner is able to demonstrate physical com- 
prehension of the command. An example is: ""Hop 
to the board and draw a picture of a monster." It 
is believed that this active involvement of the body 
with the langiiage provides immediate ""com- 
prehensible input" of the message. 

TPR presents ar approach to second language 
learning that is based on a model of how children 
learn their first language: The child spends many 
months listening and interacting with the environ* 



ment, trying to make sense out of the sounds going 
on around him or her. No one tells the baby when 
it must speak. The child chooses to speak when 
(8)he is ready* Accordingly, TPR theorizes that 
speech cannot be directly taught to students, just 
as a parent (caretaker) cannot directly teach the 
infant to talk. In addition Just as the child learned 
his or her first language in a stress-free environ* 
ment, the environment in the second language 
classroom must also be stress-free. TPR activities 
should be enjoyable so that the learners feel at ease 
at all times. 

Steps in a TPR Lesson: 

• Teacher prepares "script" of TPR com- 
mands that may focus on a particular ob- 
jective, such as students becoming familiar 
with the items in the classroom. 

- Example ''Stand up." 

• "Go to the board." 

- "Touch the chalkboard." 

• "Pick up the chalk." 

• The teacher provides the auditory 
stimulus, giving the command and simul- 
taneously modeling the action so that the 
input is immediately comprehensible. 

Example: Teacher says: "Stand up 
and pick up the chalk." 

- Teacher models standing up. 

Students stand up and pick up the 
chalk with the teacher. 

• The students demonstrate comprehension 
by carrying out the command. 

Example: Teacher says: "Stand up 
and pick up the chalk." 

Teacher does not model the action. 

The students stand up and pick up 
the chalk. 

Initially, the teacher, as "caretaker," directs all 
student behavior. At some point, usually after 10 - 
20 hours of instruction (Asher, 1982), students will 
be "ready to speak." Then there will be a role 
reversal with individual students directing the 
teacher and other students. 

Using Context, Gestures and Other 
Body Language. 

At the comprehension stage, directing atten- 
tion to the physical characteristics of the students 
can provide for immediate con'.jrehensible input. 
Students need only respond with names at this 
point: 



9io 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



• Example: Teacher: "What is your 
name?" 

- Student: ^'Susan." 

- Teacher: ^'Everyone look at Susan. 
Susan has short, curly hair." 
(Teacher uses context and ges- 
tures to clarify meaning of short, 
curly hair.) 

Teacher: **What is the name of the 
student with short, curly hair?" 

- Class: "Susan." 

- Teacher: "What is your name?" 
(Teacher chooses anotlier stu- 
dent.) 

- Student: "Judy." 

- Teacher: "Look at Judy. Does 
Judy have short, curly hair?" 

Using Pictures 

Pictures can be very effectively used at the 
comprehension stage. The instructor describes the 
picture, emphasizing only the key lexical items. 
Each student is given a different picture. The 
teacher asks questions about the picture that can 
he answered by giving the name of the student 
holding the picture. 

To summarize, the following student responses 
can be expected at the comprehension stage: 

• Physical action 

^ Gesturing or nodding 

• Saying "Yes" or "No" 

^ Saying the names of other students 

Early Speech Production 

Speech opportimities at this stage, can consi.'^t 
of questions that require single word answers. 
These can evolve into either/or questions, e.g., ''Is 
Susan's hair brown or blonde?" "Is Judy tall or 
short?" "What color is Susan's hair?" In addition, 
open-ended sentences can be presented, such as, 
"Susan's hair is and " or "I like 



At this stage, then, students can respond with: 

• Yes/no answers 

• One-word answers from either/or ques- 
tions 

• One- word answers from general questions 
or completion of open-ended sentences 

• Two^word strings 



Speech Emergence 

Effective acquisition activities during this 
period are: 

^ Games and recreation activities because 
they focus on language as a tool for reach- 
ing a goal rather than as a goal itself 

^ Content-area activities that are interest- 
ing to the students such as science experi- 
ments. 

• Humanistic-affective activities which ap- 
peal to the students on a personal level and 
explore students' ideas and feelings, in ad- 
dition to their experiences. Again, the focus 
is on the message being conveyed and not 
on the form of the language used to convey 
it. 

• Information problem-solving using charts, 
tables, graphs, and maps. 

Students at the speech emergence stage can be 
expected to respond in the following ways: 

Three words and/or short phrases 

Longer phrases 

• Complete sentences 

• Dialogue 

• Extended conversation 

As with children learning their first language, 
the stages of the Natural Approach overlap: some 
utterances are more complex while others continue 
to be expressed simply. 

Those using the Natural Approach believe that 
the function of the second language classroom is to 
promote the acquisition of the second language. 
The focus of all activities in the Natural Approach 
is on the content of the message being conveyed 
and not on the form. This approach seeks to 
facilitate an environment that is relaxed and inter- 
esting at all times and to provide activities that 
allow for immediate comprehensible input. 

How are Students Assessed in the 
Natural Approach ? 

Evaluating students' progress is a necessity in 
academic situations. Two kinds of language 
proficiency tests are recognized in second language 
assessment: tests of linguistic competence and 
tests of communicative competence in pronuncia- 
tion, morphology, and syntax. Tests that measure 
Communit^ativc^ competence assess the ability to 
use lang'iage to achieve a particular purpose. 

The goal for students is to eventually achieve 
both communicative and linguistic competence. 
The main thrust of the Natural Approach is com- 



ERIC 



10 



u 



Reading and Language Arts 

municative competence. In the beginning stages, 
therefore, preference is given to tests that evaluate 
the student's ability to understand and communi- 
cate ideas in specific situations. 

Speech Comprehension 

In the Natural Approach, testing for the abihty 
to comprehend speech is seen as particularly im- 
portant since it reveals to what extent the ""input" 
has been comprehensible. What is tesU^d at the 
beginning levels is the developing ability to recog- 
nize key lexical items and to use context as a means 
for guessing meaning. One easy way to measure 
this ability is to present students with various 
pictures and then describe one of the pictures, 
asking the students to identify the one being 
described. Another technique is to make state- 
ments about pictures, items, or actions and to ask 
the students to judge whether they are true or 
false. Ab students develop into the single-word 
stage, simple questions can be asked: ''What color 
is the little girVs hair?" or "How many people are 
in the picture?" 

Speech Production 

Speech production is evaluated in beginning 
students only in terms of their ability to communi- 
cate ideas. The best way to prepare for such a test 
would be to participate in conversation. This is a 
difficult area to assess because it is almost impos* 
sible to set up real conversational situations in the 
classroom. The most widely used of oral exams is 
the oral interview in which the instructor asks 
open*ended questions in a relaxed, informal con* 
text but limited to the topics and situations with 
which the students have been dealing. 

Reading and Writing 

Tests of reading and writing are given in 
Natural Approach classes if they relate to the goals 
and needs of the students. Areading testis one that 
tests readers on whether they have understood the 
main point or idea ofthe text and provides a variety 
of interesting topics. A writing test is appropriate 
if writing tasks are part of the goal of the class. 
Examples of such tasks include filling out forms, 
writing letters, writing personal narratives, and 
writing fiction or poetry. 

Writing samples can be evaluated in several 
ways: they can be regarded holistically as an in- 
dication of what the student has acquired, that is, 
in terms of content and not in terms of the correct- 
ness of the linguistic features. Or they can be 
evaluated in terms of grammatical accuracy. In the 
latter situation, the writer should know ahead of 
time that (s)he will be writing, and that (s)he will 
be graded specifically on grammatical accuracy for 



rules that have been studied (Krashen and Terrell, 
1983). Those using the Natural Approach recom- 
mend that testing using written exams should not 
be used at beginning levels because its emphasis 
on grammatical features may inhibit the natural 
and more important development of language ac- 
quisition. 

The Relationship Between 
Academic Competency and 
Lan^age Competency 

What are the Academic Needs of 
Native Students? 

Native students need to develop the academic 
competence to compete successfully in the 
mainstream curriculum. Cognitive Academic Lan- 
guage Proficiency (CALP) and Basic Interpersonal 
Communication Skills (BIOS), constructs formu- 
lated by Cummins (1984) are both important to the 
second language student if (s}he is to succeed in an 
academic environment. The student must even- 
tually have a command of the new language as it 
pertains to abstract thinking and problem solving. 
Schools require that the student has'e academic 
skills in addition to being able to cope with situa- 
tions that are unique to the school environment. 
Research has shown that it takes as long as 5 to 7 
years for a student to develop academic com- 
petence. Thus, even though a student may have a 
high ^^vel of communicative competence and inter- 
act w ways that suggest good second language 
comprehension, (s)he may be ill-prepared for the 
demands of the academic environment. The lan- 
guage demands made on second language learners 
in schools are diverse and varied in complexity. 
Students must learn to follow schedules, use 
textbooks, solve math problems, spell words, do 
grammar exercises, and define vocabulary words, 
to name but a few. Because schools require literacy 
skills and the ability to deal with decontextualized 
information, academic competency may be more 
difficult to specify than communicative competen- 
cy. In recent years, however, instructional 
strategies have emerged that foster the develop- 
ment of second language akills through teaching 
modified subject matter content. It is felt that this 
content approach helps students to achieve 
academic competence, or ^ihe ability to learn 
through English, rather than the ability to merely 
communicate in English** (Chamot, 1985) . dis- 
cussion of content-based second language instruc- 
tional approaches and relationship between 
academic competency and second language com- 
petency follows. 



11 12 



»l» W.I I JK ««• ■ ». •■ l« 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



What is the Instructional 
Approach? 

Goal 

Content-based second language Instmctional 
Approaches are viewed as most effective in 
developing a student's conceptual knowledge and 
academic competence. These approaches to second 
language development have the goal of developing 
both second language skills and academic concepts 
appropriate to the student's grade level. Both con- 
tent and language teaching are formally incor- 
porated into the Instructional Approach. Basic 
academic content can be taught using many of the 
approaches already discussed. For example, Total 
Physical Response could be used to teach math 
skills (Draw a hexagon; divide it in half with a 
vertical line). The Natural Approach and its exten- 
sions can be used to demonstrate how to make a 
specific mea! or how to blend paints for an art 
project The activities must make greater and 
greater demands on the students' cognitive 
abilities in order that they gain academic com- 
petence. 

Focus of Instruction 

A content area that is intrinsically interesting 
will more successfully motivate students than 
studying language for its own sake. Specifically, 
vocabulary and technical terms associated wi^h 
the subject (math, science, social studies, etc.) need 
to be taught. In addition, language functions re- 
quired for academic communication such as in- 
forming, explaining, classifying, and evaluating, 
need to be presented to the student. Other lan- 
guage skills that should be stressed in the class- 
room are those used for different academic 
functions; for example, listening comprehension 
for academic explanations, reading for informa- 
tion, speaking for oral presentations, and writing 
for reports (Chamot, 1985). Teaching English 
through the content uses primarily a cognitive 
approach blended with a content-based language 
development curriculum. The focus is on the com- 
munication of meaning through a second language 
rather than on drill and practice of grammatical 
forms. This approach places emphasis on small 
group activities where students can participate in 
cooperative problem-solving learning situationr. 

Teaching English through the content is con- 
sidered a more cognitive than communicative ap- 
proach to second language learning because the 
focus is more on the functions underlying academic 
and linguistic competence as opposed to the func- 
tions underlying socio-linguistic competence. The 
Communicative Approach emphasizes the 



development of listening and speaking that will 
allow the second language learner to interact in a 
socially appropriate way in a variety of contexts in 
the second language. The Cognitive or Content 
Approach stresses the development of academic 
language skills in order to allow the second Ian* 
guage learner to access the mainstream cur* 
riculum of the school. 

Reading and the Native 
Student 

Three questions are important as we address 
the teaching of reading to Native students: 

What is the Reading Process? 

In order to understand what happens when a 
student picks up a text and attempts to ^ead," it 
is helpful to examine three factors: 

Nature of the Text 

Texts carry a message from authors to readers 
by means of written language. The message 
reflects the author's schema or prior knowledge 
and experience with a particular topic. The sophis- 
tication of the language chosen by the author will 
determine the readability of the text 

Language 

An author selects language with which to com- 
municate the intended message. Once the message 
is determined by an author, the thoughts that 
communicate these meanings are recorded in the 
words (lexicon) and the order of words (syntax) that 
the author chooses to communicate these mean- 
ings. Thi s lexicon and syntax may vary in difficulty 
from thut which is common and simple to that 
which is abstract and complex. For example, in A 
Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens, the state- 
ment '^Scrooge gave no Christmas presents," has 
vocabulary that is concrete and the sentence struc- 
ture is simple. However, in the sentence, ''His 
inability to recognize Christmas with gifls was 
indicative of Scrooge's selfishness," the vocabulary 
(lexicon) and the sentence structure (syntax) are 
more abstract and complex. The text is a direct 
reflection of the author's language, including the 
author's skill in communicating via the written 
form of the English language. 

Schema 

In order to define schema as it relates to the 
text, it will be helpful first to define schema as it 
relates to people. Schema can be defined as the 
thoughts that come to mind when you hear or read 
language. These thoughts form pictures that we 



o 

ERLC 



12 13 



Reading and Language Arts 



' dSociate with particular words or concepts. We 
have a schema for objects such as paper and books, 
for places such as schools and gardens, for abstract 
ideas such as love and hate, for actions such as 
running and dancings and for events such as par- 
ties and garage sales. Schema is an accumulation 
of the reader's knowledge about a given topic. It is 
the reader^s prior knowledge, organized and inter- 
related to everything the reader knows about a 
specific word or concept. 

For examplei when the reader sees the word 
'library," thoughts or images may come to mind 
that reflect what the reader knows about libraries 
from personal experience. These images may in- 
clude the library building where the reader can go 
to read books or the reader^s favorite place to read 
while at the library. The reader may also know that 
when books are checked out they must be returned 
by the due date if a fine is to be avoided. The 
reader's knowledge about libraries can be called 
his or her ''content schema" for libraries. The word 
"library" may also bring to mind a particular role 
or behavior the reader performs while at the 
library. The reader^s ability to follow the sequence 
of steps necessary to locate a book and check it out 
are part of the reader's "script schema" for 
libraries. Another image that may come to the 
reader's mind may reflect the way a library is 
organized. This knowledge and experience with 
the Dewey decimal system is part of the reader's 
"structure schema" for libraries. 

Just as readers have schema based on their 
prior experiences, so do authors. The author's 
schema becomes an integral part of the text and 
helps communicate his or her message. Text 
schema can also be divided into the categories of 
content, script, and structure. 

• Content Schema. The information in the 
author's message (m£gor ideas, important 
concepts, main information, central im- 
ages, and crucial topics) aH constitute the 
content schema of a reading selection. The 
explanations and interpretations of con- 
tent schema can range from the concrete to 
the more abstract. 

For example, A Christmas Carol can be said to 
be "a story about a miserly, stingy, and cruel old 
man who refused to celebrate Christmas." Thh 
would be a more concrete example of content 
schema, or the content schema can be said to be the 
moral statements: "Stingy people are lonely 
people" or "There is more to life than money." 
These are examples of more abstract content 
schema. 

• Script Schema. Every person has specific 
roles or scripts that they perform daily at 

O 

ERIC 



an unconscious level. These roles or scriptn 
have been learned as a result of repeated 
experiences within the culture. One com- 
mon script is shopping for clothes. Actions 
are organized around looking at clothing 
displays, asking to use a dressing room, 
trying on merchandisei and purchasing 
selected items. As children, we learn 
numerous scripts by modeling adults and 
peers. Scripts in communication allow us 
to leave out boring details as we are talking 
or writing, and insert them as we are lis- 
tening or reading. A script can be defined 
as ''a predetermined, stereotyped sequence 
of actions that defines a well-known situa- 
tion." The author assigns scripts to the 
characters in a story. The characters be- 
have in certain prescribed ways. The 
scripts the author includes in his or her 
message will be scripts from the author's 
experiences or knowledge. 

* Structure Schema. The particular or- 
ganizational pattern of the message is 
termed structure schema (sometimes 
"story grammar"). A Christmas Carol has 
a beginning, middle, and end section: (1) 
Scrooge is portrayed as a cruel, miserly 
person unwilling to celebrate Christmas; 
(2) Scrooge sees himself as he appears to 
others; (3) Scrooge changes and becomes a 
pleasant, caring anH sharing individual. 
This is a typical English language struc- 
ture schema. Schema is an important con- 
cept to consider when looking at a par- 
ticular text. The text schema reflects the 
author's prior knowledge and experience, 
including the "content" of the message, the 
"scripts" performed by the characters, and 
the "structure" of the author's message. 

Readability 

Directly related to the language of the text is 
the text readability. Does the text require the 
reader to have sophisticated reading skills in order 
to unlock meaning? The following sentences, for 
example, may well be understood by an "average" 
English speaking six-year-old, if they were read to 
the child in the context of a story: 

* This dog can run fast. 

* The greyhound is an animal used for 
racing because of its quick speed. 

However, if these sentences occur in the context 
of a story the child is expected to read without 
assistance, the latter will cause greater difficulty. 
The youngreader may not have been introduced to 

14 



Indians 

the reading skills necessary to decipher the text. 
When selecting reading material for students, it is 
important to consider the readability of the 
material 

Nature of the Reader 

The reader also brings language and schema to 
the reading situation. In addition, the reader 

^ngs reading skills that allow him or her to 
decipher the written symbols used to record lan- 
guage. The reader's language, schema, and reading 
skills interact and influence each other as the 
reader actively searches for meaning. 

Language 

Native students enter our schools with lan- 
guage that has been an integral part of their per- 
sonal identity; language that has been a vehicle for 
helping them interact with loved ones, peers, and 
community members. The language of the student 
maybe other than English, or include EngHsh and 
another of the many languages spoken by the 
diverse Nutive populations of the United States. 

Native students bring varying degrees of 
English language development to the reading 
situation. The English language skills of listening, 
speaking, reading, and writing have been in- 
fluenced by a variety of factors including: 

Age of the student 

Time exposed to the English Ian* 
guage 

Home, school, and community en- 
vironment 

First language of the home 

Educational levels of the student 
and the parents 

Influence of family and peers 

Although the student may demonstrate the 
English oral language skills necessary to com- 
municate in the day-to-day interactions at home 
and on the playground, the child may not have 
acquired the academic language found in our 
schools. This academic language oflen appears in 
the reading selections assigned to the student and 
may be very different from the English language 
brought by the student into the classroom environ- 
ment. The student does not enter school devoid of 
language. The student's language, at whatever 
level of development, provides a bridge from the 
known to the unknown. By respecting and valuing 
this language, and therefore incorporating it into 
reading instruction, the reading teacher increases 
the opportunities for success. 



ERLC 



Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Schema 

The student also brings all his or her current 
knowledge and experience to the reading situation. 
The reader has schema for ''content,'' "^scripts," and 
"structure." 

^ Content Schema. A student's content 
schema includes all of his or her current 
knowledge and information. It is the 
student's understanding of the world. In 
reading A Christmas Carols a student's 
content schema may include his or her 
awareness of the expected sharing that 
occurs during the Christmas season. It 
may not include an understanding of 
Christmas as celebrated in England in 
Dicken's time or at the present. The his- 
torical perspective, the relationship be- 
tween employers and employees, the role 
of conscience in Hterature, etc., all con- 
stitute the content schema activated in a 
student as A Christmas Carol is read. 
Likewise, if the celebration of Christmas is 
not a part of the student's experience, the 
student may have difficulty under stand- 
ing the story's message unless (s)he has a 
similar schema for giving and receiving 
that can be activated and used to provide 
meaning. 

• Script Schema. The reader has numerous 
scripts that (s)he has learned. These 
scripts are dependent upon the roles the 
child has been given or has observed others 
performing in the home, school, and com- 
munity; i.e., the script for ""getting dressed 
in the morning," "eating meals," and "get- 
ting ready for bed " Without a script, some 
new experiences are totally incompre- 
hensible. Scripts vary from culture to cul- 
ture and depend upon the socio-economic 
status, lifestyle, and age of the reader. 

* Structure Schema. In addition, students 
bring with them a manner of organizing 
their world, a structure schema. Prior 
storytelling or other reading experiences 
may have provided them with a pattern for 
organizing reading material that is cul- 
turally influenced. They use this structure 
schema for anticipating the type of infor- 
mation to expect in various parts of a story. 
In approaching the reading of A Christmas 
Carols the students may have an under- 
standing of an expected story line. When 
the students have heard or read this story 
previously, following the plot development 
can be relatively easy. The more often the 

15 



Reading and Language Arts 



students have read or heard stories similar 
in structure to A Christmas Carol, the 
easier it will be for them to comprehend the 
narrative. 

Reading Skills 

The student*s ability to decode written symbols 
also influences the search for meaning. The reader 
uses many strategies to decipher the text, includ- 
ing phonics, structural analysis, and context clues. 
When the decoding requirements of the text exceed 
the skills possessed by the reader, (s)he faces an 
undecipherable language from which no meaning 
can be obtained. 

Interaction between Reader and 
Text 

When a reader and a text interact, the en- 
counter may produce a variety of results. A positive 
encounter may produce feelings of joy, excitement, 
interest, insight, and success; a negative encounter 
may evoke feelings of boredom, confusion, uncer- 
tainty, frustration, and failure. The positive 
results we desire for our students are dependent 
upon an important function of reading-comprehen- 
sion. In order for comprehension to take place, the 
reader must make sense out of the author's mes- 
sage. Understanding occurs when there is a posi- 
tive interaction between the language, schema and 
readability of the text, and the language, schema, 
and reading skills of the reader. 

Readers approach print with a degree of uncer- 
tainty about the author's message. As they begin 
reading, they make predictions about the author's 
message based on their own language and schema. 
Authors are incapable of writing without omitting 
some information, description, or content. Readers 
fill in the gaps from ; Keir own experiences, check 
to see if their predictions make sense, and then 
integrate the message into their own concept of 
reality. 

Reading is an interactive problem-solving 
process in which the reader predicts, confirms, and 
integrates meaning gleaned from the text into his 
or her world. When the language, schema, and 
readability of the text is very different from the 
language, schema, and reading skills of the reader, 
comprehension is limited at best. 

The match between the text and the reader 
need never be a perfect one. Reading situations, by 
their nature, result in changes in the student's 
language, schema, and reading skills as the reader 
is exposed to new information. Reading activates 
language development, broadens schema, and 
provides an opportunity to practice and improve 
reading skills. However, when the differences be- 



tween the text and the experience of the student 
are too great, comprehension is lost and reading 
does not take place. 

What is Unique About the Native 
Student Reader? 

The Native student may face three migor im- 
pediments which can slow learning to read in 
English. 

Limited English Proficiency (LEP) 

Limited English proficient or ''LEP" is a term 
used to describe a person from a langxiage minority 
population with less than native proficiency in 
English. A ''LEP student" is a language minority 
student who enters the school system at a level of 
English proficienQT less than that acquired by his 
or her native English speaking peers, which means 
that this student usually has limited skills in lis- 
tening, speaking, reading, and/or writing in 
English. Those students most often come from 
homes where the primary language is not English 
but is an American Indian and Alaska Native lan- 
guage. On the other hand, however, these students 
may come from a home where a language that is a 
combination of English and an American Indian 
and Alaska Native language are being spoken. 
Often times the words may seem to be English but 
the structure or grammar are derived from the 
Native language (Leap, 1979). This phenomenon 
has been characterized as "Reservation English" or 
''Village English" depending upon whether it is 
used in the "Lower 48" or in ^aska. This group 
does not usually include bilingual students who are 
fluent in English and their native tongue, or stu- 
dents who are English dominant (Ovando and Col- 
lier, 1985). 

The English proficiency of the Native student 
may range from minimal or nonexistent com- 
petence, to near fluency. The language (s)he is 
capable of understanding and using in English 
may establish an upper limit to comprehension of 
the text. Likewise, the LEP student may possess a 
vocabulary and language that varies from that 
encountered in the text. When a selection contains 
language including vocabulary, grammatical 
forms, and syntax beyond the experience of the 
student, the text will contain little or no meaning 
for the reader. For example, when a student's char- 
acteristic productive oral language is similar to the 
following: "Scrooge went home after work"; and 
the text primarily contains structures like: "When 
the Ghost of Christmas Past appeared, Scrooge 
was struck by fear of this strange apparition," the 
discrepancy may be so great as to impede com- 
prehension of the language of the text. Students 



15 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



cannot be expected to read and understand text 
that is written in a language that is too different 
from their own. When this difference is substan* 
tial, students often cope with the lesson by con- 
centrating their efforts on decoding words while 
limiting their attention to the comprehension of 
the author's meaning. 

While language is a mauor concern in helping 
the language minority students learn to read, it is 
by no means the only factor that needs to be ad- 
dressed. 

Lack of Experiences with Text 
Schema 

We know that as students read, they impose 
meanings from prior learning and experiences in 
an attempt to understand what the author has 
written. While language minority students are not 
devoid of experiences , they can be expected to have 
difficulty comprehending text written about con- 
tent for Wiiich they lack familiarity. A language 
minority student's experiences and knowledge 
may or may not be different from the experiences 
written about in the text. If a student lacks an 
understanding of 19th century England (the set- 
ting of a particular historical fiction story), (s)he 
may anticipate and impose meaning which is quite 
different from the message the author intended to 
convey. 

If the characters in the stories have roles or 
scripts unfamiliar to the reader, (s)he will have 
difficulty getting meaning from the story. For ex- 
ample, if a story portrays a humorous interaction 
between the main character and a waiter in a 
restaurant, the reader will need to understand the 
script for eating in a restaurant or the meaning will 
be lost. Likewise, a student's familiarity with text 
structure may be divergent from that followed by 
the author in organizing the written discourse. 

American Indian and Alaska Native languages 
possess structures quite different from English. 
These structures influence the thought patterns of 
the Native speakers of these languages. Coupled 
with the oral traditions of the culture, these 
thought patterns determine the text structure of 
discourse or stories. Native students are familiar 
with the structure schema of the stories they have 
heard in their homes since birth. In analyzing A 
Christmas Carol, we found that the story has a 
beginning, a middle, and an end. It is common that 
many Native stories have four parts: a beginning; 
middle A: middle B; and an end. Furthermore, it is 
possible that each part has subparts determined 
by cultural values and traditions. 

Kaplan (1966) has identified five thought pat- 
terns employed by writers as they construct dis- 



course. Each of these patterns reflects a cultural 
tradition that imposes differentiated expectations 
for the organization or development of logic in a 
written piece. When the student's expectations of 
text structure vary from that which they en- 
counter, comprehension will be less than that ex- 
pected. On the other hand, when there is a 
consistency between the logical development of 
structure foxmd in a text and that anticipated by 
the reader, comprehension increases. 

• In the Western European and American 
pattern of discourse, a linear straightfor- 
ward manner of writing occurs with ele- 
ments of text structure sequentially ar- 
ranged and built upon in a cumulative 
manner from beginning to end. The reader 
is led logically and directly to a conclusion 
through the discourse. 

• In contrast, an Asian pattern of discourse 
would be circular, with the m^or thesis 
never stated directly. In this type of 
development, content is arranged so as to 
hint at the major point intended by the 
author, without it ever being developed 
directly. 

• In romance culture writing, thought 
processes indirectly through a digression 
before it finally works its way around to 
developing its major point. 

• Semitic writing is characterized by digres- 
sions, seeming contradictions, reversals in 
development, all eventually worked 
toward an ultimate conclusion. 

• Russian discourse contains many subor- 
dinate ideas that digress from the central 
idea of a paragraph. 

Students coming from a cultural tradition 
where thought progresses through a logic unlike 
that developed in Western prose may have difficul- 
ty predicting the sequence of meaning as arranged 
by the author. 

Limited Reading Skills 

Language minority students may face a third 
impediment to success with English reading, 
namely an inability to decipher written English. 
This problem manifests itself differently if the stu- 
dent is a non reader, than when the reader is a 
reader of another language but not skilled in 
English reading. 

Nonreaders may lack the awareness needed for 
initial reading instruction. Involved in this aware- 
ness is a conscious ability to reflect on and talk 
about language. Understanding concepts such as 
words," "phrases," "sentences,'* "sounds,'* and 



ERLC 



16 



17 



Reading and Language Arts 

others have been found related to initial reading 
success. 

A related problem is inexperience with print. 
Beginning students need understand that print 
used in reading materials symbohzes language. 
Moreover, printed language is generally more com- 
plex. Limited Enghsh proficient students, like all 
others learning to read English, need to develop 
''print awareness." 

Even those students who have print awareness 
may have no understanding of the decoding 
process. This process constitutes an important, 
beginning step in developing independence in early 
reading. Students need word recognition 
strategics that they can apply in deciphering new 
or unknown words encountered in reading. This is 
formally called ''decoding." 

While inabihty to decode can be an impediment 
to success in Enghsh reading, it should be under- 
stood that identification of isolated sounds orfluen- 
cy in pronunciation of words, do not by themselves 
fulfill the intent of reading instruction. While 
limited Enghsh proficient students will need 
decoding practice, it should not occur at the ex- 
pense of reading for comprehension. 

Readers of other languages who are unable to 
read in Enghsh, will need to become famihar with 
the English alphabet Initially, students may at* 
tempt to attach the sound system from tlieir Native 
language to the English alphabet. As they acquire 
Enghsh reading skills, they also need to be made 
aware of the many inconsistencies in the Enghsh 
sound-symbol relationships. Some students come 
from language backgrounds with relatively consis- 
tent sound-symbol relationships. 

LEP students who read in their first language 
already have print awareness and many reading 
skills that are transferable to English such as use 
of context clues, reading for the main idea, se- 
quencing events, making predictions, and some 
decoding skills, depending on the first language of 
the student. LEP students who are taught to read 
in their first language before being introduced to 
English reading, have an advantage over LEP stu- 
dents whose first encounter with reading is in 
English » a language that they are still struggling 
to acquire. 

How Can We Facilitate Growth in 
Reading? 

Three factors influence growth in reading: 

English Language Development 

Reading experiences are rich in their potential 
for fostering language growth. Students have op- 
portunities in a reading lesson to create language 

ERLC 



to help them communicate their imderstanding to 
others, experience the language transmitted by an 
author, and listen to tiie language employed by 
teachers and peers. In the lesson, the LEP 
student's attention should be focused on the mean* 
ing communicated by the text, teachers, and peers. 
Likewise, teachers and peers need to focus on the 
meaning the student tries to convey rather than 
the accuracy (form) of his or her language. 

Language can be used to receive new informa- 
tion, generate new thoughts, clarify new under- 
standing, mediate misunderstandings or 
disagreements, articulate new ways of thinking, 
and relate new learning to students' Uves. In other 
words, reading lessons can provide situations for 
language to be practiced with the focus on the 
meaning (fimction) of the language. In this way, 
development of the language capabihties so needed 
by th3 limited English proficient student can occur. 

To provide reading lessons with a language 
focus, teachers must plan prereading activities 
that motivate students to talk. The teacher must 
find out what the student already knows about the 
key concepts or events central to the meaning of 
the story. An introductory language activity gives 
the teacher insight into the student's abihty to 
understand and use the language that the student 
will s )on encounter in printed form. Speaking can 
be stimulated through the introduction of concrete 
objects or visuals, the involvement of students in 
roleplajdng situations, or through the interaction 
of a problem-solving game. The teacher introduces 
key words and concepts while the communicating 
activity allows the students the opportunity to 
practice using the language in a meaningful con- 
text. 

Activation of Student Schema 

Research demonstrates that the ceihng on 
reading comprehension imposed by language 
hmitations can be raised when LEP students are 
famiharized with the content, the script, and struc- 
ture of the reading selection. Students can read 
and comprehend text written at a level higher than 
would be suggested by their hmited language 
capabihties, when they are adequately prepared 
for it through activation of their content, script, 
and structure schema. 

The students' content schema can be activated 
through prereading preparation. The students can 
be reminded of the knowledge or prior experiences 
related to the reading selection, or, a prereading 
experience can be planned to expose the students 
to thn content of the reading they will be assigned. 
When the students' content schema is similar to 
that which they encounter in the text, comprehen- 
sion is enhanced. For example, if the story content 

IS 



Indians NaUons At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



is about a young girl trying to find good homes for 
her dog's puppies, it is essential that the LEP 
student understand the concept of ''pet." In some 
cultures, animals are never '^ets''; in fact, there 
may be no word for the concept of ""pet** in the 
student's first language. However, if the class has 
a pet hamster that the LEP student has helped to 
feed and nurture, this relationship can be used to 
help the student understand the relationship be- 
tween the girl in the story and her pet puppies. 

It will also be helpful to prepare the LEP stu- 
dents for the scripts found in the story, by explain- 
ing certain roles or by acting out scripts in class. 
Reading teachers need to expand the script schema 
of LEP students to include scripts commonly en- 
countered in the reading text. For example, a story 
about a boy who gets lost while trick-or-treating on 
Halloween may assume that the reader knows the 
role children and adults perform at Halloween. If 
the LEP reader is not familiar with this custom, a 
helpful prereading activity can include role-play- 
ing the scripts for ''trick-or-treating " What do 
children do and what is the expected behavior of 
adults? 

The scripts the characters enact in a story often 
reflect socio-economic class, culture, and lifestyle. 
For example, the father in the story may get up in 
the morning, put on a suit, and drive to the office. 
This script may be very different from the one the 
reader's father would repeat daily if he is a farmer, 
fisherman, or truck driver. The teacher can 
broaden the student's knowledge of script schema 
by involving the class in a discussion of the variety 
of script possibilities for ''going to work." Helping 
students to value their own scripts and that of 
others is an important part of teaching script 
schema. A character in a story may behave in a 
certain way because the author gave her a par- 
ticular script. Students can retell or rewrite the 
story by assigning familiar scripts to the charac* 
ters from their own prior experiences. 

Likewise, when the students are forewarned as 
to the structure or organization of the text they are 
to read, comprehension can improve. Introductions 
to a readingassignment that indicate the structure 
of the selection students are to read, have been 
shown to be an affective practice in improving the 
reading performance of LEP students. 

For example, if the reading assignment invoK 
ves an adventure story, the LEP student will 
benefit if the structure of the story is explained 
prior to reading, and/or while the story is being 
read in sections. Students can make predictions 
about the story as the organizational pattern is 
explored: 

• Encounter: Who and what is involved? 



• Conflict; What is the conflict and why? 

^ Escape: WIio escapes and how will it hap- 
pen? 

• Chase: How will the story end? 

Introduce Meaningful Reading 
Skills 

If reading lessons consist only of decoding or 
word recognition practice with little relationfihip to 
comprehension, students will believe that simply 
pronouncing words accurately is all that con- 
stitutes success in reading. While decoding in- 
struction and practice are believed to facilitate 
comprehension during the first years of reading, 
they have limited usefulness once the student is 
capable of reading text written at the 3rd or 4th 
grade level of difficulty and beyond. At all times, 
decoding assistance should be provided with the 
intent of helping students achieve comprehension. 

Decoding skills are easily learned by limited 
English proficient students. At times the student's 
apparent fluency in applying decoding abilities in 
the oral reading of English may give the ap- 
pearance that(s)heis also comprehending the text. 
This may not be so. Decoding without under- 
standing is not reading. Decoding practice without 
application to real reading is useless. 

The more time spent on activities related to 
decoding, the less time is available for students to 
experience activities designed to enrich language 
development and activate the student's schema. 
While decoding skills should be practiced by LEP 
students, a balance must exist. 

Reading skills certainly include decoding prac- 
tice but decoding skills are not the only skills that 
will help students find meaning from tn: printed 
message. Comprehension can be uulunced 
through literary skills such as describing the plot, 
understanding regional jargon, recognizing pans, 
and identifying the author's point of view. Lan- 
guage skills also help students by exploring the 
grammatical, lexical, and syntactic features of the 
written English language. Meaning can be high- 
lighted as students recognize compound words, 
suffixes, and prefixes. Looking for context clues 
and recognizing the multiple meaning of words are 
additional examples ot language skills that build 
comprehension. Study skills can also be useful. 
Developing an outline of the story will help stu- 
dents understand the story structure* 

Knowing how to use reference materials, how 
and when to skim a selection or when to read for 
details, are study skills that will increase the LEP 
student's ability to read for meaning. When plan- 
ning skills instruction for LEP students, the follow- 
ing guidelines will be useful: 



18 



Reading and Language Arts 

* Introduce skills in the context of a reading 
selection. 

* Select the skills the student will need to 
unlock the author's message. 

* Dg not spend a disproportionate amount of 
time on skills instruction at the expense of 
developing the student's language and 
schema* 

* When possible, incorporate skill instruc- 
tion into the development of language and 
schema* 

The Lan^age Experience 
Approach 

There are three aspects of the Language Ex* 
perience Approach that will be discussed. 

What is the Language Experience 
Approach? 

Definition: The Language Experience Ap- 
proach is a process that transcribes students' 
words into reading material 

With this approach, the students' skills of lis- 
tening and speech are used as the bridge to reading 
and writing. The experiences of the student are an 
integral part of initial reading and writing as these 
experiences become the basis for the content of the 
materials used in instruction. 

Process: With the Language Experience Ap- 
proach, the teacher provides a stimulus and the 
students generate an oral composition or story 
which is then written down. The students are then 
guided by the teacher through a reading lesson 
using these student-dictated materials. The steps 
most common to this approach are: 

1. Stimulate with a Catalyst 

a. The teacher plans an experience for 
the class. 

b. Students directly get involved in the 
experience. 

2. Create the Story 

a. A student or several students orally 
respond to the experience. 

b. The experience is discussed and dic- 
tated. 

c. This dictation is written by the teacher 
or student. 

d. The writing is read. 

3. Develop Reading Skills 

a. Students are involved in n -..iied com- 
prehension and language extension ac- 
tivities. 



b. Decoding instruction and practice is 
provided. 

c. Follow-up activities are integrated 
into arty social studies, science, health, 
physical education, math, etc. (The 
catalyst may originate from a content 
area.) 

Why is the Language Experience 
Approach Effective With Native 
Students? 

The Language Experience Approach removes 
two mcgor impediments which can block students 
from experiencing successful interaction with the 
text, language, and schema. 

Language 

Because the language employed in creating 
reading stories is that of the student, it can never 
run ahead of the student's current English lan- 
guage proficiency level in sentence structure (syn- 
tactic complexity) or vocabulary (lexical 
abstractness). The particular sentences (syntax) 
and vocabulary (lexicon) recorded by the teacher or 
scribe, are the student's own and become the lan- 
guage in the materials used in teaching reading. 
Thus, one important impediment is removed from 
the task of teaching EngHsh reading to Native 
students. The language of the reading material is 
at the lexical and syntactical level of the language 
of the student. 

Schema 

The catalyst provides a common experience 
from which the story content is drawn. By involv- 
ing the student directly with the catalyst, teachers 
can ensure that the subject matter of the student's 
dictation is familiar and well-incorporated into the 
student's content schema. The student is never 
asked to talk about an action, event, object, sensa- 
tion, feeling, etc., that (s)he has not experienced. 
Thus, a second important impediment potentially 
faced by the student is removed. The content 
schema of the story is a part of the schema of the 
student. 

Sometimes a student writes personal experien- 
ces about people in his or her world. Therefore, the 
script schema in his or her story will be a familiar 
one that is part of the student's world. Characters 
will not be behaving in ways unknown to the stu- 
dent. The roles of family, friends, or members of 
the student's community will be reflected in his or 
her dictation. 

The student is responsible for the writing or 
organization of the sentences that are recorded in 



20 

19 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



a language experience lesson. The teacher is asked 
not to alter the student's expression or arrange- 
ment. In this v.ay, v ? a students are called upon 
to reread the ^tor;^, thoy can accurately predict the 
sequence of ; ^nt in the composition. Thus, the 
impediment ' /ifeiences in structure schema 
that sometimes limits comprehension for a stu- 
dent, is removed. The structure schema of the 
reading material reflects the structure schema of 
its author, the student. 

The Language Experience Approach is useful 
in meeting the reading needs of the Native student, 
in that it removes mcgor impediments that can 
present stumbling blocks for the reader; namely 
the author's language and text schema. 

How is a Language Experience 
Lesson Presented? 

There are three recommended parts to a lan- 
guage experience lesson. 

Catalyst 

A stimulus or common experience is used to 
spark student interest, create an atmosphere for 
oral language production, focus student attention 
on the lesson at hand, and generally prepare stu- 
dents for the creation of a written story. The 
catalyst should stimulate the students so that lan- 
guage flows naturally because of the high level of 
interest, content familiarity, low anxiety, and prior 
experiences. The catalyst provides an excellent 
means to activate schema. Suggested catalysts are: 

• Simple objects 

• Social studies dramatization 

• Animals 

• Music 

• Snort events 

• Art prints 

• Reaction to visuals 

• Rhymes 

• Stories read or retold 

• Assemblies 

• Hypothetical conjecture 

• Discussions and prior experiences 

• Field trips 

• Art experiences 

• Problem-solving situations 

• Films or filmstrips 

• Science experiments 

• Wordless books 



* Guest speakers 

Students actively experience the catalyst, and 
learn vocabulary appropriate for the concrete ac- 
tions and objects presented. They ask or answer 
questions and generate oral language as ap* 
propriate for their level of protici^ency. For very 
limited English proficient students, Uttle English 
language generation can be expected. This ap* 
proach i s appropriate for developing literacy in any 
language, therefore using a student's Native lan- 
guage may be appropriate. With these students, 
the teacher may find himself or herself as the most 
significant source of language heard during the 
lesson. More proficient students can and should be 
involved directly in using language appropriate to 
the situation. 

Story Creation 

Following the experience, the students are 
asked to talk about the catalyst. This may include 
what they remembered, what it looked like, what 
they did, what they liked or disliked, how it can be 
used, how it compares with another object or ex- 
perience, etc. Or the discussion can involve 
storytelling or oral dramatization, with the 
catalyst serving as the stimulus for this creativity. 
This language is written down by the classroom 
teacher, peer tutor, volunteer, or the students 
themselves. 

The oral language prompted by the teacher and 
generated in response to the catalyst is recorded by 
the teacher or scribe. The teacher may decide to 
record the language exactly as dictated by the 
student or (s)he may elect to correct any error in 
syntax (grammar and sentence structure) that the 
student may make. Many supporters believe that 
it is important to record the story exactly as the 
student gives it, without making any corrections in 
usage or idea organization, and that the student 
should read the material the way (s)he originally 
stated it. On the other hand, there are those who 
strongly feel that language development will be 
impaired by not correcting the grammar errors in 
the dictated story. Before deciding whether to cor- 
rect or not to correct, the teacher may wish to 
confer with other staff whose input and experience 
may be helpful. Words should be spelled correctly 
and not reflect the phonological variation of the 
student's speech. 

For minimally proficient students, all that may 
be expected is a one- word or two-word response to 
the object, action, or catalyst. With more proficient 
students, short phrases may be forthcoming. With 
still more proficiency, students may use simple 
sentences in discussing the catalyst. Procedures 
for creating stories vary sHghtly depending on 



^ 1 

20 '-^ 



Reading and Language .^rts 



group size. The teacher may work with the total 
class, small groups, individuals, or the students 
may work in pairs. 

Group Story 

• Teacher asks students to name objects, 
actions, etc. 

* Teacher initiates student discussion 
regarding the catalyst. This discussion 
depends upon the level of language of the 
students and may be stimulated with: 

Who or what occurred? 

What did you see? 

What do you do? (requesting fac- 
tual information) 

What do we call what happened? 
Saw? Did? (asking for main topic 
ideas) 

How or why did... happen? (inter- 
pretation) 

How would you feel if...? (conjec- 
ture) 

If., then... (hypothesis) 

• Student responses to teacher's questions 
are written on chalkboard using the 
student's language as closely as possible. 

• Optional: after several sentences have 
been recorded, students are asked to se- 
quence the story. (Sentences can also be 
written in the order they are dictated.) 

* Teacher asks the students to select a title 
for the story. 

* Teacher reads the composition. 

^ Each sentence is read again, this time with 
the class repeating after the teacher. 

• Individual students read the composition. 

* Students copy the language experience 
story from the chalkboard onto their own 
paper. 

Individual Story 

With slight modification, the above procedure 
can be followed when the studen - writes or dictates 
an individual story. In creating the story, the 
teacher can work with the individual to record the 
oral response to the catalyst, or the student can 
write his own story. The student*s unique ex- 
perience with the catalyst becomes the content of 
the reading material. 



ERiC 



21 



Team Stories 

Peers working together may follow the se- 
quence suggested below: 

• Catalyst activity is experienced by the 
total group and includes group discussion. 

Teacher pairs or groups students. 

Students duo* or team-brainstorm: words, 
phrases, and sentences related to their 
catalyst experience. 

Students duo- or team- write their list on a 
sheet of paper. 

Lists are shared with the entire class and 
expanded after class discussion. 

Students make decisions regarding which 
items to keep. 

Students rewrite list of words into senten- 
ces. 

Students duo- or team-decide on sequence 
of sentences and rewrite sentences in this 
order. 

Student groups select a title for their story. 
Student groups read the story to others. 
Student groups illustrate the story. 

Reading Skills Development 

The student's writing can be used to develop 
any of the reading skills taught at his or her level. 
Included among these reading skills are: 

Summarizing a story 

Word recognition strategies 

Retelling a stoiy (decoding) 

Selecting a title and main idea 

Learning correct syntax 

Sequencing sentences 

Categorizing 

Recognizing sight vocabulary 

Looking for content 

Alphabetizing 

The teacher may use the skills scope and se- 
quences from a basal reading series as a guide for 
introducing skills. Student- authored reading 
material provides the context for presenting these 
skills. 

Students can measure the growth in their read- 
ing skills as they develop word banks, language 
experience dictionaries, or a library of student- 
authored stories. The student's stories provide 
reading materials for the entire class to share and 
enjoy while they practice the skills introduced by 
the teacher. 



22 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



Adapting the Basal Reader 

Three questions will be given attention in dis- 
cussing the process of adapting the basal reader: 

What is ""Adapting the Basal?'' 

Traditional besal readers are written for an 
average native English speaking population that 
has demonstrated language development expected 
for their age, has acquired reading skills ap- 
propriate for their age and number of years in 
school, and has schema somewhat similar to that 
which they encounter in the text. Each of these 
areas, however, may pose problems for the Native 
reader. In order to provide useful instruction for 
the student, the lesson in the basal reader may 
need to be taught diflferently than the lesson 
described in the teacher^s guide. In this process of 
adaptation, the teacher analyzes the basal reader 
for potential language concerns, content schema 
deficiencies, structure schema differences, and the 
presenj;&.of reading demands that exceed the skills 
oj^tKe student. Once these problem areas have been 
identified, the teacher adjusts the lesson bo meet 
the needs of the Native student. 

V/hy Must Basals be Adapted for 
Native Students? 

For the student to benefit from reading instruc- 
tion in a basal reading series, (s)he must be able to 
find meaning in the author's message. A reading 
lesson that is planned to accommodate the special 
nature of the student helps remove the barriers to 
understanding. 

The language of the text may be beyond the 
student's productive or receptive level. The 
vocabulary, grammar, syntax, and idioms used by 
the author may be unfamiliar to the student The 
cultural experiences and backgroxmd of the child 
may be different from the schema of the text. The 
student may not be able to comprehend the text 
because of limited reading skills. All of these bar- 
riers interact to block comprehension for the 
reader. 

How Can Reading Teachers Adapt 
the Basal? 

The following steps are recommended in order 
to accommodate the special needs of the reader: 

Step I: Introducing the Story 

The purpose of the story introduction is to min- 
imize any barriers between the student and com* 
prehension. This is done by activating schema, 
developing language, and introducing reading 



skills the student will need to obtain meaning fVom 
the story. 

Activate Schema 

The reading teacher needs to find out what the 
student already knows about the content of the 
story. Is it unfamiliar to the student, or does (s)he 
have content schema that can be related to the 
story to help provide meaning? The teacher can 
discover the student's prior knowledge by asking 
questions such as: 

What do you remember about . .? 

Have you ever seen a...? 

What do you know about. . .? 

Recall when we did... 

What do you think about when. ..is 
mentioned? 

Another technique is to have students cluster a 
topic. This is done by asking all the students to tell 
you what they know about a subject and organizing 
their information in a web. If the student's 
knowledge of the topic is limited, the teacher can 
provide concrete experiences to familiarize the stu- 
dent with the content they will be reading. For 
example, if the story is about makingpancakes and 
this food is unknown to the student, then an ap- 
propriate introduction of the story will be cooking 
pancakes in class, or visually describing the 
process and demonstrating the end product for the 
student to sample. The cooking experience 
broadens the student's content schema and helps 
give meaning to the story. 

Are there scripts in the story that are unknown 
to the student? For example, if the routine of 
riding the subway to work every day is a central 
event in the story, and the child has no reference 
for this experience, it may be necessary to act out 
the routine in class: walking to the stop, climbing 
down the stairs, purchasing a ticket, waiting for 
the train, finding a seat, reading the paper, etc. 
Acting out unfamiliar roles that people in the story 
are performing will help activate the student's 
script schema. 

The introductory period can also be used to 
prepare the student for the structure of the story, 
oflen referred to as "story grammar." An advance 
organizer will help the student predict the events 
of the story and enhance meaning. The student will 
encounter a variety of organizational patterns in 
the basal reader. Several are described below: 

• Simple Narrative (Found in Primary 
Basals) 

Setting and character 

Beginning/problem 



23 

22 



Reading and Language Arts 



Reaction/feeling 

Attempt/solution 

Outcome/ending 

• Expository Writing (Found in Content 
Area Readers) 

Topic area 

Subtopic 1 

— Elaboration 

— Examples 
Subtopic 2 

— Elaboration 

— Examples 
Subtopic 3 

— Elaboration 

— Examples 
Conclusions 

• Adventure Stories 

Encounter 
Conflict 
Escape 
Chase 

• Science Reports 

Problem statement 
Hypotheses 
Materials/procedures 
Data collection/observation 
Conclusions 

• Persuasive Writing 

Problem statement 

Solution proposal 

Arguments and counter-argu- 
ments 

Effectiveness of solution 

Implementation 

Conclusions 

Develop Language 

If vocabulary, idioms, syntax, etc., in the story 
will block meaning, it is worth the time to review 
them with the student. Concrete objects and 
'nsuals should be used as often as possible to con* 
vey meaning. 

Introduce Reading Skills 

The only purpose for teaching a reading skill 
duringthe introduction to the story is if the student 
will need the skill to get meaningfrom the text. For 



examplOi if a root word is used repeatedly in the 
story, but in a variety of foms (i»e., help, helpful, 
helpless), it might be necessary to introduce struc- 
tural analysis as a means of decoding words. Time 
should be allowed for reading skills — only if 
meaning would be lost without the skill. Key 
vocabulaiy words that the student understands 
but cannot decode can be introduced as sight words 
accompanied by visuals when possible. 

The introductory period should encourage free 
language use, while the student shares his or her 
background knowledge and responds to questions 
from the teacher. The student may oflen use lan- 
guage (particularly vocabulary) which may not be 
standard. That is, the student may overgeneralize 
a term but use it in a context in which the intent 
of his or her communication may still be clean For 
example, the term ''ice cream" may be used when 
"^opsicle" is clearly the intent. Or the student may 
utter sentences that are ungrammatical such as 
•We goed to the Christmas party." 

It is recommended that the teacher respond to 
the ^truth value** of the student's utterance and not 
to the structure, form, or accuracy of the language. 
In this way, the student is encouraged to create 
language to communicate his or her background 
knowledge related to the content of the reading 
selection. This experience affords language prac- 
tice and is consistent with the suggested conditions 
for language development. 

Step II: Building Comprehension 
Through Storytelling 

Step II is an extension of Step I in that the 
teacher is still preparing the reader for his or her 
encounter with the text. This step reduces the 
uncertainty faced by the student, and ensures no 
"'surprises." During Step II, the teacher tells the 
story to the student. The following procedures are 
suggested: 

• Tell the story using visuals, gestures, and 
facial expressions to help convey meaning. 
The stoiy pictures from the text may be 
used 

• Stress key vocabulary by writing the words 
as they are being used. 

* Retell the story leaving out key words for 
the student to insert. Underline them on 
the board as the student says them. 

^ Encourage the student to retell the story in 
his or her own words. 

* Review key words by introducing ap- 
propriate reading skills that will aid word 
recognition. 



2324 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



• Ask the student questions using story 
grammar as an organizer: 

Setting: Where and when did the 
events in the story take place? 
Who was involved in them? 

Beginning: What started the 
chain of events in the story? 

Reaction: What was the main 
character's reaction to this event? 

Attempt: What did the main char- 
acter do about it? 

Outcome: What happened as a 
result of what the main character 
did? 

Step III: Reading the Story 

To facilitate comprehension, it is recommended 
that the teacher guide the student through the 
reading selection. Suggestions are given below: 

• Assign short sections to read, one at a time. 

• Establish purpose-setting questions for 
each section. 

• Ask the student to read a section and retell 
it to a peer. 

• Discuss idiomatic expressions. 

• Ask the student to predict what will hap- 
pen next. 

When the student has completed the story, 
check comprehension by asking him or her to par- 
ticipate in a variety of activities: 

• Sequence the story by drawing illustra- 
tions. 

• Act out the story. 

• Describe a character in the story. 

• Retell or rewrite the story by making 
oneself the main character. 

• End the story in a different way. 

• Compare the story to another one. 
^ Outline the selection. 

• Write a story using the same organization- 
al structure as the story just completed. 

Step IV: Applying Reading Skills 

The teacher's guide to any basal series will 
contain numerous reading skills. In selecting skills 
appropriate for the LEP student, it is important to 
remember that the focus should be comprehension. 
Skills isolated from any meaningful context will 
not be useful. Examples of appropriate skills might 
be: 



• Putting together sentence puzzles^ using 
the story to practice syntax. 

• Alphabetizing words from the story. 

• Finding words from the story that have the 
same phonetic elements (i.e., vowel 
sounds, rhyming words, etc.). 

• Identifying the main idea. 

• Making predictions about outcomes. 

• Using words from the story to associate 
consonant in initial, medial, or final posi- 
tion. 

• Developing word meaning through context 
clues. 

• Developing synonyms or antonyms for 
words in the story. 

Current Trends and Directions 
in Reading 

Any discussion of reading instruction cannot be 
considered complete without attention given to 
some current trends in language arts instruction. 
In recent years, a great deal of interest has 
emerged in instructional models that integrate 
listening, speaking, reading, and writing. The 
strongest manifestation of this direction is the 
whole language movement that is currently gain- 
ing increasing recognition and support in the 
United Stales. This section will explore what is 
meant by 'integrating the language arts." In addi- 
tion, the imderlying principles of whole language 
will be discussed. 

What is Meant by 'Integrating the 
Language Arts 

Many classroom teachers no longer view speak- 
ing, listening, reading, writing, literature, spell- 
ing, handwriting, and grammar as separate 
subjects to be taught with separate texts. Instead, 
they integrate these areas in their instruction in 
support of the following philosophical perspective: 

• Language, both oral and written, is the 
primary means of creating new knowledge 
as well as the means for communicating 
that knowledge to others. Language is ver- 
bal thinking. 

• Language is balanced between the two 
receptive processes of listening and read- 
ing and the two productive processes of 
speaking and writing. The four language 
processes are interrelated and interdepen- 
dent. Deficiency or growth in one may 
cause deficiency or growth in another. 



25 

24 



Reading and Language Arts 



• Literatiire provides the best models of lan- 
guage. Students learn language in a way 
superior to direct instruction by internaliz- 
ing literary models through listening, 
reading, retelling, discussing, dramatiz- 
ing, and writing. 

• The purpose of language is to make mean- 
ing. Skills are important in that they aid 
meaning. Skills are part of, and never 
separate from, purposeful communication. 

This philosophical perspective translates into 
the following instructional guidelines: 

• The basal reading system can be the core 
of the integrated curriculum if teachers are 
uncertain about how to teach reading 
through literature. 

• Students, working in groups, talk through 
their learning in all subjects, talk out their 
compositions before they write, and engage 
in activities that promote oral expression: 
storytelling, choral reading, reade/s 
theater, creative dramatics, etc. 

• Students write daily as a follow-up to read- 
ing, instead of using workbooks or ditto 
sheets. 

• The students' difficulties in oral and wt*it- 
ten discourse determine what they need to 
study in grammar and usage. 

• Spelling lists will be made from the 
students' errors in writing. 

• Similar guidelines are used in content 
areas to effect integrated language-across- 
the-curriculum. (Buckley, 1986) 

What the '"Whole Language'' 
Approach? 

A greater understanding and appreciation of 
children's processing abilities has emerged during 
the last 20 years supporting the notion that 
children can learn to read quite naturally if in- 
structional procedures are in keeping with their 
natural linguistic competencies and abilities. The 
term ''whole language** describes readingprograms 
that are built on this body of knowledge which has 
come out of the work of educators, cognitive 
psychologists, and psycholinguists. Their studies 
suggest that reading is not simply a compilation of 
skills to be ''poured" into learners' minds for their 
conscious learning, but rather a ''skiir of process- 
ing whole language that allows learning to read to 
occur implicitly. Whole language proponents 
believe t^at reading and writing are learned by 
reading and writing. Furthermore, practice in 



these areas cannot be artificial or contrived. It 
must be bonded to what the students bring with 
them into the classroom and directed at what mat- 
ters to them beyond the school walls. 

In the whole language instructional model, 
reading is viewed as a developmental process: 
learners grow through similar stages, but not at 
the same rate and not in the same way. As they 
grow, it is important that students be immersed in 
a language-rich environment, rich in exposure to 
written as well as oral language so that they are 
introduced to both the forms and functions of writ- 
ten language. 

Classroom practices in a whole language class- 
room are based on the belief that language should 
not be fragmented. Whole language rejects: 

• Isolating skill sequences. 

• Slicing up reading and writing into grade 
slices, each slice neatly following and de- 
pendent on prior ones. 

• Simphfying texts by controlling their sen- 
tence structures and vocabulary, or or- 
ganizing them aroimd phonic patterns. 

• Isolating reading and writing instruction 
from its use in learning, or in actual read- 
ing and writing. 

• Believing there are substantial numbers of 
learners who have difficulty learning to 
read or write for any physical or intellec- 
tual reason (Goodman, 1986). 

Whole I^anguage Instructional 
Practices 

• Reading strategy instruction is a major 
component of a whole language program. 
Readers are guided to predict and confirm 
their predictions and to constantly ask 
themselves as they read: ''Does this make 
sense?" and ''What do I think will happen 
nextr 

• Whole language programs accept the 
reality of learning through risk-taking, er- 
rors, reversed letters, invented spellings, 
creative punctuation, and reading and 
writing miscues. These are viewed as in- 
dications of growth toward control of the 
language process. 

• The teacher motivates, arranges the en- 
vironment, monitors development, 
provides relevant and appropriate 
materials, and invites the learner to par- 
ticipate in the activities. 

• Language teachers do not use basals at all, 
but build their programs around children's 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



literature. In a whole language classroom, 
there are books, magazines, newspapers, 
directories, posters, and many other forms 
of print all around. What is considered 
appropriate to read is anything the reader 
needs or wants to read. 

• The focus of all activities is on meaning and 
not on language itself, but language as it 
naturally happens in authentic speech and 
literacy events. Comprehension of mean- 
ing is always the goal of readers. (Good- 
man, 1986) 

Whole Lan^age and the Native 
Student Reader 

A growing number of English as a second lan- 
guage (ESL) instructors have become increasingly 
interested in the whole language movement hap- 
pening in the United States. Many have come to 
support the learning theory on which whole lan- 
guage is based, believing that language is in- 
clusive, and that it is indivisible. They have come 
to view the controlled vocabulary, phonic prin- 
ciples, or short, choppy sentences frequently found 
in ESL readers or basals as presenting an artificial 
idea of what the purposes of language are and thus, 
serving only to make language learning hard, ir- 
relevant, and uninteresting. 

Reading programs for the student often provide 
language that is isolated from real speech and 
literacy contexts. This may be particularly true at 
the secondary level vhere programmed ESL texts 
often dictate the direction of reading instruction. A 
reading program based on student-selected 
material, on the other hand, might provide greater 
motivation for the student to become a ''self- 
directed agent seeking meaning," especially if 
reading texts were available that were relevant to 
the student's own experiences. Because readers 
tend to be interested in reading texts that have 
some relationship to their own background, the 
student who chooses his or her own texts is, in 
effect, also providing his or her own appropriate 
background knowledge for understanding the text 
(Carroll and Eisterhold, 1983). 

Addressing the Content Area 

Curriculum Needs of the 
American Indian and Alaska 
Native Student 

It has been well established that many Native 
students have diffu ulty with content area classes 
if they do not possess adequate cognitive academic 
language proficiency at the same level as the texts 
being used. When this occurs in a content area 



class, the students are oftentimes ^pulled out" of 
the regular class and provided with remedial work. 
The problem with this approach is that while the 
student in need is out of the classroom, the level of 
instruction continues on and (8)he falls behind the 
content and skills level that the whole class is 
addressing. This section will examine approaches 
whereby students with skills' needs may stay in 
the classroom and the teacher will use varying 
methods that will address all of the needs of all of 
the students, thus avoiding the phenomenon of 
some students falling behind in content when they 
lack adequate skills to access the content area 
materials. 

What are the Needs of the Native 
Students? 

There are, despite the differences among Na- 
tive students, some uniform needs that should be 
recognized by content area curriculum classroom 
teachers: 

* The cultural heritage of the Native student 
needs to be recognized as an asset to the 
class. The various ethnic and cultural 
groups represented in the classroom pro- 
vide numerous resources which can be 
used to enhance classroom learning for all 
students. 

* The Native student needs a warm, accept- 
ing environment that allows him or her to 
become a risk-taker in learning a new skill 
or content area. 

* The student may need to have a ''silent 
period" or a period during which he or she 
listens to a great deal of language in order 
to get a feel for the new sounds and 
vocabulary that have meaning for that par- 
ticular content area. 

* Some Native students may need ap- 
propriate ESL instruction, depending on 
their level of English language proficiency. 
Such instruction should include both inter- 
personal communicative language skills 
and cognitive academic language skills. It 
should be noted that while second lan- 
guage learners (including ''Reservation 
English" and 'tillage English" speakers) 
can attain proficiency in interpersonal 
communication within two years, attain- 
ing proficiency in cognitive academic lan- 
guage skills requires from five to seven 
years (Cummins, 1981). 

* The Native student needs content material 
that will provide him or her with concepts 



26 ^ 



Reading and Language Arts 

that are appropriate for his or her grade 
level and achievement level. 

• The student needs to have abstract content 
information and concepts made com- 
prehensible. (Krashen, 1981) 

• The Native student needs an instructional 
program in the content areas which incor- 
porates the use of concrete materials, 
shared experiences, and prior knowledge. 

• The Native LEP student may need special 
consideration in regard to daily assign- 
ments and testing. The language demands 
in such situations may pose barriers to 
success and may require modification. Be- 
cause Native LEP students may have dif- 
ficulty using English as a complete thought 
medium, they may need more time to com- 
plete assignments and tests. It is impor- 
tant to determine whether assignments 
and tests assess the understanding of the 
content or knowledge of the language as- 
sociated with the content. 

Identifying Instructional 
Strategies 

The following questions should be addressed 
before the teacher plans instruction for the Native 
student: 

How Can the Teacher Plan for 
Native Student Needs? 

Creating a Positive, Welcoming 
Classroom Enviromnent 

Groing into a new or cross-cultural situation 
oflen provokes feelings of stress and anxiety. This 
is especially true of school age children when faced 
with the first day of school in a new environment. 
Add to this the factor of not knowing the language 
of the new environment and one can easily imagine 
how these feelings might be even more intense. In 
recognition of these feelings, it becomes the 
teacher's responsibility to ensure that the Native 
student be made to feel as comfortable as possible 
that first day in order that the foundation be paved 
for a positive school experience in the future. 

Immediate Needs 

When developing a plan to meet the needs of 
the Native student in the content area classroom, 
the teacher needs to consider both immediate and 
long-term needs. The immediate needs focus on 
helping the Native student feel as comfortable as 
possible in the new learning situation. 



Long-Term Needs 

The long«tenn needs involve taking into ac- 
count the background characteristics of the Native 
student, identifying resources available for serving 
that student, and giving consideration to ap- 
propriate instructional approaches. Before 
developing a plan for the student's long'-term 
needs, the teacher should consider the following 
questions: 

• What are the students' background, cul- 
ture, previous educational experience, 
home situation, general abilities, and in- 
terests? 

• What resources and materials for serving 
the Native student are available within the 
building, the district, and the state? 

• What teaching approaches are effective 
with Native students? 

After addressing the above questions, a plan 
can be developed that includes: daily schedule, 
instructional strategies, alternative instruction, 
and evaluation process. A meeting with all staff 
who will be working with the student will provide 
an opportunity for everyone to make suggestions 
and to approve the plan. When possible, meet with 
parents to review the plan and to solicit their input. 

What Instructional Strategies are 
Effective for Native Students? 

In developi' g and carrying out a long-term plan 
for the Native student, the teacher needs to con- 
sider certain instructional approaches. The follow- 
ing approaches helo to provide the Native student, 
as well as all students, with an instructional pro- 
gram that will enhance learning. 

Analyze Language Complexity of 
the Learning Task 

The language demands that the Native student 
faces in the classroom can be reduced when the 
teacher considers the complexity of the language 
involved in classroom communication activities. 
The level of complexity is influenced by two mcgor 
factors: the number of contextual clues that are 
present to assist comprehension, and the cognitive 
complexity of the task. 

Cummins (1981) suggests that all tasks requir- 
ing language skills may be placed on a grid formed 
by the intersection of two continua depicting two 
mcyor dimensions of language proflciency — com- 
municative language skills and academic language 
skills. The horizontal continuum describes the 
amount of contextual support present in a task. At 



2t8 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the ISSOs 



one extreme, meaning is actively negotiated be- 
tween speaker and listeneri and the communica- 
tion is supported by a wide range of contextual 
clues. An example of this kind of communication 
would be determining whose turn is next during a 
game at recess time. At the other end of the con- 
tinuum, context is reduced; very few clues to mean- 
ing are provided. An example of context-reduced 
communication might be the reading of a chapter 
in a history text. 

The vertical continuum represents the cogni- 
tive demands of the commimication task. An ex- 
ample of a cognitively undemanding task might be 
the experienced driver reading and interpreting 
traffic signs, an activity that has become so auto- 
matic as to be almost subconscious k typical cog- 
nitively undemanding classroom task with many 
context clues might be having the student match a 
quantity of concrete olitjects to written numerals. A 
cognitively imdemanding task with few context 
clues might be requiring the student to copy writ- 
ten materials. 

An example of a cognitively demanding task, on 
the other hand, with many clues might be giving 
the student math word problems with concrete 
referents or pictures to assist in problem-solving. 
Finally, a cognitively demanding task, with few 
clues, might be listening to a lecture on the 
American Revolution. 

The language demands that the student faces 
in the classroom increase in difRculty as the con- 
textual clues become fewer and the cognitive task 
becomes more complex. The cognitive task often 
will demand the kind of academic language skill 
required for literacy skills such as decoding, read- 
ing comprehension, deriving meaning from con- 
text, study skills, and writing proficiency. This 
kind of language proficiency, therefore, is more 
challenging in its comprehension requirements, in 
contrast to language surrounded by context clues 
where meaning is more easily clarified through 
concrete referents. 

Providing Contextual Clues 

The following strategies will help to place lan- 
guage in a more meaningful context for the stu- 
dents: 

• Use Visuals 

When a spoken word can be further represented 
by a visual, it diminishes the complexity of a task. 
The visual allows the listener one more clue to 
comprehension. The teacher talks about a country 
while using a map of the country. The teacher 
demonstrates the process of subtraction by using 
blocks or pieces of candy to show what happens 
when something is subtracted. 



• Provide Hands-On Activities 

Students needs the opportunity to explore 
and discover things. Language proficiency can be 
developed along with content through activities 
such as drawing and constructing maps, making 
dioramas, role-playing historical events, conduct- 
ing experiments, and using manipulatives. 

• Using a Model or Sample of a Finished 
Product 

A model or sample of a finished product gives 
students a guide of what is expected. Each student 
can use the model to visualize and compare his or 
her own work. It provides a visual guide when the 
teacher is not able to give further directions. The 
model provides the student with a constant self- 
monitoring process. The teacher might post a 
model ofhow to head a paper or display thefinished 
product of student-made books. 

• Give a Visual Representation of Verbal 
Directions 

The steps that a student follows to complete a 
task should be presented in the oral mode and 
reinforced with visual clue. The steps to complete 
a craft project or a math process should be repre- 
sented visually as well as verbally. The steps can 
be placed on the chalkboard or on a chart for quick 
reference. The teacher needs to spend time relating 
the visual to the verbal directions. The teacher can, 
for example, present seatwork directions verbally 
and relate them to picture clues on the chalkboard 
to help increase the student's understanding and 
memory. If the teacher wants the students to cut 
out pictures, the words "cut out the pictures" are 
printed on the board with a picture of scissors. 
Pictures with verbal directions provide com- 
prehensible input for the students. 

• Provide Demonstrations or Modeling 

Modeling is the demonstration and explanation 
of a process or product by the teacher. For example, 
the teacher, in introducing how to use a micro- 
scope, carefully demonstrates its use and points 
out the most important features. Or, the teacher 
demonstrates ways to put correct shadowing in a 
picture, or how to do a certain math procedure 
before allowing the class to try the problem. 

The modeling by the teacher provides the stu- 
dents with an example they can draw from when 
they attempt the new skill. The model should have 
two characteristics: 

The model should be perfect, which 
means it should be clearly imder- 
stood without room for 
misinterpretation. 



29 

28 



Reading and Language Arts 



• The teacher should point out the 
key ideas that make the model per- 
fect, 

Modeling helps to identity and to visualize a 
process or product that a teacher wants to teach. 
Modeling helps to reinforce skills being taught, 
clarifies a skill, meets the needs of various learning 
styles, and will provide a concrete rather than an 
abstract experience. 

^ Nonverbal Embellishment 

When the teacher points and uses hand ges- 
tures, the students are provided with additional 
clues to the teacher's message. The teacher can 
simply point to the place where finished 
worksheets should be returned. With a hand ges- 
ture, the teacher can show or approximate an inch 
in a measurement lesson. The gestures and refer- 
ences to concrete examples helps to narrow the 
scope for the listener. 

• Activate and Expand the Prior Experien- 
ces of Students 

A person's background experiences have a 
direct influence on what (s)he comprehends. If the 
learner is able to relate new information to past 
experiences, learning is enhanced (Pearson and 
Spiro, 1982). Students can share their prior 
knowledge as a preliminary stage to any lesson. As 
required, the teacher provides additional experien- 
ces to extend the student's range of experience. It 
is important that the teacher use the student's 
prior experiences as a bridge to introduce new 
information. The student who is very knowledge- 
able about animals can easily relate to a lesson on 
food chains if the teacher builds on this previous 
knowledge. The prior experiences that a student 
brings to learning can be termed the students 
''schema.'' It is the responsibility of the teacher to 
acknowledge the student's existing schema and 
provide opportxmities to expand on what is already 
known. 

Placing language in a meaningful context is one 
of the key strategies for teaching the Native stu- 
dent in the content area classroom. Not only does 
it increase the likelihood of academic success for 
the student as key concepts are explored in content 
areas, but it also simultaneously facilitates the 
development of language and communication 
skills. 

Provide for Peer Interaction and 
Cooperative Learning Etiperiences 

Acquisition of language and oral communica- 
tion skills is further facilitated by the use of 
cooperative small group work. Students working 
together in small groups obtain natural active 



practice in all language areas. Johnson, Johnson, 
Johnson, and Roy (1984) states that ^cooperative 
learning ezperienceSi where students work 
together to maximize each other's achievement, 
tend to promote positive relationships and a 
process of acceptance among students." He iden* 
tifies four basic elements that must be included in 
small group learning for it to be considered 
cooperative learning. The first element is that the 
group develops positive interdependence. This can 
be structured to occur by having mutual goals for 
a group, division of task work, and materials. The 
teacher can enhance the positive interdependence 
by joint rewards for a group showing positive inter- 
dependence. The second element is face-to-face 
interaction amongthe students. The third element 
is individual accountability for mastery of material 
covered. And finally, the fourth element requires 
students to use interpersonal and small group 
skills. The students need to be taught the social 
skills of working within a group and also how to 
assess how their group is functioning. Keeping the 
four elements of cooperative learning in mind, the 
teacher assumes the following roles to implement 
cooperative learning in the classroom: 

* States and clarifies the objectives of the 
lesson for the students. This would include 
the academic objectives as well as the ob- 
jectives for the group work. 

* Makes decisions about which groups, and 
the size of the groups, that the students 
will work in before the lesson begins. The 
decision is based on the task to be ac- 
complished, number of students, and 
materials or resources that are available. 
Heterogeneous grouping is recommended, 
at least one high-achieving student, one 
low-achieving student and a mixture by 
gender and ethnicity of middle level- 
achieving students. 

* Clarifies the task and structures the learn- 
ing activity for the students. 

* Monitors the effectiveness of the groups 
and is available to provide assistance when 
a group needs direction. 

* Evaluates the students' achievement and 
leads discussions with students about how 
their group worked effectively. 

The following are some activities that use 
cooperative learning: 
List-Group Label 

The teacher begins by choosing a topic the class 
is familiar with. Using the chalkboard or overhead, 
the teacher leads the class in a brainstorming 
activity to come up with 20 to 30 words or concepts 



29 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s 



related to the topic* The teacher writes down every 
word suggested. Discuss with the class whether 
any words are inappropriate and should be 
eliminated. The class is divided into the coopera- 
tive learning groups. The students are told that 
within their groups they are to select h^om the 
brainstormed list of words or concepts that seem to 
relate to each other. They are to write these words 
in clusters on their paper; then label each cluster 
with a descriptive term. The teacher brings the 
class together for the groups to share their work. 
There are no right or wrong answers; all 
reasonable answers are accepted. This activity can 
be a prereading activity or it can be a follow-up 
activity to help reinforce and review (Maring, Fur* 
man, and Blum-Anderson, 1985). 

The teacher in this strategy selects the most 
important topics to be covered. The teacher then 
develops directed study questions. The cooperative 
learning groups are each assigned a specific study 
question to research as a group. When the groups 
have their questions answered, they disband and 
each member joins a new group; each student in 
turn teaches his or her new group the information 
that his or her former group researched. The 
teacher needs to monitor this carefully and to 
check the research group's work before they dis- 
band. This activity allows all students to take an 
active part and to have something to share. 
Surveyi Predicti Readi Revise 
The teacher has all the students list the head- 
ings and subheadings for an assigned reading on 
paper, or the teacher can provide the handouts 
with this information. The teacher then has the 
total class brainstorm what kinds of information 
might be contained xmder each heading. They will 
also perform the same activity in their small 
groups. 

The students continue the brainstorming in 
their small groups, but they record their predic- 
tions on their paper. Each student should be re- 
quired to make at least one prediction within their 
group for each heading, but the group members 
should only record the items for which they reach 
a consensus. Following the brainstorming, the 
group does the assigned reading to confirm, reject, 
or modify their predictions. The group then makes 
decisions about their predictions, making revisions 
and additions where they are needed. The teacher 
can bring the total group together to share what 
information was confirmed. This will help to sum- 
marize the content material (Maring, Furman, and 
Blum -Anderson, 1985). 

Cooperative learning can provide the students 
with positive peer interaction. It can help to foster 

o 

ERIC 



an independence in learning that does not focus 
just around the teacher. It can tree the teacher to 
work with children who are having difficulties. 
Cooperative learning is an efficient way to meet the 
variety of needs of all students. 

Marilyn Bums (1981) describes her ''groups of 
four" as a system of cooperative learning that re- 
quires reorganizing the classroom physically, 
redefining the students' responsibilities, and care* 
fully structuring the teacher's role. Her groups 
operate under three rules: 

• You are responsible for your own work and 
behavior. 

^ You must be willing to help any group 
member who asks. 

• You may ask for help from the teacher only 
when everyone in your group has the same 
question. 

First, the teacher introduces mi activity to the 
groups that is designed to accomplish the lesson 
objective. The teacher circulates to observe inter- 
action and to help when an entire group has a 
question or when a group reaches an impasse. The 
teacher's goal is to get the groups working produc- 
tively and independently. When groups have 
finished exploring a problem, it is the teacher's 
responsibility to summarize the results for the 
entire class and to lead a discussion about the 
process. '^Groups of four" provide a usefUl manage- 
ment technique for meeting the varied needs of the 
students. It also provides a learning environment 
that maximizes interaction among students. Stu- 
dents have opportunities to exchange thoughts and 
to validate and rethink their ideas. 

The Native student can benefit greatly by work- 
ing in cooperative peer interaction situations. The 
teacher structures tasks that encourage the stu- 
dents to discuss and actively work on a problem. 
For example, a teacher might use peer groups in 
science by placing the Native student with one or 
more students. The teacher can direct the groups 
to carry out a series of experiments and to record 
the results. The teacher leads a total class discus- 
sion and helps summarize the results with the 
class. 

Social studies peer groups can be assigned 
tasks to obtain information through a research 
project, such as finding names of key American 
Indian and Alaska Native and their achievements. 
Or the students can plan and build a model of a 
city, or develop a timeline for useful inventions in 
the 21st century. The teacher can ask students to 
act out key vocabulary words following or preced- 
ing a lesson. The important thing is that all group 



Reading and Language Arts 



tasks be designed to facilitate interaction among 
the students. 

Peer tutoring can also promote the acquisition 
of language and oral commimication skills, and can 
be beneficial to the tutor as well as to the tutored 
student. An English proficient student can be 
paired with the LEP student or an older student 
with a younger student. Or, a student that has a 
basic competenQf in the target skill can serve as a 
model and tutor for the other. The tutor gains 
self-esteem while also reinforcing his or her own 
concepts within a content area. The LEP student 
is presented with an informal situation in which to 
interact verbally with only one person, in addition 
to being given one»on*one attention in a specific 
content area. 

Modify the Lesson 

Modifying the lesson means that the content 
area teacher adapts the same content and concept 
to two different populations. First, the most essen- 
tial or appropriate objectives for a lesson or unit 
are identified. The content is then modified to 
provide a better match with the language limita- 
tions of the LEP students. Thus, while the lesson 
demands of the English proficient students and the 
LEP student are different, the same information 
can be prepared for and presented to both. 

For example, an objective for a social studies 
lesson on famous American inventors might re* 
quire students to write an essay stating how the 
work of one famous inventor has influenced our 
modem world. The same lesson for the LEP stu- 
dent can require the student to tell the teacher or 
a peer the names of three famous inventors and 
what they invented, or to draw a picture to il* 
lustrate how the work of a particular inventor has 
influenced our lives. The teacher needs to be aware 
of, and to continually challenge, the LEP student's 
skills. The l^EP student's limited English skills 
should not be confused with a lack of cognitive 
knowledge. 

Incorporate Comprehension Checks 
Kvto Lessons 

Madeline Hunter's (1982) work supports learn- 
ing theories that stress the need to check for un- 
derstanding during teaching, as well as for 
monitoring and for adjusting instruction 
throughout a lesson. The following teacher ac- 
tivities will help to ensure that learning is occur- 
ring: 

^ Check to see if students understand the 
key elements by asking questions 
throughout the lesson. 



• Rephrase the main points in simple lan- 
guage at the end of the lesson. Focus on the 
main idea of the lesson. Have students 
restate in their own words their under- 
standing of the information, or have them 
tell one another one or two new ideas they 
learned during the lesson. 

• Emphasize key content words used in con- 
text by writing them on the chalkboard as 
they were used in context. The teacher can 
focus attention on written words by cir- 
cling or underlining them as the students 
or the teacher uses them. Have the stu* 
dents guess what the words mean; then 
have them revise their guesses after they 
become familiar with the definitions of 
words. 

Use Individual Preview and Review 
Techniques to Augment Instruction 

Ovando and Collier (1985) propose a model 
which outlines a strategy for lesson preview and 
review: 

• The lesson is introduced by one instructor 
in the student's first language. 

• The lesson is then presented in the second 
language by another instructor. 

• Finally, the lesson is reviewed in the first 
language. 

The regular classroom teacher can use a varia- 
tion of this model by using an instructional assis- 
tant or trained volunteer to present material 
before a class presentation or lesson. The preview 
is in English unless resources can provide a Native 
speaker. The preview stresses the language that 
will be used in the lesson by introducing the main 
points covered by the text pages. Time should be 
spent talking about pictures that are within the 
lesson. Resource material such as filmstripSi pic- 
tures, and books can be used to help build the 
background information for the student. Following 
the lesson, a review or summary is presented that 
allows a teacher to check for understanding* The 
review can be done on an individual basis by the 
teacher, instructional assistant, or trained volun- 
teer, or the student can take part in a total class 
review. 

Provide Alternative Instruction 

There are times when a particular lesson will 
not be comprehensible to the Native student* It is 
during these times that the teacher can provide 
alternative activities for the Native student. The 
following list offers some possibilities for alterna- 
tive instruction: 



o 

ERIC 



31 32 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 19905 



• Independent projects such as picture die* 
tionaries, language experience bookSi 
story tapes, filmstrips, and art projects; 
ESL lessons with an ESL instructor, in* 
structional assistant, volunteer, or peer 
tutor. 

• Preview and review lessons with an in- 
structional assistant, volunteer, or peer 
tutor. 

^ Media projects such as making a slide 
show or an animated movie under the su- 
pervision of a media instructor. 

Making the Text 
Comprehensible 

The teaching of content subjects and their em- 
phasis or reliance on textbook information 
provides a special challenge for the Native student 
and the classroom teacher. The following four-step 
plan for using a text gives procedures that will 
benefit all students by providing the support re- 
quired to comprehend the content of the text 
(Cooper, 1986). 

Step I: Preparation 

The first step requires the teacher to examine 
the material with three questions in mind. The 
first question is, ''What do I want or expect the 
students to learn from the textr This step re- 
quires the teacher to identify the objectives for the 
lesson. The teacher makes a decision based on his 
or her knowledge of the students' language skills 
and cognitive knowledge. The objective for Native 
LEP students may be different from the objective 
for English proficient students. If the teacher 
determines that the text makes it necessary to 
''teach to two objectives," then text adaptation may 
be desirable prior to presentation to the students. 

The second question the teacher asks is, ''What 
vocabulary will cause students the most diflficul- 
ty?** Some words, even though they are not directly 
related to the key concepts, may still impede text 
comprehension. Therefore, as the teacher iden* 
tifies key vocabulary to introduce to the class, other 
vocabulary should be noted that may be 
problematic to LEP students. 

The third question to consider is, ''What back- 
ground will the students need in order to com- 
prehend the text?" Is there information or a 
concept that must be explained before the students 
can understand what they will be reading? Extra 
resources may be required to help provide this 
background. The resources need to be as visual and 
as concrete as possible so that meaning can be 
grasped. 

o 

ERIC 



Step II: Developing Vocabulary 
and Background 

The teacher must decide what vocabulary and 
background information need to be developed 
before the students encounter the text. Activating 
the student's prior knowledge or schema will help 
the teacher discover what the student already 
knows and disclose what new information the stu* 
dent will need to be able to comprehend the text. 
Planning activities that give students credit for 
what they already know will help bridge the gap 
between new learning and previously acquired 
knowledge. The teacher's awareness of the 
knowledge base the students bring with them will 
help to determine appropriate resources to expand 
prior knowledge. Such resources might include the 
viewing of a film, a field trip, some concrete items 
brought to class (such as pioneer tools or clothing, 
to help build background for a unit on the Western 
movement), or the use of role-playing. Another way 
to activate prior knowledge is the use of a graphic 
organizer. Graphic organizers are a visual way of 
showing the relationship between concepts and 
ideas. Examples of graphic organizers include 
semantic maps, clustering, webbing, and linear 
outlines. 

Step III: Guided Reading 

Students usually need more information 
than that contained within the assigned pages of 
the textbook in order to comprehend the informa- 
tion. Guided reading is a step to building com- 
prehension. The following procedures suggest 
ways to guide the student through the text: 

• Introduce organization of the text. Many 
texts accent the mcgor points in bold type. 
The bold type can provide an outline for the 
student. The special content vocabulary is 
often in bold type and a definition may 
appear in an outside column or right with 
the bold-typed new vocabulary word. The 
glossaries are also an important aid to the 
student because they may help to clarify a 
word, give correct pronunciation, or pro- 
vide a visual of the word. 

• Focus the student's attention on the pic- 
tures. The pictures within a text can pro- 
vide a wealth of information. One useful 
strategy is for a teacher to assign groups of 
students a picture in a text and have them 
answer the following questions: Who, 
What, Where, Why, When, and How? 
Once the activity has been done within a 
group setting, it can give the student a 
format for looking at other content pictures 



32 



Reading and Language Arts 



as (8)he comes across them in a text. The 
charts, graphs, and maps within the text 
also provide visuals for the student and 
should also be approached with some 
guided questions. 

• Introduce a note-taking technique. The 
graphic organizer in use with a text can 
also provide a format for note-taking. The 
student starts with a single word or con- 
cept, for example ^atom." While reading 
the paper, the student writes the word 
''atom" at the top of his or her paper and 
answers tho questions: Who, What, 
Where, When, and How. 

• Ask students to predict what questions will 
be answered by the text. Afler making 
their predictions, students read for specific 
answers, thus learning to focus their atten- 
tion and improving their comprehension 
skills (Cooper, 1986). 

• Pose purpose-setting questions. The pur- 
pose for reading a text can directly in- 
fluence what students comprehend. By as- 
king students questions that relate to the 
key concepts in the text, the teacher helps 
students to zero in on the main points. For 
example, ''Why do you think the pioneers 
wanted to go West?" might be a question 
posed to students before reading a chapter 
on the western movement. 

• Pair students with reading partners. The 
use of partners in a study approach can 
allow a more capable reader to be paired 
with a less capable reader. One partner 
reads the text orally with the other student 
and helps explain the material. The other 
partner asks questions and points are 
clarifled. The tutor's imderstanding of the 
concept is reinforced by attempting to ex- 
plain it to his or her partner while the 
tutored student benefits by having his or 
her comprehension enhanced. 

• Rephrase and summarize text afler stu- 
dents have finished reading. The teacher 
needs to stop at certain points and sum- 
marize what has been read. The key con- 
cepts can be visually represented through 
outlines, pictures, and graphic organizers. 
The ultimate goal is to prepare students to 
summarize material on their own, but the 
teacher can help teach this skill by first 
modeling it for the students. 



Step IV: FolloW'Up 

The follow-up activities are an extension, rein- 
forcement, or application of concepts and skills. 
The follow-up provides a framework for the stu- 
dent to use the newly-learned or acquired skill in 
a different way. This application provides the stu- 
dent with needed practice and reinforcement. In 
addition, the follow-up can provide the instructor 
with the knowledge of how well the student has 
grasped the new skill. As much as possible, follow- 
up activities should build on the student's inter- 
ests, skills and talents. For example, the student 
who likes to act should be given the opportunity to 
use role-playing. An artistic student might choose 
to interpret the new concept through drawing a 
picture or constructing a model. The activities 
should be varied and include written, oral, and 
visual expression. The follow-up, therefore, ex- 
tends content beyond the text and helps to bring 
closure on the overall concepts that were presented 
in the text and content lesson. 

Adapting the Content Lesson 

The content lesson for the student should be 
designed to present new information using con- 
crete objects and visuals whenever they can help 
to make the oral or written information com- 
prehensible. The following is a checklist to consider 
when adapting a content area lesson. 

Lesson Objectives 

• Are the objectives appropriate? 

• Do they need to be modified? 

• Does an alternative lesson need to be 
provided? 

Vocabulary and Key Concepts 

• What are the vocabulary nnd key concepts 
that need to be presented? 

• How can these concepts be presented in a 
meaningful context? 

Prior Knowledge 

• What lesson activities will bring out the 
students' prior knowledge? 

• How can the lesson be related to past ex- 
periences? 

Text 

• Have the students been prepared to com- 
prehend the text? 

• Do preview and review activities for some 
students need to be provided? 



ERIC 



33'} 4 



Indians Nations At Risk: Solutions for tlie 1990s 



Lesson Activities 

* Are the lessons designed to include peer 
interaction? 

* Do^elessonsplacethe language in mean- 
ingful context? 

* Have activities been included that will 
check for understanding? 

FoUow-up 

* Do the follow-up activities help to apply, 
reinforce, practice, or extend what has 
been taught? 

* Do the activities address the students' 
skills, interests, and talents? 

By addressing the questions outlined above, the 
teacher will be able to meet the needs of students 
while simultaneously providing a rich learning 
environment. 

References 

A<iher, J. (1982). Learning another language 
through actions: The complete teacher's 
guidebook. Los Gatos, CA: Sky Oaks Produc- 
tions, Inc. 

Bailystok, E. B. CSTS). A theoretical model of 
second language learning. Language Learning, 
28, 69-83. 

Brown, G. (1986). Cross cultural self concept: The 
best of both worlds. Selected papers from the 
1986 MOKAKIT Conference. Vancouver, B.C.: 
MOKAiaT Indian Education Research As- 
sociation. 

Brown, R. D. (If. 73). A first language: The early 
stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 

Buckley, M. H. (1986, April). When teachers decide 
to integrate the language arts. Language Arts, 
63. 

Bums, M. (1981, September). Groups of four: Solv- 
ing t)ie management problem. Learning, 46-51. 

Carroll, P. L., and Eisterhold, J. (1983, December). 
Schema theory and ESL reading pedagogy. 
TESOL Quarterly. 

Chamot, A. U. (1985). English language develop- 
ment through a content-based approach. Issues 
in English Language Development. Rosslyn, 
VA: National Clearinghouse for Bilingual 
Education. 

Chamot, A. U. et al. (1985, April). School Science 
for Limited English Proficient Children. 
FOCUS: National Clearinghouse for Bilingual 
Education. 



Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspecto of the theory of syntax. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Cooper, J. D. (1986). Improving reading com- 
prehension. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Com- 
pany. 

Cummins, J. (1981). The role of primaiy language 
development in promoting educational success 
for language minority students. Schooling and 
Language Minority Students: A Theoretical 
Framework. Los Angeles: Evaluation, Dissemi- 
nation, and Assessment Center, California 
State University. 

Derwing, B. L. (1971). Transformational grammar 
as a theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, 
MA: Cambridge University Press. 

Enright, D. S., and MsCloskey, M. L. (1988). In- 
tegrating English. Reading, MA: Addison-Wes- 
ley. 

Fox, S. (1988). A whole language approach to the 
communication skills. Teaching the Native 
American. Hap Gilliland (Ed.). Billings, MT: 
Council for Indian Education. 

Fox, S. (1990). Literacy for the American Indian: A 
case study in the intergenerational transfer of 
cognitive skills. Applied Behavior and Cogni- 
tive Sciences, Inc. Thomas Sticht (Ed.). 

Fox, S. (1986). The whole language approach to 
language arts for the Indian student. Teaching 
the Indian Child: A Bilingual Multicultural 
Approach. Jon Reyhner (Ed.). Eastern Mon- 
tana College, Billings, MT. 

Hunter, M. (1982). Mastery teaching. Tip Publica- 
tions. 

Groodman, K (1986). What's whole in whole lan- 
guage! Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Educa- 
tional Books. 

Higgs, T. V. (1985). Language acquisition and lan- 
guage learning: A plea for syncretism. Modern 
Language Journal, 3. 

Indian Nations At Risk: Eastern Regional Public 
Hearing. (1990, October 2). (Unpublished raw 
data). Cherokee, NC. 

Indian Nations At Risk: Great Lakes Regional 
Hearing. (1990, September 20). (Unpublished 
raw data). St. Paul, MN. 

Indian Nations At Risk: High Plains Regional 
Public Hearing. (1990, August 20). (Un- 
published raw data). Billings, MT. 

Indian Nations At Risk: Northwest Regional Hear- 
ing. (1990, September 5). (Unpublished raw 
data). Seattle, WA 

Indian Nations At Risk: Plains Regional Public 
Hearing. (1990, September 17-18). (Un- 
published raw data). Oklahoma City, OK. 



34 



Reading and Language ArU 



Indian Nations At Risk: Southwest Region. (1990, 
September 12). (Unpublished raw data). 
Phoenix, AZ. 

Indian Nations At Risk: Summaries of 18 issues 
sessions. (1990, October). NIEA 22nd Annual 
Conference, INAR/NACljS joint issues sessions. 
San Diego, CA. 

Indian Nations At Risk: Si\mmary of issues and 
recommendations from regional hearings. 
(1990). (Unpublished raw data). 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force: Alaskan Hear- 
ing. ( 1990, July 16- 18). (Unpublished raw data). 
Juneau, AK. 

Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., Johnson, E., and 
Roy, P. (1984). Circles of learning cooperation 
in the classroom. Association for Supervision 
and Curriculum Development: Washington, 
D.C. 

Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in 
intercultural education. Language Learning, 
16, 1-20. 

Krashen, S. D. and Terrell, Trapy D. (1983). Lan- 
guage acquisition in the classroom. San Fran- 
cisco: Pergamon/Alemany Press. 

Krashen, S. D. (1981). Bilingual education and 
second language acquisition theory. Schooling 
and Language Minority Students: A Theoretical 
Framework. Los Angeles: Evaluation, Dissemi- 
nation, and Assessment Center, California 
State University. 

Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and practice in 
second language acquisition. New York: Ox- 
ford/Pergamon. 

Krashen, S. (1981). Second language acquisition 
and second language learning. Oxford: Per- 
gamon Press. 

Leap, W. (1979). American Indian English and its 
implications for bilingual education. In Interna- 
tional Dimensions of Bilingual Education. 
Alatis, J., (Ed). Washington, D. C: Georgetown 
University Press. 

Lindfors, J. W. (1980). Children's language and 
learning. Englewood Cliffs, N.J. : Prentice Hall, 
Inc. 

Maring, G. H., Furman, G. C, and Blum-Ander- 
son, J. (1985, December). Five cooperative 
learning strategies for mainstreamed 
youngsters in content area classrooms. The 
Reading Teacher, 39, 310-313. 



Ovando, C. J. and ColUer. V. P. (1985) BUingual 
and ESL claasrooma: Teaching in muUicul' 
iural contextt. New York: McGraw Hill. 

Pearson and Spiro. (1982, May). The new buzz 
word in reading is schema. Instructor. 

Savignon, S. J. ( 1983). Communicative competence: 
Theory and classroom practice. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Go. 

Saville-Troike, M. (1984, June). What really mat- 
ters in second language learning for academic 
achievement? TESOL Quarterly. 

Slobin, D.L (1973). Ptycholinguistics. Glenview, 
IL: Scott, Foresman. 

Winitz, H. (Ed.). (1981). The comprehension ap- 
proach to foreign language instruction. Rowley, 
MA: Newbury House Publi^ers. 

About the Author 

Gerald L. "Jerry* Brown (Salish-Kootenai- 
Siouz) works as an education specialist with Inter- 
face Network) Inc. in Beaverton, Oregon. 
Interface, the contractor for this commissioned 
paper, is a private consulting firm which provides 
educational and management s^drvices to clients in 
private and public sector oiganizations at the na- 
tional, state, and local levels. Corporate head- 
quarters for Interface is located at 4800 S.W. 
Griffith Drive, Suite 202, Beaverton, Oregon 97005 
with an office in Andiorage, Alaska. Interface has 
been a leader in developing materials and training 
capability for school districts with linguistically 
and culturally diverse populations. Its teacher 
training series, Xlassrooms Without Borders," 
was used as a basis for this paper. 

Jerry Brown's focus on reading and languages 
arts skills of American Indian and Alaskan natives 
began with his employment with the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs Torreon Boarding Sdiool in New 
Mexico in the early 1960*8. He has developed 
materials designed to bridge the gap between the 
academic language of the K-12 curriculum found 
in most schools and the culture, language, and 
discourse patterns of Native students. Since 1982, 
Jerry has provided inservice training to teachers, 
administrators, parents, and others in bilingual 
education and equity education with emphasis on 
assisting students to access the educational oppor- 
tunities available to them. 



35 



END 

U.S. Dept. of Education 

Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement (OERI) 



ERIC 

Date Filmed 
August 8, 1992 

ERIC 



