DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 380 335 



SO 024 214 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
JOURNAL CIT 



Sherman, Janice; Thompson, Marlene 

Reflections on Diversity: Implementing Anti-Bias 

Curriculum in the Primary Grades. 

North Dakota Univ. , Grand Forks. Center for Teaching 
and Learning. 
Mar 94 
lip. 

Insights, Center for Teaching and Learning, 
University of North Dakota, P.O. Box 7189, Grand 
Forks, ND 58202-7189. ($7 per year). 
Guides - Non-Classroom Use (055) ~ Reports - 
Descriptive (141) ~ Collected Works - Serials (022) 
Insights into Open Education; v26 n6 Mar 1994 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

'''Cultural Activities; ^Cultural Awareness; ^Cultural 
Background; '^Cultural Differences; ^Cultural 
Pluralism; Kindergarten; '''Multicultural Education; 
Primary Education; Student Characteristics 
Antibias Practices; Diversity Concept 



ABSTRACT 

Teacher-developed activities in one kindergarten 
classroom in Rogers (MN) are the focus for introducing diversity in 
primary grades. The process of planning the curriculum is described, 
along with a list of strategies to implement in the classroom for the 
school year. A set of persona dolls, one male and one female, were 
purchased to represent African-American, Asian, Hispanic, Native 
.American, and European-American cultural groups. Funding for the 
persona dolls was obtained from the building principal who supported 
the ideas. By using persona dolls with multicultural literature and 
art activities, the students became more aware of cultural 
differences and similarities. A 37-item bibliography and a 12-item 
selected reference list are included. (EH) 



*****************************************^^ 

* Reproductions supplied oy EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 

*********************************************** 




ft 




00 

Q 
w 





CENTER F0« TEACH** AND LEAflNWQ 

UNrviwrnr or nohth Dakota 

QRANO FOflKft M202 

Volume 26, Number 6 
March 1994 



U.S. MPAOTtttWT W f 0UCAT1ON 
COUCATtONAL A€SOU«CCS INFORMATION 

from !*• P*»o* o# 



O M*w erwifti 10 



Reflections on Diversity: Implementing 
Anti-Bias Curriculum in the Primary 

Grades 



by 



Janice Sherman and Marlene Thompson 




"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



SIGHT 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER itRlci " 



into open education 



REFLECTIONS ON DIVERSITY: IMPLEMENTING ANTI-BIAS 
CURRICULUM IN THE PRIMARY GRADES 



By Janice Sherman 
and 

Marlene Thompson 

Introduction 

Across the nation teachers of young children are recognizing the need to better prepare 
children to live happily and peacefully in an increasingly diverse society. They are finding 
creative, effective, and appropriate ways to do this through utilization of techniques and 
materials including persona dolls (dolls whose life stories are invented and told in the 
classroom), children's literature, skin tone art materials, photographic displays of diverse 
ways of living in contemporary society, etc. 

Marlene Thompson, of Rogers Elementary School in Rogers, Minnesota, is a kindergar- 
ten teacher who has been working on development of an anti-bias curriculum project for a 
graduate level staff development course on Developmental^ Appropriate Practice for teach- 
ers in the Elk River and Rochester, Minnesota, school districts. Marlene chose this topic for 
her project for both professional and personal reasons. Professionally, Marlene recognized the 
need to introduce the children in her classroom to people of color because of the limited ethnic 
and cultural diversity of the region where they live. In addition, the school where she teaches 
had selected a multicultural theme, Be a World Citizen, for the year, and Marlene wanted to 
work to assure that her multicultural teaching approach was integrated and relevant to the 
rest of the curriculum in order to avoid the "tourist" approach (Derman-Sparks and The ABC 
Task Force, 1989). Personally, Marlene was interested in this topic because she is the mother 
of two adopted Korean children. 

Marlene set goals for her project in August after our first two class sessions had been 
held. She based her goal-setting on the knowledge she had gained from reading AntUBiaa 
Curriculum: Tools for Empowering Children (Derman-Sparks et al., 1989). During our last 
class meeting in January 1994, Marlene shared the success she has had in implementing her 
goals in her kindergarten with other primary-level teachers in the class. Marlene's process 
of goal setting and implementation of the goals can best be understood by reading excerpts 
from the journal which she turned in for her project. 



3 



Marlene's Story 



8-5-93 entry 

The first part of this paper will outline my plans for implementing anti-bias strategies. 
This is written in the summer when I have large blocks of time for reflecting and organizing 
my efforts. The second part will be written as a response after these activities have been 
implemented. 

Strategies to implement during the 1993-94 school year: 

1. Make my classroom more diverse. Display more photographs of people of color during 
their everyday lives. Goal-one half images should present diversity. 

2. Purchase for art supplies-skin tone crayons, paper, and paint. 

3. Include discussion of our anti-bias activities in weekly newsletter that goes home to 
parents. 

4. Make a collage of eye shapes and colors. Graph eye colors in our classroom. 

5. Make a book, "We All Look Special," using photographs and student descriptions of how 
they look. 

6. Have students bring in pictures of family members. Talk about ways we look or don t look 
like other family members. 

7. Use black and brown colors as desirable alternatives in the art center (paint, paper, and 

play-doh). 

8. Get paint chips and sort by students' skin, eye, or hair color. 

9. Read books that depict people of color in present day life in real life situations that would 
be interesting to kindergarten students. I have researched a beginning list which is 
attached. 

10. My biggest concern is implementing these strategies in an integrated fashion that will 
connect to these students' interests and needs. To do this, I plan to integrate many of the 
activities around the theme of self-concept, which is a major social studies focus in our 
kindergarten. As they learn about themselves and each other, I hope to introduce and 
weave cultural diversity into the ongoing curriculum. To do this, I hope to use the persona 
doll technique as described in the text. However, we have no funds to purchase dolls, so 
I have written an Innovative Classroom Practices Grant at our district level. If that is 
not funded, I will substitute multicultural puppets which I do have available. As I don't 
have enough knowledge yet to write my own stories, I am going to choose published books 
as a beginning point for my doll's stories. Then, as we learn about other cultures through 
our schoolwide project, we can add stories and/or information about our dolls' lives. I 
want to start small so we can be successful. This will be our starting cast of dolls: 

• Jamie (White European boy from Pumpkin Pumpkin by J. Titherington). He will be 
introduced during our study of fall. N 

• Rosa (Hispanic girl from Something Special for Me by Vera B. Williams). She will be 
introduced during our study of self-concept and our birthdays. 

• Ling Sung (Asian boy from Cleverstkka by Bernard Ashley). He will be introduced 
during our study of self-concept and a discussion of our individual strengths. 



11. 



• Peter (Black American boy from The Snowy Day by Ezra Jack Keats). He will be 
introduced during our study of winter. 

• Jamaica (Black American girl from Jamaica's Find by Juanita Havill). She will be 
introduced during our study of self-concept and friends. 

•Misty Dawn (American Tudian from Misty Dawn, published by St. Paul Public 

Schools). She will be introduced during our study of self-concept and our family. 
The main emphasis I have planned will be to learn about racial differences and 
similarities. My hope is that the dolls or puppets will give the students new ideas and 
information and also provide a meaningful framework for discussions to solve any 
discriminatory behavior that occurs. 

Finally, I would like to use the dolls to provide a connection for the students when we are 
exposed to cultural events and presentations during the school year. As we learn about 
foods around the world, we can make fry bread that Misty Dawn makes with her 
grandma, or breakfast tortillas (a favorite food of Rosa's), etc. Hopefully, this will make 
the experiences more real for these five and six year olds. 



12-8-93 entry 

As school started, I began to organize and teach the strategies I had planned during the 
summer. As I will be working on implementation all year, what I describe is only what has 
been achieved so far. 

Our school had decided to hava an alternative Halloween party this year and focus on 
our schoolwide multicultural theme. So in kindergarte- we celebrated with a color parade. 
Our theme was "Kindergartners like All Colors." We painted paper bag vests and stapled 
paper strip hats for our costumes. We included blacks and browns and tans along with all the 
other colors. We were animpressive sight. This activity served as anintroduction to our study 
of self concept and likenesses and differences. 

I have worked on activities 1-9 during our unit on self-concept and how we are alike and 
different. Instead of paint chips to depict skin colors, however, I purchased construction paper. 
Thisworkedmuchbetter. It is difficult for kindergarten children to match skin colors, but the 
bigger pieces made comparison easier. Also when they had chosen their skin color, we used 
it to make construction paper faces. We made a bulletin board of faces, and the variety of skin 
colors chosen led to a great discussion of how much skin colors can.vary. 

The persona dolls became the largest area of focus for our anti-bias study. My principal 
liked the proposal and made the decision to allocate funds for the project. So I ordered a set 
of 10 dolls, a boy and a girl of each: African-American, Asian, Hispanic, Native American, and 
European-American. Then I looked again for books which would match the physical 
appearance of the dolls I received. The dolls were introduced as new classroom friends who 
brought a story to share about themselves. These are the characters we have so far: 



Peter: 



African-American with a baby sister (Susie) and a mom and a dad 
booka-rfce Snowy Day and Peter's Chair by Ezra Jack Keats 



5 

• has a dog named Willie 

• lives in the city where there is snow 

• celebrates Kwanza 
Nicola: 

• Asian-American with a big sister (Angel) and a mom and dad 

• adopted and goes to kindergarten 

• book-Families are Different by Nina Pellegrini 

• has a dog named Buster 
Ling Sung: 

• Asian with a baby sister and a mom and dad 

• book-Cleversticks by Bernard Ashley 

• goes to school and tries to find what he does best (using chopsticks) 
Misty Dawn: 

• Native American with three brothers (Hayna, Kunu, and Dusty) 

• has a mom and a dad and a dog named Radar 

• book-Misty Dawn by St. Paul School District 

• goes to kindergarten in St. Paul 

• 6 years old 

• makes fry bread with her grandmother 
Olivia: 

• African-American with a mom and a dad 

c book-Rachel Elizabeth Parker, Kindergarten Showoff by Ann Martin 

• has a cat named Rosie and a friend named Rachel 

• goes to kindergarten 

• celebrates Kwanza 
Gilberto: 

• Hispanic 

• book-Gilberto and the Wind by Marie Hall Ets 

• plays with a friend-the wind 

These are the "friends" we have introduced so far. I had to make some adjustments 
because some of the dolls did not look like the characters I had originally planned. These dolls 
have been great so far, and as usual the children have extended my original ideas greatly. 
After we introduce the dolls, they become our new friends in the library center. They are 
treated as additional students in the classroom. The students read to them, play school with 
them, and make up garner to involve them. One of the most popular is a Duck, Duck, Gray 
Duck." The boys play with them just as much as the girls. They notice when a friend is absent 
(they visit other kindergarten classrooms) and are patiently waiting to be introduced to the 
last four friends. 

We used the dolls when we talked about physical likenesses and differences, partly 
because we don't have much diversity in our classroom, but also because it is less threatening 
to look at differences in dolls than in classmates. 1 know this through my own parenting 
experience. In first grade I remember vividly my Korean daughter telling me they had talked 
about colors of hair at school, and she was so embarrassed that the teacher pointed out she was 
the only one with black hair. 



6 

We have also started to use the dolls as connections for other events that happen in our 
schools. When the superintendent shared his slides from Central America, we talked about 
Gilberto and noted thathis grandparents lived in Central America. When the media specialist 
did a presentation about Kwanza, we included the fact that Olivia and Peter celebrated 
Kwanza too. Hopefully this will provide more meaning to the students. When we do our 
multicultural unit on food in April, we can learn about one food which each of our friends enjoy. 
Hopefully this will prevent overgeneralizing which can sometimes lead to new stereotypes 
(such as all Asians eat with chopsticks; Ling Sung does, but Nicola doesn't, etc.). We continue 
to emphasize that differences are good. It continues to be a San and exciting experience. And 
our theme will continue to be: "We're the same. We're different. That's what makes the world 
such fun. Many kinds of people, not just one!" (Sesame Street, 1992). 

Conclusion 

Marlene's story of growth and success is a reflection of many other primary-grade 
teachers who are trying to do a better job of incorporating anti-bias concepts into the 
curriculum in appropriate and meaningful ways. First grade teachers in Rochester who have 
incorporated the use of persona dolls for multicultural and handicap awareness curriculum 
report that children begin writing about the dolls in their journals and request to take them 
home for overnight visits. In the past several years, excellent resources have been published 
to help teachers develop strategies and locate materials which are multicultural, gender-fair, 
and handicap-aware. Some of these resources which teachers may find useful are described 
below: 

Anti-Bias Curriculum: Tools for Empowering Young Children (1989)by Louise Derman- 
Sparks and the ABC Task Force (National Association for Young Children, 1509 16th Street, 
Washington, DC, Phone: 1-800-424-2460). This book provides both underlying principles and 
methodology for implementing an anti-bias curriculum, which advocates social change so that 
the ultimate goal of developing every child to her or his greatest potential can be achieved. An 
excellent 30 minute video which gives an overview of what it means to teach with an anti-bias 
curriculum approachis also available (Pacific Oaks Bookstore, 6 Westmoreland PI., Pasadena, 
CA 91103, Phone: 818-397-1330). 

Including All of Us: An Early Childhood Curriculum About Disability (1984) by 
Froschl, Colon, Rubin, and Sprung of Project Inclusive is available from Gryphon House, Inc., 
3706 Otis Street, Mt. Ranier, MD 20712. This book, which was originally designed with 
children aged three to five in mind, can also be useful to teachers in the early elementary 
grades as it provides suggestions of activities, approaches, and resources to expand children's 
experiences to include "nonstereotyped images and role models of people of color and people 
with disabilities.'' Many of the activities and strategies suggested in the guide center around 
use of "New Friend" dolls. 

Multiethnic Children's Literature ( 1994) by Gonzalo Ramirez Jr. and Jan Lee Ramirez 
(Delmar Publishers Inc., 3 Columbia Circle, Box 16016, Albany, NY 12212-5015) was written 
to serve as a resource for educators "who wish to bring quality multiethnic Uterature to our 
children," The book provides grade level suggestions of literature for and about the four major 



nonwhite populations in America-Latinos, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Native 
Americans. Information about the history of multiethnic children's literature, guidelines for 
selecting appropriate multiethnic literature, and suggested activities to use with multiethnic 
literature are also provided in this useful text. 

Developing Roots and Wings: Affirming Culture in Early Childhood Programs (1991) 
by Stacey York (distributed by Gryphon House, Inc., 3706 Otis Street, Mt. Ranier, MD 207 12) 
provides suggestions to early childhood educators for providing classroom environments and 
activities that are responsive and sensitive to culture, gender, and handicaps. A trainer's 
guide (published in 1992) can be used with teachers to explore and expand their understand- 
ing of multicultural education. 

Valuing Diversity: The Primary Years (1993) by Janet Brown McCracken (NAEYC, 
1509 16th Street, Washington, DC 20036, Phone: 1-800-424-2460) was written specifically for 
primary-grade teachers. This brief, but thoughtful, book provides the essential information 
that teachers need for providing classroom environments, materials, and strategies which 
integrate and value human diversity. 

Some Anti-Bias Books for Consideration for Kindergarten 
Compiled by Marlene Thompson 
January 1994 

finiKl Ahn " f African Americana 

Amazing Grace by Mary Hoffman, 1991, Scholastic. 

Black Snowman by Phil Mendez, 1969, Scholastic. 

Bigmama's by Donald Crews, 1992, Greenwillow. 

Bright Eyes, Brown Skin by C. Hudson and B. Ford, 1992, Scholastic. 

Cherries and Cherry Pits by Vera B. Williams, 1986, Greenwillow. 

Corduroy by Don Freeman, 1968, Viking. 

Jamaica Tag Along by Juanita Havill, 1989, Houghton-Mifflin. 

Jamaica's Find by Juanita Havill, 1986, Greenwillow. 

Mary Had a Little Lamb by Sarah Josepha Hale, 1990, Scholastic. 

A New Dress for Maya by Malorie Blackman, 1992, Gareth Stevens Children's Books. 

Peter's Chair by Ezra Jack Keats, 1967, Harper & Row. 

Rachel Elizabeth Parker, Kindergarten Show-off by Ann Martin, 1992, Scholastic. 

The Snowy Day by Ezra Jack Keats, 1962, Viking. 

Ten, Nine, Eight by Molly Bang, 1983, Greenwillow. 

Wild Wild Sunflower Child Anna by Nancy Carlstrom, 1991, Scholastic. 

Booka About Asians 

Cleversticks by Bernard Ashley, 1991, Crown Publishers. 
Families are Different by Nina Pellegrini, 1991, Scholastic. 

Lion Dancer by Ernie Wan's Chinese New Year by Kate Waters and Madeline Slovenz-Low, 

1990, Scholastic. , 
Rise and Shine, Mariko-chan!, 1992, Scholastic. 
Umbrella by Tara Yashima, 1958, Viking Press, 



8 

fiooka About Hiapaaica 

A Chair for my Mother by Vera B. Williams, 1982, Greenwillow. 
Gilbertoand the Wind by Marie Hall Ets, 1963, Viking. 
Musk, Music for Everyone by Vera B. Williams, 1984, Greenwillow. 
Something Special for Me by Vera B. Williams, 1983, Greenwillow. 

Rr>ftk« About Native America nr Alaskan Eflkimoea 

Eskimo Boy-Life in an Inupiaq Eskimo Village by Russ Kendall, 1992, Scholastic. 
Mama, Do You Love Me? by Barbara M. Joosse, 1991, Scholastic. 
Misty Dawn, Grant # G007901081, St. Paul Public Schools. 
On Mother's Lap by Ann Herbert Scott, 1993, Scholastic. 
Powwow by Linda Coombs, 1992, Modern Cumculum Press. 

flooKa About Pewlft of All Colors 

Bread Bread Bread by Ann Morris, 1989, Lothrop, Lse and Shepard Books. 

Everybody Cooks Rice by Norah Dooley, 1991, Carolrhoda. 

Friends by Rachel Isadora, 1990, Greenwillow. 

Hats Hats Hats by Ann Morris, 1989, Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books. 

Here Are My Hands by Bill Martin Jr. and John Archambault, 1985, Henry Holt Publishing. 

I Am Freedom's Child by Bill Martin Jr., 1987, DLM Teaching Resources. 

People by Peter Spier, 1980, Doubleday. 

Potluck by Anne Shelby, 1991, Scott Foresman. 

We Are All Alike ...We Are All Different by Cheltenham Elementary School Kindergarten, 
1991, Scholastic. 

References 

Ashley, B. (1991). Cleversticks. New York: Crown Publishers. 

Derman-Sparks, L. & The ABC Task Force. (1989). Anti-bias curriculum: Tools for 
empowering young children. Washington, DC: National Association for Education of 
Young Children. 

Ets, M. H. (1963). Gilbertoand the wind. New York: Viking. 

Havill,J. (1986). Jamaica's find. New York: Greenwillow. 

Kates,B.J. (1992). We're different, we're the same. SesameStreet. New York: Random House. 
Keats', E. J. (1967). Peter's cZwir. New York: Harper & Row. 
Keats, E.J. (1962). The snowy day. New York: Viking. 

Martin, A. (1992). floc/wrf Elizabeth Parker, kindergarten show-off. New York: Scholastic. 

Pellegrini, N. (1991). Families are different. New York: Scholastic. 

St. Paul Public Schools. (1982). Misty dawn. St. Paul, MN: Multicultural Resource Center, 

St. Paul Public Schools. 
Titherington, J. (1990). Pumpkin pumpkin. New York: Scholastic. 
Williams, V.B. (1983). Something special for me. New York: Greenwillow. 



9 



9 



List nf Pub liaWa Addresses: 

' Carolrhoda, 241 1st Ave. N., Minneapolis, MN 55401 
Crown Publishers, 225 Park Ave. South, New York, NY 10003 
DLM Teaching Resources, PO Box 4000, One DLM Park, Allen, TX 75002 
Doubleday & Co., 245 Park Ave., New York, NY 10167 

Gareth Stevens Children's Books, 1555 North River Center Drive, Suite 201, Milwaukee, WI 
53212 

Greenwillow (Division of William Morrow), 105 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10016 
Harper & Row, 10 East 53rd St., New York, NY 10022 
Henry Holt Publishing, 115 W. 18th St., New York, NY 10011 
Houghton Mifflin, 1 Beacon St., Boston, MA 02108 

Lothrop, Lee & Shepard (Division of William Morrow), 105 Madison Ave., New York, NY 
10016 

Modern Curriculum Press, Division of Simon & Schuster, 13900 Prospect Road, Cleveland, 
OH 44136 

Scholastic, PO Box 7502, Jefferson City, MO 65102 
Scott Foresman, 1900 East Lake Ave., Glenvitw, IL 60025 

St. Paul Public Schools, M'tlticultural Resource Center, 1930 Como Ave., St. Paul, MN 55109 
Viking, 40 West 23rd St., New York, NY 10010 



About the Authors 

Janice Sherman is Associate Professor of Education at Winona State University- 
Rochester Center, in Rochester, MN. She collaborates closely with the Rochester public 
schools, having worked with over 200 teachers through her professional development 
course which meets in the schools. Recently she began similar work with the Elk River 
School District. 

Marlene Thompson is a kindergarten teacher in Rogers Elementary School, 
which is part of the Elk River school system. , _ 



INSIGHTS 

Center for Teaching and Learning 
University Of North Dakota 
PO BOX 7189 

Grand Forks, ND 58202-7189 



TO: 



SUBSCRIBE TO INSIGHTS 

INSIGHTS is published eight times during tha academic year by the Center for Teaching and Learning, 
University of North Dakota. 

Subscriptions are $7.00 per year payable by check or money order to INSIGHTS, Center for Teaching -nd 
Learning, University of North Dakota, PO BOX 7189, Grand Forks, ND 68202-7189. Editor - Sara Hanhan. 



11 



