DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 424 046 



RC 021 689 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Frazier, Patrick, Ed. 

Many Nations: A Library of Congress Resource Guide for the 
Study of Indian and Alaska Native Peoples of the United 
States . 

Library of Congress, Washington, DC. 

ISBN- 0-8444 -0904 -9 
1996-00-00 

3 5 7 p . ; Photographs and illustrations may not reproduce 
adequately . 

Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC 20402. 

Books (010) -- Guides - Non-Classroom (055) -- Reference 

Materials - Directories/Catalogs (132) 

MF01/PC15 Plus Postage. 

* Alaska Natives; American Indian Culture; * American Indian 
History; American Indian Languages; * American Indian 
Studies; * American Indians; Annotated Bibliographies; 

Federal Indian Relationship; ^Library Collections; *Resource 
Materials; Tribes; United States History 
^Library of Congress 



ABSTRACT 



The Library of Congress has a wealth of information on North 
American Indian people but does not have a separate collection or section 
devoted to them. The nature of the Library's broad subject divisions, variety 
of formats, and methods of acquisition have dispersed relevant material among 
a number of divisions. This guide aims to help the researcher to encounter 
Indian people through the Library's collections and to enhance the Library 
staff’s own ability to assist with that encounter. The guide is arranged by 
collections or divisions within the Library and focuses on American Indian 
and Alaska Native peoples within the United States. Each section includes an 
introductory description, information on using the collections and their 
reading room, and descriptions or annotations for selected books and 
collections. Sections include: (1) general collections (main reading room, 

catalogs and Internet access, children’s literature center, local history and 
genealogy reading room, periodicals, microform reading room, multimedia 
formats) ; (2) rare book and special collections division; (3) manuscript 

division (master record of manuscript collections, register, National Union 
Catalog of Manuscript Collections); (4) the Law Library of Congress; (5) 
Prints and Photographs Division; (6) Geography and Maps Division; (7) Motion 
Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Division; (8) Music Division and 
Recorded Sound Reference Center; and (9) American Folklife Center. In 
addition, the guide contains ’’gateways, " thematic summaries of major Indian 
subject areas in the collections. Includes an index and many photographs and 
illustrations. (SV) 



******************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document . * 

******************************************************************************** 



o 

ERIC 



pcQj-l Ggg^ ( 







MANY 

NATIONS 




LIBRARY 
□F CONCRE55 
RE5DURCE 
GUIDE 




Contributors 

Elizabeth B. Bazan, American Law Division, 
Congressional Research Service 

Thomas J. Blumer, Law Library of Congress 

Jennifer Brathovde, Prints and Photographs Division 

James A. Flatness, Geography and Map Division 

Patrick Frazier, Humanities and Social Sciences 
Division 

James W. Gilreath, Rare Book and Special 
Collections Division 

Judith Gray, American Folklife Center 

John R. Hebert, Hispanic Division . 

Jerry Kearns 

Karen Lund, Motion Picture, Broadcasting and 
Recorded Sound Division 

John J. McDonough, Jr., Manuscript Division 

Lee K. Miller 

Roger Walke, Government Division, Congressional 




Research Service 




MANY 

NATIONS 

A LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 
RESOURCE GUIDE FOR THE 
STUDY OF INDIAN AND 
ALASKA NATIVE PEOPLES 
OF THE UNITED STATES 

edited by PATRICK FRAZIER 
andthe PUBLISHING OFFICE 



LIBRARY OF CONGRESS Washington 1996 



00 The paper in this publication meets the requirements for permanence 
established by the American National Standard ansi/ NISO 23948-1992. 
Permanence of Paper for Publications and Documents 
in Libraries and Archives. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Library of Congress. 

Many nations : a Library of Congress resource guide for the study 
of Indian and Alaska Native Peoples of the United States / edited by 
Patrick Frazier and the Publishing Office. 

p. cm. — (Library of Congress resource guide) 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-8444-0904-9 (alk. paper) 

— Copy 3 2663 .M2 3 1996 

1. Indians of North America— Library resources — Washington (D.C.) 
2. Eskimos— Alaska— Library resources — Washington (D.C.) 3. Library 
of Congress. I. Frazier, Patrick. II. Library of Congress. 

Publishing Office. Ill . Title. IV. Series. 

Z1209.2.U3L33 1996 96-42303 

0i6.9y304'9y—dc20 CIP 



Designed by Adrianne Onderdonk Dudden 



For sale by the 

Superintendent of Documents 
U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 



ON THE TITLE PACE: 

Tawa (Sun) Kachina, drawing by the author for the Zuni story "The Foster Child of the Deer" from The Kachinas are Coming 
by Gene Meany Hodge (Flagstaff, Arizona: Northland Press, 1967); E99.P9H66 1967 (LC-USZC4-4801 ). General Collections. 



In Pueblo sacred rites, kachinas (or sacred personages) are represented by masked men. Pueblo children are instructed in the 
tribal religion through kachina effigies, or dolls, made by the men in the kivas, or ceremonial chambers, during breaks be- 
tween ceremonies. This kachina represents the Zuni Sun Priest. The illustrations for this book of Pueblo mythology were 
based on the kachina dolls in the collections of the Southwest Museum of Los Angeles 



6 



CONTENTS 



Foreword by James H. Billington x 
Preface by Patrick Frazier xii 
Acknowl edgmen ts x vi i 

Contributors xix 



General Collections 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 2 

INTRODUCTION 2 
USING THE COLLECTIONS 

MAIN READING ROOM 3 

The Catalogs 3 
Internet Access to LOCIS 6 

SELECTED BOOKS 7 
Bibliographies and Guides 7 
American Archaeology, Ethnology and 
History 1 0 

Political Affairs 1 6 
Language and Literature 1 6 

CHILDREN'S LITERATURE CENTER 1 8 

LOCAL HISTORY AND GENEALOGY 
READING ROOM 18 

SELECTED BOOKS 19 



PERIODICALS 1 9 

MICROFORM 21 

MICROFORM READING ROOM 22 

SELECTED COLLECTIONS 23 
Ethnology 23 
Government Relations 25 
Historical Research Collections 32 
Periodicals 33 
Reform Organizations 33 
Tribal Records 34 

MULTIMEDIA FORMATS 34 



>▼<>▼<> GATEWAYS AOTOAOTOAOf OAOTOAOTOAOTOf OAOTO 



PRE-CONTACT NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN LIFE 4/5 
FUR TRADE 14/15 

EUROPEAN COLONIAL ADMINISTRATION OF INDIAN RELATIONS 26/27 




C 



V 



CONTENTS 



Special Collections 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 36 



INTRODUCTION 36 
USING THE COLLECTIONS 38 



RARE BOOK READING ROOM 38 

Catalogs 38 
Special Collections 39 

SELECTED BOOKS AND COLLECTIONS 39 

Early Contact: Discoverers and Explorers 40 

Early Spanish Contact 40 
French and English Contact with East and South 
Coasts of North America 4 1 
Spanish Penetration of the Southwest 45 
French Contacts in the Upper Midwest 48 
Contacts on Northwest Coast 
and California 49 

IMAGE PORTFO 



Captivity Narratives 50 
Government Documents: 

Franklin Treaties 50 
Bible Collection 51 

Indian Portfolios : Prints and Photographs 5 1 

Nineteenth-Century Exploration and Travel in 
the American West: Documentary Popular, 
and Fictional Accounts 53 
Twentieth-Century Decorative Arts 54 



L I O 56 




MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 72 

INTRODUCTION 72 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 74 



MANUSCRIPT READING ROOM 74 

Master Record of Manuscript Collections 
Registers 75 

National Union Catalog of Manuscript 
Collections 75 



SELECTED COLLECTIONS 75 
75 Force Papers 76 

Schoolcraft Papers 80 

Presidential Papers 81 

Congress and Indian Policy 82 



>TOAOTOAO GATEWAYS AOTO AOTO AOTO AOTO AOTOAOVOA 




EARLY CONTACTS WITH EUROPEANS 42/43 
MISSIONS AND MISSIONARIES 46/47 

EVOLUTION OF FEDERAL INDIAN POLICY AND THE BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 78/79 

8 



CONTENTS 



v i i 



Federal Judiciary 86 

Secretaries of the Interior 86 
Indian Commissioners , Agents, 
and Traders 87 
Indian Wars 89 
Explorers and Adventurers 95 

j 1 I M A G 



European Colonial Administrations 96 
Missions and Missionaries 97 
Indian Languages 1 02 

Historians, Anthropologists, Ethnologists, and 
Other Students 102 



O 



o 



I o 



105 




THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 118 



INTRODUCTION 118 



USING THE COLLECTIONS 120 



LAW LIBRARY READING ROOM 1 20 

Catalogs 121 

Major Reference Works 1 2 1 

SELECTED RESOURCES 1 24 

LAW LIBRARY RARE BOOK 
COLLECTION 124 

Colonial and Early American Materials 1 24 
Great Britain, Acts of Parliament 1 25 
Indian Territory 1 25 
Twentieth-Century Tribal Constitutions and 
Corporate Charters 1 25 



IMAGE 



LAW LIBRARY GENERAL 
COLLECTIONS 126 

Treaties 126 

Colonial and Early American Materials 
Federal Documents 1 27 

Legislative Branch Materials 1 27 
Executive Branch Materials 1 3 1 
Judicial Branch Materials 1 32 
State Documents 1 32 
Tribal Documents 133 

International Materials 1 34 



PORTFOLIO 136 



127 






LAW 

6r 6* INK 10ITANTS « 

f URiSDlCti O 

New-PIimoi 

UcVtd <mef tb* RECQRD 
GENERAL CO UR 



i mi Mt'mm CUti'mi m 



YOYO GATEWAYS AOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOYOAOYO 




CONGRESS AND INDIAN POLICY 84/85 

WARFARE 92/93 

INDIAN LANGUAGES AND TRIBAL NAMES 1 00/1 01 
AMERICAN INDIAN TREATIES 1 22/1 23 
TRIBAL AND URBAN INDIAN GOVERNANCE TODAY 

o 



1 28/1 29 

s 



CONTENTS 



v i i i 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 144 



INTRODUCTION 144 
USING THE COLLECTIONS 146 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS READING 
ROOM 1 46 

LOTS 146 



Browsing Files 1 47 
Major Reference Works 1 47 

SELECTED COLLECTIONS 1 50 




Indian Delegations and Government 
Relations 150 

Federal Government Surveys and Other 
Expeditions 1 52 

IMAGE p o r t f o 



Indian Wars and Confrontations 1 54 
The Frontier % Villages , and Reservation 
Life 155 
Education 161 

Expositions , World's Fairs , and Wild West 
Shows 161 

Pictorialist Photographs 1 66 
Allegories Satires , Stereotypes and Polemical 
Representations 1 68 



O 171 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 1 86 



INTRODUCTION 186 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 

GEOGRAPHY AND MAP 
READING ROOM 187 

MARC Maps Collection 1 87 
Uncataloged/Titled Collection 1 88 
Atlas Collection 1 88 

Vault Collection 1 88 



SELECTED COLLECTIONS 1 88 
General Reference and Bibliographic 
Resources 1 89 

Indian Maps , Mapping , and Geographic 
Knowledge 1 9 1 



OTOAOTOAO GATEWAYS AOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOA 

MODERN INDIAN ACTIVISM AND SELF-DETERMINATION 1 48/1 49 
RESERVATIONS, AGENTS, AND ALLOTMENTS 1 56/1 57 
NON-INDIAN IMAGES OF NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS 1 64/1 65 



0 



CONTENTS 



x 



Indian Lands , Village Sites , Tribal Range , 

Place Names, and Communication 
Routes 192 

Treaty Boundaries and Cessions 1 97 
Indian Territory 1 99 
Reservations and Allotments 202 

I 1 IMAGE 



Indian Wars 206 

Ethnography ; Linguistics , Distribution , and 
Archaeology 208 

Historical Maps 2 1 0 

Natural Resources 21 1 



PORTFOLIO 213 




MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND 
RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 224 

INTRODUCTION 224 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 225 

MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION READING 
ROOM 225 

Major Reference Works 226 

SELECTED FILMS, TELEVISION, AND 
DOCUMENTARY VIDEOS 227 

I ' I M A G 



Silent Films: Non-Fiction 227 
Silent Films: Fiction 231 

Sound Feature Films 234 

Television Programs 243 

Documentaries 244 



P O R T F O L 



O 



253 




OTO GATEWAYS AOYOAOYO AOYO AOYOAOYO AOYOYO AOYO 

INDIAN REMOVAL ACROSS THE MISSISSIPPI 1 94/1 95 
AMERICAN INDIAN LAND AND OTHER CLAIMS 204/205 
PRE-CONTACT INDIAN ECONOMIES AND TECHNOLOGY 228/229 

INDIAN POLICY REFORM (THE "INDIAN NEW DEAL");ANDTHETERMINATION ERA 236/237 
INDIAN ART, CRAFT, AND DESIGN TODAY 246/247 



X 



CONTENTS 



MUSIC DIVISION and Recorded Sound Reference Center of 
MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED 
SOUND DIVISION 262 



INTRODUCTION 262 
USING THE COLLECTIONS 263 



-A- ^ — 




-i _ * tJLi] 


1 

P 



5*. lot* 

r^CS-2 j^jrrv 



PERFORMING ARTS READING ROOM 

MUSIC DIVISION 263 
Catalogs 264 

SELECTED COLLECTIONS 264 
Frances Densmore Collection 264 
Natalie Curtis Burlin Collection 265 

IMAGE portf 



263 



o 



Miscellaneous Manuscript Collections 265 

The Dayton C. Miller Flute Collection 265 

RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER OF 
MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND 
RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 268 



O 271 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 276 

INTRODUCTION 276 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 277 



FOLKLIFE READING ROOM 277 

SELECTED COLLECTIONS 278 




Collections from the American Philosophical 
Society Library 278 

The Laura Bolton Collections 278 
Collections from the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (BAE) 278 
Indians for Indians Hour Collection 279 
Collections from the Peabody Museum of 
Harvard University 279 

IMAGE PORTFOL 



INDEX 



The Willard Rhodes Collections 279 
The Helen Heffron Roberts Collections 282 
Collections from the School of American 
Research 282 

Collections from the Mary C. Wheelwright 
Museum 282 

Zuni Storytelling Collections 282 

AMERICAN INDIAN 

RECORDINGS 282-298 



O 299 



>YOAOYOAO GATEWAYS 



AOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOYOAO 




SONGS AND DANCES 266/267 
TRADITIONAL INDIAN SPIRITUALITY 280/281 




FOREWORD 



When I became Librarian of Congress in 1987, I 
suggested that special guides be created to de- 
scribe the Library's resources in major subject 
categories. The purpose was to connect related 
materials across different administrative divi- 
sions and formats and thus encourage broader 
public use of these invaluable collections. 

Many Nations is the fourth such "resource 
guide" to Library of Congress holdings. Respond- 
ing to increasing public interest in various aspects 
of America's heritage, the Library began a proj- 
ect to identify and describe the Library's vast col- 
lections related to American Indians and Alaska 
Natives some years ago. Many Nations was pre- 
ceded by a guide to the Library's materials re- 
lating to black history and culture, The African- 



O 




American Mosaic. Like its predecessor, this publi- 
cation was compiled by a team of Library staff 
members, the people who work with the collec- 
tions on a daily basis, including librarians, refer- 
ence and curatorial specialists, historians, ana- 
lysts, and editors. 

We hope that this attempt to describe our col- 
lections related to the rich and diverse Native 
American experience, from earliest accounts to 
the present day, will help make our resources 
more accessible for researchers and the general 
public — and may provide new perspectives in a 
rapidly growing area of study. 

James H. Billington 
Librarian of Congress 





Raven, woodcut by John Frazer Mills, illustrating "The Wild Woman of the Woods" in Once Upon A Totem by Christie Harris 
(New York: Atheneum, 1 963); E98.629 (LC-USZ62-1 1 5664). General Collections. 



This story ; from a book featuring the mythology of Northwest Coast peoples ; stars raven , one of the emblems or totems of 
their legendary history. Raven leads a spirit boy to rescue children who had been captured and taken to her lair in the forest 
by Tezlemogk, an ugly ogress. Tricking the ogress with appeals to her vanity the boy plucks the children from a salmon rack, 
where they have been hung to smoke, and sets them on the backs of friendly bears for the ride back to their village. 




INTRODUCTION TO 
AMERICAN INDIAN 
RESEARCH AT THE 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



o 

LKIC 



The serious researcher who is in the beginning 
stages of lengthy research on American Indian 
topics, and who has ample time to devote to such 
a project, would do well to make the Library of 
Congress a base from which to explore. For some 
projects, the Library's prodigious collections in a 
wide variety of formats may obviate the need to 
leave the base. Thousands of books contain in- 
formation on North American Indians. The Li- 
brary also holds what is probably the largest 
collection of manuscripts relating to American 
history — of which America's Indian people were 
an integral part — as well as extensive holdings 
of prints, photographs, broadsides, posters, gov- 
ernment documents, laws and legal materials, 
films, videos, television programs, and sound 
recordings. If the Library does not have the ma- 
terial one needs, it likely has the resources to re- 
veal where that material is. Further, the Library 
is only a short distance from three other ma- 
jor repositories of information regarding Amer- 
ican Indian people, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
the Smithsonian's National Anthropological Ar- 
chives, and the National Archives and Records 
Administration. 

The size and complexity of the Library, how- 
ever, dictate that a researcher's time will be most 
efficiently used, especially where travel is in- 
volved, by exhausting all of one's local and 
regional institutional resources to identify re- 
search guides, bibliographies, and catalogs that 
include Library of Congress holdings. 

Library of Congress resources are formidable, 
and many have remained hitherto undiscovered, 
but its collections are not comprehensive (con- 
trary to a long-held misconception, the Library 
of Congress does not have everything ever pub- 
lished). For example, the Library's collections 
are not significantly strong in linguistics, locally 
and tribally produced materials, or textbooks be- 
low college level. Other institutions, such as 
the Smithsonian Institution, the Newberry Li- 
brary, the Library of the American Philosophical 




INTRODUCTION 



Society, and the Huntington Library may have 
more concentrated and readily identifiable man- 
uscript collections associated with Indian lan- 
guage, art, archaeology, or regional history. Nor 
is the Library the largest holder of Indian im- 
ages, a distinction that the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion's National Anthropological Archives proba- 
bly holds. And the National Archives and 
Records Administration holds the official docu- 
ments of the United States government relating 
to American Indian affairs. 

Despite its own prodigious research collec- 
tions and wealth of information on North Amer- 
ican Indian people, the Library does not have a 
separate collection or section devoted to them. 
The nature of its broad subject divisions, the va- 
riety of formats, and the methods of acquisition 
have dispersed relevant material among a num- 
ber of divisions. Those of the staff who deal with 
North American Indian topics within their gen- 
eral public service duties have frequently had to 
rely on one another to determine what may exist 
for research in various areas. The public, there- 
fore, has not had an overall guide to the re- 
sources available for American Indian research 
in the Library. The purpose of this guide, then, is 
to facilitate the researcher's ability to encounter 
Indian people through the Library's collections 
and to enhance the Library staff's own ability to 
assist with that encounter. 

Of several possible approaches to organizing 
the material for the guide, it was decided by the 
contributors and the editorial staff that an 
arrangement by the sections, divisions, and de- 
partments within the Library was the most fea- 
sible. It was further decided, given the Library's 
concentration on collections relating to United 
States history, that the guide would focus on 
North American Indians, excluding Mexico and 
Canada. The user should understand, however, 
that neither Indian groups nor collections of Li- 
brary materials relating to them were necessar- 



ily confined by borders. Thus one may find 
mention of both Canadian and Mexican tribes 
within these pages. 

The Library patron, nevertheless, may still be 
perplexed by the overlap and redundancy of 
resources throughout the Library. The circum- 
stances by which the Library acquires mate- 
rials — copyright, gift, or purchase— and the 
departmentalization of the acquisitions unavoid- 
ably help create the confusion. A natural suppo- 
sition, for example, is that individual prints and 
photographs will be found in the Prints and 
Photographs Division. Yet the American Folklife 
Center may hold a collection of photographs ac- 
companying a group of American Indian record- 
ings, or the Center's staff themselves may take 
photographs in conjunction with their own field- 
work. A collection of an individual's papers, also 
accompanied by photographs, may be acquired 
by the Manuscript Division, or a bound portfolio 
of prints may be retained by the Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division. Prints or photo- 
graphs accompanying commercial music record- 
ings will stay in the Music Division, a microfiche 
reproduction of photographs can be found in the 
Microform Reading Room, and electronically re- 
produced images may be located in various loca- 
tions in the Library. And, of course, general 
books containing collections of prints and pho- 
tographs will be located in the general book 
stacks. To give a sense of the diversity of sub- 
jects and formats to be found within each special 
collection division, and of their chronological 
spread, these chapters are each followed by a 
portfolio of images. Negative numbers are given 
in most cases. Page numbers for portfolio and 
other illustrations can be found in bold in the in- 
dex under collection or item titles and appropri- 
ate subjects. 

The nature of the relationship between Ameri- 
can Indian people, the government, and the rest 
of America throughout its history has added to 



INTRODUCTION 



x v 



the complexity. The United States has dealt with 
Indian tribes as separate nations, as wards of 
the government, and as special citizens. Indian 
people have been studied in anthropology, ar- 
chaeology, art, ethnology, law, literature, medi- 
cine, religion, and war. They are U.S. citizens, 
and yet they are members of tribal political units 
that have separate legal identities. It has not al- 
ways been easy to classify information on these 
varied topics for a people whose status with 
the government and with the rest of society has 
so often been in flux. To help the researcher 
work though this maze of possibilities, the com- 
pilers have attempted insofar as possible to iden- 
tify specific tribes or at least geographic ranges 
within collections. The user, therefore, should 
freely consult the index as a guide through 
the maze. 



To further aid researchers, thematic sum- 
maries (which we have called Gateways) discuss 
some of the principal subject areas featured in 
the Library's collections, and can be used as the- 
matic entry points to the Library divisions that 
hold relevant material. Page numbers for these 
gateways are listed in the Table of Contents. 
Space constraints have required that these sum- 
maries be kept brief; their length does not indi- 
cate an insensitivity to the great complexity of 
these subjects, each of which justifies a multi- 
volume work of reference in its own right. They 
are intended as aide-memoires and guideposts to 
researchers embarking on journeys of discovery 
across the Library's collections divisions. 



Patrick Frazier 



All-night dancing at Crow Fair, Crow Agency, Montana, August 1979. Photograph by Michael Crummett, Montana Project: 
MT9-MC24-10. American Folklife Center. 



During a week of parades, giveaways , powwow dancing , feasting , and rodeo , the Crow renew social and kinship ties each 
August at the Crow Fair on their reservation near the Little Big Horn River in south central Montana. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



Creation of this resource guide was a complex 
undertaking, eventually spanning six years and 
involving a number of people beyond the pri- 
mary contributors who, together, are the authors 
of this book. The assistance, advice, and ideas 
provided by these individuals enriched the 
guide, increasing its value to researchers and its 
appeal to general readers. Those of us on the List 
of Contributors who researched and wrote text 
for this publication thus wish to acknowledge 
and express our thanks to the following people 
for their assistance. 

In the Publishing Office, Margaret E. Wagner 
started the process, assembled and organized 
the original contributors (Thomas Blumer, James 
Flatness, Patrick Frazier, Judith Gray, Jerry 
Kearns, and Lee Miller), and established a basic 
format with the editorial team. Sara Day, who 
took over coordination of the project as the Pub- 
lishing Office editor, enhanced the guide's scope 
and presentation and encouraged more partici- 
pants who helped unearth and describe addi- 
tional material and write the Gateway sum- 
maries. Dr. Frederick E. Hoxie, former director 
of the D'Arcy McNickle Center for the History of 
the American Indian at the Newberry Library in 
Chicago, and now the Newberry's Vice President 
of Research and Education, reviewed the content 
and structure of the guide at the request of the 
Publishing Office, providing written suggestions 
which further helped the editors and contribu- 
tors to strengthen its value to researchers. 

Stephen James, chief of the Humanities and 
Social Sciences Division, deserves thanks for his 
patience and cooperation in allowing the editor 
generous time away from his regular duties to 
work on the guide.Thanks go to reference spe- 
cialist Margaret N. Coughlan in the Children's 
Literature Center, and her chief, Sybille A. Ja- 
gusch, for their input to the children's literature 
portion of the guide. And thanks are due as well 
to Lyle Minter, head of the Government Publica- 

O 




tions and Periodicals Section in the Serial and 
Government Publications Division, and to the 
head of the Newspaper Section, Frank Carroll, 
who reviewed the periodical text for accuracy. 

In Rare Book and Special Collections Division, 
curator Rosemary Fry Plakas patiently accompa- 
nied researchers in the Rare Book stacks and 
made helpful suggestions. Clark W. Evans, refer- 
ence specialist, frequently answered the call for 
books that were needed for reproducing images. 

James H. Hutson, chief of the Manuscript Di- 
vision, allowed participation by his staff, includ- 
ing assistant chief David Wigdor; early Ameri- 
can history specialist Gerard W. Gawalt; Civil 
War and Reconstruction specialist John R. Sell- 
ers; and twentieth-century political history spe- 
cialist John E. Haynes. Especially helpful were 
Michael Klein, Manuscript reference librarian, 
who did considerable work on an early version 
of the Manuscript portion, and Mary Wolfskill, 
head of the Reference and Reader Section, who 
guided us innumerable times. Jennifer Manning 
of the Congressional Reference Division of the 
Congressional Research Service, who is of Ar- 
kansas Cherokee heritage, also deserves credit 
for constructively reviewing drafts of this and 
other sections. 

In the Law Library, legal research specialists 
Jim Martin and David Rabasca aided in track- 
ing down elusive bibliographic information. Re- 
search here was further aided by Susan E. Wat- 
kins, senior legal reference specialist, and Thomas 
Dan Burney, former rare book librarian. Outside 
of the Library, thanks go to attorney Don B. 
Miller of the Native American Rights Fund; at- 
torney Judy A. Learning; and Fred E. Sanders, 
assistant chief of the Catawba Nation in South 
Carolina. 

In the Prints and Photographs Division, 
Bernard F. Reilly, Jr., head. Curatorial Section, 
critiqued various drafts of the division's text, 
suggested illustrations, and reviewed captions. 

19 



* 1 



X V 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



Harry L. Katz, curator. Popular and Applied 
Graphic Arts, wrote captions for several illustra- 
tions. The division's chief, Stephen Ostrow, and 
the head of its Reference Section, Mary Ison, 
also cooperated in furthering progress. Cata- 
loged Arden Alexander, Sarah D. Rouse, and 
Woody Woodis assigned negative numbers and 
checked catalogue data for most of the guide's 
illustrations. 

Ralph Ehrenberg, chief of the Geography and 
Map Division, and Gary Fitzpatrick, geographic 
information systems specialist, read and com- 
mented on various stages of that section's drafts. 
In the Motion Picture, Broadcasting and Re- 
corded Sound Division, reference librarian Rose- 
mary Hanes and former head of the Documen- 
tation and Reference Center Patrick Sheehan 
suggested film titles, located various illustra- 
tions, and proofread various drafts of the MBRS 
chapter. Thanks also go to Samuel Brylawski and 



Edwin M. Matthias, reference specialists in the 
Recorded Sound Reference Center, for suggest- 
ing record titles and illustrations, and for read- 
ing drafts. 

In the Music Division, gratitude goes to acting 
chief Jon Newsom; donor relations officer Eliza- 
beth Auman; and curator of the Miller Flute Col- 
lection Robert Sheldon. Wayne Shirley, music 
specialist, read the Music section's text and made 
additional suggestions. Vicky Wulff, dance spe- 
cialist in the Performing Arts Library Section, 
also read and made suggestions on all texts re- 
ferring to dance. 

In the American Folklife Center, Joseph C. 
Hickerson, head of acquisitions, and the late 
Gerald E. Parsons, head of reference, gave valu- 
able assistance. Thanks go also to Ives Goddard 
of the Smithsonian Institution's Handbook of 
North American Indians Project. 



o 

ERJC 



20 






CONTRIBUTORS 



ELIZABETH B. BAZAN earned a B. A. with high 
honors in anthropology from College of William 
and Mary (1974) and a J.D. from University of 
Maryland School of Law (1977). She was Law 
Clerk to Judge R. Dorsey Watkins, U.S. District 
Court for the District of Maryland (1977-79). A 
legislative attorney with the American Law Divi- 
sion of the Congressional Research Service since 
1980, American Indian law is one of her many 
areas of expertise. She was a panelist on fraction- 
ated heirship lands, Annual Indian Law Confer- 
ence, Fort Worth, Texas, held by the Indian Law 
Section of the Federal Bar Association; she has 
been a member of the FBA National Council 
since 1993. 

THOMAS J. BLUMER, senior editor, Law Li- 
brary of Congress, earned his doctorate in En- 
glish from the University of South Carolina and 
is a recognized expert and consultant on South- 
eastern American Indian history and culture, 
with a particular emphasis on the Catawba Indi- 
ans of South Carolina. He is the author of more 
than one hundred articles, the Bibliography of the 
Catawba (Scarecrow Press, 1987), and is working 
on a book-length study of the Catawba pottery 
tradition. He works directly for the Catawba In- 
dian Tribal Council and is a frequent lecturer for 
museums and historical societies. 

JENNIFER BRATHOVDE, reference specialist 
for Native American and western history materi- 
als in the Prints and Photographs Division, 
earned her masters degree in library science 
from the University of Washington, Seattle. Be- 
fore coming to the Library in 1991, she received 
fellowships from the Newberry Library's D'Arcy 
McNickle Center for the History of the American 
Indian in Chicago and the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion's National Anthropological Archives to 
develop guides for resource material related 
to American Indians at those institutions. An 
enrolled member of the Devil's Lake Sioux 

o 




Tribe in North Dakota, Brathovde is of Sisseton- 
Wahpeton ancestry. 

JAMES A. FLATNESS has worked in the Li- 
brary's Geography and Map Division for twenty- 
two years, initially as a reference librarian and 
more recently as the head of the division's Acqui- 
sitions Unit. 

PATRICK FRAZIER, editor of this guide, is ref- 
erence specialist in North American Indians in 
the Humanities and Social Sciences Division. He 
is the author of The Mohicans of Stockbridge (Uni- 
versity of Nebraska Press, 1992) and Portrait In- 
dex of North American btdians in Published Collec- 
tions (Library of Congress, 1992). 

JAMES GILREATH is American history special- 
ist in the Rare Book and Special Collections Divi- 
sion. His publications include Thomas Jefferson's 
Library (1989), and the introductions to the rare 
facsimile edition of Catlins North American Indian 
Portfolio (Abbeville and the Library of Congress, 
C1989) and the Tiny Folios book The North Ameri- 
can Indian Portfolios from the Library of Congress 
(Abbeville, C1993). 

JUDITH GRAY, head of reference services for 
the American Folklife Center, is an ethnomusi- 
cologist who came to the Center in 1983 to work 
on the Federal Cylinder Project, She has cata- 
loged and helped disseminate copies of the wax 
cylinder recordings made between 1890 and 
1942 that document Native American songs and 
narratives. She regularly consults with individu- 
als and tribal communities on aspects of cultural 
preservation. 

JOHN R. HEBERT, senior specialist in Hispanic 
bibliography (Hispanic Division), assistant chief, 
Hispanic Division (1976-93), and the coordina- 
tor (1989-93) of the Library of Congress's five- 
year program 1492-1992: An Ongoing Voyage 




X X 



CONTRIBUTORS 



established to commemorate the Columbian 
Quincentenary, earned his doctorate in Latin 
American history at Georgetown University 
(1972). He has written extensively on eighteenth- 
century Spanish presence in the U.S. (the Span- 
ish borderlands), historical cartography, and 
Latin American bibliography. Dr. Hebert curated 
the 1992-93 exhibition An Ongoing Voyage: 
1492-1992 and the traveling exhibition In Their 
Own Voices , which focussed on the use of Ameri- 
can Indian language documents. 

JERRY KEARNS is the former reference special- 
ist for Native American and western history ma- 
terials in the Prints and Photographs Division. 

KAREN C. LUND of the Motion Picture, Broad- 
casting and Recorded Sound Division, has an 
M.A. in Cinema Studies and a certificate in Mu- 
seum Studies from New York University. She 
compiled the guides American Indians in Silent 
Film: Motion Pictures in the Library of Congress 
(1992) and A Selected Guide to Sound Feature Films 
and Television Programs with American Indian Con- 
tent at the Library of Congress (1995) 

JOHN J. McDONOUGH of the Library's Manu- 
script Division specializes in the history of the 



nineteenth century's antebellum period. He is 
the compiler of Members of Congress: A Checklist of 
Their Papers in the Manuscript Division , Library of 
Congress (1980) and co-editor of Witness to the 
Young Republic: the Journal of Benjamin Brown 
French , 1828 -i8yo (University Press of New En- 
gland, 1989). 

LEE MILLER, an ethnohistorian and screen- 
writer, is of Eastern Cherokee and Kaw heritage. 
She has an M.A. in anthropology from Johns 
Hopkins University. From 1989 to 1991 she 
served as a consultant for the Library of Con- 
gress's Columbus Quincentenary Program, An 
Ongoing Voyage, while also working on this 
guide. Ms. Miller was writer and head of re- 
search for 500 Nations, the CBS television series, 
and is founder and CEO of the Native Learning 
Foundation, which seeks to establish culture and 
language immersion schools on Indian reserva- 
tions. 

ROGER WALKE is Analyst in American Indian 
Policy in the Congressional Research Service, Li- 
brary of Congress. He is the compiler of the 1991 
edition of Federal Programs of Assistance to Native 
Americans and holds an M.A. in anthropology 
from the University of Oregon (1975). 



22 



GENERAL 

COLLECTIONS 



Cherokee Phoenix, New Echota, Georgia, April 10, 1828 
(LC-USZ62-1 1 5659). Serial and Government Publications 
Division 



Elias Boudinot, a Cherokee schoolteacher and missionary, 
began putting out the first Indian newspaper, the Cherokee 
Phoenix; in 1828 in New Echota, Georgia. Printed in En- 
glish and Cherokee, the four-page newspaper published 
Cherokee laws and described persistent alcoholism and 
other problems. In his first issue , Boudinot called for a time 
when "all the Indian tribes of America shall rise, Phoenix- 
like, from their ashes, and when terms like 'Indian depreda- 
tions/ 'war whoops,' 'scalping knife,' and the like shall be- 
come obsolete and forever buried 'under deep ground.'" 
The paper closed after Boudinot refused to keep reports of 
divisions within the tribe over moving west to Indian Terri- 
tory out of the paper. 

o 



ERIC 




INTRODUCTION 



GENERAL 

COLLECTIONS 




For those who are initiating their research on 
American Indians in the Library of Congress, the 
general collections provide the best introduc- 
tion. Their vastness, range, and accessibility can 
often completely answer a researcher's needs. 
Reprint publishing and the publishing of many 
manuscript and archival collections may obviate 
the need to consult special materials in other 
Library divisions or in other institutions where 
location and hours of access may make study 
difficult. Even if an answer to a research question 
lay outside the Library of Congress, part of these 
collections will reveal what is available else- 
where. Scholarly secondary works and bibli- 
ographies may also save time for a researcher 
either by adequately covering the subject being 
explored or by pointing to other resources. 

Since the late nineteenth century the Library 
of Congress has been the depository for materi- 
als copyrighted in the United States. This process 
has been the major contributor to the Library's 
reputation as the largest holder of reference 
materials in the world. Additional acquisitions 
through purchase, gift, and exchange have 
brought the current total of volumes in the gen- 
eral collections to 16 million. In the classification 
span E51-E99, which contains the heaviest con- 
centration of general works on North American 
Indian topics, there are approximately twenty 
thousand volumes. In addition, relevant bibli- 
ographies and Indian-related material in other 
general works and microforms swell these num- 
bers considerably. And, of course, the numbers 
continue to grow. 

Further, as the nation's library, the Library of 
Congress is naturally a main repository of infor- 
mation regarding the history and development 
of America. Since our indigenous peoples were 
an integral part of this country's history and de- 
velopment, and even predate it, the general col- 
lections have many resources to tell the Ameri- 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



3 



can Indian story. In contemplating whether or 
not the Library of Congress has a particular 
book, therefore, it is probably safer to assume 
that it has, than that it has not. 

The size and the physical layout of the Li- 
brary's general collections, however, demand 
that, for serious study, researchers either be pre- 
pared to request specific materials or be able 
to spend considerable time discovering them. 
Whatever one's approach, the first contact a re- 
searcher should make is with a reference special- 
ist in the Humanities and Social Sciences Divi- 
sion. These specialists are best equipped to help 
researchers navigate the sometimes -labyrinthine 
complexity of the collections through the numer- 
ous print and electronic passages. 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 

MAIN READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Jefferson Building, 1st floor, Room LJ 
100; telephone (202) 707-5522 

HOURS: Monday, Wednesday and Thursday 8:30 
A.M. to 9:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Friday and Saturday, 8:30 
A.M. to 5:00 P.M. 

ACCESS AND USE: No appointments necessary. The 
Library's bookstacks are closed to the public. Books 
and bound periodicals must be brought to the read- 
ing room (allow enough time for this procedure). 
Readers must also show a Library of Congress I.D. 
To obtain this user I.D. with photograph — valid for 
two years and now required in all public reading 
rooms — first time readers should apply to the reader 
registration station. Room G22, Jefferson Building. 

INFORMATIONAL PUBLICATIONS: Information for 
Researchers Using the Library of Congress; Doing 
Research at the Library of Congress: A Guide to Sub- 
ject Searching in a Closed Stacks Library by Thomas 
Mann, free booklets available by writing to: Library 
of Congress, National Reference Service, Washing- 
ton, D.C. 20540. 

The gateway to the general collections is the 
Main Reading Room. With approximately 70,000 



0 




reference volumes around its perimeter, on-line 
and CD-ROM reference sources, card and com- 
puter catalogs, and a staff of professional refer- 
ence specialists, this reading room is the major 
entry point to Indian-related research. 

The Catalogs 

The key to the book collections is familiarity 
with the Library's subject headings and their var- 
ious subdivisions used to narrow a given topic. 
That familiarity is gained through studying the 
compilation Library of Congress Subject Headings, 
currently a four-volume work that is usually 
available in large libraries. For study of Indians 
in general the heading "Indians of North Amer- 
ica" exists for nearly all books dealing with 
Indians north of Mexico. Subdivisions cover 
particular aspects topically or geographically — 
"Art," "Biography," "Canada," "Great Plains," 
"Treaties," etc. One may also search directly un- 
der a tribal name, and similar subdivisions will 
apply, e.g. "Apache Indians — Basket making" or 
"Mohave Indians — Medicine." Anthropological, 
archaeological, and ethnological groupings also 
appear, such as "Clovis culture," "Mound- 
builders," and "Woodland Indians." Further, a 
major branch of a given group may have its own 
heading, so that it is possible to search, for ex- 
ample, under Jicarilla Indians or Santee Indians. 
In short, if one has a specific subject in mind, it is 
best to search for it directly. 

The transition from the card catalog to the 
computer catalog has created new advantages, 
and in some cases, new problems for American 
Indian-related topics. At present, the computer 
catalog is best used for publications cataloged 
since 1968, though older materials may be 
searched in a file that is undergoing biblio- 
graphic improvement. This file currently con- 
tains outdated subject terms, however, and may 
give a false impression of the amount of works 
available on a given topic. For assured coverage 




PRE-CONTACT NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN LIFE 

\0?0A0T0A0f0A0f0A0?0A0T0A0?0AC>?0A0?0A0T0A0f0A0f0A0?0A< 

rOAOfOAOTOAO?OAOTOAO?OAO?OAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOT< 

GATEWAYS 



At the time of European contact, "the Americas 
were inhabited by a complex mosaic of human 
societies, with an incredible diversity of lan- 
guages, customs, and life-styles," according to an- 
thropologists John Verano and Douglas Ubelaker. 
Native American cultures, evolving and interact- 
ing throughout their long existence on the conti- 
nent, were ancient. Exactly how ancient no one 
knows for sure: Indian nations' origin stories often 
say they have always existed here, while most ar- 
chaeologists agree that humans have been in 
North America for at least 12,000 years and prob- 
ably longer, but disagree over how much longer 
they may have been here. 

Native Americans were numerous and popu- 
lated every part of North America. Most estimates 
of Native American population north of the Rio 
Grande, at the time of contact, fall in the range of 
2-5 million people (the high estimate is 18 mil- 
lion and the low is 0.9 million). 

Native American cultures covered a large 
range of political organization, from bands and 
tribes to chiefdoms and perhaps states. The de- 
gree of social stratification varied from egalitarian 
to genuine social classes. Some Native American 
groups, like the Inuit, were egalitarian, while 
others, like the Pacific Northwest Coast tribes, the 
Chumash of California, or the mound-builders of 
the Mississippi,’ had chiefs, commoners, and in 
some cases slaves. 

In addition, there were hundreds of religions 
in North America. They varied from the individu- 
alistic vision-quest-oriented religions of the Great 
Plains, to the complex masked-dance rituals of 
the Pueblos, to the apparently temple-based 
religions of the mound-building Mississippian 
cultures. 

In the area of kinship and marriage, Native 
American cultures exhibited as wide a variety 
of marriage customs, post-marriage residence, re- 
lations with in-laws, and family structures as can 



be found in the rest of the world. Their kinship 
structures (lineages, clans, etc.), forms of descent 
(patrilineal, matrilineal, or bilateral), kinship ter- 
minology systems, and life-cycle rituals (at birth, 
puberty, and death) were more various than those 
of contact-era Europe. 

Students of culture have often made use of 
the concept of the "culture area," defined as a 
geographical area within which cultures are 
significantly similar to each other and dissimilar 
to the cultures of other such areas. In North 
America, the culture areas frequently distin- 
guished include the Arctic, Sub-Arctic, Northwest 
Coast, Plateau, Great Basin, California, South- 
west, the Plains, and the Eastern Woodlands (of- 
ten divided into two culture areas, the Northeast 
and the Southeast). 

Native American prehistoric culture evolved 
through numerous general and specific cultural 
stages. The two earliest general stages were the 
Paleo-lndian (up to about 8,000 years ago) and 
the later Archaic. As Archaic cultures differenti- 
ated, broad cultural traditions became more geo- 
graphically localized, usually coming to charac- 
terize particular culture areas or smaller regions 
within them. For instance, the Woodland archae- 
ological tradition (which included the famous 
Adena and Hopewell traditions) characterized 
most of the Eastern Woodland culture area fol- 
lowing the Archaic, and was succeeded, in the 
Southeast, by the Mississippian tradition after 
about A.D. 800. Other culture areas also went 
through unique archaeological stages. 

AOYOAOYO 

WHERETO LOOK: Studies and evidence of pre- 
contact North American Indian life can be found 
in the General Collections, and in the Manu- 
script, Rare Book and Special Collections, Prints 
and Photographs, and Geography and Map 
Divisions. 



0>fOAO 

JAOfO 



AOTOAOfOAO^ 
▼ OAOfOAOTOi 




"Village of Secotan" from Americae pars decima by Theodor de Bry. Openheim, 1619. G159,B7.pt.1 (LC- 
USZ62-52444). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 

The engraving by Theodor de Bry of an Algonquian town on the Pamlico River estuary of North Carolina 
is a composite from drawings by John White, who visited the North Carolina and southern Virginia coast 
in 1585-86 and again in 1587. Shown in this engraving are typical aspects of Carolina Algonquians' econ- 
omy, architecture, : and religion. White depicted three crops of corn (ripe corn, sown in May, labeled 'F'; 
green corn, sown in June, 'G'; new corn, sown in early July, 'H'), as well as pumpkins Cl'), tobacco ('£'), 
and sunflowers (just above the tobacco). 





5 





6 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



of older works one should also check the card 
catalog, which will contain cross references that 
the computer catalog as yet does not. The cards 
also have more complete bibliographic informa- 
tion than do the pre-1968 computer entries. In 
browsing the card catalog for comprehensive 
subjects, one may visually be able to move from 
category to category within a subject area more 
easily than with a computer. 

For works that the Library has cataloged since 



1980, however, the computer catalog is the only 
access point. Two basic approaches to the com- 
puter files are known by the acronyms MUMS 
and SCORPIO. MUMS enables a keyword search 
in the author, title, subject, and series fields of 
a bibliographic record — an especially useful ap- 
proach in locating material when one has only 
fragmentary citations. SCORPIO uses a more 
structured approach to searching but offers the 
ability to refine searches, for example, to specific 



Internet Access to LOCIS 

Through the Library of Congress Information System (LOCIS), Internet users have access to more than 
27 million records in the following databases: Library of Congress Online Catalog, Federal Legislation, 
Copyright Registrations, Braille and Audio Bibliographic Information, Library of Congress Guides and 
Organization Listings, and Foreign Law Abstracts and Citations. 

LOCIS may be reached using telnet or tn3270: 

■ telnet (or tn3270) to locisJoc.gov (or use the i.p. address 1 40.1 47.254.3) 

■ make database selections from the opening help screens 

■ 90 simultaneous Internet users are supported 

■ Hours of access (U.S.A. Eastern time): Monday-Friday, 6:30 A. M. -midnight 

Saturday, 8:00 A.M. -5:00 P.M. 

Sunday, 1 :00 P.M. -5:00 P.M. 

LOCIS may also be reached through the Library of Congress Gopher (LC MARVEL) and through the Li- 
brary of Congress WWW site (LC WEB). Use Gopher client software or first connect to another Gopher 
in order to use LC MARVEL (The LC MARVEL address is marvel.loc.gov). To connect to LC's WWW site, 
use the Internet hypertext transfer protocol (http) to connect to the address lcweb.loc.gov. You may use 
LC MARVEL and LC WEB to connect to LOCIS, but in order to do so your Gopher client software and 
WWW browser or your Internet provider software must support the Internet telnet or tn3270 function. 

Assistance for searching LOCIS may be found on both LC MARVEL and LC WEB. The guides available 
through these services are also available on the LC anonymous FTP site. FTP to ftp.loc.gov and look in 
the /pub/lc.online directory. When using FTP, log in on anonymous and use your e-mail address or the 
word guest as a password. 



o 

ERIC 



2 a 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



7 



languages or time periods. One can use either 
approach through the umbrella system, LOCIS. 
Navigating the computer catalog for basic 
searches has been made easier through the avail- 
ability of ACCESS, a menu-driven, touch-screen 
system that is available in several of the Library's 
general and specialized reading rooms. 

The Library's computer catalog is now avail- 
able on-line through the Internet. In order to 
maximize efficient use of one's time in the Li- 
brary, it is advisable to use the Internet before- 
hand, if available, in order to have the necessary 
classification number and bibliographic informa- 
tion needed for requesting books. 

Besides the Library's on-line catalog for 
books, the computer system has files for public 
policy literature, federal legislation, and general 
magazine articles, all of which may yield infor- 
mation on Indian topics. In addition, the Library 
has CD-ROM versions of Public Affairs Informa- 
tion Service , Social Science Index , Dissertation Ab- 
stracts and Congressional Information Service's 
Congressional Masterfile, all of which are potential 
resources for Indian-related study. 

□ SELECTED BOOKS 

In describing the Library's general holdings on 
Indian-related topics, their extent necessarily 
limits the discussion of specific titles to a selec- 
tive sampling. Titles are selected following cate- 
gories of American Indian study and related 
materials, illustrating the diversity of materials 
available; and are arranged alphabetically by 
title: 

■ Bibliographies and Guides 

■ American Archaeology, Ethnology, History 

■ Political Affairs 

■ Language and Literature 

■ Children's Literature 

■ Local History and Genealogy 



0 




Bibliographies and Guides 

In the initial stage of any research, bibliogra- 
phies provide an efficient first step to determine 
what has already been written on a given topic. 
In the Library of Congress, bibliographies are 
separately cataloged within the classification Z. 
As of this writing the Library holds more than 
five hundred fifty bibliographies related directly 
to North American Indians, including for ex- 
ample, nineteen from the Native American Bibli- 
ography Series by The Scarecrow Press. Hundreds 
of other bibliographies exist, however, of a local, 
regional, or topical nature that may contain 
significant Indian-related citations. 

Several works that have proved useful are on 
the reference shelves in the Main Reading Room. 
Among them are such wellknown bibliographies 
as A Bibliographical Guide to the History of Indian 
White Relations in the United States by Francis 
Paul Prucha (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1977) and its 1982 supplement; Native 
Americans: An Annotated Bibliography by Freder- 
ick E. Hoxie and Harvey Markowitz (Pasadena, 
Calif.: Salem Press, 1991); and Ethnographic Bibli- 
ography of North America by George Peter Mur- 
dock (4th ed. New Haven: Human Relations 
Area Files Press, 1975) and its 1990 supplement. 

To retrieve a relevant bibliography that may 
be in the stacks, one simply searches the com- 
puter or card catalog under the appropriate sub- 
ject heading, with "Bibliography" as the sub- 
heading — "Hopewell Culture — Bibliography," 
for example. Then, as with all book stack re- 
quests, one submits a request slip in the appro- 
priate reading room. 

Guides at the Library of Congress to 
Holdings in Other Institutions 

Within the Z and CD classifications are cata- 
logs and guides to other institutions' holdings, 
sources that may expand research possibilities. A 




8 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



representation of titles in the Library's collec- 
tions appear below. Although some of them are 
dated, they may be uncommon in other libraries 
and they offer excellent starting points to locate 
works or collections that may be hard to find or 
are unique to the institution. 

Biographical and Historical Index of American In- 
dians and Persons Involved in Indian Affairs. 8 vols. 
Boston: G. K. Hall, 1966; Z1209.H85 

A copy of a file kept until 1965 by the Depart- 
ment of the Interior library that contains cita- 
tions to tribes, Indian individuals, and persons 
in Indian affairs who are mentioned in books, 
journals, treaties, and other publications. 

Catalog of the Manuscripts of the Massachusetts His- 
torical Society. 7 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1969; 
Z1295.M39 1969 

— First Supplement. 2 vols. Boston; G. K. Hall, 
1980; Z1295.M39 1969 suppl. 

Since Massachusetts was the New England 
province most interactive with Indian groups 
during the colonial era, the papers of some of its 
populace are often valuable for research. More 
than 1,100 entries appear under the subjects "In- 
dian affairs" and "Indians," but one may also 
need to search under individual names, Indian 
or non-Indian. 

Catalog to Manuscripts at the National Anthropolog- 
ical Archives. 4 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1975; 
Z1209.2.N67 N37 1975 (fol.) 

This catalog reproduces card entries for man- 
uscripts generated mostly by the Smithsonian 
Institution's Bureau of American Ethnology be- 
tween 1879 and 1965. The collections reflect hold- 
ings mostly on North American Indians and are 
especially rich in vocabularies, grammar notes, 
and linguistic texts. Tribes, individual names, 
geographical areas, and broad topics are inter- 



filed alphabetically. Approximately eighty draw- 
ings mainly by Indian artists are also listed. 

Dictionary Catalog of the American Indian Collec- 
tion: Huntington Free Library and Reading Room, 
New York. 4 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1977; Z1209. 
H8 5 1977 

Based on an inventory and shelflist through 
1976, this set reproduces card entries for more 
than 35,000 volumes of books and periodicals 
regarding indigenous peoples of the Western 
Hemisphere. There are broad topical headings as 
well as subject arrangements by tribe or location. 

Dictionary Catalog of the Edward E. Ayer Collection 
of Americana and American Indians in the New- 
berry Library. 16 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1961; 
Z1201.N45 

— First Supplement. 3 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall, 

1971 

A catalog of about 100,000 pieces as of 1971, it 
contains citations for books, maps, atlases, and 
periodicals. A significant portion of the listings 
includes materials on Canadian, Caribbean, Cen- 
tral American, Hawaiian, Mexican, Philippine, 
and South American indigenous peoples. 

The Dictionary Catalog of the Pacific Northwest 
Collection of the University of Washington Libraries. 
6 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1972; Z1251.N7 W33 

1972 (fol.) 

This catalog lists mostly monographs, but in- 
cludes some manuscripts and theses. Among 
American Indian holdings, the concentration is 
on tribal groups of the Northwest. The arrange- 
ment follows the Library of Congress cataloging 
scheme (see discussion on p. 3). 

A Guide to Cherokee Documents in Foreign Ar- 
chives. William L. Anderson and James A. Lewis. 
Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1983; Z1210. 
C46A53 1983 



X G; 



30 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



9 



A Guide to Cherokee Documents in the Northeastern 
United States. Paul Kutsche. Metuchen, N.J.: 
Scarecrow Press, 1986; Z1210.C46K87 1986 

Two titles from the Native American Bibliog- 
raphy Series. The first identifies official docu- 
ments in Canada, France, Great Britain, Mexico, 
and Spain, the bulk of which are in Great Britain. 
The second chronologically lists and annotates 
6,257 entries from manuscript collections in 20 
public and private libraries in the Northeast. 
Nearly 4,600 of these are from Harvard Univer- 
sity's Houghton Library. Contrary to its title, it 
also lists entries from the William L. Clements 
Library at the University of Michigan, the New- 
berry Library in Chicago, and the State Eiistori- 
cal Society of Wisconsin. 

A Guide to Manuscripts Relating to the American 
Indian in the Library of the American Philosophical 
Society. Compiled by John F. Freeman. Phila- 
delphia: American Philosophical Society, 1966; 
Z1209.F7 (Q11.P612, v. 65) 

— Supplement. Compiled by Dathal Kendal. 
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 
1982; Z1209.F7 Suppl.; (Q11.P612, v. 65 s) 

Very strong in Indian language collections, 
the society's guide and its supplement contain 
more than 5,100 entries from about 300 collec- 
tions. Other historical and ethnological data, in- 
cluding recordings, also appear. The entries are 
arranged alphabetically by tribes, language fam- 
ilies, and geographic areas. Generous indexes fa- 
cilitate locating material. 

Guide to the National Anthropological Archives , 
Smithsonian Institution. By James R. Glenn. 
Washington, D.C.: National Anthropological 
Archives, 1992; Z1209.2.U5 N38 1992 

This guide describes 600 collections that con- 
tain more than 6,000 linear feet of archives. The 
collections consist of documents from the Smith- 
sonian's own anthropological and archaeological 

o 





'The New Indian War. Now, no sarcastic innuendoes, but let us have a square 
fight," wood engraving from Harper's Weekly, December 21, 1878. AP2.H32 
(LC-USZ62-55403). General Collections (Microform) and Prints and Pho- 
tographs Division. 



In December 1878 , with the latest bill before Congress to transfer the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs back to the War Department (it had been switched to Interior in 
1849), Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz appeared before a joint committee 
and presented the case against transfer so effectively that the bill was killed in 
the House. The political cartoon shows the disputed "noble red man " standing 
on a bureau, holding a peace pipe in the direction of Schurz and a tomahawk 
in the direction of General Philip Sheridan , head of the army's Division of the 
Missouri — with the retiring figure of General William Tecumseh Sherman , 
commanding general of the army, in the doorway. 



31 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 0 



o 

me 



work and that of others since the late nineteenth 
century, as well as materials donated by other in- 
stitutions and by persons such as missionaries, 
frontier army officers, settlers, and explorers. 
Materials include manuscripts, field notes, corre- 
spondence, photographic lots and other items. 
Many entries list correspondents and Indian 
tribes. 

Guide to Records in the National Archives of the 
United States Relating to American Indians. Com- 
piled by Edward E. Hill. Washington, D.C.: Na- 
tional Archives and Records Service, 1982; 
Z1209.2.U5H54 1982 

The records cited in this work document the 
United States' relations with Indian tribes, pre- 
dominantly through the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 
Although pre-federal and early federal period 
records exist here, the majority cover the period 
from the mid-nineteenth to the mid-twentieth 
centuries. 

Historical Records Survey 

Compiled under the auspices of the Work 
Projects Administration, these are inventories of 
early county and state archives that may also in- 
clude manuscript collections. They occasionally 
contain entries specifically mentioning Indians, 
but more frequently one must infer from the 
types of records represented that Indians may be 
included. Search in the catalog under the head- 
ing "Historical Records Survey. Ohio," for ex- 
ample. Each entry has its own bibliographical in- 
formation and classification number. 

The Spanish Archives of Nezv Mexico. Compiled by 
Ralph Emerson Twitchell. 2 vols. Cedar Rapids, 
Mich.: The Torch Press, 1914; CD3394 1914 

An English-language inventory giving brief 
descriptions and excerpts from about 20,000 doc- 
uments relevant to the Southwest from 1621 to 
1821. Some are translated and printed in entirety 
in this guide. The interactions between Indians 




and the Spanish colonials suffuse these docu- 
ments, which relate to land transactions, civil 
and military affairs, and mission efforts. Al- 
though the original records are in Santa Fe, the 
Manuscript Division has a microfilm edition, as 
well as a microfilm edition of Mexican Archives of 
Nezv Mexico, covering 1821-46. 

American Archaeology, 

Ethnology, and History 

The vast majority of the Library's published 
North American Indian material is found in the 
classification span E51-E99, encompassing at 
this writing approximately 20,000 volumes. Here 
are found archaeological and ethnological publi- 
cations from government and private institu- 
tions, tribal histories, captivity narratives, and 
most of the Indian-related topics from pre- 
Columbian times to the present. Besides the 
thousands of scholarly secondary works in class 
E, published primary sources exist, just a few no- 
table examples of which are: 

Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and 
Ethnology , Harvard University. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1888?-; E51.H337 
Although worldwide in scope, the majority of 
this series concentrates on North, Central, and 
South American archaeology and ethnology, and 
of these most deal with archaeology. Many of the 
studies are extensive and illustrations of sites 
and artifacts are plentiful. While the series' vol- 
ume numbers are sequential, the dates of publi- 
cation are not. One needs the volume number, 
therefore, when requesting these publications. 
Both the series and individual authors and titles 
within it can be located through the computer 
catalog. 

Bureau of American Ethnology Annual Report. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1879-80-1930-31; 
E51.U35, and the BAE Bulletin. Washington, 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 1 



D.C.: GPO, 1887-1971; E51.U6. (Note: another 
set of the Annual Report is under the class num- 
ber GN2.U5. See also the microform title Periodi- 
cals by and about the North American Indian in the 
Microform Reading Room section of the guide). 

These publications represent the work of 
American anthropologists, ethnologists, and ar- 
chaeologists working under the aegis of the 
Smithsonian Institution from the late nineteenth 
century forward. Nearly all of the work involved 
North American Indian topics and produced pi- 
oneering studies of continuing value. The Re- 
ports ceased in 1930 with the publication of vol- 
ume 48, which is a subject index to the previous 
volumes. The Bulletin ceased publication with 
number 200, which is a list of all of the Bureau's 
previous publications, with an index to authors 
and titles. Many of the titles that appeared in 
these series were also cataloged separately by the 
Library of Congress and may be found under 
other classification numbers. 

The American Indian and the United States: a docu- 
mentary history. Compiled by Wilcomb E. Wash- 
burn. 4 vols. New York: Random House, 1973; 
E93.W27 

A selection of documents that have figured 
significantly in the development of Indian-U.S. 
relations. The principal sources are reports of the 
commissioners of Indian affairs, congressional 
debates, judicial decisions, treaties, and acts of 
Congress. 

The New American State Papers: Indian Affairs. 
13 vols. Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources, 
C1972; E93.U938 

Materials drawn from the original American 
State Papers published between 1832 and 1861 
(also in the Library's collections), as well as 
Congressional documents after 1817, and the 
Legislative Records Section of the National 
Archives. Bringing together these scattered and 
sometimes rare documents into one set gives the 

3 




researcher a concentrated source with which to 
study U.S. relations with Indian people from the 
federal period up to the Civil War. Further, in the 
early years these documents contained presi- 
dential messages and the reports of the Com- 
missioner of Indian Affairs, as well as letters, 
petitions, and other documents submitted to 
Congress by persons involved with Indian 
groups and by Indian groups themselves. The 
volumes are divided into categories for general 
affairs, the Southeast, and the old Northwest. 



The E class also represents American history in 
general and contains valuable resource material 
in the form of both secondary works and pub- 
lished primary source materials relevant to In- 
dian history. All of the published papers of the 
Presidents, for example, particularly the early 
ones, contain much information. Similarly, pub- 
lished official documents and papers of other 
historical figures involved in Indian events exist 
in the general collections. Examples include: 

New American World: a documentary history of 
North America to 1612. Edited by David B. Quinn. 
5 vols. New York: Arno Press, 1979-; E101.N47 
A large sample of mostly sixteenth and seven- 
teenth century English and translated French, 
Spanish, and Portuguese documents relating 
to the earliest explorations and settlements in 
America. The first volume also contains classical, 
medieval, and Muslim writings on the concept of 
the world and the possibility of undiscovered 
lands, as well as Norse accounts of Vinland, and 
those of yet- to-be-confirmed pre-Columbian vis- 
itors to this continent. Where narratives of con- 
tact with indigenous peoples appear, and where 
the accounts are not overly embellished for Euro- 
pean consumption, the documents offer interest- 
ing glimpses at how each group's observations 
and experiences with the other may have shaped 
the course of subsequent relations. 

33 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 2 



The Papers of Chief John Ross. Edited by Gary E. 
Moulton. 2 vols. Norman: University of Okla- 
homa Press, C1985; E99.C5R82 

Landowner, farmer, trader, merchant, slave- 
holder, and preeminent political figure among 
the Cherokee, John Ross was deeply involved in 
the significant and tumultuous affairs of the 
Cherokee in the first half of the nineteenth cen- 
tury. The papers span the era from the War of 
1812 (briefly) to the onset of the Civil War and 
reflect Ross's personal life as well as his prolific 



"Wltchitaw village on Rush Creek," lithograph by James Ackerman from Explo- 
ration of the Red river of Louisiana , in the year 1852 by Randolph B. Marcy; 
assisted by George B. McLellan. Sen. Exec. Doc., 33rd Cong., 1st Sess. (Wash- 
ington, D.C.: U.S. War Department, 1854). F377.R3U51 (LC-USZ62-1 1478). 
General Collections. 



Capt. Randolph B. Marcy was sent by the federal government to find the head- 
waters of the Red River with Bvt. Capt. Ceorge B. McClellan (later Union com- 
mander in chief during the first part of the Civil War) as second in command. 
He failed to find the river's source but ; trained at West Point in figure , topo- 
graphical, and landscape drawing, he produced a number of informative illus- 
trations for his report. He drew one of the many large Wichita farming villages 
encountered in 1852, some of which contained as many as a thousand grass 
and pole lodges. 



efforts on behalf of the Cherokee, especially dur- 
ing the removal period. 

The Papers of Sir William Johnson. 13 vols. Albany: 
The University of the State of New York, 
1921-62; E195.J62 

As England's principal agent for Indian affairs 
in northern colonial America, as wealthy land- 
owner in the New York's Mohawk Valley, and as 
husband to a prominent Mohawk woman, John- 
son was an influential and knowledgeable figure 
in Indian affairs from the 1740s until his death in 
1774. His papers span 1738 to 1788, with the bulk 
covering the period from the French and Indian 
War until 1770. 

Territorial Papers of the United States. 28 vols. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1934-1975; E173.C3 
Official papers and correspondence involving 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 3 



what were the territories east of the Mississippi 
River in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth 
centuries. Many of the issues discussed in these 
documents affected Indian people directly or in- 
directly. The volumes are grouped into areas 
north and south of the Ohio River (the old 
Northwest and old Southwest), Alabama, Ar- 
kansas, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Louisiana- 
Missouri, Michigan, Mississippi, Orleans, and 
Wisconsin. 

Texas Indian Papers. Edited by Dorman H. Win- 
frey and James M. Day. 4 vols. Austin: Texas 
State Library, 1959-61; E78.T4T42 

Printed transcripts of the Indian Papers from 
the Archives Division of Texas State Library. Al- 
though coverage is from 1825 to 1916, only one 
document from each of these years appears. The 
majority date from the 1830s through 1879. The 
papers were generated by several departments 
within Texas government, including its own Bu- 
reau of Indian Affairs of the Republic in 1844 and 
1845. Sources include letters, minutes of council 
meetings with tribes, treaties, and accounts and 
supply lists by traders, agents, and others in- 
volved with Indian people. Numerous tribes are 
dealt with, particularly the Alabama, Caddo, 
Cherokee, Choctaw, Comanche, Delaware, Kee- 
chai, Kickapoo, Kiowa, Lipan, Shawnee, Tawa- 
koni, Tonkawa, Waco, and Wichita. 



Closely following the E class in importance is the 
classification F below the number 1000, devoted 
to local United States history. Located here are 
valuable sources of information such as the pub- 
lications of historical societies, many of which 
print primary source documents from their col- 
lections. Several compilations of colonial records 
and archives such as those of New York, Penn- 
sylvania, and South Carolina, are also very fruit- 
O 



ful, as are the accounts of travelers, explorers, 
missionaries, and administrative officials. Below 
is a sampling of titles: 

Anza's California Expeditions. Herbert Eugene 
Bolton. 5 vols. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1930; F864.B68 

Expeditionary and colonizer Juan Bautista 
Anza's diaries and other sources relative to his 
excursions and encounters with Indians in Ari- 
zona and California. 

Early Western Travels 1748-1846. Edited by 
Reuben Gold Thwaites. 32 vols., with index. 
Cleveland: A. H. Clark Co., 1904-7; F592.T54 
An extensive compilation of annotated re- 
prints of early travel accounts and diaries, most 
of which described encounters with Indians. 

The Expeditions of John Charles Fremont. Edited by 
Donald Jackson and Mary Lee Spence. 4 vols. in 
3, plus map portfolio. Urbana: University of Illi- 
nois Press, 1970-80; F592.F852 

These volumes contain journals, correspon- 
dence, and other papers relating to Fremont's 
several explorations and travels throughout the 
West to Oregon and California in the 1840s and 
1850s. Fremont made numerous observations of 
the land and its original occupants, and his first 
journal had enthusiastic reading in the East. 

The Jesuit Relatio?js and Allied Documents. Edited 
by Reuben Gold Thwaites. 73 vols. Cleveland: 
Burrows Bros. Co., 1896-1901; F1030.7. C96 
Extensive published primary sources relevant 
to the Jesuit missions in eastern North America 
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
Volumes 72 and 73 comprise an index. 

Life, Letters and Travels of Father Pierre-Jean 
DeSmet, S.J. 1801-1873. Edited by Hiram Martin 
Chittenden and Alfred Talbot Richardson. 4 vols. 
New York: F. P. Harper, 1905; F591.S63 



FUR TRADE 



AOTOAOfOAOTOAO?OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTO^OTOAOTOAOTOA< 
T OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOT< 



GATEWAYS 



Perhaps the most important early Indian- 
colonial trade was the fur trade, beginning in the 
early sixteenth century and continuing well into 
the nineteenth. Beaver became the major item 
but other furs (otter, ermine, marten, fox, raccoon, 
and lynx) as well as hides (moose, caribou, deer, 
and elk) were also significant. The fur trade was 
important not only in eastern-central North Amer- 
ica but also in the Spanish colonies, in Alaska, 
and later in western North America. Indians also 
supplied the buffalo robe trade in the nineteenth 
century. 

Prominent European trade goods included 
guns, ammunition, knives, beads, axes, hatchets, 
hoes, cloth, blankets, mirrors, and body paint. 
Many of these items were technologically more 
efficient or more durable versions of items Indian 
people already used, but other items, most no- 
tably liquor, were new to the people and wrought 
havoc on the native population, as did the dis- 
eases carried by the Europeans. 

Participation in the fur trade represented a ma- 
jor change from subsistence hunting, since the 
latter focused primarily on mammals that could 
supply food for a community. The search for small 
fur-bearers caused hunters and their families to 
disperse in winter (when the pelts were thickest) 
so as not to compete for — and totally deplete — 
the limited number of animals in a given territory. 
While Indian participants helped shape the fur 
trade (going many miles out of their way, if need 
be, to visit the trader with the best quality goods), 



in some cases they were also, in effect, trading 
self-sufficiency for acquired needs. 

Depending in part on pre-existing trade routes 
between Indian groups, European trade-good 
suppliers sometimes relied on coastal groups to 
carry materials inland and to return with furs. The 
Russians in Alaska, however, did the fur seal and 
sea otter hunting themselves initially, before be- 
coming dependent on Aleuts for these animals. 
While some companies established a network of 
trading posts, the French "coureurs de bois" trav- 
elled the inland waterways to rendezvouz with 
Indian clients. 

The fur trade was characterized by interna- 
tional rivalry in both hemispheres: the French 
competed with the British, and the British with 
the Americans, and both of the latter with the 
Russians. Principal rival firms included the Hud- 
son's Bay Company, the North West Company, 
the American Fur Company, and the Russian- 
American Company. Trade partnerships became 
military alliances in more than one war; thus, for 
example, the Dutch West India Company sold 
guns to their Iroquoian trade partners, but not to 
any Algonquians. 

AOTOiOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: The General Collections, 

Rare Book ancJ Special Collections, Manuscript, 
Prints and Photographs, and Geography and Map 
Divisions, and the Law Library. 



"Praevalebit Aequior" (Crease takes precedence), cover woodcut from The American Magazine and Monthly Chronicle , 
Vol. I, No. 6 for March 1758. AP2.A2A5 (LC-USZ62-1 1 5627). Rare Book and Special Collections. 




This magazine was founded during the French and Indian War for distribution both in England and in the colonies. The 
woodcut, by an unidentified artist , shows an Indian whose loyalty is being sought by French and English competitors bear- 
ing different trade items. On the left, an Englishman carries a Bible and a bolt of cloth while the Frenchman on the right of- 
fers a tomahawk and a money purse. Though doubtlessly laden with contemporaneous value judgments about the items be- 
ing offered and about the Indian and French figures, this illustration documents a British realization that Indian people had 
options regarding alliances based on their own preferences. 



3G 



TOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOT 

AOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOA 



t h; e. 



American •: MAGAZINE, 




AND- 



Monthly C H R O.NI.C L E for the B RITISH CoionHs. 
VoL L N°* VI- For MARCH 1758 . 



CONTAINING. 



I. DEBATES in MAR YLAND. . 

II. PHILOSOPHICAL MISCELLANY. 
HI. M O N T H L .Y E S S A Y S. 
IV. POETICAL 'ESSAYS. 



V. HISTORY of the WAR in NO R TH 
AMERICA. . 

VI. / MONTHLY CHRONICLE 



To be continued (Price One Shilling Pcnnjyl'uania Currency each Month) 
By aSOClETYof Gentlemen. 

Vcritatiscultorcs, Fraudis inimici. 



p S I L A- D E L P H 1 A. 

Printed and .Sold by William Bradford, at the Corner-Houfe 
in Front and Market -Struts. 



X ; 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



1 5 



37 







GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 6 



o 



Journals and letters from the 1840s through 
the 1860s of the Jesuit missionary who trav- 
elled widely from St. Louis to the Straits of 
Juan de Fuca, establishing missions and rela- 
tions with numerous tribes of the Northwest. 
He also served as an intermediary between the 
government and the Indians during peace and 
war. Tribes such as the Arapaho, Blackfeet, 
Coeur d'Alene, Crow, and others appear in his 
narrations. 

The Mountain Men and the Fur Trade of the Far 
West. Edited by Le Roy Reuben Hafen. 10 vols., 
with bibliography and index. Glendale, Calif.: 
A. H. Clark Co., 1965-72; F592.M74 

A scholarly and well-footnoted secondary 
biographical source on the trappers and fur 
traders in the Upper Missouri region, the South- 
west, and the Oregon country. The subjects cov- 
ered are the actions of the men for whom rela- 
tions with Indian people were an integral part of 
their personal and business life. 

Papers Concerning Robertson's Colony in Texas. 
Compiled and edited by Malcolm McLean. Fort 
Worth: Texas Christian University Press, 1974-; 
F389.M17 

Documents relative to a colonization effort in 
the 1820s and 1830s to place several hundred 
families along the Brazos River between Austin 
and Fort Worth in an area that now encompasses 
thirty-one counties. The settlement was near 
several Indian groups, and entries appear on the 
Caddo, Cherokee, Comanche, Shawnee, Tawa- 
koni, Waco, and others. The Library currently 
has eighteen volumes in this continuing se- 
ries, including the unnumbered introductory 
volume. Volume 6, covering March 6 through 
December 5, 1831, is titled "The Campaigns 
against the Tawakoni, Waco, Towash, and Co- 
manche Indians." 

The Papers of William Penn. Edited by Mary 
Maples Dunn. 5 vols. Philadelphia: University 



of Pennsylvania Press, 1981-1987; F152.2.P3956 
1981 

Volumes 2 and 4 of this series are the most rel- 
evant for studying the dealings of this prominent 
Quaker governor of Pennsylvania, whose legacy 
of fair play with Indians was respected by tribes 
in that colony for generations. 

The Susquehannah Company Papers. Edited by 
Julian Parks Boyd and Robert Joseph Taylor. 
11 vols. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
1930-71; F157.W9S97 

Correspondence and other papers of the com- 
pany involved in eighteenth-century land specu- 
lation in the Wyoming Valley of Pennsylvania 
and subsequent conflicts with the Delaware and 
Six Nations. 

Political Affairs 

See the discussion of this area in the Law Library 
section under "State Documents" (p. 132). Materi- 
als under this classification (J) must be requested 
in either of the general reading rooms in the 
Adams Building or the Jefferson Building. 

Language and Literature 

Recent years have seen an explosion of interest in 
Native American linguistics. Language-related 
books for North American Indians (classification 
PM), including grammars, dictionaries, and glos- 
saries, are cataloged under either the tribal name 
or the language group — "Ojibwa language," 
"Dakota language," "Siksika language," etc. The 
majority of studies and examples of Indian leg- 
ends, literature, poetry, religious texts, and song 
lyrics, however, may be found variously cata- 
loged in ethnology (E), anthropology (GN), and 
American literature (PS). One would search in 
the card or computer catalog, for example, under 
"Navajo Indians — Legends," or "Navajo Indi- 
ans — Poetry," but "American literature — Indian 
authors," for collective studies of Indian- 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 7 




generated prose. Works of individual American 
Indian authors appear under the individuals' 
names. 

While the Library generally does not assign 
subject headings to fictional works, exceptions 
include ethnic groups and places. Thus, re- 
searchers wishing to study the treatment of 
American Indians in fiction may search under 
the various Indian-related headings such as 
those described earlier, with "Fiction" as the 
subheading. In addition, one may find Indian 
characters and topics in fiction where locale is 
the dominant theme. The heading "West (U.S.) — 
O ion," is an example. 



Illustration by Walter Richard West for "How the raven got 
to be black" for Tales of the Cheyennes by Grace Jackson 
Penney (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1953). E98.F6P37 (LC- 
USZ62-1 1 5661). Copyright 1953. © renewed 1981. Re- 
printed by permission of Houghton Mifflin Company. All 
rights reserved. General Collections. 



Walter Richard West (Wah-Pah-Nah-Yah), a Cheyenne and 
director of art at Bacone College *, the only Indian college in 
the United States in the 1 950s, checked the stories retold by 
Grace Jackson Penney in this exhaustively researched book 
of Cheyenne folklore against his own childhood memories. 
According to the story of "How the Raven Got to be Black" 
a great white raven caused the near starvation of the 
Cheyenne camp by scaring away the buffalo in the area 
everytime the hunters tried to surprise them. A guardian 
spirit allowed the hunters to approach and kill buffalo by 
deafening them to the white raven's warning cries. He then 
tricked and captured the treacherous bird, and carried it 
back to the camp. Piling green wood on a tipi fire , he let the 
raven hang in the hole above it, squawking and flapping un- 
til it turned black. 



Lesser-Known Languages Collection 

This small collection contains a smattering of 
miscellaneous uncataloged pamphlets, school 
texts, and religious tracts in boxes labeled ac- 
cording to language or ethnic group. Each box 
may contain one or more publications. Tribes 
represented are: Aleut, Cherokee, Chipewyan, 
Chippewa, Cree, Creek, Dakota, Eskimo, Fox 
(Mesquakie), Hopi, Kalispel (a catechism, which 
actually indicates Flathead), Koyukon, Micmac, 
Mohawk, Navajo, Pima, Tlingit, and Zuni. 



Children's Literature 

The Library of Congress holds perhaps the coun- 
try's largest concentration of children's books. 
These books are integrated into the General Col- 
lections by subject area and are maintained for 
the scholarly study of children's literature itself, 
not as a collection for use by children. Because 
nearly all of the books come to the Library 
through copyright deposit, they represent a 





GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 8 



broad spectrum of publishing without the filter- 
ing process of selection. 

These works may be of interest to researchers 
wishing to trace the historical depiction of 
American Indians in children's texts and their 
illustrations. 

CHILDREN'S LITERATURE CENTER 

LOCATION: Jefferson Building, Main Reading Room 
Gallery (temporary); telephone (202) 707-5535 

HOURS: Monday-Friday 8:30 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. 

ACCESS AND USE: Appointments preferred, but not 
necessary. Although two reference specialists are 
available during the above hours, children's books 
are available from the General Collections through 
the Main Reading Room and are subject to its hours 
and criteria. 

For nonfiction, the Library assigns the subhead- 
ing "Juvenile literature" to those works on a 
given topic aimed at an audience below college 
level. The assignment of, and changes within, 
subject headings for Indian-related fiction is 
somewhat complicated, but the following strat- 
egy should facilitate searching for children's 
books: 

1. Search the desired subjects in the card or 
computer catalog under the subject heading es- 
tablished in Library of Congress Subject Headings, 
discussed earlier. 

2. Under this heading, refine the search to the 
subheadings "Fiction" and "Juvenile fiction." 

3. For children's fiction, select only those titles 
with a classification designation PZ5 or higher. 

In the prefatory pages of volume 1 of Library 
of Congress Subject Headings a listing of headings 
used for children's literature appears. These 
headings sometimes go beyond the normal Li- 
brary of Congress subject headings and should 
be reviewed for American Indian topics. For ex- 
ample, Indian language readers for helping chil- 
dren learn English or an Indian language may 
be found under a heading such as "Hopi lan- 



guage — Readers," while bilingual texts of folk- 
lore appear under "Hopi language materials." 

Reference aids and bibliographies can often 
help fill research gaps that cataloging does not 
address, and it is therefore advisable to consult 
with the Children's Literature Center staff. 

Local History and Genealogy 

LOCAL HISTORY AND GENEALOGY 
READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Jefferson Building, Ground floor, Room 
LJ G20 (temporary); telephone (202) 707-5537 

HOURS: Same as Main Reading Room 

ACCESS AND USE: No appointments necessary. All 
reference books relating to local U.S. history, family 
histories, and genealogical research should be re- 
quested from this room. 

The Local History and Genealogy Reading Room 
contains reference collections that specifically re- 
late to local U.S. history, family histories, and ge- 
nealogical research. All books on these subjects 
must be requested from this room. Virtually all 
of the genealogical resources are secondary, 
however, and researchers looking for primary 
genealogical materials will need to consult other 
archives and repositories that hold relevant doc- 
uments. For published genealogies on individual 
tribes, one should search the computer or main 
card catalog under the name of a tribe, with 
"Genealogy" as the subheading. Reference spe- 
cialists in the reading room will also help re- 
searchers. 

The surge of interest in genealogy has 
spawned numerous publications on genealogical 
research, some of which are relevant to Indians. 
But as complex and time consuming as genea- 
logical research can be for non-Indian ancestry, it 
is much more so for Indian ancestry, which is 
frequently recorded only in the oral traditions of 
families themselves or exists in diverse archival 
records at the federal, state, or local level. Among 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



1 9 



the few publications that exist, the vast majority 
deal with the Cherokee and the other Indians 
belonging to the so-called Five Civilized Tribes 
(Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, and Seminole), and 
these may only be valuable for identifying indi- 
vidual names rather than tracing genealogy. 

□ SELECTED BOOKS 

Following are a few useful reference titles, which 
are located within the reading room: 

Campbell's Abstract of Creek Indian Census Cards 
and Index . Compiled by John Bert Campbell. 
Muskogee, Okla.: Phoenix Job Printing Co., 1915; 
E99.C9C18 

A compilation of Creek tribal families based 
on census records, with some references to 
Freedmen census citations. Information includes 
individuals 7 names, age, sex, Indian blood ratio, 
names of mother and father when known, and 
whether living or dead at the time of the census. 

Cherokee Emigration Rolls 1817-1835. Transcribed 
by Jack D. Baker. Oklahoma City: Baker Publish- 
ing Co., C1977; E99.C5B27 

Lists of those Cherokee scheduled to emigrate 
from Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, and 
Tennessee to Indian Territory. Information varies 
among the different rolls, which may include 
the head of a family, the number in the family, 
genders, and slaves. 

The Final Rolls of Citizens and Freedmen of the Five 
Civilized Tribes in Indian Territory. Compiled by 
U.S. Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1907; E78.I5U27 

This and its companion volume, Index to the 
Final Rolls . . . , provide the name, sex, age, Indian 
"blood degree," and tribal roll number for indi- 
viduals as of 1907. With the exception of blood 
degree, the same information appears for the 
Freedmen among the tribes. 



The Osage Annuity Rolls of 1878. Louis F. Bums. 
3 vols. Fallbrook, Calif.: Burns, C1980-81; E99. 
O8B87 

More than 2,200 names appear here grouped 
within tribal bands by family, listing the age, 
sex, and family relationship. Most of the names 
are the original Osage language names. The 
compiler provides an alphabetical index to the 
names, as well as an index of the Indian names as 
they would appear in English. 

Our Native Americans and Their Records of Ge- 
nealogical Value. Kay E. Kirkham. 2 vols. Logan, 
Utah: Everton Publishers, C1980-84; Z1209.2. 
N67K57 

A useful guide to the primary sources — gov- 
ernmental, tribal, and private — available for po- 
tential genealogical research. This source should 
probably be the researcher's first stop on a ge- 
nealogical journey. 

PERIODICALS 

Bound issues of periodicals with Indian-related 
topics are scattered throughout the Library's col- 
lections in appropriate subject classifications. 
The Library has substantial holdings of titles 
such as American Anthropologist , Ethnohistory , 
and Plains Anthropologist. It also holds most of 
the publications of significant institutions and 
museums, such as those of the American Mu- 
seum of Natural History, the American Philo- 
sophical Society, Chicago's Field Museum of 
Natural History, the University of Michigan's 
Museum of Anthropology, and Yale University. 

Holdings of periodicals generated by Indian 
groups themselves are spotty, due to the ephem- 
eral nature of many of them. The Library does 
have, however, privately produced microform 
collections of American Indian periodicals, de- 
scribed in the section on the Microform Reading 
Room. If one does not know a specific periodical 
title desired, it is best to consult a bibliography 




"The Nation's Ward," chromolithograph by Grant Hamilton 
from Judge, June 20, 1885. AP101.J8 (LC-USZC4-4802). 
General Collections (Microform) and Prints and Photo- 
graphs Division. 



"The Reason of the Indian Outbreak. General Miles de- 
clares that the Indians are starved into rebellion/' unat- 
tributed chromolithograph from Judge , December 20, 1 890. 
API 01 J8. (LC-USZC4-41 01, color; LC-USZ62-56003, black 
and white). General Collections (Microform) and Prints and 
Photographs Division. 



Native Americans were targets of ridicule in the illustrated 
satirical weeklies that flourished in America after the Civil 
War. Cartoonists usually portrayed them as murderous war- 
riors or shiftless beggars taking advantage of the nation's 
largesse. Occasionally, however, they were depicted with 
more sympathy, as victims of corrupt federal agents. 






GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 1 



such as James P. Danky's Native American Periodi- 
cals and Newspapers, 1828-1982 (Z1209.2.U5D36 
1984). Librarians can assist in checking holdings 
of individual titles. 

Current, unbound issues of periodicals are 
held in the Newspaper and Current Periodicals 
Reading Room, Madison Building, 1 st floor, Room 
LM 133 (same hours as the Main Reading Room). 
In some cases, depending on acquisitions deci- 
sions, only a few months of current issues may 
be kept. In other cases, titles may be retained for 
a longer period to determine the feasibility of 
adding them to the permanent collections. Many 
Indian-generated periodicals may fall into either 
of these categories, and a researcher should check 
with reading room staff for particular titles. 

This reading room also holds all of the Li- 
brary's newspaper collections, both in paper 
copy and microform. The Library has several 
eighteenth -century domestic and foreign news- 
papers, as well as numerous nineteenth- century 
papers. Most of the eighteenth-century issues 
date from the last two decades of the period, al- 
though a few titles, such as the New York Gazette, 
Philadelphia's The American Weekly Mercury, and 
Williamsburg's The Virginia Gazette, date from 
the first half of the century. And for a British 
slant on American news, the collections include 
London's Daily Advertiser from 1731 to 1793. 
Other British and European papers may also be 
of interest. 

While newspaper accounts for these eras may 
not be as highly regarded as other historical 
sources, they are in some instances the only ac- 
counts extant. Colonial American newspapers, 
for example, frequently relayed official govern- 
ment announcements verbatim or copied reports 
from foreign papers or from each other. But oc- 
casionally they also relayed correspondence on 
events from individuals — correspondence that 
may not have subsequently survived. In addi- 
tion, occasional editorial opinion and advertise- 
ments of the period may offer insights into the 
>ular perception of American Indians. 

ERJC 



For eighteenth-century papers, researchers 
should check a four-volume, loose-leaf compila- 
tion prepared by the staff and held in the reading 
room. It lists the papers by state, and by city 
within each state, with a detailed chronological 
list of the holdings of each title. Another refer- 
ence work, A Check List of American Eighteenth 
Century Newspapers in the Library of Congress 
(Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1936; re- 
printed by Greenwood Press, 1968), originally 
compiled by John Van Ness Ingram, and revised 
and updated by Henry S. Parsons, may be avail- 
able in other large libraries. For the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries, staff member Paul E. 
Swigart compiled an eleven-volume work, Chro- 
nological Index of Newspapers for the Period 
1801-1967 in the Collections of the Library of 
Congress. 

The Library's holdings of nineteenth -century 
general periodicals also afford sources for Indian 
images and articles. Harper's Weekly and Frank 
Leslie's Illustrated series, for example, carried im- 
ages illustrating Indian-related stories, while 
Puck and fudge carried many caricatures on In- 
dian themes. These periodicals are on microfilm 
in the Microform Reading Room, but separate il- 
lustrations culled from paper copies also exist in 
the Prints and Photographs Division. 

MICROFORM 

The distribution of research materials through 
microforms has significantly enhanced scholarly 
study since the second world war. Reproduc- 
tions from numerous institutions and the policy 
of interlibrary loan have made manuscripts, 
archives, newspapers, illustrative materials, rare 
books, and pamphlets from all over the globe 
much more available to researchers than was 
previously possible. Further, microforms pro- 
long the life of original documents by reducing 
the need for handling them directly. Through 
both acquisitions and preservation filming of its 
own collections the Library of Congress has 

43 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 2 




"Meda Songs/' chromolithograph by James Ackerman after 
Seth Eastman from volume 1 of Historical and Statistical In- 
formation Respecting the History ; Condition and Prospects 
of the Indian Tribes of the United States by Henry R. School- 
craft (Philadelphia: Lippincott, Grambo & Co., 1851). 
E77.S381 (LC-USZC4-4803), General Collections. 



Schoolcraft, a former Indian agent (whose papers are held 
by the Library's Manuscript Division), began work on his 
massive six-volume encyclopedic work on American Indi- 
ans while he was employed by the Indian Office in 1847. 
He recruited Capt. Seth Eastman of the U.S. Army to make 
hundreds of drawings and watercolors of tribal ceremonies, 
landscapes, artifacts, pictographs, tools, costumes, wea- 
pons, musical instruments and maps . According to School- 
craft, this is an exact facsimile of an Ojibwa music board — 
" one of those tablets of pictorial notation" used as 
prompters for songs of the tribe's Meda Society. 



thousands of microform titles available. General 
and specialized reading rooms usually have mi- 
croform collections appropriate to their subject 
or format responsibilities. 

MICROFORM READING ROOM 

LOCATION; Jefferson Building, 1st floor, Room LJ 
107 (temporary); telephone (202) 707-5471 

HOURS: Same as those for Main Reading Room 

The Microform Reading Room is virtually a li- 
brary unto itself. In addition to books that have 
been microfilmed for preservation purposes, 
several special collections relevant to the study 
of American Indians are available here. Refer- 
ence specialists can assist with research guidance 
to the collections, and published guides to many 
of the collections are available. 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 3 



□ SELECTED COLLECTIONS 

Microform titles relevant to American Indian 
study as of this writing are grouped thema- 
tically, and then arranged alphabetically, as 
follows: 

■ Ethnology 

■ Government Relations 

■ Historical Research Collections 

■ Periodicals 

■ Reform Organizations 

Ethnology 

HRAF. New Haven, Conn.: Human Relations 
Area Files, 1958-; Microfiche 1013 

This collection of reproduced pages of ar- 
ticles, books, and manuscripts includes ethno- 
logical and anthropological studies of tribes 
or cultural groups. Holdings through 1987 con- 
tain studies on about fifty tribes, arranged by 
topic such as religious beliefs, methods of war- 
fare, etc. 

North American Indians: Photographs from the Na- 
tional Anthropological Archives , Smithsonian Insti- 
tution. Compiled by Herman Viola. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1974; Microfiche 
3020 

This microfiche collection of nearly 4,700 pho- 
tographs consists mainly of individual or group 
portraits, but also includes representations of 
artifacts, architecture, ceremonies, and crafts. 
Arranged alphabetically by tribe, it also supplies 
negative numbers that may be used to request 
prints from the National Anthropological 
Archives. 

The Northzvest Coast Collection of American Indian 
Art. Boston: G. K. Hall & Co, 1987; Microfiche 
91 / 7000 

O 



A color reproduction of Northwest Coast arti- 
facts held by the Museum of Mankind, London. 
Although the sharpness of the images in this 
33-fiche set is not perfect, it is still an absorb- 
ing, useful representation of nearly 1,300 ob- 
jects of stone, ivory, bone, wood, leather, and 
fiber-woven utensils, implements, clothing, effi- 
gies, and furnishings collected mainly between 
1800 and 1873. Many of the objects display the 
unique design and intricate carving that pay 
tribute to indigenous artistry. 

The Peabody Museum : a Visual Record of Artifacts. 
The Peabody Museum of Archaeology and 
Ethnography, Harvard University. Photography 
by Hillel Burger. Catalog by Barbara Isaac. 
Boston: G. K. Hall, C1990; Microfiche 91/7018 
(G); Guide 273 

Five of eight color fiche contain approxi- 
mately 380 images of North American Indian art, 
artifacts, and clothing, as well as early European- 
American paintings and drawings of Indian sub- 
jects selected from the museum's collections. 
Some items are attributed to collections from the 
Lewis and Clark expedition. Among the Indian 
groups represented are Aleut, Eskimo, Haida, 
Tlingit, and others of the Alaska and the North- 
west; California people such as the Karok and 
Hupa (Hoopa); Hopi, Navajo, and Zuni of the 
Southwest; Crow, Mandan, Sioux, Chippewa, 
Huron, Choctaw, Cherokee, and Seminole; a few 
Northeastern tribes; and prehistoric cultures of 
the Anasazi, Hopewell, Mississippian, and Mim- 
bres. Two of the three remaining fiche cover 
Mesoamerica and South America. A guide ac- 
companies the collection and describes the 
items. 

University of South Dakota American Indian Oral 
History Collection. Sanford, N.C.: Microfilming 
Corp. of America, 1979; Microfiche 83 / 200; 
Guide AI3.O7, no. 2 

The Library has Part II of this collection, 
which largely includes personal experiences and 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 4 



"Washington, D.C. — Photographing an Indian delegation, in C. M. Bell's stu- 
dio, for the government/' wood engraving from Frank Leslie's Illustrated News- 
paper , September 10, 1 881 . AP2.L52. LOT 4391 -F (P&P). (LC-USZ62-77077). 
General Collections (Microform) and Prints and Photographs Division. 



Charles Milton Bell (1848-93) was one of Washington's leading portrait pho- 
tographers during the last quarter of the nineteenth century. He may be best 
known today for his photographs of Native Americans , which he began to pro- 
duce in 1873. He was assigned by Ferdinand K Hayden of the U.S. Geological 
Survey of the Territories to photograph as many of the Indian visitors to the cap- 
ital as possible during this period of intense treaty negotiations. Cooperative 
chiefs were apparently rewarded with a trip to the photographer's studio. From 
the end of the Hayden Survey in 1879 until the 1890s, Bell also made pho- 
tographs of Indians for the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of Ameri- 
can Ethnology. The C. M. Bell Studio Collection is among the holdings of the Li- 
brary's Prints and Photographs Division. 



reminiscences of more than two hundred Indi- 
ans and non-Indians associated with them. 
Recorded in the late 1960s, most of the inter- 
views cover a variety of topics, reflecting the eth- 
nic reawakening of the period. In some in- 
stances, an interviewee's age, religious affiliation, 
and degree of Indian blood is given. The major- 
ity of tribes represented are Chippewa and vari- 
ous branches of the Sioux. Others included are: 
Apache (1 interviewee), Cheyenne (1), Coeur 
d'Alene (3), Colville (1), Cree (i). Crow (17), Flat- 
head (1), Hidatsa (i), Kalispel (i), Navajo (1), 
Ponca (i), Pueblo (i), Spokane (8), and Win- 
nebago (10). In an unusual instance of cata- 
loging, each individual's name has been entered 
in the Library's computer catalog. 




ERIC 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 5 



Government Relations 

Annual Report , 1838-1943, of the Office (Bu- 
reau) of Indian Affairs. Washington, D.C.: Li- 
brary of Congress Photoduplication Service, 
1974; Microfilm 04093. 

These reports include each Indian agent's 
summary of the previous year's activity among 
the people under his jurisdiction. A published 
set of reprinted reports from 1824 to 1847 is 
available from the book collections under the call 
number £93.117153. 



British Manuscripts Project. Washington, D.C.: 
Library of Congress Photoduplication Service, 
1941-45; Microfilm 041; Guide: Z6620.G7U5 

Among the millions of manuscript pages 
filmed, the most germane to Indian matters are 
those of the Jeffery Amherst Papers in the War 
Office, and these are relevant mainly for the 
French and Indian War from late 1758 through 
1763, with some material touching on Pontiac's 
rebellion. The collection is prodigious, nonethe- 
less, comprising more than fifty reels for this pe- 
riod, and includes frequent correspondence with 
Amherst's officers and with William Johnson on 
Indian participation. 

Also useful are the Colonial Office papers for 
Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hamp- 
shire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, 
Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, consisting 
mainly of papers of the governors and corre- 
spondence between them and the Board of Trade 
in London. Indian-related material is scattered, 
and it is best for a researcher to have a particular 
date or correspondent in mind. Much of this 
same material, however, may be published or ap- 
pear in the State Records Microfilm described be- 
low. A checklist exists for this collection, giving 
principally the correspondents' names and dates 
of coverage. 







The FBI files on the American Indian Movement and 
Wounded Knee. Edited by Rolland Dewing. Fred- 
erick, Md.: University Publications of America, 
1986; Microfilm 88/359; Guide 105-150 

This collection of twenty-six reels consists of 
memoranda from agents, office reports, letters, 
protest literature, and some periodical clippings 
that deal not only with AIM (the American 
Indian Movement) but also with numerous 
protests, demonstrations, and government prop- 
erty occupations by Indians throughout the 
country. Most of the material is dated 1973, and 
nearly half of it represents coverage of the 
Wounded Knee incident of that year. 

Some sections of reports are blacked out, and 
some papers are deleted entirely by an invoca- 
tion of cited exemptions under the Freedom of 
Information Act. 

Indian Claims Commission. New York: Clearwater 
Publishing Co., 1973-82; Microfiche 90/7052 
(negative image); Guide 238a-b 

This collection represents more than half a 
million pages from the commission's files in the 
National Archives. Set up to hear and determine 
tribal claims against the United States, the com- 
mission operated mainly from 1947 to 1978. Its 
files contain not only important background in- 
formation on specific claims (nearly all of which 
were based on inadequate compensation for 
land purchases), but also historical documents 
from public and private sources, cartographic 
and illustrative material, retrospective mineral 
and land appraisals, and expert testimony by 
ethnologists, historians, and anthropologists. 
The collection is, therefore, not only valuable as 
a reference source itself, but as a guide to other 
sources that may produce further information. 
The collection is divided into five segments, and 
researchers should determine which section they 
wish to view: 

1. The decisions. The commission's findings 
of fact, opinions, orders, and final awards. 




EUROPEAN COLONIAL ADMINISTRATION OF INDIAN RELATIONS 

^OYOAOYOAOYOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOYOAOWOAOYOAOTOAO y WOA< 

TOAOYOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOYOAOWOAOWOAOYOAOVOAOYOAOVOAOYOAOV< 

GATEWAYS 



Six European countries — Spain, Great Britain, 
France, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Russia — 
at one time or another, between 1 500 and 1 867, 
established a colonial presence within what is 
now the continental United States. 

Spain was the first of these European powers to 
establish a permanent settlement in the present- 
day continental United States, in 1565 in Florida. 
Further Spanish settlement followed in the Ameri- 
can Southwest after 1 598, Texas after 1 700, Cali- 
fornia from the mid-eighteenth century on, and 
the Mississippi Valley from the eighteenth cen- 
tury. Spanish administration generally lasted until 
Mexican independence, in 1 821 , but this varied 
for Florida and the Mississippi Valley. 



The first permanent English settlement was in 
1 607 in Virginia, and lasted along the Atlantic 
Coast until American independence in 1 783, and 
lasted elsewhere (the Great Lakes region, the 
Pacific Northwest) as long as the mid-nineteenth 
century. France, while initially based in Canada, 
was active in the present United States from 1 608 
until 1 763, and then again from 1 800 to 1 803 in 
the Mississippi Valley. The Dutch colonial efforts 
were shortlived, beginning in 1 609 in the cen- 
tral Atlantic Coast region and ending in 1664 
with the English conquest of New Netherland. 
Swedish settlement, chiefly for trading purposes, 
lasted from 1638 until their ouster by the Dutch 
in 1655. Russian traders and others were active in 






>VOAOVOAOTOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOYOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOVOAOV 

>AOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOYOAOYOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOVOAOWOAOYOAOWOA 



present-day Alaska from 1 741 to 1 867 (when the 
U.S. purchased the territory) and for a while in 
California (1 81 2-44). 

Each of the European colonial nations had to 
develop a means of handling Indian relations. 
Their solutions varied markedly from country to 
country and all changed, to some degree, over 
time. These differing solutions had differing ef- 
fects on the many Indian peoples. 

For all the European colonial powers except 
Spain, the national government in Europe at first 
eschewed direct administration of colonies, 
whether the colonial purpose was trade or settle- 
ment. Instead, administration of both the colony 
and Indian relations, in the Western Hemisphere, 
was left to private entities — chartered trading 
companies, individual traders, or proprietors and 
grantees of landed estates. These private entities 
were subject to varying methods and amounts of 
national government oversight, but it was over- 
sight exercised from Europe. 

The Dutch, Swedish, and Russian govern- 
ments, during the period of each country's colo- 
nial presence, did not establish administrative 
structures in the Western Hemisphere to govern 
colonies and handle Indian relations. The English 
and French governments eventually did. New 
France was transferred to royal control in 1663 
and became a crown colony, with royal adminis- 
trators, in 1674. (The Louisiana province was a 
separate crown colony.) The French king ap- 
pointed a governor and an intendant for each of 
the two provinces; the latter official was in charge 



of Indian tribal relations. The English experience 
varied with each of its numerous colonies along 
the Atlantic coast, since, while the English king 
did appoint colonial governors, each colony 
handled its own Indian relations. It was not until 
1 755 that the British government set up a system 
of Indian superintendencies (one northern, one 
southern) and only in 1 763 that the royal govern- 
ment assumed exclusive jurisdiction over Indian 
affairs. 

Spain's holdings in the present United States 
began as royal colonies, but its systems for deal- 
ing with Native Americans changed several times 
during its long colonial tenure. Usually a military 
presidio and a mission shared the immediate su- 
pervision of an Indian population in each area, 
under the control of a governor and the viceroy. 
After 1 763, however, in most (but not all) regions, 
Indian administration was secularized, and presi- 
dios assumed complete jurisdiction. In the Missis- 
sippi Valley, however, the Spanish government 
used traders, much like the other colonial powers. 

AOYOAOYO 

WHERETO LOOK: Library collections bearing 
on European colonial administration of Indian af- 
fairs include the Law Library, the General Collec- 
tions (including the Microform Reading Room), 
and the Manuscript, Geography and Map, and 
Rare Book and Special Collections Divisions. 

Note especially the photocopies, transcriptions, 
and microfilm of British, French, and Spanish 
archival documents. 



"A North View of Fort Johnson drawn on the spot by Mr. Guy Johnson[,] Sir W. Johnson's Son," from The Royal Magazine, or 
Gentleman's Monthly Companion, October 1759. APR.R7 (LC-USZ62-9288). Rare Book and Special Collections 
Division. 



William Johnson (1715-74), a 1 738 Irish immigrant to an uncle's upstate New York estate , became a major British colonial 
diplomat in Indian affairs , especially with the Iroquois , as well as a military leader and a very wealthy land speculator and 
fur trader. In 1755 he was appointed the first northern superintendent of Indian affairs. In 1739 he had acquired Fort John- 
son on the Mohawk River in New York and had made it a leading site for Indian councils and trade. The Indian council 
house is labeled " I " the Indian camping ground is "K," the Mohawk River is "Q," and Johnson's residence is "A." 

o 

ERIC 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 8 



Arrangement is by volume and page numbers 
listed in the guides mentioned below. 

2. Expert testimony. Written, professional eth- 
nological and historical reports, as well as retro- 
spective appraisals of land and minerals. Ar- 
rangement is by docket number. Many of the 
expert testimonies have also been published by 
Garland Publishing, Inc., and are in the general 
book collections. 

3. Transcripts of oral expert testimony. Oral testi- 
mony was allowed in the early years of the com- 
mission's operation, and this segment contains 
less material than the written testimony. Ar- 
rangement is by document number. 

4. The briefs. These provide both the Indian 
and the government positions, backed up by 
all the references and citations used to support 
their cases. It is here that one will find excerpts 
from primary sources and the references to them 
that make the section a valuable resource guide 
and bibliography. Arrangement is by docket 
number. 

5. GAO and GSA reports. These are accounts by 
the General Accounting Office and the General 
Services Administration of the actual disburse- 
ments made to a tribe under a treaty that was the 
basis of a claim. As such it may contain a histori- 
cal record of related disbursements for the tribe. 
Arrangement is by date of the original treaty in 
question. 

A two-volume guide divides the series by the 
written expert testimony and decisions, and fur- 
ther by a table of cases, tribe, state, author, and 
docket number. These guides can be somewhat 
confusing because of the collection's different 
sections and access points, and one should check 
both volumes under all headings to insure ade- 
quate coverage. 

Reports of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized 
Tribes. Arlington, Va.: University Publications 
of America, C1975; Microfilm 88/240; Guide 
105-121 



This collection brings together the annual re- 
ports from 1894 to 1920 and special documents 
relating to the division of tribal lands among in- 
dividuals of the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, 
Creek, and Seminole tribes. Known as the Dawes 
Commission, it generated numerous documents, 
including legal decisions, samples of census 
rolls, genealogical charts, allotment maps, and 
discussions of the conditions among the tribes. 

State Records Microfilm. Washington, D.C.: Li- 
brary of Congress in association with the Univer- 
sity of North Carolina, 1941-50; Microfilm 1550; 
Guide, A Guide to the Microfilm Collection of Early 
State Records. Edited by Lillian A. Hamrick. 
Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress Photo- 
duplication Service, 1950; Z663.96.G8 or Z1223.5. 
Ai U47 

Also known as Records of the States or Early 
State Records, this collection contains approxi- 
mately 1,700 reels of film with nearly 3 million 
pages of colonial and state legislative, executive, 
judicial, and Indian records from the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries, many of which are in 
manuscript form. The guide (cited above) out- 
lines the various record groups under each state 
and provides the reel numbers. The guide itself 
was compiled in segments and amended, so a 
careful perusal is necessary to glean as many 
records as possible. 

A Guide to the Microfilm Collection of Early State 
Records: Supplement. Washington, D.C.: Library 
of Congress Photoduplication Service, 1951. 
Lists "Records of American Indian Nations," 
which are part of the State Records Microfilm; 
Microfilm 1551. 

The records include mostly manuscript 
sources filmed in eight state archives and histori- 
cal societies. A major portion of the material is 
from the Indian Archives of the Oklahoma His- 
torical Society, where nearly all of the Cherokee 
records were filmed. The guide supplement pro- 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



2 9 



vides cursory descriptions of the contents and 
reel numbers. The sections on newspapers and 
miscellany should also be checked for material 
from early newspapers, broadsides, proclama- 
tions, and some manuscripts that may also con- 
tain relevant information, though the Guide may 
not cite it. Following are descriptions of notable 
collections from the "Records of American In- 
dian Nations," and a few items from the "Miscel- 
lany," arranged by state. 

Connecticut 

Connecticut Archives: Indians 1647-1820. A 
manuscript work useful for study of Connecti- 
cut's relations with Indians. Indexes to topics 
and tribes appear at the beginning of each of the 
two volumes. A majority of entries concern land 
issues, and among the tribes represented are 
Massachusett, Mohegan, Pequot, Pocumtuc, 
Scaticook, and Tunxi, as well as Mohawk. 

In the "Miscellany" section for Connecticut is 
a 1770 text called "The Moheagon Indians 
against the Governor and Company of Connecti- 
cut," which includes an introductory history of 
the Mohegan, followed by tracts that deal with 
Uncas and his progenitors' claims to certain 
Connecticut lands. 

Kansas 

Letterbook of John Beach, Indian agent for the 
Sac and Fox of Iowa and Kansas (478 pages). 
Dating from June 1840 to August of 1847, this 
collection consists of Beach's letters to the U.S. 
commissioner of Indian affairs, the governor of 
Iowa, other Indian agents and sub-agents. No 
letters from his correspondents appear. 

Constitution and Laws of the Sac and Fox Na- 
tions, 1888 (30 pages), including tribal laws 
adopted between 1885 and 1887. An eight-page 
supplement includes laws adopted in 1889. 

o 



Massachusetts 

The topics are not Massachusetts Indians, but the 
contents are from volumes 60 and 61 of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society's Timothy Pick- 
ering Papers. These volumes deal with Indian re- 
lations and treaties in 1790 and 1791 with the 
tribes then occupying the old Northwest Terri- 
tory, comprising the present states of Illinois, In- 
diana, Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin. Among 
tribes involved either directly or diplomatically 
are the Delaware, Miami, Mohawk, Oneida, 
Seneca, Shawnee, Stockbridge, Tuscarora, and 
Wyandot. A full microfilm set of the Pickering 
Papers is in the Manuscript Division. 

Michigan 

In the "Local Records" section appears a manu- 
script journal in French on Pontiac's Conspiracy, 
from the Burton Historical Collection in Detroit. 
It is rather faded and some of the pages are torn. 

New Mexico 

In the Miscellany section, as part of the official 
record book of Don Manuel Alvarez, American 
consul at Santa Fe, is a printed version in Span- 
ish of the diaries of several New Mexican militia 
officers from an 1839 campaign against the 
Navajo (8 pages) 

New York 

Four reels of microfilm contain reproductions 
from the Henry O'Reilly Papers, called 
"O'Reilly's Western Mementos." Relating to the 
Iroquois from 1784 to 1820, the papers are 
important for study of post-Revolutionary New 
York's involvement in Indian affairs and land 
acquisition prior to the federal government's 
assumption of that role. The primary tribes 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



3 0 



involved were the Six Nations — Cayuga, Mo- 
hawk, Oneida, Onondaga, Seneca, and Tuscarora. 

The miscellany section for this state contains 
an eclectic assembly of eighteenth-century docu- 
ments and treaties, many of which were printed 
and have been subsequently issued elsewhere. A 
1718 map of the country of the Five Nations and 
the tribes of the Great Lakes appears, as do a few 
1840s issues of the journal, "The Mental Eleva- 
tor," a Seneca language publication from the 
tribe's Buffalo Creek reservation. 

Oklahoma 

Fourteen reels contain Cherokee documents 
dating from the 1820s to 1906, the bulk of mate- 
rial covering the latter half of the nineteenth 
century. These are documents generated by the 
Cherokee themselves as they began adopting 
Anglo-American social and political culture in 



the early nineteenth century. They contain 
records of the national council, legislative jour- 
nals, several editions of the laws and constitu- 
tion, records of the supreme court, and annual 
reports of administrative officers such as the 
treasurer, the board of education, medical super- 
intendent, high sheriff, commission on citizen- 
ship, insane asylum supervisors, and the editor 
of the Cherokee Advocate. 

The legislative journals are good sources for 
identifying names of influential and politically 
active Cherokee. The laws and constitution, in 
both Cherokee and English, provide a look at the 
transition from tribal and clan law to Anglo- 
American oriented procedure from 1808 for- 
ward. They also reflect the social condition of 
women, blacks, and mulattoes, as well as the at- 
tempts to regulate potential or actual intrusions 
from non-Indian groups. With this material (on 
reel 1 of M.2a-B:C) is a 48-page compilation, in- 



Cherokee Phoenix , New Echota, Georgia, April 10, 1828 (LC-US262-1 1 5660). Serial and Government Publications Division 
(detail) 







’■/. * 4 DiTEO ,B YyEl^t < 



J;V 0 At*«W if paid So fa*i* 



a'Woet, orepO>o 

<c > »triptjoo win be eitttidrrrd u 
.•.ecclinoeduitttti scbwnberigiTa malo-Mo 
> -the ofcaitrbrj before commencement ef a 
/air." ; • . .. /J v. ‘ 

.‘I'/Aht -ptT^ipro*aHnj^Ui.*ul<a£ribers, 
br coding rcepoeci^U tbe payment, 

: ,/)«bsl1 ‘icte'trf - y ( >1 t 
AdroliaepCBti will b« haertid jtarrao- 
J. . ty-five-centa per tqtrare , ftrr the Snrt-inarr* 
r .tin*, 'anil ihirtjUevnB and a halfeenti fbr 
,1 oath coctinuiare j longer; e*e» in /proper- 

lytiw.- • . * >-'*» >\ 

‘tCT'Atl letter* a+lresneilto ■ the Editor’, 

. >o*t (aid, will rrcrhr-:_«lut. attention* 






:#-of thw National CJ jnmittre, , 
IN0, -BOSS, Pnb^ K.. Cora. 

|W. ;hi* .> 

i-drattr .} ? 

.Aj-.M’fiOT, Clerk'N. Coen.' >.fV. - 1 
•KUJAHHICKS, Clerk Ni Coiia'eil, ' , 

i '■ jiftj# Tjmrn, ■ 7fqo. *8 v 'l 622. . 

WnEEEti, lb o. great variety of. rice* 

: -emanating from diuipatioff, parti- 
* (Jala rfy • from inloiicatiou", apei gala* 

' tig M.c'a'rds. which, are to' prnva- 
t Icnt'at public place*, tbo national 
, tMutaittco a»l coaacil, -atclrtag i tie 
. ' truo tolercit ahd bappbeit oTUielr 
-.people, ;harn maturely tokoV thli 
-growing evil' into tfecir«Wrioot v eda> 

, aideration. emi beits.fuUy convin- 
ced that do oatiod . of people can 
■ .prosper and flourish or become mag- 
aauJmooa in character/tha basis of 
tvboae latra tie not founded upvo 
wirtM and inatL-n: tborefere. ! 



S cribe fcourt, jo be held at Ndw Toi 
oring ’Uie session of each’ ratio 
council, lobecbmjiMwJ of the ’•'*( 
ral circuit jadgea*; dclermWv’i 
eauaea which caajf be appealed -f"' 
■the dlatrict coorla; and '• Z. / '• 

, v IU iRtn hid, TheUbelRr 

dpprcpriatidg<foMy dollart for the i®£ ■ 
jwttxf sacbidilirtct* otfaniil;' raVefeV- 
by repeal'd,! and 3 that, in nitaroit 4 ^*- 
nation ahaU'oot’be accoo'nt able fora) 
plica fufmsHcd.the datrlcV coEcicllJ.. 

' Dr order of the Nislosal C«nicittrV,l : L 1 , 
"7 Jwo. ROSS. Preat N.-Cwa. 

, ’ • > - * 

■ PATH X KI1XER, ■ 

ELIJAH Hr6KS,Clert N. CivV: 
jA. M’coy.^cairi. N. Cnoaci). - 

■\ Tom, vYoiii t s/iesa.'^.V 

lietohid by the A'ul/emai Cowbalttt 
and Covacil, That the circuit juagri 
bo veiled with authority to nominate 
lithl hortc companies in their naj et - 
live dlatrict* . In « MO ok" reai^mitino' ct 
olberwhe. and auihorminaiion beb-f 



-^Uctebts 14, I8237|f;v‘ 
i^^jred/ThaLthi'b'aiineM of' Ihe' 
.’council, dolin’ the aeiairin, bo.auapeiw 
“(fed’dithi) Sabbat ha, and aJao, ilnt iho- 
m ercbxntal ^ pod jars,' and mechanics, 
pt-Nfw Xow^.clww. the door* of their 
tSopip pnd a'uspend all ^busia^-j and 
aoy.-nerioft ‘or :per*oa*J;vl^lati»g' ihh 
retOlutiaD'ahaij forfeit and pay tlto iunl 
of fiftceaTdoUariJ ; tp he'tmJlccled for 
the benefit of the nation by the proper 
oJBccr. ’• *-• - v • 



'* ' P AT H * KILLER, 

* ' citiAiujas Hicks.- ' ' . 

A,' MeCt)Y, Src’j to the Council, ■ 

t -A to Totro, Oelobir 0. 1823. 

• '■ Rtiohtd by thi .VuiiMUj) Camilla 
and Council, That all rejoin lions, em- 
acalii^ frbra eilhcr body, shall recciio 
the tioaoarrewe of i)m oilier, before 
ihe eaa.nt a<d iLeatme of thi> heed 

-M e. .1-11 w. -,_1 -J. 1 .U!. 



lAtvetT, otaya ± ' 

• f to* A lino ' I lS>* ' 



D r.i W4' wtj,- Of t *r> a* a wo-v &>. 

' Dr o*4-;*i»ay, ye jai 7 Ay dm* - 

TMAl 

' thWo^r.v. .. ,. ^ -. ...v-.:.. . 

• , . V; ■ . ,crPAyy v'eh JMiV 'v’jfy. 

* ‘ 0-1*4 S4- .- • ,■ 

• jiJBPay. 

■ ’ ' ( '•» 

. ■ < .tmwi, 8 o-v»a,1822. ; - 
■■ EJ>erw*0H»tr to- ary 
art, d# moE t»»o-A, per r.&auj out ■ 
trr.ee- a»4»Aar, utrt LraafiAJ^AT}' * ' * 
uaty iroww* taiti haJcr j«tveTi$Jt) - 
it-iuiiT, 4Driyiia d*p 4o»o-a.fy, 
oe airwei, *oPhRyio.fj(rAjc-n -Via* 
vc-ae*»a4*- <C(v«4 o>A*»Ti,ir, ’i>t 

Q*wr ChOLAAor. Toapawua o«ie-fW" > -. 

Trrru ae. ' cay o-uar *xe- v.tA, 
ao-aaer. Of aytM* aJleMe AO 
wif'ifJ*, at j.'tAG-AAnr e yv pa* 

\ey te 4* trio- TGi\oj>*viJ .*r-rr, . * 

M t MrOW-.lO- t>M AMT TO-j O-ITP 

j: aera.i uiou cw t cr < rv <>• 



l-*, :**■■■ 



o 

g 2 bs^it copir avamm 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



3 1 



eluding letters, titled "Communication of the 
Delegation of the Cherokee Nation to the Presi- 
dent of the United States . . . which discusses 
the Cherokee role in the Civil War. Further dis- 
cussion of the Civil War appears in the letter- 
book of Stand Watie, July 1863 to July 1864, and 
proceedings and laws of the executive council 
(M.2a-E.i). Note: much of this material is also 
kept in the Law Library, which provided some of 
the documents filmed. 

Annual reports of officers. 1880-1906. Com- 
bined with "Messages of the principal chief" 
(M.2a-D.2) and the minutes of some of the ad- 
ministrative officers' meetings (M.2a-D.24), these 
reports provide insights to some of the social and 
economic issues facing the tribe at the turn of the 
century. 

M.2X contains miscellaneous Cherokee docu- 
ments, as well as some for the Creek, Osage, and 
Seminole. It also includes an 1850 compilation of 
an Ottawa alphabet and portions of the New Tes- 
tament in Ottawa. 

The records of the remaining four of the so- 
called "Five Civilized Tribes" are not as compre- 
hensive as those of the Cherokee, since most of 
their records were not available at the time of mi- 
crofilming. The bulk of material for the Chicka- 
saw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole consists of 
tribal laws and editions of constitutions, many of 
which are in the native languages as well as En- 
glish. The laws, nonetheless, reflect interesting 
social issues, such as the Indians' relations with 
the blacks and whites living among them. A few 
other items of interest are listed below. 

Reel 2 of M.2b-B:C contains a "Compact be- 
tween the several tribes of the Indian Territory," 
a legal agreement to resolve intertribal issues 
among the Five Civilized Tribes and the Caddo, 
Comanche, Delaware, and Wichita tribes. 

Journal of the General Council of the Indian 
Territory, 1870-85. A council of all the tribes in 
Indian Territory, which by this time included 
Ottawa, Shawnee, Quapaw, Seneca, Wyandot, 



o 




Peoria, Sac and Fox, and Osage. The sixth annual 
conference of 1875 was a pan-Indian congress of 
numerous tribes, many of whom described their 
respective conditions, and who sought advice 
from the more acculturated tribes about follow- 
ing their style of living. 

Journal of the Union Mission to the Osages in 
Arkansas, 1820-26 (Mss. 314 pages). 

Pennsylvania 

The Penn Manuscripts, 1687-1801. Most of the 
material dates from the 1750s, especially the 
French and Indian War, and some of it has been 
published. Journals of Conrad Weiser appear, as 
do reports by George Croghan, Daniel Claus, 
and Moravian missionaries. Among the tribes 
included are the Cherokee, Delaware, Miami, 
Nanticoke, Shawnee, Six Nations, Susquehanna, 
and Wyandot. 

Rhode Island 

One hundred and thirty-four manuscript items 
on the Narragansett cover the period from 1735 
to 1859 and deal with land problems, tribal dis- 
sensions, and oversight issues, primarily involv- 
ing the Ninigret family. 

South Carolina 

Two reels contain the original manuscript vol- 
umes on Indian affairs from the Colonial Records 
of South Carolina, including the Journals of the 
Commissioners of Indian Trade from September of 
1710 to August of 1718; Documents Relating to In- 
dian Affairs, from 1750 to 1760; and the Journal 
of the Directors of the Cherokee Trade from 1762 
to 1765. These documents have also been pub- 
lished by the University of South Carolina Press, 
however, and are, therefore, more easily read 
in printed form. The journals of the commis- 
sioners are available by Library of Congress class 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



3 2 



number E78.S6S65, and the Documents . . . and 
Journal of the Directors . . . are available by 
E78.S6S6. Predominant among the tribes in- 
cluded are Catawba, Cherokee, Chickasaw, and 
Creek, but entries also appear for Tuscarora and 
smaller tribes such as Congaree, Pee Dee, Wacca- 
maw, and Yuchi. 



Historical Research Collections 

American Culture Series 1493-1875. Ann Arbor, 
Mich.: University Microfilms, 1956-76; Micro- 
film 01291; Guide: Z1215.A583 

This is a series of early books and pamphlets 
filmed from the collections of numerous institu- 
tions, including the Library of Congress. The Li- 
brary did not acquire reels one through twenty- 
six, which contain about forty titles on Indians 
out of more than two hundred titles. 

The guide for this series has an author, title, 
and subject index with general headings and 
subheadings under "Indians of North America" 
and under specific tribes. 

Doctoral Dissertatmt Series. Ann Arbor, Mich.: 
University Microfilms International, 1938-. 

The Library of Congress has those disserta- 
tions that are part of the University Microfilms 
Project, and for which an abstract identification 
number appears after an entry in Dissertation Ab- 
stracts. A special guide. North American Indians: a 
Dissertation Index (Ann Arbor, Mich.: University 
Microfilms International, 1977; Z1209.2.N67U54 
1977, and supplement 1979), identifies by author 
and by key word those works on Indians be- 
tween 1904 and 1976. Other dissertations date 
from 1861, and comprehensive indexes for the 
series exist in the Main Reading Room reference 
collection. In addition. Dissertation Abstracts 
Ondisc, a CD-ROM database also available in 



the Main Reading Room, provides comprehen- 
sive coverage from 1861 forward, with the added 
convenience of quick, current indexing and 
display of the abstracts in one source. 

Library of American Civilization. Chicago: Library 
Resources, 1971-72; Microfiche 1008; Guide: 
Z1236.L45 

A collection of books, pamphlets, periodicals, 
public and private documents relating to all as- 
pects of American life and literature from the 
fifteenth century to World War I. Most of the 
coverage, however, is the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries. A four-volume guide pro- 
vides an author, title, and subject index that fol- 
lows Library of Congress subject headings as of 
1972, and a "biblioguide," which arranges the 
material under broad disciplinary headings. 

Pamphlets in American History. Glen Rock, N.J.: 
Microfilming Corp. of America, 1978; Micro- 
fiche 1014; Guide: Z1236.M54 

Group I of this series contains more than 1,500 
rare Indian-related pamphlets from the late eigh- 
teenth to the early twentieth centuries. Topics of 
these tracts are diverse: Indian biographies, mis- 
sionary and government activities, wars, ser- 
mons, speeches, and essays on Indian affairs, ed- 
ucation, tribal charters, constitutions and laws, 
ethnological obst vations, and linguistic tracts. 

The guide provides author, title, and subject 
indexes. 

Western Americana , 1550-1900. 2 vols. New 
Haven, Conn.: Research Publications, 1975; 
Microfilm 51566; Guide: Z1251.W5W48 

This collection of over 7,000 titles, assembled 
with the cooperation of Yale University and the 
Newberry Library, represents basic published 
sources — many of thenYrare or not easily avail- 
able — for study of the exploration, settlement. 



54 



GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



3 3 



and development of the Trans-Mississippi West. 
They consist mainly of personal narratives by 
participants in the frontier experience, but also 
include other relevant works. 

A two-volume guide provides catalog entries 
arranged by author and subject. Topics on Indi- 
ans are entered either under the general heading 
''Indians of North America" and its subdivi- 
sions, or under specific tribes. 

Periodicals 

American Indian Periodicals from the State His- 
torical Society of Wisconsin. New York: Clearwater 
Publishing; Bethesda, Md.: University Publica- 
tions of America, 1981-; Microfilm 94/2119; 
Guide 359 

Thirteen reels contain forty-one titles of 
American Indian-produced periodicals. 

American Indian Periodicals in the Princeton Uni- 
versity Library. New York: Clearwater Publishing, 
1981-; Microfiche (o) 92/ 6012 

More than 2,000 microfiche represent about 
130 titles produced by American Indian groups 
and Indian interest organizations. There is some 
overlap with the titles that follow. 

Periodicals by and about the North American Indian. 
Glen Rock, N.J.: Microfilming Corp. of America, 
1974; Microfilm 90/8032; Guide 260. Periodicals 
by and about North American Indians , 1923-1981. 
Bethesda, Md.: Congressional Information Ser- 
vice, 1982; Microfilm 94/ 2118; Guide 341 

Because of changes in the microfilm publish- 
ers, the Library received the two parts of this se- 
ries at different times; hence, the different titles 
and microfilm and guide numbers. The series 
by Microfilming Corporation contains forty-two 
reels of the Smithsonian Institution's Bureau of 
American Ethnology bulletins from 1887 to 1971, 



o 




and its annual reports from 1879 to 1931. The se- 
ries by Congressional Information Service con- 
tains eighty-two reels of publications produced 
by Indian groups themselves. There is partial 
overlap with the previous title. 

Reform Organizations 

Annual Report of the Executive Committee of the In- 
dian Rights Association , 1883-1934. Philadelphia: 
The Association, n.d.; Microfilm 38734; and the 
Association's Publications (1st series, 1882-92, 
Microfilm 8124E; 2nd series, numbers 1-99, [#19 
and #35 missing] 1893-1915, Microfilm 04190); 
Guide 17 

This organization has concerned itself with 
the protection of the legal rights and welfare of 
American Indians. Included among the various 
publications are its constitution and by-laws, 
statements by Indian individuals, pamphlets on 
Indian related issues, accounts of conditions 
among tribes, and public addresses. Some of its 
pamphlets may also appear in the General Col- 
lections or among other microform series de- 
scribed below. See also the association's listing 
under the Manuscript Division. 

Archive of the Fourth Russell Tribunal on the Rights 
of the Indians of the Americas. Zug, Switzerland: 
IDC, 1985; Microfiche (w) 87/203 (E); Guide 
124 (in English and Spanish) 

Organized by a private Dutch group called 
the Workgroup Indian Project, in cooperation 
with the Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation, the 
tribunal had an eleven-member jury that met in 
Rotterdam in 1980 to consider alleged violations 
of the rights of the Indians in the Americas. 
The collection contains seventy groups of docu- 
ments, forty-seven of which relate to the cases 
presented to the tribunal. Twelve of these in- 
volve Indians within the United States and five 




GENERAL COLLECTIONS 



3 4 



involve those in Canada. Each case may in- 
clude historical documents, statements and testi- 
mony by Indian representatives, articles, legal 
briefs, and correspondence. The guide contains a 
checklist of materials in each document group, 
as well as an index of topics and tribes. 

The Library of World Peace Studies . Edited by War- 
ren F. Kuehl. New York: Clearwater Publishing 
Co., 1978-82; Microfiche 90/10 (H) (negative 
image); Guide 244 

This microfiche collection contains the pro- 
ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the LakeMohonk 
Conference in Behalf of the Civilization and Legal 
Protection of the Indians of the U.S . from 1883 to 
1929. This gathering at various times included 
benevolent association representatives, minis- 
ters, journalists, active or retired government 
and military officials, and others interested in the 
welfare of American Indians. Theodore Roo- 
sevelt and Rutherford B. Hayes, for example, 
were among the attendees who met to discuss 
and to offer solutions for problems in Indian af- 
fairs. The diversity of professions represented 
among the participants gives an interesting 
glimpse at the attitudes toward Indian people 
and experiences with them. Each proceeding has 
a subject index. A separate, printed compilation 
exists of these indexes, The Lake Mohonk Confer- 
ence of Friends of the Indian: Guide to the Annual Re- 
ports, with an introduction that discusses the 
Mohonk conferences. 

Tribal Records 

(note: See also the section on Oklahoma under 
the State Records Microfilm in the Government Re- 
lations section, pp. 30-31) 



Major Council Meetings of American Indian Tribes . 
Frederick, Md.: University Publications of Amer- 
ica, C1982; Microfilm 88/253; Guides 134a, 134b 

Divided into two sections covering 1911-56 
and 1957-70, this collection was selected from 
documents in the National Archives' Record 
Group 75, Bureau of Indian Affairs central 
classified files. Tribes included are the Arapaho, 
Cherokee, Cheyenne, Chippewa, the Mississippi 
Band of Choctaw, intertribal meetings of the Five 
Civilized Tribes of Oklahoma, Klamath, Semi- 
nole, Sioux, and Ute. 

MULTIMEDIA FORMATS 

American Indian studies are becoming part of 
the rapidly developing electronic media. A few 
titles specifically dealing with Indian topics have 
begun to appear in CD-ROM format, including 
multimedia publications containing text, visuals, 
and sound recordings. These formats enable a 
user to experience in one sitting a broad range of 
Indian research that might otherwise require vis- 
its to different locations. This is an evolving area 
of technology, as well as reference and research, 
and the Library's policies and services are devel- 
oping accordingly. 

Titles and subjects in electronic formats are 
generally searchable in the Library's computer 
catalog. A researcher interested in electronic for- 
mats for American Indian subjects may first wish 
to check locally in guides such as CD-ROMS in 
Print to identify particular titles and the equip- 
ment needed to handle them, and then call 
ahead to see if the Library has them and if they 
can be read here. As of this writing, however, 
machines are not available in the main or related 
reading rooms to read CD-ROMs. 



SPECIAL 

COLLECTIONS 



While the general collections can satisfy many 
research needs, other materials in the Library's 
special collections offer an additional wealth of 
potential for Indian-related pursuits. Rare and 
illustrated books, broadsides, manuscripts, gov- 
ernment documents, laws and legal materials, 
visual materials — from photographs to posters, 
maps, music and recorded sound, motion pic- 
tures, television shows, and documentaries are 
all available to help researchers gain a more 
extensive view of Indian affairs. In the sections 
that follow, each of these special areas are dis- 
cussed. Keep in mind that in an institution the 
size of the Library of Congress, with its ongoing 
acquisitions and its continuing analysis of ma- 
terials already held, none of the sections below 
represents a complete listing of the Library's 
holdings. It is wise always to consult reference 

librarians and specialists, whose assistance can 

, "Pehriska-Ruhpa," by Karl Bodmer in Reise in das innere Nord-America in den 

be as valuable, or more SO, than a printed Jahren 1832 bis 1834 by Prince Maximilian Alexander Philipp von Wied- 

Neuwied (Koblenz, 1839-41). E165.W64, atlas (LC-USZC4-4804, color; LC- 
8 u 'de. USZ62-91 83, black and white). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 





This Minnetarre (Hidatsa) warrior, and principal leader of the Dog Society in his 
village, is shown in a magnificent ceremonial costume. Members of the Real 
Dog Society were expected to be daring and brave in battle. Eighty-one hand- 
colored copperplate engravings after Swiss artist Karl Bodmer's magnificent and 
accurate watercolors of Plains Indians can be found in the picture atlas accom- 
panying Prince Maximilian's two-volume account of their travels up the Mis- 
souri River. 
v * * r * ** 

o t 




RARE BOOK 
AND SPECIAL 
COLLECTIONS 
DIVISION 



O 

ERLC 



INTRODUCTION 

The Rare Book and Special Collections Division 
holds the books that are the foundation stones 
for the Library of Congress. Thomas Jefferson's 
personal library, purchased by Congress in 1815, 
resides here. Jefferson maintained an active in- 
terest in American Indians and their languages 
and the division that preserves his library is ap- 
propriately rich in accounts by European and 
American explorers, settlers, missionaries, and 
historians of encounters with Indian peoples. 

The Library did not create a separate Rare 
Book and Special Collections Division until 1934 
when it moved into its present reading room and 
stack area, but the institution had been actively 
seeking out collections of rare materials since 
the visionary Ainsworth Rand Spofford was 
Librarian of Congress (1864-97). The purchase 
of the large private library of Peter Force, the 
Russian collection of Gennadii Yudin, and 3,000 
fifteenth-century books from Otto H. Vollbehr, 
as well as gifts from many donors, including the 
large library of Joseph Meredith Toner and the 
collection of John Boyd Thacher, a leading nine- 
teenth century authority on the history of dis- 
covery, necessitated a separate, secure quarters 
and staff. Between 1943 and 1979, Lessing J. 
Rosenwald presented to the Library 2,600 rare 
illustrated books — its finest single collection 
of rare books — including some of the earliest 
images made by Europeans of North American 
Indian peoples, collected and published by 
Theodor de Bry. 

Today the division's collections — including 
well over one hundred separate collections 
with their own indexes — amount to approxi- 
mately 650,000 books, broadsides, pamphlets, 
theater playbills, title pages, prints, posters, 
photographs, and medieval and Renaissance 
manuscripts. 

These abundant materials include many key 
works for the study of the early contact between 



58 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



3 7 



Europeans and various American Indian groups, 
beginning with two copies — one illustrated — of 
Columbus's printed letter announcing his dis- 
covery of the Americas and calling the people 
there "los Indios." Accounts of early encounters 
with Indian peoples in North America include 
those of Hernando de Soto in the Southeast and 
Southwest, with significant references to Indian 
political alliances, and distinctive cultures from 
Florida to eastern Texas; Alvar Nunez Cabeza de 
Vaca's autobiographical work on his 1520s to 
1530s trek across Texas and the near southwest; 
Rene de Laudonniere's personal remembrances 
of the ill-fated French colonization in Florida in 
the 1560s and his impressions of the Timucua 
and other Atlantic coastal groups; Samuel de 
Champlain's various early seventeenth-century 
descriptions of the peoples and places of Canada 
and Maine; as well as many first hand accounts 
of European explorers, expedition leaders, colo- 
nizers, and missionaries as they for the first time 
met and tried to describe Indian cultures in what 
is now the United States. 

The division also has rich collections on 
British colonial administration, the American 
Revolution, the early American republic, and the 
westward movement of explorers and settlers in 
the nineteenth century. Period documentation of 
contacts with Indian tribes includes copies of the 
famous pre-Civil War portfolios of color litho- 
graphs depicting Indian individuals and tribes. 
These valuable visual records of Indian life be- 
fore the invention of photography were en- 
hanced recently by the addition of a copy of 
Prince Maximilian Alexander Philipp von Wied- 
Neuwied's Reise in das inner e Nord- America in den 
}ahren 1832 bis 1834 (Coblenz, 1839-41), includ- 
ing the supplemental picture atlas of eighty- 
one hand-colored copperplate engravings after 
paintings by Karl Bodmer of Plains Indians. The 
division also holds a complete set of the most 
extensive photographic record of Indian tribes 
of the early twentieth century: Edward S. Cur- 
O 




tis's twenty- volume The North American Indian , 
with twenty portfolios of photogravures (Seattle 
and Cambridge, Mass., 1907-30). The Prints and 
Photographs Division holds contact prints made 
from Curtis's large-format negatives, many of 
which were not published by him. 

Many of these works have appeared also in 
reprint form, which can be found normally in 
the Library's General Collections. While in most 
cases little distinction exists between the intellec- 
tual content of the original imprint and the 
reprinted, e.g., facsimile, editions, opportunities 
for comparison of editions and to physically use 
the original edition exist. More recent, non-rare 
editions may include translations into English, 
indexes, supplementary documents, and schol- 
arly assessments that intervening researchers 
have provided. Yet, it is important to review the 
original source to ascertain the original contents 
and to obtain the "feel" of the historic document. 
In addition, researchers and curators looking for 
high quality illustrations for publication or exhi- 
bitions will find a wealth of material in original 
editions. 

Although much of the materials held by the 
Rare Book and Special Collections Division de- 
scribe Indian peoples from a European and 
Euro-American point of view, colored by classi- 
cal or religious influences and cultural and per- 
sonal biases, they should not be dismissed as 
mere examples of cultural imperialism. In the 
absence of written and pictorial records by In- 
dian peoples themselves, these documents often 
provide the only documentation we have. By 
looking at them with keen awareness of the 
probable bias of their authors, a researcher can at 
the very least understand the motivations of 
those who recorded the encounters. 

Not all European depictions of Indian life 
need be treated with a high degree of suspicion. 
For example, it has been broadly accepted that 
John White's drawings between 1584 and 1587 
of Carolina Algonquians are living, vigorous 

53 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



3 8 



expressions of a non-European culture. His 
drawings, transferred into prints under the di- 
rection of Theodor de Bry, serve as invaluable 
documents in the study of pre-European Car- 
olina Tidewater history. 

An educated writer, such as Giovanni da Ver- 
razzano, produced a many-sided account of 
a voyage of exploration, but his knowledge of 
classical tales about the barbarians known to 
Mediterranean cultures often distorted his ac- 
count of what he saw, or thought he saw. Often 
the simple seaman or soldier, a Bernal Diaz del 
Castillo, Hans Staden, or Miles Philips, brought 
the new scene and the newly envisaged cultural 
landscape most sharply and objectively to light. 
Although necessarily hardened toward potential 
adversaries, soldiers and sailors often had a con- 
siderable capacity for identifying with the en- 
emy. Many of the most useful narratives are by 
such individuals. 

On the other hand, the cleric, and more espe- 
cially the missionary, was often likely to distort 
by condemnation and exaggeration the non- 
compatible culture. These individuals observed 
the new cultures primarily with the thought of 
transforming their ideology, and this kept the 
great majority of them from seeing clearly what 
it was that they proposed to alter. There were ex- 
ceptions. Bartolome de las Casas tried hard, if 
not too clearly, to see the conquest from the 
American Indian point of view; Gonzalo Fernan- 
dez de Oviedo y Valdes expressed his disgust at 
their practices yet gave some of the best descrip- 
tions of the way the American Indian peoples 
got things done; Richard Hakluyt swayed be- 
tween his strong Protestant reaction against pa- 
ganism and his objective curiosity about the 
non-European world and its inhabitants. 

The Jesuits, who sought to apply a detached 
and critical intelligence to the problems of con- 
version, pushed aside the more elementary mis- 
sionary misconceptions of non-European and 
non-Christian society. In the Jesuit letters, the 



external descriptions provided by lay travellers 
were paralleled by attempts to reveal the inner 
character of the non-European societies. 

The researcher will find two works especially 
useful in sorting through the various accounts 
that have provided some of the first and perhaps 
most compelling images of American Indian 
peoples and society. They are The Discovery of 
North America by W. P Cumming, R. A. Skelton 
and D. B. Quinn (London: Elek, 1971; E101 .C96) 
and The Exploration of North America 1630-1776 
by W. P. Cumming, D. B. Quinn, et al. (London: 
Elek, 1974; E121 .E9 1974c). 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 

RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL 
COLLECTIONS READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Jefferson Building, 2nd Floor, Room LJ 
206; telephone (202) 707-5434 

HOURS: Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 
5:00 P.M. 

ACCESS AND USE: Researchers are required to 
present a Library of Congress photo ID card when 
they register and to use pencil when taking notes. 
Any requests for photocopying materials, including 
microfilming and the preparation of photoprints or 
color transparencies, must be directed to the Library's 
Photoduplication Service. 

Catalogs 

Because nearly four-fifths of the division's mater- 
ial consists of a group of collections built around 
specific subjects, chronological periods, geo- 
graphical areas, formats, and authors, only a 
portion of the total holdings — the general, or 
classified, collection of books — is represented 
in the main catalog of the Library of Congress. 
The division's own dictionary catalog contains 
650,000 cards that provide access to almost the 
whole of the division's collections by author or 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



3 9 



other form of main entry and, in some instances, 
by subject and title also. In addition to this cen- 
tral card catalog, the division has created over 
one hundred special card files describing indi- 
vidual collections or special aspects of books 
from many collections. 

Special Collections 

Indian-related material can be found in many 
special collections in addition to the general 
book collection: 

American Almanac Collection : 3,896 titles; sev- 
enteenth through nineteenth centuries 

American and Foreign Magazines Collection: 
3,872 titles; seventeenth to early twentieth 
centuries 

American Imprints, 1640-1800 : 16,990 titles 

Bible Collection: 1,471 titles; early editions and 
rare issues in many languages, including 
Indian languages 

Broadside Collection: 30,500 items; mostly 
American single-sheet publications; six- 
teenth to twentieth centuries. See Catalog of 
Broadsides in the Rare Book Division , Library of 
Congress (Boston: G. K. Hall & Co., 1972; 
Z1231.B7 A5) 

Dime Novel Collection: 35,000 titles; popular 
paperback fiction, nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries 

Documents of the First Fourteen Congresses : 
12,922 titles 

Benjamin Franklin Collection: 850 titles; publi- 
cations written, printed, edited, or pub- 
lished by Franklin 

Henry Harrisse Collection: 414 items; publi- 
cations pertaining to early exploration of 
America 

Lessing /. Rosenwald Collection : 2,653 titles;. il- 
lustrated books, fifteenth through twentieth 
centuries. See A Catalog of the Gifts- of Lessing 
]. Rosemvald to the Library of Congress (Wash- 



ington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1977; 
Z881.U5 1977) 

Spanish American Imprint Collection: 368 titles; 
books from various Latin American coun- 
tries, sixteenth to nineteenth centuries 
Johii Boyd Thacher Collection: 5,193 items, in- 
cluding incunabula and early Americana. 
See The Collection of John Boyd Thacher . . . 
(Washington, D.C., 1931; Z881.U5 1931) 
Wag7ier-Camp Collection: 451 titles; Western 
Americana selected from Henry R. Wag- 
ner's and Charles L. Camp's bibliography 
The Plains and the Rockies (San Francisco, 
1921; Z1251.W5 W2) 

□ SELECTED BOOKS 
AND COLLECTIONS 

This brief description of some of the rich variety 
of materials in the Library of Congress's Rare 
Book and Special Collections Division is in- 
tended to suggest in general terms to researchers 
the broad parameter of materials that one can 
find on American Indian topics from the late 
fifteenth to the twentieth century. Individual re- 
searchers, with different intents and interests, 
should be able to uncover equally specific, 
rare, and exquisite records. Selections are 
arranged thematically and then chronologically, 
as follows: 

■ Early Contact: Discoverers and Explorers 

Early Spanish Contact 
French and English in the East and South 
of North America 

Spanish Penetration of the Southwest 
Spanish American Imprint Collection 
French Contacts in the Upper Midwest 
Jesuit Relations 

Contacts on Northwest Coast and California 

■ ' Captivity Narratives 

■ Government Documents: Franklin treaties 

■ Bible Collection 



0 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



4 0 



■ Indian Portfolios: Prints and Photographs 

■ Nineteenth Century Exploration and Travel 
in the American West: Documentary, Popu- 
lar, and Fictional Accounts 

Wagner-Camp Collection 
The Dime Novel Collection 

■ Twentieth Century Decorative Arts 

Early Contact: 

Discoverers and Explorers 

The following examples of the rich varieties of 
materials available for the study of the initial 
contact of European and American Indian cul- 
tures in the Rare Book collections serve merely 
as the extreme tip of a large iceberg. The thou- 
sands of records reporting on multiple Indian 
cultures by European rivals vying for control in 
what is now the United States, such as those pit- 
ting the Spanish against the French or French 
against the English, and so on, or by proponents 
of conflicting religious views seeking souls in the 
Americas, provide researchers with ample de- 
scriptions, from different perpectives and with 
different intentions, of Indian cultural, political, 
and economic activities during the initial contact 
with Europeans. 

Early Spanish Contact 

Although the scope of this guide is generally 
limited to America north of Mexico, the division 
holds copies of some of the classic works de- 
scribing Columbus's discovery of Caribbean is- 
lands and the subsequent Spanish colonization 
of the hemisphere. These works provided the 
first representation for Europeans of American 
Indian peoples and their influence endured for 
generations: 

Historia Baetica. Carol Verardi. [Basel]: I[ohann] 
B[ergmann, de Olpe], 1494; Incim.1494.47 Voll 
H15942 



This edition of Columbus's 1493 letter an- 
nouncing the discovery of what became known 
as America has several woodcuts, including a 
depiction of the Spanish ship landing on Hispan- 
iola with native people gathered on shore watch- 
ing the arrival (see Rare Book portfolio). Since 
Columbus thought that he had arrived in the 
East Indies, the letter incorrectly uses the name 
Indian to describe the indigenous peoples of the 
Americas, the generic identification that en- 
dured. Columbus wrote that both the men and 
women wore no clothes and were timid, guile- 
less, and generous. His letter spread quickly 
throughout Europe, with numerous editions in 
various languages published within a year, an 
astonishing number for a fifteenth-century book; 
these included versions in Rome, Florence, Paris, 
Basel, and Antwerp. 

In addition to this edition, which was pub- 
lished bound with an epic poem celebrating 
Christian Spain's triumph over the Moors at 
Granada, the Library possesses an even earlier 
edition of Columbus's 1493 letter, the second Ro- 
man edition in Latin entitled Epistola de insulis 
nuper inventis (Thacher Collection No. 731; In- 
cun. 1493. C6). It was printed after April 30, 1493, 
only two months following Columbus's return to 
Europe from his first voyage. 

De orbe nous decades. Pietro Martire d'Anghiera. 
Alcala: A. Guillelmi, 1516; Thacher Collection 
No. 635; E141.A58 1516 

Commonly known as Peter Martyr's Decades , 
this is a collection of his letters sent from Spain 
to prominent individuals in Italy attesting to the 
news of the early Spanish voyages to America, 
including those of Columbus and Vespucci. Mar- 
tyr continued Columbus's characterization of the 
American Indian peoples as noble savages living 
in a paradise without books, laws, and, as he put 
it, "lying judges." This description, which fol- 
lowed his P. Martyris Angli mediolanensis opera , 
legatio babylonica , oceani decas . . . (Sevilla, 1511; 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



4 1 



E141.A5 1511a Thacher Collection), which con- 
tains a map showing the southern tip of Florida, 
echoed through many of the other early explo- 
ration and discovery accounts. These included 
La historia general delas Indias by Gonzalo Fernan- 
dez de Oviedo y Valdes (n.p., 1535; E141.O92) 
and also his Libro XX. De la segunda parte de la 
general historia de las Indias (Valladolid, 1535; 
E141.O942), Jose de Acosta's Historia natural y 
moral de las Indias (Seville, 1590; E141.A283), and 
Andre Thevet's Historia delVIndia America (Ven- 
ice, 1561; E141.T43). 

Brevissima relacion de la destruycion de las Indies. 
Bartolome de las Casas. Seville: S. Trugillo, 1552; 
F1411.C25 

If Peter Martyr described the Indian peoples 
of the Indies as living in paradise, Dominican 
priest Bartolome de las Casas described their 
rough treatment under Spanish rule as virtually 
living in hell. Las Casas recounted for the Span- 
ish court the mutilations inflicted by Spaniards 
on the American Indians and the fact that dogs 
were kept to hunt them down. He personally ex- 
pressed his horror to Spain's King Charles V in 
pressing for the passage of the New Laws related 
to the treatment of Indian peoples in the Ameri- 
cas. His impassioned pleas are landmarks in the 
description of European and American Indian 
contact, and were heavily used by those opposed 
to Spanish successes in the Americas to create 
the Black Legend regarding Spain's legacy there. 
Also important is his Aqui se cotiene treynta propo- 
siciones muy juridicas, published in Seville in 1552 
(F1411.C24). 

La Florida del ynca. Garcilaso de la Vega, el Inca. 
Lisbon: P. Crasbeeck, 1605; E125.S7G1 

Garcilaso de la Vega, the mestizo son of an In- 
can princess and a Spanish conquistador in Peru, 
wrote an extraordinarily rich book on Hernando 
de Soto's 1539-42 expedition through Spanish 

o 



Florida to East Texas, based on eye-witness ac- 
counts. In this work, he praised both Spaniards 
and Indian leaders, providing oral record from 
both sides; especially noteworthy is the speech of 
Florida cacique Acuera to Soto. La Florida del 
ynca , completed in 1599, contained one of the 
earliest descriptions of multiple Indian cultures 
in the southeastern and trans-Mississippi por- 
tions of the United States in confrontation with a 
sizeable Spanish expeditionary force. Instances 
of cooperation with, and opposition to, that force 
filled Garcilaso 's writings. This remarkable ac- 
count is filled with valuable information on In- 
dian land use, inheritance, size of communities, 
agricultural production and variety, trading ac- 
tivities, intra- and inter-tribal relationships, mili- 
tary prowess, and numerous religious and social 
practices. In addition to a full record of the Soto 
expedition, the author described subsequent 
Spanish efforts in Florida, which then included 
most of southeastern United States, through the 
ill-fated Jesuit mission to Ajacan in the Chesa- 
peake Bay area in 1570-71. A French translation, 
Histoire de la Floride (Paris: G. Clovzier, 1670; 
E125.S7 G31), and a twentieth-century English 
translation. The Florida of the Inca; a history of the 
adelantado, Hernando de Soto , Governor and Captain 
General of the kingdom of Florida, and of other heroic 
Spanish and Indian cavaliers (Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 1951; E125.S7 G26), are also in the 
Library of Congress. 

French and English Contact with East 
and South Coasts of North America 

L'Histoire Notable de la Floride Sitvee en hides Occi- 
dentales. Rene Goulaine de Laudonniere. Paris: 
G. Auvray, 1586; F314.L37 

An original non-illustrated edition of Lau- 
donniere's account of his voyages in the early 
1560s to Florida and his experiences among the 
Timucua during his attempt to establish a Hu- 
guenot colony there, this edition also includes 



EARLY CONTACTS WITH EUROPEANS 

AOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOA< 

y WOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOYOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOW< 

GATEWAYS 



At the time of contact, the region that became the 
United States was filled with hundreds of tribes 
speaking a multiplicity of languages and dialects 
and occupying a range of habitats. One result of 
this diversity and fragmentation was the emer- 
gence of complicated alliances and antagonisms 
among Indians and with Europeans; another was 
the dependence of Europeans on the local people 
for their very survival. At first, groups usually wel- 
comed Europeans and only later resisted them. 

While parallel settlements occurred, conflicts 
developed as European peoples attempted to 
force their cultural practices on existing struc- 
tures, disrupting long-established living patterns 
and often leaving a legacy of fear and hostility. 
Devastating diseases, warfare, and occasionally 
enslavement reduced American populations 
drastically. Yet, in vast stretches of America, no 
European contact occurred until long after the 
initial voyages of exploration were completed. 
Ultimately, Indian societies endured significant 
disruption to customs, practices, and spiritual be- 
liefs. But these societies did survive and adapt to 
the presence of Europeans in their midst. 

Europeans — French, Spanish, Portuguese, and 
English — arrived in the sixteenth century sporadi- 
cally, in small numbers, and in pursuit of various 
objectives. With the exception of fishermen, 
whalers, and fur traders, none of the Europeans 
found what they sought. There was no passage to 
Asia, nor were there great accumulated riches of 
gold and silver. Nor did Europeans confront an 
untamed wilderness but, in many areas, encoun- 
tered densely settled populations who carefully 



managed and utilized the land and its plant and 
animal life. The Hurons of the Great Lakes region, 
among others, lived in semipermanent villages of 
800 to 1 ,600 people. Some of the largest and mil- 
itarily strongest groups, such as the Five Nations 
of the Iroquois and the Creek, were able to dic- 
tate the terms of their relationship with 
Europeans. 

Spanish forays into the region began early in 
the sixteenth century. These expeditions included 
those of Hernando de Soto in the Southeast and 
Vazquez de Coronado in the Southwest. At that 
time, attempts to settle and exploit the Southwest 
all but ceased until the end of the century with 
the expedition of Juan de Onate and the arrival of 
the Franciscan missionaries. Spanish activity in 
Florida resulted in the founding of St. Augustine 
in 1 565. In the late sixteenth century, the English 
under Walter Raleigh attempted unsuccessfully to 
found a settlement in the mid-Atlantic region. 

With permanent European settlements in the 
seventeenth century, relations with the Indian 
tribes became uneasy and frequently hostile. The 
two worlds — European and Indian — remained for 
the most part sharply separated and fundamen- 
tally at odds, notwithstanding alliances made for 
purposes of trade or war. 

AOfOAOfO 

WHERETO LOOK: Material for the era of Euro- 
pean exploration can be found in the General 
Collections, Rare Book and Special Collections, 
Manuscript, Prints and Photographs, and Geogra- 
phy and Map Divisions, and the Law Library. 



^TOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOl 

C>AOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTO^ 




"Outina defeats Potanou with the aid of the French," from Brevis narratio by Theodor de Bry (Frankfurt, 1591). F31 4.L33 
(LC-USZ62-370). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



Chief Outina used the French in his battle against the enemy Potanou in 1564 in Florida. Outina placed the French soldiers 
at the front of the attack and in a short time routed Potanou. The French were used in. similar fashion by a number of the In - 
dian leaders in Florida as the French desire to reach gold and silver sources required the support of various warring factions 
of Florida Indians. 





4 3 












RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



4 4 



o 

ERIC 



an account of Dominique de Gourgues' 1568 re- 
prisal raid on the Spanish in Florida. 

La Floride Frangaise, Scenes de la Vie Indienne, 
Peintes en 1564. Charles Germain Marie Bourel 
de la Ronciere. Paris: Les Editions nationales, 
1928; F314.L33 

This work reproduces in color Jacques Le 
Moyne de Morgues' original sixteenth-century 
drawings and watercolors of American Indian 
life in Florida and South Carolina, when Le 
Moyne accompanied Rene de Laudonniere's ex- 
pedition to establish a Huguenot colony. 

A briefe and true report of the newfound land of Vir- 
ginia . Thomas Hariot. Francoforti ad Moenum: 
Typis I. Wecheli, sumtibus vero T. de Bry, 1590; 
Rosenwald Collection no. 723; F229.H27 1390 

In 1585 Hariot sailed on an exploration with 
Sir Walter Raleigh, to what is now known as 
North Carolina. Raleigh's expedition made con- 
tact with American Indian peoples throughout 
the voyage, and his party explored inland, giv- 
ing Europe some of the most detailed accounts of 
Indian culture. The artist John White accompa- 
nied the explorers and made detailed watercol- 
ors of Indian villages and customs. Though first 
published in 1588 without illustrations, this 1590 
edition contained uncolored engravings based 
on White's observations. Hariot's account was in- 
cluded in a larger effort by Theodor De Bry to 
compile sixteenth-century exploration narratives 
for the Americas, which he published in Frank- 
furt between 1390 and I634. 

A census of the Library's holdings of De Bry's 
works appears on pages 236-39 in A Catalog of 
the Gifts of Lessing J. Rosenwald . . . (Washington, 
D.C.: Library of Congress, 1977; Z881.U3 1977). 
The catalog describes Rosenwald's magnificent 
collection of illustrated books and manuscripts, 
produced between the fifteenth and twentieth 
centuries, that was given to the Library for the 
most part between 1943 and 1973. Few items 




pertain to Native Americans; his rich group of 
De Bry's works is an exception. 

New English Canaan or Newe Canaan . Thomas 
Morton. Amsterdam: J. F. Stam, 1637; F67.M88 
Morton provides a descriptive account of the 
Indian peoples of New England, especially in 
Massachusetts, at the point of early contact with 
the English. He describes the language, religious 
beliefs, architecture, and clothing styles of the 
people, as well as the geographical setting. 

A Briefe Narration of the Originall Undertakings of 
the Advancement of Plantations into the Parts of 
America. Ferdinando Gorges. London: Printed by 
E. Brudenell, for N. Brook, 1638; F7.G66 pt. 2 
Gorges, a prominent seventeenth-century En- 
glish military figure who never went to America, 
sponsored a few unsuccessful attempts to colo- 
nize New England. This title, one of a series of 
pamphlets called "America Painted to Life," is 
the only substantive account of his colonial en- 
deavors. His description of New England and its 
Indian peoples are secondhand, although he re- 
ceived information from three Indians who were 
brought to England in 1603. 

Flistoire de la Louisiane, con tenant la decouverte de ce 
vaste pays; sa description geographicfue; un voyage 
dans les terres; I'histoire naturelle, les moeurs, cou- 
tumes & religion des naturels, avec leurs origines; 
deux voyages dans le nord du nouveau Mexique , dont 
un jusqu'a la Mer du Sud. . . . Antoine Simon Le 
Page du Pratz. Paris: De Bure, 1738; F372.L34 
Le Page du Pratz's three-volume work con- 
tains an extensive account, with illustrations, of 
the Natchez people of the Mississippi Valley. The 
work is based on his long involvement with the 
Natchez, which included day-to-day life, hunt- 
ing trips, and occasional war parties against 
neighboring communities. The work provides 
especially rich detail regarding the religion and 
the political structure of the Natchez society. 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



4 5 



The memoirs of Lieut. Henry Timberlake, (who ac- 
companied the three Cherokee Indians to England in 
the year 1762) containing whatever he observed 
remarkable , or worthy of public notice, during his 
travels to and from that nation. Henry Timberlake. 
London, 1765; E99.C5 T6 

Timberlake's work provides a description of 
the Cherokee nation and culture at the time the 
British were seeking alliance with them against 
the French in the middle of the eighteenth cen- 
tury. This work includes a map of the Cherokee 
communities along the Tennessee River in the 
vicinity of Fort Loudoun. 

A concise natural history of East and West Florida. 
Bernard Romans. New York, 1775; F314.R75 

Romans serves as an important source of in- 
formation on the Indian peoples of the Gulf 
Coast area of the United States, with special ref- 
erences to, and descriptions of, the Chickasaw, 
Creek, and Choctaw. His account, prepared fol- 
lowing the British expansion into Spanish East 
and West Florida after the British capture of Ha- 
vana during the French and Indian War, was in- 
tended for both military and economic purposes. 
It speaks frankly about British relations with 
various Indian peoples of the southern area. 

Spanish Penetration of the Southwest 

"Relatione del Reverendo Fra Marco da Nizza" 
in Terzo volume delle navigationi nel quale si con - 
tengono al mondo nuouo. Giovanni Battista Ramu- 
sio. Venetia: Giunti, 1556; G159.R2 vol. 3 1556 

While the French and English were primarily 
absorbed in exploring the Atlantic coastal area 
of North America, the Spanish, in addition to 
settlements in Florida, and after conquering 
Mexico, undertook a penetration into what is 
now the southwestern United States, especially 
New Mexico. Fray Marcos, as he is popularly 
known, was inspired to make his incursion in 
1539 after hearing tales of fabulous cities of gold 

o 



to the north of Mexico. Fray Marcos's mission 
underscores one of the motives of the early Euro- 
pean contacts with American Indians, which 
was the search for wealth. Fray Marcos found the 
Pueblo Indians friendly but lacking the gold he 
sought. 

Giovanni Battista Ramusio, who compiled 
Navigations et viaggi, issued in three volumes in 
Venice between 1550 and 1556, was one of the 
most important publishers of accounts of voy- 
ages and explorations to America (along with 
the Englishman Richard Hakluyt). In addition to 
Fray Marcos's account in this volume, the ac- 
counts — some with illustrations — of the expedi- 
tions of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Francisco 
Vasquez de Coronado, Giovanni da Verrazzano, 
and Jacques Cartier appear. 

Noticias de la Nueva California. Francisco Palou. 
4 vols. San Francisco: E. Bosqui, 1874; F864.P2 

A native of Spain, Father Francisco Palou ar- 
rived in Mexico in 1749 with fellow Franciscan 
Junipero Serra. Two decades later, Palou was 
president of the missions in what was then called 
Old California, now Baja California, and Serra 
was missions president of New California, with 
his base in Monterey. Later, Palou directed the 
missions in New California and recorded his 
observations of mission life and individual 
missions, around which were gathered many 
American Indian communities. In general, Pa- 
lou writes of a peaceful coexistence between 
the Spanish missionaries and those California 
Indians who converted to Catholicism. 

SPANISH-AMERICAN IMPRINT COLLECTION 
Palou's Noticias is part of the Division's general 
collection, but the researcher should also consult 
the Spanish- American Imprint Collection in the 
Division, which contains many works relating 
to New Spain, including Miguel Venegas's El 
apostol Mariano representado en la vida del V.P. 
Juan Maria de Salvatierra, de Compania de Jesus, 



MISSIONS AND MISSIONARIES 



AOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOVOAOfOAOTOAOfOAC 

▼OAAfOAATAAATOAATAAOTOAOTAAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAATOAATOAAfC 



GATEWAYS 



Religious conversion of Indian people was an ad- 
junct to the expansion of empire and trade of sev- 
eral of the colonizing European nations. Usually, 
a desire to convert native peoples to Christianity 
was accompanied by attempts to convert them to 
European ways of life and ally them politically 
against other competing European nations. Indian 
groups that chose to accept missions did so with 
varying degrees of enthusiasm, but seem to have 
viewed them as both a means to extend their spir- 
ituality and to accommodate cultural differences 
between them and the new Americans. Often, 
however, missions and the competing Christian 
sects presented confusing and divisive choices for 
tribes and opened a wedge for further inroads by 
non-Indians, 

Spain relied on missions in California, the 
Southeast and the Southwest, along with civilian 
and military settlements, to expand territory and 
to curb the advances of other nations. Similarly, 
New France sought to convert Indian tribes to 
Catholicism and French civilization through the 
Capuchins and Jesuits, who were particularly ac- 



tive in the areas along the present U.S./Canadian 
border. The Jesuits, especially, compiled extensive 
records of their efforts. 

One of the Puritans' stated purposes in settling 
New England was conversion of its native people 
to Christianity, but the practice was somewhat 
limited. Massachusetts and Rhode Island estab- 
lished a few missions in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, but Indian-colonial wars 
and waves of European immigrants with more 
secular interests lessened missionary fervor. 

Missionary efforts continued, however, by 
Catholics and various Protestant sects, throughout 
the country into the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries. And mission records comprise rich 
sources for study relating to North American 
Indian culture. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: The General Collections 
and almost every specialized division of the 
Library, particularly the Manuscript and Prints 
and Photographs Divisions. 



Feast day at San Estevan del Rey Mission, Acoma Pueblo, New Mexico. Photographed by Charles F. Lummis, c.1 890. LOT 
2840 (LC-USZ62-29347). Prints and Photographs Division. 



The church in the background of Lummis's photograph was built under Franciscan direction in the mid-seventeenth century. 
After Franciscans gave up residence a century later, tribal clan and religious leaders assumed its management. The mission 
had become sacred to the Acoma , as had their pre-Christian religious kivas, and the church was similarly protected from 
public view on occasions. In this scene, a statue of a saint is carried in a procession from the church to the site of feast day 
dances . 





AATOAOTOA 

TOAOTOAOT 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



4 8 



fervoroso missionero en la provincia de Nueva- 
Espana, y conquistado apostolico de las Californias 
(Mexico: Maria de Ribera, 1754; F864.S18) and 
Relation historica de la vida y apostolicas tareas del 
venerable padre fray Juntpero Serra, y de las misiones 
que fundo en la California Septentrional, y nuevos 
establecimientos de Monterey (Mexico: Felipe de 
Zuniga y Ontiveros, 1787; F864.S48). There is a 
card index in the Rare Book Reading Room to the 
Spanish-American Imprint Collection. The en- 
tries are arranged by date, printer, and place of 
publication. 

French Contacts in the Upper Midwest 

Nouvelle decouverte d'un tres grand pays situe dans 
I'Amerique, entre le Nouveau Mexique, et la Mer 
Glaciale, avec les cartes, & les figures necessaires, & 
de plus I'histoire naturelle & morale, & les avantages 
qu'on en peut tirer par I'establissem.des.colon . . . 
Louis Hennepin. Amsterdam: Chez A. van 
Someren, 1698; F352.H61 

Hennepin travelled extensively in the Illinois 
and Mississippi River sections of the upper mid- 
western part of the United States. He describes 
through words, images, and maps the variety of 
Indian societies in the region, reflecting on the 
multiplicity of languages in use. 

Nouveaux voyages de Mr. le baron de Lahontan, 
dans I'Amerique Septentrionale, qui contiennent une 
relation des differents peuples qui y habitent; la na- 
ture de leur gouvernement; leur commerce , leurs 
coutumes, leur religion, & leur maniere de faire la 
guerre. Louis Armand de Lorn d'Arce, baron de 
Lahontan. La Haye: Chez les freres THonore, 
1703-04; F1030.L152 

Lahontan's famous account about the Indian 
peoples of the St. Lawrence and the eastern 
Great Lakes region is filled with a rich variety of 
materials on various Indian groups, their prac- 
tices, languages, and arts of war. This work con- 



tains some of the earliest illustrations of the 
articles used by Algonquian, Huron, and Iro- 
quois peoples to hunt, to fight, and to travel. A 
special section of the work, "Petit dictionaire 
de la langue des sauvages Iroquois," is com- 
plemented by additional glossaries of French- 
Algonquian and French-Huron words. A graphic 
description of a battle, in the same form as the 
midwestem winter counts, is found herein. The 
book contains numerous maps of the area cov- 
ered by his account. 

Two additional works related to the French in 
Canada and the northern part of the United 
States include Gabriel Sagard's Dictionaire de la 
langue huronne necessaire a ceux que n'ont lintelli- 
gence d'icelle (Paris: Chez Denys Moreau, 1632; 
F1030.S13) and Joseph Francois Lafitau's Moeurs 
des sauvages ameriquains, comparees aux moeurs 
des premiers temps (Paris: Saugrain Paine, 1724; 
E58.L16). Lafitau's work is especially useful for 
the study of American Indians, containing rich 
illustrations of customs and practices. 

Histoire de I'Amerique Septentrionale . . . Claude 
Charles Le Roy Bacqueville de la Potherie. 4 vols. 
Paris: J.-L. Nion et F. Didot, 1722; F1030.B11 

Bacqueville, comptroller-general of the ma- 
rines and fortifications in Canada for a brief 
period in the late 1690s, recounts his experiences 
and those of his contemporaries and predeces- 
sors, including Nicolas Perrot and Louis Fron- 
tenac. There is considerable discussion of groups 
such as the Iroquois, Abenaki, Huron, Ottawa, 
Illinois, Potawatomi, and Sac and Fox. Several in- 
teresting illustrations appear. An English trans- 
lation and condensed version of both Perrot's 
and Bacqueville's accounts appear in The Indian 
Tribes of the Upper Mississippi Valley and Region of 
the Great Lakes . . . , edited by Emma Helen Blair 
(Cleveland: Arthur H. Clark, 1911; E78.N8 B63) 

JESUIT RELATIONS 

The division possesses a comprehensive collec- 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



4 9 



tion of original editions and reprints of what is 
known as the Jesuit Relations. These include 
works of Paul Le Jeune, Jacques Gravier, Jerome 
Lallemant, Jean de Quen, and Paul Ragueneau. 
These accounts were the equivalent of annual re- 
ports to superiors in France about Jesuit efforts 
to convert the Indian people in Canada, the up- 
per Midwest, and the lower Mississippi Valley 
during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
The most convenient way to identify these items 
in the Rare Book Reading Room is under the 
subject heading "Jesuits. Letters from Missions 
(North America)." 

Two distinctive series of publications are 
found within this large body of materials. One 
numbered series includes primarily original sev- 
enteenth- and eighteenth-century Paris imprints 
appearing in the Rare Book collection under the 
classification F1030.7.Z632 (a total of forty-one 
works). Another numbered series appears as 
nineteenth-century reprints of original works 
prepared under the direction of John Dawson 
Gilmary Shea, who was a major compiler of in- 
formation on the Catholic Church in the United 
States and Canada. Some twenty-six facsimiles 
of original works appeared between 1850 and 
the 1880s in Shea's Cramoisy Press Series 
(F1030.7.C57). The Cramoisy Press (Paris) had 
been a seventeenth- and eighteenth-century pub- 
lisher of Jesuit Relations. 

Separate from these series but of major impor- 
tance for the documentation of Jesuit descrip- 
tions of American Indian peoples are the works 
of Father Pierre Jean de Smet, including his Voy- 
ages aux montagnes Rocheuses, et une annee de 
sejour chez les tribus indiennes du vaste territoire 
de VOregon . . . (Malines: P. J. Hanicq, 1844; 
F592.S633), New Indian sketches (New York: D. & 
J. Sadlier, .1863; E77.S64 1863), and Missien van 
dem Oregon en reizen naer de Rotsbergen en de 
bronnen der Colombia (Gent: Schelden, 1849; 
F880.S635). In these books he provides early 
descriptions of the Salish and Siksika (Blackfeet), 



o 




including a Salish catechism and a Kootenai 
glossary. 

Contacts on Northwest Coast 
and California 

Geschichte der reisen, die seit Cook an der Nord- 
west . . . Edited and compiled by Georg Forster. 
Berlin: Voss, 1791; F851.5.F73 1791 

This three-volume illustrated work con- 
tains late eighteenth-century descriptions of the 
Northwest Coast and its people by explorer- 
adventurers George Dixon, John Meares, Na- 
thaniel Portlock, and fur trader John Long. 
English language accounts of these encounters 
are available in other editions in the Rare Book 
collection and in the General Collections. 

Noticias de la provincia de Californias en tres cartas 
de un sacerdote religioso, hijo del Real convento de 
predicadores de Valencia a un amigo suyo. Luis 
Sales. Valencia: Los hermanos de Orga, 1794; 
F864.S16 

Father Sales provided a description of the 
character and the religion of the Indian peoples 
of both Baja and Upper California, including ref- 
erences to the peoples of San Diego, Monterey, 
and the Northwest Coast near Nutka. 

Voyage pittoresque autour du monde , avec des por- 
traits de sauvages d'Amerique , d'Asie, d'Afrique , et 
des lies du Gran ocean. Louis Choris. Paris: Firmin 
Didot, 1822; G420.K84 C5 

This work, dedicated to the Emperor of Rus- 
sia, provides a description of the tribes and 
places encountered during the Russians' second 
voyage around the world. Of particular signi- 
ficance are the descriptions of the Indian groups 
of California (in the San Francisco Bay area), the 
Aleutians, and the peoples of the Bering Strait 
region. This illustrated compilation contains nu- 
merous images of the people, dances, arms and 




RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



5 0 



o 

ERIC 



utensils, boats, artifacts, and transcribed music 
of each of the three groups. 

Captivity Narratives 

If earlier descriptions of American Indians por- 
trayed them as peaceful and living in an idyllic 
state, another picture emerged as the British be- 
gan to occupy Indian lands and met resistance. 
Indian peoples were described as vicious sav- 
ages, especially in the genre known as captivity 
narratives. 

The Soveraignty and Goodness of God , Together with 
the Faithfulness of His Promises Displayed: Being 
a Narrative of the Captivity and Restauration of 
Mrs. Mary Rowlandson. Mary Rowlandson. Bos- 
ton: T. Fleet, 1720; E87.R862 

Mary Rowlandson's is one of the best known 
examples of this genre. She describes her capture 
by a band of Indian peoples after a frontier skir- 
mish and what she terms her enslavement. She 
pictures the Indian peoples in her book as war- 
like and nomadic, mocking the European set- 
tlers. The captivity narrative was an influential 
force in the creation of American Indian images, 
and there are many examples from the seven- 
teenth- through the late nineteenth-century, as 
primarily English settlers pushed westward 
from the Atlantic Coast. Many accounts, such as 
Rowlandson's book first printed in 1685, had en- 
during readership; an edition issued as late as 
1930 is in the Rare Book collection. 

Those captivity narratives printed before 1800 
in what is now the United States are generally 
housed in the division's pre-1800 Collection, one 
of the largest collections of this sort of material in 
the country. After 1800, they are generally found 
in the division's general book collection and can 
be located by searching under the subject head- 
ing "Indians of North America — Captivity Nar- 
ratives." One particularly descriptive title pub- 
lished in Providence, Rhode Island in 1815 gives 




an excellent sense of the captivities themes: An 
Affecting Narrative of the Captivity and Sufferings 
of Mrs. Mary Smith , Who, with Her Husband and 
Three Daughters Were Taken Prisoners by the Indi- 
ans, in August Last and after Enduring the Most 
Cruel Hardships and Torture of Mind by the Indians 
for Sixty Days (in which time Site Witnessed the 
Tragical Death of her Husband and Helpless Chil- 
dren) Was Fortunately Rescued from the Merciless 
Hands of the Savages by a Detached Party from the 
Army of the Brave General Jackson Now Command- 
ing at New Orleans (Providence, 1813; E87.S663 
1813a). 

Government Documents: 

Franklin treaties 

Some of the most important sources for under- 
standing American Indian culture and history 
are government documents of all types, since the 
United States government has been the principal 
institution to deal formally with Native Ameri- 
cans. Government documents, however, are not 
collected in one place in the Library of Congress. 
For example, the Benjamin Franklin Collection, 
purchased by the U.S. government in 1882, con- 
sists of the books and manuscripts carried to 
England by William Temple Franklin, Benjamin's 
grandson, in order to write a biography of his 
grandfather. The books became part of the Rare 
Book and Special Collections Division's holdings 
and the manuscripts are located in the Library's 
Manuscript Division. 

An Account of the Treaty Held at the City of Albany. 
Philadelphia: Printed by Benjamin Franklin, 
1746; E99.17.P4 

This example of one of the many treaties be- 
tween the government and various Indian tribes 
is from the division's outstanding Franklin col- 
lection. In it, representatives from Massachu- 
setts, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, and New York 
inform the Iroquois of the hostilities between the 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



5 1 



English and the French at the start of King 
George's War. The Iroquois promised the English 
that they would not allow any of the Indians al- 
lied with the French to cross their land, and the 
British colonists promised protection from the 
French. Often in these treaties, American Indian 
peoples are reported to speak in a stilted and 
romanticized way that many historians believe 
to be more the product of the English reporter 
on the scene than a true depiction of Indian 
manners and pattern of speech. 

The Franklin treaties are gathered together 
and reprinted with an introduction by Carl Van 
Doren and notes by Julian P. Boyd in Indian 
Treaties Printed by Benjamin Franklin, iyy,6-iy62 
(Philadelphia: The Pennsylvania Historical Soci- 
ety, 1938; E95.I64). References to other treaties, 
regardless of printer, can be found in the divi- 
sion's card catalog under the heading "Indians of 
North America — Treaties." The same heading 
can be used to search the computer catalog for 
any treaties added to the division after its card 
catalog was closed in 1990. 

Bible Collection 

Within this collection are American Indian lan- 
guage prayer books, hymnals, and bibles, in- 
cluding an original edition of the first Indian 
Bible, colonial missionary John Eliot's translation 
into the Massachuset language. 

The . . . Holy Bible . . . Containing the . . . Old Testa- 
ment . . . and the New Translated into the . . . Indian 
Language. Cambridge: Samuel Green and Mar- 
maduke Johnson, 1663; BS345.A2E4 1663 

This bible, commonly referred to as the Eliot 
Indian Bible, was the first complete bible pub- 
lished in what is now the United States. It was a 
remarkable feat. Only primitive conditions for 
printing English language texts existed in seven- 
teenth-century Massachusetts. Not only did the 
Puritans have to develop a written language for 



the Massachuset Indians but they also had to cre- 
ate the individual type fonts to print it. The Eliot 
Indian Bible is housed in the division's large 
Bible Collection in which are found many other 
later Indian bibles, including those in Iroquois 
and Cherokee. A later edition, Mamusse . . . Wun- 
neetupanatamwe . . . Up-Biblum God ; ; ; Naneeswe 
. . . Nukkone Testament (Cambridge: Printeeuoop 
Nashpe Samuel Green, 1685; BS345.A2E4 1685), 
is also in the collection. 

Cherokee Gospel Tidings. Goingsnake, Indian Ter- 
ritory: Presbyterian Mission Press, 1898-1902; 
E99.C5 C404 

A Cherokee language religious periodical, 
with some sections in English, for which the 
division has issues covering 1898 to 1902. The 
Cherokee were the first Native Americans to 
have their own alphabet and writing system, in- 
vented by Sequoyah in the nineteenth century. 
This rare periodical, printed in the Cherokee 
syllabary, was meant to be used during Sunday 
services. 

Indian Portfolios: 

Prints and Photographs 

The lithographic revolution of the 1830s and 
1840s allowed the widespread dissemination of 
pictures to all classes of society. Public interest 
in the West was answered by entrepreneurs 
involved in Indian administration, such as 
Thomas L. McKenney, and by expeditionary 
artists who recorded and interpreted what they 
saw in precise illustrations to accompany factual 
descriptions. Between 1843 and 1863 the federal 
government alone published almost thirty dif- 
ferent illustrated survey reports of the trans- 
Mississippi West (see the Law Library and Prints 
and Photographs sections also). Most of these 
pictures are suffused with the lessons and at- 
titudes of European Romanticism and to a 
greater or lesser degree reveal the changing 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



5 2 



Anglo-European attitudes toward American In- 
dians: from exotic specimens to "savages" to 
"uncivilized" enemies, to remnants of a doomed 
and disappearing race. These monumental docu- 
ments of United States Indian life, treasures in 
most cases, were part of a general treatment of 
Indian societies in the Americas, produced by 
such individuals as Alexander Freiherr von 
Humboldt in South America and Mesoamerica, 
Jean Baptiste Debret in Brazil, and John Lloyd 
Stephens and Frederick Catherwood in the 
Yucatan. 

History of the Indian Tribes of North America. 
Thomas L. McKenney and James Hall. Philadel- 
phia: E. C. Biddle, 1836-44; E77.M13 

An original edition of McKenney and Hall's 
compilation of biographies and hand-colored en- 
gravings of portraits of Indian individuals by 
early painters, such as Charles Bird King and 
James Otto Lewis, this work is one of the few 
sources for color likenesses of prominent Indian 
leaders from east of the Mississippi River. 
Thomas L. McKenney amassed many Indian ar- 
tifacts and portraits as superintendent of Indian 
affairs, particularly the more than one hundred 
portraits in his Indian Gallery, which he began in 
1821. McKenney was dismissed from his govern- 
ment position by Andrew Jackson's administra- 
tion in 1830. 

Reise in das innere N or d- America in den Jahren 1832 
bis 1834. Prince Maximillian Alexander Philipp 
von Wied-Neuwied. 2 vols., and atlas. Coblenz, 
1839-41; E165.W64 

Prince von Wied-Neuwied's book, which was 
translated into English as Travels in the Interior of 
North America (London, 1843; E165.W65), is one 
of the most magnificent works produced about 
the U.S. Midwest and its Indian inhabitants be- 
fore the Civil War. Von Wied-Neuwied brought 
with him on his travels up the Missouri River a 



Swiss artist named Karl Bodmer. The eighty-one 
hand-colored copperplate engravings in this 
book are based on Bodmer's delicate watercolors 
of the Midwestern and Western landscape and 
Indian life, the first truly accurate depictions of 
American Indians to reach the general public. 
Bodmer was the most accomplished artist to 
paint Plains Indians and his contemporaries at- 
tested to his strict attention to detail. 

The French edition of the work. Voyage dans 
Vinterieur de I'Amerique du Nord, execute pendant 
lesannees 1832, 1833 et 1834 . . . (Paris: A. Bertrand, 
1840-43; E165.W66 Copy 3 Atlas), is one of the 
few completely colored aquatint reproductions 
of eighty-one of artist Karl Bodmer's lustrous 
paintings of the West, including scenes and 
portraits of the Arikara, Assiniboine, Blackfeet, 
Hidatsa, Mandan, and Sioux. 

North American Indian Portfolio. George Catlin. 
London, 1844; NE2527.C4 1844 

An original edition of hand-colored litho- 
graphs of Catlin 's paintings of Plains Indians and 
their culture in the 1830s. Catlin's work, and that 
of his contemporary Karl Bodmer (see above), 
provided the first portfolios of images of western 
American Indians in their own setting. 

If the authors of some works, represented 
by Mary Rowlandson's captivity narrative de- 
scribed above, saw American Indians as savages, 
others, such as George Catlin, went to another 
extreme. Catlin was a moderately successful por- 
trait painter on the East Coast of the United States 
who, according to his own story, when he saw a 
group of American Indians who had travelled 
from the West, was taken with the idea of 
becoming their pictorial biographer and spent 
most of his life journeying from the upper to the 
lower Plains painting scenes of Indian life. He 
later took his paintings and the artifacts that he 
had collected to London where he exhibited 
them and had this book made, copying some of 
the paintings. 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



5 3 



The North American Indian Portfolio , though 
highly romanticized and not artistically distin- 
guished, nevertheless depicts many scenes, oth- 
erwise unknown pictorially from contemporary 
sources, of such activities as "Indian Ball Play," 
which resembled modern-day lacrosse, the Buf- 
falo Dance, and hunting activities. Catlin be- 
lieved the American Indian way of life was being 
destroyed by encroaching European settlements 
and that the closer the Indian peoples were to 
East Coast civilization the more they were cor- 
rupted. Indeed, historians and anthropologists 
have long considered his prints to be useful 
sources. 

The division has a fine group of material relat- 
ing to Catlin, including the page proofs for his 
The Manners, Customs, and Condition of the North 
American Indians (London, 1841; E77 .C377), his 
Nord-Amerikas Indianer och de, under ett attaa- 
right vistande bland de vildaste af deras stammar 
(Stockholm, 1848; E77.C3818 1848)), which is a 
Swedish edition of his The Manners but illus- 
trated with miniature reproductions of the hand- 
colored images in the large Portfolio of the North 
American Indian rather than with the simple line 
sketches found in the American and English edi- 
tions; a salesman's sample for a quarto edition of 
the large oversized folio Portfolio of the North 
American Indian, and ephemera in the Broadside 
Collection relating to the sale of his books and 
his exhibits of Indian artifacts in London. 

The North American Indian. Edward S. Curtis. 
20 vols. and 20 portfolios of photogravures. 
Seattle and Cambridge, Mass.: E. S. Curtis, 1907- 
30; E77.C97 

Edward Curtis's photographs provide a ro- 
mantic and sometimes staged view of American 
Indians. He found many parallels between him- 
self and George Catlin and wanted to create a de- 
scription in photographs of what he considered 
to be a vanishing people and its way of life. 
The division has one of the 500 original twenty- 
O 




volume published sets, with twenty large portfo- 
lios, of Curtis's photogravure prints produced 
during his nearly three-decade effort to record 
native life, particularly in the Plains, Southwest, 
California, and Northwest, a venture that was 
financed by J. Pierpont Morgan. 

Originally a society photographer, as Catlin 
was initially a painter of East Coast society, Cur- 
tis produced photographs in a soft-focused sepia 
tone that self-consciously sought a spiritual look, 
bordering on mysticism. 

Nineteenth-Century Exploration 
and Travel in the American West: 
Documentary Popular, and 
Fictional Accounts 

Wagner-Camp Collection 

The Wagner-Camp Collection is named for 
Henry R. Wagner and Charles L. Camp's bibliog- 
raphy The Plains and the Rockies (San Francisco, 
1921; Z1251.W5 W2 1921), which was revised in 
1982 for a fourth edition by Robert H. Becker, a 
copy of which is in the division's reading room 
(1251. W5 W2 1982). The Plains and the Rockies is, 
by its own description, an annotated "bibliogra- 
phy of exploration, adventure and travel in the 
American West" consisting of 429 titles. The ear- 
liest entry was printed in 1801 and the latest was 
first issued in 1865, though later editions of some 
of these books were produced after this date. It is 
impossible to characterize these books in a gen- 
eral way except to say that they are the classic 
works describing the westward movement by 
those who participated. They tell the story of the 
first fledgling moves toward the Mississippi, to 
the spread of U.S. settlers across the Plains, to the 
treks up the Oregon Trail and down the Santa Fe 
Trail. 

Such classic Western books as Josiah Gregg's 
Commerce of the Prairies (New York, 1844; F800.G8), 




75 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



5 4 



Zenas Leonard's Narrative of the Adventures of 
Zenas Leonard . . . Who Spent Five Years in Trap- 
ping for Furs , Trading with the Indians (Clearfield, 
Pa., 1839; F592.L36 1839), Alonzo Delano's Life 
on the Plains and Among the Diggings, Being Scenes 
and Adventures of an Overland Journey to Califor- 
nia: With . . . Mistakes and Sufferings of the Emi- 
grants, the Indian Tribes, the Present and Future 
of the Great West (Auburn, Buffalo, 1854; F593. 
D33) and Francis Parkman's The California and 
Oregon Trail (New York, 1849; F592.P24) are in- 
cluded. As might be expected, many of the de- 
pictions of Indian peoples are negative because 
they resisted the occupation of their lands. How- 
ever, accounts compiled by the exploring expe- 
ditions sponsored by the government to study 
the West or to plan a railroad route across the 
continent contain rich materials. 

Ethnologists and artists often accompanied 
such expeditions and their observations pro- 
vided much of what is known about contempo- 
rary Indian societies. Such reports as Amiel 
Whipple's and Joseph Ives' in Reports of Explo- 
rations and Surveys . . .fora Railroad Route from the 
Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean (Washington, 
D.C., 1855-60; F593.U58) are rich in information 
and extremely important in influencing legisla- 
tors in Congress, who were destined to play a 
crucial role in the history of American Indian 
people. 

The Dime Novel Collection 

Approximately 35,000 items comprise this collec- 
tion of the popular pulp fiction of the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries. Dime novels rose 
to prominence in the publishing industry after 
the U.S. Civil War (1861-65) and are so named 
because of their price, although many were sold 
for a little more as the century wore on. They 
were widely distributed, sold in railway stations 
and cars, newsstands, and other popular gather- 
ing places. Always highlighting sensationalism. 



an action-packed plot, simple characterization, 
and an uncomplicated narrative, dime novels 
quickly became very important for helping to 
shape the country's perception of itself. Many 
titles are also useful for a study of the literary 
portrayal of American Indians, portrayals that 
undoubtedly helped form popular impressions. 

The cover art on some of these novels is in it- 
self revealing. It often depicts frontiersmen and 
American Indians locked in mortal combat, with 
the pages of the text always revealing that the In- 
dian lost the fight. The titles of some of the books 
give a fair indication of the typical contents: 
Hunters and Redskins, The Shawnee Witch, Panther 
Jack, and Malaeska, the Indian Wife. While there is 
no subject guide to this fiction, bibliographies 
and series guides can help to identify genres that 
may be fruitful. Reference staff can also offer in- 
formed guidance. 

Twentieth-Century Decorative Arts 

With the turn of the twentieth century, a small 
group of Californians became fascinated with 
Pueblo Indian arts and actively collected the 
beautiful blankets, pots, and baskets of the New 
Mexican pueblos. The group's interest sparked a 
worldwide movement that valued the grace and 
originality of Indian design of all kinds. During 
the early years, especially, a number of books 
about the artifacts and designs were published 
in limited editions, many of which had original 
photographs tipped into their pages in order to 
more accurately portray the elegant objects. Be- 
cause of their rarity and fragility many of these 
books are housed in the division. 

American Indian Designs. Philadelphia: H. C. 
Perleberg, 1925-30; E98.A7W5 

This two-volume work, called separately "Se- 
ries one" and "Series two," contains seventy-two 
plates with over four hundred New Mexican In- 



7 0 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 



5 5 



dian designs from prehistoric to modem times. 
Indian peoples included are the Laguna, Zuni, 
Cochiti, Mimbres, Casas Grandes, San Ildefonso, 
Acoma, Santo Domingo, Jemez, and Tewa. Ex- 
planatory texts accompany the designs. 

Kioiva Indian Art: Watercolor Paintings in Color 
by the Indians of Oklahoma . Compiled by Oscar 
Brousee Jacobson. Nice: C. Szwedicki, C1929; 
E98.A7J17 

This compilation contains thirty mounted 
watercolors of Indian portraits and ceremonial 
representations by Monroe Tsa-to-ke, Steve 
Mopope, Jack Hokeah, Spencer Asah, and Bou- 
ge-tah-smokey. 

Pueblo Indian Painting: 50 Reproductions of Water- 
color Paintings by Indian Artists of the Neiv Mexi- 
can Pueblos of San Ildefonso and Sia . Nice: C. 
Szwedicki, C1932; E98.A7P88 

A treasury of ceremonial and religious art by 
Velino Herrera, Julian Martinez, Miguel Mar- 
tinez, Richard Martinez, Encarnacion Pena, Al- 
fonso Roybal, Louis Roybal, Abel Sanchez, Awa 
Tsireh, and Romando Vigil is found in this work. 



Decorative Art of the Southzvestern Indians. Com- 
piled by Dorothy Smith Sides. Santa Ana, Calif.: 
Fine Arts Press, 1936; E98.A7S53 

This work contains fifty color plates of pot- 
tery, basket, and textile designs. Tribes and 
pueblos represented are the Acoma, Apache, 
Chemehuevi, Cochiti, Hopi, Laguna, Maricopa, 
Mimbres, Mohave, Navajo, Papago, Pima, San 
Ildefonso, Sia, and Zuni. 

Pueblo Indians of New Mexico as They Are Today : 
Tzventy Photographs in Color by David Hare. New 
York, 1941; E99.P9H25 

This is a collection of twenty 8" x 10" portraits 
in color taken at fifteen pueblos. 

A Book of Plains Indians. By Leonard Baskin and 
Fritz Scholder. Northampton, Mass.: Gehenna 
Press, 1994; E77.5.S36 1994 

A book containing fourteen monotype illus- 
trations with accompanying text of the Sioux, 
Cheyenne, and Crow Indian peoples by the com- 
bined creative talents of Leonard Baskin and 
Fritz Scholder. Scholder is considered to be a 
leading American Indian painter. This publica- 
tion is limited to twenty-six copies. 





77 





"Their manner of fishing in Virginia" from briefe and true report of the new found land of Virginia by 
Thomas Hariot (Frankfort, 1590). F229.H2 7 1590 Rosenwald (RBSC neg. 454 and LC-USZC4-4805, color, 
LC-USZ62-576, black and white). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



Thomas Hariot and artist John White , members of the English Roanoke Island settlement in 1585-86 , made 
detailed and admiring reports on American Indian methods of agriculture and food preparation and use. Ac- 
cording to Hariot , the Indian peoples " have likewise a notable way to catche fishe in their Rivers. For whear 
as they lacke both yron and Steele , they faste unto their Reedes or longe Rodds, the hollowe tayle of a cer- 
tain fishe like to a sea crabbe in steede of a poynte, wehr with by nighte or day they stricke fishes , and take 
them opp into their boates. " 






"Insula hyspana" from De insuiis in mari Indico nuper in- 
vents by Christopher Columbus in Historia Baetica by 
Carlo Verardi (Basel, 1494). Incun 1494 .V47 Voll HI 5942 
(LC-USZC4-4806). Rare Book and Special Collections 
Division. 



I In his pursuit of recognition and fame, Christopher Colum- 
bus had published, in Latin, a letter to the world at large 
| concerning his "recently found islands." This earliest 
printed record of America contained the first use of the 
term Indian to name the peoples of America. This edition 
I included curious illustrations depicting the peoples and the 
places he had encountered on his first voyage. All of the il- 
lustrations evolved from the imagination of the publisher. 

"Timucua Dugouts and typical houses/' color facsimile of 
engraving from La Flo ride Fran^aise: Scenes de la vie In- 
dienne peintes en 1564 by Theodor de Bry and Charles 
de la Rone i£ re (Paris, 1928). F314.L33 (LC-USZC4-4807, 
color; LC-USZ62-31 870, black and white). Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division. 

The image of a Timucua dugout canoe and a dwelling, 
drawn in 1564 by Jacques Le Moyne de Morgues from ob- 
servation, shows a party of Indians bringing in a harvest for 
| storage. Le Moyne said that " there are in that region a great 
many islands, producing abundance of various kinds of 
fruits, which they gather twice a year, and carry home in 
! canoes, and store up in roomy low granaries built of stones 
and earth, and roofed thickly with palm-branches and a 
kind of soft earth fit for the purpose." 



©ejnfulie nuper in 
mart Jndico repertie 














"Virginia" from The general! Historie of Virginia, New-England, and the Summer Isles; with the names of the adventurers, 
planters, and governours from their first beginning, ano: 1584 to this present 1624 by john Smith (London, 1 624). F229.S61 
; (LC-USZ62-1 1 6706). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



John Smith's map of Virginia provides information on substantial areas that were not visited by the English. The data were 
provided by the skilled cartographers of Powhatan who described streams, communities , and natural features to the English 
expedition. The scene at top left shows the leader Powhatan in council. 







rare book and special* 



HSiSwlilv 



C^fflEC{riONSDLyi$pN^:t;; 



;• a‘m 




"The defeat of the Pequot Indians in Connecticut in 1 637. The figure of the Indians' fort or F^lizado in New England And the 
maner of the destroying It by Captayne Underhill And Captayne Mason" from Newes from America by John Underhill (Lon- 
don, 1638). E83.63.U55 (LC-USZ62-32055). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



The Pequots were a dominant Indian tribe in seventeenth-century New England . For several years after English settlers 
landed in the Connecticut River Valley the two groups lived in peace. But , as colonists moved farther into Pequot lands, 
war broke out. In 1637, colonists and their Mohegan and Narragan sett allies, under John Mason, attacked the main Pequot 
village at night . Several hundred defenders, including women and children, were burned alive. By the end of the Pequot 
War, the tribe was virtually wiped out. 




9,1 




"Raquetes" (Snow Shoes) from Nouveaux voyages 
by Baron de Lahontan (LaHaye, 1703). FI 030. LI 52 
(LC-USZ62-1 15626). Rare Book and Special Collections 
I Division. 



Comparing Indian snowshoes to European tennis rackets, 
Lahontan observed, "By the help of this Contrivance they 
walk faster upon the Snow, than one can do with Shoes 
upon a beaten path . . . [without them it would be] impos- 
sible not only to hunt and range the Woods, but even to so 
to Church " 



Le transport du Grand So lei I* from Histoire de la 
Louisiane by Antoine S. Le Page du Pratz (Paris 1 758) 
F372.L54 (LC-USZ62-1 15625). Rare Book andSpecial 
Collections Division. 



According to Le Page du Pratz, the Natchez lived under a 
theocracy where the state, the people, and their resources 
j were devoted to the religious establishment. The head of I 

| the state was the Sun - B y worshipping the human Sun, they I 

I als ° worshipped the true Sun. They built high mounds on i 

which they erected temples so that the earthly Sun could I 
converse^ with his elder brother, the heavenly Sun. , 






"Topographical plan of Indian country from Smith's account of the Expedition Against the Ohio Indians" by Thomas 
Hutchins from An historical account of the expedition against the Ohio Indians, in the year 1764 by William Smith 
(Philadelphia, 1 765). E83.76.S65 (LC-USZC4-4809). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



Cartographer Thomas Hutchins accompanied British Colonel Henry Bouquet on an expedition to relieve Fort Pitt from a 
siege by tribes involved in Ottawa Chief Pontiac's rebellion against incursions into the Ohio area. Tactical graphics such as 
this usually accompanied narratives of British campaigns. 







[Deer hunting], engraving from tes Voyages du Sieur de Champlain by Samuel de Champlain (Paris, 1613). F1030.1.C446 
.R3 (LC-USZ62-1 16707), Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



it was not always individual stealth that provided food for Indian stomachs. This illustration from Champlain's travels in the 
Northeast renders a method of capturing large amounts of game for the kill. Similar practices were observed in other parts 
of the country, where fire may have been part of the driving force. In the West , bison were sometimes herded over cliffs. 










[Indian sugar camp, showing sap collection from maple trees] from The American aboriginal portfolio by Mary Henderson 
Eastman (Philadelphia: Lippincott, Crambo & Co., 1 853). E77.E1 25 (RBSC neg. 2672, also LC-USZ62-1 1 5628). Rare Book 
and Special Collections Division. 



In her book, Dahcotah; or, life and legends of the Sioux around Fort Snelling (New York , 1849), Mary Henderson Eastman, 
wife of artist and army officer Seth Eastman, observed the sugar extraction processes . "After the scalp-dance had been per- 
formed long enough , the Dahcotahs turned their attention to making sugar. Many groves of sugar trees were in sight of their 
village, and on this occasion the generous sap rewarded their labors . . . when the medicine men announced that they must 
keep the sugar- feast, all left their occupation, anxious to celebrate it . . . they were all occupied with the construction of 
their summer wigwams, which are made of the bark of trees, which must be peeled off in the spring." 




CUD 





"Ball-play," color lithograph from North American Indian Portfolio by George Catlin (London, 1 844). NE2527.C4 1 844 
(LC-USZC4-481 0). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



Catlin attempted to chronicle the Indian people of America and their lifeways in his North American Indian Portfolio. This 
view depicts Choctaws near Fort Gibson , Oklahoma , to which they had been forced from their lands in Alabama and Mis- 
sissippi . The ability of the people to preserve in their new home such customs as their ball-play is the underlying message of 
Catlin. In the game—the forerunner of lacrosse-players attempted to throw or carry a ball between goal posts, cradling the 
ball in webbed rackets while running or passing it to teammates. 



RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 6 5 

~ 1 i : ' : — 



l r vv | 




"Dog sledges of the Mandan Indians," aquatint by Karl Bodmer from Reise in das innere Nord-America in den Jahren 1832 
bis 1834 by Prince Maximilien Alexander Philipp von Wied-Neuwied (Coblenz, 1 839-41 ). El 65.W64 (RBSC neg. 1 494A 
and LC-USZC4-481 1). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 

Dogs were used by various Indian peoples in America for numerous functions. For the Dakota \, the dog was used for hunt- 
ing , dragging the travois, or as a packer. Among the village tribes , the dog was used for pulling the sled , for hunting , and for 
food during famine and for special ceremonies , and as a pack animal and guard dog. Bodmer's illustration, made in 1834 , 
shows two dogs dragging a toboggan of the Mandan Indians along the frozen Missouri River. 




6 

ft 

I 

W 

ii 



Yi ■ ^ r_- ^xc ■- ate-,- 




TWO YOUNG LADIES TAKEN PRISONERS BY THE SAVAGES 

The present year (1832) will be long remembered as a year of much human dis- 
tress, and a peculiarly unfortunnto one for the American nation ; for while many 
of her most populous cities have been visited by that dreadful disease, the Ciiol* 
EnA, and to which great numbers have fallen victims, the merciless Savages have 
been as industriously and fatally engaged in the work of human butchery, on the 
western frontiers ; where, while many have fallen victims to the bloody tomahawk, 
others have been conveyed away into captivity, to endure more protracted tortures 
of mind, as tho following instances fully prove.— 

JUST PUBLISHED, 

Ah Interesting Narrative of the Captivity ol 

MUSSES FRAJTCIS AND JILBinui H*3LL. 

Two respectable young fcniolcs (sisters) of the uges of lfl nnd 3 8. 

Who were taken primoer* by tba Sartgw it » EnitUicr SlttleraiDt, near Indus CiwV, is Miy lul, whra fifUa* of the 
inha bitants wera barbarously murdered, among wbots wen tba parrot! of the ttnfortuntts fcwla*. 

TO WHICH IS ADDED, 

An affecting Narrative of tho Captivity and Sufferings of 

PHILIP URIC DON, 

A KeottokUo, who fell into lbs hinds of the Strtgei on then- ntoro to Lbtir sctUnmnl, ihm Oars «ft*r tba 

I Ikxxi 7 M macro. 

Ptka of tbs Nam lim 10 Cents. 

£J* Please preterm thb piper until catbd for. 







IS7E~W" ' ’TOBK : 



BEADLE AND COMPANY; 118 WILLI AM ST- 

General Dime Book' Publishers, 



! 

I 

i 







RARE BOOK AND SPECIAL COLLECTIONS DIVISION 6 7 



FAR LEFT: War and Pestilence! Two young ladies taken ' 
prisoners by the savages ... to which is added, an affecting 
narrative of the captivity and sufferings of Philip Bridgon, 
(1832). Broadside collection, portfolio 230, No. 9. Also in 
i Narrative of the capture (New York, 1 833). E83.83 .N24 
(LC-USZ62-43902). Rare Book and Special Collections Di- 
vision. 



From the beginnings of European exploration and settle- 
) ment in the sixteenth century through the end of the nine- 
teenth century, Indian captivity was very much a historical 
reality for countless explorers and settlers living on the 
edge of the American frontier, and in one form or other it 
touched the fears of those for whom it was a possibility. 

! While the authenticity of such narratives varied, they were 
appealing to early American audiences since they com- 
bined dramatic form, thrilling adventure, exotic context, 
and seemingly personal relevance. The account above is 
based on the reported captivity of Sylvia and Rachel Hall 
by Sac and Fox Indians in Illinois. 



LEFT: Front cover of The Lost Trail, Beadle's Dime Novels, 
Number 71 (New York: Beadle and Company, 1 8 ). Dime 
Novel Coll. (LC-USZ62-75779). Rare Book and Special 
[ Collections Division. 

! Covers like this for the popular melodramatic fiction of the 
late nineteenth century served as thrillers for readers who 
| likely never had contact with Indian peoples. They also re- 
inforced one of the Indian stereotypes that persisted for 
generations. 



LEFT: "Massacre of the Whites by the Indians and Blacks in 
Florida. The above is intended to represent the horrid Mas- 
sacre of the Whites in Florida, in December 1 835, and Jan- 
uary, February, March and April 1836, when near Four 
Hundred (including women and children) fell victims to 
the barbarity of the Negroes and Indians," woodcut from 
I Authentic narrative of the Seminole War (Providence, 

I 1836). E83.835 .A94 (LC-USZ62-366). Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division. 



INDIAN 


LAND FO 


IR SALE 


GET A HOME 


W i 


PERFECT TITLE 


OF 

YOUR OWN 


NHH 

liinm 


POSSESSION 

WITHIN 


EASY PAYMENTS 


THIRTY DAYS 



ml rlnHHl 

FINE LANDS IN THE WEST 



IRRIGATED 

IRRIGABLE 



GRAZING 



AGRICULTURAL 
DRY FARMING 



Ik 1910 THE Oepirtbeht of the Interior Solo Uwoeh Seileo Bios Allotteo Ihouk Uko h foaowv 



Locttiot. 


Actcb. 


per Acr<. 


LccBtico. 


*cr« 


A«r*c< Pnu 


Colorado 


5,211.21 


$7.27 


Oklahoma 


34,664.00 


$19.14 


Idaho 


17,013.00 


24.85 


Oregon 


1,020.00 


15.43 


Kansas 


1,684.50 


33.45 


South Dakota 


120,445.00 


16.53 


Montana 


11,034.00 


9.86 


Washington 


4,879.00 


41.37 


Nebraska 


5,641.00 


36.65 


Wisconsin 


1,069.00 


17.00 


North Dakota 


22,610.70 


9.93 


Wyoming 


865.00 


20.64 



FOR THE YEAR 1911 IT IS ESTIMATEO THAT 350,000 ACRES WILL BE OFFEREO FOR SALE 



For information as to tbe character of tbe land wr-ite for booklet. " IKDIAfl LANDS FOR SALE," to the 
Superintendent U. S. Indian School at any one of tbe following places: 



CALlFOBNlA. 

Booth. 

COLORADO: 

IDAHO: 

KANSAS: 

Bono* 

nt4u«. 



MINNESOTA 

Oaicsa. 

MONTANA: 

Crow AitocT 
NEBRASKA: 

Mat y. 
Suite. 
Vuuta|o 



NORTH DAKOTA: 
Fort I ouu>. 
Fort Y.te*. 
OKLAHOMA: 
AiodAiko 
CtotoSocM. 

D*rtu>ttoo. 

Piuk"' 



OKLAHOMA -Coo. 

S*c *ad P«i Aitocj 
SJuwbw*. 
WyosdotU. 
OREGON: 

KUmtUi A[*bcT 
P<S<1I<U1B . 

Silttl. 



sooth Dakota: 
Cbcr<oo« Accocr 

Crow Crock. 
Greenwood 
Lower Brule 
Pise Rid(< 

Hole tod 



WASHINGTON: 
Fori Suncoe 
Fort Spokane. 
TbAob. 
Tolalip. 
WISCONSIN: 
Ottid*. 



WALTER L. FISHER, 

ScCrctarT cl m< InUr.or. 



ROBERT G. VALENTINE, 

Com mifll oner o> InCl.n A 



Indian Land For Sale. U.S. Dept, of Interior [Washington, 1911] Broadside 
Portfolio 240, no. 24, (RBSC neg). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



A Department of the Interior advertisement of about 191 1 — with a photograph 
of Not Afraid of Pawnee, a Yankton Sioux — offers surplus Indian land for sale . 
A total of 150,000 acres of Indian land was sold in 1911 for $ 2,500,000 , an 
average of $16 per acre. 



This depiction of anti-Indian sentiments published during 
the Second Seminole War illustrates in part the attack of 
Maj. Francis I. Dade and his contingent of approximately 
one hundred men by Seminoles and Blacks. Such accounts 
heightened concerns over racially motivated warfare. 






ABOVE: "Danse des habitants de Californie & la mission San Francisco" from Voyage pittoresque autour du monde, avec 
des portraits de s auvages d'Am&ique, d'Asie, d'Afrique, et des iles du Grand ocean ... by Louis Choris (Paris: Firmin 
Didot, 1822); G420.K84 C5 (RBSC neg. 2945). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



As part of the 1816 Russian von Kotzebue expedition i, Choris visited the pueblo of San Francisco , where he found fifteen 
hundred Indians in the Spanish mission community. Although attending mass on Sunday ; the Indian participants followed 
it with a ritual dance in the cemetery in front of the mission house , wearing traditional regalia. 

RIGHT TOP: "A Chinook Lodge [Oregon Territory, 1 83-]," engraving by R. W. Dodson, from a sketch by Alfred Agate in vol- 
ume 4 of Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition by Charles Wilkes (Philadelphia, 1 844). Q1 1 5.W6 v.1 -5. (LC- 
USZ62-31 244). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



j The United States Exploring Expedition of 1838-42 was led by Lt. Charles Wilkes and included a large scientific corps 
j and three artists. After extensive exploration of the Pacific and Antarctic, their final effort was to make a survey of North 
) America's Northwest coastline north of the Columbia River. One result was many drawings representing native lifestyles. 

| The Chinook, who were the great traders of the region, built large semi subterranean cedar plank houses with gabled roofs. 

I Sleeping platforms were arranged along the side walls. 

RIGHT BOTTOM: "Int6rieur d'une cabane de Caloches, lie de Sitkha," from Voyage autour du monde by Fedor Petrovich 
Lutke (Paris, 1835-36). G420.L93, Rare Book and Special Collections Division for text volumes. Illustration in atlas volume; 
G2860.L8 1 835 copy 2 Vault (LC-USZ62-1 1 5629). Geography and Map Division. 



The Russian expedition under Captain Fedor P. Lutke explored the coasts of Kamchatka, Anadyr Gulf, Bering Strait and 
other places in the Pacific Ocean and the Sea of Okhotsk. Lutke circumnavigated the globe from 1826 to 1829; his publica- 
tion brings to us some of the earliest images of the people of the far Northwest Coast of America. 






LEFT: "Wedding Ceremony" by Steve Mopope in Kiowa In- 
dian Art: Watercolor Paintings in Color by the Indians of 
Oklahoma by Oscar Brousse Jacobson (Nice, France: C. 
Szwedicki, 1929). E98.A7 J1 7 (LC-USZC4-481 2). Rare 
Book and Special Collections Division. 



Steve Mopope's brilliantly illuminated, stylized work is part 
of a larger ; limited edition portfolio on Oklahoma Indian 
peoples. Mopope was one of the Kiowa Six, a group of 
artists who launched the renaissance of southern Plains 
painting after World War I with an emphasis on dance and 
elaborate and decorative costumes. Their work was among ' 
several efforts during the first half of the twentieth century 
to document and idealize Indian cultures at a time when 
much concern existed over their assumed loss. 



LEFT BELOW: . . then upon one knee, uprising, Hia- 

watha aimed an arrow, . . . ," photogravure after Frederic 
Remington from The song of Hiawatha by Henry 
; Wadsworth Longfellow (Boston and New York: Houghton, 
| Mifflin and Company, 1 891 ). PS2267.A1 1891 

(LC-USZC4-481 3). Rare Book and Special Collections 
Division. 





Noted United States artists, such as Frederic Remington, re- 
peatedly used the Indian peoples as a rich source for their 
work. Here, in contrast to his well-known scenes of In- 
dian/white conflict, Remington illustrates Longfellow's fa- 
mous work memorializing past glories of a declining 
culture. 



i 



RIGHT: "Tah-Col-O-Quoit/' hand-colored engraving from 
History of the Indian Tribes of North America by Thomas 
Loraine McKenney and James Hall (Philadelphia: E.C. Bid- 
dle, 1836-44). E77.M13 (LC-USZC4-481 4) Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division. 



McKenney and Hall's work provides an interesting descrip- 
tion of the migrations of the Sauk (or Sac), to which the 
warrior Tah-Col-O-Quoit belonged. The Sac settled origi- 
nally along the St. Lawrence River, near the Atlantic but 
they were driven progressively toward the Great Lakes by \ 
the French and other Indian peoples. They waged war with 
the Iroquois , collided with the Wyandot on the southern 
shore of Lake Erie, allied with the Fox on Lake Michigan, 
and ultimately, in the time of McKenney and Hall, had 
reached the Rock River area, in Illinois. Tah-Col-O-Quoit 
(Rising Cloud) was a member of the 1824 Sac and Fox del- 
egation to Washington. His portrait was painted by Charles 
Bird King. 





MANUSCRIPT DIVISION introduction 



The Manuscript Division's holdings of more than 
fifty million items in eleven thousand collections 
document all aspects of American history and 
culture and include some of the nation's greatest 
manuscript treasures. Represented are the pa- 
pers of twenty-three of the presidents of the 
United States, their cabinet members, many of 
their colleagues and adversaries in the Senate 
and House of Representatives, members of the 
Supreme Court and federal judiciary, military 
officers and diplomats, artists and writers, scien- 
tists and inventors, and other prominent Ameri- 
cans, as well as records of organizations whose 
existence reflects aspects of our country's evolu- 
tion. Many of these collections reveal individu- 
als' private lives in addition to professional or 
political careers, suggesting how their origins, 
family relationships, personal experiences, moti- 
vations, prejudices, and humor affected their 
public behavior and activities. 

Although several hundred divisional collec- 
tions focus on Native Americans and document 
their role in the creation and development of the 
United States, only rarely does one find in the 
extant record a manuscript or a document origi- 
nating in the hand of an American Indian, The 
predominant viewpoint expressed is that of 
non-Indians, including colonialists, military of- 
ficers, missionaries, administrators, politicians, 
or public officials, many of whom actively estab- 
lished and supported the long-term policies that 
have defined relations between America's gov- 
ernments and North American Indians. The 
significance of the manuscripts lies in their evi- 
dentiary value, that is they are the primary 
sources upon which the study of the past is 
based. Without them we would be largely un- 
able to understand the actions of individuals and 
evaluate their accomplishments within the larger 







MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



7 3 



context of the history of the United States. Types 
of manuscripts included are letters, diaries, jour- 
nals, notebooks, logs, scrapbooks, subject files, 
photographs, legal and financial papers, and 
other materials in a variety of formats. 

The division's holdings document the course 
of American Indian history before and following 
the appearance of European settlers in the Amer- 
icas down to the present. Narratives and letters 
of early missionaries speak of their attempts 
to evangelize the Indian nations of North and 
South America, and constitute some of the earli- 
est materials informing us of the cultural and po- 
litical interaction of complex and highly ordered 
societies. For example, the substantial records of 
the Russian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church in 
Alaska chart its earliest efforts to convert and 
Russify the native populations of that region: its 
records (in Russian) of vital statistics, kept by 
clergy who adopted the dual roles of ecclesiastic 
and civil servant, have long been appreciated by 
descendants who wish to discover the date of 
birth, death, or marriage of an indigenous Alas- 
kan ancestor. 

In their desire to communicate with Indian 
tribes, many missionaries studied Indian lan- 
guages and at times produced prayer books 
and bibles in these languages. For example, a 
Micmac prayer book devised by a French mis- 
sionary, Father Chrestien LeClerq, who lived 
among the Micmac in the 1670s, is composed of 
hieroglyphic characters. However, the Division's 
richest collection of vocabularies of North Amer- 
ican Indian languages — largely those of the In- 
dian peoples of California — was formed by nat- 
uralist, ethnologist, and linguist Clinton Hart 
Merriam. 

In addition to missionary accounts, the pa- 
pers of explorers, fur traders, pioneers, and other 
frontiersmen, as well as military officers and 
colonial leaders, document areas of Indian life in 
pre-Revolutionary America. Printer and pub- 

ERIC ^ 



lisher Peter Force amassed a monumental collec- 
tion of original manuscripts and transcriptions 
for publication in his American Archives, origi- 
nally planned as a history of America to 1789. 
The collection, which was purchased for the Li- 
brary of Congress in 1867, includes a wide range 
of materials relating to interaction with Indian 
peoples. Examples include documents on Anglo- 
Indian treaty negotiations; a formal appeal of the 
Mohegan Indians against the colony of Con- 
necticut in 1746; and a letter to the Archbishop of 
Canterbury requesting missionaries, drafted for 
four sachems and dually inscribed in cursive 
and glyphic signatures, at Boston, Massachu- 
setts, July 21, 1710. The Spanish- American expe- 
rience with the Indian is also reflected in the 
Force collection. 

Following the Revolutionary War, the history 
of American Indians is almost inextricably in- 
volved with the federal government's evolving 
Indian policy. The gradual termination of tribal 
land ownership over the years and the forced re- 
moval of entire tribes from their established 
lands in the east to settlements west of the 
Mississippi, and then on to reservations, is docu- 
mented in the papers of presidents, congress- 
men, secretaries of the interior, Indian com- 
missioners and agents, and military officers. 
Papers of such presidents as George Washing- 
ton, Andrew Jackson, and William Henry Harri- 
son; of military commanders Duncan McArthur, 
John McAllister Schofield, Philip Henry Sheri- 
dan, William Tecumseh Sherman, Hugh Lenox 
Scott, and many others; and of such Indian 
agents as George Croghan and Return Jonathan 
Meigs, reveal attitudes and policies of the coun- 
try's leadership toward American Indians, and 
trace the course of military and diplomatic inter- 
action as the rim of the frontier moved further 
westward. 

Fortunately, there were some during the peri- 
ods of expansion who recognized the value of 



03 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



7 4 



recording the traditions, customs, and relations 
of societies whose members were forced to ac- 
cept an approximation of their original cultures. 
Henry Rowe Schoolcraft, explorer, author, and 
ethnologist, was preeminent among these. His 
voluminous papers include correspondence; 
various Indian vocabularies; his Algic Researches ; 
his "Muz-ze-ni-e-gun" and other manuscript 
magazines; and notes on Indian history, mythol- 
ogy, and language. 

Many manuscripts of the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries document attempts by 
the federal government to reform the adminis- 
tration of Indian affairs. The papers of secretaries 
of the interior Carl Schurz and Harold L. Ickes 
are especially useful as are those of members 
of congress, such as Clinton Presba Anderson, 
Henry Laurens Dawes, Robert M. La Follette, Sr., 
and Thomas J. Walsh, who attempted to change 
the. legal and physical lot of American Indians. 
Among the congressional papers are those of 
Robert Latham Owen, one of the first two U.S. 
senators from Oklahoma and an enrolled Chero- 
kee, a fiscal expert who co-authored the Federal 
Reserve Act of 1913. 

Finally, the division's voluminous judicial 
papers offer another rich area for research. The 
papers of Associate Supreme Court Justice Smith 
Thompson, for example, include the manuscript 
of his memorable Supreme Court dissent in 
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831). At issue was 
whether or not the Cherokee were to be consid- 
ered a foreign nation, subject to repressive state 
laws. Chief Justice John Marshall denied that 
they were a foreign nation, whereas Thompson 
in his dissent argued that the Cherokee Indians 
had long been treated as a nation by the U.S. gov- 
ernment. Thompson could not turn the mood of 
President Andrew Jackson, a long-time advocate 
of removing the Indians to land west of the Mis- 
sissippi, nor of Congress, which had the year be- 
fore enacted the Indian Removal Act. 



USING THE COLLECTIONS 

MANUSCRIPT READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Madison Building, 1st floor, Room LM 
1 01 ; telephone (202) 707-5387 

HOURS: Monday through Saturday, 8:30 A.M. to 
5:00 P.M. 

ACCESS AND USE: No appointments necessary, ex- 
cept with staff historians. Because the Manuscript 
Division's holdings are rare, valuable, and irreplace- 
able, their use is limited primarily to patrons con- 
ducting serious research. Student access is generally 
limited to those engaged in graduate study. First-time 
researchers are required to read and sign a form 
agreeing that they will abide by the formal rules 
and regulations for using the reading room. All re- 
searchers must complete a registration card every 
two years and must present a Library of Congress 
photo I.D. card at the time of registration. Pencils, 
note cards, and note paper are provided. Only mate- 
rials essential to research are allowed in the reading 
room. As a rule researchers are permitted to make 
copies of original manuscript material on the photo- 
copiers in the reading room, with the exceptions of 
bound documents, fragile items, or collections that 
have restrictions on photoduplication. 

The division's reference staff is available to pro- 
vide information about the division's holdings 
and on related topics important to successful re- 
search, such as the nature of the copyright law 
(Title 17, United States Code) as it applies to un- 
published manuscripts, restrictions on the use 
of certain materials, procedures for obtaining 
duplicates of documents through the Library's 
Photoduplication Service, and reference books 
and finding aids pertaining to manuscript 
sources. 

The division also has several staff historians 
who specialize in particular eras or fields of 
American history. They are available for per- 
sonal consultation with researchers, and their 
areas of expertise are: Colonial era and early 
American history to 1825; National period to 





MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



7 5 



1861; Civil War and Reconstruction to 1900; 
Twentieth-century political history; African- 
American history; American literary history 
and culture; and the history of science and tech- 
nology. 

Access to the collections is through the on- 
line master record of manuscript collections. Re- 
searchers are also referred to one or more of the 
following general finding aids: 

Master Record of 
Manuscript Collections 

The basic guide to the division's holdings is the 
Master Record of Manuscript Collections, which 
consists of two parts. The first. Master Record I, 
lists collections alphabetically by the name of the 
individual or organization whose documents are 
collected and includes brief descriptions of the 
entries. Master Record II generally contains more 
detailed catalog descriptions of the collections 
including the types of material, the major topics 
represented, and the names of principal corre- 
spondents. It indexes the names and key terms 
found in the collection descriptions. Although 
there are printed volumes for Master Record II in 
the Manuscript Reading Room, they were last 
printed in mid-1986. Since this file is on-line as 
part of the MUMS (Multiple Use Marc System) 
database, researchers should consult it by com- 
puter for the most up-to-date information. Com- 
mands for information from the manuscript file 
should be qualified with "f=mss" preceded by a 
semicolon. For example, to search for informa- 
tion on the subject of Indians, the command 
should be "find s indians;f=mss." 

Registers 

Detailed finding guides or registers exist for vir- 
tually all of the division's larger collections. Ap- 
proximately 1,800 are available for reader use in 

o 




the reading room. Most include information 
about the provenance and administration of the 
collection, a scope and content note, an organiza- 
tional or biographical history or chronology, a 
description of the various series, and a container 
list (or reel list if the collection, or portions of it, 
have been microfilmed). 

Presidential Papers Indexes 

(see " Selected Collections" section) 

National Union Catalog of 
Manuscript Collections 

The standard and most comprehensive guide 
to the holdings of manuscript repositories in 
the United States is the multi-volume National 
Union Catalog of Manuscript Collections (Wash- 
ington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1959-93)/ com- 
monly known as NUCMC. Approximately 1,880 
of the division's collections have been reported 
to NUCMC since it began publication. Beginning 
in 1988, the catalog information has been made 
available in a machine-readable format on RLIN 
(Research Libraries Information Network). The 
1993 volume is the last printed catalog to be pub- 
lished; all future catalog information will be 
available only through RLIN or OCLC (Online 
Computer Library Center). 



Numerous other helpful guides, indexes, and 
checklists to various collections have been com- 
piled by the division and by others. Researchers 
should consult with the reference staff to deter- 
mine the most efficient approach for their topics. 

□ SELECTED COLLECTIONS 

This presentation of the Manuscript Divi- 
sion's rich resources is arranged initially by 
the division's principal representative collec- 




MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



7 6 



tions containing Indian material, and then 
thematically: 

■ Force Collection 

■ Schoolcraft Papers 

■ Presidential Papers 

■ Congress and Indian policy 

■ Federal Judiciary 

■ Secretaries of the Interior 

■ Indian Commissioners, Agents, and Traders 

■ Indian Wars 

■ Explorers and Adventurers 

■ European Colonial Administrations 

■ Missions and Missionaries 

■ Indian Languages 

■ Historians, Anthropologists, Ethnologists, 
and Other Students 

To be sure, such categories are somewhat ar- 
bitrary and overlapping. Andrew Jackson was 
not only the seventh President of the United 
States but also had a lengthy military career that 
affected many Indian lives during the War of 
1812 and the Seminole Wars in Florida; Peter 
Force, a historian, gathered papers of military 
men; the administrative papers of colonial pow- 
ers contain material related to missions, Indian 
wars, and other themes. But such categories can 
help a potential researcher better understand the 
sometimes overwhelming complexity of Ameri- 
can Indian history as it is represented in the 
Manuscript Division. 

This selection of the Manuscript Division's 
holdings of material relating to American Indi- 
ans can only suggest their richness. While origi- 
nal items are stressed, there is also extensive 
photocopied material available for researchers. 
The researcher should be aware that the Manu- 
script Division has maintained a widespread ac- 
quisitions program with respect to manuscript 
collections in other American repositories and in 
foreign repositories and that these microfilmed 
collections are a very valuable resource for stu- 
dents of American Indian peoples. For instance. 



the Foreign Copying Program, begun in 1905, 
has brought to the Library several million pages 
of manuscripts copied from several hundred li- 
braries in twenty-four foreign countries. Much 
of this material, especially from the colonial 
period, contains information about American 
Indians. 

note: Accompanying the official names of the 
collections listed below are the span dates — the 
dates of the first and last manuscripts in the col- 
lection — as well as the availability of a finding 
aid. Collections that have also been recorded on 
microfilm are cited accordingly. 

Force Papers 

The Peter Force Papers and Collection (span 
1170-1961; finding aid) 

The Library of Congress manuscript, rare 
book, and map Americana collections owe much 
to Peter Force, a printer who moved to Wash- 
ington during the early nineteenth century. A 
student of American history, he amassed an 
enormous collection of printed and manuscript 
sources — dating chiefly from 1750 to 1868 — for 
his multi-volume American Archives— A Docu- 
mentary History . . . . 

Those few collections within the Force Papers 
that are substantially about American Indian 
peoples will be noted in the relevant thematic 
sections of this chapter. Other Force material re- 
lating to them is scattered through the various 
collections he gathered together and may be di- 
vided into two parts — originals and transcripts. 
These collections are cataloged within the con- 
fines of an overall, comprehensive guide to the 
Force Collection, and many of them can be 
viewed on microfilm. 

ORIGINALS 

Andrews , Joseph Gardner. Papers (1795; microfilm) 

The diary (Jan. l-Dec. 31, 1795) kept by An- 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



7 7 



drews (b. 1768?) as an army surgeon at Fort 
Defiance, Ohio (Northwest Territory) includes 
numerous accounts of meetings with Indian 
groups. 

Atkinson , Theodore. Papers (1724-54) and Journal 
(1727; transcript; both on microfilm) 

An Indian commissioner, Atkinson (1697- 
1779) kept a journal of a journey (Jan. 15- 
May 14, 1724) through New York to Canada on a 
diplomatic mission to Governor Vaudreuil relat- 
ing to problems with Indians and violations of 
the Treaty of Utrecht. Another diary, of Atkin- 
son's journey (June 3-July 19, 1754) from New 
Hampshire to Albany, N.Y., to negotiate a treaty 
with the Six Nations, was annotated and pub- 
lished in 1907 by the Society of Colonial Wars 
(E186.3.N58). The Force Collection also contains 
a transcript of Atkinson's 1727 journal of a con- 
ference between Massachusetts and New Hamp- 
shire commissioners and the Norridgewock, 
Penobscot, and Wawenoc Indians. 

Chalmers , George. Collection (1640-1825; micro- 
film) 

The journals, papers, reports, and records col- 
lected by this historian (1742-1825) relate to his 
broad interest in British colonial administration 
and include a Mohegan appeal to the Assembly 
of Connecticut (1746) which can also be seen in 
State Records Microfilm for Connecticut in the 
Microform Reading Room section. 

Force, Manning Ferguson. Papers (1678-1846; 
microfilm) 

Letters, patents, commissions, pamphlets, 
maps, and other papers relating to French explo- 
ration of the Mississippi River collected by Man- 
ning Force (1824-99), a lawyer, army officer, and 
historian. 

Jesuit Relations Collection (1632-1847; microfilm) 

French original documents, English transla- 
tions, and one 1847 pamphlet, E. B. O'Cal- 



laghan's "Jesuit Relations of Discoveries and 
Other Occurrences in Canada and the Northern 
and Western States of the Union, 1632-72," and 
narratives relating to Mississippi missions, mis- 
sions at Detroit, drunkenness among Indians, 
war against the Iroquois, request from St. Louis 
for "gifts" for Indian nations, and Father Pierre 
Millet's captivity and treatment among the 
Iroquois. 

Lincoln, William. Papers (ca. 1830; microfilm) 

The notes, extracts, and other papers of 
lawyer and antiquarian Lincoln (1801-43) relate 
to the history, languages, and customs of the In- 
dians of New England, as well as the Mohawk 
and Osage. 

Penhallozv, Samuel. Manuscript (1726; microfilm) 
"History of the wars of New England with the 
Eastern Indians continued" is the account by 
Penhallow (1665-1726), a New Hampshire offi- 
cial, of a voyage to the Penobscot in Maine carry- 
ing supplies from Lieutenant Governor William 
Partridge. It mentions Penobscot and Pigwacket 
Indian Wars and the involvement of France and 
England, Pemaquid Fort, and a missionary to the 
Norridgewock. 

Strange, Robert. Manuscript (no date) 

Strange (1796-1854), lawyer and U.S. senator 
from North Carolina (1836-40), sent the two- 
volume manuscript of his novel entitled "Eone- 
guski, or the Cherokee Chief," to Peter Force 
who published it for private circulation in 1839. 
The novel describes Indian traditions in the 
region of Fayetteville, North Carolina, where 
Strange resided. 

TRANSCRIPTS 

Fleete, Henry. Journal (July 4, 1631-February 22, 
1632; microfilm) 

Account of a voyage to America by Fleete (fl. 
1621-54), including "customs of those Indians 



EVOLUTION OF FEDERAL INDIAN POLICY and the BUREAU OF 

^OWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOTOAC 

WOAO'WOAOWOAOWOAOYOAO'TOAOVOAOWOAO'TOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOVOAOWt 

GATEWAYS 



Federal Indian policy has passed through various 
identifiable phases or periods, as circumstances 
have changed and policymakers have responded 
by emphasizing different options. While the long- 
time goal was acquisition of Indian lands, the 
policy question was what to do about the Indians 
occupying the lands. In the nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries, policymakers debated among 
three broad options: removal of Indians to other 
areas, segregation in enclaves, and assimilation. 
Of course, these options were not mutually ex- 
clusive. Later in the twentieth century the policy 
debate expanded to include the option of Indian 
tribal autonomy and self-development. 

Among the periods generally identified by his- 
torians (although with some disagreements on 
dates) are the following eras: 

■ early treatymaking and trade, from ratification 
of the Constitution (1 789) to about 1 830; 

■ mass removal of tribes across the Mississippi 
River, from about 1 830 to about 1 850; 

■ concentration of tribes on reservations, from 
about 1850 to 1887; 

■ allotment of reservation lands and assimilation 
of individual Indians, from 1887 to about 
1925 (or to 1933); 

■ reform and reorganization, the "Indian New 
Deal," from about 1 925 (or 1 933) to the late 
1940s (or 1953); 

■ termination of federal-tribal relations, from the 
late 1 940s (or 1 953) to the early 1 960s (or 
1975); and 

■ tribal self-determination, from the mid-1960s 
(or 1 975) to the present. 

See other topical summaries for discussions of 
particular periods in federal Indian policy. 



Since 1 824 the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA) — called at various times, formally or infor- 
mally, the Office, or Department, of Indian Affairs 
or the Indian Service — has been the key federal 
agency to carry out federal Indian policies and 
programs. Initially created by the Secretary of 
War, the BIA was statutorily authorized by Con- 
gress in 1834, two years after it authorized a 
commissioner of Indian affairs. In 1849 Congress 
moved the BIA from the Department of War to 
the new Department of the Interior. Congress 
finally assigned a major federal Indian program to 
an agency other than the BIA in 1 954, when it 
moved health care programs from the BIA to a 
new Indian Health Service in the then Depart- 
ment of Health, Education and Welfare. In the 
1 969s and 1 970s a number of other federal de- 
partments also added important new federal In- 
dian programs. The BIA remains, however, the 
most comprehensive federal Indian agency. In- 
dian affairs achieved greater salience within the 
Interior Department in 1977, when President 
Jimmy Carter created the position of assistant sec- 
retary of the interior — Indian affairs, with author- 
ity over the BIA and the commissioner. 



AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Library collections with ma- 
terials relevant to federal Indian policy and the 
BIA include the Law Library, the Manuscript Divi- 
sion, the Microform Reading Room, the Local 
History and Genealogy Reading Room, the Rare 
Book and Special Collections Division, the Geog- 
raphy and Map Division, the Prints and Photo- 
graphs Division, and the General Collections. 






INDIAN AFFAIRS 

C>TOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOfOAOTOAOTOAO'f 

JAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOfOAOfOAOfOA 




"Move On." Has the Native American no rights that the naturalized American is bound to expect, wood engraving by 
Thomas Nast from Harper's Weekly, April 22, 1871. AP2.H32. LOT 4391 -H (LCTUSZ62-53856). Prints and Photographs 
Division and General Collections (Microform). 



Nast's political cartoon advocating enfranchisement of Indians includes figures representing Irish, German, English, Scots, 
French, and Asian immigrants. They are shown voting, along with an African-American, while an Irish policeman indicates 
to an Indian that he is not wanted at the polls. While some Indian bands had been granted citizenship by Congress, debate 
continued over citizenship for all Indians, and over whether the Fourteenth Amendment (adopted in 1868) made Indians 
U.S. citizens. The cartoon's title, intentionally or not, captures one of the cardinal aims of nineteenth-century Indian policy. 




1 



7 9 





MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 0 



living along the rivers and harbors of Maryland 
and Virginia." 

Gates, Horatio. Papers (1 777; microfilm) 

Correspondence, orderly book, and reports 
on the Philadelphia and Saratoga campaigns by 
Gates (1728-1806), a Continental Army general, 
include information on Indian alliances. (The di- 
vision also has a 20-reel microfilm collection of 
Gates's papers from the New- York Historical So- 
ciety, 1726-1828). 

Georgia Committee of Correspondence. Records 
(1762-71; microfilm) 

Consists chiefly of letters from the Provincial 
Committee of Safety to colonial agent William 
Knox concerning frontier defense during the 
French and Indian War and negotiation with 
Creeks over land. 

St. Clair, Arthur. Papers (1772-93; microfilm) 
Post-Revolutionary War correspondence of 
this army officer (1736-1818), as governor of the 
Northwest Territory, concerns Indian affairs, 
fortifications, and trade on the Western frontier; 
also a letter (November 10, 1791) from Michael 
McDonough describing Saint Clair's November 4 
defeat by an Indian alliance. 

Scottow, Joshua. Journal (1677; microfilm) 

Titled "Narrative of ye voyage to Pemaquid," 
the journal describes the participation by Scot- 
tow (1618-93) in negotiations and an abstract of 
a treaty with the Pemaquid. 

South Carolina, Provincial Congress. Records (1770- 
76; microfilm) 

Letters and reports concerning the Indian sit- 
uation on South Carolina's western frontier. 

Sprague, William Buell. Collection (1702-83; mi- 
crofilm) 



The collection of Sprague (1793-1876), a cler- 
gyman and author, includes correspondence 
(1755-74) t° and from Sir William Johnson, su- 
perintendent of Indian affairs in the northern 
colonies. 

Stevens, Phineas. Journals (1749 and 1752; mi- 
crofilm) 

Journals kept during two journeys to Canada 
by Stevens (1706-56) to negotiate the release of 
Massachusetts soldiers and civilians held pris- 
oner by the French and their Indian allies. 

Schoolcraft Papers 

The Schoolcraft Papers are the division's leading 
collection on Indian matters. A published guide, 
Henry Rowe Schoolcraft: A Register of His Papers In 
the Library of Congress, goes into great detail on 
the contents. 

Schoolcraft, Henry Rowe. Papers (1788-1906; find- 
ing aid; microfilm) 

Schoolcraft (1793-1864) was the ]ndiari~agent 
at Sault Ste. Marie and Mackinac Island, superin- 
tendent for Indian affairs for Michigan (1836- 
41), leader of expeditions throughout the Great 
Lakes region, member of Michigan's legislative 
council, ethnologist studying and reporting on 
the Iroquois of New York State, and compiler 
and editor of the six-volume Historical and Statis- 
tical Information Respecting the History, Condition, 
and Prospects of the Indian Tribes of the United 
States (Philadelphia, 1851-57) for the Office of 
Indian Affairs. The general correspondence and 
the journals in the collection are rich sources of 
information about the working of an Indian 
agency at the time. Schoolcraft also interviewed 
American Indians on Mackinac Island between 
May and September 1837 about their personal 
and tribal histories and constructed vocabu- 
laries for the Ojibwa, Mandan, Costanoan, and 







9 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 1 



Cushna, a branch of the California Maidu. A sep- 
arate section of the collection contains manu- 
scripts of the many articles and speeches he 
wrote about American Indian peoples. There is 
also a brief manuscript of Indian maxims. Many 
of Schoolcraft's accounts of his visits to and ob- 
servations among Indian tribes have been pub- 
lished, but his papers include considerable un- 
published correspondence and other materials. 
Poems by Schoolcraft's first wife Jane Johnston 
Schoolcraft, who was part Chippewa, are in- 
cluded in the Poetry File. 

Presidential Papers 

The establishment of the Presidential Papers Pro- 
gram by Congress at the Library of Congress in 
1957 has been, and continues to be, of permanent 
importance for the study of national culture. The 
program's purpose was to preserve and to make 
widely accessible presidential papers in the Li- 
brary's collections. The presidents listed below 
are represented in the Manuscript Division by 
major groups of personal papers, whose span 
dates are noted in parentheses, and are re- 
corded in finding aids which contain full writer- 
recipient indexes. All are on microfilm: 

George Washington (1592-1937) 

Thomas Jefferson (1606-1902) 

James Madison (1751-1836) 

James Monroe (1758-1839) 

Andrew Jackson (1775-1860) 

Martin Van Buren (1787-1910) 

William Henry Harrison (1734-1939) 

John Tyler (1691-1918) 

James K. Polk (1775-1891) 

Zachary Taylor (1814-1931) 

Franklin Pierce (1820-69) 

Abraham Lincoln (1774-1931) 

Andrew Johnson (1814-1947) 

Ulysses S. Grant (1843-1969) 



James A. Garfield (1831-81) 

Chester A. Arthur (1843-1960) 

Grover Cleveland (1859-1945) 

Benjamin Harrison (1787-1938) 

William McKinley (1847-1901) 

Theodore Roosevelt (1759-1920) 

William Howard Taft (1784-1930) 

Woodrow Wilson (1786-1957) 

Calvin Coolidge (1915-32) 

The papers of former presidents beginning 
with Herbert C. Hoover are in the custody of 
presidential libraries, administered by the Na- 
tional Archives and Records Administration. 
There is also a Rutherford B. Hayes Library 
in Fremont, Ohio; the John and John Quincy 
Adams papers are in the Massachusetts Histori- 
cal Society; the Millard Fillmore Papers are in the 
Buffalo and Erie County Historical Society; the 
James Buchanan papers are in the Historical So- 
ciety of Pennsylvania; and the Warren G. Hard- 
ing papers are in the Ohio Historical Society. The 
Manuscript Division has microfilm copies of all 
of them. 

Among those listed above, a few have particu- 
lar relevance for this guide and are described; in 
chronological order: ; . 

The George Washington Papers are important for 
his years as a military leader during the French 
and Indian War (1754-63) and the Revolution, as 
a Virginia commissioner to the Ohio Indians, as 
well as for his tenure as president during the 
post-Revolutionary frontier conflicts. One of 
the formative statutes in federal Indian policy, 
the 1790 Trade and Intercourse Act, was enacted 
during his first term. 

The Thomas Jefferson Papers provide evidence of 
the third president's insatiable curiosity about al- 
most everything, and the lives and customs of 
American Indian peoples were no exception. He, 
more than any other president, was interested in 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 2 



the culture of American Indians. He studied 
their languages and compiled vocabularies of 
them (they were stolen in 1809), excavated a bur- 
ial mound, and collected native artifacts. Ameri- 
can Indians visited his homes in his youth and 
adulthood, and his papers include an early 
drawing of burial mounds in Ohio Territory. 
Though he did not as president engage in any 
military activity against American Indian tribes, 
he nonetheless thought that they must be assimi- 
lated into white culture to survive or be in- 
evitably forced to move west. 

The James Monroe Papers show the fifth presi- 
dent's impact on American Indian policy from 
the Confederation Congress of the 1780s through 
the War of 1812 and the First Seminole Indian 
War. They also document the expansion of gov- 
ernment economic and educational support of 
the Indians. 

The Andreiv Jackson Papers illustrate the seventh 
president's long public career and its un- 
precedented effects on American Indians' lives. 
Though his military career is best known by 
his repulse of the British at New Orleans during 
the War of 1812, Jackson (1767-1845) received 
that command through his decisive campaign 
against the Creeks culminating in the Battle of 
Horseshoe Bend (1814). Later, during the Semi- 
nole War, exceeding his order to intervene in the 
area, he precipitously invaded Florida, capturing 
the Spanish town of Pensacola (1818). After elec- 
tion as president in 1828, he made his long-held 
view that all Indian tribes should be moved west 
of the Mississippi River a centerpiece policy of 
his administration, a decision that profoundly 
affected the course of American Indian history. 

The William Henry Harrison Papers consist of his 
correspondence and military papers, largely 
from the period 1796-1841, with special empha- 
sis on Indian campaigns and treaties. A letter- 



book of 1812-13 relates to incidents of the War of 
1812 on the western borders. Also of interest are 
reports of the February 3, 1813, Indian confer- 
ence at Fort Feree, Ohio, the 1838 Tippecanoe Al- 
manac, and speeches about Indians (1813, 1836). 

The Zachary Taylor Papers cover his military ca- 
reer against Indians during the War of 1812 in 
Indiana and Illinois Territory. Later, he served 
during the Black Hawk War and followed that 
service with a stint during the Second Seminole 
War that led to a key U.S. military victory in the 
Battle of Okeechobee in 1837. 

The Theodore Roosevelt Papers show that he was 
interested in Indian affairs and on at least one oc- 
casion attended the Lake Mohonk Conference 
concerned with the acculturation and legal pro- 
tection of Indian groups. As president, he once 
sought the advice of photographer and journalist 
Charles F. Lummis, a harsh critic of federal In- 
dian policy, in developing his own administra- 
tion's Indian programs. 

Congress and Indian Policy 

Members of Congress and their staffs have 
significantly affected American Indians and 
American Indian history in four ways: as elected 
representatives from states with substantial In- 
dian populations, through dealings with the Bu- 
reau of Indian Affairs and its predecessors, by 
service on either the Senate or House committees 
handling Indian affairs, and as persons passing 
legislation affecting American Indians. Follow- 
ing is a selection from more than 900 collections 
representing a range of these activities. 

Anderson , Clinton Presba. Papers (1938-72; find- 
ing aid) 

Anderson (1895-1975) was a representative 
(1941-45) and senator (1949-73) from New 
Mexico. His administrative and legislative files 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 3 



contain correspondence with constituents and 
the Department of the Interior regarding New 
Mexican Indian claims and affairs. Other files 
relate to the Pueblos, Klamath, Ute, and Fort 
Berthold Indians; the New Mexico Association of 
Indian Affairs; the Santa Fe Indian School; Blue 
Lake; the Santa Fe Bureau; Indian irrigation 
problems; and Mescalero Apache lumber and 
ranching operations. 

Borah , William E. Papers (1905-40; finding aid) 

The papers contain files marked Indian Af- 
fairs for each Congress from 1907 through 1940, 
and respectively for the tribes within the Idaho 
constituency of Senator Borah (1865-1940). 

Cutting , Bronson Murray. Papers (1899-1950; find- 
ing aid) 

Cutting (1888-1935), a United States senator 
from New Mexico from 1927 to 1935, kept a gen- 
eral correspondence file dealing with matters re- 
lating to constituents, many of whom were Na- 
tive American. He had a special interest in the 
Mescalero Apache. 

Dawes, Henry Laurens. Papers (1833-1933; find- 
ing aid) 

Dawes (1816-1903) had a major impact on 
Indian affairs. The highlight of his long service 
as U.S. representative (1857-75) and senator 
(1875-93) from Massachusetts was the passage 
of one of the most significant pieces of legisla- 
tion affecting American Indian people, the 1887 
Dawes Severalty Act (or General Allotment 
Act — see Reservations, Agents, and Allotments 
gateway, pp. 156-157). Dawes also was chair of 
the Commission to Administer the Tribal Affairs 
of the Five Civilized Tribes (1893-1903) and his 
records for this period are valuable for under- 
standing internal political factions, especially 
among the Choctaw, and the problems of freed 
blacks once owned by American Indians, who 
had settled on Indian land. 



La Follette, Robert M., Sr. (1844-1925) section in 
the La Follette Family Papers (1844-1973; find- 
ing aid) 

Congressman (1885-91), governor of Wiscon- 
sin (1901-5), and senator (1906-25), La Follette 
(1855-1925) was one of the strongest legislative 
supporters of Indian rights during the Progres- 
sive era and advocated allowing Indians greater 
control of their resources. His unusually rich 
files are arranged by tribe, including most 
prominently the Chippewa, the Crow, the Five 
Civilized Tribes, the Menominee, the Oneida, 
the Osage, and additionally the Tomah Indian 
School. The division also has microfilm of the 
Robert La Follette Sr. papers in the State Histori- 
cal Society of Wisconsin. 

Morgan, John Tyler. Papers (1840-1907; find- 
ing aid) 

The wide ranging interest in Indian affairs of 
this Alabama senator (1824-1907) included his 
desire to see Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Wash- 
ington territories, all areas with dense Native 
American population, achieve statehood. 

Owen, Robert Latham. Papers (1920-41) 

Owen (1856-1947), lawyer, banker, Indian 
agent to the Five Civilized Tribes, U.S. senator 
from Oklahoma (1907-25), and Cherokee Tribal 
Council member, was one of a small number of 
U.S. congressmen of Indian descent. A co-author 
of the Federal Reserve Act of 1913, his papers re- 
late primarily to fiscal causes of depressions and 
arguments for government control of currency 
and credit. 

Pittman, Key. Papers (1898-1951; finding aid) 

In addition to his substantial office files relat- 
ing to his work on the Senate Committee on In- 
dian Affairs and correspondence with the Bu- 
reau of Indian Affairs, Key Pittman (1872-1940), 
senator from Nevada from 1913 to 1940, had a 



o 



CONGRESS AND INDIAN POLICY 



\OTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAO?OAOTOAO?OAO?OAOfOAOf<)AOTOAOTOAC 

rOAOTAAOfOAOTOAOTAAOTOAOTOAOTAAAfOAATOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOfC 



GATEWAYS 



Congress, under current law, is considered to have 
plenary power over federal Indian policy. In other 
words, statutes passed by Congress, and treaties 
ratified by the Senate, control what relationship, if 
any, the federal government will have with Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaska Native tribes and villages. 
The major debates over Indian policy have eventu- 
ally ended up in Congress. Most major shifts in In- 
dian policy have been marked by congressional 
legislation, including the Indian Trade and Inter- 
course Act of 1 790, the Indian Removal Act of 
1 830, the General Allotment Act of 1 887, the In- 
dian Reorganization Act of 1 934, the termination 
resolution of 1953, and the Indian Self-Determina- 
tion and Education Assistance Act of 1 975. The 
major federal agencies dealing with Indians — cur- 
rently the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Indian 
Health Service — have been authorized by Con- 
gress. 

Congress has exercised its control by passing 
statutes, ratifying some 370 treaties, approving 
agreements, appropriating funds, and exercising its 
oversight function. Treaties ratified by the Senate 
were the chief vehicle for relationships with indi- 
vidual tribes until 1871, when, at the House of 
Representatives' insistence, a proviso in the annual 
Indian appropriations bill forbade further negotia- 
tion of treaties with tribes. After that act, agree- 
ments between the federal government and tribes 
had to be approved by both houses. 

To carry out its Indian policy functions, Con- 
gress has worked through a variety of committees 
(standing, select, special, joint) and subcommit- 
tees, although each house had a permanent com- 
mittee on Indian affairs from the 1 820s to 1 947 
(and, in the Senate, since 1984). 

Indians have at times been members of Con- 
gress. The earliest members publicly identified as 
Indian were Kansas Representative and later Sena- 
tor Charles Curtis (1893-1907 in the House, 



1 907-1 3 and 1 91 5-29 in the Senate) and Okla- 
homa Senator Robert Latham Owen (1 907-25). 
They have been followed by six more representa- 
tives and one additional senator. 

AOWOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Congress's ongoing discussion 
of Indian policy can be found not only in floor de- 
bates (in the Congressional Record and 
its predecessors) but also in hearings, documents, 
prints, and reports, as well as in the personal 
papers of members of Congress. Library collections 
in which to follow this debate, or to determine the 
legislative history of a particular act, 
are the Law Library, the Manuscript Division, the 
Microform Reading Room, the Geography and 
Map Division, and the General Collections 







OTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOl 

OAOTOAOfOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOi 




OPPOSITE PACE: Robert Latham Owen. Unknown pho- 
tographer, c.1908. BIOC FILE. (LC-USZ62-11 51 24). Prints 
and Photographs Division. 



Owen (1856-1947), an enrolled Cherokee, was the sec- 
ond Indian elected to the US. Senate and one of the first 
two senators elected from Oklahoma. He served from 
1907 to 1925. Lawyer, educator, publisher, Indian agent, 
and banker, Owen championed progressive causes in 
Congress, especially national monetary reform. See the de- 
scription of his papers in the Manuscript Division chapter. 



ABOVE: U.S. commissioners and delegations of Sioux chiefs visiting 
Washington, October 15, 1888. LOT 12566 (LC-USZ62-92959). Prints and 
Photographs Division. 

The commissioners shown here, standing with the Sioux chiefs on the steps 
of the Senate wing of the Capitol, were led by Richard H. Pratt (first row, 
fourth from right) of Carlisle Indian School. They had failed to gain Sioux ac- 
ceptance of an earlier 1888 statute authorizing the break-up and diminution 
of the Great Sioux Reservation in Dakota Territory. The Sioux leaders had 
come to Washington to try to negotiate better terms t fr s oni Congress and the 
secretary of the interior. Subsequeptly, ,a k new and more generous offer enacted 
in 1889 gained grudging approval by the requisjte three-quarters of eligible 
(i.e., adult male) Sioux voters. '' • ^ 




\V 



M. 



107 



8 5 








MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 6 



special interest in the Indian school at Elko and 
the Temoak bands of Western Shoshone. 

Walsh , Thomas James. Papers (1910-34; finding 
aid) 

Like Robert La Follette, Sr., and Key Pittman, 
Thomas Walsh (1859-1933), senator from Mon- 
tana (1913-33), was a member of the Senate 
Committee on Indian Affairs. The papers contain 
information on American Indian affairs from 
1901 until 1934, including correspondence, mem- 
oranda, and legislation about the openings of the 
Fort Peck Indian Reservation, the Crow Indian 
Reservation, the Blackfeet Reservation, as well as 
issues concerning the Fort Assiniboine Military 
Reservation, the sale of the lands of the Flathead 
Reservation, and the relief of the Crow Indians. 
Walsh's papers also contain those of John Ed- 
ward Erickson, who finished out Walsh's term 
after his death in office. 

Federal Judiciary 

The division's collections include the nation's 
largest corpus of the papers of chief justices and 
associate justices of the U.S. Supreme Court, as 
well as of the many judges of the lower federal 
courts who played leading roles in American life 
and of lawyers who practiced in federal courts. 
Many of these justices and judges presided over 
major cases involving Indian claims and rights 
and their papers are likely to contribute sig- 
nificantly to research on these subjects. The 
Supreme Court, for example, has decided cases 
concerning almost every aspect of Indian life, in- 
cluding the determination of a tribe's existence 
and an individual's membership in a tribe. 

CHIEF JUSTICES OF THE SUPREME COURT 
Oliver Ellszvorth (term of office: 1796-99) 

John Marshall (1801-35) 

Roger B. Taney (1836-64) 

Salmon P. Chase (1864-73) 

• *1 

* , v .a. 



Morrison R. Waite (1874-88) 

Melville Weston Fuller (1888-1910) 

William Howard Taft (1921-30) 

Charles Evans Hughes (1930-41) 

Harlan Fiske Stone (1941-46) 

Earl Warren (1953-69) 

Associate justices are also well represented. 
For the Warren Court alone, the division holds 
the papers of Hugo L. Black, William O. Doug- 
las, Felix Frankfurter, Harold H. Burton, Robert 
H. Jackson, William J. Brennan, Jr., Byron R. 
White, Thurgood Marshall, and Arthur J. Gold- 
berg. 

Of these, the very large collection of Wil- 
liam O. Douglas may be singled out for evi- 
dence of support of the rights of North American 
Indians: 

Douglas , William O. Papers (1801-1980; finding 
aid) 

Douglas (1898-1980), who lived near Wash- 
ington's Yakima Reservation as a boy, and who 
retained an association with it and with some of 
its residents, has been cited for the consistency of 
his record in Indian decisions. Over the period 
1939-74 he was on the side of the Indian in thirty- 
nine of forty-seven decisions. In his Supreme 
Court files are a variety of materials bearing on 
such cases as United States v. Santa Fe Railroad 
(1941); Northzvestern Bands of Shoshone Indians v. 
United States (1944); Menominee Tribe of Indians 
v. United States (1967); and Mescalero Apache Tribe 
v. Jones , et al (1972). 

Secretaries of the Interior 

The role of the secretary of the interior in Indian 
affairs has varied over time and has historically 
been, especially in the nineteenth century, more 
directly engaged than it is today. Though the 
federal-Indian relationship is complex and mul- 
tifaceted, in general the Department of the Inte- 
rior has been the major agency managing federal 




MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 7 



concerns with American Indians. Among these 
are the administration of public land held in 
trust for American Indians and other trust assets, 
and handling or sharing in government services, 
such as social welfare, education, health, local 
law enforcement, and the courts. 

Fisher , Walter Lowrie. Papers (1879-1936; find- 
ing aid) 

A rich source of information for his years as 
secretary of the interior between 1911 and 1913, 
the papers of Walter Fisher (1862-1935) relate 
particularly to the Oklahoma Indians. 

Garfield , James Rudolph. Papers (1879-1950; find- 
ing aid) 

Garfield (1865-1950), son of President 
James A. Garfield, was Theodore Roosevelt's ap- 
pointee as secretary of the interior (1907-9). The 
papers include carefully kept diaries, correspon- 
dence, office files, and files of legal cases. 

lakes, Harold LeClair. Papers (1815-1969; finding 
aid; part on microfilm) 

Ickes (1874-1952), who had a lifelong concern 
for the American Indian, was one of the most 
prominent secretaries of the interior and an out- 
spoken conservationist who became involved in 
efforts to improve the economic and cultural sta- 
tus of tribes and protect them from aggressive 
exploitation. The papers cover his years as secre- 
tary of the interior (1933-46), during which time 
his support of John Collier, commissioner of In- 
dian affairs, led to what some have termed "the 
Indian New Deal." Together they brought about 
the termination of the fifty-year-old allotment 
policy and pushed through Congress the Indian 
Reorganization Act of 1934. 

Schurz, Carl. Papers (1842-1932; finding aid; mi- 
crofilm) 

The papers provide perhaps the earliest 
record of a secretary of the interior's attempt to 

o 



root out corruption in the Bureau of Indian Af- 
fairs. In doing so, Schurz (1829-1906) dismissed 
the commissioner of Indian affairs and reorga- 
nized the agents, discharging many of them dur- 
ing his tenure between 1877 and 1881. He also re- 
sisted concerted attempts to transfer oversight of 
American Indians back to the War Department, 
where it had resided until 1849. 

Indian Commissioners , Agents > 
and Traders 

The subject of Indian agents frequently overlaps 
with topics falling under the division's Reference 
Index headings for Congress, the War Depart- 
ment, Department of the Interior, and Indian 
Wars. The following are representative of Manu- 
script Division holdings on this subject: 

Bonaparte , Charles. Papers (1760-1921; finding 
aid) 

A lawyer, civil service reformer, and U.S. at- 
torney general (1906-9), Bonaparte (1851-1921) 
was a Theodore Roosevelt appointee to the U.S. 
Board of Indian Commissioners (1902-4), dur- 
ing which time he was charged with an investi- 
gation into abuses against Indians ini Indian Ter- 
ritory. A box of documents is related to this 
investigation, as well as to later matters involv- 
ing Indians between 1912-17. 

Crittenden , John /. Papers (1782-1888; finding aid; 
microfilm) 

A commissioner of Indian affairs as well as 
a U.S. attorney general and Kentucky senator 
and governor, Crittenden (1787-1863) left pa- 
pers which include information on Cherokee 
treaties (1847), Seminole removal, Seneca reser- 
vation lands, Georgia's desire for Creek lands 
(1825), appointment of agents to treat with Sioux 
for lands (1850), and Kiowa and Comanche 
wars (1861). 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 8 



Croghan, George. Papers (1768; finding aid; mi- 
crofilm) 

Part of the Peter Force Collection , the papers of 
Croghan (d. 1782), the principal deputy to the 
British government's superintendent for Indian 
affairs in the Northern district for fifteen years, 
contain the minutes of a 1768 conference be- 
tween Croghan and the chiefs of the Ohio and 
western Indian tribes, including treaty negotia- 
tions with the Six Nations, Delaware, Shawnee, 
and Wyandot. 

Ewing , George Washington. Papers (1829-1910) 

This merchant, banker, and land speculator's 
family and business correspondence, account 
book, documents, and assembled printed mater- 
ial reveal his perception of Indian affairs and 
land speculation in the wide sweep of what is 
now Kansas, Indiana, Missouri, Illinois, and 
Wisconsin. Ewing (1804-66) and his brother 
acquired Indian lands as debt settlements by 
Shawnee and other northern tribes. 

Franklin , Benjamin. Papers (1726-1907; finding 
aid; microfilm) 

An index to List of the Benjamin Franklin Papers 
in the Library of Congress ; compiled by Worthing- 
ton C. Ford (1905) shows several entries for "In- 
dians," including observations on treaty-making 
power of inhabitants of Pennsylvania, remarks 
on a plan for regulating Indian trade, remarks 
concerning the "savages" of North America, and 
1787 letters to a Cherokee Indian "noblewoman" 
and a Cherokee chief. 

Johnston , George. Papers (1824-27) 

The collection consists of his 120-page "Jour- 
nal of George Johnston in the North West" (Au- 
gust 29, 1824-May 16, 1827), written in the form 
of letters from posts on the Red River, from Sault 
Ste. Marie, Fond du Lac, Flameau, and La Pointe, 
while trading with Indian groups for the Ameri- 
can Fur Company. 



Kendall , Amos. Papers (1835-1909; part photo- 
copies; microfilm) 

Correspondence and other papers, chiefly 
1835-80, relate primarily to the work of Kendall 
(1789-1869), attorney for the Cherokee Nation, 
on behalf of Cherokee claims and treaties. 

McKee, John. Papers (ca. 1792-1825) 

An Indian agent and congressman from Al- 
abama, McKee (1771-1832) was appointed com- 
missioner to the Cherokee in 1792 and two years 
later made temporary agent. In 1802 he became 
an agent to the Choctaw. During the Creek War 
he was active in persuading other tribes to re- 
main at peace with the U.S. He helped negotiate 
the peace treaty with the Choctaw in 1816 and 
the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek (1830). Al- 
though the McKee Papers were badly burned in 
a fire before they were donated to the Library, 
four containers of letters are legible. 

Medill, William. Papers (1834-64) 

Medill (ca. 1805-65) was commissioner of In- 
dian affairs from 1845 to 1849. Some of his corre- 
spondence relates to Indian schools, removal of 
Indians from Wisconsin, Cherokee treaties, and 
other aspects of Indian relations. 

Meigs, Return Jonathan I, II, and III in Meigs Family 
Papers (1772-1862; microfilm) 

An agent to the Cherokee ,(1801-23), Return 
Jonathan Meigs I (1740-1823) was active in per- 
suading other tribes to remain at peace during 
the Creek War. He was genuinely sympathetic 
to the Indians and worked hard to improve 
their lives through instruction and direction. 
The collection also includes papers of his son. 
Return Jonathan Meigs II (1764-1825), governor 
of Ohio, and correspondence of his grandson. 
Return Jonathan Meigs III (1801-91), a lawyer 
and attorney general of Tennessee, concern- 
ing primarily the removal of Creek from Al- 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



8 9 



abama and Choctaw from Mississippi Territory 
(1831-34). 

Morgan, George. Papers (1775-1822; part tran- 
scripts and photocopies; microfilm) 

Morgan (1743-1810) was an agent to the 
Delaware tribe in what was called the Middle 
Department of the Colonies. As Indian agent 
during the Revolution, he dealt with the 
Delaware, Shawnee, Mingo, and Wyandot tribes 
in Virginia and Pennsylvania. Papers include a 
report (1789) on the settled territory of the Ohio 
and Mississippi Rivers, and letters from Han- 
cock, Lafayette, and others concerning Indian 
affairs. 

MICROFILM 

Panton Leslie & Co. Papers (1780-1815; finding 
aid; 26 reels) 

Operating in Florida from the late eighteenth 
through the mid-nineteenth centuries, this firm 
generated tens of thousands of documents rele- 
vant to its trade with the Cherokee, Chickasaw, 
Choctaw, Creek, Seminole, and other southeast- 
ern tribes. More than 8,000 documents in English 
and Spanish were selected from various collec- 
tions for this microfilm edition. 

Indian Rights Association Papers (1864-1973; find- 
ing aid; 136 reels) 

Microfilms of originals in the Historical 
Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. For forty 
years from its founding in 1882 in Philadelphia, 
the Indian Rights Association was the major 
non-governmental group to which Indians could 
turn for protection and support and was the 
primary source for non-Indians of information 
about Indian affairs. In addition to its purpose of 
protecting the interests and general welfare of 
the Indians, the IRA also initiated, supported, or 
opposed government legislation and policies de- 
signed to "civilize" the American Indian. 



Indian Wars 

Collections relating to military history are 
among the most important and numerous held 
by the Manuscript Division. The division's hold- 
ings contain material for the broad spectrum of 
wars that erupted between Indian peoples and 
whites, and perhaps those most often repre- 
sented are the first two Seminole wars in Florida 
and the battles that flared across the Great Plains 
after the Civil War. The Seminole wars are espe- 
cially well represented in the James Monroe Papers 
and Andrew Jackson Papers (see the Presidential Pa- 
pers section). 

The following collections are among those 
containing war-related materials: 

Anderson, Robert. Papers (1819-1919; part photo- 
copies; finding aid) 

Anderson (1805-71) served in the U.S. Army 
during the Black Hawk War, Seminole wars, and 
the Cherokee removal. 

Brown, Jacob Jennings. Papers (1812-28; micro- 
film) 

As a major general in command in the North 
during the War of 1812, Brown (1775-1828) be- 
came interested in the Indians beyond matters of 
military strategy. His papers include "Memoran- 
dum of the Tribes of Indians in the North- 
West. . . . with various statistics on the tribes 
and their ways of life. 

Burt, Elizabeth. Papers (1797-1917; microfilm) 

Burt (1839-1936), the wife of an army offi- 
cer, wrote letters to her daughter describing rela- 
tions with Indian people, including Shoshone 
Chief Washakie, and military life at Forts Bid- 
well, Bridger, Laramie, D. A. Russell, Sanders, 
Washakie, Missoula, Smith, Omaha, and Robin- 
son. The papers also contain her typescript auto- 
biography, "An Army Wife's Forty Years in the 
Service, 1862-1902." 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9"0 



Carlton , Caleb Henry. Papers (1831-1954; find- 
ing aid) 

Military papers, letters, and diaries from the 
army service of Carlton (1836-1923) in the 3rd, 
7th, 8th, and 10th cavalries during the Plains 
Wars mention the Comanche, Wichita, Kiowa, 
Caddo, Cheyenne, Chemehuevi, Sioux, Snake, 
and Nez Perce; Schofield's attack on a Comanche 
camp; and the Indian leaders Quannah Parker, 
Satanta, and Dull Knife. 

Carson , Christopher "Kit." Collection (1842-69) 

The collection of papers of Carson (1809-68), 
famous trapper, guide, Indian agent, and colonel 
of the 1st New Mexico Volunteers, includes the 
headquarters letterbook for Carson's Navajo ex- 
pedition in New Mexico, July 11, 1863-May 17, 
1864. The expedition ended Navajo armed resis- 
tance to the United States. 

Clinch, Duncan Lamont. Papers (1834-59) 

Clinch (1787-1849) was commander of Fort 
King and other Florida fortifications at the start 
of the Second Seminole War (1835-42). An order 
book and a letterbook include his observations 
about alleged depredations committed by Semi- 
noles and escaped slaves aligned with them. 

Clinton, George and James. Collection (1776-91; 
microfilm) 

James Clinton (1733-1812) was a Continental 
Army officer and public official. His 1779 orderly 
book mentions a treaty with the Six Nations, the 
relations of different tribes to the English and 
Americans, and orders given during the expedi- 
tion against the Iroquois in New York. 

Drennan, Daniel. Papers (1861-1904; part tran- 
scripts; finding aid) 

Military secretary to General Philip Sheridan 
(1865-88), Drennan (1840-1905) left papers re- 
lating to Sheridan and other Civil War officers. 



including two drafts of annual reports (1877 and 
1883) submitted to the secretary of war by 
William T. Sherman as General of the Army, and 
giving much detail on the Nez Perce uprising 
and other Indian campaigns. Papers include 
news clippings of Sitting Bull, Geronimo, Custer, 
Lt. John G. Bourke, the 1870 massacre of Piegans 
in Montana, and many other Indian-related 
matters. 

Flournoy, Thomas. Papers (1812-46; microfilm) 

Correspondence, including copies of Flour- 
noy's letters, is largely concerned with his com- 
mand of the 7th Military District from headquar- 
ters at New Orleans during the War of 1812. In 
the South, the war principally involved combat 
with the Creek Indians. In 1820, Flournoy 
(1775-1857) was appointed U.S. commissioner 
to bring about a treaty with the Creek Indians of 
Georgia. 

Godfrey, Edward Settle. Papers (1863-1933; find- 
ing aid) 

Material relates to various Indian engage- 
ments in the West in which Godfrey (1843-1932) 
was involved, especially the battles of the Wa- 
shita, Little Big Horn, and Bear Paw Mountains. 

Hatch, John Porter. Papers (1843-68) 

The papers consist primarily of letters written 
home by Hatch (1822-1901), an army officer, de- 
scribing his service in campaigns against the 
Navajo and the Gila Apache in New Mexico and 
Texas between 1851 and 1861. 

Heintzelman, Samuel Peter. Papers (1822-1904; 
finding aid; microfilm) 

Correspondence, diaries, journals (1825-72), 
military papers, maps, and clippings cover this 
army officer's participation in the Seminole and 
Creek Wars in Florida and Georgia (1835-42) 
and his command of a fort among the Yuma In- 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9 1 



dians in the 1850s. Heintzelman (1805-80) devel- 
oped a deep interest in Indian culture and his 
journals contain information especially about the 
Colorado River tribes. 

Hitchcock , Ethan Allen . Papers (1810-73; fil- 
ing aid) 

The long military career of soldier and author 
Hitchcock (1798-1870), a grandson of Revolu- 
tionary patriot Ethan Allen, included Indian 
duty in the Northwest from 1837 to 1840. In 1841, 
he investigated the frauds against the Cherokee, 
resulting in a highly controversial report that the 
War Department tried to suppress. Correspon- 
dence and a journal are particularly relevant to 
his service in Florida, which involved campaigns 
against the Seminole and their removal west 
of the Mississippi. He also saw duty on the 
Louisiana frontier in 1845, in the Mexican War, 
and as commander of the Military Division of 
the Pacific. 

Hughes , Robert Patterson . Papers (1865-1909) 

Among the small collection of papers of Maj. 
Gen. Hughes (1839-1909) is an eight-page letter 
he wrote to his wife when he was a captain in the 
18th Infantry and an aide-de-camp to Gen. Al- 
fred H. Terry. Written on June 30, 1876, five days 
after the Battle of the Little Big Horn, it describes 
the massacre of Custer's command (Hughes was 
one of the first officers to reach the scene) and in- 
cludes a hand-drawn map keyed to his remarks. 

Jesup, Thomas Sidney. Papers (1789-1907; find- 
ing aid) 

The official papers of this army quartermaster 
general relate to his service in the War of 1812, 
the Second Seminole War, and the Mexican War. 
As U.S. commanding general (1836-38) against 
the Seminole, Jesup (1788-1860) engineered the 
capture of Osceola. The correspondence in the 



collection is largely between Jesup and his fellow 
army officers. 

Kautz, August Valentine . Papers (1846-1945; find- 
ing aid) 

Descriptive material accumulated by Kautz 
(1828-95), an army officer, about Oregon and 
Washington territories and the Indian nations 
there, includes information on the trial and 
execution of Nisqually Chief Leschi; diaries 
(1857-95); news clippings on Apache, Mo- 
have, Hualapai, Warm Springs, Rogue River, 
Nisqually, Yakima, Puyallup, the Puget Sound 
War, Wounded Knee, and views on anglicizing 
Indian people. 

McAdoo, William Gibbs. Papers (1786-1941; find- 
ing aid) 

The collection of this secretary of the treasury 
(1913-18) and senator from California (1933- 
39), William Gibbs McAdoo (1863-1941), con- 
tains early family papers, among which are 
the letterbooks (1806-15) of Gen. John Floyd 
(1769-1855), who led Tennessee state troops in 
campaigns against the Creek, and the diaries, 
letterbooks, order books, and scrapbooks of 
Charles R. Floyd (1797-1845), a Marine officer 
who led Georgia state troops against the Chero- 
kee. This portion of the collection is available 
only on microfilm. 

McArthur , Duncan. Papers (1783-1848) 

McArthur (1772-1839) was active in military 
and Indian affairs in the Northwest, beginning 
with campaigns against the Shawnee in 1790. 
The papers include military documents during 
his command of the Army of the Northwest 
(1814-15), when his task was to wrest influence 
with tribes of the old Northwest from the Brit- 
ish. In 1816, he served as Indian treaty commis- 
sioner, resulting in cession of Indian lands in 



WARFARE 

\OYOAOVOAOVOAOWOAOWOAOWOAO'TOAOYOAOWOAOYOAOYOAOWOAOWOAC 

WOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOWC 

GATEWAYS 



Indian groups engaged in their own rivalries, bat- 
tles, and ritualized contests before and after the 
arrival of Europeans. But it is the warfare between 
Indians and the new Americans that dominates 
the printed record. Many of the earliest contacts 
between North American Indians and European 
explorers were hostile, from an eleventh-century 
Norse attack on Northeast coast natives to Span- 
ish battles in the Southeast and Southwest in the 
sixteenth century. Indeed, friction between Indi- 
ans and North American colonists developed into 
war only fifteen years after the settlement of 
Jamestown, and continued intermittently until the 
late nineteenth century. Although the onset of 
conflicts may have been triggered by various 
events, the principal condition producing antago- 
nism was the relentless American territorial ex- 
pansion that threatened the Indian way of life. 

The location of Indian-white wars in North 
America moved gradually, and unevenly, inward 
from the Atlantic Coast and northward from Mex- 
ico. In the seventeenth century, wars occurred 
mostly in eastern and northeastern North America 
near the coast, in areas of British and Dutch colo- 
nization, as well as in the Southwest, an area into 
which the Spanish empire had expanded. In the 
eighteenth century, before the American Revolu- 
tion, the northeastern Indian-white wars generally 
occurred farther inland, reaching into the Great 
Lakes area, while new wars started in the South- 
east. These eastern wars involved British and 
French colonists and traders. Indian-Spanish war- 
fare, meanwhile, continued in the Southwest, and 
began in California. Indian-Russian warfare also 
started in Alaska in the eighteenth century. From 



the beginning of the American Revolution to 1 850, 
the new nation's battles with Indians took place 
chiefly in the Northeast, Old Northwest, and 
Southeast, and also moved west of the Mississippi 
River. In the rest of the nineteenth century, the 
final Indian-U.S. wars mainly took place in the 
Pacific Northwest, the Southwest, and the Plains. 

Indian resistance was never taken lightly and 
could be costly if done so. Indian tribes had inti- 
mate knowledge of their own lands and resources 
and often frustrated and prolonged government 
counter efforts. Geronimo, Osceola, and Chief 
Joseph and his co-leaders, for example, demon- 
strated leadership strategies that put their adver- 
saries to considerable trouble and expense. And 
the outcome of the Battle of the Little Big Horn is 
just the most publicized example of Indian mili- 
tary successes that shocked the non-Indian pub- 
lic. The war conducted by Wampanoag leader 
King Philip (Metacomet) and his allies in 1 675 
and 1 676 is considered to be proportionally the 
most costly American war in terms of human life 
and material losses. Colonial losses were esti- 
mated at 600 men, 1,200 houses burned, and 
8,000 head of cattle lost. The Indian side of the 
ledger, however, bespeaks the ultimate outcome 
of continued conflicts with whites where battles 
might be won but the war lost — 3,000 Indian 
men, women, and children were killed, and the 
Wampanoag nation was nearly obliterated. 

AOVOAOVO 

WHERETO LOOK: The General Collections 
through the Main Reading Room, and virtually 
every special collection. 





Z>YOAOTOAOTOAOYOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOYOAOYOAOTOAOVOAO y fOAOVOAOV 

>AOYOAOYOAO y fOAO y fOAOVOAOYOAO'TOAOWOAOVOAOYOAO'fOAOWOAOYO£ 




Attack of the Seminoles on the Block House . Lithograph, 1 837. PGA — Gray & James (A size). (LC-USZ62-1 1 463, also LC- 
USZC4-2397, color). Prints and Photographs Division. 



For seven years , from 1835 to 1842 , the Seminole Indians of Florida fiercely resisted attempts to remove them from their 
homeland. The battle depicted in this lithograph took place at Lake Okeechobee on December 25, 1837 . Zachary Taylor 
won promotion to brigadier general for his leadership in the fight. The Seminole wars are richly documented in collections 
in the Manuscript Division. 








9 3 




MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9 4 



Ohio to the U.S., and later represented Ohio in 
congress (1823-25). 

McCarthy , Michael. Papers (1865-1905; microfilm) 

McCarthy (b. 1845) served continuously as a 
sergeant in Co. H of the 1st U.S. Cavalry from 
1869 to 1879. His journal, memoir, and scrap- 
book cover his part in the Modoc War in Califor- 
nia (including the capture of Captain Jack) and 
southern Oregon (1872-73), while stationed at 
Fort Harney, Oregon, and in the Nez Perce cam- 
paign, Idaho Territory. He was awarded the Con- 
gressional Medal of Honor for his actions at the 
Battle of White Bird Canyon, June 17, 1877. 

Nash, Edzvin R. Diary (August 3 -September 26, 
1865) 

Nash's diary describes a two-month period 
when, as a member of the Powder River Expedi- 
tion, he led Omaha Indians against Dakotas. 

Pershing, John Joseph. Papers (1882-1971; finding 
aid; microfilm in part) 

The papers of Pershing (1860-1948) contain 
materials relating to his early career with the 6th 
Cavalry during the 1886-90 Apache campaigns 
in Arizona and New Mexico; his participation in 
the Sioux campaigns in South Dakota (1890-91); 
and his role in the round-up of Cree Indians for 
deportation to Canada. 

Pratt, Richard Henry. Papers (1862-1964; part 
transcript) 

Pratt (1840-1924) was an army officer in wars 
against the Kiowa, Comanche, Cheyenne, and 
Arapaho, and commanded Tonkawa scouts in 
Texas and Indian scouts in Oklahoma. He was 
ordered to accompany Kiowa prisoners to Fort 
Marion, Florida, and became interested in edu- 
cating them. Pratt's interest led to a seminal role 
in the development of Indian education. He was 
an organizer of the Indian education department 
at Hampton Institute, Va., and founder and su- 



perintendent of Carlisle Indian School. The col- 
lection includes his manuscript autobiography 
and typewritten copies of his military record and 
Civil War diary (the originals of which are at 
Yale University, together with his Carlisle Indian 
School papers). 

Reid, John. Papers (1802-42) 

Reid (1784-1816) served as Andrew Jackson's 
aide-de-camp in the War of 1812, involving 
campaigns against the Creek and at New Or- 
leans. Letters written to family members almost 
weekly relate in full the events of that time 
(1813-16). Reid was co-author of Life of Andrew 
Jackson, Major General in the Service of the United 
States, 1817. 

Rhodes, Charles Dudley. Papers (1885-1940) 

A typescript copy of his journal, "Diary Notes 
of a Soldier" (1885-1919), relate particularly to 
the service of Rhodes (1865-1948) as a 6th Cav- 
alry officer during the 1890 Brule Sioux (or Pine 
Ridge) War, involving the Ghost Dance. 

Root, Elihu. Papers (1863-193 7; finding aid) 

Root (1845-1937) was Theodore Roosevelt's 
secretary of war (1899-1904). Army reports and 
correspondence (1890-95) deal with the 1890 
U.S. attack on the Sioux at Wounded Knee. 

Schofield, John McAllister. Papers (1837-1906; find- 
ing aid) 

Sheridan, Philip Henry. Papers (1853-88; part tran- 
scripts; finding aid) 

Sherman, William Tecumseh. Papers (1759-1897; 
part photocopies; finding aid; microfilm) 

These three large collections chronicle the ac- 
tions of successive commanders-in-chief of the 
"Army of the Frontier" following the Civil War 
when they oversaw the relocation of American 
Indians from their tribal lands on the Plains and 
in the Black Hills onto 'reservations. Both Sheri- 
dan (1831-88) and Schofield (1831-1906) also 




MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9 5 



had substantial experience fighting Indians be- 
fore the Civil War. Schofield was dispatched to 
Florida during the Second Seminole War; Sher- 
man (1820-91) saw duty against the same tribe 
in that state during the 1840s; and Sheridan faced 
the Yakima in the Pacific Northwest. 

Scott , Hugh Lenox. Papers (1845-1981; part photo- 
copies; finding aid; partial microfilm) 

The papers include details of this army 
officer's campaigns against the Sioux, Nez Perce, 
and Cheyenne between 1876 and 1883, including 
observations about Custer, Chief Joseph, and the 
Apache. Scott (1853-1934) also studied Plains 
Indian languages for the Army and the Smith- 
sonian Institution (there are materials on Plains 
sign language and a grammar book of Dakota). 
He was a member of the Board of Indian Com- 
missioners from 1919 to 1933. 

White , John Chester. Memoir (1861-1921) 

An officer in the 17th, 19th, and 21st Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers and the 11th U.S. Infantry, 
White's memoir includes comments on the con- 
duct of Indian soldiers during the Civil War and 
on the western frontier. 

Explorers and Adventurers 

The division holds several collections that de- 
scribe the experiences of Euro- American ex- 
plorers through country occupied by Indian 
tribes before and after they were confined to 
reservations. 

Beale , Edward Fitzgerald section in Beale Family 
Papers (1801-1957; finding aid) 

E. F. Beale (1822-93) was appointed general 
superintendent of Indian affairs for California 
and Nevada by President Fillmore in 1852. His 
1858 journal relates to a survey through Indian 
country for a wagon road from Arkansas to the 
Colorado River. 







Chittenden , Newton H. Papers (1873-1920) 

More of an adventurer than an explorer, Chit- 
tenden's scrapbooks record his travels across the 
continent in 1884, 1888, and 1889. He traveled 
3,400 miles on burro and foot through the 
Southwest, Northwest Coast, and Central Plains. 
The collection includes descriptions and hand- 
drawn copies of Indian rock paintings; a photo 
album of Indian tribes from the Southwest and 
California (Yuma, Cahuilla, and Hopi); pho- 
tographs of Northwest Coast artifacts Chitten- 
den collected; and general Plains pictures. 

Freeman , Thomas. Collection (1806-73; finding aid; 
microfilm) 

This small segment of the Peter Force Collection 
contains a 141-page manuscript entitled "An Ac- 
count of the Red River, in Louisiana, drawn up 
from the returns of Messrs. Freeman and Custis 
to the War Office of the U.S. who explored the 
same, in the year 1806." The report was pub- 
lished very early in the nineteenth century (there 
is a copy in the Rare Book and Special Collec- 
tions Division). In 1804, Jefferson commissioned 
Freeman (d. 1821) and Peter Custis to explore 
what would soon be part of the Louisiana Pur- 
chase. During their voyage, they classified and 
described the flora and fauna, and visited the 
largest settlement of the Caddo Indians and the 
Coushatta Village. 

Ingraham , Joseph . Journal (1790-92; microfilm) 

Ingraham (1762- 1800) was a navigator, trader, 
and explorer whose 208-page journal describes 
a voyage of the brigantine Hope from Boston to 
the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii), stopping on the 
Northwest Coast. It includes descriptions and 
color illustrations of Indians. 

Lander, Frederick West. Papers (1836-94; finding 
aid; microfilm) 

Printed and manuscript material represents 
the efforts of Lander (1821-62), chief civil 




MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9 6 



engineer for the Northern Pacific Railroad, to 
find an alternate route to the Oregon Trail and 
his consequent negotiations with the Paiute led 
by Chief Winnemucca, especially when he acted 
as special agent for Indians along the Honey 
Lake Wagon Road in 1858 and 1859. 

McClellan , George B. Papers (1823-98; finding aid; 
microfilm) 

The voluminous papers of army officer 
McClellan (1826-83) include diaries, correspon- 
dence, reports, military papers, and field and en- 
gineering notebooks relating to his participation 
in two expeditions in which he encountered In- 
dians: the 1831 Red River Expedition and the 
1.833-34 Pacific Railway Survey in Washington 
Territory. Of particular interest is McClellan's 
manuscript report "The Indian Inhabitants of 
Washington Territory," which contains appen- 
dices and a Comanche alphabet. 

Nicollet, Joseph Nicholas. Papers (1832-43; mi- 
crofilm) 

Nicollet (1786-1843) was a scientist and geog- 
rapher who visited the upper Mississippi during 
the 1830s and compiled a variety of notes about 
the tribes of the region, including dictionaries 
and grammars of the Dakota and the Ojibwa. He 
also made observations about the Choctaw and 
the Osage. The papers include journals of Fran- 
cis A. Chardon concerning his experiences at 
and around Fort Clark in the upper Missouri 
country among the Mandan and Gros Ventre. 

Peale, Titian Ramsay. Journals (1819-42; micro- 
film) 

Peale (1799-1883) was artist and assistant nat- 
uralist with the Stephen Long Expedition by 
steamboat down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers 
and up the Missouri, during which he kept a 
journal (May 3 -August 1, 1819). The collection 
also includes his 1838-42 journals when he was 
naturalist with the U.S. Exploring Expedition. 



Volume 7 relates to Oregon and California, and 
includes references to encounters with Indians. 
The latter was published as Overland Journey from 
Oregon to California, G. Dawson, ed., 1937 
(E836.E174 vol. 36); also Microform 84/128E; 
also as part of Titian Ramsay Peale and His Journals 
of the Wilkes Expedition, Jessie Poesch, ed., 1961 
(Q11.P612 vol. 32, pp. 190-8.) 

Talbot, Theodore. Papers (1837-67; microfilm) 

Talbot's diary, "Notes of a Journey" (1843-44), 
kept on Fremont's second expedition, describes 
the route across Kansas and along the Oregon 
Trail. He encounters numerous Indian tribes and 
characterizes the Shawnee and Delaware as "re- 
markably brave and intelligent," and the Pawnee 
as ferocious. Talbot also touches briefly on the 
Sioux and the Shoshone. 

Weber, Charles Henry. Journal (1839; part tran- 
script) 

Observations as he traveled between St. Louis, 
Missouri, and Fort Benton, Montana, via the 
Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers, May 28- 
August 16, 1839. Weber visited, and gave a liter- 
ate and entertaining account of, a number of 
Pawnee, Omaha, Sioux, and other tribal settle- 
ments. 

European Colonial Administrations 

The Manuscript Division's coverage of the ad- 
ministration of Indian affairs during the Colonial 
period is particularly full. The Force Collection, 
which contains considerable material on the thir- 
teen original colonies, is described earlier in this 
section. Collections describing Spanish colonial 
administration are strongly represented in origi- 
nal and copied material. Most likely to answer 
researchers' needs in this subject area, however, 
are the massive records copied from European 
archives and libraries through the Foreign Copy- 
ing Program. 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9 7 



Connor, Jeanette M. Thurber. Papers (1565-1927; 
transcripts and photocopies) 

Historian Connor (d. 1927) assembled one of 
the finest collections relating to the early Spanish 
history of Florida, including materials on Florida 
and Georgia Franciscan missions to Indians, the 
Timucua Indians, and the French in Florida. It 
includes photocopies and transcripts of docu- 
ments from Spanish, French, and English reposi- 
tories. 

East Florida Papers (1737-1858; finding aid; mi- 
crofilm) 

When Spain ceded all of Florida to the United 
States in 1821, the treaty brought these Spanish 
colonial papers into American hands. These 
Spanish-language diplomatic, military, econo- 
mic, judicial, legal, and administrative archives 
of the colonial government of East Florida are 
primarily for the period of its second occupation, 
1783-1821, and include orders and decrees, cen- 
suses, and other vital records. Relations with the 
Indians loom large in these records. 

Lowery, Woodbury. Collection (1522-1803; tran- 
scripts) 

Lowery (1853-1906) copied material from the 
Spanish Archives relating to Spanish settle- 
ments, primarily in Florida, but also in Califor- 
nia, Louisiana, New Mexico, and Texas, the sub- 
ject of his The Spanish Settlements Within the 
Present Limits of the United States (New York: G. P. 
Putnam's Sons, 1905); F314.L91 

Russian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church in Alaska. 
Records 

(see Missions and Missionaries) 

Woodbury, Levi. Papers (1668-1897) 

Woodbury (1789-1851) was a governor of 
New Hampshire, U.S. senator, and Supreme 
Court justice, whose Miscellaneous Papers Series 
include an autograph album containing two 



treaties (1714 and 1717) made in New Hamp- 
shire with New England nations, including the 
Amassacontoag (Amaseconti), Kennebec, Na- 
rakamigock (Rocameca), Norridgewock, Pena- 
cook, Penobscot, Pigwacket, and Saco. This se- 
ries also contains the 1668 will of Pomantaquash, 
the "Black Sachem," as well as a 1687 Nipmuc 
land deed. 

MICROFILM 

Spanish Archives of New Mexico (1621-1821; 
22 reels) 

These are the official records of Spanish cen- 
tral and local government, including census and 
court records. The originals are at the New Mex- 
ico Records Center and Archives, Santa Fe. 

FOREIGN COPYING PROGRAM 
Except for brief interruptions during the two 
World Wars, the Library's Foreign Copying 
Program has been carried on continuously since 
1905. The result is a collection of reproduc- 
tions — handwritten, photostatic, and micro- 
film — of several million manuscripts from ar- 
chives and other collections throughout the 
world. These reproductions are especially rich 
for the Colonial period for manuscripts copied in 
Great Britain, Spain, and France, whose military 
and governmental activities in America often in- 
volved Native Americans. In general, most copy- 
ing has been carried on in each country's princi- 
pal national repositories: the British Library and 
the Public Records Office in Great Britain; the 
Bibliotheque Nationale and the Archives Na- 
tionals in France; and the Archivo Historico 
Nacional and the Archivo General de Indias in 
Spain. 

Missions and Missionaries 

Narratives and letters of early missionaries 
speak of their attempts to evangelize the In- 
dian nations of North and South America and 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



9 8 



o 



constitute some of the earliest materials inform- 
ing us of the cultural and political interaction of 
two disparate societies. Missionaries were gener- 
ally the first to attempt to write down and com- 
pile vocabularies for the languages of the tribes 
with whom they were interacting. While the 
Manuscript Division does not hold many collec- 
tions of original material pertaining to mission- 
ary work, it does hold microfilm or transcripts 
for several major missionary collections in other 
institutions (see Microfilm). 

Copway, George . Collection (1858) 

A Chippewa chief, Methodist missionary, and 
author, Copway (1818-63) discusses 'civiliza- 
tion' of Indian nations, and the role of Congress 
in appropriating funds toward that end for edu- 
cation and similar programs in his letters. One 
letter is signed by eighteen Midwestern chiefs. 

Post, Christian Frederick . Papers (1758-59; finding 
aid; microfilm) 

Post (17107-85), whose papers are in the Peter 
Force Collection, served as a Moravian lay mis- 
sionary and an emissary of the Pennsylvania 
government to the Ohio Indians. The papers in- 
clude contemporary copies of journals he kept 
while working among the Indians of the Ohio 
(July 15, 1758-October 25, 1759), as well as min- 
utes of a conference in Philadelphia with the 
Cayuga Indians (February 8-9, 1759) and of an 
Indian conference at Fort Duquesne, Pittsburgh 
(October 24-25, 1759). 

Russian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church in Alaska . 
Records (1733-1938; finding aid; microfilm) 

These Russian-language records are the divi- 
sion's most important collection of original ma- 
terials about missionary work with American 
Indians. Although primarily ecclesiastical, they 
encompass the broader life of the various Aleut, 
Eskimo, and Tlingit Indian communities in the 
vast area of Alaska under the Church's jurisdic- 
tion. The priests who compiled the records not 



only served their church but also acted as agents 
of the Russian Imperial government and assisted 
the Russian- American Company, which had a 
monopoly on trade in the area. In order to con- 
vert the natives and establish bilingual schools 
the priests worked diligently to learn the native 
dialects. The records contain translations of 
Christian texts, dictionaries, grammars, primers, 
and prayer books in native languages, as well 
as numerous statistical records of conversions 
and invaluable genealogical information, such as 
dates of births, deaths, and marriages. Native 
and Christian names, places of origin, and the 
like. Approximately two hundred photographs 
are also present in the records. 

Smith, George Nelson . Papers (1835-79; microfilm) 

Smith (b. 1807) was a Presbyterian minister, 
educator, and farmer who kept thirty-seven 
journals (1840-79) while performing mission- 
ary work among the Indians of southwestern 
Michigan. 

Zuni Indian Mission. Records (1732-34; microfilm) 

Three volumes in Spanish of events at Zuni 
pueblo in New Mexico contain lists of births, 
deaths, and marriages. 

MICROFILM 

American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Mis- 
sions. Papers (Unit 6: Missions on the American 
Continents, 1811-1919; finding aid; 134 reels) 

Reels 736 through 793 of Unit 6 cover mis- 
sions to such tribes as the Cherokee, Pawnee, 
Choctaw, Sioux, Ojibwa, Stockbridge, Osage, 
Chickasaw, and Indians in Oregon. 

American Home Missionary Society. Papers (1816- 
94; 385 reels) 

Composed of Congregational, Presbyterian, 
Dutch Reformed, and Association Reformed 
churches, the society's papers contain some In- 
dian material on missions to the Indian Territory, 
George Henry Atkinson's notes on the Indian 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



nations of Oregon and Washington states, and 
the Oregon Indian wars. 

American Indian Correspondence Collection (1833- 
93; 35 reels) 

Microfilms of originals in the Library of the 
Presbyterian Historical Society, Philadelphia, 
containing almost 14,000 letters from Presbyter- 
ian missions. The material discusses Indian reli- 
gion, culture, relations with the U.S. govern- 
ment, and tribal factionalism. Tribes included 
are: Apache, Assiniboine, Blackfeet, Cherokee, 
Chickasaw, Chippewa, Choctaw, Creek, Crow, 
Dakota, Fox, Iowa, Kickapoo, Missouri, Mo- 
hawk, Navajo, Nez Perce, Omaha, Oto, Ottawa, 
Pawnee, Potawatomi, Pueblo, Sac, Santee, 
Seminole, Seneca, Shawnee, Shoshone, Sioux, 
Spokane, Teton Sioux (Lakota), Wea, Winne- 
bago, Uinta Ute, Umatilla, Ute, and Zuni. 

Missionary Society of Connecticut. Papers (1759- 
1948; 20 reels) 

Congregational Church of Connecticut's orig- 
inal records at Congregational House, Hartford, 
Conn., including those concerning an Indian 
mission project (1800-4) and later correspon- 
dence relating to tribes in Oklahoma Territory 
and the Southwest. 

The Moravian Mission Among the Indians of North 
America (1739-1800; 40 reels) 

The originals (mostly in German) in the Mora- 
vian Church Archives, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, 
include missionaries' journals and diaries; word 
lists, dictionaries, and grammars (in Creek, Mo- 
hawk, Onondaga); sermons to children in 
Delaware; and the works of missionaries David 
Zeisberger and John Heckewelder. Contains 
material on the Cherokee, Chippewa, Creek, 
Delaware, Mohican, Nanticoke, Onondaga, and 
Shawnee from missions in Connecticut, Georgia, 
Indiana, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Ontario, 

I Pennsylvania. 



The Manuscript Division also has an exten- 
sive collection of photostats of the Church ar- 
chives in Germany regarding the Church in the 
U.S. (mostly in German script). 

Santa Barbara Mission Collection (1768-1844) 

Photocopies of originals in the Santa Barbara 
Mission Archives, California. Documents are 
in Spanish and relate primarily to Junipero 
Serra, Indian missions, the "pacification" of the 
Apache, reductions, conversions, and the mis- 
sions at San Xavier, San Ildefonso, San Juan, and 
Candelaria. 

Company for the Propagacion of the Gospell in New 
England and the Parts Adjacent. Letterbook . . . 
(1688-1761; 1 reel) (formerly Society for . . .) 

Original at University of Virginia includes let- 
ters to the Company commissioners in America 
concerning, among other things, the education of 
Indian children and the settlement of Indian 
people on their own lands. 

FOREIGN COPYING PROGRAM 
Among the records relating to missionary work 
copied in foreign repositories are the following: 

Bolognetti, Cardinal Mario. Collection (1555- 
1709) 

Bressani, Francisco Giuseppe. Jesuit Relation 
(1659) 

Church of England, Diocese ofLoiidon. A rchives of 
the Bishop of London at Fulham Palace (1629- 
1829) 

Church of England, Province of Canterbury. Man- 
uscripts of the Archbishop of Canterbury at 
Lambeth Palace Library (1595-1864) 

Miinchner Jesuiten Kollegium. Correspondence 
(selections of letters from Jesuit missions in 
America) 

Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in For- 

• eign Parts Records (1701-1901) 

„ S 



INDIAN LANGUAGES AND TRIBAL NAMES 

^OWOAOTOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAC 
V OAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOTC 

GATEWAYS 



More than two hundred different languages were 
spoken among tribes north of Mexico at the time 
of European contact. These languages, like those 
of Indo-European origin, can be grouped into 
larger families according to their linguistic simi- 
larities. Among these families are Algonquian, 
Athabaskan, Caddoan, Eskimo-Aleut, Iroquoian, 
Kiowa-Tanoan, Muskogean, Penutian, Salish, 
Siouan, and Uto-Aztecan. An Algonquian lan- 
guage like Shawnee is as different from the 
Athabaskan Navajo language as French is from 
Chinese. The need to communicate over such lin- 
guistic boundaries led to the development of sign 
language on the Plains and to the use of "'trade 
languages," such as Chinook jargon along the Co- 
lumbia River valley in the Northwest and the use 
of Comanche in the Southwest. 

Within a linguistic family, some languages 
were so similar as to be essentially dialects. The 
language cluster (though not the "political" entity) 
Europeans called "Sioux" consists of Lakota 
(Teton), Dakota (Santee-Sisseton), and Nakota 
(Assiniboine and Stoney) — indicating the use of 
"L," "D," or "N," respectively, at a given position 
in a word that means the same thing in all three 
language groups. A further complication arises 
with Yankton and Yanktonai, both of which have 
some Dakota and some Nakota characteristics. 

Tribal names in Euro-American documents 
reflect, in part, the east-to-west sequence in 
which many contacts were made. For example, 
the Algonquian-speaking people of the Great 
Lakes region referred to their traditional enemies 



to the west by the name of "nadessioux" (an 
Ottawa word for "those people" joined to the 
French plural suffix), from which we derive the 
collective name "Sioux " In recent years, commu- 
nities have been asserting their own names for 
themselves — Tohono O'odham for Papago, Mes- 
quakie for Fox, Quechan for Yuma, and so on. 

Adding to the proliferation of names was the 
fact that Indian linguistic features were heard dif- 
ferently by various European groups. The same 
tribal name that was heard as "Chippewa" (voice- 
less, aspirated "ch" and "p") by English speakers, 
for example, was heard as "Ojibwa" (voiced, 
unaspirated "j" and "b") by the French. 

In general, Indian languages north of Mexico 
were not written down nor did the people use the 
elaborate pictographs of the Mesoamerican re- 
gion. Contemporary written forms derive basi- 
cally from Euro-American phonetic transcriptions. 
Native people did, however, develop a variety 
of mnemonic devices and some syllabaries, the 
most famous of which is the Cherokee syllabary 
created around 1821 by Sequoyah. 

Numerous tribes today are involved in lan- 
guage preservation and revival programs. 

AOVOJkOVO 

WHERETO LOOK: The American Folklife Center, 
General Collections, the Rare Book and Special 
Collections, Manuscript, and Geography and 
Map Divisions, the Recorded Sound Reference 
Center of Motion Picture, Broadcasting and 
Recorded Sound Division, and the Law Library. 



"Se-quo-yah," from History of the Indian Tribes of North America by Thomas L. McKenney (Philadelphia: E. C. Biddle, 
1836-44). E77.M13 (LC-USZC4-481 5; LC-USZ62-1 292, black and white). Rare Bookand Special Collections Division. 




This is the only likeness of Sequoyah, inventor of the Cherokee syllabary to which he is pointing. Not literate in English or 
other European languages ;, Sequoyah devised his writing system using symbols that in some cases look like Roman letters. 
Each symbol , however ; consists of a consonant , or consonant cluster, together with a vowel: that which looks like "A" for 
example, stands for the syllable "go," while "K" stands for "tso." 



Kr 



122 



OYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYO 

OAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAO 




1 0 1 







1 0 2 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



Indian Languages 

Two collections lend support to the interest in 
Native American languages that has been re- 
ferred to in other collections mentioned in this 
chapter (for example, see Henry Rowe School- 
craft section and Hugh Scott in Indian Wars 
section). 

Merriam, Clinton Hart. Papers (1873-1938; finding 
aid; partial microfilm) 

The papers of this naturalist, zoologist, lin- 
guist, and ethnologist (1855-1942) contain 125 
volumes of his journals (1873-1938), with in- 
dexes, and numerous sets of Indian vocabularies 
with accompanying large-scale manuscript maps 
showing the distribution of all known Indian 
tribes in California and Nevada. Among the 
languages included — not all from that region — 
are: Achumawi, Algonquian, Bannock, Cahuilla, 
Chemehuevi, Chimariko, Chinook, Choctaw, 
Chowchilla, Chumash, Cocopa, Crow, Ennesen 
(Salinan), Hualpi (Hualapai), Havasupai, Hupa, 
Kahto (Cahto), Kammei (Kamia), Karok, Kla- 
math, Lolahnkok (northern Sinkyone), Luiseno, 
Maidu, Mattol (Mattole), Miwok, Mohave, 
Monache, Mono, Nekanni, Nisenan, Panamint, 
Papago, Pima, Porno, Sahaptin, Salish, Semi- 
nole, Serrano, Shasta, Shoshone, Soolahtelukan 
(Wiyot), Tlohomtol (New River Shasta), Tolowa, 
Tsennahkennes (Wailaki), Tubatulabal, Washo, 
Wintu, Yokuts, Yuki, Yuma, and Yurok. 

Toiunsend, John Kirk. Vocabularies (1835) 

An ornithologist, Townsend (1809-51) col- 
lected vocabularies of languages that white 
traders and Indians used to communicate with 
each other in the Pacific Northwest, especially 
along the Columbia River to the Puget Sound, in- 
cluding the Carrier (Takelhe), Cayuse, Chinook, 
Kootenai, Nisqually, Nez Perce, Puyallup, Skay- 
wamich (Skokomish), Suquamish, and Walla 



Walla. These vocabularies were not entirely from 
indigenous languages but rather combined local 
languages, English, and French. 

MICROFILM 

Gallatin , Albert. Papers (1783-1847; 46 reels) 

Gallatin (1761-1849), secretary of the treasury 
under presidents Jefferson and Madison, and an 
ambassador and banker, published the first 
reasonably comprehensive classification of the 
American Indian languages of North America 
(1836) and a work on Indian vocabularies (1848) 
and founded the American Ethnological Society. 
The division also holds a small original collec- 
tion of Gallatin's correspondence while secretary 
of the treasury (1801-14), including an 1826 let- 
ter to Thomas L. McKenney, commissioner of In- 
dian affairs. 



Historians , Anthropologists, 
Ethnologists, and Other Students 

In addition to the Force, Schoolcraft, Merriam, 
and other papers, the Manuscript Division has ac- 
quired several collections of research papers and 
records amassed by historians, anthropologists, 
ethnologists, and others interested in aspects of 
American history related to Indian peoples. 

Borglum , [John] Gutzon. Papers (1895-1960; find- 
ing aid) 

Borglum (1867-1941), the sculptor who de- 
signed and sculpted the presidents' heads on 
Mount Rushmore, became an advocate for the 
struggling Oglala Sioux at the nearby Pine Ridge 
Reservation, South Dakota. He solicited aid, ar- 
gued against further depletion of the buffalo, 
and worked to change the image of Indians. The 
papers of his brother, Solon Hannibal Borglum, 
also reveal an interest in Indian peoples. 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



1 0 3 



Cline, Howard Francis. Papers (1608-1972; find- 
ing aid) 

Among the papers of Cline (1915-72), a noted 
ethnohistorian who specialized in Mesoamerica, 
are materials on California Indian, Creek, Semi- 
nole, Apalachee, Yamassee, and Jicarilla Apache 
land claims and Spanish Indian policy. 

Ghent , William James. Papers (1876-1942; find- 
ing aid) 

Ghent (1866-1942) was an author and jour- 
nalist whose papers contain the original diaries 
of Edward S. Godfrey and Holmes O. Paulding, 
participants in the Battle of the Little Big Horn, 
and files of clippings, notes, and printed material 
on many subjects, including Buffalo Bill, Custer, 
various forts, battles, and chiefs. Tribes men- 
tioned are the Apache, Cherokee, Crow, Kaw, 
Nez Perce, Osage, and Sioux. Ghent also corre- 
sponded with Mrs. George Custer and twenti- 
eth century historian of the West Frederick S. 
Dellenbaugh. 

McGee, William John. Papers (1822-1916; find- 
ing aid) 

Voluminous letters and writings by W J (sic) 
McGee (1853-1912), a self-taught ethnologist 
and geologist, cover the period when he was eth- 
nologist in charge of the Smithsonian's Bureau of 
American Ethnology (1893-1903) and in charge 
of the anthropological and historical exhibit of 
the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis 
(1903-5), which is extensively documented. 

Mead, Margaret. Papers and South Pacific Ethno- 
graphic Archives (1838-1987; finding aid) 

Columbia University sponsored Margaret 
Mead (1901-78) in her studies of the Omaha In- 
dians in Nebraska. A small section of this vast 
collection documents her investigations that 
eventually led to the writing of The Changing 
Culture of an Indian Tribe, 1969. 




Price, Vincent. Papers (1883-1992; finding aid) 
The papers include materials that document 
the abiding interest of actor Price (1911-93) in 
American Indian art as collector and member 
of the Indian Arts and Crafts Board of the De- 
partment of the Interior (1957-71) and the Insti- 
tute of American Indian and Alaska Native Cul- 
ture and Arts Development. In 1958, he also was a 
member of the Indian Art of America Committee. 

Quinn, David B. Papers (1000-1988) 

This contemporary historian's notes, com- 
piled for more than twenty books on discovery 
and exploration of the Americas, forms an 
archive of the meeting of American Indian and 
European cultures. 

Squier, Ephraim George. Papers (1841-88; finding 
aid; microfilm) 

Part of the papers of this diplomat, archaeolo- 
gist, anthropologist, and ethnologist (1821-88) 
reflect his interest in American Indian history. 
His correspondence, drawings, and diagrams re- 
lating to the Indians of the Mississippi Valley 
shed light on his research for Ancient Monuments 
of the Mississippi Valley, 1847, first publication of 
the new Smithsonian Institution. 

MICROFILM 

Boas, Franz. Papers (ca. 1858-1942; 44 reels) 

Microfilm of the personal and professional 
correspondence, diaries, and family papers of 
the great anthropologist Boas (1858-1942) in the 
American Philosophical Society Library, Phila- 
delphia. Materials cover anthropology and lin- 
guistics in the United States and the develop- 
ment of their study. 

Draper, Lyman Copeland. Papers (1735-1890; 134 
reels; finding aid) 

Originals at the State Historical Society of 
Wisconsin of this monumental collection as- 
sembled by historian Draper (1815-91) on the 




1 0 4 



MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



trans-Allegheny frontier, encroachment on In- 
dian lands, and on friendly and hostile Indian- 
white relations. Significant Indian-related com- 
ponents of Draper's collection include his Daniel 
Boone collection, "Border Forays" and "Frontier 
Wars" collections, the papers of scouts and In- 
dian fighters Samuel Brady and Lewis Wetzel, 
and papers of Joseph Brant, George Rogers 
Clark, Thomas Forsyth, and Simon Kenton. 
Among nations prominently represented are 
the Catawba, Cherokee, Chickasaw, Chippewa, 
Choctaw, Creek, Delaware, Fox, Miami, Mohawk, 
Ottawa, Potawatomi, Seneca, and Shawnee. 

Griffith, D. W. (David Wark). Papers (1897-1954; 
36 reels) 

Griffith (1875-1948) directed many films 
about Indians (a selection is listed in the Mo- 
tion Picture, Broadcasting section). His original 
papers are at the Museum of Modern Art, 
New York. 

Iroquois Indians: A Documentary History of the 
Diplomacy of the Six Nations and Their League 
(1665-1921; 50 reels) 

A comprehensive collection of manuscript, 
archival, and published primary sources from 



widely scattered repositories dating from the 
mid-seventeenth century through the early nine- 
teenth century, this microfilm is also a valuable 
aid for the study of many other tribes who in- 
terrelated with the Iroquois throughout this 
period. 

Kroeber, Alfred Louis. Papers (1948, 1957) 

Kroeber (1876-1960), famous for his study of 
Ishi, sole survivor of a small band of Yahi Indi- 
ans, gave the manuscript drafts and corrected 
typescripts for two of his books to the Library: 
Anthropology (1948) and Style and Civilizations 
(19 57 )- The remainder of his papers are at 
Berkeley. 

U.S. Work Projects Administration Collection. Rec- 
ords (1627-1940) 

These extensive transcriptions of records cov- 
ering Utah history, including Mormon diaries, 
journals, autobiographies, life sketches, inter- 
views, and local histories, as well as transcrip- 
tions of interviews with pioneer Utahans, are 
replete with references to Indians. Also, the 
records of the WPA's Folklore Project contain 
files on "Indian lore," state by state. 






g) gj) ^ °° 

<s/-&f f-p/./Z^Sr GSyf 3 >3-%- 



/«• y*§fc 

M 3 P^xr%z $%? 

& P>p2 Pf>' r '~ Jr - 



G ’5> 



'cj&° >~z&£ & 


cA~ ] 


I ^ 


i*s6&9* 


& <& 


<7 . ■ • 

c > 2>z7»r^ 




% 


sg ^ | 


I jf 


DJ>J>g£ 


rj - v 


2 >J)D | 




JL* 

+ r* *// 


1 


[ st/To 




Ph?J& 


.1 




&&$§£ 'pJiT 

ca> >vyrgB.~ <& <G j#f0* 



&* CO 



«r^3 v 


■M- 


,, &? <g f~f 


/f%* 


-c o_XL-^cu 

Py^Lr-z.^ 


~~&gS 


B 


:3 ' ' g 







Pages from a Micmac prayer 
Division. 



book, 17th century [?]. Miscellaneous Manuscripts Collection (LCMS-35956-156). Manuscript 



Although of uncertain provenance, this volume appears to be written in a system of symbols or 

_ InutJhv Father Chrestien LeClercq The Micmacs, associated primarily with the maritime provinces of Canada, were als 

a M poopte of t. -fo. - »»>«»« to be central to the goal of 

bringing them into "civilized" society. 





till 





// <y , , - 



•'! & l /: /:n,. ,. 


✓/ ✓/ :- . 


h- 


o— ' y tT/" 1 f/W //• 


^A‘ /' .''.fy i 


y a f////C 

*> 


L ? / y.9' u - t 


* -»?//.■//.■ * ,*„■/. ' 


v Aw .W . ✓.»./— 


Z' *' Y '. 








• •- Vtvri. Y'rr.-.’ & vr* * 

ij 

v/c c^.J.‘Asn>\ *- cy ~ 



^ /ic 

v/i 



< , * .. 

U<t “’“ A /' /t’z farsrrr/tt; 0 /.cz/- 

is' v / , . < 7 s /ft: /.-./-. 

//. c A ./\ / - « v 7 ♦ ^ /.*• /S/s*>, .y /V, ,•/•/<* / /* 



'- w ' w "’ f. vr ffz (G?snrr*i*: \ 

C * V / r / C ‘- /? V *^ ; Z^/i* ay- /fi\_ [ , \ i >/ ■ ‘Ji 



{S/l<+ izj?r /.‘ l* /y «.'/.*.■/ I 

/ t 7 *. <*. -V ^ ' r 

. — Cl Ci-frZ y. t*: 4 y^ Q fry C^ //.■«:-« . >/. ■✓#-!/ **« “ ^ 

vX //- / yt. ■ *.•* v /.'u / *i’/ 4 a' /.'.v A '■ ( } A 

'/z-xr? / w .<2 ’ -> i 

V-/ _ ^ ^ ' V '7 ' **^ V '*■ / V t »V • M , /> Ay /-■ l/y>t\--!' iV 7 : 

*' Cjc^c//-/ y (/ V.\ : \ /7< A d \'/A. *>. /' V £ C 'r /■ y-r*\-fZi 

. 

■»‘ y / / f 

0 /f r : ' / *, v * - 



J 

V * I t . *»* * • //. y,' . - *1, l 

*" / 

T 1 

/V/ /A/' - 

*2 ■ b. 



"/• 




/"• a/n. 



Qfa c 6yy~ . •: . “T • ft 



T: tSM.i/tzJ*’ f ^F /: ■• v * f 7(v »>' 

. • a V 



A.-V 

*. V ;? ✓ T/U't^ 

P ' 0 *T, 



•#*.*■ 

IV C£y.Z.S £> * 



J V’ C 



■A- 



>7 j ,-. 









'■*■/?' /JZZ/X.' 

-/#u.j, /e.rfz^Cyc^j 



* u7r** ' Ar 
/^/n <! 

7 * ^ 

y/s,A*^ y . yiyc. 

yrz? x-.- 

'Z<*L*£, <~y — 



7 






>£3Z~ 



^3«lL a ‘ 

Kl y-iZ^.. 






WtL 



<^^<6x1 ^ 

* < ^/A.^,,,. aA. „ ^ JC^ ^ 

''■" A’---' x ^ 

^ ^ ^ :zy /Z.^,+ J!y4£ c , t ^>. £c 

x^=£A- Axg- r>y /jczcz?, &~y.i 

~+xj£.U /fitZA, /^ 7 

^ tZ/Z-. 1-1^ . ^ AtTT) — 

y>-a.Z) £s-r-fZ’/%Z~-r' ^Vyi-^rt, -*'5'^ ■**-!» 

4 . 

/'jZ "A'Axtx^ x*'*' *Z, ***>%+-*,■' AtfU* 



The opening paragraphs of a paper by Benjamin Franklin — 
"Remarks concerning the Savages of North America." It is 
not known when Franklin wrote this paper, but it was first 
published as a pamphlet in England in 1784. Benjamin 
Franklin Papers (LCMS*21451-21). Manuscript Division. 

"Savages we call them , because their Manners differ from j 
ours, which we think the Perfection of Civility. They think 
the same of theirs." Franklin, in contrasting the two civi- 
lizations, is very respectful of that of the Indian. 




Indian treaty signed at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, 

July 28, 1714. Levi Woodbury Papers (LCMS-1 2930-S1 1 6 
and Cl 7). Manuscript Division. 

7he "Eastern Tribes /' which had been allied with the 
French, submitted on July 13, 1713, following the end 
of Queen Anne's War. The delegates and sachems of the 
tribes met at Portsmouth a year later with represenfaf/Ves 
of the provinces of Massachusetts Say and New Hampshire 
to sign this treaty. Pictographs and English and French 
names were used by the Indian signatories . The treaty 
brought temporary peace to the northern frontier, following 
several years of violent warfare. 



i 





Ly 



X 




. A 

/TJX* 

^ -«s 



. ^ . Oi .<* * - 

- .■*> y ' -k.'- 
* - » > 

f^s. , **- ^ ^ ^ ^* t f S T ~/ZZT~ 

/+S Ct^~ £+*~~ ++ ■*. ^ i\ £ +-+. ■—,»■■ 

7^ /L*J*- $ZZ?*leA. »w * c ^-. ‘^V . ^Vf-cT - *4 v 

x*4v - ^ '*-c> / ^- K r ^— 

A~> ^ **"” 7 f 

~-aJ- Ct^? /Sw /5C ^,/jCu £ , . , ^y S'-+-^~Z~‘ ^ &~*£ 

^ < * At - ’ "Jft^yPT - aA'A*}+ + ^ ^c /x. <_ 

^£<rn,l Atw'/^- 4 fjf, f^*-y-/'-^~-*- &f* 7^^- St-'f A, 

%/Z& <£»r ft**,, ~~2isZ, . 

fy ’A~*r tf $***Z %&*<* 

C^yLr+CS-- ?t <*- Z &l-^Z 4>»6 ^ , 

- ,w ^ ^ '^^L f<yC^ r *L. £&#;. , 6^/A^ 

*5 x ' v,, *~*^^ r ^ **“ (iXiip'^UZi^ *«£- 

' r 6c*fti^ syA^fh -4^*'* — ’ iar; /-*ZZzyc,>' wi^* ^/7. xSik^ 

**■ -4 AJr •yp^Z 

«~~- r$ /^*xzz*t 

U r IZC+t&A-f'** JL <W/ . /^&ZZ .a^L 

{^Z^S /&, 'A ^*vC /u -7T S . " *- 4 „-~. - '^L' ^» ' 

\7 • „/ * ■ v- .*>+ 

/*+*£+ «.^‘ (+**&/ ^CtZ^ 

* *t * < *- i 




— - ■ v . J : (,- - 

^K/iJ A*.:'' jtr*L 

, . / TpT^ Jy~ * ****•$*■ '‘Gyzr 






425 



r 



;,r> ■;•>>'. . • 



John Reid to Betsy [Reid], Fort Williams, Alabama, written 
on April 1 , 1814, during the course of Andrew Jackson's 
campaign against the Creek Indians in the War of 1 81 2. 
John Reid Papers (LCMS-37507-1). Manuscript Division. 



Reid, who was Jackson's aide-de-camp , tells his wife that 
on March 27, 1814, Jackson's forces had "gained the most 
signal victory that has ever been obtained over Indians," 
having destroyed the power of the Creek at the Battle of 
Horseshoe Bend on Alabama's Tallapoosa River. The Creek 
had occupied a well-fortified position and Jackson was 
forced to storm its walls. Reid remarked that the "enemy 
fought with the bravery of desperation; but at length were 
cut to pieces " 








t nV^i |Tr«r»»i i* ri v ?i ~n ■ V * , ^ -i V - > *~‘^ , *' A .rTV'^S ^vnr*. •*^»* v * i 

vn ^ &ZZ£*xt R-e&fy*** ^ JAzt&Z c<mb\X++^ #u ^2fei^A,'| 

- fySojeJ^i 'i^J*fv&r&Gx>ovf 

JJiAg^cj r s <?a» *A^> 

Ta.^^c^u^. /Ai»4>th^)U «Ay<^ A^ty^CtA^^UMXfL^ZZi^'i druZ'Ajx^i. {+ft\ 

tjfef&JO, +&S£Z>*T gAc^vry 1 ^ tfAc/iCyyi.^c^/ AJC>4***ibfy&0%y 
-AQ4>«cU2tc4 AV *, o. M * v ’*'»* Vr>S I, . 

bastJtet /^mui Jtxxx)* •* 

ctrr^Zr^^&rp^&un^ M*<yr A^&rty 

tr*-9r:eu*^rb/iA^ /l H&tA ' Te^tf&rA' ^ 

fiia, 

^e^Srt^c di*4*t kAi/beOf J* /^W j^ms^A 

A*/z& Zi'iurnfe^^ifJt +m*X 4uLUf?&*Zm )n*v»AtJ%JZ^ 

0>4d**H» CM ^4v«r AyrriAtf r fJ^7i^Z^nS 

ypn^hiH^gK &/rrC£k 'fjL&t t^tCiXT^y *J&£t& *Jb*M:cZur\ f&Zt 

j9-e*Z&f tfctA Za h-3t cy £ <rm//yCf WfU£* ^ 

-6**£2+y ff k^uAk+tJ **+*i M» K«m< y» 6«7 t il i laa^r |frf>\j i 



Draft in Jefferson's hand of his second Inaugural address, 
March 4, 1805. Thomas Jefferson Papers (LCMS-27748- 
276). Manuscript Division. 



Jefferson, who had a deep interest in American Indians, 
and frequently commented upon them, devoted two long 
paragraphs to them in his second inaugural address. Al- 
though regarding Indians "with the commiseration their 
history inspires," he recognized that they had been "over- 
whelmed" and were being "driven before" the "stream of 
overflowing population from other regions . . . ." In notes 
for this address he spoke of promoting the "work of hu- 
manizing our citizens towards these people . . , ” 




bestcop^t availa ble 






. * • *»' 



5KT"^ j}C*y 

£>£>£**—. w a/Z^C. 

XSk5 (^z^fC^jJ 

J^~~y ^ 

>^£~>£e S^U. -£&&*— X*~ 

-■> ^ ^ “^7 ; ^ 

i®si#il£gs: 

x i ^*^> f » » i y!w 





7*" 




X- 

db-J$Ux>r, 



Letter from Andrew Jackson to his wife Rachel, April 8, 

1 81 8, describing warfare against the Indians in Florida. An- 
drew Jackson Papers (LCMS-27532-3). Manuscript 
Division. 



/ 2'i-*-' S^CSfiLsti *±y£> r/jb 
j^iD /^C*^ birtrfL ' **-»w 



yr 



r 



SH^ c/l ^ , - .<! i 

// ;!. . i 

C.&~v ^ ( A ■*y*j /l/tyb+S ‘ /9 ^y^! f y^ry^y^ u" «v«vl 

c6v+*f4S' 6* y 4<x-^, vij 

.Afe- -&* d(L: e^L~ 

by A~ t >PwQ 

-X^ub ; 




a/4a <**sk~ &{cs. i+s'C bA*+<. o^J) ^v-c^ 

j^/t *x o4l*<^je<* - ./j^Ackt^ v ^ 

^ ^"/ > ^ ^u? fC*A*s 



* ... . j . - 7 </ r ;! ] 

’ >/llc*u */i P> oU+^0 (vjL AA4i j 4 v-A*Ui^ 

"fjotfas CC- ✓v 4 '* i Hi 

jlaz i<Uy* hU^ tusv±- 'to vJ* i^ "^4 k^C: <A*~? <kA 
rfa^M'iv ej^UA' fyLfr^yy) tt^ f oj CfimA'a *. (joJ/j^ 
$1*4*1' /)vmvvJ ^ 

iiS*J s fiSj^ c/(/a/Iv eJL^tA/ jjG^tr 

$?u&v4 vr<vt4 */ a<mJ&a>i zi4a„' £o j a,^ y 

yAt^'eU+nyl y^) 



X^. pi-* 

u 



Charles Henry Weber's journal entry of July 1 8, 1 859. 
Charles Henry Weber Papers (LCMS-35956-147). Manu- 
script Division. 




Early in Andrew Jackson's 1818 invasion of Spanish 
Florida, during which he conducted a swift and decisive 
campaign against the Seminole Indians, he wrote to his 
wife Rachel describing the grisly side of such warfare . 

Thirty Indians had been killed, and the "miskasooky" 
towns of the Seminoles near Tallahassee destroyed. To Jack- 
son these towns were "the modern Sodom and Comor- 
row," in which "upwards of fifty fresh scalps from the infant 
to the aged matron" had been found. 

•* <r 



Weber's Journal describes a trip to Fort Benton, Montana,' 
via the Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers, on board the 
steamboat Spread Eagle, May 28-August 16, 1859 . 7he 
Journey was undertaken to determine the limit of steam- 
boat navigation on these rivers. Weber comments fre- 
quently on the Indians encountered along the way, and his 
touch is generally light and his reportage enthusiastic and 
interesting. In this entry he describes a horse-drawn travois 
used for "children and small packages." 








Photograph of Henry Rowe Schoolcraft. (LC-USZ62- 
34719). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Draft of Henry Rowe Schoolcraft's letter of December 1 9, 
1855, to Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Henry Rowe 
Schoolcraft Papers (LCMS-391 1 5-1 2), Manuscript Division. 



Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, in a letter of December 14, 
1855, to Henry Rowe Schoolcraft, had expressed his ap- 
preciation and gratitude for the work Schoolcraft had done 
to call attention to Indian legends and mythology, thereby 
contributing to the poet's The Song of Hiawatha. School- 
craft's letter in response mentions having "perused the 
poem with equal avidity & high gratification." 





BEST CflPYWAlLABLE 

r=bi I 



o 

ERIC 




"Plan of the Ancient Works at Marietta, Ohio" by Charles Whittlesey, 1 837. Ephraim George Squier Papers (LCMS-41 087-3). 
Manuscript Division. 



Ephraim George Squier (1821-881 journalist ; diplomat ; and archeologist, is renowned for his Ancient Monuments of the 
Mississippi Valley (1847), the first volume to be published by the newly founded Smithsonian Institution . Included in his pa- 
pers is this 1837 plan made by Charles Whittlesey (1 808-86), geologist, topographical engineer ■ and student of ancient In- 
dian culture. 



V2>Z 





1M 6 





water color roll backed with linen and mounted on pan- 
els, 1907. Miscellaneous Manuscripts Collection (LCMS- 
35956-159). Manuscript Division. 



Battiste Good ( 1821-1908 ?) was a Brul6 Dakota living at 
the Rosebud Agency, South Dakota , when he made this 
copy of a winter count in 1 907 . Winter counts were used 
to mark significant events. A circle of lodges represents a 
cycle of years, and individual years also depicted buffalo 
hunts, fights with neighboring tribes, famines , and other 
particular occurrences . 




Rage four of a letter of high Indian policy from Gen. 
William T. Sherman to Gen. Philip H. Sheridan, Head- 
quarters, Army of the United States, Washington, D.C., 
August 12, 1876. Philip H. Sheridan Rapers (LCMS-39768- 
1). Manuscript Division. 



Less than two months after the Battle of The Little Big Horn 
two of the great commanders of the Civil War discuss the 
status of the Sioux Indians . Sherman was commanding 
general of the army at the time, and Sheridan headed the 
Division of the Missouri. The situation remained volatile, 
and Sherman, who had been in touch with President 
Grant, thought it advisable that * all the Sioux nation be 
kept under close military surveillance till they can again be 
trusted to civil agents." 





I 2>3 



BEST COPY AVAILMT 



Photograph of orchestra on 5t. Raul Island, c. 1890s. Records of the Russian Church in Alaska (LCMS-38695-27). Manu- 
script Division. 

This small orchestra , made up of native (Aleut) and non-native members , is gathered on remote St. Fhul Island , part of the 
Pribilof or Fur Seal Islands in the Bering Sea some three hundred miles from the Alaskan mainland. The island is only thirty- 
five square miles in area and has a population of well under one thousand. 



; m 









MANUSCRIPT DIVISION 



1 1 3 




Photograph of a "Japanese Drill" at Immaculate Conception Indian Boarding School, Stephan, South Dakota 1 899 Solon 
Borglum Papers (LCMS-35956^1 58). Manuscript Division. 



The American sculptor, Solon Borglum, noted for his cowboy, horse, and Indian pieces, spent the summer of 1899 in South 
Dakota at the Crow-Creek Reservation (Fort Thompson ) making studies for an Indian group he was planning. This unusual 
cross-cultural photograph appears in Borgl urn's papers without further explanation. 



ERIC 



1 




/*-'* yh+'/f/l. d.lc /- . * x. 

4- «■ ■' t-*- 54» • — /<_ 4:-» »-«♦-. V/., - — < 

/../^/.; /-,/£. /gf XtnU*. 

y^*»/ yC*-*y££ A^r ^ a**-*/ 

a.-* +*s *zr/' y ^'V/l 



xfcC/ jU- 

*- y #c. 



2*. - • >»/ 






Z2 



Y r *-*-^g ds+*-+£> ZL. 



s<sm^A^T /C*~« ■ yf 



Uy^~/c*+— *' — yi~ r— 2 Y r+^t 

•*/ Zl. yS-f+K ’7r-/^ /^£~-. •■■ 

%2s***s '^t/ - ^»t#>t,/Zi 

*yg* ■■ <» ■ >» » »ZZXZ S? » «^ t. t ^>w -» - W * «- ^ 

CL-< Or^iL^Ct 

/Z^ .fy£*- +ys O S' Xs***~<) nS* 

/ / ^ W *' ^ *p f£i*y> /£*++, K^Z -w«- &j£- + 

&**■ a. — yhx~~^~ 

jr~yjy £. ^ ,y ^cu^4u< ^ 6.Z4> ^u/ 

<?-*<-* » ■• 1 j%£zo^ 

A' **^ ?7 a*-*-' 0-W ,y <**£/— r / ^- ? 

$!'>+** 'jfcc&Ciycj*.. yc«r*^£-*<L. 
f \£.^y C ^CSy CL~ <Zl " - * S* - S^ . 

jbt*— /^y j 

')£t~£*.\c J^u^yzy ?'? ^+s~ny / — , 

y*«*- &-/*>*>/ g~ \ ^ ^ j~~/^^-/' 

y /£ ^i-u-^iZ ^ /^tt£- al*j, 

/Ze^ <^2. ^ c/c^ysO sX?~ ~~~ 

xy &yL~£ c**.< j. nuyg<j£ yb~L-<^ y j/U-^ 

.^•Z ^&*— «-*< _ 

* y> ^ 



Final page of a report of August 31 , 1 863, recorded in Col. Christopher ("Kit") 
Carson's headquarters letterbook (1863-64). Christopher Carson Papers (LCMS- 
35956). Manuscript Division. 



K7f Carson, guide , Indian agent ; and soldier, was serving as a colonel in the 1st 
New Mexico Volunteer Infantry during the Civil War. In 1863 he was charged 
with campaigning against the Mescalero Apache and Navajo. In writing of his 
preparations he spoke of having gained "a knowledge of where the Navajos 
have fled . . . and where / am certain to find them," and looked ahead to "the 
entire subjugation of the Navajo Nation." 



o r. n :; y a 

of tho 

•paoho rloonarr of r (\r, "art .’111, ffclrQionn, ^oocnber ",1'Jl". 





Tho foil or. In* hond 


of f nilloo ind odaltn, 18 yoorn of ago 




older, h“Te olooted to r.Vifo th« 4 r fut;ire ronldonoo r’th tho nlloao 
of tho ; - ooo iloro IndKn “«ronrr\tl on, 'low 'orloo : 

v o lot ion- 


;'o. 


Jndlon naoo 


'.'tv< 1 1 oh r*;o 


nhlp r 


ox Ago 


1 


!5\lohe 


:hrl oti.TTi 


“ttoh-md 


;: 56 


e 


•Ta o elnre 




■ Ifo 


V El 


3 




cello 


"an/'htex 


•>’ 14 


4 




7a«ol 




T 0 


6 




3nrnaban f^oonarelt) 


r,on 


U 6 


C 


HMcho 


rhrlotlfm, Jr. 


•lnglo 


a 23 


7 


To ol finny 


Togtr 


Kua 


•1 60 


0 


'.'y o konne 




T.lfo 


? 47 


9 




Toter 


non 


3 9 


10 

11 




Kdlth 


Doe 


? 7 


11 


ChftttO 


.Ofrod 


Hon 


i: 87 


1C 


Bo ffln olay allm 




rim 


7 36 


13 


Za nh to naj 


Jacob 


rma 


J. 62 


14 


Bah nab toan 




T.lfo 


P 69 


13 




LlarElno, Chfirloo 


non 


H 86 


16 


Cah (joh aahon 




7 If o 


7 48 


17 


Bartha fJonnla) 


"an 


P G 


10 




U&rt lr.e , "eorre 
, Lillian 


Bub 


K 23 


19 




rifa 


7 17 


CO 




* , Knldon (Edwnrdl 


Don 


!: 3 


Cl 




* . , Brellno 


KlU 


p 1 


28 




Tatty, Parld 


ntta 


U 66 


E3 


Hah d&l yah 


tlf a 


r 49 


84 


“ Tan too o 


Con 


U 17 


ca 




" Ilatthow 


son 


M 16 


26 




* BOM noon 


Don 


c n 


ET 




- Hattie 


nan 


B 9 


88 




tottlo (Uaey) 


Dsn 


? 4 


89 




* lahrlal 


Son 


U 2 


80 


Oqy da 11th ken 




Tathor 


U 63 


81 


Tool 


Don 


V. 10 


S3 




Thlhmhm, agono 


Bus 


32 


33 




7lolo 


rifa 


7 30 


94 




* .Vgnoa 1 llvry ) 


Bon 


7 6 


38 


B— mh 


Leal do 




? 4 


50 


7oo-noh 


;:dn* 


? 4 


57 


Yah no sha 


rdwoxd 


Hub 


K 47 


88 




'noh ol 


>lfO 


7 40 


89 




Honar 


Con 


r. 0 


40 




Hilton (KdTTird) 


Con 


V 8 


41 


TTah do i In 




clngla 


U 68 


48 


Yin ehtsm 


.■jTWld 


ITun 


U 48 


48 




Cara 


rifa 


f 59 


44 




-lnr.1 froi 


Dim 


7 12 


46 




Ha than 'Ualools) 


3 on 


M 6 


46 


/ 


’^rlnoa 


sen 


II 8/1 



Census of Apache prisoners of war held at Fort Sill, Okla- 
homa, December 2, 1 91 2. Hugh L Scott Papers (LCMS- 
39297-3). Manuscript Division. 



77?e Apaches at Fort Sill had been incarcerated since the 
surrender of Ceronimo in 1886. Cen. Hugh L. Scott was 
overseeing their release in 1912, and this census, which 
lists 264 individuals, was taken in order to give the prison- 
ers an opportunity to decide whether to settle in Oklahoma 
or on the Mescalero Reservation in New Mexico . One of 
the Apaches, speaking through an interpreter, said: "For 
twenty-eight years l have been a prisoner of war ancH have 
got married a prisoner of war and got children as prisoners 
of war and I do not understand for what reason I am for 
twenty eight years a prisoner of war . . . " 




CaElMPYAVlIJLABIEJ 



136 






Scrapbooks compiled by Newton H. Chittenden. Newton H. Chittenden Papers (LCMS-9141 3-1). Manuscript Division. 

Newton H. Chittenden , adventurer and author, wandered throughout the Pacific Northwest and California during the latter 
years of the nineteenth century recording his observations of the Indians he encountered and on the artifacts of their past. 








X- 

Browning, Hon tan*. 

February E3rd,19I&. 

Honorable Franklin X.Lane, 

3 oo rot ary of the Interior, 

Washington. D.C. 





Mr. Chalr*an4Ni* ieuHueejs 
■gmnimii or the Committee* 






Dear Sir: 

Wo, the Bleokfeot Indians are now look- 
ing to you to help ua a little more. You helped us 
once when you took Agent HoPatrldge away from here. 
How we ask you to help ue again, when you send us 
a new Agent. 

“Two years ago Chief Curly Bear and many 
of our other Chiefs and Coundllmen and head men went 
to Washington and told you about our troubles. While 
In your City we met a good white man. his name Is 
Hart In J. Bentley, and we had a long talk with him. 
What he said to us and what we said to him we hare 
told our people. We are thinking about that yet. We 
know that the Great Spirit does not want us to sat 
down and let trouble oattfh us. He wants us to work 
and push until we get what is right. We know that 
when we work right we sleep well. The earth is our 
mother. She holds a plenty for ua all. We must find 
the way to get it. We oan't get it now in the old 
, . Indian way. The game is gone. We must dig it out of 
’** ' “■* tho ground. We think Mr. Bentley oan show ue how. 

W* hare made a lot of noise about our bad Agents. 
Send us this man beosnse we know a good man when we 
see him. W% know him In a different way from tho 
White man's way. We may be mistaken about Ur. Ben- 
tley but if wo are illll we wdil-kiok ourselves and 
not klok you. 



f 



3 

4* 



Robert). Hamilton, et al., members of the Blackfeet tribe, 
to Franklin K. Lane, Browning, Montana, February 23, 
1915. Robert M. LaFollette Family Papers (LCMS-291 65-3). 
Manuscript Division. 




Senator Robert M. LaFollette bad long service on the Sen- 
ate's Indian Affairs Committee and his papers include a 
very large "Indian Affairs File" that incorporates materials 
from the Interior Department's Office of Indian Affairs. This 
letter, from a "Blackfeet" folder, has an additional twelve 
pages of signatures attached — 278 signatures in all — many 
with accompanying thumbprints. 



It It gratifying to no to appear for the first tims before tho 
Houoo Committee on Indian Affairs in behalf of H.H. 6254, tho Thomas- 
Rogor* Oklahoma Indian Welfare hill, tho most important piooo of Indian 
legislation to oomo before Congrsss elnoo tho passage of tho modified 
rrheeler -Howard bill o year sgo.-'^Uy interest in Indian affairs h&o 
extended orar cmny yoart. It li ba.od on personal aoquaintanoe and 
•yu^.thy with many Indians and savor al Indian triboo. !»» achievements 
Of the present Administration haw glwn mo more personal satisfaction 
than tbs tffort. euooeeeful so far but not completed, to bring about s 

rv 

basic* reorganisation of federal Indian polloy and^the Indian Serrioe. 

this rr irp i 1 T 1 * • effort to plaoo tho Indian on a sound 
eoonoalo foundation, to cake him self-supporting and to glTO him tho 
right of olrio e el f -dot srnl nation. is oow underlay owrywhare. oioept 
in Oklahoma^tha state whloh oontains almost one-third of tho oountry 'e 
total Indian population. Tho bill now before this oonadttoo eialoaiunr~ 
to extend to the Oklahoma Indians tho enlarged measure of federal pro- 
toot ion. aid and guidance now available to ail Indians outeldo of 
Oklahoma. 

The mashers of this comnittoe apparently are in full agreement on 
tbs principal foatures of the bill. I have beard of no opposition to 
the propoeal to supply land to Oklahoma's landless Indians, to assist 
in the organisation of Indian cooperative groups for eoonooio purpose# . 



Cilf. e..<A/yv^ < ] 



Retained copy of a letter from Harold L. Ickes to Robert F. 
Jones, Washington, July 22, 1943. Harold L. Ickes Papers 
(LCM5-2701 1-7). Manuscript Division. 



Harold L. Ickes, as secretary of the interior in the cabinet 
of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, puts his well-known 
spirit and temper on display in behalf of the American In- 
dian. Deriding a speech made on the floor of the House of 
Representatives by Congressman Robert F. Jones of Ohio, 
as one of "labored facetiousness," Ickes went on to give a 
succinct account of the Roosevelt administration's 
beneficial treatment of the Indian. 






luj Lt 



/G 



hi ^ 

S 102..JL <C 





w^Je^ .. t 

<C<2^UvvvVa 

._ ld#.-<^ 

_ _<x^Ht* _cumJ_ 

£vC_A^ 

— ^ trx\ l 

. L V V*- 

__ - ^( — / 

_ .^U^, _*v fW? us&^>_ 

/Uv*. ^S<LO < / _ 

. ./^n -!^-‘< < £tX^M Jj.-tvzt+ctZ—jdQ 

t. a >1 ftr~l /"Y Ijt J ±1) J Jfc. 




.. JdMu^CS? i/uu^dyL 



/^A<rVO 



/C-i^/^vL 

l/V~C*-' i -'V^ ^ ^ ^y^rJ — . 

„ LO-M»* &JQ-P_ .. . 

Jtu L_fej Tfc V^ i .irf. n *71*77 



First page of Associate justice William O. Douglas's draft 
of his dissenting opinion in The Northwestern Bands of 
Shoshone Indians v. The United States. October Term, 
1944. William O. Douglas Papers (LCMS-1 8853-1). Manu- 
script Division. 



The Northwestern Bands of Shoshone Indians were seeking 
to "recover from the United States damages estimated at 
fifteen million dollars for the taking of some fifteen million 
acres of the lands held by aboriginal or immemorial title." 
The opinion of the Court was that "no recovery may be 
had." In his dissent justice Douglas alluded to an 1863 
treaty and asserted that the negotiation of the treaty's provi- 
sions constituted "plain recognition by the United States 
that it was dealing with people who had the power to grant 
these rights . ..." A note from Justice Felix Frankfurter to 
Douglas declared: "This is a spirited opinion reflecting the 
justice which the law here requires. I am glad to join it." 




Indian schoolchildren visiting the Southern Plains Indian 
Museum in Anadarko, Oklahoma. Photograph, U.S. De- 
partment of the Interior, Indian Arts and Crafts Board. 
Copy in Vincent Price Papers (LCMS-36905-1). Manuscript 
Division. 



Many of the items in the museum's exhibit were by mem- 
bers of the Comanche , Kiowa, Cheyenne, Arapahoe , 
Caddo, Wichita, and Delaware tribes. Vincent Price, who 
took an intense interest in Native American art, was a long- 
time member of the Interior Department's Indian Arts and 
Crafts Board. 



'< — r 




Lbestcopyavaslabi 


T { 


1 


iva ] 





INTRODUCTION 



THE LAW LIBRARY 
OF CONGRESS 




Research in Indian law provides entree into a 
world of unique, complex, and fascinating legal 
issues. These issues may require knowledge of 
constitutional law, federal law, tribal law, state 
law, international treaties, or some combination 
of these. Constitutional, treaty, statutory, and 
regulatory language must be examined. Re- 
course to legislative history of various enact- 
ments may be a valuable asset in evaluating leg- 
islative intent. 

In Indian law, areas of inquiry may range 
from taxes to criminal law, from Indian gaming 
to child custody, from environmental issues to 
tribal sovereignty, and beyond. Almost every 
area of legal specialization has its counterpart in 
Indian law. In addition, those working in Ameri- 
can Indian legal studies must be conversant with 
the full range of historical, anthropological, and 
ethnological resources and possess skills which 
take them across disciplinary lines, often into 
waters that are difficult to chart. Broad scholarly 
perspectives are needed. 

A few examples may be illustrative of the 
multi-faceted nature of the legal issues involved 
in the field of Indian law. A water rights dispute 
may necessitate an examination of Indian re- 
served water rights under Winters v. United 
States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908), which held that im- 
plicit in the creation of a reservation is the 
reservation of sufficient water to accomplish 
the purposes for which the reservation was cre- 
ated. To quantify Indian reserved water rights 
for a particular reservation, expert testimony 
may be necessary to determine the amount of 
water sufficient to irrigate all of the practicably 
irrigable acreage on the reservation. Resolution 
of such a dispute may necessitate federal litiga- 
tion; or, under the Me Carr an Amendment, 43 
U.S.C. § 666, Indian water rights may be among 
those addressed in a general state water adjudi- 
cation. Alternatively, resolution of issues sur- 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 1 9 



rounding Indian reserved water rights may re- 
sult in a negotiated settlement involving tribal, 
federal, state, and local parties. To become effec- 
tive, such a settlement agreement may require 
ratification by federal legislation, or by both fed- 
eral and state legislative action. 

Similar complexity is reflected in questions 
regarding Indian hunting and fishing rights. 
Such disputes often arise in areas where tribal 
religious, subsistence, and commercial interests 
may be in competition for a limited resource 
with local commercial interests and a recre- 
ational hunting or fishing industry which may 
bring substantial income into state and local 
economies. Expert testimony with respect to the 
historical, religious, and economic factors in- 
volved may provide perspective and context. 
Such cases may require an examination of fed- 
eral treaties with pertinent Indian tribes re- 
garding on- and off-reservation hunting and 
fishing rights. Court interpretations of similar or 
identical treaty language may provide added 
illumination. 

Federal litigation may be precipitated by a 
dispute over the applicability of federal, state, 
and tribal laws and regulations on fish and 
wildlife. A question may also arise as to whether 
the Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. § 1531 et 
seq., applies to a particular fact situation. If a 
tribal right to take fish or to hunt is established, 
historical, cultural, and ethnographic expertise 
may be required to determine what traditional 
methods of hunting or fishing may legally be 
used by tribal members today. Expert testimony 
as to fluctuations in the size of a fish or animal 
population may lead a federal court to take con- 
tinuing jurisdiction over a matter for years, par- 
ticularly where preservation of the species is at 
issue. 

Even when treaty rights are established 
through litigation, questions may arise as to 
which tribes now extant are entitled to share the 
benefits of particular treaty rights as descen- 

O 




dants or successors in interest of the treaty signa- 
tory tribes. Generally treaty rights inure to the 
benefit of the tribe or tribes, and only deriva- 
tively to the individual members of that tribe. 
This issue becomes more complex if some of the 
modem descendants of the signatory tribes are 
not now federally recognized tribes. A question 
may then arise as to whether they may partic- 
ipate in those treaty rights. 

Attorneys who specialize in American Indian 
legal issues today understand the complexity 
of this demanding branch of law and the depth 
of research that must be brought to it. Histo- 
rians, anthropologists, archaeologists, and ex- 
perts from other disciplines may be called upon 
to provide background in the litigation pro- 
cess. While historical documentation proceeds, 
a mass of pertinent federal laws must be lo- 
cated and assimilated. Consideration also must 
be given to state laws that affect the issues at 
hand as well as a growing panorama of tribal 
laws. Tribal laws are taking on more weight in 
U.S. courts today because of a change in philoso- 
phy regarding tribal autonomy and a shift in 
tribal relations with the federal government. 

The collections of the Law Library of the Li- 
brary of Congress afford researchers a wide ar- 
ray of resources with which to pursue Indian law 
issues. To begin to address such intricate issues, 
one may wish to start with an overview of the 
subject area. A number of hornbooks, treatises, 
and case books available in the Law Library 
Reading Room may provide an avenue into this 
area of the law. A law review article on the sub- 
ject being explored can also provide illumina- 
tion, and the Law Library's law reviews are 
legion. 

Once a preliminary course is charted, the Law 
Library can offer a vast array of federal materials 
to further the legal inquiry. In addition to federal 
laws, both codified and uncodified, and treaties, 
comprehensive legislative history materials are 
available. These include the Annals of Congress, 




1 2 0 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



the Register of Debates, the Congressional Globe, 
the Congressioiwl Record, committee reports and 
hearings, and House and Senate Journals. The 
earliest legislative materials may be accessed in 
the American State Papers which are included 
in the Law Library's microfilm collection. Some 
of the personal journals of the members of the 
early Congresses may also be found among the 
Law Library's resources. 

A complete collection of federal trial and ap- 
pellate court decisions is also part of the Law 
Library resources. In addition, the Law Library 
maintains a large collection of appellate and 
Supreme Court records and briefs. These can 
often stimulate ideas for persuasive approaches 
to particular issues and can act as springboards 
into fruitful lines of research to support those 
approaches. 

If state materials are needed, current and his- 
torical state laws are available, as are reporters 
containing state case law. If early state treaties 
with Indian tribes are necessary, as in cases in- 
volving Eastern land claims, the arrival in the 
Law Library of Early American Indian Documents: 
Treaties and Laws, i6oj -ly 89 may prove to be 
a boon to research (see discussion under Law 
Library General Collections — Colonial and Early 
American Materials). If the Law Library's collec- 
tions do not include state treaties or legislative 
history materials needed to pursue a particular 
area of inquiry, recourse to the general collec- 
tions or to state legislative reference services may 
provide further information. 

The Law Library's collection of tribal laws 
and constitutions is growing, although not yet 
exhaustive. Tribal laws and constitutions are 
playing an increasing role in today's complex In- 
dian legal issues. 

In some areas of Indian law study, interna- 
tional materials are also an integral part of the re- 
sources which must be examined. For example, a 
dispute over fishing or whaling in international 
waters may necessitate an examination of fishing 




or whaling treaties with Canada or other af- 
fected nations. A question regarding free pas- 
sage rights or duty-free passage rights of tribes 
whose ancestral lands traverse the United 
States / Canada border may require an examina- 
tion of Article HI of the Jay Treaty of 1794 with 
the 1796 Explanatory Article, Article IX of the 
Treaty of Ghent of 1815, the Treaty of Spring 
Wells of 1815, 8 U.S.C. § 1359, and pertinent case 
law, as well as more recent American and Cana- 
dian laws and regulations, and tribal laws imple- 
menting those rights. In addition, the relation- 
ship of the federal government with the Pueblo 
Indian tribes originally stemmed, in part, from 
the Spanish and Mexican laws which defined the 
relationship that those governments had with 
the Pueblo Indian tribes prior to the acquisition 
of the lands they occupied by the United States 
under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848). 

The Law Library possesses a substantial col- 
lection of international treaties and bilateral 
agreements, as well as legal materials from many 
nations around the world. Its resources can pro- 
vide the means to gain historical and legal per- 
spectives upon such matters. 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 

LAW LIBRARY READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Madison Building, 2nd floor. Room 
LM 201; telephone (202) 707-5079 

HOURS: Monday, Wednesday and Thursday 8:30 
A. M. -9:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Friday and Saturday 8:30 
A. M. -5:00 P.M. 

ACCESS AND USE: Closed Sunday except to Con- 
gress when in session. The Law Library book stacks 
are closed to the public. Requested materials must be 
brought to the reading room. Allow adequate time 
for this procedure. Bring photo identification with 
you. A staff of professional legal reference specialists 
will be available to assist you. Appointments are ad- 
vised, and photo ID and pencils are required, for use 
of rare book material. 



142 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 2 1 



The resources of the Law Library of Congress, 
the largest law library in the world, are very rich 
in American Indian materials A reference staff 
assists readers in utilizing the collections, in- 
cluding federal, state, tribal, and international 
materials. 

Catalogs 

A researcher may use the author /title card cat- 
alog in the Law Library Reading Room (new 
card entries closed December 1980), or may uti- 
lize the Library's own on-line research tools. 
Both SCORPIO and MUMS services may be ac- 
cessed through the Library of Congress Informa- 
tion System. These two services provide on-line 
searching capabilities within the Library of Con- 
gress Catalog. Computer terminals and instruc- 
tion sheets are available in the Law Library 
Reading Room to enable researchers to deter- 
mine what parts of the Law Library collections 
will be of greatest assistance to them. 

Major Reference Works 

When beginning research into an unfamiliar area 
of Indian law, an examination of major reference 
works may prove invaluable. The three most 
commonly used law texts are: 

Felix S. Cohens Handbook of Federal Indian Law. 
Charlottesville, Va.: Michie Bobbs-Merrill, 1982; 
KF8202.P75 1994 

The first edition of this monumental work, 
printed in 1941, was written by Felix Cohen, 
Chairman of the Board of Appeals at the Depart- 
ment of the Interior. It represents the first com- 
prehensive text addressing substantive laws, ap- 
propriation acts, and treaties affecting American 
Indians. The most recent edition of this text was 
published in 1982. 



American Indian Law , Cases and Materials. R. N. 
Clinton, N. J. Newton, and M. E. Price. Char- 
lottesville, Va.: Michie Co., 1991; KF8204.5.L38 
1991 

Cases and Materials on Federal Indian Lazo. David 
H. Getches, Charles F. Wilkinson, and Robert A. 
Williams. 3rd edition. St. Paul, Minn.: West Pub- 
lishing Co., 1993; KF8204.5 G47 1993 

These two books are teaching texts which use 
selected cases, accompanied by explanatory text 
and supplementary notes and questions, as a 
means of learning principles of Indian law. 



Other useful texts available through the Law Li- 
brary Reading Room include: 

American Indian Law Deskbook. Conference of 
Western Attorneys General, N. J. Spaeth, Chair, 
Editing Committee; J. Wrend, and C. Smith, 
Chief Editors. Niwot, Colo.: University of Col- 
orado Press, 1993; KF8205.A76 1993 

American Indian Treaties , The History of a Political 
Anomaly. F. P. Prucha. Berkeley, Ca.: University 
of California Press, 1994; KF8205.P75 1994 

Documents of United States Indian Policy. Edited 
by F. P. Prucha. Lincoln and London, Neb.: Uni- 
versity of Nebraska Press, 1990; KF8205.D63 
1990 

Early American Indian Documents: Treaties and 
Laws , 1607-1789 (see discussion on page 127) 

Indian Law Reporter , Volumes 20, 21, and 22. Oak- 
land, Calif.: American Indian Lawyer Training 
Program, Inc., 1993-95; KF8201.A3I5 

Each year, this loose-leaf binder series com- 
piles decisions on Indian law topics from the 
United States Supreme Court, the United States 
Courts of Appeals, the United States District 
Courts, the United States Court of Federal 



AMERICAN INDIAN TREATIES 

^OfOAOfOAOfOAOTOAOfOiOfOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOfOAOTOAO 

rOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOfOAOfOAOfOAATOAATAAOfAAOTOAOfOAOfO 

GATEWAYS 



The British, French, Dutch, and Swedish all en- 
tered into treaties with North American Indian na- 
tions. Within the bounds of the 1 3 colonies, 

British colonial treaty-making started as early 
as 1 607, when the Virginia colonists signed a 
treaty with the Powhatan Confederacy, and ex- 
tended to 1 775, by which time at least 1 75 
treaties had been signed. Treaty-making by the 
new United States with the Indian tribes, both by 
the Continental Congress (1 774-88) and under 
the Constitution (1 789-1 871 ), was modeled on 
the practices that the British and Indians had de- 
veloped during their nearly 1 70 years of diplo- 
macy preceding the Revolution. The United States 
government's first Indian treaty was concluded in 
1778 with the Delaware Nation. 

Treaties under the Constitution are agreements 
between the United States and independent na- 
tions that are ratified by the Senate and signed by 
the President. In fact the first two treaties ever 
submitted to the Senate under the Constitution, in 
1 789, were ones with the Six Nations (Iroquois) 
and with six Northwest Territory tribes. The last 
Indian treaty the United States ratified was in 
1869, with the Nez Perce. In 1871 Congress pro- 
hibited any further treatymaking (as defined un- 
der the Constitution) with Indian nations. This 
prohibition resulted both from the House of Rep- 
resentatives' objections to its exclusion from 
treaty approval (while still having to appropriate 
funds for treaty obligations) and from growing ob- 
jections by Indian policy-makers to treating In- 
dian tribes as independent nations. 

Between 1 778 and 1 871 the United States 
ratified about 370 treaties with Indian nations. 

A number of additional agreements with tribes 
were never ratified. 



After 1871 the federal government continued 
to make agreements with Indian nations, but they 
had to be passed as regular laws by both houses 
of Congress. Between 1871 and 1913 Congress 
approved at least ninety-six such agreements 
with tribes. The United States still uses the statute 
process to make agreements with tribes, espe- 
cially to settle claims. 

From the U.S. government's point of view, the 
purposes of Indian treaties were various, from the 
securing of peace and friendship to the cession of 
land. As U.S. power waxed, tribal land cessions 
became the predominant purpose of treaties 
and agreements. From an Indian point of view, 
treaties reserved lands, other rights, and tribal 
self-governmental status and were meant to gain 
a cessation of military or other hostile activities. 
Furthermore, since treaties also varied in the fair- 
ness and equity of their terms, negotiation, and 
tribal ratification, they became the basis for many 
Indian claims. 

Indian treaties remain important because they 
are — with the Constitution, statutes, executive 
orders, and Supreme Court decisions — the basis 
both of Indian tribes' unique status in the U.S. 
political system and of the federal government's 
trust relationship with Indian tribes and special 
programs for Indians. 



AOTOAOf O 

WHERETO LOOK: Library collections bearing 
on Indian treaties include the Law Library, the 
Manuscript Division, the Microform Reading 
Room, the Geography and Map Division, and the 
General Collections. 





OTOAOVOAO'TOAO'TOAOTOAOVOAOVOAOVOAO'TOAOYOAOYOAO'VOAO'TOAO' 
OAOTOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOT Oa 




"'View of the treaty ground at Prairie du Chien, Michigan Territory [now Wisconsin], in 1 825" by Lehman and Duval after 
a painting by James Otto Lewis, from The Aboriginal Port-Folio by J. O. Lewis (Philadelphia, 1835). E89.L66 (LC-USZC4- 
4816, without caption, and LC-USZC4-510, with caption, both color; LC-USZ62-32586, with caption, black and white). 
Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



Not a land cession treaty, the agreement signed here on August 19, 1825, was a U.S. attempt to set boundaries and make 
peace among the Eastern Sioux, Lake Superior Ojibwa (Chippewa), Sac and Fox, Menominee, Iowa , and Winnebago, and 
parts of the Ottawa and Potawatomi. 





1 2 3 



1 2 4 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



Claims, state courts, and tribal courts. Also in- 
cluded are decisions from various miscellaneous 
proceedings by, for example, the Interior Board 
of Indian Appeals or the United States Tax Court. 

Irredeemable America , The Indians' Estate and 
Land Claims. Edited by I. Sutton. Albuquerque, 
N.M.: University of New Mexico Press, 1985; 
KF8208.I77 1985 

Native American Rights Fund National Indian Law 
Library Catalog: An Index to Indian Legal Materials 
and Resources. Boulder, Colo.: Native American 
Rights Fund, 1973-; KF8201.A1N38 

The Rights of Indians and Tribes , The Basic ACLU 
Guide to Indian and Tribal Rights. Edited by S. L. 
Pevar. Carbondale and Edwardsville, 111 .: South- 
ern Illinois University Press, 1992; KF8210.C5P48 
1992 

□ SELECTED RESOURCES 

A more detailed familiarity with some of the re- 
sources available for Indian legal studies at the 
Law Library may assist researchers in making 
maximum use of the collections. While the Law 
Library's own wide-ranging primary and sec- 
ondary materials — in hard copy, microfiche, and 
microfilm — are divided between the division's 
rare book and general collections, recourse may 
also be taken to a vast array of materials in other 
parts of the Library of Congress. Some funda- 
mental areas of research, with selected resources, 
are organized and described in the following 
discussion. References are made to useful mate- 
rials located elsewhere in the Library where 
appropriate: 

LAW LIBRARY RARE BOOK COLLECTION 

■ Colonial and Early American Materials 

■ Great Britain, Acts of Parliament 

■ Indian Territory 



■ Twentieth-Century Tribal Constitutions and 
Corporate Charters 

LAW LIBRARY GENERAL COLLECTIONS 

■ Treaties 

■ Colonial and Early American Materials 

■ Federal Documents 

Legislative Branch Materials 
Executive Branch Materials 
Judicial Branch Materials 

■ State Documents 

■ Tribal Documents 

■ International Materials 



LAW LIBRARY RARE BOOK 
COLLECTIONS 

Colonial and Early American 
Materials 

Although the emphasis in researching American 
Indian legal issues is federal law, legal research 
into many Indian legal questions (particularly 
those relating to Eastern tribes) must begin with 
the Colonial period. The Law Library Rare Book 
Collection is a good place to begin research for 
those tribes with the longest histories of contact 
with the non-Indian world. Indian-related mate- 
rials will be found within various collections of 
statutes for the colony or state in question. Good 
examples are: 

The Statutes at Large of South Carolina , 1632-1838. 
Edited under Authority of the Legislature by 
Thomas Cooper (vols. 1-5) and David J. McCord 
(vols. 6-10). Columbia, S.C.: A. S. Johnson, 
1836-40; Law Office S.C.-i 

The Statutes at Large: Being a collection of all the 
Lazvs of Virginia , from the First Session of the 
Legislature in the year 1619. Edited by William 
Waller Hening .'"Richmond (vols. 1-12), 1809-23, 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 2 5 



and Philadelphia (vol. 13), 1823; Law Office 
KFV2425.2 1619 

Both of these sets of statutes are fully indexed. 
The materials for other colonies may not be so 
well organized. For instance, a researcher must 
examine each volume of the Rhode Island Acts and 
Resolves (Law Office R.I.-i) in order to locate all 
citations on a particular subject. Henings Statutes 
are also available through the Law Library's 
stack collections. These will always be used in 
preference to the rare book collections, where 
they are available. 

Because of a lack of indexes and reference 
guides for these rare materials, it is advisable to 
use all standard printed and automated catalogs 
available, including MUMS and SCORPIO, the 
card catalog located in the Law Library Reading 
Room (new card entries closed December 1980), 
and the National Union Catalog, pre-1956. Even 
this kind of cautious research may not be ade- 
quate. For instance, legislation from the Colony 
of Virginia is most thoroughly identified by ex- 
amining the entire Virginia collection by index 
and/or table of contents for each volume. 

Great Britain , Acts of Parliament 

The Law Library Rare Book Collection also con- 
tains a large number of acts passed by the Parlia- 
ment of Great Britain during the colonial period. 
These are arranged in volumes by reigning 
monarch and year (Law Office Gt Brit I 33 Geo 2 
1763, for example). Again, ascertaining whether 
or not this collection contains American Indian 
material requires a volume-by-volume approach. 

Indian Territory 

The Rare Book materials also include a limited 
number of volumes devoted to Indian Territory. 
Perhaps the most important of this Indian Terri- 
tory documentation is the seven-volume Indian 
Territory Reports , 1900-09 (Law Office Ind. Terr.), 
0 




compiled by James Frank Craig, which provides 
many insights into the management of Indian 
Territory. Other valuable resources include: 

Rules of the United States Court of Appeals , Indian 
Territory . South McAlester, Okla.: News Print, 
1903; Law Office Ind. Ter. 6 Rules Ct. App. 1903 

Revised Leasing Regulations of June 11, iqoj, Gov- 
erning Leasing of Lands of Members of the Five Civi- 
lized Tribes. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1907; Law 
Office Indian Tribes 

Annotated Statutes of the Indian Territory Embrac- 
ing All Laws of a General and Permanent Character. 
Compiled by Dorset Carter. St. Paul, Minn.: West 
Publishing Co., 1899; Law Office Indian Terr. 2 
1899 



A small but historically valuable collection 
housed among the Law Library's rare book mate- 
rials comprises legal materials published by the 
"Five Civilized Tribes" in Oklahoma, part of In- 
dian Territory at the time of publication. Some of 
these constitutions, codes, and acts are in the 
languages of the publishing nation: Cherokee, 
Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Creek, for instance. 
Some are bilingual editions, in both Indian lan- 
guages and English. 

Twentieth-Century 
Tribal Constitutions 
and Corporate Charters 

A sizeable part of the Law Library's Rare Book 
Collection consists of twentieth-century tribal 
constitutions and tribal corporate charters for a 
little more than two hundred of the three hun- 
dred and thirty recognized tribal groups cur- 
rently residing in the Lower Forty-eight. A num- 
ber of Alaskan Indian villages and communities 
are also represented. These may be accessed by 




1 2 6 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



the call number "Law Office Indian Tribes" plus 
the name of the group. 



LAW LIBRARY 
GENERAL COLLECTIONS 

Treaties 

The current relationship between the United 
States government and many Indian tribes may 
stem in part from the terms of one or more 
treaties negotiated prior to March 3, 1871. In 
some cases, earlier treaties between the same na- 
tion and Great Britain should be consulted as 
well. As a rule, these treaties delineate rights and 
territories ceded by the Indian nation to the 
United States. Other rights and territories are re- 
tained. In addition, the treaty language may in- 
clude guarantees of hunting, fishing, or gather- 
ing rights; may define annual annuities to be 
paid by the United States to the tribe or tribes; 
may provide for peaceful relations between the 
parties; and may commit the United States to the 
provision of some educational benefits, among 
other terms. To understand the current impact of 
a given treaty, a researcher would benefit from 
an examination of the details of the treaty lan- 
guage, its historical context, and the way in 
which the tribe or tribes would have understood 
its terms, and any subsequent history, along with 
any relevant statutes and case law. To pursue 
this field of inquiry, a number of the resources 
available in the Law Library may be of help, 
including: 

A Compilation of all the Treaties Between the United 
States and the Indian Tribes Now in Force as Laws. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1873; E95.U6 1873 
The needed citations are provided. 



United States Statutes at Large. 1789 to present; 
KF50.U5 

This multi-volume set contains the text of 
ratified treaties signed by the United States with 
Indian tribes during the treaty-making period, 
which ended in 1871. Volume 7 contains a com- 
pilation of all Indian-U.S. treaties signed be- 
tween 1778 and 1842. The texts for treaties 
signed between 1846 and 1871 are found in the 
appropriate volume of the U.S. Statutes at Large. 
A full set of Statutes at Large is located in the 
reading room. 

Indian Treaties , 1778-1883. Compiled by C. J. 
Kappler. New York, N.Y.: InterLand Pub., 1972; 
KF8203 1972b 

A one-volume compendium of treaties with 
Indian tribes. 

Indian Affairs , Laws and Treaties. Compiled by C. J. 
Kappler. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1903; KF8203 
1972 

This multi-volume set contains general laws 
relating to Indian affairs, along with pertinent 
acts of the United States Congress, Executive 
Orders, proclamations, treaties, and agreements. 



In addition, the Law Library's microfiche collec- 
tion includes the American State Papers, Docu- 
ments, Legislative and Executive of the Congress of 
the United States, 1st through 19th Congresses, 
1789-1827 (Gales and Seaton, 1832). Class II of 
this collection includes a wide array of docu- 
ments relating to Indian affairs, including docu- 
ments accompanying Indian treaties. A related 
resource is The New American State Papers: Indian 
Affairs, drawn from the original American State 
Papers, published from 1832 to 1861 (E93.U938), 
included in the General Collections (see the dis- 
cussion of thes£*materials in the General Collec- 
tions portion of this guide, p. 11). 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 2 7 



Some commentaries to the treaties and addi- 
tional copies of the texts are generally classified 
in E (General Collections) and many original im- 
prints are located in the Library of Congress Rare 
Book and Special Collections Division. 

Since understanding the most subtle points 
made in treaties remains crucial, a steady stream 
of commentary continues to be published in law 
reviews. These law reviews are accessed through 
the Index to Legal Periodicals (K9.N32) and the 
Current Law Index (K33.C87), both located in the 
Law Library Reading Room. Materials from 1980 
to the present may also be accessed through 
"LegalTrac," a CD-ROM database. 

Many texts of Indian treaties were published 
as monographs as part of their promulgation. 
These are not found in the Law Library collec- 
tions but in the Rare Book and Special Collec- 
tions Division and may be located through 
SCORPIO. 

Colonial and Early 
American Materials 

When researching the history of tribes in the 
eastern part of the United States, contemporane- 
ous documents can provide valuable insights. 
Materials providing such illumination may be 
found in the following multi-volume source, and 
among the state materials discussed in a separate 
section of this chapter. 

Early American Indian Documents: Treaties and 
Laws , 1607-1789. General Editor, A. T. Vaughan. 
Frederick and Bethesda, Md.: University Publi- 
cations of America, 1979-; KF8202 1979 

The Law Library has thus far received eight 
volumes of this on-going, ambitious compilation 
of colonial documents relating to North Ameri- 
can Indians. These volumes cover Pennsylvania 
and Delaware treaties, 1629-1737 (Vol. I); Penn- 
sylvania treaties, 1737-1756 (Vol. II); Virginia 



0 




treaties, 1607-1722 (Vol. IV); Virginia treaties, 
1723-1755 (Vol. V); Maryland treaties, 1632- 
1775 (Vol. VI); New York and New Jersey 
treaties, 1609-1682 (Vol. VII); Georgia Treaties, 
1733-1789 (Vol. XI), and the Revolution and 
Confederation (Vol. XVIII). Included in this ef- 
fort are reliable texts of important Indian-related 
documents ranging from treaties to minutes of 
meetings to correspondence about events of 
importance. 

Federal Documents 

The Law Library houses a large number of gov- 
ernment publications concerning Indian nations 
dating from the foundation of the republic to the 
present. Although the colonies dealt individu- 
ally with tribes within their boundaries, and the 
states also engaged in some direct contact and 
treaty-making with Indian tribes, a Proclamation 
under the Articles of Confederation, constitu- 
tional language,’ and a series of Trade and inter- 
course or Non-Intercourse acts beginning in 1790 
emphasized the plenary authority of the federal 
government over Indian affairs. While much of 
the early documentation was concerned with 
treaties, it quickly expanded to cover a wide 
range of topics such as health, education, law, 
and culture. Codified and uncodified federal 
statutes are part of the Law Library's collection, 
as is a complete set of the decisions of the federal 
trial and appellate courts. A review of some of 
the other significant federal resources in the Law 
Library's collection may also be of assistance. 

Legislative Branch Materials 

HOUSE AND SENATE COMMITTEE REPORTS 
Several sources can be used to explore the House 
and Senate Committee Reports on bills which 
have been reported out of committee. Among 
these sources are: 




TRIBAL AND URBAN INDIAN GOVERNANCE TODAY 

^OWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAO^OAOWOAOVOAOWOAOVOAOYOAOVOAOWOAC 
^OAOTOAOVOAOVOAOfOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOf OAOTOAOVOAOT< 

GATEWAYS 



American Indians and Alaska Natives today may 
be members of tribes that are recognized by the 
federal government, by their state government 
but not the federal government, or by neither 
government. At the end of 1994 there were about 
565 federally recognized Indian entities, includ- 
ing 225 Alaska Native villages and 1 3 recognized 
sub-groups of larger entities. Most federally rec- 
ognized tribes outside Alaska are located on fed- 
eral reservations (Alaska Native villages are not 
considered reservations by the federal govern- 
ment, although there is one federal reservation in 
Alaska and one recognized council). Most feder- 
ally recognized tribes, with or without reserva- 
tions, and most Alaska Native villages have a 
tribal (or village) government. Many of the gov- 
ernments are based on written tribal constitutions 
adopted under the Indian Reorganization Act 
(IRA) and related acts, but many others are based 
either on non-IRA written constitutions or on tra- 
ditional tribal governments without a written con- 
stitution. The federal government deals with all 
these types of tribal government. Most tribal gov- 
ernments have a legislative body, an executive 
branch, and a tribal judicial system. The relation- 
ships of the executive and judicial arms to the 
legislative branch vary from tribe to tribe. 

Most members of federally recognized tribes 
do not live on a federal reservation or in an 
Alaska Native village. Many members live near 
their reservation. A large proportion, however, 
live away from their reservation, often in a city. 
These are often lumped together under the term 
"urban Indians." "Urban Indians" is a flexible 
term and may include enrolled tribal members, 
persons eligible for membership who have not 



enrolled as members, members of non-federally- 
recognized tribes, and persons who consider 
themselves Indians but are not members of any 
one tribe. Cities with large urban Indian popula- 
tions include Chicago, Los Angeles, San Fran- 
cisco, Minneapolis-St. Paul, Phoenix, New York, 
and other major U.S. cities. Urban Indians do not 
constitute tribes and do not have tribal govern- 
ments in the cities where they live, but they have 
created urban Indian centers that provide cultural 
support, a social and political focus, and coun- 
selling services for employment, substance abuse 
problems, housing, and many other needs. 

To be eligible for most (but not all) federal 
programs specifically established for Indians, an 
Indian must be a member of a federally recog- 
nized tribe. Most BIA programs are additionally 
restricted to tribal members living on or near the 
reservation. (A few BIA programs — mostly educa- 
tional — are available to tribal members living off 
the reservation.) Indian Health Service programs 
are chiefly for members of federally recognized 
tribes but are available in some urban areas (at 
urban Indian health clinics) as well as on or near 
reservations. Other federal programs for recog- 
nized tribes may or may not be restricted to reser- 
vation areas, depending on the service offered. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERE TO LOOK: Library collections with ma- 
terials relevant to tribal governments, federal 
recognition, federal programs, urban Indians, 
and similar topics include the General Collec- 
tions, the Microform Reading Room, the Law 
Library, the Manuscript Division, and the Geog- 
raphy and Map Division. 






OTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOVOAOTOAOTOAOI 

OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOYOAOTOAOTOZ 




Navajo Tribal Council committee listening to industry presentations, in the Council House in Window Rock, Arizona, 
the Navajo Nation's capital, in 1966. U.S. News & World Report Collection (LC-U9-1 5608, Frame 9/9A). Prints and Pho- 
tographs Division. 



o 

ERIC 



A 



151 



1 2 9 



r wre — ^ .-.ik 




1 3 0 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



United States Congressional Serial Set . Washing- 
ton, D.C.: G.P.O., Serial Set. 

A valuable resource in accessing these materi- 
als is Steven L. Johnson's Guide to American Indian 
documents in the Congressional Serial Set , i8iy- 
1899 (KF8201.A1J63). The Law Library has a 
complete set of these volumes, which contain 
many documents relevant to Indian affairs. 
Among these are House and Senate Reports on 
bills reported out after committee consideration. 
These also include House and Senate docu- 
ments. The U.S. Congressional Serial Set may con- 
tain petitions from Indian groups, reports of ex- 
plorations, letters, and reports to Congress on 
Indian matters, and many other materials. Vol- 
umes 1 to 7915 of the Serial Set are accessible only 
through microfiche, unless the fiche is unread- 
able. These materials may be accessed through 
the U.S. Serial Set Index , 1/89-1969 (Z1223.Z9C65 
1975) located at the reference desk in the Law Li- 
brary Reading Room. A CD-ROM version of the 
general Serial Set index, entitled Congressional 
Masterfile 1/89-1969, and its supplement for 
1970 to the present, Congressional Masterfile II, 
may be accessed on computer terminals in the 
Thomas Jefferson Building's Computer Catalog 
Center. 

U.S. Senate Executive Documents & Reports, 181/- 
1969. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Informa- 
tion Service, 1987 

This reference source is available at the refer- 
ence desk of the Law Library Reading Room. It 
covers documents and reports not published in 
the U.S. Serial Set. 

U.S. Code Congressional and Administrative News . 
St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 1941 
KP48.W45 

The texts of measures enacted into law are 
published in the U.S. Code Congressional and Ad- 
ministrative Nexus, along with some of the perti- 



nent committee reports on the legislation. This 
resource began in 1941. 

CONGRESSIONAL HEARINGS 
For congressional hearings held before 1970, the 
title of the hearing and committee information 
can be found in the U.S. Congressional Committee 
Hearings Index (1833-1969) (KF40.C56), located 
in the Law Library Reading Room. A second in- 
dex, the Congressional Information Service Index 
and Abstract (KF49.C62) is used for hearings held 
after 1969. This publication, also located in the 
Law Library Reading Room, indexes and ab- 
stracts congressional hearings, documents, re- 
ports, and committee prints, but does not cover 
The Congressional Record. In addition, the CIS 
(Congressional Information Service) Masterfile 
in the Thomas Jefferson Building indexes con- 
gressional hearings. Most of the hearings them- 
selves, however, are in the General Collections 
prior to 1970. From 1970 to the present, all 
hearings are included in the Law Library stack 
collection. 

As a possible alternative source of current 
congressional hearings, researchers may wish to 
look at the federal depository library collection 
in Room LM 133 of the Madison Building. Some 
unpublished congressional hearings may be 
identified through two indexes, Unpublished U.S. 
Senate Committee Hearings, 1823-1964 (KF40.C55 
1986) and Unpublished U.S. House of Representa- 
tives Committee Hearings, 1833-1936 (KF40.C54 
1988). The Law Library Reading Room has both 
of these indexes. Original transcripts of unpub- 
lished congressional hearings may be found at 
the National Archives. 

The Serials Division holds unpublished U.S. 
Senate executive documents and reports. The 
originals are kept in a secured area, but copies 
are available on microfiche. The Congressional 
Information Service (CIS) has compiled an index 
to many of the U.S. Senate executive documents 
and reports. 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 3 1 



CONGRESSIONAL DEBATES 

The floor debates on matters before the United 
States House of Representatives or the United 
States Senate are contained in a series of publica- 
tions, all of which are available in the Law Li- 
brary collections. These include: 

Annals of Congress , 1789-1824 
Register of Debates, 1824-37 
Congressional Globe, 1833-73 
The Congressional Record, 1873 -present 

These materials from 1789 to 1901 are available 
only in microform, unless the microform version 
is unreadable. The indexes for these titles from 
1789 to the present are kept in the Law Library 
Reading Room. Another useful index kept in the 
Law Library Reading Room is A. W. Greely's 
three-volume Documents of First Fourteen Con- 
gresses, 1789-1817 (Z1223.A 1973). Full text of 
The Congressional Record from 1951 to the present 
is available in hard copy in the Law Library 
Reading Room, and editions from earlier years 
are kept in the closed stacks. These materials are 
also available on microfilm in the Law Library 
Reading Room. The Law Library also has the 
House Journal and Senate Journal for each Con- 
gress, which can shed further light upon the ac- 
tivities of each house of Congress during a given 
session or Congress, and can provide a more 
comprehensive access approach to The Annals of 
Congress. 

BILLS INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OR SENATE 
The Law Library collection also contains a set of 
all of the versions of the bills introduced in the 
House or the Senate under classification KF16. 
The early bills are on microfilm, related American 
State Papers on microfiche, and more recent bills 
are available in hard copy. The bills from 1789 to 
1921 (for the 1st to the 66th Congresses) are only 
available in microform. This collection of bills 
permits a researcher to observe the evolution of 

o 




bill language during the legislative process. If a 
researcher wishes to view hard copy of early leg- 
islative and executive materials, he or she may 
examine The New American State Papers: Indian 
Affairs, drawn from the original American State 
Papers published from 1832-61 (E93.U938), in- 
cluded in the General Collections. (See the dis- 
cussion of these materials in the General Collec- 
tions portion of this guide, p. 11.) 

Executive Branch Materials 

In addition to the extensive legislative and judi- 
cial resources in the Law Library, a wide range of 
Executive Branch materials are also available. 
Among them are: 

Presidential Executive Orders and Proclamations, 
1789-1987, . Washington, D.C.: Congressional In- 
formation Services, 1987; KF70.A55 1987 

This source, available at the Law Library 
Reading Room reference desk, contains a nearly 
complete set of executive orders that can provide 
useful insights into presidential involvement in 
Indian Affairs. Those proclamations and execu- 
tive orders issued after 1936 are also found in 
Title 3 of the Code of Federal Regulations (KF70.A3 
1949) in the Law Library Reading Room. Procla- 
mations and executive orders also appear in: 

Federal Register; KF70.A2 

Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, 1965 
to present; J80.A284 

U.S. Code Congressional and Administrative News; 
KF48.W45 

The texts of executive orders and proclama- 
tions are only available from this resource from 
1944 to the present. 

Proclamations are also found in the Statutes at 
Large. A complete set is available in the Law Li- 
brary Reading Room. 




1 3 2 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



o 

ERIC 



The published Public Papers of the Presidents 
(J80.A283) are housed in the Serials Division and 
the Main Reading Room rather than in the Law 
Library. 

FEDERAL REGULATIONS 

Federal regulations promulgated by Executive 
Branch departments and agencies are published 
in the Federal Register (KF70.A2) and codified in 
the Code of Federal Regulations (KF70.A3 1979). 
Many of the regulations pertinent to Indian af- 
fairs are contained in Title 25 of the Code of Fed- 
eral Regulations. 

Opinions of the Solicitor of the Department of the In- 
terior Relating to Indian Affairs , 1917-1974. Wash- 
ington, D.C.: U.S. Dept, of the Interior, 1979; 
KF8204 1917. 

These opinions deal with important matters 
concerning such topics as the management of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, the interpretation of 
laws of importance to Indians, land resource is- 
sues, and tribal government powers. 

The Law Library Reading Room also has the 
CIS checklist of U.S. Executive Branch Documents, 
1789-1909. This index may prove helpful in ac- 
cessing materials which may be of use in Indian 
legal research. 

Judicial Branch Materials 

A complete collection of federal trial and appel- 
late court decisions is also part of the Law Li- 
brary resources. Further, the Law Library main- 
tains a large collection of appellate and Supreme 
Court records and briefs. 

State Documents 

While federal law plays a preeminent role in In- 
dian legal studies, there are a number of circum- 
stances in which a knowledge of state law is cru- 

,A to4 



cial to a comprehensive understanding of legal 
issues affecting a tribe. For example, there are a 
few states which have some degree of civil or 
criminal jurisdiction over Indian tribes within 
their borders because of a federal delegation of 
such jurisdiction under P.L. 83-280, Act of Au- 
gust 15, 1953, as amended; 18 U.S.C. § 1162; 25 
U.S.C. §§ 1321-1326; 28 U.S.C. §§ 1360 and 1360 
note (often referred to simply as Public Law 280 
or P.L. 280). In some parts of the country, state 
hunting and fishing cases involving Indians may 
be part of the backdrop to federal litigation in 
this field of law. Under the McCarran Amend- 
ment, 43 U.S.C. § 666, Indian reserved water 
rights may be adjudicated as part of general state 
water adjudications. Sometimes interstate com- 
pacts are pertinent to a particular area of inquiry. 
As these examples suggest, state laws and state 
court decisions may be a necessary part of re- 
search in a particular Indian law dispute. Codi- 
fied versions of state laws (under classifications 
KFA-KFW) and state case law (under classifica- 
tions KFA-KFW for individual state reporters, 
or under classification KF for those decisions 
printed in a regional reporter series such as At- 
lantic Reporter or Southern Reporter) are available 
in the Law Library Reading Room. 

Other state documents are located in the Gen- 
eral Collections under classification J. Materials 
in this classification must be requested in either 
of the general reading rooms in the John Adams 
Building or the Thomas Jefferson Building. Clas- 
sification J contains the published proceedings of 
state executive and legislative bodies. State leg- 
islative materials are arranged alphabetically by 
state in the J87 (politics) classification of the Gen- 
eral Collections. As a rule, these materials in- 
clude the journals of the state's house and senate, 
and house and senate bills. Some states also print 
governors' reports, legislative journals, and vari- 
ous and sundry annual reports, some of which 
/ 

pertain to Indians. This is most apt to be the case 
with states with large Indian populations such as 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma. However, 
the situation is complicated by emerging splinter 
groups and urban Indian communities. Some of 
these groups have state recognition and some are 
actively seeking federal recognition. As a result, 
legislative materials may be found in the printed 
volumes of nearly every state. 

A thorough check of indexes and other find- 
ing aids must be made when approaching the 
legislative papers of any particular state. A re- 
searcher should note that the indexes are not 
consistent as to how Indian materials may be cat- 
egorized. For example, it may be assumed that 
the heading "Indian" or the name of the particu- 
lar tribe should be checked. However, a recent 
Virginia legislative journal indexed Indian mate- 
rials under "Virginia History." Normally, it 
might be safe to assume that such an index 
would include the names of the several tribes — 
Chickahominy, Pamunkey, and Mattaponi — 
which have called Virginia home for many 
centuries; but this index does not mention these 
ancient communities. Once again, the place to 
begin research on these "State Indians" is in the 
legislative materials published by the state in 
question. These are found under the J87 (poli- 
tics) classification in the General Collections. 

The General Collections also contains a large 
body of legal materials classified under JK. These 
materials, including special reports and manu- 
als, are not in alphabetical order but are shelved 
according to region. Such materials should be ac- 
cessed through automated finding aids such as 
MUMS and SCORPIO. A firm grasp of each 
state's history is needed to determine if any of 
these miscellaneous volumes might produce in- 
formation relevant to the Indian group being 
researched. 

A few notable examples of early period titles 
appear below: 

General Index to the Documents of the State of New 
York. Albany, N.Y.: James B. Lyon, 1891; J87.N75d 

O 



A checklist of documents from 1777 to 1888 
arranged under subject headings that include 
specific tribes. 

Report of the Governor of Oklahoma to the Secretary 
of the Interior. 17 vols. in 3. Washington, D.C.: 
GPO, 1891-1907; J87.O51 

Reports during Oklahoma's status as a 
territory. 

The Journal of the Commons House of Assembly . 
Edited by J. H. Easterby. Columbia, S.C.: His- 
torical Commission of South Carolina, 1951; 
KFS1818.2 1736 (now in Law Library) 

South Carolina's colonial legislative records 
dating from 1736. The Law Library currently has 
volumes through 1732. 

Messages of the Governors of Tennessee. Compiled 
by Robert H. White. 8 vols. Nashville: Tennessee 
Historical Commission, C1932-1972; J87.T216 
Covers 1796-1907. Index. 

Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia. 
Edited by H. R. Mcllwaine. 6 vols. Richmond: 
Virginia State Library, 1923-1966; J87.V388 

Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia. 
Edited by H. R. Mcllwaine. Richmond: Virginia 
State Library, 1619-1776; J87.V6 

An Index to Governors' Messages (Wisconsin). 
Madison, Wise.: Wisconsin Historical Records 
Survey, 1941; J87.W66 

The messages themselves have the call num- 
ber J87.W62. 

Tribal Documents 

As the various Indian nations become increas- 
ingly involved in the management of their own 
affairs, their tribal governments are naturally be- 
ginning to generate official legal documents. 




1 3 4 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



ERIC 



However, it is often difficult to locate such mate- 
rials. Some are classified with the general Amer- 
ican Indian collections under E and others may 
be found in any number of places, such as with 
the political collections under J. If these materials 
are obviously legal in nature, they become part 
of the Law Library collections. 

While the Law Library's collection of tribal le- 
gal materials is not exhaustive, it does contain a 
number of useful resources. For example, the 
Navajo Nation was once governed by a constitu- 
tion and a corporate charter. Today, as a result of 
the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
Act, Public Law 93-638 (88 Stat. 2203), the Navajo 
have endeavored to provide their nation with the 
full range of twentieth-century legal materials. 
The Law Library collections contain the Navajo 
Tribal Code (KF8228.N3A5), which covers such 
topics as tribal administration, domestic rela- 
tions, education, elections, land, law and order, 
parks, wildlife, and Navajo /U.S. relations. The 
Navajo Court Rules (KF8228.N3A5) includes rules 
of court, civil, and criminal procedure, probate 
and appellate procedure, and the rules of evi- 
dence. The Navajo Reporter (KF8228.N3A5) dis- 
cusses landmark decisions made within the 
Navajo Nation court system. Another example of 
the Law Library's collection of tribal laws is the 
Cherokee Nation Code Annotated, 2 vols. (St. Paul, 
Minn.: West Publishing Co. 1993; KF8228.C5A5 
1993). 

In addition to the hard copy materials relating 
to tribal laws, the Law Library's microfiche col- 
lection includes Indian Tribal Codes: A Microfiche 
Collection of Indian Tribal Law Codes , edited by 
Ralph W. Johnson (Marian Gould Gallagher 
Law Library, University of Washington School 
of Law, Research Studies Series, 1981). While 
neither comprehensive nor up-to-date in all re- 
spects, this source is one of the largest compila- 
tions of such codes available. Introductory mate- 
rials for this collection are available in hard copy 
in the Law Library. 




Smaller tribal groups may not have generated 
such extensive published materials. But the 
number of Indian tribes now in the publishing 
business, including the publication of legal mate- 
rials, is growing. Researchers should work on 
the assumption that such sources exist rather 
than on the assumption that none are to be 
found. 

International Materials 

Under some circumstances, historical and con- 
temporary international materials may also as- 
sist researchers engaged in Indian legal studies. 
For example, early Spanish laws and royal ordi- 
nances and early Mexican laws may shed light 
upon early American treatment of the Pueblo 
tribes or the California tribes. See, e.g., among the 
pertinent Spanish laws relating to the Pueblo In- 
dians, the Act of March 21, 1551; the Act of De- 
cember 1, 1573; the Act of October 10, 1618; the 
royal cedula of July 12, 1695; the decree of Febru- 
ary 23, 1781; the decree of January 5, 1811; and 
Decree 31 of February 9, 1811. For relevant early 
Mexican legal materials regarding the Pueblo In- 
dians, see the Plan of Iguala of February 24, 1821; 
the Treaty of Cordova of August 24, 1821; the 
Declaration of Independence of October 6, 1821; 
and the Act of August 18, 1824. Early Russian 
materials may be illuminating in setting some of 
the issues relating to Alaskan natives in their his- 
torical context. Further, modern international 
treaties may impact upon such Indian law issues 
as the exercise of traditional hunting and fishing 
rights. 

The Law Library has an extensive collection 
of international treaties and bilateral agree- 
ments. Contemporary and historical legal mate- 
rials are also available from many foreign 
nations, either in English or in the original lan- 
guage. The Law Library rare book collections 
include some materials which may also be of in- 
terest, such as the Russian Imperial Collection. 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 3 5 



In addition, the Law Library resources include 
numerous law reviews from foreign nations. The 
Law Library's professional staff includes an im- 
pressive array of specialists in the laws of many 
foreign nations. Finally, some early historical 



materials pertinent to Indian law issues may also 
be reprinted in secondary sources, such as gen- 
eral texts relating to Indian law, or may be refer- 
enced in the records, briefs, or decisions arising 
out of related litigation in United States courts. 



0 



157 



iSKKTCII 




"Buffalo Dance, Pueblo of Zuni, NM," lithograph by Ackerman after R. H. Kern in Report of an Expedition down the Zuni 
and Colorado rivers by Capt. L. Sitgreaves, Corps Topographical Engineers. Senate Exec. Doc. No. 59, 32nd Congress, 2nd 
Session, Washington, D.C., 1853. KF12.U5; "Cocopas" in Report upon the Colorado River of the West, Senate Exec. doc. 
No._, 36th Congress, 1 st Session, Washington, D.C., 1 861 . KF1 2.U5; and "Sketch of part of the March and Wagon Road of 
Lt. Col. Cooke from Santa Fe to the Pacific Ocean, 1 846-7. . in House Exec. Doc. No. 41 , 30th Congress, 1 st Session, " 
Washington, D.C., 1 848 {Serial Set 51 7). The last of these three has been removed from the serial set volume and is now be- 
ing kept in the Geography and Map Division. Lt. Col. Cooke's report appears in this volume at pp. 549-63. Law Library. 



Three reports of government-funded expeditions which encountered Indian cultures provide examples of the kind of mater- 
ial one might unexpectedly find in a congressional document from the Law Library collection. These reports and other sur- 
vey expeditions contain vibrant illustrations and accounts of the Indian tribes encountered; plants, animals and fossils 
found; ruins discovered; and maps of the; routes taken and surrounding areas. 






"Chemehuevis" in Report upon the Colorado River of the West . . . , Exec, doc No._, 36th Congress, 1 st session, Washing* 
ton, D C., 1 861 . KF1 2.U5 (LC-USZC4-481 7). Law Library. 



Another illustration from Report upon the Colorado River shows Chemehuevi Indians at a point in their history when con- 
tact with non-Indians was minimal . Such reports provide a vital historical link to early contacts with Indian tribes . The illus- 
trations, maps, and written records of these expeditions provide a contemporaneous view of the lands, flora and fauna, 
weather conditions, and topography. They also reflect some of the perspectives and experiences of those early travelers and 
of the Indian peoples they encountered. 









and in every fueh cafe the Veftry ol rhe fefpeftive Parifh where fueh Gift • . " 
or Grant hath been made, and the Quantity nor afcertained, as atorefaid, 
may demand and take of fueh Lands, tor the ufe of the Church, and thereto ' 
adjacent. Two Acres, and no more, which they (lull caufe to be Surveyed 
and ftaked out, and make Returns of twer Certificates thereof, one of which 



muft be Recorded in the County. Court, and the other, in the High Court of 
Chancery, there to he Regiftred in PerPetuam rei Memcriam, as aforefaid. 

And . be it further Enabled by the Authority aforefaid , by and with the Ad- 
vice and Confent aforefaid , That where the Veftry of any Parifh within this Prb- uStfa Ew 
vjnee have or (hall think cohvcnient to place either Church or Chappcl Churchcfrc; by 
of Eifc within their refpefti ye Parifhes, for the better conveniency of 
their Parifhioners, hut the owner or owners of fueh Land chofen out Damnwi - 
and- appointed hy fiich Vertry, as aforefaid, for the life of their Parifh 
aforefaid, either refufe to make Sale thereof, or are. Unreafonable in his 
or their demands for the fame, dr otHerwife incapacitated by Non-age, non 
fond Memorea , or beyond the Sea , that then ana in every fueh Cafe the 
refpefti ve Vcftrys of the refpefti ve Parifhes (hail apply theirifelves to 
the Commiflioners of the County Court whereto they belong, upon 
whofc application the, faid Commiflioners (hall forth- with grant 
their Warrants to the Sheriff of their County, thereby requiring him, it 
a certain Day and Time, to be hy them nominated and appointed, to 
impannel a jury of fubftantial Free holders next adjacent t<f the, Land in 
queft aforefaid, which faid Commiflioners and jury aforefaid (hall pro- 
ceed in all things as hy an other Aft of Aflembly (emituled, An AH 
impo wiring the Commijfonerr of the fcveral and refpeflive Counties tt> take up 
and purebafe Land for their County Court Noujet) they are direfted, not 
exceeding two Acres, as before in this Aft mentioned and expreft, anjp 
thing in this Aft or any other hrdained to die contrary nOtwithfUnding. 



An Aft declaring thdt the Grantees of Land lying \flthirt the 
Indians Land may have Action of Trefpals againft fueh 
Perfons as cut Timber off their Land on .pretence of 
having bought the fame of the Indians . 



"An Act declaring that the Grantees of Land lying within 
the Indians Land ..." in The Laws of the Province of 
Maryland Collected into one Volumn (Philadelphia, 1718). 
KFM1 225.2 1 692b (LC-USZ62-1 1 6678). Law Library. 



This act gave land grantees within "Indians Land " a right to 
seek damages for trespass from persons cutting, purchasing 
or receiving timber from the grantees' land on the pretense 
that the timber was bought from the Indians or under any 
other unlawful pretense. It provides an insight into con- 
cerns related to the legality of eighteenth-century land ac- 
quisitions from Indian tribes. Such concerns eventually led 
the British Crown to assume responsibility for all Indian 
I land transactions. This right passed to the United States. 



B E it hereby Enacted and Declared by the £>Ucehr 'trtojl Etcelleht Majeflj, 
by and with the Advice and Confent of her Majefljs Govern our. Council 
and Aflembly of this Province , and the Authority of tlx fame , That the 
falling, mauling and carrying away of Timber, or purchafing or recei- 
J ving any Timber hy any Perfonor Perfons upon pretence of having bought 

i the fame of the lhdia»s t or upon arty unlawful prelehce whatfbever ort 

or from off any Lands within the Bounds of the Indians Ladd, whereof any 
other perfon or perfons have in hifn, her or them the Fee, be judged, 
deemed and accounted a tVcflpafs j ,aftd Whofoever (hall purchafe or re- 
ceive, fall, maul or carry away TirAber, as aforefaid, (hall be deemed and 
' adjudged Trefpaflers, and (hall be lyahle to Aftion or Aftions of TreP ( 
I pafs, and the Perfons grieved (hall and may recover their Damiges ac- ( 
cordingly, 'as if the Grantee or Patentee aforefaid did aftually occupy 
and enjoy fueh Land, and had improved it, any LlW, Aft of AffembJy at 
j ' Ufagc to the contrary notwithftandiri^. 

i a 











160 



. - OF the I NH4 MIT A % N l 5 .01 tne . - 

i -j u R is D;i C 1 1 o n; of;. 

S •VNe^^PlirxipTum, ;v v :.]I ; 

5 ColleUed * out of the .RE COR DS t : of t be ' ;K 

I ; • • 'General, c ourt, ' ' .! # 

d v \AnA latety Rcvifcd: • jj& 

j And with fomc Emendations aad Additions Eftabliftied ■ and Difpofai > into fucH 
^ Order as they may readily Conduce to General Ufe and Benefit. 1 : {^> 

i And by the Order and Authority of the. GENERA L COURT of NevTlir^atb Held £<* 
^ at Plimoatb, Jim's a/ Anno Dom. i68j. Reprinted and Publiftied-; ■ - j|S£ 

4 4 \ \ ^ NatbJiniel Clerk SecrtlM^ 





'•Q& \ 

t ... » ) 

;%v^ ,r % ■ U ■ 

'/■ lt07, ,§►* 



«&• 



>Bt fuljeB to tvtrj Or Unmet Man fur tbt Lerit faii , 1 Tet.i.i%* ' l| 5 £ 

M — — • '■ .. ^ — — ' ' — ' ■ ' W ) 



■B 0 ST 0 N In N NCf LAND:' 
o . ^ 

. Printed by Semutl Green.* 1685. . ' 

'r * * • 



L 



■ >L< 



' %: 



Title page and "Indians" in The Book of the General Laws 
of the Inhabitants of the Jurisdiction of New-Plimouth 
{Boston, 1685). Law Office Mass.1685 (LC-OSZ62-1 1 6708, 
above, LC-USZ62-1 16709, right). Law Library. 

Volumes such as this one found in the Law Rare Book Cob 
lection provide insights into some of the fears the early set- 
tlers experienced and their legal approaches to Indian- 
white contacts. Section 4 reflects an effort to give equal 
protection to property owned by the Indians. 






V 



BEST COPY AVAiLABin 





LAWS OF TUB STATE OF CALIFORNIA. 




out ft new execution agftjnsl the good* and atnte of tho pruooer, is like manner u if he h*d nerer 
been corn mi ued. 

§ 11. Tlie plaintiff in the action may nt any timo order the prisoner to be dneharged, and ho ih.nl! 
not thereafter bo liable to imprisonment for the aame cause of action. 

§ 1!. Whenever a person is committed to jail on tin execution issued on n judgment recovered in s 
civil setion, the creditor, his agent or attorney, ehftU ndvnnes to the jailor, within twenty-four hour* after 
such commitment, sufficient money to ]My for tho support of said prisoner during the lime for which he 
tufty be imprisoned, and in case the money should not bo so advanced, or if, during the lime the 
prisoner rosy be in confinement, the money should be expended in the support of such prisoner, sod 
the creditor should neglect for twenty.fonr hours to advnnce such further eum as might be necessary for 
his Support, the jailor shall forthwith discharge such prisoner from custody ; and such discharge shall 
have the same effect as a discharge by order of the creditor. 



Chop. 133. 

AN ACT for the Government and Protection of Indian t. 






Paasod April 32, 1850. 

T/u People of the State cf California, represented in Senate and Alterably, do enact at folletet : 

§ 1. Justices of the Peace shall have jurisdiction in nil cases of complaints by, for, or against Indiana, 
in their respective Townships in this State. 

§ 2. Persons end proprietors of lands on which Indians are residing, shall permit such Indians 
peaceably to reside on sueh lauds, unmolested in the pursuit or their usual avocations for the 
maintenance of themselves and families: Pro tided, the white person or proprietor in possession of such 
lands may apply td a Justice of the Pence in the Township where the Indians reside, to set off to such 
Indians a certain amount of land, and, on such application, the Justice shall set off' a sufficient amount 
of land for the necessary wants of such Indians, including the site uf their village or result non, if tli«y 
so prefer it; and in no ease shall such selection be made to the prejudice of such Indians, nor shall 
they be forced to abandon their homes or villages where they have resided for a number of years ; 
and either party feeling themselves aggrieved, can appeal to lh« County Court from the decision of the 
Justice : and then divided, a record shall lie made of llio lands so set off in the Court so dividing them, 
and tho Indians shall be permitted to remain thereon until otherwise provided for. 

§ 3. Any person hiving or hereafter obtaining a minor Indian, male or fornale, from the parents or 
relations of such Indian minor, and wishing to keep it, ench person shall go before a Justice of the 
Peace in his Township, with the parents or friends of tho child, and if the Justice of tho Pvano becomes 
satisfied that no compulsory means havo been used to obtain the child from its parents or friends, shall 
enter on record, in a book kept for tliat purpose, the sex and probable ago of the child, and shall give 
to such person n certificate, authorising him Or her to havo tho care, custody, control, and earnings of 
such minor, until he or she obtain the ago of uinjority. Every mala Indian aball be deemed to have 
attained bis majority at eighteen, and the female »t fifteen years. 

§ 4. Any person having a minor Indian in hi* cure, m described in the foregoing Section of this Act, 
who shall nejfcct to dolhc and suitably food such minor Indian, or shall inhnnsanly treat him or hrr, on 
conviction thereof shall bo subject to a fine not less tlmn ten dollars, at the discretion of n Couyt or Jury ; 
and the Justice of the Peace, in his discretion, may place the minor Indian in the care of sonw other 
person, giving him the same rights and liabilities tliat the former roaster of said minor was enti Jed and 
subject to. 

8 J. Any person wishing to hire an Indian, shall go before a Justice of the Pence with the Indian, 
and make such contract a* the Justice may approve, and the Justice shall file sueh contract in writing 



"An Act for the Government and Protection of Indians," 
passed April 22, 1850, in The Statutes of California passed 
at the First Session of the Legislature (San Jose, 1 850). 
KFC25.A21 3 1st 1849 (LC-USZ62-1 1 6681 ). Law Library. 



The act reveals a continuing effort to regulate Indian affairs 
and provide some protection to Indians . Section 2 contains 
provisions to guarantee Indians continued occupation of 
their traditional homes . Sections 3 and 4 establish proce- 
dures to be followed by those seeking custody of Indian 
children, and providing penalties for improper treatment of 
these children. Since 1978, the Indian Child Welfare Act 
has established a preference.for adoptive and foster care 
placement of Indian children with their extended families 
or tribes. Unless otherwise provided by federal law, the In- 
dian tribes have exclusive jurisdiction over child custody 
proceedings involving Indian children from their respective 
reservations. 



16 ACTS OF THE CHOCTAW NATION. 

BILE. NO. 16. 

RESOLUTION. 

AUTHORIZING THK PEINOIPAL CHIEF TO TAKE LEGAL STEPS 
TO RECOVER THE VALUE OF TIMBER UNLAWFULLY CUT 
FROM PUBLIC DOMAIN OF THE CHOCTAW NATION. 
Whereas: Many million feet of pine timber has 

been out from the domain of the Chootaw Nation by non- 
oitizens, over the protest of the tribal government; and, 
Whereas: Ths United States Government, through 
its intercourse laws and treaties solemnly guaranteed, 
proteotion to our property interests; and, 

Whereas:. The United States' Government,, having 
failed to enforce the laws and treaties, has rendered it- 
self liable to the Chootaw Nation. 

THEREFORE 

BE IT RESOLVED BY THE OENERAL COUNCIL OF THE CHOC- 
TAW NATION ASSEMBLED. 

Seo. 1. That the Prinoipal Chief of the Choctaw 
Nation is hereby authorized to take the neoessury steps 
to asoertain the amount of timber unlawfully out from 
the publio domain of the Choctaw Nation, and is hereby 
further authorized to take such legal aotion as he may 
deem necessary to recover the value of said timber from 
the United States Government. 

Seo. 2. That this resolution shall take effect and 
be in foroe from and after its passage and approval.. 
Proposed by Daniel. Webster, Chairman Commit- 
tee on Chief’s Message. 



Approved this the 26th day of Ootober, 1906. 




"Bill No. 1 6, Resolution. Authorizing the principal chief to 
take legal steps to recover the value of timber unlawfully 
cut from public domain of the Choctaw Nation" in Acts 
and Resolutions of General Council of the Choctaw 
Nation , 1905; LLAB Case Indian Nations Choctaw Acts 
and Resolutions 1905 (LC-USZ62-1 1 6679). Law Library. 



This bill is included in a two-part collection of the original 
Acts and Resolutions of the Choctaw General Council 
passed at its Extraordinary and Regular Session in 1 905. 
These acts and resolutions also included measures autho- 
rizing disbursement of funds, directing actions on im- 
peachment resolutions, and vesting authority in the Princi- 
pal Chief to take particular action or to respond to a given 
concern. Still others dealt with land transactions or the ap- 
pointment of a committee to attend a separate statehood 
meeting. Some, like Bill No. 16, reflect action by President 
Theodore Roosevelt approving or disapproving action 
taken by the General Council of the Choctaw Nation. 





i BEST COPY AVMSBOET 




.JOURNAL 

or TM« 

SIXTH AX X UAL SESSION 

nr thb 

General Council 

OF TUB 

|(iulian fjurriforg, 

ouxroaso or 

DKt.ftlATES hl'V.V KI-EtTEO fKUU THE 1N0UM TRIKES f.EQAl.l.T RESIDENT 
THEUKIN. 

auebhuco ti council. 

AT OKMULGEE, INDIAN TERRITORY. 

Ebon tub 3d to tub Ifim (is«.c*t»it) or Mat. 1874. 

Und*f tha ProvEtlonr «f Ihl Twitfth Artlcl* *f Us* Treitj raid* «*d awcluded it th* City 
*f Wtihlngton In thi jttf 1866. b«tw**n th* Unit»d SUtu and th* ( txroktt Kitkw, 
usd ilmllir TrutiM b*h«**« th* Ualtid 8tlt»* ind th* thoctis, ud 
Chlckiuw, MuteegM *nd Siminol* THb*» *f IllJIttt, 

•1 urn dit*. 



LAWRENCE, KANSAS: 

UKPtJRl.IGAN JOCKXAL STEAM PaiSTTEU ESTABLISH: 
1876. 



:L, 



Title page, Journal of the Sixth Annual Session of the Gen- 
eral Council of.the Indian Territory . Lawrence, Kansas, 
1875; LLAB Case Indian Territory, 1875 (LC-USZ62- 
1 1 6680). Law Library. 

This pamphlet is an example of the kind of surprise a legal 
resource can contain. This journal is the record of the 6th 
Annual General Council of the Indian Territory : The Coun- 
cil was composed of elected delegates from the Cherokee 
Nation and the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Muskogee and Semi- 
nole tribes of Indians assembled under the provisions of a 
series of 1866 treaties. Speeches by delegates are filled 
with progress reports and comments on acculturation 
progress. The appendices consist of status reports for each 
tribe, a report by the Education Committee, the text of the 
Constitution of the Indian Territory, and the Declaration 
of Rights. 



& 



sjaoti, AROTOtsz 



J© 0 (x(TS)J 









GWyD£f SO^vSUT 

• ; ’Lvv v - 




. Bhh, AJBf DhZWO-ldiy, JLt 

118 r 
1875. 



- 



53 



Title page, Constitution and Laws of the Cherokee Nation 
(in Cherokee), originally published by the authority of the 
National Council of the Cherokee Nation in 1 839. (St. Louis, 
Mo., 1 875). Law Office (LC-USZ62-61 1 41 ). Law Library. 

One of the treasures of the Law Library Rare Book Col- 
lection , this volume is one of the most important in the 
field of Cherokee law and history. A Cherokee publica- 
tion authorized by the National Council, it shows the ad- 
vanced state of legal structure and organization among the 
nineteenth-century Southeastern tribes. 



ffiggT COPY AVAILABLE 




163 





Title page, Handbook of Blackfeet Tribal Law by Dan 
Cilham, Sr. (Browning, Mont.: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 
1979). KF8228.S54 copy 2 1979 (LC-USZ62-1 16682, left, 
and LC-USZ62-1 16683, detail). Law Library. 



Today, many tribes are publishing legal materials. This 
handbook provided information to tribal members about 
their legal rights and obligations as reflected in Tribal Court 
decisions. Not yet officially recognized by the Blackfeet 
Tribal Business Council at the time of its publication, it was 
written by an enrolled member of the Blackfeet Tribe who 
was serving as a judge for the tribe. 





16 4 



1 



S3WV0. 



. - 



THE LAW LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 



1 4 3 




jo 7r f b£ • doeLri hsjte. 

JUDICIAL BRANCH 



3 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE AN GOON 

ft COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION 

v'» 

' I PREAMBLE 

We, the Indians having a common bond of residence in the neighbor- 
hood of Angoon. Territory of Alaska, do ordain and establish this 
constitution and by-laws in accordance with and by authority of, the 
Acts of Congress of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), and May 1, 1936 
(49 StaL 1250). 

Article I — Name 

The name of this organization shall be the Angoon Community 
Association, hereinafter called the Community: 

Article II — Membership 

Section 1. The membership of this Community shall be os follows: 

(a) All persons whose names appear on the roll of those entitled to 
vote on the adoption of this constitution and by-laws. Within one’ 
year from the approval of this constitution, the council elected under 
this constitution may make corrections in this roll. 

(&) All children both of whose parents are enrolled members of the 
Community. 

(<j) All children one of whose parents is an enrolled member of the 
Community and has a permanent nome in Angoon. 

(d) All other persons of Indian blood who make a permanent home 
in Angoon and are adopted by the Council. 

Sec. 2. All members and their minor children who cease to make a 
permanent home in Angoon shall cease to be members of this Com- 
munity until they resume their residence. 

Sec. 3. The Council may make rules and regulations governing the 
enrollment and adoption of members and the conditions under which 
a member may abandon his membership, or having abandoned it, be 
readmitted to membership. 

Sec. 4. Definition of Residence . — Any person shall be considered a 
resident of the neighborhood of Angoon who maintains a home within 
the town of Angoon or in any area in the vicinity of Angoon which 
may be reserved or otherwise acquired for the use of the Indians of the 
Community. 

Article III — Govebnino Boot 

Section 1. The governing bodv of this Community shall he a Coun- 
cil composed of seven members elected by the adult membership of the 
Community. 

> Seo. 2. The membership of the Community shall meet on the first 
Tuesday in November and the first Monday in March of- each year. 
At the regular membership meeting in November the adult members 

238420—40 (1) 



OF THE 

NAVAJO NATION 




Rulat-of Court 
Rules Of Civil Procedure 
Rules of Criminal Procedure 
Rules Of Probate Procedure 
Rules Of The Court Of Appeals 
Rules Of Evidence 



Constitution and By-Laws of the Angoon Community Asso- 
ciation l Alaska 1 (ratified November 15, 1939). (Washing- 
ton D.C., 1940). Law Office. Indian Tribes- Angoon Com- 
munity Assoc. (LC-USZ62-1 16684). Law Library. 

The Law Library Collection contains a large number of 
tribal corporate charters, tribal constitutions, and by-laws 
drawn up under the Indian Reorganization Act of 1 934. 
They address issues such as tribal or community member- 
ship; governing structure; elections; powers and duties of 
officers or governing body; qualifications, installation, 
and removal of officers; rights of tribal or community mem- 
bers; and procedures for ratification of the constitution and 
by-laws . 



Front cover, Judicial Branch of the Navajo Nation; 
KF8228.N3 A5 1977 (LC-USZ62-1 16685). Law Library. 



The Navajo Nation has one of the most developed of all 
Native American governments. Among the rules included 
in this volume are the Rules of Court, Rules of Civil Proce- 
dure, Rules of Criminal Procedure, Rules of Probate Proce- 
dure, Rules of the Court of Appeals, and Rules of Evidence. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

i<o5 




INTRODUCTION 



PRINTS AND 

PHOTOGRAPHS 

DIVISION 



Since their first encounter with European cul- 
ture, North American Indians have been the sub- 
ject of countless prints, drawings, and pho- 
tographs. The Library of Congress Prints and 
Photographs Division preserves and makes 
available thousands of pictorial records of In- 
dian people, in the form of drawings, woodcuts, 
engravings, etchings, lithographs, posters, and 
photographs, made chiefly by European and 
Euro-American artists and photographers since 
the seventeenth century. Most of these have doc- 
umentary importance; some are also important 
to the artistic development of graphic art and 
photography. 

Many of these pictorial records came to 
the Library through copyright. Other pictorial 
works have been obtained through gift, pur- 
chase, transfer from other federal agencies, and 
exchange, contributing to a total of nearly fifteen 
thousand pictorial documents pertaining to Na- 
tive Americans, more than three-quarters of 
which are photographs. 

While pictorial material relating to American 
Indians was produced as early as the fifteenth 
century, the Prints and Photographs Division's 
holdings in this area are strongest for the period 
i860 to 1940. Currently the division has little ma- 
terial from the period after the late 1970s. 

The division's holdings document several ma- 
jor aspects of Indian history and life, and the 
conventions of their depiction: 



■ Indian Delegations and Government 
Relations 

■ Federal Government Surveys and Other 
Expeditions 

■ Indian Wars and Confrontations 

■ The Frontier, Villages, and Reservation Life 

■ Education 





PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 4 5 



■ Expositions, World's Fairs, and Wild West 
Shows 

■ Pictorialist Photographs 

■ Allegories, Satires, Stereotypes, and Polemi- 
cal Representations 

These categories provide the organizing prin- 
ciple for the Selected Collections section of the 
Prints and Photographs Division chapter. 

Among the earliest true portraits of Native 
Americans are those made of tribal leaders or 
delegates who, beginning in the seventeenth cen- 
tury, travelled to European capitals for diplo- 
matic purposes. These visits were often memori- 
alized in such works as Wenceslaus Hollar's 1645 
etching of an Algonquian from Virginia, which 
is considered to be the earliest printed portrait of 
a Native American taken from life. This practice 
continued in the United States as Indian emis- 
saries visited Washington to negotiate treaties or 
disputes. Once photography was introduced in 
the 1840s, a trip to the photographic studio be- 
came customary on these missions. 

Some of the most important portrayals of In- 
dians and Indian life were produced by artists 
and photographers accompanying exploration 
teams into the western parts of the United States, 
Canada, and Alaska. During the nineteenth cen- 
tury prints and photographs were produced as 
records of several such excursions. 

Wars and confrontations between Indians and 
the U.S. military were rendered for posterity in 
prints, drawings, and in illustrations for books 
and magazines. Many, if not most, of these are 
highly interpretive or even wholly fanciful por- 
trayals; few are based on firsthand observation. 
The many lithographs of William Henry Harri- 
son and Richard M. Johnson's fabled exploits 
during the Indian Wars of the 1810s, produced 
by American publishers of popular prints, are 
notable examples of this genre. 







In the age of photography the recording of In- 
dian life was limited initially by the bulky size 
and fragility of the early photographic equip- 
ment and by the long exposure times required by 
the glass negative process. Consequently, from 
the Civil War period to the end of the century, 
photographs afford the historian largely static 
views of military figures, installations, prisoners 
of war, and the sites and tragic aftermaths of 
battles, rather than glimpses of these violent en- 
counters themselves. With time the medium's 
capabilities were enlarged. 

During the nineteenth century, as Indian 
tribes were relocated to reservations, artists, 
photographers, journalists, and others journeyed 
to frontier towns and reservations to record 
Native American lifestyles that were increas- 
ingly being altered by assimilation. The thou- 
sands of resulting images document the domes- 
tic life, homes, ceremonies, games, and work of 
tribal people and their families. Photographs 
such as those by Frances Benjamin Johnston 
of the Indian School at Carlisle, Pennsylvania, 
show life in the boarding schools where young 
Native Americans recruited from reservations 
learned to read, write, and practice white cul- 
tural traditions. 

Later, newspaper, magazine, and wire-service 
photographers captured the realities of reserva- 
tion life and the economic challenges resulting 
from the federal government's self-determina- 
tion policies and the Indian rights movement. 
Posters, used to advance the often acrimonious 
struggle to redress past Indian grievances 
against federal and state governments, also sur- 
vive as records of these activities and of the vary- 
ing issues and viewpoints which drove them. 

Both anthropologists and showmen had an 
interest in recording threatened tribal cultures. 
During the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries, anthropological organizations spon- 
sored a number of world's fair exhibits featuring 




1 4 6 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



o 

ERIC 



representatives from many different tribes. Pho- 
tographers documented these "living exhibits" 
and also produced hundreds of studio portraits 
of the Indians. 

The spectacle of wild west show perfor- 
mances featuring "real Indians" also attracted 
photographers and artists who produced often 
dramatic records of such performances as well as 
dynamic and colorful advertising posters pro- 
moting them. 

Aside from being the objects of historical 
record and scientific study. Native Americans 
have since the end of the nineteenth century fre- 
quently aroused in artists and photographers the 
vision of a simple, exotic existence, appealing in 
its stark contrast to the rapid urbanization and 
industrialization of American society after the 
Civil War. During the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth century, several photographers of the 
Pictorialist school (a movement in American 
photography well represented in the division's 
holdings) created soft-focus and often highly ro- 
manticized images of Indians and of tribal life. 
Works in this vein held by the division range 
from the photographs of Edward S. Curtis, who 
employed props, costumes, and various stag- 
ing devices to construct his idealized portrayals, 
to the masterful portrait studies of Gertrude 
Kasebier. 

The Indian figure has also been widely used 
as the allegorical symbol of America in political 
cartoons and on bank note engravings and cer- 
tificates. Generalized or fictionalized Indians 
often appeared on labels for tobacco and herbal 
medicines, on music covers, and in the popular 
prints of Currier and Ives and others. 

The next section of this chapter describes 
access, arrangement, and guides to the Prints 
and Photographs Division's incomparable hold- 
ings. The final section highlights notable collec- 
tions in each of the major areas of Native Ameri- 
can representation. 




USING THE COLLECTIONS 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS 
READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Madison Building, 3rd floor, LM 337; 
telephone (202) 707-6394 

HOURS: Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 
5:00 P.M. 

To make full use of the collections, a personal visit is 
recommended. Limited service by mail and tele- 
phone is also available. Advanced research guidance 
relating to the Library's pictorial collections is pro- 
vided. In addition to presenting the mandatory Library 
of Congress photo ID card, researchers are required 
to register on arrival in the reading room. Photo- 
graphic copies of works in the division's collections 
may be obtained from the Library's Photoduplication 
Service (telephone (202) 707-5640). 

LOTS 

The pictorial materials described in the Prints 
and Photographs Division section of this guide 
may be viewed in the division's reading room. A 
major portion of this material has been orga- 
nized as "LOTS." Often referred to as a collec- 
tion, a LOT is a cohesive body of material, main- 
tained and cataloged as a group to preserve 
unity of subject, provenance, or format. A LOT 
can consist of a few items, an album containing 
photographs or prints, or a large number of 
loose items. More than five hundred LOTS per- 
taining to American Indians are described in In- 
dians of North America: A Guide to LOTS , available 
in the Prints and Photographs Reading Room. 
Many of the LOT descriptions are also available 
on-line in the Library's bibliographic database 
and throughout the world on Internet. LOTS are 
stored in areas adjacent to the reading room and 
can be retrieved by the reference staff using call 
slips filled out by the researcher. 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 4 7 



Browsing Files 

Another significant portion of the Native Ameri- 
can related material is stored in self-serve 
"browsing files" in the reading room. These files, 
which provide easy and immediate access to 
researchers, contain original photographs and 
prints as well as reference copies of originals 
housed in other parts of the division. Four im- 
portant browsing files related to American Indi- 
ans include the following: A Biographical File 
contains photographs, lithographs, engravings, 
photomechanical reproductions of paintings, 
and other kinds of portraits filed alphabetically 
by surname, Indian name, or translated name 
such as Rain-in- the-Face. Although not com- 
plete, a corresponding card file, the "Indian Bio- 
graphical Index," lists more than 3,000 names 
and provides a brief description, name of pho- 
tographer, creator, or publisher, and the original 
source of the image within the Library. In the 
Specific Subjects File, photographs of Indians are 
organized by the heading "Indians of North 
America" with subdivisions by subjects such as 
"Government relations," "Education," and "Do- 
mestic life." Similarly, the Stereograph Subjects 
File, which holds approximately five hundred 
stereos, is organized under the main subject 
heading "Indians of North America," further 
subdivided by geographic region, and then by 
tribe. Stereographs consist of two almost identi- 
cal photographic images mounted on a card. 
When viewed through a binocular-type device 
called a stereoscope, the images produce a three- 
dimensional effect. 

Graphic material related to Native Americans 
can be found in a separate Specific Subjects Graph- 
ics File, a major source for reproductions of 
drawings and paintings, and photocopies of 
many of the original historical prints, drawings, 
posters, and book and magazine illustrations in 
the Library's collections. The images are filed by 

o 




broad topics such as "Discovery and explo- 
ration," "Colonial life and settlement," "Indians 
and Indian life," and the "Seminole Indian War." 
In addition, there are a few images of Indians un- 
der headings such as "American Revolution," 
"War of 1812," "Advertising," "Symbolism," and 
"Political cartoons." The file also includes sec- 
tions, organized alphabetically by state name, 
that often include views of settlements and forts, 
the earliest of which frequently show Indian 
dwellings and people. (Many of the images in 
the Graphics File are, of course, recreated scenes 
rather than depictions based on actual obser- 
vation.) 

Native Americans and related subjects are 
also treated in original popular graphic art, 
posters, panoramic photographs, cartoon draw- 
ings, newspaper and magazine photographic 
collections, fine prints, master photographs, 
and architectural drawings and photographs. 
Organized in "filing series," this material can 
be identified and accessed by consulting speci- 
fic card catalogs, an on-line public access cata- 
log, reference aids, and other electronic imaging 
devices, all available in the division's reading 
room. Notable collections representing many of 
these diverse formats are discussed in the final 
section. 

Major Reference Works 

Useful publications that specifically address 
American Indian-related collections in the Prints 
and Photographs Division include the following: 

American Political Prints , 2766-1876: A Catalog of 
the Collections in the Library of Congress . Bernard 
F. Reilly, Jr. Boston, Mass.: G.K. Hall, 1991; 
E183.3.R45 1991 

Native American-related political prints com- 
prise a small but significant percentage of the 
hundreds discussed in Reilly's illustrated catalog. 

' 1 169 



MODERN INDIAN ACTIVISM AND SELF-DETERMINATION 

kOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOA< 

rOAOVOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOVOAOWOAOYOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOW< 



GATEWAYS 




Since the 1 960s, the struggle for Native American 
self-determination has dominated Indian affairs. 
The threat of termination from the previous 
decade, combined with the sweeping civil rights 
movement, fostered inter-tribal unification and re- 
sulted in a resurgence of pan-Indian organiza- 
tions demanding tribal control over their gover- 
nance. The first major instance of pan-Indian 
militancy — focusing on cultural revitalization and 
self-determination — was the occupation of Alca- 
traz Island in San Francisco Bay in November 
1 969 by a group of armed Indians calling them- 
selves Indians of All Tribes. Renaming the island 
"Indian land/' the activists sought to establish an 
Indian cultural center, a college, a museum, and 
a center for ecology. After nineteen months, fed- 
eral marshalls halted what they considered an in- 
vasion of federal land. 

Indian activism accelerated during the Johnson 
and Nixon administrations when the American In- 
dian Movement (AIM) was founded in Minneapo- 
lis by a group of urban Indians that included Den- 
nis Banks and Russell Means. Court action was 
also an important source of political mobilization. 
Rapidly expanding to national status after their ac- 
tive participation in the Alcatraz protest, AIM next 
mobilized the November 1 972 "Trail of Broken 
Treaties" caravan of more than two thousand 
people representing one hundred reservations. Be- 
gun as an effort to draw attention to Indian issues 
just prior to the presidential elections, the peaceful 
march ended in a six-day takeover of the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs offices in Washington, D.C. 

Perhaps the protest of greatest symbolic im- 
pact, stunning both militant and moderate Indian 
factions, was the confrontation between AIM ac- 
tivists and a heavily armed force of federal agents 
at the site of the famous 1 890 Sioux Wounded 
Knee massacre on the Pine Ridge Reservation in 
South Dakota. Two Indians were killed and a U.S. 
marshall was paralyzed. The final unified national 
action undertaken by AIM was the 1 978 "Longest 
Walk," a six-month cross-country trek froi^S,ap^ 



Francisco to Washington, D.C., intended to in- 
crease Indian cultural awareness and stimulate 
political activism. 

Three factors persuaded Congress to adopt a 
policy of Indian self-sufficiency: the Indian rights 
movement and the well-established National 
Congress of American Indians; national task force 
investigations documenting abject impoverish- 
ment on most reservations, and underscoring the 
inadequacy of past federal assistance; and White 
House endorsement of self-determination from 
presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon, includ- 
ing the latter's 1970 "self-determination without 
termination" message to Congress. The key- 
stone legislation to emerge was the Indian Self- 
Determination and Education Assistance Act of 
1975, which recognized that "prolonged federal 
domination of Indian service programs has served 
to retard rather than enhance the progress of In- 
dian people." Supported by statutory authority 
and increases in federal expenditures, tribes be- 
gan administering their own programs and con- 
tracting directly with the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
and Indian Health Services. The trend toward self- 
determination was further supported by important 
Supreme Court decisions during the 1 980s, such 
as Mississippi Choctaw v. Holyfield, and congres- 
sional actions. These reaffirmed tribal sovereignty 
and broadened Indian rights to control land, nat- 
ural resources, economic development, law and 
order, education, and health within reservation 
boundaries. Today Indian tribes continue to seek 
greater self-determination and reversal of injus- 
tices. Primary concerns which have been ad- 
dressed by legislative action include child wel- 
fare, religious freedom, fishing rights, and 
repatriation of ancestral remains and objects. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: The General Collections 
(including Microform), Law Library, Prints and 
Photographs Division, and Motion Picture, 
Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Division. 




We Remember Wounded Knee , 1890- 1973. Poster based on a woodcut by Bruce Carter (New York: Akwesasne Notes, 
1973). POS 6-U.S.361 . Yanker Poster Collection (LC-USZC4-4819, color; LC-USZ62-1 11941, black and white). Prints and 
Photographs Division. 

During the 1960s and '70s, Indian activists often referred to the massacre at Wounded Knee as a reminder to policy makers 
that injustices toward American Indians still existed. 




AOWOAO 

TOiOTO 



1 4 9 






1 5 0 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 




The caricatures, allegories, campaign banners, 
and other visual political commentary from the 
Prints and Photographs Division of the Library 
of Congress, reflect public debate on government 
policy toward Indians during the early years of 
the nation. 

The First Americans: Photographs from the Library of 
Congress. William H. Goetzmann. Washington, 
D.C.: Starwood Publishers, 1991; E89.L53 1991 

Historian William H. Goetzmann offers social 
commentary on about one hundred fifty images 
of Native Americans from the Prints and Pho- 
tographs Division, most of which were taken by 
tum-of-the-century commercial photographers. 
Investigating the photographers themselves, 
Goetzmann questions how their perceptions of 
American Indians, as well as what was mar- 
ketable, influenced the visual records they made. 

Indians of North America: A Guide to LOTS. Jen- 
nifer Brathovde with Arden Alexander and 
Sarah Rouse. Washington, D.C.: Library of Con- 
gress, 1995; Available from Prints and Pho- 
tographs Division. 

A comprehensive, annotated list and sub- 
ject/creator index of American Indian related 
collections (LOTS) in the Prints and Photographs 
Division of the Library of Congress. Entries, 
which number more than five hundred, gener- 
ally include a descriptive summary noting tribe, 
geographic location, activity, photographer, crea- 
tor, or copyright claimant, dates, and number 
of items. 

The North American Indian. Edward S. Curtis. 
20 vols. and 20 portfolios in 4 vols. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1907-30; New 
York: Johnson Reprint Corp., 1970; E77.C98 

Curtis spent nearly thirty years compiling 
twenty volumes and twenty portfolios of pho- 
tographs and text describing Indians of the 



Plains, the Central Plateau, the Northwest Coast, 
the Southwest, California, and Alaska. More than 
eighty tribes are pictured in nearly every facet of 
native life including portraits, dwellings, cere- 
monies, domestic activities, hunting, fishing, and 
battle. The 1970 reprint of this work is available 
in the division's reading room. 

Prints of the West: Prints from the Library of Con- 
gress. Ron Tyler. Golden, Colo.: Fulcrum Publish- 
ing, 1994; NE962.W48 T96 1994 

Tracing the illustrated history of the West 
among the holdings in the Library of Congress, 
Tyler also examines the portrayal of Native 
Americans from the earliest depictions by expe- 
ditionary artists to Frederic Remington's popular 
cowboy and Indian compositions. Tyler's lav- 
ishly illustrated work surveys the historical for- 
mats and genres in which Indians were pre- 
sented, and analyzes art works as embodiments 
of values and beliefs, reflecting as well as shap- 
ing, widely-held attitudes toward the American 
Indian. 

□ SELECTED COLLECTIONS 

The Prints and Photographs Division collections 
selected for description are grouped within the 
subject categories described in the introduction 
to this chapter, as follows: 

Indian Delegations and 
Government Relations 

During the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies, English monarchs anxious to win the alle- 
giance of powerful tribal leaders invited many 
of them to visit London to establish or ce- 
ment diplomatic relations. During these friendly 
political missions, chiefs and other prominent 
Native Americans would often have their por- 
traits painted. Such was the case with the four 



172 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 5 1 



sachems presented at Queen Anne's court in 
April 1710, whose portraits were painted by 
John Verelst, and engraved and published as 
prints (Fine Prints, John Simon). 

Indian delegates visiting Washington, D.C., 
during the first half of the nineteenth century 
continued this tradition, sitting for such artists 
as Charles Balthazar Julien Fevret de St. Memin, 
and Charles Bird King. As in earlier centuries, 
such likenesses were disseminated through in- 
expensive prints. Eventually, photography sup- 
planted painting and drawing as the preferred 
means of documenting delegation trips to the 
capital. The Library's collection is rich in both the 
earlier, European-produced portrayals (included 
in the Fine Prints and Popular Graphic Art filing 
series) and the printed and photographic repre- 
sentations of Native American leaders of the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as noted 
below: 

McKenney & Hall Lithographs (PGA Filing Series 
and LOT 7802). 

Thomas McKenney, a long-time key adminis- 
trator of federal Indian policy and the first direc- 
tor of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, maintained 
an active interest in preserving the historical 
record of American Indians. He established the 
Indian Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C., and 
commissioned artists such as Charles Bird King 
and James Otto Lewis to paint the portraits of In- 
dian delegates in their traditional clothing. Lith- 
ographs of the portraits, with accompanying text 
by James Hall, were published in the History of 
the Indian Tribes of North America between 1836 
and 1844, and are held by the Rare Book and 
Special Collections Division. About one hundred 
twenty large prints and twenty-five smaller lith- 
ographed plates from McKenney and Hall's pub- 
lication are held by the Prints and Photographs 
Division. These prints, many of which are hand- 
colored, represent leaders from the Iroquois, 



Creek, Sioux, Shawnee, Winnebago, Sauk (Sac) 
and Fox, Chippewa, Pawnee, Seminole, and 
Cherokee tribes. 

A. Zeno Shindler (LOT 12894). 

This small, extraordinary collection of studio 
portraits was produced in 1868 by A. Zeno 
Shindler, a leading delegation photographer. 
Two images feature Chief Keokuk, Jr., wearing 
ceremonial clothing, and his fourteen-year-old 
son Charles, in a modem suit. These descendants 
of Keokuk — a noted Sac and Fox leader whose 
daguerreotype portrait was taken twenty years 
earlier — reportedly came to Washington as mem- 
bers of an unofficial delegation to complain about 
the agent assigned to oversee their tribal affairs. 
A number of the Indian delegates were arrested 
on the journey between Kansas and D.C. Other 
noteworthy photographs in the collection include 
oval albumen print portraits of two unidentified 
Montauk Indians from New York, in stiff poses, 
wearing the white man's conventional, formal at- 
tire, and of O-Tan-Dan, a prisoner-of-war from 
Minnesota. 

Alexander Gardner (LOTS 11790 and 12935). 

Many of Alexander Gardner's studio portraits 
of Sioux Indians visiting Washington, D.C., were 
commissioned by William Blackmore of the 
Blackmore Museum in Salisbury, England. Black- 
more pursued his avid interest in American In- 
dians and the West by publishing photographic 
booklets of prominent leaders and their rela- 
tives. The Library's thirty-eight albumen prints 
of the Sioux, taken in 1872, include portraits of 
Big Foot, Lone Wolf, Red Cloud (pictured shak- 
ing hands with Blackmore), and others. 

C. M. Bell Studio Collection (LOTS 12262, 12552, 
12566, 12567, and 13008). 

One of Washington's leading portrait photog- 
raphers during the latter part of the nineteenth 






1 5 2 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



century, Charles Milton Bell is well known for 
his photographs of Native Americans. Under the 
auspices of Ferdinand Hayden, a director of the 
U.S. Geological Survey, Bell produced several 
hundred portraits of Indian delegates who came 
east to negotiate treaties. Bell also photographed 
Indians for the Department of the Interior and 
the Bureau of American Ethnology. 

Of the more than six hundred Indian pho- 
tographs produced by Bell, nearly one hundred 
photographic prints and original glass plate neg- 
atives, dating from 1873 to 1892, are held by the 
division. Most of these are individual or group 
portraits of Sioux leaders, although Fox, Nez 
Perce, Pawnee, Comanche, and Navajo tribes are 
also represented. These range in format from 
cabinet cards to larger (twenty by twenty-four 
inch) mounted photographs. Many present 
tribal groups wearing modern, Euro-American 
clothing, seated or standing against a prosaic 
studio backdrop. More elaborate portraits fea- 
ture men (and a few women) in ceremonial 
dress, holding peace pipes, feathers, or war 
clubs, against a painted wilderness backdrop. 

National Photo Company Collection (LOTS 12282, 
12283, 122 86 , 12291, 12293-12299, and 12337). 

The National Photo Company operated as a 
service to newspapers, news distributors, and 
other photo agencies by supplying photographs 
of current political and social events in Washing- 
ton, D.C. The collection of loose images and 
chronological albums, covering activities from 
1909 to 1932, includes about two hundred and 
fifty Indian-related photographs documenting 
Indian delegates from more than twenty tribes 
from Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Arizona, the 
Dakotas, Oklahoma, and Montana. Some of the 
representatives are posed with presidents Hard- 
ing or Coolidge. Prominent leaders, pictured 
either in studio portraits or informally on the 
Capitol grounds, include the famous Chief 
Plenty Coups who traveled to Washington many 

• ■» 17 4 



times to lobby for Crow Indian land claims. Var- 
ious activities on Capitol Hill such as ceremonial 
dancing, mock battles, and a tribute to the un- 
known soldier, also feature Indian participation. 

New York World-Telegram & Sun Collection (find- 
ing aid in Prints and Photographs Reading 
Room). 

A small number of images from this vast 
photo morgue document newsworthy Indian 
events between 1920 to 1967, including incidents 
in the history of tribal rights activism among the 
Chippewa, Creek, Iroquois, Seminole, Yakima, 
and Blackfeet, and a 1962 meeting between Pres- 
ident John F. Kennedy and tribal delegates. 

U.S. News & World Report Magazine Collection 
(Prints and Photographs Reading Room). 

The magazine's archive of photographs, cov- 
ering the years 1952 to 1986, includes visual doc- 
umentation of relatively recent social, cultural, 
and political events concerning American Indi- 
ans. A few photographs record the 1972 pan- 
Indian occupation of the Bureau of Indian Af- 
fairs in Washington, D.C., and the 1978 "Long- 
est Walk" demonstration that included tipi 
encampments on the Washington Monument 
grounds and at Patapsco Park in Maryland. 

Federal Government Surveys 
and Other Expeditions 

Beginning in the early 1800s, the federal govern- 
ment and various private sponsors sent a num- 
ber of survey teams and other exploring expe- 
ditions to the western U.S. to map territory, 
document natural resources, and identify poten- 
tial travel routes. Artists and photographers 
were frequently among the geologists, zoolo- 
gists, botanists, biologists, entomologists, and 
other scientists who composed these parties, and 
their visual documentation of American Indians 
was often incorporated in the surveys' published 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 5 3 



reports. The earliest photographic record of In- 
dian life held by the division, in fact, originated 
with such a survey: a daguerreotype, made by 
Solomon Nunes Carvalho on the 1853 govern- 
ment expedition led by John Charles Fremont, 
pictures a Plains Indian tipi encampment and 
meat drying racks in the Kansas Territory. Im- 
portant collections in this genre include the 
following: 

Pacific Railroad Reports (LOT 3986). 

The findings of the U.S. government-spon- 
sored enterprise to determine the best railroad 
route from the Midwest to the West Coast were 
published in the massive twelve-volume Reports 
of Explorations and Surveys, to Ascertain the Most 
Practicable and Economical Route for a Railroad from 
the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean, (1855- 
61), commonly known as the Pacific Railroad Re- 
ports. More than seven hundred lithographs and 
engravings by about a dozen artists illustrate the 
work. Many loose plates from the publication, 
fifty of which feature American Indians from 
California, Colorado, Oregon, Utah, and Wash- 
ington, are held in the Prints and Photographs 
Division. The lithographs, some colored and 
others uncolored, show native people in their 
natural environments, surrounded by mountain 
ranges, valleys, rivers, or canyons, and often con- 
versing with the surveyors. Scenes from the 
tribal life of Blackfeet, Nez Perce, Salish, Assini- 
boine, Zurri, Navajo, Mohave, and Gros Ventre 
Indians, including the convening of treaty coun- 
cils, the distribution of government goods, and 
the tribes' villages and encampments near mili- 
tary forts, are also portrayed. 

Wheeler, Hayden, and Pozoell Surveys (LOTS 3193, 
3427, 3960, 4677, 11557, and 12975). 

These major geographical and geological 
surveys, conducted over large areas of the West 
between 1867 and 1879, were undertaken by 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Named after 







the expedition leaders, the Wheeler, Hayden, 
and Powell surveys were published in well- 
illustrated reports. 

Timothy H. O'Sullivan, an official photog- 
rapher for the Wheeler Survey, documented 
Apache, Mohave, Navajo, Zuni, and Paiute Indi- 
ans primarily in Arizona, New Mexico, Col- 
orado, and Nevada, between 1870 and 1879 
(LOTS 3427 and 4677). Many of the nearly sev- 
enty stereographs and photographic prints pic- 
ture Indian scouts posed with expedition crew 
members. Others show homes, portraits, and 
daily life. Two stereographs taken by William 
Henry Jackson on the Hayden Survey (LOT 
3960) depict a Nez Perce Indian tipi encampment 
in Montana around 1871 and traditional food 
preparation by a tribal woman. 

Chief photographer of the Powell Survey, 
John K. Hillers, often posed the Zuni, Hopi, Ute, 
and Paiute Indians he encountered, perhaps to 
obscure the grim realities of their impoverished 
existence. Taken between 1871 and 1879, more 
than forty of Hillers' images document tribal 
activity in Arizona, New Mexico, Utah, and 
Wyoming (LOTS 3193, 11557, and 12975). 

Harriman Expedition to Alaska, 1899 (LOT 4841). 

One of the last major surveys of the nine- 
teenth century, the Harriman Expedition was 
undertaken to explore potential routes for a 
trans- Alaskan railroad. Twenty-three of Amer- 
ica's leading authorities in various fields, led by 
C. Hart Merriam (see entry in Manuscript Divi- 
sion chapter), accompanied the expedition to 
document botanical, anthropological, geological, 
and other scientific findings. Edward S. Curtis, 
one of the party's chief photographers, recorded 
the daily life of the Native Alaskans among 
other subjects, and this early experience greatly 
influenced his eventual commitment to a thirty- 
year photographic study of North American In- 
dians. Close to one hundred photographic prints 
from the expedition show native dwellings. 




1 5 4 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



campsites, small family groups, seal hunting, 
basketry, and totem poles. 

Indian Wars and Confrontations 

To a large extent, Indian-white relations were 
marked by hostility and violence for hundreds 
of years after the first encounters, causing the 
term "Indian wars" to gain wide currency. 
Artists portrayed the bloody conflicts, some- 
times literally and sometimes imaginatively, in 
paintings, drawings, prints, and in illustrations 
for popular newspapers and magazines. Until 
the twentieth century, photographic technology 
was not sufficiently developed to effectively cap- 
ture the action of a military battle or skirmish. As 
a result, nineteenth-century photographers usu- 
ally confined themselves to documenting the 
sites of battles (rather than the action itself), 
leaders and other participants, peace negotia- 
tions, and such stationary subjects as forts, 
equipment, ordinance, and terrain. The division's 
holdings reflect the full range of this sort of 
graphic and photographic documentation, with 
notable areas of concentration as follows: 

Gray and James Publishers (PGA Filing Series). 

Nine hand-colored lithographs issued by the 
printing firm of Gray and James illustrate the 
Second Seminole War in Florida (1835-42). 
Scenes include U.S. soldiers in camp at Tampa 
Bay; Seminole Indians attacking a block house; 
a military detachment fording Lake Ocklawah 
in central Florida; troops burning a Seminole 
village; and other significant sites. Most of the 
Seminoles were driven from Florida after 
the war. 

Louis H. Heller (LOT 11480). 

One of two photographers to document the 
military camps, battlefields, and participants in 
the 1872-73 Modoc War in California, Louis H. 
Heller alone produced images of the Modoc pris- 



oners of war. These rare portraits show the In- 
dian militants, some of whom are chained to- 
gether, shortly before their execution. Others, 
sentenced to life imprisonment, are also pic- 
tured. The Modoc Indians, originally residing in 
California, had been relocated to a reservation in 
Oregon in 1864. After several peaceful attempts 
to return to their homeland, fighting finally 
broke out in 1872 and resulted in the deaths of 
many white officers, soldiers, civilians, and Indi- 
ans. Key insurgents, whose portraits appear in 
this collection, included Captain Jack, Schonchin 
Jim, and Curley Headed Doctor. 

C. S. (Camillus S.) Fly (LOT 7449). 

Although he operated a thriving photography 
studio in Tombstone, Arizona, for more than 
twenty years, C. S. Fly is best known for the 
documentary images he produced during the 
March 25, 1886, peace conference between Gen- 
eral George C. Crook and Apache leader Geron- 
imo. Fly boldly invited himself to join Crook's 
expedition to the Canyon de los Embudos in the 
Sierre Madre Mountains, where Crook planned 
to confer with the Apaches about ending their 
frequent raids on settlers and restricting their 
tribal domicile to the San Carlos Reservation. 
The resultant documentation, which shows both 
leaders, Geronimo's camp, Apache and U.S. 
troops, and the council meetings, includes the 
only known photographs taken inside a hostile 
Indian camp. 

George £. Trager (LOT 11347). 

Although no photographs of the actual mas- 
sacre at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, exist, 
George E. Trager was the first photographer on 
the scene to record the grim aftermath. Soon af- 
ter, he formed the Northwestern Photographic 
Company to speed the commercial circulation 
of those haunting images. Five of Trager's 1891 
photographic prints, showing the frozen corpses 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 5 5 



of Sioux Indians and their burial, are in the divi- 
sion's collection. 

Indian Prisoners of War (LOTS 5635 and 7106). 

Four photographs (ca. 1895) document vil- 
lages of relocated Apache prisoners of war near 
Fort Sill, Oklahoma, including one showing 
Geronimo with his wife and children holding 
watermelons grown in their garden (LOT 3635). 
Stereographs were produced of Sitting Bull and 
other Sioux Indian prisoners of war about 1881, 
at a campsite near Fort Randall, South Dakota, 
where they were held for two years. Published 
by Bailey, Dix & Mead as a series, these works 
show daily life and dwellings in the camp during 
the winter and summer months; Sitting Bull and 
others; issuance of annuity supplies and rations; 
and the daily roll call of prisoners. The collection 
also includes a portrait of a photographer report- 
edly taken by Sitting Bull (LOT 7106). 



Charles Schreyvogel (LOT 4655). 

Among the most popular western artists and 
illustrators, Charles Schreyvogel is best remem- 
bered for his late nineteenth and early twentieth- 
century oil paintings of military scenes. After a 
brief tour of the West during which he made 
studies of Ute Indians, army life, and cow- 
boys, Schreyvogel returned to his New Jersey 
studio with the gear he had collected, to create 
the painstakingly detailed works for which 
he is known. Prints and Photographs Division 
has forty-four black-and-white photographs of 
Schreyvogel's paintings which are action-filled, 
often graphically violent portrayals of battles be- 
tween American Indians and U.S. troops. 

The Frontier ; Villages ;, 
and Reservation Life 

Away from the confines of the studio, a number 
of frontier photographers endured substantial 



0 




hardships and surmounted great obstacles to 
capture the daily life of Indian people. A few set- 
tled among tribal communities, on or near reser- 
vations, and began long-standing careers. Visit- 
ing photographers, eager to satisfy the curious 
(or prurient) interests of the mass market, 
wanted pictures of these "exotic" people for 
commercial use. Others, inspired by more altru- 
istic motives, sought to expose injustices or 
merely to record the peoples that fascinated 
them. While hundreds of graphic and photo- 
graphic images of American Indian life and cul- 
ture are scattered throughout the division, de- 
scriptions of several notable collections follow. 

Charles Gentile (LOT 13024). 

Among the earliest pictorial records of 
Mohave, Yuma, Maricopa, Yavapai, Pima, and 
Apache Indian people are forty-one albumen 
photographs taken between 1870 and 1872 by 
Charles Gentile. Contained in an apparently 
unique album titled, "Series of Photographic 
Views and Portraits of Arizona and Arizona In- 
dian Tribes," the images show various reserva- 
tions, military camps, and "the first Indian 
school in Arizona," with students posed in front 
of the building. Some captioned studio portraits 
suggest Gentile's preoccupation with an exotic 
presentation of native people. 

Ben Wittick (LOTS 12910 and 12949). 

George Ben Wittick produced photographs 
for early railroad enterprises and independently 
for his own commercial purposes. An ardent 
recorder of Southwestern Indian life, Wittick is 
noted for his images of the Hopi Snake Dances, 
taken shortly before the tribe outlawed the pho- 
tographing of sacred ceremonies. Some of these 
reveal a profaned, commercialized spectacle in 
which the dancers are surrounded, and even 
crowded, by fashionably dressed tourists, pho- 
tographers, and other curious onlookers. In 

o V & 



277 



RESERVATIONS, AGENTS, AND ALLOTMENTS 

iOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOiO 

rOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTO 

GATEWAYS 



Under current federal law, Indian reservations are 
lands reserved by Indian tribes for themselves, of- 
ten out of larger areas ceded to the federal gov- 
ernment, wherein tribes exercise self-government 
within limits set by federal law. 

The concept of defined land areas for Indian 
groups dates from early in the colonial period. 

The concept usually acknowledged inherent 
native land claims but chiefly sought to confine 
Indian activities within recognized boundaries 
while attempting to prevent colonial encroach- 
ment. After independence, the United States in- 
cluded in its Indian treaties the concept of tribes 
reserving lands for themselves, but the govern- 
ment also used the idea of general boundary lines 
beyond which non-Indians could not settle. In- 
dian removal beyond the Mississippi in the 1830s 
and 1 840s can be seen as an intensification of the 
boundary-line concept. By the mid-nineteenth 
century, however, non-Indian pressure for land 
west of the Mississippi led the federal government 
to establish defined reservations for individual 
tribes or bands or for groups of tribes. 

On these reservations, political authority was 
gradually taken from tribal leaders by U.S. gov- 
ernment officials — Indian agents — who pressed 
the assimilation policy and made major decisions 
involving reservation life. Indian agents were po- 
litical appointees (until 1 908). They and other 
reservation employees were regularly accused of 
corruption or incompetence throughout the nine- 
teenth century, and were frequently the objects 
of congressional investigation. Like most non- 



Indians, many agents came to their jobs with little 
knowledge of Indian culture. 

As problems on Indian reservations became 
publicized, and as land pressure continued un- 
abated, Indian sympathizers ("friends of the Indi- 
ans") and non-sympathizers, who generally fa- 
vored assimilation, concluded that reservations 
themselves were a hindrance to that assimilation 
as well as to non-Indian expansion. Collective 
tribal ownership should be ended, they felt, and 
reservation land allotted to Indian families and 
the surplus opened to homesteading. This policy 
found expression in the General Allotment Act 
(Dawes Severalty Act) of 1 887. 

Allotment and the sale of surplus land, while it 
did not occur on all reservations, deprived Indi- 
ans of some 60 percent of their lands between 
1 887 and 1 934, when allotment was ended. Like 
reservations, allotment exerted further pressure 
on Indian autonomy and culture. Since 1934, leg- 
islation and tribal litigation have restored some of 
the lands lost in treaty cessions and under the al- 
lotment policy. At present about 1 1 5 million acres 
lie within Indian reservations and Alaska Native 
lands, nearly 57 million acres of which are held 
in trust by the federal government for the benefit 
of Indian people. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: The General Collections, the 
Law Library, and the Rare Book and Special Col- 
lections, Manuscript, Geography and Map, and 
Prints and Photographs Divisions. 







1 78 



OTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAO^ 
OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOA OWOl 




"An Indian agency — distributing rations," wood engraving from Harper's Weekly , November 13, 1875. AP2.H32. LOT 
4391 -B (LC-USZ62-38020). General Collections (Microform) and Prints and Photographs Division. 



The engraving represents the distribution of rations at the Red Cloud Agency in Nebraska (now part of the Pine Ridge Sioux 
Reservation). Home of the O glala chief Red Cloud, this agency was one of several under investigation during that year for 
suspected fraud on the part of contractors and suppliers. 




* '■ v 

c \ A 




1 5 7 





1 5 8 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



o 

ERIC 



addition, the division's holdings include about 
fifty photographic prints and stereographs pro- 
duced between 1879 and 1899, which show 
Apache, Mohave, Pueblo, Hopi, and Havasupai 
people, pueblos, and ceremonies in Arizona and 
New Mexico. 

John C. H. Grabill (LOT 3076). 

Thought to be the largest surviving collection 
of this early Western photographer's work, the 
division's holdings of John C. H. Grabill's pho- 
tographs document frontier life in Colorado, 
South Dakota, and Wyoming. Grabill had stu- 
dios in Deadwood and Lead City, South Dakota, 
not far from the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. 
About fifty large sepia-toned prints (ca. 1891) in 
the division's collection concern Sioux Indian life 
on and near the reservation. Although a few pic- 
turesque views of Indian villages are included, 
most of the images are straightforward and un- 
sentimental. Grabill recorded the Sioux people in 
contact with white culture, primarily with gov- 
ernment beef issue activities, but also with Buf- 
falo Bill (William F.) Cody, who visited the reser- 
vation to recruit performers. Other images show 
community dwellings, tipi encampments, an In- 
dian school, ceremonial dancing, and members 
of the Sioux nation. 

Charles F. Lummis (LOT 2840). 

A journalist, photographer, and pioneer in the 
study of the American Southwest, Charles F. 
Lummis was among the first photographers to 
live near the Pueblo Indians, learn their lan- 
guage, and record their history. Nearly one hun- 
dred photographs by Lummis in the division 
portray the daily life of many Southwestern 
tribes between 1888 and 1894 and combine a 
journalistic objectivity with a marked sensitivity 
to the Indian people. Some of Lummis's pho- 
tographs portray individuals at work in farm- 
ing, hunting, weaving, making pottery, and bak- 
ing, and at play in foot races, swinging lassos. 




and gaming. Others show ceremonial dancing, 
homes, prayer sticks, and a mission school. 

Lloyd Winter and Percy Pond (LOT 2291-A). 

Lloyd Winter and Percy Pond operated a 
commercial photography studio in Juneau, 
Alaska, from 1893 to 1943. During that time they 
produced a relatively small number of pho- 
tographs (about four hundred in all) depicting 
Tlingit and Haida Indian life, which are nonethe- 
less quite valuable as records for historians to- 
day. Although they were commercial photogra- 
phers, Winter and Pond differed from most of 
their fellow professionals in many ways. First, 
they did not present an anachronistic view of 
Native Alaskan culture. Modern western in- 
fluence in clothing, dwellings, tools, utensils, 
and economic conditions is in evidence in most 
of their works. Second, as year-round residents 
of Alaska they were able to document everyday 
activities and conveniently visit obscure native 
communities which surrounded the more popu- 
lated areas. Some works show a summer fishing 
encampment, remote Indian villages, women 
weaving baskets, individuals and small groups 
in front of their homes, children on the beach, 
and Indian prisoners hauling water in wagons. 
Finally, Winter and Pond had been formally ini- 
tiated into a Tlingit tribe and were allowed to 
explore areas prohibited to others. Interiors of 
highly respected tribal leaders' homes, potlatch 
dancers, and other ceremonials are represented. 
The division's collection of seventy- five Winter 
and Pond photographs, taken between 1894 and 
1905, also picture totem poles, grave houses, cer- 
emonial masks, and other beautifully and intri- 
cately carved objects. 

Katherine Taylor Dodge (LOT 12768). 

Katherine Taylor Dodge's small collection of 
photographs document harsh life on the San 
Carlos Apache Reservation in Arizona around 
1899 and includes reservation Indians crowded 
in line to receive government provisions. 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 5 9 



John Alvin Anderson (LOTS 3328, 3398, and 
12984). 

John Alvin Anderson, a Swedish immigrant, 
lived with his family on the Rosebud Reserva- 
tion in South Dakota for nearly half a century be- 
ginning in 1880. While photography was his pri- 
mary career, Anderson also worked as a clerk in 
a trading post and in both capacities developed a 
close relationship with the Brule Sioux people 
whose lives he recorded. Anderson's photo- 
graphic approach ranged from starkly literal 
documentation to dramatic staging of his sub- 
jects. The division's collection of seventy-five 
photographs includes portraits of prominent In- 
dian leaders such as Hollow Horn Bear, He Dog, 
Crow Dog, and others; everyday scenes such as 
Sioux camps, councils with government leaders, 
dances, and beef issues; and staged recreations 
of traditional activities, such as a scaffold burial, 
a man making arrows, and hunting and fishing. 

Adam Clark Vroman (LOTS 3273 and 3333). 

A Pasadena, California, book dealer and for- 
mer railroad worker, Adam Clark Vroman began 
traveling to the Southwest to photograph Indi- 
ans, their homes, rituals, and handicrafts about 
1894. His portrayals of Pueblo, Hopi, Zuni, and 
Navajo people are simple, genuine, and unro- 
manticized. Vroman lectured publicly about the 
mistreatment of Indians and offered his evoca- 
tive images, many of which feature young chil- 
dren in street scenes, as documentation. The 
division's collection of forty photographs also 
depict tribal officials and other individuals, fam- 
ilies, a Snake Dance, and daily cultural activities, 

Frank Bennett Fiske (LOT 4810). 

Born in Dakota Territory in 1883, Frank Ben- 
nett Fiske spent most of his life in the Fort Yates 
(or Standing Rock Sioux) Reservation area where 
he gained an uncommon familiarity with his 
photographic subjects. The more than six hun- 
dred photographic prints by Fiske included in 

o 




the division's holdings were produced between 

1900 and 1931. Both studio and plein air por- 
traits, they depict Standing Rock Sioux adults, 
children, and families, primarily in traditional 
dress, and non-Indian community members 
such as government agents and interpreters. 
Among these are also group portraits of tribal 
police and the tribal council, images of dwellings 
and other structures including tipi camps, a 
medicine lodge, cabins, Indian schools, and the 
Fort Yates agency buildings. Traditional danc- 
ing, drumming, rodeos, ranching, farming, and 
church activities are also shown. 

Simeon Schwemberger (LOTS 5026, 11497, 11498, 
11891, and 11892). 

Simeon Schwemberger, a Franciscan brother, 
arrived at St. Michael's Mission in Arizona in 

1901 and began taking pictures of the native 
population a year later. A self-taught amateur, 
Schwemberger was undoubtedly influenced by 
the many professional photographers who trav- 
eled to the Southwest to record Indian life at the 
turn of the century. Brother Schwemberger's im- 
ages of the Navajo, Jemez, Hopi, and Zuni Indi- 
ans from surrounding reservations are marked 
at times by the formality characteristic of studio 
photography in the period and at times by a can- 
did realism evidently born of his vocational em- 
pathy with his subjects. More than two hundred 
photographic prints held by the division include 
intimate individual, family, and other group por- 
traits, and views of daily reservation life, cere- 
monial dancing, dwellings, Navajo prisoners 
and scouts, and military activity at Fort De- 
fiance, Arizona. An extraordinary series chro- 
nicles a Navajo Yebichai (Nightway or Night 
Chant), a nine-day healing ceremony which 
involved construction of a medicine lodge and 
sweat lodge. Aspects portrayed include sand 
painting, various stages of the ceremony itself, 
and portraits of the patient and participants. 
That Brother Schwemberger was permitted to 

j L -i 0 J. 



1 6 0 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



attend and photograph the ceremony was a tes- 
tament to the trust he earned among the tribal 
members. His work is an important contribution 
to the photographic history of Navajo people. 

Frederic Remington (Prints & Photographs Refer- 
ence Aid #79). 

One of the best-known illustrators of the 
American West, Frederic Remington was born in 
New York in 1861 and first visited Montana 
when he was nineteen years old. He later pur- 
sued occupations as a gold prospector, cowboy, 
sheepherder, and salonkeeper, and also traveled 
with the U.S. Army as a civilian scout on several 
military campaigns. These diverse frontier expe- 
riences provided material for Remington's vast 
body of artwork and writings. The division 
holds nearly one hundred reproductions of 
paintings, drawings, and etchings by Reming- 
ton. These include portraits and illustrations 
of daily life among Ute, Blackfeet, Apache, 
Cheyenne, Sioux, and Crow tribes. Many of the 
works portray battles with pioneers and U.S. 
military troops, including the surrender of Chief 
Joseph, Custer's last stand, and a defiant Geron- 
imo. Others depict buffalo hunting, the Sun 
Dance and Ghost Dance, picture-writing, prayer 
and worship, and lodges. 

Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) (Prints 
and Photographs Reading Room). 

The largest and most widely used architec- 
tural collection in the division, HABS includes 
photographs, measured drawings, and written 
historical documentation on nearly thirty thou- 
sand structures. Created under this ongoing proj- 
ect, more than fifty surveys currently relate to 
American Indians. Those made in the Southwest, 
such as the Acoma pueblo in New Mexico, are 
the most extensive. Aside from pueblos, struc- 
tures documented include missions, churches, 
government agency buildings, military forts, 
trading posts, and Indian schools. The surveys 



can be identified by consulting a subject card 
catalog. 

Farm Security Administration/Office of War Infor- 
mation Collection (Various microfilmed LOTS and 
Prints and Photographs Reading Room). 

The photographs produced under these fed- 
erally-sponsored projects form an extensive pic- 
torial record of American life between 1935 and 
1943. An estimated three hundred images con- 
cern American Indians. Photographers Marion 
Post Wolcott, Dorothea Lange, and Arthur Roth- 
stein recorded daily activity and living condi- 
tions in Indian communities and on reservations 
in Montana, Oregon, Nevada, and New Mexico. 
Russell Lee's documentation of Cherokee tenant 
farmers and day laborers in Oklahoma and the 
families of migrant Indian blueberry pickers in 
Minnesota tent camps convey a vivid sense of 
the hard times of the Great Depression. 

Photographs of signs in Midwestern taverns 
warning "No beer sold to Indians" also reflect 
the discriminatory practices of the era. John 
Collier, Jr.'s photographs of a local Indian fair in 
Connecticut suggest the commercialization and 
stereotyping of Indian lore and image. This se- 
ries by Collier includes images of a medicine 
show featuring "Paw Maw — the Great American 
Indian Psychic" and photographs of "Indian 
braves" teaching white customers how to use a 
bow and arrow. 

U,S. Nezvs & World Report Magazine Collection 
(Prints and Photographs Reading Room). 

About three hundred photographs of Indian 
subjects in this collection examine substandard 
living conditions and tribal efforts to combat 
poverty during the 1960s and 1970s on the 
Navajo, Northern Cheyenne, and Rosebud Sioux 
reservations. Images include portraits, scenes 
from Indian business, government, mining, man- 
ufacturing, farming, ranching, and construction 
activities, and scenes from everyday life. 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 6 1 



Education 

As part of the federal government's assimilation 
efforts, many Indian children were taken from 
their reservations and enrolled in boarding 
schools run by non-Indians. "Before and after" 
photographs of the students were often used to 
demonstrate and publicize this "civilizing" pro- 
cess. Many such documents are found among 
the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century 
commercially produced photographs deposited 
in the division's LOT holdings. Numerous single 
images of Indian^ schbols, their students, and 
group portraits of their football teams and musi- 
cal bands can also be found in the division's col- 
lections. Extensive photographic documentation 
of two institutions which earned considerable re- 
gard as model schools are noted below. 

Hampton Normal & Agricultural Institute, Hamp- 
ton, Virginia (LOT 11051). 

Founded in 1868 to educate newly freed 
blacks, the Hampton Normal & Agricultural In- 
stitute accepted its first American Indian stu- 
dents (former prisoners of war) ten years later. 
Over a fifty-year period more than thirteen hun- 
dred Indian students from sixty-five tribes en- 
rolled in the Hampton program, which was de- 
signed to assimilate Indians into the dominant 
white culture. Housed in "wigwam" dormitories 
and dressed in military uniforms, the Indian stu- 
dents were encouraged to master the cultural 
ways of mainstream America through academic 
coursework, vocational training, and a Christian 
education. In Frances Benjamin Johnston's pho- 
tographs of the school taken between 1899 
and 1900, Indian students appear among the 
predominantly black population in classroom 
scenes; farming, carpentry, bricklaying, and sew- 
ing instruction; orchestra and band group por- 
traits; and related school activities. Some boys 
and girls are shown wearing traditional Indian 
clothing. 







Carlisle Indian Industrial School, Carlisle , Pennsyl- 
vania (LOTS 6818, 12369, 12764, and 13016). 

Established in 1879 by Richard Henry Pratt, 
the military officer who first placed Indian stu- 
dents at Hampton, the Carlisle Indian School 
was initially set up in abandoned army cavalry 
barracks. Similar to Hampton, the program at 
Carlisle offered reading, writing, and mathemat- 
ics, as well as vocational and farming trades for 
the boys and housework for the girls. Pratt advo- 
cated the students' complete severance from 
their tribes, and promoted this strict approach to 
Indian education through lectures, pamphlets, 
and "before and after" photographs of trans- 
formed students. The local, semi-official school 
photographer John N. Choate recorded early stu- 
dent life at Carlisle and also produced studio 
portraits of well-known visiting Indian leaders 
(LOTS 6818, 12764 and 13016). More than one 
hundred photographs by Frances Benjamin 
Johnston also document student activity be- 
tween 1901 and 1903 (LOT 12369). 

Panoramic Photographs of Indian Schools (On-line 
Public Access Catalog). 

Campus-wide views of Indian government 
schools, student group portraits, school parades, 
and the 1905 Carlisle Indian Industrial School 
football team are pictured in this unique col- 
lection of large photographic prints, most ex- 
ceeding 28 inches in length. Taken between 1905 
and 1914, the panoramas represent schools in 
Arizona, Kansas, Michigan, North Carolina, 
Pennsylvania, and South Dakota. 

Expositions , World's Fairs, 
and Wild West Shows 

Some of America's early anthropologists pro- 
duced educational "living exhibits" of Native 
American homes, traditional dress, ceremonials, 
and daily life, which were shown at expositions 




1 6 2 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



and world's fairs. Photographers often docu- 
mented these staged tableaux and performances, 
and memorialized many of the Indian partici- 
pants in studio portraits. Wild West shows, on 
the other hand, appealed less to the educational 
interests than to the imaginations of middle class 
Americans, and became a popular form of enter- 
tainment during the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries. Because of the offer of em- 
ployment and the opportunity to escape the des- 
perate conditions of reservation life, many Na- 
tive Americans appeared in the purportedly 
"historical" depictions of frontier events fea- 
tured in such shows. Indian performers are par- 
ticularly well documented in studio portraits 
while the actual shows are represented in pho- 
tographs and in posters advertising such at- 
tractions. Of particular note are the following 
collections: 

Frank A . Rinehart and Adolph Muhr (LOT 12841). 

In 1885 Rinehart opened his own photo- 
graphic studio in Omaha, Nebraska. Thirteen 
years later he became the official photographer 
for the Trans-Mississippi International Exposi- 
tion held in Omaha, which established his 
renown. In addition to the fair buildings, Rine- 
hart photographed many of the living exhibits 
of the Plains Indians, particularly the sham 
battle extravaganzas performed by the "Indian 
Congress." Originally intended as educational 
demonstrations of traditional culture, "Indian 
Congress" activities quickly degenerated into 
pure, and extremely popular, entertainment. A 
notable image in this collection is an outdoor 
group portrait depicting several hundred In- 
dian Congress performers, spectators, scouts on 
horses, and onlookers. The scene typifies the 
circus-like atmosphere of the performances. Also 
pictured is a constructed Indian encampment on 
the exposition grounds featuring Pueblo men 
making bricks and Cheyenne and Arapaho Indi- 
ans reenacting the Ghost Dance. 



Adolph Muhr, a Rinehart employee, took the 
studio portraits of Indian participants, including 
Sioux chiefs Hollow Horn Bear and American 
Horse, and Apache leader Geronimo. More than 
sixty portraits of Sioux, Assiniboine, Kiowa, 
Tonkawa, Arapaho, Pueblo, Sac and Fox, and 
Blackfeet tribal representatives make up the ma- 
jor portion of the Rinehart-Muhr collection. 

Herman Heyn and James Matzen (LOT 3401). 

Heyn and Matzen, of Omaha, Nebraska, 
probably took their striking, finely-crafted stu- 
dio portraits at the Trans-Mississippi Interna- 
tional Exposition in 1898. Five hundred and fifty 
images came to the Library between 1899 and 
1900. This portrait collection depicts primarily 
Sioux Indian men, women, and children, most of 
whom appear in elaborate ceremonial garb. 
Group portraits of families and individuals are 
also included as well as evidently staged out- 
door portrayals of hunting, stalking, dancing, 
and tribal council meetings. 

C. D. Arnold (LOT 4654). 

Charles Dudley Arnold was the official pho- 
tographer for the 1893 Chicago World's Fair and 
in 190X be also documented the Pan-American 
Exposition held in Buffalo, New York. Of the 
division's extensive holdings of Arnold pho- 
tographs, nearly fifty depict American Indians. 
The most notable of these are the images of the 
"Indian Congress" mock battles between whites 
and Indians, Three years after the initial presen- 
tation at the Trans-Mississippi Fair, the theatrics 
seemed perfected. At the New York site, an enor- 
mous stadium was constructed to stage the bat- 
tles which featured "real war whoops," Geron- 
imo, the "human tiger," and Winona, a Sioux 
woman touted as the "most phenomenal rifle 
shot in the world." After the battles, Indian 
women appeared on the field and pretended 
to mutilate the "dead" bodies. Arnold's pho- 
tographs vividly document these performances 



m 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 6 3 



and the American Indians on the fair grounds 
and in the studio. 

The Gerhard Sisters (LOTS 3796, 4863, and 13007). 

At the 1904 St. Louis World's Fair, American 
Indians were featured in living anthropological 
exhibits (along with villagers from the Philip- 
pines) that showed indigenous peoples from var- 
ious parts of the world in their daily activities. 
The "least civilized" and "advanced people" sec- 
tion of the fairgrounds juxtaposed tableaux of In- 
dian reservation dwellings occupied by Indian 
people in traditional clothing with a neighboring 
exhibit in which their grandchildren learned 
white ways in a model government Indian 
school. 

The Gerhard Sisters, Mamie and Emma, 
about whom little is known, produced sensitive 
and dynamic portraits of the Indian people, 
taken in their St. Louis studio, revealing dig- 
nified, unique individuals, often interacting 
warmly or playfully with each other. Cheyenne, 
Osage, Pueblo, Apache, Inuit, and Sioux people, 
including the well-known Geronimo, American 
Horse, Hollow Horn Bear, and Wolf Robe, are 
pictured in forty elegant compositions. Family 
group portraits, mothers with babies, young 
children and their pet dogs, and individual men 
and women clothed in fine, traditional attire, are 
pictured as well. In sharp contrast, a small num- 
ber of images, taken in the exposition, document 
exhibit performances and mock ceremonials 
such as the Snake Dance. Overwhelmingly, how- 
ever, the Gerhard Sisters chose to portray the 
Indians as people, rather than as curiosities or 
exhibits. 

William H. Ran (LOT 11043). 

Rau began his career as a government survey 
photographer, working briefly with William 
Henry Jackson, but established his reputation by 
producing scenic landscape views for railroads. 
In 1904 he also photographed the anthropologi- 

o 




cal Indian exhibits at the St. Louis World's Fair, 
documenting the diverse activities of the Hopi, 
Wichita, Pawnee, Cheyenne, and Sioux tribes. 
Thirteen stereographic prints, taken outdoors on 
the fair grounds, capture the hustle and bustle of 
the exposition, unlike the sedentary views of stu- 
dio images. They include "Indian braves" riding 
horses, Pueblo women selling pottery, a "rain- 
maker" in conversation, a Hopi "squaw" weav- 
ing a blanket, Wichita men building an enor- 
mous grass lodge, and "medicine men" wearing 
face paint with squirming rattlesnakes at their 
feet. A staid Geronimo is also shown demon- 
strating how to use a bow and arrow. 

Buffalo Bills Wild West Show and Congress of Rough 
Riders of the World (LOTS 3424 and 6337). 

Pony Express rider, Indian scout, buffalo 
hunter, and showman William F. Cody produced 
the most famous touring Wild West show in the 
United States and Europe. "Buffalo Bill" Cody 
mounted and toured his namesake extravagan- 
zas between 1883 and 1916. Cody employed 
thousands of Indians (and cowboys) to perform 
in spectacular mock battles, war dances, fancy 
horseback riding, acts of markmanship, and 
other western theatrics. Photographs of Cody 
and his shows are documented in two notable 
collections. 

Napoleon Sarony, a photographer known for 
masterful portraits of actors, actresses, and other 
famed personalities, chronicled a New York per- 
formance of Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show in 
1886 (LOT 6337). Departing from posed studio 
compositions, Sarony's unusual images capture 
the animation of an Indian attack, charging wild 
horses and stage coaches, and a mass retreat by 
the defeated Indians, performed in an outdoor 
stadium. Additional photographs show a perfor- 
mance group of Native American men, women, 
and children, informally gathered around tipis 
on the arena backlot, sharing a watermelon. Two 

Vi 185 



NON-INDIAN IMAGES OF NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS 

\OVOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOWOAO 

70A0W0A0T0A0T0A0T0A0T0A0W0A0W0A0T0A0T0A0T0A0T0A0T0A0T0 

GATEWAYS 



"Lo, the poor Indian." "Indian giver" 

" Drunken Indian." "Noble savage." 

"The only good Indian is a dead Indian." 

"Squaw." "On the warpath." 

"B loodthi rsty wa rrior. " 

"Vanishing American. " "Redskin. " 

Images, stereotypes, and myths have profoundly 
affected the way Native Americans were tradi- 
tionally viewed. Most depictions, whether pre- 
sented in dime novels, motion pictures, paintings, 
federal policies, advertising, photographs, or mu- 
seum exhibits, have not been based on a thor- 
ough knowledge of Indian people but rather have 
reflected non-Indian political, religious, eco- 
nomic, or moral attitudes. 

Since Columbus's first encounter, misconcep- 
tions about Indians have persisted. The basic no- 
tions of "discovery" and "new world" have been 
sharply challenged as millions of inhabitants, 
comprising hundreds of distinct cultural societies, 
had already discovered America. Characterizing 
these native inhabitants as exotic, primitive, 
wild, and heathenish, Columbus and other new- 
comers applied the doctrine of conquest and, 
later, intent to "civilize." Depictions of savage-like 
creatures flourished in historical accounts and 
drawings. 

Images of American Indians changed through 
time to mirror particular political or social trends. 
Manifest destiny justified forcing the "good," sub- 
missive natives onto reservations for assimilation 
purposes, while battling the recalcitrant, "bad" 
hostiles advanced settlement of the last frontier. 
The cowboys and Indians of the West became in- 
delible symbols of a moral struggle in the public's 



imagination. Traveling wild west shows featuring 
Buffalo Bill and Sitting Bull brought these myths 
to life with reenactments of battle scenes played 
against wilderness backdrops. Some non-Indian 
sympathizers tended to view native people as a 
"vanishing race," doomed to extinction. Many 
nineteenth and twentieth-century anthropologists 
rushed to document tribal customs while photog- 
raphers such as Edward S. Curtis and Joseph K. 
Dixon recreated romantic scenes of pristine na- 
tive culture before encroachment. Museums also 
attempted to preserve traditional lifestyles by pre- 
senting a static image of the American Indian, 
frozen in time, surrounded by artifacts. Years later, 
the youthful counter-culture embraced Native 
Americans with nostalgia and guilt-ridden sympa- 
thy. Ironically, many Indian people in cities and 
on reservations were disparaged for not being 
"real Indians," although government, church, 
boarding schools, and other social institutions 
had relentlessly urged tribal communities to 
cease being Indian. Despite centuries of change 
since contact, many picture the "real" Indian as 
the one created by non-Indian image makers in 
art, literature, films, photography, and other 
media. 

AOWOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Images, stereotypes, and 
myths of the American Indian are pervasive 
throughout the collections, most particularly in 
the General Collections and in the collections of 
the Rare Book and Special Collections, Prints and 
Photographs, Motion Picture, Broadcasting and 
Recorded Sound, and Music Divisions. 



Lo the poor Indian. Lithograph by Vance, Parsloe and Co. Publishers, New York, 1875. PGA — Vance & Parsloe (A size). 
(LC-USZ62-92901). Prints and Photographs Division. 




Awkwardly holding the white man's weapon while inadvertently spilling his liquor, this dazed and inept Indian is among 
the many historic caricatures devised by non-Indian artists. 



O'VOAOYOAO'TOAO'TOAO'TOAO'TOAO'TOAO'TOAO'TOAO'VOAOYOAOVOAO'TOAO'1 

OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOl 






1 6 5 



16 6 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



particularly rare photographs in this group, 
taken on board a ship by the company Merritt 
and Van Wagner, picture the Indian performers, 
Cody, and other troupe hands departing from 
New York for London. The collection also in- 
cludes a studio portrait of Sitting Bull with Cody. 
Sitting Bull, who toured briefly with the show, 
was prominently featured in the "Custer's Last 
Stand" dramatizations. 

Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show troupe also vis- 
ited many European cities where their perfor- 
mances were equally popular. Thirty-six images 
provide a pictorial record of the 1903 presenta- 
tion at the Olympia Stadium in London, England 
(LOT 3424). 

Pawnee Bill's Wild West (LOT 12898). 

Gordon W. Lillie, another famous showman 
and entrepreneur, billed this rival Wild West 
show "Pawnee Bill's." Sixteen studio pho- 
tographs, copyrighted in 1905 by the Chicago- 
based Siegel, Cooper, and Company, picture 
reenactments of "The Death of Custer," "Poca- 
hontas [saving] John Smith," "The Departure of 
Minnehaha," and other stereotypical dramas. A 
group portrait of Lillie with the Indian perform- 
ers includes Princess Winona, who had also been 
featured at the New York World's Fair in 1901. 

Wild West Show Posters (Poster Collection). 

With the promise to present "actual scenes, 
genuine characters" from the West, posters mar- 
keting the Wild West performances helped bring 
to life images of American Indians in popular 
culture. Showing attacks on the Deadwood 
stage, covered wagons, forts, settlements, and 
troops, and the defeat of General George Custer 
at Little Big Horn, these colorful images of Indi- 
ans lured audiences into the stadiums and are- 
nas where the shows were performed. Other 
posters, focussing on the exotic and lurid "pecu- 
liarities of the wily dusky warriors" and their 
"weird war dances," attracted the curious, who 
were anxious to see real Indians for the first time. 



More than twenty lithographic posters pro- 
moting Buffalo Bill's and Pawnee Bill's Wild 
West shows are held in the division's poster 
collection. 

Pictorialist Photographs 

The Pictorialist movement in photography, 
which flourished in the United States between 
the 1890s and about 1910 and resurged again 
briefly during the 1920s, was founded upon the 
belief in photography as a fine art, comparable to 
drawing and painting. Pictorialist photogra- 
phers tended to compose their images carefully, 
and often manipulated the optical qualities and 
printing processes of the medium, and cropped 
their final prints to produce photographs in- 
tended to be viewed as artistic objects. Photogra- 
phers working in this vein created beautiful, ide- 
alized portraits of Native Americans and Indian 
life. The division holds an extensive collection of 
American pictorialist works: 

Edward S. Curtis (LOTS 12310 through 12331). 

America's leading photographer of Indian 
people, Edward S. Curtis produced over forty 
thousand negatives of more than eighty tribes 
during his lifetime. Begun in 1898, Curtis's major 
work. The North American Indian , was published 
in a twenty-volume set of photogravure prints 
with ethnographic text. Financed in part by 
J. Pierpont Morgan and encouraged by President 
Theodore Roosevelt, the thirty-year project was 
an attempt to photograph all of the Indian tribes, 
as noted by Curtis in his introduction, that "still 
retain to a considerable degree their primitive 
customs and traditions." However, by the turn 
of the century, virtually all native people had 
changed radically and tribal life incorporated el- 
ements of both traditional and contemporary 
European culture. Nevertheless, Curtis was de- 
termined to produce a record of Indians as they 
supposedly looked and lived prior to contact 
with whites. To this end he masterfully manipu- 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 6 7 



lated his subjects and their surroundings to cre- 
ate an artistically beautiful but artificial past, of- 
ten obliterating traces of the modern, such as 
product labels, alarm clocks, and Euro-American 
attire. Still Curtis's photographs, albeit nostalgic 
and sentimental, today epitomize for many the 
archetypal Native American. 

The division's Curtis holdings number more 
than 2,800 contact prints made from the original 
large-format negatives, arranged in twenty-two 
LOTS and organized by tribe. More than half 
of the photographs were not published in The 
North American Indian . They include variant 
views of the same people and places repre- 
sented in many of those that were published, 
and are a valuable, but little known, source of 
documentation. 

Gertrude Kdsebier (LOT 10136). 

Trained as an artist, Gertrude Kasebier was a 
founding member of the Photo-Secession Club 
and a leading figure in the Pictorialist move- 
ment. In 1964 the Library acquired fifty-two of 
the original glass negatives for Kasebier's studio 
portraits of Sioux Indians who were members of 
Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show. Taken in New 
York in 1901, most of these beautifully composed 
and technically superior images show the per- 
formers wearing ceremonial clothing and feath- 
ered headdresses, and holding such implements 
as peace pipes, war clubs, and bows and arrows. 
A number of poignant double portraits, of Mr. 
and Mrs. Samuel Horse and Mr. and Mrs. Charg- 
ing Thunder, are included along with an unusual 
and delightful photograph of Charging Thunder 
with his collie dog. 

Roland Reed (LOTS 12840 and 13022). 

During his childhood years in Wisconsin, 
Roland Reed was drawn to the Native Ameri- 
cans he encountered, and throughout his life he 
befriended many Indians from numerous tribes. 
As a photographer, Reed made American Indi- 
O lS the exclusive subject of his images. Shunning 

ERIC 



commercial success, Reed slowly and arduously 
produced his technically advanced, and meticu- 
lously and artistically composed photographic 
studies. The division holds about thirty of Reed's 
photographs of Blackfeet, Chippewa, Navajo, 
and Hopi Indians, many of them portraits and 
views of fishing, scouting, traveling, and other 
aspects of village life, from about 1907 to 1913. 

Joseph Kossuth Dixon (LOTS 11687-1 and 12916). 

Guilt-ridden and concerned about the plight 
of Native Americans, Rodman Wanamaker 
launched a privately-funded, national campaign 
to focus attention on saving Indian populations 
from extinction by promoting U.S. citizenship 
for them. Joseph Kossuth Dixon was commis- 
sioned to organize and document three Wana- 
maker Expeditions to several tribal communities 
including the Apache, Blackfeet, Cheyenne, 
Umatilla, and Sioux, between 1908 and 1913. The 
division's holdings of Dixon's contrived yet 
starkly alluring images, some of which were 
published in his 1913 book The Vanishing Race , 
show reenactments of battles, romantic tipi 
camps at twilight, bands of warriors on horse- 
back, mock scenes of peace treaty signings, "the 
last great Indian council," U.S. flag raising cere- 
monies, and individual portraits of chiefs in 
ceremonial dress. Dixon's sentimentalized pic- 
torial recreations of the past were designed to 
convince the public and government officials 
that Indians were worthy of citizenship and wor- 
thy of saving. 

Laura Gilpin (LOT 4322 and PH Filing Series). 

The soft-focus quality and impeccable crafts- 
manship evident in Laura Gilpin's early images 
of Pueblo and Navajo Indians reflect the 
influence of her photographic training at the 
school of Clarence H. White. (White was a for- 
mative influence on many American pictorialist 
photographers.) Gilpin was engaged in docu- 
menting the lives and environment of the South- 
west Indians for over sixty years, and published 




1 6 8 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



two books which combined social commentary 
with her art. The division's holdings include 
twenty master photographs produced by Gilpin 
between 1925 and 1930, mostly portraits and 
views of dwellings and landscapes. A group of 
about twenty-five platinum prints, produced by 
Gilpin in 1939 (LOT 4522), shows Acoma Pueblo 
Indian men, women and families, dwellings, 
street scenes, church interiors and exteriors, a 
woman spinning wool, and a Navajo silversmith. 

Allegories , Satires , Stereotypes , 
and Polemical Representations 

The image of the Native North American has, 
since the Age of Discovery, served a number of 
imaginative and symbolic purposes for artists of 
Europe and America. The Indian has appeared 
in allegories and political satires to represent the 
virgin domain of the American continent, the re- 
bellious actions of the early colonists, and, in the 
late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, 
the emerging United States itself. Many of these 
are scattered among the Library's outstanding 
collection of British and American satirical 
prints. The division's extensive holdings of 
American Indian-related advertising prints and 
labels, posters, and photographs, moreover, ex- 
emplify the many ways in which pictorial im- 
ages have conveyed and disseminated powerful 
and influential ideas, both favorable and unfa- 
vorable to Native Americans. Significant concen- 
trations of such works are described below. 

American Political Prints (PC /US and PGA Filing 
Series). 

Nearly thirty cartoons, caricatures, patriotic 
allegories, campaign banners, and other individ- 
ually issued prints, provide a visual record of 
political debate on federal policies affecting Na- 
tive Americans during the early years of the na- 
tion. Several images, for instance, vilify Presi- 
dents Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, 



both of whom established government treaties 
under which thousands of Cherokee, Seminole, 
and other eastern tribes were displaced and de- 
prived of their lands. Van Buren is further criti- 
cized for his directive to use bloodhounds to hunt 
fugitive Indians during the Second Seminole War 
in Florida. The country's ninth president, William 
Henry Harrison, successfully exploited his zeal- 
ous military record of Indian-fighting in his 1840 
presidential campaign banners. 

Indians were also a frequent motif in prints 
promoting the nativist "Know Nothing" move- 
ment's prejudice against the foreign-born. They 
also appear as symbols in an elaborate martial al- 
legory of the U.S. titled "Arms of the United 
States of America." American Political Prints , 
iy66-i8y6: A Catalog of the Collections in the Li- 
brary of Congress (Boston: G.K. Hall, 1991) by 
Bernard Reilly, Jr., is a chronological illustrated 
guide to this material. 

Currier and Ives Lithographs (PGA Filing Series). 

Currier and Ives, one of America's best- 
known lithographic printing and publishing 
firms, may be the richest single source of nine- 
teenth-century American popular imagery. Be- 
tween 1835 and about 1900, the New York firm 
produced more than seven thousand different 
prints illustrating nearly every aspect of Ameri- 
can life and culture. The inexpensive prints were 
primarily used as decorative pieces, "works of 
art to brighten the home within the reach of all." 
The Library's holdings of approximately 3,600 
Currier & Ives lithographs are the most exten- 
sive held by any public institution. Currier & 
Ives: A Catalogue Raisonne (Detroit: Gale Research 
Company, 1983; NE2312.C8 A4 1983a), a com- 
prehensive, illustrated catalog, lists the individ- 
ual lithographs. 

The American Indian is prominently featured 
in more than thirty works by Currier & Ives, 
many of which are hand-colored, and as inciden- 
tal figures in numerous others. Typical of Currier 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 6 9 



& Ives' style, the images are often sentimental 
and conventionalized, appealing to the romantic 
notions of the era. Indian males are stereo typi- 
cally rendered as warriors (bare-chested and 
holding tomahawks), hunters, or as noble primi- 
tives settled in idyllic wilderness villages. More 
dramatic are two representations of Longfellow's 
poem "Hiawatha," one illustrating Minnehaha 
on her deathbed, the other showing a preter- 
natural Hiawatha entering the kingdom of 
heaven — in a canoe. Deviations from Currier & 
Ives' familiar stylized approach include George 
Catlin's relatively realistic portrayals of Wi-jun- 
jon, an Assiniboine Indian delegate visiting 
Washington, D.C., in 1831, and a Mandan (?) 
Snow-Shoe Dance. Originally issued as part of 
Catlin's North American Indian Portfolio, these 
prints were reissued by Currier & Ives, probably 
in the late 1840s or early 1850s. 

Bank Note Engravings (LOTS 11344, 12592-12595, 
and 12601). 

During the first half of the nineteenth century, 
paper currency was issued by state and local 
banks, rather than by the federal treasury. The 
vignette illustrations used on these engraved 
bank notes often incorporated images of Indians, 
especially in symbolic representations mapping 
the progress of the United States and of the 
virtues of "civilization." Nearly thirty-five proofs 
for these engravings, scattered among various 
LOTS, picture Native Americans witnessing the 
encroachment of ships, colonists, the Christian 
ministry, and urban industry on the American 
wilderness. Other scenes featuring Indians show 
confrontational and peaceful encounters with 
frontiersmen, the arms of Ohio, Kentucky, and 
New York states, and hunting and fishing scenes. 

Tobacco Labels (LOT 10618-48). 

Images of American Indians were widely 
used by the tobacco industry on their nine- 
teenth-century advertisements and labels, per- 

O 




haps because of the widely-held belief that to- 
bacco use originated with native people. More 
than twenty-five richly colored labels, designed 
to attract the attention of consumers and increase 
sales, picture Indians in a wide range of settings. 
Many feature the bare-breasted Indian "prin- 
cess," variously holding tobacco leaves, gingerly 
crossing a stream, or walking on a river bank. A 
few show women in more active roles, such as 
hunting and canoeing. Many labels promoting 
brand names of famous chiefs offer bold and dy- 
namic likenesses of Black Hawk, Sequoyah, Red 
Cloud, and Massasoit. Others show scenes from 
frontier life in which Indians hunt animals or sit 
peacefully in tipi camps. 

Patent Medicine and Other Advertising Labels (LOT 
10632-22 and LOTS 10692-10771). 

Nineteenth-century advertisers, invoking na- 
tive culture's traditional knowledge of herbs and 
plants, often used images of Indians to sell medi- 
cinal concoctions. Focusing on famous individu- 
als such as Joseph Brant and Red Jacket, or incor- 
porating general tribal names, patent medicine 
labels promoted "Indian" expectorant, stomach 
bitters, Cherokee liniment, Seminole cough bal- 
sam, and wigwam tonic. In many of the nearly 
twenty illustrative, engraved medicine labels in 
the collection, Indian men and women are pic- 
tured heroically curing an ailing white popula- 
tion. Depictions of Native Americans hunting, 
greeting colonists, or communing with nature 
are also found on miscellaneous advertisements 
for fertilizers and manures, insurance, paint, fur 
garments, and perfume. 

Music Covers (LOT 10615). 

A small number of decorative covers for sheet 
music of popular songs from the nineteenth 
century feature images of Indians and Indian 
life. Frontier and tipi encampment scenes adorn 
editions of songs such as "Sacajawea's Pa- 
poose Waltz," "Indian Hunter Quick Step," and 




1 7 0 



PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



"Indian's Lament/' while images of first encoun- 
ters between Native Americans and Europeans 
illustrate "The Pilgrim's Legacy" and "My New 
England Home." 

Cabinet of American Illustration (Videodisc in 
Prints and Photographs Reading Room). 

Among this collection of original drawings by 
American book, magazine, and newspaper illus- 
trators from the period 1850 to 1930 are about 
twenty-five works which depict the American 
Indian, primarily in sentimental wilderness 
scenes, as a hostile threat to settlers in the West, 
or as a spiritual force in nature. Four drawings 
by F. O. C. Darley, a noted illustrator of Indian 
life, picture an Indian on horseback, a tribal 
council, a War of 1812 battle, and a white hunter 
befriending an Indian brave. 

Caroline and Erwin Swann Collection of Caricature 
and Cartoon (Online Public Access Catalog — One 
Box and Swann Collection Finding Aid). 

The Swann Collection, spanning the years 
1780 to 1975, contains drawings, prints, and 
paintings for caricatures, cartoons, and book 
and magazine illustrations. American Indians 
are caricatured as wilderness guides, "Indian 
givers," deft ax-throwers, users of wampum, and 
the nemesis of cowboys, in more than thirty im- 
ages, primarily from the period 1910 to 1950. 

Work Projects Administration Posters (Poster Col- 
lection — POS WPA Filing Series). 

Silkscreen posters generated by this 1930s 
New Deal program were used to publicize ex- 
hibits, community activities, theatrical produc- 
tions, and health and educational programs. 
Noteworthy posters related to American Indians 
incorporate symbols and images from various 



tribes, some of which were created by Indian 
artists. These vibrant color posters include those 
advertising a Museum of Modern Art exhibit on 
Indian art in the U.S., Index of American Design 
exhibitions featuring craft and folk arts, and U.S. 
Travel Bureau promotions to "See America." 

New York World-Telegram & Sun Neivspaper Photo- 
graph Collection (Finding aid in Prints and Pho- 
tographs Reading Room). 

Covering mainly the period from 1920 to 
1967, this collection contains about two hundred 
photographs that are American Indian-related. 
As images captured for news and human inter- 
est events that represented the fare of newspaper 
journalism, some of these photos reflect, espe- 
cially in their captions, a contemporaneous, 
stereotypical view of Indian people. Derisive 
commentary, often facetious in intent, frequently 
accompanies pictures of Native Americans eat- 
ing hot dogs, watching television, using soap 
and toothbrushes, and inspecting a Cadillac. 

Yanker Collection of Posters (Videodisc in reading 
room and POS 6 Filing Series). 

Native American-related political, propa- 
ganda, and social issue posters in this collection 
reflect the emergence of pan-Indian national or- 
ganizations and the tribal rights movement. 
Spanning the years i960 to 1980, many of the 
posters concern American Indian Movement 
(AIM) demonstrations, native women's libera- 
tion, and Indian self-determination. Another fo- 
cus of several posters is the non-Indian counter- 
culture's rediscovery of the traditional Native 
American, whose image illustrates ecological 
awareness, spirituality, and worldly wisdom. 
About forty posters pertain to American Indians. 



erIc 



it % 







ABOVE: Villa of Brute. Albumen silver print by john C. H. 
Grabill, 1891. LOT 3076. (LC-USZ62-19725). Prints and 
Photographs Division. 



This tranquil view of a Brute Sioux camp near Pine Ridge 
documents the vicinity of the Wounded Knee shortly after 
the massacre. Grabill, an early Western photographer, cre- 
ated some of the more detailed images of frontier life in the 
Dakota territory, including Indians and Indian life. 



RIGHT: View of a Plains Indian Camp. Daguerreotype, half 
plate, possibly by Solomon Carvalho, 1853. DAG no. 251. 
(LC-USZ62-9065). Prints and Photographs Division. 



This daguerretoype, possibly taken on the John C. Fr&mont 
expedition of 1853, is the earliest photographic view of In- 
dian life in the Library's collections. The tipis and drying 
racks are typical of those created by the Plains buffalo 
culture. 



0 

ERIC 








o 

ERIC 



LEFT: Pigeon's Egg Head (the Light) going into and return- 
ing from Washington. Lithograph by Currier and Ives after 
George Catlin, 1837-39. PGA -Currier & Ives — Wi-Jun-Jon 
(B size). (LC-USZC2-3313). Prints and Photographs 
Division. 



In late 1831, Wi-jun-jon, or Pigeon's Egg Head, travelled 
with a small delegation of his Assiniboine tribesmen to 
Washington to meet President Andrew Jackson. Along the 
way he met the artist George Cat I in, who followed the im- 
pressionable young man's journey from a Western wigwam 
to the nation's capital. At Washington, Wi-jun-jon imbibed 
the sights, sounds and, unfortunately, spirits he found 
there. Back home in the West he affected the dress, man- 
ners, and vices of a white man with tragic results: three 
years after his return he was murdered by tribesmen suspi- 
cious of his Eastern ways. 



RIGHT TOP: A Scene on the Frontiers as Practiced by the 
Humane British and their Worthy Allies. Etching with wa- 
tercolor by William Charles, 1812. PGA-Charles (W.)— 
Scene {A size). {LC-USZC4-4820, color; LC-USZ62-5800, 
black and white). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Scottish-born caricaturist William Charles emigrated to 
America about 1805 and soon established himself as one 
of the country's leading political cartoonists. During the 
War of 1812, he produced a memorable series of satires 
against the British, including this image in which an En- 
glish officer offers money and weapons to mercenary Indi- 
ans in return for scalps taken from American troops. 



RIGHT BOTTOM: The Grand National Caravan Moving 
East. Lithograph drawn by Hassan Straitshanks [attributed 
to David Claypool Johnston], 1 833. PC/US- 1 833. E567, 
no. 1 (A size). (LC-USZ62-9646). Prints and Photographs 
Division. 



Two events of 1832, the election of President Andrew Jack- 
son to a second term and the arrest of militant Sac Indian 
leader Black Hawk, converge in this caustic political satire. 
The cartoonist portrays Jackson at the head of a motley vic- 
tory parade which includes Vice-President Martin Van Bu- 
ren, the Devil, a prostrate drunkard, an army officer, and a 
barred wagon bearing the captured Sac chief and other 
Native Americans. 




~-ri) 'afwT^nlfte'l r i<- ON tiers , u iy 



- m™AKE ~EIUTISH gn<l IMir WORT/IY~riT.LTES . 




Qrut CcUmiia* S,n, andhrvard firtfl, ■ 

hear Country's.' wronjj coil toucUyJor redrtfi\ 
Ukt Jauiuit.dndaui milk ku JctJfMij 
Or JornahcLtiti mat/ stel to tali your- ujm> 



fit, (travery ant'd (Mult Lit a (dreadful 
Shrink Hack For ffuyt to the tfi.de inyfyht, 

e-r, . r> i t / /.»/// nmeACu skal^ , 



Shrink OacA. jor rrvyuyc* *■*» — ""7 f 
U/uirlBntU 'Uadcn-Om . mU 

'Jndjor l/iod MOtijsskaJl, tutUuUon maAc.. .._ 



BEST COPY' AVAILABLE 




o 

ERIC 



r i q 5 





FAR LEFT: OSCEOLA, of Florida. Lithograph by George 
Catlin, 1838. PGA-Catlin— Osceola (D size). (LC-USZ62- 
7747). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Osceola (ca. 1804-38), born a member of the Creek na- 
tion, first distinguished himself in the defense of the Florida 
territories against federal troops under Andrew Jackson in 
the first phase of the Seminole Wars. In 1837, after leading 
the Seminole Indians in their long and costly campaign of 
guerilla resistance against U.S. government efforts to relo- 
cate them to the Arkansas Territory, Osceola was tricked 
into captivity under a flag of truce by Cen. Thomas Jesup. 
He was imprisoned at Fort Moultrie near Charleston, South 
Carolina, and died the following year. Catlin's large-scale 
and sympathetic life portrait of the great leader was issued 
within a few weeks of Osceola's death. 



RIGHT: Joseph Fayadaneega, Called the Brant, The Great 
Captain of the Six Nations. Mezzotint (proof before letters) 
by John Raphael Smith, after a painting by George Rom- 
ney, circa 1776. PGA-Anonymous — Joseph (B size). (LC- 
USZ62-20488). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Joseph Brant (1 742- 1807), or Thayendanegea, was an 
influential Mohawk chief and staunch supporter of the 
British Army during the French and Indian War and the 
American Revolution. Raised in the Mohawk Valley, he 
was educated at Eleazer Wheelock's Indian Charity School 
in Lebanon, Connecticut, where he became a convert to 
Christianity. He first fought for the British against the 
French at Lake George in 1755 and by the mid-1770s had 
become prominent in the Iroquois League. In 1776, Brant 
traveled to London with a delegation of British and Mo- 
hawk leaders, where this likeness was captured by the 
fashionable English painter George Romney. 



LEFT: Unus Americanus ex Virginia. Aetat: 23. Engraving by 
Wenceslaus Hollar, 1645. FP-XVII-H733, no. 2009 (A 
size). (LC-USZ62-1 1 4953). Prints and Photographs 
Division. 



This work is apparently the earliest engraved portrait made 
from life of a Native American. Drawn and engraved by the 
Czech printmaker Wenceslaus Hollar, it depicts a twenty- 
three-year-old Algonquian Indian of Virginia, presumably 
seen by the artist in England during his prolonged tenure as 
artist in residence to the Earl of Arundel. Hollar's sensitive 
and detailed eyewitness rendering is surprisingly free of the 
caricature and conjecture found in most Native American 
portraits from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 



o 






LEFT TOP: Native American stickball players. Silver gelatin print, copyrighted by C. H. Farnum, 1924. LOT 1 3001 (LC- 
USZ62-1 14959). Prints and Photographs Division. 



An Oklahoma team of Creek or Cherokee Indian stickball players, wearing ribbon work loincloths and holding hand-crafted 
racquets. Stickball, a more vigorous and rougher version of modern lacrosse, was a standard part of ceremonial events and 
an occasional means of settling disputes among Southeastern tribes. 



LEFT BOTTOM: Under the salmon row. Silver gelatin print by Frank H. Nowell, 1 906. LOT 1 2779 (LC-USZ62-1 1 4925). 
Prints and Photographs Division. 



In Nome, Alaska, on the Bering Sea, Frank Nowell photographed these Inuit children posing in the bright summer sun, 
under a tribal community fish drying rack. More than seventy views by Nowell reveal daily life among the Tlingit and Inuit 
people between 1904 and 1910. 



BELOW: The patient on the sand painting. Silver printing out paper print by Simeon Schwemberger, 1 906. LOT 11891 (LC- 
USZ62-1 03650). Prints and Photographs Division. 



In this rare image of a healing ritual inside a Navajo hogan in Arizona, the patient is seated on a sand painting while a 
masked participant in the ritual, a Yebichai, sits on a nearby blanket . Such healing ceremonies, still practiced today, took as 
long as nine days, requiring sweat baths, memorized chants, and intricate sand paintings such as the one pictured here. 





Hopi artists. Albumen stereographic print, copyrighted by 
Underwood & Underwood, 1903. Stereo file (LC-USZ62- 
57189, full stereograph; LC-USZ62-4691 8, single image). 
Prints and Photographs Division. 



In this stereograph, two women look on as the potters 
decorate their wares inside a pueblo room on the Hopi 
Reservation in Arizona. The traditional squash blossom 
hairstyles of the two young women standing in this photo- 
graph denote their unmarried status. 



Full delegation of Sioux Indians in Washington, 1891. Al- 
bumen print by C. M. Bell, 1891. LOT 12566 (LC-USZ62- 
4536). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Photographs of Indian delegations to Washington are 
among the earliest and most extensive historical records 
of Native American diplomacy This Sioux delegation of 
prominent tribal leaders came to Washington , D.C., in 
an effort to hold the government to the terms of existing 
treaties. The names of the individuals shown are printed on 
the studio mount. 





Mathematics class, Carlisle Indian School. Cyanotype print by Frances Benjamin Johnston, 1903. LOT 12369 (LC-USZ62- 
72450). Prints and Photographs Division. 



/\s part of the U.S. government's late nineteenth and early twentieth century assimilation policy, Indian children were fre- 
quently enrolled in boarding schools away from their reservations. Photographs documenting student life at the highly regi- 
mented institutions often portray Indian children wearing clothing and hairstyles of the dominant white culture. Such im- 
ages were used to publicize this "civilizing" or "transformation" process advocated by school officials. 







180 PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 





Images of Indians in Advertising. [LEFT:] "Cleveland Cycles." Color litho- 
graphic poster by Jean de Raleologue, Paris, c. 1897. POS-U.S. P349, no. 6 
(D size). (LC-USZC4-3893, color; LC-USZ62-80342, black and white). 
[RIGHT:] "Harris, Beebe & Company— The Pocahontas Chewing Tobacco " 
Color lithograph by the Hatch Lithograph Co., New York City, 1868. LOT 
10618-48 (LC-USZC4-1071). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Invoking native culture's traditional use of herbs and plants, nineteenth cen- 
tury tobacco and patent medicine industries incorporated images of famous 
Indians into graphic designs on labels (such as Pocahontas, right). Fictional- 
ized depictions of Indians also appeared in product advertisements , often with 
seemingly little or misconstrued link to native cultures , such as this poster of a 
hatchet-waving Plains Indian on a bicycle. 

BEST copy available 








Buffalo Bill's Wild West and Congress of Rough Riders of the World. Color lithograph by Courier Lithographic Company, 

1 899. Poster Collection, POS-CIRCUS-Buff.BilL 1 899, no. 3 (C size). (LC-USZ62-1 1 64, black and white, and LC-USZC4- 
778, color). Prints and Photographs Division. 



The Wild West Show became a popular entertainment for people east of the Mississippi and in Europe . Freed from the 
confines of their reservations, the Indian performers helped recreate wagon attacks and sham battles and performed tradi- 
tional dances in the productions. The Poster Collection in the Prints and Photographs Division houses several of the litho- 
graphs used to advertise these extravaganzas. 









SLOtf 



‘* : y. ■ -- % ; v‘ ; v*V ; ' : --^v% ’■■*'. *-'-:«i'.\i ■■■. ' ■ 

PRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



1 8 3 






FAR LEFT: Old Woman, Acoma Pueblo. Platinum print by 
Laura Gilpin, 1939. LOT 4522 (LC-USZ62-36220). Prints 
and Photographs Division. 



Laura Gilpin, an acclaimed Southwestern photographer, is 
noted for both her intimate portraits and monumental land- 
scapes. This woman of the Acoma Pueblo wears several 
strands of beads and a Navajo silver necklace with squash 
blossoms. The traditional woven black manta and strip wo- 
ven belt is worn over a cotton print blouse and covered 
with a check cloth apron. The eclectic style is typical of the 
clothing worn by the Pueblo women during the first years 
of the twentieth century : 



LEFT: Joe Black Fox , a Sioux Indian from Buffalo Bill's Wild 
West Show. Silver gelatin print from original glass negative 
by Gertrude Kasebier, 1901. LOT 101 36 (LC-K2-65). Prints 
and Photographs Division. 



Gertrude Kasebier, a leading figure in the Pictorial ist move- 
ment in photography, created this sensitive portrait in her 
New York City studio. Pictorial ist photographers tended to 
create artistically pleasing or idealized images of Indian 
life. Works by many American pictorialists are included in 
the Library's photography collections. 



RIGHT: Navajo smile. Silver gelatin print by Edward S. Cur- 
tis, c. 1904. LOT 12311 (LC-USZ62-46943)’. Prints and 
Photographs Division. 



Edward S. Curtis, the best-known photographer of Indians 
and Indian life, was a master at presenting the stoic, van- 
ishing American in his romantic images. This distinctive, 
atypical portrait of a young Navajo woman, smiling and 
unreserved, is among the many Curtis photographs held by 
the division that were not published by him. 



o 





2P5 







1 8 4 



PRINTS ANQ PHOTOGRAPHS DIVISION 



5ri 

si 





o 

ERIC 



S?^TJZ an p d C . aPta !, n Ju Ck <Km, P UaSh> - Albumen P ri "‘ by Louis Heller, 1873. LOT 11480 (LC- 
UbZ62-45903). Prints and Photographs Division. 



After an aggressive two-year struggle to reclaim their ancestral lands from the U.S. government the 

lion Scho'rh S °I C h' ( °Tr SU . rrended to militar Y officers in ,873 - Modoc leaders of the rebel- 

foe, " ^ » <fe **/, before 



206 



Signs behind the bar, Birney, Montana. Silver gelatin print 
by Marion Post Wolcott, 1941 . Farm Security Administra- 
tion Collection (LC-USF34-58504-D). Prints and Pho- 
tographs Division. 



The federal government restricted the sale of alcohol to In- 
dian people , in varying degrees, until 1953. Although in- 
tended to enforce such legislation, signs in taverns often re- 
inforced discrimination against Indians. The sentimental 
banner "God Bless America — Life, Liberty and Justice for 
all/' pictured here on the left, is an ironic juxtaposition. 



Mitchell Red Cloud, Congressional Medal of Honor recipi- 
ent. Silver gelatin print, U.S. Army, c. 1940. New York 
World-Telegram and Sun Collection (LC-USZ62-109610). 
Prints and Photographs Division. 



Mitchell Red Cloud, a Winnebago Indian from Wisconsin, 
posed for this portrait when he was a World War II Marine 
sergeant. After heroic service in the Korean War, Red 
Cloud was posthumously awarded the medal of honor. 
Distinguished military veterans are highly honored by their 
family tribes in traditional ceremonies , usually during pow- 
wows held on their reservations. 






o 

ERIC 




GEOGRAPHY AND 



INTRODUCTION 



MAP DIVISION 



Land and environment are fundamental to 
American Indian culture and history and also 
central to Indian /non-Indian relations. As the 
primary means of storing geographical knowl- 
edge and experience and communicating loca- 
tional and spatial information, maps are links be- 
tween landscape and history, and although often 
overlooked, they are potentially rich sources of 
historical information for Indian studies. Maps 
provide a graphic representation of an almost 
five hundred-year historical record of the physi- 
cal and cultural landscape of America. As such 
they reflect the changes set in motion by the ar- 
rival of Europeans in America and the subse- 
quent competition for control of the land. In 
many cases the maps most valuable for the study 
of Indian history are those that are not spe- 
cifically devoted to Indian matters but include 
such Indian-related geographic data as place 
names, settlement sites, trails, and tribal range as 
part of recording the known geographic land- 
scape. In addition to their historical value, maps 
are tools for portraying the present-day physical 
environment and natural resources of Indian 
lands. 

Maps are not, however, only neutral and im- 
partial mirrors of nature. What is depicted and 
what is omitted from the cartographic record, 
either inadvertently or intentionally, reveal as- 
pects of the cultural values and attitudes of the 
map-maker and the social and political climate 
in which the map was constructed. Since maps 
of North America are almost exclusively Euro- 
American in origin, the cartographic depiction 
of Indian cultures and environments is primarily 
a reflection of the non-Indian population's per- 
ceptions of, and attitudes toward, indigenous 
peoples and their lands. These attitudes are also 
revealed in the imagery of the title cartouche and 
vignettes that appear on a variety of continental. 




2 08 




GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



1 8 7 



national, and regional maps. The imagery may 
depict either noble or ignoble stereotypes, as- 
pects of Indian culture and environment, the in- 
teraction of Indians and whites (often depicting 
trade relationships), and the Indian as a sym- 
bolic representation for the continent of North 
America. 

In the contest over land rights, maps and 
mapping can be seen as tools for defining power 
relationships and symbolizing authority. As a 
means for documenting as well as legitimizing 
the transfer of land rights from Indian to non-In- 
dian control, maps were tools for promoting and 
promulgating the Euro-American appropriation 
of territory. In particular, as tools for identifying 
and publicizing information about the existence 
and location of valuable natural resources, maps 
had a direct effect on Indian groups' use and 
control of their environment. Even maps spe- 
cifically of established and recognized Indian 
lands were often not intended to portray Indian 
affairs, but rather reflected the interest of others 
in acquiring rights to those lands. 

The Library's cartographic holdings relating 
to Indian studies are neither comprehensive nor 
easily identified, but the coverage is broad and 
embraces those aspects of Indian society and cul- 
ture that have been traditionally mapped. Em- 
phasis has been on mappable characteristics as- 
sociated with the Indians' physical world and 
historical distribution. Little cartographic atten- 
tion has been given to social or political issues af- 
fecting Indian lives. 

Cartographic works, including reproductions 
of historical maps, are frequently illustrative 
supplements to textual works. Consequently, 
significant maps can be found in most parts of 
the Library's diverse collections. The majority of 
the Library's cartographic holdings are, however, 
held in the Geography and Map Division, and 
the focus of this chapter is on that division's 
collections. 



0 




USING THE COLLECTIONS 

GEOGRAPHY AND MAP 
READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Madison Building, Basement, Room 
B01 ; telephone (202) 707-6277 

HOURS: Monday to Friday, 8:30 A. M. -5:00 P.M. 

Access to collections is restricted. Reference service 
is available by mail and telephone, but to make full 
use of the Geography and Map Division's collections 
and reference services a personal visit is recom- 
mended. Limited "quick-copy" photocopying facili- 
ties are available in the Reading Room and a variety 
of other photoreproduction services can be ordered 
from the Library's Photoduplication Service. 

The Geography and Map Division has custody 
of a cartographic collection of over 4.5 million 
items. Unfortunately, there is neither a compre- 
hensive catalog of the division's holdings nor a 
guide to its resources for Indian studies. The di- 
vision's Indian-related cartographic holdings are 
composed primarily of governmental (federal) 
and commercial printed materials. The division 
also has a number of manuscript maps and a 
valuable collection of photostatic reproductions 
of maps from European archives and libraries 
which primarily supplement its coverage of the 
colonial period. 

The Geography and Map Division maintains 
a number of organizational and filing schemes 
for its cartographic materials and, because of this 
variety, researchers must consult with the divi- 
sion's reference staff. The following are the major 
collections which contain cartographic material 
of value for Indian studies: 

MARC Maps Collection 

Maps acquired since 1968 have been cataloged 
in the Library's MARC Maps format and are 
searchable through the computer catalog in the 
same way one would search for textual records. 



203 



1 8 8 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



Computer-based searches on MUMS can be lim- 
ited to map records by appending the term 
,, ;file=maps ,/ to the search entry. SCORPIO 
searches can be limited to the maps file by enter- 
ing "bgns gmap." 

Uncataloged/Titled Collection 

The majority of maps received prior to 1968, in- 
cluding most of the maps of interest for Indian 
studies, are uncataloged and unclassified and 
will remain uncataloged for the foreseeable fu- 
ture. This Uncataloged /Titled collection is orga- 
nized primarily by geographic area and date. 
The geographic areas of concern for this resource 
study are North America, United States, and the 
individual states. These geographic areas are 
further subdivided by: a) subjects, b) miscella- 
neous geographic regions, c) first order admin- 
istrative divisions (county maps), and d) city 
plans. Since Indian-related maps fall within a 
great number of geographic areas, there are nu- 
merous possible filing locations for pertinent 
material. There are, however, two key filing loca- 
tions under each geographic heading where 
most of the material on American Indians will be 
found. The first and most important is in the 
"subject" files under the heading "Indians," and 
the second, which will contain fewer items of in- 
terest, is in the "miscellaneous geographic re- 
gions" files under the name of individual tribes. 
Other subject files, such as archaeology, history, 
military, linguistics, and wars, may also contain 
items of interest. 

Atlas Collection 

The majority of atlases are cataloged and search- 
able in the Library's computer catalog. In addi- 
tion, the Library's nine-volume A List of Geo- 
graphical Atlases in the Library of Congress by 
Philip L. Phillips and Clara Egli LeGear contains 



a fairly complete index to individual maps bound 
into atlases published prior to 1968. 

Vault Collection 

The division's rare globes, atlases, and maps, in- 
cluding all manuscript maps, are housed in a 
separate secure room. The "Vault" collection 
contains a combination of cataloged and uncata- 
loged material. Most of the separate maps in- 
cluded in the Vault collection are described in a 
preliminary vault shelflist which is available for 
examination in the division's reading room. 

The division's Vault collection holds two 
small manuscript collections which contain 
some Indian-related material. The Lewis and 
Clark Collection contains thirteen maps which 
belonged to the explorer William Clark. The 
maps were transferred to the Library by the 
Office of Indian Affairs in 1925. Several of the 
maps pertain to Clark's years as superintendent 
of Indian affairs. The Andrew Jackson Collection 
of eleven maps relates chiefly to General Jack- 
son's operations in the South during the War of 
1812 and his campaign against the Creek Indians 
in 1813 and 1814. 

□ SELECTED COLLECTIONS 

Although the maps of value for Indian studies 
are scattered geographically throughout the di- 
vision's collections, they fall in general within a 
number of subject categories related to the Indi- 
ans' physical and cultural environment. Some 
maps overlap into more than one category, but 
the following thematic structure provides a 
guide to the various Indian-related subjects for 
which the Library's cartographic collections offer 
research resources: 

■ General Reference and Bibliographic 

Resources 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



1 8 9 



■ Indian Maps, Mapping, and Geographic 
Knowledge 

■ Indian Lands, Village Sites, Tribal Range, 
Place Names, and Communication Routes 

■ Treaty Boundaries and Cessions 

■ Indian Territory 

■ Reservations and Allotments 

■ Indian Wars 

■ Ethnography, Linguistics, Distribution, and 
Archaeology 

■ Historical Maps 

■ Natural Resources 

Following topical introductions are brief de- 
scriptions of selected cartographic resources, 
which are listed in chronological order. All items 
cited are in the Geography and Map Division, 
unless noted otherwise. 

General Reference and 
Bibliographic Resources 

General coverage in a cartographic format of a 
variety of historical and cultural aspects of 
American Indian studies is found in the follow- 
ing works: 

Comparative Studies of North American Indians. 
Harold E. Driver and William C. Massey. In 
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 
(New Series, Vol. 47, part 2). Philadelphia: The 
American Philosophical Society, 1957; Q11.P6 — 
General Collections 

Contains 163 maps illustrating broad general- 
izations about the geographic distribution of 
aspects of the subsistence, material culture, 
economics, and social organization of North 
American Indians. 

Atlas of the North American Indian. Carl Wald- 
man. New York: Facts on File Publications, 1985; 



o 




E77.W195 1985 — General Collections and Geog- 
raphy and Map Reading Room 

Contains ninety-six maps dealing with cul- 
tural distribution, migrations, wars, settlement 
sites, and aspects of social issues. 

Atlas of Ancient America. Michael Coe, Dean 
Snow, and Elizabeth Benson. New York: Facts on 
File Publications, 1986; E61.C66 1986 — General 
Collections and Geography and Map Reading 
Room 

Although primarily text, this work contains 
several maps illustrating the climate, physical 
environment, and cultural groupings of pre-con- 
tact American Indians. 

Atlas of Great Lakes Indian History. Edited by 
Helen Hornbeck Tanner. Norman, Oklahoma: 
Published for the Newberry Library by the 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1987; E78.G7A87 
1987 — General Collections and Geography and 
Map Reading Room 

Contains thirty-three maps showing Indian 
battle sites, land cessions, and disease epidemics, 
and also a series of maps showing the changes in 
village sites and tribal distribution between the 
late prehistoric period and 1870. 

Atlas of American Indian Affairs. Francis Paul 
Prucha. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Ne- 
braska Press, 1990; G1201.E1P7 1990 — General 
Collections and Geography and Map Read- 
ing Room 

Contains 109 maps. In addition to the histori- 
cal coverage of land cessions, reservations, re- 
moval, and military engagements, it includes 
coverage of modern social issues and population 
distribution. 



The following bibliographic works, all of which 
can be found in the Geography and Map 



V . 



9 



1 9 0 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



Reading Room, list maps and atlases within the 
Library's collections, some of which will be of 
value for Indian studies: 

A List of Maps of America in the Library of Congress. 
P. Lee Phillips. Washington, D.C.: Library of 
Congress, 1901; Z881.U5 

Published in 1901, this bibliography is a valu- 
able, but not a comprehensive, guide to the maps 
of America in the Library's collections. 

United States Atlases: A List of National, State, 
County, City, and Regional Atlases in the Library of 
Congress. Compiled by Clara Egli LeGear. Wash- 
ington, D.C.: GPO, 1950; Z881.U5 1950 

Contains bibliographic descriptions of some 
1,400 county atlases dating from the late nine- 
teenth century, some of which will include de- 
tailed coverage of Indian lands 

Land Ownership Maps: A Checklist of Nineteenth 
Century United States County Maps in the Library 
of Congress. Compiled by Richard W. Stephen- 
son. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1967; Z6027.U5U54 
1967 

Contains bibliographic descriptions of nearly 
1,500 county landownership maps, ' some of 
which will include coverage of Indian lands. 

Maps and Charts of North America and the West In- 
dies. 1750-1759: A Guide to the Collections in the 
Library of Congress . Compiled by John R. Sellers 
and Patricia Molen van Ee. Washington, D.C.: Li- 
brary of Congress, 1981; Z6027.N68U54 1981 

The American Revolution in Drawings and Prints; a 
Checklist of 1765-1790 Graphics in the Library of 
Congress. Compiled by Donald H. Cresswell. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1975; E209.U54 1975 
Within this extensive work are reproductions 
as well as bibliographic descriptions of Indian 



imagery appearing in map cartouches and 
vignettes. 

A List of Geographical Atlases in the Library of Con- 
gress. 9 vols. Compiled by Philip Lee Phillips and 
Clara Egli LeGear. Washington, D.C.: Library of 
Congress, 1909-1992; Z6028.U56 

An extensive listing of atlases with a thorough 
index to the maps within the atlases. 



The following are additional reference resources 
and bibliographic works which identify Indian- 
related cartographic works. All can be examined 
in the Geography and Map Reading Room: 

Mapping the Transmississippi West, 1540-1861. 
Carl I. Wheat. 5 vols. in 6. San Francisco: The 
Institute of Historical Cartography, 1957-1963; 
GA405.W5 

Monumental history and bibliographic study 
of the mapping of the American West. 

The Bibliography of Cartography. Library of Con- 
gress, Geography and Map Division. 5 vols. 
Boston: G.K. Hall & Co., 1973; Z6028.U49 1973 
Two-volume supplement published in 1980. 
Contains citations to a few Indian-related maps 
and articles under the headings "Indians" and 
"Maps, primitive." 

Cartographic Records of the B urea u of Indian Affairs. 
Compiled by Laura E. Kelsay. Washington, D.C.: 
National Archives and Records Service, 1977; 
Z1209.2.U5U53 1977 

This is a revised edition of a bibliography by 
Kelsay published in 1954 under the title List of 
Cartographic Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 

Indianische Karten Nordamerikas, Beitrage zur his- 
torischen Kartographie vom 16. bis zum 19. Jahrhun- 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



1 9 1 



dert. Rainer Vollmar. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer 
Verlag, [1981]; E98.C17V64 1981 

Reproduces and describes many Indian-drawn 
cartographic works. 

U.S. Serial Set Index , Part XIV, Index and Carto- 
Bibliography of Maps, 1789-1969 . Edited by 
Donna P. Koepp. Bethesda, Md.: Congressional 
Information Service, 1996; Z1223.Z9C65 1973 
Multi-volume work containing a comprehen- 
sive index to, and complete bibliographic de- 
scriptions of, more than fifty thousand maps 
bound in the reports and documents comprising 
the Congressional Serial Set. Included are de- 
scriptions of maps depicting Indian ceded lands, 
migrations, reservations, village locations, battle 
sites, and burial grounds. 

Indian Maps, Mapping, 
and Geographic Knowledge 

Maps drawn by Indians and Indian mapping 
abilities have been documented in a number 
of sources, but because of their ephemeral na- 
ture, relatively few Indian-produced maps exist 
today. The indigenous population was often 
sought out by European explorers to guide or 
provide geographical information about un- 
known lands, and Indian guides were also often 
enlisted to provide reconnaissance data for mili- 
tary activities. Responses to solicitations for geo- 
graphic information were sometimes given in a 
cartographic format. The cartographic and geo- 
graphic information provided by Indians could 
appear in the explorer's report and might even- 
tually be incorporated into published maps. 
Maps drawn by Indians, as well as evidence of 
their contributions to European-produced maps, 
are valuable and rare documents for studying In- 
dian peoples' geographical knowledge and spa- 
tial understanding. They complement the oral 



0 




record, and they also help establish and clarify 
the Indians' role as guides and informants in fur- 
thering European explorations in North Amer- 
ica. The Geography and Map Division does not 
have original examples of Indian cartography 
which pre-date European contact, but it has two 
eighteenth-century manuscripts created by Indi- 
ans for use by Europeans and a few reproduc- 
tions and facsimiles of other maps drawn by 
Indians. 

Pintura que por Mandado de D[on] Fran[cisco] 
Balverde de Mercado factor de S.Maglestad] hizo 
Miguel yndio natural de la provincias de Nuevo 
Mexilcol. . . . [1602?] Photocopy from original 
manuscript in Archivo de las Indias, Seville. Map 
21 x 28 cm. Scale not given; New Mexico — 1602? 

Drawn by the Indian Miguel, this map of New 
Mexico is the earliest known example of Indian 
cartography in the United States. 

Virginia . Discovered and Described by Captain 
John Smith, 1606. Graven by William Hole. [Lon- 
don? 1624?] Map 32 x 41 cm. Scale ca. 1:1,290,000; 
G3880 1624 .S51 Vault, and Rare Book and Spe- 
cial Collections (see p. 38) 

Symbols on the Smith map distinguish the 
portions of the map which are based on informa- 
tion supplied by Indian informants. 

This Map describing the Scituation of the Several 
Nations of Indians to the NW. of South Carolina 
was Coppyed from a Draught drawn & painted on a 
Deer Skin by an Indian Cacique and Presented to 
Francis Nicholson Esqr., Governour of Carolina. . . . 
[ca. 1721] Photocopy, original manuscript in the 
British Museum, London. Col. map 81 x 118 cm. 
Scale not given; U.S. — South — Indians — 1721? 

This Catawba deerskin map shows an inter- 
connected network of tribes located on the South 
Carolina piedmont. It includes an inset of Charles- 
ton with its rectangular street grid pattern (p. 213). 



^ i “2 i 3 



1 9 2 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



Copy of a sketch of the Monongahela, with the field of 
battle, done by an Indian. [1755?] Manuscript map 
on sheet 26 x 27 cm. Scale not given; G3824.P6S26 
1755 .C6 Vault (see p. 215) 

Based on information provided by an uniden- 
tified Indian scout, this map depicts the site of 
the battle between English forces and the French 
and Indians near Fort Duquesne (Pittsburgh) on 
July 9, 1755. 

Map of the country about the Mississippi. Drawn by 
Chegeree (the Indian) who says he has travelled 
through the country. [1755?] Manuscript map on 
sheet 34 x 42 cm. Scale not given; G3300 1755 .C5 
Vault 

Shows Indian settlements in the area from 
Lake Erie to the mouth of the Ohio River. 

A New Map of the Cherokee Nation with the Names 
of the Towns & Rivers They are Situated on, No. Lat. 
from 34 to 36. Engrav'd from an Indian Draught 
by T. Kitchin. For the London Magazine. [London, 
1760] Map 18 x 23 cm. Scale ca. 1:1,100,000; 
G3865 1760 .K Vault 

Shows area between the head of the Savannah 
River and the Mississippi River. 

An Indian Map of the Upper-Missouri. 1801. Map 
19 x 50 cm. Scale not given; Kohl Collection 243 
Manuscript redrawing of a map by a Blackfeet 
Chief, which was given to the Hudson Bay Com- 
pany fur trader Peter Fidler in 1801. It shows the 
tributaries of the Upper Missouri River and sup- 
plies the Indian name for each branch. 

Wayishkee's Map of the Source of the Taquymenon 
and Maniste Rivers. 1826 [possibly 1820]. Manu- 
script map on sheet 41 x 35 cm. Scale not given; 
Henry Rowe Schoolcraft Papers (Oversized ma- 
terial container 91). Manuscript Division 

This manuscript map shows headwaters of 
the Manistique and Tahquanmenon Rivers in the 
Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 



[Map copied from one drawn by the Tassel, and some 
other head-men of the Cherokees, to describe their ter- 
ritorial claims. 1 785] Photocopy from Misc. U.S. 
Congressional Doc. no. 25, 33d Congress, 2d. 
Session. 1855. Map on sheet 36 x 28 cm. Scale not 
given; Tennessee — Indians — 1785 

Shows area between Savannah River and Mis- 
sissippi River. 

[Map of New Archangel (Sitka, 1841?) Made by a 
Native during the Russian occupancy, 1841?]. Fac- 
simile printed in 1977? Col. map on sheet 42 x 50 
cm. Scale not given; G4374.S5A5 1841 .M3 1977 
Drawn by an unknown Indian, this map 
shows native and Russian settlements at Novo- 
Arkangel'sk (New Archangel), Alaska. 

[Lean Wolfs map from Fort Berthold to Fort Buford, 
Dakota, along the Missouri River. 1878] Redrawing 
from 4th annual Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, 1885. Map on sheet 14 x 20 cm. Scale 
not given; U.S. — Indians — 1878 

Shows footprints of Lean Wolf's route to Fort 
Buford to steal a horse; his return route is shown 
by hoof prints. 

Sketch of the Akularak Slough from the Catholic Mis- 
sion to near the Yukon River, drawn by a native. 
Copied from original in possession of Father 
Bamum, March 1899 . . . Blueprint map on sheet 
32 x 20 cm. Scale not given; Alaska — Akularak 
Slough — 1899 

Depicts watercourse in the Yukon River Delta 
and shows village locations. 

The Archive of North American Indian Maps on CD- 
ROM. Edited by Sona Andrews, David Tilton, 
and Mark Warhus. Milwaukee: University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Department of Geogra- 
phy; forthcoming. 

Contains high resolution reproductions ac- 
companied by bibliographic and textual descrip- 
tions of over 400 maps of areas of the United 
States and Canada drawn by Indians. 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



1 9 3 



Indian Lands, Village Sites, 

Tribal Range, Place Names, 
and Communication Routes 

The Geography and Map Division holds a very 
large group of maps, both historic and current, 
which in most cases were not intended to spe- 
cifically describe the Indian environment, but 
which nevertheless record such cultural data as 
village locations and tribal range. A large com- 
ponent of this category, and one of value for an- 
thropological and archaeological studies, is the 
series of maps that portray the landscape at the 
time of Euro- American contact and exploration. 
Since exploration of North America was an evo- 
lutionary process that began with maritime ex- 
peditions and continued almost four hundred 
years, maps illustrating the contact period for a 
coastal area may differ greatly in date from those 
of interior regions of the continent. 

With the advancement of Euro-American 
settlement, much of the Indian cultural data 
recorded on early maps was replaced by depic- 
tions of the evidence of non-Indian occupancy. 
When these maps are studied over time, they can 
provide insight into tribal migrations as well as 
intertribal and Indian /non- Indian relations. 

This category encompasses thousands of 
maps dating from the time of first European 
contacts to the present. It includes small-scale 
maps of North America, general maps of the 
United States, early state maps, regional maps, 
county maps, and even some city plans. For ex- 
ample, large-scale county landownership maps 
and atlases published from the mid-nineteenth 
century to the present may provide information 
about Indian landownership and the sale of 
reservation lands. Even large-scale nineteenth 
century hydrographic charts of the Pacific coast 
published by the United States, Great Britain, 
and Russia often include the location of, and 
sometimes significant detail about, coastal In- 
dian settlements. 



o 




The maps in this category are also valuable re- 
sources for tracing Indian place names. When 
correctly deciphered, indigenous place names 
are linguistic artifacts containing environmental 
and historical meaning. In addition, early maps 
may record the trails and communication routes 
of aboriginal people, routes which have in many 
cases determined the course of modern roads 
and influenced the location of American cities 
and towns. 

Modern mapping continues, at larger scales, to 
depict settlements, roads, names, and other cul- 
tural features of Indian reservations. The i : 24,000 
scale and x: 100,000 scale topographic mapping 
of the United States by the U.S. Geological Sur- 
vey, for example, portrays the current physical 
and cultural landscape of Indian reservations. 

Descripsion des costs , pts., rades , illes de la Nouuele 
France faict selon son vray meridien . . . Samuel de 
Champlain, 1607. Manuscript map on vellum 
37 x 55 cm. Scale ca. 1 : 1,500,000; Vellum Chart 
Collection no. 15 

Based on Champlain's explorations and ob- 
servations and his interviews with Indians, this 
map locates a number of French and Indian 
settlements on the northeast coast of North 
America. 

Manatus, Gelegen op de Noot Riuier . [Johannes 
Vingboons] 1639. Col. manuscript map 45 x 67 
cm. Scale ca. 1:170,000; Harrisse Collection — 
Vingboons Atlas, vol. 3, map 12 (see p. 213) 

Copied between 1665 and 1670 from Ving- 
boons' original 1639 manuscript, this map shows 
Manhattan Island and vicinity and locates and 
names Indian villages on Long Island. 

This represents the Charecke Nation by Col. Herberts 
map & my own observations with the path to Charles 
Town . . . , Certified by me, George Hunter, May 21, 
1730. Manuscript map 42 x 66 cm. Scale ca. 
1 : 1,500,000; G3860 1730 .FI8 Faden 6 Vault 




INDIAN REMOVAL ACROSS THE MISSISSIPPI 

!\OVOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOA 

^OAOfOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTAAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAATAAOT 

GATEWAYS 



Continued non-Indian population expansion 
after the American Revolution led to conflicts 
with Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River. 

By the early nineteenth century the United States 
government attitude toward Indians moved into 
a new phase. The post-1 780s policy of gradual, 
controlled expansion of white settlement and the 
acculturation (called "civilization") of Indians had 
not met its supporters' hopes. After the War of 
1 81 2 the idea of removing all eastern tribes 
across the Mississippi was urged more and more 
strongly. Proponents argued that the tribes ob- 
structed settlement and could be preserved only 
by separation from the undesirable influences of 
their non-Indian neighbors. Under President An- 
drew Jackson, Indian removal became federal 
policy, although Congress only narrowly ap- 
proved the Indian Removal Act (1830) authoriz- 
ing negotiation of removal treaties. 

Many tribes and some of their non-Indian sup- 
porters, however, saw the many U.S. -Indian land 
treaties as inviolable agreements between sover- 
eign nations, and attempted to fight removal on 
these grounds. These conceptions were dealt a 
blow by the Supreme Court in Cherokee Nation 
v. Georgia (1831), which deemed the Indian 
tribes "domestic dependent nations." Although 
the Supreme Court later barred application of 
Georgia law on Cherokee Nation lands {Worces- 
ter v. Georgia, 1831), President Jackson refused to 
enforce the Court's order. 



Of the voluntary and involuntary tribal move- 
ments west of the Mississippi, few were as trau- 
matic as those of the so-called "Five Civilized 
Tribes." The coercion of Cherokee, Chickasaw, 
Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole tribes into aban- 
doning their homelands for Indian Territory was 
ironic because many had adopted the larger 
American culture. Several families were more 
educated, cultured, industrious, and wealthy than 
their non-Indian neighbors. The Cherokee had 
constitutional government by 1827, practiced 
non-Indian agriculture, sought white education, 
and published a tribal newspaper facilitated by Se- 
quoyah's Cherokee syllabary. 

Tribes varied in their reaction to federal insis- 
tence on agreement to removal, and not all fac- 
tions within tribes accepted removal. These divi- 
sions sometimes led to bloodshed. In addition, 
some of the moves were harsh journeys that re- 
sulted in disease and death for significant num- 
bers; in the case of the Cherokee, this gave rise to 
the appellation of the path westward as "the Trail 
of Tears." 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Material on Indian removal 
across the Mississippi can be found in the Gen- 
eral Collections, the Local History and Genealogy 
Reading Room, the Law Library, and Manuscript, 
Rare Book and Special Collections, and Geogra- 
phy and Map Divisions. 




John Currin's bid of August 4, 1836, addressed to Capt. John Page, Superintendent of Creek Emigration. Thomas S. Jesup Pa- 
pers (LCMS-27771-1). Manuscript Division 



One of forty bids submitted during July and August 1836 for the removal of the Creek Indians from Georgia and Alabama to 
"homes west of the Mississippi," Currin's price of "twenty four dollars per head" for subsistence and transportation was at 
the low end of the bidding. His bid was rejected , however, because he failed to appear. 



216 



O'TOAO'TOAOVOAOVOAOVOAO'TOAO'TOAO'TOAO'VOAO'VOAOYOAO'TOAOYOAO ' 

OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTO, 






217 



1 9 5 



1 9 6 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



Shows path from Charleston, South Carolina 
to the Mississippi River and includes names of 
Indian villages. 

Description Geographica, de la parte que los Es- 
panoles poseen Actualmente en el Continent e de la 
Florida . . . 1670 . . . Drazvn in 174.2 by Antonio de 
Arredondo . Col. manuscript map 41 x 70 cm. Scale 
ca. 1:4,750,00; G3860 1742 .Ay 1914 Vault 

Copied in 1914 from the original in Archivo 
General de Indies, Seville, Spain, this map shows 
the route through the southeastern United States 
of Hernando de Soto (1539-43) and the Indian 
villages he visited. Another manuscript copy of 
this map is in the Manuscript Division, Hans P. 
Kraus Collection of Hispanic American Manu- 
scripts, #156. 

Plan du Fort des Sauvages Natchez Blocque par les 
Frangois le 20 Janvier 1731 . . . Photocopy. Map 25 
x 38 cm. Scale ca. 1:3,000; Louisiana — Sicily Is- 
land — 1731 

Copied from an original manuscript in Biblio- 
theque Nationale, Paris, the map shows the 
French attack on the Natchez settlement at Sicily 
Island, Louisiana. In addition to the military 
data, it shows the settlement pattern of a Natchez 
community. 

Carte Particuliere du Fleuve Saint Louis [Missis- 
sippi River], Dressee sur les Lieux avex les Noms des 
Sauvages du Pais , . . . [Henry Abraham Chatelain. 
1732] Map 37 x 46 cm. Scale ca. 1:11,500,00; 
U.S. — Great Lakes — 1732 

Shows Indian settlements in the Great Lakes 
region; it also includes legends listing Indian 
tribes and languages. 

[A trader's map of the Ohio country before 1733. John 
Patten. 1753?] Col. manuscript map 52 x 74 cm. 
Scale ca. 1:1,270,000; G3707.O5 1753. P3 Vault 
Attributed to the English fur trader John 
Patten, this map covers the area from Lake Erie 



to Virginia and shows Indian towns, trails, and 
portages. 

A Map of the British and French Dominions in North 
America , . . . John Mitchell. [London]: Sold by 
And: Miller, 1755. Col. map 136 x 195 cm. Scale 
ca. 1:2,000,000; G3300 1755 .M5 Vault Shelf 

One of the most important and complete car- 
tographic documents in American history, this 
map shows roads, frontier settlements, routes of 
exploration, and Indian settlements, fortifica- 
tions, and deserted villages. 

Mapa que comprende la Frontera de los Dominios del 
Rey en la America Septentrional . . . Joseph de 
Urrutia and Nicolas de LaFora. 1769. Col. manu- 
script map in four parts, each 64 x 163 cm. Scale 
ca. 1 : 1,350,000; G4410 1769 .V Vault 

Based on surveys conducted by Joseph de 
Urrutia and Nicolas de LaFora, this map shows 
the border areas of northern Mexico and the 
southwestern United States from the Gulf of 
Mexico to the eastern frontier of Texas. Pictorial 
symbols designate various Spanish and Indian 
settlements. 

Map of Alabama Constructed from the Surveys in the 
General Land Office and other Documents. John 
Melish. Philadelphia, 1819. Col. map 69 x 49 cm. 
Scale ca. 1:950,000; G3970 1819 .M4 Vault 

Shows Indian village sites, tribal territories, 
Indian battle sites, and Indian paths. 

A Map of Fox River and that part ofWinnebagoe Lake 
as contained within the limits of the cession of 1821 
by the Menominie and Winnebago Indians to the 
New York Tribes . . . Anonymous. 1832. Col. man- 
uscript map on sheet 52 x 72 cm. Scale not given; 
G4122.F7 1832 .M Vault 

Detailed plan of the town of Statesburgh es- 
tablished by Munsee and Stockbridge Indians on 
the Fox River in Wisconsin. 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



1 9 7 



[Map of the western United States, from 91 0 to 119 0 
West longitude and 36° to 50° North latitude] Re- 
spectfully presented to Col. D. D. Mitchell by P. J. 
De Smet, Soc. Jes., 1851. Col. manuscript map 89 
x 168 cm. Scale 1:2,200,000; G4050 1851 .S Vault 
Oversize (see p. 219) 

Drawn by Father P. J. De Smet, a Jesuit mis- 
sionary to the western Indians, this map shows 
tribal lands. Some scholars believe it was made 
in conjunction with the Treaty of Fort Laramie 
concluded in 1851 between the United States and 
several Plains Indian tribes. 

Map of the Territory of the United States from the 
Mississippi to the Pacific Ocean; . . . Lieut. G. K. 
Warren. Office of R.R. Surveys, War Dept. 
[Washington, D.C.: War Dept., 1857] Col. map 
108 x 118 cm. Scale 1 13,000,000; G4050 1857 .W32 
Vault 

Displays tribal territories and some Indian 
villages. 

U.S. Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Meri- 
dian. Lieut. Geo. M. Wheeler, U.S. Army in 
charge. [Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1873-89] Map sheets 45 x 53 cm. 
Scales 1:253,440 and 1:506,880; G1380.U56 1873 
Vault 

Wheeler produced nearly one hundred 
medium-scale topographic maps of much of the 
southwestern United States based on field sur- 
veys conducted between 1871 and 1879. These 
detailed maps include Indian names and show 
the locations of Indian settlements, trails, and 
ruins. 

Standard Atlas of Becker County, Minnesota . . . 
Compiled and published by Geo. A. Ogle & Co. 
Chicago, 1911; G1428.B2O3 1911 

This atlas shows detailed physical, cultural, 
and cadastral information about Becker County, 
including coverage of a portion of the White 
Earth Indian Reservation. Like many other late 

o 




nineteenth- and early twentieth-century county 
maps and atlases, this work contains landowner- 
ship information, including references to Indian 
landownership. 

Map of the Navajo Country: Arizona, Nezv Mexico, 
and Utah. U.S. Geological Survey Professional 
Paper 93, plate 1. [Washington, D.C.], 1916. Col. 
map 61 x 76 cm. Scale 1 : 500,000; U.S. — Indians — 
1916 

Shows roads, trails, schools, missions, ruins, 
and routes of scientific explorations between 
1853 and 1906. 

Indian Villages of the Illinois Country. Compiled by 
Sara Jones Tucker. Volume II, Scientific Papers, 
Illinois State Museum, part 1, Atlas. Springfield: 
Illinois State Library, 1942; G1406.E1T8 1942 

Contains reproductions of fifty-four maps re- 
lating to the Indian occupation of the central 
United States. In 1975, Tucker's atlas was re- 
printed with a supplement of thirty-nine addi- 
tional maps compiled by Wayne C. Temple. 

Treaty Boundaries and Cessions 

The first permanent Euro-American settlements 
began a pattern of Indian displacement and land 
appropriation that continued until the twentieth 
century. The agreements and treaties which re- 
sulted in the progressive extinguishing of Indian 
title and the cession and surrender of Indian 
lands were often accompanied, or soon followed, 
by surveys of the boundaries of the ceded lands. 
The Geography and Map Division has only a 
few surveys of individual cessions in the United 
States. As records of official governmental deci- 
sions and actions, most boundary and cession 
maps will be found in the National Archives and 
Records Administration. In addition to the sur- 
veys of individual cessions, there have been a 
number of maps which depict the history of the 




1 9 8 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



cession of Indian lands. As documentation of 
tribal land use and occupancy, cession and treaty 
boundary maps have been important legal 
sources for Indian land claims. 

A Map of the Lands Ceded by the Cherokee Indians to 
the State of South Carolina at a Congress held in 
May , A.D. 1777; containing about i,6yj,joo acres 
[1777?]. Col. manuscript map 51 x 60 cm. Scale 
ca. 1:250,000; G3910 1777 .M3 Vault (see p. 217) 
Shows the lands ceded to the states of South 
Carolina and Georgia by the Cherokee follow- 
ing their defeat during the American Revolution- 
ary War. 

Sketch of the coast of which the Creek Indians have 
been deprived by the Americans on both sides of the 
River Apalachicola. Anonymous. 1814? Col. man- 
uscript map 49 x 60 cm. Scale ca. 1:1,900,000; 
G3941.E1 1814 .M Vault 

Shows the tribal areas of the southeastern 
United States. In what is now Alabama, a large 
area is labeled "Lands which the Americans 
obliged the Indians to cede lately by which 
means their communication is cut off from 
the Sea." 

Map by which the Creek Indians gave their Statement 
at Fort Strother on the 22nd. Jciny. 1816. John Cof- 
fee. Manuscript map 25 x 39 cm. Scale note 
given; Andrew Jackson Collection no. 4 

Covering the Creek lands in Alabama and 
Georgia, this map was apparently drawn by John 
Coffee, one of the commissioners appointed in 
1816 to survey the boundary of the lands ceded 
by the Creek following their defeat in 1814 at the 
Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Prior to beginning this 
survey. Coffee interviewed some of the Creek 
headmen regarding the boundaries of the Creek 
Nation. A note on the verso of the map contains 
"Spokehajo's [spelling unclear] Statement" of the 
extent of Creek lands. 




Plat of the Survey of the Delaware Lands and Out- 
let, north ofKanzas River (on sheet No. 1, No. 2, and 
No. 3), according to the Treaty of September 24, 1829, 
ratified by the Senate of the U.S . , May 29, 1830. Isaac 
McCoy, Surveyor. December 30, 1830. Col. man- 
uscript map 33 x 118 cm. Scale ca. 1:320,000; 
G4200 1830 .M Vault Oversize 

Shows the strip of land in northeastern 
Kansas granted to the Delaware in 1829, which 
was later surrendered by treaties. 

A Map of the Choctaw Territory in Alabama, from the 
United States Surveys . Shelving each Section & Frac- 
tion Section. John La Tourrette. Mobile: 1833. Col. 
map 62 x 27 cm. Scale ca. 1:280,000; Alabama — 
Choctaw Territory — 1833 

The Choctaw were the first of the "Five Civi- 
lized Tribes" to relocate on western lands, mov- 
ing across the Mississippi between 1830 and 
1833. This map depicts the former Choctaw 
Territory as it was being opened for white 
settlement. 

Map Exhibiting the position of the Lands occupied by 
Indian Tribes in Amity with the United States; and 
also the Lands ceded to the United States by Treaty 
with various Indian Tribes. Compiled in the Bu- 
reau of Topographical Engineers, from the Maps 
of Capt. Wash. Hood; C.T.E. and I. McCoy, Esq. 
with additions in compliance with a Resolution 
of the Senate, 1839. J. Goldsborough Bruff, Del. 
Col. map 115 x 192 cm. Scale 1:2,000,000; G3701 
.G5 1839 .B Vault 

The base map is a commercially published 
1839 map of the United States which has been 
heavily annotated to illustrate cession bound- 
aries. The map also includes legends detailing 
Indian land cessions. Twelve copies of this map 
were produced by the War Department. 

Map of the Mineral Lands upon Lake Superior ceded 
to the United States Government by treaty of 1842 
with the Chippeway Indians. Drawn by A. B. Gray. 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



1 9 9 



Col. manuscript map 70 x 96 cm. Scale ca. 
1:455,000; G4112.U6H1 1845 .G Vault 

Shows lands adjacent to Lake Superior in 
Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota, and loca- 
tions of U.S. Mineral Land Agency, Methodist 
and Catholic missions, and American Fur Com- 
pany posts. 

Map of the State of Indiana, Exhibiting the Lands 
ceded by the Indian Tribes to the United States. C. C. 
Royce. [Washington, D.C.] Bureau of Ethnology, 
188-?] Col. map 81 x 58 cm. Scale 1:633,600; In- 
diana — Indians — 188-? 

Delineates Indian land cessions and locates 
Indian towns and villages. 

Map of the Former Territorial Limits of the Cherokee 
"Nation of" Indians. Exhibiting the Boundaries of the 
Various Cessions of Land Made by Them to the 
Colonies and to the United States . . . C. C. Royce. 
U.S. Bureau of Ethnology, 5th Annual Report, 
pi. VIII. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Ethnology, 
1884. Col. map 72 x 80 cm. Scale ca. 1: 1,000,000; 
U.S. — Indians — 1884 

Includes portions of Virginia, West Virginia, 
North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Al- 
abama, Tennessee, and Kentucky and shows In- 
dian place names, paths, and villages. 

Indian Land Cessions in the United States. Comp, 
by Charles C. Royce. U.S. Bureau of American 
Ethnology. 18th Annual Report, 1896-97. Wash- 
ington, D.C., 1899; G1201.G6R7 1899 

Contains sixty-seven maps illustrating the 
history of Indian land cessions. A comprehen- 
sive study of Indian land cessions, it was used as 
the geographical basis for land claims litigation 
heard by the Indian Claims Commission. 

Indian Land Cessions. Sam B. Hilliard. Map sup- 
plement no. 16, Annals of the Association of 
American Geographers, vol. 62, no. 2, June 1972. 
New York: Association of American Geogra- 

o 




phers, 1972. Col. map 114 x 86 cm. Scale ca. 
1:10,000,000; G3701.E1 1972 .H5 

Seven maps on one sheet, five show the extent 
of Indian land cessions for the periods 1784- 
1819, 1820-39, 1840-59, 1860-79, anc * 1880- 
1972; the others show "Land Claim by Tribe" 
and "Present Indian Reservations." 

Garland American Indian Ethnohistory Series. Com- 
piled and edited by David Agree Horr. New 
York: Garland Publishing Inc. The individual 
volumes are filed in the Library's General Collec- 
tions under each tribe's unique classification 
number. See also the Indian Claims Commission in 
the Microform Reading Room section of this 
guide. 

Published in the 1970s, the multi-volume Gar- 
land American Indian Ethnohistory series contains 
historical and anthropological documents that 
were presented as evidence before the Indian 
Claims Commission in the 1950s, 60s, and 70s. 
Map reproductions were often included in the 
volumes of this series to illustrate the claims of 
various tribes to certain geographical regions. 

Indian Land Areas Judicially Established. Prepared 
under the direction of the Indian Claims Com- 
mission as part of its final report. Reston, Vir- 
ginia: U.S. Geological Survey, 1978. Col. map 89 x 
123 cm. Scale 1:4,000,000; G3701.E1 1978 .U5 
Portrays the results of cases before the U.S. 
Indian Claims Commission or U.S. Court of 
Claims, in which an American Indian tribe 
proved their original tribal land occupancy. 

Indian Territory 

A movement began in the United States in the 
early nineteenth century to remove Indian tribes 
from their ancestral lands in the rapidly develop- 
ing eastern states and settle them in the newly 
acquired and largely uninhabited western lands. 
The Indian Removal Act of 1830 established 




2 0 0 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



the government policy of relocating the eastern 
tribes to a separate, reserved "Indian Territory" 
west of the Mississippi. A chronology of contem- 
poraneous maps of the Indian Territory reveals 
the continuous loss of portions of this reserved 
land due to the pressure from non-Indian settlers 
and commercial interests to open Indian lands 
for non-Indian use. By the 1870s, Indian Terri- 
tory — which had once extended from the pre- 
sent Texas-Oklahoma border to the Nebraska- 
Dakota border — had shrunk to encompass only 
what is today most of the state of Oklahoma. The 
Geography and Map Division has a good collec- 
tion of maps, both federal and commercial pub- 
lications, which document the diminishing of 
Indian Territory. There is also good coverage 
of Indian and Oklahoma Territories from the 
post-Civil War period to 1907 (when the remain- 
ing portions of Indian Territory were incor- 
porated into the newly formed state of Okla- 
homa), and maps of individual parcels of land, 
such as the "Cherokee Outlet," which were 
ceded to the United States and opened for non- 
Indian settlement. 

A Map of a Portion of the Indian Country Lying East 
and West of the Mississippi River . . . Constructed 
for the Topographical Bureau by G. W. F[eather- 
stonehaugh]. [Washington, D.C.?], 1835. Map 67 
x 96 cm. Scale ca. 1:1,000,000; U.S. — North Cen- 
tral States — 1835 

Map of the northern Mississippi River basin 
showing Indian occupied lands, lands ceded to 
the federal government, and lands assigned to 
Indians removed from the eastern United States. 

Map Showing the Lands assigned to Emigrant Indi- 
ans West of Arkansas & Missouri. Prepared at the 
[U.S. Army] Topographical Bureau. [Washing- 
ton, D.C.] 1836. Col. map 49 x 46 cm. Scale ca. 
1 : 2,534,000; U.S. — Indians — 1836 (see p. 220) 

Shows boundaries of lands assigned to indi- 
vidual tribes, and includes legends listing the 



population of various Indian tribes and size of 
their land holdings. 

Plat of the Survey of the loway and Sauk Lands. W. S. 
Donahoe, Surveyor, 1837. Col. manuscript map 
on sheet 53 x 82 cm. Scale ca. 1 131,680; Lewis and 
Clark Collection "g" — Vault 

Shows Iowa and Sauk (Sac) lands in Kansas. 
One of several manuscript maps belonging to 
William Clark which were found in the Office of 
Indian Affairs in 1916. 

Map of the Nebraska and Kansas Territories. Show- 
ing the Location of the Indian Reserves , according 
to the Treaties of 1854. Compiled by S[eth] East- 
man, Captain, U.S. A. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 
Grambo & Co., 1854. Col. map 61 x 91 cm. Scale 
ca. 1 : 1,200,000; Nebraska — Indians — 1854 

Map of Eastern Kansas. E. B. Whitman & A. D. 
Searl, General Land Agents, Lawrence, Kansas. 
Boston: J. P. Jewett and Co., 1856. Col. map 69 x 
53 cm. Scale ca. 1 :515,00c; Kansas — 1856 

Features the Indian reservations in Kansas 
and also locates trading posts, missions, post 
offices, forts, Indian villages, roads, and trails. 
Includes inset of the federal government reserva- 
tion at Fort Riley. 

Map of the Shawnee & Wyandott Lands in the Terri- 
tory of Kansas. Compiled from the U.S. Surveys 
by Robt. J. Lawrence. Pittsburgh: Wm. Schuch- 
man & Bros., 1857. Col. map 68 x 71 cm. Scale ca. 
1 : 85,000; Kansas — Indians — 1857 

Shows roads, missions, Indian agencies, and 
names of selected settlers. 

Boundary of the Creek Country. Surveyed under 
the Direction of the Bureau of Topi. Engs. I. C. 
Woodruff, 1st Lieut., Topi. Engs. [1858] From: 
House Exec. Doc. No. 104, 35th Cong., 1st Sess. 
Map 61 x 94 cm. Scale 1 : 600,000; Oklahoma — In- 
dians — 1858 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



2 0 1 



Shows trails and Indian villages of the Creek 
lands in Oklahoma. 

Indian Territory with part of the adjoining State of 
Kansas &c. U.S. Engineer Bureau, War Dept., 
[Washington, D.C.] 1866. Col. map 50 x 63 cm. 
Scale 1:1,300,000; Oklahoma — 1866 

Annotated to illustrate reduction of Chero- 
kee, Seminole, Choctaw, and Creek tribal territo- 
ries resulting from Indian involvement in the 
Civil War on behalf of the Confederate cause. 

Indian Territory . Compiled from the official 
records of the General Land Office and other 
sources under supervision of Geo. U. Mayo. New 
York: U.S. General Land Office, 1887. From the 
papers of President Benjamin Harrison. Col. 
map 61 x 82 cm. Scale ca. 1:760,000; G4020 1887 
.U Vault 

This map contains extensive cultural detail re- 
lating to the reservations composing Indian Ter- 
ritory. It has also been annotated to illustrate the 
boundaries of the formation of Oklahoma Terri- 
tory within Indian Territory. 

Indian Territory . Compiled under the direction of 
the Hon. John H. Oberly, Commissioner of In- 
dian Affairs, by C. A. Maxwell. Baltimore, 1889. 
Col. map 62 x 81 cm. Scale ca. 1:760,000; Okla- 
homa — 1889 

Shows the lands occupied by the various 
tribes and includes details about land transfers 
and cessions. 

Map of the Indian and Oklahoma Territories. 
Chicago: Rand McNally & Co., 1892. Col. map 62 
x 82 cm. Scale ca. 1 :760,00c; Oklahoma — 1892 

Rand , McNally & Cos New Sectional Map of the 
Cherokee Outlet, to be opened to settlers at High 
Noon (Central Standard Time), Saturday, September 
16, 1893. [Chicago]: Rand, McNally & Co., 1893. 

o 



Col. map 49 x 112 cm. Scale ca. 1:310,000; Okla- 
homa — Cherokee Outlet — 1893 

One of several real estate promotional maps 
illustrating lands ceded to the United States and 
opened for white settlement. 

Trout & Wall's Map of the Ft. Sill Country. Duncan, 
I.T.: Trout & Wall, 1894. Col. map 87 x 57 cm. 
Scale ca. 1:250,000; Oklahoma — Indians — 1894 
Shows the Cheyenne, Arapaho, Wichita, 
Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache lands which 
were scheduled to be opened to homesteading. 

Tahlecjuah , Cherokee Nation, Ind. Terr. June 1896 
[New York]: Sanborn-Perris Map Com., 1896. 
Col. map 64 x 54 cm. Scale ca. 1:600; Sanborn 
Fire Insurance Map Collection (see p. 220) 

This 1896 set of three sheets is the second of 
nine editions of Sanborn fire insurance maps of 
Tahlequah published between 1894 and 1949. 
The Sanborn fire insurance maps provide de- 
tailed information about buildings in urban ar- 
eas. This edition of the Tahlequah series depicts 
such structures as the Cherokee Male and Fe- 
male Seminaries, the Cherokee National Capitol, 
and the Cherokee National Penitentiary. 

Map of the Choctaw Nation, Indian Territory. Com- 
piled and drawn by R. L. McAlpine. [Washing- 
ton, D.C.]: Department of the Interior, Commis- 
sion to the Five Civilized Tribes, 1903. Col. map 
96 x 84 cm. Scale ca. 1 1250,000; Oklahoma — Indi- 
ans — 1903 

Showing progress of land allotments and se- 
lections and the coal and asphalt regions, it is 
one of several maps appearing in the annual re- 
ports of the Commission to the Five Civilized 
Tribes. 

Proposed State of Oklahoma, Act of June 16, 1906. 
Compiled from official records in the General 
Land Office and other sources under the direc- 
tion of Frank Bond, Chief of Drafting Division, 



2 0 2 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



0 



General Land Office. Washington, D.C.: General 
Land Office, 1906. Col. map 56 x 108 cm. Scale ca. 
1 : 760,000; Oklahoma — 1906 

The Osage Nation's lands are shown as the 
only remaining tribal reserve. 

[Township Maps of the Cherokee Nation]. Musko- 
gee, Oklahoma: Indian Territory Map Company 
[1909]; G1365.I5 1909 (see p. 222) 

This atlas shows cadastral and landownership 
information for the Cherokee Nation lands. 

Trail of Tears National Historic Trail. Comprehensive 
Management and Use Plan , Map Supplement , Sep- 
tember 1992. Denver: U.S. National Park Service, 
1992; G1282.T7U5 1992 

Set of maps illustrating the water route and 
the three principal overland routes used during 
the forcible removal of the Cherokee people in 
1838-39. 

Reservations and Allotments 

By the mid-nineteenth century the policy of re- 
moval to one large Indian territory was replaced 
by a policy of isolating Indians on reservations. 
Maps of individual reserves make up a large part 
of the items included in the Geography and Map 
Division's subject files under the heading "Indi- 
ans" and in the miscellaneous geographic re- 
gions file under the names of the individual 
tribes. The reservation maps date from the 1830s 
to the present, but most of the division's cover- 
age is in the 1890-1950 time period. 

Many of the individual reservation maps 
were produced by the Office of Indian Affairs 
during the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s. The Geogra- 
phy and Map Division does not, however, have 
coverage of all reservations. The larger tribes 
with major land holdings are normally repre- 
sented by the greatest number of maps, while 
there may be no separate maps of smaller reser- 
vations. The cultural information contained on 



the maps varies, but generally includes such fea- 
tures as roads, trails, boundaries, schools, wells, 
fences, and buildings. Since the 1970s, the U.S. 
Bureau of Indian Affairs has published a series 
of single and multi-sheet "Highway System 
Maps" for some 175 reservations. These maps 
and map series provide detailed coverage of the 
current physical and cultural features of reserva- 
tions. In addition to the individual reservation 
maps, there is a rather extensive collection of 
small-scale maps of the United States dating 
from the early 1880s to the present which illus- 
trate the Indian reservation system. 

Within the collection of individual reserva- 
tion maps there is a category which relates to the 
General Allotment or Dawes Severalty Act of 
1887, and subsequent provisions to that act, 
which allowed for the allotment of tribal lands 
on certain reservations to individual Indians and 
the sale of unassigned lands to non-Indians (see 
pp. 156-7). The allotment policy led to the 
breakup of tribal land ownership and eventually 
resulted in the loss of over half of the Indian 
tribal lands before the termination of this policy 
in the 1930s. These allotment maps were primar- 
ily commercial publications prepared as promo- 
tional tools to advance the sale of unassigned 
lands. Because of their promotional character, 
they often contained information about the 
adaptability of the reservation lands for agricul- 
tural purposes. Another interesting feature of a 
few of the allotment maps is that, in the process 
of distinguishing allotted lands from unassigned 
lands, they included the names of Indian allot- 
tees, a feature of value for genealogical research. 

A Map of Allegany Reservation. Anonymous. 
[18-?] Col. manuscript map 22 x 30 cm. Scale ca. 
1:158,400; G3801.E2 18 — .M Vault 

Shows the Seneca Nation's Allegany Reserva- 
tion in Cattaraugus County, New York. 

Diagram of Indian Reservation on the Minnesota 
River. By Treaties with the Dakota or Sioux Indians 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



2 0 3 



of 23d. July & $thAugt. 1855. U.S. Surveyor Gener- 
als Office, St. Paul, 1859. Col. manuscript map 40 x 
48 cm. Scale ca. 1 : 510,000; G4141.E1 1855 .U Vault 

Shows alternate survey lines for the Sioux 
reservation adjacent to the Minnesota River. 
These reserved lands were ceded to the federal 
government in the 1860s. 

Territory of Arizona. Compiled from the official 
records of the General Land Office and other 
sources by C. Roeser. [Washington, D.C.]: Gen- 
eral Land Office, 1876. Col. map 59 x 73 cm. Scale 
ca. 1 : 1,150,000; Arizona — 1876 

This is one of several editions of the General 
Land Office map of Arizona published in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Viewed 
together, they illustrate the development of the 
reservation system in the state. Similar maps 
were produced for all the other western states. 

Map of Tuscarora Indian Reservation, Located and 
Platted A.D. 1890. Henry B. Carrington, U.S. 
Army, Special Agent, Indian Statistics, 11th U.S. 
Census. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1894. Col. map 
25 x 27 cm. Scale not given; New York — Indi- 
ans — 1890 

This map of the Tuscarora Reservation in Nia- 
gara County, New York, is one of several maps 
appearing in the Report on Indians Taxed and Indi- 
ans Not Taxed in the United States (Except Alaska) 
at the Eleventh Census, 1890 (U.S. Congressional 
Serial Set #3016). 

Map Showing Indian Reservations within the Limits 
of the United States. Compiled under the direction 
of the Hon. T. J. Morgan, Commissioner of In- 
dian Affairs. Washington, D.C., 1892. Col. map 
59 x 73 cm. Scale ca. 1 : 1,150,000; U.S. — Indians — 
1892 

One of numerous maps which indicate the lo- 
cation of Indian reservations. 

Allotment Map of the Oto and Missouri Indian 
§ rvation, 0 . T. R. S. Steele. 1902. Col. map 47 x 



70 cm. Scale ca. 1:42,000; Oklahoma — Indians — 
1902 

Names Indian allottees. 



Map of the Spokane Indian Reservation, Stevens 
County, Washington Showing Indian Allotments, 
with the Name of the Allotters, Lands to he opened to 
Homestead Entry marked "Agricultural Lands," 
Lands not Allotted or to he opened to Homestead En- 
try shown blank. Spokane, Washington: W. M. 
Manning, 1910. Col. map 46 x 89 cm. Scale ca. 
1:63,360; Washington — Spokane Indian Reser- 
vation — 1910 



Mescalero Indian Reservation, New Mexico. Com- 
piled from aerial photographic mosaics, with 
corrections from the field. [Washington, D.C.] 
Department of the Interior, Office of Indian 
Affairs, 1938. Col. map 82 x 117 cm. Scale ca. 
1:63,000; New Mexico — Indians, Mescalero 
Reservation — 1938 

Similar to many other maps of individual 
reservations published by the Office (Bureau) of 
Indian Affairs, it shows roads, trails, telephone 
lines, water sources, schools, and fire lookout 
stations. 



The Navajo Atlas: Environments, Resources, People, 
and History of the Dine Bikeyah. James M. Good- 
man. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1982; G1497.N3G6 1982 

Contains forty-eight maps dealing with the 
physical environment, history, population, liveli- 
hood, and resources of the Navajo, and includes 
a section on the Navajo-Hopi land dispute. 



A Zuni Atlas. T. J. Ferguson and E. Richard Hart. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1985; 
G1496.E1F4 1985 

Contains forty-four maps illustrating the 
physical environment, history, natural resources, 
and culture of the Zuni. 



AMERICAN INDIAN LAND AND OTHER CLAIMS 

/\OfOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAO?OAO?OAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAO?OA 

TOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOT 

GATEWAYS 



There are several different kinds of Indian claims, 
broadly considered, and a number of different 
venues in which the claims have been pursued. 
Indian claims can be for land, water rights, hunt- 
ing and fishing rights, mineral rights, or other 
financial or resource losses. Indian claims have 
been based on allegations of fraud, theft, duress, 
unconscionably low compensation, breach of 
contract, statutory violations, mismanagement, 
and erroneous actions, among other reasons, by 
federal, state, or private agents. Indian claims 
have been pursued in federal trial and appellate 
courts, U.S. claims courts, the Indian Claims 
Commission, state and local courts, the U.S. Con- 
gress, and state legislatures. Indian claims have 
been brought both by tribes, federally recognized 
and unrecognized, and by individuals. 

Land claims comprise the best known and 
longest lived claims. From 1863 to 1946, Indian 
claims against the U.S. needed an act from Con- 
gress granting jurisdiction to the U.S. Court of 
Claims to be heard. Congress created the Indian 
Claims Commission (1 946-78) to try to answer 
all Indian claims against the U.S. The Commis- 
sion received over six hundred claims and 
created a large body of ethnographic, ethno- 



historical, and legal records. Tribes continue to 
file claims in the U.S. Claims Court. Claims under 
the Indian Trade and Intercourse Act of 1 790, in- 
volving state acquisitions of Indian land without 
federal approval, have required action by both 
federal courts and Congress, as well as states. 
Settlements of Indian water rights claims have 
also required congressional action. 

The evidence brought forward in pursuing In- 
dian claims has come from Indian and non- 
Indian sources. The former group includes tribal 
representatives, delegates sent to petition the fed- 
eral government, and tribal members. The latter 
group includes, among others, travelers, mission- 
aries, soldiers, traders, and settlers; federal em- 
ployees such as Bureau of Indian Affairs agents 
and U.S. Army officers; and anthropologists, eth- 
nohistorians, economists, and other scientists. 

AOTOAOfO 

WHERETO LOOK: Library collections bearing on 
Indian claims include the Law Library, the Gen- 
eral Collections, Microform Reading Room, Local 
History and Genealogy Reading Room, and the 
Manuscript and Geography and Map Divisions. 



President Harry S. Truman is congratulated by representatives of the Oklahoma Choctaw and the Uncompahgre and Uintah 
Utes of Utah, after signing the Indian Claims Commission Act, August 1 3, 1 946. Collections of Encyclopedia Britannica. 
PRES FILE — Truman, Harry S. — Misc. political and social activities. (LC-USZ62-1 05437). Prints and Photographs Division. 




The Choctaw were one of the first tribes to win a claim under the Act, while the Ute tribes later won several large awards . 



yVOAOYOAO'TOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOYOAOVOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOVOAOVOAO'' 

>AOVOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOYOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOYOAOYOa 





2 0 5 





2 0 6 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 




Indian Land Areas. Compiled by the Handbook of 
North American Indians (Smithsonian Institution) 
in cooperation with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 
Prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey. Reston 
Va., 1989. Col. map 65 x 105 cm. Scale ca. 
1:5,000,000; G3701.G6 1989 .S6 

Shows federal and state reservations, Alaskan 
regional corporation lands, and federal Indian 
groups without reservations. 

Federal-aid Indian Road System Atlas. Bureau of In- 
dian Affairs, Division of Indian Affairs. [Albu- 
querque, N.M.]: Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1974-; 
G1201.P2U46 1974 

This atlas contains modem 1:63,360 scale 
maps which, in addition to portraying road and 
other transportation information, also show re- 
lief, drainage, administrative divisions, and 
building locations and usage within many In- 
dian reservations. 

Indian Wars 

Cartography has long been a valuable resource 
for illustrating and studying military events 
within their topographic and environmental 
context. Although there is no large collection of 
Indian battle maps in the Geography and Map 
Division, the existing examples are useful tools 
for depicting the hostilities between Indians and 
non-Indians. Many of the Indian-related military 
maps in the Geography and Map Division were 
issued by the federal government to illustrate the 
results of specific battles, but there are also ex- 
ample of maps depicting military campaigns, 
maps of the "seat of war," and reconnaissance 
maps. There are also numerous maps that simply 
give the locations of battle sites. No examples 
were located of maps portraying conflicts exclu- 
sively between rival Indian groups. 

Most of the Indian battle maps are filed in the 
Uncataloged /Titled collection under the head- 
ing "United States — Wars, Indian." Within this 

22B 



file of miscellaneous battle maps, the largest 
group relates to the French and Indian War. The 
maps of this war as well as those of the Revolu- 
tionary War contain very little data about the in- 
volvement or impact of the Indian participants. 
This file also contains a good collection of maps 
of the Seminole Wars in Florida, with particular 
emphasis on maps of the Second Seminole War 
from 1835-42. The single engagement most of- 
ten represented is the Battle of the Little Big 
Horn. 

A Prospective View of the Battle fought near Lake 
George, on the 8th of Sepr. 1755, between 2000 En- 
glish, with 250 Mohawks, under the command of 
Genl. Johnson: & 2500 French & Indians under the 
command of Genl. Dieskau. . . . Samuel Blodget, 
delin. T. Jefferys, sculp. London: Thomas Jef- 
ferys, 1756. In A General Topography of North 
America and the West Indies . . . 1768 by Thomas 
Jefferys. Col. map 29 x 51 cm. Scales differ; 
G1105.J4 1768 Vault, map no. 37 (see p. 217) 

Contains map of Hudson River and views of 
the two engagements between New Englanders 
and their Mohawk allies, and French troops and 
their Iroqois allies. 

Map of Gen. Sullivans march from Easton to the 
Senaca & Cayuga countries. [1779] Col. manuscript 
map 76 x 75 cm. Scale ca. 1:350,000; G3791.S3 
1779 .M3 Vault 

Shows the route of Gen. Sullivan's 1779 expe- 
dition against the Indians of the Finger Lakes 
region of New York. Indian villages are located 
and engagements shown. 

Battle of Tehoo [peka]. Anonymous. Manuscript 
map on sheet 21 x 13 cm. Scale not given; 
G3972.H6S42 1814 .B Vault 

Shows the decisive 1814 battle at Tohopeka or 
Horseshoe Bend on the Tallapoosa River, Ala- 
bama between U.S. regular army troops led by 
Andrew Jackson and Creek forces led by Red 
Eagle (William Weatherford). 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



2 0 7 



[Battle of Okeechobee, Florida, 1837] Anonymous. 
Col. manuscript map 32 x 40 cm. Scale ca. 
1 : 17,000; G3931.S1 1837 .B Vault 

General map of the Tampa Bay to Lake Okee- 
chobee region during the Second Seminole War; 
it includes an inset of the troop positions at the 
Lake Okeechobee battle site. 



ington, D.C., [1877?]. Col. map 55 x 117 cm. Scale 
ca. 1:2,000,000; U.S. — Wars, Indian — 1877? 

Coverage extends from the Pacific coast to the 
Dakota Territory. Shows Chief Joseph's route 
through Idaho, Wyoming, and Montana and 
includes detailed insets of each of the major 
engagements. 



Map of the Seat of War in East Florida. Compiled 
from various data in the U.S. Topi. Bureau under 
the direction of Col: John J. Abert, U.S. Top. 
Engr., by Wash: Hood. Washington, D.C., 1837. 
Col. map 118 x 69 cm. Scale ca. 1:330,000; U.S. — 
Wars, Indian — Florida — 1837 

Shows roads, Indian trails, fortifications, and 
battle sites for the 1835-37 campaign. 

Sketch of the Blue Water Creek embracing the field of 
action of the force under the command of Bvt. Brig. 
Genl W. S. Harney in the attack of the 3rd Sept. 
1855, on the "Brule" Band of the Indian Chief Little 
Thunder. Made by Lieut G. K. Warren, Topi. 
Engr. of the Expedition. Sen. Ex. Doc. 76, 1st 
Sess., 34th Cong. [Washington, D.C.: 1855?]. Col. 
map 23 x 15 cm. Scale ca. 1:85,000; U.S.-Wars, In- 
dian — Nebraska — 1855 (see p. 216) 

The sketch llustrates the surprise attack by 
federal forces on the Brule Sioux band at Blue 
Water Creek, Nebraska. 



Custer's Battle-Field (June 23th, 1876). Surveyed 
and drawn under the personal supervision of 
Lieut. Edward Maguire, Corps of Engineers, 
U.S.A., by Sergeant Charles Becker. From Report 
of the Secretary of War . . . vol. II, part III. Washing- 
ton, D.C., [1876?]. Col. map 39 x 45 cm. Scale ca. 
1:21,000; U.S. — Wars, Indian — Montana — 1876 
Topographic plan of the battlefield showing 
locations of the officers' graves. 



Map of the Nez Perce Indian Campaign. Brig. Gen. 
O. O. Howard, U.S.A., Commanding. Compiled 
repared by Robt. H. Fletcher, 1st Lieut. Wash- 



Sketch of Scene of Action with Hostile Apache Indi- 
ans on Big Dry Fork, A.T. July 17th, 1882. Drawn 
by Thomas Cruse, 2nd. Lieut, 6th Cav. Blueprint. 
Col. map 45 x 33 cm. Scale ca. 1 : 7,200; Arizona — 
Indians — 1882 

Shows positions of U.S. and Indian forces, 
rifle pits, and route of Apache retreat. 

Outline Map of the Field of Operations against Hos- 
tile Chiricahua Indians showing operations from 
April 12th 1886 to the date of their Surrender Sep- 
tember 4th 1886. Compiled and Drawn by direc- 
tion of Brigadier General Nelson A. Miles, com- 
manding the Department of Arizona, in the 
Office of First Lieut. E. J. Spencer, Corps of 
Engineers. [1886?] Blueprint. Col. map 95 x 110 
cm. Scale ca. 1:633,000; U.S. — Wars, Indian — 
Arizona — 1886 

Covers portions of southern Arizona and 
New Mexico and northern Mexico, illustrating 
scene of final organized Indian resistance (led by 
Geronimo) against the United States. 

Map of Custer Battlefield. Birdseye view of the Little 
Big Horn country and a portion of Davis creek— a 
tributary of the Rosebud — showing where Custer and 
his men traversed— June 25, 1876. Compiled and 
drawn by Russell White Bear. [Crow Agency, 
Montana], 1925. Col. map 28 x 31 cm. Scale not 
given; U.S. — Wars, Indian — Montana — 1876 

Includes inset: "Birdseye view of Custer's last 
stand hill." (see p. 222) 

Battle of the Bears Paw Between General Miles and 
Chief Joseph, Sept. 30 to Oct. 5, 1877. Surveyed by 



2 0 8 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



o 

ERIC 



C. R. Noyes. [1935?]. Col. map 51 x 37 cm. Scale 
ca. 1:2,400; U.S. — Wars, Indians — Montana — 
1877 

Detailed survey of the battlefield at the Bear 
Paw, Montana portraying the final engagement 
of the Nez Perce campaign. 

Civil War in Indian Territory ; 1861-1865. Prepared 
by the Oklahoma Department of Transportation, 
Planning Division. [Oklahoma City: 1979?]. Col. 
map 44 x 62 cm. Scale ca. 1:1,375,000; G4021.S5 

1979 ,o 4 

Shows location of twenty-seven battle sites in 
Oklahoma. 

Ethnography, % Linguistics, 
Distribution, and Archaeology 

Maps are tools for portraying the organization 
and distribution of American Indian cultures. 
Ethnographic maps depict the distribution of In- 
dian tribes with common ethnic affinities, and 
linguistic maps group them by common lan- 
guage characteristics. As noted earlier, indica- 
tions of tribal range appear on a number of early 
maps, but the first systematic efforts to map 
the geographic distribution of Indian cultural 
groups did not begin to appear until the early 
nineteenth century. Most ethnographic and lin- 
guistic maps focus on cultural and language as- 
sociations at the time of European contact and 
often do not reflect the migrations and adapta- 
tions that occurred either prior to or after the 
contact period. 

Portrayals of other aspects of Indian distribu- 
tion appear primarily on recent maps, including 
items illustrating Indian land occupancy and use 
in relationship to Indian land claims; population 
maps which are usually based on federal census 
data and illustrate the distribution of individuals 
rather than tribes; and archaeological maps 
which portray the locations and distribution pat- 
terns of prehistoric Indian culture and habita- 




tion. The Geography and Map Division contains 
maps illustrating all these aspects of the cul- 
tural and ethnic distribution of North American 
Indians. 

Locations and Wandering of the Aboriginal Tribes , 
Introductory Map to Accompany Willards History of 
the United States. Emma Hart Willard. In A Series 
of Maps to Willards History of the United States , . . . 
New York: White, Gallaher, & White, 1828. Col. 
map 25 x 29 cm. Scale ca. 1:9,000,000; G1201. 
S1W5 1828 Vault (see p. 220) 

One of the first attempts to graphically illus- 
trate the distribution and migrations of Indian 
tribes in the eastern United States. 

Map of the Indian Tribes of North America, about 
1600 A.D. along the Atlantic; and about 1800 A.D. 
zvestivardly. Published by the Amer: Antiq: Soc: 
from a drawing by Hon: A. Gallatin. [1836] From 
American Antiquarian Society, Transactions and 
Collections, vol. 2 .,i 836. Col. map 39 x 43 cm. 
Scale ca. 1 : 15,000,000; G3301.E1 1800 .G Vault 
Gallatin, the founder of the American Ethno- 
logical Society, was a recognized authority on 
Indian languages. This map of Indian tribal dis- 
tribution appeared in his study of Indian lan- 
guages, A Synopsis of the Indian Tribes within the 
United States East of the Rocky Mountains. . . . 

A Map of the Ancient Indian Towns on the Pickaway 
Plain, Illustrating a sketch of the country. Felix 
Renick. Cincinnati: Doolittle & Munson, [1844]. 
Col. map 47 x 53 cm. Scale not given; Ohio — In- 
dians — 1846 (see p. 221) 

Shows Shawnee villages and earthworks in 
central Ohio. 

Plan of Indian Mounds at " Gideons Farm," Excel- 
sior, Hennepin Co., Minnesota, 1879. Frank H. Nut- 
ter, Topographical Engineer. Col. manuscript 
map 57 x 91 cm. Scale ca. 1 : 96,000,000; G4141.E1 
1879 .N Vault 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



2 0 9 



Shows location and height of over seventy In- 
dian mounds at Gideon Bay and Lake Park near 
the shore of Lake Minnetonka, Minnesota. 

Map of Alaska and Adjoining Regions . . . Showing 
the Distribution of Native Tribes. Compiled by Ivan 
Petroff, Special Agent, Tenth Census, 1880. 
Drawn by Harry King. [New York, 1880?] From 
Ivan Petroff, Report on the Population, Industries, 
and Resources of Alaska, 1884. Col. map 62 x 78 cm. 
Scale ca. 1:3,500,000; Alaska — Indians — 1880 
Shows distribution of Indian, Aleut, and Es- 
kimo tribes. 

Map of the Linguistic Stocks of American Indians 
chiefly within the present limits of the United States. 
J. W. Powell. From Eleventh Census of the United 
States. Washington, D.C.: [1890]. Col. map 52 x 45 
cm. Scale ca. 1 : 13,000,000; North America — Indi- 
ans — 1890 

Powell, the founder of the Bureau of Ethnol- 
ogy, conducted numerous archaeological, lin- 
guistic, and ethnographic studies of American 
Indians. 

Chart of Central Settlements of Quivira and Harahey, 
Kansas Valley, North America. Drawn for Robert 
Henderson, by J. V. Brower. 1902. Col. map 21 x 
34 cm. Scale ca. 1:350,000; Kansas — Indians — 
1902 

Shows locations of Quivira, Harahey, and 
Kaw village sites and burial mounds in the vicin- 
ity of Manhattan, Kansas. 

Archeological Atlas of Ohio, Showing the Distribu- 
tion of the various Classes of Prehistoric Remains in 
the State, with a Map of the Principal Indian Trails 
and Towns. William C. Mills. Columbus: Ohio 
State Archeological and Historical Society, 1914; 
G1396.E15M5 1914 

Contains a separate map of each county 
showing locations of mounds, enclosures, vil- 

o 



lage sites, burial grounds, petroglyphs, and flint 
quarries. 

Archaeological Atlas of Michigan. Wilbert B. Hins- 
dale (Michigan Handbook Series No. 4). Ann Ar- 
bor: University of Michigan Press, 1931; G1411 
.E8H55 1931. 

Contains twenty maps showing locations of 
mounds, enclosures, earthworks, villages, burial 
grounds, gardens, trails, and copper excavations. 

The North American Indians, 1950 Distribution of 
Descendants of the Aboriginal Population of Alaska, 
Canada and the United States. A map prepared 
under the direction of Sol Tax, Department of 
Anthropology, University of Chicago. 4th Edi- 
tion. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1961?. Col. 
map 63 x 71 cm. Scale ca. 1:10,000,000; North 
America — Indians — 1950 

Locates and gives the population of all self- 
identified Indian communities as of 1950. 

Maps of Tribal Locations and Indian Agencies. In Re- 
port with Respect to the House Resolution Authoriz- 
ing the Committee on Indian and Insular Affairs to 
Conduct an Investigation of the Bureau of Indian Af- 
fairs. Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1953. 82d Cong. 
2d. Sess. House Report no. 2503; U.S. Congres- 
sional Serial Set no. 11582, Law Library 

Contains 157 maps illustrating the location of 
various Indian groups as of 1950 and depicts ap- 
proximations of the original range occupied by 
these groups. 

Tribal Distribution in North America, 1500-1600. 
Robin F. Wells. [Toledo, Ohio], 1971. Col. map 
122 x 105 cm. Scale ca. 1:6,336,000; G3301.E1 
1600 .W4 

Depicts the migrations of various tribes and 
links between tribes. There are five additional 
"Tribal Distribution" maps by Wells, filed under 
different classification numbers, covering the 



2 1 0 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



time periods 1600-50, 1650-1715, 1715-60, 
1760-1810, and 1810-40. 

North America Before Columbus. Produced by the 
Cartographic Division, National Geographic So- 
ciety. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic 
Society, 1973. Col. map 92 x 80 cm. Scale ca. 
1:10,610,000; G3301.E1 1973 .N3 

Shows Indian occupation sites at four time 
periods: before 8000 B.C., 8000-1000 B.C., 1000 
B.C.-A.D. 1000, and A.D. 1000-contact with Eu- 
ropeans. Verso of map contains map entitled 
"Indians of North America" which illustrates 
cultural and tribal divisions. 

Number of American Indians by Counties of the 
United States: lyjo. Prepared by Geography Divi- 
sion in cooperation with Population Division, 
Bureau of the Census. United States Maps, GE- 
50, no 49. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1973. Col. map 70 x 99 cm. Scale 
ca. 1:5,000,000; G3701.E1 1970 .U5 
Shows population density by county. 

Native Languages of the Northwest Coast. Wayne 
Suttles. [Portland, Oregon:] The Press of the Ore- 
gon Historical Society, 1985. Col. map 70 x 101 
cm. Scale ca. 1:3,000,000; G4371.E3 1985 .S9 
Illustrates language families and relationships 
for the region from Kodiak Island, Alaska, to 
Northern California. 



maria Amitrano. Genoa: Edizioni Colombo, 1992; 
G1101.E1A8 1992. 

Shows the territorial distribution and habitat 
of Indian groups in the 1692-1728 time period. 

Historical Maps 

In general there has been little effort to produce 
historical cartography portraying the wide range 
of social, political, economic, and cultural 
themes of Indian life. Historical coverage is usu- 
ally limited to depicting ethnographic or linguis- 
tic distribution, battle sites, and the locations of 
villages and reservations. Exceptions are found 
in Comparative Studies of North American Indians 
(1.957), Atlas of the North American Indian (1985), 
Atlas of Great Lakes Indian History (1987), and At- 
las of American Indian Affairs (1990), all of which 
include historical coverage of a broader spec- 
trum of Indian matters, and which are cited in 
the "General Reference and Bibliographic Re- 
sources" section at the beginning of this chapter. 
General coverage of Indian history is usually in- 
cluded in thematic and historical atlases of the 
United States and in individual state atlases. His- 
torical maps are valuable resources not only for 
their recreation of past events and their docu- 
mentation of tribal distribution and habitation 
sites, but also for what they reveal about the per- 
ceptions and cultural values of the time in which 
they were produced. 



We the People: An Atlas of Americas Ethnic Diver- 
sity. James Paul Allen and Eugene James Turner. 
New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1988; 
G1201.E1A4 1988 

Contains chapter titled "People of Early North 
American Origin" which discusses and illus- 
trates modem distribution and migration issues 
relating to Indians, Eskimos, and Aleut. 

Atlante: Le civilta indigene delle Americhe. Intro- 
duzione di Aurelio Rigoli, a curi di Anna- 



Atlas of the Historical Geography of the United 
States. Charles O. Paullin. [Washington, D.C.]: 
Published jointly by Carnegie Institution of 
Washington and the American Geographical So- 
ciety of New York, 1932; G1201.S1P3 1932 

Contains coverage of Indian distribution, 
wars, reservations, and missions. 

Hearne Brothers Indian History Series. Detroit, 
Heame Brothers. Maps are filed individually 
under each state. 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



2 1 1 



In the early 1960s, Heame Brothers published 
a separate large wall map for each state illustrat- 
ing pre-contact tribal ranges, settlements, his- 
toric sites, and reservation boundaries. Textual 
information about the tribes within the state is 
included on the verso of each map. 

Atlas of Early American History, The Revolutionary 
Era , 1760-1790. Edited by Lester J. Cappon. 
Chicago: Published for the Newberry Library 
and the Institute of Early American History and 
Culture by Princeton University Press, 1976; 
G1201.S3A8. 1976 

Contains maps of Indian villages located in 
the eastern U.S. in the 1760-94 time period. 

Atlas of Native History. Jack D. Forbes. Davis, 
California: D-Q University Press, [1981]; G1201 
.E1F6 1981 

Contains seventeen maps showing tribal mi- 
grations and distribution. 



Historical Atlas of Oklahoma. John W. Morris, 
Charles R. Goins, and Edwin C. McReynolds. 
Third Edition. Norman: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1986; G1366.S1M6 1986 

Contains twenty-seven maps relating to In- 
dian affairs in Oklahoma, including coverage of 
tribal lands and location of missions and battle 
sites. 

Natural Resources 

Natural resources have always been key factors 
influencing the choice of settlement sites, the 
level of subsistence, and the survival of a region's 
inhabitants. Historically, the identification and 
O pping of resources of economic value on In- 



dian lands often have had the effect of promot- 
ing non-Indian encroachment and the removal of 
the native inhabitants. The demand for agricul- 
tural lands and the search for mineral deposits 
are the most obvious examples, but other re- 
sources, such as timber, water, and grazing 
lands, were also often sought on Indian lands 
and occasionally depicted on maps. The natural 
resources of present-day reservations have been, 
in many cases, the principal means of tribal in- 
come, and modem maps of the soils, geology, 
mineral deposits, water, climate, energy, timber, 
and agriculture potential of reservation lands are 
all aids to decision-making regarding issues 
of land use, economic development, and conser- 
vation. 

The extent of thematic mapping of the natural 
resources varies for each reservation, but in gen- 
eral there is little coverage for most reservations 
in the Geography and Map Division. Some perti- 
nent earth sciences maps will, however, be in- 
cluded with scientific publications and can be 
found in the Library's General Collections rather 
than the Geography and Map Division. 

A Map of that Part of Georgia Occupied by the Chero- 
kee Indians Taken from an Actual Survey made dur- 
ing the present year, 1831 in Pursuance of an Act of 
the General Assembly of the State. John Bethune, 
Surveyor Genl. of the State of Georgia. [Mil- 
ledgeville, George: 1831]. Col. map 74 x 55 cm. 
Scale ca. 1 :2,200,ooo; G3921.E1 1831 .B Vault 

Shows roads, towns, villages, and gold min- 
ing sites in northwestern Georgia, an area occu- 
pied by the Cherokee Indians. The map also in- 
cludes the following note: "This interesting Tract 
of country contains four millions . . . Acres, many 
rich Gold Mines & many delightful Situations & 
though in some parts mountainous. Some of the 
richest Land belonging to the state." 

Sketch of Public Surveys in New Mexico & Ari- 
zona to accompany the Annual Report of the Com- 
missioner of the General Land Office for 1866. 

233 ... ; 



Historical Atlas of the United States, Centennial Edi- 
tion. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic So- 
ciety, 1988; G1201.S1N3 1988 

Includes coverage of a number of aspects of 
Indian culture, politics, lands, and wars. 



2 1 2 



GEOGRAPHY AND MAP DIVISION 



[Washington, D.C.]: Department of the Interior, 
General Land Office, 1866. Col. map 54 x 71 cm. 
Scale ca. 1 : 1,850,000; New Mexico — 1866 

Shows gold, silver, and copper deposits 
situated within the lands occupied by Indian 
nations. 

Classification Map of Creek and Seminole Nations. 
Ricksecker, Hackbush and Patton, Civil Engi- 
neers. Muskegee, I.T.: Bradley Real Estate Co., 
[189-?]. Col. map 68 x 63 cm. Scale ca. 1:250,000; 
Oklahoma — Indians — 189-? (see p. 223) 

Lands of the Creek and Seminole Nations in 
Indian Territory are classified according to po- 
tential agricultural use. 

Map of the Blackfeet Indian Reservation Showing the 
Mountainous Region Proposed to be ceded to the U.S. 
Government, also a part of Flathead and Deer Lodge 
Counties. Made by Ross Cartee. 1896. Col. map 56 
x 62 cm. Scale ca. 1:126,000; Montana — Indi- 
ans — 1896 

Includes text entitled "Opening of the Ceded 
Mineral Strip of the Blackfeet Reservation," 
which describes the mineral potential of the land 
ceded in 1895 to the federal government. 

The Rosebud Indian Reservation of South Dakota: 
Map and Guide to Quality of the Soil. Omaha: C. J. 
Conner, 1903. Col. map 65 x 56 cm. Scale ca. 
1:90,000; South Dakota — Indians — 1903 

In addition to coverage of soil and vegetation 
types, this map designates lands allotted to the 
Indians. 

Part of Uinta Indian Reservation, Utah, To be dis- 
posed of under Act of March 3, 1905 and Presidents 
Proclamation dated July 14, 1905. I. P. Berthrong. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Land Office, 
[1905]. Col. map 65 x 115 cm. Scale ca. 1:130,000; 
Utah — Indians — 1905 

Shows grazing lands, proposed Indian timber 
reserve, allotments, mining claims, water re- 




served for Indian irrigation, and water reserved 
by the U.S. Geological Survey for irrigation. 

Graphic Summary of the Tewa Basin Study. By the 
Indian Land Research Unit in Cooperation with 
United States Forest Service, Soil Conservation 
Service. Prepared under direction of Mark W. 
Radcliffe. [Albuquerque]: U.S. Department of the 
Interior, Office of Indian Affairs, Land Division, 
1935 ; G1507.T4U5 1935 

Contains fifty-eight maps, accompanied by 
aerial photographs illustrating the soil types, soil 
erosion, vegetation, geology, timber, population, 
endemic diseases, and ownership of cultivated 
lands in the Tewa Basin of New Mexico. 

Land Resources of Southeast Alaska Native Villages : 
An Inventory of Lands Withdrawn for Native Selec- 
tion in Southeast Alaska under the Alaska Native 
Claims Settlement Act. Juneau: Sealaska Corpora- 
tion, 1973; G1531.G1S4 1973 

Includes coverage of timber, water, mineral, 
soils, and man-made resources. 

Soil Survey of Colorado River Indian Reservation 
Arizona-California. U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, Soil Conservation Service; in cooperation 
with the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs, Arizona 
Agriculture Experiment Station, and California 
Agricultural Experiment Station. [Washington, 
D.C.?]: Soil Conservation Service, [1986]; S599. 
A7N45 1986 — General Collections 

Contains twenty-six 1:20,000 scale maps de- 
tailing the location of various soil types. 

Northern Cheyenne Integrated Resource Manage- 
ment Plan: Atlas. [Billings, Montana: U.S. Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, Billings Area Office, 1988?]; 
G1472.N6G4U5 1988 

Contains fifteen maps illustrating forest, agri- 
cultural, mineral, oil and gas, rangeland, and 
recreation resources. 




Manatus, Geiegen op de Noot Riuier . [Johannes Vingboons]. 1639 [ca. 1665] Harrisse Collection, Vingboons Atlas, vol. 3, 
map 12 (LCG&M-2086,1 CT). Geography and Map Division. 



This manuscript map of Manhattan and vicinity was drawn in ca. 1665 after a 1639 work by the Dutch cartographer, , 
Johannes Vingboons . In addition to the evidence of Dutch settlement in Manhattan , the map features in the Brooklyn area 
four longhouses representing the Indian villages Wichquawank, Techkonis, Mareckewich, and Keskachauc. One of the 
settlements contains the note: u This is the type of houses the Indians live in" This is typical of the unexpected evidence of 
Indian settlement and culture that can appear on cartographic documents not normally considered resources for American 
Indian studies. 





1^5 





•: 236 1 



Detail from La France Occidentale Dans I'Amtrique Sep- 
tentrional .../ La Cours du Mississippi ou de St. Louis 
Fameuse Rividre de I'Am&ique Septentrionale ux Environs 
de laquelle se trouve le Pais appelld Louisiane. Nicolas De 
Fer. 1 71 8. G3300 1 71 8 F Vault (LCG&M-283 CT). Geogra- 
pny and Map Division. 

Illustrated is the portion of De Fer's map of North America 
showing the Rio Grande Valley with its Spanish settlements 
and Indian villages and pueblos . The two illustrations of In- 
dian settlements at the top of this map also appeared on 
other early maps of North America and likely depict settle- 
ment patterns of Eastern Indians, rather than those of the 
Southwest. The map is typical of the many general maps 
that may also include information pertinent for Indian 
studies. 



RIGHT: This Map describing the Scituation of the Several 
Nations of Indians to the NW. of South Carolina was Cop- 
pyed from a Draught drawn & painted on a Deer Skin by 
an Indian Cacique and Presented to Francis Nicholson 
Esqr ., Governour of Carolina . . . ca. 1721. Photocopy 
from original manuscript in the British Museum, London, 
North America — Indians — 1 721 ? (LCG&M-4290 CT ). 
Geography and Map Division 



Given to the governor of South Carolina , Francis Nichol- 
son , in ca. 1721 , this map was drawn on a deerskin , prob- 
ably by a Catawba chief. It features thirteen circlesTepre- 
senting the Indian tribes in the South Carolina piedmont. 
The tribes are connected by a network of double lines rep- 
' resenting paths . Along the left side of the map is a portrayal 
of the city of Charlestown, with its rectangular street grid 
and a ship in the harbor : Although the map may appear to 
be rather schematic, it accurately reflects the spatial rela- 
tionships of the Indian groups and their interconnecting 
trails. 




Copy of a Sketch of the Monongahela , with the field of 
battle, done by an Indian. 1755. G3824.P6S26 1755 .C6 
Vault (LCG&M-780). Geography and Map Division. 

Drawn by an unidentified Indian scout, this sketch is one 
of two original manuscript maps by an Indian in the Ge- 
ography and Map Division. It depicts the battle near Ft. 
Duquesne between Gen. Edward Braddock's British forces 
and the French and their Indian allies on July 9, 1755. With 
a sizable force of Indian allies and the advantage of fight- 
ing from the protection of natural cover, the French de- 
stroyed over half of the British force. 

i - 






Detail from A Sketch of the North Bend of Missouri. Attributed to David 
Thompson, copied by Meriwether Lewis. 1798? Lewis and Clark Collection, 
map j (LCG&M-4289). Geography and Map Division. 



In preparation for the Lewis and Clark Expedition, Lewis copied David Thomp- 
son's 1798 sketch of the Great Bend of the Missouri River. The portion of the 
map shown here locates a number of Mandan and Pawnee settlements near 
the confluence of the Knife and Missouri Rivers and includes notations on the 
number of warriors, houses, and tents of each village. 







Sketch of the Blue Water Creek embracing the field of ac- i 
tion of the force under the command of Bvt. Brig. Genl. - \ 

W.S. Harney in the attack of the 3rd Sept. 1855, on the i 
Brule Band of the Indian Chief Little Thunder. Lieut. G.K. 
Warren. [1855] U.S. Wars, Indian— Nebraska— 1 855 
(LCG&M-4288 CT). Geography and Map Division. 



One of the numerous engagements between the Sioux and j 

the U.S . military over nearly fifty years, the Battle of Blue j 
Wafer Creek (Nebraska) was precipitated by earlier con- 
flicts, including the Sioux destruction of a detachment of I 
U.S. infantrymen in 1854. In retaliation in 1855 a force of I 

600 troops from Fort Kearny conducted a surprise attack on I 

a Brul£ village at Blue Wafer Creek, killing or capturing 
half of its 250 inhabitants. ! 





'APt nfpecliv c Vu; T X JE ^jfoug/it' mM r Xalte George, on/ tJic'S^o^ i , bctfveetv o.oooJ^^il)i,or///yajo^Moha^ks , 
JrtvtfttiwuttHiinb tuf'On xr* jrouuvs o?r:%4fio rPtmxJj ^'Indian* unJrriJuy cvunn.uu/^ Gw* rtiKn^i tt ui'nr/ub/vl/f.Ybn^rih. Gc t\./tvi‘th<i 7lu/n/>crof /uj 9/hu‘//t//tng joo ,f ,/ '" // " 



r t/nV>Y,*f/io /fifjk 




A Prospective View of the Battle fought near Lake George , 
on the 8th of Sepr. 1755 , between 2000 English , with 250 
Mohawks > under die command of Gen I. Johnson: & 2500 

French & Indians under the command of Genl. Dieskau 

Thomas Jefferys. 1 756. G1 105.J4 1 768 Vault, no. 37 
(LCG&M-4287). Geography and Map Division. 



This map illustrates the two stages of the battle in 1755 be- 
tween a force of New Englanders with their Mohawk allies 
and French troops and their Iroquois supporters, part of the 
long series of battles between the French and British for 
control of North America that often involved Indian parti- 
cipants. Ambushed in the initial engagement near Crown 
Point on Lake George, the New Englanders retreated south 
where they repelled another French attack . Although the 
English and Mohawk could claim victory, the success was 
bitter for the Mohawk, who had fought their fellow Iroquois . 



A Map of the Lands Ceded by the Cherokee Indians to the 
State ofSouth-Carolina at a congress held in. May, A.D. 
1777; containing about 1 ,697,700 acres, [1777?) G3910 
1777 .M3 Vault (LCG&M-4286). Geography and Map 
Division. 



This manuscript map shows the land ceded by the Chero- 
kee Indians to South Carolina and Georgia by a treaty 
signed on May 20, 1 777 . The Cherokee entered the Ameri- 
can Revolutionary War against the Americans in 1776, but 
a counterattack by southern militia forced the Cherokee to 
sue for peace. This treaty and a later one with Virginia and 
North Carolina ceded over two and a half million acres of 
Cherokee territory to the southern colonies or states . 








m 









MO 



Cartouche from A Map of the Inhabited Part of Canada 
from the French Surveys; with the Frontiers of New York 
and New England. William Faden. 1 777. G3401 ,F2 1 777 
*F3 Vault (LCG&M-4291 CD. Geography and Map 
Division. 



As with many map title cartouches , this one of a map of 
Canada and New England reflects elements of the eco- 
nomic interests of the region depicted on the map . In this 
case the cartouche symbolizes the economic importance 
of the North American fur trade and the significance of the 
America Indian in the promulgation of that trade. 

Frontispiece from Colton's American Atlas. George W. 
Colton. 1 855. G1 01 9.C548 1 855 vol. 1 , copy 2 (LCG&M- 
4292 CD. Geography and Map Division. 



This frontispiece symbolizes elements of the attitude of 
manifest destiny the divine sanctioning of the westward 
expansion of the United States. In the foreground, Indians 
are depicted as part of the natural environment observing 
the advance of the population, agriculture, commerce, 
and industry of Western civilization. 



RIGHT: [Map of the western United States, from 91° to 
119° West longitude and 36° to 50° North latitude] Pierre 
Jean DeSmet. 1 851 . G4050 1 851 .S Vault (LCG&M-653). 
Geography and Map Division. 



De Smet, a Jesuit missionary to the Indians of the American 
west, travelled widely and wrote extensively about the 
Western Indians. This manuscript map attests to his exten- 
sive knowledge of the geography and tribal lands of the 
American West. De Smet was present at the 1 85 1 Treaty of 
I Laramie and his map may have been produced to illustrate 
the lands of the Western Indians at the time of the treaty. A 
portrait of a signer of the treaty, the Crow Chief Big Robber, 

| appears at the center top margin. 





CEQC^PH-V AN^M^ISJQN 



2 1 9 



Vignette from A Map of the State of Kentucky, .... Luke 
Munseli. 1818. G3950 1818 .M8 Vault, copy 2 (LCG&M- 
1427.1 CT). Geography and Map Division. 



This allegorical vignette expresses the Euro-American view 
of the legitimacy of Indian removal and also depicts the 
role that surveying and cartography played in that removal 
process. The surveyors in the foreground with their tools 
and cadastral surveys have measured and divided the land 
for sale and settlement. Justice stands above , appearing 
to legitimize and sanction the legality of the proceedings. 
In the background the native inhabitants leave their 
homeland. 







Map Showing the Lands assigned to Emigrant Indians 
west of Arkansas & Missouri . U.S, Topographical Bureau, 
1836. United States— Indians— 1836 (LCG&M-683 CT). 
Geography and Map Division. 



Indian policy in the early nineteenth century favored the 
formation of an Indian Territory west of the Mississippi 
River which would alleviate the continuing clash of oppos- 
ing cultures and open eastern Indian lands to white settle- 
ment Indian Territory included both local tribes and those 
removed from east of the Mississippi . Beginning in the 
1850s a series of land appropriations reduced this suppos- 
edly inviolate Indian reserve until the last Indian lands 
were incorporated into the State of Oklahoma. 



LEFT: Locations and Wanderings of the Aboriginal Tribes . 
Emma Willard. From A Series of Maps to Willard's History 
of the United States. 1 828. G1 201 .SI W52 1839 Vault 
(LCG&M-429 CT). Geography and Map Division. 



Emma Willard, an early nineteenth century American pub- 
lisher, author, and educator, published this early graphic 
depiction of the distribution and migrations of Indian tribes 
in the eastern United States. Rather than employing the 
Western tradition of delineating precise geopolitical 
boundaries separating the Indian nations, the map portrays 
a loose affiliation of independent groups. 



RIGHT: A Map of the Ancient Indian Towns on the Pick- 
away Plain Illustrating a Sketch of the Country. Felix Renick, 
ca 1 844. Ohio— Indians — 1 844? (LCG&M-4295 CT) 
Geography and Map Division. 



Renick's map illustrates the Shawnee villages located on 
the Pickaway Plains of Ohio after the Shawnee had moved 
there in the mid-1700s. The map locates Indian mounds 
and the important sites of Lord Dunsmore's battles with 
the Shawnee Chief Cornstalk. It also illustrates the route of 
the escape of John Slover from the Shawnee at Cornstalks 
Town. 





Tahlequah, Cherokee Nation , Ind. Terr. Sanborn-Perris Map 
Company. June 1896. Sanborn Fire Insurance Map Collec- 
tion (LCG&M-4294 CT). Geography and Map Division. 



Sanborn fire insurance maps provide detailed coverage of 
cities and towns in the United States . Illustrated here is 
sheet one of a four-map series of Tahlequah, the capital of 
the Cherokee Nation. It depicts specific Indian institutions, 
such as the Cherokee Female and Male Seminaries shown 



here, and the Cherokee National Penitentiary and Capitol 
shown on another sheet. This 1896 edition is one of nine 
editions issued between 1894 and 1949 that provide a 
unique graphic history of the development of Tahlequah. 










CHEROKEE NATION 




Map of Custer Battlefield. Birdseye view of the Little Big 
Horn country and a portion of Davis Creek — a tributary of 
the Rosebud— showing where Custer and his men tra- 
versed June 25, 1876. Russell White Bear. 1925. U.S.— 
Wars, Indian— Montana— 1876 (LCG&M-4284). Geogra- 
phy and Map Division. 



The Battle of the Little Big Horn was precipitated by the 
effort of the United States to gain control of the Black Hills 
and further subdue the Plains tribes. Drawn in 1925 by 
Russell White Bear of the Crow Agency, Montana, this 
view depicts the annihilation of a force of some three hun- 
dred cavalry troops under the command of Gen. George A. 
Custer by a combined force of Sioux, Cheyenne, and 
Arapahoe. Although a major defeat for the U.S. military, 
the loss served to rally the United States to advance its con- 
quest of the Sioux and its allies. 



Cherokee Nation, Township 21 North, Range 24 East. 
From: [Township Maps of the Cherokee Nation } Indian Ter- 
ritory Map Company. [1909] G1 305.15 1909 (LCG&M- 
4296). Geography and Map Division. 



Illustrated is one plate (one township) of a 237-plate atlas 
depicting the cadastral division and landowners of the 
lands of the former Cherokee Nation. Under a policy of as- 
similation and land allotment, federal legislation promoted 
the break-up of tribal lands and the allotment of 160-acre 
parcels to the heads of Indian families. Unassigned prop- 
erty could be purchased or leased to non-Indians. The 
Cherokee refused to participate in the allotment program, 
but in 1898 Congress dissolved their tribal government and 
extended the policy to them. The inclusion of numerous In- 
dian names on this plate attest to the landownership by in- 
dividual Cherokee Indians. 




24 4 



_J 




Classification Map of Creek and Seminole Nations. Rich- 
secker, Hackbush and Patton, Civil Engineers. [1 89— ?1 Ok- 
lahoma — Indians — 189-? {LCG&M-4297 CT) Geography 
and Map Division. 



The discovery and mapping of economic resources of In- 
dian lands often promoted non-Indian encroachment on 
native lands. This map, prepared for the Bradley Real Estate 
Co., classifies the agricultural potential of the lands of the 
Creek and Seminole Nations t indentifying the prime lands 
that the allotment system would possibly make available 
for white settlement. 



Kaibab Indian Reservation, Arizona, 1944. Department of 
the Interior, Office of Indian Affairs. Arizona — Indians — 
Kaibab Reservation — 1944 (LCG&M-4285). Geography 
and Map Division. 



Located in northern Arizona, between the Utah border and 
the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River, the 1 20,000-acre 
Kaibab Reservation is the homeland of the Southern Raiute. 
This 1944 map of the reservation locates roads, trails, 
pipelines, telephone lines, fences, corrals, springs, reser- 
voirs, and streams. The map is similar in content to many 
other reservation maps produced by the Office of Indian 
Affairs. 







INTRODUCTION 



MOTION PICTURE, 
BROADCASTING 
AND RECORDED 
SOUND DIVISION 



The Motion Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded 
Sound Division (MBRS) of the Library of Con- 
gress houses more than 275,000 motion picture 
and video recordings in all formats and genres, 
including educational films, documentaries, 
newsreels, television programs, and feature 
films, making this the largest and most diverse 
repository of its kind in the United States. The 
division's extensive holdings of moving images 
provide a formidable historical record of the 
changing perceptions of Indian people in society 
on both the large and small screens. 

Whether motion pictures reflect or shape 
popular attitudes is a question social critics con- 
tinue to debate. But there is little doubt that for 
Americans in the eastern half of the country, 
who had little or no contact with Indian people 
after the mid-nineteenth century, movies — like 
the dime novels before them — shaped percep- 
tions (or misperceptions) of America's native 
peoples. 

The first motion pictures to feature Native 
Americans documented ceremonial dances of 
Sioux and Hopi tribes at the 1893 World's 
Columbian Exposition. Shown at vaudeville the- 
aters on Thomas Alva Edison's kinetoscopic de- 
vices, these 90-second films provided entertain- 
ment to an audience eager to view "exotic" 
subjects. During the silent film era, Indians 
quickly became a mainstay in the classic western, 
a genre which grew enormously in popularity 
after the introduction of sound. 

Stereotypical portrayals of American Indians 
and formulaic story patterns established during 
the early development of the movie industry 
persisted for several decades. In the descriptions 
of the fiction films that follow, one also sees the 
era's social strata, mores, prejudices, and even 
the sense of fair play reflected in the dramas. It is 




S46 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 2 5 



striking in the silent films, for example, to see 
how frequently the tensions of cross-ethnic love 
were played out on the screen. The usual im- 
ages — good and bad — of Indian people appear, 
sometimes in the same film: the treacherous sav- 
age or the noble savage; the doomed victim of 
Euro- American society or the honorable avenger 
of that society's wrongdoers; the faithful com- 
panion or the faithless heathen. Even some of 
the early documentaries emphasized the stereo- 
types. Yet, more than occasionally, the screen- 
writer's or director's thrust appears intentionally 
to prick America's conscience about the real con- 
dition of its first peoples. 

Strong and positive characterizations, as well 
as recognition of diverse and complex native 
cultures, however, were usually neglected until 
the 1970s. With the continuing pressure of the 
civil rights movement, the film industry began to 
address cultural sensitivity. Tribal consultants 
and Indian actors were hired; scripts attempted 
to reflect historical accuracy and a native view- 
point; and stereotypes were countered by more 
humane representations of Indian people. Docu- 
mentary film makers, especially independents, 
became the most powerful force in transforming 
images of American Indians, both in commercial 
and public broadcast arenas. 

Native- American-produced “documentary 
films, television programs, and videos have 
flourished, as have supporting professional or- 
ganizations, such as the Film and Video Center 
of the National Museum of the American Indian, 
the American Indian Film Institute, and the Na- 
tive American Public Broadcasting Consortium. 
The National Film and Video Center maintains a 
comprehensive database of documentary films 
and videotapes about American Indians, many 
of which concern tribal cultures, history, art, and 
political and social issues presented from a Na- 
tive American perspective. Most of these recent 
works are among the division's vast holdings 



0 




which chronicle the history of the American In- 
dian in film and video to the present. 



USING THE COLLECTIONS 

MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION 
READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Madison Building, 3rd floor, Room LM 
336; telephone (202) 707-8572 

HOURS: Monday to Friday 8:30 A. M. -5:00 P.M. 

Viewing facilities, available without charge, are pro- 
vided for those doing research of a specific nature 
leading toward a publicly available work such as a 
dissertation, publication, or film-television produc- 
tion. All viewing is by advance appointment and 
viewing lists (arranged in alphabetical order) must be 
received at least three days in advance of appoint- 
ments. Long lists require one week for preparation. 
Three consecutive weeks of viewing time may be re- 
served. Upon request, the division will send out 
copies of its viewing guidelines. 

Films currently protected by copyright can- 
not be reproduced. Preservation status, special 
donor restrictions, and the uniqueness of the 
film material are other factors affecting availabil- 
ity for reproduction. To inquire about individual 
titles, contact the division's Public Services Of- 
fice, which handles requests for duplication and 
provides information on costs and procedures. 
The majority of films and television programs 
within the division's collections are copyright 
deposits (that is, films deposited in the Copy- 
right Office at the time of registration and 
housed within the film archive). Early copyright 
deposits consisted of photographs printed on 
strips of paper. The division holds viewing 
copies of three thousand of these paper print 
titles, dating from 1894 to 1915. Currently, more 
than ten thousand titles are added annually to 
the collection through copyright deposit. The 




2 2 6 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



division also acquires materials by purchase, 
gift, and exchange. 

Access to much of the archival material within 
the division is by title only. Thus the patron will 
not often find subject headings such as " Ameri- 
can Indian," specific tribal names, or genres such 
as "Indian dance" in the card and computer cata- 
logs. The division does, however, maintain a 
small vertical subject file for "Indians of North 
America" that includes catalogs of American and 
Canadian films, flyers, lists, reviews, and so on. 

Major Reference Works 

Also useful for determining relevant educational 
and documentary titles are basic reference works 
such as the Educational Film & Video Locator 
and the Video Source Book , as well as the audio- 
visual records found on MUMS; note, however, 
that an earlier method used in coding such titles 
on the Library's computer may result in an erro- 
neous "Not in LC Collection" message. The ref- 
erence staff can help the researcher assess the 
information. 

For information on television program titles, 
see Three Decades of Television: A Catalog of Tele- 
vision Programs Acquired by the Library of Con- 
gress 1949-1979 by Sarah Rouse and Katharine 
Loughney (Washington, D.C.: Library of Con- 
gress, 1989; PN1992.9.L53 1989). Broad content 
descriptors help lead the researcher to programs 
listed by title. For more recent acquisitions, see 
the title card catalog and MUMS. 

The reading room also contains reference 
books on its shelves and in its subject file with 
specific relevance for Indian-related searches; a 
few titles are: 

The American Indian in Film. Michael Hilger. 
Metuchen, N.J., and London: Scarecrow Press 
Inc., 1986; PN1995.9.I48H54 1986 



Descriptions and synopses of a broad range of 
fictional films from the silent era to the 1980s. 

Images of American Indians on Film: An Annotated 
Bibliography. Gretchen Bataille and Charles Silet. 
New York and London: Garland Publishing Co., 
1985; Z5784.M9B388 1985 

"Meanwhile Back on the Reservation: 'Good' 
and 'Bad' Indians in Television Westerns" in Rid- 
ing the Video Range: The Rise and Fall of the Western 
on Television. Gary A. Yoggy. Jefferson, N.C.: 
McFarland & Company, Inc., 1995; PN1992.8.W4 
Y64 1995 

Native Americans on Film and Video. Vols. 1 and 2, 
plus supplement. Elizabeth Weatherford and 
Emelia Seubert. New York: Museum of the 
American Indian /Heye Foundation, 1981, 1988, 
and 1993; PN1995.9.I48N37 1981 

Lists approximately 800 films by title with 
production information and short synopses. 



There are also guides to educational films and 
videos about Indians in the subject file and clip- 
pings for individual titles in the review files. 

Once titles have been identified, the next step 
is to find out whether MBRS has the films them- 
selves or only other documentation. The division 
stopped entering new acquisitions in the reading 
room card catalogs in 1986; thus the cards should 
be consulted primarily for older materials. 
For additional and more recent information, 
patrons use computer searches, using the com- 
mand "find t [title of film or program]; f=av". 
Some titles in which a patron is interested may 
be listed in a separate nitrate film database. Check 
with the reference staff if there are questions con- 
cerning specific Indian-related titles. 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 2 7 



The division also holds a limited selection of 
movie stills, while film posters are held by the 
Prints and Photographs Division. 

□ SELECTED FILMS, TELEVISION, 

AND DOCUMENTARY VIDEOS 

The following lists of film, documentaries, and 
videos are only representative selections of vi- 
sual media on Indian themes in the division's 
collections. They are extracted from two guides 
available in the Reading Room: American Indians 
on Film and Video: Documentaries in the Library of 
Congress by Jennifer Brathovde and American In- 
dians in Silent Film: Motion Pictures in the Library 
of Congress by Karen Lund. Each lists selected 
films and videos from the division's holdings. 
For this guide, theatrical films from the 1930s to 
the 1990s and television programs have been 
added. Titles are in black and white unless other- 
wise stated. 

Silent Films: Non-Fiction 

The American Indian: Government Education. Har- 
mon Foundation (FAA 5999). Harmon Founda- 
tion, [1933]; 1 reel, 15 min., 16mm ref. print. 

Surveys provisions made by the government 
for citizenship training of American Indians. 

The American Indian: How he earns a living. Har- 
mon Foundation (FAA 6010). Harmon Founda- 
tion, [1933]; 1 reel, 15 min., 16mm ref. print. 

Discusses the Indians' adaptation of ancient 
crafts to modem farming, fishing, cattle ranch- 
ing, carving, and jewelry-making; and points out 
that Indian peoples are also working in the 
learned professions. 

Buffalo Bill's Wild West and Pawnee Bill's Far East. 
Ernst Collection (FLA 1402). Buffalo Bill and 
Pawnee Bill Film Co., 1910; 1 reel (inc.), 436 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 







In this wild west show, Indians and cowboys 
are shown parading by on horses, and wild 
horse riding and trick riding are exhibited 
among other acts. This copy is missing reels 2 
and 3. 

Carrying out the Snakes. Paper Print Collection 
(FLA 4120). Edison, 1901; Cameraman: James H. 
White (?); 1 reel, 31 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

Hopi Indians of Walpi village perform a tribal 
ceremony in which they carry snakes. One of a 
series of five short films. [See also: Line-up and 
Teasing the Snakes, The March of Prayer and En- 
trance of the Dancers , Panoramic View of Moki-land, 
and Parade of Snake Dancers Before the Dance.] 

A Century of Progress Exposition: Indian Village. 
Herford T. Cowling Film Collection (FLA 236). 
Burton Holmes Films, 1933; 1 reel, 114 ft., 16mm 
ref. print. 

Shows scenes of Navajo from New Mexico, 
Hopi from Arizona, Sioux from North Dakota, 
and Winnebago from Wisconsin at Chicago's 
Century of Progress International Exposition in 
replicas of their native surroundings, dressed in 
traditional costumes, performing dances unique 
to their tribes, and working with tribal crafts. 

Esquimaux Game of Snap-the-Whip. Paper Print 
Collection (FLA 3739). Edison, 1901; Camera- 
men: Edwin S. Porter, Arthur White; 1 reel, 17 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

In front of a large tent of animal skins, two 
spectators watch two participants perform a 
game of skill. Each participant holds a long whip 
with which he attempts to snare his opponent's 
whip. Filmed at the Pan-American Exposition in 
Buffalo, N.Y. 

Ford Educational Weekly, No. 232; The Wards of a 
Nation. AFI/Nichol Collection (FEB 3995). Ford 

U - V 

24 9 



PRE-CONTACT INDIAN ECONOMIES AND TECHNOLOGY 

i0f0A0f0A0T0A0f040T040f0A0?0A0f0A0f0A0T040f0A0T0A0T0A0 

rOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOVOAOWOAOWOAOVOAOWO 



GATEWAYS 



Native American economies ranged from hunt- 
ing-and-gathering societies to agricultural and 
urbanized ones, and by the time of European 
contact included whale and sea-mammal hunting 
in the Arctic; caribou and moose hunting across 
the forests of Alaska and northern Canada; inten- 
sive fishing by many groups along the coasts of 
Alaska, the Pacific Northwest, southern Califor- 
nia, and Florida; buffalo and large-game hunting 
on the Great Plains and in the Rocky Mountains; 
intensive gathering in California and the Great 
Basin, supplemented by small-game hunting; 
and farming of maize (corn), beans, squash, and 
other plants in the eastern United States and the 
Southwest. 

Native American economies chiefly utilized 
stone, wood, plant fibers, bone, shells, animal 
skin and fur, and pottery, although metals were 
used in parts of North America. (Indians near 
Lake Superior cold-hammered native copper, 
starting as early as 3000-2500 B.C.; the copper 
tools and ornaments they made were traded far 
and wide across the United States. Eastern Inuit in 
the far north also cold-hammered meteoric iron.) 
Trade in other materials had begun to increase 
during the Archaic period (6000-700 B.C.). The 
earliest pottery currently known in North America 
dates to 2500 B.C., but pottery only became 
widespread with the intensification of agriculture 
after about 700 B.C. 

Maize, squash, and beans were domesticated 
in Mesoamerica before 5000 B.C. Maize first ar- 



rived in the Southwest some time between 1 500 
and 1000 B.C. In eastern North America, mean- 
while, gourds (perhaps from Mesoamerica) were 
cultivated before 2000 B.C., and local plants such 
as sumpweed, goosefoot, and sunflowers began 
to be domesticated around 2000-1500 B.C. An- 
other Mesoamerican import, squash, was being 
cultivated in Kentucky by 1000 B.C. The elaborate 
North American mound-building traditions called 
Adena and Hopewell (700 B.C. -400 A.D.) were 
based on an intensified pre-maize agriculture us- 
ing local domesticates and squash. Maize cultiva- 
tion arrived in the Southeast soon after 200 A.D., 
but it was not until new, cold-adapted forms of 
maize appeared, after about 700 A.D., that the 
plant became the major eastern North American 
crop. A new tradition called the Mississippian, 
boasting towns, early urban centers, and renewed 
mound-building, was based largely on these new 
maize strains. Cities arose, such as Cahokia, the 
largest prehistoric city north of Mexico, which 
flourished between 1 050 and 1 250 A.D. and was 
the center of a transcontinental trading network. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Readers interested in pre- 
contact Indian economies and technology should 
explore the General Collections and Rare Book 
and Special Collections, Manuscript, Prints and 
Photographs, Motion Picture, Broadcasting, and 
Geography and Map Divisions. 

In Indian languages, there is not always a generic 




OYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOV 

OAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOA 




'"Mode of tilling and planting/' from La Floride frangaise, scenes de la vie indienne, peintes en 1564 by Theodor de Bry and 
Charles de la Ronci&re (Paris: Les editions nationales, 1928). F314.L33 (LC-USZC4-4821, color; LC-USZ62-31 869, black 
and white). Rare Book and Special Collections Division. 



Timucua Indians of northeast Florida are shown planting beans or maize in a print made from a watercolor by Jacques Le 
Moyne de Morgues (ca. 1533-88). Le Moyne observed the Timucua during an abortive French Huguenot settlement in 
1564 - 65 , while his illustrations of the Timucua are considered less reliable ethnographically than his explanatory descrip- 
tions, they are the only pictures of the tribe to have survived. 




95 1 



2 2 9 



2 3 0 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



o 

ERIC 



Motion Picture Laboratories, 1920; 1 reel, 675 ft., 
35mm ref. print. 

Newsreel footage of American Indian dele- 
gates from more than one hundred churches at- 
tending fiftieth annual Christian conference, site 
unknown. Includes scenes of Indians attending 
church, tent life, and a confirmation service. 

Hopi Indians Dance for TR at [Walpi, Ariz.] 1913. 
The Theodore Roosevelt Association Film Col- 
lection (FAB 1134). Producer unknown, Aug. 
1913; 1 reel, 103 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

On Aug. 20, 1913, Theodore Roosevelt, nu- 
merous visitors, and Hopi Indians observed the 
performance of the ritual Hopi snake dance on 
the Hopi Reservation at Walpi, Arizona. 

[Ickes, Harold L. Home Movies: Indian Family and 
Community Life]. Ickes Collection (VBK 2101). 
[193-?]; 1 videocassette, ca. 13 min., 3/4" view- 
ing copy. 

Contents include Indians rolling dough; bak- 
ing bread; cooking; shearing sheep; washing, 
carding, spinning and weaving wool; working 
metal; views of pueblos; Indian ruins; Indian 
children playing; and people posing for the 
camera. 

In the Land of the War Canoes: Kzvakiutl Indian Life 
on the Northwest Coast. Copyright Collection 
(FDA 2741). Burke Museum, University of Wash- 
ington, 1973; 1 reel, 44 min., 16mm ref. print. 

Bill Holm and George I. Quimby's re-edited 
version of the Edward S. Curtis 1914 film origi- 
nally entitled In the Land of the Headhunters , a 
saga of romantic love among the Kwakiutl Indi- 
ans on Vancouver Island. The added soundtrack 
includes authentic tribal singing, chants, spoken 
parts, and instrumental music. 

Nanook of the North. The Copyright Collection 
(FCA 9828-29). U. S. Pathe, 1922; Direction, sce- 
nario, photography, and editing: Robert Fla- 
herty; 2 reels, 64 min., sd., 16mm ref. print. 



Flaherty seeks to show man's struggle to 
live against the forces of nature by portraying 
scenes from the life of Nanook and his family, 
Eskimos in the Hudson Bay area. Restored ver- 
sion by David H. Shepard, with music by Stanley 
Silverman. 

Serving Rations to the Indians , No. 1. Paper Print 
Collection (FLA 4383). Edison, 1898; 1 reel, 27 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

Indians come out of a door of a log cabin car- 
rying flour or grain sacks in their arms. The loca- 
tion is possibly New Mexico or Colorado. 

Sham Battle at the Pan-American Exposition. Paper 
Print Collection (FLA 5203). Edison, 1901; 1 reel, 
128 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

Some American Indians on horseback wear- 
ing feathers, warpaint, and carrying frontier 
rifles ride across a field. Men dressed as U.S. 
Army troops in battle regalia are lined up in the 
position of skirmishers. They fire at the Indians, 
who gallop by and then circle them. The location 
is Buffalo, N.Y. 

A Vanishing Race. The George Kleine Collection 
(FLA 1897). Edison, 1917; 1 reel, 168 ft., 16mm 
ref. print. 

Scenes of daily life of the Blackfeet Indians on 
a reservation in northwestern Montana. Shows 
maps which indicate the empire of the Blackfeet 
in the early part of the nineteenth century, and 
shows the Indians demonstrating sign language, 
taking down a tipi when they break camp, and 
fording a river. 

The Zuni Kicking Race. Ickes Collection (VBJ 
9309). Outing-Chester Pictures, 1918; Producer: 
C. L. Chester; 1 videocassette, ca. 11 min., 3/4" 
viewing copy. 

The Zuni are shown making pottery and par- 
ticipating in the kicking race, an Indian sport 
where players kick a stick for twenty-five miles 
with their bare feet across the desert. 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 3 1 



Silent Films: Fiction 

The Aborigine's Devotion. AFI/Post Collection 
(FEA 9790). World Film Mfg. Co., 1909; 1 reel, 
429 ft., 35mm ref. print 

A trapper leaves his small child in his Indian 
friend's care. A trader attacks the child, but the 
Indian tracks him down and kills him. 

The Call of the Wild. Paper Print Collection (FLA 
5273). American Mutoscope & Biograph, 1908; 
Director: D. W. Griffith; Camera: Arthur Marvin, 
G. W. Bitzer; Cast: Florence Lawrence, Charles 
Inslee, Mack Sennett; 1 reel, 376 ft., 16mm ref. 
print. 

An Indian proposes to a white woman. She 
declines, and the Indian angrily returns to his 
tribe. Later, the heroine is captured by Indians 
while in the woods, but is saved by the interven- 
tion of her rejected suitor. She returns home, 
while the Indian rides off sadly. 

The Chief's Daughter. MOMA Collection (FAB 
2670). Biograph, 1911; Director: D. W. Griffith; 
Camera: Billy Bitzer; Cast: Frank Grandon, 
Stephanie Longfellow, Jack Dillon; 1 reel, 408 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

A prospector wins the love of the Indian 
chief's daughter and cruelly casts her aside when 
his Eastern fiancee arrives unexpectedly. The In- 
dian girl has the opportunity to show his un- 
faithfulness, and he loses both his fiancee and 
the Indian girl. 

Comata, the Sioux. Paper Print Collection (FLA 
3228). Biograph, 1909; Director: D. W. Griffith; 
Camera: G. W. Bitzer; Cast: James Kirkwood, 
Marion Leonard, Arthur Johnson, Florence 
Lawrence, Linda Arvidson, Verner Clarges; 
1 reel, 360 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

An Indian maiden leaves her village to live 
with a white man, and they have a child. After 
the man abandons her for a white woman, she 



goes off toward the Black Hills with an Indian 
man who has loved and guarded her from the 
beginning. 

The Girl and the Outlaw. Paper Print Collection 
(FLA 5407). American Mutoscope & Biograph, 
1908; Director: D. W. Griffith; Camera: Arthur 
Marvin; Cast: Florence Lawrence, Charles Inslee; 
1 reel, 316 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

The chief of a band of renegade Indians leaves 
his girlfriend beside the road after severely beat- 
ing her. She is found and revived by the daugh- 
ter of a local settler. The two start out for the set- 
tlement, but they are captured by the outlaw 
band. The Indian girl dies after helping her res- 
cuer to escape. 

Her Indian Mother. AFI/New Zealand Film 
Archive Collection (FEB 8630). Kalem, 1910; 
Cast: Alice Joyce, Jane Wolfe; 1 reel, 995 ft., 
35mm ref. print. 

A man in the Hudson Bay country takes an 
Indian wife, and they have a daughter, but he 
leaves them to return to Montreal. When he sees 
his daughter years later on an inspection trip, he 
decides to take her back to Montreal to educate 
her. Missing her tribe, she returns to her village, 
and her heartbroken father finds her in the tipi of 
a young brave whose wife she has become. 

Hiawatha. AFI/Ohio Historical Society Collec- 
tion (FBC 5871). Fort Defiance Film Co., Gau- 
mont, 1913; Producer: Frank E. Moore; Camera: 
Victor Milner; Based on the poem "The Song of 
Hiawatha" by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow; 
Cast: Soon-goot; 1 reel, 16mm ref. print. 

Years after Gitche Manito proclaims that a 
prophet will come to unite the Indian warriors, 
Hiawatha is bom and is later declared to be the 
long-awaited prophet. Hiawatha marries and 
lives happily until famine strikes the village. 
When white men arrive, Pliawatha greets the 



2 3 2 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 




Black Robe and proclaims that the real prophet 
has finally arrived. 

His Last Game. AFI/ Miller Collection (FAB 0434). 
Imp, 1909; 1 reel (incomplete?), 354 ft., 16mm ref. 
print. 

Two gamblers attempt to fix a baseball game 
by bribing the Indian pitcher. When he refuses, 
they try to poison him, and he kills one of the 
gamblers. The Indian is about to be shot for his 
crime when the sheriff grants him a respite to 
pitch in the game, which he wins. The Indian 
is shot the moment before a reprieve for him 
reaches the sheriff. 

fust Squaw. Public Archives of Canada /Dawson 
City Collection (FEB 8387-90). Superior Pic- 
tures, 1919; Director /Producer: George E. Mid- 
dleton; Writer: Earle Snell; Cast: Beatriz Miche- 
lena, William Pike, Andrew Robson, Albert 
Morrison, D. Mitsoras, Jeff Williams, Katherine 
Angus; 4 reels (inc.; reels 1-3 and 5 of 5 only), 
2,127 ft-, 35mm ref. print. 

A mixed blood woman named Fawn falls in 
love with a white stranger. Her brother, a fugi- 
tive known as the Phantom, saves Fawn from the 
man who stole her from her white father. Her fa- 
ther later kills the kidnapper who confesses that 
Fawn is white, thus making it possible for Fawn 
and the stranger to marry. 

Kentuckian. Paper Print Collection (FLA 5513). 
American Mutoscope & Biograph, 1908; Direc- 
tor: Wallace McCutcheon; Scenario: Stanner E. V. 
Taylor from the play by Augustus Thomas; Cam- 
era: G. W. Bitzer, Arthur Marvin; Cast: Eddie Dil- 
lon, Robert Vignola, John Adolfi, Florence Auer, 
Wallace McCutcheon, Jr., D. W. Griffith; 1 reel, 
311 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

An Indian woman saves the life of a card 
player robbed by Indians and left for dead. They 
marry and have a child. As he is struggling to de- 




cide whether to return East for his inheritance, 
his Indian wife commits suicide. 

Leather Stocking. Paper Print Collection (FLA 
5524). Biograph, 1909; Director: D. W. Griffith; 
Camera: G. W. Bitzer, Arthur Marvin; Cast: 
James Kirkwood, Linda Arvidson, Mack Sennett, 
Billy Quirk, George Nicholls, Owen Moore, 
Henry B. Walthall; 1 reel, 372 ft., 16mm ref. 
print. 

Based on James Fenimore Cooper's story, the 
movie begins as a party of settlers led by a 
friendly Indian and escorted by a British soldier 
set out out on a journey. En route they are 
stalked and attacked by Indians. At the crucial 
moment, soldiers from the fort arrive and beat 
off the unfriendly Indian tribe. 

The Little Indian Weaver. AFI/Casselton-Larson 
Collection (FEB 8579). Madeline Brandeis Pro- 
ductions, Pathe, 1929; 1 reel, 1,015 ft-/ 35mm ref. 
print. 

Based on the book of the same title by Made- 
line Brandeis, the movie tells the story of a 
Navajo girl who wants the doll of a white child, 
so she weaves a blanket to exchange for one at 
the trading post. The trader refuses to take the 
blanket, but the trader's son buys the girl a doll 
with his savings. Because of this act of kindness, 
the Navajo accept the white boy as their friend. 

The Mended Lute. Paper Print Collection (FLA 
5568). Biograph, 1909; Director: D. W. Griffith; 
Camera: G. W. Bitzer; Cast: James Kirkwood, Flo- 
rence Lawrence, Owen Moore, Mack Sennett, 
Arthur Johnson, James Young Deer, Princess Red 
Wing; 1 reel, 375 ft., 16mm ref. print. 

Little Bear and Standing Rock are vying for 
the Sioux chief's daughter, and the chief gives 
her to the highest bidder. Standing Rock, the 
man she does not love. After she leaves her new 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 3 3 



husband for Little Bear whom she loves, the two 
are captured by Standing Rock and his tribe and 
are about to be burned at the stake when, 
impressed by his rival's bravery, he sets them 
both free. 

A Midnight Phantasy. Paper Print Collection 
(FLA 3256). American Mutoscope & Biograph, 
1903; Camera: F. S. Armitage; 1 reel, 15 ft., 16mm 
ref. print. 

A cigar-store Indian is standing in front of a 
picket fence and next to it is a poster of a balle- 
rina. A man appears, steals the cigar from the In- 
dian and escorts away the ballerina who steps 
out of the poster. The Indian scalps him and 
hands the scalp to the astonished ballerina. 

A Mohawks Way . Paper Print Collection (FLA 
5584). Biograph, 1910; Director: D. W. Griffith; 
Camera: G. W. Bitzer; Cast: Dorothy Davenport, 
George Nicholls, Alfred Paget, Mack Sennett, 
Claire McDowell, W. J. Butler; 1 reel, 398 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

A white doctor refuses to treat a sick Indian 
child, so his wife ministers in his stead. Later, the 
Indians take to the warpath and kill the settlers 
except for the wife, who is spared because of her 
earlier kindness to the ailing Indian child. 

The Paleface . Copyright Collection (FBA 3635). 
Comique Film Co., First National, 1921; Direc- 
tor/Writer: Buster Keaton, Eddie Cline; Cast: 
Buster Keaton, Joe Roberts; 1 reel, 800 ft., 16mm 
ref. print. 

Indians capture Buster Keaton, and his as- 
bestos clothing saves him from burning. They 
think he is a god and take him into the tribe un- 
der the name of Little Chief Paleface. Then he 
saves the tribe from being cheated by crooked 
oilmen. 

Ramojia. Paper Print Collection (FLA 5651). Bio- 
graph, 1910; Director: D. W. Griffith; Camera: G. 

O 




W. Bitzer; Cast: Mary Pickford, Henry B. 
Walthall, Frank Grandon, Kate Bruce; 1 reel, 432 
ft., 16mm ref. print. 

The movie is based on the story by Helen 
Hunt Jackson of an orphan from a great Spanish 
household who falls in love with an Indian, 
Alessandro, but her foster mother tries to thwart 
the romance. Upon hearing that she has Indian 
blood, Ramona renounces the white world to 
be with Alessandro, but they are driven away 
from Alessandro's home by white men until he 
finally dies. 

The Redman and the Child . Paper Print Collection 
(FLA 5657). American Mutoscope & Biograph, 
1908; Director: D. W. Griffith; Camera: Arthur 
Marvin; Cast: Charles Inslee, John Tansy, Harry 
Salter, Linda Arvidson; 1 reel, 328 ft., 16mm ref. 
print. 

Outlaws kill an old miner and kidnap his 
grandchild while their Indian friend is away. 
Upon his return, the Indian rescues the child and 
avenges the death of his old friend by killing the 
outlaws. 

Redskin. AFI/ Paramount Collection (FCA 
6983-84). Paramount, 1929; Director: Victor 
Schertzinger; Story & Screenplay: Elizabeth Pick- 
ett; Photography: Edward Cronjager; Color 
Photography: Ray Rennahan and Edward Es- 
tabrook; Musical Score: J. S. Zamecnik; Cast: 
Richard Dix, Gladys Belmont, Tully Marshall, 
George Rigas, Noble Johnson, Jane Novak, Larry 
Steers, Augustina Lopez; 2 reels, 2,927 ft., 16mm 
color, ref. print. 

The son of a Navajo chief returns from college 
and finds it difficult to assimilate into his tribe. 
When his father dies, he refuses to take his place 
and is exiled. He goes to a fellow student he 
loves. Com Blossom, a member of an enemy 
tribe, the Pueblos, but is discovered in her camp 
and escapes into the desert where he discovers 




2 3 4 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



oil. He returns to his people, informing them 
they are rich now and marries Com Blossom, 
who had been hiding from her people in his 
village. 

The Silent Enemy. AFI / Paramount Collection 
(FEA 8085-92). Paramount, 1930; Director: H. P. 
Carver; Cast: Chief Yellow Robe, Chief Long 
Lance, Chief Akawanush, Spotted Elk, Cheeka; 8 
reels, 7,548 ft., 35mm ref. print. 

With winter approaching and food scarce for 
the Ojibwa tribe, Baluk attempts to lead the tribe 
in search of food, but is opposed by his rival, 
Dagwan, who tries to have him killed. 

Strongheart. Paper Print Collection (FLA 5902). 
Klaw & Erlanger, 1914; Supervisor: D. W. 
Griffith; Director: James Kirkwood; Cast: Henry 
B. Walthall, Lionel Barrymore, Alan Hale, Anto- 
nio Moreno, Blanche Sweet, Gertrude Robinson; 
1 reel, 1,144 ft*/ 16mm ref. print. 

Based on the play by William C. DeMille, the 
movie tells the story of Strongheart who leaves 
his tribe, goes to college in the East, becomes a 
football star, gets in trouble for lying to help a 
white friend who has cheated, and falls in love 
with a white woman. When he finds out that his 
tribe needs him because of the death of his fa- 
ther, he respects his duty and, leaving his sweet- 
heart behind, sadly returns to his people. 

The Vanishing American. AFI /Paramount Film 
Collection (FGC 1728-32). Paramount, 1925; Di- 
rector: George B. Seitz; Screenplay: Ethel Do- 
herty; Adaptation: Lucien Hubbard; Photogra- 
phers: Edgar Schoenbaum, Harry Perry; Cast: 
Richard Dix, Lois Wilson, Noah Beery, Malcolm 
MacGregor; 10 reels, 9,816 ft., 110 min., 35mm 
ref. print. 

Based on the serial story by Zane Grey, the in- 
justices suffered by reservation Indians are dra- 
matized in the story of Nophaie who falls in love 



with a white school teacher on the reservation. 
He and other Indians return from World War I to 
find their lands taken and their people starving. 

Sound Feature Films 

Across the Wide Missouri. Copyright Collection 
(FGA 66-73). Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 1951; Di- 
rector: William A. Wellman; Producer: Robert 
Sisk; Screenplay: Talbot Jennings; Story: Talbot 
Jennings, Frank Cavett; Music: David Raksin; 
Film editor: John Dunning; Cast: Clark Gable, Ri- 
cardo Montalban, John Hodiak, Adolph Menjou, 
J. Carrol Naish, Maria Elena Marques; 8 reels, 
7,020 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

A beaver trapper marries a Blackfeet girl in 
the hope that their union will give him and his 
fellow hunters ready access to unexplored In- 
dian country. 

Apache. Copyright Collection (FGA 435-444). 
Linden Productions, 1954; released by United 
Artists; Director: Robert Aldrich; Producer: 
Harold Hecht; Screenplay: James R. Webb; Mu- 
sic: David Raksin; Editorial supervisor: Alan 
Crosland, Jr.; Based on the novel Broncho Apache 
by Paul I. Wellman; Cast: Burt Lancaster, Jean 
Peters, John McLntire, Charles Buchinsky, John 
Dehner; 10 reels, 8,190 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

Embittered by the surrender of Geronimo, by 
threats of imprisonment, and by betrayal by fel- 
low tribesmen, the fierce Apache warrior Massai 
wages a one-man war against the U.S. Army. 

Billy Jack. Copyright Collection (FGC 8046- 
8051). National Student Film Corporation, 1972 
(originally released by Warner Bros., 1971); Di- 
rector: T. C. Frank; Producer: Mary Rose Solti; 
Screenplay: T. C. Frank, Terean Christin; Cam- 
era: Fred Koenekamp, John Stephens; Cast: Tom 
Laughlin, Delores Taylor, Clark Howat, Bert 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 3 5 



Freed, Julie Webb; 12 reels on 6, 9,900 ft., color, 
35mm ref. print. 

A mixed blood Vietnam veteran resorts to vi- 
olence to protect a freedom school for runaway 
teenagers on an Indian reservation when it is 
threatened by local townspeople. 

Broken Arrow. Copyright Collection (FGA 
1.545 -1.553). Twentieth Century-Fox, 1950; Direc- 
tor: Delmer Daves; Producer: Julian Blaustein; 
Screenplay: Michael Blankfort; Music director: 
Alfred Newman; Music author: Flugo Fried- 
hofer; Film editor: J. Watson Webb; Based on the 
novel Blood Brother by Elliott Arnold; Cast: James 
Stewart, Jeff Chandler, Debra Paget, Basil Ruys- 
dael, Will Geer; 9 reels, 8,370 ft., color, 35mm ref. 
print. 

In a courageous effort to make peace between 
the white man and the Indian, a former army 
officer turned prospector goes into the Apache 
stronghold. lie negotiates a peace with Cochise, 
the Apache leader, and marries an Indian 
woman, who is killed later when renegade 
whites attack the tribe. 

Broken Lance. Copyright Collection (FGA 1554- 
1564). Twentieth Century-Fox, 1954; Director: 
Edward Dymtryk; Producer: Sol C. Siegel; Story: 
Philip Yordan; Screenplay: Richard Murphy; 
Music: Leigh Plarline; Music conductor: Lionel 
Newman; Film editor: Dorothy Spencer; Cast: 
Spencer Tracy, Robert Wagner, Jean Peters, 
Richard Widmark, Katy Jurado; 11 reels, 
8,700 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

An imperious cattle baron's empire is threat- 
ened by his three weakling sons who resent their 
father's domination, his defiance of the law and 
society, his marriage to an Indian princess after 
their mother's death, and his favoritism to their 
mixed blood brother. 

Cheyenne Autumn. Copyright Collection (FGB 
9357-9366). Ford-Smith Productions, 1964; re- 
td 




leased by Warner Bros.; Director: John Ford; Pro- 
ducer: Bernard Smith; Screenplay: James R. 
Webb; Music: Alex North; Director of photogra- 
phy: William Clothier; Film editor: Otho Lover- 
ing; Cast: Richard Widmark, Carroll Baker, Karl 
Malden, Sal Mineo, Dolores Del Rio; 10 reels, 
13,300 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

A small, heroic band of Cheyenne escape 
from a wretched Oklahoma reservation in 1878 
and fight their way back to their homeland in the 
Yellowstone River country fifteen hundred miles 
away. 

Chief Crazy Horse. Copyright Collection (FGA 
2034-2043). Universal, 1955; Director: George 
Sherman; Producer: William Alland; Story: Ger- 
ald Drayson Adams; Music: Frank Skinner; Mu- 
sic supervisor: Joseph Gershenson; Film editor: 
A 1 Clark; Cast: Victor Mature, Suzan Ball, John 
Lund, Ray Danton, Keith Larson; 10 reels, 7,800 
ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

Crazy Plorse believes that he is the warrior 
who will defeat the whites, as promised by a 
Sioux prophecy. After uniting the Dakota tribes 
and leading them in their struggle to defend 
their territory against invading white men, Chief 
Crazy Plorse is killed by a jealous tribesman 
while visiting an Army fort on a peaceful mission. 

Dances with Wolves. Copyright Collection (CGB 
7454-7463). Tig Productions, 1990; released by 
Orion Pictures; Director: Kevin Costner; Produc- 
ers: Jim Wilson and Kevin Costner; Screenplay: 
Michael Blake; Based on the novel by Michael 
Blake; Cast: Kevin Costner, Mary McDonnell, 
Graham Greene; 19 reels on 10, ca. 17,420 ft., 
color, 35mm ref. print. 

An army lieutenant is stationed at a deserted 
outpost where he becomes friendly with the lo- 
cal Sioux. He joins them in fighting their enemies 
and marries a white woman who has become 
part of their tribe. When captured by soldiers, he 




INDIAN POLICY REFORM (THE "INDIAN NEW DEAL"); AND THE 



^OfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOT 

fOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOA 



OAO?OAO?OAO?OAOTOAO?OAO?OA( 

0?OAO?OAO?OAOTOAO?OAO?OAOT( 



GATEWAYS 



By the mid-1 920s it was widely held that the al- 
lotment policy had not succeeded and that condi- 
tions on Indian reservations were deplorable. 
Many of the criticisms of federal Indian policy 
were summarized in the 1928 Meriam report, The 
Problem of Indian Administration. The debate 
over federal Indian policy shifted to the idea 
of maintaining tribal cultures and encouraging 
tribal self-government and reservation develop- 
ment. Support for these ideas led to a major 
change in policy, called the reform era or the 
"Indian New Deal" Many of the reforms were 
carried through during John Collier's term as 
commissioner of Indian affairs (1 933-1945). 
Congress enacted a number of new laws, includ- 
ing (1 ) the Indian Reorganization Act (Wheeler- 
Howard Act) of 1934, which ended allotment, au- 
thorized tribes to create their own business 
councils and governments, and promoted reser- 
vation land acquisition and economic develop- 
ment; (2) the Johnson-O'Malley Act of 1 934, 
which authorized the contracting of BIA programs 
by States and, later, by other entities, including 
tribes; and (3) the Indian Arts and Crafts Board 
Act of 1 935, which promoted nationwide market- 
ing of Indian crafts. The reform policy also led, in- 
directly, to the beginning of modern national In- 
dian political activism. 

While the Indian New Deal era ended allot- 
ment, it did not end the debate over assimilation. 



Proponents of assimilation inside and outside 
Congress attacked the reform policy and, after 
World War II, succeeded in moving federal In- 
dian policy back toward assimilation. This began 
the termination era of Indian policy, whose even- 
tual goal was to terminate the trust relationship 
between the federal government and every Indian 
tribe, in order to free tribes and individual Indians 
from federal control. Termination found its gen- 
eral expression in a 1953 congressional resolu- 
tion and its specific expression both in Public 
Law 83-280, which granted to five states criminal 
and most civil jurisdiction over most reservations 
within their borders, and in statutes terminating 
the federal relationship with about 1 20 tribes or 
bands, such as the Menominee and the Klamath. 
The opposition of Indian political organizations, 
and the unhappy experience of the terminated 
tribes, led Congress to cease terminating tribes in 
1 962. By the end of 1 994, Congress had restored 
federal recognition to almost all terminated tribes. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Library collections with 
materials on federal Indian policies include the 
General Collections, the Microform Reading 
Room, the Law Library, and the Manuscript, Ge- 
ography and Map, and Prints and Photographs, 
and Motion Picture, Broadcasting Divisions. 



0 



TERMINATION ERA 

OTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAO^ 

OAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOfOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTOJ 




Representatives of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, Montana, receiving their just- 
approved constitution and bylaws from Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes, October 28, 1935. LOT 1 2363-1 -C. 
(LC-USZ62-1 15958). Prints and Photographs Division. 



The Salish and Kootenai constitution was the first approved under the Indian Reorganization Act, which was the brainchild 
of Commissioner of Indian Affairs John Collier but had the whole-hearted support of Secretary Ickes . 




2 3 7 





2 3 8 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



o 

ERIC 



is rescued by the Sioux. Knowing that the army 
will pursue him, he leaves the tribe with his wife 
to protect the Sioux. 

Drums Along the Mohazok . AFI/ Anonymous 6 
(FCA 9509-9512). Darryl F. Zanuck production, 
1.939; presented by Twentieth Century-Fox; Di- 
rector: John Ford; Associate Producer: Raymond 
Griffith; Scenario: Lamar Trotti, Sonya Levien; 
Photography: Bert Glennon, Ray Rennahan; Mu- 
sic: Alfred Newman; Art director: Richard Day; 
Based on the novel by Walter D. Edmonds; Cast: 
Claudette Colbert, Henry Fonda, Edna May 
Oliver, Eddie Collins, John Carradine, Doris 
Bowdon, Jessie Ralph, Arthur Shields; 4 reels, 
3,727 ft., color, 16mm ref. print. 

A young couple moves to the Mohawk Valley 
at the start of the Revolutionary War where they 
are subject to Indian attacks by the Iroquois. 
They have a loyal Indian friend. Blue Back, who 
is a Christian. 

The Exiles. LC Purchase (FCA 9398-9399). A 
Mackenzie Production, 1961; distributed by 
Pathe Contemporary Films; Director, producer, 
writer: Kent Mackenzie; Producers: Ronald 
Austin, Sam Farnsworth, John Morrill, Erik 
Daarstad, Robert Kaufman, Beth Patrick, Sven 
Walnum, Paula Powers; Photography: Erik 
Daarstad, Robert Kaufman, John Merrill; Ar- 
chive photographs: Edward Curtis; Cast: Yvonne 
Williams, Homer Nish, Tommy Reynolds, Rico 
Rodriguez, Clifford Ray Sam; 2 reels, 2,604 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

Three young Indians leave the reservation 
and go to Los Angeles where they eventually 
discover that they are caught between cultures 
and do not belong in city life. They go to a hilltop 
near the freeway where they beat drums and 
sing and dance in the traditional ways. 

Flap. Copyright Collection (FGD 495-500). 
Warner Bros., a Kinney National Company, 1970; 

260 ,; 



Director: Carol Reed; Screenplay: Clair Huffaker; 
Based on the novel Nobody Loves a Drunken Indian 
by Clair Huffaker; Cast: Anthony Quinn, Shelley 
Winters, Claude Akins, Victor Jory; 12 reels on 6, 
9,450 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

An Indian war hero tries to claim the city of 
Phoenix for his tribe. 

Fort Apache. AFI/RKO Collection (FEA 8289- 
8301). Argosy Pictures, 1948; released by RKO 
Radio Pictures; Director: John Ford; Presenters: 
John Ford and Merian C. Cooper; Cinematogra- 
pher: Archie Stout; Screenplay: Frank S. Nugent 
from the story "Massacre" by James Warner Bel- 
lah; Cast: John Wayne, Henry Fonda, Shirley 
Temple; 13 reels, 11,492 ft., 35mm ref. print. 

A Civil War general is demoted to lieutenant 
colonel and is sent west to fight Indians. In his 
search for glory he follows Cochise into Mexico 
with his men and sends his captain, whom 
Cochise trusts, to arrange a meeting. The colonel 
double-crosses his captain and Cochise and 
sends troops to force Cochise's people to return 
to their appointed lands. The Indians slaughter 
the colonel's troops, with the exception of the 
captain's small squad. 

Geronimo , an American Legend. Copyright Collec- 
tion (CGB 9897-9903). A Walter Hill /Neil Can- 
ton production, 1993; released by Columbia Pic- 
tures; Director: Walter Hill; Producers: Walter 
Hill and Neil Canton; Screenplay: John Milius 
and Larry Gross; Cast: Wes Studi, Jason Patric, 
Gene Hackman, Robert Duvall; 14 reels on 7, 
ca. 10,350 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

Geronimo is taken into custody by the U.S. 
Army, but he and some followers escape and go 
on a rampage through the settlements. An army 
lieutenant, Gatewood, is ordered to capture 
Geronimo. 

The Great Sioux Massacre. Copyright Collection 
(FGB 9182-9187). F. & F. Productions, 1965; re- 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 3 9 



leased by Columbia Pictures; Director: Sidney 
Salkow; Producer: Leon Fromkess; Story: Sidney 
Salkow, Marvin Gluck; Screenplay: Fred C. 
Dobbs; Music: Emil Newman, Edward B. Powell; 
Director of Photography: Irving Lippman; Edi- 
tor: William Austin; Cast: Joseph Cotten, Darren 
McGavin, Philip Carey, Julie Sommars, Nancy 
Kovack; 12 reels on 6, 8,200 ft., color, 35mm ref. 
print. 

General Custer, a sadistic, ambition-plagued 
man, is persuaded by a group of political lobby- 
ists to kill off the Sioux tribes so that their lands 
may be confiscated. 

Hiawatha. Copyright Collection (FGA 4966- 
4973). Monogram Pictures Corp., 1952; Direc- 
tor: Kurt Neumann; Producer: Walter Mirisch; 
Screenplay: Arthur Strawn, Dan Ullman; Music: 
Marlin Skiles; Film editor: Walter Hanneman; 
Based on the poem "The Song of Pliawatha" by 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow; Cast: Vincent 
Edwards, Yvette Dugay, Keith Larsen, Gene Igle- 
sias, Armando Silvestre; 8 reels, 8,000 ft., color, 
35mm ref. print. 

After his marriage to Minnehaha, a Dakota 
maiden, Hiawatha thwarts the plot of Pau Puk 
Keewis, a villainous young brave who seeks to 
instigate a war between the peaceful Ojibwa and 
the hostile Dakota. 

Hondo. Copyright Collection (FGA 5129-5138). 
Wayne-Fellows Productions, 1953; released by 
Warner Bros.; Director: John Farrow; Producer: 
Robert Fellows; Screenplay: James Edward 
Grant; Music: Emil Newman, Hugo Friedhofer; 
Film editor: Ralph Dawson; Based on a story by 
Louis L'Amour; Cast: John Wayne, Geraldine 
Page, Ward Bond, Michael Pate, James Amess; 10 
reels, 7,500 ft., color, 3-D, 35mm ref. print. 

In 1874, Hondo, a cavalry dispatch rider who 
is part Indian, escapes from execution by the 
Apache and saves a band of settlers and a cav- 
alry patrol from warring Indians. 




Igloo. AFI/ Universal Collection (FEB 0916- 
0921). Universal, 1932; Carl Laemmle presents; 
Director and story: Ewing Scott; Producer: Ed- 
ward Small; Photography: Roy H. Klaffki; Film 
editor: Richard Cahoon; Narrative by Edward T. 
Lowe and Wilfred Lucas; Narration by Gayne 
Whitman; Cast: Chee-Ak, Kyatuk, Toyuk, Lanak, 
Nahshook, and other Eskimo villagers and 
huntsmen of the Nuwuk tribe in the Arctic; 6 
reels, 5,2 77 ft., 35mm ref. print. 

In the area above Pt. Barrow, Alaska, the 
Nuwuk, an Eskimo tribe, emerge from their 
igloos at the end of winter. Chee-ak, a member of 
a neighboring tribe who hopes to win Kyatuk, 
the daughter of the chief, arrives with food. After 
a storm occurs and they run out of food, Chee- 
ak leads them on an arduous journey in search 
of food. 

Jeremiah Johnson. Copyright Collection (FGC 
8086-8092). Warner Bros, Inc. & Sanford Pro- 
ductions, Inc., 1972; Director: Sidney Pollack; 
Producer: Joe Wizan; Screenplay: John Milius, 
Edward Anhalt; Cast: Robert Redford, Will Geer, 
Stefan Gierasch, Allyn Ann McLerie; Based 
upon the novel Mountain Man by Vardis Fisher; 
14 reels on 7, ca. 10,890 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

An ex-soldier, Jeremiah Johnson, retreats to 
the wilderness to become a fur trapper. He be- 
comes friends with the Flathead and marries the 
chief's daughter. Later, the cavalry desecrates a 
Crow burial ground against Jeremiah's wishes 
when he acts as their guide. The Crow seek re- 
venge by killing Jeremiah's family, and he retali- 
ates by killing Crows. 

The Last of the Mohicans. AFI/Small Collection 
(FEB 0306-0315). Reliance Pictures, 1936; re- 
leased through United Artists; Director: George 
B. Seitz; Producer: Edward Small; Screenplay: 
Philip Dunne; Based on the novel The Last of 
the Mohicans by James Fenimore Cooper; Cast: 

*■ 



2 4 0 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



Randolph Scott, Binnie Barnes, Henry Wilcoxon; 
10 reels, 8,225 ft-, b&w, 35mm ref. print. 

During the French and Indian War, Hawkeye, 
a white man raised by Indians, comes to the aid 
of the two daughters of a British colonel, Alice 
and Cora. They have been kidnapped by an In- 
dian scout named Magua. With the help of the 
Mohicans, Uncas and Chingachgook, Hawkeye 
rescues them and falls in love with Alice. The 
two women are captured by Magua again after 
an Indian attack on the fort. Uncas falls in love 
with Cora and dies trying to save her. Cora leaps 
off a cliff to join Uncas in death. Hawkeye is cap- 
tured attempting to save Alice, but is rescued by 
the army. 

The division also has the 1992 Twentieth 
Century-Fox version of this title. 

The Legend of the Lone Ranger. Copyright Collec- 
tion (FGE 4157-4162). A Martin Starger produc- 
tion, 1981; distributed by Universal; Director: 
William A. Fraker; Producer: Walter Coblenz; 
Screenplay: Ivan Goff, Ben Roberts, Michael 
Kane & William Roberts; Adaptation by Jerry 
Derloshon; Cast: Klinton Spilsbury, Michael 
Horse, Christopher Lloyd; 6 reels, 8,820 ft., 
color, 35mm ref. print. 

John Reid assumes the identity of the Lone 
Ranger to avenge his family's deaths and is aided 
by his childhood Indian friend, Tonto. 

Little Big Man. Copyright Collection (FGC 
6480-6487). National General, 1970; Hiller Pro- 
ductions, Ltd. & Stockbridge Productions, Inc., 
released by Cinema Center Films; Director: 
Arthur Penn; Producer: Stuart Millar; Screen- 
play: Calder Willingham; Music: John Ham- 
mond; Camera: Harry Stradling, Jr.; Based on the 
novel by Thomas Berger; Cast: Dustin Hoffman, 
Faye Dunaway, Martin Balsam, Richard Mulli- 
gan, Chief Dan George, Jeff Corey; 15 reels on 8, 
13,230 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 



An elderly white man recounts his life story, 
which includes being raised by Indians as a 
Cheyenne brave. He is captured by the army 
and rejoins white civilization, but later meets a 
woman from his old tribe and marries her. Gen- 
eral Custer attacks the Indian camp where they 
live, killing the man's wife and child. He is later 
made a scout and is present at the Little Big Horn 
massacre, where his life is saved by a Cheyenne 
friend. 

A Man Called Horse. Copyright Collection (FGC 
4545-4550). National General, 1970; Sandy 
Howard Productions Corp.; Director: Elliot Sil- 
verstein; Producer: Sandy Howard; Story: 

Dorothy M. Johnson; Screenplay: Jack DeWitt; 
Music: Leonard Roseman, Lloyd One Star; Cast: 
Richard Harris, Dame Judith Anderson, Jean 
Gascon, Manu Tupou, Corinna Tsopei; 12 reels 
on 6, 10,260 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

A British man is captured by Sioux. He adapts 
to their way of life and marries the daughter of 
the chief after enduring the torture of being hung 
by the skin of his chest. His wife and the chief die 
in confrontations with a rival tribe, and he be- 
comes the tribe's new chief, before later deciding 
to return to England. 

Massacre. United Artists Collection (FEB 
1616-1623). First National Pictures, 1934; Direc- 
tor: Alan Crosland; Story: Robert Gessner; 
Screenplay: Ralph Block, Sheridan Gibney; 
Photography: George Barnes; Cast: Richard 
Barthelmess, Ann Dvorak, Dudley Digges, 
Claire Dodd, Henry O'Neill, Sidney Toler; 
8 reels, 6,289 ft., 35mm ref. print. 

An Indian who makes. a living as a stunt rider, 
Joe Thunder Horse, returns to the reservation to 
see Eiis sick father and learns that the reservation 
is run by corrupt officials. When he avenges the 
rape of his sister, he is arrested for attempted 
murder, but escapes to Washington, D.C., where 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 4 1 



he pleads his case to the head of the Bureau of In- 
dian Affairs. The Indian agent's corruption is 
eventually revealed, and Joe is offered a job by 
the Bureau. 

Navajo. Copyright Collection (FGA 7964-7971). 
B-F Productions, 1951; released by Lippert Pic- 
tures; Director and writer: Norman Foster; Pro- 
ducer: Hall Bartlett; Music: Leith Stevens; Editor: 
Lloyd Nosier; Cast: Francis Kee Teller, John 
Mitchell, Mrs. Teller, Billy Draper, Hall Bartlett; 8 
reels, 6,300 ft., 35mm ref. print. 

A seven-year-old Navajo boy determines to 
remain free of the white man and the reservation 
school by escaping to a canyon. 

The Outsider. Copyright Collection (FGB 5711- 
5716). Universal, 1961; Director: Delbert Mann; 
Producer: Sy Bartlett; Screenplay: Stewart Stern; 
Composer and conductor: Leonard Rosenman; 
Photographer: Joseph LaShelle; Film editor: Mar- 
jorie Fowler; Based on the book The Hero of Iiuo 
Jima by William Bradford Huie; Cast: Tony Cur- 
tis, James Franciscus, Gregory Walcott, Bruce 
Bennett, Vivian Nathan; 11 reels on 6, 9,500 ft., 
b&w, 35mm ref. print. 

The tragic career of Ira Hamilton Hayes, a 
Pima youth who lived on a reservation and was 
thrust into national fame as one of the six 
Marines who raised the American flag on Iwo 
Jima during World War II, is traced, from his en- 
listment in the Marines in 1944 to his death in 
1955 of alcoholism and exposure. 

The Paleface. Copyright Collection (FBA 3632- 
3634). Paramount, 1948; Director: Norman Z. 
McLeod; Producer: Robert A. Welsh; Screenplay: 
Edmund Hartman; Music score: Victor Young; 
Film editor: Ellsworth Hoagland; Cast: Bob 
Hope, Jane Russell, Robert Armstrong, Iris 
Adrian, Robert Watson; 10 reels, 8,180 ft., 35mm 
ref. print. 



A timid, traveling dentist, mistaken for a fed- 
eral agent, despite gun duels and attempted 
burning at the stake, escapes the Indians on the 
war path, outwits the outlaws, and wins the love 
of a gun- to ting cowgirl. 

Rio Conchos. AFI/2oth Century-Fox Collection 
(FGD 2002-2007). Twentieth Century-Fox, 1964; 
Director: Gordon Douglas; Cast: Richard Boone, 
Stuart Whitman, Tony Franciosa; 12 reels on 6, 
9,630 ft., color, 35mm ref. print 

An Indian-hating white man leads the U.S. 
cavalry to a gun runner who is planning to give 
rifles to Apaches. When he finds the Indian that 
killed his family, he tries to attack him, but is im- 
prisoned by the colonel. An Indian woman 
named Sally frees him, and he and a sergeant de- 
stroy the camp, killing everyone except for Sally 
and a captain. Note: Film is English language 
with Spanish subtitles. 

Sitting Bull. Copyright Collection (FEB 
6983-6994). W. R. Frank production, 1954; Direc- 
tor: Sidney Salkow; Mexican director: Rene Car- 
dona; Cast: Dale Robertson, Mary Murphy, J. 
Carol Naish; 12 reels, 9,630 ft., color, 35mm ref. 
print 

A pro-Indian soldier tries to make peace with 
the Sioux, led by Sitting Bull. He is accused of 
aiding the enemy when Custer attempts to de- 
stroy the Indians. At the end. President Grant 
and Sitting Bull meet to discuss peaceful coexis- 
tence between the two races. 

Tell Them Willie Boy is Here. Copyright Collection 
(FGC 5708-5712). Universal, 1969; Director and 
writer: Abraham Polonsky; Producer: Philip A. 
Waxman; Presented by Jennings Lang; Photog- 
rapher: Conrad Hall; Cast: Robert Redford, 
Katharine Ross, Robert Blake, Susan Clark; 
10 reels, 8,575 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 



2 4 2 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



Willie Boy, a Paiute Indian, returns to his 
reservation in 1909. He attempts to meet his love, 
Lola, in the woods, which leads to a fight be- 
tween him and her father and brothers, resulting 
in the father's death. Willie and Lola run away 
and are pursued reluctantly by the sheriff at the 
head of a bloodthirsty posse. Willie kills a mem- 
ber of the posse, which intensifies the pursuit. 
Lola is found dead, and the sheriff is forced to 
kill Willie only to discover that Willie's gun has 
no bullets. 

Thunderheart. Copyright Collection (CGB 
6173-6179). Tribeca-Waterhorse, 1992; released 
by TriStar Pictures; Director: Michael Apted; 
Producers: Robert De Niro, Jane Rosenthal, John 
Fusco; Screenplay: John Fusco; Cast: Val Kilmer, 
Graham Greene, Sam Shepard; 13 reels on 7, ca. 
10,620 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

A federal agent who is part Indian is sent to 
investigate a murder on a Sioux reservation in 
the late 1970s. Even though he is disdainful of 
his Indian heritage initially, during the course of 
the investigation he becomes attuned to his In- 
dian self. 

The Unforgiven. Copyright Collection (FGB 6887- 
6893). James Productions, Inc., i960; released by 
United Artists; Director: John Huston; Producer: 
James Hill; Screenplay: Ben Maddow; Music: 
Dimitri Tiomkin; Cast: Burt Lancaster, Audrey 
Hepburn, Audie Murphy, John Saxon, Charles 
Bickford, Albert Salmi, Lillian Gish; 7 reels, 
11,000 ft., color, 33mm ref. print. 

Rachel, a girl raised by whites in Texas in the 
1870s, is discovered to be Kiowa. She is subjected 
to racism, and the Indians attempt to claim her 
back through battle. When the Indians attack her 
foster home, the girl is forced to kill her Indian 
brother. After the Indians are defeated, Rachel 
and her foster brother, Ben, decide to marry. 



Valley of the Sun. AFI Collection (FBA 8386- 
8389). RKO Radio Pictures, 1942; Director: 
George Marshall; Producer: Graham Baker; 
Screenplay: Horace McCoy; Music: Paul Sawtell; 
Photographer: Harry Wild; Editor: Desmond 
Marquette; Based on the story of the same title 
by Clarence B. Kelland; Cast: Cedric Hardwicke, 
Dean Jagger, Lucille Ball, James Craig, Peter 
Whitney, Billy Gilbert, Tom Tyler; 4 reels, 2,795 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

An Indian scout averts a massacre by prevent- 
ing a crooked Indian agent from swindling food 
from his people. 

The White Dawn. Copyright Collection (FGD 
529-535). Paramount, 1974; Director: Philip 
Kaufman; Screenplay: James Huston and Tom 
Rickman; Based on the book An Eskimo Saga by 
James Huston; Cast: Warren Oates, Timothy Bot- 
toms, Lou Gossett, Simonie Kopapik; 14 reels on 
7, 9,810 ft., color, 35mm ref. print. 

In 1896, three whalers stranded in the Arctic 
are rescued by Eskimos and bring havoc to the 
Eskimos' lives. 

Windwalker. Copyright Collection (FGE 0074- 
0078). A Santa Fe International production, 1980; 
distributed by Pacific International Enterprises; 
Director: Keith Merrill; Producers: Thomas E. 
Ballard, Arthur R. Dubs; Screenplay: Ray Gol- 
drup; Director of photography: Reed Smoot; 
Based on the novel by Blaine M. Yorgason; Cast: 
Trevor Howard, Nick Ramus, James Remar, 
Serene Hedin, Dusty Iron Wing McCrea, Silvana 
Gallardo; 10 reels on 5, ca. 9,000 ft., color, 35mm 
ref. print. 

In the eighteenth century, a Cheyenne comes 
back to life to protect his tribe from their ene- 
mies, the Crow, one of whom is his son, who was 
stolen from his tribe. Note: Soundtrack is in 
Cheyenne and Crow languages with English 
subtitles and narration. 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



Television Programs 

Broken Arrow. Copyright Collection (FBB 7728- 
7747; FBB 8731-8743, 8745, 8747; FBB 9635, 9960; 
FCA 9956-60). Twentieth Century -Fox; telecast 
on ABC-TV, 1956-1958; Cast: John Lupton, 
Michael Ansara; 42 episodes on 42 reels, ca. 936 
ft. each, 16mm ref. print. 

Cochise and Indian agent Tom Jeffords fight 
renegades and evil men together. 

The Broken Chain. Copyright Collection (VBN 
2509-2510). A VonZerneck-Sertner production, 
1993; released by Turner Pictures, Inc.; telecast 
on cable TV channel TNT; Director: Lamont 
Johnson; Producers: Cleve Landsberg, Lamont 
Johnson, Hanay Geigamah, Phill Lucas, Richard 
Hill; Writer: Earl W. Wallace; Camera: William 
Wages; Cast: Eric Schweig, Buffy Saint-Marie, 
Pierce Brosnan, J. C. White Shirt; 2 videocas- 
settes, color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

In the mid-eighteenth century, a young Mo- 
hawk is sent away by an Englishman to be edu- 
cated. When he returns, he finds himself tom be- 
tween his loyalties to the Indian world and the 
British world. A boyhood friend spurns the 
Indian's adoption of white ways, and a conflict 
ensues. 

Centennial. Copyright Collection (FDA 5324-48). 
A John Wilder Production in association with 
Universal, 1978; telecast on NBC-TV; Director: 
Virgil W. Vogel; Producers: Howard Alston; 
Writers: John Wilder; From the novel by James 
A. Michener; Cast: Robert Conrad, Raymond 
Burr, Richard Chamberlain, Sally Kellerman, 
Michael Ansara, Clint Walker, Barbara Carrera, 
Gregory Harrison, Donald Pleasence, Christina 
Raines, Richard Crenna, Mark Harmon, Cliff De 
Young, Dennis Weaver, Timothy Dalton, Lynn 
Redgrave, Brian Keith, David Janssen, Andy 
Griffith, Robert Vaughn, Sharon Gless, Merle 



Haggard; 12-part mini-series; 26 reels, 56,160 ft., 
color, 16mm ref. print. 

The settlement of a piece of land in the Rocky 
Mountain region is chronicled from the white 
man's first contact with Pawnee and Cheyenne to 
the present day. During this history, the white in- 
habitants clash with the Indians, even though 
some wish to coexist peacefully with them. 

Geronimo. Copyright Collection (VTB 1332- 
1333). Yorktown production, 1993; released by 
Turner Pictures, Inc.; telecast on cable TV chan- 
nel TNT; Director: Roger Young; Producer: Ira 
Marvin; Writer: J. T. Allen; Camera: Donald M. 
Morgan; Cast: Joseph Runningfox, Nick Ramus, 
Michelle St. John, Michael Greyeyes; 2 videocas- 
settes, 1/2" viewing copy. 

The life of Apache warrior Geronimo is de- 
picted through the various stages of his life: his 
youth, his middle years, and old age. He battles 
Mexican and, later, American soldiers, and ul- 
timately witnesses the destruction of his way 
of life. 

Hawkeye and the Last of the Mohicans. Copyright 
Collection (FCA 565). Normadie Productions; 
telecast on syndicated TV, 1957; Director: Sam 
Newfield; Producer: Sigmund Neufeld; Story 
and teleplay: Bob Bailey and Hugh King; Cast: 
John Hart, Lon Chaney, Jr., Daryl Masters, Bonar 
Stuart; 1 episode, "Snake tatoo," 30 min., 1,100 ft., 
16mm ref. print. 

Hawkeye and his Indian friend Chingach- 
gook have adventures on the frontier in the 
1750s. In this episode, the son of a Cree chieftain 
is stolen and raised by a reformed white man. A 
former accomplice of the white man returns with 
the idea of using the child to learn the secret of 
the Cree silver wealth. 

The Last of His Tribe. Copyright Collection (VBN 
2507-2508). A River City production, 1992; 



2 4 4 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



ERIC 



released by Home Box Office, Inc.; Director: 
Harry Hook; Cast: Jon Voight, Graham Greene, 
David Ogden Stiers, Anne Archer; 2 videocas- 
settes, color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

In 1911, an anthropologist discovers the last 
living member of the Yahi tribe, Ishi. Ishi be- 
comes an object of study for the remainder of 
his life. 

The Legend of Walks Far Woman. Copyright Col- 
lection (FDA 5877-5878). A Roger Gimbel Pro- 
ductions for EMI Television Programs, Inc., 1982; 
telecast on NBC-TV; Director: Mel Damski; Pro- 
ducer: William S. Gilmore; Cast: Raquel Welch, 
Bradford Dillman, George Clutesi; 2 reels, 4,320 
ft., color, 16mm ref. print. 

The life story of a Sioux woman is told from 
her youth to old age. 

The Lone Ranger. Copyright Collection (FCA 
0717, FCA 0718, FCA 0720, FCA 0975, FCA 0719). 
Lone Ranger or Range Rider Productions; tele- 
cast on ABC-TV, 1949-1957; 5 episodes, 30 min., 
16mm ref. print. 

A masked man fights crime on the frontier 
with the help of his Indian friend, Tonto. 

The Mystic Warrior. Copyright Collection (FDA 
7275-7277, FDA 7284-7285). A David L. 
Wolper/Stan Margulies production in associa- 
tion with Warner Brothers Television, 1984; tele- 
cast on ABC-TV; Director: Richard T. Heffron; 
Producer: Paul Freeman; Based on the novel 
Hanta Yo by Ruth Beebe Hill; Cast: Robert Bel- 
tran, Devon Ericson, Rion Hunter; 2-part mini- 
series; 5 reels, 12,800 ft., color, 16mm ref. print. 

In the early 1800s, a young Sioux warrior be- 
comes the leader of his tribe. 

Documentaries 

Aghvegh n iigh m i : At the Time of Whaling. Copy- 
right Collection (FCA 942X). Alaska Native 




Heritage Film Project, 1974; Director: Leonard 
Kamerling and Sarah Elder; 1 reel, 38 min., color, 
16mm ref. print; In Eskimo with English subtitles. 

Documents the extreme danger and exact- 
ing coordination of a modern Inuit community 
whale hunt. 

The American Indian Speaks. Copyright Collection 
(FBB 2887). Encyclopedia Britannica Educational 
Corporation, 1973; 1 reel, 23 min., color, 16mm 
ref. print. 

Members of three Indian tribes articulate past 
injustices and present concerns. A Muskogee 
Creek remembers the "Trail of Tears;" Nisqually 
Indians discuss fishing rights; and a Dakota 
Rosebud Sioux explains the significance of the 
massacre at Wounded Knee. 

And Woman Wove it in a Basket. Copyright Collec- 
tion (VBH 6652). Bushra Azzouz, Marlene Far- 
num, Nettie Jackson Kuneki, 1989; Director: 
Bushra Azzouz; 1 videocassette, 70 min., color, 
3/4" viewing copy. 

’ While focusing on the life of Nettie Kuneki, a 
Klickitat and master basketweaver, this film pre- 
sents the history of the Klickitat of Oregon and 
their life along the Columbia River. Archival 
footage and current interviews document fishing 
methods, legends and beliefs, and the intricate 
art of basketmaking. 

Another Wind is Moving: The Off-Reservation In- 
dian Boarding School. Copyright Collection (VBF 
5418). Summit Street Productions /Kickapoo Na- 
tion School, 1985; Director: David M. Kendall; 1 
videocassette, 59 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

Examining the history of Indian boarding 
schools which were once intended to foster as- 
similation of Indian children into white culture, 
the documentary shows the impact of the schools 
on tribal survival. 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 4 5 



Beyond Tradition: Contemporary Indian Art and its 
Evolution. Copyright Collection (VAB 9471). 
Jacka Photography Video Presentation, 1989; 1 
videocassette, 45 min., color, 1/2" viewing copy. 

Based on the award-winning book of the same 
title, this video presents more than three hun- 
dred examples of prehistoric, historic, and con- 
temporary American Indian art. The evolution of 
Indian art is traced through the centuries, in- 
cluding carvings, paintings, sculptures, baskets, 
rugs, jewelry, and pottery. 

Broken Rainbozv. Copyright Collection (FDA 
8448). Earthwork Films, Inc., 1986; Director: Vic- 
toria Mudd; Narrator: Martin Sheen; 1 reel, 69 
min., color, 16mm ref. print. 

This Academy-award winning (1985) docu- 
mentary examines the controversial Hopi- 
Navajo land dispute which resulted in the dra- 
matic relocation of ten thousand Navajo from 
their hogans in northern Arizona to distant tract 
housing. 

Broken Treaty at Battle Mountain. Copyright 
Collection (FDA 9513). Cinnamon Productions, 
Inc., 1974; Director: Joel L. Freedman; Narrator: 
Robert Redford; 1 reel, 60 min., color, 16mm ref. 
print. 

The struggle of the Western Shoshone to keep 
24 million acres of land in Nevada — which they 
say is guaranteed in a treaty — is shown by con- 
trasting differing viewpoints within the tribe be- 
tween traditionalists and those who are willing 
to sell the land to the government. 

Buckeyes: Food of the California Indians. Copyright 
Collection (FBA 110). Department of Anthro- 
pology, University of California, 1961; 1 reel, 14 
min., color, 16mm ref. print; From the University 
of California American Indian Film Series. 

The ancient methods used to purify the poiso- 



o 




nous buckeye, or horse chestnut, and prepare it 
as food, are demonstrated by Nisenan Indians. 

Calumet , Pipe of Peace. Copyright Collection (FBA 
4339). Department of Anthropology, University 
of California, 1964; 1 reel, 23 min., color, 16mm 
ref. print; From the University of California Ameri- 
can Indian Film Series. 

This film presents the traditional use of the 
calumet, or peace pipe, among the Plains Indi- 
ans. Rituals, legends, history, and powers of the 
calumet peace pipe are described. 

The Chaco Legacy. Copyright Collection (VBB 
4198). Public Broadcasting Associates, Inc. 1980; 
Director and producer: Graham Chedd; narrated 
by Stacy Keach; 1 videocassette, 59 min., color, 
3/4" viewing copy.; from the Odyssey series. 

Examines archaeological theories about the 
rise and fall of Chacoan culture, which flour- 
ished between 1,000 and 1,400 years ago in the 
area of Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. 

Children of Wind River. Copyright Collection 
(VBH 7063). Wyoming Public Television, 1989; 
Director: Victress Hitchcock; 1 videocassette, 30 
min., color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

Filmed on the Wind River Reservation in 
Wyoming, this documentary takes a critical look 
at the problems facing Indian families. Through 
interviews with tribal leaders, health and child 
care providers, social service workers, and tribal 
members, solutions to teenage suicide, alco- 
holism, and poverty are sought. 

A Conversation zvith Vine Deloria , Jr. Copyright 
Collection (VBD 3748). University of Arizona 
and KUAT-TV, 1978; 1 videocassette, 29 min., 
color, 3/4" viewing copy; From the Words and 
Place: Native Literature of the American Southzvest 
series. 




INDIAN ART, CRAFT, AND DESIGN TODAY 

^OWOAOYOAOWOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOWOAOYOAOWOAOWOAOYOAOWOAAWOAC 

VOAOWOAOYOAOYOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOYOAOWOAOYAAOWC 



GATEWAYS 



Always part of American Indian life, artistic ex- 
pression involves religious, mythological, natural, 
and economic influences. North American ar- 
chaeological excavations have abundantly 
demonstrated that indigenous people often cre- 
ated objects — functional or not — for their artistic 
value. Since Columbus's arrival, Indian artists and 
craftspeople have incorporated European tools 
and materials into their workmanship and devel- 
oped new art forms. Navajo silverwork, for ex- 
ample, was not a native craft, but one encour- 
aged by Mexican influences. 

In the non-Indian world, until about sixty years 
ago, most Indian art and craft was appreciated 
largely by museums or by the savant. The intense 
drive toward acculturation during the late nine- 
teenth and early twentieth centuries subdued In- 
dian art, craft, and design. This condition started 
changing in the 1920s and 1930s with exhibi- 
tions of Indian work presented for its artistic 
merit. Key artisans and artists who sparked the re- 
naissance were San lldefonso potter Maria Mar- 
tinez and her artist husband Julian, artists Fred 
Kabotie (Hopi), Harrison Begay (Navajo), Allan 
Houser (Apache), and others. 

In 1935, the federal government established 
the Indian Arts and Crafts Board to promote In- 
dian creativity and broaden markets. The Santa Fe 
Indian School devoted a studio to Indian art; from 
this seed developed today's Institute of American 
Indian and Alaska Native Culture and Arts Devel- 
opment. As appreciation and demand grew, In- 
dian artists and artisans began tailoring or modi- 
fying styles and designs to accommodate public 
tastes. Over time, traders and merchants also con- 



vinced them to sign their works, a concept that 
was alien to people with a communal rather than 
an individualistic view of their efforts. 

By the 1960s and 1970s cultural and eco- 
nomic appreciation of Indian work began achiev- 
ing unprecedented heights. Artistic spillover and 
the economic attraction, meanwhile, revived arts 
and crafts among other individuals and tribes. 
Artists began — and continue — innovating tradi- 
tional Indian motifs, establishing individual styles 
within the context of American Indian experi- 
ence. Navajo rugs and silverwork, Zuni jewelry 
and fetish carving, Pueblo pottery, Hopi kachinas, 
Porno basketry, Kiowa beadwork and painting, 
Haida and Iroquois wood sculpture, and individ- 
ual creations in all media by Indian artists from 
many tribal affiliations command worldwide re- 
spect and appropriate prices. 

This worldwide popularity has also, however, 
attracted cheap imitation, mass production, stylis- 
tic copying, and outright forgery of Indian cre- 
ations, here and abroad. As with any art vogue, 
this may saturate interest and affect the Indian art 
market. But the distinctiveness and originality of 
the true American Indian artist appears to be set 
permanently on the landscape. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: The General Collections, 
Microform Reading Room, Rare Book and Special 
Collections, Manuscript (Vincent Price Papers), 
Prints and Photographs, and Motion Picture, 
Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Divisions, 
and the American Folklife Center. 



"Navajo Weavers." Gelatin silver print by William J. Carpenter, copyrighted in 1914. LOT 1 1442. (LC-USZ62-99569). Prints 
and Photographs Division. 




Recognized as fine weavers since the eighteenth century, Navajos by the late nineteenth century had largely turned from 
weaving blankets for their own use to weaving rugs for the retail trade. Nontraditional textiles, dyes, and designs emerged to 
satisfy the public taste. Today, as with most Indian art and craft, Navajo rugs command high prices in the marketplace. 

268 



2 4 8 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



The noted Native American author discusses 
the unique role of the Indian writer. 

Discovering American Indian Music. Copyright 
Collection (FBA 7268). BFA Educational Media, 
1971; Director: Bernard Wilets; 1 reel, 24 min., 
color, 16mm ref. print. 

Introduces traditional native customs, cos- 
tumes, dances, and music still practiced by 
eleven Indian tribes, principally of the Plains 
and Southwest. Dances include the Kiowa Vic- 
tory War Dance, the Tesuque Pueblo Bow and 
Arrow Dance, and the Tlingit Death Dance. 

The Divided Trail: A Native American Odyssey . 
Copyright Collection (FCA 8923). Phoenix Films, 
1977; Director: Jerry Aronson; 1 reel, 33 min., 
color, 16mm ref. print. 

Documents eight years of urban living for 
three Chippewa Indians who were encouraged 
to move from the reservation by the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs. Michael Chosa, his sister Betty 
Chosa Jack, and their friend Carol Warrington 
confront poverty, discrimination, alcohol abuse, 
and, finally, rehabilitation. 

The Drummaker. Copyright Collection (FCA 
1689). Smithsonian Institution-Folklife Pro- 
grams, 1978; 1 reel, 38 min., 16mm ref. print; 
from Smithsonian Folklife Studies. 

William Bineshi Baker, Jr., an Ojibwa living 
on the Lac Courte Oreilles Reservation in north- 
ern Wisconsin constructs a drum, step-by-step 
according to tradition. 

Franz Boas, 1858-1942. Copyright Collection 
(VBB 3407). Public Broadcasting Associates, Inc., 
1980; Director: T. W. Timreck; 1 videocassette, 58 
min., color, 3/4" viewing copy; from the Odyssey 
series. 

Franz Boas was one of the most important 
influences in American anthropology. This film 
explores his life and ideas through interviews 



with modern anthropologists. Native American 
people, and Boas himself. 

Fritz Scholder: An American Portrait. Off-Air Col- 
lection (VAA 1145). Oklahoma Summer Arts In- 
stitute, 1983; Director: Mary Y. Frates; 1 video- 
cassette, 29 min., color, 1/2" viewing copy. 

Fritz Scholder, Native American artist, takes 
the viewer from his studio, where painting is a 
solitary, private activity, to the public world of a 
gallery opening. 

Geronimo: The Final Campaign. Copyright Collec- 
tion (VBG 7342). KUAT-TV, 1988; Directors: Hec- 
tor Gonzalez and Fran Sherlock; 1 videocassette, 
30 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

Narrated by Will Rogers, Jr., the film presents 
the history of the Chiricahua Apache of the 
Southwest from the Spanish introduction of 
cattle and horses into their society until their 
eventual confinement to reservations. 

Home for the Weekend. Copyright Collection (FAB 
370). Davidson Films, Inc., 1972; 1 reel, 13 min., 
color, 16mm ref. print. 

Indians from the Sac and Fox tribes talk about 
their dances, way of life, and the differences be- 
tween them and the white people who watch 
them perform during a weekend powwow. 

Hopi Indian Arts and Crafts. Copyright Collection 
(FAB 1280). Coronet Instructional Media, 1975; 
1 reel, 10 min., color, 16mm ref. print. 

Hopi Indians demonstrate basket weaving, 
pottery making, silverwork, and weaving using 
traditional tools. 

Hopi: Songs of the Fourth World. Copyright Collec- 
tion (FDA 9402). Ferrero Films, 1983; Director: 
Pat Ferrero; 1 reel, 58 min., color, 16mm ref. print. 

An in-depth look at the Hopi way, a philoso- 
phy of living in balance with nature, the film de- 
scribes the Hopi meaning of life, death, and re- 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 4 9 



newal as revealed in the interweaving life cycle 
of humans and corn plants. 

Huteetl: Koyukon Memorial Potlach. Copyright 
Collection (VBD 6069). Yukon Koyukuk School 
District, 1983; Director: Curt Madison; 1 video- 
cassette, 55 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy; in 
Koyukon and English. 

Documents a traditional Koyukon Athabas- 
kan memorial potlatch held in Hughes, Alaska, 
in June 1982. 

The Image Maker and the Indians: E. S. Curtis and 
his 1914 Kzvakiutl Movie. NEA/ Burke Museum 
Collection (FBA 6681). Burke Memorial Mu- 
seum, University of Washington, Seattle, 1979; 
Director: David Gerth; 1 reel, 16 min., b&w & 
color, 16mm ref. print. 

Investigates how the famous photographer 
Edward S. Curtis made the first full-length docu- 
mentary film on Native Americans. Provides 
background and methods, as well as previously 
unpublished photos and testimony of Indians 
who were actors or spectators during the film- 
ing. (See also In the Land of the War Canoes: Kzva- 
kiutl Indian Life on the Northwest Coast in the 
Silent Films — Non-Fiction section). 

Indian Country. Copyright Collection (VBF 9914). 
WGBH Educational Foundation, 1988; 1 video- 
cassette, 60 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy; from 
the PBS series, Frontline. 

Close-up look at life on the Pacific coast Qui- 
nault Reservation — one of the largest in Wash- 
ington state. Through interviews with the tribal 
chair and other members, the film traces the 
largely "white influenced" economic and envi- 
ronmental demise of the tribe and then focuses 
on current efforts to rebuild the community. 

Inuqqaanin: From the First People. Copyright Col- 
lection (FDA 6285). Leonard Kamerling and the 



village of Shungnak, Alaska, 1976; Directors: 
Sarah Elder and Leonard Kamerling; 1 reel, 45 
min., color, 16mm ref. print. 

A community-produced film which presents 
the Inuit village of Shungnak through early win- 
ter subsistence activities in temperatures of —47 
degrees and short three-hour days. 

Ishi: the Last Yahi. LC Off-Air Taping Collection 
(VBL 6649). Rattlesnake Productions, 1992; tele- 
cast on PBS-TV as part of The American Experience 
in 1994; Director and producer: Jed Riffe and 
Pamela Roberts; Writer: Anne Makepeace; 1 
videocassette, color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

The life of Ishi is recounted from his emer- 
gence in the white man's world in 19x1 to his 
death from tuberculosis. Emphasis is given to 
anthropologist Alfred Kroeber's study of Ishi 
and his friendship with him. 

Keep Your Heart Strong. Copyright Collection 
(VAB 3907). Prairie Public TV, 1986; 1 video- 
cassette, 58 min., color, 1/2" viewing copy. 

Documents a series of Indian powwows dur- 
ing the summer of 1986 in Bismark, Fargo, Fort 
Totten, and Twin Buttes, North Dakota. 

Lakota Quillwork: Art and Legend. Copyright Col- 
lection (FBC 2032). Nauman Films, Inc., 1983; Di- 
rector: H. Jane Nauman; Narrator: Alice Blue 
Legs and H. Jane Nauman; 1 reel, 27 min., color, 
16mm ref. print; in Lakota and English. 

Explores the spiritual origins of porcupine 
quillwork through the legend of Double Woman, 
who brought the art from the spirit world to the 
Lakota Sioux. Contrasts the original method of 
handwork with some modem adaptations used 
by nationally recognized artist Alice Blue Legs. 

Lenape: The Original People. Copyright Collection 
(FBC 1937). Agnello Films, 1986; Director: 
Thomas Agnello; 1 reel, 22 min., color, 16mm ref. 
print. 



2 5 0 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



Two full-blooded Lenape (Delaware) Indians 
recall their tribe's history and customs and 
reflect on their own loneliness and fears for the 
tribe as their numbers dwindle. Includes art re- 
productions, archival photographs, and scenes 
from the first reunion of Lenape from all parts of 
the U.S. which was held in 1983. 

Make my People Live: The Crisis in Indian Health 
Care. Copyright Collection (VBD 6522). WGBH 
Educational Foundation, 1984; Director: Linda 
Harrar; Narrator: Lee Grant; 1 videocassette, 60 
min., color, 3/4" viewing copy; from the PBS se- 
ries, Nova. 

Examines the health problems of Native 
Americans and the quality of care they receive, 
particularly among four tribes (Sioux, Tlingit, 
Navajo, Creek). The film also explores the rea- 
sons why American Indians suffer from diseases 
such as diabetes, tuberculosis, and alcoholism at 
rates far exceeding the national averages. 

Mohawk Basketmaking: A Cultural Profile. Copy- 
right Collection (VBB 5813). Frank Semmens, 
1980; Director: Frank Semmens; Narrator: Larry 
Richardson; 1 videocassette, 28 min., color, 3/4" 
viewing copy. 

Photographed on the St. Regis Reservation in 
upstate New York, this film documents the art of 
basketmaking as practiced by Mary Adams, a 
nationally recognized Mohawk artist. During the 
intricate process, she narrates the story of her 
youth and her people's struggle to survive. The 
paintings of Iroquois artist Ernest Smith illus- 
trate the historical use of Indian baskets. 

More than Bozvs and Arrows. Copyright Collection 
(FBB 8012-8013). Cinema Associates, Inc., 1978; 
Director: Roy Williams; Narrator: N. Scott Mo- 
maday; 2 reels, 58 min., color, 16mm ref. print. 

This award-winning film demonstrates the 
impact of Native American culture on American 
society in areas of medicine, architecture, agri- 







culture, science, urban development, and envi- 
ronmental planning, among others. 

My Hands are the Tools of My Soul. Copyright Col- 
lection (FDA 6215). Swann Films, Inc., 1975; Di- 
rectors: Arthur Barron and Zina Voynov; Narra- 
tor: Gerald Vizenor; 1 reel, 54 min., color, 16mm 
ref. print. 

Vignettes of Indian artists with their work 
stress that "the process of artistic creation, the 
doing, is as important as the end product." A 
Navajo woman weaving an original design, 
Pueblo basketmasters and potters, a Hopi Ka- 
china doll carver, and various musicians are 
included. 

Myths and the Moundhuilders. Copyright Collec- 
tion (VBB 1561). Public Broadcasting Associates, 
Inc., 1981; Director, producer, and writer: Gra- 
ham Chedd; 1 videocassette, 58 min., color, 3/4" 
viewing copy; from the Odyssey series. 

Reconstructs the myths and theories of the 
huge earthen mounds scattered throughout the 
central United States. Until the late 1800s it was 
believed that these were built by a lost civiliza- 
tion, but it is now known that the mound-build- 
ing cultures were American Indians. 

Native American Myths. Copyright Collection 
(FBA 7370). Encyclopedia Britannica Educa- 
tional Corporation, 1977; 1 reel, 24 min., color, 
16mm ref. print. 

Collaborators Alfonso Ortiz, Stephen S. Jones, 
Hazel John, Frank Collison, Barbara Bravo, and 
Mary Lou Byler helped create this animated pre- 
sentation of American Indian myths of the 
Seneca, Haida, Klamath, Cherokee, and Hopi 
tribes. 

Navajo Code Talkers. Copyright Collection (VBC 
4789). New Mexico Film & Video, 1981; Director: 
Tom McCarthy; 1 videocassette, 27 min., color, 
3/4" viewing copy. 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



2 5 1 



This film documents the participation of 
Navajo Indians in the Marine Corps during 
World War II. A code for military communica- 
tions was invented based on the Navajo lan- 
guage; the Navajos interviewed in the film were 
the radio operators. 

Navajo: The Last Red Indians. L.C. Purchase (VBA 
7956). BBC TV/Time-Life Films, 1972; Director: 
Michael Barnes; 1 videocassette, 35 min., color, 
3/4" viewing copy; from the BBC series. Horizon . 

Depicts efforts by the largest tribe in America 
to preserve traditional culture while synthesiz- 
ing it with selected features of modern American 
life. Filmed on their reservation in northern Ari- 
zona and New Mexico, many uncensored scenes 
of Navajo rituals, ceremonies, and healing prac- 
tices are presented. 

Neshnabek: The People. Copyright Collection (FCA 
98x3). Donald David Stull and University of 
Kansas, 1979; Director: Gene Bernofsky; Narra- 
tor: Kirby Kemble and James Carothers; 1 reel, 30 
min., 16mm ref. print. 

Using original footage made of the Prairie 
Band Potawatomi by amateur anthropologist 
Floyd Schultz between 1927 and 1941, this film 
was edited and supplied with a soundtrack 
based on recent interviews with elderly 
Potawatomi. 

The Nezv American Indian Wars: Without Arrows 
and Bullets. Copyright Collection (VAB 0071). 
Rodman-Downs, Ltd., 1987; 1 videocassette, 
30 min., color, 1/2" viewing copy. 

David Hartman interviews tribal members 
from various reservations about current political 
and economic concerns. The Lummi tribe in 
Washington state discuss fishing rights; the Flat- 
head in Montana battle for land; the Mohawk 
Nation confronts gambling; and the Navajo pur- 
sue entrepreneurial interests. 



No Turning Back. Copyright Collection (VBF 
4584). KNME-TV, 1984; Director: Dale Sonnen- 
berg; 1 videocassette, 58 min., b&w & color, 3/4" 
viewing copy. 

Examines the recent phenomenon of a funda- 
mental Christian movement on Navajo reserva- 
tions — which includes tent revivals, speaking in 
tongues, and healings — and the opposition by 
traditional tribal members. Much of the docu- 
mentary, which was filmed in part by hidden 
cameras, focuses on the personal crusade of 
evangelist Boots Wagner, himself a Navajo. 

Origin of the Crown Dance and Ba'ts'oosee: An 
Apache Trickster Cycle. Copyright Collection 
(VBD 3743). University of Arizona and KUAT- 
TV, 1978; 1 videocassette, 40 min., color, 3/4" 
viewing copy; in Apache with English subtitles; 
from the Words and Place: Native Literature of the 
American Southwest series. 

Apache storyteller Rudolph Kane relates 
"stories of long ago" to a group which in- 
cludes his children, grandchildren, and great- 
grandchildren. 

Our Sacred Land. Copyright Collection (VBE 
9793). Chris Spotted Eagle, 1984; Director: Chris 
Spotted Eagle; 1 videocassette, 28 min., color, 
3/4" viewing copy. 

Explores the contemporary issue of Native 
American religious freedom by focusing on the 
continuing struggle of the Sioux to regain the 
Black Hills of South Dakota. Many spokesmen 
with key roles in the dispute are interviewed. 

People of the Klamath: Preserving a Way of Life. 
Copyright Collection (VBH 1397). James Culp 
Productions, 1989; Director: James Culp; Narra- 
tor: Ed Asner; 1 videocassette, 28 min., b&w & 
color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

Shows how the Karuk (Karok) of Northern 
California preserve their culture by teaching the 



2 5 2 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 



younger generation traditions such as basket- 
making, salmon fishing, language, and crafts. 

Return to Sovereignty: Self-Determination and the 
Kansas Kickapoo. Copyright Collection (VBI 
6635). Donald D. Stull and David M. Kendall, 
1982; Director: David Kendall; 1 videocassette, 
46 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

Examines how the Indian Self-Determination 
and Education Assistance Act of 1975 has been 
implemented among the Kansas Kickapoo. Com- 
mentary from tribal administrators and elders, 
local BIA representatives, specialists in Indian 
law, and anthropologists reveals success on 
some levels and failure on others. 

Seeking the First Americans . Copyright Collection 
(VBB 3406). Public Broadcasting Associates, Inc., 
1980; Director: Graham Chedd; 1 videocassette, 
60 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy; from the 
Odyssey series. 

Investigates the work of archaeologists who 
are trying to determine when the earliest Ameri- 
can Indians lived on this continent. 



The 21st Annual World Eskimo-Indian Olympics. 
Copyright Collection (VBD 4387). Skip Blum- 
berg, 1983; Director: Skip Blumberg; 1 videocas- 
sette, 27 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy. 

More than ten thousand fans gathered to ob- 
serve the 1982 Eskimo-Indian Olympics in Fair- 
banks, Alaska. Contests include two-foot and 
one-foot high kicks, seal-skinning, knuckle hop, 
and blanket toss. 

Vision Dance [Ihanbla Waktoglag Wacipi]. Copy- 
right Collection (VBB 8937). Solaris Dance The- 
atre, Inc., 1982; Director: Skip Sweeney; 1 video- 
cassette, 60 min., color, 3/4" viewing copy; in 
Lakota with English subtitles. 

Solaris, a modem dance theater company, and 
Sioux dancers from nine reservations of the 
Lakota Nation in South Dakota perform sacred 
and traditional powwow dances. 

Warriors. Copyright Collection (VAB 3903). 
Prairie Public Broadcasting, 1987; 1 videocas- 
sette, 60 min., color, 1/2" viewing copy. 

Examines the active role of Native Americans 
in the Vietnam war. 









MOTION PICTURE, BRCMpCAsflNigiANI) RECORDED 





9 

ERIC 



Motion picture frames sent to the Library of Congress as part of the copyright deposit for the film /n the Land of the Head- 
hunters (Seattle Film Co., 191 4). Motion Picture 

This film which was directed by Edward S. Curtis, was rereleased as part of a preservation effort by the Burke Museum in 
1 973 under the title In the Land of the War Canoes: Kwakiutl Indian Life on the Northwest Coast. Curtis a celebrated p o- 
tographer of Indians, attempted to recreate the lifestyle of the Kwakiutl Indians before their contact with whuemenuing 
Kwakiutl actors. Even though it has been criticized for its romanticism, the film remains one of the most important ea ly 
films to depict Indian life. 








MOTION PICTURE. BROADCAS TING AND RFCORnFO-Sni ;mi~> mwicirm- 



'OHM no. >SS2 IDlLITM iSi, RELEASED October 37, 190* 

THE CALL OF THE WILD 



Sad Plight of the Civilized Redman 



LENGTH. QSS rEET. PRICE, 14 CENTS PER TOOT, 



“Gild the farthing if you will, but it is a farthing still. ' ‘ So it is with the 
Redman. Civilization ana education cannot bleach his tawnv epidermis, and that 
will always prove an unsurmountable barrier to social distinction. He may be 
lauded and even lionized for deeds of valor and heroism, or excellence in scientifics, 
but when it comes to the social circle — never. “ Lo the poor Indian ", and well we 
may say it, for his condition is indeed deplorable; elevated to intellectual supremacy, 
only to more fully realize his extreme commonalty. Such was the plight of George 
Redfeather, the hero of this Biograph subject, upon his return from Carlisle, where 
he not only graduated with high honors, but was also the star of the college football 
team. At a reception given in his honor by Lieut. Penrose, and Indian Agent, the 
civilfzed brave meets Gladys, the Lieutenant’s daughter, and falls desperately in 
love with her. You may be sure he is indignantly repulsed by Gladys and ordered 
from the house for his presumption by her father. With pique he leaves, and we 
next find him in his own room, crushed and disappointed, for he realizes the truth: 
“Good enough as a hero, but not as a husband”. What was the use of his struggle? 
As he reasons, his long suppressed nature asserts itself and he hears the call of the 
wild: ” Out there is your sphere, on the boundless plains, careless and free, among 

your kind and kin, where all is truth". Here he sits; this nostalgic fever growing 
more intense every second, until In a fury he tears off the conventional clothes he 
wears, donning in their stead his suit of leather, with blanket and feathered headgear. 
Thus garbed, and with a bottle of whiskey, he makes his way back to his former 
associates in the wilds. He plans vengeance and the opportunity presents itself, 
when he surprises Gladys out horseback riding. He captures her after a spirited 
chase and intended holding her captive, but she appeals to him, calling to his mind 
the presence of the All Powerful Master above, who know's and sees all things, and 
who is even now calling to him to do right. He listens to the call of this Higher 
Voice and helping her to her saddle, sadly watches her ride off homeward. The film 
is most thrilling in situations, beautiful in photography and superbly acted. 

/ No. 3482 CDDE WORD — Rovozado 



Produced and Controlled Exclusively by the 

American Mutoscope © Biograph Co. 
II East 14th Street, New York City. 
PACIFIC COAST BRANCH, “cIT' 

I / Klein* Optical Co. American Mntoscope 8 Blogrepb Co. 

Licensees j Great Northern Film Co William*, Brown 8 Earle, 

We will protect oar customer* and those of oar license#* 
edaliMt oatent imitation In the os* of onr licensed films. 



Biograph Bulletin no. 3482 for The Call of the Wild 
(AM&B), released October 27, 1 908 (LC-USZ62-1 1 6691 ). 
Motion Picture 




Have YOU said 'if l could get THE PICTURE 
/ can get the crowds?' 

Here is THE picture / 



f^EVILLON FREGES 




you have been looking for during 
the dull days of the past twelve months. 

You know that if you've got the picture 
you can get the crowds. 

Your chief worry has been that big pic- 
tures are so scarce. Here is as big a 
picture as this business has ever seen, 
different, absolutely different from any 
other ever made. 




Advertisement from Motion Picture News , June 1 1 , 1922, 
for Nanook of the North (U.S. P&th£, 1922). (LC-USZ62- 
1 16710) Motion Picture 



One of the most famous documentaries ever made , 

Nanook of the North was initially turned down for distribu- 
tion by several film companies before Pbth£ agreed to dis- 
tribute it. The film was both a critical and box-office suc- 
cess. In what has been termed "salvage ethnography/ 
Flaherty chose to focus on a hunter of the Itivimuit tribe , 
Nanook , asking him and the others to recreate the Inuit 
lifestyle before exposure to white men. 




This company advertised its product to exhibitors on hand- 
bills such as this one , which typically contained florid l 
melodramatic synopses , but did not mention the names of 
the actors because they were considered to be unimpor- 
tant. The Call of the Wild, one of several films D. W. 

Griffith made concerning Indians , focuses on the love of an 
Indian man for a white woman. 



XI (o 







Advertisement from Exhibitor's Trade Review, May 3, 1919, 
for Just Squaw (Superior Pictures, 1919), featuring Beatriz 
Michelena (LC-USZC4-4822). Motion Picture 



Fiction films about Indians often focused on the subject of 
interracial love . Many of these films would posit race as a 
barrier to love — a barrier which is removed when one of 
the protaganists discovers that he or she is in reality white , 
a typical example of which is the film Just Squaw. 



Still from Igloo (Universal, 1932), featuring Eskimo vil- 
lagers and huntsmen of the Nuwuk tribe in the Arctic. 
Motion Picture. Copyright © 1932 by Universal City Stu- 
dios, Inc. Courtesy of MCA Publishing Rights, a Division of 
MCA Inc. (LC-USZ62-1 1 6692). All rights reserved. 



Director Ewing Scott shot this film using an all-native cast 
while living with the tribe in the Arctic region of Alaska. 
The film was supposedly based on authentic incidents in 
the lives of the Eskimos. 




ERLC 




2 5 6 ‘ HT I nV^ni/^Ti' 



MQTfoNyj CiyRi:, br OAD^ST | N(>ANW 3 R E€QRlj)gp'$^OpNO Ql\/|§IQ-sj 












^ fc ' a cv d?< 
a^ss^cV-* -• * 







S,ill l,«n too* *= tot Missouri (MCM, 1951). lealo.iog Bc.do Mon„lb,n (LC-USZ62-1 166931. M«lo« P.cto.e 
Copyright © 1951 Turner Entertainment Co. All Rights Reserved. 



Although Across the Wide Missouri attempted to follow the trend of sympathetic Indian portrayals started by films such as 
BrTnA, ZjtZiJZed the standard film battle scenes between Indians and whites and a stereotype, Ind, an 
princess who died for her white man. 




m 






Still from Ramona (Biograph, 1910), featuring Mary 
Pickford, Kate Bruce, and Henry B. Walthall (LC-USZ62- 
1 1 671 1 ). Motion Picture 



The first of several film versions of Helen Hunt Jackson's 
novel Ramona, this film attempted to dramatize the white 
man's injustice to the Indian. Jackson loosely based the 
character of Ramona upon a Cahuilla woman named Ra- 
mona Lubo , or Lugo. 



Still from Navajo (Li ppert Pictures, 1951), featuring Francis 
Kee Teller and John Mitchell (LC-USZ62-1 1 6694). Motion 
Picture 



In a story far removed from the typical dramas of Indian 
warfare and interracial romances, a young Navajo boy 
resists going to a white-run reservation school , 







vii Aftjjfea 



SffiiSKSOOND DIVISION ' "j 






i- : - _ • ) 

THE STARTLING STORY BEHIND THE INDIAN KID 
WHO MADE BLAZING IVIARINE HISTORY! 



‘1 said crawl up bn the enemy... "Just because you’re a hero, you're too "So you got a medal! How 
not* waddle like a duck! 1 ’ proud to have fun with a girl like me!” prove that you can be a man!" 




ScreecpUy by STEWART STERN • Directed by DELBERT MANN • Produced by SY BARTLETT • A UNIVERSAL-INTERNATIONAL PICTURE 



Advertisement for The Outsider (Universal, 1961 ), featuring 
Tony Curtis, from Universal International Showman's Man- 
ual (LC-USZ62-1 1 6695). Motion Picture. Copyright © 

1961 by Universal City Studios, Inc. Courtesy of MCA Pub- 
lishing Rights, a Division of MCA Inc. All Rights Reserved. 



This biographical film illustrated the difficulties of being 
an Indian in U.5. society through the tragic life of World 
War II hero Ira Hamilton Hayes, a Pima Indian who died 
from alcoholism. 



Motion picture poster from Broken Arrow (20th Century- 
Fox, 1950), featuring James Stewart, Jeff Chandler, and De- 
bra ftjget. C Mot. Pic. B 843 1 (LC-USZC4-3931). Prints 
and Photographs Division. Copyright 1950 20th Century- 
Fox Film Corporation. All Rights Reserved. 




Broken Arrow was the most influential of a wave of films in 
the 1 950s which attempted to depict Indians in a more 
positive and sympathetic vein. In this film, Cochise is por- 
trayed as a man of integrity, Indian society is portrayed as 
cultured, and an interracial marriage is condoned, although i 
it ends with the death of the Indian woman and the return 
of the white man to * civilization 

U%o J~ 






MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 




VICTOR MATURE SUZAN RALLJOHN LUND 




OBERT WARWICK 



and fnfroduWnp 

RAY DANTON 



1 mm ir fiCORCE Sil[flWi • siory m stum nr f MIN CON m MO DHAYSON IEGNARD Mli - hlto ot \<V !4M <M 



Motion picture poster from Chief Crazy Horse (Universal, 1955), featuring Victor Mature, Suzan Ball, and John Lund. C 
Mot. Pic. 1955 C55 1 (LC-USZC4-3932). Prints and Photographs Division. Copyright © 1955 by Universal City Studios, Inc. 
Courtesy of MCA Publishing Rights, a Division of MCA Inc. All rights reserved. 



Although films in the 1 950s, such as Chief Crazy Horse, portrayed Indians sympathetically, they still continued to use non- 
Indian actors in the major Indian roles . 







Still from Apache (United Artists, 1954), featuring Burt Lan- 
caster and Jean Peters (LC-USZ62-1 1 6696). Motion Picture 
Copyright 1 954. United Artists Corporation. All Rights 
Reserved. 



In an effort to show the Indian's point of view about white 
civilization , this film focused on one of Ceronimo's braves 
who refused to surrender : This attempt by Hollywood to 
be sympathetic to the Indian cause was mitigated by an 
ending which showed the Indians conforming to a white 
lifestyle . 



Still from Little Big Man (National General, 1970), featur- 
ing Dustin Hoffman and Robert Little Star (LC-USZ62- 
1 1 6697). Motion Picture. Courtesy of CBS, Inc. 



Several feature films in the 1970s attempted to reverse 
stereotypes of Indians by portraying the atrocities of white 
soldiers , and by featuring Indian actors . Little Big Man was 
told from a white man's viewpoint and \ as such , served 
more as an allegory for what was happening in Vietnam at 
the time. 



MOTION PICTURE, BROADCASTING AND RECORDED SOUND DIVISION 2 6 1 





Still from A Man Called Horse (National General, 1970), featuring Richard Harris and Dame Judith Anderson (LC-USZ62- 
1 1 6698). Motion Picture. Courtesy of CBS, Inc. 



Promotion for this film stressed the authenticity of the Indian rituals portrayed and the language used, but critics charged 
that the film was highly inaccurate and that it was another depiction of the supposed superiority of white men. 







INTRODUCTION 



MUSIC DIVISION AND 
RECORDED SOUND 
REFERENCE CENTER 
OF MOTION PICTURE, 
BROADCASTING 
AND RECORDED 
SOUND DIVISION 



Patrons come into contact with two large special 
collections when they enter the Performing Arts 
Reading Room. The Music Division holds some 
seven million items; the Recorded Sound Refer- 
ence Center of the Motion Picture, Broadcasting 
and Recorded Sound Division is the access point 
for more than two million audio recordings. 
Given the size of these two collections and the 
knowledge that oral traditions such as songs and 
stories are major elements of cultural expression 
in tribal communities, the patron might expect 
that this reading room would be a major resource. 
The history of scholarship, documentation, and 
copyright, as well as of the institution itself, how- 
ever, have made this presumption somewhat 
problematic. 

Spoken language was transcribed according 
to varying phonetic schemes from the time Euro- 
peans made contact with native people. Until the 
late nineteenth century, however, very few Euro- 
peans and Americans wrote down more than 
brief impressions (usually critical) of Indian 
songs and dances. But with the growing belief 
that Indian cultures were dying, there was a 
move to document as much as could be found. 
With the invention of the cylinder recorder, eth- 
nologists, folklorists, and linguists had a tool 
with which to capture the actual sounds of those 
cultures. By and large, however, the linguistic 
materials continued to be documented by pho- 
netic transcription, and since most of the re- 
searchers had little experience with music, they 
typically chose to leave the analysis of song 
recordings to others. The field recordings them- 
selves were not often gathered with the intention 
of actual publication. (The earliest published 
recordings of Indian songs were Berliner discs 
recorded in Washington, D.C., in July 1894; the 
singer was not an Indian, but rather the anthro- 
pologist Charles Mooney, or possibly his brother 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



2 6 3 



James, singing Ghost Dance songs from five 
tribes.) 

Tum-of-the-century Euro-American com- 
posers who wanted to evoke or create uniquely 
American sounds, however, sought out field 
recordings — or made their own — and used the 
melodic materials as well as general impres- 
sions of "Indian-ness" as resources for their own 
works. It is these compositions, rather than 
transcriptions of the actual recordings, for the 
most part, which ended up on sheet music deco- 
rated with generalized "Indian" motifs. 

Sound recordings themselves could not be 
copyrighted until 1972. Before that, only tran- 
scriptions of music could be registered by the 
composer. Given that Indian people themselves 
did not generally think of songs as being com- 
posed as much as being received, that few songs 
were transcribed, and that few Native Ameri- 
cans were regular participants in the copyright 
process, the Indian-related material that has 
found its way to the Music Division is typically 
the work of non-Indian composers. 

The same is true for the earliest commer- 
cial recordings accessed through the Recorded 
Sound Reference Center; these, even if recorded 
by Indian people, are directed primarily to non- 
Indian audiences. Working with these materials, 
we perhaps learn more about the audience's 
expectations and perceptions than about the 
cultures from which the musical motifs and 
iconography were derived. But this is important 
documentation in its own right of Indian and 
non-Indian history. 

As time has passed, there have been more and 
more commercial recordings pertaining to In- 
dian America. Some were recorded by scholars 
primarily for non-Indian audiences, others are 
on labels that sell principally to native people. A 
substantial number of these recordings can be 
accessed through the Recorded Sound Reference 
Center. But a tradition of privately-made record- 

O 




ings marketed solely at Indian events and oc- 
casionally by mail has also grown up in the 
past few decades. Producers of these relatively 
"homemade" recordings rarely send copies to 
the Library, so unless Library staff are aware of 
these publications and specifically order them, it 
is unlikely that the Library would have them. 
There is no mechanism to assess what may be 
missing from this category of publication. 

The original unpublished ethnographic field 
recordings that came to the Library of Congress 
were placed in the Archive of Folk Song, initially 
part of the Music Division but transferred to the 
American Folklife Center after its creation in 
1976. Those in search of primary sound-record- 
ing documentation will, therefore, need to visit 
the Folklife Reading Room. 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 

PERFORMING ARTS 
READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Madison Building, LM 113; telephone 
(202) 707-5507 

HOURS: Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 
5:00 P.M. (Listening service is also accessible on Sat- 
urdays, if appointments are made in person during 
the week). 

MUSIC DIVISION 

Only a small percentage of the Library's music 
holdings of more than seven million items is in- 
cluded in published book or computer catalogs 
distributed by the Library. The remainder is ei- 
ther uncataloged or can be accessed through 
catalog cards found only in the division itself 
or on-line at Library computer terminals. Read- 
ers should, therefore, first consult the reading 
room's reference staff for orientation in use of the 
collections. 




2 6 4 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



Catalogs 

The reading room contains several sets of card 
files for works cataloged up to 1980: the names 
catalog of composers, arrangers, and editors of 
musical scores; the title catalog for musical 
scores; the classed catalog scores (all entries for a 
specific call number); the catalog of literature 
about music (works for which the call number 
begins with "ML"); the catalog of instruction 
and study books (the "MT" entries); and special 
files and indexes. The periodical index cards in- 
clude entries for many articles published from 
the 1880s to the 1940s. 

The basic call number for American Indian 
music is M1669. Under this number will be 
found published collections that have been clas- 
sified as music (as opposed to books on Ameri- 
can Indian music in which the transcriptions are 
considered as illustrations rather than as the 
books' main purpose). M1669 includes much 
published music by the late nineteenth- and 
early twentieth-century Indianists — non-Indian 
composers who used American Indian melodies, 
mostly in simple voice-and-piano arrangements. 
Some Indianists, such as Charles Wakefield Cad- 
man and Thurlow Lieurance, conducted their 
own fieldwork in American Indian communities 
to gather musical materials. Specific tribal sources 
and transcriptions of the Indian melodies are 
sometimes found in the printed music. 

More ambitious Indianist compositions — 
those symphonies, suites, and string quartets 
"on Indian themes," for example, or songs 
"based on an Indian melody" — are classified not 
in M1669 but by their musical genre (symphony, 
M1001; orchestral suite, M1003; piano suite, 
M24; string quartet, M452; song with piano, 
M1621). Works in the larger forms can almost al- 
ways be found in the Music Division's catalogs 
under composer and title; songs and piano 
pieces may have to be searched by classification 



and composer within the collections themselves. 

There is no subject approach to music on 
American Indian subjects, a category of work 
that could be of interest to those studying the im- 
age of Native Americans in works of other cul- 
tures. (A useful list of operas [but not musicals] 
on American Indian subjects may be found in 
H. Earle Johnson's Operas on American Subjects 
[New York: Coleman-Ross, 1964]; ML128.O4J6) 
Nor is there any subject access to works by indi- 
vidual American Indian composers. 

"M2132.I5" is the heading for Indian lan- 
guage hymnals of North America. According 
to the classed catalog scores index, these include 
Apache, Cherokee, Cree, Dakota, Flathead/ 
Kalispel / Spokane, Iroquois, and Narragansett 
material. 

The "ML" catalog includes the subject head- 
ing "Indians of North America" and lists 
standard ethnomusicological texts with cross- 
references to anthropological and ethnographic 
sources in the "E," "GN," and "Q" areas of 
the General Collections; some of the references 
are linked as well to disc recordings. In addition, 
readers will find references to period pieces 
such as Saidee Knowland Coe's Melodrama of 
Hiazuatha (1903). 

Some other guides to the collection are avail- 
able at the circulation desk and may be consulted 
with the help of the reference staff on duty. 
These include a card file for the division's special 
collections as well as ring binders containing 
Music Division and Archive of Folk Culture 
finding aids and bibliographies, and brief de- 
scriptions of the special collections. 

□ SELECTED COLLECTIONS 

Frances Densmore Collection 

Frances Densmore, a prominent collector of 
American Indian recordings (see the American 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



2 6 5 



Folklife Center/ Archive of Folk Culture entries), 
deposited important materials with the Music 
Division. Nineteen archival boxes contain nine 
annotated scrapbooks documenting her career; 
some correspondence and lectures; a typed 
chronology of her work; a few photographs, 
glass negatives, and lantern slides; and papers 
pertaining to an analysis by physicist Dayton C. 
Miller (see below) of samples of her Ute record- 
ings. This collection is not as yet fully processed; 
until it is, it will be available to Library patrons 
only by prior appointment with the acquisitions 
and processing staff of the Music Division. 

Natalie Curtis Btirlin Collection 

Material relating to the author of The Indians' 
Book includes four boxes containing handwritten 
transcriptions of mostly American Indian songs 
with some translations and other notes docu- 
menting use and ownership. Organized primar- 
ily by tribe, the collection has separate folios for 
Acoma, Apache, Arapaho, Cheyenne, Cocopa, 
Dakota, Hopi, Isleta, Kiowa, Kwakiutl, Laguna, 
Mohave /Apache, Navajo, Pawnee, Pima, San 
Juan, Seneca, Sioux, Wabanaki (including Mali- 
seet, Passamaquoddy, and Penobscot), Win- 
nebago, Yuma, and Zuni, in addition to miscella- 
neous non-Indian compositions. A few songs of 
other tribes are also found in the notebooks in 
some of the folios. 

Miscellaneous Manuscript Collections 

Special collections also include a fragile music 
manuscript underlaid with Micmac or Maliseet- 
Passamaquoddy texts for parts of the Catholic 
liturgy. The provenance of the manuscript is un- 
clear, but it probably dates back to the nineteenth 
century. 

Several other collections also pertain to gath- 
erers of American Indian material (e.g., Charles 

o 



Wakefield Cadman, Willard Rhodes, the Lieu- 
rance correspondence in the Taubeneck collec- 
tion) but do not necessarily focus on that part of 
their careers. 

The Dayton C. Miller Flute Collection 

Dayton C. Miller (1866-1941), a professor of as- 
tronomy and physics at the Case School of Ap- 
plied Science in Cleveland, Ohio, spent much of 
his life collecting flutes and primary material 
concerning the instrument's history and devel- 
opment. Hoping to establish a national archive 
for scholarly studies of the flute at the Library of 
Congress, he bequeathed his collection to the 
nation. He died before these plans could be real- 
ized, but the instruments, books, and related ma- 
terials were moved to the Library. 

Of the more than 1,600 flutes in Miller's collec- 
tion, approximately 120 are American Indian. 
While Miller's books on flutes and flute music 
are available in the Performing Arts Reading 
Room, the instruments themselves may be 
viewed only by appointment. Inquiries should 
be directed to the Curator, Dayton C. Miller Col- 
lection, Library of Congress, Music Division, 
Washington, D.C. 20540. Patrons may also call 
(202) 707-9083 to arrange a time. 

In 1961 the Music Division published a check- 
list of the instruments. Compiled by Laura E. 
Gilliam and William Lichtenwanger, The Dayton 
C. Miller Flute Collection follows the numbering 
assigned by Dr. Miller, roughly chronological by 
date of acquisition. The index for "Primitive, 
Folk, and Oriental Instruments," on pages 114- 
15, lists most of the North American Indian flutes 
by tribal source, where that is known. Note, how- 
ever, that Miller purchased many of the Indian 
flutes from curio stores and dealers around the 
country, especially N. E. Carter of Elkhorn, Wis- 
consin. Confirmation of the Indian source is avail- 
able in relatively few cases: see, for example, the 



SONGS AND DANCES 

\OWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAO 

WOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOWO 

GATEWAYS 



In Indian languages, there is not always a generic 
word for "music" as Euro-Americans usually think 
of the term (encompassing both vocal and instru- 
mental expression). Instead, there are words for 
"song" — for texted melodies. Even in cases where 
the only audible sound is instrumental, as in 
flute melodies, there is usually an underlying 
text of which the player is conscious. The texts, 
however, are frequently not words found in 
the singer's spoken language, but are instead 
vocables — "nonlexical" syllables, such as "hey" 
or "na," that are not randomly chosen but fall into 
patterns shaped by linguistic, song genre, and 
musical considerations. 

Studies of Indian musical expression typically 
divide the area north of Mexico into "culture ar- 
eas," such as Woodlands, Plains (Northern and 
Southern), Southwest, California, Great Basin, 
Plateau, Northwest, Subarctic, and Arctic. Each 
area has different musical characteristics and 
song genres not found elsewhere. The style that 
has come to typify pantribal "Indian" music — 
characterized by songs that start high (men in 
falsetto) and descend, by a tense vocal style, and 
by the use of a large drum around which a group 
of singers clusters — is Northern Plains in origin. 
Songs from other regions have different forms and 
melodic shapes, different characteristic rhythms, 
and use other kinds of drums or no drums at all. 
But the Hollywood Indian "BOOM boom boom 
boom" drum rhythm is rarely, if ever, heard. 

Songs constitute property in many areas. Songs 
often originate in dreams and may be conveyed 



from person to person by formal rites of transfer. 
Song performance often includes the telling of the 
song's origin. 

Over the course of time, some song genres 
have declined as the occasions for their use have 
passed, while new ones have arisen and others 
have been adapted in response to changing con- 
texts. The tradition of war dance songs, for ex- 
ample, once used to commemorate intertribal 
conflict, now honors the experiences of Indian 
members of the armed forces in the World Wars, 
in Korea, in Vietnam, and in the Persian Gulf. 

Like song, dance permeates Indian cultures 
and is manifested in different ways depending on 
function and context, whether social, ceremonial, 
or courtship. Filled with meaning and rich sym- 
bolism, dances take different forms in different 
areas — from the counterclockwise circles typical 
of Iroquoian dances, to the clockwise Sun Dance 
circuits of the Plains, to the straight lines of Great 
Basin Bear Dances, to the individual exhibitions 
of competitive powwow "fancy dancers." In many 
cases, events called dances are ceremonial com- 
plexes that include not only movements to song, 
but also specific roles, prayers, site preparation, 
regalia, timing, and food. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: American Folklife Center, 
Music Division, Recorded Sound Reference Cen- 
ter of the Motion Picture, Broadcasting and 
Recorded Sound Division, Prints and Photographs 
Division, and the General Collections. 



Dance contestants and drum arbor in the center of the arena, Omaha powwow, Macy, Nebraska, 1986. Photograph by 
Dorothy Sara Lee (Federal Cylinder Project; FCP/0-86-DSL-2-1 3). American Folklife Center. 



Dance contests are part of many current powwows. Here three men in the Men's Traditional (or Straight Dance) category 
await the judges. Several drum groups are under the arbor — one identified as the Host Drum , the others invited guests. The 
drums take turns providing the songs for the dance competitors. 



o 







O'TOAO'TOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOVOAOYOAO'TOAO'TO&OYOAOYOAOYOAO'TOAO' 
OAAYAAAYOAAYAAAYAAOYAAAYAAOYAAAYAAAYAAAWAAAWAAAWAAAY Oa 




2 6 8 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



Winnebago flute (#242 in Miller's collection) 
made by John Spear; the Ute instrument (#205) 
made by Henry Johnson especially for the collec- 
tion, and purchased through Frances Densmore; 
the Quapaw flute (#480) made by Red Fox, a gift 
to Miller from Thurlow Lieurance [this last flute 
is not listed in the index]. 

The checklist identifies flutes from the follow- 
ing communities (using Miller's or his agents' 
names for the tribes): Apache, Arapaho, Black- 
feet, Cheyenne, Chippewa / Ojib wa / Pillager, 
Crow, Haida, Iroquois, Kickapoo, "Kichai," 
Kwakiutl, Mandan, "Moki" (Hopi), Omaha, 
Osage, Pawnee, Potowatomi, Pueblo, Quapaw, 
Sac and Fox, Seminole, Shoshone, Sioux, Ute, 
Umatilla, "Utsehta or Little Osage," Winnebago, 
Yuki, Yuman, and Yurok. About twenty-five 
flutes are of unknown tribal origin. 

RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE 
CENTER OF THE MOTION PICTURE, 
BROADCASTING AND RECORDED 
SOUND DIVISION 

The Performing Arts Reading Room is also the 
point of access — through the Recorded Sound 
Reference Center — to the approximately three 
million sound recordings and radio broadcasts of 
the Motion Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded 
Sound Division (whose film collections are de- 
scribed in the preceding section of this guide). 

Commercial recordings have been cataloged 
by the Library since 1951 and are accessible 
through computer databases and separate card 
catalogs. However, only 10-20 percent of the Li- 
brary's collection of commercial recordings has 
been cataloged to date. The pre-MARC database 
contains materials cataloged between 1951 and 
1984; post-1984 cataloging is found in MUMS. In 
addition, copyrighted sound recordings released 
since 1978 are listed in the copyright computer 



catalog (COHM) by title, performer, and copy- 
right claimant; perhaps 10 percent of these re- 
ceive full Library cataloging. Another place to 
search is the OCLC CD-ROM database which 
gives subject access and, unlike MUMS, will also 
index by record company. The Recorded Sound 
Reference Center staff provides assistance in 
searching the different catalogs. 

A patron should begin by checking the card 
files and computers, but because such a small 
percentage of the Library's sound recording 
holdings has been fully cataloged, the failure to 
find a listing does not automatically mean that a 
recording is not in the Library. Further, in pre- 
MARC listings, the method that was used for 
coding sound recordings may cause the com- 
puter to give an erroneous "Not in LC Collec- 
tion" message. The reference staff will assist the 
researcher in assessing such messages and 
choosing various means of locating material. 

Most commercial releases are shelved numer- 
ically by recording company. Among the best 
guides to the collections, therefore, are the many 
record manufacturers' or other trade catalogs on 
file in the reference center, or listed there and 
filed in the Music Division. Once a label and 
number are located, a search can be made for the 
recording. Note, however, that the presence of 
a manufacturer's catalog does not indicate that 
all of those recordings will be in the Library's 
collection. 

The card catalog in the reference center is 
searchable by album title, performer or ensemble, 
and subject. It provides some listings of Ameri- 
can Indian recordings following the heading "In- 
dians of North America" as well as after individ- 
ual tribal names and some song genres ("sun 
dance" and "chicken scratch," for example, but 
not "ghost dance" or "stomp dance"). There are 
also some materials about Indians, found in en- 
tries such as "Indians — Lectures" or "Indians — 
Treatment of." The subject cataloging may be 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



2 6 9 



based partially on song or composition titles, 
for sometimes a Euro-American orchestral piece 
with a tribal name in its title is found among that 
tribe's entries. 

Note as well the segment of the card catalog 
labeled "Recorded Sound Catalog Supplement: 
Index of Uncataloged Items." Many Indian en- 
tries here are for items in the American Folklife 
Center's Archive of Folk Culture or for perfor- 
mances of Indianist compositions like the "In- 
dian Love Call," but there are also a few cassettes 
of Indian languages. 

The Library acquires commercial recordings 
through the copyright process, through gifts, 
and through purchase. Unfortunately for the re- 
searcher, as noted in the introduction, many 
American Indian recordings were and are re- 
leased by small independent producers who do 
not necessarily copyright their materials or dis- 
tribute them nationally. While Library staff are 
making efforts to locate such recordings, many 
releases may not find their way into this national 
repository. Larger labels such as Canyon, Indian 
House, and Folkways, however, are better repre- 
sented. 

Researchers may wish to consult volume five 
of Richard K. Spotts wood's Ethnic Music on 
Records : A Discography of Ethnic Recordings Pro- 
duced in the United States , 2893 to 1942 (University 
of Illinois Press, 1990; ML156.4.F5 S69). Pages 
2927-34 describe a variety of commercial disc 
releases, some authentic Indian songs, others the 
works of Indianist composers like Carlos Troyer 
and Thurlow Lieurance. Another useful source is 
the Rigler and Deutsch Index, a union catalog of the 
78rpm discs in five U.S. libraries (Syracuse, Stan- 
ford, and Yale Universities; the New York Public 
Library; and the Library of Congress). This index 
is based on literal transcriptions from the record- 
ing labels, so users should anticipate the need to 
search for variant forms and spellings of names 
and titles. The index provides no subject access. 



Other resources in the Recorded Sound Refer- 
ence Center include the microfiche indices and 
databases for major radio broadcasting collec- 
tions. National Public Radio (NPR), Pacifica, and 
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) pro- 
grams can be searched by subject on microfiche. 
The NPR index covering 1971 through 1983 in- 
cludes over seven hundred entries under "Indi- 
ans, America." Note, however, that while NPR 
transfers recordings of its cultural programming 
broadcasts to the Library (about five years after 
initial broadcast), its news and public affairs pro- 
grams are housed at the National Archives. 
Many of the Indian topics appear to fall under 
the "news" heading and would not, therefore, 
be available in the Library. The Pacifica index 
identifies approximately one hundred fifty pro- 
grams under "Indians of North America." To de- 
termine which of these are in the Library collec- 
tions, patrons will need to consult the computer 
database, searching by title or subject. The BBC 
lists about thirty programs under "Red Indians;" 
those with a cataloging number beginning with 
"LP" may be in the Library's collections. 

The Library also holds over 175,000 discs of 
National Broadcasting Company (NBC) radio 
broadcasts between 1935 and 1970. A rapidly 
growing database available on microcomputer in 
the Reference Center already provides subject 
access to more than 30,000 items. Among them, 
for example, are radio dramas and educational 
series ("The World is Yours," "Lands of the 
Free," "Music of the New World," etc.) that pre- 
sent various images of Indian societies. 

There are additional collections accessed 
through the Recorded Sound Reference Center 
that include some Indian-related material. For 
example, the recordings in the Margaret Mead 
collection include two interviews with Atsugewi 
people in 1963 and a symposium, "On Indians 
and Anthropologists," held at the 1970 meeting 
of the American Anthropological Association. 



2 7 0 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



Researchers should work with the reference staff 
to locate other published and unpublished in- 
dexes to sound recordings. 

LISTENING FACILITIES 

Performing Arts Reading Room multi-purpose 
rooms are available for listening to commer- 
cially-recorded materials, broadcasts, and field 
recordings for which there is as yet no reference 
tape. The Recorded Sound Reference Center staff 
will guide the patron through the procedures re- 
quired to listen to such recordings and to see al- 
bum covers or other documentation. Though the 
Recorded Sound Reference Center itself is closed 



on the weekend, patrons who visit the Library 
during the week may make listening appoint- 
ments for Saturday. The materials they request 
will then be available through the Performing 
Arts Reading Room desk. 

Recordings are heard through speakers in the 
listening rooms. A handout identifies guidelines 
for listening. Copying of recordings is not per- 
mitted; tape recordings or equipment may not be 
taken into the listening area. Patrons may put- 
chase tape copies of recordings from the Li- 
brary's Recording Laboratory after written au- 
thorization is acquired from those who possess 
legal rights. 



MUSIC DIVISION AND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER 



Frances Densmore and Mountain Chief ; member of the Blackfeet tribe , listening to a cylinder recording , 1916. Photograph 
by Harris and Ewing. (Similar to LC-USZ62-1 07289). Prints and Photographs Division. 



Densmore , the well-known " collaborator " for the Smithsonian Institution's Bureau of American Ethnology, is shown here 
with Mountain Chief. They are listening to a recording , as is evident by the playback horn on the cylinder machine in front 
of Densmore (a recording horn is narrow and does not flare out at the end). Mountain Chief apparently was translating what 
he heard into sign language. It is possible that they were listening to cylinder recordings gathered by Walter McClintock in 
Montana in 1898 , including words that Mountain Chief had recorded. The recordings Densmore herself made , as well as 
the McClintock Blackfeet collection, are presently in the American Folklife Center collections, while Densmore's scrap- 
books are in the Music Division. 








2-72- - -MU SI C DIVISION AND RECORDED-SO.U N D.REF-ERENCE CENTER.^ 







Flutes from the Dayton C. Miller collection: Flute #480-obtained from Red Fox, a Quapaw of Miami, Oklahoma in 1925. 

Gift ofThurlow Lieurance, a collector of cylinder recordings; Flute #205-made for the collection by Henry Johnson, a Ute, 
in 1921. Purchased from Frances Densmore, a collector of cylinder recordings; Flute #242-made for the collection by John 
Spear, a Nebraska Winnebago, in 1 922. Purchased from Oliver La Mere, of the family included in the Paul Radin cylinder 
collection. 1 



These flutes from the Music Division's Dayton C. Miller collection are related to sound recording collectors or performers 
whose materials are in the Archive of Folk Culture. 







ABOVE: Navajo War Dance by Arthur Farwell (Newton 
Center, Mass.: The Wa-Wan Press, 1905). Ml 669 (LC- 
USZ62-1 16699). Music Division. 



In this piano piece , Arthur Farwell , an Indianist composer, 
conveyed his impression of Navajo music through the use 
of the repeated single note in the left hand (imitating a 
drum) and a right-hand melody consisting primarily of 
skips rather than adjacent notes. See also his instructions 
on how to play the piece: " with severe precision of rhythm 
throughout , and savagely accented " 



RIGHT: Indian Songs by Thurlow Lieurance (Philadelphia: 
Theodore Dresser Co., 19? ) (LC-USZ62-1 1 6700); and 
From Wigwam and Tepee by Charles Wakefield Cad man 
(Boston: White-Smith Music Publishing Co., 19? ) (LC- 
USZ62-1 1 6701 ). Both Ml 669. Music Division. 



Sheet music covers for Indianist compositions by Thurlow 
Lieurance and Charles Wakefield Cadman (both collectors 
of Indian recordings — see the American Folklife Center 
entries). The design motifs — lone Indian males next to 
trees , tipis , the moon and setting sun, and a courting 
flute — convey a sense of closeness to nature as well as an 
impression , perhaps, that songs are individualistic expres- 
sions removed from the hustle and bustle of daily life . 

o 




1 ^ 



HIGH VOICE 




S4S 



27T 



.MUSIC DIVISION /\ND RECORDED SOUND REFERENCE CENTER- 





POPULAR DANCE MUSIC OF THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN ARIZONA 

WAIL A NKNT.I MO C. TOMONNO O'ODHAM SA’I S-HA-HOHOID 




Relocation by XIT. Canyon Record C-71 21 , 1 977 (LC- 
USZC4-4823). Recorded Sound Center of Motion Picture, 
Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Division. 



This album , released in 7 977 by the intertribal group XIT, 
features rock songs that include historical commentary 
(* Christopher Columbus") or draw on elements of social 
dances such as the "49" (a genre in which songs often 
incorporate an English-language phrase or two). 



The Molinas: Super Scratch Kings: Popular Dance Music of 
the Indians of Southern Arizona. Canyon Record C-61 28, 
1975 (LC-USZ62-1 1 6702). Recorded Sound Center of Mo- 
tion Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded Sound Division. 



"Waila" or "chicken scratch" music is a popular dance 
tradition among the Tohono O'odham (Pcipago) people 
of southern Arizona. Evolving from an ensemble featuring 
fiddles to one composed of accordion, saxophone, electric 
(or amplified acoustic) guitar and bass, and drums, waila 
bands provide the’ music for dances such as the polka-like 
waila, the chota (schottische), and cumbia (a dance show- 
ing Hispanic influences). 








Turtle Dance Songs of San Juan Pueblo. Indian House 
11 01 , 1 972 (LC-USZ62-1 1 6703). Recorded Sound Center 
of Motion Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded Sound 
Division. 



The Turtle Dance, which takes place at the winter solstice, 
is a major public religious ceremony at San Juan. Named 
for the turtle (described as the first hibernating being that 
moves about after the beginning of a new annual cycle), 
the dance defines the end of one year and the beginning 
of the next. The dancers, all male, carry gourd rattles and 
evergreen branches. Turtle shell rattles are tied to their right 
knees. 



Handgame of the Kiowa, Kiowa Apache, & Comanche: 
Carnegie Roadrunners vs. Billy Coat Hill. Indian House 
2501, 1972 (LC-USZ62-1 16704). Recorded Sound Center 
of Motion Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded Sound 
Division. 



Recorded live in Carnegie, Oklahoma, in 1968, this album 
(and its cover photo) demonstrate the excitement of such 
an event. Two teams face each other. Each team sings, in 
part to distract the other, whenever it has a turn to hide two 
plain and two marked sticks in the hands of two team 
members. The singing stops when the sticks are hidden. 

The opposition then guesses the location of the marked 
sticks, using gestures to signify the choices . The object, 
ultimately, is to win the set of sticks used for score-keeping. 
Handgames are occasions for vigorous socializing and 
sometimes gambling. 




inomn House IH 1101 




CARNEGIE ROADRUNNERS vs. BILLY GOAT HILL 




Recorded LIVE at 
Carnegie, Oklahoma 



fS 1 



irkwk 



mourn House 



INTRODUCTION 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE 
CENTER 



erJc 



American Indian culture has been preserved 
over the centuries primarily by oral and physical 
rather than written means. Even today, the past 
is continually brought to life as parents and 
grandparents tell children the stories, sing the 
songs, and perform the dances that had been 
passed along to them. One of the Library's prin- 
cipal collections of unique American Indian ma- 
terials, therefore, is the more than one thousand 
hours of ethnographic sound recordings located 
in the American Folklife Center. While the em- 
phasis of these recordings is on oral traditions 
(both spoken and sung), they also document as- 
pects of cultural expression such as dance and 
ceremonial complexes. 

Established within the Library by an act of 
Congress in 1976, the center is charged with the 
preservation and presentation of American folk- 
life, defined in Public Law 94-201 as the "tradi- 
tional, expressive, shared culture of various 
groups in the United States." Serving a varied 
constituency, the center coordinates programs 
with other government agencies, academic orga- 
nizations, and local groups; and offers a wide 
range of programs and services, such as refer- 
ence and research facilities, archival preserva- 
tion, field projects, publications, conferences, 
exhibitions, workshops, concerts, advisory assis- 
tance, and equipment loans. 

The Archive of Folk Culture, established in 
1928, became part of the Folklife Center in 1978. 
Originally called the Archive of American Folk- 
Song, it was renamed to reflect the subject 
breadth of its multiformat holdings. The Archive 
consists of more than forty thousand hours of 
recordings, two hundred thousand photographs, 
and more than six hundred thousand pages of 
manuscript material, as well as a number of 
video recordings, microfilms, material objects. 




AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 7 7 



and other formats. Acquisitions stem from field- 
work by staff members, donations of materials, 
and duplication of major collections from the 
United States and other nations. 

The Library's acquisition of American Indian 
recordings began within a decade of the estab- 
lishment of the Archive of Folk-Song. Starting in 
1936, the noted ethnomusicologist Helen Hef- 
fron Roberts gave the Library her original cylin- 
der recordings plus disc copies of California In- 
dian songs as well as Blackfeet, Flathead, and 
Pacific Basin material collected by others. The 
Library also collaborated in field projects with 
outside agencies by supplying recording equip- 
ment, technical assistance, archiving facilities, 
and sometimes funding. Between 1944 and 1946, 
for example, Henrietta Yurchenco was engaged 
by the Library of Congress, the Inter-American 
Indian Institute, and the Department of Educa- 
tion of Mexico to document music of isolated 
Indian communities in Mexico and Guatemala. 
From 1940 to 1952, Willard Rhodes of Columbia 
University recorded the music of approximately 
fifty tribes in this country in the course of work- 
ing for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, partly with 
Library-supplied equipment. 

Most of the early recordings documenting 
American Indian traditions were made on wax 
cylinders by employees or contractees ("collabo- 
rators") of the Smithsonian Institution Bureau of 
American Ethnology (BAE). After a brief transfer 
from the Smithsonian to the National Archives, 
the BAE cylinders were moved to the Library of 
Congress, where they were preserved through 
duplication on disc and later on tape by staff of 
the Library's Recording Laboratory. In time, other 
institutions and individuals added their collec- 
tions, making the Library currently the largest 
repository of such early recordings. In 1979, the 
American Folklife Center initiated the Federal 
Cylinder Project to further preserve and catalog 
the ten thousand ethnographic cylinders now in 



the Archive. Part of this project was the dissemi- 
nation of copies of the American Indian material 
to the communities of origin. To date, five cata- 
log volumes have been published, and cassette 
copies of relevant cylinder collections have been 
given to more than one hundred Indian commu- 
nities. The American Folklife Center also collab- 
orated with the Omaha Tribal Council to pro- 
duce an album of turn-of-the-century recordings 
of Omaha songs assembled by Fletcher and 
LaFlesche (see their collection description). 

In the course of the Omaha project, Center 
staff recorded and photographed several annual 
powwows. Such contemporary documentation 
of Indian traditions has also been part of the cen- 
ter's field projects in Chicago (1977), Paradise 
Valley, Nevada (1978-82), and Montana (1979); a 
study of ethnic heritage and language schools 
(1982); and the ongoing work of the Federal 
Cylinder Project; as well as several concerts and 
lectures sponsored by the center at the Library. 
Visitors to the center may consult these files, 
photos, and recordings. 

USING THE COLLECTIONS 

FOLKLIFE READING ROOM 

LOCATION: Jefferson Building, Ground floor. Room 
LJ G1 7 (temporary); telephone (202) 707-551 0 

HOURS: Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M.- 
5:00 P.M. 

ACCESS AND USE: Appointments for more than 
three people are recommended. A Library of Con- 
gress photo I.D. card is required for registration. Per- 
missions issues will arise for most phonoduplication 
and some photoduplication requests. 

In addition to serving as the access point for the 
Archive of Folk Culture ethnographic collec- 
tions, the center's reading room has several thou- 
sand books, indices, and periodicals pertaining 
to folk music and folklore — a sampling of the 




299 



2 7 8 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



many relevant works in the Library's collections. 
Here readers may use standard publications as 
well as sizable collections of magazines, news- 
letters, posters and other ephemera, unpub- 
lished theses and dissertations, plus many bibli- 
ographic, subject, and collection-related files. 
More than two hundred bibliographies, directo- 
ries, and finding aids describing the collections 
(some on American Indian groups or topics) 
have been prepared by staff members and are 
available to the public free of charge. As in other 
divisions, readers are encouraged to consult the 
reference staff for assistance in locating informa- 
tion on American Indian topics. 

In addition, the Library has published eighty- 
six LP or cassette recordings from the Archive's 
collections; twenty contain samplings of Ameri- 
can Indian materials recorded by Frances Dens- 
more, William Fenton, Alice Fletcher and Francis 
LaFlesche, and Willard Rhodes. These record- 
ings may be purchased in the Library's gift shop 
or by mail order. 

Other relevant publications include the 
American Folklife Center's Folklife Annual for 
1987, containing two richly illustrated articles on 
Indian powwows and community gatherings; 
the Folklife Center News, which occasionally fea- 
tures articles on Native American collections; 
and the ten issues of American Folk Music and 
Folklore Recordings: A Selected List, an annotated 
discography of thirty to forty releases annually 
from 1983 to 1992 that were judged by an inde- 
pendent panel of specialists to feature American 
folk and ethnic cultural traditions in a well- 
documented manner. American Indian record- 
ings were among those listed. 

Patrons may request copies of manuscript, 
photographic, and recorded materials in person 
or by mail. Order forms, billing information, and 
notification of necessary permissions will be pro- 
vided. After permissions are obtained (where 
applicable), such orders are filled by the Li- 



brary's Recording Laboratory and other dupli- 
cating services. 

□ SELECTED COLLECTIONS 

Collections from the American 
Philosophical Society Library 

In 1970 several ethnographic collections of wire 
and disc recordings were sent to the Library 
for preservation duplication. Among the North 
American Indian materials are Nootka and 
Makah stories gathered by Morris Swadesh, 
Tlingit recordings by Frederica de Laguna and 
Catherine McClellan, Tonawanda Seneca songs 
recorded by Martha Randle, and Northern and 
Southern Cheyenne material from Kenneth Croft. 

The Laura Boulton Collections 

Boulton (1899-1980) documented world music 
in the course of more than twenty expeditions on 
five continents. Her collections — over thirteen 
hundred discs and three hundred fifty tapes — 
also include some material recorded by others. 
Boulton's American Indian materials are primar- 
ily from the Southwest and from Canada. 

Collections from the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (BAE) 

The core of the ethnographic cylinder collections 
now at the Library of Congress, the thirty-five 
hundred BAE recordings were assembled by 
many people. Those who contributed most to the 
documentation process include: 

Alice Cunningham Fletcher ( 1838 - 1923 ) An 
Office of Indian Affairs employee who assisted 
with the land allotment procedure on the Omaha 
and Nez Perce reservations, Fletcher is known 
primarily for her documentation of Omaha 
ceremonies in collaboration with her adopted 




.1 A 



J 0 

K.f, 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 7 9 



son, Francis LaFlesche. Her home in Washing- 
ton, apparently in the block where the Library of 
Congress's Madison Building now stands, was 
the site of many recordings made by members of 
visiting Indian delegations at the turn of the 
century. The Library has published the Alice 
Fletcher /Francis LaFlesche recording, Omaha 
Indian Music (AFS L71) 

Francis LaFlesche ( 1857 - 1932 ) Son of Joseph 
LaFlesche (who, though half French, was one 
of the last traditional Omaha chiefs), Francis 
LaFlesche was the first American Indian pro- 
fessional anthropologist. His major work was the 
documentation of Osage rituals, the written 
portion of which is found in a series of BAE 
publications. 

Frances Densmore ( 1867 - 1957 ) Most prolific 
of the cylinder collectors, Densmore gathered 
more than twenty-five hundred recordings from 
members of forty tribes between 1907 and the 
early 1940s; she also organized the cylinder 
collections of other BAE employees. Since she 
worked intensively with Library staff on the 
production of the published recordings drawn 
from her cylinder material, abundant correspon- 
dence is available, along with copies of the BAE 
bulletins in which she published her descrip- 
tions of dance, musical and other ceremonial 
events, commentaries, and musical analyses. 

The Library has published sampler record- 
ings drawn from the Frances Densmore collec- 
tions. They are: 

Songs of the Chippewa (AFS L22) 

Songs of the Sioux (AFS L23) 

Songs of the Yuma, Cocopa , and Yaqui (AFS L24) 
Songs of the Pawnee and Northern Ute (AFS L25) 
Songs of the Papago (AFS L31) 

Songs of the Nootka and Quileute (AFS L32) 
Songs of the Menominee, Mandan and Hidatsa 
(AFSL33) 



O 




John Peabody Harrington ( 1884 - 1961 ) An 
ethnologist and linguist, Harrington recorded 
primarily California Indian songs and speech on 
more than three hundred cylinders and one 
hundred discs. Voluminous documentation of 
his work is housed at the National Anthropo- 
logical Archives in the Smithsonian Institution. 

Indians for Indians Hour Collection 

In 1988 the Western History Collection at the 
University of Oklahoma in Norman sent the Li- 
brary a collection of discs for preservation dupli- 
cation. The 121 discs contain WNAD radio 
broadcasts made between 1943 and 1950. Devel- 
oped and emceed by Don Whistler, a Sac and 
Fox chief, the programs include songs by more 
than five hundred people from eighteen Okla- 
homa tribes. 

Collections from the Peabody Museum 
of Harvard University 

In 1970 the Peabody Museum presented the Li- 
brary with more than two hundred fifty cylin- 
ders, including those from the first documented 
use of a phonograph for ethnological research: 
Jesse Walter Fewkes's recordings of two Passa- 
maquoddy men in March 1890. Other American 
Indian collections include Fewkes's recordings of 
Zuni and Hopi, Benjamin Ives Gilman's record- 
ings of Kwakiutl participants in the 1893 World's 
Columbian Exposition in Chicago, tum-of-the- 
century Navajo recordings collected by Wash- 
ington Matthews, and Nez Perce cylinders made 
by Herbert Spinden. 

The Willard Rhodes Collections 

Through the transfer of material from the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs and a gift of Dr. Rhodes in 1964, 
the Library acquired approximately two hundred 
seventy original discs and fifty tapes of American 




TRADITIONAL INDIAN SPIRITUALITY 

IOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOWOAOTOAO 

rOAOWOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOTOAO'WOAOTOAO'WOAOWOAOTOAOTOAOTOAOTO 

GATEWAYS 




Despite years of vigorous suppression, and even 
prohibition, of sacred ceremonies by the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs and various Christian groups, 
many Native Americans have tenaciously re- 
tained their ancient spiritual beliefs and practices. 
Although surviving religions vary from tribe to 
tribe, commonalities exist. Spiritual beliefs form a 
cornerstone of tribal cultural identity. Native reli- 
gion is reflected in virtually all areas of native so- 
cieties from child-naming practices and medici- 
nal approaches to hand-made objects used in 
daily life such as cradleboards, clothing, and 
utensils. Dances of all kinds usually involve some 
facet of religious belief. 

Most American Indian religions include cre- 
ation stories. They recount how the world, its 
people, and the complexities of the human con- 
dition came into being. These sacred oral histo- 
ries differ among tribes, usually according to 
geographical tribal origin and historical patterns 
of subsistence such as gathering, hunting, fishing, 
and farming. Accordingly, an inextricable link 
between nature and religion often exists among 
Indian people, emphasizing reverence and 
harmony. 

Many Native Americans experience spiritual 
guidance through sacred ceremonies such as fast- 
ing, sun dances, vision quests, and sweat lodges. 
At rituals and ceremonies, dance forms part of the 
complex celebrating the physical and spiritual 
worlds. In effect, dance serves as a connection 
between the natural and the spiritual world. 
Sacred objects, which include drums, medicine 
bundles, pipes, rattles, masks, feathers, and corn 
ears, to name a few, are often an integral part of 
religious practices. Many ceremonies are only 
conducted at specific natural locations such as 
mountains, lakes, and mounds, all of which may 
be ancient sacred sites of worship. In these tradi- 
tional places, believers reverentially communi- 
cate with spiritual powers, ancestors, humans, 

.^302 



plants and animals, and glean spiritual suste- 
nance. 

It was not until 1 934 that the federal govern- 
ment ceased regulatory action — begun in the 
nineteenth century and inconsistently applied — 
to suppress the practice of traditional Indian reli- 
gions. Today Native Americans are understand- 
ably concerned about protecting and preserving 
their religious freedom. Efforts to bolster the 
American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1 978 
have increased as sacred sites throughout the 
country have been threatened or destroyed by 
logging/ ski resorts, mining, hydroelectric plants, 
and careless land development. Unlike Judaeo- 
Christian worshippers, Indian practitioners of na- 
tive religions do not always arbitrarily construct 
places of worship. 

A 1 994 amendment to the American Indian 
Religious Freedom Act, which legalizes the use of 
peyote by Indians for religious purposes, repre- 
sents a major victory for Native American Church 
members, who for years have actively defended 
its use as a sacrament in their ceremonies. Tribal 
leaders are increasingly requesting that religious 
and funerary object^ which are stored and dis- 
played in non-Indian museums be returned to the 
tribes under the 1 990 Native American Graves 
Protection and Repatriation Act. Drug and alco- 
hol treatment programs, based on traditional spir- 
itual principles, healing ceremonies, and tribal 
medicine, are also proliferating on reservations 
nationwide. 

AOTOAOTO 

WHERETO LOOK: Studies and evidence of Na- 
tive American religions, or related legal statutes, 
can be found in General Collections, American 
Folklife Center, Law Library, and Rare Book and 
Special Collections, Manuscript, and Prints and 
Photographs Divisions. 



OYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAO'VOAOYOAOYOAO'VOAOYOAO' 

OAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOAOYOi 




Ponca Indian Sun Dance . Silver gelatin print by Thomas Croft, 1894. LOT 12831. (LC-USZ62-1 00432). Prints and Photo- 
graphs Division. 



During the sacred Sun Dance ceremonial \ which is common among Plains Indian tribes , participants seek spiritual renewal 
through a series of rituals , some of which demand extraordinary physical endurance. 








303 



2 8 1 




2 8 2 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 




Indian songs from a series of field trips Rhodes 
made between 1940 and 1952. The ten LPs based 
on these collections that were released by the Li- 
brary in cooperation with the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs and the Indian Arts and Crafts Board are 
listed below; Rhodes also edited two LPs for 
Folkways Records: 

Northwest (Puget Sound) (AFS L34) 

Kiowa (AFS L35) 

Indian Songs of Today (AFS L36) 

Delaware , Cherokee , Choctaw , Creek (AFS L37) 
Great Basin : Paiute, Washo , Ute, Bannock, 
Shoshone (AFS L38) 

Plains: Comanche, Cheyenne, Kiowa, Caddo, Wi- 
chita, Pawnee (AFS L39) 

Sioux (AFS L40) 

Navajo (AFS L41) 

Apache (AFS L42) 

Pueblo: Taos, San Ildefonso, Zuni, Hopi 

(AFSL43) 

The Helen Hejfron Roberts Collections 

As noted above, Roberts (1888-1985) was the 
first to donate American Indian recordings to the 
Archive of Folk-Song. Beginning in 1936, she 
gave the Library approximately two hundred 
fifty cylinders and three hundred sixty disc 
copies of her own and other collectors' cylinder 
recordings of songs, together with extensive fiel- 
dnotes and transcriptions of her work. 

Collections from the School 
of American Research 

In 1979 this Santa Fe organization transferred 
several cylinder collections to the Library. 
Among them are Mescalero and Chiricahua 
Apache recordings made in 1931 by members of 
a field ethnology training school, Ernest Beagle- 
hole's Hopi materials, Acoma rituals recorded by 
Bernhardt Reuter, and various Pueblo record- 
ings made by Helen Roberts. 

30^/ 



Collections from the 

Mary C. Wheelwright Museum 

In 1972 the museum transferred southwestern 
Indian recordings to the Library of Congress. 
Most notable among the collections are the 1,285 
cylinders documenting Navajo Creation and 
Hail chants. Beadway and Blessingway rituals, 
collected in 1929 and 1932 by George Herzog 
(1901-83). Herzog was the founder of ethno- 
musicological studies in American academic in- 
stitutions and of the Archives of Folk and Primi- 
tive Music (now the Archives of Traditional 
Music at Indiana University). 

Zuni Storytelling Collections 

In 1991, the Archive of Folk Culture received 
over fifty hours of Zuni storytelling in the 
Zuni and English languages, accompanied 
by transcriptions and translations. This project, 
"Telapna:we — Zuni Verbal Art in Performance," 
was undertaken by the Pueblo of Zuni and 
funded by the Folk Arts Program of the National 
Endowment for the Arts. In the course of collect- 
ing this material from seven storytellers, project 
members located some four hundred fifty hours 
of storytelling tapes recorded by twenty-two Zu- 
nis in 1967 as part of the Doris Duke Oral His- 
tory Project. The Library of Congress has agreed 
to purchase and conserve the 1967 tapes, which 
in due course will be added to the collection 
already here. 

□ AMERICAN INDIAN RECORDINGS 

The table below provides information on collec- 
tions of American Indian recordings in the Folk- 
life Center's Archive of Folk Culture, arranged 
alphabetically by tribe. 

Each entry identifies the relevant accession 
numbers, the collector (usually individuals but 
in some cases institutions), the known or approx- 
imate date(s) of the collection, and the estimated 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 8 3 



duration of the material. The Archive of Folk 
Culture labels American Indian collections ac- 
cording to the tribal affiliation of the performers: 
this means, for example, that songs of Sioux 
origin recorded by Frances Densmore from 
Chippewa singers are considered part of her 
Chippewa collection. 

In some cases, the documentation for a collec- 
tion does not completely specify the tribe; there 
are, for example, collections identified only as 
"Iroquois" or "Sioux," while others indicate 
which Iroquois and Siouan tribal or linguistic 
subgroups ("Mohawk," "Teton," or "Lakota," 
for example) are included. To help the reader lo- 
cate all relevant collections, the list groups all 
"Iroquois" and "Sioux" recordings together, but 
points out (by means of parenthetical notes) 
whatever subgroups have been labeled. "N" and 
"S" are used to indicate northern and southern 
branches of tribes such as the Cheyenne and Ute. 
Since collectors usually identified specific pueb- 
los, readers should look first for the particu- 
lar pueblo names rather than to the general 
"Pueblo" category. In certain instances, such as 
the Puget Sound recordings of Willard Rhodes, 
decisions were made to group closely related 
communities under one heading. Readers seek- 
ing information on a tribe in close proximity 
to other groups (e.g., Mandan, Hidatsa, and 
Arikara) may also find relevant materials among 
the entries under the related names. 

Tribal affiliations have tentatively been as- 
signed to some collections based on the specific 
location(s) where the recordings were made, and 
are therefore followed by question marks. Other 
collections can only be listed as "Unidentified," 
with a general geographical reference if one is 
known. 

Recordings in Archive of Folk Culture collec- 
tions are located principally by their catalog 
numbers. Until 1991, each original recording or 
its preservation copy was assigned an "AFS" 
(originally meaning "Archive of Folk Song") 



number — and those are the numbers listed in the 
table. Starting in 1991, the American Folklife 
Center staff has assigned accession numbers that 
begin with the year and the sequence in which 
the materials were processed — "1991/001" and 
so on. Several collections already in the Library 
to which the new numbering sequence has been 
applied are identified by the AFC designation in 
the "AFS Number" column. 

Some AFS numbers are followed by an aster- 
isk. This indicates that there are materials be- 
longing to other tribes within the specified range 
of AFS numbers. Where it was feasible to be 
specific about the tape locations of materials 
from one group, this has been done, but in many 
instances, a collection contains recordings from 
several tribes or ethnic groups, and the mate- 
rial belonging to one community is scattered 
throughout; or a preservation tape contains ma- 
terials from several locations or collections. This 
is particularly true for the Willard Rhodes and 
Laura Boulton collections, as well as for materi- 
als from some of Frances Densmore's field trips. 

Some collections, especially of cylinders, 
came to the Library in increments over the years. 
Consequently these materials were not always 
transferred to preservation tape or assigned AFS 
numbers at the same time, so these collections as 
wholes are not numbered consecutively. In such 
cases, the AFS numbers for the first portion of 
each collection are noted, followed by a plus (+) 
sign to indicate that more numbers apply. 

Collection dates can suggest the original 
recording medium and its typical characteristics. 
For example, with very few exceptions, the pre- 
1930s material was recorded on cylinders; such 
collections are often partially obscured by sur- 
face noise and broken into two-minute segments. 

Many persons begin their searches by re- 
questing information on materials from a partic- 
ular tribe or gathered by a particular collector. 
Quite often, however, both visiting researchers 
and those who send inquiries by mail are looking 



2 8 4 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



for recordings of a particular singer or of a 
specific song or dance genre. The reference staff 
frequently can oblige with detailed information, 
but they are dependent on whatever documenta- 
tion accompanied the collections. Sometimes 
there was no index with a collection, or the doc- 
umentation is fragmentary and confusing. With 
the help of Indian consultants and knowledge- 



able persons, the American Folklife Center staff 
is clarifying the unidentified portions of Ameri- 
can Indian collections. 

While the following pages attempt to cover 
the materials currently available, given the di- 
mensions of the collections the list is incom- 
plete. Patrons should check further with the ref- 
erence staff. 



* includes materials belonging to other tribes + additional AFS numbers apply ? tentative tribal affiliations 



AMERICAN INDIAN RECORDINGS IN ARCHIVE OF FOLK CULTURE 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Achumawi 


10,501 -10,502* 


Jaime de Angulo 


1949 


50 min. 


Acoma 


10,71 2B— 10,71 8; other versions: 
21,268-21,270, 21,835-21,837 


Stirling/Densmore 


1928 


3.2 hrs. 


Acoma 


1 4,069-1 4,071 * 


Robert Black 


1957 


5 hrs. 


Acoma 


1 9,471-19,501 


Bernhardt Reuter 


1929-30 


62 hrs. 


Acoma 


19,502-19,508* 


Helen H. Roberts 


1929-30 


1.3 hrs. 


Alabama 


10,736-10,739 + 


Frances Densmore 


1932 


1 .7 hrs. 


Aleut 


15,414-15,419 


J.P. Harrington 


1941 


6 hrs. 


Apache 


3314-3315* 


M. Valiant (FSA) 


1939 


10 min. 


Apache 


9541 B-9542A 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


20 min. 


Apache 


12,269-12,273* 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


30 min. 


Apache 


13,560 


Russell Mosby 


1949 


8 min. 


Apache 


14,618-14,623* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


2.6 hrs. 


Apache 


1 4,624B 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


4 min. 


Apache 


15,467 


J.D. Robb 


1949 


<40 min. 


Apache 


16,800-16,815 


Laura Boulton 


1940 


2 hrs. 


Apache 


19,183*, 19,185 


Monroe Benton 


ca. 1969 


30 min. 


Apache 


19,509-19,513 


Ethnology Training Croup 


1931 


11 hrs. 


Apache 


19,728*, 19,730 


Richard Spottswood 


1976 


40 min. 


Apache 


21,341-21,343 


Ethnology Training Group 


1931 


6.3 hrs. 


Apache 


26,053, 26,086, 26,099 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


1 .5 hrs. 


Apache/Sioux 


20,615 


AFS/Chicago Ethnic Arts Project 


1977 


25 min. 


Arapaho 


10,094: A7 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


3 min. 


Arapaho 


14,034, 14,038-14,041, 14,045 


Charles & James Mooney 


1894 


15 min. 




AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 8 5 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Arapaho 


1 4,61 8-1 4,619* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


55 min. 


Arapaho 


1 5,097 


Frank Speck 


1950 


8 min. 


Arapaho 


20,308, 20,324* 


Alice Fletcher 


1895 


30 min. 


Arapaho 


26,093 + 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


2.5 hrs. 


Arikara 


14,624* 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


5 min. 


Arikara 


21,368: 10-16 


Frances Dens more 


1912-15 


20 min. 


Arikara 


23,206-23,207* 


Orin Grant Libby 


1915 


1 hr. 


Arikara 


AFC 1990/032 


Sol Tax, et al. 


1950-53 


3.2 hrs. 


Assiniboine? Gros Ventres? 


9556-9557* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


20 min. 


Assiniboine 


10,053-10,054* 


Christian Leden 


1911 


5 min. 


Assiniboine 


12,149 


Willard Rhodes 


1942 


4 min. 


Atna Athabaskan 


12,000*- 12,003 


De Laguna 


1954 


7.3 hrs. 


Atna Athabaskan 


12,066-12,073 


De Laguna/McClellan 


1960 


8 hrs. 


Athabaskan/Tlingit 


10,498 


Catherine McClellan 


1950-51 


1 hr. 


Blackfeet 


801 -810; also on 11,31 6— 
11,320 and 20,327-20,329 


Walter McClintock 


1898 


2.5 hrs. 


Blackfeet 


814-816 


Clark Wissler 


1904 


30 min. 


B lackfeet 


9553-9556* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


1 .3 hrs. 


B lackfeet 


9847, 9853, 9864* 


National Folk Festival 


1938 


20 min. 


B lackfeet 


10,879* 


William Fenton 


1950 


<1 hr. 


Blackfeet 


17,999 


Ralph McFadden 


ca. 1950 


1 hr. 


Blackfeet 


20,519-20,520 


Truman Michelson 


1910 


1 .3 hrs. 


Blackfeet? 


22,490-22,491 


RCA (commercial) 


1914 


1 5 min. 


Caddo 


14,036, 14,042* 14,044 


Charles & James Mooney 


1894 


8 min. 


Caddo 


9538B* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


3 min. 


Caddo 


1 4,621 B* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


2 min. 


Caddo 


1 4,624B* 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


1 1 min. 


Caddo 


26,066+ 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


1 hr. 


Caddo 


AFC 1 988/024 


Scott Tonemah 


1962 


4 hrs. 


Cahu ilia 


11,098-11,099*+ 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


1 5 min. 


Cahuilla 


19,890: 12-17 


Richard Lando 


1969 


20 min. 


Cahuilla/Chemehuevi 


21,284: 7 


J.P. Harrington 


? 


5 min. 


Carrier 


10,693* 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


3 min. 


Carrier 


16,587-16,599 + 


Laura Boulton 


1942 


1 .7 hrs. 


Catawba 


21,352 


Truman Michelson 


1913 


25 min. 


Chehallis 


1 0,093 B* 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


5 min. 


Cherokee 


7957-7958 


Artus Moser 


1946 


15 min. 





t 



2 8 6 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Cherokee 


9811-9812 


Gillespie/Moser 


1949 


1 5 min. 


Cherokee 


12,199B-12,200B 


Willard Rhodes 


1943 


1 2 min. 


Cherokee 


14, 622-14, 623A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


20 min. 


Cherokee 


14,624: B14 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


4 min. 


Cherokee 


15,098-15,099 


Frans Olbrechts 


1927 


2 hrs. 


Cherokee 


26,072+ 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


25 min. 


Cheyenne (S) 


10,1 45*, 13,735: B3 


Vincent McMullen 


1940 


5 min. 


Cheyenne (N), (S) 


14,358-14,367 
[= 1 4,445B-1 4,449B] 


Kenneth Croft 


1948-49 


9 hrs. 


Cheyenne (S) 


1 4,621 B-1 4,622A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


25 min. 


Cheyenne (N) 


1 7,995* 


Thurlow Lieurance 


1911-12? 


20 min. 


Cheyenne 


20,308, 20,324* 


Alice Fletcher 


1895-1900 


1 0 min. 


Cheyenne (N) 


20,519-20,520* 


Truman Michelson 


1910 


25 min. 


Cheyenne (S) 


21,262* 


Frances Densmore 


1935 


3 min. 


Cheyenne (S) 


26,049-26,167* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


7.5 hrs. 


Chilkat 


14,052, 16,878 


J.P. Harrington 


1929 


3 min. 


Chippewa 


9700 


(John Lufkins?) 


1948 


? 


Chippewa 


10,515-10,556+ 


Frances Densmore 


1907-10 


17.5 hrs. 


Chippewa 


16,568: A1 


Laura Boulton 


1942 


2 min. 


Chippewa 


20,308* 


Alice Fletcher 


1899 


1 0 min. 


Chippewa 


22,168 


Laura M. Taylor 


1915 


30 min. 


Chippewa 


23,185-23,196 


E. Oberholtzer 


1946 


7 hrs. 


Chitimacha 


18,472-18,473 


Morris Swadesh 


1931-34 


2.5 hrs. 


Choctaw 


9522: B6-B7 9540B-9541 : A7 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


30 min. 


Choctaw 


10,735 + 


Frances Densmore 


1933 


3 hrs. 


Choctaw 


1 2,201 -12,202A 


Willard Rhodes 


1943 


1 2 min. 


Choctaw 


1 4,625B 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


30 min. 


Choctaw 


26,072 + 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


20 min. 


Chumash 


15,422 


Henley/Bizzel 


1912-14 


ca. 1 hr. 


Chumash 


21,283-21,292 + 


J.P. Harrington 


1912-19 


7 hrs. 


Clackamas Chinook 


21,830-21,834 


Melville Jacobs 


1929-30 


4.2 hrs. 


Clayoquot 


10,092: A9, A22 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


5 min. 


Clayoquot 


10,665-10,671 + 


Frances Densmore 


1923-26 


2.1 hrs. 


Cochi ti 


9610-9611 (=15,463*)+ 


J.D. Robb 


1948 


24 min. 


Cochiti 


10,725-10,726*, 21,260* 


Frances Densmore 


1930 


30 min. 





AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 8 7 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Cochiti 


1 9,502-19,508* 


Helen Roberts 


1929-30 


1 .5 hrs. 


Cochiti 


21,317* 


Inez Duddington 


1927 


24 min. 


Cochiti/Taos/Navajo 


21,317-21,323* 


Arnold Barrington 


1927 


1 1 .3 hrs. 


Cocopa 


10,642-10,645+ 


Frances Densmore 


1922 


1.7 hrs. 


Cocopa (plus others?) 


16,817-16,826? 


Laura Boulton 


1940 


ca. 1 hr. 


Comanche 


9540A 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


10 min. 


Comanche 


14,035 (=18,051?) 


Charles & James Mooney 


1894 


2 min. 


Comanche 


14,621-14,622* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


15 min. 


Comanche 


20,616 


AFC/Chicago Ethnic Arts Project 


1977 


45 min. 


Comanche 


21,250-21,254* 


Harry H. St. Clair 


1902 


1 .5 hrs. 


Comanche 


21,957-21,958* 


Maurice Smith 


1930 


8 min. 


Comanche 


26,051-26,163* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


7.5 hrs. 


Comox 


10,691-10,692+ 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


1 hr. 


Costanoan 


20,341 -20,344 


J.P. Harrington 


1930 


4 hrs. 


Creek 


12,197-12,203* 


Willard Rhodes 


1943 


28 min. 


Creek 


14,622: B6-B17 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


15 min. 


Creek 


14,624: A10, B15-B18 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


10 min. 


Creek 


26,054 + 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


2.7 hrs. 


Crow 


10,940 


Oliver Lion Shows? 


pre-1956 


10 min. 


Crow 


1 2,271 A 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


5 min. 


Crow 


17,995* 


Thurlow Lieurance 


1911-12? 


30 min. 


Crow 


19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


4 min. 


Crow 


20,261 


Carter Inauguration 


1977 


10 min. 


Crow 


20,418-20,420 


AFC/Montana Folklife Survey 


1979 


1.5 hrs. 


Crow 


23,206-23,207* 


Orin Grant Libby 


1915 


10 min. 


Delaware 


14,621-14,622* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


30 min. 


Delaware 


AFC 1991/045 


Frank Speck 


1928 


45 min. 


Diegueho 


11,037-11,044* 


Constance DuBois 


1905 


45 min. 


(Fox: see Mesquakie, Sac and Fox) 










Flathead 


11,024-11,026 


Claude Schaeffer 


1934 


30 min. 


Flathead 


20,471 -20,473, 20,475-20,476 


AFC/Montana survey 


1979 


1.8 hrs. 


Cabrielino 


20,345-20,348 


J.P. Harrington 


1918-33 


3.5 hrs. 


Cros Ventre 


1 7,995* 


Thurlow Lieurance 


1911-12? 


10 min. 


Haida 


12,076-12,078 


Ada Charlton 


1963 


1 .5 hrs. 


Haida 


16,600-16,609+ 


Laura Boulton 


1942 


1.3 hrs. 


Halkomelem? 


10,093: B31-B32, B37-B38 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


8 min. 





2 8 8 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Halkomelem 


10,726-10,727 + 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


45 min. 


Hare 


12,298-12,302 


Hiroko Sue 


1962 


4.5 hrs. 


Havasupai 


10,144 


Alfred S. Whiting 


1950 


5 min. 


Havasu pa i 


1 2,278-1 2,280* 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


20 min. 


Hidatsa: see also Mandan) 










Hidatsa 


10,919-10,922 


Voegel in/Harris 


pre-1955 


35 min. 


Hidatsa 


10,597-10,605 + 


Frances Densmore 


1912-15 


55 min. 


Hidatsa 


21,361-21,362 + 


Gilbert Wilson 


1909-11 


1 .2 hrs. 


Hidatsa 


21 ,363-21 ,367*, 23,206* 


Frances Densmore 


1912-15 


35 min. 


Hidatsa 


23,206* 


Libby/Reid 


1929 


15 min. 


Hopi 


3314: B1-B2 


M. Valiant (FSA) 


1939 


3 min. 


Hopi 


8691 :A1 


Austin Fife 


1946 


2 min. 


Hopi 


8900-891 1 * 


Samuel Barrett 


1911 


4 hrs. 


Hopi 


9521 A-9522A, 9542B 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


1 hr. 


Hopi 


11,093: A2-B2 


Charles Lummis 


1903-5 


1 0 min. 


Hopi 


11,321-11,325 (14,046-14,051) Jesse W. Fewkes 


1926 


20 min. 


Hopi 


12,279-12,295* 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


1 hr. 


Hopi 


14,059-14,077* 


Robert A. Black 


1957-66 


28 hrs. 


Hopi 


1 4,737-1 4,738* 


Jesse W. Fewkes 


1890-91 


15 min. 


Hopi 


16,235-16,256* 


Laura Boulton 


1933 


2.5 hrs. 


Hopi 


19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


4 min. 


Hopi 


19,502-19,508* 


Helen Roberts 


1929-30 


1.7 hrs. 


Hopi 


19,503 


Ernest Beaglehole 


ca. 1930 


30 min. 


Hopi 


19,976 


Diana Cohen 


1974 


2 hrs. 


Hopi 


21,317-21,323* 


Barrington 


1927 


? 


Hopi. 


22,175 


Natalie Curtis Burlin 


1903 


1 hr. 


Hupa 


11,104-11,105 + 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


15 min. 


Hupa 


19,886: 14-23 


Frank Quinn 


1956 


15 min. 


Ingalik 


10,712* 


John W. Chapman 


1925 


10 min. 


Iowa 


26,051* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


1 0 min. 


Iroquois: M=Mohawk 


0=Oneida Og=Onondaga 


C=Cayuga S= Seneca T = 


: Tuscarora 




Iroquois (S/Og/C) 


4556-4627 


William Fenton 


1941 


9.5 hrs. 


Iroquois 


8042-8105 


William Fenton 


1941 


11 hrs. 


Iroquois (O) 


8463-8465, 8468 


Charles Hofmann 


1946 


30 min. 


Iroquois 


8906 


Samuel Barrett? 


ca. 1918 


1 0 min. 




AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 8 9 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Iroquois 


9596-9600 


Rochester Museum/ 
William Fenton 


1948 


2 hrs. 


Iroquois 


9963-9973 


William Fenton 


1948 


5.5 hrs. 


Iroquois (M) 


10,146-10,148 


Martha Randle 


pre-1945 


25 min. 


Iroquois 


10,725 


Frances Densmore 


1932 


6 min. 


Iroquois (M) 


10,898 


Library of Congress 


ca. 1954 


1 hr. 


Iroquois (T; maybe Og/S) 


14,329-14,344 
(= 1 4,434A-1 4,441 A] 


Anthony Wallace 


1948-49 


1 4 hrs. 


Iroquois (O/Og) 


14,345-14,357 
[= 14,441 A-1 4, 445A] 


Fred Lukoff 


1948 


8.5 hrs. 


Iroquois (S) 


14,387-14,414 
[= 1 4,453A-1 4,456A] 


Randle/Fenton 


1936 


5 hrs. 


Iroquois (Og) 


14,653-14,661 


Harold Blau 


1956-66 


18 hrs. 


Iroquois (S) 


14,698-14,721 


Dorothy Gaus 


1962-63 


48 hrs. 


Iroquois (M) 


15,335-15,345 


Ann & Frank Warner 


1940-41 


40 min. 


Iroquois (C/S/O/Og) 


15,832-15,835, 16,929, 16,938 


Laura Boulton, et al. 


1930+ 


40 min. 


Iroquois (S) 


17,484 


Merritt Malvern 


1974 


25 min. 


Iroquois (Og) 


19,871 


National Folk Festival 


1972 


? 


Iroquois (S) 


20,617 


AFC/Chicago Ethnic Arts Project 


1977 


20 min. 


Isleta 


6317-6327 


Alan Lomax 


1942 


4 hrs. 


Isleta 


10,723-10,724*+ 


Frances Densmore 


1930 


50 min. 


Isleta 


11,082-11,093 


Charles Lummis 


1904-12 


2 hrs. 


Jemez 


777-789 


Bernice King 


1933 


2 hrs. 


Jemez 


951 9A, 9520B 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


7 min. 


Jemez 


1 6, 220A, 16,272-16,276 


Laura Boulton 


1933 


30 min. 


Jemez? 


19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


3 min. 


Kalapuya 


18,471* 


Leo Frachtenberg 


1915 


45 min. 


Karuk 


19,874-19,882* 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


7.5 hrs. 


Karuk 


19,880+ 


J.P. Harrington 


1926-29 


1 .5 hrs. 


Kaw 


26,068*, 26,124* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


1 0 min. 


Kickapoo 


15,090: A1, 15,092: B3 


Omer C. Stewart 


1938 


10 min. 


Kickapoo (Mexican) 


20,513:6-7 


Truman Michelson 


1910s 


5 min. 


Kiowa 


9537B-9539 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


1 hr. 


Kiowa 


10,145*, 13,735* 


Vincent McMullen 


1940 


10 min. 


Kiowa 


13,554-13,571* 


Russell Mosby 


1949 


1 .4 hrs. 


Kiowa 


14,037, 14,042-14,043 


Charles & James Mooney 


1894 


6 min. 


Kiowa 


14,618-14,622* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


25 min. 


Kiowa 


19,182-19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


4 min. 





2 9 0 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

duration 


Kiowa 


20,309* 


Alice Fletcher 


1896 


5 min. 


Kiowa 


21,957-21,958* 


Maurice Smith 


1930 


1 .2 hrs. 


Kiowa 


26,052-26,168* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


15.5 hrs. 


Kiowa-Apache 


9522-9543* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


30 min. 


Kiowa- Apache 


13,573 


Russell Mosby 


1949 


8 min. 


Kiowa-Apache 


14,62 IB* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


8 min. 


Kiowa-Apache 


21,957-21,958* 


Maurice Smith 


1930 


20 min. 


Kitanemuk 


20,335-20,336+ 


).P. Harrington 


1916-17 


3 hrs. 


Klallam (includes Lummi, 10,090-10,094* 

Nooksack, Samish, Samiamo, Swinomish) 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


1.1 hrs. 


Klamath 


11,131* 


Samuel Barrett 


1907 


5 min. 


Klamath 


12,274-12,276* 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


5 min. 


Konkow 


11,027-11,028 + 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


20 min. 


Konkow 


14,315* 


Frances Densmore 


1937 


15 min. 


Konomihu 


19,878-19,880* 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


1 .5 hrs. 


Kwakiutl 


10,092: B20, 10,093: A1 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


8 min. 


Kwakiutl 


14,741* 


Benjamin 1. Gilman 


1893 


40 min. 


Kwakiutl 


not yet assigned 


Ida Halpern 


1951-52 


9.25 hrs. 


Laguna 


9520A*, 9523A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


4 min. 


Laguna 


14,069-14,071* 


Robert Black 


1957-66 


45 min. 


Laguna 


19,182* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


3 min. 


Luiseno 


751-754 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


40 min. 


Luiseno 


11,039-11,044* 


Constance DuBois 


1905 


45 min. 


Luiseno 


11,100-11,101* + 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


20 min. 


Luiseno 

(Maidu: see Konkow) 


15,403-1 5,413 


J.P. Harrington 


ca. 1933 


1 1 hrs. 


Makah 


10,092-10,093* 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


1 .7 hrs. 


Makah 


10,649-10,664 + 


Frances Densmore 


1923-26 


6.7 hrs. 


Makah/Nootka 


14,368-14,372* 

(= 14,450A-14,451 A] 


Morris Swadesh 


pre-1950 


2 hrs. 


Mandan 


8945 


Library of Congress 


1947 


25 min. 


Mandan 


9556-9562* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


50 min. 


Mandan 


10,597-10,605* 


Frances Densmore 


1912-15 


3 hrs. 


Mandan 


20,613 


AFC/Chicago Ethnic Arts Project 


1977 


1 5 min. 


Mandan 


21,363-21,370*, 23,206* 


Frances Densmore 


1912-15 


7.2 hrs. 


Maricopa 


11,098* 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


3 min. 


Menominee 


6801-6822 


Alanson Skinner 


1919 


1.2 hrs. 




AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 9 1 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Menominee 


1 0,676-10,687, etc. 


Frances Densmore 


1925-28 


4 hrs. 


Mesquakie 


20,508-20,513 + 


Truman Michelson 


1912-16 


2 hrs. 


Micmac 


7184-7313* 


Helen Creighton 


1943-44 


45 min. 


Mi wok 


9573-9575 


Edward W. Gifford 


1914 


1 .2 hrs. 


Miwok 


10,502: B13-B18 


Jaime de Angulo 


1949 


8 min. 


Miwok 


19,888: 17-21 


unidentified 


1948 


10 min. 


Modoc 


10,502: B25-B26 


Jaime de Angulo 


1949 


4 min. 


Mohave 


10,648: A1 -A3 


Frances Densmore 


1922 


7 min. 


Mohave 


1 1,132: A1 


Alfred Kroeber 


1908 


3 min. 


Mohave 


16,816* 


Laura Boulton 


1940 


8 min. 


Mono 


1 1,102-11,103* + 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


10 min. 


Mono 


19,890: 1 -5 


Mrs. John Marvin 


1961 


5 min. 


Navajo 


6895B 


Frances Densmore 


1933 


4 min. 


Navajo 


8691, 8699* 


Austin Fife 


1946 


10 min. 


Navajo 


9519-9533A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


3.4 hrs. 


Navajo 


9545* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


15 min. 


Navajo 


1 0,879* 


William Fenton 


1950 


< 15 min. 


Navajo 


1 1 ,094B-1 1 ,096A 


Charles Lummis 


1903-4 


20 min. 


Navajo 


12,081-12,086 


David McAllester 


1957 


12 hrs. 


Navajo 


12,177-12,196 


Willard Rhodes 


1942 


2.5 hrs. 


Navajo 


12,203* 


Willard Rhodes 


1943 


2 min. 


Navajo 


12,265-12,294* 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


1.1 hrs. 


Navajo 


12,321-12,331 


David McAllester 


1958 


22 hrs. 


Navajo 


1 4,058A 


KTAR-Phoenix 


1937 


5 min. 


Navajo 


1 4,073* 


Robert A. Black 


1959 


1 5 min. 


Navajo 


14,078 


Geoffrey O'Hara 


ca. 1914 


1 hr. 


Navajo 


14,619A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


6 min. 


Navajo 


14,624-14,625* 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


1.1 hrs. 


Navajo 


14,742* 


Washington Matthews 


ca. 1900 


15 min. 


Navajo 


16,152-16,236* 


Laura Boulton 


1933 


8.7 hrs. 


Navajo 


16,699-16,844* 


Laura Boulton 


1941 


? 


Navajo 


19,182*, 19,184 


Monroe Benton 


ca. 1969 


35 min. 


Navajo 


20,210-20,218* 


Washington Matthews 


ca. 1 900 


8 hrs. 


Navajo 


21,294-21,317 


George Herzog 


1929-31 


48 hrs. 


Navajo 


21,324-21,237 


George Herzog 


1932 


28 hrs. 





2 9 2 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Navajo 


21,338-21,340 


Fr. Berard Haile 


1929-34 


6 hrs. 


Navajo 


21,344-21,346 


Harry Hoijer 


ca. 1930 


5 hrs. 


Navajo 


21 ,347-21 ,350* 


Fr. Berard Haile 


1929-34 


7 hrs. 


Navajo 


22,177 


Hubbell Trading Post 
(C. O'Hara?) 


ca. 1914? 


1 hr. 


Navajo/Pueblo 


14,773-14,778* 


Wheelwright Museum 


1920s 


11.2 hrs. 


Navajo/Taos/Coch iti 


21,317-21,323* 


Arnold Barrington 


1927 


1 1 .3 hrs. 


Nez Perce 


9548-9553* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


50 min. 


Nez Perce 


14,054 


J.P. Harrington 


1929 


3 min. 


Nez Perce 


14,739* 


Herbert Spinden 


1907 


2 hrs. 


Nez Perce 


16,905-16,906 


Laura Boulton? 


? 


1 2 min. 


Nez Perce 


20,309* 


Alice Fletcher 


1897 + 


10 min. 


Nez Perce 


AFC 1990/030 


Washington State University 


1909-12 


6 hrs. 


Nitinat 


10,092: A5, A12-A15 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


1 5 min. 


Nitinat 


10,694-10,697+ 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


1 .5 hrs. 


Nomlaki 


11,028* 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


5 min. 


Nootka/Makah 


14,368-14,372 
[= 14,450A-1 4,451 A| 


Morris Swadesh 


pre-1950 


2 hrs. 


Nootka 


18,473* 


Morris Swadesh 


1933 


8 min. 


Nootka, etc. 


23,252* 

|cf. 23,255, 24,980-24,981] 


Edward Sapir 


1934 


4 min. 


Omaha 


11,728* 


Melvin Cilmore 


1905 


10 min. 


Omaha 


13,574-13,576 


Roger Welsch 


1969 


3 hrs. 


Omaha 


20,308-20,325* 


Fletcher/La Flesche 


1895-1905 


7 hrs. 


Omaha 


20,330-20,332* 


Frances Densmore 


1941 


2.5 hrs. 


Omaha 


21,255 


Charles Cadman 


1909 


20 min. 


Omaha 


See ref. staff 


Federal Cylinder Project 


1983-85 


62+ hrs. 


Osage 


20,200-20,209 + 


Francis La Flesche 


1910-23 


28 hrs. 


Osage 


20,314*+ 


Alice Fletcher 


1897-98 


1 hr. 


Osage 


26,144-26,153* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


20 min. 


Otoe 


11,728* 


Gilmore/Murie 


1905 


7 min. 


Otoe 


20,315-20,324* 


Alice Fletcher 


1895 


45 min. 


Otoe 


26,068-26,165* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


1 .6 hrs. 


Ottawa 


8417 


Charles Hofmann 


1946 


1 0 min. 


Ottawa 


14,316-14,328 
[= 14,430-1 4, 434A] 


Jane Willets Ettawageshik 


1947 


8 hrs. 


Raiute 


9520-9522* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


35 min. 


Paiute 


12,274-12,276 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


20 min. 





AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 9 3 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Paiute 


1 4,038A 


Charles & James Mooney 


1894 


2 min. 


Paiute 


1 5,090-1 5,096* 


Omer C. Stewart 


ca. 1938 


15 min. 


Ranamint 


19,890:6-11 


Not identified 


? 


1 5 min. 


Papago 


3314: A3-A4 


M. Valiant (FSA) 


1939 


3 min. 


Papago 


10,606-10,622+ 


Frances Densmore 


1920 


6.5 hrs. 


Papago 


11,097: B3-B4 


Charles Lummis 


1904? 


2 min. 


Papago 


17,621-17,623 


Richard Spottswood 


1975 


1 .5 hrs. 


Papago 


17,979 


Richard Spottswood 


1975 


30 min. 


Papago 


1 9,736*-19,737 


Richard Spottswood 


1976 


45 min. 


Passamaquoddy 


14,737-1 4,739* 


Jesse Walter Fewkes 


1890 


1 .6 hrs. 


Passamaquoddy 


23,259 


David Francis re. Fewkes 


1985 


25 min. 


Passamaquoddy 


25,245-25,250 


Am. Dialect Society 


1934 


45 min.? 


Pawnee? 


9414-9421 


Martha Lincoln 


1947 


50 min. 


Pawnee 


9527A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


3 min. 


Pawnee 


1 0,053* 


E.M. von Hornbostel 


1906 


2 min. 


Pawnee 


10,623-10,632+ 


Frances Densmore 


1919-20 


3 hrs. 


Pawnee 


11,728* 


Addison Sheldon 


1905 


30 min. 


Pawnee 


14,618-14,622* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


20 min. 


Pawnee 


20,316-20,320* 


Alice Fletcher 


1898-1901 


2.1 hrs. 


Pawnee 


22,197-22,201 


James Murie 


1911-21 


10 hrs. 


Pawnee 


26,144-26,161* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


4.2 hrs. 


Picuris 


20,333-20,334* 


j.P. Harrington 


1918 


1.5 hrs. 


Pima 


3315: A1, 3334: A1-A2 


M. Valiant (FSA) 


1939 


5 min. 


Pima 


9519: A3 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


2 min. 


Pima 


11,097* 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


1 2 min. 


Pima 


16,788-16,793 


Laura Boulton 


1940 


35 min. 


Pima 


19,182* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


3 min. 


Porno 


9563-9565* 


Samuel Barrett 


1902-7 


45 min. 


Porno 


9564-9565* 


Henriette Kroeber 


1908 


20 min. 


Porno 


9566* 


A. Warburton 


1909 


3 min. 


Porno 


9566-9568* 


Edward W. Gifford 


1919 


50 min. 


Porno 


9568-9572* 


Derrick N. Lehmer 


1926-27 


1.2 hrs. 


Porno 


11,029* 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


5 min. 


Porno 


11,102*+ 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


10 min. 


Porno 


19,886: 24 to 19,888: 5 


Quinn/Riddell/Peri/ 

Dawson-Norick 


1949-63 


1 .6 hrs. 





BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



2 9 4 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Ponca 


20,308-20,323* 


Alice Fletcher 


1896-1900 


2 hrs. 


Ponca 


20,614 


AFC/Chicago Ethnic Arts Project 


1977 


25 min. 


Ponca 


26,068-26,153* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


2.7 hrs. 


Ponca 


AFC 1988/025 


Buffalohead/Fenner/Orens 


1980s 


30 hrs. 


Potowatomi 


12,186 


Willard Rhodes 


1943 


4 min. 


Pueblo/Navajo 


14,773-14,778* 


Wheelwright Museum 


1920s 


11.2 hrs. 


Pueblo? 


20,334* 


J.P. Harrington 


pre-1940 


30 min. 


Quileute 


1 0,093 :A8-B8 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


40 min. 


Quileute 


10,672-10,673 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


30 min. 


Quileute 


20,868-20,873 


Leo Frachtenberg 


1916-17 


6.2 hrs. 


Quinault 


10,092: B5, B14-B15 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


8 min. 


Sac and Fox 


26,049-26,166* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


2.7 hrs. 


Sac and Fox 


20,513* 


Truman Michelson 


1910s 


1 5 min. 


Salinan 


20,349* 21,293* 


J.P. Harrington 


1930 


1 0 min. 


San lldefonso 


9527-9542* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


10 min. 


San lldefonso 


19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


5 min. 


San lldefonso 


19,502-19,508* 


Helen H. Roberts 


1929-30 


3.8 hrs. 


San Juan 


9519B* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


2 min. 


San Juan 


19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


1 min. 


Santa Ana 


19,182* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


3 min. 


Santa Clara 


12,203: B3-B4 


Willard Rhodes 


1943 


2 min. 


Santa Clara 


19,502-19,508* 


Helen H. Roberts 


1929-30 


2 hrs. 


Santo Domingo 


10,743-10,744+, 21,259-21,260* 


Frances Densmore 


1936 


2.8 hrs. 


Seminole 


3892-3895A 


Corse/Cornwall/WPA 


1940 


30 min. 


Seminole/Calusa 


10,729-10,734+ 


Frances Densmore 


1931-33 


7 hrs. 


Seminole 


11,427 


Harry & Josiah Jumper 


1954 


30 min. 


Seminole 


26,054-26,154* 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


45 min. 


Serrano 


11,099-11,100* + 


Charles Lummis 


1904 


8 min. 


Shasta 


10,502: B21-B23 


Jaime de Angulo 


1949 


4 min. 


Shasta 


18,471* 


Leo Frachtenberg 


1915 


8 min. 


Shawnee 


1 4,624: A8-A9 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


5 min. 


Shawnee 


20,513-20,519 


Truman Michelson 


1911 


6.5 hrs. 


Shawnee 


26,136 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


30 min. 


Shinnecock 


13,052 


Dennis Starin 


1966 


< 15 min. 


Shoshone/Bannock 


1 0,094A 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


45 min. 


Shoshone 


14,618-14,619* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


1 hr. 




AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 9 5 



TRIBE 


afs numbers 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Shoshone 


14,625A* 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


15 min. 


Sioux 


6895-6896* 


Frances Densmore 


1933 


1 2 min. 


Sioux 


8371-8372 


Charles Hofmann 


1946 


15 min. 


Sioux 


9165-9167 


Library of Congress 


1941 


1 hr. 


Sioux (Pine Ridge) 


9534B-9537B, 9542A-9543A 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


1.2 hrs. 


Sioux (Pine Ridge, Stand. Rock) 


9543B-9562* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


3 hrs. 


Sioux (Dakota) 


10,453-10,485 


Willard Rhodes 


1940 


4 hrs. 


Sioux (Teton, Santee) 


10,556-10,578 


Frances Densmore 


1911-14 


10 hrs. 


Sioux (Rosebud) 


10,762 


Tosh i & Pete Seeger 


1951 


? 


Sioux 


10,902 


Hartle/Howard 


1951 


? 


Sioux (Oglala, Santee) 


11,106 


Charles Lummis 


1905-7 


10 min. 


Sioux 


1 1,403 


Bates Littlehales 


1955 


1 hr. 


Sioux (Pine Ridge) 


12,139-12,173 


Willard Rhodes 


1942 


4 hrs. 


Sioux 


13,561 


Russell Mosby 


1949 


8 min. 


Sioux (Dakota) 


16,270-16,271 


Laura Boulton 


ca. 1933 


12 min. 


Sioux (Santee, Oglala) 


16,908-16,909, 16,948 


Laura Boulton 


ca. 1931 


12 min. 


Sioux 


17,995* 


Thurlow Lieurance 


191 1-12? 


2 min. 


Sioux (Lakota) 


19,038-19,040 (=19,187-19,219) 


Evelyn Yellow Robe 


1947 


5.5 hrs. 


Sioux? 


19,514 


"Hindus collection" 


? 


8 min. 


Sioux 


20,263-20,264* 


Carter Inaugural 


1977 


25 min. 


Sioux (Dakota, Oglala, 
Teton, Santee, Yankton) 


20,309-20,325* 


Alice Fletcher 


1896-1904 


50 min. 


Sioux 


21,957-21,958* 


Maurice Smith 


1930 


8 min. 


Skokomish/Twana 


10,090B*, 10,0938* 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


20 min. 


Snuqualmie (includes Nisqualli, 
Puyallup, Skagit, Snohomish) 


10,090-10,094* 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


2.3 hrs. 


Squamish 


10,725-10,726* 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


25 min. 


Taos 


951 9A, 9533B-9534B 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


45 min. 


Taos 


9617-9625 (=10,393-10,401 
and 15,462-15,463*) 


J.D. Robb 


1946 


50 min. 


Taos 


13,565-13,572* 


Russell Mosby 


1949 


40 min. 


Taos 


17,995* 


Thurlow Lieurance 


pre-1915 


6 min. 


Taos 


19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


2 min. 


Taos 


19,502-19,508* 


Helen Roberts 


1929-30 


30 min. 


Taos/Navajo/Cochiti 


21,317-21,323* 


Arnold Barrington 


1927 


11.3 hrs. 


Tesuque? 


8383A 


Charles Hofmann 


1946 


4 min. 


Tesuque 


19,502-19,508* 


Helen Roberts 


1929-30 


2.2 hrs. 





2 9 6 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Tewa 


14,067B-1 4,068B 


Robert Black 


1957-66 


2 hrs. 


Thompson/Okanagon 


10,053* 


Franz Boas 


1897? 


3 min. 


Thompson 


10,727-10,728 + 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


40 min. 


Tlingit 


10,499 = 14,373 [ = 14,451*] 


De Laguna/McClellan 


1950 


45 min. 


Tlingit 


11,934-11,937 


De Laguna 


1954 


8 hrs. 


Tlingit 


11,998-12,000* 


De Laguna 


1954 


4.5 hrs. 


Tlingit 


12,057 


De Laguna 


1954 


2 hrs. 


Tlingit 


14,052, 14,055 


J.P. Harrington 


1929 


6 min. 


Tlingit 


1 4,619:A7 


Willard Rhodes 


1951? 


3 min. 


Tlingit 


17,029, 21,251-21,254* 


John Swanton 


1904 


4 hrs. 


Tlingit 


19,379-19,380 


Carol B. Davis 


ca. 1920 


1 hr. 


Tlingit 


AFC 1986/017 


Agnes Bellinger 


ca. 1985 


2.2 hrs. 


Tlingit/Athabaskan 


10,498 


Catherine McClellan 


1950-51 


1 hr. 


Tolowa 


19,886: 1-7 


Frank Quinn 


1956 


15 min. 


Tonkawa? 


9401-9413 


Martha Lincoln 


1948 


1.5 hrs. 


Tonkawa 


1 3,571 B 


Russell Mosby 


1949 


4 min. 


Tsimshian 


10,499 = 14,373 [ = 14,451*] 


De Laguna/McClellan 


1950 


1 0 min. 


Tsimshian 


10,693* 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


1 .5 hrs. 


Tsimshian 


16,579-16,586 


Laura Boulton 


1942 


> 15 min. 


Tsimshian 


16,910-16,913 


Laura Boulton? 


1934 


35 min. 


Tsimshian 


17,184-17,187 


Laura Boulton 


1942 


40 min. 


Tututni 


18,471* 


Leo Frachtenberg 


1915 


1.1 hrs. 


Umpqua 


18,471* 


Leo Frachtenberg 


1915 


5 min. 


Unidentified 


10,879 


William Fenton 


1950 


< 1 hr. 


Unidentified (Plains) 


11,728* 


Gilmore/Sheldon/Murie 


ca. 1905 


12 min. 


Unidentified 


13,053 


White House concert 


1965 


30 min. 


Unidentified (Oregon) 


17,125-17,134 


Laura Boulton 


1946-47 


1 .2 hrs. 


Unidentified 


20,263* 


Carter Inaugural 


1977 


1 0 min. 


Unidentified (California) 


20,341* + 


J.P. Harrington 


? 


2.2 hrs. 


Unspecified (Flagstaff Powwow) 


19,186 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


30 min. 


Unspecified 

("Tucson, Meet Yourself") 


19,731 


R. Spottswood 


1976 


30 min. 


Ute (N) 


10,583-10,596+ 


Frances Densmore 


1914-16 


5.5 hrs. 


Ute (S) 


12,1 74-1 2,1 76A 


Willard Rhodes 


1942 


20 min. 


Ute (N) 


14,619-14,620* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


1 .1 hrs. 


Ute 


15,092-15,096* 


Omer C. Stewart 


ca. 1938 


8 min. 





< 4 \ 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



2 9 7 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Ute (S?) 


19,1 82* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


3 min. 


Wailaki 


1 1 ,029* 


Helen Roberts 


1926 


5 min. 


Walapai 


12,277-12,278 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


18 min. 


Warm Springs 


9548-9550* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


40 min. 


Warm Springs 


14,625* 


Willard Rhodes 


1952 


3 min. 


Warm Springs 


19,871 


National Folk Festival 


1972 


? 


Washo 


12,263-12,264 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


20 min. 


Washo 


1 5,090B-15,095* 


Omer C. Stewart 


ca. 1938 


30 min. 


Wichita 


14,621 B-14, 622* 


Willard Rhodes 


1951 


7 min. 


Wichita 


20,323* 


Alice Fletcher 


1898 


3 min. 


Wichita 


21,957-21,958* 


Maurice Smith 


1930 


30 min. 


Wichita 


26,150 


Indians for Indians Hour 


1943-50 


30 min. 


Winnebago 


3244: A1 3256: A1-B1 


Sidney Robertson 


1937 


1 5 min. 


Winnebago 


8365-8413* 


Charles Hofmann 


1946 


1 .5 hrs. 


Winnebago 


8903 


Huron H. Smith 


1928 


8 min. 


Winnebago 


8977-8978 


Horace Beck 


pre-1948 


1 5 min. 


Winnebago 


9551: B3-B9 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


1 2 min. 


Winnebago 


10,698-1 0,707 + 


Frances Densmore 


1927-32 


8.2 hrs. 


Winnebago? 


16,236: B1-B5; 16,257-16,269 


Laura Boulton 


1933 


1.4 hrs. 


Winnebago 


20,323-20,325* 


Alice Fletcher 


1897-1900 


20 min. 


Winnebago 


21,356-21,360 


Paul Radin 


1908-12 


4 hrs. 


Winnebago 


23,256-23,258 


N.O. Lurie 


1980 


1 hr. 


Wintu (Nomlaki, Ratwin) 


19,888:6-16 


Quinn/Dawson-Norick 


n.d./l 963 


20 min. 


Yakima 


9545-9548* 


Willard Rhodes 


1947 


1 .3 hrs. 


Yakima? 


18,052 


Leroy Selam 


1975 


30 min. 


Yakima 


21,266* 


Frances Densmore 


1926 


3 min. 


Yaqui 


8187-8202 


Henrietta Yurchenco 


1946 


2.2 hrs. 


Yaqui 


10,646-10,648* 


Frances Densmore 


1922 


30 min. 


Yaqui 


14,374 (=14,451 B-14, 452A) 


John Alden Mason 


1954 


1 hr. 


Yaqui 


1 4,381 B (=14,453*) 


Robert H. Barlow 


ca. 1949 


2 min. 


Yaqui 


16,794-16,795 + 


Laura Boulton 


1940 


15+ min. 


Yaqui 


19,735*, 19,745-19,746 


Richard Spottswood 


1976 


1.1 hrs. 


Yokuts (Tachi) 


19,888-19,889* 


Hatch/Marvin 


1957/1961 


35 min. 


Yokuts 


20,336-20,340* + 


J.P. Harrington 


1916-17 


4+ hrs. 


Yuki 


11,132-11,133* 


Samuel Barrett 


1907 


10 min. 


Yuma (Quechan) 


3334: A3- A4 


M. Valiant (FSA) 


1939 


2 min. 




313 



-r;? 



2 9 8 



AMERICAN FOLKLIFE CENTER 



TRIBE 


AFS NUMBERS 


COLLECTOR 


DATE 


APPROXIMATE 

DURATION 


Yuma (Quechan) 


10,633-10,641* + 


Frances Densmore 


1922 


3.3 hrs. 


Yurok 


11,131* 


Alfred Kroeber 


1906 


5 min. 


Yurok 


19,886:8-13 


Frank Quinn 


1956 


10 min. 


Zia 


9520A 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


2 min. 


Zuni 


8369-8376* 


Charles Hofmann 


1946 


15 min. 


Zuni 


9519-9532* 


Willard Rhodes 


1941 


1 .2 hrs. 


Zuni 


12,292-12,294 


Willard Rhodes 


1949 


10 min. 


Zuni 


14,068-14,069* 


Robert Black 


1957 


1 hr. 


Zuni 


1 4,737-1 4,738* 


Jesse W. Fewkes 


1 890-91 


30 min. 


Zuni 


16,711, 16,827-16,830 


Laura Boulton 


1941-42 


30 min. 


Zuni 


19,182-19,183* 


Monroe Benton 


1969 


1 2 min. 


Zuni 


20,220 


Frances Densmore 


1940 


35 min. 


Zuni 


AFC 1991/007 


Zuni Story-Telling Project 


1980s 


53 hrs. 


Additional relevant recordings: 


Chinook jargon 


10,093B 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


7 min. 


Shaker Church (Puget Sound) 


1 0,091 B- 10, 092B 


Willard Rhodes 


1950 


1.2 hrs. 


Rhode Island Indians 


14,004 


Nat. Fed. of Music Clubs/ 
Mrs. Kaiser 


1961 


30 min. 


Radio program "Am. Ind. 
music is alive and well" 


16,979 


David McAliester 


1970s 


30 min. 


"Fuss and Feathers" (radio?) 


16,982-16,983 


John S. Candelairo 


1 950s- 60s 


1 hr. 


Interview with Helen Roberts 


19,894-19,899 


LaVigna/McAllester 


1979 


3 hrs. 




?rZc° 7c?0Sny%T^rri tiOn ' Ar % e '"° nt * na ' Ju, y 1987 Photograph by Edwin Schupman, Jr. (Federal Cylinder 
Project. rC,r-Do-87-ES-l 6A-8). American Folkltfe Center. 



Women m buckskin dresses dance in place while fancy dancers move by. Many elements of dance regalia move as the 
people move and some of the articles worn, also make sounds (the sleigh bells often sewn on fancy dancers' belts and leg- 
gings the shells on the one woman's shoulders, and arms). This clothing with all the fringed, dangling, swiveling, and feath- 
ery elements emphasizes movement. The long fringes on the women's dresses and dance shawls, for example can best be 
appreciated when they are swaying elegantly in response to dignified dance steps. P 




o 


32-1 ] 


ERJC 1 


. 




LEFT: Drum group at powwow, Lafayette, Rhode Island, 1979. Photograph by Carl Fleischhauer. {Rhode Island Project: 
RI79-CF8-1). American Folklife Center. 



The drum is both the symbolic and often the literal center of such events, as dancers circle the cleared area. Both the instru- 
ment and the group of men seated around it, beating on the drumhead and singing, are called "the drum" Much informa- 
tion regarding songs and dances native to East Coast tribes has been lost, so many intertribal events use the Plains-style big 
drum and song repertory. 



BELOW: Grand Entry at the 1983 Omaha powwow, Macy, Nebraska. Photograph by Carl Fleischhauer. (Federal Cylinder 
Project: FCP/0-CF9-6). American Folklife Center. 

The Grand Entry begins each dance session at this annual event. The dancer carrying the American flag leads the procession 
that circles the arena, followed in this case by the powwow princess wearing a sash and a beaded crown. Other dancers 
follow, grouped by age, gender, and the type of dance regalia they are wearing. The male "fancy dancers " with brightly-col- 
ored feather bustles attached to their necks and waists are in the foreground. 







LEFT: Cover of brochure for Omaha Indian Music. AFC L71 
album. American Folklife Center. 



This Library of Congress-published recording — a sampler ~ 
of the cylinder recordings made by Alice Fletcher and Fran- 
cis LaFlesche between 1895 and 1897 — was produced in 
collaboration with the Omaha Tribal Council in 1985. The 
cover illustration is drawn after a photo of a Hethu'shka 
dancer at the Omaha Pow-wow, August 1925 (Nebraska 
State Historical Society photo); underneath is part of a 
photo of an Omaha gathering near Macy, Nebraska , ca. 
1890, courtesy of the Presbyterian Historical Society. 



BELOW: Parents dressing their children for the Omaha 
powwow % 1983. Photograph by Carl Fleischhauer. (Federal 
Cylinder Project: FCP-21 4061-1 1 -frame 1 2A). American 
Folklife Center. 



Traditions live by being passed along. In this photo, 
Omaha parents dress the next generation of dancers. Over 
time, children and youth learn how to put on — as well as 
to make — dance regalia themselves and to perfect their 
dance steps. But even the very young ones participate in 
cultural activities, wearing items of regalia that are made 
for them and appropriate to their size, and learn by doing. 






Partial transcription of a Karuk song. (Federal Cylinder 
Project). American Folklife Center. 

Helen Heffron Roberts made a partial transcription o f a 
■■ Karuk song she recorded from Fritz Hansen on wax cylin - 
der.in Orleans, California, on March 8, 1926. Transcrip- 
tions such as these, are part of the documentation re- 
searchers may find for collections accessed in the Folklife 
Reading Room. 



Federal Cylinder Project dissemination process, Sitka, 
Alaska, August 1986. Photograph by D. Toby James. (Fed- 
eral Cylinder Project: FCP/DS-86-CC-257650-2, frame 1). 
American Folklife Center. 



Federal Cylinder Project staff member, Carey Caldwell, 
meets with the Sitka Community Association Tribal Coun- 
cil, as part of the process of returning to the Sitka commu- 
nity a set of cassettes containing the Tlingit cylinder 
recordings made in 1 904 by john Reed Swanton. 



OixliT^tyDcerSktaDanceSonj 

> ' SunjbyTrtfi Hansen 

HtcofAld ' 3 

ha>ahewa haya he a yi)&v&hau.e ya < 




hennana* he htnana u he e ylyawar 
e yahihihiyi henna na u he e yiyawana* 



e hi hi hi yi e henna na tt htnennana u 

he e yiyawaha a e ya hi hi hi yi e yiyavana u 
eyahihihiyl e ytyawana u eyahihihiyi e yt 

1 OrxtKtrtpcol Pbtccmu f*\ 




| ABOVE: Panoramic view of Crow Fair , ; Crow Agency, Montana, 1979. Photograph by Michael Crummett, (Montana Project: 
| MT9-MC20-7). American Folklife Center. 



The Crow Fair is among the largest annual powwows . People from many places in Indian Country camp here for the dura- 
tion of the event. Those who have tipis (nowadays most often made of heavy canvas) proudly erect them in family encamp- 
ments that also include tents, arbors, sun shades, cooking areas, and the vehicles that people need in order to get food, 

| water, ice, and other supplies. 



j RIGHT: Dancer at the Crow Fair, Crow Agency, Montana, August 1979. Photograph by Michael S. Crummett. (Montana 
j Project: MT9-MC27-1 ). American Folklife Center. 



Dance regalia consist of many components, some specific to certain dance styles. The dancer with his back to the camera is 
wearing, among other items, a dance bustle made of the skin and head of a raptor together with several kinds of feathers; 
sleigh bells hanging from his waist; beaded leather armbands, gauntlets, and belt; fringed cloth yoke over his shoulders; 
a porcupine-hair "roach" on his head to which feathers on swivels are attached; and hair ties that appear to be quilled 
"wheels." The colors and ornamentation patterns on his regalia and that of his neighbor may reflect personal tastes or, in 
some cases, tribal affiliation (some tribes historically have favored particular patterns and colors). 



32 






32 2 




LEFT: Interviewing teacher at a Flathead summer school , 
near Valley Creek, Montana, 1979. Photograph by Carl 
Fleischhauer. (Montana Project: MT9-CF8-6). American 
Folklife Center. 



American Folklife Center fieldworker Kay Young interview- 
ing Agnes Vanderburg at the summer school where aspects 
of traditional Flathead culture were taught. Topics dis- 
cussed included deerskin-processing methods, medicinal 
and food plants, childbirth customs, ways of learning tradi- 
tional skills, and perceptions of powwows. 



RIGHT: Teaching Hupa legends at the Hu pa Day Care Cen- 
ter, Hoopa Valley, California, 1982. Photograph by 
Lee Davis. (Ethnic Heritage Schools Project: ES82-1 98934- 
4-1 1A). American Folklife Center. 



Ruth Bennett used Red-Headed Woodpecker and Skunk 
puppets to help Hupa elder Alice Pratt teach young chil- 
dren about Hupa legends . In northern California as well as 
in many Indian communities elsewhere, parents are con- 
cerned about native language transmission, especially 
since many grew up at a time when use of native lan- 
guages was discouraged, and therefore they themselves are 
not able to speak those languages in the home for the 
benefit of the next generations. 



Poster on classroom door in Mesquakie Settlement School, 
Tama, Iowa, 1986. Photograph by Judith Gray. (Federal 
Cylinder Project: FCP/DS-86-JG-1 -1 3). American Folklife 
Center. 




Included on this poster are the names and emblems of the 
Mesquakie clans. The photograph was taken on the occa- 
sion of a visit to the community to return cassette copies of 
Mesquakie wax cylinder recordings made there between 
1912 and 1916. Dissemination visits such as this usually 
included opportunities to see cultural retention programs 
and projects. 







Page numbers in boldface type refer to illustrations 



A 

Abenaki: early contact, 48 

The Aborigine's Devotion (silent film), 231 

Achumawi, 102, 284 (recording) 

Ackerman, James, 12, 22 

Acoma Pueblo, 46, 55, 160, 167, 183, 265, 282, 284 
(recordings) 

Acosta, Jos£ de, 41 

Across the Wide Missouri (film), 234, 256 
"An Act declaring that the Grantees of Land lying within 
the Indians Land . . . 138 

"An Act for the Government and Protection of Indians," 
140 

activism, 33, 34, 82, 148, 152, 251 
See also American Indian Movement 
Acts and Resolutions of General Council of the Choctazo 
Nation , 140 

Acuera, 41 (Florida cacique) 

Adams, John. Papers, 81 
Adams, John Quincy. Papers, 81 
Adams, Mary, 250 
Adena, 4, 228 

advertising, 147, 169, 180, 181, 254, 255 
Agate, Alfred, 68 
agency. See reservations 

Aghveghniighmi: At the Time of Whaling (documentary), 
244 

agriculture, 5, 12, 56, 228, 229 
AIM. See American Indian Movement 
Ajacan, 41 

Alabama, 13, 19, 64, 88, 107, 194, 198, 199, 284 (recording) 
legislators, 83, 88 
maps, 196, 198, 206 

Alaska, 23, 27, 68, 134, 177, 239, 249, 303 
genealogy, 98 
law, 125, 143 

maps, 192, 206, 209, 210, 212 
prints and photographs, 153, 158 
religion, 73, 98 

Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, 212 

Alaska Native lands, tribes, villages, 84, 128, 156 

Alcatraz Island, 148 

alcohol, 165, 172, 185, 238, 241, 258 

Aldrich, Robert, 234 

Aleut, 17, 23, 49, 98, 112, 284 (recording) 
map, 209, 210 
Algic Researches , 74 
Algonquian, 5, 37, 48, 102, 145, 175 
Allegheny frontier, 104 
allotment, 84, 87, 156, 236, 278 
maps, 201-203, 2 °6/ 2.12 

Allotment Map of the Oto and Missouri Indian Reservation , 
203 

Alvarez, Manuel, 29 



Amaseconti, 97 
Amassacontoag, 97 
American Almanac Collection, 39 
American and Foreign Magazines Collection, 39 
American Anthropological Association, 269 
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. 
Papers (microfilm), 98 

American Civilization, Library of (microfilm), 32 
American Culture Series (microfilm), 32 
American Folklife Center, 269, 276-307 
American Folk Music and Folklore Recordings: A Selected List, 
278 

American Fur Company, 88, 199 
American History, Pamphlets in (microfilm), 32 
American Home Missionary Society. Papers (microfilm), 
98 

American Horse,, 162, 163 
American Imprints, 1640-1800, 39 
The American Indian: Government Education (silent film), 
227 

The American Indian: Flow he earns a living (silent film), 

227 

American Indian Correspondence Collection (micro- 
film), 99 

The American Indian in Film , 226 
American Indian Law, Cases and Materials, 121 
American Indian Law Deskbook, 121 
American Indian Movement (AIM), 25, 148, 170 
American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978, 280 
The American Indian Speaks (documentary), 244 
American Indian Treaties, The History of a Political Anomaly, 
121 

American Philosophical Society, 9, 278 
American Political Prints,. 167 
American Political Prints, 1766- i8y 6: A Catalog of the 
Collections in the Library of Congress, 147 
American Revolution in Drawings and Prints ; a Checklist of 
1765-1790 Graphics in the Library of Congress, 190 
American State Papers, Documents, Legislative and Executive 
of the Congress of the United States, 11, 120, 126, 131 
Amherst, Jeffery. Papers, 25 
Anasazi, 23 

Anderson, Clinton Presba, 74 
Papers, 82 

Anderson, John Alvin, 159 
Anderson, Robert. Papers, 89 
Andrews, Joseph Gardner. Papers, 76 
And Woman Wove it in a Basket (documentary), 244 
Annals of Congress, 1789-1824, 119, 131 
Annotated Statutes of the Indian Territory Eznbracing All 
Lazos of a General and Permanent Character, 125 
Another Wind is Moving: The Off-Reservation Indian Board- 
ing School (documentary), 244 
Anthropological Archives, National. See Smithsonian 
Institution 



330 



3 1 0 



INDEX 



Anza, Juan Bautista, 13 

Apache, 24, 91, 95, 99, 103, 243, 284 (recordings) 
art, 54, 246 

films, 234, 235, 239, 241, 251, 260 
maps, 201, 207 
music, 265, 268, 282 
prints and photographs, 153, 155, 160 
warfare, 94, 114, 207 
Apache (film), 234, 260 

Apache, Chiricahua, 207 (map), 248 (documentary), 

282 

Apache, Gila, 90 

Apache, Jicarilla, 103 

Apache, Kiowa, 275 

Apache, Mescalero, 83, 86, 114, 203, 282 

Apache /Sioux, 284 (recording) 

Apalachee, 103 
Apalachicola River, 198 
Apted, Michael, 242 

Arapaho, 16, 34, 94, 117, 162, 201 (map), 222, 265, 268, 284 
(recordings) 

Archaeological Atlas of Michigan, 209 
archaeology, 4, 10, 208 (map), 209 (map), 245, 250, 252 
Archeological Atlas of Ohio, Shozuing the Distribution of the 
various Classes of Prehistoric Remains in the State , ivith 
a Map of the Principal Indian Trails and Tozuns, 209 
Archive of Folk Culture, 269, 276, 283 
The Archive of North American Indian Maps on 
CD-ROM, 192 

Arikara, 52, 285 (recordings) 

Arizona, 13, 94, 129, 159, 161, 178, 227, 230, 274 
documentary, 245, 251 
maps, 197, 203, 207, 211, 212, 223 
prints and photographs, 152, 153, 154, 158 
warfare, 207 (map) 

Arkansa, 31 
Arkansas, 13, 175 
Army of the Frontier, 94 
Arnold, C. D., 162 
Arredondo, Antonio de, 196 
art, 23, 54, 70, 95, 103, 117, 246 
documentaries, 245, 248, 249, 250 
Arthur, Chester A. Papers, 81 
Asah, Spencer, 55 
assimilation, 156, 236 
See also schools 

Assiniboine, 99, 172, 285 (recordings) 
prints and photographs, 52, 153, 162,169 
Athabaskan, 249, 285 (recordings), 296 (recording) 
Athabaskan, Koyukon, 249 
Atkinson, George Henry, 98 
Atkinson, Theodore. Papers and Journal, 77 
Atlante: Le civiltd indigene della Americhe, 210 
Atlas collection, 188 
Atlas of American Indian Affairs, 189 
Atlas of Ancient America , 189 



Atlas of Early American History, The Revolutionary Era, 
1760-1790, 211 

Atlas of Great Lakes Indian History, 189 
Atlas of Native History, 211 

Atlas of the Historical Geography of the United States, 210 
Atlas of the North American Indian, 189 
Atna Athabaskan, 285 (recordings) 

Athabaskan /Tlingit, 285 (recordings) 

Atsugewi, 269 
Ayer, Edward E., 8 



B 

Bacone College, 17 

Bacqueville de la Potherie, Charles Le Roy, 48 

Baker, William Bineshi Jr., 248 

Bank Note Engravings, 169 

Banks, Dennis, 148 

Bannock, 102, 282, 294 (recording) 

Bamum, Father, 192 
basketry, 244, 246, 248, 250, 252 
Baskin, Leonard, 55 

[Battle of Okeechobee, Florida, 1837] (map), 207 
Battle of the Bear's Paw Between General Miles and Chief 
Joseph, Sept. 30 to Oct. 5, 1877 (map), 207 
battle sites, 196 (map) 

See also particular battle; warfare 
Beach, John, 29 
Beaglehole, Ernest, 282 
Beale, Edward Fitzgerald. Papers, 95 
Bear Paw Mountains, Battle of, 90, 207 (map) 

Becker, Robert H., 53 
Begay, Harrison, 246 
Bell, Charles Milton, 24, 178 
Studio Collection, 24, 151 
Benjamin Franklin. Collection, 39, 30 
Bennett, Ruth, 307 
Bering Strait, 49 

Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation, 33 
Beyond Tradition: Contemporary Indian Art and its Evolution 
(documentary), 245 
Bible Collection, 39, 51 

bibliographies, catalogs, and guides, 5-10 (General Col- 
lections), 38-39 (Rare Book), 75 (Manuscripts), 124 
(Law Library), 146-147, 150 (Prints and Pho- 
tographs), 187-191 (Geography and Map), 226 
(MBRS), 264 (Music), 268-269 (Recorded Sound) 

The Bibliography of Cartography, 190 
Big Foot, 151 
Big Robber, 218 (map) 
bills, House and Senate, 131 
Billy Jack (film), 234 

Biographical File (Prints and Photographs), 147 
biracial themes in film, 231, 232, 233, 235, 239, 240, 242 
Black, Hugo L., 86 



INDEX 



3 1 1 



Blackfeet, 16, 49, 142, 271, 285 (recordings) 
correspondence, 99, 116 
films, 230, 234 
maps, 192, 212 
music, 268, 277 

prints and photographs, 52, 152, 153, 160, 162, 167 
See also Piegan; Siksika 
Black Fox, Joe, 183 
Black Hawk, 169, 172 
Black Hawk War, 82, 89 
Black Hills, 94, 231 
Blackmore, William, 151 
Blacks, 30, 67 
See also Freed men 
Black Sachem, 97 
Blue Lake, 83 
Blue Legs, Alice, 249 

Blue Water Creek, Battle of (maps), 207, 216 
boarding schools. See schools 
Board of Indian Commissioners, 95 
Boas , Franz, 1858-1942 (documentary), 248 
Boas, Franz. Papers (microfilm), 103 
Bodmer, Karl, 35, 37, 52, 65 
Bolognetti, Cardinal Mario. Collection, 99 
Bonaparte, Charles. Papers, 87 

Book of the General Laws of the Inhabitants of the Jurisdiction 
of New-Plimouth , 138 
Boone, Daniel. Collection, 104 
Borah, William E. Papers, 83 
Borglum, Gutzon. Papers, 102 
Borglum, Solon Hannibal, 102, 113 
Bou-ge-tah-smokey, 33 
Boudinot, Elias, 1 
Boulton, Laura, 278 

Boundary of the Creek Country, 200 (map) 

Bouquet, Henry, 61 
Bourke, John G., 90 
Boyd, Julian P, 31 
Braddock, Edward, 215 
Brady, Samuel, 104 
Brandeis, Madeline, 232 
Brant, Joseph, 104, 169, 175 
See also Thayendanegea 
Brazil, 32 

Brennan, William J. Jr., 86 

Bressani, Francisco Giuseppe. Jesuit Relation, 99 

British Manuscripts Project (microfilm), 23 

broadcasting, 224, 262 

Broadside Collection, 39, 33, 67 

Broken Arrow, 233 (film), 243 (TV program), 258 (film) 

The Broken Chain (TV program), 243 

Broken Lance (film), 233 

Broken Rainbow (documentary), 243 

Broken Treaty at Battle Mountain (documentary), 243 

Brown, Jacob Jennings. Papers, 89 

Rr ule Sioux War, 94 



ERIC 



Buchanan, James. Papers, 81 

Buckeyes: Food of the California Indians (documentary), 

M 5 

Buffalo and Erie County Historical Society: presidential 
papers, 81 

Buffalo Bill's Wild West and Paivnee Bill's Far East (silent 
film), 227 

Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show and Congress of Rough 
Riders of the World, 163, 167, 181, 183 
See also Cody, William F. 

Bureau of American Ethnology, 10, 24, 33, 103, 271, 277, 
278 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, 9, 25, 78, 83, 84, 87, 128, 148, 132, 
190, 202, 204, 241, 277 
burials, 82, 280 

Burlin, Natalie Curtis. Collection, 265 

Burt, Elizabeth. Papers, 89 

Burton Historical Collection, 29 



C 

Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar Nunez. See Nunez Cabeza de Vaca 

Cabinet of American Illustrations, 170 

Caddo, 13, 16, 31, 90, 93, 117, 282, 283 (recordings) 

Cadman, Charles Wakefield, 263, 273 

Cahokia, 228 

Cahto, 102 

Cahuilla, 95, 102, 257, 283 (recordings) 

Caldwell, Carey, 303 

California, 13, 54, 68, 73, 81, 91, 93, 96, 102, 103, 115, 140, 
130, 307, 296 (recording) 
documentaries, 245, 251 
early contact, 45, 49, 97 
maps, 210, 212 

prints and photographs, 33, 133 
warfare, 94, 134 

The Call of the Wild (silent film), 231, 254 
Caloches, 68 

Calumet, Pipe of Peace (documentary), 243 
Calusa, 294 (recording) 

Camp, Charles L., 39, 33 
Canada, 37, 80, 94, 105, 120, 230, 231, 278 
early contact, 48, 77 
maps, 209, 218 
Captain Jack, 94, 134, 184 
captivity narratives, 30, 67 
See also kidnapping 
Capuchins, 46 

caricatures, 20, 165, 167, 168, 170, 172 
Carlisle Indian School, 85, 161, 179 
Carlton, Caleb Henry. Papers, 90 
Carpenter, William J., 246 
Carrier, 102, 283 (recordings) 

Carrying out the Snakes (silent film), 227 



33? 



3 1 2 



INDEX 



Carson, Christopher, 114 
Collection, 90 

Carte Particuliere du Fleuve Saint Louis [Mississippi River], 
Dressee sur les Lieux avex les Norns des Sauvages du Pais 
(map), 196 
Carter, Bruce, 149 
Carter, Jimmy, 78 
Carter, N. E., 265 
Cartier, Jacques, 45 

Cartographic Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, 190 

cartoons, 9, 20, 79, 168, 170 

Carvalho, Solomon Nunes, 153, 171 

Carver, H. P., 234 

Casas, Bartolom£ de las, 38, 41 

Casas Grandes, 55 

Cases and Materials on Federal Indian Lazo, 121 

catalogs: See bibliographies 

Catawba, 32, 104, 191, 214, 285 (recording) 

Catherwood, Frederick, 52 
Catlin, George, 52, 64, 169, 172, 175 
Cayuga, 30, 98, 206 (map), 288 (recording) 

Cayuse, 102 
CD-ROM, 34, 192 
Centennial (TV program), 243 
Central Plateau, 150 

A Century of Progress Exposition: Indian Village (silent 
film), 227 

ceremonies, 35, 53, 35, 68, 70, 136, 152, 169, 177, 224, 248, 
251, 275, 278, 279, 280, 282 
Ghost Dance, 94, 160, 162, 263 
Snake Dance, 155, 159, 163, 227, 230 
Sun Dance, 160, 281 
Yebichai, 159, 177 

The Chaco Legacy (documentary), 245 
Chalmers, George. Collection, 77 
Champlain, Samuel de, 37, 62, 193 (map) 

Chardon, Francis A., 96 

Charging Thunder, Mr. and Mrs., 167 

Charles, William, 172 

Chart of Central Settlements of Quivira and Harahey, Kansas 
Valley , North America (map), 209 
Chase, Salmon P., 86 
Chegeree, 192 
Chelassis, 285 (recording) 

Chemehuevi, 54, 90, 102, 137, 285 (recordings) 

Cherokee, 1, 8, 9, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 23, 28, 30, 31, 32, 34, 

45, 74, 85, 88, 89, 91, 103, 104, 177, 250, 282, 285 
(recordings) 
correspondence, 88, 99 
law, 125, 141 
litigation, 74, 88, 194 

maps, 192, 193, 198, 199, 201 (map), 202, 211, 217, 

221 

prints and photographs, 151, 160, 167, 168 
religion, 51, 98, 99 
removal, 89, 194 

1 v & 

D V 



syllabary, 100, 101 
treaties, 87, 88 

Cherokee Nation Code Annotated, 134 
Cherokee Nation, Township 21 North (map), 222 
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831), 74, 194 
Cherokee Outlet, 200, 201 
Cherokee Phoenix, 30 
Cherokee Tribal Council, 83 
Chesapeake Bay, 41 
Cheyenne Autumn (film), 235 
Cheyenne, 17, 24, 34, 54, 117, 278, 286 (recordings) 
films, 240, 242 
maps, 201 (map), 212 
music, 265, 268, 282 

prints and photographs, 160, 162, 163, 167 
TV program, 243 
warfare, 90, 94, 95, 222 
Chicago World's Fair, 162 

Chickasaw, 28, 31, 32, 45, 89, 98, 99, 104, 125, 141, 194 

Chief Crazy Horse (film), 235, 259 

Chief Joseph, 92, 95, 160, 207 (map), 208 (map) 

The Chief's Daughter (silent film), 231 
Children of Wind River (documentary), 245 
Children's Literature Center, 18 
Chilcat, 286 (recording) 

Chimariko, 102 

Chinook, 68, 102 

Chinook jargon, 298 (recording) 

Chipewyan, 17 

Chippewa, 17, 34, 83, 104, 99, 123, 198 (map), 248, 286 
(recordings) 
artifacts, 23, 24 
correspondence, 98, 99 
music, 268, 279, 283 
prints and photographs, 151, 152, 167 
See also Ojibwa 
Chitimacha, 286 (recording) 

Chittenden, Newton H., 115 
Papers, 95 

Choate, John N., 161 

Choctaw, 13, 23, 28, 31, 34, 45, 64, 83, 88, 89, 96, 98, 99, 
102, 104, 140, 204, 282, 286 (recordings) 
law, 125, 141 
maps, 198, 201 
Mississippi Band, 34 
removal, 89, 194 
Choris, Louis, 49, 68 
Chosa Jack, Betty, 248 
Chosa, Michael, 248 
Chowchilla, 102 
Chumash, 4, 102 

Church of England, Diocese of London. Archives of the 
Bishop of London at Fulham Palace, 99 
Church of England, Province of Canterbury. Manuscripts 
of the Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth Palace 
Library, 99 




INDEX 



3 1 3 



cigar-store Indian, 233 
cities, pre-contact, 228 
citizenship, 79, 167 

training, 227 (silent film) 

Civil War, U.S., 75, 90, 94, 95, 201 (map), 208 (map), 238 
Clackamas Chinook, 286 (recording) 

Clark, George Rogers, 104 
Clark, William, 188, 200 

Classification Map of Creek and Seminole Nations (map), 212, 
223 

Claus, Daniel, 31 
Clayoquot, 286 (recordings) 

Cleveland, Grover. Papers, 81 
Clinch, Duncan Lamont. Papers, 90 
Cline, Eddie, 233 

Cline, Howard Francis. Papers, 103 
Clinton, George and James. Collection, 90 
Cochise, 235 (film), 238 (film), 243 (TV program), 258 
(film) 

Cochiti 

recordings, 286, 292, 295 
twentieth-century art, 54, 55 
Cocopa, 102, 136, 265, 279, 287 (recordings) 

Code of Federal Regulations , 132 
code talkers, 250 

Cody, William F. (Buffalo Bill), 103, 158, 163, 164, 166, 

181 

Coeur d'Alene, 16, 24 
Coffee, John, 198 
COHM, 268 



Collier, John, 87, 236, 237 

Collier, John Jr., 160 

Colonial Office (British) papers, 25 

Colonial period, 13, 26, 74, 76, 96, 124, 127, 147 

Colorado, 153, 158, 230 

Colorado River, 91, 212 

Colton, George W., 218 

Columbia River, 68, 102 

Columbus, Christopher, 37, 40, 57 

Colville, 24 

Comanche, 13, 16, 31, 96, 117, 152, 201 (map), 275, 282, 
287 (recordings) 
warfare, 87, 90, 94 
Comata, the Sioux (silent film), 231 
commercial releases and recordings, 268, 269 
Comox, 287 (recording) 

Company for the Propagacion of the Gospell in New 
England and the Parts Adjacent (formerly Society 
for) (microfilm), 99 

Comparative Studies of North American Indians, 189 
Compilation of all the Treaties Between the United States and 
the Indian Tribes Now in Force as Laws, 126 
computer tools and services. See CD-ROM; COHM; FTP; 
internet access; LC MARVEL; LC WEB; LegalTrac; 
LOCIS; MARC Maps Collection; MUMS; OCLC; 
online access; RLIN; SCORPIO; WWW site 



ERIC 



Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, 237 
Confederation, Articles of, 127 
Conga ree, 32 

Congress, 39, 82, 84, 130, 131 
members, 72 

See also House of Representatives; Senate; particular 
member names 

Congressional Globe , 1833-73, 12 °' 1 3 1 
Congressional Information Service (CIS), 130 
Congressional Record, 120, 131 
Congressional Serial Set, 191 
Connecticut, 29, 50, 59, 73, 77, 99, 160 
Connecticut, Missionary Society of, 99 
Connor, Jeanette M. Thurber. Papers, 97 
Constitution and By-Laws of the Angoon Community Associa- 
tion, 143 

Constitution and Lazos of the Cherokee Nation , 141 
constitutions, tribal, 125, 237 
contact, European, 40, 41, 42 

A Conversation zoith Vine Deloria,Jr. (documentary), 

2 45 

Cook, Lt. Col., 136 
Coolidge, Calvin, 152 
Papers, 81 

Cooper, James Fenimore, 232, 239 
Copway, George. Collection, 98 

Copy of a sketch of the Monongahela, zoith the field of battle, 
done by an Indian (map), 192 
copyright, 74, 225, 263, 268, 269 
copyright computer catalog. See COHM 
Cordova, Treaty of, 134 
Cornstalk, 220 

Coronado, Francisco Vasquez de, 42, 45 
corporate charters, tribal, 125 
Costanoan, 80 
Coushatta Village, 95 
Crazy Horse (film), 235, 259 
See also Chief Crazy Horse 
creation stories, 280 
Cree, 17, 24, 94 

Creek, 17, 19, 31, 32, 89, 90, 99, 104, 125, 151, 152, 175, 177, 
244, 250, 282, 287 (recordings) 
early contact, 42, 45 
land, 28, 80, 87, 103 

maps, 188, 198, 200, 201, 206 (map), 212, 223 
removal, 88, 194, 194 
warfare, 82, 90, 91, 94, 107, 206 
Creek War, 88, 90 
crimes, 132 

Crittenden, John J. Papers, 87 
Croft, Kenneth, 278 
Croft, Thomas, 281 
Croghan, George, 31, 73 
Papers, 88 

Crook, George C., 154 
Crosland, Alan, 240 



3 1 4 



INDEX 




Crow, xv i, 16, 23, 24, 54, 83, 86, 99, 102, 103, 152, 160, 218 
(map), 268, 287 (recordings), 304 
fiction, 239, 242 
Crow Dog, 159 
Crow Fair, xvi, 304 
Crummett, Michael, xvi, 304 
culture areas, 4 
Curley Headed Doctor, 154 
Current Law Index , 127 
Currier and Ives Lithographs, 168, 172 
Currin, John, 194 
Curtis, Charles, 84 

Curtis, Edward S., 37, 53, 146, 150, 153, 164, 166, 183, 249, 
253 

Curtis, George I., 230 
Cushna, 81 
Custer, Elizabeth, 103 

Custer, George A., 90, 95, 103, 160, 166, 222, 239, 240, 241 
Custer's Battle-Field (map), 207 
See also Little Big Horn, Battle of 
Custis, Peter, 95 

Cutting, Bronson Murray. Papers, 83 

D 

Dade, Francis I., 67 
Dahcotah. See Dakota 

Dakota, 17, 63, 65, 94, 95, 96, 99, 100, 202, 239, 244, 265, 
295 (recording) 

See also Sioux 
Dakota, Brule, 111 
See also Sioux, Brule 
Dakota Territory, 85, 159, 192 (map) 

See also North Dakota; South Dakota 
dance, 248 (documentary), 232, 266, 266, 274, 299, 301, 
302, 304 

See also ceremonies; music 
Dances with Wolves (film), 233 
Dancing Rabbit Creek, Treaty of, 88 
Darley, F. O. C., 170 
Daves, Delmer, 233 
Davis, Lee, 307 
Dawes Commission, 28 

Dawes Severalty Act (General Allotment Act), 83, 156, 

202 

Dawes, Henry Laurens, 74 
Papers, 83 

Debret, Jean Baptiste, 32 

De Bry, Theodor, 5, 36, 38, 43, 44, 57, 229 

Declaration of Independence (Mexican), 134 

De Fer, Nicolas, 214 

Delano, Alonzo, 34 

Delaware, 13, 16, 29, 31, 88, 89, 96, 99, 104, 117, 122, 127, 
198 (map), 282, 230, 287 (recordings) 
delegations to Washington, 85, 150-132, 172, 178 
Dellenbaugh, Frederick S., 103 ’ 0 ' ?: ~ 

^ \i 



Deloria, Vine Jr. (documentary), 245 
DeMille, William C., 234 
Densmore, Frances, 268, 271, 272, 278, 279, 283 
Collection, 264 

Department of the Interior, 9, 24, 78, 86 
See also Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Department of War, 78 

Descripcion Geographica, de la parte que los Espanoles poseen 
Actualmente en el Continente de la Florida . . .16 70 . . . 
Drawn in 1742 by Antonio de Arredondo (map), 196 
Descrips ion des costs , pts., rades, Hies de la Nouuele France 
faict selon son vray meridien (map), 193 
De Smet, Pierre Jean, 13, 49, 197 (map), 218 (map) 
Detroit, 77 

Diagram of Indian Reservation on the Minnesota River. By 
Treaties with the Dakota or Sioux Indians of 23d. July & 
5th Augt . 1855 (map), 202 
Diaz del Castillo, Bernal, 38 
The Dime Novel Collection, 39, 54, 67 
Discovering American Indian Music (documentary), 248 
Dine Bikeyah. See Navajo 
discrimination, 160, 185 
diseases, 212 (map), 250 (documentary) 
dissertations, 32 

distribution; maps, 208-211, 220 
The Divided Trail: A Native American Odyssey 
(documentary), 248 
Dixon, George, 49 
Dixon, Joseph Kossuth, 164, 167 
Doctoral Dissertation Series (microfilm), 32 
documentaries, 225, 227, 244-252 

Documents of First Fourteen Congresses, 1789-1817, 39, 131 

Documents of United States Indian Policy, 121 

Dodge, Katherine Taylor, 158 

Dodson, R.W., 68 

dogs, 65 

Doris Duke Oral History Project, 282 
Double Woman, 249 
Douglas, Gordon, 241 
Douglas, William O., 117 
Papers, 86 

Draper, Lyman Copeland. Papers (microfilm), 103 
Drennan, Daniel. Papers, 90 
The Drummaker (documentary), 248 
drums, 301 

Drums Along the Mohawk (film), 238 

Dull Knife, 90 

Dunsmore, Lord, 220 

dwellings, 57, 63, 69, 171, 213, 214, 230 

Dymtryk, Edward, 235 

E 

Early American Indian Documents: Treaties and Lazos, 
1607-1789, 120, 121, 127 
East Florida Papers, 97 



INDEX 



3 1 5 



Eastman, Mary Henderson, 63 
Eastman, Seth, 22, 63 
economy, 227, 228, 230, 251 
Edison, Thomas Alva, 224 
Edmonds, Walter D., 238 

education, 84, 94, 98, 99, 117, 161, 233, 234, 235, 243, 252 
See also schools 

Educational Film & Video Locator , 226 
Eliot, John, 51 
Ellsworth, Oliver, 86 

England, 12, 14, 15, 26, 99, 125, 196 (map), 240 
early contact, 41, 44, 45, 50 
treaties, 51, 106, 126 
warfare, 39, 61, 77 
Ennesen (Salinen), 102 
Erickson, John Edward. Papers, 86 
Eskimo, 17, 23, 98, 209 (map), 210 (map), 230, 239, 255 
See also Inuit 

Eskimo -Indian Olympics, 232 
An Eskimo Saga 242 

Esquimaux Game of Snap-the-Whip (silent film), 227 
Ethnic Music on Records: A Discography of Ethnic Recordings 
Produced in the United States , 1893 to 1942, 269 
ethnology, 10, 23, 102, 199, 208 
Ewing, George Washington. Papers, 88 
Executive Branch materials, 131 
Executive Journals of the Council of Colonial Virginia, 133 
The Exiles (film), 238 



F 

family, 230, 231, 234, 239 
Far West, 16 

Farm Security Administration Collection, 160 
Farrow, John, 239 
Farwell, Arthur, 273 

FBI Files on the American Indian Movement and 
Wounded Knee (microfilm), 25 
Federal-aid Indian Road System Atlas (map), 206 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 25 
Federal Cylinder Project, 277, 303 
recordings, 284-298 
federal documents, 127 . 

See also particular agencies and collections 
federal government surveys, 152 
federally recognized tribes, 128 
Federal Register, 131, 132 
Federal Reserve Act of 1913, 74, 83 
Felix S. Cohens Handbook of Federal Indian Law, 121 
Fenton, William, 278 

Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdes, Gonzalo, 38, 41 
Fevret de St. Memin, Charles Balthazar Julien, 131 
Fewkes, Jesse Walter, 279 
fiction, 17 

:.e also Dime Novel Collection; films; television 




Fidler, Peter, 192 
Fillmore, Millard. Papers, 81 
films. See particular title 
Finger Lakes, 206 

First Americans: Photographs from the Library of Congress, 
150 

Fisher, Walter Lowrie. Papers, 87 

fishing and fishing rights, 36, 119, 120, 132, 177, 244, 251, 
252 

Fiske, Frank Bennett, 159 

Five Civilized Tribes, 28, 30, 31, 34, 42, 83, 125, 194, 198, 
201 

See also Iroquois, Five Nations of the Iroquois 
Flap (film), 238 

Flathead, 17, 24, 239, 251, 277, 299, 307, 287 (recordings) 
Fleete, Henry. Journal, 77 
Fleischhauer, Carl, 302, 307 
Fletcher, Alice Cunningham, 278, 302 
Florida, 13, 37, 41, 43, 89, 94, 175, 196 
early contact, 42, 44, 45, 97 
East Florida Papers, 97 
maps, 196, 206, 207 
See also Seminole Wars; Timucua 
Flournoy, Thomas. Papers, 90 
Floyd, Charles R., 91 
Floyd, John, 91 
flutes, 263, 272 
Fly, C. S., 154 
folklife, 276 
Folklife Annual, 278 
Folklife Center Nezvs , 278 
Folklife Reading Room, 277 
folklore, 17, 104 

Force, Manning Ferguson. Papers, 77 
Force, Peter. Papers and Collection. 36, 73, 76-80, 88, 93, 
96, 98 

Ford Educational Weekly, No. 232; The Wards of a Nation 
(silent film), 227 
Ford, John, 235, 238 
Ford, Worthington C., 88 
Foreign Copying Program, 76, 97, 99 
Forsyth, Thomas, 104 
Fort Apache (film), 238 
Fort Benton, 96, 108 
Fort Berthold Indians, 83 

Fort Berthold to Fort Buford. See Lean Wolfs Map 

Fort Bidwell, 89 

Fort Bridger, 89 

Fort Clark, 96 

Fort D. A. Russell, 89 

Fort Defiance, 77, 139 

Fort Duquesne, 98, 192, 213 

Fort Feree, 82 

Fort Gibson, 64 

Fort Harney, 94 

Fort Johnson, 26, 27 . 




3 1 6 



INDEX 



Fort Laramie, 89 
Treaty of, 197 
Fort Marion, 94 
Fort Missoula, 89 
Fort Moultrie, 175 
Fort Omaha, 89 
Fort Pitt, 61 
Fort Randall, 155 
Fort Robinson, 89 
Fort Sanders, 89 
Fort Sill, 114, 155, 201 (map) 

Fort Smith, 89 

Fort Strother, 198 (map) 

Fort Thompson, 113 
Fort Washakie, 89 
Fort Williams, 107 
Foster, Norman, 241 
Fox, 17, 29, 70, 99, 104, 152 
See also Sac and Fox 
Fox River: map, 196 
Fraker, William A., 240 
France, 11, 14, 15, 26, 37, 80, 97, 106 
early contact, 41, 43, 44, 46, 48, 77 
maps, 193, 196, 206, 217 
Frank, T.C., 234 
Frankfurter, Felix, 86, 117 
Franklin, Benjamin, 39, 50 
Papers, 88, 106 
Franklin, William Temple, 50 
Freedmen, 19, 83, 161 
See also Blacks 

Freeman, Thomas. Collection, 95 
Fremont, John Charles, 13, 171, 153 
second expedition, 96 

French and Indian War, 25, 31, 45, 51, 80, 81, 175, 240 
maps, 192, 206, 215, 217 
French settlements, 193 

Fritz Scholder: An American Portrait (documentary), 248 
See also Scholder, Fritz 
Frontenac, Louis, 48 
FTP site, 6 

Fuller, Melville Weston, 86 
fur trade, 12, 14, 16, 27, 49, 54, 88 
maps, 196, 199, 218 
See also economy; trade 

G 

Gabrielino, 287 (recording) 

Gallatin, Albert, 208 (map) 

Papers, 102 
gambling, 232, 251 

games, 53, 64, 177, 227, 230, 232, 234, 252, 275 
Garcilaso de la Vega, el Inca, 41 
Gardner, Alexander, 151 



Garfield, James A. Papers, 81 
Garfield, James Rudolph. Papers, 87 
Garland American Indian Ethnohistory Series , 199 
Gates, Horatio. Papers, 80 
genealogy, 98 

Reading Room, 18 

General Accounting Office reports, 28 
General Allotment Act of 1887 (Dawes Severalty Act), 83, 
84, 156, 202 

General Index to the Documents of the State of New York, 133 
General Services Administration reports, 28 
General Collections, 2-34 
Gentile, Charles, 155 

Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Meridian, 197 
Geography and Map Division, 186 
Reading Room, 187 

Geological Survey of the Territories, 24 
Georgia, 19, 25, 87, 90, 91, 99, 127, 194, 194 
maps, 198, 199, 211 

Georgia Committee of Correspondence. Records, 80 
Gerhard Sisters (Mamie and Emma), 163 
Germany: Church Archives, 99 

Geronimo, 90, 92, 114, 154, 155, 160, 162, 163, 207 (maps), 
234 

Geronimo (TV program), 243 
Geronimo, an American Legend ( film), 238 
Geronimo: The Fmal Campaign (documentary), 248 
Ghent, Treaty of (1815), 120 
Ghent, William James. Papers, 103 
Ghost Dance. See ceremonies 
Gilman, Benjamin Ives, 279 
Gilpin, Laura, 167, 183 
The Girl and the Outlaiv (silent film), 231 
Godfrey, Edward Settle, 103 
Papers, 90 

Goetzmann, William H., 150 
Goldberg, Arthur ]., 86 
Good, Battiste, 111 
Gorges, Ferdinando, 44 
Gourgues, Dominique de, 44 
governance. See tribal governance 
government documents, 50, 127 

See also specific agencies and collections 
government services, 87 
See also education; health care; reservations 
Grabill, John C. H., 158, 171 
Grant, Ulysses S., 241 
Papers, 81 

Graphic Summary of the Tezva Basin Study (map), 212 

Gravier, Jacques, 49 

Gray and James Publishers, 154 

Gray, Judith, 307 

Great Basin, 282 

Great Britain. See England 

Great Depression, 160 

Great Lakes, 42, 48, 70, 80, 196 



INDEX 



3 1 7 



The Great Sioux Massacre (film), 238 
Gregg, Josiah, 53 
Grey, Zane, 234 

Griffith, D. W., 231, 232, 233, 234, 254 
Papers (microfilm), 104 
Gros Ventre, 96, 153 
recordings, 285, 287 

Guadalupe Hidalgo, Treaty of (1848), 120 
GUffefriala, 277 

Giifffe ffl American Indian documents in the Congressional 
Serial Set, 1817-1899, 130 
guides. See bibliographies 



HABS. See Historic American Buildings Survey 
Haida, 23, 138, 246, 250, 268, 287 (recordings) 

Hakluyt, Richard, 38, 45 
Halkomelem, 287 (recordings) 

Hall, James, 52, 70, 151 
Hall, Sylvia and Rachel, 67 
Hamilton, Grant, 20 
Hamilton, Robert J., 116 

Hampton Normal & Agricultural Institute, Hampton, 
Virginia, 161 
Hancock, John, 89 
Handbook of Blackfeet Tribal Law, 142 
Handbook of Federal Indian Law, Felix S. Cohen's, 121 
Hansen, Fritz, 303 
Harahey, 209 (map) 

Harding, Warren G., 152 
Papers, 81 

Hare, 288 (recording) 

Hare, David, 55 
Hariot, Thomas, 44, 56 
Harney, W. S., 207, 216 
Harriman Expedition to Alaska, 1899, 153 
Harrington, John Peabody, 279 
Harrison, Benjamin. Papers, 81 
Harrison, William Henry, 73, 145, 167 
Papers, 81, 82 

Harrisse, Henry. Collection, 39 
Harvard University, 9, 10 
see also Peabody Museum 
Hatch, John Porter. Papers, 90 
Havasupai, 102, 158, 288 (recordings) 

Hazvke ye and the Last of the Mohicans (TV program), 243 
Hayden Survey, 24, 153 
Hayden, Ferdinand V., 24, 152 
Hayes, Ira Hamilton, 241, 258 
Hayes, Rutherford B., 34 
Papers, 81 
He Dog, 159 

health care, 78, 128, 177, 250 
Indian Health Service, 84, 148 




Hearne Brothers Indian History Series (maps), 210 

Heckewelder, John, 99 

Heintzelman, Samuel Peter. Papers, 90 

Heller, Louis H., 154, 184 

Hening's Statutes, 124, 125 

Hennepin, Louis, 48 

Her Indian Mother (silent film), 231 

Herberts, Col., 192 

Hererra, Velino, 55 

The Hero oflzvo ]ima, 241 

Herzog, George, 282 

Heyn, Herman, 162 

Hiazoatha, 70, 169, 231 (silent film), 239 (film) 

Hidatsa, 24, 35, 52, 279, 288 (recordings) 

Hill, Walter, 238 

Hillers, John K., 153 

His Last Game (silent film), 232 

Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS), 160 

Historical Atlas of Oklahoma, 211 

Historical Atlas of the United States, Centennial Edition, 211 
Historical Records Survey, 10 
History of the Indian Tribes of North America, 151 
See also McKenney, Thomas L.; McKenney & Hall 
Hitchcock, Ethan Allen. Papers, 91 
Hodge, Gene Meany, i 
Hokeah, Jack, 55 
Hollar, Wenceslaus. 145, 175 
Hollow Horn Bear, 159, 162, 163 
Ho?nefor the Weekend (documentary), 248 
Hondo (film), 239 
Honey Lake Wagon Road, 96 
Hoopa: See Hupa 
Hoover, Herbert C. Papers, 81 
Hopewell, 4, 23, 228 
Hopi, 17, 95, 203, 288 (recordings) 
art, 34, 178, 246, 248, 250 
artifacts, 23 

Century of Progress Exposition, 227 
ceremonies, 224, 227 
documentaries, 243, 248, 230 
music, 248, 263, 268, 282 

prints and photographs, 153, 155, 158, 139, 163, 167 
recordings, 279, 282 

Hopi Indian Arts and Crafts (documentary), 248 
Hopi Indians Dance for TR at [ Walpi , ArizJ 1913 (silent 
film), 230 

Hopi: Songs of the Fourth World (documentary), 248 
Horse, Mr. and Mrs. Samuel, 167 
Horseshoe Bend, Battle of, 82, 107, 198, 206 
House bills, 131 
House committee reports, 127 

House of Representatives committee hearings. Unpub- 
lished, 130 
Houser, Allan, 246 

HRAF. See Human Relations Area Files 
Hualapai, 91, 102 

- V > 




3 1 8 



INDEX 




Hudson River, 206 

Huffaker, Clair, 238 

Hughes, Charles Evans, 86 

Hughes, Robert Patterson. Papers, 91 

Huguenot colony, 41, 44 

Huie, William Bradford, 241 

Humanities and Social Sciences Division, 3 

Human Relations Area Files, 23 

Humboldt, Alexander Freiherr von, 52 

Hunter, George, 192 

hunting and hunting rights, 62, 119, 132, 160, 228 

Huntington Free Library and Reading Room, 8 

Hupa, 23, 102, 307 

Huron, 23, 42, 48 

Huston, James, 242 

Huston, John, 242 

Hutchins, Thomas, 61 

Huteetl: Koyukon Memorial Potlach (documentary), 249 



I 

LALA. See Institute of American Indian and Alaska Native 
Culture and Arts Development 
Ickes, Harold LeClair, 74, 116, 230, 237 
ickes, Harold L. Home Movies : Indian Family and Community 
Life (silent film), 230 
Papers, 87 

Idaho, 83, 94, 152, 207 (map) 

Igloo (film), 239, 255 

Illinois, 13, 29, 48, 67, 70, 82, 88, 197 (map) 

Illinois River, 48 

The Image Maker and the Indians: E. S. Curtis and his 1914 
Kzvakiutl Movie (documentary), 249 
Images of American Indians on Film : An Annotated 
Bibliography , 226 

In the Land of the Headhunters (silent film), 230, 253 
In the Land of the War Canoes: Kzvakiutl Indian Life on the 
Nortluvest Coast (silent film), 230 
Inca, 41 
incunabula, 39 

An Index to Governors' Messages (Wisconsin), 133 
Index to Legal Periodicals, 127 
Indiana, 13, 29, 88, 99, 199 (map) 

Indiana and Illinois Territory, 82 

Indian Affairs, Lazvs and Treaties, 126 

Indian agents, 73, 80, 83, 84, 87-89, 156 

Indian Art of America Committee, 103 

Indian Arts and Crafts Board, 103, 117, 246, 282 

Indian Arts and Crafts Board Act (1935), 236 

Indian boarding schools. See schools 

Indian Child Welfare Act, 140 

Indian Claims Commission, 25, 28, 199, 204 

Indian Claims Commission Act, 204 

Indian commissioners, 77, 87 



Indian Congress, 162 
Indian Country (documentary), 249 
Indian fair, 160 
See also Crow Fair; powwows 
Indians for Indians Hour Collection, 279 
Indian Health Service. See health care 
Indianische Karten Nordamerikas, Beitrdge zur historischen 
Kartographie vom 16. bis zum 19. Jahrhundert (map), 
190 

Indian land. See land; tribal land 

Indian Land Areas (map), 206 

Indian Land Areas Judicially Established (map), 199 

Indian Land Cessions in the United States (map), 199 

Indian language publications, 30, 33 

Indian Lazo Reporter, 121 

Indian law texts, 121 

An Indian Map of the Upper-Missouri (map), 192 
Indian maps, mapping, and geographic knowledge, 
191-192 

Indian New Deal, 78, 87, 236 
Indian Office, 22 
See also Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Indian policy, 78, 84, 121, 122, 220, 236 
See also Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Indian Portrait Gallery, 151 
Indian prisoners of war, 155 
See also warfare 

Indian removal, 78, 82, 88, 89, 93, 94, 175, 194 
See also Trail of Tears 

Indian Removal Act (1830), 74, 84, 194, 199 
Indian Reorganization Act (1934) (IRA), 84, 87, 128, 236, 
237 

Indian Rights Association, 33 
Papers (microfilm), 89 
The Indians' Book , 265 

Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act 
(1975) (Public Law 93-638), 84, 148, 252 
Indian settlements, 155, 193 
maps, 192, 193, 196, 197, 199, 202, 206, 208-211, 213, 
214 

Indians of North America: A Guide to LOTS, 146, 150 
Indian Songs of Today (recordings), 282 
Indian Territory, 19, 31, 98, 125, 141 
maps, 199, 201, 208, 212, 220 
Indian Territory Reports, 125 

Indian Territory with part of the adjoining State of Kansas &c. 
(map), 200 

Indian Trade and Intercourse Act (1790), 84, 204 
Indian Treaties, 1778-1883, 126 

Indian Tribal Codes: A Microfiche Collection of Indian Tribal 
Lazv Codes, 134 

Indian villages. See Indian settlements 
Indian Villages of the Illinois Country (map), 197 
Indian wars. See particular war; warfare 
Ingalik, 288 (recording) 

Ingraham, Joseph. Journal, 95 



>:■ 3jj 



INDEX 



3 1 9 



Institute of American Indian and Alaska Native Culture 
and Arts Development (IAIA), 103, 246 
instruments, musical, 265, 272 
international material, legal, 134 
Internet access, 6 
Inuit, 4, 163, 177, 244, 249, 254 
Inuqqaanin: From the First People (documentary), 249 
Iowa, 29, 99, 123, 200, 307, 288 (recording) 

Iroquois, 27, 29, 51, 70, 77, 80, 175, 238, 246, 250, 268, 288 
(recordings) 
early contact, 42, 48 
maps, 206, 217 

prints and photographs, 151, 152 
treaties, 50, 122 
warfare, 90, 206, 217 

See also Six Nations and particular tribal name 
Iroquois Indians: A Documentary History of the Diplo- 
macy of the Six Nations and Their League (micro- 
film), 104 

Irredeemable America, The Indians' Estate and Land Claims, 
124 

irrigation. See water 
Ishi, 104, 244 

Ishi: The Last Yahi (documentary), 249 
Isleta, 265, 289 (recordings) 

Ives, Joseph, 54 
Iwo Jima, 241 



J 

Jackson, Andrew, 32, 73, 74, 76, 94, 107, 108, 167, 172, 175, 
194 (map), 206 (map) 

Collection (maps), 188 
Papers, 81, 82, 89 
Jackson, Helen Hunt, 233, 257 
Jackson, Robert H., 86 
Jackson, William Henry, 153 
Jay Treaty of 1794, 120 
Jefferson, Thomas, 36 
Papers, 81, 107 

Jemez, 55, 159, 289 (recordings) 

Jeremiah Johnson (film), 239 
Jesuit Relations Collection, 48, 77, 99 
Jesuits. See missions and missionaries 
Jesup, Thomas Sidney, 175 
Papers, 91, 194 
Johnson, Andrew, 81 
Johnson, Guy, 27 
Johnson, Henry, 268, 272 
Johnson, Richard M., 145 
Johnson, William, 12, 25, 27, 80 
Johnson -O'Malley Act (1934), 236 
Johnston, David Claypool, 172 
Johnston, Frances Benjamin, 161, 179 
Johnston, George. Papers, 88 




Jones, Robert F., 116 

The Journal of the Commons House of Assembly (South 
Carolina), 133 

Journal of the Sixth Annual Session of the General Council of 
the Indian Territory, 141 

Journals of the House of Burgesses of Virginia, 133 
Judicial Branch of the Navajo Nation, 143 
judicial branch materials, federal, 74, 132 
Just Squaw (silent film), 232, 255 
justices' papers, 86 
juvenile literature, 18 

K 

Kabotie, Fred, 246 
kachina doll, tp, 246, 250 
Kahto, 102 

Kalapuya, 289 (recording) 

Kalispel, 17, 24 
Kamia, 102 
Kammei, 102 
Kane, Rudolph, 251 

Kansas, 29, 84, 96, 141, 151, 153, 161, 252 
land, 88, 200 
maps, 198, 200, 209 
Karok, 102, 251, 289 (recordings), 303 
Kasebier, Gertrude, 146, 167, 183 
Kaufman, Philip, 242 
Kautz, August Valentine. Papers, 91 
Kaw, 103, 209 (map), 289 (recording) 

Keaton, Buster, 233 
Keechai, 13 

Keep Your Heart Strong (documentary), 249 

Kendall, Amos. Papers, 88 

Kennebec, 97 

Kennedy, John F., 152 

Keaton, Simon, 104 

Kentuckian (silent film), 232 

Kentucky, 87, 168, 199, 219 

Keokuk, Charles, 151 

Keokuk, Jr., Chief, 151 

Kern, R. H., 136 

Kichai (flute), 268 

Kickapoo, 13, 99, 252, 268, 289 (recordings) 
kidnapping (films), 232, 233, 240, 242 
See also captivity narratives 
King, Charles Bird, 52, 70, 151 
King Philip, 92 
kinship, 4 

See also genealogy 
Kintpuash. See Captain Jack 

Kiowa, 13, 33, 70, 117, 162, 201 (map), 242, 246, 248, 275, 
289 (recordings) 
music, 263, 275, 282 
warfare, 87, 90, 94 

■' 340 



3 2 0 



INDEX 



Kiowa-Apache, 290 (recordings) 

Kitanemuk, 290 (recording) 

Kittanning, 104 
Klallam, 290 (recording) 

Klamath, 34, 83, 102, 236, 250, 290 (recordings) 

Klickitat, 244 
Knife River, 216 
Know Nothing, 167 
Knox, William, 80 
Konomlhu, 290 (recording) 

Kootenai, 49, 102, 237 
Korean War, 185 
Kotzebue expedition, 68 
Koyukon, 17, 249 (documentary) 

Kroeber, Alfred Louis, 249 
Papers, 104 

Kwakiutl, 230, 253, 265, 268, 279, 290 (recordings) 

L 

lacrosse. See games 
Lafayette, Marquis de, 89 
Lafitau, Joseph Francois, 48 
LaFlesche, Francis, 278, 279, 302 
LaFlesche, Joseph, 279 
La Follette, Robert M. Sr., 74, 83, 116 
La Follette Family Papers, 83 
LaFora, Nicolas de, 196 

La France Occidentale Dans TAmerique Septentrional . . . 
(map), 214 

Laguna, 55, 265, 290 (recordings) 

Laguna, Frederica de, 278 

Lahontan, Louis Armand de Lorn d'Arce, baron de, 48, 60 

Lake Erie, 192, 196 

Lake George, Battle of, 206, 217 

Lake Minnetonka, 208 

Lake Mohonk Conference, 34, 82 

Lake Ocklaway, 154 

Lake Okeechobee, 82, 93, 207 

Lake Superior, 199 

Lakota, 99, 100, 249, 295 (recording) 

Lakota Nation (documentary), 252 
Lakota Quilhvork: Art and Legend (documentary), 249 
Lallemant, Jerome, 49 
La Mere, Oliver, 272 

land, 29, 86, 87, 88, 97, 99, 139, 156, 186, 199, 206, 245 
cessions, 122 

cessions, maps, 196, 198-201, 217 
claims, 103, 124, 152, 192, 204 
See also allotment; tribal land 
Land of the War Canoes: Kzuakiutl Indian Life on the North- 
west Coast (silent film), 253 

Land Ownership Maps: A Checklist of Nineteenth Century 
United States County Maps in the Library of Congress , 
190 



Land Resources of Southeast Alaska Native Villages: An 
Inventory of Lands Withdrawn for Native Selection in 
Southeast Alaska under the Alaska Native Claims Settle- 
ment Act (map), 212 
Lander, Frederick West. Papers, 95 
land ownership, 193, 197, 202, 222 
Lane, Franklin K., 116 
Lange, Dorothea, 160 

language, 9, 16, 48, 51, 73, 80, 82, 95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 102 
maps, 208- 210 
recordings, 284-298 
unidentified, 296 (recordings) 

Laramie, Treaty of, 218 

The Last of His Tribe (TV program), 243 

The Last of the Mohicans , 239 (film), 243 (TV program) 

Latin America, 39 

Laudonniere, Rene de, 37, 41, 44 

Law Library of Congress, 118-143 

Law Library Reading Room, 120 

LC MARVEL, 6 

LC WEB, 6 

Lean Wolf's map from Fort Bert hold to Fort Buford, Dakota, 
along the Missouri River. 1878 (map), 192 
leasing, 125 

Leather Stocking (silent film), 232 
LeClerq, Chrestien, 73, 105 
Lee, Dorothy Sara, 266 
LegalTrac, 127 

The Legend of the Lone Ranger (film), 240 
The Legend of Walks Far Woman (TV program), 244 
legislative histories, 118, 119-120, 127, 130-131 
legislators, 82 

See also Congress; individual members 
Le Jeune, Paul, 49 

Le Moyne de Morgues, Jacques, 44, 57, 229 
Lenape. See Delaware 

Lenape: The Original People (documentary), 249 
Leonard, Zenas, 54 

Le Page du Pratz, Antoine Simon, 44, 60 
Leschi, 91 

Lewis and Clark Collection, 188 

Lewis and Clark expedition, 23, 104, 216 

Lewis, James Otto, 52, 123, 151 

Lewis, Meriwether, 216 

Lieu ranee, Thurlow, 265, 268, 269, 272, 273 

Lillie, Gordon W., 166 

Lincoln, Abraham. Papers, 81 

Lincoln, William. Papers, 77 

linguistics. See Language 

Lipan, 13 

A List of Geographical Atlases in the Library of Congress, 190 
A List of Maps of America in the Library of Congress, 190 
literature, 16, 17 

Little Big Horn, Battle of, 90, 91, 92, 103, 166 
maps, 206, 207, 222 
Little Big Man (film), 240, 260 



INDEX 



3 2 1 



The Little Indian Weaver (silent film), 232 
Little Thunder, 207, 216 

Local History and Genealogy Reading Room, 18 
Locations and Wandering of the Aboriginal Tribes , Introduc- 
tory Map to Accompany Willards History of the United 
States (map), 208, 220 
LOCIS, 6 
Lolahnkok, 102 

Lone Ranger, The Legend of the (film), 240 
The Lone Ranger (TV programs), 244 
Lone Wolf, 151 
Long, John, 49 

Long, Stephen, Expedition, 96 
"Longest Walk", 148, 152 

Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth, 70, 109, 231, 239 
LOTS, 146 

Louisiana, 13, 27, 44, 91, 94, 97, 196 
See also Natchez 

Louisiana Purchase: exploration, 95 
Louisiana Purchase Exposition, 103 
Lowery, Woodbury. Collection, 97 
Lubo (or Lugo), Ramona, 257 
Luiseno, 102, 290 (recordings) 
lumbering, 83 
Lummi, 251 

Lummis, Charles F, 46, 82, 158 
Liitke, Fedor P, 68 



M 

Mackenzie, Kent, 238 
Mackinac Island, 80 
Madison, James: Papers, 81 
magazines. See periodicals 
Mahican. See Mohican 
Maidu, 81, 102 
Main Reading Room, 2 
Maine, 37, 77, 105 
maize, 5, 228, 229 

Makah, 278, 290 (recordings), 292 (recording) 

Make my People Live: The Crisis in Indian Health Care 
(documentary), 250 
Maliseet, 265 

A Man Called Horse (film), 240, 261 
Manatus, Gelegen op de Noot Riuier (map), 193, 213 
Mandan, 23, 52, 65, 80, 96, 169, 216 (map), 268, 279, 290 
(recordings) 

Manhattan Island (map), 193, 213 
Manistique River (map), 192 
Mann, Delbert, 241 
Manuscript Division, 72-117 
Reading Room, 74 
manuscripts, other institutions, 76 




Mapa que comprende la Frontera de los Dominios del Rey en la 
America Septentrional . . . Joseph de Urrutia and Nicolas 
de LaFora, 196 

Map by which the Creek Indians gave their Statement at Fort 
Strother on the 22nd. Jany. 1816, 198 
Map copied from one drazvn by the Tassel, and some other 
head-men of the Cherokees, to describe their territorial 
claims, 192 

Map Exhibiting the position of the Lands occupied by Indian 
Tribes in Amity with the United States; and also the 
Lands ceded to the United States by Treaty zvith various 
Indian Tribes, 198 

Map of Alabama Constructed from the Surveys in the General 
Land Office and other Documents, 196 
A Map of Allegany Reservation, 202 
Map of a Portion of the Indian Country Lying East and West 
of the Mississippi River, 200 

Map of Custer Battlefield. Birdseye viezv of the Little Big Horn 
country and a portion of Davis creek— a tributary of the 
Rosebud — shozving where Custer and his men tra- 
versed— June 25, 1876, 207 
Map of Eastern Kansas, 200 

Map of Fox River and that part of Winnebagoe Lake as con- 
tained zvithin the limits of the cession of 1821 by the 
Menominie and Winnebago Indians to the Nezo York 
Tribes, 196 

Map of Gen. Sullivan's march from Easton to the Senaca & 
Cayuga countries, 206 

Map of Nezo Archangel (Sitka, 1841?) Made by a Native dur- 
ing the Russian occupancy, 1841?, 192 
Map of that Part of Georgia Occupied by the Cherokee Indians 
Taken from an Actual Survey made during the present 
year, 1831 in Pursuance of an Act of the General 
Assembly of the State, 211 

Map of the Ancient Indian Tozvns on the Pickazvay Plain, Il- 
lustrating a sketch of the country, 208, 220 
Map of the Blackfeet Indian Reservation Shozving the Moun- 
tainous Region Proposed to be ceded to the U.S. Govern- 
ment, also a part of Flathead and Deer Lodge Counties, 

212 

Map of the British and French Dominions in North 
America, . . . John Mitchell, 196 
Map of the Choctazo Nation, Indian Territory, 201 
Map of the Choctazo Territory in Alabama, from the United 
States Surveys. Shezving each Section & Fraction Section, 
198 

Map of the country about the Mississippi. Drazon by Chegeree 
(the Indian) zvho says he has travelled through the coun- 
try, 192 

Map of the Former Territorial Limits of the Cherokee "Nation 
of" Indians. Exhibiting the Boundaries of the Various 
Cessions of Land Made by Them to the Colonies and to the 
United States, 199 

Map of the Indian and Oklahoma Territories, 201 
Map of the Indian Tribes of North America, about 1600 A.D. 
along the Atlantic; and about 1800 A.D. zvestwardly, 208 



34? 



3 2 2 



INDEX 



o 

ERIC 



Map of the Inhabited Part of Canada from the French Surveys: 
with the Frontiers ofNeiv York and New England , 218 
Map of the Lands Ceded by the Cherokee Indians to the State of 
South Carolina at a Congress held in May , A.D. 1777 ; 
containing about 1,697,700 acres l lyyy ?], 198, 217 
Map of the Linguistic Stocks of American Indians chiefly 
within the present limits of the United States , 209 
Map of the Mineral Lands upon Lake Superior ceded to the 
United States Government by treaty of 184.2 with the 
Chippezoay Indians , 198 

Map of the Navajo Country: Arizona , New Mexico, and Utah, 
197 

Map of the Nebraska and Kansas Territories. Showing the Lo- 
cation of the Indian Reserves, according to the Treaties of 
1854, 200 

Map of the Nez Perce Indian Campaign , 207 
Map of the Seat of War in East Florida , 207 
Map of the Shawnee & Wyandot t Lands in the Territory of 
Kansas, 200 

Map of the Spokane Indian Reservation, Stevens County, 

Washington Showing Indian Allotments, with the Name 
of the Allotters, Lands to be opened to Homestead Entry 
marked " Agricultural Lands," Lands not Allotted or to be 
opened to Homestead Entry shown blank, 203 
Map of the State of Indiana, Exhibiting the Lands ceded by the 
Indian tribes to the United States, 199 
Map of the State of Kentucky, 219 

Map of the Territory of the United States from the Mississippi 
to the Pacific Ocean, 197 (map) 

Map of the western United States, from 91 0 to 119 0 West lon- 
gitude and 36° to 30° North latitude, 19 y, 218 
Map ofTuscarora Indian Reservation, Located and Platted 
A.D. 1890, 203 

Map Showing Indian Reservations within the Limits of the 
United States, 203 

Map Showing the Lands assigned to Emigrant Indians West of 
Arkansas & Missouri, 200, 220 
Mapping the Transmississippi West, 1340-1861, 190 
maps, 45, 48, 58, 59, 61, 186-223 
Indian-drawn, 191 

Maps and Charts of North America and the West Indies. 

1730-1739: A Guide to the Collections in the Library of 
Congress, 190 

Maps of Alaska and Adjoining Regions . . . Showing the Dis- 
tribution of Native Tribes, 209 
Maps of Tribal Locations and Indian Agencies, 209 
MARC Maps Collection, 187 
Marcos da Nizzas, Fray, 45 
Marcy, Randolph B., 12 
Maricopa, 54, 155, 290 (recording) 
marriage, 70 
See also romance 
Marshall, George, 242 
Marshall, John, 74, 86 
Marshall, Thurgood, 86 
Martinez, Julian, 55, 246 




Martinez, Maria, 246 
Martinez, Miguel, 55 
Martinez, Richard, 55 
Martire d'Anghiera, Pietro, 40 
Martyr, Peter, 40 

Mary C. Wheelwright Museum, 282 
Maryland, 25, 80, 127, 138 
Mason, John, 59 
Massachuset, 29, 51 
Massachusetts, 25, 29, 51, 83, 138 
early contact, 44, 46 
negotiations, 77, 80 
treaties, 50, 106 

Massachusetts Historical Society, 8, 29, 81 
Massacre (film), 240 
Massasoit, 169 

Master Record of Manuscript Collections, 75 
Matthews, Washington, 279 
Mattole, 102 
Matzen, James, 162 

Maximilian, Prince of Wied-Neuwied, 35, 37, 52, 65 
maxims, 81 

McAdoo, William Gibbs. Papers, 91 
McArthur, Duncan, 73 
Papers, 91 

McCarran Amendment, 118, 132 
McCarthy, Michael. Papers, 94 
McClellan, Catherine, 278 
McClellan, George B. Papers, 96 
McClintock, Walter, 271 
McCutcheon, Wallace, 232 
McDonough, Michael, 80 
McGee, William John [W J]. Papers, 103 
McKee, John. Papers, 88 

McKenney, Thomas L., and McKenney and Hall, 51, 52, 
70, 100, 102, 151 
McKinley, William. Papers, 81 
McLellan, George B., 12 
Papers, 96 

McLeod, Norman Z., 241 
Mead, Margaret, 269 (recordings) 

Papers and South Pacific Ethnographic Archives, 

103 

Means, Russell, 148 
Meares, John, 49 
medicine, 233 

See also healing; health care 
medicine labels, 169 
medieval writings, 11 
Medill, William, 88 
Meigs, Return Jonathan, 73 
Papers, 88 

The Mended Lute (silent film), 232 
Menominee, 83, 86, 123, 196 (map), 236, 279, 290 
(recordings) 

Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States, 86 



INDEX 



3 2 3 



Merriam, Clinton Hart, 73, 153 
Papers, 102 
Merrill, Keith, 242 

Mescalero Apache Tribe v. Jones, et al, 86 
Mesoamerica, 23, 52, 228 
Mesquakie, 307, 291 (recording) 

See also Fox 

Messages of the Governors of Tennessee, 133 
Metacomet, 92 
Mexican -U.S. War, 91 
Mexico, 10, 120, 134, 196, 207, 238, 277 
Miami, 29, 31, 104 
Michigan, 13, 29, 80, 88, 98, 161, 123 
maps, 192, 199, 209 
Michigan, University of, 9 
Micmac, 17, 73, 105, 263, 291 (recording) 

Microform Reading Room, 22-34 
Middleton, George E., 232 
A Midnight Phantasy (silent film), 233 
Midwest, 48 

migration; maps, 208, 209, 210, 211 
Miguel, 191 (map) 

Miles, Nelson, 20 
militancy, 148 

See also American Indian Movement 
Miller, Dayton C., Flute Collection, 263, 272 
Millet, Pierre, 77 
Mills, John Frazer, xi 
Mimbres, 23, 34, 33 
minerals, 228 

maps, 198, 199, 201, 209, 212, 

See also natural resources 
miners, 233 
Mingo, 89, 104 
Minnehaha, 166, 168, 239 
Minnesota, 151, 160 
maps, 197, 198, 208 
Minnesota River (map), 202 
Minnetarre, 35 

Missionary Society of Connecticut Papers (microfilm), 99 
missions and missionaries, 13, 38, 45-49, 51, 68, 73, 77, 
97-99 

Association Reformed, 98 
Candelaria, 99 
Catholic, 199 
Congregational, 98, 99 
Dutch Reformed, 98 
Florida, 97 

Franciscan, 45, 97, 159 
Georgia, 97 

Jesuit, 13, 16, 38, 41, 46, 48, 99, 197, 218 

maps, 210, 211 

Methodist, 199 

Moravian, 31, 98, 99 

Presbyterian, 98, 99 

Saint Michael's, 159 

o 

ERIC 



San Estevan del Rey, 46 
San Francisco, 68 
San Ildefonso, 99 
San Juan, 99 
San Xavier, 99 
Union, 31 
Zuni, 98 

Mississippi Band of Choctaw, 34 
Mississippi Choctaw v. Holyfield , 148 
Mississippian culture, 4, 23, 228 
Mississippi River, 13, 27, 48, 52, 64, 77, 89, 96, 103, 110 
maps, 192, 196, 200, 214 
Mississippi Territory, 89 
Missouri, 13, 16, 88, 96, 99, 203 (map) 

Missouri River, 52, 96, 108, 192 (map), 216 (map) 

Mitchell, John, 196 

Miwok, 102, 291 (recordings) 

Modoc, 184, 291 (recording) 

Modoc War, 94, 154 

Mohave, 55, 91, 102, 265, 291 (recordings) 
prints and photographs, 153, 155, 158 
Mohawk, 12, 17, 29, 30, 77, 99, 104, 175, 243, 251, 289 
(recordings) 
maps, 206, 217 

Mohawk Basketmaking: A Cultural Profile (documentary), 
250 

Mohawk River, 238 
A Mohazvk's Way (silent film), 233 
Moheagon. See Mohegan 
Mohegan, 29, 59, 73, 77 
Mohican, 99 

See also Stockbridge 
Moki. See Hopi 
The Molinas, 274 
Monache, 102 

money: Bank Note Engravings, 168 
Mono, 102, 291 (recording) 

Monongahela, Battle of the (map), 192, 215 
Monroe, James. Papers, 81, 82, 89 

Montana, 86, 90, 96, 108, 116, 160, 230, 237, 251, 304, 307 
maps, 207, 208, 212, 222 
prints and photographs, 152, 153 
Montauk, 151 
Mooney, Charles, 262 
Mooney, James, 262 
Moore, Frank E., 231 
Mopope, Steve, 55, 70 

Moravian Mission Among the Indians of North America 
(microfilm), 99 

More than Bozos and Arrows (documentary), 250 

Morgan, George. Papers, 89 

Morgan, J. Pierpont, 53 

Morgan, John Tyler. Papers, 83 

Mormons, 104 

Morton, Thomas, 44 

Motion Picture and Television Reading Room, 225 



3 2 4 



INDEX 



Motion Picture, Broadcasting and Recorded Sound 
Division (MBRS), 224-261 
motion pictures. See particular titles 
mounds, 82, 228, 250 (documentary) 
maps, 110, 208, 209 
Mountain Chief, 271 
mountain men, 16 
Muhr, Adolph, 162 
MUMS, 6, 125, 133, 188, 226, 268 
Munchner Jesuiten Kollegium. Correspondence, 99 
Munsee, 196 

Museum of Mankind, London, 23 
Museum of Modern Art, 104 
music, 112, 230, 248, 262, 273, 302 
See also ceremonies; dance; instruments, musical 
Music Covers, 169 
Music Division, 263-268, 272, 273 
Muskogee, 141 
Muslim writings, 11 

My Hands are the Tools of My Soul (documentary), 250 
The Mystic Warrior (film), 244 
mythology, xi, 17, 250 (documentary) 

Myths and the Moundbuilders (documentary), 250 

N 

Nakota, 100 

See also Dakota; Lakota; Sioux 
Nanook of the North (silent film), 230, 254 
Nanticoke, 31 
Narakamigock, 97 
Narragansett, 31, 59 
Nash, Edwin R. Diary, 94 
Nast, Thomas, 79 
Natchez, 44, 60, 196 (map) 

National Anthropological Archives. See Smithsonian 
Institution 

National Archives and Records Administration, 10, 11 
presidential papers, 81 
National Broadcasting Company (NBC), 269 
National Congress of American Indians, 148 
National Film and Video Center, 225 
National Photo Company Collection, 152 
National Public Radio (NPR), 269 
National Union Catalog of Manuscript Collections, 75 
Native American Church, 280 

Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act, 
280 

Native American Myths (documentary), 250 
Native American Rights Fund National Indian Lazu Library 
Catalog: An Index to Indian Legal Materials and Re- 
sources, 124 

Native Americans on Film and Video , 226 
Native Languages of the Northwest Coast (map), 210 
natural resources; maps, 203, 211, 212 
See also minerals 



Navajo, 17, 23, 24, 29, 99, 129, 143, 177, 183, 227, 250, 251 
art, 54, 246, 246, 250 
documentaries, 245, 250, 251 
films, 232, 233, 241, 257 
maps, 197, 203 
music, 265, 273, 282 

prints and photographs, 152, 153, 159, 160, 167, 177 
recordings, 279, 282, 287, 291, 294, 295 
warfare, 90, 114 
Navajo (film), 241 

Navajo: The Last Red Indians (documentary), 251 
Navajo Atlas: Environments, Resources, People, and History 
of the Dine Bikey ah (maps), 203 
Navajo Code Talkers (documentary), 250 
Navajo Court Rules, 134 
Navajo Reporter, 134 
Navajo Tribal Code, 134 
Nebraska, 157, 266, 272, 301, 302 
maps, 200, 207, 216 
Nekanni, 102 

Neshnabek: The People (documentary), 251 

Netherlands, 26, 33 

Neumann, Kurt, 239 

Nevada, 83, 95, 102, 153, 160, 245 

The New American Indian Wars : Without Arrozvs and Bullets 
(documentary), 251 

Nezv American State Papers : Indian Affairs, 11, 126, 131 

New Deal, posters, 170 

New England, 44, 77, 218 (map) 

New England: Company for the Propagacion of the 

Gospell in New England and the Parts Adjacent . . . , 

99 

New Hampshire, 25, 77, 97, 106 
New Jersey, 25, 127 

Nezv Map of the Cherokee Nation zvith the Names ,of the Tozuns 
& Rivers They are Situated on, No. Lat.from 34 to 36, 
192 

New Mexico, 10, 10, 29, 43, 46, 54, 82, 83, 98, 227 
films, 230, 245, 251 
maps, 191, 197, 203, 207, 211, 212 
prints and photographs, 153, 158, 160 
reservations, 114, 160, 203 
Spain and, 10, 97 
warfare, 90, 94, 114, 207 (map) 

New Mexico Association of Indian Affairs, 83 
New York World-Telegram & Sun Collection, 152, 170 
New York, 23, 27, 29, 80, 81, 90, 99, 133, 238, 230 
maps, 196, 202, 203, 206, 217, 218 
prints and photographs, 151, 168 
treaties, 30, 127 
Newberry Library, 8, 9, 32 
newspapers, 21, 24, 30, 170 
tribal, 1, 21, 194 
newsreels, 230 

Nez Perce, 99, 102, 103, 122, 278, 279, 292 (recordings) 
prints and photographs, 132, 153 
warfare, 90, 94, 95, 207 (map) 



INDEX 



3 2 5 



Nicholson, Francis, 214 

Nicollet, Joseph Nicholas. Papers, 96 

Ninigret family, 31 

Nipmuc, 97 

Nisenan, 102, 245 

Nisqually, 91, 102, 244 

Nitinat, 292 (recordings) 

Nobody Loves a Drunken Indian , 238 
Nomlaki, 292 (recording), 297 (recording) 

Nootka, 278, 279, 290 (recording), 292 (recordings) 
Norridgewock, 77, 97 
Norse, 11 

North America Before Columbus (map), 210 
The North American Indian , 53, 150, 166 
North American Indians , 1950 Distribution of Descendants 
of the Aboriginal Population of Alaska, Canada and the 
United States (map), 209 
North Carolina, 5, 19, 25, 38, 77, 161, 199, 217 
North Dakota, 152, 227, 249 
See also Dakota Territory 
Northeast, 23, 193 (map) 

Northern Cheyenne Integrated Resource Management Plan: 
Atlas (map), 212 
Northwest, 23, 53, 68, 91, 282 
Northwest Coast, 49, 95, 150, 210 (map), 230 
Collection of American Indian Art (microfilm), 23 
Northwest Territory, 12, 29, 77, 80, 89, 91, 122 
The Northwestern Bands of Shoshone Indians v. The United 
States , 86, 117 
Not Afraid of Pawnee, 67 
No Turning Back (documentary), 251 
novels, 77 

See also Dime Novel Collection; films 
Nowell, Frank, 177 

Number of American Indians by Counties of the United States, 
lyyo (map), 210 
Nuneki, Nettie, 244 
Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar, 37, 45 
Nuwuk, 239, 255 



O 

OCLC (Online Computer Library Center), 75, 268 
Office of Indian Affairs, 25 

See also Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Office of War Information Collection, 160 
Ohio, 29, 77, 81, 82, 94, 110, 168 
legislators, 88, 94, 116 
maps, 61, 196, 208, 209, 220 
missionaries, 98, 99 
negotiations, 82, 88 
Ohio Historical Society, 81 
Ohio River, 89, 96, 192 
Ojibwa, 22, 80, 81, 96, 98, 234, 239, 248, 268 
See also Chippewa 
_ _ O ;wa, Lake Superior, 123 

ERjC 



Okanagon, 296 (recording) 

Okeechobee, Battle of, 82, 93, 207 (map) 

Oklahoma, 30, 34, 55, 64, 70, 74, 87, 99, 114, 117, 125, 133, 
177, 200, 204, 220, 272, 279 
legislators, 83, 84, 85 
maps, 200-202, 208, 211 
prints and photographs, 152, 155, 160 
warfare, 94, 208 
Oklahoma, University of, 279 
Oklahoma Historical Society, 28 
Omaha, 94, 96, 99, 103, 266, 278, 301, 292 (recordings) 
music, 268, 277, 302 
Omaha Indian Music (recording), 279 
Onate, Juan de, 42 
Oneida, 29, 30, 83, 289 (recordings) 
online access, 6 

Onondaga, 30, 99, 288 (recordings), 289 (recordings) 
Ontario, 99 

Opinions of the Solicitor of the Department of the Interior 
Relating to Indian Affairs , 1917-1974, 132 
oral history, 23 
Oregon, 13, 16, 49, 54, 96, 244 
missionaries, 98, 99 
prints and photographs, 152, 153, 160 
reservations, 154, 160 
warfare, 94, 99 
Oregon Territory, 91 
Oregon Trail, 53, 96 
O'Reilly, Henry. Papers, 29 
O'Reilly's Western Mementos, 29 
Origin of the Crozvn Dance and Bats' oosee : An Apache 
Trickster Cycle (documentary), 251 
Orleans, 13 

Osage, 19, 31, 77, 83, 96, 98, 103, 163, 202 (map), 268, 292 
(recordings) 

Osage, Little, 268 
Osceola, 91, 92, 175 
O'Sullivan, Timothy H., 153 
O-Tan-Dan, 151 

Oto, 99, 203 (map), 292 (recordings) 

Ottawa, 31, 48, 61, 99, 104, 123, 292 (recordings) 

Our Sacred Land (documentary), 251 
Outina, 43 

Outline Map of the Field of Operations against Hostile Chiric - 
ahua Indians showing operations from April 12th 1886 to 
the date of their Surrender September 4th 1886 (map), 
207 

The Outsider (film), 241, 258 
Owen, Robert Latham, 74, 84, 85 
Papers, 83 

P 

Pacific Basin, 277 

. Pacific Northwest, 8, 102, 115, 249 
Pacific Railroad, 96, 153 
See also railroad 



3 2 6 



INDEX 



Page, John, 194, 195 

Paiute, 96, 153, 242, 282, 292 (recordings) 

Paiute, Southern, 223 

The Paleface , 233 (silent film), 241 (film) 

Palou, Francisco, 45 
Pamphlets in American History, 32 
Pan-American Exposition, 162, 230 
Panamint, 102, 293 (recording) 

Panton Leslie & Co. Papers (microfilm), 89 
Papago, 54, 102, 274, 279, 293 (recordings) 

See also Tohono O'odham 
Parker, Quannah, 90 
Parkman, Francis, 54 

Part of Uinta Indian Reservation , Utah , To be disposed of 
under Act of March 3, 1905 and President's Proclamation 
dated July 14, 1905 (map), 212 
Partridge, William, 77 
Passamaquoddy, 265, 279, 293 (recordings) 
patent medicine and other advertising labels, 169 
Patten, John, 196 
Patwin, 297 (recording) 

Paulding, Holmes O., 103 
Paw Maw, 160 

Pawnee, 96, 98, 99, 216 (map), 243, 293 (recordings) 
music, 265, 268, 279, 282 
prints and photographs, 151, 152, 163 
Pawnee Bill, 166, 227 

See also Buffalo Bill's Wild West; Pawnee Bill's Far East 
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, 10, 23 
(microfilm), 279 (recordings) 
peace pipe, 245 

Peale, Titian Ramsay. Journals, 96 
Pee Dee, 32 
Pemaquid, 77, 80 
Pena, Encamacion, 55 
Penacook, 97 

Penhallow, Samuel. Manuscript, 77 
Penn, Arthur, 240 
Penn, William, 16 
Penn Manuscripts (microfilm), 31 
Penney, Grace Jackson, 17 

Pennsylvania, 16, 25, 31, 89, 95, 98, 99, 161, 192 (map), 215 
(map) 

treaties, 50, 88, 127 

Pennsylvania, Historical Society of, 81, 89 
Penobscot 77, 97, 265 
Penobscot Indian Wars, 77 
People of the Klamath: Preserving a Way of Life 
(documentary), 251 
Peoria, 31 
Pequot, 29, 59 
Pequot War, 59 

Performing Arts Reading Room, 262, 263, 270 
periodicals, 15, 19, 20, 27, 33, 39, 170 
Indian, 21, 74 
Perrot, Nicolas, 48 
Pershing, John Joseph. Papers, 94 



Peru, 41 

Philips, Miles, 38 
Photo-Secession Club, 167 
Pickering, Timothy. Papers, 29 
Picuris, 293 (recording) 

Piegan, 90 
See also Blackfeet 
Pierce, Franklin. Papers, 81 
Pigeon's Egg Head, 172 
Pigwacket, 97 
Pigwacket Indian Wars, 77 
Pillager, 268 

Pima, 17, 54, 102, 155, 241, 258, 265, 293 (recordings) 

Pine Ridge, 171 
Pine Ridge War, 94 

Pintura que por Mandado de D[on] Fran[cisco ] Balverde de 
Mercado factor de S.Mag[estad] hizo Miguel yndio nat- 
ural de la provincias de Nuevo Mexilco]. . . . (map), 191 
Pittman, Key. Papers, 83 
place names, 193 

Plan of Indian Mounds at "Gideons Farm/' Excelsior , Hen- 
nepin Co., Minnesota (map), 208 
Plains, 39 

Plains Indians, 35, 37, 54, 70, 95, 171, 180, 197, 281, 282, 
296 (recording) 
documentaries, 245, 248 
prints and photographs, 52, 53, 150, 153, 162 
Plains Wars, 89-95 

Plan du Fort de Sauvages Natchez Blocque par les Frangois le 
20 Janvier iy^i (map), 196 
Plan of Iguala (1821), 134 

Plat of the Survey of the Delaware Lands and Outlet, north of 
Kanzas River, according to the Treaty of September 254, 
1829, ratified by the senate of the U.S., May 29, 1S30 
(map), 198 

Plat of the Survey of the loway and Sauk Lands (map), 200 

Plenty Coups, Chief, 152 

Pocahontas, 166 

Pocumtuc, 29 

poetry, 16, 81 

political affairs, 4, 16, 44, 147, 167, 170 

political cartoons, 147, 168, 172 

Polk, James K. Papers, 81 

Pollack, Sidney, 239 

Polonsky, Abraham, 241 

Pomantaquash, 97 

Porno, 102, 246, 293 (recordings) 

Ponca, 24, 281, 294 (recordings) 

Pond, Percy, 158 
Pontiac, 61 

Pontiac's Conspiracy, 25, 29 
population, 4, 210 (map), 212 (map) 

See also distribution 
Portlock, Nathaniel, 49 
Portugal, 11 

Post, Christian Frederick. Papers, 98 
posters, 146, 147, 149, 166, 170, 180, 307 



o 



INDEX 



3 2 7 



Potanou, 43 

Potawatomi, 48, 99, 104, 123, 268 
Potawatomi, Prairie Band, 251 (documentary) 
potlatches, 249 

pottery 54, 55, 158, 178, 246, 248, 250 
See also art 

Powder River Expedition, 94 
Powell, J. W., 209 (map) 

Powell Survey, 153 
Powhatan, 58 

Powhatan Confederacy, 122 
powwows, xvi, 248, 249, 252, 266, 299, 301, 304 
Pratt, Alice, 307 
Pratt, Richard Henry, 85, 161 
Papers, 94 

pre-contact life, 4, 5, 11, 189, 210 (map) 
prehistory, 4 

presidential documents, 131 

Presidential Executive Orders and Proclamations , 1789-1983, 
131 

Presidential Papers, 72, 75, 81-82 
Price, Vincent. Papers, 103, 117 
Prints and Photographs Division, 144-185 
Reading Room, 146 

Prints of the West: Prints from the Library of Congress, 150 
Progressive era, 83 
propaganda posters, 170 

Proposed State of Oklahoma, Act offline 16, 1906 , 201 (map) 
Prospective Viezv of the Battle fought near Lake George , on 
the 8th of Sept. 1755, between 2000 English , with 
250 Mohawks, under the command of Genl. Johnson: & 
2500 French & Indians under the command of Genl. 
Dieskau (map), 206, 217 
Provincial Committee of Safety, 80 
Public Law 83-280, 132, 236 

Public Law 93-638. See Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Act 
Public Law 94-201, 276 
Public Papers of the Presidents, 132 

pueblos, 24, 83, 99, 120, 134, 233, 248, 282, 292 (recording), 
294 (recording) 
art, 54, 246, 250 
early contact, 45, 46, 51 
music, 268, 275, 282 

prints and photographs, 158, 159, 162, 163, 167 
See also particular pueblo name; reservations 
Puget Sound, 102, 298 (recording) 

Puget Sound War, 91 
Puyallup, 91, 102 

Q 

Qua paw, 31, 268, 272 
Quechan, 297 (recordings) 

Queen Anne's court, 151 
een Anne's War, 106 

343 



Quen, Jean de, 49 
Quileute, 279, 294 (recordings) 
quillwork, 249 
Quinault, 294 (recording) 
Quinn, David B., 38 
Papers, 103 
Quivira, 209 (map) 



R 

Radin, Paul. Collection, 272 
Ragueneau, Paul, 49 
railroad, 54, 96, 153, 155 
See also Pacific Railroad 
Raleigh, Walter, 42, 44 
Ramona (silent film), 233, 257 
Ramusio, Giovanni Battista, 45 

Rand, McNally & Co's Nezv Sectional Map of the Cherokee 
Outlet, to be opened to settlers at High Noon (Central 
Standard Time), Saturday, September 16, 1893 (map), 
201 

Randle, Martha, 278 

Rare Book and Special Collections Division, 36-71 
Reading Room, 38 
rations, 157, 230 
See also famine 
Rau, William H., 163 

reading rooms, 3 (Main), 18 (Local History and Geneal- 
ogy), 21 (Newspaper and Current Periodicals), 22 
(Microform), 38 (Rare Book and Special Collections), 
74 (Manuscript), 120 (Law Library), 146 (Prints and 
Photographs), 187 (Geography and Map), 225 
(Motion Picture and Television), 263 (Music and 
Recorded Sound Reference Center), 277 (Folklife) 
Reconstruction, 75 
recorded sound, 224, 262 
Recorded Sound Reference Center, 268, 269 
recordings, Indian tribes, 278, 282 
available as of 1996, 284-298 
Red Cloud, 151, 157, 169 
Red Cloud, Mitchell, 185 
Red Eagle, 206 
Red Fox, 268 
Redfox, 272 
Red Jacket, 169 
Red River, 88, 95 
Red River Expedition, 96 
The Redman and the Child (silent film), 233 
Redskin (silent film), 233 
Reed, Carol, 238 
Reed, Roland, 167 
reform organizations, 33-34, 89 
Register of Debates, 1824-37, 12 °> 1 3 1 
Reid, John. Papers, 94, 107 

religion, i, 4, 44, 46, 46, 54, 60, 73, 230, 251, 265, 280 
See also ceremonies 




3 2 8 



INDEX 




Remington, Frederic, 70, 150, 160 
removal. See Indian removal 
Renick, Felix, 220 

Report of an Expedition doiun the Zuni and Colorado rivers , 
136 

Report of the Governor of Oklahoma to the Secretary of the 
Interior, 133 

Report on Indians Taxed and Indians Not Taxed in the United 
States (Except Alaska) at the Eleventh Census, 1890, 

203 

Report upon the Colorado River of the West, 136, 137 
Reports of the Commissioner to the Five Civilized Tribes 
(microfilm), 28 
reservations, 78, 156, 251, 257 
Allegany, 202 
Arizona, 203 
Blackfeet, 86, 212, 230 
Buffalo Creek, 30 
Colorado River, 212 
Crow, xvi, 86, 222, 304 
Crow Creek, 113 
films, 234, 235, 238, 240, 241, 242 
Flathead, 86, 237, 299 
Fort Assiniboine Military, 86 
Fort Peck, 86 
Fort Riley, 200 

Fort Yates (Standing Rock Sioux), 159 

Great Sioux, 85 

Hopi, 178, 230 

Kaibab, 223 

Kansas, 200 

Lac Courte Oreilles, 248 

maps, 199, 200, 202, 203, 206, 210-212 

Mescalero, 203, 114 

Missouri, 203 

natural resources, 211 (map) 

Navajo, 160, 251 
Nez Perce, 278 
Northern Cheyenne, 160 
Omaha, 278 
Oregon, 154 
Oto, 203 

Pine Ridge, 102, 148, 157, 158 
prints and photographs, 135, 158-160 
Quinault, 249 
Red Cloud, 157 

Rosebud, 111, 159, 160, 212 (map) 

San Carlos, 154, 158 
Seneca, 87 
Sioux, 202 
Spokane, 203 
St. Regis, 250 
Tuscarora, 203 
Uinta, 212 
White Earth, 197 
Wind River, 245 



349 



Wisconsin, 248 
Yakima, 86 

See also particular pueblo name; pueblos 
Return to Sovereignty: Self-Determination and the Kansas 
Kickapoo (documentary), 252 
Reuter, Bernhardt, 282 

Revised Leasing Regulations of }une 11, 1907, Governing 
Leasing of Lands of Members of the Five Civilized Tribes, 
125 

Revolutionary War, 73, 80, 81, 127, 175, 198, 238 
maps, 206, 211, 217 

Rhode Island, 31, 46, 301, 298 (recording) 

Rhodes, Charles Dudley. Papers, 94 
Rhodes, Willard, 265, 277, 278, 283 
Collections, 279 

Riding the Video Range: The Rise and Fall of the Western on 
Television, 226 

The Rights of Indians and Tribes, The Basic ACLU Guide to 
Indian and Tribal Rights, 124 
Rigler and Deutsch Index, 269 
Rinehart, Frank A., 162 
Rio Conchos (film), 241 
Rising Cloud, 70 

RLIN (Research Libraries Information Network), 75 
Roberts, Helen Heffron, 277, 298 (recording), 303 
Collections, 282 
Robertson's Colony, 16 
Rocameca, 97 
Rock River, 70 
Rocky Mountains, 39, 53 
Rogue River, 91 
romance, 225 

films, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 239, 242, 254, 255, 256, 
258 

Romans, Bernard, 45 
Romney, George, 175 
Ronciere, Charles de la, 57, 229 
Roosevelt, Theodore, 34, 230 
Papers, 81, 82 
Root, Elihu. Papers, 94 

Rosebud Indian Reservation of South Dakota: Map and Guide 
to Quality of the Soil (map), 212 
Rosenwald, Lessing J. Collection, 36, 39, 44 
Ross, John, 12 
Rothstein, Arthur, 160 
Rough Riders, 163 
Rowlandson, Mary, 50 
Roybal, Alfonso, 55 
Roybal, Louis, 55 

Rules of the Uruted States Court of Appeals, Indian Territory, 
125 

Rushmore, Mount, 102 
Russell, Bertrand, 33 
Russell Tribunal, 33 
Russia, 26, 49, 73, 134, 192 
Russian -American Company, 98 



INDEX 



3 2 9 



Russian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church in Alaska. 
Records, 73, 98, 112 



S 

Sac, 70, 99, 172 
See also Sauk 

Sac and Fox, 29, 31, 48, 67, 70, 123, 248, 294 (recordings) 
music, 268, 279 

prints and photographs, 151, 162 
Saco, 97 

Sagard, Gabriel, 48 
Sahaptin, 102 

Saint Clair, Arthur. Papers, 80 
Saint Lawrence River, 48, 70 
Saint Louis, 77 
World's Fair, 163 
Sales, Luis, 49 

Salinan, 102, 294 (recording) 

Salish, 49, 102, 153, 237 
Salkow, Sidney, 239, 241 
San Ildefonso, 55, 246, 282, 294 (recordings) 

San Juan, 265, 275, 294 (recordings) 

Sanchez, Abel, 55 
sand painting, 177 
Santa Ana, 294 (recording) 

Santa Barbara Mission Collection (microfilm), 99 
Santa Clara, 294 (recordings) 

Santa Fe Bureau, 83 
Santa Fe Trail, 53 
Santee, 99 

Santo Domingo, 55, 294 (recording) 

Sarony, Napoleon, 163 
Satanta, 90 
Sauk, 70, 200 
See also Sac 
Savannah River, 192 
Scaticook, 29 
Schertzinger, Victor, 233 
Schofield, John McAllister, 73 
Papers, 94 

Scholder, Fritz, 55, 248 
Schonchin Jim, 154, 184 
Schoolcraft, Henry Rowe, 22, 74, 109 
Papers, 80 

Schoolcraft, Jane Johnston, 81 
School of American Research, 282 
schools, 88, 244, 257, 307 
boarding schools, 161, 244 
Carlisle Indian, 85, 94, 179 
Eleazer Wheelock's Indian Charity, 175 
Elko, 86 

Hampton Institute, 94 
Immaculate Conception, 113 
Santa Fe Indian, 83, 246 




Tomah, 83 
See also education 

Schools, Panoramic Photographs of Indian, 161 
Schreyvogel, Charles, 155 
Schultz, Floyd, 251 
Schurz, Carl, 9, 74 
Papers, 87 

Schwemberger, Simeon, 159 

Scituation of the Several Nations of Indians to the NW of 
South Carolina (map), 214 
SCORPIO, 6, 125, 133, 188 
Scott, Ewing, 239, 255 
Scott, Hugh Lenox, 73 
Papers, 95, 114 
Scottow, Joshua. Journal, 80 
Seeking the First Americans (documentary), 252 
Seitz, George B., 234, 239 
self-determination, 78, 84, 148, 252 
Seminole, 23, 28, 31, 34, 89, 91, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104, 141, 
268, 294 (recordings) 
maps, 201, 212, 223 

prints and photographs, 151, 152, 167, 168 
removal, 87, 91, 194 

Seminole Wars, 67, 76, 89, 90, 108, 147, 175 
First, 82 
maps, 206, 207 

Second, 82, 90, 91, 93, 95, 154, 167, 168, 206, 207 
Senate bills, 131 

Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, 83, 84, 86 
Senate committee reports, 127 

Seneca, 29, 30, 31, 87, 99, 104, 202 (map), 206 (map), 250, 
265, 278, 288 (recording), 289 (recordings) 

Sequoyah, 51, 100, 101, 169, 194 
Serra, Junipero, 45, 99 
Serrano, 102, 294 (recording) 

Serving Rations to the Indians N0.1 (silent film), 230 
settlement agreements, 119 
Shaker Church, 298 (recording) 

Sham Battle at the Pan-American Exposition (silent film), 230 
Shasta, 102, 294 (recordings) 

Shasta, New River, 102 

Shawnee, 13, 16, 29, 31, 88, 89, 91, 96, 99, 104, 151, 294 
(recordings) 
maps, 200, 208, 220 
Shea, John Dawson Gilmary, 49 
Sheridan, Philip Henry, 9, 73, 90, 111 
Papers, 94 

Sherman, George, 235 
Sherman, William Tecumseh, 9, 73, 90, 111 
Papers, 94 

Shindler, A. Zeno, 151 
Shinnecock, 294 (recording) 

Shoshone, 86, 89, 96, 99, 102, 117, 268, 282, 294 
(recordings) 

Shoshone, Western, 86, 245 
Sia, 55. See also Zia 



350 



3 3 0 



INDEX 



o 

ERIC 



sign language, 100, 230, 271 
Siksika, 49 

See also Blackfeet; Piegan 
The Silent Enemy (silent film), 234 
silent films, 227, 231-234 
Silverstein, Elliot, 240 
silverwork, 246, 248 
Sinkyone, northern, 102 

Sioux, 34, 54, 87, 96, 98, 99, 100, 202, 103, 111, 183, 202, 

224, 227, 244, 295 (recordings) 
artifacts, 23, 24 
delegation, 85, 178 

films, 231, 232, 235, 239, 240, 241, 242, 250, 251, 252 
music, 265, 268, 279, 282, 283 

prints and photographs, 52, 151, 152, 154, 158, 160, 162, 
163, 167 

warfare, 90, 94, 95, 154, 222 

See also Dakota; Lakota; Nakota; Wounded Knee, Mas- 
sacre of 

Sioux, Brule, 94, 159, 171, 207, 216 
Sioux, Eastern, 123 

Sioux, Oglala, 102, 157, 295 (recordings) 

Sioux, Pine Ridge, 295 (recordings) 

Sioux, Rosebud, 244, 293 (recordings) 

Sioux, Santee, 295 (recordings) 

Sioux, Standing Rock, 159, 295 (recordings) 

Sioux, Teton, 99, 295 (recordings) 

Sioux, Yankton, 67, 295 (recording) 

Sitgreaves, I., 136 
Sitka, 68, 303 
See also Alaska 
Sitting Bull, 90, 155, 164, 166 
Sitting Bull (film), 241 
Six Nations, 16, 30, 31, 175 
treaties and their negotiation, 77, 88, 90, 122 
See also Iroquois; Cayuga; Mohawk; Oneida; 

Onondaga; Tuscarora 
Skaywamich, 102 

Sketch of part of the March and Wagon Road of Lt. Col. Cooke 
from Santa Fe to the Pacific Ocean , 1846-7 (map), 136 
Sketch of Public Surveys in New Mexico & Arizona to accom- 
pany the Annual Report of the Commissioner of the Gen- 
eral Land Office for 1866 (map), 211 
Sketch of Scene of Action with Hostile Apache Indians on Big 
Dry Fork , A.T. July 17th, 1882 (map), 207 
Sketch of the Akularak Slough from the Catholic Mission to 
near the Yukon River , drawn by a native (map), 192 
Sketch of the Blue Water Creek embracing the field of action of 
the force under the command ofBvt. Brig. Genl. W. S. 
Harney in the attack of the yd Sept . 1855, on the "Brule" 
Band of the Indian Chief Little Thunder (map), 207, 216 
Sketch of the coast of which the Creek Indians have been de- 
prived by the Americans on both sides of the River 
Apalachicola (map), 198 
Sketch of the Monongahela (map), 213 
Sketch of the North Bend of Missouri (map), 216 
Skokomish, 102, 293 (recording) 

331 - 



slaves, 90 

See also Blacks; Freedmen 
sledges, 65 
Slover, John, 220 
Smith, Ernest, 250 
Smith, George Nelson. Papers, 98 
Smith, John, 58, 166, 191 
Smith, Mary, 50 
Smith, William, 61 

Smithsonian Institution: National Anthropological 
Archives, 8, 9, 23 

See also Bureau of American Ethnology 
Snake, 90 

Snake Dance. See ceremonies 
snow shoes, 60 
Snoqualmie, 293 (recording) 
social issues, 77, 170 
See also alcoholism 

Soil Survey of Colorado River Indian Reservation 
Arizona-California (map), 212 
songs, 22, 266, 276, 279 
See also music 

Songs of the Chippezva (recordings), 279 
Songs of the Menominee , Mandan and Hidatsa 
(recordings), 279 

Songs of the Nootka and Quileute (recordings), 279 

Songs of the Papago (recordings), 279 

Songs of the Pawnee and Northern Ute (recordings), 279 

Songs of the Sioux (recordings), 279 

Songs of the Yuma, Cocopa , and Yaqui (recordings), 279 

Soolahtelukan, 102 

Soto, Hernando de, 37, 41, 42, 196 

South America, 23, 52 

South Carolina, 25, 31, 38, 44, 80, 99, 124, 133, 175, 214 
maps, 191, 196, 198, 215, 217 
South Dakota, 94, 111, 212 
documentaries, 251, 252 
prints and photographs, 152, 135, 138, 139, 161 
reservations, 102, 148, 159 
schools, 113, 161 

See also Dakota Territory; Wounded Knee, Massacree of 
South Dakota, University of, 23 

Southwest, 16, 23, 54, 93, 99, 150, 196 (map), 197 (map), 
248, 278 

early contact, 42, 43 
prints and photographs, 53, 138 
See also pueblos 
Southwest, Old, 12 

Spain, 11, 37, 97, 103, 120, 134, 196 (map) 
colonial administration, 26, 97, 196 (maps) 
early contact, 40, 44, 43, 46, 73 
Spanish- American Imprint Collection, 39, 43 
Spear, John, 268, 272 
Spinden, Herbert, 279 
spirituality, 280 

See also ceremonies; religion 
Spofford, Ainsworth Rand, 36 



INDEX 



3 3 1 



Spokane, 24, 99, 203 
Spokehajo, 198 

Sprague, William Buell. Collection, 80 
Spring Wells, Treaty of (1885), 120 
Squamish, 295 (recording) 

Squier, Ephraim George, 110 
Papers, 103 
Staden, Hans, 38 

Standard Atlas of Becker County , Minnesota, 197 
state documents, 132 
See also particular state 
statehood, 83 

State Records Microfilm, 25, 28 
Statesburgh (Wisconsin), 196 

Statutes at Large: Being a collection of all the Laws of Virginia, 
From the First Session of the Legislature in the year 1619, 
124, 126, 131 

Statutes at Large of South Carolina, 1632-1838, 124 
Stephens, John Lloyd, 52 

stereotypes, 9, 20, 54, 150, 160, 162, 166, 168-170, 187, 

224, 2 33 , 256 

Stevens, Phineas. Journals, 80 
Stockb ridge, 29, 98, 196 
Stone, Harlan Fiske, 86 
storytelling, 231, 282 
Straitshanks, Hassan, 172 
Strange, Robert. Manuscript, 77 
Strongheart (silent film), 234 
sugar camp, 63 
Sullivan, John, 206 (map) 

Supreme Court justices" papers, 86 
Suquamish, 102 
Susquehanna, 31 
Susquehannah Company, 16 
Swadesh, Morris, 278 

Swann, Caroline and Erwin. Collection of Caricature 
and Cartoon, 170 
See also caricatures 
Swanton, John Reed, 303 
Sweden, 26 

symbolism, 147, 148, 164, 169 



Tachi, 297 (recording) 

Taft, William Howard, 86 
Papers, 81 

Tah-Col-O-Quoit, 70 

Tahlequah, Cherokee Nation, Ind. Terr. June 1896 (map), 201, 



Tahquanmenon River, 192 (map) 
Takelhe, 102 

Talbot, Theodore. Papers, 96 
Taney, Roger B., 86 
Taos, 282 

ecordings, 287, 292, 295 



35 £ 



Tassel, 192 
Tawakoni, 13, 16 
Taylor, Zachary, 93 
Papers, 81, 82 

technology, pre-contact, 228 
Tehoo, Battle of, 206 
television, 226, 227, 243 
reading room, 225 

Tell Them Willie Boy is Here (film), 241 
Temoak, 86 

Tennessee, 19, 88, 91, 133, 192, 199 
termination era, 236 
termination resolution of 1953, 84 
Territory of Arizona (map), 203 
Terry, Alfred H., 91 
testimony, expert: Indian claims, 28 
Tesuque, 248, 295 (recordings) 

Tewa, 55, 212 (map), 296 (recording) 

Texas, 16, 37, 41, 90, 94, 97, 196 (map), 242 
Texas State Library, 13 
Thacher, John Boyd, 36 
Collection, 39 

Thayendanegea, 169, 175. See also Joseph Brant 
Thevet, Andre, 41 

This Map describing the Scituation of the Several Nations of 
Indians to the NW. of south Carolina was coppyed from 
a Draught drawn & painted on a Deer Skin by an Indian 
Cacique and Presented to Francis Nicholson Esqr., Gov- 
ernour of Carolina, 191 

This represents the Charecke Nation by Col. Herberts map & 
my own observations with the path to CharlesToivn . . . , 
Certified by me, George Hunter, May 21, 1730, 193 
Thompson, 296 (recordings) 

Thompson, David, 216 
Thompson, Smith, 74 

Three Decades of Television: A Catalog of Television Programs 
Acquired by the Library of Congress, 226 
Thunderheart (film), 242 
Timberlake, Henry, 45 
Timucua, 37, 41, 57, 97, 229 
Tippecanoe Almanac, 82 
Tlingit, 17, 23, 98, 138, 177, 285 (recording), 296 
(recordings) 
documentary, 248, 230 
recordings, 278, 303 
Tlohomtol, 102 
tobacco advertising, 180 
tobacco labels, 169 
See also medicine labels 
Tohopeka. See Horseshoe Bend, Battle of 
Tohono O'odham, 274 
See also Papago 
Tolowa, 102, 296 (recording) 

Toner, Joseph Meredith, 36 

Tonka wa, 13, 94, 162, 296 (recordings) 

Tonto, 240, 244 
totem poles, 138 



3 3 2 



INDEX 



Towash, 16 

Townsend, John Kirk. Vocabularies, 102 
Township Maps of the Cherokee Nation, 50, 202 
Trade and Intercourse Act (1790), 81 
trade and traders, 78, 80, 84, 87, 88, 89, 98 
languages, 100, 102 
pre-contact, 228, 231, 232 
See also fur trade 

A traders map of the Ohio country before 1753, 196 
Trager, George E., 154 
"Trail of Broken Treaties", 148 
Trail of Tears, 194 
See also Indian removal 

Trail of Tears National Historic Trail. Comprehensive Man- 
agement and Use Plan, Map Supplement , September 
1992., 202 

Trans-Mississippi International Exposition, 162 
transportation, 57, 60, 65, 108 
trappers, 16, 231, 234, 239 
See also fur trade 

treaties, 78, 84, 88, 90, 91, 97, 106, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 
126, 168 

maps, 194, 197, 198 
negotiations, 73, 77 
Treaty of Cordova, 134 
Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek, 88 
Treaty of Fort Laramie, 197 
Treaty of Ghent 1815, 120 
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (1848), 120 
Treaty of Laramie, 218 (map) 

Treaty of Spring Wells of 1815, 120 
Treaty of Utrecht, 77 

Tribal Distributions in North America , 1300-1600 (maps), 
102 

tribal documents, 133 
tribal governance, 29, 125, 128, 129, 133 
tribal lands, 25, 28, 67, 73, 80, 91, 104, 122, 193, 200, 204, 
211, 215, 220 

tribal laws and constitutions. See tribal documents 

tribal names, 100 

tribal range, 193 

tribal records, 34 

tribal rights movement, 170 

tribes. See particular name or state 

Trout & Wall's Map of the Ft. Sill Country, 201 

Troyer, Carlos, 269 

Truman, Harry S., 204 

trust assets, 87 

Tsa-to-ke, Monroe, 55 

Tsennahkennes, 102 

Tsimshian, 296 (recordings) 

Tsireh, Awa, 55 
Tubatulabal, 102 
Tunxi, 29 

Tuscarora, 29, 30, 32, 203, 289 (recording) 

Tutni, 296 (recording) 



Twana, 295 (recording) 

The 21st Annual World Eskimo-lndian Olympics (documen- 
tary), 252 

Tyler, John. Papers, 81 



U 

Ubelaker, Douglas, 4 
Uinta. See Ute, Uinta 
Umatilla, 99, 167, 268 
Umpqua, 296 (recording) 

Uncas, 29 
Uncompahgre, 204 
The Unforgiven (film), 242 
United Kingdom. See England 
United States Army Corps of Engineers, 153 
United States Atlases: A List of National, State, County, City, 
and Regional Atlases in the Library of Congress, 190 
United States Code Congressional and Administrative News, 
130, 131 

United States Congressional Serial Set, 130 
United States Exploring Expedition, 68, 96 
United States Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Merid- 
ian (maps), 197 

United States Geological Survey of the Territories, 24 
United States House of Representatives Committee 
Hearings, Unpublished, 130 

United States Senate Committee Hearings, 1823-1964, Un- 
published, 130 

United States Senate Executive Documents & Reports, 
1817-1868, 130 

United States Serial Set Index, Part XIV, Index and Carto- 
Bibliography of Maps, 1789-1969, 191 
United States Statutes at Large, 126 
United States v. Santa Fe Railroad, 86 
urban Indians, 128, 248 
Urrutia, Joseph de, 196 

U.S. News & World Report Magazine Collection, 152, 160 
Utah, 104, 153, 204 
maps, 197, 212 

Ute, 34, 83, 99, 296 (recordings) 
music, 265, 268, 268, 272, 282 
prints and photographs, 153, 155, 160 
Ute, Northern, 279 
Ute, Uinta, 99, 204, 212 (map) 

Utrecht, Treaty of, 77 
Utsehta (flute), 268 



V 

Valley of the Sun (film), 242 
Van Buren, Martin, 167, 172 
Papers, 81 



o 



INDEX 



3 3 3 



Van Doren, Carl, 51 

Vanderburg, Agnes, 307 

The Vanishing American (silent film), 234 

A Vanishing Race (silent film), 230 

The Vanishing Race, 167 

Vaudreuil, Governor, 77 

Venegas, Miguel, 45 

Verano, John, 4 

Verelst, John, 151 

Verrazzano, Giovanni da, 38, 45 

Video Source Book, 226 

Vietnam veterans, 235, 252, 260 

Vigil, Romando, 55 

villages. See Indian settlements 

Vingboons, Johannes, 193, 213 

Vinland, 11 

Virginia, 44, 56, 80, 81, 89, 104, 124, 127, 133, 145, 175, 199 
maps, 58, 191, 196, 217 

Vision Dance [lhanbla Waktoglag Wacipi] (documen- 
tary), 252 

Vollbehr, Otto H., 36 

von Kotzebue expedition, 68 

Vroman, Adam Clark, 159 



W 

Wabanaki, 265 
Waccamaw, 32 
Waco, 13, 16 
Wagner, Boots, 251 
Wagner, Henry R., 39, 53 
Wagner-Camp Collection, 39, 53 
Wah-Pah-Nah-Yah, 17 
Wailaki, 102, 297 (recording) 

Waite, Morrison R., 86 
Walapai, 297 (recording) 
walla, 274 
Walla Walla, 102 
Walsh, Thomas James, 74 
Papers, 86 
Wampanoag, 92 
Wanamaker, Rodman, 167 
Wanamaker Expeditions, 167 

warfare, 25, 29, 43, 48, 59, 61, 76, 77, 80, 82, 87, 88, 89-95, 
99, 144, 154, 243 

films, 232, 233, 234, 235, 238, 239, 241, 256 
maps, 196, 206-208, 210 

prints and photographs, 59, 93, 144, 154-155, 162, 163 
reenactments, 181, 230 
See also particular war 
Warm Springs, 91, 297 (recordings) 

War of 1812, 76, 82, 89, 90, 91, 94, 107, 147, 170, 172 
Warren, Earl, 86 
Warren, G. K., 197, 216 




Warrington, Carol, 248 
Warriors (documentary), 252 
Washakie, 89 

Washington, 83, 86, 91, 96, 99, 152, 153, 203 (map), 249, 
251 

Washington, University of, 8 
Washington, George, 73 
Papers, 81 

Washita, Battle of, 90 

Washo, 102, 282, 297 (recordings) 

water 

irrigation, 83 
rights, 118, 132, 212 
Watie, Stand, 31 
Wawenoc, 77 

Wayishkee's Map of the Source of the Taquymenon and 
Maniste Rivers (map), 192 
Wea, 99 

Weatherford, William, 206 (map) 
weaving, 158, 246, 248, 250 
Weber, Charles Henry, 108 
Journal, 96 

Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, 131 

Weiser, Conrad, 31 

Wellman, William A., 234 

West, Walter Richard, 17 

West Virginia, 199 

Western Americana (microfilm), 32 

We the People: An Atlas of America's Ethnic Diversity, 210 

Wetzel, Lewis, 104 

whaling, 120, 242, 244 

Wheeler, George M., 197 

Wheeler-Howard Act (1936), 236 

Wheeler Survey, 153 

Wheelwright Museum, 282 

Whipple, Amiel, 54 

Whistler, Don, 279 

White, Byron R., 86 

White, Clarence H., 167 

White, John, 5, 37, 44, 56 

White, John Chester. Memoir, 95 

White Bear, Russell, 222 

White Bird Canyon, Battle of, 94 

The White Dawn (film), 242 

Whittlesey, Charles, 110 

Wi-jun-jon, 168, 172 

Wichita, 12, 13, 31, 90, 117, 163, 201 (map), 282, 297 
(recordings) 

wild west shows, 146, 161, 164, 166, 181 
Wilkes, Charles, 68 

Wilkes Expedition. See United States Exploring 
Expedition 

Willard, Emma Hart, 208, 220 
Wilson, Woodrow. Papers, 81 
Wind River, 245 
Windwalker (film), 242 




3 3 4 



INDEX 



Winnebago, 24, 99, 123, 151, 185, 196 (map), 227, 297 
(recordings) 
music, 265, 268, 272 
Winnemucca, 96 
Winona, Princess, 162, 166 
winter count, xxx 
Winter, Lloyd, X58 
Winters v. United States , 118 
Wintu, 102, 297 (recording) 

Wisconsin, 13, 29, 83, 88, X23, 133, X85, 227 
maps, 196, 199 

Wisconsin, State Historical Society of, 9, 83, X03 
American Indian Periodicals at, 33 
Wittick, Ben, 155 
Wiyot, 102 

Wolcott, Marion Post, 160, X85 
Wolf Robe, 163 

And Woman Wove it in a Basket (documentary), 244 
Wood, X04 

Woodbury, Levi. Papers, 97, xo6 
Worcester v. Georgia , (1831), 194 
Workgroup Indian Project, 33 
Work Projects Administration Collection 
Posters, 170 
Records, 104 

World Peace Studies, Library of (microfilm), 34 

World War I, 234 

World War II, X85, 241, 251 

World's Columbian Exposition, 224, 279 

world's fairs, 161 

Wounded Knee, Massacre of, 14, 25, 91, 94, 99, 148, X49, 
X54, X7X, 244 

WPA. See Work Projects Administration 
WWW (World Wide Web) site, 6 
Wyandot, 29, 31, 70, 88, 89, 200 (map) 

Wyoming, X53, X58, 207 (map), 245 



Y 

Yahi, 104, 244, 249 

Yakima, 91, 95, 152, 297 (recordings) 

Yale University, 8, 32 
Yamassee, 103 

Yanker Collection of Posters, 170 
Yaqui, 279, 297 (recordings) 

Yavapai, 155 

Yellowstone River, 96, xo8, 235 
Yokuts, 102, 297 (recordings) 

Young, Kay, 307 
Yucatan, 52 
Yuchi, 32 

Yuki, 102, 268, 297 (recording) 

Yukon River, 192 

Yuma, 90, 95, 102, 155, 265, 268, 279, 297 (recordings) 
Yurchenco, Henrietta, 277 
Yurok, 102, 268, 298 (recordings) 

Z 

Zeisberger, David, 99 
Zia, 298 (recording) See also Sia 
Zuni, 17, 23, 99, X36, 279, 298 (recordings) 
art, 54, 55 ' 246 
music, 265, 282 

prints and photographs, 153, 159 
A Zuni Atlas (map), 203 
Zuni Indian Mission. Records, 98 
The Zuni Kicking Race (silent film), 230 
Zuni Storytelling Collection, 282 



X 

XIT, 274 





J 



ISBN 0-8444-0904-9 




9 78 



9 



44 409047 1 




■# $*■ 

# # 

#• # 
41 

♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 

► ◄ 

*#> 4 
t' ► 

♦ ♦ 
► ^ 
♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 
* < 
♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 
► « 
♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 

► « 

♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 
► ◄ 
♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 



♦ ♦ 
► ◄ 
♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 

♦ ♦ 

► < 

♦ ♦ 

«► 

♦ ♦ 

► 4 
•& ♦ 

o 

♦ $■ 

► 4 



I 



# $» S * 





NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 





This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




