DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED A03 941 



JC 970 104 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Indian Hills Community College, Exploring America’s 
Communities* Progress Report* 

Indian Hills Community Coll*, Ottumwa, Iowa* 
American Association of Community Colleges, 
Washington, DC* ; National Endowment for the 
Humanities (NFAH) , Washington, D*C* 

Jan 97 

8p*; In: National Conference on American Pluralism 
and Identity Program Book (New Orleans, LA, January 
18-19, 1997); see JC 970 087* 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 



EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage* 

DESCRIPTORS ’^American Indians ; *Basic Writing; ^Community 

Colleges; ^Cultural Pluralism; History; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Literature; Multicultural 
Education; Program Descriptions; ’'Remedial Reading; 
Two Year Colleges; United States History; ^United 
States Literature 

IDENTIFIERS Indian Hills Community College lA; Native 

Americans 



ABSTRACT 

In 1996, Indian Hills Community College (lowa) 
participated in the American Association of Community Colleges' 
Exploring America's Communities project, which works to strengthen 
the instruction of American history, literature, and culture at U*S* 
community colleges* The college's action plan was initially comprised 
of three parts: (1) establishing a course addressing current identity 
and cultural pluralism issues; (2) creating workshops to acquaint 
faculty with these issues and assist the implementation of the issues 
in their classes; and (3) organizing a cultural fair, comprised of 
lecturers, artists and crafts people* Each of these goals was 
accomplished and more have been added* A Native American Studies 
course was implemented and has been popular with students* A cultural 
fair and a trip to a reservation were held, and the library's Native 
American collection was developed* Many faculty members have 
enthusiastically participated in the project, accepting the 
challenges and extra work associated with it* The two major concerns 
among students and professors were securing materials and ensuring 
their availability to students* The Native American collection at the 
library helped ease the first problem* To solve the second problem, 
more books were made available on the reserve shelf and greater 
restrictions were placed on their circulation* Two areas of the 
project yet to be completed are a Spring Cultural Festival and 
recognition and incorporation of other racial/ethnic groups* (HAA) 



* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * -k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document* * 

>V k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k kk k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k 



^^0 l(Xt BD 403 941 



Indian Hills Community College 
Exploring America’s Communities 
Progress Report 



0.8. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educahonal Research and improvement 



EOUCATIONAL^R^^URCEjS ^INFORMATION 



'^This document has been reproduced as 
^received from the person or orgamxation 
originalirtg it 

□ MitM>r changes have been made to improve 
' reproduction quality. 



e Points of view or opinions 
ment do not necessarily 
OERI position or policy. 



stateointhisdocu' 
represent official 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J . Gollattscheck 



TO THE educational RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



In: National Conference on American Pluralism and Identity Program Book 
(New Orleans, LA, January 18-19, 1997) 



;ERLC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



2 



iQdiaD Hills 

commcinitg college 

PROGRESS REPORT OUTLINE 

Established in 1966 when Centerville Junior College and Iowa Technical 
College merged, Indian Hills Community College is located in rural Southeastern 
Iowa. The two-year college serves a generally culturally homogeneous ten- 
county district and features two campuses. The main campus is located in 
Ottumwa. This campus offers classes to approximately 3000 students, half of 
which are enrolled in transfer courses. The college is also embarking on an 
ambitious outreach program which will put Extension Centers in each of the 
eight remaining district counties. These Extension Centers will be able to offer 
in-house courses as well as courses offered over the state’s groundbreaking 
Iowa Communications Network’s (ICN) fiber-optics educational transmission 
system. As a part of the ICN, Indian Hills is able to broadcast any of its classes 
live to any other college or high school in the state. 

Indian Hills Community College’s Exploring America’s Communities: in 
Search of Common Ground’s Action Plan was initially three-fold. The first part 
of it called for the introduction of a course (or, perhaps, a series of courses) 
which would address current issues of cultural pluralism and identity. The 
second part necessitated workshops designed to acquaint the faculty with such 
issues and sensitize them to the implementation of the issues in their classes, no 

3 



Ottumwa Campus 



525 Grandview 



Ottumwa, Iowa 52501 



(515)683-5111 



matter the discipline area. The final thrust was to organize a “Cultural Fair, “ 
which would bring expert lecturers, artists and crafts people to the college for 
students and community members to experience and appreciate. Our plan was 
to be annually thematic with Native American culture being the first highlighted. 

We are happy to report that we have completed each of these goals and 
have added more! We have instituted a new course. Native American Studies, 
which we are currently teaching; we created a workshop entitled “Incorporating 
Native American Materials into the Classroom, ” which was offered not only to 
our college instructors but to the area K^12 teachers as well. And we have made 
arrangements for Native American performers and artists to be on our Ottumwa 
campus April 12, 1997, for our first annual Cultural Fair. In addition, we have 
substantially developed our library’s Native American collection, we undertook 
in July a week-long student trip to South Dakota, camping on the Oglala Lakota 
Pine Ridge Reservation, and we have begun to put together a video which 
details Native American history and culture in southeastern Iowa. This will be 
distributed to all schools and libraries in the area when it is finished and will be 

available, free of charge, to any service group or individual who wishes to show 
it. 

While we still have more goals to accomplish, we have had several major 
successes as a result of this project. The trip to the Oglala Lakota Reservation 
in Pine Ridge. South Dakota kicked off our project, and was an extremely 
worthwhile experience. This kind of direct experience with the culture certainly 
made a lasting impression on the students and faculty who attended. We also 



received some very positive publicity about the project as a result of this trip. 
Another major accomplishment has been the enthusiastic participation of so 
many faculty members in the project. Many instructors from a variety of 
disciplines have modified their existing course content to include attention to 
Native American issues. Consequently, students have encountered the issue 
from a variety of perspectives. We firmly believe that the level of awareness 
concerning this issue is much higher now as a result of this project. The new 
course in Native American Studies has also been popular with the students. 
Because of this multi-discipline approach, there were many “conversations” 
occurring both in and out of the classroom concerning Native American issues. 
The general issue of American pluralism and identity has become the focus of 
most of our College Communication classes as well. With the adoption of a new 
t6xt. Common Ground , students read several essays by authors from a variety 
of cultural backgrounds concerning American pluralism and cultural identity. 
Students discussed the issues raised in the readings, and all of their essays 
focused on some aspect of cultural pluralism and identity. Through these oral 
and written conversations, students explored their own identities and, we 
believe, developed a more empathetic understanding for the difficulties of 
various cultural and ethnic groups in our pluralistic society. 

Because of the additional work that our project required of the Arts and 
Sciences teachers at Indian Hills Community College, our committee anticipated 
problems “selling" our proposal to our members. This concern proved false as 
the faculty readily accepted the challenge and the extra work that went with it. 

o 

ERIC 



5 



However, discussions with professors and students indicated two major 
concerns. The first was securing necessary materials and the second was to 
ensure these materials be available to the students. 

Instructors who incorporated Native American issues into their classes at 
the beginning of the fall term were initially limited in the sources available for 
student and faculty use. Sources on Native Americans were both limited and 
outdated. This problem was greatly alleviated by the end of the term as the 
library had added 99 new titles and have 54 additional titles on order. In 
addition, the library has subscribed to a newspaper and two periodicals that deal 
exclusively with Native American issues. These additions to our library 
represent a substantial commitment of Indian Hills Community College to our 
project as we were denied two grants that were to have helped finance these 
additions to our library. 

These additions to our library, as substantial as they may be, have not 
resolved the concerns of every faculty member. The Psychology department 
claims that research concerning Native Americans in that field appears to be 
very limited. An English professor expressed pleasure with the new additions to 
the library but felt that in some areas there was a greater need for balance. 

Native Arnerican views were readily available, but opposing views may be 
lacking. 

The second problem, having enough material available for students, 
reflects a willingness of both faculty and students to cooperate in our project. 

The number of instructors requiring projects and/or papers led to a “rush” on 



available resources. In response to concerns of both faculty and students, two 
changes were initiated during the fall term. It is anticipated that these two 
changes, as well as any future remedies that may be proposed, will be continued 
through the school year. 

Our first change was to recognize certain texts as essential to a large 
number of students and to place these texts on the reserve shelf. Our second 
change was to place greater restrictions on the time that books dealing with 
Native Americans can be checked out. It is hoped that these solutions will allow 
all students greater access to these resources as more instructors incorporate 
the Native American experience into their courses. 

A main concern is to seek help in financing our project both to alleviate 
the financial burden placed upon Indian Hills Community College and to expand 
the scope of the project. We are waiting to hear from one grant application and 
are preparing to apply for another. While awaiting to resolve these financial 
concerns, we are in the process of dealing with two areas of our project yet to be 
completed. 

1. Spring Cultural Festival (Native Americans) 

This is in the final stages of planning. A tentative agenda, meeting 
areas, and participants have been arranged. 

2. Recognize and Incorporate Other Racial/Ethnic Groups 

No work has been done on this to date. This concern does need 
to be addressed soon enough to prepare and make arrangements 




for necessary additions to our library. 

7 



As previously stated, our faculty has embraced this project 
enthusiastically. Most believe that the issues involved in this project need to be 
addressed, and this project has provided the needed “push” to get them started. 
It has been gratifying to see how excited our colleagues have been about this 
project. Our vocal music instructor even composed special music featuring 
Native American poetry for the fall choral concert. But our primary focus and 
concern is with students’ attitudes toward the questions inherent in this project. 
We believe that students are addressing what it means to be an American in 
several classes. For instance, in American Literature classes, students read 
Crevecoeur’s essay “What is an American?” in conjunction with an article of the 
same title written by Jerry Adler in 1995. Student discussion of the issues raised 
by both essays was quite animated. In College Communications I, the 
discussion concerning questions of what divides us has been quite interesting. 
Some students discovered that they harbored prejudices that they didn’t know 
they had. Several students discussed incidents that they had experienced that 
made them feel “divided” from the rest of their community. Some of the most 
interesting responses were those in which students saw some of their own 
feelings reflected in the lives of people who were, on the surface, quite different 
from themselves. Several students saw that the concerns, ambitions, and fears 
voiced by people from many different backgrounds are really quite similar to 
their own. While it is difficult to measure changes in attitudes, the 
conversations about these vital issues have certainly made our students address 
issues they may not have considered before. 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



\o\ 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



