DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 401 013 



PS 024 730 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Burch, Connie W. 

Increasing Awareness and Appreciation of Cultural 
Diversity among Fourth Graders through Integrated 
Curriculum Experiences. 

95 

85 p . ; Ed.D. Practicum Report, Nova Southeastern 
University. 

Dissertations/Theses - Practicum Papers (043) — 
Reports - Evaluat ive/Feas ibi 1 i ty (142) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; American Indians; Black 
Culture; Black Leadership; Blacks; Childrens 
Literature; Cultural Background; Cultural Images; 
Grade 4; Group Discussion; Hispanic American Culture; 
Hispanic Americans; Intermediate Grades; Minority 
Groups; *Mul t i cul tural Education; ''Social Studies; 
Student Journals; Units of Study 
Diversity (Groups); Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This practicum was designed to increase the cultural 
awareness of fourth-grade students of cont r ibut i ons to American 
society by those of different races and colors. The program consisted 
of an integrated 12-week curriculum and a variety of materials 
allowing students to conceptualize the diversity of America. Students 
were exposed to other cultures through literature, computer programs, 
research, and class discussion. The "Person or People of the Week" 
theme allowed discussion of particular individuals, including Ralph 
Bunche, Thurgood Marshall, Joan Baez, Caesar Chavez, Pablo Casals, 
Maria Martinez, and Bishop Harold S. Jones. After class discussion on 
the Person or People of the Week, students recorded information on 
these individuals ' cont r ibut i ons to American history and culture in 
their journals. Students completed an oral and written report on a 
member of an ethnic minority group who contributed to American 
society. They explored their own cultural background by identifying 
the countries from which their ancestors emigrated. The results 
indicated that elementary school students could enumerate reasons for 
multicultural education, could identify the cont r ibut ions to American 
society by Non-Europeans, could identify the native countries of 
their ancestors, could identify a minority person as a favorite 
reading topic, and could list at least three African Americans, three 
Hispanic Americans, and three Native Americans who have contributed 
to American society. The lack of authentic literature on Hispanic 
Americans limited students’ understanding of Hispanic American 
culture. Appendices contain data collection and evaluation 
instruments and a parental questionnaire. (Contains 29 references.) 
(KDFB) 



it it it it it it it it it it it * it it it * it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 



^This document ha3 been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

0 Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction Quality 



• Points of view or opinions stated in thisdocu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



Increasing Awareness and Appreciation of 
Cultural Diversity among Fourth Graders 
through Integrated Curriculum Experiences 



by 

Connie W. Burch 
Cluster 69 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



A Practicum I Report Presented to 
the Ed.D. Program in Child and Youth Studies 
in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements 
for the Degree of Doctor of Education 



CENTER (ERIC) 




Nova Southeastern University 
1995 



APPROVAL PAGE 



This practicum took place as described. 




Elementary School Principal 



Title 



Dacula, Georgia 



Address 



November 6, 1995 



Date 



This practicum report was submitted by Connie 
W. Burch under the direction of the adviser listed 
below. It was submitted to the Ed.D. Program in 
_ Child and Youth Studies and approved in partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Education at Nova Southeastern University. 



Approved : 





Date of Final Approval 
of Report 



Wm. W. Anderson, Ed.D., 
Adviser 



Acknowledgments 



My sincere thanks and grateful appreciation are 
expressed to the following people without whom this 
practicum would not have reached fruition. A special 
thanks to my mother-in-law and father-in-law, 

Horace and Jean Burch, for their unwavering belief 
in me in that I could achieve this goal. My thanks 
also to my principal. Dr. Olivia J. Hodges, for her 
enthusiastic support of this practicum. A heartfelt 
thanks to Donna Harrison, my proofreader, for her 
mastery of the English language and her ability to 
proofread anything. 

A special thanks to Dr. William Anderson for 
his advice and insight on the making of a positive 
practicum experience. I truly appreciate his 
leadership and guidance through this practicum 
experience . 

A loving thanks to my husband. Bob Burch, who 
has been so supportive of my work and willing to 
take on extra responsibilities so that I might 
achieve my goal. Finally, a mother's thanks to our 
three children. Brad, Kayce, and Brian, who make me 
proud to be their mom. 



in 




4 



Acknowledgments 
Abstract . . . 



Table of Contents 



iii 



Chapter I : Introduction 

Description of Community 

Description of Work Setting 

Writer's Role 

Chapter II: Study of the Problem 

Problem Statement 

Problem Description 

Problem Documentation 

Causative Analysis 

Relationship of the Problem to the Literature 

Chapter III: Anticipated Outcomes and Evaluation 

Instruments 

Goals and Expectations 

Expected Outcomes 

Measurement of Outcomes 

Chapter IV: Solution Strategy 

Discussion and Evaluation of Solutions . . . . 

Description of Selected Solution 

Report of Action Taken 

Chapter V: Results 

Results 

Discussion 

Recommendations 

Dissemination 

References 

Appendices 

A Survey of Ethnic Minorities 

B Rubric for Evaluating Writing Samples. . . . 

C Questionnaire for Identifying Ancestors. . . 

D Parental Questionnaire 

Tables 

1 Racial Profile of Student Population . . . . 

2 Reasons for Multicultural Education . . . . 



O 

ERLC 



V 

1 

1 

2 

7 

9 

9 

9 

9 

12 

14 

24 

24 

24 

25 

27 

27 

41 

42 

60 

60 

64 

67 

68 

69 

72 

74 

76 

78 

4 

63 



IV 



Abstract 



Increasing Awareness and Appreciation of Cultural 
Diversity among Fourth Graders through Integrated 
Curriculum Experiences. Burch, Connie W. , 1995: 
Practicum Report, Nova Southeastern University, 

Ed.D. Program in Child and Youth Studies. Classroom 
Teacher /Counselor /Principal /Curriculum Director 

This practicum was designed to increase the 
cultural awareness of fourth-grade students of 
contributions to American society by those of 
different races and colors. 

The writer designed a 12-week unit that exposes 
students to African Americans, Hispanic Americans, 
and Native Americans who have contributed to 
American society. 

The outcomes from the practicum revealed that 
elementary school students can enumerate reasons for 
multicultural education, identify the contributions 
to American society by NonEuropeans, identify the 
native countries of their ancestors, identify a 
minority person as a favorite reading topic, and 
list at least three African Americans, three 
Hispanic Americans, and three Native Americans who 
have contributed to American society. 



Permission Statement 

As a student in the Ed.D. Program in Child and Youth 
Studies, I do (X) do not ( ) give permission to Nova 
Southeastern University to distribute copies of this 
practicum report on request from interested 
individuals. It is my understanding that Nova 
Southeastern University will not charge for 
dissemination except to cover the costs of 
microf iching, handling, and mailing of the 
materials . 



***** 





(date) 



( signature ) 



Chapter I: Introduction 
Description of Community 

According to demographic data from the local 
Chamber of Commerce, the writer's community is a 
large suburban area encompassing 440 square miles 
with a population of 412,000. The county is home to 
247 international firms and over 400 high-tech 
companies. An international airport within an hour's 
drive of this community contributes to its universal 
appeal. Residents are employed in a variety of high- 
tech jobs with 80% of the population working within 
the county borders . 

Rolling hills and picturesque views contribute 
to the allure of this progressive county. Although 
most of the land was once cultivated, only 
approximately 11% of the land is currently farmed. 
Land adjacent to cities is used for urban 
development, and the remaining land is pasture or 
hardwood trees. 

Socioeconomic status fluctuates from one area 
to another in this large district. Dual-income, 
predominantly White, middle-class families are the 
largest segment of the population. Pockets of low- 
socioeconomic families are sprinkled throughout the 



( 



2 

county but compose only approximately 10% of the 
population. The average household income is $47,024. 

The county parks and recreation division 
manages 21 parks and recreational sites within the 
community. The community also boasts a museum of 
natural history, an arts center, and a botanical 
garden. A variety of yearly events contribute to 
the family recreational focus of this community. 

A civic and cultural center nurtures the 
community's culture and performing arts. The 50,000- 
square-foot exhibition hall houses a 6,000-square- 
foot ballroom and a 700-seat performing arts 
theater. Area choral groups, a county orchestra, and 
a youth symphony utilize the cultural center. 

Health care is available at the 190-bed 
medical center or the many surrounding medical care 
facilities. The hospital system includes a 100-bed 
psychiatric facility providing care for adults and 
adolescents . 

Description of Work Setting 

The school district provides educational 
opportunities in 64 schools to 75,000 students in 
kindergarten through 12th grade. Programs designed 




3 



to meet the individual needs of each 
student are employed in the elementary (K-5), 
middle (6-8), and high schools (9-12), while 
additional opportunities are available through the 
school system's vocational education center, special 
education center, community school programs, and 
technical school. 

Ethnic and cultural diversity contribute to the 
richness of this progressive school district. 
Students from a melange of countries with 84 
different languages enhance global awareness. 

The majority of the students are White; however. 
Native Americans, Asians, African Americans, 
Hispanics, and Multiracial students also constituted 
the student body of this ever-changing district. 
Table I summarizes the racial diversity of the 
student body according to school district records. 

Free or reduced lunches are served to the 12% 
of the population that meet the requirements. 

Family size compared to family income is computed to 
determine eligibility for the lunch program. System 
wide, 2,262 students receive lunch at a nominal fee 
and 7,307 students receive lunch without charge. 




4 



Table 1 

Racial Profile of Student Population 



' 


Number of 


Students 


Race 


District Elementary 
Schools 


Writer ' s 
School 


Native 

American 


.1 


.1 


Asian 


5.8 


.5 


African 

American 


• 

00 


1.5 


Hispanic 


3.4 


.4 


White 


81.9 


97.2 


Multi- 

racial 


.4 


.3 



Special and gifted education services are 
offered throughout the system. Intelligence and 
achievement tests are utilized as qualifiers for the 
gifted program; 10% of the student body meets the 
criteria. Special education meets the needs of 7,500 
students system wide. Teacher referral, parent 
referral, or both may be the first step toward 
inclusion in this program. A battery of intelligence 




--q 

1 



0 



and achievement tests, anecdotal records, 
interviews, checklists, and psychological 
evaluations are used to assess referred students. 

The school district employes 8,000, making it 
the largest employer in the county. Five thousand 
employees are teachers, of whom 59% hold master's 
degrees and beyond. Educators are offered 
opportunities for continuous growth through staff 
development courses. The proximity to universities 
allows educators additional opportunities to further 
their scope of knowledge. System wide, the teacher- 
student ratio is 25 to 1, permitting teachers to 
apply their expertise in manageable classroom 
settings . 

This rapidly changing district is one of the 
fastest growing systems in the nation. Its projected 
enrollment by the year 2000 is 100,000. Its 
proximity to a large metropolis encourages 
international companies to locate in this county, 
thereby continually adding ethnic and cultural 
diversity to the school system. 

The writer's work setting is an elementary 
school (K-5) located in a rural section of a 



6 



suburban school district. The school's student 
population of approximately 1,200 is increasing 
rapidly as new development emerges and large farms 
disappear. Free or reduced lunch is furnished to 11% 
of the population. The professional staff comprises 
66 certified and 33 noncertified employees. 

The mission statement of this district, hence 
this school, is to provide each student a rigorous 
and challenging education in which academic skills 
are learned and applied. The strategic goals strive 
for 100% of the students to achieve at their optimum 
and make successful transitions into the post- 
secondary endeavors of their choice. 

More of a community school than others in the 
district, this school has served many families for 
generations, with some current students the 
grandchildren of former students. The community, 
therefore the school, is a close-knit group of 
people with deep religious roots and traditional 
standards. Parental involvement is extremely high 
and home support for the school is exceptional. 




12 



Writer's Role 



This writer, an elementary education major, 
holds a Specialist in Education degree and meets 
state certification requirements in elementary 
education. The writer has earned Staff Development 
Units (SDU) on a plethora of educational issues, 
served on the district science restructuring 
committee, attended local and state conferences, 
and completed Talent Unlimited training. 

The writer's primary responsibility is to meet 
the educational needs of a diverse group of 22 
fourth-grade students. The class is composed of 10 
girls and 12 boys with varying cognitive abilities: 
Two students are enrolled in the gifted program and 
four students receive special education services. 

Implementation of the school district's 
curriculum is a crucial responsibility of the 
writer. The curriculum includes language arts, math 
science, social studies, and health. The school is 
committed to providing educational opportunities in 
the least restrictive environment while challenging 
students to reach their potential. 

Multicultural education is encouraged in this 



8 



rapidly changing county. As the population moves 
from a majority White race to encompass a vast array 
of ethnic groups and races, educators are supported 
as they strive to meet the educational needs of 
every student. With the flexibility granted by the 
curriculum and county, this writer adjusts the 
curriculum to expose students to a variety of 
cultures and races. 




14 



Chapter II: Study of the Problem 

Problem Statement 

The problem that was solved in this practicum is 
that students had little awareness of the contributions 
to American society by those of different races and 
colors . 

Problem Description 

The students in this writer's school had minimal 
information about and exposure to ethnic minorities. 

This school is in a predominantly White middle class 
neighborhood with roots that cover several generations. 
Students are isolated geographically and demographically 
and have little contact with minority ethnic groups. 

In addition to being physical segregated, these 
students were isolated by a curriculum that does not 
illuminate the contributions of NonEuropeans to 
American society. 

Problem Documentation 

Evidence for the existence of this problem was 
supported by student surveys and writings obtained from 
an entire class of 22 fourth-grade students. Using a 
written survey (Appendix A) with a 10-minute time limit, 
students were asked to recall from memory three African 



10 



Americans, three Native Americans, and three Hispanic 
Americans who had contributed to American society. This 
survey was evaluated by counting the number of correct 
responses in each category. The median score for this 
class of 22 students was the identification of 2 
African Americans, 1 Native American, and zero Hispanic 
Americans, out of a possible 9 total points. 

In another assignment, each student was instructed 
to identify a member of an ethnic minority who had 
contributed to American society and to compose a 
paragraph that identified similarities between the 
student's life and that of the minority member, 
explain the effect this person had on the student's 
life, and identify the contribution this person made 
to American society. The rubric (Appendix B) used to 
assess the writing sample evaluates each category with 
"Yes, the objective was met" or "No, the objective was 
not met." Writing samples revealed that, out of a 
possible 1 in each category, the median score was 1 for 
identifying a minority person, zero for recognizing 
similarities between the student's life and that of the 
minority person, zero for listing the effect the 
minority person had on the student's life, and zero for 




11 

identifying contributions to American society by the 
minority person. 

In addition, students were asked to write as many 
reasons as they could generate that multicultural 
education is important. This assignment was given to the 
class with a 10-minute time limitation, and each 
relevant reason received a score of 1. Assessment of the 
reasons revealed a median score of 2 . 

Students were asked in another assignment to list 
the five characters, either real or fictitious, whom 
they had read about and whom they found most memorable. 
This assignment was evaluated by counting the number of 
ethnic minorities the students listed. The students 
achieved a median score of 1 out of a possible 5. 

A written questionnaire revealed that the vast 
majority of students could not identify the native 
countries of their ancestors (Appendix C) . The 
questionnaire asked students to list the ancestral homes 
of their grandparents, great-grandparents, and great- 
great-grandparents. The students achieved a median score 
of 1 out of a possible 3. 

This data indicated that students were unaware of 
ethnic minorities and their contributions to American 




17 



12 



society. Other than observing African Americans in the 
news, students had little exposure to or interaction 
with other races and cultures. Handicapped by a 
curriculum that did not stress contributions of Non- 
Europeans, these students remained ignorant about other 
cultures, ethnic groups, and races. 

Causative Analysis 

There were four major factors that contributed to 
the problems associated with multicultural education. 
Although a vast array of secondary causes were 
enumerated, the primary causes were related to 
unearned privilege that is available to White males, 
myths that White Americans believe, curricula that do 
not represent minorities' contributions, and White 
Americans ' perception that multicultural education is 
unimportant . 

First, unearned privilege of the White adult male 
in American society contributes to racism, sexism, and 
stereotypes. Without their being earned, opportunities 
were afforded White adult males that are not given to 
other members of society. 

Second, myths that White Americans believe about 
minorities were perpetuated by folktales that lack 




13 



authenticity and contribute to the misrepresentation of 
ethnic groups or cultures. Folktales were one of the few 
sources of cultural information accessible to White 
Americans. Unfortunately, folktales were not always an 
accurate representation of a culture and perpetuate 
stereotypes. The limited amount of literature 
providing valid information about minority groups 
created a void as educators strive to bridge the 
cultural gap. 

Another contributing factor, curricula that 
overlooked the contributions of ethnic minorities to 
American society and created a lack of history for 
minorities, contributed to the problem of multicultural 
education. Most school curricula do not focus on Non- 
Europeans' contributions to American society. For the 
most part, ethnic minorities were ignored or trivialized 
in textbooks and curricula. This lack of acknowledgment 
led to misrepresentation of minorities' heritages in 
America. 

Finally, White Americans did not realize the need 
or reason for multicultural education, and teachers 
lacked knowledge concerning the customs, traditions, and 
behaviors of minority cultures. White Americans viewed 



14 



themselves as authentic Americans and did not perceive a 
need for exposure to other cultures. Persons who viewed 
real Americans as White, middle-class Christians saw 
little value in exploring other cultures. After all, 
they reason, such persons belonged to the major group; 
the others are savages or immigrants. Teachers lacked 
knowledge concerning the customs, traditions, and 
behaviors of minority cultures. A large percentage of 
teachers were not aware of other cultures and had 
limited exposure to minority children. This lack of 
knowledge created a barrier that educators must breach 
before multicultural education can reach fruition. 

These four causes collectively created a problem 
that widens the cultural gap and hinders understanding 
and tolerance. 

Relationship of the Problem to the Literature 

Educators believe that multicultural education is 
necessary to prepare students to live in the global 
society. Teachers believe that the study of 
multiculturalism is linked to school success in minority 
children, that literature does not always represent a 
culture, that counseling an ethnic minority child is 
different from counseling a White child, and that school 




20 



15 



choice can build racial balance. 

Price (1992) indicated that there is a 
correlation between self-esteem and academic success, 
and that minorities do not develop high self-esteem 
without models from their race or culture. Self-esteem 
affects students in a variety of ways: socially, 
emotionally, and academically. Children with low self- 
esteem are withdrawn and have a sense of hopelessness 
and loss. These feelings in turn affect their academic 
achievement. Students do not perform to their potential 
when hindered by self-doubt and low opinions of their 
culture. 

According to Price (1992), cultural tolerance and 
success are related. Society's acceptance of a culture 
or race has a direct effect on the financial success of 
persons from that culture or race. Employment 
opportunities must not be an exclusionary practice based 
on myths about a culture or its people. Although 
discrimination is prohibited by law, there appears to be 
a glass ceiling that affects certain segments of 
American society. 

Hearne (1993) reported that folktale books lack 
source notes and that the burden to include the notes 




21 



16 



and authenticate the work is the responsibility of the 
adaptor, illustrator, and publisher. Source notes 
provide the reader with the specific source and 
cultural context, and they identify and explain any 
changes the author has initiated. Without source notes, 
the authenticity of the story is questionable. Cultural 
awareness and appreciation grow from knowledge. 
Literature presented to students as culturally 
significant must carry with it credibility. Folktales 
can easily misrepresent and create negative connotations 
about a culture. 

Lee and Richardson (1991) espoused the idea that 
counseling for minority children must revolve around the 
cognitive, social, and emotional aspects of their 
culture. To help students reach their fullest potential, 
their cultural framework must be understood, respected, 
and valued. Students' perceptions of themselves and 
their world are inherent to their culture. Counseling 
must use the culture of the student as the basis from 
which counselors can begin to problem solve creatively. 

Teachers need an appreciation for the different 
methods of responding to situations. Students' cultures 
will guide their responses. Instead of judging a 




22 



17 



response as right or wrong, a teacher should view the 
response in the context of the race, ethnic group, and 
culture of the student. Sensitivity to cultural 
diversity must guide interaction between student and 
teacher. 

Yanofsky and Young (1992) described a White Plains, 
New York, program that allows parents to select their 
child's school while maintaining racial-ethnic balance 
throughout the system. Seven major elements are 
encompassed in the program: indication of preference, 
guaranteed priority for siblings, residential 
preference, deadline, lottery, waiting list, and 
transfer. Since the conception of this program, the 
percentage of parents who have voluntarily selected a 
school outside their residential attendance area has 
steadily increased. This program's success appears to be 
rooted in parental choice, not forced busing. 

Parental input in any school is a necessity. 

Parents must feel valued and have options available to 
them. Racial harmony cannot be forced but can be 
obtained through community involvement . 

Research reveals that learning styles affect 
acquisition of knowledge and that minority students are 




23 



18 



hampered by cultural barriers and teaching styles. 
Roadblocks to learning must be destroyed if the 
educational system is going to provide opportunities for 
all of its students. 

Correa and Tulbert (1991) examined the current 
crisis regarding meeting the educational needs of 
culturally diverse students. Culturally diverse students 
have unique behaviors representative of their 
backgrounds. These behaviors can be misinterpreted if 
educators are not aware of the cultural characteristics 
of these students. According to Correa and Tulbert, 
meeting the educational needs of these students requires 
interactive teaming, parental involvement, service 
delivery options, a support system, and a curriculum 
that relates to their culture. 

Educating diverse students requires adjustments in 
the status quo of the curriculum. Teaching and learning 
styles should be correlated to enhance understanding. 

Encisco (1994) reported on a research project that 
makes connections using literature and cultural 
imagination. As students read about experiences 
different from their own, they conceptualize those 
differences and relate them to their life experiences. 



ERIC 




19 



0 

ERIC 



These connections allow students to see other cultures 
as being different from, but similar to their own. 

Using cultural imagination permits insight into 
another culture and way of life. Identifying with 
aspects of that culture breaks down barriers that 
separate people and nations. Using cultural imagination 
requires that dance, music, art, and all aspects of the 
curriculum be interrelated. 

Giroux (1992) felt that a multicultural curriculum 
must reflect the social, cultural, and political 
diversity that characterizes American life. National 
identity will not be damaged by identifying the unique 
factors of American society, but will be enhanced by 
celebrating its diversity. According to Giroux, one 
critical element of a multicultural curriculum is to 
analyze how social systems perpetuate racism and other 
forms of discrimination. Recognizing these forms is the 
first step toward eliminating discrimination. 

Rejoicing in the wealth of diversity that 
contributes to Americanism, recognizing the value of 
each citizen, and honoring the traditions of dissimilar 
cultures will result in a unified society that functions 
with one heart. Schools must prepare students for the 




20 



next millennium when people of color will replace Whites 
as the majority. 

Howells (1992) reported on a gifted minority 
program that espoused two basic assumptions: Giftedness 
exists in all racial and ethnic groups, and the 
realization of intellectual potential begins with the 
recognition of that potential. Enrichment, the affective 
component, and academics are the three aspects of 
education enhanced by this pilot program. The enrichment 
component exposes gifted minority students to a variety 
of cultural experiences. The affective component 
develops positive self-concept while the academic 
component presents the regular academic curriculum 
in an accelerated program. 

Schools must realize the inherent basis of some 
standardized tests. All too often these tests are used 
as the sole indicator of giftedness. Other avenues must 
be explored to identify the minority gifted and to help 
them reach their full potential. 

Research indicates that the causes of the problem 
stem from racism, cultural isolation of students, and 
misrepresentation of ethnic minorities in print. 
Recognizing and acknowledging the causes of a problem 




26 



21 



are the first step toward a solution. 

Baird (1992) explained a unit she created for an 
eighth-grade classroom to combat racism, bigotry, and 
hate. Identifying prejudices involved examining the 
community, family unit, and self. Objectives of this 
unit included empowering young people with knowledge and 
thinking skills necessary to make intelligent decisions. 
Guest speakers, literature, and writings were used to 
stimulate thinking and engage students in the process. 

Teachers' knowledge and the belief that they can 
make a difference will result in classrooms where 
diversity is celebrated and appreciated. When educators 
take the first steps toward appreciating cultures, the 
road to equality is being paved. 

Miller-Lachmann (1994) revealed that folktales from 
unfamiliar cultures may represent a distortion of 
reality. When one is familiar with a culture, it is 
easy to discern fantasy from reality; however, when the 
culture is unfamiliar, those lines are easily blurred. 
Folktales from distant locations may be assimilated as 
factual information about that culture or ethnic group. 
Although more books are being published about Non- 
European cultures, for young readers there is a 




9 -; 

d 



22 

deficiency in literature that realistically represents 
these cultures. 

Teachers need an awareness of potential problems 
in using folktales as a basis for multicultural 
education. The distortion of reality could compound the 
problems facing a diverse society. Efforts should be 
made to represent races, ethnic groups, and cultures in 
an authentic manner. 

McElmeel (1993) indicated that most books that 
portray minorities represent them in folktale or 
stereotypical fashion. Books about African Americans 
predominantly feature sports heroes. Native American 
literature features Indians in costumes and portrays 
them as warmongers, and Hispanic American books feature 
these minority people as migrant workers. Resources 
that represent minorities in an accurate fashion are 
needed. The historical perspective is important but does 
not outweigh the need for contemporary portrayal of 
ethnic groups. 

Schools and public libraries need to pursue 
publishing companies that accurately and sensitively 
portray cultures in a realistic fashion. Books that 
represent contributions to American society should 




28 



23 



also be aggressively pursued. 

Schmidt (1995) described the difficulties facing 
ethnic minority children in a kindergarten literacy 
program. Research identified four patterns that 
interfere with literacy development and social 
interaction: Social interaction throughout the school 
year is negative; the school's staff lacks understanding 
of the students and their cultures; the staff lacks 
interest in the students' home languages; and the staff 
seems unaware of the cultural biases that can occur in 
the testing and interpretation of standardized tests. 
When combined, these factors result in ethnic minority 
children being misunderstood, isolated, and incorrectly 
diagnosed in academics. 

Educators must be trained in cultural diversity. 
Teachers need to understand the role culture plays in 
language development and social interaction. Students 
whose primary language is not English face a vast array 
of obstacles to overcome in the educational arena. 
Educators who realize these obstacles can implement 
interventions to help students reach their potential. 

The literature indicates that students lack knowledge 
about ethnic minorities and diverse cultures. 




o 



Chapter Ills Anticipated Outcomes and 
Evaluation Instruments 
Goals and Expectations 

Students will have an awareness of diverse culture 
and an appreciation of the contributions made by ethnic 
minorities to American culture. 

Expected Outcomes 

The following outcomes were projected for this 
practicum: 

1. In a 10-minute time frame, all students will list 
from memory at least three African Americans, three 
Native Americans, and three Hispanic Americans who have 
contributed to American society. 

2. All students will write a paragraph on a minority 
person, enumerating similarities between the minority 
person's life and their own, identifying ways the 
minority person has affected their lives, and 
identifying the contribution made to society by the 
minority person. 

3. All students will be able to identify reasons that 
multicultural education is important. 

4. When asked to list five persons they have read about 
either real or fictitious, all students will include at 



25 



least two persons who are members of ethnic minorities. 
5. All students will be able to list the ancestral homes 
of their grandparents, great-grandparents, and great- 
great-grandparents . 

Measurement of Outcomes 

The outcomes will be assessed in the following manner: 

1. A written survey will be utilized to ascertain if 
the students can identify three members of three ethnic 
groups: African Americans, Native Americans and Hispanic 
Americans (Appendix A) . The students will be allowed 
10-minutes to complete the survey by recalling from 
memory three members of each ethnic group. This outcome 
will be evaluated by counting the number of correct 
responses in each category. The median score will be 3. 

2. Students will write a paragraph that includes the 
following: the name of the minority person, the 
similarities between the life of the minority person and 
their own, the effect the minority person has had on the 
students' lives, and the contribution the minority 
person made to American society. The paragraph will be 
assessed using a teacher-generated rubric (Appendix B) . 
The rubric used to assess the writing sample will 
evaluate each section with "Yes, the objective was met" 




3 



26 



or "No, the objective was not met." The median score 
will be 1 in each category, for a total of 4. 

3. In a 10-minute time period, students will generate a 
written list that explains why multicultural education 
is important. The list should include valid and logical 
reasons that multicultural education is important. The 
teacher will use a class-generated checklist to 
determine if the reasons are valid. Each valid reason 
will receive a score of 1. The median score will be 3. 

4. Students will create a written list of the five 
most memorable characters about whom they have read. 

The list will be evaluated for ethnic minority 
representation. Each minority character will receive 
a score of 1. The median score will be 1. 

5. Students will be able to list the ancestral homes of 
their grandparents, great-grandparents, and great-great- 
grandparents (Appendix C) . Accuracy of lists will be 
determined by comparing students' responses with those 
provided by parents on a questionnaire (Appendix D) . 

The median score will be 2 . 




32 



Chapter IV: Solution Strategy 
The problem solved in this practicum is that 
students had little awareness of the contributions to 
American society by those of different races and colors. 
Discussion and Evaluation of Solutions 

The literature suggests a variety of methods to 
include multicultural education in the curriculum. 
Realizing the need for and importance of ethnic and 
racial awareness is a first step toward developing a 
curriculum that includes cultural diversity. As 
educators struggle with the most appropriate method to 
include cultural awareness, school systems are debating 
the merit of multiculturalism. White American students 
need to understand the rationale for multicultural 
education in the curriculum. 

Banks (1993) explored the myths and misconceptions 
concerning multicultural education. The first myth is 
that multicultural education is for others. White 
mainstream America has a propensity to believe that 
multicultural education is for African Americans, 
Hispanic Americans, and other minority groups. Instead 
of viewing multicultural education as preparation to 




28 



live in a culturally diverse global society, some White 
Americans view it as an instrument to destroy White 
culture . 

The second misconception, identified by Banks 
(1993), is that multicultural education opposes Western 
tradition. Multicultural education seeks the truth about 
America's historical treatment of Non-Whites and 
accuracy concerning the contributions of Non-Whites to 
American society. Diversity education seeks to enhance 
information available to students about Western 
civilization. 

The third myth and potentially the most damaging is 
that multicultural education will divide the nation. 
Multicultural experience should bring the nation closer 
together with a sense of pride in the contributions made 
by a richly diverse society. 

Howard (1993) revealed that White students, as well 
as students from other cultures, can participate in the 
building of a multicultural America. American students 
need an awakening to their heritage and the 
circumstances that brought their ancestors to America. 
When students appreciate the historical reasons for 
immigrating to America and the rich history and 




34 



29 

heritage that these immigrants brought, then White 
Americans can begin to accept the pluralism of their 
society . 

Educators should highlight the connections between 
cultures and societies. Realizing that no culture 
developed on its own and no culture is supreme is a step 
toward appreciating and valuing other cultures. 

Lefton (1992) described a pilot program in New York 
aimed at breaking down stereotypes of race, sex, or 
color. The program is unique in the fact that students 
want to attend it and have the opportunity to voice 
their opinions. Focusing on the goals of eliminating 
stereotypes and encouraging communication between people 
of different races and cultures, the program has a free 
format that does not utilize a textbook but requires the 
students to read newspapers and selected chapters from 
history books and to listen to guest speakers. 

A program of this nature should foster 
communication and alleviate misconceptions among 
students. The success of this program is enhanced by the 
diversity of the student population. In areas where a 
multicultural student population exists, this type of 
program would be beneficial. 




35 



30 

Marker (1992) proposed that educators need to 
evaluate the generalizations they perpetuate about 
Native Americans. Marker suggested a variety of ways to 
eliminate misconceptions about Native Americans: invite 
tribal elders to speak at schools; teach a unit on 
treaties; discuss Native Americans' viewpoints when 
discussing modern social problems; avoid neatly packaged 
conclusions; remember generalizations are only 
generalizations; emphasize the diversity in life 
patterns and physical features exhibited by Native 
Americans; and read books that have been written and 
endorsed by Native Americans. 

Native Americans have a rich and diverse heritage 
that can only be realized through an accurate and 
sensitive presentation of their culture. To foster 
pluralism and eliminate prejudice, teachers must 
acknowledge the contributions of Native Americans. 

School curricula need to be restructured to 
include contributions of Non-European cultures to 
American society. Banks (1993) argued that schools must 
undergo fundamental changes to prepare low-income and 
minority students to be successful in a technological 
society. Programs that involve parents have produced 





31 



positive results in the academic arena, but more changes 
are needed to bridge the cultural gap. Banks believes 
that schools must undertake new challenges and 
restructure the school environment. Schools must become 
inclusionary institutions that teach the value and worth 
of all people. Restructuring schools takes a commitment 
to accept and acknowledge the pluralism of American 
society. Cooperative grouping of students appears to 
have a positive influence toward this end. Working 
together creates a community of learners where 
accomplishing the task is the main objective. Economic 
status, race, religion, and ethnic background become 
inconsequential . 

For some students, cooperative learning allows them 
to reach their academic potential while a competitive 
environment hinders their academic success. Educators 
must be sensitive to the learning styles of a diverse 
group of students and plan activities to meet their 
educational needs. 

Garcia (1993) evaluated the purpose of 
multiculturalism in the classroom and its effect on 
textbooks. Multiculturalism is both a political and 
an educational issue. Textbooks appear to be the 




37 



32 



political football. Garcia reported that publishing 
companies have changed textbooks in response to 
pressure. Textbooks today have more visual and print 
representation of ethnic groups; however, these 
representations remain stereotypical and limited in 
quality. Political multicultural ism is a controversial 
issue that is being discused and debated across the 
nation. Pressure comes from politicians to represent 
all faces of the culture, and in response educators 
strive to represent diversity in their classrooms. The 
browning of America demands a change in curricula. 

Curricula must meet the demands of an ever- 
changing society, not with trivilization of cultures and 
races, but with accurate representations. Textbooks need 
to be written with accountability for and sensitivity 
to diverse cultures. 

McCarthy (1993) reported that many public schools' 
curricula are under attack by special interest groups 
who wish to control the textbooks and the curricula. 
McCarthy suggested that instead of arguing that 
challenged instructional programs are valuable, neutral 
policy makers should defend the content, attitudes, and 
skills that will not be compromised. Allowing one 



33 



special group to dictate the curriculum is setting the 
stage for educational disaster. One group should not 
control a curriculum; instead, the it should reflect the 
values, ideals, and culture of the society. 

Racism and hate will only be diminished when open 
communication, accurate representation, and true 
appreciation of other cultures are integrated into a 
curriculum. Groups that wish to control integration of 
diversity into a curriculum are striving to control the 
thoughts, ideas, and values of a society. 

Epstein and Ellis (1992) reported on the 
refusal of Oakland, California, to utilize a social 
studies textbook that trivialized Non-European cultures 
and neglected contributions made by people of color to 
American society. A committee of local leaders designed 
an alternative social studies curriculum when the one 
proposed by the state was determined to be flawed with 
misconceptions. The goal of the alternative curriculum 
was to acknowledge, appreciate, and validate Non- 
Europeans ' and Europeans ' contributions to the diverse 
society in America. According to Epstein and Ellis, the 
need for this alternative curriculum arose for four 
reasons: a rise in racism nationally, new confidence on 



ERIC 




34 



the part of people of color regarding their historical 
contributions to American society, an ethnic mix of 
school board members, and the challenge made by 
African American educators regarding the current view 
of American history. 

Educators, students, parents, and society should 
demand that textbooks contain accurate and fair 
representations of all races and ethnic groups. To 
neglect one group while favoring another results in a 
distorted view of American history. 

Literature, writings, and point-of-view articles 
can be utilized as methods to teach multiculturalism. 
Students can internalize the emotions of a group of 
people through reading their literature. 

Vandergrift (1994) revealed that the struggles, 
celebrations, despairs, and triumphs of African 
Americans are expressed in poetry. Reading literature 
enhances cultural awareness, and understanding poetry 
produces role models, as well as revealing feelings, 
attitudes, and beliefs. Poetry crosses cultural barriers 
and permits the reader or listener to visualize events. 
Although not all poetry represents the positive sides of 
the African American heritage, much of this poetry is a 




35 



living history. 

Poetry can be used as an avenue for students to 
express their emotions. Multicultural education allows 
different ethnic groups to express negative and positive 
aspects of their cultures. Poetry opens the door for 
students of diverse backgrounds to communicate with each 
other . 

Gillespie, Powell, Clements, and Swearinger (1994) 
reviewed Newberry Medal Books from 1930 to present from 
a multicultural perspective. The review generated four 
steps used when selecting books: read the book to 
ascertain if the story accurately reflects the group's 
culture, assess the book for racism or bias, use several 
books to convey a culture, and evaluate the way the book 
teaches diversity. A book's representation of a culture 
affects students' conceptions of that culture. 

Teachers need an awareness of bias and racism in 
books and a knowledge base about cultures. Reading a 
book and sharing its information with students without 
evaluating the book for accuracy leads to false 
assumptions . 

Nelson (1994) designed a history lesson around a 
literacy approach that encourages students to examine 




% 



36 



cultural beliefs and values. This approach supports 
students as they examine how cultural beliefs and values 
influence perception and understanding of events. 

Presenting and analyzing different perspectives 
allow students to develop an understanding of other 
people. Diversity education must open the doors of 
communication. Appreciation, acceptance, and tolerance 
can only be nurtured through communication and 
understanding . 

Lobach (1995) examined the value of students 
exploring heritage through writer's workshops and 
professional publications. A young writer's workshop is 
held over a 10-day period during the summer. The 
participants write about their firsthand experiences of 
Japanese American traditions and customs. Workshop 
experiences include cooking, art, and special events 
that foster understanding of Japanese American 
traditions . 

These activities allow students to experience the 
culture without trivializing it. The writing and 
publishing process gives merit and value to students' 
work. After writing, editing, and rewriting, the 
students submit their work to The Kids Explore Series . 



ERIC 




37 

The goal of these publications is to promote better 
understanding of America's diverse cultural heritage. 

Teacher education programs must prepare teachers to 
meet the needs of a diverse population. Garcia and Pugh 
(1992) proposed that schools should reflect the changing 
culture of America and that teacher education must pave 
the way for this change. This appears to be the crux of 
the problem in American education. America's schools 
primarily represent White Anglo-Saxon culture and not 
the vast multicultural configuration that embodies 
America. Multiculturalism in education is not fully 
committed to bridging the gap between White America and 
the rest of society. Few schools are dedicated to the 
belief that multicultural education is more than a few 
words about a famous African American. 

Teacher education programs must lead the way for 
comprehensive multicultural education to begin. 
Multicultural education must become a vital part of 
teacher education courses if professional educators are 
going to possess the skills necessary for teaching 
cultural awareness. 

Bullard (1992) described a humanities program 
taught in Dade County, Florida, that is designed to 




38 



acquaint public school teachers with the literature and 
arts of different cultures. The program exposes teachers 
to a wide variety of cultures and ethnic backgrounds. 
Educators in this program predominantly teach in schools 
with diverse populations and high racial tension. 
Objectives of the program are to equip teachers with the 
knowledge to expose students to a wide variety of 
cultures through literature. 

Teacher education programs must provide guidance 
as educators strive to teach a pluralistic society. 
Programs, training, and inservices are necessary if 
educators are going to help solve society's 
cultural and racial identity problems. 

Gersten and Jimenez (1994) explained three 
approaches to literacy development in English-as-a- 
second language (ESOL) students. The research 
revealed that strategies for teaching ESOL students fall 
into three major categories: vocabulary development, 
mediation and feedback, and all areas of literacy 
development. Developing vocabulary and constructing 
meaning are a critical step in the acquisition of a 
language. Feedback and mediation must be frequent and 
allow students to learn new strategies. Literacy 



ERIC 




39 

development, both verbal and written, must use 
consistent language. 

Gersten and Jimenez (1994) recommended mentoring 
and professional development as strategies to enhance 
teacher knowledge in the skills and competencies 
necessary to teach ESOL students. Mentoring permits a 
novice teacher to observe excellent instruction and 
interact with the mentor to solve problems. 

Professional development utilizes experts to relay 
information to teachers. 

Hu-DeHart (1993) revealed that ethnic studies 
programs have had to fight for recognition and 
acceptance since their conception. Many institutes of 
higher learning have few if any ethnic studies programs. 
Most of these programs are located in the western part 
of the United States where a more diverse population 
lives. The reluctance of institutions of higher learning 
to create and maintain ethnic studies is rooted in the 
fact that these studies are perpetuated as being of 
little value. 

To prepare students to be functional members of a 
diverse society, social awareness must be taught. 
Ignorance leads to racism, prejudice, and fear. Children 




■45 



40 



of today will enter a multicultural society in which 
they are ill-equipped to function if appropriate 
multicultural educational programs are not implemented 
in elementary schools. Racism and prejudice are learned 
behaviors. Schools, as social agencies, must be 
proactive in eliminating these unfounded fears and 
prejudices. Learning to share the planet and all its 
vast resources hinges on society's ability to work 
together. 

From the research, a variety of ideas have been 
generated to integrate multiculturalism into the 
curriculum. Because of the geographic isolation of 
America, students are unaware of other cultures, 
traditions, and societies, and they need exposure to 
these diverse cultures. Exposing students to the 
diversity of American society can be accomplished 
through careful selection of authentic literature. This 
literature must realistically portray the values, 
beliefs, and customs of the culture. This approach 
exposes students to other cultures without judging the 
culture. This solution is material and time manageable 
and can be easily blended into the present curriculum. 

Perspective writings permit the students to view 





\ A 



41 



circumstances from others' points of view. Point-of-view 
writings permit students to discover others' feelings. 
This approach allows students to internalize the 
circumstances and situation of others. Through these 
writings students can identify with other cultures. 

This solution is manageable and will develop self- 
awareness in students. 

Diversity education for teachers would enhance 
students' exposure to other cultures. This is a needed 
educational program that would enrich multicultural 
education. Although the need is great, this writer does 
not possess the power base to see this solution to 
fruition. 

Description of Selected Solutions 

The use of an integrated curriculum and a variety 
of materials allowed students to conceptualize the 
diversity of America. Students were exposed to other 
cultures through literature, computer programs, 
research, and class discussion. After a class discussion 
on the Person or People of the Week, students recorded 
in their journals the name, birth country, race, 
and contribution to American society of the Person or 
People of the Week. Students were exposed to other 




47 



42 



cultures through oral and written assignments 
and research. Each student completed an oral and 
written report on a member of an ethnic minority group 
who contributed to American society. Students explored 
their own cultural backgrounds by identifying the 
countries from which their ancestors immigrated and by 
sharing information about their ancestors' cultures. 

This activity enabled students to realize that most 
people came to this country as immigrants. 

These activities allowed students to reach the 
goal of becoming aware of other cultures and their 
contributions to American society. Through this 12-week 
unit students were exposed to a variety of cultures 
and identified with at least one member of an ethnic 
minority by writing a research paper on that person. 
Report of Action Taken 

This writer adhered to the 12-week lesson plan, but 
the number of students dropped from 22 to 20. During the 
first session, the writer presented an overview, 
validated the purpose, and explained the five outcomes 
of the unit. The People of the Week journals were 
disseminated to the class and instructions were given 



ERIC 




43 



for recording notes, thoughts, and information 
pertaining to the Person or People of the Week. The 
journals consisted of 12 pieces of notebook paper with 
front and back covers of construction paper. 

As the writer set the stage for learning, the class 
discussed multicultural education and the reasons 
schools should include it in their curriculums. Students 
were afforded the opportunity to express their personal 
feelings and knowledge about different cultures. This 
open dialogue led to a discussion of the world and its 
rapidly changing population. Different races were 
identified, and this evolved into an introduction of the 
first Person of the Week. 

Week _1 

The writer read to the class a book on the life of 
Mary McLeod Bethune, an African American educator born 
to former slaves. As the writer shared the book, 
important facts and pertinent information were written 
on the chalkboard. Students were reminded to record the 
information in their journals. 

As relevant information was presented in the 
literature, the writer led a class discussion about this 
information. Situations in Ms. Bethune' s life that the 



ERIC 



49 



44 

students did not understand were expounded upon by the 
writer. 

Class discussion enumerated similarities between 
Mary McLeod Bethune 's life and the students' lives, the 
effect Ms. Bethune had on the students' lives, and her 
contribution to American society. Students recorded 
this information in their journals. 

Week 2 

The writer began this lesson with a review of last 
week's Person of the Week. The class responded verbally 
to questions about Mary McLeod Bethune. Her life, her 
triumphs, and her struggles were retraced. The reasons 
for her difficulties were explored and possible 
solutions generated. The writer gave out the parent 
questionnaire (Appendix D) and instructed students 
to return the questionnaire by the next class session. 

The writer shared a book on the life of Ralph 
Johnson Bunche, an African American educator 
instrumental in developing the United Nations. As the 
book was read aloud, the class recorded notes and 
pertinent information in their journals, and asked 
questions. The questions revolved around the treatment 
of African Americans by White Americans. The class 




50 



45 



inquired why African Americans couldn't go to the 
theaters, hotels, and restaurants that White Americans 
frequented. The writer explained about racism and its 
effects on African Americans as well as on White 
Americans. The class generated solutions to racism and 
expressed the belief that the most appropriate way to 
eliminate racism is to accept people for what and who 
they are. 

The writer led a class discussion on similarities 
between Bunche's life and their own, Bunche's effect on 
their lives, and his contribution to American society. 
The class concluded with a recap of the major events in 
Bunche's life. 

Week 3^ 

Questionnaires given out last week were collected. 
The students described the fun they'd had talking with 
their parents as the forms were completed. The class 
discussed the many countries from which their ancestors 
emigrated and located these countries on a world map. A 
few students shared brief histories of their families' 
migration to America. 

The questionnaires revealed that the majority of 
the students' ancestors hailed from England, Ireland, 




51 



46 



and Scotland. A few students are descendants of 
Native Americans, Hispanic Americans, and African 
Americans . 

The writer briefly reviewed the previous People of 
the Week and introduced this week's Person of the 
Week. Through literature, the life of Thurgood Marshall 
and his contributions to America were shared with the 
class. The book contained background information about 
his family and revealed that Thurgood Marshall was 
descended from slaves. Students recorded important 
information in their journals. 

Students again expressed confusion about the 
fact that African Americans were limited in their 
opportunities. It was difficult for the class to grasp 
the concept that racism and the denial of opportunities 
was a fact of life for generations of African Americans. 
The class burst into applause when the writer read that 
Thurgood Marshall represented an African American 
seeking entry into Harvard University and won the case. 

As in previous weeks, the similarities between the 
students' lives and the life of the Person of the Week 
were highlighted. Contributions to America and the 
effect Thurgood Marshall had on students' lives were 




52 



47 



reviewed. 

Week 4 

The writer began this session by asking the class 
if anyone had heard of Martin Luther King, Jr. Several 
students had heard of him and shared what information 
they knew. The majority of the students, who had heard 
of Dr. King, knew he was an African American who desired 
equality for all people. A few students had toured his 
childhood home, and they shared what they had seen. 

The writer explained the social relationships of 
African Americans and White Americans during the 190 's, 
50' s, and 60' s. Students needed to understand the social 
and cultural barriers of those decades before literature 
was shared with them so that they could comprehend why 
certain events took place. Several children's books on 
the life of Martin Luther King, Jr. were shared with the 
class. The similarities between Dr. King's life and 
theirs, the effect Dr. King had on their lives, and the 
contributions Dr. King made to society were recorded in 
journals. Other significant information was also 
recorded in their journals, along with a short 
bibliographical sketch of Dr. King. 

The writer shared with students the written 




53 



48 



assignment that would be due in six weeks. Students 
were to write a report on a minority person, either 
African American, Hispanic American, or Native American, 
who had contributed to American society. The paper was 
to include the minority person's name, similarities 
between students' lives and that of the minority person, 
the effect the minority person had on their lives, and 
the contribution the minority person had made to 
American society. Students were given several 
suggestions for research, including utilizing the 
school's media center, writing to the minority person, 
and utilizing the public library. 

Week 5 

This week began with an explanation of the 
ancestral countries of Hispanic Americans. These 
countries were located on the map and students 
deliberated how these people arrived in America. 

Because students had difficulties visualizing ancestors 
of Hispanic Americans a discussion followed about the 
physical characteristics of Hispanic Americans. 

A computer program highlighting the 
contributions of ethnically diverse people who have 
contributed to American society was loaded into the 




54 



49 



computer and then relayed to the overhead projector. 

This enabled the entire class to view the program 
simultaneously. Personal data and the accomplishments of 
Alicia Alonzo, Herman Bodillo, Luis Alverze, and Joan 
Baez were presented. Students recorded this information 
in the journals. As each person's data was revealed, the 
class located his or her birth country or city and 
discussed his or her contributions to American society. 

The class compared the difficulties that African 
Americans and Hispanic Americans experienced 
in America. Students debated ways to avoid stereotypes 
and prejudice, reaching a consensus that people should 
be judged by their character, not their color or 
national origin. 

The writer reviewed the requirements for the paper 
on a minority person and encouraged students to select a 
book from the media center or public library. Many 
students had already selected a book and shared with the 
class the name of the person whom they were researching. 
Week 6 

This session began with students brainstorming 
reasons that multicultural education is important. They 
verbalized five primary reasons: White Americans can 




55 



alter the way they think about ethnic minorities. White 
Americans can have a better understanding of minorities, 
all people can learn from each other, all people can 
become friends, and all people should realize that 
others think differently. A class discussion followed 
that fostered students' understanding of multicultural 
education and the reasons it should be included in 
school curricula. 

A computer program highlighting contributions to 
American society was used to teach about Vicki Carr, 
Ramona Banuelos, and Cecilia de Burciaga. Their 
birthdates, their contributions to American society, and 
similarities between their lives and those of students 
were discussed. Several students discussed other 
Hispanic American entertainers with whom they were 
familiar. 

Students shared the name of the minority person 
who was the subject of their report. Some of the 
students verbalized information they had garnered from 
reading. They were reminded that many sources of 
information are available and utilizing them 
would enhance their report. 

This session concluded with a recap of the 



51 



previous People or Person of the Week. Students verbally 
responded to questions concerning the contributions to 
American society and noteworthy events in the lives of 
these individuals. 

Week 7 

This writer began the session by distributing 
copies of Appendix B, the criterion by which the 
reports on minorities will be assessed. Each element of 
the rubric was discussed and students asked questions 
that clarified concepts. The writer explained that 
these were minimum standards and that a quality piece of 
work would contain a plethora of information. The oral 
report was discussed and several students wanted to 
dress-up as the minority person of their choice. The 
class adjudicated by class vote that dress-up was 
optional . A date three weeks in the future was set as 
the due date for the oral and written reports. 

Reviewing the major reasons for implementing 
multicultural education was a springboard for 
introducing that week's Person of the Week. Students 
verbalized the same reasons as in the previous week but 
added that every school should have multicultural 
education programs so that students would not be 




57 



52 



prejudiced. 

Caesar Chavez, the Hispanic American founder of the 
National Farm Workers Association, was the Person of the 
Week. This writer shared with students a book that 
traced Chavez's life from his early years through his 
national leadership in an organization designed to aid 
migrant farm workers. Part of the class discussion 
revolved around how migrant farm workers lived and how 
arduous it was for their children to stay in school. 

This writer led a class discussion on the similarities 
and differences between Chevaz's life and their own and 
the contribution Chevaz made to American society. 

As this multicultural unit progressed, students 
became more aware of the contributions of a diverse 
racial and cultural population to American society. 
Students have not just learned the names of a few 
NonEuropeans; they have also come to understand that all 
people contribute to the richness of a society. 

Week 8 

This week began with a review of reasons to include 
multicultural education in school curricula. Students 
cited reasons previous discussed, and many also 
elaborated that multicultural education was not only 




58 



53 



important to further race relationships but that it 
was needed to foster understanding and acceptance of 
mentally and physically challenged people. The students 
felt that handicapped individuals are discriminated 
against as much as members of diverse ethnic groups and 
minorities. Through discussion the class decided that 
acceptance of differences and developing a non judgmental 
frame of mind evolve from education and knowledge. 
Students elaborated that the more knowledge a person has 
about a group of people or a situation, the more likely 
the person is to be tolerant of the people or situation. 

This week's Peoples of the Week were Pablo Casals, 
Carlos Castanela, and Franklin Chang-Diaz. Aided by a 
computer linked to an overhead projector, the entire 
class viewed a computer program on these individuals and 
the contributions they made to American society. As in 
previous weeks, students recorded pertinent information 
in their journals. 

This writer reminded students that the written 
and oral reports on member of ethnic minorities were 
due in a few weeks and that it was optional for them 
to dress-up for presentation of the oral reports. 




54 



Week 9 

This week's session began with the writer asking 
the class to define the phrase "Native American." Many 
students contributed to the definition, and the class 
reached a concensus that a Native American was either a 
person already living in North America when Christopher 
Columbus arrived or a person descending from 
these people. This writer led a class discussion on the 
many groups of Native Americans and the effect their 
natural environment had on their way of life. 

This writer shared a book on the life of Maria 
Martinez and her contributions of pottery to the art 
world. The writer and the class discussed similarities 
between Maria's life and their own, the effect she had 
on their lives, and the contributions she made to 
American society. As in previous weeks, students 
recorded these facts, along with other valuable 
information, in their journals. 

As students continued to listen to the biography of 
Martinez, they began to verbalize that Indians did not 
hurt the Earth, but lived in harmony with it. This led 
to a discussion of pollution and ways that all Americans 
can contribute to a clean, safe environment. 



55 

As the lesson was concluded, the writer reminded 
students that oral and written reports were due next 
week and that dressing-up was optional. 

Week 10 

The students presented their oral and written 
reports on the minority persons they had researched. 
During oral reports, over half of the class dressed like 
the subjects of their reports and spoke as if they were 
their subjects. Subjects for students' research 
encompassed a wide range of people, including athletes, 
entertainers, political leaders, scientists, and 
artists. This writer was impressed with the depth of 
understanding verbalized by students concerning the 
obstacles in the minority persons' lives. 

A class discussion following the presentations 
revealed students' feelings about the mistreatment of 
any group of people because of skin color or 
nationality. Every student could verbalize the way in 
which the subject of his or her report was mistreated. 

As the discussion closed, many students expressed the 
opinion that Americans just need to get along. 

This writer ask the students to write down as many 
reasons as they could generate that multicultural 




56 

education is important. As they were writing, this 
writer circulated around the room and observed that the 
students needed very little think time to think of 
reasons for multicultural education. 

LaDonna Harris, a Native American, was the Person 
of the Week. Her rise from a child of limited 
opportunities to a civil rights leader and supporter of 
Indian rights was traced. Students recorded in their 
journals pertinent information and were able to 
verbalize some of the obstacles Mrs. Harris had to 
overcome . 

At the close of this session, students were asked 
to write down the native homes of their ancestors. The 
students completed this task in a short period of time 
and had little difficult identifying these locations. 
Week 11 

The writer began this session by asking the each 
student to compile a written list of the five most 
memorable persons, either real or fictitious, about 
whom they had read. Several students asked if they could 
list a group of people but were instructed to list 
individuals only. Students worked for a few minutes and 
easily completed the assignment. 





57 



This writer also asked students to compile from 
memory a written list of at least three African 
Americans, three Native Americans, and three Hispanic 
Americans who had contributed to American culture. A 
10-minute time limitation was placed on this assignment. 
While circulating around the room, this writer observed 
that the students had little difficult compiling the 
list of African Americans and Native Americans, but had 
a difficult time generating a list of Hispanic 
Americans. Several students inquired if they could 
utilize their People of the Week journals to help them 
recall names. From students' comments, it appeared that 
recalling events was easier than recalling Hispanic 
American names. 

Harold S. Jones, a Sioux Indian Episcopal bishop, 
was the Person of the Week and a book featuring 
contemporary American Indian leaders was the literature 
utilized for this class session. Students readily 
identified with many events in Bishop Jones' life: the 
loss of a beloved grandfather, devotion to and love 
of God, and the desire to help others. As the class 
discussed Bishop Jones' life, it was evident that 
students were making connections between Bishop Jones' 



ERIC 




58 



life and their own. The students recorded facts about 
Harold S. Jones in the Person of the Week journal. 

Students had no trouble identifying the 
contribution Bishop Jones made to American society: They 
were grasping the concepts of the multicultural unit and 
beginning to view people as individuals, not as 
stereotypical members of a race. The students verbalized 
that Bishop Jones had held the same views as Martin 
Luther King, Jr. 

Week 12 

This writer began the session with an introduction 
of Pulitzer Prize winner N. Scott Momaday, a Cherokee- 
Kiowa Indian, utilizing a book on contemporary American 
Indians to discuss Dr. Momaday 's life, his 
perspective, and his hopes for Native Americans. The 
students identified similarities between his life and 
their own and identified his contributions to American 
society. Students recorded valuable information 
in their journals. 

When asked their opinions of this multicultural 
unit, students unanimously agreed that it should be 
taught to other fourth graders and that they now have a 
better understanding of other culture and peoples. 



59 



ERIC 



Developing sensitivity to others, understanding other 
people, and valuing all persons and their contributions 
to American society were verbalized most frequently as 
the primary reason for teaching the unit. 

Students expressed regret that the unit was 
over and thought that this writer should expand it for 
next year. One student verbally expressed his belief 
that this fourth-grade class is better prepared to live 
in a diverse world because of this multicultural unit. 




Chapter V: Results 



Results 

The problem solved in this practicum was that 
students had little awareness of the contributions 
to American society by those of different races and 
ethnic background. This writer used an integrated 
curriculum and a variety of materials that allowed 
students to conceptualize the diversity of America. 
Students were exposed to other cultures through 
literature, computer programs, research, and class 
discussion. The goal of this practicum was that 
students would develop an awareness of diverse 
cultures and an appreciation of the contributions 
made by ethnic minorities to American culture. 

The following outcomes were projected: 

1. In a 10-minute time frame, all students will list 
from memory at least three African Americans, three 
Native Americans, and three Hispanic Americans who 
have contributed to American society. 

This objective was met. The median score for 
each of the lists was three. Student-generated lists 
for African Americans contained the most entries, 
followed by Native Americans and then Hispanic 



61 



Americans. Sports figures, civil rights leaders, and 
professional singers were the most common African 
Americans listed. Native Americans were 
predominantly historical figures discussed in the 
fourth-grade curriculum or individuals that played a 
significant role in American history. Although the 
objective was met, the list of Hispanic Americans 
was the shortest of the three. A civil rights 
leader, an entertainer, and a professional baseball 
player dominated the list of Hispanic Americans. 

2. All students will write a paragraph on a minority 
person, enumerating similarities between the 
minority person's life and their own, identifying 
ways the minority person has affected their lives, 
and identifying the contribution made to society by 
the minority person. 

This objective was met. The students conducted 
research on and wrote about minorities. A dearth of 
available literature in the school media center and 
the public library hindered students' selection of 
Hispanic Americans. Most of the students realized 
similarities between their lives and the minority 
person's in terms of childhood experiences. Students 




67 



62 



internalized that, regardless of nationality or 
race, responsibilities and chores are a part of 
all children's lives. A few students generated 
abstract similarities, such as sharing a value 
system, but the majority of students identified 
concrete similarities. Contributions made by a 
minority person and the effect this person had on 
the student's life were usually expressed in 
correlate to each other. Through identifying the 
contribution the minority person made to American 
society, the students determined his or her effect 
on their lives. 

3. All students will be able to identify reasons 
that multicultural education is important. 

This objective was met. The median score was 
5. Students generated a variety of reasons that 
multicultural education was important. Avoiding 
prejudiced thoughts, behaviors, and actions and 
understanding how other people felt were two of the 
reasons listed most frequently. From the impressive 
responses, it was evident that students had realized 
the value of and necessity for multicultural 
education. Table II summarizes the seven most 



ERIC 




63 

frequent responses. 

Table II 

Reasons for Multicultural Education 



Reason 



n 



Avoiding prejudiced behavior 12 

Understanding other cultures 6 

Understanding other people's feelings 12 

Learning about history 11 

Identifying similarities between people 7 

Changing the way people think 7 

Making friends and getting along 7 



n = number of students out of 19 that listed that 
reason 

4. When asked to list five persons they have read 
about, either real or fictitious, all students will 
include at least two persons who are members of 
ethnic minorities. 

This objective was met. The median score was 
3 . The most frequently listed minority persons were 
African Americans, followed by Native Americans and 




69 



64 



then Hispanic Americans. The majority of the 
students listed an ethnic minority member who the 
class had discussed or read about. Most of the lists 
contained two African Americans, predominantly civil 
rights leaders, attorneys, or lawyers, and one 
Native American or Hispanic American. The Native 
American was usually an historical figure or a 
prominent entertainer, while the Hispanic American 
was usually a professional sports player. 

5. All students will be able to list the ancestral 
homes of their grandparents, great-grandparents, and 
great-great-grandparents . 

This outcome was met. The vast majority of the 
students were able to identify the native lands of 
their ancestors. Many of the students' families have 
resided in this small rural community for several 
generations and it was a feasible task to ascertain 
their ancestral homes. 

Discussion 

The overarching goal and outcomes of this 
practicum were met. Information about African 
Americans and Native Americans was plentiful and the 
students related well to these groups; however. 




70 



65 



there were some obstacles that hindered the 
students' appreciation of Hispanic Americans. 

One obstacle that severely limited students' 
understanding and appreciation of Hispanic American 
culture was the lack of authentic literature. The 
media center contained only one biography on an 
Hispanic American. The other Hispanic Americans 
introduced in this unit were presented via computer 
program. The program was informative but did not 
contain the depth and volume of information that 
books would contain. This dearth of information did 
not allow students to relate to Hispanic Americans, 
thus making it difficult for them to recall 
memorable figures and list Hispanic Americans. 

Another factor that hindered the acquisition of 
knowledge about Hispanic Americans was the language 
barrier. Most Hispanic Americans have names of 
Spanish origin, which are difficult for most fourth- 
graders to pronounce and remember. An interesting 
fact noted by this writer was that an Hispanic 
American entertainer who had changed her name to a 
common English name was on most students' lists of 
minority people. It appears that the ability to 




71 



66 

pronounce and or spell a name affects recall 
positively. 

A third factor that encumbered the 
conceptualization of Hispanic Americans was their 
lack of familiarity to students. The majority of the 
students have African American friends and are 
familiar with Native Americans from history; 
however, they lack connections with Hispanic 
Americans. The absence of relationships became an 
obstacle when students tried to identify with 
Hispanic Americans . 

African Americans and Native Americans were 
identified more easily because of students' 
familiarity and their ability to recall names. Many 
of the students had prior information about African 
Americans and Native Americans, which facilitated 
the acquisition of knowledge. 

Since a large percent of America's population 
is Hispanic American, this writer feels that schools 
need to foster curricula that expound upon the 
contributions of Hispanic Americans. Encouraging the 
acquisition of authentic literature about Hispanic 
Americans will allow students to expand their base 




72 



of knowledge. Bridging the cultural gap is to some 
extent dependent on the availability of materials. 
Recommendations 



67 



The following recommendations should be 
concerned before implementing a multicultural 
education program. 

1. Students should be exposed to a brief 
history of the treatment of NonEuropeans in 
America. This writer found that students had very 
little base knowledge about slavery, racism, and 
prejudice. Many of the students had a difficult time 
conceptualizing the treatment of minorities. 

2. Provide opportunity for members of 
ethnic minorities to share their experiences with 
the class. Meeting an individual who has experienced 
prejudice would make the concept real. Students 
would also more easily relate to a person than to 
printed literature. 

printed literature. 

3. Students should be required to complete a 
project that fosters ways to prevent racism and 
prejudice. Racism and prejudice are learned 
behaviors, and the avoidance of internalizing 



ERIC 




68 



negative feelings and beliefs needs to be a focus of 
multicultural education. 

Dissemination 

The practicum results will be disseminated to 
other professionals in a variety of ways. Interested 
teachers in this writer's work setting have 
requested a copy of the practicum and wish to 
consult with this writer to discuss integral 
parts of implementation. Copies of the approved 
practicum report will be sent to the county's 
multicultural center and human relations department. 
This writer has also submitted an application to 
present this unit at a state reading convention. 




74 



69 



References 

Banks, J. A. (1993). Multicultural education 
development, dimensions, and challenges. Phi Delta Kappan, 
75, 22-28. 



Baird, S. (1992). The face of bigotry. Teaching 
Tolerance, 1, 58-59. 

Bullard, S. (1992). Shifting sands. Teaching Tolerance, 
lj_ 38-45. 

Correa, V. , & Tulbert, B. (1991). Teaching culturally 
diverse students. Preventing School Failure, 35(3), 20-25. 

Encisco, P. (1994). Integrating "cultural imagination." 
The Reading Teacher, 47, 336-337. 

Epstein, K. K., & Ellis, W. F. (1992). Oakland moves to 
create its own multicultural curriculum. Phi Delta Kappan, 

73. 635-638. 

Garcia, J. (1993). The changing image of ethnic groups 
in textbooks. Phi Delta Kappan. 75, 29-35. 

Garcia, J., & Pugh S. L. (1992). Multicultural education 
in teacher preparation programs: A political or an 
educational concept? Phi Delta Kappan. 74, 214-219. 

Gersten, R. E., & Jimenez, R. T. (1994). A delicate 
balance: Enhancing literature instruction for students of 
English-as-a-second language. The Reading Teacher. 47, 438- 
447. 

Gillespie, C. S., Powell, J. L., Clements, N. E., & 
Swearinger, R. A. (1994). A look at the Newberry Medal books 
from a multicultural perspective. The Reading Teacher. 48, 
40-50. 



Giroux, H. A. (1992). Curriculum, multiculturalism, and 
the politics of identity. NASSP Bullentin, 76, 1-11. 

Hearne, B. (1993). Cite the source reducing cultural 
chaos in picture books, part one. School Library Journal. 39, 
22-27. 




75 



70 



Howard, G. (1993). Whites in multicultural education: 
Rethinking our roles. Phi Delta Kappan, 75, 36-41. 

Howells, R. F. (1992). Thinking in the morning, thinking 
in the evening, thinking at suppertime . . . . Phi Delta Kappan. 

74, 223-225. 

Hu-DeHart, E. (1993). The history, development, and 
future of ethnic studies. Phi Delta Kappan, 75, 50-54. 

Lee, C. C., & Richardson, B. L. (1991). Promise and 
pitfalls of multicultural counseling. Multicultural issues in 
counseling: New approaches to diversity, (pp. 3-10). 
Alexandria, Virginia: American Association for Counseling 
and Development. 

Lefton, T. (1992). Building bridges in the big apple. 
Teaching Tolerance. 1, 7-13. 

Lobach, M. R. (1995). Kids explore heritage through 
writers workshops and professional publications. The Reading 
Teacher. 48, 522-524. 

McGee Banks, C. A. (1993). Restructuring schools for 
equity what we have learned in two decades. Phi Delta Kappan. 

75. 42-48. 

Marker, M. (1992). The education of little tree: What it 
really reveals about the public schools. Phi Delta Kappan. 

74. 226-227. 

McCarthy, M. M. (1993). Challenges to the public school 
curriculum: New target and strategies. Phi Delta Kappan, 75, 
55-60. 



McElmeel. S. L. (1993). Toward a real multiculturalism. 
School Library Journal, 39, 50 . 

Miller-Lachmann, L. (1994). Multicultural publishing: 
The folktale flood. School Library Journal. 40. 35-36. 

Nelson, C. S. (1994). Historical literacy: A journey of 
discovery. The Reading Teacher. 47, 552-556. 




71 



Price, H. B. (1992). Multiculturalism: Myths and 
realities. Phi Delta Kappan, 74, 208-213. 

Schmidt, P. R. (1995). Working and playing with others: 
Cultural conflict in a kindergarten literacy program. The 
Reading Teacher. 48, 404-412. 

Shanahan, T. , Robinson, B., & Schneider, M. (1994). Black 
history month resolutions: Fifth graders construct their 
heritage. The Reading Teacher. 47, 660-661. 

Vandergrift, K. E. (1994). And bid her sing the poetry 
of African American women. School Library Journal, 40, 30-34. 

Yanofsky, S. M. , & Young, L. (1992). A parent school- 
choice plan for racial-ethnic balance. Phi Delta Kappan. 73. 
476-479. 




1 



APPENDIX A 



SURVEY OF ETHNIC MINORITIES 




7 



8 



73 



Name 



African Americans Native Americans Hispanic Americans 



1 . 1 . 1 . 

2 . 2 . 2 . 

3 . 3 . 3 . 




APPENDIX B 



RUBRIC FOR EVALUATING 
WRITING SAMPLES 




75 



Name 



Evaluating Rubric for Writings about Minorities 



Identified a Minority Person 



0 1 

No Yes 



Revealed Similarities Between a 
Minority Person and Himself 



0 1 

No Yes 



Realized the Effect the Minority 
Person Had on His Life 



0 1 

No Yes 



Identified the Contribution the 
Minority Person made to American Society 



0 1 

No Yes 




APPENDIX C 



QUESTIONNAIRE FOR IDENTIFYING 
NATIVE COUNTRIES OF ANCESTORS 



O 

ERLC 

iamaffamiaaa 



82 



77 



Name 



1. Identify native country of grandparents. 



2. Identify native country of great-grandparents. 



3. Identify native country of great-great-grandparents. 




APPENDIX D 



PARENTAL QUESTIONNAIRE 




84 



79 



Name 



Child's Name 



Dear Parents: 



We are exploring the cultural diversity of America and 
the contributions made by a diverse society to this 
nation. Please assist us by answering these questions. 



Thank you 



1. What are the native countries of your parents? 



2. What are the native countries of your grandparents? 



3. What are the native countries of your great- 
grandparents? 




ERIC 







U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educe tlonal Research end Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



® 



I. 



DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 




Tine: Xrvcreo. 6 ma Awareness and Appreciation of Cu\ 

(Xmcaa fourth Graders A-hrcuqh IhVeq rated Cu.rncw.lam 



Au,W!|: CftnniP. U> fV.UTJh 


Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 

ia-i\-q 


15 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely £nd significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents 
announced in the monthly abstract Journal of the ERIC system. Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users 
in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit Is given to the source of each document, and. if reproduction release is granted, one of 
the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following options and sign the release 
below. 



0 * 

Check here 

Permitting 

microfiche 

(4"x 6” film), 

paper copy. 

electronic. 

and optical media 

reproduction 



Sample sticker to be affixed to document Sample sticker to be affixed to document 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 




"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 


MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTEO BY 








TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




o'* 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



*□ 

or here 

Permitting 
reproduction 
In other than 
paper copy. 



Level 1 



Level 2 



»ign Here, Please 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission to reproduce is granted, but 
neither box is checked, documents will be processed at level 1. 



vj) "I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce this document as 
Indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than ERIC employees and its 
r system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception Is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries.' ‘ 



, sl9nature 'C.£mtu, Id 


Varhp.r 


Printed^Name: ^ . 

mnnif 3 Ute ntLrr_h 


gjj±w Public Schd^ 


315 moon Vtod 
uganv 1 lie, 6- a 3oa4<( 




° al " [ 



Ql 




Ill 



DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 



.If permission to reproduce Is not granted to ERIC , or. if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of this document from another 
• V # s o urce »' please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document 

* ( ~ unless It'is publicly. available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection 
criteria are significantly more stringent for documents which cannot be made available through EDRS). 



'■Publisher/bistributor: > (!■ 4 








Address: 


Price Per Copy: 


Quantity Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 



If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate 
name and address: 



Name and address of current copyright/reproduction rights holder: 
Name: 

t 

Address: 



V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Educational Management 
College of Education - Agate Hall 
5207 University of Oregon 
Eugene, OR 97403-5207 



If you are making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, you may return this form (and the document being contributed) to: 



ERIC Facility 
1301 Piccard Orlva, Suita 300 
Rockvllla, Maryland 20850-4305 
Telephone: (301) 258-5500 



ERIC*' ® 9 " 



