DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 364 635 



UD 029 616 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Gilliam, Sonja Patrice 

An Assessment of the Cross-Cultural Training Needs of 

South Carolina Counselors. 

[90] 

76p. 

Reports - Evaluative/Feasibility (142) 
MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

American Indians; Asian Americans; Blacks; ^Counselor 
Training; *Cross Cultural Studies; *Cultural 
Awareness; Cultural Differences; ^Educational Needs; 
*Ethnic Groups; Hispanic Americans; Job Skills; 
Minority Groups; Needs Assessment; Racial 
Differences; Research Methodology; *School 
Counselors; Secondary Education 
*South Carolina 



ABSTRACT 

A study is proposed to assess the extent of 
cross-cultural training of secondary school counselors in South 
Carolina and to assess the need for training as identified by 
practicing counselors. Chapter 1 introduces the problem and provides 
background, while Chapter 2 is a literature review. Chapter 3 
describes the research methodology, and chapters 4 and 5 (not 
included) will present study findings and a summary. The increasing 
diversity of school populations makes it imperative that counselors 
be able to respond to students of different ethnic groups and 
cultural backgrounds. The literature review provides a framework for 
cross-cultural counseling, presenting theory and a review of the work 
of notable theorists, and a discussion of the characteristics of the 
following racial and ethnic groups; (1) Native Americans; (2) Black 
Americans; (3) Asian Americans; and (4) Hispanic Americans. Some 
existing programs for cross-cultural counselor training are reviewed. 
Participants in the study will be randomly selected secondary school 
counselors in South Carolina who will be asked to complete a 36-item 
questionnaire after it is pilot tested and revised as necessary. 
(SLD) 



******************^ 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* / from the original document. * 



************%^ 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

1 



NO 



An Assessment of the Cross-Cultural 
Training Needs of South Carolina Counselors 
Sonja Patrice Gilliam 
University of South Carolina 



0«„ C ^'~''£"' CES INFORMATION 
ED OCAT10NAL c BESOUBCES ( 

0€Ri po*rt*>"° f Po«»cy 



ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

2 



Abstract 



3 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

3 

An Asessment of the Cross-Cultural 
Training Needs of South Carolina Counselors 

A new problem faced by counselors in the public school setting 
is the increasing diversity of the public school population. Accord- 
ing to the 1980 census report, racial-ethnic minorities were 16% 
of the total U.S. population. In the state of South Carolina, 
1980 census figures show that racial-ethnic minorities were 31.2% 
of the total population, and this figure is projected to approach 
34% by 2010. The language and cultural differences that these 
individuals espouse present a challenge for some human service 
professionals. This complex task of being recognized, respected, 
and accepted by a society that is based on similarities, not differe- 
nces, makes it necessary for practitioners to be trained for work 
in crosscul tural settings. 

Racial and ethnic minority group populations have special 
counseling needs and yet tend to be under serviced by professionals. 
There are many conflicts and problems that develop as a result 
of being ethnically, racially, and/or culturally different. Host 
counseling programs have not prepared culturally and racially sensi- 
tive counselors with enthusiasm (McDaniels & Parker, 1977; Mitchel, 
1971; Sue, 1977). Research on counselor education by flcFadden 
and Wilson (1977) concluded that fewer than 1% of counselor educators 
require their students to study non-white cultures. Bernal and 



ERIC 



4 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
4 

Pad-ilia (1982) found that psychology faculty members indicated 
that preparing clinical psychologists to work with minorities was 
"somewhat important". However, the authors also provided ample 
evidence that such preparation actually received minor attention. 

The American Psychological Association (APA) sponsored a 
conference in Vail, Colorado (Korman, 1974), which strongly 
recommended that the counseling of persons of culturally diverse 
backgrounds by persons who are not trained to work with such groups 
should be regarded as unethical. Further, in 1977, the Association 
for Non-White Concerns took the position that individuals of 
different ethnicity need to be assured that the counselor is indeed 
competent in the treatment of their specific cultural needs in 
addition to emotional needs. The Association for Counselor Education 
and Supervision (1978) went on record recommending that counselor 
preparation should provide counselors with skills in the identifica- 
tion of developmental tasks, objectives, and strategies for program 
implementation and evaluation appropriate to the specific populations 
served. 

Bernal and Padilla (1982) identified the following problems 
in the provision of mental health services to the ethnically differen 
(a) Minority groups in this country are underscored by the National 
Public Mental Health System (b) There is a severe shortage of ethnic 
minority professionals in the mental health field (c) This shortage 
of minority professionals is not being sufficiently addressed at 



ERIC 



5 



1 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
5 

the graduate level through accurate recruitment programs (d) The 
dearth of minority faculty in graduate education parallels the 
minority student underepresentation and demonstrates a heightened 
lack of growth (e) A large proportion of minority graduates of 
professional training institutions find employment in clinical 
as well as applied research settings which serve minorities (p. 
780). 

Specific to counselor education, McFadden, Quinn and Sweeney 
(1978) reported that counselor preparation suffered from all of 
the problems listed by Bernal and Padilla (1982). Further, McFadden 
et al., (1978) reported that insufficient numbers of non-white 
faculty and the lack of cross-cultural experiences for counselors 
only perpetuated the very conditions that guidance services are 
purported to alleviate. In addition, they concluded that training 
programs must reflect the multicultural nature of this society 
if guidance services are to be effective. 

Additional rationale for the need for counselors to be cross- 
culturally trained include (a) the likelihood of_ America's minority 
population will continue to experience discrimination (Bernal & 
Padilla, 1982); (b) the contention that the counseling needs of 
minorities remain unmet; (c) the refusal of some ethnic minorities 
to be assimilated into mainstream society; (d) the presence of 
minorities in all major institutions, i.e., mental health, schools, 
postsecondary environments, and the work place. 



ERIC 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
6 

Background of the Problem 
The failure to create a realistic understanding of minority 
populations in America has been noted in the literature by many 
writers (Byrd, 1971; Ruiz & Padilla, 1974; Sue, D.W., & Sue, S., 
1972; Sue, 1981; Sumade, 1975; Thomas & Sillen, 1972;). In fact, 
Sue (1981) and Hi Hard (1986) found that certain practices have 
greatly harmed minorities by ignoring them, maintaining false stereo- 
types and/or distorting their lifestyle. 

An example of this contention can be seen in the Genetic 
Deficiency Model which depicted blacks and other ethnic minorities 
as uneducable and intellectually inferior. The writings of Shuey 
(1966), Jensen (1969), Hernstein (1971), and Shockley (1972) all 
reflect the effects of this model. Sue (1981) stated that the 
use of such terms implies that to be different was to be deviant, 
pathological, or sick. 

The Civil Rights Movement and the passage of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 highlighted areas with respect to traditional mental 
health practices that heretofore had received little attention. 
The impetus of this moment as well as other societal events, made 
mental health practitioners aware of the need to address problems 
and concerns of ethnic minority groups in America. Affirmative 
Action guidelines were established to ensure accessibility to 
university study and to equal . employment opportunities. Both areas 
were relevant to cross-cultural education (Arrendo, 1985). 



7 



J 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
7 

Cross cultural counseling, the by-product of the social 
movements of the 60's and early 70's, emphasized the notion that 
practitioners must be adequately trained to meet the needs of America's 
cultural and minority groups. Although the term in its broadest 
sense suggested that all cultural groups (women, ethnic minorities, 
the elderly, handicapped, and homosexuals) should be included under 
this umbrella, the scope of this concept did not lend itself to 
reaching this goal (DeBlassie, 1974; Pedersen, Lonner & Draguns, 
1976; and Sue, 1977). Therefore, proponents suggested the central 
aims of cross cultural counseling should be limited to those ethnic 
minority groups that traditionally had been victims of discrimination 
and oppression because of their unique characteristics (Dillard, 
1983). These groups, historically, included Native Americans, 
Asian Americans, blacks, Hispanics and other ethnic minorities. 

It is important to note that while other ethnic minority 
groups have also been the victims of discrimination and oppression 
and have counseling needs that are not adequately addressed by 
traditional approaches, this study focuses only on blacks, Native 
Americans, Asian Americans, and Hispanics. This decision was affected 
primarily by group characteristics, the availability of information 
on these groups in the literature, the impact these groups have 
had on our society from a historical perspective, and the percent 
of the total population that these groups represent. 

The American Psychological Association (APA), in an attempt 



ERIC 



8 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
8 

to address the growing concerns of America's ethnic minorities, 
recommended that the counseling of persons from culturally diverse 
backgrounds by persons not trained or competent to work with such 
groups should be regarded as unethical (Koram, 1974), In an 
examination of counselor education programs,. Copeland (1982) concluded 
that much has yet to be done to incorporate the needs of America's 
ethnic minorities into the training of students (Arrendo-Dowd and 
Gonsalves (1980); Bernal and Padillo (1982: Sue 1981). 

The field of counseling, however, is not the only area where 
there has been a push for relevant training at the pre-service 
level. Psychotherapists, teachers and other practitioners have 
also voiced concern that training programs do not afford experiences 
at the pre-service level (Sue, 1981; Arrendo, 1985). 

The National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education 
and Supervision (NCATE) and the American Association for Counselor 
Education and Supervision (ACES) have also set the stage for the 
training of practitioners to work with cross cultural clients. 
NCATE recommended that postsecondary institutions give evidence 
of planning for multicultural education in their teacher education 
curriculum including both the general and professional studies 
component. Further, NCATE recommended that experiences should 
be made available to trainees which include values clarification, 
the dynamics of diverse cultures, racism and sexism, and linguistic 
variation patterns among the culturally diverse (NCATE Standard 



ERLC 



9 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
9 

2.11, 1979). ACES went on record as recommending that counselor 
preparation provide counselors with skills in the developmental 
tasks, objectives, and strategies for program implementation and 
evaluation appropriate to programs served. ACES' support for 
Multicultural experiences was further evidenced in its recommendation 
that training program provide training experiences in social and 
cultural foundations, i.e., ethnic group subcultures, sexism, cultural 
mores, etc. (ACES standards, 1979). 

While the recommendations of these agencies speak directly 
to the training of counselors and teachers entering programs in 
the 1980's, a large number of practitioners who entered prior to 
this time are not subjected to these requirements. These 
practitione-s, however, continue to provide services to the cul- 
turally different. Therefore, however formidable a task it may 
be, cross cultural education must become a part of existing training 
programs at the pre-service and in-service levels. 

Statement of the Problem 
Despite a deluge of professional journal articles and 
innovative programs of the 1960's calling attention to the needs 
of ethnic minorities, research literature continues to claim that 
there is an absence of practitioners who can effectively work with 
this growing population of people. 

Secondary school counselors in South Carolina are exemplified 
as a profession faced with a growing need to provide support services 



10 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
10 

to ethnic minorities. Rece.it reports indicated that 40.4% of the 
students enrolled in secondary education in South Carolina public 
schools in 1987 were of minority status (Department of Education 
report, 1988). The count by race is as follows: 336 Native 
Americans, 1,583 Asian Americans, 113,032 Blacks, 617 Hispanics, 
and 170,658 Whites. 

In addition to the number of ethnic minorities enrolled in 
public schools, it is clear that minorities are interspersed through- 
out the state, and are not concentrated in one area; therefore, 
the need for all practicing counselors to be cross-culturally trained 
has become more of a necessity. The purposes of this study are 
to (a) assess the extent of cross-cultural training of secondary 
school counselors in South Carolina and (b) to assess the need 
for training as identified by practicing counselors. 

Need for the Research 
The need to evaluate cross-cultural counseling theories and 
practices as well as traditional theoretical approaches has been 
documented in the literature (Copeland, 1979, 1982; Gunnings & 
Simpkins, 1972: Smith, 1985; Sue, S., 1981). As indicated in the 
literature, to date, there does not exist a consensus on what theories, 
approaches and practices should be used with ethnic minority groups. 
Hilliard (1986) pointed out that research in the field of cross- 
cultural counseling has been relatively subjective. He asserted 
that there was a need to conduct research to provide evidence to 



9 

ERJC 



11 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
11 

support the various existing theories on cross-cultural counseling 
as well as to add to traditional counseling approaches. Hilliard 
also asserted that as multicultural counseling becomes more widely 
recognized as a priority, there will exist a greater need to conduct 
empirical research . 

In view of the need to prepare counselors of both minority 
and majority cultures to serve minority populations, it is necessary 
to determine the current status of these individuals that are trained 
to work with ethnic minority groups. Once this baseline has been 
established, the need for additional training programs such as 
coursework, field experiences, etc., can be assessed. 

Additionally, the overall aim of the present study is to 
(a) bring attention to areas of need counselors have with respect 
to cross-cultural training, (b) sensitize counselor education program 
administrators to these needs for incorporation into current training 
programs, and (c) most importantly, since there is evidence to 
support the contention that most counselor education programs are 
not sure how to go about strengthening their multicultural components, 
it is hoped that the information generated from this study will 
add to this area. 

It is important also to point out that while members of an 
ethnic minority group do share a common culture, practitioners 
must be cautious about the attributions given to each group based 
on assumed cultural characterise cs^Moreover , in this age of 



12 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
12 

rapid change and heightened awareness of the need to be culturally 
sensitive, there is a dangerous tendency for practitioners to ascribe 
all the cultural traits of a given group onto an individual. Counselors 
must be aware that while each individual may present a complex 
blend of cultural values or oth^r group characteristics, it is 
improbable that each will manifest all of the described character- 
istics of that group. Therefore, clients must be considered as 
individuals first with individualized counseling needs and 
expectations. 

Research Questions 
The purposes of this study are twofold: (1) to assess the 
extent of training in cross-cultural counseling received by secondary 
school counselors in South Carolina and (2) to assess the need 
for training as identified by practicing counselors. The following 
research questions are to be examined: 

1. To what extent is cross-cultural counseling provided 
in South Carolina secondary schools? 

2. What types of cross cultural training experiences have 
practicing counselors in South Carolina received? 

3. What was the quality of the cross-cultural training 
experiences as evaluated by practicing counselors in 
South Carolina? 

4. What cross-cultural training needs are identified by 
secondary counselors practicing in South Carolina? 



ERLC 



13 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
13 

Limitations of the Study 
This study will be limited to currently employed secondary 
school counselors in South Carolina. It will not include those 
individuals trained as counselors but working in other areas, nor 
did it focus on teachers who have daily opportunities to interact 
with racial-ethnic minorities. The reader is cautioned against 
generalizing the findings of this study to populations not similar 
to secondary school counselors in South Carolina. Further, the 
population of secondary school counselors in South Carolina will 
include only those counselors that are members of the faculty in 
schools that are certified secondary schools by the State Department 
of Education. 

Definition of Terms 

The use of the following terms will persist throughout the 
research. The definitions presented will expedite the understanding 
of the cross-cultural perspective as it relates to this study. 

Cross-cultural counseling : A counseling relationship in 
which the participants (counselor and client) are culturally different. 
Cross-cultural counseling includes all of the differences, e.g., 
sex, age, socioeconomic status, and ethnicity that exist between 
the client and counselor. Although this counseling relationship 
has also been referred to as transcul tural , multicultural, and/or 
intercultural , the term cross-cultural directs specific attention 
to the variables ethnicity and minority status which will be used 



ERLC 



14 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
14 

throughout the study. In addition, the term has persisted throughout 
the review of the literature (Pedersen, 1985; Ponterotto & Casas, 
1987; Sue, 1981) as being the most widely accepted concept to describe 
those counseling situations in which the counselor and client are 
racially and/or ethnically different. 

Minority : An individual who holds membership in a nonwhite 
racial or ethnic group. 

Counseling services : In its broadest sense, this term refers 
to assistance or services provided to students which include: pupil 
appraisal, information, career planning and placement, and follow-up. 

Need: The lack of something required or desired (Webster's 
Dictionary, 1987). The term as used within this research will 
focus on the cross-cultural training needs of practicing secondary 
school counselors. 

World view : A person's perception of his/her relationship 
to the world (nature, institution, other people, things, etc.). 
World views are highly correlated with a person's cultural upbringing 
and life experiences (Sue, D.W., 1975; Jackson, 1975). 

Culturally Skilled Counselor : The ability of the counselor 
to determine appropriate processes and appropriate goals when working 
with clients of varying cultural and ethnic backgrounds. Further, 
the term refers to the counselor's sensitivity and awareness of 
personal biases, ethnic identity, and sociopolitical influences 
as they relate to ethnic minorities (Dillard, 1983). 




15 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

15 

Cultural conflict : Problems/difficulties that arise when 
the beliefs, notions and/or behavioral styles of two or more indi- 
viduals clash. 

Organization of the Study 
This study will be divided into five chapters: Chapter I 
will include the introduction, statement of the problem, research 
questions, limitations of the study, and definition of terms. 
Chapter II will include a review of the literature. Chapter III 
will consist of research methodology, i.e., the subjects, 
instrumentation, research procedures, data collection, and analyses. 
Chapter IV will present the findings of the study. Chapter V will 
present a summary of the study, conclusions based upon the findings, 
a discussion relative to the conclusions, and recommendations. 



ERLC 



16 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

16 

CHAPTER TWO 
Review of the literature 
Introduction 

For nearly two decades, the counseling profession, along 
with other mental health programs, has been examining its concepts 
toward special populations. This process was heightened in the 
1960 l s when blacks, Hispanics, and other ethnic minorities pressed 
for changes in the American social structure. The actions of these 
groups have caused a fundamental if not revolutionary change in 
the counseling profession-a profession that traditionally regarded 
the American society as the potpourri, or melting pot. 

However, cross-cultural counseling proponents contend that 
the "melting pot" theory is not applicable to today's society (Larson, 
1982). This theory perpetuates the notion that traditionally trained 
counselors could make the necessary adaptations for each setting 
and client without further systematic knowledge and skills. The 
myth of sameness (Smith, 1982), as this attitude has been termed, 
asserted that the similarities of individuals in basic psychological 
processes override the many differences due to sex, culture, race, 
and other factors. Smith (1981) noted, however, "to treat everyone 
the same is to deny their humanness, their individuality, and their 
sense of cultural heritage" (p, 162), 

The review of literature contained in this chapter provides 
a framework for cross-cultural counseling. Specifically, this 



ERLC 



17 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

17 

chapter presents literature related to the areas of (a) traditional 
counseling approaches and their applicability to the culturally 
different; (b) cross-cultural counseling theories; (c) impediments/- 
barriers to counseling racial-ethnic minorities; (d) racial -ethnic 
group characteristics; (e) counselor education and training programs- 
-an assessment (f) cross-cultural training models. 
Traditional Counseling Approaches 

Counseling approaches subscribed to, heretofore, by tradition- 
ally trained counselors have been regarded by some as inappropriate 
to meeting the needs of the culturally different (Arrendo-Dowd 
& Gonsalves, 1980; Pederseen, Holwill & Shapiro, 1978; Sue, 1981; 
Vontres, 1974). However, a number of cross-cultural counseling 
proponents have contended that a vast amount of information can 
be gained from the theoretical tenets of these approaches (Brammer, 
1969; Larson, 1982; HcDavis, 1978; Trimble & Lambromboise, 1985). 

One of the most influential theories and techniques that 
holds relevance for counseling special populations is Rogers' (1981) 
client centered approach to counseling. Glasser & Zunin's (1973) 
Reality therapy and Ellis' (1979) theory of Rational Emotive Therapy 
have also been singled out as particularly useful when working 
with the culturally different. The following is a description 
of these theories and their relevance to ethnically/culturally 
different clients. 



ERIC 



18 



I 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
18 

Carl Rogers 

Rogers' (1951) client-centered approach to counseling empha- 
sizes the attitudes and personal characteristics of the therapist 
and the quality of the client/therapist relationship as the prime 
determinants of the outcome of the therapeutic process. The approach 
which originally implied that people seeking psychological assistance 
were treated as responsible clients with the power to direct their 
own lives gradually extended its sphere of influence and applicability 
to include minority groups, interracial and intercul tural groups 
and international relationships (Rogers, 1977). Because of the 
ever widening scope and influence of this counseling approach, 
it has become known as the person-centered approach (Rogers, 1977). 

The person-centered approach focuses on the client's 
responsibility and capacity to discover ways to encounter reality. 
The approach emphasizes the phenomenal world of the client. With 
accurate empathy and an attempt to apprehend the client's internal 
frame of reference, therapists concern themselves mainly with the 
client's perception of self and the world. 

The humanistic base that Rogers offers through the person- 
centered approach provides clients with an opportunity to be listened 
to and heard. Further, clients can express their feelings in their 
own way without fear of being evaluated or judged (Corey, 1977). 
This approach is particularly useful with cross-cultural clients 
because of the degree of unrestricted freedom of expression that 



o 19 

ERIC 1 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
19 

is not afforded to them by the more traditional psychoanalytic 

approaches to therapy. 

Research that supports Rogers' client centered approach included 
Wright's (1975) study with 24 black and 24 white freshmen college . 
students on the effects of counselor's race and counselor's trust 
(as measured on the Rotter Interpersonal Trust Scale, RITS) on 
client perceptions of the facilitative conditions offered by coun- 
selors. Wright found that despite black students' expectations 
that black counselors would be more facilitating than white coun- 
selors, both black and white subjects rated white counselors higher 
on congruence and unconditional ity. 

In a study conducted by La Fromboise, Dauphinais and Rowe 
(1980) with 150 American Indian 11th and 12th grade students on 
their preference for a "helpful person", they concluded that "trust" 
was a more important factor in determining client satisfaction 
than ethnicity per se. 

Additionally, Roll, Schmidt, and Kaul (1972) exposed 18 black 
and 18 white inmates in a state prison to 12 videotaped interview 
vignettes and asked them to rate the trustworthiness of five 
interviewers portrayed in the vignettes. Regardless of race, inmates 
rated the trustworthy content-trustworthy manner vignettes higher 
than any of the other vignettes (untrustworthy content-trustworthy 
manner, trustworthy content-untrustworthy manner, and untrustworthy 
content-untrustworthy manner). 



ERIC 



20 



*Cross Cultural Counseling 

20 

William Glasser 

Like Rogers' person-centered counseling theory, the reality 
therapeutic counseling approach can also be considered a humanistic 
branch of the existential perspective. 

Reality therapy is based on the premise that there is a single 
psychological need present throughout life: the need for identity, 
which includes a need to feel a sense of uniqueness, separateness, 
and distinctiveness. The need for identity is seen as universal 
among all cultures. According to Glasser (1965), the primary 
function of reality therapy is to help clients fulfill their basic 
psychological needs which include "the need to love and to be loved 
and the need to feel that we are worthwhile to ourselves and to 

others" (p. 9). 

The overall goal of reality therapy is to help the individual 
achieve autonomy. Essentially, autonomy is the state of maturity 
which accounts for the person's ability to relinquish environmental 
support and substitute internal support. This maturity implies 
that people are able to take responsibility for who they are and 
what they want to become and to develop responsible and realistic 
plans to fulfill their goals. But as Sue (1978) claims, in referring 
to minority clients, an individual's ability to assume this degree 
of responsibility would depend on that individual's world view. 

Nonetheless, the reality counseling approach grounds three 
concepts that can be used when working with cross-cultural clients. 



ERIC 



21 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
21 

One concept of this approach is that the counselor should be actively 
involved in the counseling relationship (Glasser & Zunin, 1979). 
Inherent to this approach is the idea that counselors should not 
make a value judgement as to whether their client's behavior is 
responsible and therefore good for them and those with whom they 
are involved. The third and final concept is that counselors should 
encourage clients to be committed to carry out a plan of action 
(Gasser & Zunin, 1979). 
Albert Ellis 

Ellis' theory of rational -emotive theory is viewed as an 
extension of reality therapy in that it stresses thinking, judging, 
deciding, analyzing and doing. Rational emotive therapy is highly 
didactic, very directive and concerned with the cognitive versus 
the connative skills. 

Rational emotive therapy is based on the assumption that 
human beings are born with a potential for both rational straight 
thinking and irrational self destructive thinking (Ellis, 1979). 
Ellis asserted that people are unique and have the power to 
understand limitations, to change basic v- - :ws and values and to 
challenge self-defeating ideas and values. The major goal of RET 
is to minimize the client's central self-defeating outlook and 
acquire a more realistic, tolerant philosophy of life (Ellis, 1979). 

A number of theorists maintained that blacks and other ethnic 
minorities preferred the directive approach to counseling. Included 



9 

ERJC 



22 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

22 

are Atkinson, Maruyama, and Matusi , (1978) and Peoples and Dell 
(1975). 

In the study conducted by Atkinson, Maruyama, and Matsui 
(1978) with Asian American clients, the counselor's credibility 
and utility were rated. The researchers reported that subjects 
rated the counselor (on the audiotaped video sessions) more credible 
when a directive approach to counseling was employed. These same 
conclusions were drawn by Atkinson, et al . in a second study with 
21 male and 27 female Japanese subjects. That is, the counselor 
was again rated more credible and utilizable when employing a 
directive approach than when employing a nondirective counseling 
approach. 

Peoples and Dell (1975), conducted a study in which 28 black 
and 28 white female university students rated the counselor's 
performance (both black and white) on one of four experimental 
conditions. These conditions were: (1) black counselor, active 
role; (2) black counselor, passive role; (3) white counselor, active 
role; (4) white counselor, passive role. All subjects gave higher 
ratings of competence and helpfulness to counselors in the active 
role than counselors in the passive role. 

The contention, therefore, is that Ellis' theory can be 
effectively used to help cross-cultural clients. The ABC method, 
which the approach employs, encourages clients to use rational 
thinking to control their emotions, to think in ways that would 



23 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

23 

help them solve their own problems, and with the help of a therapist, 
to develop a sense of responsibility in carrying out their goals 
(McDavis, 1979). 

Cross-Cultural Counseling Theories 
In addition to the traditional counseling theories and tech- 
niques which may be applicable for cross-cultural clients, a number 
of cross-cultural counseling models targeted specifically at 
understanding minority groups may be identified. One is the Minority 
Identity Development (MID) model proposed by Atkinson, et al. (1979). 
According to Atkinson, et al . (1979), the Minority Identity Develop- 
ment model can be applied to all minority groups who have experienced 
oppression. The model consists of five stages. At each stage, 
four corresponding attitudes that form the minority person's identity 
are examined. At each stage, these attitudes are the person's 
views of: (a) the self, (b) others of the same minority (c) others 
of another minority, and (d) majority individuals. 

Research has not yet determined the extent to which this 
process is characteristic of all minority groups_or whether the 
stages are necessarily experienced in the same order. Sue (1981) 
contended that some individuals undoubtedly do not go through the 
entire sequence, but remain in one particular stage. In contrast, 
Larson (1982) contended that as an individual changes toward a 
more integrated identity, similarity of belief tends to become 
more important than similarity of cultural background. 



24 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
24 

Another cross-cultural approach proposed by Sue (1981) focused 
on the ways that race and culture-specific factors interact to 
produce people of different world views. World view, according 
to Sue (1981) is a combination of familiar internal-external locus 
of control with internal-external locus of responsibility. He 
incorporated Rotter's (1966) concept of internal-external locus 
of control with another dimension from attribution theory. 
Specifically, internal-external locus of responsibility as defined 
by Jones, et al . , (1972) to arrive at his general definition of 
world view. 

Jackson (1975) and Sue (1978) contended that world views 
are highly correlated with a person's cultural upbringing and life 
experiences. Sue (1978) further asserted that not only are world 
views composed of our attitudes, values, opinions, and concepts, 
but they may also affect how we think, make decisions, behave, 
and define events. Economic and social class, religion and sex 
are also interactional components of an individual's world view. 
Therefore, with respect to racial and ethnic mino_rities-as with 
the dominant culture, upper and lower socioeconomic class, Asian 
Americans, blacks, Chicanos, or Native Americans do not necessarily 
have identical views of the world. 

Rotter's (1966) first concept of internal-external locus 
of control referred to people's beliefs that reinforcements are 
contingent upon their own actions and that people can shape their 



ERIC 



25 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
25 

own fate. External control refers to people's belief that 
reinforcing events occur independently of their actions and that 
the future is determined more by chance and luck (Sue, 1978). 
Lefcourt (1966) and Rotter (1966, 1975) have summarized research 
findings which correlate high internality with (a) greater attempts 
at mastering the environment, (b) lower predisposition to anxiety, 
(c) higher achievement motivation, (d) greater social action involve- 
ment, and (e) placing greater value on ski 11 -determined rewards. 

Early research on generalized expectancies of locus of control 
suggested that ethnic group members (Hsieh, Shybut, Lotsof, 1969; 
Levenson, 1974), lower class people (Battle & Rotter, 1963; Garcia 
& Levenson, 1975), and women (Sanger & Alker, 1972) score 
significantly higher on the external end of the continuum. 

Rotter's internal-external (I-E) distinction has come under 
criticism. Mirels (1970) felt that a strong possibility existed 
that externality may be a function of a person's opinions about 
prevailing social institutions. For example, lower class individuals 
and minorities are not given an equal opportunity to obtain material 
rewards in Western culture (Sue, 1978), Atkinson, et al . , 1979). 

Gurin, Gurin, Lao & Beattie (1969), in their study, concluded 
that while high-external people are less effectively motivated, 
perform poorly in achievement situations and evidence greater 
psychological problems, this does not necessarily hold for minorities 
and low-income persons. 



26 



I < 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
26 

Jones- et al., (1972) in a study similar to Gurin et al . 
indicated that locus of responsibility measures the degree of 
responsibility or blame placed upon the individual or system. 
For example, blacks' and other minorities' lower standard of living 
may be attributable to their personal inadequacies and shortcomings 
or the responsibility for their plight may be attributable to racial 
discrimination and the lack of opportunities. The former orientation 
blames the individual, whereas the latter blames the system (Sue, 
D.W., 1978). Sue also asserted that the individual or system blame 
distinction is critical to understanding minority group perceptions 
and behaviors. 

The two psychological orientations in Sue's model, locus 
of control (personal control) and locus of responsibility, are 
independent of one another. The four world view categories 
conceptualized by Sue reflected the individual's degree of intern- 
al ity and externality on the two constructs. The views are internal 
locus of control-internal locus of responsibility (IC-IR); external 
locus of control-external locus of responsibility (EC-ER); external 
locus of control-internal locus of responsibility (EC-I); and 
internal locus of control -external locus of responsibility (IC-ER). 

Sue cautioned that the validity of this world view model 
has not been established directly through research. Nonetheless, 
empirical and clinical evidence by Atkinson, Hariyuma & Matsui 
(1978) with Asian American clients and Ivey (1977) with black and 



* 27 

ERIC 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
27 

white counselor trainees supported the contentions of Sue's model. 

Another approach that is similar to Sue's world view theory 
emphasized the distinction between responsibility for the problem 
and responsibility for the solution (Brickman, Rabinowitz, Karuza, 
Coates, Cohn & Kidder, 1982). As with Sue's world view model, 
this model can also be structured with two independent dimensions 
that create a matrix of four distinctive approaches to the social 
situation of help seeking. The first model is referred to as the 
moral model, in which the responsibility for both the problem and 
the solution resides in the individual. When the responsibility 
for the problem is viewed as within the individual, but the solution 
is outside the individual's control, the individual is operating 
within the enlightenment model. In the third model, the compensatory 
model, the individual is suffering because of deprivation of 
opportunity. The fourth and final model is defined as the medical 
model in which both the source of the problem and the solution 
resides in the environment. 

The existential approach to cross-cultural_counsel ing offers 
another theoretical orientation to working with the culturally 
different. Vontress (1983) suggested that all humans are in the 
same predicament, regardless of their racial, ethnic, or national 
identities. He further suggested that all individuals live 
simultaneously in three interacting environments: the Unwelt 
(natural environment), the Miltwelt (how an individual impacts 



9 

ERJC 



28 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
28 

others and how others impact the individual), and the Gienwelt 
(private, personal environment). According to Vontress 1983, these 
concepts have direct implications for the nature and conduct of 
the counseling relationship, diagnosis, recommendation/progress, 
intervention, and follow up. 

In diagnosing culturally different clients, Vontress (1983) 
used five concepts as guidelines to determine the client's mode 
in the world. The first concept, dasein, refers to the individual's 
actual existence in the world. It also refers to the uniqueness 
that each member of the human species brings into the world and 
the individual's striving to reveal himself/herself psychologically 
to leave the world fulfilled. The second, existential concept, 
the individual develops a sense of responsibility to others and 
self. This socialization process becomes internalized during infancy 
and the individual is imbued with it throughout life. Authenticity, 
which characterizes the third diagnostic guideline, means being 
real, true, and genuine. According to Bugental (1965), people 
are authentic when their being in the world is in accord with 
t-emselves as they really are. This understanding encompasses 
the Miltwelt--how they impact on others and how others impact on 
them. The fourth diagnostic guideline that can be used in cross- 
cultural counseling is meaning in life. As Frankl (1962) pointed 
out, meaning can make the difference between life and death in 



9 

ERJC 



29 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
29 

difficult situations. Vontress (1983) noted that it is important 
to find out from clients whether they have meaning in life, the 
source of it, and how consumed they are about it. The fifth guideline 
used to determine the client's mode of existence is existential 
anxiety. It is the illustrative fear of movement, of proceeding 
through life as nature exists. 

Unlike the directive approach that many of traditional counsel- 
ing practices have, the existential counselor assumes the role 
of a close concerned, but nonpossessi ve , friend who guides another 
onto the road of self-knowledge, self mastery, discipline and freedom 
and courage to be (Ofman, 1976). Clients from all racial, ethnic, 
and national backgrounds are received with the same psychotherapeutic 

eros (Vontress, 1983). 

The systematic approach to counseling (Gunnings, 1976) offered 
yet another theoretical orientation. This approach had three mutually 
reinforcing goals: (1) to enable the client to exert effective 
control over those aspects of the environment that are instrumental 
in goal attainment, (2) to enable the client to .develop a decentralized 
power base so that efforts to achieve will have reasonable probabili- 
ties of success, and (3) to assure that the client develops a hopeful 
perspective towards exchanges with self and subsystems in the relevant 
envi ronment. 

Basic to the systemic approach is the postulation that in 



30 



I 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
30 

exchange with the social environment, the individual takes an active 
role. The conditions of the social environment are ever responded 
to or perceived directly. The individual responds to the interpreted 
meaning of environmental conditions and, in the process, the individual 
is engaged in a series of cognitive-conceptual processes whereby 
the environment is selectively perceived, constructed, and evaluated 
in terms that are significant to the individual (Charon, 1985). 
In this rational and conscious process, the individual deliberately 
and consciously selects from among the available alternatives those 
options that are rational (i.e., perceived to be beneficial to 
the individual's goals and purposes). Moreover, in this active 
exchange with the socio-physical environment, the person is affected 
by the environment as the environment is altered by the person. 
In short, systemic counseling emphasized client empowerment so 
that environmental restrictions may be overcome in the pursuit 
of the continual expansion of self boundaries through more effective 
person-environment exchange (Gunnings & Stewart, 1986). 

Summary 

The focus in this section was on selected traditional theoretical 
approaches to counseling and cross-cultural models thought to be 
effective when working with ethnic minority clients. While the 
scope of this review did not contain all of the information available 
for use with ethnic minority groups, it can be used as a reference 
source for trainees, practitioners, and counselor educators. 



ERIC 



31 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
31 

It is also important to point out that there is not one approach 
that can address the needs of all ethnic minority clients. Rather, 
when working with these and other clients, consideration should 
be given to all of the model s/approaches-both traditional and cross- 
cultural. Finally, it is suggested that training activities and 
coursework at both pre-service and in-service levels make the greatest 
difference in the delivery of mental health services to clients. 

Barriers to Counseling 
Counseling may be legitimately viewed as a process of inter- 
personal interaction and communication. For effective counseling 
to occur, the counselor and client must be able to appropriately 
and accurately send and receive both verbal and nonverbal messages 
(Sue, 1981). While breakdowns in communication often happen between 
members who share the same culture, the problem is exacerbated 
between people of different racial or ethnic backgrounds (Attneave, 
1972; Pedersen, 1976; Ruiz & Padilla, 1977; Stadler & Rynearson, 
1981; Sue, 1981; and Thompson & Cimbolic, 1978). Misunderstandings 
that arise from cultural variations in communication may lead to 
alienation and/or the ability to develop trust and rapport. As 
suggested by Yamatoto, Hames, and Palley (1968), this may result 
in the early termination of therapy. 

In one of the most comprehensive studies ever conducted on 
ethnic minority clients, Sue, Allen, and Conaway (1978) found that 
Asian American, Blacks, Chicanes, and Native Americans terminate 



32 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
32 

counseling after only one contact at a rate of approximately 50%. 
This was in sharp contrast to a 30% rate for Anglo clients. These 
investigators contended that it is the inappropriateness of 
interpersonal interactions—what happens between counselor and 
client—that account for this premature termination. 

Previous research on minority clients' use of mental health 
services, for the most part, regarded race as the most salient 
and challenging counselor client difference (Banks, 1971; Bryson 
& Fardo, 1975; Harrison, 1975; Jones & Seaquel ; 1977; Kadushin, 
1972, 1974; & Sattler, 1977). In recent years, however, attention 
has focused on variables such as: the appropriateness of various 
conceptual and theoretical orientations for counseling, client 
expectation?, interpersonal interactions; and counseling style 
(Atkinson, Maruyana & Matsui , 1978; Daughinais, Dauphinais & Rowe, 
1981; Proctor & Rosen, 1981; Sue, 1978) as being important to the 
counseling relationship. 

In a study conducted by Proctor and Rosen (1981) on client 
expectations and preferences for counselor race and their relation 
to intermediate treatment outcome, the authors concluded that although 
clients expected their counselor* to be white, about half of the 
black and white clients indicated that they had no preference for 
counselor race. Further, the study concluded that satisfaction 
with treatment was not related to the nature of clients' racial 
makeup of the treatment dyad. Jackson and Kirschner (1973), in 



ERLC 



33 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
33 

a earlier study on blacks, concluded that preference for same or 
different race counselor was associated with the strength of the 
black student's racial identity. 

Bryson and Cody (1973) in a study on the relationship between 
race and the extent of client understanding of counselors found 
that their clients (black and white) were not affected by the race 
of their counselor. However, they reported that black counselor 
indicated that they understood their black clients better than 
their white clients. Daughinais, Daughinais and Row (1981) in 
a study on the effectiveness or utility of a specific counseling 
style with American Indian high school students concluded that 
students preferred a directive or culturally appropriate style. 

Inasmuch as the general body of literature supported the 
contention that clients preferred interaction with counselors of 
the same race, cross-cultural counseling proponents concur that 
counselors who (a) are trained to be sensitive to the needs of 
their clients; (b) understand the cultural differences and historical 
backgrounds of clients; and (c) are knowledgeable of the theoretical 
and conceptual underpinnings, can be cross-culturally effective, 
regardless of the counselor's race (Sanchez & Atkinson, 1981). 

Johnson and Vestermark (1970), in discussing impediments 
of the counseling relationship, described counselor cultural 
encapsulation, a term first coined by Wreen (1962). A culturally 
encapsulated counselor is one who disregards cultural variations 



ERLC 



34 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
34 

among clients in a dogmatic adherence to some universal notion 
of technique-oriented truth. 

Padilla, Ruiz, and Alvarex (1975) have identified three major 
impediments/barriers to counseling a non-Latino client. Sue and 
Sue (1977) generalized these barriers to all third world people. 
They are: (a) language differences; (b) class bound values; and 
(c) culture bound values. Because of the importance of each within 
the counseling relationship, a description follows. 

Language differences - Much of the criticism related to the 
traditional counseling role has focused on the central importance 
of verbal interaction and rapport in the counseling relationship. 
This heavy reliance by counselors on verbal interaction to build 
rapport presupposes that the participants in a counseling dialogue 
are capable of understanding each other. Yet, many counselors 
fail to understand the client's language and its nuances sufficiently 
so as to make rapport building possible (Vontress, 1973). Furthermore, 
educationally and economically disadvantaged clients often lack 
the prerequisite verbal skills required to benefit from "talk therapy" 
(Calia, 1966; Tyler, 1964), especially when confronted by a counselor 
who relies on complex cognitive and conative concepts to generate 
client insight. 

Sue and Sue (1977) have pointed out that the use of standard 
English with a lower class or bilingual client may result in 
misperception of the class or the client's strengths and weaknesses. 



ERIC 



35 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
35 

Wilson & Calhoun (1974) have indicated that the counselor who is 
unfamiliar with a client's dialect or language system will be unlike- 
ly to succeed in establishing rapport. Furthermore, Vontress (1973) 
suggested that counselors need to be familiar with minority groups' 
body language or nonverbal communication styles lest they misinterpret 
the meaning of postures, gestures, and inflections. Vontress (1976) 
also indicated that psychological factors that are characteristic 
of racial and ethnic minorities reserve in self-disclosure, self- 
rejection, machismo, personalism, poor attending behavior, and 
modesty also constitute barriers in the counseling relationship. 
Atkinson, et al . , (1979) contended that the inability to communicate 
effectively in the client's language may contribute significantly 
to the poor acceptance which counseling has received from minorities. 

Class -Bound Values 

Differences in values between counselor and client that are 
basically due to class differences are relevant to minority group/- 
cross-cultural counseling since, almost by definition, many minority 
group members are also of lower socioeconomic class (Atkinson, 
et al., 1979, 1981). Furthermore, differences in attitudes, behaviors, 
beliefs and values among the various socioeconomic groups also 
constitute cultural differences. The interaction of social class 
and behavior has been well documented by Hollingshead (1949). 
The importance of social class for school counseling has been discussed 
by Bernard (1963). 



36 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

36 

Combining the results of several studies, Havinghurst and 
Neugarten (1962) concluded that at least 50% of the American 
population fall into either the upper lower or lower lower socio- 
economic classes, suggesting that a large portion of the counselor's 
potential clientele may be from these socioeconomic classes. The 
impact of social class differences on counseling in general acquires 
added significance if one accepts the statement that existing counseling 
techniques are middle and upper class bound (Atkinson, et al . 1979; 

Sue & Sue, 1977). 

The fact that clients' socioeconomic status affect the kind 
of therapeutic treatment they receive has been well documented, 
Ryan and Gauer (1968), for instance, found that students from upper 
socioeconomic backgrounds have more exploratory interviews with 
counselors than do students representing other social classes. 
Hollingshead and Redlick (19858) also found that the level of 
therapeutic intensi veness also varies directly with socioeconomic 
background. 
Culture-Bound Values 

Culture bound values involve such elements as attitudes, 
beliefs, customs, and institutions. Counselors frequently impose 
their own cultural values upon minority clients, thereby reflecting 
an insensitivity to the clients' values (Atkinson, et al . , 1979). 

The role of the counselor's values on the counseling relation- 
ship, for some time, has been a controversial issue. The issue 



9 

ERJC 



37 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
37 

becomes even more poignant when a majority counselor and minority 
client interact (Pedersen, 1976, 1981; Sue, 1981). 

While the major concern with this issue in its broader context 
centers on the counselor's influence upon the client, class and 
culture-bound differences can impede further rapport building. 
For example, one of the most highly valued aspects of counseling 
entails self disclosure, or a willingness of the client to let 
the counselor know what he/she thinks or feels. Many professionals 
argue that this is a necessary condition for effective counseling. 
Yet, for many minorities, self disclosure may be contrary to basic 
cultural values (Sue & Sue, 1972; Calia, 1966). Furthermore, Sue 
and Sue (1977) suggested that "self disclosure is itself a cultural 
value and counselors who value verbal, emotional, and behavioral 
expressiveness as goals in counseling are transmitting their own 
cultural values" (p. 425). In addition, they suggested that this 
Western framework of counseling holds many values and characteristics 
that are different from third world groups. 

Sanchez and Atkinson (1983), in a study with Mexican American 
students on cultural values, concluded that students with a strong 
commitment to the Mexican American culture expressed the greatest 
preference for an ethically similar counselor and were least willing 
to self disclose. They also concluded that these clients preferred 
the directive counseling style to a nondirective one, suggesting 
that this approach was more compatible with their cultural values. 



ERIC 



38 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
38 

Dauphinais, et al . (1981) in a replication of the Atkinson, et 
al. study with American Indian high school students also found 

similar results. 

Sue and Sue (1977) indicated that another factor that should 
be considered in counseling cross-cultural clients is the implicit 
assumption that a clear distinction can be made between mental 
and physical illness and health. But as the authors pointed out, 
minority group cultures may not be able to make this distinction, 
thus leading to problems within the counseling encounter. According 
to these authors, not only are nonphysical problems most likely 
to be referred to a physician, priest, or minister, but third world 
clients operating under this orientation may enter counseling expect- 
ing to be treated by counselors in the manner they expect priests 
or doctors to behave. Sue (1981) also asserted that relationships 
with minority members outside their family may be indicative of 
their cultural upbringing. 
Ethnic-Racial Group Characteristics 

This section will present a description of the familial, 
psychological, educational, and economic characteristics of the 
four ethnic groups selected for this study. This section will 
also focus on specific recommendations for practitioners working 
with ethnic-minority groups. 
Native Americans 

Although attention has been focused on the problems of Native 



9 

ERJC 



39 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
39 

Americans-poor health, failure to be assimilated into the American 
culture, unemployment, and poverty, there is much that still remains 
unreported about present day Native Americans (Dillard, 1983). 
Most importantly, counseling literature, particularly research 
literature, has been described as extremely scanty and at best 
spotty (Trimble & Lafromboise, 1985). Trimble and Haye- (1984) 
in an overview of Indian counseling literature, concluded that 
there were enormous gaps and far more questions were raised than 
there appeared to be answers. 

Much of the confusion and obscurity about present day Indians 
can be found in the definition of this ethnic group. Common labels 
include Native American, American Indian, Alaska Native, and New 
Indian. The first two terms are perhaps the most popular among 
members of this cultural group and will persist throughout this 
discussion. 

According to the 1980 United States Census, the Native American 
Indian population increased from approximately 760,000 in 1970 
to 1,361, 969 in 1980. This figure did not include approximately 
56,000 Eskimos and Aleuts in Alaska, collectively referred to as 

Alaska Natives. 

The Native American population is heavily concentrated in 
the Southwest, North Carolina, Oklahoma, and Alaska. California 
has the largest number of Native Americans found in any state (198,000), 
followed by Okalhoma (169,297), Arizona (152,610), New Mexico (104,634), 



ERIC 



40 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
40 

North Carolina (64,519), and Alaska (56,326). 
Soci oeconomi c Chara c teri sti cs 

In 1970, most Native Americans remained predominantly rural. 
Today, about 50% of all Indian Alaska Native people live in large 
cities (U.S. Census, 1980). 

The unemployment rate for Native Americans is alarmingly 
high. Although the rate varies between the various tribes current 
figures indicate that there was a 40% unemployment rate (U.S. Census, 
1980). In a survey conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor (1973) 
on the reasons for joblessness on Indian reservations, unavailability 
of jobs was ranked number one by respondents. Other reasons included 
lack of vocational education, lack of general education, and 
transportation difficulties. Alcoholism and lack of day care and 
supportive services were listed as the least important reasons 
for joblessness. 

Josephy (1971), Pepper (1973), and Richardson (1981) summarized 
some of the broad socioeconomic characteristics of American Indian 
cultures: 

1. The average annual income of Native Americans ($1500) 

is 75% below that of the national average and $1000 less 
than that of blacks; 

2. The unemployment rate for Native Americans is ten times 
the national average; 

3. The life expectancy of Indians is 44 years; 



41 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
41 

4. Infant mortality for Native Americans after the first 
month of life is three times the national average; 

5. Fifty percent of Indian school children (double the 
national average) fail to complete high school; 

6. Suicide rate for Indian teenagers is twice that of 
whites. 

In addition to the socioeconomic and cultural barriers that 
have contributed to the persistence of problems among Native Americans, 
Johnson (1975) reported that the prejudice and discrimination that 
this cultural group is frequently subjected to often hinders its 
chances for upward mobility, 
Famil ial characteristics 

The Native American family is an important dimension that 
must be underscored if counselors are to understand this ethnic 
group. The separation of children from their families is perhaps 
the most tragic and destructive aspect of American Indian life 
today (linger, 1978). 

The Association on American Indian Affairs jAAIA) in 1969 
and again in 1974 surveyed states with large Native American popula- 
tions and concluded that approximately 25-35% of all Indian children 
are separated from their families and placed in foster homes, adoptive 
homes, or institutions. According to the AAIA (1974), in Minnesota 
one in every eight Indian children under 18 years of age was living 



ERLC 



42 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
42 

in an adoptive home, and nearly one in every four children under 
the age of one was adopted. 

The federal of board school and dormitory programs, developed 
by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), which prior to 1975 was 
completely run by Non-Indians, also contributes to the destruction 
of Native American family and community life (Blanchard, 1977; 
Unger, 1977). For example, on the Navajo Reservation about 90% 
of the BIA school population in grades K-12 live at board schools 
(AAIA, 1974). The language spoken by the vast majority of children 
attending these schools is not English, thereby making it difficult 
for them to verbalize or comprehend the English language (Pepper, 
1973). 

In addition to the trauma of separation from their families, 
most Native American children in placement or in institutions have 
to cope with the problems of adjusting to a social and/or cultural 
environment much different from their own. This is particularly 
true when one considers that the majority of all children adopted 
are by nonlndian couples (Ulger, 1977). 

The harsh living conditions in many Indian communities have 
been cited as prompting the removal of children from their families 
by welfare agencies. Paradoxically, this too makes it difficult 
for the vast majority of Indian people to qualify as foster or 
adoptive parents. Additionally, because these conditions are often 
viewed as the primary cause of family breakdown and because generally 



ERIC 



43 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

43 

there is no end to Indian poverty in sight, government agencies 
often fail to recognize immediate, practical means to reduce the 
incidence of neglect or separation (Attneave, 1977; Unger, 1977). 
Further, Manson, (1982) described Native Americans as the most 
neglected of all ethnic groups in the United States with respect 
to the provision of mental health services. 

In focusing on the mental health needs of Native Americans, 
Attneave (1985) stated that since there are more than 400 Native 
American tribes in the United States, each with its own language, 
customs, history, and styles or relationships, there exists a greater 
tendency for problems to develop in the delivery of mental health 
services. Further, she suggested that in delivering services to 
Native Americans, it is important that practitioners not only be 
familiar with the social and economic conditions impacting on this 
group as a whole, but with the cultural patterns indigenous to 
each group. 

Miller (1982) presented nine strategies that could facilitate 
an effective counseling relationship with Indian^ cl ients . Among 
the strategies, she recommended the following as most useful: 
(1) Personal ethnic identity in itself is hardly sufficient for 
understanding the influence of culture on the client. (2) The 
client's history contains a number of strengths that can promote 
and facilitate the counseling process. (3) A counselor should be 
aware of his or her own biases about cultural pluralism. (4) A 



ERIC 



44 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
44 

counselor should encourage the client to become active in the process 
of identifying and learning the various elements associated with 
positive growth and development. (5) The most important elements 
in the counseling relationship are empathy, caring and a sense 
of the importance of the human potential (p. 182). Trimble (1976) 
maintained that if the counselor can keep the relationship on the 
client's terms, not the "counselor's naive terms," the client may 
be less likely to drop out of the counseling relationship. 
Additionally, he stated that the "core of the problem between a 
nonlndian counselor and an Indian student is one of communication 
and mutual understanding" (p. 77). 
Black Americans 

Like all Americans, blacks share the dream that each succeeding 
generation of children will get a better education, work a better 
job, and live in a better home. 

While it is true that the individual blacks have made substantial 
progress in this country, life for the majority of black Americans 
remains a struggle for survival and equality. One only has to 
look at the statistics to get a clear picture of the demise of 
black Americans: 

1. During the past 15 years, the number of black families 
headed by women has soared 113 percent, and today 49 
percent of all black families are without a father in 
the home. 



45 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
45 

2. The number of black children living with both parents 
dropped during the same period from 58 percent to 41 
percent, while the percentages in single parent situations 
increased. 

3. Since 1960, unemployment rates for blacks have been 
consistently double those for whites. As of 1985, the 
jobless rate for blacks was 15.1 percent and 6.2 percent 
for Whites. Teenage unemployment was 42.4 percent (U.S. 
Census, 1985). 

Soci oeconomi c Characteri sti cs 

According to the United States Current Population Reports 
(1980), there were 26,488,218 black Americans (12% of total national 
population) living in the United States. 

The regional population distribution of black Americans in 
1979 indicated that 20% of black Americans live in suburbs, 25% 
in nonmetropolitan areas, and 55% in central cities (U.S. Bureau 
of Census, Current Population Reports, 1979). 

In black married couple families, the median income for 1985 
was $23,420* compared to $30,060 for white husband-wife families. 
Additionally, black persons below the poverty level rose from 8.6 
million in 1980 to 9.5 million in 1984 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 
1985). 

Familial Characteristics 

Historically, it has been the strong black family, reinforced 



46 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
46 

by the black church, that has been a kind of shield against the 
external pressures and negative signals in the world with which 
blacks have had to content for years (Height, 1985). That shield, 
however, because of the weakening of the black family (broken homes, 
teenage parenting, etc.), has become dangerously thin. 

Specific to black teenagers, the problem of pregnancy has 
reached epidemic proportions. In core cities like Chicago and 
Washington, D.C., nearly all children born to teenagers are born 
out of wedlock. This phenomenon of babies raising babies deprives 
offspring of the benefits of being raised by mature persons with 
well developed parental skills. Consequently, infants fail to 
receive proper environmental stimulation, nurturing and language 
development (Copies, 1986). 

Compared to five years ago, black children are now more likely 
to be born in poverty, lack early prenatal care, have a single 
mother, an unemployed parent, be unemployed themselves as teenagers, 
and not go to college after high school graduation (Edelman, 1986). 

The statistics highlighting the problems and issues surrounding 
the black family might be less devastating if the extended black 
family network were still strong (Edelman, 1986). But as Edelman 
pointed out, this unit that, heretofore was relied upon for emotional 
and economic support has also become too fragmented (as a result 
of unemployment, economic depression, and discrimination) to serve 
as the source of support it once did. 



ERIC 



47 



t 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
47 

Educational Characteristics 

The United States Bureau of Census, Current Population Reports 
(1979), indicated an increase in school enrollment of blacks across 
most age groups. Substantial growth in school attendance among 
blacks enrolled in school above the compulsory attendance age of 
16 reflects a rise in the number of blacks now graduating from 
high school and enrolling in higher education, particularly prior 
to the 1980' s. 

Blacks, however, in the 1980' s are encountering a number 
of educational and socioeconomic setbacks, despite their high interest 
in pursuing postsecondary education and despite the gains made 
by them prior to the 1980 's. 

In a recent report commissioned by the College Board (1985), 
the following trends for blacks were noted: 

1. College attendance and completion rates have dropped 
for black students since 1975, despite the fact that 
graduation rates (from high school) have improved over 
the past two decades. 

2. Black students are "disproportionately more likely to 

be enrolled in special education programs and less likely 
to be enrolled in programs for the gifted and talented 
than are whites". 

3. Black high school students are overrepresented in 



9 

ERJC 



48 



Cross Cultural Counseling 



48 

vocational education and underrepresented in academic 
programs. 

4, Black college bound seniors in 1981 took fewer years 

of course work in mathematics, physical science and social 
studies than their peers. Moreover, where number of 
coursework was similar, course content differed. For 
example, according to the report, "black seniors in 1980 
were as likely as white to have taken at least three 
years of math, but they were much less likely to have 
taken algebra, geometry, or the higher level courses. 
Astin (1984), in discussing the educational progress of blacks 
and other minorities, indicated that there was a direct link between 
certain family background characteristics and educational progress. 
He further asserted that parental income alone predicts persistence 
and academic achievement for minority groups but is unrelated to 
college performance for whites. 

Support of this contention can be seen in a survey commissioned 
by the College Board (1984) of 311 minority educators. Their findings 
were that encouragement and support from family members contributed 
heavily to the enrollment and completion of baccalaureate degree 
by minority individuals. 

In light of the contention that the educational status of 
blacks and other ethnic minorities, particularly those on the lower 
end of the socioeconomic ladder, will continue to be affected by 



ERLC 



49 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
49 

emerging policy trends, minimum competency tests, etc., school 
counselors and teachers must become much more active in the education 
of these groups. The College Board Commission (1984) made the 
following recommendations: (1) that school counselors and teachers 
make special efforts to assist minority students in understanding 
the relationships between their education and their future careers 
and other life options; (2) that secondary school counselors and 
teachers encourage minority students to enroll in college preparatory 
and to take courses in mathematics, languages, natural science, 
and social science; and (3) that the school leadership make greater 
efforts to ascertain and respond to the concerns of minority parents, 
to involve them in the operation of the school, and to assist them 
in understanding the objectives, procedures, and practices of the 
schools. 
Asian Americans 

Because of the diversity of this ethnic group, the Asian 
American's own identity varies from generation to generation (Sue, 
D.W. & Sue, S., 1985). Professional literature refers to members 
of this ethnic group in a number of ways. Among them are Asian, 
Asian American, Chinese, Chinese Americans, Orientals, Malays, 
Japanese, Guamians, Red Guard, Yellow Peril and Yellow Brotherhood 
(Sue, 1981). Wrong (1972) and Sue (1979) maintained that the term 
"Asian Americans" was adopted to attain ethnicity that would contri- 
bute to group solidarity, personal identity, pride, and identity 



ERIC 



50 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

50 

in the political arena. Sue and Sue (1985) suggested that the 
terms Asian, Asian Americans, and Orientals are broad and cut across 
cultural and geographic boundaries that may include those ethnic 
groups listed above. The two terms, Asian Americans and Chinese 
Americans, will be used interchangeably within this discussion 
to refer to members who comprise this ethnic group. 
Socioeconomic Characteristics 

The Chinese American population is concentrated mostly in 
urban areas, but can also be found in suburban and farm areas. 
According to the U.S. Census figures for 1980 there were 806,027 
Chinese Americans residing in this country. Honolulu had the largest 
Chinese population followed by San Francisco, Oakland, Boston, 
and Chicago. 

The unemployment rate for Asian Americans is relatively low, 
4.7%, compared to other ethnic groups. Moulton (1978) indicated 
that for the most part, Chinese Americans are willing to work at 
substandard menial jobs rather than be unemployed. Additionally, 
the desire to work among this ethnic group seems to be related 
to the traditional Chinese values that occupational achievement 
is highly prized (Dillard, 1983). 

The socioeconomic levels among Asian Americans varies. Lyman 
(1974) suggested that middle class Asian Americans are on the rise. 
However, a closer analysis reveals that Asian Americans are lower 
in income and higher in unemployment than the white population. 



51 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

51 

This disparity is even greater when one gives consideration to 
the fact that, generally, Chinese Americans achieve higher educ- 
ational levels than whites (Sue, 1981). 
Educational Characteristics 

Traditional Asian Americans place strong emphasis on educational 
achievement. Educational achievement is perceived as a means of - 
attaining economic and social mobility, as well as a way of improving 
life conditions. According to Sue and Kirk (1973), many young 
Chinese Americans pursue careers in nonverbal fields such as science, 
rather than careers which require proficiency in verbal skills, 
such as the humanities. Daniels and Kitano (1970) and Sue (1980) 
asserted that, by proportion, Asian Americans complete a higher 
number of grades than any other group. 

The conclusion can be drawn that Asian Americans have been 
successful in their educational attainment, however, it would be 
a misrepresentation of this group to overlook individual differences 
with respect to those individuals who have been less successful 
in their pursuits (Sue, 1981). Additionally, within the area of 
education, consideration must be given to language characteristics 
of this ethnic group. While the vast majority of Chinese Americans 
born in the United States speak mostly English, the language of 
recent Chinese immigrants is Cantonese, Chinese and what Lyman 
(1974) refers to as "pigeon English", a less developed form of 
English. 



ERIC 



52 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

52 

Familial Characteristics 

Although the Chinese family, like all other groups in America, 
is changing, it still retains many of the cultural values from 
its past (Sue, 1981). The Chinese family is an ancient and complex 
institution, and the roles of family members have long been rigidly 
defined. The Chinese and Japanese families are traditionally 
patriarchial with communication and authority flowing vertically 
from top to bottom. Children are taught to obey parents, to respect 
elders, and to create a good family name by outstanding achievement 
in some aspect of life; for example, by academic or occupational 
success. 

Additionally, parents emphasize obligation of the child to 
the family. The structure is so arranged that conflicts within 
the family are minimized; each member has his/her own role to play 
which does not interfere with that of another. If a person has 
feelings which might disrupt family peace and harmony, he is expected 
to hide them. Restraining of potentially disruptive emotions is 
so strongly emphasized in the development of the Asian character 
that the lack of outward signs has given rise to the prevalent 
opinion among Westerners that Asians are "inscrutable" (Atkinson, 
et al., 1979; 1981). Further because misbehaviors (juvenile 
delinquency, academic failure, and mental disorders) are looked 
upon as being disgrace upon the entire family and because of the 
low official rates of juvenile delinquency (Kitano, 1967; Abbott 



ERIC 



53 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
53 

& Abbott, 1968), psychiatric contact and hospitalization (Kimmich, 
1960; Sue & McKinney, 1975) and low rates of divorce (Sue, S., 
& Kitano, 1973), Asian Americans are looked upon as relatively 
well adjusted. Additionally, the degree to which Chinese and Japanese 
Americans have interacially married with white Americans has also 
been used as a measuring stick to ascertain their degree of adjustment 
and assimilation. For example, in areas such as Los Angeles, San 
Francisco, and Fresno, California, that rate in 1970 had approached 
50% (Kikumura & Kitano, 1973; Tinker, 1973). 

Despite these evidences (educational attainment, low juvenile 
delinquency rate, interracial marriage) of success, Sue and Sue 
(1972) asserted that the transition between traditional and Western 
cultures presents many social and psychological conflicts for Asian 
Americans. Sue (1981) also asserted that because Asian Americans 
are portrayed as the "model" minority, they are thought to be immune 
to the forces of prejudice and discrimination. 
Hi spanics 

To begin with, there is no monolithic group known as Hispanics. 
While Hispanics do have a common language, Spanish, they are, in 
fact, an aggregate group of distinct subcultures (Puerto Ricans, 
Latinos or Latin Americans, Mexican Americans, and Cubans) each 
emanating from different geographic areas. However, the term "His- 
panic" is gradually replacing labels that were previously used 
to describe people of Spanish origin and descent. 



54 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
54 

Soci oeconomi c Characteri sti cs 

Hispanics are currently the second largest and fastest growing 
minority in the United States, having registered 14.6 million in 
1980 (U.S. Census, 1980). This figure did not include U.S. citizens 
in Puerto Rico who are of Spanish descent. 

While the population as a whole was growing at a 3% rate 
during the 1980-1985 time period, the Hispanic population was increas- 
ing at a 16% rate. The U.S. Department of Commerce (1983) estimates 
also indicated that the Hispanic population will continue to show 
a substantial increase in population with a projected increase 
of 16.9 million in 1985. 

The Hispanic population, despite the fact that they are wide- 
spread, are still mostly concentrated in the five southwestern 
states of Arizona, California, Colorado, New Mexico- and Texas. 
What is even more dramatic is that both California and Texas, which 
had in 1970 the first and second largest Hispanic populations, 
increased the share of this population with 50% of the nation's 
Hispanics now residing in these states. 

Additionally, the social and economic problems surrounding 
the Hispanic community are also showing marked increase. In 1983, 
for example, 25.2% of the Hispanic population were still living 
in poverty. Puerto Rican families were most affected, with 41.9% 
in poverty followed by 24.1% of Mexicans, 23.6% Central and South 



ERIC 



55 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
55 

Americans, 1.5% others of Spanish origin and 12.9% Cubans (U.S. 
Department of Commerce, 1983). 

1. The median family income for 1982 was $16,000 compared 
to $24,000 for non-Hispanic families. The proportion 
of Hispanics below the poverty level in 1982 was 30%. 

2. The average number of children was 2.3 compared to 1.9 
for non-Hispanics. 

3. By 1983, 23% of Hispanic families were maintained by 
women compared to 15% for non-Hispanic families. (The 
Puerto Rican subgroup had a 40% female-headed household). 

4. The most often spoken language within the home is Spanish. 

5. The Hispanic unemployment rate for 1982 was about one 
and one-half times that of non-Hispanics, or 13.8%. 

In short, the socioeconomic picture of the Hispanic population 
suggested that they are among the lowest paid individuals in this 
country. Delgado (1986) best summarized the condition of this 
ethnic group in her statement that "the Hispanic population is 
still hurting". 
Fami 1 i al characteri sti cs 

The Hispanic culture, historically, seems to hinge on one 
important factor, the family, which was traditionally regarded 
as a source for social, psychological and financial support. 
However, existing socio-economic conditions and sociocultural factors 
have affected this unit of support. 



ERLC 



56 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
56 

The makeup of the Hispanic family has also had a significant 
impact on the overall family unit. Today, the Hispanic family 
can best be described as one of youth, with 42% of the total Hispanic 
population falling under 20 years of age,. Conversely, 3% of all 
Hispanics in 1983 were 70 years of age and over. 

The cultural values of present day Hispanics are yet another 
area that has impacted heavily on the family unit. According to 
Fitzpatrick (1972), the degree to which Hispanics have adopted 
present day living styles, customs, values, and attitudes impacts 
on traditional family cultural values. Cabrera (1963) had earlier 
argued that many Hispanics are caught between two conflicting 
societies, a situation that is comparable to having a split per- 
sonality. He further asserted that as changes occur, there are 
conflicts in cultural roles, and the conflicts that can result 
due to changes in cultural roles. Cabrera also asserted that the 
conflict that can take place as a result of the changing cultural 
roles (traditional versus dominant Anglo Society) is one of the 
most important sources of mental health problems among the Hispanic 
culture . 

Despite the social problems and conflicts encountered by 
this group, there is a serious problem with their use of mental 
health services (Sue, 1981; Padilla & DeSnyder, 1985; Rogler, et 
al., 1983). Rogler, et al . used two theoretical perspectives to 



57 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

57 

explain underuse in terms of (a) indigenous Hispanic social 
organizations that serve as therapeutic alternatives to the official 
mental health agency system; and (b) the barrier theory which 
explains low use of it as a result of institutional and structural 
impediments inherent in the mental health delivery system. Specifi- 
cally,, it is believed that failure of mental health delivery systems 
to acknowledge Hispanic language and culture is a major factor 
in client underuse. 

Acosta, Yamamoto, and Evans (1982) also asserted that the 
persistent problem of Hispanics dropping out of psychotherapy is 
related to unmet role expectations. These assertions were earlier 
echoed by Atkinson, Morten and Sue (1979). 

In as much as Hispanics' underuse of mental health services 
has been greatly discussed in the literature (Padilla, Carlos, 
& Keefe, 1976; Rogler et al . , 1983; Ruiz, Casas, & Padilla, 1977; 
Sanchez & King, 1986), the following recommendations are made for 
practitioners in their delivery of services: 

1. Counselors must be knowledge and understanding of both 
minority cultural values and beliefs as well as their 
mani festations . 

2. Counselors must be aware of client's environmental 
conditions that may be serving as mediators of positive 
or negative conditions (Padilla & Desnyder, 1985). 

3. Counselors must take into account the acculturati ve level 



58 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

58 

of the client and differences in acculturation between 
members of the same family when working with Hispanics. 
4. Counselors must be aware of the impact the family can 
have on Hispanic clients, and where appropriate, be able 
to incorporated the family systems approach. 
Educational Characteristics 

In educational status, Hispanics 25 years and older continue 
to compare unfavorably with the rest of the U.S. population. The 
Census Bureau (1983) reported hat 58% of the Hispanic population 
had completed four years of high school compared to 45% in 1970; 
but 88% of non-Hispanics had a high school diploma. 

In a study commissioned by the National Center for Education 
Statistics (1982) of Hispanic and non-Hispanic white series of 
factors interfering with their school work, there were four factors 
for which the differences were the greatest: worry over money 
problems (45.5% Hispanics versus 27.4% whites); family obligations 
(39.3% Hispanics versus 23.6% whites); lack of a good place to 
study at home (36.7% Hispanics versus 22.1% whites); disinterest 
on + he part of parentis) (33.7% Hispanics versus 19.4% whites). 

The National Center for Education Statistics (1977) had earlier 
concluded that there was a direct relationship between the language 
and drop-out rate among Hispanics. More recent studies also 
indicated that language is, indeed a significant prediction of 



ERIC 



59 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

59 

achievement in relationship to other factors (De Avila, 1980; De 
Avila, 1981). 

In the study conducted by De Avila (1980) related to the 
ethnic background, socioeconomic status, language proficiency and 
achievement in reading and mathematics, her findings were that: 

(1) there were, as expected, significant difference in achievement; 

(2) when socioeconomic background was controlled, these differences 
were virtually eliminated between black and white children and 
slightly reduced with Hispanics; and (3) when language and 
socioeconomic status for Hispanics were controlled, the differences 
in achievement were eliminated. 

De Avila's (1981) study of 408 children from seven 
ethnolinguistic groups also concluded that proficiency in English 
was the most significant predictor of academic achievement relative 
to other factors, including cognitive style, cognitive development, 
etc. De los Santos (1982) suggested that because Hispanics, more 
than any other ethnic group retain use of their language, this 
impacts significantly on their academic achievement. 

Summary 

Because of the multicultural overtones of today's society, 
it is highly improbable that counselors can escape interacting 
with ethnic minority individuals. To be effective in the delivery 
of services to these individuals, counselors must be motivated 
to learn about ethnic minority group characteristics, i.e., 



60 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
60 

psychological, educational, familial, and how these impact on both 
the individual and the counseling relationship. Additionally, it 
is important to point out that while information has been presented 
primarily on the four ethnic minority groups selected for this 
study, counselors have a responsibility to concern themselves with 
information on the cultural patterns, mores, and other historical 
background information on all culturally/ethnically" different clients. 
Finally, it behooves the researcher to point out that while each 
ethnic minority group in our society may possess some of the 
characteristics assigned to, that group, it is highly unlikely that 
that individual will have all of the attributes of that group. 
Therefore, it is important that client needs be addressed on an 
individual versus a group basis. Moreover, it is recommended that 
counselors utilize the information provided in this discussion 
to enhance their awareness and to become sensitive to the culturally 
different and how these characteristics interact with the cultural 

patterns of society. 

Counselor-Education Training Program-An Assessment 
Counselor Education as a profession, and as an area of 
specialization, has occurred in the last 30 yeas (Wantz, Sherman, 
Hollis, 1982). Counselor education curricula are shaped by: (a) 
the standards established by national accrediting agencies, specifi- 
cally AACD/ACES and NCATE, and (b) certification requirements for 
school counselors as established by the various state departments 



61 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
61 

of education. 

Counselor preparation includes all educational programs 
administered in any department or college for preparation of college 
and university counselors, community college counselors, counseling 
psychologists, counselors for blacks and other special groups with 
culturally different backgrounds, counselors in group work, 
elementary school counselors, employment counselors, marriage and 
family counselors, mental health counselors, counselors for public 
offenders, rehabilitation counselors, and secondary school counselors 
(Wantz, Sherman & Hoi lis, 1982). 

Specific to the preparation of counselors for work with the 
culturally different, the Association for Counselor Education and 
Supervision (ACES) in 1979 recommended that counselor preparation 
should provide counselors with skills in the identification of 
developmental tasks, objectives and strategies for program 
implementation and evaluation appropriate to the specific populations 
served. 

Similar views were echoed earlier by the Association for 
Multicultural Counseling and Development (formerly the Association 
for Non-White concerns). In addition, AMCD took the position that 
minority-oriented counseling requires more specialized intensive 
training, experience, and evidence of expertise than traditional 
qeneralist counselor training currently provides (AMCD, 1978). 



62 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
62 

Further, Wilson and Stills (1981) recommended that individuals 
of different ethnicity seeking assistance need to be assured that 
the counselor is indeed competent in the treatment of their specific 
cultural needs in addition to their emotional needs. Additionally, 
the National Association of Social Workers (1980), American 
Psychological Association (1979), and NCATE (1977) also expressed 
similar views relative to the preparation of professionals who 
work with minority populations. 

How much progress has been made in the area of counselor 
preparation since these and other cross-cultural counseling issues 
were brought to the floor? What follows is an assessment of counselor 
education training programs. Specifically, the emphasis will be 
on the trends and status of these training programs as they relate 
to training practitioners for work with the culturally different. 

Counselor preparation training with an emphasis on human 
rights has been an area of concern for the past decade (Atkinson, 
Morten & Sue, 1979; Atkinson, 1983; Arrendondo, Dowd & Gonsalves, 
1980; Harper & Stone, 1974; McFadden, Quinn & Sweeney, 1978). 
In addition, several authors have recently charged that there are 
few, if any, counselor education programs in the United States 
wherein an undergraduate or graduate students can major, minor, 
or otherwise acquire systematic experiences in the problems and 
advantages of counseling these clients (Arrendo-Dowd & Gonsalvles, 



9 

ERJC 



63 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
53 

1980; Pedersen, Hoi will & Shapiro, 1978). Atkinson (1981) asserted 
that the same conclusions can be drawn about the broader area of 
human rights counseling. 

In discussing current practices related to the selection 
and training of human rights counselors, Atkinson (1981) asserted 
that without a proper recruitment effort, the pool of applicants 
from which counselor trainees are selected is not likely to be 
sensitive to or representative of minority population. Conclusions 
can be drawn about the broader area of human rights counseling. 

Further, Atkinson asserted that counselor education programs 
should design their selection procedures to eliminate discrimination 
against their selection procedures to eliminate discrimination 
against minority applicants and increase the chances of enrolling 
a broadly representative student population. 

In a national survey conducted by Ibrahim and Thompson (1982) 
on coursework offered by counselor education programs, they concluded 
that little attention is given to cross-cultural counseling despite 
the national attention this area has been drawing and the 
requirements of national accreditation committees that some emphasis 
be placed on multicultural education and sensitivity. In addition, 
Ibraham and Thompson emphasized the need for a broader approach 
to human concerns. 

Bernal and Padilla (1982) expressed similar views to those 
of Ibrahim and Thompson (1982). In a survey of accredited clinical 



64 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
64 

psychology programs on the training experiences of students to 
work with minority populations, they found that even though 
psychology faculty members indicated that preparing clinical psycho- 
logists to work with minorities was "somewhat important," there 
was ample evidence that such preparation actually received little 
attention. They concluded, therefore, that a "comprehensive multi- 
cultural approach to preparing minority and majority-culture students 
to work with minority populations was poorly represented in course- 
work, clinical practicum, research training and language requirements 
for the PhD degree in clinical psychology" (p. 786). McFadden 
and Wilson (1977) in an earlier survey found that fewer than 1% 
of the counselor education programs surveyed actually required 
their students to study non-white cultures. 

Hoi lis and Wantz (1980), on the other hand, in a survey of 
all counselor preparation programs in the United States and its 
territories ranked multicultural counseling tenth in terms of courses 
and program emphases. Data collected by Hollis and Eantz (1983) 
ranked it sixth. Therefore, their conclusion was that program 
emphasis is stronger and that multicultural counseling will continue 
to grow. 

The conclusion drawn is that there has been a marked increase 
in the amount of attention given to cross-cultural counseling issues 
and research it is apparent that there is much yet to be done to 
improve the quality of training for counselors to work with ethnic 



ERIC 



65 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

65 

minority groups (CASAS, 1984), Additionally, proponents argue 
that failure of counselor training programs to prepare counselors 
to work with the culturally different will result in a significant 
number of practitioners who will continue to provide inadequate 
counseling services (Casas, Ponterotto & Gutierrez, 1986). 

In light of the need for counselor education training programs 
to provide training experiences that are cross-cultural in nature, 
the following recommendations are made: (a) more counseling courses 
need to be developed with mul ticul tural ly sensitive oriented mate- 
rials (Pedersen, 1981); (b) more minority students need to be actively 
recruited into counselor preparation programs (Atkinson, 1977; 
Samuda, 1975); (c) training programs are going to need to involve 
more resources from the culturally diverse community; (d) in addition 
to cognitive content, affective experiences need to be incorporated 
into the curriculum to increase awareness of cultural differences 
in personalized ways (Pedersen, 1977); (e) students should be taught 
to examine how cultural factors in their own lives influence their 
professional philosophies and challenged to recognize their personal 
limits these impose on their counseling theories and practices 
(Paradis, 1981); and (f) practicum experiences should be in culturally 
diverse environments in which students might learn about their 
own limitations and biases when working among ethnic minority or 
economically disadvantaged persons (Katz, 1982). 

Additionally, Ibrahim and Arrendo (1986) recommended that 



66 



Cross Cultural Counseling 

66 

the Ethical Standards of the American Association for Counseling 
and Development (AACD, 1981) should be extended to address cross- 
cultural dimensions of counselor functions* Specifically, these 
authors suggested that the focus of the standards should (a) prepare 
culturally effective professionals, (b) provide ethnical and effective 
counseling services to American minority immigrant, refugee, and 
foreign student populations; (c) select and use culturally 
appropriate assessment techniques; and conduct culturally appropriate 
research. 

Cross-Cultural Training Models 
Cross-cultural counseling has been regarded as central to 
working with racial-ethnic minority groups (Arredondo-Dowd & Gonsalves 
1980; Ibrahim & Arrendondo, 1986; Pedersen, 1985; Sue, Akutsu, 
& Higashi, 1985). A cross-cultural emphasis in counselor education 
and training has received increased attention over the past decade. 
Courses, conferences, seminars, research studies, assessment and 
evaluation procedures and instrumentation and professional 
organization in the name of cross-cultural counselor education 
are reported in the literature and at national conventions with 
greater frequency. 

Theoretical models to understand persons in terms of cultural 
life experiences, societal forces and individual psychodynamics 
have been proposed by counseling practitioners (Arrendondo-Dowd, 
1981, LeVine & Padillo, 1980; Pedersen, 1978; Sue, 1977, 1978). 



67 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
67 

Sue, Bernier, Durran, Feinberg, Perdersen, Smith, & Vasquez-Nuttal 1 
(1982), Arrendondo-Dowd & Gonsalves, (1980), and Carney & Kahn 
(1984) have outlined cross-cultural competencies by which one can 
become culturally skilled and effective. Furthermore, Sue et al . 
(1982) have recommended that specific competencies be adopted by 
APA to be used as a guideline for accreditation. 

Additionally, a number of competency-based training models 
have been proposed (Ivey, 1977; Arrendondo-Dowd & Gonsalves, 1980; 
Copeland, 1983; Cases, 1982) that can be used at both the pre-service 
and the in-service training levels. Because these models can be 
used in diverse institutional settings, some will be presented 
below. 

Developing Intercultural ly Skilled Counselors (DISC) 

Pedersen and Marsella designed and directed the DISC project 
at the University of Hawaii for the years 1978-1981. The DISC 
project combined an emphasis on intercultural awareness of cultural 
bias, knowledge about culturally different dynamics of mental health, 
and skills to make culturally appropriate interventions. Participants 
in the project were graduate students from a range of disciplines 
related to mental health such as psychology, anthropology, public 
health, education, communication, and social work. According to 
Pedersen, (1983), the DISC project, with its interdisciplinary 
approach, provided "one possible basis for a comprehensive training, 
research, and development program (p. 26). 



ERIC 



68 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
68 

Bilingual Cross-Cultural Counseling Specialization 

The Bilingual cross-cultural program originated by Arrendondo, 
1979, is an interdisciplinary program of studies. The program 
includes coursework such as: Issues of Bilingual-Multicultural 
Education, Multicultural Counseling Perspectives, and Cultural 
Awareness Group Experience, and Psychological testing of Minorities. 
Participants are also required to be involved in a practicum 
experience in an approved bilingual placement of Bi 1 ingual-Mul icul tural 
Education, Multicultural Counseling Perspectives, and Cultural 
Awareness Group Experience, and Psychological testing of Minorities. 
Participants are also required to be involved in a practicum 
experience in an approved bilingual placement. The primary objective 
of this cross-cultural training program is to prepare culturally 
effective counselors to work with bilingual multicultural populations 
(Arredondo-Dowd, Gonsalves, 1980). 

Pedersen's Triad Model of Cross-Cultural Counselor Training 

Pedersen's Triad Model (1981) views counseling as a three-way 
interaction between the counselor, the problem (anticounselor) , 
and the client. Within the counseling situation, the anticounselor 
describes the client's functioning through the use of cultural 
similarity to that of the client. The overall aim of the 
anticounselor is to allow both counselor and client to cut through 
the pretense and defenses that both have erected against each other, 
i.e., value conflicts, fears, unspoken feelings and expectations. 



ERIC 



69 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
69 

According to Pedersen (1985), immediate and continuous feedback 
from the client, anticounselor, and counselor provides an opportunity 
for the counselor to increase skills in (1) perceiving the problem 
from the client's viewpoint, (2) recognizing specific sources. of 
resistance, 93) reducing counselor defensiveness, and (4) rehearsing 
recovery skills for getting out of trouble. 

Additional cross-cultural models include Copeland's (1983) 
models: (a) as separate course model; (b) the area of concentration; 
(c) the interdisciplinary model; and (d) the integration model, 
the Ivey Taxonomy (1977, 1980); and Mcdavis & Parker's (1977) 
separate course model. 

The University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Boston University, 
Western Washington University, and Teachers College, Columbia 
University also have an intact counseling program which emphasizes 
cross-cultural counseling. 

At the University of Massachusetts, students at both the 
masters and the doctoral levels are involved in specialized 
coursework and practicum experiences. At Teachers College, cross 
cultural counseling is one of six specializations in the counseling 
program. All students take the required generic courses and then 
select among courses in six content areas, such as social organization, 
to complement their area of specialization. The Program in 
Counseling Psychology in the School of Eduction at Boston University 
(BU) offers both the master's and doctoral degree. All program 



ERIC 



70 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
70 

students are required to take a course on cross-cultural perspectives 
in counseling psychology. Additionally, students in bilingual 
cross cultural counseling are required to enroll in two semesters 
of supervised practicum in an approved bilingual placement. 

Summary 

As has been indicated, there is a growing need for counselor 
education training programs to become cross-culturally sensitive. 
To some degree, the programs outlined above can serve as programmatic 
role models for the increasing numbers of counselor education 
training programs interested in improving their cross-cultural 
competence. 

However, it should be noted that because there continues 
to be confusion and a general lack of consensus on the whole issue 
of cross-cultural training and competence, direct attention needs 
to be focused on specific guidelines for improvement of the status 
of cross-cultural training in counselor education. Despite this 
contention, these models can be used as guidelines for incorporating 
cross-cultural training activities into existing training programs. 



ERIC 



71 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
71 

Chapter III 
METHODOLOGY 

This chapter describes the research methodology that will be used 
to implement this study. The research questions, subjects to be 
used, assessment measures, and procedures for gathering and interpre- 
ting the data will be described. 

SUBJECTS 

Subjects in this study will be secondary school counselors 
in the state of South Carolina. The participants will be randomly 
selected from the participating counselors during the 1989-1990 
school year. The selected participants will be individuals who 
were currently employed within the secondary school system across 
the state. Additionally, opinions and views should be representative 
of practicing counselors throughout the state. Counselors employed 
within the vocational system will not be included in this study 
due to their narrow focus of work. 

ASSESSMENT MEASURES 

The major method of assessment used in the study will be 
a 36 item questionnaire. Several items on the survey instrument 
were developed from a review of the extant literature on cross- 
cultural counseling. The instrument will be presented to subjects 
in the form of a three section questionnaire. Section one of the 
questionnaire consists of demographic information on the school 
(total population; racial and ethnic composition; percent of 



ERIC 



72 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
72 

bilingual and low-income students; size of the city/town in which 
the school was located; amount of cross-cultural counseling done 
within the school and the amount of cross-cultural counseling done 
by the counselor participating in the study; the counseling needs 
of minority students'; and counselor's views on the importance 
of selected cross-cultural counseling areas. The latter two items 
were designed to a 5 point Likert scale. Section two consists 
of pre-service and in-service counselor training experiences, and 
Section three consists of personal information on the counselor 
(sex, racial-ethnic information, graduate training, and number 
of years in the field of counseling. 

The questionnaire was designed and administered using the 
Total Design Method developed by Dillman (1978). The content 
validity of the survey will be derived through the use of a pilot 
study that will be administered to a panel of experts that are 
employed in the counseling profession. The internal validity of 
the two Likert scales on the instrument (questions 9 and 10) will 
be computed using the cronback Alpha formula. 

PILOT TESTING OF THE INSTRUMENT 
The purpose of the pilot study will be to identify problems 
with the administration of the instrument. Specifically, the 
researcher is interested in assessing the instrument in the following 
areas : 



ERIC 



73 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
73 

1. To determine if the directions to completing the question- 
naire were stated clearly. 

2. To determine if the questions were too restrictive, limited, 
or narrow in focus. 

3. To determine if the questions were designed in a manner 
which would, when taken as a whole, answer the basic 
philosophy and purpose of the study. 

The pilot study will be administered in August, 1989. 
PREPARATION FOR CONDUCTING THE STUDY 

A master list of secondary school counselors will be requested 
from the South Carolina State Department of Education. The researcher 
will randomly select participants using a random number table. 
Each school will be contacted to confirm counselors' placement 
and address. The researcher will then update the list based on 
information received from the schools. 

DATA COLLECTION 

The survey instrument and cover letter used to collect the 
data will be revised based upon information received from the pilot 
test. 

To ensure an orderly collection of data, the following steps 
will be taken: (a) data files will be established for completed 
and returned surveys; (b) each survey will be assigned a code number; 
and (c) a master list will be prepared to check off the respondent's 
name, and the date of the completed survey was posted. 



74 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
74 

Finally, each participant will be mailed a packet which will 
contain the following: 

(a) a self-addressed, stamped envelope; (b) a cover letter 
explaining the purposes of the study, the importance of each 
counselor's participation in the study, and the steps that would 
be taken to insure the confidentiality of the responses; and (c) 
the survey in a booklet form. The researcher established and will 
use a mailing sequence in accordance with Dillman's (1978) general 
recommendations. 

DATA ANALYSIS 

Analysis of the data will be undertaken using the SPSSX (1983) 
statistical procedures. 

Research questions will be answered using frequencies and 
percentages. Cross-tabulations will be done to determine significant 
differences between pertinent populations. Qualitative analysis 
will be used to interpret responses to the open-ended questions 
relative to the training needs identified by practicing counselors. 

SUMMARY 

The focus of this study will be to assess the extent of cross- 
cultural training of school counselors in South Carolina and tne 
need for training as identified by practicing counselors. The 
participants will be randomly selected from practicing secondary 
counselors across the state. 

The assessment measure used in the study will be a 36 item 



ERIC 



75 



Cross Cultural Counseling 
75 

questionnaire that will be field tested for content validity by 
means of a mailed pilot survey. Additionally, two Likert type 
questions, 9 and 10, on the entire sample will be tested for 
reliability using the Cronbach Alpha formula. Data analyses for 
this study will consist of frequencies, percentages, and cross-tabu- 
lations. Qualitative analysis will be used to interpret responses 
to several open-ended questions on the survey. 



7fi 



