DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 414 607 



CS 216 138 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Brannon, Lil, Ed.; Greene, Brenda M. , Ed. 

Rethinking American Literature. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, IL. 
ISBN-0-8141-4119-6 
1997-00-00 
2 84p . 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. Kenyon 
Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 41196-3050: $19.95 
members, $26.95 nonmembers). 

Collected Works - General (020) -- Opinion Papers (120) 

MF01/PC12 Plus Postage. 

* Authors; ^Cultural Differences; Culture Conflict; 
Curriculum Development; Higher Education; Introductory 
Courses; ^Literary Criticism; Literary History; *Theory 
Practice Relationship; ^United States Literature 
Educational Issues; *Ethnic Literature; Literary Canon; 
^Multicultural Literature; Regional Literature 



ABSTRACT 



This volume, the fourth in a series, brings together the 
conversations of the profession that were explored during the 1993 and 1994 
Summer Institute for Teachers of Literature. This anthology of essays 
considers what "American literature" is and how definitions of this category 
affect teaching practices. The essays argue for the recovery of often 
overlooked writers and works such as slave narratives, works by Native 
Americans, 19th-century women regionalists , and Af rican-Americai , 
Asian-American, Caribbean, and Latino liter ?.ture . Issues of pedagogy are also 
explored, i.e., current, debates ever canon formation, ethnicity, and 
representation. Essays and their authors are: (1) "Not Born on the Fourth of 

July: Cultural Differences and American Studies” (Gregory S. Jay); (2) "'Not 
in the Least American': Nineteeneh-Century Literary Regionalism as UnAme?::lean 
Literature" (Judith Fetterley) ; <3) "Transcendentalism Then and Now: Towards 

a Dialogic Theory and Praxis of Multicultural U.S. Literature" (AnaLouise 
Keating); (4) "A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean 
Character in Literature" (Elizabeth Nunez) ; (5) "Teaching and Learning across 

Cultures: The Literature Classroom as a Site for Cultural Transactions" 

(Joyce C. Harte) ; (6) "Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women 

of Color" (Brenda M. Greene) ; (7) "Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie 

Marmon Silko's 'Ceremony'" (Robert O’Brien Hokanson ) j (8) "Mirrors, Windows, 
and Prisms: Teaching Asian American Literature in the P.R.C. and the U.S. A." 
(Mary Louise Buley-Meissner ) ; (9) "Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous 

Infidel? Rereading Willa Cather ' s 'Death Comes for the Archbishop'" (Judith 
Beth Cohen); (10) "Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature" 
(Patricia Bizzell) ; (11) "Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter: 

Models for Organizing the Introductory Course" (Marjorie Pryse) ; (12) "But, 

Is It Good Enough to Teach?" (Frances Smith Foster) ; (13) "Teaching the 

Rhetoric of Race: A Rhetorical Approach to Multicultural Pedagogy" (John 
Alberti); (14) "Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion's Regionalism" 
(Louise Z. Smith); (15) "Beyond 'Beyond the Cultural Wars': Students Teaching 
Themselves the Conflicts" (James S. Laughlin) ; and (16) "Teaching Others: A 
Cautionary Tale" (Joseph F. Trimmer) . (NKA) 



o 

ERIC 



VO 



§ 



Rethinking 





Rethinking American Literature 



NCTE Editorial Board: Pat Cordeiro, Colette Daiute, Bobbi Fisher, Brenda Greene, 
Richard Luckert, Bill McBride, Alleen Pace Nilsen, Jerrie Cobb Scott, Karen Smith, 
Chair, ex officio, Michael Greer, ex officio 



Two-Year College, Four- Year College, and University Section Committee: Frank 
Madden, Chair, Westchester Community College; Gail E. Hawisher, Assistant Chair, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; Pat Belanoff, SUNY-Stony Brook; Theresa 
Enos, CCCC Representative, University of Arizona; Dawn Rodrigues, Colorado State 
University; Ida Simmons Short, Schoolcraft College; Howard Tinberg, Bristol Commu- 
nity College; Demetrice A. Worley, Bradley University; Collett Dil worth, CEE Repre- 
sentative, East Carolina University; Louise Smith, ex officio, Editor, College English , 
University of Massachusetts at Boston; Miriam Chaplin, Executive Committee Liaison, 
Rutgers University; Patricia Lambert Stock, NCTE Staff Liaison 



Rethinking American Literature 



Edited by 

Lil Brannon 

University at Albany, SUNY 

Brenda M. Greene 

Meclgar Evers College, CUNY 



National Council of Teachers of English 
1 1 1 1 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 




Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following material: “Not 
Bom on the Fourth of July: Cultural Differences and American Studies,” by Gregory S. 
Jay, originally published in After Political Correctness: The Humanities and Society in 
the 1990s , edited by Christopher Newfield and Ronald Strickland. Copyright © 1995 by 
Westview Press. Reprinted by permission of Westview Press. The excerpt on 57 from 
“ Cihuatlyotl , Woman Alone,” originally published in Borderlands/La Frontera: The New 
Mestizo. San Francisco: Spinsters/Aunt Lute. Copyright © 1987 by Gloria Anzaldua; 
reprinted by permission of the author. The excerpt on 59 from “La Prieta originally 
published in This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color. Eds. 
Cherrie Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press. 
Copyright © 1983 by Gloria Anzaldua; reprinted by permission of the author. “‘Not in 
the Least American’: Nineteenth-Century Literary Regionalism as unAmerican Litera- 
ture” by Judith Fetterley appeared in a slightly different version in College English 56 
(1994): 877-95. 

Manuscript Editor: Jamie Flutchinson 
Production Editors: Jamie Flutchinson, Kurt Austin 
Interior Design: Tom Kovacs for TGK Design 
Cover Photographs and Design: Evelyn C. Shapiro 
NCTE Stock Number: 41 196-3050 

©1997 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. Printed in 
the United States of America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a forum for the 
open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching of English and the 
language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point of view does not imply en- 
dorsement by the Executive Committee, the Board of Directors, or the membership at 
large, except in announcements of policy, where such endorsement is clearly specified. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Rethinking American literature / edited by Lil Brannon, Brenda M. Greene, 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-8141-41 19-6 (pbk.) 

1. American literature — Study and teaching (Higher) 2. American literature — 
History and criticism — Theory, etc. 3. American literature — Minority authors — 
Study and teaching (Higher) 4. Cultural conflict — United States. 5. Canon 
(Literature) I. Brannon, Lil. II. Greene, Brenda M., 195Q- . III. National 

Council of Teachers of English. 

PS42.R47 1997 

8 10.9 — dc21 97-15044 

CIP 



Contents 



Introduction 

Lil Brannon and Brenda M. Greene 

I Reshaping American Literature 

1 . Not Born on the Fourth of July: Cultural Differences and 
American Studies 

Gregory S. Jay 

2. “Not in the Least American”: Nineteenth-Century Literary 
Regionalism as unAmerican Literature 

Judith Fetterley 

3. Transcendentalism Then and Now: Towards a Dialogic 
Theory and Praxis of Multicultural U.S. Literature 

AnaLouise Keating 

II Crossing Cultural Boundaries 

4. A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean 
Character in Literature 

Elizabeth Nunez 

5. Teaching and Learning across Cultures: The Literature 
Classroom as a Site for Cultural Transactions 

Joyce C. Harte 

6. Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women 
of Color 

Brenda M. Greene 

7. Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Marmon Silko’s 
Ceremony 

Robert O’Brien Hokanson 

8. Mirrors, Windows, and Prisms: Teaching Asian American 
Literature in the PR.C. and the U.S.A. 

Mary Louise Buley-Meissner 



O 




vii 

3 

32 

50 

71 

81 

97 

115 

128 



v 



VI 



9. Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? Rereading 
Willa Cather’s Death Comes for the Archbishop 
Judith Beth Cohen 

III Negotiating Differences 

10. Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature 

Patricia Bizzell 

1 1 . Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter: 

Models for Organizing the Introductory Course 

Marjorie Pryse 

12. But, Is It Good Enough to Teach? 

Frances Smith Foster 

13. Teaching the Rhetoric of Race: A Rhetorical Approach to 
Multicultural Pedagogy 

John Alberti 

14. Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion’s Regionalism 

Louise Z. Smith 

15. Beyond Beyond the Cultural Wars: Students Teaching 
Themselves the Conflicts 

James S. Laughlin 

16. Teaching Others: A Cautionary Tale 

Joseph F. Trimmer 

Index 

Editors 

Contributors 



8 

o 

ERIC 



146 

163 

175 

193 

203 

216 

231 

249 

257 

271 

273 



Introduction 



Lil Brannon 

University at Albany, SUNY 

Brenda M. Greene 
Medgar Evers College, CUNY 



This volume, the fourth in a series, brings together the conversations of the 
profession that were explored during the 1993 and 1994 Summer Institutes for 
Teachers of Literature, sponsored by the College Section Steering Committee 
of the National Council of Teachers of English. The voices represented here 
come from not only those who participated during the Institutes but extend to 
the larger conversation that has erupted over the ways American literature has 
been traditionally practiced. The volume reflects the debate: the theoretical 
reorientations that cause teachers of literature to question their ideas of “Ameri- 
can,” of “literature,” and of who they are as teachers and what they do in the 
classroom. Also explored here are the questions of organizing the “American 
literature” curriculum, of deciding what to teach, and of finding one’s way 
through the political, theoretical, and practical implications of efforts to rethink 
what one does. This volume continues the tradition of the Summer Institutes of 
bringing theory and practice together, of presenting not a unified argument but 
the flavor of the interestingly complicated debate that is sure to have profound 
impact on the future of the profession. Often the professional debate is highly 
theoretical and difficult to enter into; at other times, the debate is taken up in 
heated faculty meetings or in the quiet of faculty offices where one might be 
struggling alone to make sense of why a student responded to a story in the way 
that she did. We have tried to capture the richness of all of this theorizing, of 
this making sense, so that no matter what one’s site of teaching is — the commu- 
nity college classroom or the research university — one can find a way into the 
conversation and determine what texts and issues are important to bring into the 
classrooms. 

The larger aim of this volume is to question to what end teachers of literature 
seek to establish an American literary canon and to question the processes of 
the past whereby the knowledge of what constitutes American literature has 

vii 




9 



Introduction 



viii 

been produced. The essays explore the historical, sociological, political, and 
practical implications of questioning our understanding of “American” by ex- 
ploring the potentialities or the actual consequences of bringing to the class- 
room literatures that cross cultural boundaries within and outside of the United 
States. By examining this “new” American literature both from a global and 
critical perspective and from a local, shifting, and more tentative critical space, 
this volume offers alternative, and at times competing, strategies for re-seeing, 
discussing, and teaching traditional and emerging texts in the literature of the 
Americas. 

We have organized the collection so that one might enter the conversation 
and begin the questioning from different sites. The first section, “Reshaping 
American Literature,” offers theoretical arguments for recovering and examin- 
ing writers, texts, and traditions not previously included in the field (for ex- 
ample, the slave narrative, nineteenth-century women regionalists, the oral and 
written literatures of Native Americans, and contemporary women of color). 
Jay, Fetterley, and Keating assume readers who are thoroughly immersed in 
current theoretical arguments as they work to complicate traditional understand- 
ings of history that have led to their rethinking of the relationship among the 
literary, the political, and the economic. These essays offer an important fram- 
ing for the entire volume, but they do not have to be tackled first. What they 
offer are ways of rethinking American literature — of thinking about how “iden- 
tity” is part of “ideology.” 

Gregory Jay’s and Judith Fetterley’s keynote addresses, as well as an essay 
by AnaLouise Keating, address the question, “What constitutes American lit- 
erature and on what basis do we decide?” Gregory Jay opens the volume with 
an exploration of the United States’ multicultural history and the struggle over 
representation. Within the tradition of radical reform in American literary and 
cultural studies that Jay sets forth, he argues that the teaching of literature must 
be to educate a democratic citizenry which “obligates us to engage in complex 
and difficult acts of identification and imagination . . . [and to] affirm that which 
we have not experienced.” Judith Fetterley examines how “American” in the 
context of American literature has always been a political category which has 
excluded particular writers whose stories lie outside the dominant tradition and 
whose stories challenge the values within canonical works. She argues for these 
“unAmerican” texts by offering a counterpoint to American realism, literary 
regionalism, and by exploring the contributions of writers who work within this 
frame. AnaLouise Keating concludes this section by challenging the dominant 
view of multiculturalism, the coexistence of a variety of distinct literary and 
cultural traditions, which she argues is based on a politics of location which 
“essentializes textuality by equating it with biological ‘roots’ ” Her essay ex- 
plores the implications of establishing a transcultural dialogue which neither 
erases nor reifies the many differences among the various texts that we read. 



Introduction 



IX 



Such rethinking, of course, takes on particular significance in a context of 
changing student, faculty, and national demographics, for whom we imagine 
as “American” and what we understand as “literature” will have major implica- 
tions for how we conceptualize the connection between teaching American 
literature and preparing a citizenry for the twenty-first century. Section II, 
“Crossing Cultural Boundaries,” gives practitioners a way into the debates by 
offering firsthand struggles in understanding American writers in a global sense — 
Caribbean, Asian American, Latino, African American, South American, Cen- 
tral American, Canadian — those writers who participate both inside and outside 
of the dominant “American” culture and thereby bring different lenses through 
which they write. The challenge to teachers of literature is exemplified in this 
section. Here, the reader witnesses the struggle to “make sense” of these new 
literatures and to make the literature speak to students. Whether or not one 
agrees with the paradigms that are articulated here, the debate over whether one 
needs to develop new frameworks for understanding this literature or to build 
on existing, traditional ones must be engaged so that differences can be ac- 
knowledged and negotiated. This section, we hope, is a contribution to this 
critical dialogue that attempts to address the complexities of identity politics 
and its implications for teaching. 

Elizabeth Nunez begins the section with the keynote address she gave to the 
Summer Institute, “A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean 
Character in Literature ” In this essay she offers a theory for understanding the 
“paradoxical” character of Caribbean literature and offers a close reading of 
several Caribbean novels, including Crick Crack Monkey , to make her point. 
Brenda Greene continues this reading of new literatures by theorizing the posi- 
tion of female writers of color as dually constructed both within and outside our 
understandings of America. She argues, with reference to several novels by 
women of color, that these writers have developed characters who can cross 
cultural boundaries and make visible “sites of resistance,” those places where 
reflective activity can bring about transformative action. Joyce Harte follows 
with an exploration of how a teacher, herself educated within a British colonialist 
tradition, can rethink the teaching of literature for students in an urban commu- 
nity college by drawing on the theoretical and pedagogical frameworks of reader- 
response theory, cultural criticism, and feminist theory so that students can enter 
into conversation with texts written by women and writers of color. She is fol- 
lowed by Robert O’Brien Hokanson, who offers a careful reading of Silko’s 
Ceremony, in which he demonstrates how students can understand through their 
encounter with this novel the dynamism of “multiculturalism ” Mary Louise 
Buley-Meissner demonstrates how her students in both China and America 
have come to value Asian American literature through an exploration of its 
artistry, rhetoricity, and history. We end the section with Judith Beth Cohen’s 
delicate exploration of coming to know Willa Cather’s Death Comes for the 




'-4 J / 

11 



X 



Introduction 



Archbishop — its surface beauty and its problematic political rendering of the 
“real.” She speaks of her own learning and its relation to her students’ learn- 
ing — an enactment of teaching that is willing to explore its very assumptions 
and blind spots. 

The final section, “Negotiating Differences,” offers ways of developing the 
curriculum for this new study of American literature and of thinking through 
the problems that arise in teaching. This section offers practitioner/theorists a 
way into the volume by exploring the issues of pedagogy: determining what to 
teach, organizing the material, developing new ways of reading, and making 
the debates in the field visible and productive. 

We begin the section with Pat Bizzell’s keynote address at the 1994 Insti- 
tute, “Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature.” Basing her 
argument on Mary Louise Pratt’s “Contact Zone,” Bizzell offers a way of se- 
lecting and grouping multicultural readings and of integrating literary and rhe- 
torical approaches in the teaching of multicultural literature. Marjorie Pryse 
follows with an essay, the material of which was covered during the workshop 
she gave at the 1993 Institute. She offers various models for organizing intro- 
ductory courses in American literature. Frances Foster offers her keynote ad- 
dress next, an exploration of ways of reading African American literature that 
demonstrates its complexity and its importance in the teaching of American 
literature. John Alberti, then, explores the issues of race and ethnicity as rhe- 
torical rather than “absolute” constructs, “as context-specific discursive prac- 
tices.” He addresses the issue of whether or not white teachers can and should 
teach “other” people’s literatures by problematizing the category of race in the 
act of teaching Frederick Douglass. Louise Z. Smith draws on reception theory 
to give us a way into texts which may seem remote or distant to our students. In 
so doing, she also gives us a way, as teachers, to examine texts unfamiliar to us. 
Using Joan Didion as a focus, Smith creates the exciting possibilities that re- 
ception theory offers teachers. We end the volume with essays by Jim Laughlin 
and Joseph Trimmer. Laughlin discusses how he engaged students in “teaching 
the conflicts” to and for themselves by having them engage in an exploration of 
popular culture that had parallels to disputes in the academic work they would 
be taking up later in the semester. Trimmer offers a narrative reflection on the 
complexities of teaching multicultural literature. He ends by understanding that 
teaching and learning about multicultural literature is in large part a process, “a 
new method of inquiry that encouraged students to mount their own expedi- 
tions through the history and literature of other cultures.” 

This volume would not have been possible without the support of NCTE’s 
College Section Steering Committee and the membership of the College Sec- 
tion who made the Summer Institute possible. We also are indebted to Kimberly 
Dunn and Tami Britton of the Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning 
at the University at Albany, SUNY, who helped prepare this manuscript. We 



Introduction 



xi 



thank Leon and Cy, who gave us intellectual and personal support and endured 
the long telephone conversations as we put this volume together. Our collabora- 
tion has been an exciting one. Though we have worked together in many 
capacities over the last ten years, the product of this collaboration, we hope, 
will intellectually stimulate and sustain others as our work together has cer- 
tainly sustained and challenged us. 



I Reshaping American 
Literature 



1 Not Born on the Fourth of July: 
Cultural Differences and American 
Studies 



Gregory S. Jay 

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 

The PC World 

The scenario has become familiar. After a long history of apparent uniformity 
and consensus, a nation suddenly collapses. Political institutions and ideolo- 
gies that had once been its supposed foundations are blown down like a house 
of cards. Beneath the appearance of a monolithic history and singular future 
there abruptly bursts forth the reality of irreconcilable differences. Citizens in- 
creasingly see themselves primarily as members of particular regional, racial, 
ethnic, religious, economic, or sexual groups rather than as individuals with a 
common society, culture, or system of beliefs. A shrinking economic pie polar- 
izes citizens into competing interest groups. Political correctness (PC) and iden- 
tity politics become pervasive practices and accusations. Where once the 
identification of the individual person with the universal national spirit was 
seen as an equalizing force that promised the eventual participation of all in 
directing the country’s fate, this universalism now is roundly condemned as a 
ruse that obscures the subordination of disempowered groups exploited by an 
entrenched elite. The political culture descends into exchanges of condemna- 
tion, recrimination, and even gunfire; the fracturing of any sense of commonal- 
ity leads to an appalling cynicism and lack of compassion. Argument centers on 
proving who has been the most victimized and who the most reprehensible. The 
classic question of politics — “What is the common good?” — is replaced by the 
question, “What’s in it for me and my friends?” 

Citizens of the United States may take this scenario to describe the former 
Soviet Union or Yugoslavia; yet, with qualifications, this scenario mirrors the 
social and political dissensus characteristic of the United States as the twentieth 
century gives way to a postcolonial (PC), postmodern, multicultural future. Since 
global patterns link the cultural crises around the world, the forces driving cul- 
tural change in the United States ought to be interpreted partly from an interna- 
tional perspective. The struggle for representation knows no borders. Many 
nations are trying to find a way to balance the claims of individuality, ethnic or 



4 



Gregory S. Jay 



racial solidarity, democracy, economic development, and nationalism. The prin- 
ciples of self-determination and freedom abstractly embodied in theories of 
democracy clash with the desires of particular groups to create social systems 
predicated on their own traditional beliefs. Perhaps most significant, the glo- 
balization of the labor force and the mobility of international commodity capi- 
talism create economic competition that often exploits the resources of 
patriotic nationalism and of racial, ethnic, and gender bigotry. Films such as the 
1996 blockbuster Independence Day ; marketed for months before its premiere 
over the Fourth of July holiday, continue to play to the American anxiety about 
national catastrophe and “aliens,” even as the good-guy forces assembled to 
combat the new “them” now reflect the commodified image of multiculturalism. 

Postcolonialism often leaves former dependent states in splintered ruins, while 
the once imperial powers themselves suffer internal breakdowns complicated 
by an influx of postcolonial refugees. At the level of political ideology, any 
recourse to the rhetoric or policies of universalism, humanism, and common 
culture is often denounced from the start, a victim of its own record of hypoc- 
risy and bad faith. Yet the economic integration of the globe’s regions contin- 
ues, defying the tide of tribalism as multinational corporations transgress political 
borders. Likewise the technology of communication, from the PC (personal 
computer) and fax machines to the “information highway” of the World Wide 
Web, does not respect the lines drawn by factions on a map. The exchange of 
images and consumer goods bridges peoples to create commonalities in the 
practices of their everyday lives. My PC can connect me to the world, though of 
course my ownership of one says something particular about my privileged 
place in the universe. 

Across the globe, one question repeats itself: Is the elemental unit of politi- 
cal theory and culture to be the individual or the group? A series of corollary 
questions follows: How do we respond to the fact that the creation of any na- 
tional identity always involves the exclusion of certain citizens, whether through 
the subtle omission of their beliefs from dominant institutions or through the 
violence of outright genocide? Is democratic freedom possible for individuals 
who are seen more as members of groups than as individuals? Can a person 
resist such oppression (or privilege) individually, or only through changing the 
way the group is represented? To turn from questions of theory to conditions of 
history: Can the nation-state be a viable political or cultural entity now that the 
technology of industrial production, transportation, and communication makes 
global mobility so pervasive? Can the power of multinational corporations be 
resisted without strong nation-states predicated on affirmation of common cul- 
tural values and social goals? Are categories such as race or ethnicity any longer 
viable as fundamental components of cultural identity now that science and 
cultural theory have discredited them and people increasingly marry and repro- 
duce across such lines? Or have our crises been the product of wrongly thinking 



Not Born on the Fourth of July 



5 



that we could transcend such categories in appeals to universal principles, 
whether those of Marxism or Western humanism? 

In trying to frame the current cultural discord in the United States today, 
then, I think it useful to remember that the struggles for representation here are 
not unique. Yet they do have a very specific and unusual history that ought to be 
revisited if we are to avoid treating the present crisis as a kind of Fall from an 
Eden of communal harmony. I believe the divisions in American culture today 
can only be understood historically, and understood first of all as a symptom of 
the nation’s recurrent historical amnesia. As a nation we do not like to remem- 
ber the past. Freedom from the past, after all, has been our national myth, and 
that innocence has often been a key to our achievements. We tell ourselves that 
we received our unique identity in a moment of revolutionary forgetting, when 
we declared ourselves independent of an old world. We think a new world can 
be made because we have shed the old world and renamed ourselves. At some 
time or other, every American has been Jay Gatsby. Unfortunately, we have 
gone on fabricating stories about ourselves through repeated acts of amnesia, 
forgetting our own divisive history in the process of creating our common fu- 
ture. How else could a nation of immigrants, expropriated peoples, and former 
slaves wake up one morning to a debate over the meaning of multiculturalism? 

What so many insurgent groups in the United States today have in com- 
mon — from African and Native Americans to women, the working class, re- 
cent Asian immigrants, and gays and lesbians — is their insistence that we all 
have an ethical and political responsibility to remember our history differently. 
That is why the debates over school and university curricula are so important 
and so symptomatic. The history of oppression in America is tied to the oppres- 
sive way history has been represented and taught, in the mass media and popu- 
lar culture as well as in the schools. Revisionists, moreover, go beyond debating 
ideas to focus attention on the material institutions that produce cultural identi- 
ties, and so the agitation of political activists has surprisingly joined forces with 
the skepticism of poststructuralist academics eager to deconstruct the ideolo- 
gies of Representational Man. 

If politics is in some degree essentially about the distribution of power, and 
if knowledge about the powerless tends to be biased or simply left out, then 
redressing the imbalance will be seen by some as a “political” rather than an 
“academic” matter. But teachers cannot help the fact that they inherit schools, 
textbooks, and ideas that reflect the biases of the past. Surely it is the responsi- 
bility of teachers to correct those biases as best they can. These educational 
biases are in part caused by the way political power has been distributed in the 
United States. Through discriminatory application of categories such as race, 
ethnicity, class, sexual orientation, and gender, people whose perceived identity 
does not conform to the politically correct line in the past have been excluded 
from power. This political motive behind traditional educational biases means 




6 



Gregory S. Jay 



that those who seek to tell the story differently will inevitably be accused of 
“politicizing” the curriculum when in fact they are simply trying to point out 
the effect that politics has already had on what we study and what we value. 

We should not have been surprised, then, when the exaggerated story of 
political correctness gained such rapid and powerful ascendancy in the public 
sphere. The same biases that dominated higher education also shaped the per- 
sonnel and policies of broadcasters, magazines, think tanks, and government 
officials. Even “Marxists” and other “left” intellectuals joined the ranks criti- 
cizing feminists, multiculturalists, and literary theorists, for these newer aca- 
demic movements challenged the cultural politics of the Old Left as well. Thus, 
from all sides we heard about how a conspiracy of tenured radicals, leftover 
1960 s activists, feminists, and minority scholars has succeeded in taking over 
U.S. colleges, imposing upon them a uniform ideological program of lowbrow 
totalitarianism that rejects Western civilization in favor of Afrocentrism, 
deconstructive nihilism, Hollywood films, Harlequin romances, and MTV. We 
are routinely told that the agents of political correctness have brought politics 
into the ivory tower, indoctrinating their students and tolerating no opinions 
that do not match their own. This ludicrous exaggeration of the power of groups 
that are still very much on the margins reflects the degree of fear on the part of 
the establishment that these groups and their concerns may actually now be 
winning some influence. 

Such attempts to blame progressive intellectuals for imposing a standard of 
political correctness on our campuses perversely misrepresent the truth of his- 
tory, which is that educational institutions have always been partly in the ser- 
vice of dominant social and political institutions. After all, most colleges are 
owned and run by churches, corporate boards, or governmental bodies. Where 
were today’s born-again champions of democracy, freedom of thought, and 
evaluation by merit during all the years when women were denied admission to 
many of the nation’s top colleges and universities? Where were they during all 
the years when Jews, blacks, and others were similarly discriminated against? 
Why were Atlantic, Time, Newsweek, the New York Times, and the rest of the 
media relatively silent during the decades when curriculum and teaching prac- 
tices amounted to a “thought police” on behalf of white Anglo-Saxon males? 
Who cried out then about “political correctness” on campus? The only new 
McCarthyism in town, sad to say, is still the old one, though now it is busy 
discovering feminists, black studies scholars, and poststructuralists under every 
bed. 

Although I do not mean to suggest that literary study should become a branch 
of political science, we ought not complacently imagine that culture and poli- 
tics have no ties that bind. Contrary to some accusations, it was not the irrel- 
evance of work done by activist academics and critical theorists that precipitated 
the crisis at the universities. Rather, it was the increasingly irrelevant character 




18 






Not Born on the Fourth of July 



1 



of higher education that prompted the move toward multiculturalism. The viru- 
lent campaign of the anti-PC crowd testifies to exactly how relevant the reforms 
are, how precisely they have hit the target, and how far the powers-that-be will 
go in protecting their privileges. Just take a look at the success with which the 
Reagan and Bush administrations reversed the gains made by women and mi- 
norities since the 1960s and you can imagine what conservatives have in mind 
for education. Defunding and “privatization” have already gone far in destroy- 
ing the autonomy of schools. Perhaps the Clinton Administration will stall or 
reverse these policies, though its opponents have a powerful ideological and 
financial machine ready to attack (and, at least at this moment, a majority in 
Congress). As for free speech, it was the justices of the Supreme Court of the 
United States who ruled that doctors at clinics receiving federal funds could not 
even mention abortion to their patients. They are the real thought police, and 
they remind us of the Court that decided, in the Dred Scott case, that blacks had 
no rights that a white man need respect. Fortunately the Supreme Court does 
not yet have jurisdiction over our course syllabi; if they do extend their political 
control from the womb to the classroom, there are many opinions we in the 
universities may be forbidden to express. 

The politics of PC in American culture, then, unfolds as part of a contradic- 
tory global transformation that has local effects. Whereas the internal history of 
American higher education explains some of the present controversy, that his- 
tory in turn belongs to a larger history that shapes it and that today overdetermines 
the campus as a site of racial, economic, political, and social unrest. In the next 
section I want to review that larger history, specifically of certain contradictions 
in American cultural history, in an effort to better situate present debates over 
the politics of cultural identity. 



Whose Declaration of Independence? 

One can dismantle the various interpretive paradigms that were used in the past 
to fabricate the illusion of a singular “American” literature, as many critics over 
the last few years have done. Turning from theory to history, one can also show 
that the diversity of written texts produced in the colonies and the United States 
always amounted to a multicultural dialogue rather than adding up to a single or 
univocal voice of the national spirit. In the words of Paul Lauter, general editor 
of the Heath Anthology of American Literature , “From its start, the New World 

community was multi-racial and multi-cultural The New World, comprised 

of defined spheres of influence over territories claimed and counterclaimed by 
European sovereign powers, early offered signs of the necessary mingling of 
red, white, and black that remain as both a defining and a contested national 
vision” (18). The United States became a postcolonial nation on that famous 




ie 



8 



Gregory S. Jay 



Fourth of July and went on to become a rarity — a former colony that would 
itself become an imperial colonial power. This lack of a homogeneous or pure 
racial, ethnic, or cultural origin meant that the United States would have to 
struggle to produce a common national culture, even if this meant violently 
repressing the differences within its borders. What I want to explore in the fol- 
lowing pages, then, is how this struggle for representation unfolded around a 
key document — the Declaration of Independence — whose meaning was con- 
stantly contested and revised. 

Since the Revolution of 1776, literary journalists, critics, and artists have 
repeatedly called for a uniquely ‘‘American” literature. All about them, how- 
ever, that uniqueness was already taking the form of a poly vocal, even multilin- 
gual, writing that would continually resist formulation into a homogeneous 
canon. But, as Paul Lauter has concisely demonstrated, literary critics at the 
colleges and universities largely succeeded during the period from 1 920 to 1 970 
in drastically narrowing the canon of authors and works and in creating text- 
books, curriculums, departments, professional organizations, and interpretive 
studies based on that canon ( Canons and Contexts 22-97). Throughout this era, 
from the early essays of Van Wyck Brooks through the decisive works of Vernon 
Louis Parrington, F. O. Matthiessen, Richard Chase, and Lionel Trilling (who, 
like Nathaniel Hawthorne, really was bom on the Fourth of July), definitions of 
the American literary canon hinged on the critic’s search for a usable past and 
were motivated by the desire to construct a set of authorizing cultural docu- 
ments to give foundation to specific notions of a democratic culture (see Reising, 
Shumway). 

In retrospect we can see how limited those notions were, especially as they 
tended to depend on an ideology of American individualism that emptied the 
human being of his or her material, historical features — such as race, class, 
gender, and sexuality. The tendency to focus on common human traits and con- 
ditions is of course understandable when one considers the historic diversity of 
wave after wave of immigrants who, to this day, continue to alter the physical 
and cultural face of the United States, as postcolonial immigration also brings a 
crisis of cultural identity and social power to such traditionally homogeneous 
nation-states as England, France, and Germany, though one should not mini- 
mize the cultural diversity that always characterized these geographical regions 
to some extent (consider the history of the Jewish people in Europe for a lesson 
in the long-standing relationship of racism to the construction of nation-states). 
Bom during the height of the European Enlightenment, the United States was 
founded on philosophical doctrines that emphasized the universal rather than 
the particular. This philosophy produced a legal system of justice predicated on 
the ethos of an abstract human subjectivity equally shared by all rational crea- 
tures. The ringing phrases of Thomas Jefferson’s language in the Declaration of 
Independence forever linked the establishment of the nation to that humanistic 
idealism. 1 



Not Bom on the Fourth of July 



9 



“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that 
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among 
these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.” The subject of the Decla- 
ration of Independence — grammatically and politically — is the rhetorical “we,” 
produced in discourse and on paper before it appears in reality. This “we” cre- 
ates the theatrical illusion of a preexistent body politic, a univocal subject who 
originates and speaks the revolutionary utterance. But as Jacques Derrida points 
out in his commentary on the Declaration, this utterance is what rhetoricians 
call a “performative” speech-act: it performs an action as well as declaring a set 
of facts. “One cannot decide . . . whether independence is stated or produced by 
this utterance” since “this people does not exist, before this declaration, not as 
such. If it gives birth to itself, as free and independent subject, as possible signer, 
this can hold only in the act of the signature. The signature invents the signer” 
(10). Who signs, asks Derrida, and with what so-called proper name, the de- 
clarative act which founds an institution or a nation? The “we” of the American 
people is born during this performance. We become our own subjects, subject 
no longer to the King but to the higher “Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God.” 
While it can be argued that, in a cultural sense, an Anglo-Saxon American na- 
tion had already developed by 1776, Jefferson’s “we” refers less to an historical 
population than to a proposed political position (one, not incidentally, that many 
Americans at the time opposed). As Jay Fliegelman points out in Declaring 
Independence: Jefferson , Natural Language , and the Culture of Performance, 
the Declaration represents the Revolution as both an unavoidable necessity and 
a free act of will. The language of the Declaration exhibits an uneasy dialectic 
between mechanical determinism and individual agency characteristic of the 
period. The Declaration speaks predominantly in the passive voice of what is 
“necessary for one people” to do after such “patient sufferance” of the willful 
actions against them of the King. By making their invention of their own rebel- 
lious subjectivity sound like a necessity imposed upon them, the colonists miti- 
gate their guilt and obscure the artificial character of the union they declare. 

In this “UNANIMOUS DECLARATION” we hear of “one people,” of “the 
Right of the People” and “their duty” to — among other things — commit trea- 
son. Although the agency of human action narrated by the Declaration anthro- 
pomorphizes the body politic, imagining it as a collective of different persons, 
this subject nonetheless speaks with one voice, as if it were a particular indi- 
vidual with rights and duties. Was this universalizing presumption ethical, es- 
pecially considering how many particular people had no voice in this utterance? 
“Jefferson’s statement of equality” in the sense of being equally made by God 
with moral faculties, writes Fliegelman, “was far from a racial call for social 
equality” (197). The Declaration postulated an abstractly equal and universal 
human subjectivity despite the historical exclusion from it of Indians, the en- 
slaved, women, and those men who did not own property. The words of the 
Declaration have continued to haunt the moral and political life of America, 



10 



Gregory’ S. Jay 



and subsequent generations have both embraced and repudiated them. At the 
origin of the United States, then, we find an ethically troubling contradiction 
between enabling fictions of universalism and stubborn realities of particularity 
and exclusion. What the next two centuries would bring was not simply a his- 
tory of hypocrisy, however, but a series of appropriating subversions as those 
who were left out of the original declaration used its own utopian terms both to 
challenge and to expand the practices of American democracy. 

The original draft of Jefferson’s Declaration contained a long, hypocritical, 
and self-serving condemnation of the King’s encouragement of the interna- 
tional slave trade, and of the Crown’s policy of offering manumission to slaves 
who rebelled against their rebellious masters. But even Jefferson and his col- 
leagues quickly recognized the folly of citing the King’s offer of freedom for 
the enslaved as an example of the tyranny they opposed; the passage was dropped, 
though a veiled reference to the Crown’s instigation of “domestic insurrections” 
was inserted (see Wills, Inventing America, chap. 5; Fliegelman 189-200). When 
the Constitution of the United States was eventually negotiated, it counted en- 
slaved Africans as two-thirds of a person for the purpose of determining the 
representation of districts and states in the Congress. These enslaved Africans, 
of course, had no vote themselves; nor did women and most unpropertied men, 
for that matter. The Declaration and the Constitution presented Americanness 
as a revolutionary identity or ethos for all, but the reality and power of citizen- 
ship were in practice restricted. 

Even before 1776, the blacks enslaved in Massachusetts were using the 
language of the Enlightenment, protesting that “we have in common with all 
other men a naturel [sic] right to our freedoms.” In a subsequent petition of 
January 1777, enslaved Africans in Massachusetts were already appropriating 
the Declaration of Independence and Jefferson’s phrases as they made two claims 
that would characterize abolitionist (and later women’s rights) literature: (1) 
that African Americans were entitled to equal status as human beings, and 
(2) that the oppression of African Americans vividly resembled the oppression 
suffered by the colonies at the hands of King George. These petitioners claimed 
to “have in common with all other men a Natural and Unaliable Right to that 
freedom which the Grat parent of the Unavers hath Bestowed equalley on all 
menkind and which they have Never forfeited by any Compact or agreement 
whatever”; they further expressed “their Astonishment that It have Never Bin 
Consirdered that Every Principle from which America has Acted in the Cours 
of their unhappy Difficultes with Great Briton Pleads Stronger than A thousand 
arguments in favours of your petitioners” seeking freedom from slavery 
(Aptheker 8, 10). 

Black and white abolitionists throughout the early 1800s continued to throw 
the slave owner Jefferson’s words back in the face of the political establishment 
and to make that one sentence (“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all 





Not Born on the Fourth of July 



11 



men are created equal”) the most often and ironically quoted text in abolitionist 
literature. David Walker’s 1 829 Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World , 
perhaps the most fiery antislavery pamphlet before the speeches of Frederick 
Douglass, pointedly singled out Jefferson for analytical ridicule. Walker re- 
sponded at length to the assertion of the racial inferiority of blacks in Jefferson’s 
Notes on the State of Virginia. He also quoted the first two paragraphs of the 
Declaration verbatim and asked: “Compare your own language . . . with your 
cruelties and murders inflicted by your cruel and unmerciful fathers and your- 
selves on our fathers and on us .... I ask you candidly, was your sufferings 
under Great Britain, one hundredth part as cruel and tyrannical as you have 
rendered ours under you?” (75). When in 1 853 William Wells Brown wrote the 
first novel by an African American, he called it Clotel, or The President } s Daugh- 
ter. Brown based his story on the rumors that Jefferson had fathered two mu- 
latto slave daughters who were subsequently sold south. The epigraph on Brown’s 
title page was, of course, Jefferson’s by then notorious sentence about equality 
from the Declaration of Independence. 

This tradition of antislavery responses to the Declaration perhaps reached its 
climax in Frederick Douglass’s spectacular oration “What to the Slave Is the 
Fourth of July?” An escaped slave and abolitionist leader, Douglass pointedly 
delivered his speech on the 5th of July, 1852: 

What to the American slave is your Fourth of July? I answer, a day that 
reveals to him more than all other days of the year, the gross injustice and 
cruelty to which he is the constant victim. To him your celebration is a 
sham; your boasted liberty an unholy license; your national greatness, swell- 
ing vanity; your sounds of rejoicing are empty and heartless; your denun- 
ciation of tyrants, brass-fronted impudence; your shouts of liberty and 
equality, hollow mockery; your prayers and hymns, your sermons and 
thanksgivings, with all your religious parade and solemnity, are to him 
mere bombast, fraud, deception, impiety, and hypocrisy — a thin veil to 
cover up crimes which would disgrace a nation of savages. There is not a 
nation of the earth guilty of practices more shocking and bloody than are 
the people of these United States. (Aptheker 334) 2 

Sadly, some in the United States today would probably dismiss Douglass’s speech 
as merely the hot air of political correctness, but his words can be an antidote to 
that very historical amnesia that plagues debates about American identity. The 
apostles proclaiming the univocal, superior virtues of “Western Civilization” 
seem to forget the role of slavery and the voices of people like Douglass in the 
history of that civilization. 

In analyzing racism in the United States, however, it would be well to re- 
member its economic motive, for this determines its role in building the civili- 
zation. Like most discourses of bigotry, this one results in profits for one group 
at the expense of another. More specifically, the rhetoric of “Negro inferiority” 




* 




12 



Gregory S. Jay 



helped justify a system that kept wages for labor at an artificially low — even 
nonexistent — level. Slavery presents the extreme example of bigotry, for here 
the subject is not simply represented as a deficient or perverse individual: this 
subject is not a subject but property. As the Boston Tea Party suggests, the 
Declaration of Independence declared the independence of (some) men to own 
property. Moreover, it dramatized the dependence of their rights as citizens on 
their freedom to acquire, sell, and possess property. Insurrectional classes (the 
enslaved, women, immigrants, etc.) will be subjected to discrimination to the 
degree that it profitably regulates their relation to (or as) property. For such 
classes, declaring independence of the Master means taking back their own 
bodies as property and claiming the political power that comes with the free- 
dom to control property. The original language behind the Declaration,, after 
all, had listed “life, liberty, and property” as the citizen’s trinity. The cultural 
and political history of the United States was and continues to be conditioned 
by this codependency of freedom and property, with the attendant complicating 
relation of freedom to wage labor. 

Critical economists have argued with some persuasiveness that the enor- 
mous and rapid growth of wealth in the United States economy resulted mainly 
from the successive exploitation of low-wage labor, performed by indentured 
servants, the enslaved, women, and a wave of different immigrant populations. 
At the close of the twentieth century, multinational corporations now find this 
labor abroad, often for pennies a day. Workers in the U.S. find themselves com- 
peting with the populations the West once controlled through imperialism; do- 
mestically, cultural separatism increases as discrimination works to bar certain 
groups from gaining access to the increasingly small pool of higher-paid labor. 
Although the American ethos states that prosperity for all is available through 
hard work, work is not available for all Americans. To the degree that capitalism’s 
structural necessity for an underclass comes to overlap with groupings by cul- 
tural identity, economic strife may take the symbolic form of ideological war- 
fare, from debates over racial and female inferiority to the more recent uproar 
about multiculturalism and feminism. 

It was no accident that Frederick Douglass gave his speech in response to an 
invitation from the Rochester Ladies’ Anti-Slavery Society. For decades the 
causes of women’s rights and antislavery had been closely linked, as women 
played a key role in advancing the work of abolitionism in the North. Indeed, 
the association of the condition of women with that of the enslaved goes back at 
least to 1776. In a famous exchange of letters during the months prior to the 
signing of the Declaration, Abigail and John Adams gave rare witness in writ- 
ing to a debate that doubtless raged in many households. “I long to hear that 
you have declared an independancy,” wrote Abigail, “ — and by the way in the 
new Code of Laws which I suppose it will be necessary for you to make I desire 
you would Remember the Ladies.” Observing to her husband that “your Sex are 




24 



Not Bom on the Fourth of July 



13 



Naturally Tyrannical, 1 ” she asked for specific laws to protect women from the 
“cruelty and indignity” suffered under the “unlimited power” of husbands: “If 
perticuliar care and attention is not paid to the Laidies we are determined to 
foment a Rebelion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any Laws in which we 
have no voice, or Representation” (Lauter, Heath , 876). 

John Adams responded, “As to your extraordinary Code of Laws, I cannot 
but laugh.” Exploiting the witty tone of Abigail’s letter to his own ends, he 
noted that the revolutionaries had been accused of fomenting a general anarchy 
and a disruption of traditional social hierarchies: the Tories claimed that chil- 
dren, apprentices, students, Indians, and Negroes all grew “insolent to their 
Masters.” “But your letter,” John continued, “was the first Intimation that an- 
other Tribe more numerous and powerfull than all the rest were grown discon- 
tented.” He went on to say, “We know better than to repeal our Masculine 
systems,” and he repeated the myth that men were the victims of what he called 
the “Despotism of the Peticoat.” He (perhaps) jokingly accused King George’s 
government of instigating rebellion among the women as it did among “Tories, 
Landjobbers, Trimmers, Bigots, Canadians, Indians, Negros, Hanoverians, Hes- 
sians, Russians, Irish Roman Catholicks, Scotch Renegadoes” (Lauter, Heath , 
877). By this argument, the same made by Jefferson in the Declaration’s struck 
passage on slavery, the Founding Fathers meant to declare their independence 
from women as well as from the King. Their construction of the American 
political ethos carefully separated a masculine claim to inalienable (property) 
rights from claims made by the groups whose clamoring for representation they 
thought ought to be squelched. John Adams’s sarcastic linking of women’s claims 
to those of Negroes, Indians, and other oppressed groups would, of course, 
return as a serious political argument in the hands of feminists and abolitionists 
in the nineteenth century and remains a logical connection for many cultural 
analysts to this day. Confirming John Adams’s fear, polemicists from the Ameri- 
can Indian tribes were also adept at invoking the white man’s Revolution and 
Declaration for their own purposes. In his 1834 Indian Nullification of the 
Unconstitutional Laws of Massachusetts Relative to the Marshpee Tribe , Will- 
iam Apess (himself a Pequot) denounced the expropriation of Marshpee lands 
and resources by invoking the comparative memory of 1776: “I will ask him 
[the white man] how, if he values his own liberty, he would or could rest quiet 
under such laws. I ask the Inhabitants of New England generally how their 
fathers bore laws, much less oppressive, when imposed upon them by a foreign 
government” (O’Connell, On Our Own Ground 211). 

By the late 1 820s, women were increasingly apt to compare their situation to 
that of the enslaved, all the more so when women’s attempts to speak in public 
and exercise political power were met with contempt, ridicule, and violence. 
One of the first of these women, Angelina Grimke, herself the daughter of a 
slave owner, wrote Catharine Beecher in 1837 that “the investigation of the 



14 



Gregory S. Jay 



rights of the slave has led me to a better understanding of my own.” Employing 
the rhetoric of sentiment, domesticity, and Christianity, Grimke established equal- 
ity on the basis of morality: “Human beings have rights , because they are moral 
beings: the rights of all men grow out of their moral nature; and as all men have 
the same moral nature, they have essentially the same rights. . . . My doctrine, 
then, is that whatever it is morally right for man to do, it is morally right for 
woman to do” (Lauter, Heath , 1866). This radical feminist assertion of the ethos 
of a common moral nature aims to stop the particular discrimination against the 
character of women and blacks; her moral egalitarianism would theoretically 
prevent the use of character as a justification for subordination by race or gen- 
der. In 1845 Margaret Fuller underscored how America’s declaration of na- 
tional independence was “blurred by the servility of individuals,” and she too 
drew the by-then standard analogy between women and the enslaved: “As the 
friend of the negro assumes that one man cannot by right hold another in bond- 
age, so should the friend of Woman assume that Man cannot by right lay even 
well-meant restrictions on Woman” (Chevigny 243, 248). 

As Barbara Bardes and Suzanne Gossett point out in Declarations of Inde- 
pendence: Women and Political Power in Nineteenth-Century American Fic- 
tion , women’s rights activists and women novelists in the nineteenth century 
often took up Jefferson’s rhetoric for their own subversive purposes. The par- 
ticipants in the historic 1848 Women’s Rights Convention in Seneca Falls (which 
Frederick Douglass attended) left this account of preparing their manifesto, 
which they would call the Declaration of Sentiments: 

And the humiliating fact may as well now be recorded that before taking 
the initiative step, those ladies resigned themselves to a faithful perusal of 
various masculine productions. The reports of Peace, Temperance, and Anti- 
Slavery conventions were examined, but all alike seemed too tame and 
pacific for the inauguration of a rebellion such as the world had never be- 
fore seen. . . . After much delay, one of the circle [Elizabeth Cady Stanton] 
took up the Declaration of 1776, and read it aloud with much spirit and 
emphasis, and it was at once decided to adopt the historic document, with 
some slight changes such as substituting “all men” for “King George” 

(Buhle and Buhle 92) 

In substituting “all men” for “King George,” the women turned the strategy of 
universalization to their own ends — the same strategy that had left them out of 
the original Declaration when the men’s reference to “men” obscured their ex- 
clusion of women. To these rebellious ladies, all men were King George. This 
feminist strategy recast the figure of the oppressor from the particular tyrant 
King George to the universal tyranny of men over women. And in their Decla- 
ration, the women boldly rewrote Jefferson’s most famous line, thus: “We hold 
these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal.” By 
rewriting, with a significant difference, the words of the founding document of 



Not Bom on the Fourth of July 



15 



the nation’s political and cultural identity, the women of Seneca Falls gave voice 
to something repressed at the nation’s origin, even something whose repression 
was constitutive of that origin. Their Declaration became an uncanny return of 
the repressed, producing a mocking echo within the uni vocal expression of 
American truth, replacing his-tory with her-story. The women’s version stated: 
“The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations on the 
part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an 
absolute tyranny over her” (Buhle and Buhle 94). The women of Seneca Falls 
exposed the masculine ethos of the Founding Fathers even as they invoked the 
value of liberty (not least of all in the liberties they took with Jefferson’s text). 

By the 1850s, an ironic reference to the Declaration of Independence was 
standard in the rhetoric of the women’s rights movement. Sara Parton, who 
under the pen name of Fanny Fern became perhaps the most famous woman 
journalist of her day, delighted in satirizing the injustices of patriarchal tyr- 
anny — be they in the bedroom and parlor or the houses of prostitution and pub- 
lishing. In a column of 30 July 1 859 for the New York Ledger, Parton wrote as if 
in conscious imitation of Douglass as she took up the theme of women’s rela- 
tion to the promises of the Founding Fathers. Characteristic of her style, the 
column features the first-person voice of an American woman who speaks up: 

“FOURTH OF JULY.” Well— I don’t feel patriotic. Perhaps I might if they 
would stop that deafening racket. Washington was very well, if he couldn't 
spell, and I’m glad we are all free; but as a woman — I shouldn’t know it, 
didn’t some orator tell me. Can I go out of an evening without a hat at my 
side? Can I go out with one on my head without danger of a station-house? 

Can I clap my hands at some public speaker when I am nearly bursting 
with delight? Can I signify the contrary when my hair stands on end with 
vexation? Can I stand up in the cars “like a gentleman” without being im- 
mediately invited “to sit down”? . . . Can I go to see anything pleasant , like 
an execution or a dissection? . . . Can I be a Senator, that I may hurry up 
that millennial International Copyright Law? Can I even be President? 

Bah — you know I can’t. “Free/” Humph! (Fern 315) 

Fanny Fern didn’t feel patriotic because, in many detailed ways, she did not live 
in the land of the free. The nation created by the Declaration treats her like a 
criminal and a child, denying her the most mundane as well as sublime rights. 
With characteristic wit, Fern makes it amply clear that her freedom is sharply 
restricted by gender: she cannot go “out of an evening without a hat” (that is, 
without a male escort), and she cannot go out wearing a man’s hat without fear 
of arrest. The proper sex roles are literally policed, though Fern has fun point- 
ing out what a superficial costume gender difference may be, if it comes down 
to what hats we wear. By playing with that well-recognized pun, however. Fern 
also prompts readers to reconsider seriously the ways we dress up our differ- 
ences, who controls the show, and the punishments inflicted when the 
disempowered try to assert their freedom. Freedom of dress and freedom of 



16 



Gregory S. Jay 



address — of speech, of bodily movement, of social location — walk hand in hand. 
Dress how she might, and attend however many Fourth of July addresses as she 
can bear, Fern’s address will never be 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. The only 
space of free address Fern can carve out is on the page, where her irreverent 
authority of experience is worn stylishly. Such cultural literacy as Fern com- 
mands serves her well in judging the Founding Fathers: “Washington was very 
well, if he couldn *t spell.” 

In her commentary on this column, Lauren Berlant argues that “to Fern, 
citizenship is not an abstract condition or privilege: it is a relay to protection 
and legitimation under the law and in the public sphere, which includes the 
world of the arts and the more banal experience of the body in the marketplace,” 
including “the absurdity of the degree to which society regulates juridically 
what women wear and what they say” (442). In contrast to the Enlightenment 
notion of a universal political citizen with equal rights, Fern portrays the spe- 
cific ways that society and the law address women and their bodies, disciplin- 
ing their freedom with an oppressive protective custody. Implicitly, as some 
feminist legal scholars argue today, women’s freedom cannot result from the 
simple application to them of a doctrine of rights developed on the model of a 
masculine citizen but must instead be crafted to address the specifics of women’s 
condition in a patriarchal society. Whereas “freedom” remains a universal ab- 
stract token of women’s desire, the realization of freedom (or of its absence) 
takes place only in particulars— in the wearing or not wearing of certain hats, in 
the public display of emotion, in preferring to stand on an omnibus, in watching 
an execution or dissection, in getting paid for one’s work, in being president. In 
a democracy, part of our ethical responsibility (by which I mean our responsi- 
bility to others) involves asking what freedom will look like for particular citi- 
zens, not simply for the citizen in the abstract. (See also Fern’s piece titled “A 
Little Bunker Hill,” in which she comments about the often-heard demand for 
rights, “I hope no female sister will be such a novice as to suppose it refers to 
any but masculine rights” [243].) 

For white women in antebellum America, it was property rights, not the 
vote, that dominated the agenda as these women considered the particulars of 
their lack of freedom. Under the legal doctrine of coverture, women lost their 
property rights under marriage, even their rights to their children. Upper- and 
middle-class women found this an increasingly restrictive and shameful state 
of affairs, as did lower-class women who were beginning to receive wages for 
labor (such as shoebindery and needlework) that had once been remunerated 
through barter. The late 1840s saw the first legislative acts guaranteeing prop- 
erty rights for married women. At the same time, women in the manufacturing 
industries continued to complain about the artificially low wages paid them 
under the ethos of domestic ideology which defined women first as wives and 
mothers: women were paid only those wages calculated to compensate the fam- 




Not Born on the Fourth of July 



17 



ily for time taken from domestic chores. Men were paid under the “head of 
household” rubric, and so domestic ideology blocked any notion of equal pay 
for equal work. Women could not be independent of the patriarchal home with- 
out a wage, but if they left the home for outside work they found themselves 
paid as if they were wives or mothers or daughters. True citizenship for women 
would mean the right to hold property equally and the achievement of a just 
wage. Any “political” rights granted in the absence of these reforms was of 
little worth and deceptive, for it would throw a cloak of respectable universal 
citizenship over the particular reality of women’s inequality in a patriarchal 
society. The claim of women to the universal principles of freedom and equal- 
ity, however, provided a rhetorical and utopian lever by which to move men off 
the pedestal of privilege they had erected for themselves. 

What the antislavery and women’s rights literature demonstrates is that ev- 
ery attempt to rectify a past injustice involves some appeal to universality. As 
one might expect, these claims usually produce more rather than less social and 
cultural discord along with any actual progress they achieve in the treatment of 
individuals. When women and African Americans appropriate Jefferson’s voice, 
they decenter the national rhetoric by speaking it through an unauthorized body . 3 
This tactical appropriation of language and ideas seems to express the exten- 
sion of universality to the formerly excluded subject, but the ironic embodi- 
ment this entails seems to underscore the limits of pluralism. Americans 
previously excluded by prejudice or exploitation cannot lay claim to equal rights 
in the abstract without eventually upsetting the practical distribution of social 
power and cultural authority. Equal rights cannot be achieved painlessly by 
rhetorical or legislative fiat; injustice has meant that some persons have had 
their bodies, wealth, and rights taken from them, and undoing this injustice 
means depriving a once-dominant group of the privileges and resources it has 
taken for granted as its own rights. This redistribution of wealth and power can 
also be formulated in moral terms as a general ethos of justice to which one 
submits regardless of one’s own particular self-interest. 



Promissory Notes of a Dream Deferred 

The Enlightenment rhetoric of universality portrays a relatively harmonious 
society, but that peace obscures the interdependence of rights and powers. The 
resistance of men and slave owners to the women’s rights and abolitionist re- 
formers, like the resistance in the United States today to affirmative action, 
Indian treaty rights, or gays and lesbians in the military, stems from a realistic 
understanding that the application of universal principles results in particular 
change. Since the original postulation of an abstract universal human subject 
(“We the people”) had actually been predicated on an unequal distribution of 



18 



Gregory S. Jay 



social power among particular cultural groups (by race, class, gender, etc.), the 
response of those oppressed must necessarily be double-edged. On the one hand, 
they must claim membership in the very universal category of humanity from 
which they have been excluded, and entitlement to the rights that go with it; on 
the other hand, they must insist on affirming the value of the particular social 
group to which they feel tied and whose fate has largely determined their des- 
tiny as individuals. Somewhat paradoxically, we understand universal rights by 
recognizing the historical, concrete, and contingent lives led by individuals in 
real social classes. The contradictions inherent in classical liberal political theory, 
then, still inform today’s struggles for representation, shaping the debate be- 
tween the advocates of “identity politics” and their opponents (whether liberal 
humanists upholding Enlightenment individualism or poststructuralists opposed 
to essentialism). 

In the heat of these disputes, it is vital to remember that no group can be 
formed without postulating some quality, experience, or factor universal to 
members of the group; likewise, any universality that does not have a basis in, 
and a respect for, the particular qualities and experiences of human lives as 
actually lived is worthless and may well be an unintended ally when dominant 
groups force their will on a society. Ultimately, cultural identity is not some- 
thing inherent in an individual but a meaning that persons give themselves or 
others as a result of social determinations and subjective choices. Cultural iden- 
tity is an ethos, a way of life. It follows that an ethics of social change requires 
altering the systematic, material, and impersonal forces that condition and ac- 
count for the lives of individuals. At the same time, it also requires respecting 
the freedom of individuals to determine the character of their lives and to create 
meaningful accounts of them. 

The rigidity of the sides in the dispute over identity politics might be eased if 
the antagonists concentrated more on its material basis, on how notions of cul- 
tural assimilation and the “melting pot” lose their credibility when times are 
tough. Since the 1960s the United States has experienced a steady decline in the 
number of entry-level manufacturing jobs that require few skills and offer good 
wages and a chance for some upward mobility. To this diminution of the manu- 
facturing base one should add the cutbacks in government jobs programs begun 
under Ronald Reagan and continued by the Congress and subsequent adminis- 
trations. These kinds of jobs were a vital channel for the assimilation of every 
immigrant group before today, including the large numbers of African Ameri- 
cans who moved North into industrialized cities after the 1890s. The growing 
underclass has become more difficult to assimilate into the economy, whatever 
the social or ethnic group of the individual. As a result, racism, anti-Semitism, 
xenophobia, violence against women, and overt acts of bigotry are on the rise 
nationwide. The depravity of our politics feeds at the trough of material de- 
spair. 





0 



Not Bom on the Fourth of July 



19 



The economic crisis has precipitated a cultural crisis of scapegoating, sepa- 
ratism, selfishness, cynicism, and rank exploitation of anxieties and fears. So- 
cial and immigrant groups that cannot look forward to assimilation turn more 
readily to insisting on the preservation of what cultural identity they do have, 
since no route toward a common identity or common culture appears open. In 
an era of scarcity, competition for jobs, housing, college admissions, and other 
necessities takes the shape of group conflicts as individuals band together to 
strengthen their hand in the struggle for a piece of the shrinking pie. Scarcity 
also makes it vastly more difficult to redistribute wealth in order to right past 
injustices, such as the denial of equal opportunity to women and minorities. 

Individuals belonging to social groups that have been the regular victims of 
bigotry and discrimination fight even harder to get some small increase for 
themselves, and step up the ferocity of their denunciation of the group that has 
benefited from their exploitation or oppression. Whites often respond to this 
challenge to their dominance in the same way in which they respond to the 
general decline of economic opportunities: they look for a scapegoat and por- 
tray themselves as the true victims, fortifying the walls of prejudice and selfish- 
ness rather than building bridges of common cause and compassion. On the one 
hand, women and minorities see the discrimination against them as groups more 
clearly than ever, and so tend to respond as alienated communities of interest 
that have no common bonds. On the other hand, middle- and lower-income 
whites, especially men, react to the reduction in their own economic opportuni- 
ties by irrationally blaming feminism and affirmative action programs, as if 
these were responsible for the disappearance of entry-level manufacturing jobs, 
government employment, and retail expansion. Thus, one should greet the cur- 
rent tendency to portray white men as the unfairly victimized targets of left- 
wing hate groups by pointing out (as does Michael Lind) the long history of 
white supremacist attitudes informing U.S. public policy and economic life as 
well as the continuing position of predominance most white men have in Ameri- 
can society (unfortunately, Lind thinks it necessary to balance this account with 
a hyperbolic jeremiad against affirmative action). If reforms in society and edu- 
cation and government result in targeting the privileges white men have had for 
so long, it is done not out of a personal hatred of them for their gender or their 
race but out of historical recognition and moral evaluation of the unjust distri- 
bution of social power and knowledge. 

At colleges and universities a similar story unfolds. The momentum of the 
Civil Rights and women’s movements of the 1960s created a variety of institu- 
tions and ideas, mostly on the periphery of academe, to remedy past intellectual 
injustices through collective action. Autonomous (though usually precarious 
and underfunded) programs in Women’s Studies, Black or African American 
Studies, and similar innovations brought identity politics into campus adminis- 
tration and curriculum. Throughout the Reagan and Bush years, however, the 





20 



Gregoty S. Jay 



moneys and political support for these programs dried up, along with financial 
aid for the poor and victims of discrimination. Twenty-five years after the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964, black enrollment in higher education actually began to 
decline despite affirmative action programs. The fall into poverty of northern 
black industrial communities that lost their share of the wealth produced by 
urban manufacture (now exported to the Third World) had a devastating impact 
on the ability of blacks to attend college. By 1990, after a decade of expanding 
requirements, tuition increases, and cuts in financial aid, white students too 
began to feel the economic pinch, and massive numbers of white college stu- 
dents took part-time jobs to pay their way through school. Again, many whites 
irrationally blamed affirmative action programs for the decline in college op- 
portunities and course offerings rather than pointing the finger at the govern- 
ment officials who stole from the poor and middle-class and gave to the rich. 
Young Americans of college age now stare hungrily at one another, seeing not 
friends or compatriots in a common culture but instead eyeing each other as 
competitors in a grim struggle for money and power. 

In debates on multiculturalism and the diversity of educational offerings, 
one sometimes encounters objections to the constant reiteration of “race, class, 
and gender” as seemingly the only categories requiring revised representation. 
Why, critics ask, should we restrict ourselves to this holy trinity? What about 
all the other, theoretically infinite, kinds of differences that separate people, 
such as region and religion? Why not affirmative action to ensure representa- 
tion of evangelical Christians or Irish Americans or short people (the “verti- 
cally challenged,” as some wags put it)? The answer lies, I think, in the connection 
between our knowledge about social groups and the relative power they have in 
a given culture. In the context of the United States, a strong argument has been 
made that acts of bigotry and discrimination against people on the basis of their 
race, class, and gender (including sexual orientation) are at their highest point 
in our history. These groups — people of color, women, the poor, gays and lesbi- 
ans — are on the whole less socially powerful and more easily targeted than 
other groups. Although abstract ideas about justice and equality might suggest 
the arbitrariness of privileging race, class, and gender, historical understanding 
of U.S. society shows the dominant role these categories have played. The fact 
that everyone can claim to be a victim of some prejudice does not mean that all 
have been equally harmed or that degrees of oppression are insignificant. Al- 
though it is important to discourage exercises wherein people argue over who 
has been most oppressed, these disputes seem preferable to the relative silence 
about bigotry and discrimination that preceded them. 

The lack of power of specific social groups has been reflected in the way 
they have been represented in educational materials and institutions (if at all), 
and this misrepresentation (or lack of representation) in turn reproduces their 




32 



Not Born on the Fourth of July 



21 



social disempowerment. So the reiteration of “race, class, and gender” does not 
follow from some wrong-headed assertion that non-whites, the working class, 
and women are the only categories of victimization, or that only these 
marginalized groups have cultural riches that require study and appreciation. 
Rather, the argument I am pursuing asserts that throughout America’s history 
the traditions of cultural groups other than these have had relatively more ac- 
cess to representation; thus, such relatively well-represented groups do not re- 
quire exceptional efforts to gain their place in the national culture. In this way 
one can understand why questions of educational purpose and scholarship can- 
not be easily disentangled from political questions, especially when an educa- 
tion often provides the most ready access to better-paid jobs and social power. 

Cultural and economic assimilation in the United States has historically been 
relatively easy for those of European descent, more difficult for those of His- 
panic descent, and virtually impossible for those of African descent. American 
Indians, of course, were removed beyond the pale and subjected to attempted 
genocide. Assimilation of Asian Americans remains problematic even as they 
wield great economic power in states such as California and Hawaii. Racial 
prejudice, then, the ancient human habit of making one’s own personal identity 
dependent on the illusion of superiority over someone else, continues to be 
decisive in American life and public policy. The last four decades of the twenti- 
eth century show a demographic swing toward growth in those very sectors of 
the population that have been traditionally the most recalcitrant toward assimi- 
lation, since assimilation meant either accepting the superiority of Anglo-Saxon 
culture or melting into the pot of white European pluralism. This has contrib- 
uted to the ever-stronger tendency to see the nation as a conglomerate of dis- 
tinct social and cultural groups rather than as a social contract among highly 
individual and independent persons. 

Indeed, many now question whether assimilation should be a goal at all, 
since it usually means the assimilation of less empowered groups to the cultural 
values and institutionalized powers of dominant groups. Cities such as Los 
Angeles, New York, and Chicago are increasingly made up of racially and eth- 
nically distinct neighborhoods, composing together a kind of multicultural 
metropolis. (A recent article on demographics in California was called “Los 
Angeles: Capital of the Third World,” a title that suggests the white fear of 
hordes of racial others descending on America in some remake of 1950s horror 
classics of xenophobia about “Them.”) As the cultural critic Todd Gitlin sees it, 
there has been an almost complete reversal of the political landscape with re- 
spect to the old debate between universalism and particularism. Whereas in the 
eighteenth century, liberal progressives of the Enlightenment swore allegiance 
to an equal and common humanity transcending material particulars, today leftist 
reformers insist that political change must start with, and always respect, the 










22 



Gregory S. Jay 



unbridgeable differences between heterogeneous peoples. At this rate we will 
soon have difficulty finding anyone who was bom on the Fourth of July, who 
thinks of himself or herself as “simply an American.” 

Obviously academic scholars can only indirectly affect the fundamental eco- 
nomic factors that are accelerating the breakdown of cultural consensus in the 
United States. But educators can work vigorously to change the policies and 
material practices of their own institutions; after all, professors should not pro- 
test injustice in faraway places while ignoring its persistence in their own back- 
yards. Across the nation, the pressure on universities to make budgetary ends 
meet threatens to roll back innovative programs in area studies and to limit the 
hiring of younger scholars and nontraditional voices. Administrators may also 
be tempted to exploit further the services of poorly paid teaching assistants or 
part-time instructors who receive no benefits and are not protected by unions. 

Still, most academics will continue, in their professional lives, to respond to 
the “culture wars” through the battle of books and ideas, whether in public 
forums or classroom syllabi or in the pages of journals and magazines. Here 
there are many strategies, many tasks. As intellectuals or cultural historians, we 
can object to the language of novelty commonly used about the “disuniting of 
America.” It can be pointed out that the consensus about the American dream 
was never very comprehensive in the first place, and that acceptance of it was 
often not a matter of choice. We can also look positively at the multicultural and 
multinational demographics of the American population as something to be 
proud of and something requiring a new vision of the nation’s history and pur- 
pose. Reversions to nationalistic patriotism, whether in the political sphere or 
in formulas for cultural history, should be strenuously resisted. Intellectuals 
have a responsibility to remind the public at large of how such patriotism has 
historically been used as a weapon of violence against many of our own citi- 
zens and as an excuse for telling lies about our past. 

At the same time, it remains indispensable to mark the limitations of identity 
politics and cultural separatism, since these repeat at the local level the same 
blindness that nationalism perpetuates at the state level. Criticisms of identity 
politics, though, should regularly remind the audience that the equation of “race” 
with “nation” is a dominant feature of modem European and Western thought, 
and that the invention of “whiteness” by Europeans and their American descen- 
dants is the key factor in the development of the contemporary problem of iden- 
tity politics. Rather than taking sides in disputes between fixed positions in the 
debates over identity politics, we should be encouraging encounters that focus 
on how the ways we represent our differences affect the ways we value one 
another and the access each of us has to social and economic opportunities. We 
may want to challenge the centrality of “identity” itself in arguments about 
culture, for example, by considering the difference between “having” an iden- 
tity and living by an ethos. At the colleges and universities, cultural difference 



Not Born on the Fourth of July 



23 



cannot help but be a central focus of the agenda, though it should not become 
the pretext for naive pluralism or heated celebrations of ethnic traditions. Here 
the poststructuralist critique of identity proves politically useful; the uncritical 
assertion of the value of one’s personal or cultural identity is not ultimately a 
sufficient response to those who have, on the basis of their own identity poli- 
tics, repressed and denied one’s identity. When we talk about rescuing those 
“differences within” that are whitewashed by totalizing identity, that goes for 
the differences within the self as well as within the community or state. 

An experience of the relativity of cultural values can lead to an ethical mo- 
ment of self-criticism. I call this moment ethical in part because in it I submit 
myself to the judgment of a principle larger than my own self-interest. I hold 
my cultural identity and its practices to the standard of justice, and ask how my 
mode of being affects the lives of others. Slavery and patriarchy were, after all, 
popular because they served the self-interest of a ruling class. What justifies 
struggles against that ruling class? Merely the desire of other classes, too, for 
power? Power to do what? For whom? To what end? These are questions, again, 
of “the good,” and they cannot be reduced solely to questions of power. In a 
pure clash of forces for power, there is no reason to prefer either side. Rather, a 
real political philosophy requires that I be able to argue that one arrangement of 
power is harmful, unjust, and immoral. If so, even those who benefit from in- 
justice can (in theory) be persuaded or constrained to give it up. 

In raising the question of the good, I mean to suggest that cultural criticism, 
to be worth the effort, should have an affirmative dimension. Certainly such 
affirmation may take complex, even ironic forms, as my discussion of the sub- 
versive affirmations of the Declaration of Independence has demonstrated. Ralph 
Ellison continues this tradition in the “Epilogue” to Invisible Man, where his 
narrator gives this final gloss to his grandfather’s deathbed injunction to “over- 
come ’em [whites] with yeses, undermine ’em with grins, agree ’em to death 
and destruction” ( 16 ): 

Could he have meant — hell, he must have meant the principle, that we 
were to affirm the principle on which the country was built and not the 
men, or at least not the men who did the violence. . . . Did he mean to 
affirm the principle, which they themselves had dreamed into being out of 
the chaos and darkness of the feudal past, and which they had violated and 
compromised to the point of absurdity even in their own corrupt minds? Or 
did he mean that we had to take the responsibility for all of it, for the men 
as well as the principle. . . ? Was it that we of all, we, most of all, had to 
affirm the principle, the plan in whose name we had been brutalized and 
sacrificed . . . ? (574) 

Ellison’s affirmation of the white master’s “plan in whose name we had been 
brutalized and sacrificed” is bound to strike many today as naive if not self- 
destructive. But is Ellison’s idealism — his affirmation of principles despite par- 



ERIC 



3 ! 



24 



Gregory S. Jay 



ticular individual failures to live up to them — really so ineffectual a course, or 
so lacking in theoretical strength or practical justification? There has been, I 
think, too little admission by the left today (at least on campus) that its prin- 
ciples remain indebted to the tradition of the Declaration of Independence, es- 
pecially as appropriated and extended by successive generations since Abigail 
Adams and David Walker. Uneasiness about being seen as oppressively “patri- 
otic” or “nationalist” in the wake of the 1960s and the Vietnam War explains 
some of this hesitance, as does the influence of Marxism on academics, among 
whom it helped foster an atmosphere hostile to liberalism and suspicious of 
hypocritical pieties about equal rights, justice, and democracy. Writers who 
unabashedly espoused belief in American possibilities suffered harsh attack, as 
was the case with Ralph Ellison. Recalling Ellison at the current moment pre- 
sents an interesting opportunity to reflect on conflicting intellectual, artistic, 
and political commitments, as Jerry Watts notes in his recent study of Ellison in 
Heroism and the Black Intellectual. Many of Ellison’s views might be dubbed 
“politically incorrect” and he has indeed been taken to task by the Left and by 
proponents of the Black Aesthetic and Black Nationalism ever since the publi- 
cation in 1952 of Invisible Man. The criticisms have merit, but one hopes that 
the days of having to choose between Ellison and Wright (or between Martin 
Luther King and Malcolm X) are past. 

What makes Ellison newly fascinating is his stance as a hybrid character. 
While grounding his fiction and essays in the black experience — in blues and 
folklore — Ellison freely adapted techniques and themes from white writers he 
praised, including Malraux, Joyce, Hemingway, and Eliot. He saw “American” 
culture, especially in music and literature, as having always been shaped by the 
contributions of African Americans, so that to speak of American culture as 
distinct from black culture (or vice versa) made little sense. This position did 
not endear Ellison to many in the black community, who, even if they acknowl- 
edged the truth of his position, could nonetheless rightly argue that African 
Americans and their art had been regularly discriminated against and violated, 
to the point where it made no sense not to speak of a difference between white 
and black cultural experience. And whatever cultural achievements the black 
community could boast in no way mitigated the extremes of poverty and vio- 
lence to which it was subjected. Nonetheless, Ellison seems clearly the forerun- 
ner of Toni Morrison, who in Playing in the Dark demonstrates extensively 
how white literature is haunted by an Africanist presence. 

Ellison’s gamble on the tactics of integration and subversive appropriation 
was a dangerous one, and is obviously still controversial no matter who takes it 
up. Yet in the current swing away from essentialism and identity politics, Ellison’s 
decision to say “yes” to multiple and contradictory versions of America might 
offer fresh lessons. The Ellison controversy recalls other such debates over the 
question “Who is an authentically black (or Jewish or Indian or feminist) writer?” 



Not Bom on the Fourth of July 



25 



Ellison’s move away from Marxism and social determinism toward an existen- 
tialism of the blues emphasized the real power of choice, or agency, in a way 
that resonates in the aftermath of the determinism of structuralism and debates 
over the impact of the “welfare state.” Watts cautions, however, that “in his 
public statements Ellison will sometimes offer a perfunctory mention of the 
dire plight of many blacks before he proceeds into a celebration of black Ameri- 
can creative endurance and American possibility. . . . Ellison utilizes hegemonic 
American democratic rhetoric as well as the resilient hopeful outlooks of many 
black Americans to divert his attention from the most debilitating aspects of 
black existence in America” (108). Ellison’s championing of the blues and folk- 
lore can come to seem like other paeans to popular culture, that is, as an account 
that overestimates the “resistance” power of popular culture and mistakes the 
artistic expression of oppression for the practical undoing of its material and 
political causes. 

Ellison’s “yes” to American democracy never translated into political ac- 
tion, as his critics in the 1960s were quick to point out. The freedom imagined 
in Invisible Man becomes so universal a principle of enlightenment (recall the 
room of bulbs and the subversive appropriation of the power grid) that it fails to 
stay connected to the particulars of the black experience in America. When the 
Civil Rights movement sought to take to the streets with that “yes” as a weapon 
of political action, it continued to invoke Jefferson’s words. Martin Luther King 
takes up the theme of the Declaration during his “I Have a Dream” speech at the 
1963 March on Washington, combining the oratorical authority of Douglass’s 
cry against injustice with Ellison’s idealistic affirmation. 4 

Speaking from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, King begins by recalling 
the “Gettysburg Address”: 

Five score years ago, a great American, in whose symbolic shadow we 
stand today, signed the Emancipation Proclamation. This momentous de- 
cree came as a great beacon light of hope to millions of Negro slaves who 
had been seared in the flames of withering injustice. It came as a joyous 
daybreak to end the long night of their captivity. But one hundred years 
later, the Negro still is not free; one hundred years later, the life of the 
Negro is still sadly crippled by the manacles of segregation and the chains 
of discrimination; one hundred years later, the Negro lives on a lonely is- 
land of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of material prosperity; one 
hundred years later, the Negro is still languished in the corners of Ameri- 
can society and finds himself in exile in his own land. 

So much reminds us of Douglass: the cadence, the imagery, the syntactic paral- 
lelisms, the evocation of the sermon and the jeremiad. Strategically, though, 
what interests us is King’s implicit comparison of his speech to Lincoln’s 
“Gettysburg Address,” perhaps the most famous instance of American demo- 
cratic rhetoric. King understands that the Civil Rights movement is a continua- 



26 



Gregory S. Jay 



tion of the Civil War by other means. Lincoln had followed (reluctantly) the 
abolitionist tradition of applying the Declaration and its rights to an unintended 
beneficiary: the enslaved Africans of America (see Wills, Lincoln). The 
“Gettysburg Address” expresses that extension by first quoting Jefferson’s lines: 
“Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth upon this continent , 
a new nation, conceived in liberty , and dedicated to the proposition that all men 
are created equal.” (I quote from the first draft, known as the Nicolay version.) 
Unless we read the “Gettysburg Address” within this context, as one more invo- 
cation of Jefferson in a line stretching back through Douglass and William Wells 
Brown and David Walker, we may miss how pointedly it in fact refers to the 
liberation of African Americans. In citing Lincoln, or in appropriating him sub- 
versively. King reclaims the “Gettysburg Address” for the purposes of the Civil 
Rights movement, even as he goes on to iterate the undone work of reconstruc- 
tion. 

In once more citing Jefferson, however. King does not restrict his language 
to the rhetoric of democracy. Instead, his often biblical imagery suddenly takes 
a very material turn, as he reminds his audience that the “riches of freedom” are 
counted in money as well as votes: 

When the architects of our republic wrote the magnificent words of the 
Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a prom- 
issory note to which every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise 
that all men, yes, black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the 
unalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. It is obvious 
today that America has defaulted on this promissory note in so far as her 
citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring this sacred obligation, 
America has given the Negro people a bad check; a check which has come 
back marked “insufficient funds.” 

King circumvents the intentionalist reading of the Declaration and the Consti- 
tution (documents which certainly did not intend to extend the freedoms of 
citizenship to people of color) by reconstruing them as “promissory notes,” or 
writings of a utopian cast. This recasting puts the founding fathers and their 
heirs under an obligation which, however morally and politically right, does 
not strictly follow from the original documents. But from Abigail Adams to 
Abraham Lincoln to King, this has become standard procedure in uses of the 
Declaration. More interesting in King’s rhetorical troping of the Declaration 
and Constitution as “promissory notes” is his implication that they constitute 
economic as well as political obligations. While accounts of the Civil Rights 
movement sometimes divide its emphases into first a legal and then an eco- 
nomic phase. King’s speech shows that black Americans always saw the link 
between the two, as the boycott in Birmingham earlier that year demonstrated. 

The most quoted passage of King’s speech is that now-titular paragraph in 
which he tells us that “I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the 




38 



Not Born on the Fourth of July 



21 



American dream. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live 
out the true meaning of its creed. ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident, that 
all men are created equal.’” Playing (or signifying on that most cliched of phrases 
(“the American dream”), King’s reiterated “I have a dream” comes to have some 
of the same aggressive, ironic, even caustic, force one could hear in Walker, 
Fern, and Douglass (though King’s performance stuck to tones of righteous- 
ness and avoided pronouncing the bitterness of the speech’s content). In assert- 
ing that he, too, has a dream, King both contests the exclusion of African 
Americans from the American dream and insists rhetorically on their place within 
it (a place that has often been imagined by whites as the scene of a haunting 
nightmare). The integrationist, appropriative terms of King’s dream of racial 
harmony and transcendence (“I have a dream that my four little children will 
one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin, 
but by the content of their character”) so expertly express the dogmas of official 
American idealism that he leaves the white audience watching on TV with few 
authorized means of resistance. At the same time, his image of the promissory 
note implies an ambiguity in “the American dream”: Is it a dream of civil and 
political freedoms, or a dream of economic possibilities? Given the economic 
infrastructure of racism, can it be both? Since a promise belongs to the realm of 
moral action, what kind of ethos does the “promissory note” of “the American 
dream” require? To whom was that note issued? And what will it take to pay the 
debt? Do we have the economic, cultural, and spiritual funds, or are they insuf- 
ficient? The shape of multicultural America’s dilemmas in subsequent decades 
has its roots in these questions. 

King would come down from the mountain only to be assassinated while 
assisting a sanitation workers’ strike in Memphis as part of his “poor people’s 
campaign.” By 1968 his “American” credentials were in dispute because of his 
opposition to the Vietnam War and his emphasis on economic issues rather than 
civil rights. Criticism from black militants and harassment from J. Edgar Hoover’s 
FBI further eroded King’s capacity to hold together an American dream capa- 
cious enough to unite people across races. For his part, Ellison never did finish 
his much-awaited second novel. The “yes” Ellison pronounced in Invisible Man 
gave voice to a dream he found it hard to fulfill, as if the energy expended in 
upholding his belief in freedom robbed him of what force he needed to achieve 
something more in art (or politics). Ellison did write a series of powerful and 
problematic essays on literature, art, and cultural politics (collected in Shadow 
and Act and Going to the Territory ;) which, together with Invisible Man , deeply 
influenced the development of African American criticism and such practitio- 
ners as Houston Baker and Henry Louis Gates Jr. In retrospect, however, it is 
not surprising that it was the black nationalist, black aesthetic, and women’s 
liberation movements that predominated in black cultural and literary studies 
from the 1960s to the 1990s, rather than any vision growing out of the work of 



28 



Gregory S . Jay 



King and Ellison. In the dialectic of cultural struggle, their integrationist work 
in the arenas of political idealism and artistic universalism would inevitably 
have to make way for the claims of the particular and the material — of the 
differences that came to be the chief theme of contemporary cultural studies. 

Of course. King and Ellison were always there alongside Malcolm X, Alice 
Walker, Amiri Baraka, Toni Morrison, Jesse Jackson, Albert Murray, Cornel 
West, and the others. It has just been difficult of late to know where to place 
King and Ellison, since the liberal tradition they belong to has been subject to 
so much critique in the less idealistic years since King's death. In trying to 
move the dialectic again and to pick up the thread of their legacies, I think we 
can borrow profitably on the promissory note of the tradition, as this essay has 
tried to show. The various calls for a “rainbow coalition,” for “intercultural 
dialogue” and “the politics of recognition,” and even for “multiculturalism” are 
symptomatic of an effort to declare a new “we the people,” though there remain 
good reasons to fear any rush to revive patriotic community unless it is built on 
a foundation of historical memory and mutual care. 

Meditating in Shadow and Act on the black writer’s contradictory relation to 
the American dream and its fictional tradition, Ellison observes that “though as 
passionate believers in democracy Negroes identify themselves with the broader 
American ideals, their sense of reality springs, in part, from an American expe- 
rience which most white men not only have not had, but one with which they 
are reluctant to identify themselves even when presented in forms of the imagi- 
nation” (25). As I see it, the tradition of radical reform in American literary and 
cultural studies says “yes” to democracy in just the double-edged way Ellison 
describes. This affirmation obligates us to engage in complex and difficult acts 
of identification and imagination. On occasion we will need to affirm that which 
we have not experienced or, in politics, say “yes” even when the Supreme Court, 
from Dred Scott to yesterday, says “no.” Although the America of which many 
dream has yet to be bom, and may exceed the boundary of any nation-state, the 
outlines of its ethos have already begun to form as the cultural struggles of the 
late twentieth century take their next turns. One of those is the “ethical turn” 
now apparent in various arenas, from academic theory to the political market- 
place. If an ethos is a way of life, combining the certainties of knowledge with 
the uncertainties of ideals and beliefs, what ethos follows from today’s struggles 
for representation? Looking back to 1776 and forward beyond 1996, 1 think this 
ethos could be one that is accountable to history’s horrors, that dreams of a 
community of stories, that is merciless in exposing the practices of injustice, 
that emphasizes the responsibility of individuals to each other, and that acknowl- 
edges that power without a vision of the good is a hollow goal. 




40 



Not Born on the Fourth of July 



29 



Notes 

1 . The faculties of rationality and the moral sense were often used to construct this 
subjectivity (and to define those groups outside its borders). The essential study here is 
certainly Garry Wills’s Inventing America. But Wills, in my judgment, often goes a bit 
far in exonerating Jefferson for his prejudices and racism. (See chapter 15, for example, 
where Jefferson’s often prurient remarks on the inferiority of Negroes are implausibly 
balanced by his sentimental respect for the moral sense of slaves.) As I shall show, Wills 
exaggerates the “obscurity” into which the Declaration fell and underestimates the de- 
gree of influence its ideas immediately had among disenfranchised portions of the new 
American population. 

2. For an account of the speech’s context, see McFeely, Frederick Douglass ; 1 72— 
73. For the complete text of the address see Blassingame, Douglass Papers 2:359-88. 
The tradition of ironically citing the Declaration continued into the twentieth century, as 
can be seen in depictions of the Fourth of July in Audre Lorde’s Zami and Alice Walker’s 
The Color Purple. Martin Luther King Jr.’s invocation of the Declaration will be exam- 
ined later in this chapter. 

3. History has a way of continuing to ignore these voices. In his marvelous volume 
on Lincoln at Gettysburg , Garry Wills focuses most of his attention on the centrality of 
the Declaration of Independence to Lincoln’s political thought, and Wills presents de- 
tailed reviews of how white politicians in the era appropriated Jefferson’s document. 
Unaccountably, there is no mention of Walker, Douglass, the Declaration of Sentiments, 
or any other instances from the counter-tradition I have sketched. Wills’s analysis of 
how Lincoln interprets the Declaration as an idealistic promise would have been strength- 
ened (and made more historically accurate) had he included a more diverse set of sources 
for his study. Lincoln’s interpretation appears less novel when one considers how long it 
had been articulated by African Americans protesting slavery. 

4. The speech King delivered was based on a carefully written and revised text, 
though King appeared to depart from it when he improvised the final section containing 
the “I have a dream” passages. This and other sections, however, represented reworkings 
of material King had been using for a number of years. Published versions of the speech 
are based on the delivered one, though the speech has often been reprinted with minor 
discrepancies. Some of these originate in the first publication of the speech in the Negro 
History Bulletin , which presumably drew on the prepared as well as the delivered text. 
For background and analyses see the essays collected in Calloway -Thomas and Lucaites. 
The edition of 1993 authorized by King’s wife and daughter carries this note: “Dis- 
claimer: The words that appear here are the original words written by Martin Luther 
King Jr., and are slightly different from the words Reverend King spoke on August 28, 
1963.” But King and his biographers confirmed that the latter part of the speech departed 
from the “original” written text; perhaps the Kings are referring to the written version 
King gave to the Negro History Bulletin. A still different version, closer to but not ex- 
actly the same as the delivered one, is available from the Martin Luther King Jr. Papers 
Project Web site at Stanford University. I have used this version and checked it against 
videotape of the speech. 




30 



Gregory S . Jay 



Works Cited 

Aptheker, Herbert, ed. From the Colonial Times through the Civil War. Vol. 1 of A Docu- 
mentary History of the Negro People in the United States. New York: Citadel, 1951. 

Bardes, Barbara and Suzanne Gossett. Declarations of Independence: Women and Po- 
litical Power in Nineteenth-Century American Fiction. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
UP, 1990. 

Berlant, Lauren. “The Female Woman: Fanny Fern and the Form of Sentiment.” Ameri- 
can Literary History 3 (1991): 429-54. 

Blassingame, John W., ed. The Frederick Douglass Papers . Series I: Speeches , Debates , 
and Interviews. New Haven: Yale UP, 1982. 

Brown, William Wells. Clotel, or The President's Daughter (1853). Ed. William Edward 
Farrison. New York: Carol Publishing Group, 1989. Also reprinted in William L. 
Andrews, ed., Three Classic African-American Novels . New York: Mentor, 1990. 

Buhle, Mari Jo and Paul Buhle. eds. The Concise History of Woman Suffrage: Selections 
from the Classic Work of Stanton, Anthony ; Gage, and Harper. Urbana: U of Illinois 
P, 1978. 

Calloway-Thomas, Carolyn and John Louis Lucaites, eds. Martin Luther King , Jr., and 
the Sermonic Power of Public Discourse. Tuscaloosa: U of Alabama P, 1993. 

Chevigny, Bell Gale. The Woman and the Myth: Margaret Fuller's Life and Writings. 
New York: Feminist Press, 1976. 

Derrida, Jacques. “Declarations of Independence.” New Political Science 15 (1986): 7- 
15. 

Ellison, Ralph. Shadow and Act. New York: Random House, 1964. 

. Invisible Man. New York: Vintage, 1952. 

. Going to the Territory. New York: Random House, 1987. 

Fern, Fanny (Sara Payson Willis Parton). Ruth Hall and Other Writings. New Brunswick, 
NJ: Rutgers UP, 1986. 

Fliegelman, Jay. Declaring Independence: Jefferson, Natural Language, and the Cul- 
ture of Performance. Stanford: Stanford UP, 1993. 

Gitlin, Todd. “On the Virtues of a Loose Canon.” Beyond P.C. : Toward a Politics of 
Understanding. Ed. Patricia Aufderheide. St. Paul, MN: Gray wolf Press, 1992. 1 85— 
90. 

Hollinger, David A. Postethnic America: Beyond Multiculturalism. New York: Basic 
Books, 1995. 

King, Martin Luther, Jr. “I Have a Dream.” Negro History Bulletin 21 (May 1968): 16- 
17. 

. I Have a Dream. 1963. San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1993. 

Lauter, Paul. Canons and Contexts. New York: Oxford UP, 1991 . 

Lauter, Paul, ed. The Heath Anthology of American Literature. 2nd edition. 2 vols. Lex- 
ington, MA: D C. Heath, 1994. 

Lind, Michael. The Next American Nation: The New Nationalism and the Fourth Ameri- 
can Revolution . New York: Free Press, 1995. 

McFeely, William S. Frederick Douglass. New York: Norton, 1991. 

Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. New York: 
Random House, 1992. 




Not Born on the Fourth of July 



31 



O’Connell, Barry, ed. On Our Own Ground : The Complete Writings of William Apess, A 
Pequot. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992. 

Reising, Russell. The Unusable Past: Theory and the Study of American Literature. New 
York: Methuen, 1986. 

Shumway, David. Creating American Civilization: A Genealogy of American Litera- 
ture as an Academic Discipline. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1994. 

Tise, Larry E. Proslavery: A History of the Defense of Slavery in America, 1701-1840. 
Athens: U Georgia P, 1987. 

Walker, David. David Walker's Appeal, in Four Articles, Together with a Preamble, to 
the Coloured Citizens of the World, But in Particular, and Very Expressly, to Those of 
the United States of America (1829). Ed. Charles M. Wiltse. New York: Hill and 
Wang, 1965. 

Watts, Jerry Gafio. Heroism and the Black Intellectual: Ralph Ellison, Politics, and the 
Afro-American Intellectual Life. Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 1994. 

Wills, Garry. Inventing America: Jefferson's Declaration of Independence. New York: 
Random House, 1978. 

. Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words that Remade America. New York: Simon and 

Schuster, 1992. 



2 “Not in the Least American”: 
Nineteenth-Century Literary 
Regionalism as unAmerican 
Literature 

Judith Fetterley 
University at Albany, SUNY 



My title comes from a book called Deephaven , published in 1877 by a writer 
named Sarah Ome Jewett. In this book Jewett describes the experiences two 
young women have when they choose to spend the summer in a little town in 
Maine rather than remaining in Boston or traveling with friends or family. The 
summer in Deephaven becomes the occasion for a pause in the lives of Kate 
and Helen, taken before the presumptively inevitable plunge into marriage and 
motherhood, irreversible adulthood. Yet for one of the women, the narrator Helen, 
the pause provides the opportunity to interrogate, however indirectly, conven- 
tional wisdom on the subjects of marriage and motherhood, the definition of 
adulthood, and the value of the characteristics associated with it. For Jewett, 
who chose not to marry, who chose in one crucial sense not to grow up as her 
culture defined this process for women, writing Deephaven may have helped 
her acknowledge and understand this difference and may have enabled her four 
years later to enter into a life-long relationship with Annie Adams Fields, widow 
of James T. Fields, the man who made the Atlantic Monthly , founded Ticknor 
and Fields, and for twenty years served as the arbiter of what would be called 
American literature. Was Jewett’s choice unAmerican? Is her book unAmerican? 

Deephaven, Jewett’s narrator declares, “was not in the least American. There 
was no excitement about anything; there were no manufactories; nobody seemed 
in the least hurry. The only foreigners were a few standard sailors. I do not 
know when a house or a new building of any kind had been built” (84). I 
take this text as my starting point in proposing the term “unAmerican” as a way 
of thinking about a particular body of nineteenth-century texts and as a way of 
describing a particular critical stance, for when Jewett refers to the town of 
Deephaven as “not in the least American” I read her as thus marking the differ- 
ence of her own text from what even in the 1870s could be considered Ameri- 
can literature. In this context we might note the choice of another writer, Henry 
James, who appropriated the term “American” for the novel he published in 
1877, the same year as Jewett published Deephaven , and who thus signaled 




32 



‘ Not in the Least American” 



33 



his ambition to write a specifically American novel, perhaps even “the great 
American novel” (see Spengemann 98-1 14). 

While the term “unAmerican ,” like all terms constructed in opposition, is 
problematic by virtue of its connection to the very thing it opposes, it has the 
advantage of foregrounding the degree to which the term “American” in the 
context of American literature has always referred to certain thematic content 
and to the values associated with that content. “American” has in this sense 
always been political. Thinking of texts as unAmerican has the added advan- 
tage of moving the question of the canon beyond tokenism; for it suggests that 
the controversy over what we teach cannot be resolved by merely adding a 
woman and/or a minority male writer to our syllabi since not all texts by women 
or minority males challenge the values currently associated with the term “Ameri- 
can” in the context of American literature. While adding texts by women and 
minority males to our courses and syllabi is necessary political work, it is not 
sufficient, for we may well ask how much has been gained if black men estab- 
lish personhood through invoking sexism or if white women establish personhood 
through invoking racism. It is, for example, no accident that I have sought to 
recover the tradition of American literary regionalism as opposed to, say, the 
body of anti-Tom texts written by white Southern women in the years following 
the publication of Uncle Tom's Cabin and preceding the Civil War. For in the 
texts of literary regionalism I find the values that lead me to critique the canon 
in the first place; that is, in regionalism I find a literature that models a subjec- 
tivity attained by standing up for others, not on them. Invoking the concept of 
“unAmerican” thus helps focus attention on the significance of which texts by 
minority males and women we choose to include. Finally, figuring one’s criti- 
cal stance as unAmerican provides a way of thinking about one’s activity that 
does justice to its political intent and recognizes the dangers which attend it. 

In this essay, I wish to model what Paul Lauter has labeled canonical criti- 
cism, a criticism that focuses on “how we construct our syllabi and anthologies, 
on the roots of our systems of valuation, and on how we decide what is impor- 
tant for us to teach and for our students to learn” (134), and specifically that 
form of canonical criticism which, in the words of Jane Marcus and Lillian 
Robinson, takes treason as its text. “Canon critique,” a term I prefer to “canoni- 
cal criticism” (which can perhaps be misread as traditional interpretation of the 
current canon), has been from the outset overtly political, concerned with is- 
sues of power and aligned with certain values. As an overtly political criticism, 
canon critique has sought to expose the political nature of the processes of 
canon formation and literary valuation, asking such questions as these: By what 
specific historical processes have certain texts become canonical? What poli- 
tics have informed these processes? What politics inform the definitions of aes- 
thetic value that accompany such processes? Lending still greater urgency to 




> > 




34 



Judith Fetterley 



these questions is a context of increasing pressure to “get back to basics,” and to 
create a set body of texts that will define what is American and who is literate. 
Indeed, as Paul Lauter comments, “it would not be too much to say that canoni- 
cal criticism constitutes a part of a broader effort to reconstruct our society, and 
particularly our educational institutions, on a more democratic and equitable 
basis” (144-45). 

In the field of American literature canon critique has sought to expose how 
the term “American” has been used to create a literary canon so hegemonic in 
the privileging of certain subjectivities as to make the term unAmerican not 
simply politically useful but actually meaningful. The equation of American 
literature with a handful of texts written by white men, primarily of Anglo- 
Saxon ethnicity and middle or upper middle-class backgrounds, with formal 
and thematic coherence sufficient to enable a theory of the “Americanness” of 
American literature, began in the early decades of the nineteenth century (see 
Baym, “Early Histories,” and Brodhead, Hawthorne 48-66). Paul Lauter, Nina 
Baym, and Elizabeth Renker, however, have focused our attention on the middle 
decades of the twentieth century — when American literature became fully in- 
stitutionalized as a field of study in colleges and universities — as the period 
which produced the map of American literature still operative today. Nina Baym 
has aptly labeled the canon established during these decades “melodramas of 
beset manhood” and has demonstrated how this paradigm ensures “that stories 
about women could not contain the essence of American culture” and thus “that 
the matter of American experience is inherently male” (“Melodramas” 130). 
Elizabeth Renker, in tracing how the First and Second World Wars created a 
context in which American literature could be read as engendering masculinity, 
has provided an additional context for understanding our current situation and 
in particular for understanding the connection between what we currently iden- 
tify as American literature and certain formulations of our national interest. 

To the degree that the analyses of Baym, Lauter, and Renker are correct, that 
what we currently accept as American literature implicitly and explicitly de- 
fines as American only certain persons and only the stories that serve the inter- 
ests of those persons, then those of us who challenge the value of those texts 
and seek to disrupt the hegemony of the canon by recovering texts with differ- 
ent definitions and different stories are engaging in a process that could itself be 
described as unAmerican. And to the degree that the fictions we recognize as 
American serve the interests of those who also represent the state, the feminist 
critique of the American literary canon can be seen as a form of treason — a 
connection that explains the not-so-strange career of Lynne Cheney, perhaps 
the most politically motivated appointment in the history of the National En- 
dowment for the Humanities, whose goal was to delegitimate, if she could not 
eradicate, the unAmerican activity of feminist canon critique. To put it anoth- 
er way, one can reasonably argue that American education at every level is 



‘ Not in the Least American ” 



35 



currently organized to serve the needs of “boys” (here understood as a synecdo- 
che for Baym’s “beset manhood”) and that through what is taught and how it is 
taught our educational system ratifies boys’ sense of agency, primacy, and sub- 
jectivity, particularly as defined against the objectivity of girls. Thus those of us 
who seek to place the needs of girls first — in our classroom practices, in our 
determination of course content, in our criticism — can be considered to be act- 
ing in an un American, even treasonous fashion. For those of us who engage in 
feminist canon critique do so from a complex set of assumptions about the 
relation of identity to reading and writing practices. To put it simply, we assume 
a connection between the self-concept of a reader and the self imagined by and 
in a literary text. Thus, extrapolating again from Baym’s argument and from my 
own argument in The Resisting Reader, the classic tradition of American litera- 
ture, by excluding women from the definition of “American,” constructs the girl 
reading this tradition as herself unAmerican. To the degree, then, that our litera- 
ture cannot imagine the American as other than male, to that degree we who are 
women are already unAmerican. So indeed let treason be our text. 

I wish to use as my example of the “unAmerican,” and as my basis for ex- 
ploring the political utility of this term, a body of texts produced in the United 
States primarily by women writing during the second half of the nineteenth 
century which Marjorie Pryse and I call literary regionalism and which we have 
gathered together in a Norton Anthology, American Women Regionalists , 7 850- 
19 JO ( AWR ). The obligatory use of the term “American” to describe this anthol- 
ogy for marketing purposes itself provides a rich context for thinking about the 
difficulties and even contradictions of our enterprise. For while some of the 
writers in this tradition may be familiar to readers — e.g., Chopin, Dunbar-Nelson, 
Freeman, Jewett — most are marginal to, if not absent from, current American 
literary history. Absent as well is any concept of the tradition of nineteenth- 
century regionalist writing as we understand it. Though some of the writers and 
texts included in our anthology come into the field of American literature through 
the rubric of “regional realism” or “local color,” understood as subsets of “real- 
ism” (see, for example, Berthoff 90-102, and Sundquist), these categories de- 
rive from a history of American literature based on the writing of men, one 
which privileges their work as the source of its definitions. Indeed, certain re- 
cent texts have sought to establish the specifically masculinist nature of real- 
ism, the dominant term in virtually all writing about American literature after 
the Civil War (see, for example, Habegger and Bell). While in the case of Michael 
Bell in The Problem of American Realism , this identification has the effect of 
allowing him to ask the question, “what Jewett made of American realism” 
(179), and thus of positioning Jewett as a potential alternative to the values of 
realism, he reads her only within the context of her entanglement with what he 
calls “realist thinking.” Thus he concludes, not surprisingly, that the ambitious 
Nan Prince of A Country Doctor (1884) is “free” to defy tradition only by 




36 



Judith Fetter ley 



embracing it and that once Jewett left behind the ambition projected into the 
story of Nan Prince “she would appear to have left herself with no clear ratio- 
nale or counter rationale to put in its place, and after The Country of the Pointed 
Firs there was no obvious direction for her career to go” (204). Hence the fall in 
1902, which effectively ended her life as a writer, was for Bell “fortunate.” Bell 
fails to recognize that Jewett’s work derives from a tradition of women’s writ- 
ing that goes back at least as far as the end of the eighteenth century and Maria 
Edgeworth, a tradition developed through the first half of the nineteenth cen- 
tury by writers such as Mitford, Stowe, Cary, and Cooke, and practiced by 
Jewett’s contemporaries and acquaintances such as Thaxter, Murfree, and Free- 
man. In Bell’s version of American literary history Jewett appears as an isolated 
individual struggling to create an alternative to oppose to the dominant dis- 
course of realism and failing precisely because of her isolation and because 
realism is finally the only game in town. In a different version of American 
literary history, but perhaps not called that, Jewett might appear as a particu- 
larly talented practitioner of a long-established tradition, seeking to critique the 
self-consciously masculine “new” realism from a larger historical perspective. 

And here I might observe that the elegiac tone Michael Bell adopts for his 
discussion of Jewett finds echo in Eric Sundquisfs chapter in the Columbia 
Literary History of the United States. Sundquist subsumes regionalism under 
the rubric of local color and identifies it as “a literature of memory” (508), a 
memory, he observes, “often lodged in the vestiges of a world of female domes- 
ticity” (509). This reading bears an uncanny resemblance to the process Laura 
Romero has analyzed in “Vanishing Americans: Gender, Empire, and New His- 
toricism,” a process in which the elegiac mode of cultural and literary history 
performs the “historical sleight of hand” of representing “the disappearance of 
the native as not just natural but as having already happened” (385). Both Michael 
Bell in The Problem of American Realism and Richard Brodhead in Cultures of 
Letters position their reading of Jewett in relation to what they see as an overtly 
feminist effort to recuperate Jewett for contemporary readers (see Bell 197 ff. 
and Brodhead 142-144), and both participate in a process I would call the “re- 
vanishing” of Jewett — Brodhead by seeking to dismantle the conceptual frame- 
work which has led to her recuperation and Bell by suggesting that she can not 
finally be distinguished from the masculinist enterprise of realism. In Sundquist’s 
chapter the palpable politics of the discourse over Jewett is itself “vanished” to 
re-emerge as a description of her disappearance as “having already happened” 

While Marjorie Pryse and I retain the term “regional” in our name for this 
tradition, in part to focus attention on the significance of place to the produc- 
tion, reception, and content of this writing, and in part to avail ourselves of 
whatever recognition currently obtains from its present usage, we seek prima- 
rily through this term to create a category parallel to and thus potentially of 
equal importance to that of realism. And we seek as well to create a framework 




‘Not in the Least American 



37 



that will enable us to see connections, origins, and aims that remain obscure if 
we continue to subsume the work of regionalist writers under the category of 
realism. In creating the category of regionalism, then, we seek to model the 
effect on our understanding of American literature of deriving our map of Ameri- 
can literary history from an analysis of the work of women. That this consti- 
tutes an unAmerican activity may be inferred from the fact that presentation of 
our work invariably leads to the question, “Weren’t there any men writing re- 
gionalist fiction between 1850 and 1910?” — a question which barely contains 
the anxiety that men might be excluded from an American tradition or that 
certain male writers (for example, Charles Chesnutt) might best be understood 
in a context created by the work of women and subsumed within a category 
primarily female. 

In asking readers to engage with the tradition of regionalist writing and in 
identifying the stakes of this engagement, I seek to provide a context within 
which the concepts of “unAmerican” and “treason” have meaning. For one can 
perhaps understand the intent of the effort to write Jewett out of history before 
she is even in, to “re-vanish” her, if one considers the effect of choosing Jewett’s 
The Country ; of the Pointed Firs as the required American text for an eighth 
grade English class or a freshman introductory literature course; or of organiz- 
ing an entire course in American literature around the issues it raises; or even of 
introducing it in an American literature survey. As my students like to point out, 
“This isn’t an American book. It has no story and it is all about old women and 
a few old men. There isn’t an American in it.” Or consider the effect of defining 
Sylvy, the protagonist of “A White Heron,” as an American cultural hero, a girl 
who comes to understand (hetero)sexuality as sexual harassment, the great red- 
faced boy who used to chase and frighten her in town reappearing in the form of 
the “nice” boy with a gun who seeks to kill and stuff “the very birds he seemed 
to like so much” (AWR 201); a girl who chooses to renounce the world, her 
chance of being an “American,” perhaps even nationality itself, in favor of a 
bird’s life. My students can’t understand why she doesn’t promise to marry the 
hunter when she grows up, and so we talk about domestic violence and why so 
much romance should end in so much battering. 

My use of the term “unAmerican” presents one final question which I wish 
to raise here. In introducing literature currently considered unAmerican, is our 
goal to redefine the meaning of “American,” to make it possible for girls to be 
Americans too? Or is the goal to replace the term “American” entirely? Can 
significant change be accomplished without renaming the field? Or has the term 
“American” become so profoundly associated with certain values that in order 
to introduce literature with different values into the field we will need to do 
nothing less than to cease using the term “American” and develop instead an 
alternative term, for example, “Writing in the U.S. ” as Gregory Jay has sug- 
gested in “The End of ‘American’ Literature”? To put the matter another way, 



38 



Judith Fetterley 



can the term “American” be recuperated for a different set of values or does its 
energy, its power, its eroticism derive from the values currently associated with 
it? Yet if we abandon the term are we not complicit in the very pattern we 
protest, and, by leaving all that power in the “wrong” hands, have we not made 
as well a major political error? On the other hand, can we have the power with- 
out a price? And is it possible that our very attachment to the term “American” 
derives precisely from those values which have precluded the participation of 
all but a few persons in the literary and cultural definition of the term in the first 
place? By playing with the terms “American” and “unAmerican,” I seek thus to 
join the effort to identify the naming of the field of “American literature” as 
itself a site of contestation, not so much because I care what name we give it as 
because I care what values we promote through it. In seeking to gain readers for 
these texts, I seek nothing less than the creation of a citizenry committed to the 
values of inclusion, empathy, diversity, and community, and the cultural change 
which would follow upon the creation of such a citizenry. And in bringing at- 
tention to texts which have historically been excluded from the canon of Ameri- 
can literature, I seek to model the process of inclusion and the change which it 
can accomplish, whether the end result be a redefined American literature or a 
new name for our enterprise. 



If Huckleberry Finn, white boy on the run from the “sivilization” of women, 
provides the paradigm for how “our” literature has constructed the American, 
then a story like Mary Wilkins Freeman’s “On the Walpole Road” — which opens 
with a description of a woman “who might have been seventy” with “a double 
bristling chin” (AWR 306), driving slowly along a road in company with an- 
other woman who was “younger — forty perhaps” — marks a difference, just as 
in The Country of the Pointed Firs Mrs. Todd, a woman of sixty-seven, and 
Mrs. Blackett, a woman in her eighties, pass on their knowledge to the younger 
generation defined as a woman in her forties, “perhaps.” A literature which 
foregrounds old women rather than boys hardly seems American; it is as if the 
Widow Douglas were to take the story away from Huck. 

But when we consider more closely that “bristling” chin, we realize that 
regionalism’s understanding of story must be as different as its understanding 
of character, for women with bristling chins are not capable of generating those 
stories we have come to think of as American nor even those other fictions not 
quite so American, those novels whose business it is to negotiate the marriage 
of girls. Indeed, I would argue that literary regionalism occurs primarily in the 
form of the sketch or short story because this form made it possible to tell 
stories about elderly women with bristling chins, about women for whom the 
eventful means something other than marriage, about women in relation to each 
other, about women who take care of themselves. In “A New England Nun,” 



1 Not in the Least American 



39 



one of the few regionalist texts that might be considered well-known, Freeman 
makes this feature of regionalist writing the subject of the fiction itself, for in 
this story Louisa Ellis comes to realize that her meaningful event is not the 
marriage she has awaited for fourteen years but the ritualized and sacramental 
life she has created during those years, feeding herself “with as much grace as 
if she had been a veritable guest to her own self’ (AWR 356). Similarly, Jewett’s 
“A White Heron,” one of the few regionalist texts to feature a young girl as its 
protagonist, dramatizes Sylvy’s instinctive swerve away from the seemingly 
inevitable heterosexual plot, her choice of her own life over the hunter’s need. 
In that pause which halts the headlong rush, in that Deephaven time-out, re- 
gionalism creates its own “world elsewhere” which has yet to be recognized as 
American — no doubt in part because our current understanding of American 
cannot encompass the privileging of women’s relations to themselves or other 
women over their relation to men. Indeed, since the literature we call American 
romanticizes the relation of boy to boy and man to man while it denies, if it 
does not vilify, the love of women for women and presents women primarily as 
rivals for the attention of boys and men, Deephaven deserves the accolade of 
unAmerican for its devotion to inscribing romantic love between women and 
the “deephaven” of female friendship. 1 

If the sketch provided the form which made it posible to talk about 
unAmerican women — women with bristling chins, women who love other 
women, women who love themselves, women who choose birds over boys — it 
did so precisely because such fictions could not be candidates for the accolade 
“great American novel.” Indeed, the vexed relation of the form of regionalist 
writing to the definition of great American literature can best be demonstrated 
by The Country of the Pointed Firs. This text, which Jewett herself referred to 
as “papers,” has defied efforts to define it as a novel and puzzled readers who 
have previously tried to label it. In concluding her preface to the edition of The 
Country of the Pointed Firs published in 1925, Willa Cather writes, “If I were 
asked to name three American books which have the possibility of a long, long 
life, I would say at once, ‘ The Scarlet Letter,' *. Huckleberry Finn / and ‘ The Coun- 
try of the Pointed Firs.’” If Jewett recognized that she had to write a novel- 
length book in order to have a chance at the “immortality” predicted by Cather, 
she nevertheless refused in so doing to relinquish the essential identity of the 
sketch, no doubt one reason why her text has not in fact had the kind of life 
Cather predicted for it. And while Jewett’s genius enabled her to find a way to 
write a novel-length regionalist text and thus to seek for regionalist fiction the 
status associated with length, the very fact that she needed to do this under- 
scores the marginal status of the sketch in American literature. Yet if the mar- 
ginal status of the sketch form was the price that had to be paid to gain the 
discursive freedom of regionalism, and if literary regionalists sold their birth- 
right to be considered great American writers to gain that discursive freedom, 



40 



Judith Fetterley 



they too, like Louisa Ellis, could be said not to “know it, the taste of the pottage 
was so delicious” ( AWR 365). For, as Freeman suggests, pottage may be prefer- 
able to persons excluded from rights and required to cook. 

In honor of the deliciousness of pottage, Marjorie Pryse and I have chosen 
the phrase “free to say” as the working title for our book on regionalist fiction. 
This title comes from a story by Rose Terry Cooke, “Miss Beulah’s Bonnet,” 
first published in 1880 in Harper's. In this story an elderly woman, having 
opened her house to her niece and her niece’s children, Sarah, Janey, and Jack, 
finds herself “free to say I never did like boys. I suppose divine Providence 
ordained ’em to some good end; but it takes a sight o’ grace to believe it: and of 
all the boys that ever was sent into this world for any purpose, I do believe he is 
the hatefulest” (AWR 130). Published four years after Mark Twain’s The Adven- 
tures of Tom Sawyer , ; “Miss Beulah’s Bonnet” can be read as an item in a dia- 
logue about boys as a privileged subject of American literature and culture, and 
Miss Beulah’s “free to say I never did like boys” can be read as Cooke’s articu- 
lation of her desire to be free to write about women with “bristling” chins. 
Though Miss Beulah’s “boy” refers to an actual Jack, we feel free to read “boys” 
as referring to a cluster of values associated with that word, and we see region- 
alism as originating in part in the desire to participate in a dialogue which chal- 
lenges those values by doing something other than “liking boys ” 

Regionalist writers were themselves aware of the difficulties they faced in 
trying to create a space in American literature for stories which assert that bon- 
nets matter more than boys, and they both addressed these difficulties in their 
fiction and developed strategies for circumventing them. For regionalist writers 
to be able to tell stories about bonnets rather than boys, they had to imagine 
audiences capable of hearing and reading such stories. In “Miss Beulah’s Bon- 
net,” Miss Beulah finds herself unable to attend church because her new bon- 
net, hidden under the cushion of a chair by Jack, gets smashed when the stout 
Mrs. Blake unwittingly sits on it during a visit. When the deacons come to 
interrogate Miss Beulah about her absence from church, they are confounded 
by her explanation: 

“Well, if you must know, I hain’t got no bunnit ” 

The deacons stared mutually; and Deacon Morse, . . . curious as men 
naturally are, asked abruptly, “Why not?” 

“’Cause Miss Blake sot on it.” 

The two men looked at each other in blank amazement, and shook their 
heads. Here was a pitfall. Was it proper, dignified, possible to investigate 
this truly feminine tangle? They were dying to enter into particulars, but 
ashamed to do so; nothing was left but retreat” (AWR 135). 

Because the culture associated with the church defines Miss Beulah’s story as 
a trivial feminine tangle, hers is not a story that can be told or heard in church; 
and since the deacons are there in their official capacity as churchmen who 





‘Not in the Least American 



41 



must report back to their congregation, they cannot hear her story because they 
cannot imagine telling it. Indeed, within Cooke’s fiction Miss Beulah’s story 
only gets told by a woman to other women, within the separate sphere of the 
sewing circle, though we may suppose that the women go home and tell their 
husbands. In describing the deacons as dying to enter into particulars but ashamed 
to do so, Cooke herself constructs men as a rich potential audience for her story, 
just as she suggests that “girls’” stories may not get fully heard until men can 
imagine themselves telling them. In writing her story for a readership obvi- 
ously comprised of men as well as women, she proposes that men in the privacy 
of reading can satisfy their desire to enter a truly feminine tangle without the 
loss of status that would attend a public acknowledgment of their curiosity. Yet 
such a proposition reveals men to be boys, governed primarily by the peer pres- 
sures of male bonding, formalized in such institutions as the church. In this 
context, male bonding, that holiest of holies in American culture (as witness the 
rituals of Superbowl Sunday), takes on a negative cast as Cooke challenges 
men to commit the treason of admitting in public in front of other men their 
interest in and connection to women’s lives. In a culture obsessed with the ques- 
tion of why Johnny can’t read and insistent on providing boys’ stories to lure 
Johnny into literacy (since, as one elementary school teacher put it to me, girls 
will read stories about boys but boys won’t read stories about girls), to ask men 
to hear and tell women’s stories may indeed be unAmerican. Yet, as Cooke 
implies, what’s truly shameful is a construction of masculinity that makes boys 
ashamed to read girls’ stories. 

For those of us interested in the unAmerican act of getting Janey to read, 
regionalism not only provides “girls’” stories but models as well the impor- 
tance for women of having and telling their stories. In the figure of her own 
Janey, Cooke presents the situation of woman and story in a world of boys. Jack 
preserves the letter of his own honesty by making his little sister hide Miss 
Beulah’s bonnet; he then terrifies her into silence with “wild threats of bears 
and guns” ( AWR 126) and quickly distracts her so that she soon forgets what 
she has done. In creating women who come to recognize that they have a story 
and who become empowered to tell their story, regionalist fiction seeks to con- 
struct women as storyful rather than story less and to connect having and telling 
stories to their sanity and survival. In “Sister Liddy,” Freeman identifies having 
a story to tell as the one thing that maintains the sanity and dignity of the old 
women who are inmates of the county poorhouse. Polly Moss, whose physical 
deformity adds another dimension to her struggle, temporarily comes into her 
own in this strife-ridden community when she makes up and tells a series of 
stories about her imaginary sister Liddy. Similarly, in “The Praline Woman,” 
Alice Dunbar-Nelson shows the significance of story to a working-class woman 
of color who is determined to share her stories with her customers and who 
exercises considerable ingenuity to find openings in the chatter of commerce 





42 



Judith Fetterley 



for such an exchange. Of Jewett we could say that the entire art of The Country 
of the Pointed Firs lies in creating a written text that can identify women as a 
rich source of story and as storytellers, through characters such as Mrs. Todd 
but more importantly still through the narrator herself, who must find the way 
to write them down. 

In seeking to empower persons made silent or vacant through terror to tell 
stories which the dominant culture labels trivial, regionalism seeks to change 
our perspective and thus to destabilize the meaning of margin and center. For 
including the story of one previously silenced and marginalized inevitably af- 
fects the definition of margin and center and calls into question the values that 
have produced such definitions. In Deephaven Jewett specifically associates 
this process with the category of the American, seeking thus to unsettle and 
destabilize our understanding of that term. In a chapter entitled “The Circus at 
Denby,” Kate and Helen attend a circus. At the end of the day, their companion, 
Mrs. Kew, declares an interest in the side shows and they enter the tent contain- 
ing the Kentucky Giantess, for, as Mrs. Kew says, “she never heard of such a 
thing as a woman’s weighing six hundred and fifty pounds” (106). When Kate 
and Helen return from looking at the monkeys, an added attraction of this side 
show, they find Mrs. Kew engaged in conversation with the giantess who turns 
out to be someone Mrs. Kew used to know. In a quiet but momentous revolu- 
tion, the freak turns out to be a neighbor with a story and a history and a secret 
and feelings, and as we read this account and experience this revolution we are 
forced to question definitions of center and margin, normal and freak, national 
and regional. Positioned as a spectacle for those who can afford to pay to see 
her and offered up as a subject for their conversation, the fat lady is not herself 
meant to speak. By placing cages of monkeys on the same platform as the gi- 
antess, the entrepreneur running the show seeks to rationalize the category of 
freak as somehow not really human and as therefore available for profit and use 
to exhibitor and viewer alike. Thus when the fat lady does in fact speak and the 
“freak” becomes “somebody’s neighbor” (the title Cooke gave to her 1881 col- 
lection of regionalist fiction) the rationalization collapses and the category it 
has sustained no longer seems inherent. Once revealed as constructed, it can 
then be deconstructed. 

In the second half of the chapter, Kate and Helen attend an evening lecture 
on “The Elements of True Manhood.” Evoking here the Emersonian doctrine 
of self-reliance, Jewett associates this event with the issue of who is and is not 
included in the term “American.” The young white man who comes to Deephaven 
to deliver this lecture assumes that in talking of and to himself he addresses 
everyone. His use of the stage as a place from which to speak at an audience 
expected to remain silent — so different from the arrangements of the fat lady — 
confirms his assumption of his own centrality. The lecture would seem to con- 
trast with the circus, yet in Jewett’s hands it comes to seem far more of a “show” 





‘ Not in the Least American 



43 



than the circus itself. “You would have thought,” observes Helen, “the man was 
addressing an enthusiastic Young Men’s Christian Association. He exhorted 
with fervor upon our duties as citizens and as voters, and told us a great deal 
about George Washington and Benjamin Franklin, whom he urged us to choose 
as our examples” (1 10). And she continues, “If the lecture had been upon any 
other subject it would not have been so hard for Kate and me to keep sober 
faces; but it was directed entirely toward young men, and there was not a young 
man there” (110). As the lecture drones on, we come to see the lecturer himself 
as crazy for delivering a talk on the elements of true manhood to an audience 
composed entirely of old men, women, and children. Yet his failure to recog- 
nize his audience, and the arrogant solipsism implicit in this failure, reflects a 
larger cultural madness. For young men do not represent the majority of the 
population in Deephaven or anywhere else, and a culture that devotes itself 
entirely to the feeding of boys as if they constituted the whole human race, and 
that has nothing to say to old men, women, and children, is crazy if not mali- 
cious. After they have laughed long and hard, Kate and Helen come to see “the 
pitiful side of it all” (1 1 1) and send a contribution to the lecturer to help pay his 
expenses. Later they learn that he will repeat his lecture the following evening 
and, as Helen observes, “I have no doubt there were a good many women able 
to be out, and that he harvested enough ten-cent pieces to pay his expenses 
without our help” (1 1 1). While the chapter ends in anger, however subdued, we 
should memorialize Kate and Helen’s laughter, their inability to keep sober 
during the lecture, as an instance of treason in the text and as a model of 
unAmerican activity. 

Challenging and destabilizing the meaning of margin and center serves as a 
paradigm for regionalism’s efforts to dismantle and deconstruct hierarchies based 
on the categories of gender, race, class, age, and region. While certainly not free 
itself of the infection of these hierarchies, regionalist fiction works toward dis- 
mantling the binary oppositions and the concomitant privileging of one item 
over the other that structures a culture dedicated to the elements of true man- 
hood. Regionalist texts are astonishingly free of the dialect of gender that domi- 
nates most of nineteenth-century American writing by both men and women, 
for while regionalist fiction acknowledges gender differences, it recognizes these 
differences as the product of privilege, not biology. Jack is not so much bom a 
nuisance as made one by the fact of living in a world run by deacons. And a 
story like Freeman’s “A Church Mouse,” which opens with the line, “I never 
heard of a woman’s bein’ saxton” (AWR 344), develops the position that such 
failures to hear exist not because of “nature” but because they help men main- 
tain the privilege of not having to share the church with a “mouse” or the world 
with women. Hetty Fifield — old, poor, and homeless — fights for her own sur- 
vival through pressing the revolutionary statement, “I dun know what differ- 
ence that makes” ( AWR 344). 



44 



Judith Fetter ley 



Writing of a world inhabited by old men and women, Jewett creates a space 
to experiment with breaking down the rigid gender identities associated in her 
mind with the Emersonian definition of American. No figure in The Country of 
the Pointed Firs is more pathetic than Captain Littlepage, landlocked in the 
trivial feminine tangle of Dunnet Landing while longing for a world of high art, 
all lofty, lofty, and obsessed by the memory of another man’s last voyage to the 
“end” of the world, the ultimately masculine adventure. Yet, ironically, those 
discoveries he has promised to pass on of “a kind of waiting place between this 
world an’ the next” ( Firs 26) are emblems of mediation, dissolution, blend- 
ing — as if Jewett means to say, Go as far as possible toward one pole and you 
will arrive at a space that dissolves the idea of pole. For at the end of the world 
there seems to be a middle ground, a meeting place of this world and the next, 
emblematic of the dissolution of oppositional polarities. Yet while this space 
both obsesses and horrifies Captain Littlepage, for other characters and perhaps 
for Jewett herself this space functions as a desired goal. Thus Elijah Tilley places 
stakes in his fields to indicate, like buoys, the presence of rocks, declaring that 
“one trade helps another” ( Firs 120), and in the absence of his wife has become 
himself a careful housekeeper ( Firs 120). And thus Mrs. Blackett declares that 
“William has been son an’ daughter both” (Firs 41). Regionalism’s intention to 
dismantle race and gender differences finds succinct expression in Alice Dunbar- 
Nelson’s “The Praline Woman.” Here a praline-colored woman speaks a dia- 
lect which renders such distinctions temporarily inoperative: “‘Ah, he’s fine 
gal, is Didele’” (AWR 481). If this were American language, maybe we might 
not have a problem with gays in the military. 

In regionalist fiction, the impulse to dissolve binary oppositions and destabi- 
lize the definition of margin and center through shifting our perspective begins 
with a feeling that can best be described as empathy, the capacity to imagine 
how someone else might feel, and we see regionalism as a fiction characterized, 
indeed inspired, by empathy. Regionalism’s commitment to empathy serves to 
distinguish it from the post-Civil War local color movement under which re- 
gionalist writers are often subsumed. In local color writing, genteel narrators 
present regional characters to urban readers as instances of the quaint or queer. 
Such characters form a literary circus which serves to ratify readers’ sense of 
their own normalcy and normativeness. Despite the gesture toward the local, 
then, local color writing in effect ratifies the hegemony of the “national” as a 
standard against which the local can be measured and found wanting. Region- 
alism, however, as we have seen from the instance of Deephaven and “The 
Circus at Denby,” deconstructs the “national,” revealing its presumed univer- 
sality to be in fact the position of a certain, albeit privileged, group of locals. 

In valuing empathy, regionalism proposes alternative behaviors to those 
which characterize the world of boys and, to the extent that boys are equated 
with the national, models behaviors not in the national interest. In “Miss Beulah’s 



' o 

ERLC 



r— /~o 

OD 



“Not in the Least American 



45 



Bonnet,” Jack gets the reputation of a nuisance for his harassment of the hens, 
the cat, Nanny Starks, and even Miss Beulah herself, all creatures relatively 
defenseless against him. While empathy can obtain in a context of peers (as 
witness the impassioned defense of Beulah Larkin by Mary Jane Beers, the 
milliner who made her bonnet) regionalist fiction presents empathy primarily 
as a model for the relationships of “persons” with differing amounts of cultural 
power. By modeling an alternative mode of relating to that evinced by the “boy,” 
regionalist fiction seeks as well to convert the boy and by such conversion to 
redistribute cultural power. When Sylvy in “A White Heron” refuses to “tell the 
heron’s secret and give its life away” (AWR 205), we are left to wonder how 
different her life might have been had the boy looked at her the way she looks at 
the bird. A further instance of this phenomenon can be found in Stowe’s The 
Pearl of Orr’s Island, a text which Jewett identified as the origin of her own 
career as a writer of regionalist fiction. In this story, Stowe describes a boy and 
a girl, Moses and Mara, growing up together in early nineteenth-century New 
England, and analyzes the social structures which lead the boy to view the girl 
as an inferior being and to treat her with contempt. Mara, watching Moses pre- 
pare for his first fishing voyage, protests, however faintly, her own exclusion 
from the event: 

“How I do wish I were going with you!” she says [sic]. “I could do 
something, couldn’t I — take care of your hooks, or something?” 

“Pooh!” said Moses, sublimely regarding her while he settled the collar 
of his shirt, “you’re a girl — and what can girls do at sea? you never like to 
catch fish — it always makes you cry to see ‘em flop.” (136) 

While Moses reads empathy as disqualifying Mara for life — Mara will later 
literally die for lack of the air and exercise such a voyage might give her — and 
as justifying his contempt for her, Stowe reads Moses’ lack of empathy as a far 
more serious disqualification. In Moses we recognize a version of Tom Sawyer, 
the American bad boy who can do no wrong in the nation’s eyes, despite the 
cries of tormented cats and aunts. Thus when we realize that Stowe’s text in- 
tends to convert this boy into a “girl,” to bring him to the point of feeling pain 
when she gasps so and thus to be more like her, we have a context for reflecting 
on the unAmericanness of empathy. 

Empathy can characterize narrator as well as character, and in creating em- 
pathic narrators regionalist writers also propose a different model of storytelling 
from that “American” tradition begun by Washington Irving and developed 
through the genre of the tall tale, and in particular by the humorists of the old 
Southwest. In “In the Name of Wonder: The Emergence of Tall Narrative in 
American Writing,” Henry B. Wonham provides evidence of the gendered na- 
ture of “American” in this explicitly American genre, not simply through the 
masculinist content of the tales or the masculine identity of the teller. More 
significantly, it occurs, as Wonham notes, because the audience for such tales is 






46 



Judith Fetterley 



composed of boys (303), because the action of such tales involves the humilia- 
tion of a naive outsider frequently figured as female, and because “her victim- 
ization becomes a patriotic victory for American wit” (297). In “The Legend of 
Sleepy Hollow” Irving poses the question, Who will be given possession of 
Sleepy Hollow, that imaginative space which inspires our stories, and who will 
be driven out? In answering this question, Irving identifies the masculine Brom 
Bones as the decisive victor, the effeminate Ichabod Crane as the figure to be 
driven out, and the tall tale as the best way to tell a story about winning and 
losing because its very telling enacts a similar drama. Indeed, in his postscript 
to this story Irving suggests that the quintessential American story will be a tall 
tale circulated among men for the purpose of establishing dominance. The good 
reader is the one who gets the joke; the bad reader is the one who doesn’t get it 
or refuses to find it funny, perhaps because the joke is on her or him; and telling 
stories about winning and losing becomes itself an act of winning and losing, of 
inclusion and exclusion, with character, teller, and listener all invited to identify 
with each other and against someone else, everyone a Brom Bones getting rid 
of an Ichabod Crane. As Wonham puts it, the tall tale serves an audience of 
“cultural insiders” (288) whose enjoyment depends upon the exclusionary prac- 
tices of a narrative form appropriately characterized as “a sort of inside joke” 
(305). 

Regionalist writers provide a different model of storytelling. Constructing 
women as storytellers, they also present storytelling as an activity designed to 
include rather than exclude, to heal rather than harm. In The Country of the 
Pointed Firs, the long anticipated visit of Susan Fosdick creates the occasion 
for an evening of storytelling. The narrator has invited Mrs. Todd and Susan 
Fosdick to her room, and as storytelling ensues from this invitation Jewett sug- 
gests the connection between storytelling and hospitality, just as she connects 
storytelling and healing through the narrator’s references to the season of the 
year being the “time of syrups and cordials” (see Romines 63). Telling the story 
of Joanna serves as a way of keeping Joanna, the one “driven” out, connected in 
some way to her community and of easing the pain of those who feel they have 
lost her. Indeed, it continues the efforts Dunnet Landing folk made to stay con- 
nected with Joanna while she was still alive as “one after another ventured to 
make occasion to put somethin’ ashore for her if they went that way” ( Firs 77). 
Storytelling as one mode of staying connected thus participates in creating the 
community of Dunnet Landing as one in which far islands and scattered farms 
are linked together through “constant interest and intercourse . . . into a golden 
chain of love and dependence” ( Firs 90). Moreover, in elaborating Joanna as a 
symbol of that place “in the life of each of us . . . remote and islanded, and given 
to endless regret or secret happiness” ( Firs 82), the narrator indicates that in 
hearing this story she has come not simply to empathize but to identify with the 
exile. 



( Not in the Least American" 



47 



In her last published story, entitled “The Foreigner,” however, Jewett chose 
to critique the limits of regionalist empathy and in so doing to complicate still 
further the question of the American and the unAmerican, a gesture appropriate 
to a tradition which takes the critique of cultural values as its particular prov- 
ince. Yet it would be a mistake, I think, to read Jewett’s critique as in fact argu- 
ing for a recuperation of the American, for the question her final story asks — How 
could Mrs. Todd have missed the foreigner and her story? — suggests that such 
losses occur through creating the category of the foreigner, a category which 
has meaning only in the context of the American and not-American. Indeed, 
anticipating the arguments of Virginia Woolf in Three Guineas against the value 
of nationalism for women, Jewett’s regionalist fiction implies that the ancient 
knowledge women need to learn and inherit, and the stories we all need to hear, 
can be unfolded only in a space which refuses to participate in the masculinist 
notion of nation. Thus I would like to conclude this essay with a brief medita- 
tion on Jewett’s “The Foreigner,” a story which helps me think about the value 
of the term “American” in the global context of the twenty-first century. 
Deephaven, Jewett tells us, was not in the least American in part because “the 
only foreigners there were a few standard sailors.” Here Jewett identifies 
Deephaven, and by extension the Dunnet Landing of her later work, as ethni- 
cally and racially homogeneous, an observation which prepares us for a story 
which seeks to extend the range of empathy to include those constructed as 
foreign. 

“The Foreigner” tells the story of a woman, French by birth and Jamaican by 
residence, rescued from poverty and sexual harassment through marriage to a 
Captain Tolland, who brings her home to Dunnet Landing, a community which 
has no more ability to hear her story than the deacons do Miss Beulah’s, and 
which lacks the curiosity of the deacons. As Mrs. Todd recounts to the narrator 
her story of Mrs. Tolland’s life in Dunnet Landing and of the circumstances of 
her death, she reveals as well the limits of her own empathy, her failure to 
extend herself to include this woman in her definition of community. 

Jewett’s critique of the limits of Mrs. Todd’s empathy becomes even more 
pointed when we consider how she has constructed the foreigner whom Mrs. 
Todd belatedly accepts. In creating her foreigner, Jewett hints at dimensions of 
otherness that might have made it impossible for Mrs. Captain Tolland to live in 
Dunnet Landing at all. She comes to Dunnet Landing by way of the West Indies, 
yet she herself is white and French, not colored or even native to those foreign 
islands. In this severely Protestant community, she seems foreign in her Ca- 
tholicism, but she is neither Jewish nor atheist nor a practitioner of voodoo. 
Though the captains rescue her from a bar full of drunken men, she has not 
been raped, she is not a prostitute, and she does not arrive pregnant or with an 
illegitimate child. If Dunnet Landing cannot extend itself to include a white 
French Catholic who, duly married, still loves to sing and dance, what, Jewett 




59 



48 



Judith Fetterley 



makes us wonder, would they do to a black unwed mother who practices voo- 
doo? 

Belatedly, Mrs. Todd finds common ground with the foreigner. Through her 
love for her own mother, Mrs. Todd can “see” the foreigner’s mother and assure 
her that her mother is indeed present in the room where she lies dying. While 
we are all familiar with the cliche “as American as apple pie and Mom,” noth- 
ing is in fact more foreign to our literature than “seeing” mother or listening to 
her story. To return for a moment to Freeman’s “On The Walpole Road” and the 
woman with the “bristling chin,” we might equally locate this story’s 
unAmericanness in its celebration of the resurrection of “mother” for when 
Mis’ Green discovers that the funeral she has been called to attend is not for 
Aunt Rebecca, the woman who has been like a mother to her, but for Uncle 
Enos, she becomes “kinder highstericky” and laughs “till the tears was runnin’ 
down my cheeks, an’ it was all I could do to breathe” (AWR 3 10). “I thought you 
was dead,” she explains to Aunt Rebecca, “an’ there you was a-settin” ( AWR 
310). 

Throughout this essay I have used the term “unAmerican” to refer to a body 
of literature that challenges the values currently understood as “American” in 
order to provoke reflection about what we are doing when we teach American 
literature. For, to me, the question of values constitutes the “To what end?” of 
rethinking American literature, the title I gave to the 1 993 NCTE Summer Insti- 
tute for Teachers of Literature, where this paper was first presented. We suffer 
today from a national narrative that valorizes violence, that defines masculinity 
as the production of violence and defines the feminine and the foreign as legiti- 
mate recipients of such violence. We need different narratives and different 
identities, whether we locate these in a field named “American literature” or 
“writing in the U.S.” or “literatures of America” or “literatures of the Ameri- 
cas” or “post-colonial writing.” It is my argument here that we can find such 
narratives and such identities in certain texts, of which the work of nineteenth- 
century literary regionalists serves as one instance, that have been systemati- 
cally excluded from the definition of American literature precisely because they 
do not reproduce the national narrative of violence or the definitions of “mascu- 
line” and “feminine,” “American” and “foreign,” which such a narrative pre- 
sents as our national interest. It is time, then, to take treason as our text and to 
begin reading “unAmerican” literature. 



Note 

1 . See Marjorie Pryse, “Archives of Female Friendship and the ‘Way’ Jewett Wrote,” 
New England Quarterly 66 (March 1993), 47-66; and Judith Fetterley, “Reading 
Deephaven as a Lesbian Text,” in Sexual Practice, Textual Theory: Lesbian Cultural 
Criticism , eds. Susan J. Wolfe and Julia Penelope (Oxford; Blackwell, 1993), 164-83. 




60 



‘ Not in the Least American" 



49 



Works Cited 

Baym, Nina. “Early Histories of American Literature: A Chapter in the Institution of 
New England.” American Literary History 1 (1989), 459-88. 

. “Melodramas of Beset Manhood: How Theories of American Fiction Exclude 

Women Authors.” American Quarterly 33 (1981), 123-39. 

Bell, Michael. The Problem of American Realism: Studies in the Cultural History of a 
Literary Idea. Chicago: Chicago UP, 1993. 

Berthoff, Warner. The Ferment of American Realism: American Literature 1 884-1 9 1 9. 
New York: Free Press, 1965. Reprint Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1981. 

Brodhead, Richard. Cultures of Letters: Scenes of Reading and Writing in Nineteenth- 
Century America. Chicago: Chicago UP, 1993. 

. The School of Hawthorne. New York: Oxford, 1986. 

Cather, Willa. Preface. The Country of the Pointed Firs and Other Stories . By Sarah 
Orne Jewett. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1925. 

Fetterley, Judith, and Maijorie Pryse, eds. American Women Regionalists, 1850-1910. 
New York: Norton, 1992. 

Habegger, Alfred. Gender, Fantasy, and Realism in American Literature. New York: 
Columbia UP, 1982. 

Jay, Gregory. “The End of ‘American’ Literature: Toward a Multicultural Practice.” Col- 
lege English 53 ( 1 992), 264-8 1 . 

Jewett, Sarah Orne. Deephaven. Boston: Osgood, 1877. Reprint New Haven: College 
and University P, 1966. 

. The Country of the Pointed Firs. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1896. Reprint ed. 

Maijorie Pryse. New York: Norton, 1981. 

Lauter, Paul. Canons and Contexts . New York: Oxford, 1991. 

Renker, Elizabeth. “Resistance and Change: The Rise of American Literature Studies.” 
American Literature 64 (1992), 347-65. 

Robinson, Lillian S. “Treason Our Text: Feminist Challenges to the Literary Canon.” 
Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 2 (1983). Reprinted in Feminisms. Eds. Robyn 
Warhol and Diane Price Herndl. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers UP, 1991. 212-26. 

Romero, Laura. “Vanishing Americans: Gender, Empire, and New Historicism.” Ameri- 
can Literature 63 (1991), 385-404. 

Romines, Ann. The Home Plot: Women, Writing and Domestic Ritual. Amherst: U of 
Massachusetts P, 1992. 

Spengemann, William C. A Mirror for Americanists: Reflections on the Idea of Ameri- 
can Literature . Hanover: UP of New England, 1989. 

Stowe, Harriet Beecher. The Pearl of Orr’s Island. Boston: Ticknor and Fields, 1862. 
Reprint Hartford: Stowe-Day Foundation, 1979. 

Sundquist, Eric J. “Realism and Regionalism.” Columbia Literary History of the United 
States . Ed. Emory Elliot. New York: Columbia UP, 1988. 501-24. 

Wonham, Henry B. “In the Name of Wonder: The Emergence of Tall Narrative in Ameri- 
can Writing.” American Quarterly 4 1 (1989), 284-307. 





3 Transcendentalism Then and Now: 
Towards a Dialogic Theory and 
Praxis of Multicultural U.S. Literature 



AnaLouise Keating 

Eastern New Mexico University 



To make a claim for multi-culturalism is not, therefore, to suggest the jux- 
taposition of several cultures whose frontiers remain intact, nor is it to 
subscribe to a bland “melting-pot” type of attitude that would level all 
differences. It lies instead, in the intercultural acceptance of risks, unex- 
pected detours, and complexities of relation between break and closure. 
Every artistic excursion and theoretical venture requires that boundaries 
be ceaselessly called to question, undermined, modified, and reinscribed. 

— -Trinh T. Minh-ha 



It is by now a commonplace among many Americanists to acknowledge the 
multicultural nature of U.S. American literature. All too often, however, 
multiculturalism is defined simply as the coexistence of a variety of distinct 
literary and cultural traditions, or as what Trinh Minh-ha describes in my epi- 
graph to this essay: “the juxtaposition of several cultures whose frontiers re- 
main intact.” Although these explorations of ethnic-specific literary traditions 
have played an important role in expanding contemporary views of U.S. litera- 
ture, they rely on a rhetoric of cultural authenticity that reinforces the belief in 
self-contained ethnic identities. Rather than develop new forms of identity, this 
rhetoric of authenticity is based on a politics of location that essentializes 
textuality by equating it with biological “roots” When readers focus almost 
exclusively on the differences between these supposedly distinct cultural iden- 
tities, they inadvertently reinscribe inflexible boundaries that foreclose possible 
common ground in the discussion of works by apparently discrete ethnic/cul- 
tural groups. Thus, for example, African American literature is associated only 
with writers of African descent while Chicano/a writings are identified only 
with people of Mexican ancestry. Although scholars often examine the inter- 
sections between these distinct cultural traditions and canonical Euro-Ameri- 
can literature, they rarely expand their studies to explore the similarities and 
differences among the various ethnic-specific traditions themselves. Reduced 
to a series of binary oppositions between ethnic-specific literary traditions and 

50 




62 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



51 



“mainstream” canonical U.S. texts, multiculturalism becomes another form of 
separatism . 1 But this conception of self-contained cultural/ethnic identities and 
literary traditions is far less accurate than it seems. If identity is always (al- 
ready) relational, then it’s never self-contained. However, by focusing almost 
entirely on the differences between cultural identities and literatures, we often 
overlook their commonalities. 

In this chapter, I explore the pedagogical and theoretical implications of 
establishing transcultural dialogues, alternate forms of multicultural theory and 
practice that go beyond recent emphases on ethnic-specific literary texts and 
identities without becoming immersed in benign celebrations of “American ” 2 
identities and themes. More specifically, I suggest that dialogic patterns of reading 
can transform the boundaries between apparently distinct literary traditions into 
thresholds opening up new definitions of “American” literature and identities 
which neither erase nor reify the many differences among the various texts we 
read. 

Given the central role Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau have 
played in constructing an “American” self and an “American” literary tradition, 
canonical Transcendental texts like “Self-Reliance” and Walden offer a useful 
point of departure for these explorations in multicultural thinking. By rereading 
these nineteenth-century classics in conversation with contemporary works by 
June Jordan, Gloria Anzaldua, Paula Gunn Allen, or other self-identified Afri- 
can American, Chicana, and Native American writers, I argue that static, uni- 
versalized notions of an authentic “American” self can be transformed into 
flexible models of literary and cultural identity that deconstruct monolithic 
notions of difference and similarity. Let me emphasize: My goal is not to erase 
the differences between the various ethnic-specific traditions that make U.S. 
literature multicultural. Nor do I attempt to demonstrate that Anzaldua, Jordan, 
Allen, or other contemporary writers marked by gender, ethnicity, or sexuality 
“should be” considered twentieth-century inheritors of Transcendentalist tradi- 
tions and on those terms incorporated into the U.S. literature canon. Instead, I 
want to develop alternate reading practices that go beyond separatist 
multiculturalism to open up new narratives of “American” selves and “Ameri- 
can” literary traditions. 

Despite the many differences among them — differences which include but 
are not limited to gender, ethnicity, skin color, region, and historical era 3 — the 
nineteenth- and twentieth-century writers I examine in this chapter share a num- 
ber of striking similarities: Their willingness to position themselves as outsid- 
ers to dominant U.S. cultural standards, their desire to challenge existing social 
conventions, their faith in each individual’s untapped potential, their attempts 
to create nondual metaphysical systems which locate the spiritual in material 
and intellectual life, and their confidence in language’s transformational power. 



ERJC 




52 



AnaLouise Keating 



Although each point of similarity opens up new areas of exploration leading to 
alternate definitions of “American” literatures and identities, in this essay I will 
focus primarily on the various ways their quests for independence and self- 
definition play themselves out in their texts. My reasons for doing so are two- 
fold. First, Emerson and other nineteenth-century Transcendentalists have played 
a key role in shaping the highly celebrated belief in “American” individualism. 
Second, this celebration of self-reliance and personal autonomy is deeply in- 
grained in contemporary U.S. culture and viewed as an essential, uniquely 
“American” theme as well as a distinguishing mark of U.S. literary classics. 
Thus, for example, Joyce Warren argues that the works of Emerson, Thoreau, 
Melville, and other nineteenth-century Euro-American male writers illustrate 
what she calls the “American Narcissus,” a radically solipsistic subject who 
denies the existence of other human beings in his quest for complete self-defi- 
nition and control: 

Emerson and Thoreau were writing in the American tradition, the tradition 
that glorifies the individual and insists upon the sanctity of the self. Such a 
philosophy forces the individual to protect himself by projecting a persona 
that exhibits all of the traits he feels he must live up to. With all of his 
energies devoted to the development of this inflated self, the American 
Narcissus can allow no room for the reality of other selves. That Ameri- 
cans have adopted this philosophy wholeheartedly and continue to endorse 
the writings of Emerson and Thoreau with such enthusiasm indicates how 
much this belief in the totality of the self remains apart of our culture. (69- 
70) 

In this binary configuration, individualism entails a hierarchical relationship 
between subject and object, where the individual and society occupy mutually 
exclusive poles. For Warren’s American Narcissus, nature and all other human 
beings are objectified and denied independent existence; they serve “only as 
objects to be ignored or destroyed (if they are undesirable) or to be made use of 
or absorbed into the self (if they are desirable)” (17). 

To be sure, these binary oppositions between self and other or between sub- 
ject and object have played a central role in canonical descriptions of American 
individualism. As Nina Baym points out, during the 1940s and 1950s F.O. 
Matthiessen, Henry Nash Smith, Charles Feidelson, and other well-known schol- 
ars constructed a literary canon centered around their own highly individualis- 
tic “myth of America” This myth, associated almost exclusively with texts by 
“white, middle-class, male” writers 

narrates a confrontation of the American individual, the pure American 
self divorced from specific social circumstances, with the promise offered 
by the idea of America. This promise is the deeply romantic one that in this 
new land, untrammeled by history and social accident, a person will be 
able to achieve complete self-definition. Behind this promise is the assur- 




64 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



53 



ance that individuals come before society, that they exist in some meaning- 
ful sense prior to, and apart from, societies in which they happen to find 
themselves. The myth also holds that, as something artificial and second- 
ary to human nature, society exerts an unmitigatedly destructive pressure 
on individuality. To depict it at any length would be a waste of artistic time; 
and there is only one way to relate it to the individual — as an adversary. 

( 71 ) 

As Baym’s description of the adversarial relationship between the individual 
and society indicates, canonical descriptions of “American” individualism rely 
on a radical distinction between individual and collective identities. In this highly 
celebrated “myth of America,” the individual is viewed as an autonomous, in- 
dependent human being, alienated from a society which requires repressive, 
mind-numbing conformity. Like Warren, Baym argues that this literary drive 
for self-expansion and independence relies on a restrictive definition of the in- 
dividual that excludes far more people than it includes. Euro-American women, 
African Americans, Native Americans, and other marginalized peoples have 
been denied the freedom and independence associated with this solipsistic ver- 
sion of “American” individualism. 

Yet I would argue that this “myth of America” can be enacted in other ways 
as well, ways that illustrate and perhaps even extend Emersonian self-reliance. 
Like canonical forms of “American” individualism, these alternate, multicultural 
forms reject external sources of authority and underscore the importance of 
self-trust, yet they do so without reinforcing narcissistic, self-enclosed con- 
cepts of identity. Instead, they replace the belief in isolated individual human 
beings with a more flexible theory of identity, where self-development occurs 
always in the context of others. By positing the interconnectedness between 
each individual and society, these intersubjective models of individualism break 
down the exclusionary, dualistic divisions between personal and communal iden- 
tities found in conventional interpretations of an “American” self. In short, self- 
reliance becomes a highly democratic endeavor that simultaneously extends 
canonical interpretations of “American” individualism outward to include pre- 
viously ignored groups and reconfigures the relationship between personal and 
communal identities. 

June Jordan’s politics of self-determination — which I would describe as a 
theory and praxis of intersubjective identity formation where self-development 
occurs in the context of other equally important individuals — illustrates one 
form these alternate, multicultural models of individualism can take. Through- 
out her work, Jordan emphasizes the importance of self-trust by insisting that 
all human beings must have the freedom to define themselves and choose their 
own courses Of action. In “Civil Wars,” for example, she challenges all external 
forms of authority, including the “professional leadership” guiding the Black 
Power Movement, the Women’s Movement, and other politicized groups. Ac- 




65 



54 



Ana Louise Keating 



cording to Jordan, no matter how democratic such leadership seems to be, it 
cannot replace the authority and guidance she associates with each person’s 
inner desires: “The only leadership I can respect is one that enables every man 
and woman to be his and her own leader: to abandon victim perspective and to 
faithfully rely upon the truth of the feeling that is his or hers and then to act on 
that, without apology” (186-87). As this emphasis on inner-directed leadership 
implies, Jordan bases her politics of self-determination on the non-elitist belief 
that each person has the ability and the wisdom to control his or her own life. In 
this essay and others, she attempts to share this belief with her readers. By 
rejecting the rhetoric of victimhood that denies personal agency, Jordan urges 
her readers to take responsibility for their own lives. Because she believes that 
each person has an infallible source of guidance located within him or herself, 
she encourages her readers to explore their hidden needs and desires and begin 
speaking out. 

In many ways, this confidence in each individual’s inner potential resembles 
canonical versions of self-trust seen, for example, in Emerson’s assertion in 
“Self-Reliance” that “[n]othing is at last sacred but the integrity of your own 
mind. Absolve you to yourself, and you shall have the suffrage of the world” 
(149) or in Thoreau’s confidence that by simplifying his life and relying en- 
tirely on himself he would discover universal truths about human existence. 4 
Like Jordan, these nineteenth-century Transcendentalists reject external forms 
of authority and underscore each individual’s ability to think for him or herself. 
Yet in Jordan’s politics of self-determination, this belief in intellectual integrity 
and personal power has a distinctive, highly complex social dimension rarely 
seen in Emerson or Thoreau. Thus in “Thinking about My Poetry” she associ- 
ates the self-trust she requires as a writer with the development of a personal- 
ized yet collective voice. This perspective enables her to avoid the solipsistic 
withdrawal or escape from society generally associated with canonical versions 
of American individualism. Instead, she can insist that self-reflection leads to 
the discovery of new forms of intersubjective identity. By looking within, she 
recognizes her interconnections with others which she then explores in her work. 
She explains that she sees herself and other Black and women poets as 

all of us working on the same poem of a life of perpetual, difficult birth, 
and . . . therefore, I should trust myself in this way: that if I could truthfully 
attend to my own perpetual birth, if I could trace the provocations for my 
own voice and then trace its reverberations through love, Alaska, whatever, 
that then I could hope to count upon myself to be serving a positive and 
collective function, without pretending to be more than the one Black woman 
poet I am, as a matter of fact. ( 126 ) 

By locating the source of social change within each individual, Jordan opens up 
an intersubjective space where self-reflection, self-definition, and the creation 




86 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



55 



of transformational collective identities can converge. Similarly, in “Civil Wars” 
she associates each individual’s ability to think for him or herself with the con- 
struction of collective identities capable of bringing about radical social change. 
She maintains that “the ultimate power of all the people rests upon the indi- 
vidual ability to trust and to respect the authority of the truth of whatever it is 
that each of us feels, each of us means” (187, my emphasis). 

As this oscillation between individual and communal identities indicates, 
Jordan’s politics of self-determination relies on an intersubjective matrix where 
personal interests work in conjunction with the interests of others. Again in 
“Waking Up in the Middle of Some American Dreams” Jordan challenges con- 
ventional forms of individualism, or what she describes as the “beloved, na- 
tional myths about you and me as gloriously rugged, independent individuals” 
(15). According to Jordan, these “national myths” of limitless autonomy and 
freedom are far less empowering than they seem, for they inhibit self-growth by 
preventing us from recognizing the ways our individualized needs intersect with 
those of others. Seduced by visions of uniqueness, each person becomes iso- 
lated and unable to attain his or her personal desires and goals. Drawing on the 
rhetoric of democracy embedded in U.S. culture, she insists that 

our American dreams of “the first” and “the only” produce an invariably 
mistaken self-centered perspective that repeatedly proves to be self-de- 
feating and, even, antidemocratic. Demos , as in democratic, as in a demo- 
cratic state, means people, not person. A democratic nation of persons, of 
individuals, is an impossibility and a fratricidal goal. Each American one 
of us must consciously choose to become a willing and outspoken part of 
the people who, together, will determine our individual chances for happi- 
ness, and justice. (19, her emphasis) 

Jordan does not establish a binary opposition between the individual and soci- 
ety. Nor does she deny the validity of each individual’s private needs and de- 
sires. Instead, she invents new forms of personal agency acknowledging the 
interconnections among apparently separate human beings. More specifically, 
she incorporates a communal dimension into her definition of the personal and 
establishes a model of identity formation where self-development requires each 
individual’s interaction with others. By thus emphasizing the reciprocal, 
intersubjective nature of each individual’s autonomy and self-growth, Jordan 
constructs an agent-centered collective subjectivity that unites inner direction 
with outward change. 

Jordan’s self-naming process in her 1989 collection of poetry, Naming Our 
Destiny , illustrates one form this model of interactional identity formation can 
take. Throughout the poems collected in this volume, she uses her own experi- 
ences as a twentieth-century bisexual woman of Jamaican descent to under- 
score the importance of personal and communal self-determination. As she 



56 



AnaLouise Keating 



examines the interconnections between her own destiny and the destinies of a 
wide variety of national and international groups, she rejects restrictive ver- 
sions of isolated, self-enclosed individualism. Exploring a diverse set of private 
and public issues — including her relationships with female and male lovers, 
homophobia, Black English, racial violence in Atlanta, South African apart- 
heid, and the Palestinian crisis — Jordan demonstrates that her own self-deter- 
mination entails recognizing and affirming both the similarities and the 
differences between herself and others. For instance, in “Poem About My Rights,” 
written in response to her experience of being raped, she alternates between 
personal, national, and international concerns. By so doing, she illustrates how 
the specific forms of oppression she experiences as a single black woman living 
in the United States intersect with South Africa’s invasion of Namibia and Angola, 
U.S. imperialism, sexual violence against women, and unjust rape laws. In this 
poem and others, Jordan synthesizes personal and communal agency by draw- 
ing analogies between her own rights and the rights of all women, colonized 
countries, and other supposedly disparate groups. 

As Jordan’s willingness to identify herself with a variety of apparently dis- 
similar peoples implies, her complex self-naming process represents a signifi- 
cant departure from the rhetoric of authenticity found in many forms of 
ethnic-specific literary and cultural studies. In her politics of self-determina- 
tion, individual and collective identities cannot automatically be based on 
ethnicity, gender, nationality, or other restrictive, naturalized categories of mean- 
ing. As she explains in “Civil Wars,” “Neither race nor gender provides the final 
definitions of jeopardy or refuge. The final risk or final safety lies within each 
one of us attuned to the messy and intricate and unending challenge of self- 
determination” (187). 5 By rejecting ethnic- and gender-specific collective iden- 
tities without denying their temporary historic significance, Jordan exposes the 
limitations in contemporary forms of separatist multicultural thinking. 

Like Jordan, Gloria Anzaldua enacts a variety of to-and-fro movements in 
which individual and collective identity formation are interconnected and oc- 
cur simultaneously. Throughout her poetry, fiction, and prose she draws on her 
experiences as a Chicana growing up in south Texas and employs a highly per- 
sonalized, assertive voice to invent new forms of intersubjective identity. Thus, 
for example, in “ Cihuatlyotl , Woman Alone,” she adopts a paradoxical position 
enabling her to redefine the personal and communal components of her own 
self-identity. Although she associates herself with Cihuatlyotl , a precolonial 
Mexican Indian creatrix figure representing the collective, ethnic-specific di- 
mensions of her identity, she insists on her ability to define herself according to 
her own needs and desires. After exploring the various ways her family and 
other Mexican Americans have attempted to control her, she boldly asserts her 
independence without severing all ties to her ethnic community: 




(88 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



57 



I refuse to be taken over by 



things people who fear that hollow 

aloneness beckoning beckoning. No self, 

only race vecindad familia. My soul has always 

been yours one spark in the roar of your fire. 



We Mexicans are collective animals. 



This I 



accept 

like oxygen. 

Raza. 



but my life’s work requires autonomy 



This lifelong battle has ended, 
I don’t need to flail against you. 



( Borderlands/La Frontera 173) 



Even the style — the jarring line breaks and the unexpected, irregular spaces 
within each line — indicates the difficulties Anzaldua experiences in her attempts 
to negotiate between the personal autonomy she desires as a writer and the 
sense of connection she desires as a member of her ethnic community. Yet as 
her shifts between singular and plural first-person pronouns suggest, she does 
not create a binary division between these conflicting desires. Instead, by locat- 
ing her “soul” both in the beckoning “hollow / aloneness” she requires as a 
writer and in the collective Mexican familia , she destabilizes the binary opposi- 
tion between them. This oscillation between individual and collective identities 
enables her simultaneously to accept and reject both her need for autonomy and 
the demands placed upon her by other Mexican Americans. 

In many ways, this rejection of social convention resembles the emphasis on 
nonconformity found in nineteenth-century Transcendental writers. Like 
Emerson, Anzaldua exposes the paralyzing effects society’s dictates have on 
each individual. And like Thoreau, she openly refuses to live her life according 
to the codes of behavior established by others . 6 However, by specifying the 
many various forms these social conventions can take, she adds increasing lev- 
els of complexity and sophistication to conventional interpretations of “Ameri- 
can” individualism. More specifically, she uses the conflicts she experiences as 
a Chicana writer to enact a complex, multi-layered dialogue between a variety 
of groups, including the mainstream assimilationist U.S. culture which attempts 
to impose a single standard on all citizens, the Mexican American community 
which imposes its own ethnic-specific standards on its members, and her own 
personal desires. Thus in Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestiza she delib- 
erately breaks with all negative religious and cultural belief systems and boldly 
declares: 

No, I do not buy all the myths of the tribe into which I was bom. ... I will 
not glorify those aspects of my culture which have injured me and which 
have injured me in the name of protecting me. So, don’t give me your 
tenets and your laws. Don’t give me your lukewarm gods. What I want is 
an accounting with all three cultures — white, Mexican, Indian. I want the 
freedom to carve and chisel my own face, to staunch the bleeding with 



58 



Ana Louise Keating 



ashes, to fashion my own gods out of my entrails. And if going home is 
denied me then I will have to stand and claim my space, making a new 
culture — una cultura mestiza — with my own lumber, my own bricks and 
mortar and my own feminist architecture. ( Borderlands/La Frontera 21- 
22 ) 

By replacing the two-way conversation between the individual and society 
found in canonical interpretations of “American” individualism with this multi- 
layered discourse, Anzaldua generates flexible, open-ended forms of individu- 
alized collective identity, or what she describes as the “new mestiza.” As the 
term suggests, Anzaldua’s new mestiza represents a hybrid, a complex mixed- 
breed who can neither be reduced to a single category nor rigidly classified 
according to a specific set of traits. 7 The product of two or more cultures — each 
with its own value system — Anzaldua’s new mestiza draws from these various 
traditions yet reorganizes them according to her own needs, desires, and be- 
liefs. As she explains in “To(o) Queer the Writer,” her “new mestiza queers have 
the ability, the flexibility, the amorphous quality of being able to stretch this 
way and that way. We can add new labels, names and identities as we mix with 
others” (249). 

Anzaldua’s “new mestiza” represents several remarkable departures from 
previous interpretations of mestizaje found in Chicano literature. By feminiz- 
ing the term “ mestizo ,” her mestiza provides an important intervention into twen- 
tieth-century Chicano literary and theoretical movements which have been 
dominated by male-centered issues. 8 And by extending conventional definitions 
of the mestizo as a member of a specific biologically-based cultural group to 
encompass the experiences of non-Mexican, non-Indian peoples as well, 
Anzaldua de-essentializes and pluralizes culturally-specific notions of identity. 
As Marcos Sanchez-Tranquilino points out, Anzaldua’s theory of mestizaje rep- 
resents an innovative alteration of earlier views: “Her interpretation goes be- 
yond the traditional concept of mestizaje. For Anzaldua, that concept cannot 
ever again be thought of as a simple mixing of blood or cultures, but rather that 
what has always been in effect a mixing of identities many times over — beyond 
the old dualities be they gender, historical, economic, or cultural, etc.” (568). I 
want to underscore the radical implications of Anzaldua’s new mestiza : By re- 
jecting essentialized conceptions of identity that rely on blood quantum, physi- 
cal appearance, or other biologically-based components, she constructs a 
transcultural theory of hybrid subjectivities. 

In short, Anzaldua replaces the rhetoric of authenticity found in many eth- 
nic-specific traditions with new forms of communal identity based on each 
individual’s experiential knowledge and personal choice. Like Jordan, she cre- 
ates highly personalized yet collective identities that go beyond gender- and 
ethnic-specific categories of meaning. Take, for example, her self-positioning 
in “La Prieta,” an early autobiographical essay. As in Borderlands/La Frontera , 




70 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



59 



she acknowledges the numerous forms of conflict she has experienced in her 
interactions with Mexican Americans, other people of color, feminists, and les- 
bians and gay men, yet refuses to sever her ties with these various groups. In- 
stead, she confidently insists on her ability to define herself as she sees fit and 
locates herself on the thresholds between these diverse groups: 

I am a wind-swayed bridge, a crossroads inhabited by whirlwinds. . . . 

“Your allegiance is to La Raza, the Chicano movement,” say the members 
of my race. “Your allegiance is to the Third World,” say my Black and 
Asian friends. “Your allegiance is to your gender, to women,” say the femi- 
nists. Then there’s my allegiance to the Gay movement, to the socialist 
revolution, to the New Age, to magic and the occult. And there’s my affin- 
ity to literature, to the world of the artist. What am I? A third world lesbian 
feminist with Marxist and mystic leanings. They would chop me up into 
little fragments and tag each piece with a label. (205, her emphasis) 

Significantly, Anzaldua’s threshold location includes ethnic- and gender-spe- 
cific worlds she could be said to have entered by virtue of appearance and birth, 
as well as other worlds she has more consciously chosen to enter. Although 
each group makes full membership contingent on its own exclusionary sets of 
rules and demands based on ethnicity, gender, sexuality, class, ideology, or be- 
liefs, Anzaldua refuses these terms without disassociating herself from the vari- 
ous groups. By rejecting the need for unitary identities and exclusive, single-issue 
alliances, she challenges her readers — no matter how they identify — to reex- 
amine and expand their own personal and social locations. 

For Paula Gunn Allen as well, self-definition occurs only in the context of 
others. But unlike Anzaldua and Jordan, who rely extensively on their personal 
experiences to create an intersubjective matrix where these new constellations 
of individual and collective identities can occur, Allen relies extensively on 
literature and myth . 9 More specifically, she builds on the radical holism she 
finds in traditional Native cosmologies and invents a transformational model of 
identity formation synthesizing the personal and communal dimensions of each 
individual’s life. By locating this transformational model within the oral tradi- 
tion, Allen develops a dialogic theory of tribal literatures that draws on language’s 
performative effects to generate personal and social change. 

Based on a relational model requiring participation by both storyteller and 
listeners, oral traditions reinforce the communal, creative dimensions of human 
existence. As Richard Bauman points out, this conversational structure can lead 
to the creation of new social systems. He associates the “distinctive potential” 
found in oral narratives with a performative, interactive model of language use 
and explains that verbal art’s communal nature potentially establishes a unique 
bond between an individual and a group: 

It is part of the essence of performance that it offers to the participants a 
special enhancement of experience, bringing with it a heightened intensity 



60 



AnciLoitise Keating 



of communicative interaction which binds the audience to the performer in 
a way that is specific to performance as a mode of communication. Through 
his [sic] performance, the performer elicits the participative attention and 
energy of his audience, and, to the extent that they value his performance, 
they will allow themselves to be caught up in it. (43) 

Throughout her scholarly writings, Allen draws on this interactive model of 
performative language to argue that oral narratives function simultaneously as 
the expression and the active fulfillment of each individual’s social needs. Yet 
by incorporating a transcultural perspective into her description of oral tradi- 
tions, she attempts to expand conventional anthropological definitions of the 
term. According to Allen, 

[t]he oral tradition of all tribal people — whether Native American, Hindu, 

Greek, Celtic, Norse, Samois, Roman, or Papuan is best seen as psychic 
literature. It cannot adequately be comprehended except in terms of the 
universe of power, for it speaks to the relationships among humans, ani- 
mals of all kingdoms, supematurals, and deities in a landscape that is sub- 
ject to influences of thought, intention, will, emotion, and choice. 

( Grandmothers 22) 

This transition from oral to psychic literature underscores the intersubjective 
dimensions of Allen’s transformational model of identity formation, for she 
associates these communally-based knowledge systems with a spiritualized mode 
of perception located within each individual. 

Allen provides one of the most extensive discussions of her dialogic theory 
of literature in “The Sacred Hoop: A Contemporary Perspective,” where she 
draws from a wide variety of tribal mythic systems, including Cheyenne, Hopi, 
and Keres, to distinguish between western literature’s highly individualistic bias 
and the communal dimensions she finds in American Indian literatures. Whereas 
the former celebrates solipsistic, self-enclosed forms of individualism leading 
only to isolation, separation, and loss, the latter does not. Instead, the oral nar- 
ratives embodied in traditional tribal literatures posit an underlying dynamic 
intelligence — or what, borrowing from the Hopi, she describes as “what lives 
and moves and knows” ( 61 ) — enabling us to create communal identities based 
on a shared worldview. By associating this holistic worldview with language’s 
transformational effects, Allen can insist that the mythic stories conveyed in 
oral narratives utilize participatory, performative speech acts to unify individu- 
als with communities and bring about radical change: 

The tribes seek — through song, ceremony, legend, sacred stories (myths), 
and tales — to embody, articulate, and share reality, to bring the isolated 
private self into harmony and balance with this reality, to verbalize the 
sense of the majesty and reverent mystery of all things, and to actualize, in 
language, those truths that give to humanity its greatest significance and 
dignity. To a large extent, ceremonial literature serves to redirect private 




72 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



61 



emotion and integrate the energy generated by emotion within a cosmic 
framework. (55) 

As this synthesis of personal power and cosmic communal experience indi- 
cates, Allen does not reject all forms of individualism. Instead, she locates each 
individual’s personal integrity and power within communally-based oral tradi- 
tions, thus destabilizing the binary opposition between individual and collec- 
tive identities. 

In many ways, Allen’s discussion of oral narratives’ unifying effect resembles 
Thoreau’s discovery of patterned, perpetual rebirth in Walden 10 or Emerson’s 
theory of the imagination. Like Allen, Emerson locates the source of each 
person’s individual power within a larger, communal context and a holistic 
worldview. As he explains in “The Poet,” 

[i]t is a secret which every intellectual man [sic] quickly learns, that be- 
yond the energy of his possessed and conscious intellect he is capable of a 
new energy (as of an intellect doubled on itself), by abandonment to the 
nature of things; that beside his privacy of power as an individual man, 
there is a great public power on which he can draw, by unlocking, at all 
risks, his human doors, and suffering the ethereal tides to roil and circulate 
through him; then he is caught up into the life of the Universe, his speech is 
thunder, his thought is law, and his words are universally intelligible as the 
plants and animals. (233) 

Just as Emerson’s theory of imagination gives thinkers access to a “great public 
power” uniting them with all that exists, Allen’s dialogic theory of tribal litera- 
tures underscores each individual’s interconnections with a communally-based 
“universe of power” ( Grandmothers 22). However, her emphasis on the par- 
ticular forms this all-inclusive power can take gives her work a transculturally 
universal dimension not found in Emerson’s more generalized universalism. In 
a sense, she translates the “universally intelligible” words of his poet into a 
variety of gender- and ethnic-specific forms. 

Allen illustrates one form this transcultural translation can take in Grand- 
mothers of the Light: A Medicine Woman s Sourcebook. Composed of an intro- 
ductory section containing her reinterpretation of North American Indians’ 
holistic worldview, her versions of Pueblo, Mayan, Cherokee, and other tribal 
mythic stories, and a brief overview of ten North American peoples’ pre- and 
post-colonial histories, Grandmothers of the Light is targeted at a wide, 
multicultural female audience. In many ways, this text represents a radical de- 
parture from Allen’s earlier, more scholarly works, for it can easily be viewed 
as a mainstream self-help book. And indeed, Allen implies that — read from the 
proper mythic perspective — the Native American myths she retells function as 
a guidebook for any woman interested in learning to “walk the medicine 
path ... to live and think in ways that are almost but not quite entirely unlike 
our usual ways of living and thinking” (3). As she asserts in an interview with 



O 

ERIC 



73 



62 



AnaLouise Keating 



Jane Caputi, “The stories are guides and a handbook on how to be spiritual if 
you want to be spiritual. [ Grandmothers of the Light ] gives you stories you can 
use like recipes on how to act, what to do. These stories are about being medi- 
cine women” (66). 

More specifically, the stories are about women’s ability to attain personal 
and collective agency. As Allen explains in the preface, the mythic tribal stories 
she retells demonstrate “the great power women have possessed, and how that 
power when exercised within the life circumstances common to women every- 
where can reshape (terraform) the earth” ( Grandmothers xvi, my emphasis). In 
other words, she implies that by fully participating in the “sacred myths” col- 
lected in her anthology, twentieth-century English-speaking women of any 
ethnicity or cultural background can become “medicine women” by developing 
a spiritual mode of perception that empowers them to bring about psychic and 
material change. 11 

You say my name is ambivalence? Think of me as Shiva, a many-armed 
and legged body with one foot on brown soil, one on white, one in straight 
society, one in the gay world, the man’s world, the women’s, one limb in 
the literary world, another in the working class, the socialist, and the occult 
worlds. A sort of spider woman hanging by one thin strand of web. 

Gloria Anzaldua 

In this passage, Anzaldua positions herself on the thresholds — simultaneously 
inside and outside a number of what seem to be mutually exclusive groups — 
and develops flexible models of intersubjective identity formation enabling her 
to establish points of similarity and difference among people of diverse back- 
grounds. Similar comments can be made about Allen and Jordan as well. By 
rejecting the belief in self-enclosed identities and the rhetoric of authenticity 
based on naturalized concepts of culture, ethnicity, gender, or other systems of 
difference, all three writers replace the celebrated versions of “American” indi- 
vidualism that rely on an authentic core self with alternate, more flexible forms. 
As they engage in multiple dialogues simultaneously, they enact a series of 
displacements that confound binary oppositions between personal and commu- 
nal identities. 

These to-and-fro movements between individual and collective identities 
resemble the ‘ fort/da of the symbolic process of political negotiation ” or trans- 
lation, Homi Bhabha associates with the invention of new forms of social sub- 
jects. As he explains in “The Commitment to Theory ” the construction of cultural 
meaning relies on an ambivalent movement which fragments claims of authen- 
tic, unitary, cultural identities from within (117). Drawing on discourse analy- 
sis and psychoanalytic theory, he outlines a transformational process of cultural 
translation based on his contention that all forms of identity are hybrid cre- 
ations rather than pre-existing, organic discoveries; they are “symbol -forming 




74 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



63 



and subject-constituting, interpellative practices” (“Third Space” 210). He main- 
tains that the slippage between signifier and signified occurring within litera- 
ture and other types of cultural representation opens up an ambivalent space 
where new political subjects and pluralized cultural identities can be articu- 
lated. 12 As he explains in an interview with Jonathan Rutherford, cultural trans- 
lation indicates a twofold process of internal division, or self-alienation, and 
imitation: 

By translation I first of all mean a process by which, in order to objectify 
cultural meaning, there always has to be a process of alienation and of 
secondariness in relation to itself. In that sense there is no “in itself’ and 
“for itself’ within cultures because they are always subject to intrinsic forms 
of translation. . . . Developing that notion, translation is a way of imitating, 
but in a mischievous, displacing sense — imitating an original in such a 
way that the priority of the original is not reinforced but by the very fact 
that it can be simulated, copied, transferred, transformed, made into a 
simulacrum and so on: the “original” is never finished or complete in it- 
self. The “originary” is always open to translation so that it can never be 
said to have a totalised prior moment of being or meaning — an essence. 
(“Third Space” 210, his emphasis) 

As this rejection of static, self-enclosed identities implies, translation is an 
ongoing, de-essentializing process that relies on yet problematizes “authentic” 
representations of present and past cultural traditions, as well as the notions of 
authority and truth all such representations reinforce. Indeed, it’s the recogni- 
tion of difference within apparently unified cultural identities — or what Bhabha 
describes in “The Commitment to Theory” as “a Third space,” a “split-space 
enunciation” ( 1 31) — that destabilizes apparently stable authoritative claims, thus 
making transformation possible. He maintains that 

[t]he intervention of the Third space of enunciation, which makes the struc- 
ture of meaning and reference an ambivalent process, destroys this mirror 
of representation in which cultural knowledge is customarily revealed as 
an integrated, open, expanding code. Such an intervention quite properly 
challenges our sense of the historical identity of culture as a homogenising 
unifying force, authenticated by the originary Past, kept alive in the na- 
tional tradition of the people. (130) 

In short, although cultural meaning often relies on what seem to be unitary 
notions of an authentic core self, cultural identities are created, not discovered. 

But what does this process of cultural translation and intervention have to do 
with reading and teaching U.S. literature? As a number of theorists suggest, the 
narratives we read — the stories we tell ourselves and our students — play an 
important role in constructing “American” identities and themes. 13 Thus, for 
example, the highly celebrated belief in a radically independent, solipsistic 
“American” self explored in this paper has, to a great degree, shaped the ways 







75 



64 



AnaLouise Keating 



we see ourselves and our world. Seduced by the rhetoric of “American” indi- 
vidualism, we view ourselves as unique, fully autonomous human beings with 
distinct boundaries separating us from all others. Although we often believe 
these identities to be marked by gender, sexuality, and ethnicity, we generally 
view these components as authentic, stable attributes and assume that cultural 
identities are permanent categories of meaning based on biology, family, his- 
tory, nationality, and tradition. In such instances, the boundaries between vari- 
ous groups of people — and, by extension, the theoretical perspectives designed 
to represent them — become rigid, inflexible, and far too restrictive. Yet as 
Bhabha’s theory of cultural translation suggests, these self-enclosed, isolated 
identities are themselves produced by a rhetoric of authenticity that covers over 
internal contradictions, antagonisms, and gaps. Transcultural dialogues acti- 
vate these internal contradictions, thus demonstrating that this belief in autono- 
mous, self-contained identities is far less accurate than it seems. As Stuart Hall 
asserts, “[i]dentity is not as transparent or unproblematic as we think. Perhaps 
instead of thinking of identity as an already accomplished fact ... we should 
think, instead, of identity as a ‘ production which is never complete, always in 
process, and always constituted within not outside, representation” (222, my 
emphasis). 14 

In the classroom, this view of identity as a fluid ongoing process continually 
reinvented by literature and other forms of representation serves at least two 
interrelated purposes. First, by challenging the rhetoric of authenticity associ- 
ated both with canonical descriptions of an isolated “American” self and with 
the creation of ethnic-specific literary traditions, it provides us with more flex- 
ible forms of multicultural thinking. Unlike separatist multiculturalism — which 
reinforces apparently discrete ethnic traditions — these alternate types of 
multicultural thinking illustrate the hybridity in all U.S. literary forms. By read- 
ing ethnic-specific texts in dialogue with each other, students learn that the 
different literary traditions they explore are far less self-contained than they 
seem, for they’re constructed through a complex process of appropriation and 
transformation in dialogue with “mainstream” U.S. canonical texts and themes. 
This insight takes them — takes us — beyond issues of inclusion to redefine ex- 
isting knowledges and beliefs, such as “American” individualism, separatist 
multiculturalism, and the rhetoric of authenticity they rely on. 

This fluid model of identity serves another purpose as well: By unsettling 
fixed notions of selfhood, it opens up the transformational possibilities con- 
tained within any apparently self-enclosed subject. Because each subject is com- 
posed of multiple parts and located at the intersection of diverse — sometimes 
overlapping, sometimes conflicting — discourses, no identity is or ever can be 
entirely stable and fixed. Instead, identity is always in process and we are al- 
ways open to further change. This potential openness provides an important 
challenge to students’ generally more stable, essentialized notions of subjectiv- 




ity 



Transcendentalism Then and Now 



65 



ity and selfhood, for it compels them to reexamine their own personal and so- 
cial locations. More specifically, by disrupting the restrictive networks of clas- 
sification that inscribe each “American” self as a racialized, en-gendered subject, 
it creates psychic spaces where alterations in consciousness can occur. As they 
begin recognizing the ways the highly celebrated belief in self-enclosed “Ameri- 
can” individualism has (mis)shaped their sense of personal and communal iden- 
tity, they enact flexible models of identity formation, where self-definition and 
self-growth occur in the context of others. 

I want to underscore the radical possibilities opened up by the dialogic theory 
and praxis of multiculturalism I’m advocating in this paper. By reading nine- 
teenth-century canonical texts in conversation with texts by Jordan, Allen, 
Anzaldua, or a number of other writers , 15 we — whatever color, class, ethnicity, 
or sex “we” are — recognize contradictions and antagonisms within our own 
pre-existing knowledges, self-perceptions, and beliefs. This recognition trans- 
forms us. We engage in a series of conversations — transformational dialogues — 
that destabilize the rigid boundaries between apparently separate individuals, 
literary traditions, and identities. Like Jordan, Allen, and Anzaldua, we invent 
new intersubjective spaces where transcultural identifications — mestizaje con- 
nections — can occur. 



Notes 

1 . Jack Salzman, Director of the Columbia University Center for American Culture 
Studies, makes a similar point in a recent interview: 

“What first astounded me here was the lack of interest that people in vari- 
ous ethnic communities have in other ethnic communities. If I do a panel, 
whether fairly low-keyed or high-powered, let us say on the African Ameri- 
can community, the audience will be, for the most part, African Ameri- 
cans. There will be very few Hispanics, very few Asians. If I do a panel on 
Asian Americans, almost no one who is not Asian American will show up. 

We use terms such as discourse and dialogue all the time, but, in fact, there 
seems to be relatively little interest in dialogue between and among vari- 
ous communities.” (qtd. in Kroeber 56) 

2. Throughout this paper I have put the word “American” in scare quotes in order to 
emphasize the mythic/metaphoric dimensions of the term as it is often used in literary 
and cultural discourse. When I’m referring specifically to the United States, or to litera- 
ture written in the United States, I use the term “U.S.,” rather than “American.” As I see 
it, the latter term is too general for my purposes, for it incorporates Canada, Mexico, and 
all of Central and South America. For insightful discussions of the difficulties with the 
various ways the term “American” is used, see Jay and Fetterley. 

3. Even the sketchiest biographical information indicates some of the many differ- 
ences among the writers examined in this paper: Ralph Waldo Emerson, bom in 1803 in 
Boston, Massachusetts to a long line of ministers who first came to this country from 



66 



Ana Louise Keating 



England in the 1630’s; Henry David Thoreau, born in 1817 in Concord, Massachusetts 
to a second-generation French-American father and a mother of Scottish descent; June 
Jordan, daughter of Jamaican immigrants, born in 1936 in Harlem, New York; Paula 
Gunn Allen, born in 1 939 on the Cubero Spanish-Mexican land grant in New Mexico to 
a Laguna-Sioux-Scottish mother and a Lebanese- American father; and Gloria Anzaldua, 
bom in the Rio Grande Valley of south Texas in 1942 to sixth-generation mexicanos. 

4. For another fascinating parallel between Emerson and Jordan, consider Emerson’s 
description of leadership in his journal: 

I have been writing & speaking what were once called novelties, for twenty- 
five or thirty years, & have not now one disciple. Why? Not that what I said 
was not true; not that it has found no intelligent receivers but because it did 
not go from any wish in me to bring men to me, but to themselves. I delight 
in driving them from me. What could I do, if they came to me? They would 
interrupt & encumber me. This is my boast that I have no school & no 
follower. I should account it a measure of the impurity of insight, if it did 
not create independence, (qtd. in Porte 434) 

5. For another example of Jordan’s rejection of the rhetoric of authenticity, see her 
self-positioning in “A Short Note to My Very Critical Friends and Well-Beloved Com- 
rades” where she defiantly outlines the numerous ways her well-meaning friends and 
comrades have tried unsuccessfully to classify her according to color, sexuality, age, and 
ideology and asserts that their inability to do so indicates their own limitations rather 
than her own. 

6. For Emerson’s description of the personal paralysis that occurs when we attempt 
to follow society’s dictates see, for example, “Self-Reliance.” ForThoreau’s rejection of 
social standards see the first chapter of Walden. 

7. Anzaldua discusses the new mestiza throughout B order land s/La Frontera, but 
see especially Chapter 7, “La concienca de la mestiza : Towards a New Consciousness.” 

8. For critiques of the male bias in Chicano literature and theory, see Ramon Saldivar 
and see Anzaldua in “To(o) Queer the Writer.” 

9. As I explain in Women Reading Women Writing, Allen does occasionally draw on 
her personal experiences. However, she does not include the types of intimate details 
found in Jordan’s and Anzaldua’s writings. 

10. See, for example, the final chapter in Walden. 

1 1. For Allen, participation entails fully entering into the mythic tales. She explains 
that any reader who enters the stories “as a room is entered . . . moves into mythic space 
and becomes a voyager in the universe of power” ( Grandmothers 109). Similarly, in The 
Sacred Hoop she states that “entry into the narrative tradition . . . lets people realize that 
individual experience is not isolate but is part of a coherent and timeless whole, provid- 
ing them with a means of personal empowerment and giving shape and direction to their 
lives” (100). 

12. Ernesto Laclau and Chatal Mouffe describe this process of articulation in Hege- 
mony and Socialist Strategy : Towards a Radical Democratic Politics. 

13. See, for example, Peter McLaren’s “Multiculturalism and the Postmodern Cri- 
tique: Toward a Pedagogy of Resistance and Transformation” and McLaren and Tomaz 
Tadeu da Silva’s “Decentering Pedagogy: Critical Literacy, Resistance and the Politics 
of Memory.” 




Transcendentalism Then and Now 



67 



1 4. Anzaldua makes a similar point in “To(o) Queer the Writer” where she insists that 
identity cannot be reduced to a compilation of discrete categories or to “a bunch of little 
cubbyholes stuffed respectively with intellect, race, sex, class, vocation, gender. Identity 
flows between, over, aspects of a person. Identity is a river, a process. Contained within 
the river is its identity, and it needs to flow, to change to stay a river” (252-53). 

1 5. Other dialogic combinations of nineteenth- and twentieth-century “Transcenden- 
talist” writers might include Emerson, Alice Walker, and N. Scott Momaday on the poet 
and imagination; Walt Whitman and Leslie Marmon Silko on landscape and “American” 
identities; or Emerson, Thoreau, and Ralph Waldo Ellison on self-reliance. 



Works Cited 



Allen, Paula Gunn. Grandmothers of the Light : A Medicine Woman s Sourcebook. Bos- 
ton: Beacon, 1991 . 

. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in American Indian Traditions . 

Boston: Beacon, 1986. 

Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestizo. San Francisco: Spin- 
sters/Aunt Lute, 1987. 

. “La Prieta.” This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color. 

Eds. Cherrfe Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of 
Color Press, 1983. 198-209. 

. “To(o) Queer the Writer — Loca y escritora y chicana .” Inversions: Writing by 

Dykes , Queers , and Lesbians. Ed. Betsy Warland. Vancouver: Press Gang, 1991. 
249-64. 

Bauman, Richard. Verbal Art as Performance. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland P, 1984. 

Baym, Nina. “Melodramas of Beset Manhood: How Theories of American Fiction Ex- 
clude Women Authors.” The New Feminist Criticism: Essays on Women , Literature , 
and Theory. Ed. Elaine Showalter. New York: Pantheon, 1985. 125-43. 

Bhabha, Homi K. “The Commitment to Theory.” Questions of Third Cinema . Jim Pines 
and Paul Willeman. London: British Film Institute, 1989. 1 1 1-31. 

. “The Third Space: Interview with Homi Bhabha.” Rutherford 207-21. 

Caputi, Jane. “Interview With Paula Gunn Allen.” Trivia 16 (1990): 50-67. 

Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Selections from Ralph Waldo Emerson. Ed. Stephen E. Whicher. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957. 

Fetterley, Judith. “Nineteenth-Century Literary Regionalism.” College English 56 (1994): 
877-95. 

Hall, Stuart. “Cultural Identity and Diaspora.” Rutherford 322-37. 

Jay, Gregory S. “The End of ‘American’ Literature: Toward a Multicultural Practice.” 
College English 53 (1991): 264-81. 

Jordan, June. “Civil Wars.” Civil Wars. Boston: Beacon, 1981. 178-88. 

.“A Short Note to My Very Critical Friends and Well-Beloved Comrades.” Nam- 
ing Our Destiny: New and Selected Poems. New York: Thunder’s Mouth, 1989. 98. 

. “Thinking about My Poetry.” Civil Wars. Boston: Beacon, 1981. 122-30. 




79 



68 



AnaLouise Keating 



. “Waking up in the Middle of Some American Dreams.” Technical Difficulties: 

African-American Notions and the State of the Union. New York: Pantheon, 1993. 

1 1-24. 

Keating, AnaLouise. Women Reading Women Writing: Self-Invention in Paula Gunn Allen, 
Gloria Anzaldua, and Aud re Lorde. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1996. 

Kroeber, Karl. “An Interview with Jack Salzman, Director of the Columbia University 
Center for American Culture Studies.” American Indian Persistence and Resurgence. 
Ed. Karl Kroeber. Durham: Duke UP, 1994. 50-57. 

Laclau, Ernesto, and Chantal Mouffe. Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radi- 
cal Democratic Politics. London: Verso, 1985. 

McLaren, Peter. “Multiculturalism and the Postmodern Critique: Toward a Pedagogy of 
Resistance and Transformation.” Between Borders: Pedagogy and the Politics of 
Cultural Studies. Eds. Henry Giroux and Peter McLaren. New York: Routledge, 1 994. 
192-222. 

McLaren, Peter, and Tomaz Tadeu da Silva. “Decentering Pedagogy: Critical Literacy, 
Resistance and the Politics of Memory.” Paulo Freire: A Critical Encounter. Eds. 
Peter McLaren and Peter Leonard. New York: Routledge, 1993. 47-83. 

Porte, Joel, ed. Emerson in His Journals. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1982. 

Rutherford, Jonathan, ed. Identity: Community, Culture, Difference. London: Lawrence 
& Wishart, 1990. 

Saldivar, Ramdn. Chicano Narrative: The Dialectics of Difference. Madison: U of Wis- 
consin P, 1990. 

Sanchez-Tranquilino, Marcos, and John Tagg. “The Pachuco’s Flayed Hide: Mobility, 
Identity, and Buenas Garras.” Cultural Studies. Eds. Lawrence Grossberg, Cary 
Nelson, and Paula Treichler. New York: Routledge, 1992. 556-70. 

Thoreau, Henry David. Walden. 1854. New York: Bantam, 1962. 

Trinh T. Minh-ha. When the Moon Waxes Red: Representation, Gender and Cultural 
Politics. New York: Routledge, 1991. 

Warren, Joyce. The American Narcissus: Individualism and Women in Nineteenth-Cen- 
tury American Fiction. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 1984. 




80 



II Crossing Cultural 
Boundaries 



O 

ERIC 



81 



4 A Fusion of Cultures: The 
Complexities of the Caribbean 
Character in Literature 



Elizabeth Nunez 

Medgar Evers College, CUNY 



When I was in high school at St. Joseph’s Convent in Port of Spain, Trinidad, 
my literature teacher introduced my class to the concept of the coexistence of 
irreconcilable opposites. She was trying to get us to understand the odes of the 
nineteenth-century English poet John Keats. For reasons that were unclear to 
me then but are somewhat clearer now, I found immediate empathy with Keats 
and his point of view. And so too, I must add, did my Trinidadian teacher. In- 
deed, if there were a way for us to penetrate the heart of this frail English poet 
from another time and another place, it was through this notion of the coexist- 
ence of irreconcilable opposites. For there we were — the daughters of the en- 
slaved and indentured from Africa, India, China, and the vast extinct empires of 
the Amerindians — all now living together in a tropical island where the heat 
and the sea were constant, speaking the language of our British conqueror and 
slave master and loving it, defending it. We aspired to his culture, his way of 
life, while remaining secretly comfortable with our own. We praised his achieve- 
ments and accomplishments while celebrating with relish our own rituals — 
Hosay, Carnival, Duvali, baptisms, weddings, funerals— in our own way, in our 
own style. 

It was also in that high school class that I first fell in love with the word 
“paradox,” again for no reason that I was aware of at that time. Our teacher had 
asked one of my classmates to read her essay to the class. I don’t remember the 
specific subject, that is, which of Keats’s poems she was analyzing. I vaguely 
remember our teacher praising her paper. I remember her saying something 
about its brilliant insights, but nothing specific except the word that my class- 
mate had used: paradox. The word resounded in my head. I was to use it over 
and over again, sometimes totally out of context, sometimes without apparent 
context, as though hearing it was enough; for it was a word that described me, 
bonded all of us in that multiethnic class, all the Trinidadians I knew. 

I never stopped to ask why. It seemed a truth that did not require explaining 
or deconstructing. It simply was. But then in 1993 in Stockholm, Derek Walcott 
was to make the reason eminently clear to the world in a way only a master poet 



0 




82 



72 



Elizabeth Nunez 



could. In his acceptance speech for the Nobel Prize in Literature, “The Antilles: 
Fragments of Epic Memory,” Walcott told us what we Caribbean people al- 
ready sensed: that paradox, contradiction, is the essence of Caribbean identity. 

Walcott began his speech by describing his reactions to the Indian religious 
festival of Ramleela in the village of Felicity in Trinidad. Commenting that his 
first instinct was to view that ceremony as some watered-down version of the 
original epic, he admitted that “out of the writer’s habit,” he was “polluting the 
afternoon with doubt and with the patronage of admiration” (6). He was seeing 
the Caribbean as a purist might: “illegimate, rootless mongrelized” (7). He had 
failed to see it as the “celebration of a real presence,” the “perpetuation of joy” 
(8). He had failed to recognize what he already knew: that the paradox of the 
Caribbean identity was that perfection and wholeness arrived out of contradic- 
tion and fragmentation. Finally, evoking the analogy of a broken vase that has 
been repaired with glue, Walcott declared: 

It is such a love that reassembles our African and Asiatic fragments, the 
cracked heirloom whose restoration shows its white scars. This gathering 
of broken pieces is the care and pain of the Antilles, and if the pieces are 
disparate, ill-fitting, they contain more pain than their original sculpture, 
those icons and sacred vessels taken for granted in their ancestral places. 
Antillean art is this restoration of our shattered histories, our shards of 
vocabulary, our archipelago becoming a synonym for pieces broken off 
from the original continent. (9) 

Musing on these shards, he said wistfully, “I am only one-eighth the writer I 
might have been had I contained all the fragmented languages of Trinidad” (9). 

This is the paradox of the Caribbean character — this containment of frag- 
ments, many irreconcilably opposed to one another — and thus the challenge of 
the Caribbean writer. For in order to portray the Caribbean character truthfully, 
the writer must be able to convey this complexity of the Caribbean identity, this 
coexistence of fragments from many diverse and sometimes contradictory 
sources. It is a challenge that novelist and critic Wilson Harris, in his Tradition , 
the Writer and Society ; claims is very difficult to assume, because such a per- 
spective does not yield “to consolidation of character” (28). As Harris puts it, 
the Caribbean writer is faced with the problem of how “to reconcile the broken 
parts of an enormous heritage, especially when those broken parts appear very 
often like a grotesque series of adventure, volcanic in its precipitate effects as 
well as human in its vulnerable settlement” (31). But broken, volcanic, even 
grotesque as these parts are, Harris stresses, as does Walcott, that it is in the 
gluing and joining of these parts that one discovers the Caribbean identity. It is 
this which Harris calls “remarkable about West Indian personality in depth,” 
this sense of a “series of subtle and nebulous links which are latent within him” 
(28). For the writer then to portray one fragment without the other, to condemn 
or to praise one aspect of personality without acknowledging the coexistence of 



S3 



A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean Character 



73 



its opposite, is to distort the truth of the Caribbean person; for these competing 
fragments are as ever present in the Caribbean personality as are the many and 
varied ingredients in a sancoche soup which give it its distinctive flavor. 

Perhaps V.S. Naipaul provides us with the clearest example of the dire con- 
sequences of this myopic view (though I hope to point out that Naipaul is not 
the only Caribbean writer who appears to find it difficult to deal with the para- 
dox of Caribbean character). In his collection of essays The Overcrowded 
Barracoon, Naipaul says frankly that though every writer is, in the long run, on 
his own, “it helps, in the most practical way, to have a tradition.” The English 
language he says, “was mine; the tradition was not” (25). As a Caribbean writer, 
then, Naipaul confronted his particular problem of possessing attitudes, values, 
and beliefs that were transmitted to him through the language of the British, a 
language which, though he claimed it as his own, originated with a people whose 
vision was not his. Indeed, Naipaul contends that the English way of seeing was 
alien to his own: “It diminished my own and did not give me the courage to do 
a simple thing like mentioning the name of a Port-of-Spain Street” (25). 

Unfortunately, Naipaul does not extend this complexity of personality and 
the containment of paradox to his portrayal of Caribbean character. For when 
he attempts to mirror the West Indian in his writings, he sees only fragments 
that are reductions and distortions of the original. And he views the “glue” that 
bonds the parts not as Walcott urges us to — as that which creates a new and 
stronger symmetry — but rather as mimicry of the original, the parody of a fool- 
ish people ridiculously imitating that which they could never hope to attain. 
Thus it is that the Caribbean cities of Naipaul’s novels teem with corrupt philis- 
tines who mimic European customs and habits, prostitute the integrity of Euro- 
pean ideals and values, and are themselves filled with self-contempt and loathing. 

Singh, the East Indian protagonist of Naipaufs novel The Mimic Men , is 
presented as “justifiably alarmed” that on the island he was now claiming as 
his, he found himself “now committed to a whole new mythology, dark and 
alien, committed to a series of interiors I never wanted to enter” (188). He can 
empathize with Hok, of mixed Chinese and Negro parentage, who refused to 
acknowledge his Negro mother in public, because it “wasn’t only that the mother 
was black and of the people, though that was a point; it was that he had been 
expelled from that private hemisphere of fantasy where lay his true life” (97). 
And where is that “private hemisphere of fantasy”? It is for Singh located in the 
legacy of Europe, that fragment of civilization that can be glimpsed in the midst 
of Caribbean corruption. It is to be found in The Heroes , the last book Hok was 
reading. “What a difference,” Singh bemoans, “between the mother of Perseus 
and that mother!” (97). 

How then to reconcile these opposing fragments — that of the legacy of the 
conqueror (by implication the superior) and that of the conquered, the enslaved, 
the indentured (by implication the inferior)? One approach could be that of 



O 

ERIC 



84 



74 



Elizabeth Nunez 



those writers, the novelist George Lamming in particular, who use the para- 
digm of the Prospero-Caliban relationship as a means of explaining and inter- 
preting Caribbean character. Thus for these writers, as Caliban learned language 
from Prospero, so did the Caribbean acquire a new language from the English. 
As Caliban was generous to Prospero, showing him which streams were fresh, 
which poisonous, which land barren, which fertile, so was the Caribbean to the 
English, cultivating Caribbean lands for the Englishman’s profit. As Prospero 
betrayed and enslaved Caliban, so did the English repay the Caribbean for kind- 
ness by imposing a state of political and economic dependence. As Caliban 
revolted against Prospero’s attempt to denigrate his past, so must the Caribbean 
resist the seductive lure of the English that would encourage rejection of 
Africanness. The Caribbean person, then, may contain fragments of the En- 
glish personality, but these fragments are not to be embraced or celebrated. 
Rather, they are to be rejected and reviled. There can be no coexistence of these 
irreconcilable opposites. 

In Lamming’s novel The Emigrants , a man gives advice to Collis, a fledg- 
ling writer who is “running away” from his own country to seek exile in En- 
gland. He says: 

A writer’s work is public property. That’s not my fault nor yours. It’s as it 
should be. But you remember: every word you use can be a weapon turned 
against the enemy or inward on yourself, and to live comfortably with the 
enemy within you is the most criminal of all betrayals. (100) 

What does it mean “to live comfortably with the enemy within you”? 
Lamming’s entire oeuvre can be viewed as an attempt to respond to this ques- 
tion. In his first novel, In the Castle of My Skin , the young boys are taught in 
Sunday school that “it would be better to belong to the empire and in the end to 
get back to the garden. After all there was nothing to lose by belonging to the 
empire” (73). But when they grow up, they discover there is everything to lose: 
self-esteem, self-rule, dignity, manhood. In their struggle for political indepen- 
dence from England, these young nationals begin to understand the consequence 
of allegiance to and love for the British empire. For it is the older generation 
who have accepted the inferior status accorded them by the British, who are 
their greatest obstacles. These adults regard their island as Little England, an 
essential part of Big England: “Like children under the threat of hell-fire, they 
accepted instinctively that the others, meaning the white, were superior” (21). 

Ultimately in his final novel, Natives of My Person, Lamming makes it clear 
that the survival of Caribbean identity depends on the Caribbean ability to resist 
European influence. The Caliban one meets in this novel is not a creature in the 
“process of becoming” who depends upon Prospero for his identity. Rather, this 
Caliban resists Prospero, preferring death to surrender. Indeed, in no other work 
does Lamming make it clearer that these contradictory aspects of Caribbean 




85 



A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean Character 



75 



character (fragments of the Old World of Europe and shards of the Americas, 
Asia, and Africa) cannot coexist. The very environment of the tropics works 
against this coexistence and rejects the European “fragments .” Tropical breezes 
carry an infection that seeps into the brains of the Europeans, driving them to 
madness or self-destruction. Tropical birds crash into the ships of the coloniz- 
ers, piling dead bodies on the deck so that the Europeans are forced to “run for 
cover.” After the birds come the crocodiles turning the water blood red. By 
contrast, the Caribbean landscapes provide the natives with underground caves 
to protect them from the European invasion. 

It is not surprising, then, that in the Caribbean novel, the crisis in the life of 
the Caribbean character is more often than not caused by the character’s grow- 
ing awareness that Caribbean identity is shaped by fragments of opposing cul- 
tures. This awareness is further complicated by a sense of shame and 
embarrassment about aspects of the Caribbean character which are rooted in 
Africa or Asia. 

Let us take, for example, the bildungsromans of Merle Hodge and Jamaica 
Kincaid. In Hodge’s novel Crick Crack Monkey, Tee, the main character, moves 
in two worlds, the world of Tantie and the world of Aunt Beatrice. In Tantie’s 
rural world, the children of the inheritors of England’s policy of slavery or in- 
dentured servitude live in harmony with each other and the tropical landscapes. 
Tee is at home with her Indian friend, Doolarie, and Tantie has ongoing ami- 
cable disagreements with the Chinese shopkeeper. While no specific references 
are made to Africa, African beliefs in the spirit and the ancestors permeate ev- 
eryday life and provide explanations for occurrences such as the frequent break- 
ing of the swing under the mango vert tree (“there was a jumble living in the 
tree” [5]), or the winning of so many scholarships by the students in the Roman 
Catholic school (“It was all on account of their nuns and Fathers working obeah 
with Mary-statues and candles in the Catholic Church” [52]). 

In this world where the “air smelt brown and green,” Tee and her friends are 
free to run “as if [they] would always be wiry-limbed children whose darting 
about the sun would capture like amber and fix into eternity” (18). This Eden 
begins to shatter when Tee goes to the Big School and learns there is punish- 
ment for not giving due reverence to the British King. Her teacher informs the 
class that “not an eyelid must bat not a finger must twitch when we honor the 
Mother Country” (26). 

Tee wins an academic scholarship to the best high school in the city, where 
she enters the middle-class world of Aunt Beatrice. Here Mr. Hinds’s lessons 
are reinforced. Tee is admonished for her “ordinariness” and her “niggemess” 
for eating with a spoon; for liking tropical fruits and Caribbean food; for want- 
ing to go to Doolarie’s wedding, which her aunt dismisses as a “coolie affair”; 
and for wanting to wear her best dress, which her aunt discards as “niggery- 
looking.” She begins to understand that she is expected to be ashamed of her 




76 



Elizabeth Nunez 



African roots and that her dark skin represents “the rock-bottom of the family’s 
fall from grace” (82). 

She is taught that the European fragment of her identity is the better part and 
that she would do well to suppress the other part. Soon she becomes confused 
by her feelings of resentment toward her Tan tie and her shame for finding her- 
self thinking that way. On a seaside holiday with her Aunt Beatrice and her 
cousins, she is troubled by a vision of her relatives on her Tantie’s side of the 
family: 

I saw us coming up out of the water with our petticoats and panties and old 
trousers clutching at our bodies, and some of us who hadn’t bothered to 
find a piece of tattered clothing to bathe in, naked. And then Ma. Ma who 
sold in the market. Ma who was a market-woman. I wondered if Auntie 
Beatrice were aware of this fact. Then I thought with bottomless horror 
suppose Bernadette and Carol and Jessica came to know of this! It was not 
a thought to linger upon for one second. Frantically I swept it out of my 
mind, and into the vacuum floated Auntie Beatrice, leaning on the bannis- 
ter, looking out to sea, as I was crouching there looking out at the sea. I was 
irritated at the sea. I considered it had no right to roll itself to and fro, to 
and fro, in such a satisfied manner, as though nothing at all was wrong. 

And the sea-birds and the jumbled footprints in the sand and the dead leaves 
insulted me, too. (88-89) 

Later Tee begins to feel that her “very sight” is “an affront to common de- 
cency,” and she wishes that her body could “shrivel up and fall away,” that she 
could “step out new and acceptable” (97). Ultimately, she concludes that the 
only way to alleviate her distress is to run away, to leave the island. When her 
father invites her to visit him in England, Tee desires “with all my heart that it 
were next morning and a plane were lifting me off the ground” (111). 

Jamaica Kincaid’s Annie John, the main character of her novel of the same 
name, responds in very much the same way as Tee to this clashing of the contra- 
dictory heritages that form her identity. She tells us of the “paradise” she lived 
in as a child when she felt no conflict between the African world of obeah and 
the spirits and the Judeo-Christian world of her Sunday school class. But once 
she enters the big school, she begins to experience discomfort with the slave 
master’s culture, and she struggles to reconcile her sympathy for her English 
classmate with the rage she knows she should have for “the terrible things her 
ancestors had done.” She concludes: 

Of course, sometimes, what with our teachers and our books, it was hard 
for us to tell on which side we really now belonged — with the masters or 
the slaves — for it was all history; it was all in the past, and everybody 
behaved differently now; all of us celebrated Queen Victoria’s birthday, 
even though she had been dead a long time. But we, the descendants of the 
slaves, knew quite well what had really happened. (76) 




A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean Character 



11 



It is this knowledge of what really happened that makes it difficult for Annie 
John to feel at ease in the world she finds herself loving more and more. In a 
scene uncannily reminiscent of that in Naipaul’s The Mimic Men where Singh 
empathizes with Hok’s yearning for “that private hemisphere of fantasy where 
lay his true life,” Annie John tells that her frequent daydreams are of scenes in 
Belgium, a place she had picked because Charlotte Bronte, the author of her 
favorite novel, Jane Eyre , had spent a year there. More and more, she longs to 
be where “at last” she could understand the books she read (92). 

Confused by these contradictory feelings, Annie John — like Tee, who ad- 
mits that “at times she resented Tantie bitterly” — begins to resent her mother 
and the world she represents, with its “everlasting blue sky” and “everlasting 
hot sun.” She, too, wants to run away. She says, “The things I never wanted to 
see or hear or do again now made up at least three weeks' worth of grocery lists. 
I placed a mark against obeah women, jewelry, and white underclothes” (135). 

This, of course, is the peculiar dilemma of the Caribbean person: How to 
live comfortably in the castle of the skin, when within the walls of that castle 
are opposing forces which nevertheless claim equal rights to ownership of the 
castle. The shock of the awareness of this paradox propels both Kincaid’s Annie 
John and Hodge’s Tee into desperate flight to escape the horror of their accep- 
tance of the “enemy” and the shame of their rejection of the “victim.” How 
much more interesting it would have been for the reader had Kincaid and Hodge 
dared to develop their characters beyond this point, to present us with charac- 
ters that every Caribbean person knows exist: those who live comfortably with 
irreconcilable opposites, those like Walcott, who says of himself, “I’m just a 
red nigger who love the sea,/ ... I have Dutch, nigger, and English in me,/ and 
either I’m nobody, or I’m a nation” (“The Schooner Flight” 346). 

Yet Walcott’s work, in spite of his bold assertion, does not always reflect his 
ease with these “shards,” as he calls them, these fragments from “disparate 
cultures” and “partially remembered customs,” held together by a glue that makes 
the person whole and distinctly Caribbean. I attended a reading Walcott gave of 
Omeros at Queens College on November 23, 1993. At the question-and-answer 
period, a student with all the fresh innocence of his youthfulness, asked, “Mr. 
Walcott, was Omeros your attempt to make an analogy between the characters 
of Homer’s Odyssey and the people of St. Lucia?” 

Walcott seemed ready for the question. He cleared his throat and asserted 
that it would be foolish of him to write some sort of Black Odyssey. He said that 
some people were under the erroneous impression that that was what he was 
trying to do, as if a fisherman or fisherwoman in St. Lucia could not be heroic in 
his or her own right. He then mused on his own childhood and the admira- 
tion he had for the courage of the fishermen who risked their lives every day on 
a fickle sea. These are the true heroes, he said. If one were called Achilles, 



O 

ERIC 



8 8 



78 



Elizabeth Nunez 



another Hector, another Helen, it was certainly not because they were aware of 
a literary and cultural connection to Homer's characters. In fact, he said, it is 
arrogance on the part of Plunkett, the Englishman living on the island where 
Omeros is set, to think that he could only admire the Caribbean Helen by com- 
paring her to the Homeric Helen. Walcott quoted from Omeros : 

Helen needed a history 
that was the pity Plunkett felt towards 
her. 

Not his, but her story. Not theirs, 
but Helen’s war. 

The name, with its historic hallucination, 
brightened the beach (31) 

After reading these lines, Walcott murmured into his microphone something to 
the effect that, of course, one must question not only Plunkett but the author of 
Omeros who chose to write his poem from this frame of reference. 

It is indeed that very specter of doubt Walcott raised by the comment mumbled 
under his breath that has been the source of criticism of his work by some 
Caribbean writers and critics. For despite Walcott’s passionate condemnation 
of those who dismiss every West Indian endeavor as imitative (which many 
read as a veiled rebuke of Naipaul), there are as many who suspect Walcott of 
not being sufficiently Afrocentric, of placing more worth on the contributions 
of his European ancestors than on those of his African forefathers. 

Be that as it may, this debate will surely go on. There will always be people 
who will demand that the Caribbean person not be at ease with contradiction; 
who, like Rochester in Jean Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea , will require that the 
Caribbean person choose; who will not be able to understand that an Antoinette 
can feel a sense of belonging both to the African world of obeah and to the 
world of her English slave-owning ancestors. So, like Rochester, they will re- 
name Antoinette, try to remake her, take her back to the home of her English 
forefathers. Then, like Rochester, they may call her insane when she chooses to 
plunge toward the freedom she finds in the moment of suspension between the 
fiery English mansion and the illusion of Tia’s beckoning hands. If only Roch- 
ester could have accepted what he saw so clearly: “Creole of pure English de- 
scent she may be, but they are not English or European either” (67). 

The challenge for the Caribbean writer is to portray this paradox, to insulate 
herself from the politics of the moment so that she can recreate the true image 
of the Caribbean person — fragments of original sources with histories of vio- 
lence and antipathy towards each other, but fragments which nevertheless now 
coexist to form a whole identity that, to quote Walcott, is “not decayed but 
strong” (Antilles 1 1). The challenge is to render the contradictions in the Carib- 




89 



A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean Character 



19 



bean character in the way Gabriel Garcia Marquez has done for us with Carib- 
bean settings so that we see how something new and unique has been created 
out of parts of different cultural histories. 

Early in his novel Love in the Time of Cholera, Garcia Marquez describes 
the home of Dr. Juvenal Urbino. He tells us that though the reception rooms 
were furnished with European pieces from the late nineteenth century, “that 
European coherence vanished in the rest of the house, where wicker armchairs 
were jumbled together with Viennese rockers and leather footstools made by 
local craftsmen. Splendid hammocks from San Jacinto, with multicolored fringes 
along the sides and the owner’s name embroidered in Gothic letters with silk 
thread, hung in the bedrooms along with the beds” (19). In the dining room 
there are Turkish rugs on the tiles, a Manila shawl on the piano. And, as if this 
eclectic mix were not enough, Garcia Marquez tells us that Fermina Daza, the 
wife of Juvenal Urbino, “was an irrational idolator of tropical flowers and do- 
mestic animals” (21), so that all sorts of tropical flowers and trees and animals 
could be found in their garden and in their house: curlews and swamp herons 
eating anthuriums in flowerpots, an Amazonian monkey chained to a mango 
tree, an anaconda with free rein in the house to frighten the bats, salamanders, 
and the countless species of harmful insects that could be found everywhere 
during the rainy season. It is against this setting where symmetry is achieved 
out of apparent chaos that Garcia Marquez wants us to judge his characters. 
Like the home of Dr. Urbino, like his colonial city which he refers to as “an 
illusion of memory,” these Caribbean people are not European, Asian, African, 
or Amerindian, but contain parts of them all and are shaped by their many per- 
spectives. 

“Caribbean genius,” Walcott tells us, “is condemned to contradict itself’ 
{Antilles 21), and the critic of Caribbean literature must be open to this para- 
dox. She must be able to appreciate what Caribbean sociologist Anthony Maingot 
calls upon his non-Caribbean colleagues to understand: One cannot predict in 
the Caribbean how things will turn out by simply basing one’s conclusion on 
empirical evidence of origins. (Discussion at a Caribbean Studies conference at 
the University of Florida at Gainesville, 22 October 1 994). The critic must bring 
a way of seeing to the interpretation of Caribbean literature that will allow her 
to find coherence in seeming inconsistencies in the thinking and behavior of 
Caribbean characters. She must be willing to divest herself of traditional crite- 
ria that might make it impossible for her to understand that the Caribbeans can 
celebrate the old plantation system while condemning it; they can rejoice in the 
rich heritage of their African or Asian past while extolling the beauty of their 
European cultural connections; they can dance through the streets at Carnival 
to the rhythms of the steelpan, an instrument forged out of the slave experience, 
while costumed as characters from Milton’s Paradise Lost. 




99 



80 



Elizabeth Nunez 



Works Cited 

Garcia Marquez, Gabriel. Love in the Time of Cholera. New York: Knopf, 1988. 

Harris, Wilson. Tradition, the Writer and Society. London: New Beacon, 1967. 

Hodge, Merle. Crick Crack Monkey. 1970. London: Heinemann, 1987. 

Kincaid, Jamaica. Annie John. New York: Farrar, 1983. 

Lamming, George. The Emigrants. 1954. New York: McGraw Hill, 1955. 

. In the Castle of My Skin. New York: Collier, 1953. 

. Natives of My Person. 1972. London: Picador, 1974. 

Naipaul, V. S. The Mimic Men. 1967. Middlesex: Penguin, 1967. 

. The Overcrowded Barracoon. New York: Knopf, 1972. 

Rhys, Jean. Wide Sargasso Sea. 1966. New York: Norton, 1982. 

Walcott, Derek. The Antilles: Fragments of Epic Memory. New York: Farrar, 1993. 
. Omeros. New York: Farrar, 1990. 

. “The Schooner Flight.” Collected Poems , 1948-1984. New York: Noonday, 

1986. 



5 Teaching and Learning across 
Cultures: The Literature Classroom 
as a Site for Cultural Transactions 



Joyce C. Harte ' 

Borough of Manhattan Community College, CUNY 



Tradition has never favored the woman. (Jason) 

Society dictates how women should live, what they should do and should 
not do. Fortunately, there are always women who rebel against these op- 
pressive demands, and look for their own self-realization even if it means 
risking their own lives. (Nora) 

Where there is oppression, there is resistance. (Linda) 

Any human being should . . . have choices and not be locked into roles. 
(Jon) 

Thank you for self-growth through literature. (Anne) 



I strongly believe that one of the major functions of literature is to expand 
the reader’s experience. This belief comes as a result of the ways in which 
literature has touched my life. I share the beliefs of Maxine Greene and Louise 
Rosenblatt in the power of literature to help readers transcend their own exist- 
ence by opening themselves to the lived realities of people outside their own 
immediate culture. But, as Jane Tompkins reminds us, literature is also a ve- 
hicle of cultural definition. It should offer readers an opportunity to learn about 
and affirm themselves. 

When I was a young girl growing up in British Guiana, now Guyana, books 
allowed me to imaginatively cross the boundaries of time and place. The child- 
hood image most vivid to me is of a twelve-year-old girl lying flat on her stom- 
ach on the floor reading a book. This was my favorite place and position. It was 
where I would transport myself into other worlds, other possibilities. It was 
from this position that I would gradually become aware of my mother’s voice 
calling me to run some errand or do some chore I had promised to do long hours 
before. Only after a threat would I get up from my book. 

I was an avid reader and I often finished at least two books per day. I would 
then walk about five miles to the colonial public library, return them, borrow 
more, and hurry home in the dimming sunlight to read again, and again lose 
myself in a world of language. But what were those worlds to which I was 





81 



82 



Joyce C. Harte 



transported in my reading? What were the books I read, and whose language 
was I absorbing? Although I was unaware of it at the time, the language, be- 
liefs, and customs of my life-world lay far outside the boundaries of that culture 
represented by the books I read at school and at home. A critical part of my 
relationship to literature meant identifying with the culture and ideologies of a 
foreign white world. In other words, I, in the castle of my black skin, learned to 
read and write the world as an English person with a white Western yardstick. 

In our classroom, with the tropical sun blazing down upon its roof, we were 
offered English culture through English literature and history. Our literary diet 
consisted of Shakespeare, Milton, Austen, and Keats. I recited and sang “with 
expression” my aesthetic delight in Wordsworth’s daffodils and Shakespeare’s 
“Song to Silvia.” I memorized the lineage of English royalty. I learned about 
the Battle of Hastings and William the Conqueror. I analyzed, parsed, and wrote 
precis of poetry and prose passages. I remember my headmaster giving us “who 
steals my purse, steals trash /’Tis something, nothing/ . . . and has been slave to 
thousands.” Long after I forgot that these lines were from Othello , I remem- 
bered that he was understood as the subject of the verb steals. And finally, I 
along with all the children in my classroom, descendants of slaves, sang confi- 
dently of our belief that as Britons, we “never, never shall be slaves.” 

In none of these cross-cultural encounters with literature was there any ac- 
knowledgment of the people who inhabited my landscape, my reality. It was as 
if we did not exist. 

Part of what underlies my teaching has to do with my own experience as a 
reader/leamer in a colonial context. The function of English education in colo- 
nial classrooms was to create a community of “common readers” (Hirsch) of 
one set of literature, one set of knowledge. The literary standard was fixed and 
held true for all readers. Differences were denied. Absent from my school expe- 
rience was any admission of the dimensions of race, gender, sex, or class. Learn- 
ing was a one-way transmission of knowledge from an English literary text 
which was projected, in the words of Ania Loomba, as “an amalgam of univer- 
sal value, morality, truth, rationality” (1) and which we, as passive reader/leam- 
ers, accepted and internalized unquestioned. 

We acquired the language and culture of the British academy at the expense 
of our own cultures, our own selves. 

My first consideration as a teacher who has been shaped by a colonial his- 
tory is to recognize that which has previously been marginalized or excluded. I 
offer my students texts that not only reflect their lives, their landscapes, their 
realities, but that also reflect the wider culture of the world in which we live. 
My second consideration has to do with how those texts are taught. I want 
students to be active participants who engage with and reflect on texts and who 
question and criticize using their own backgrounds and experience in the pro- 
duction of knowledge. Thus, I have tried to create what Frances Maher calls “an 




33 



Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



83 



interactive pedagogy, a pedagogy which integrates student contributions into 
the subject matter” (9). 

I teach in an urban community college composed of mainly working-class 
students of African American, Latino, and Caribbean cultures. They are over- 
whelmingly female. Many of them have gained access to college through open 
admissions at the City University of New York. They see education as a vehicle 
to change their lives, which are often lived on the borders of society. Their 
responses, the meanings they construct, the ways they approach literature, and 
their ways of knowing are often based on their life experiences and their mem- 
bership in particular communities. 

Maxine Greene has written: 

In the culture of the United States, because of its brutal and persistent rac- 
ism, it has been painfully difficult for Afro-American young people to af- 
firm and be proud of what they choose as personal history. Poverty, 
hopelessness, the disruption of families and communities, the ubiquity of 
media images — all of these make it difficult for Black youth to place new 
conceptions against a past too often made to appear a past of victimization, 
shadows, and shame. (256) 

It is perhaps because of this victimization, shadows, and shame that my stu- 
dents are often reluctant to read novels that only depict painful cultural experi- 
ences. They also want to read texts that affirm and empower them as men and 
women, that allow them to negotiate their own histories and to articulate their 
own realities and their own ways of being in the world, that allow them to grow, 
as Phoeby puts it in Their Eyes Were Watching God, “ten feet higher.” In Adrienne 
Rich’s words, my students want to read “with belief that what they read has 
validity for them” (65). 

In the spring and summer of 1994, I taught an English elective course en- 
titled “Women in Literature.” My theme was a cross-cultural perspective on 
women’s quest for personal freedom and self-definition. The novels I used were 
Kate Chopin’s The Awakening, Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watch- 
ing God, Zee Edgell’s Beka Lamb and Mariama Ba’s So Long a Letter. The 
novels depict in a global way the cultural forces that seek to oppress women 
and the women’s struggle not only to define a self, but also for the right to live 
their lives to the fullest potential. My aim was to give visibility and voice in the 
literature classroom to women authors and writers of color. My use of these 
texts draws on a paradigm suggested by the work of Henry Louis Gates Jr. 
(1991), who asserts that “the challenge facing America in the next century will 
be the shaping, at long last, of a truly common public culture, one responsive to 
the long-silenced cultures of color” (712). Gates suggests that we rethink edu- 
cation so that our teaching becomes an invitation to our students to enter into 
“conversation in which we learn to recognize the voices, each conditioned by a 
different perception of the world” (723). These novels provided the opportunity 




Pi 



84 



Joyce C. Harte 



for my students, men and women of mixed ethnic and cultural backgrounds, to 
enter into conversation with these texts as they examined the thought, feeling, 
opinion, and lived experience of these literary women who refused “to keep 
their tongue between their teeth” (Beka Lamb 35). 

The course derived its theoretical and pedagogical framework from a com- 
bination of reader-response, cultural, and feminist pedagogies. In The Feminist 
Classroom , feminist educators Frances Maher and Kay Thompson Tetreault 
define feminist and liberatory pedagogies as those which “aim to encourage the 
students, particularly women, working-class students, and members of 
underrepresented ethnic groups, to gain an education that would be relevant to 
their concerns, to create their own meanings, and to find their own voices in 
relation to the material” (9-10). As well, Louise Rosenblatt opens The Reader, 
the Text , the Poem(\91%) with the statement: “The premise of this book is that 
a text, once it leaves its author’s hands, is simply paper and ink until a reader 
evokes from it a literary work — sometimes, even, a literary work of art” (i). The 
experience of reading is an interactive, dialectical process whereby readers trans- 
act with texts using their own lives and experiences as men and women in soci- 
ety to help them construct meaning and knowledge from the experiences of the 
texts. However, as Patrocinio Schweikart indicates, reader-response criticism 
has tended to be utopian and has overlooked “the issues of race, class, and sex, 
and [has given] no hint of the conflicts, sufferings, and passions that attend 
these realities” (35). This leads Schweikart to assert that “reader-response criti- 
cism needs feminist criticism” (36). 

I asked students to keep journals of their reading. Their responses served as 
springboards for class discussions. I began the course by having students read a 
few selected traditional and feminist versions of fairy tales which I supplied as 
a way of exploring traditional and changing perceptions of women and their 
roles in society. After the fairy tales and before starting discussion of the nov- 
els, the students and I also read the title essay from Alice Walker’s In Search of 
Our Mothers ' Gardens and Virginia Woolf’s “If Shakespeare Had Had a Sister” 
from A Room of One ’s Own. These essays placed in historical perspective some 
of the issues and tensions affecting women’s lives and the constraints their par- 
ticular cultures imposed on them. Students wrote journal responses to lines or 
ideas they found significant. These responses were discussed in class and the 
issues raised formed a framework for discussion of not only the novels, but also 
for the two films we later saw: Madame Bovary and Thelma and Louise. 

In “Toward a Black Feminist Criticism,” Barbara Smith states that “the Black 
Feminist critic would find innumerable commonalities in works by Black women 
. . . and would assert the connections ... of all Black women” (164). However, 
while in teaching we generally examine the commonalities in the texts of women 
of the African diaspora, seldom do we explore and examine the commonalities 
of experience between black and white women in literature. As Alice Walker 





Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



85 



states, “black and white writers seem to be writing one immense story . . . with 
different parts . . . coming from a multitude of different perspectives.” She sug- 
gests that it is only when we open ourselves to these multiple realities that we 
understand “the whole story” While it is imperative that we first give students 
an intact sense of their own humanity, a sense of their own traditions, this does 
not mean a rejection of other cultures. We must be careful to avoid closing our 
students off from other diverse melodies and avoid perpetuating those”fixities” 
that Maxine Greene cautions us about (256). 

In this essay I would like to give voice to and celebrate my students, those 
“academic outsiders” who engaged with these texts. The snapshots I offer here 
of student responses, taken from their papers, demonstrate that while students 
inevitably focused on race, gender, class, and religion as social forces which 
have a negative impact on women’s lives and which serve to repress their voices, 
their journals and essays show concern with the broader concepts of freedom 
and the true worth of human life. As Nora, a Salvadoran woman, asks, “Is not 
freedom something we would all like to have?” They see this need for freedom 
as no easy fight because “the opinion of society is like a strong tidal wave 
knocking against the person who wishes to get through it without drowning” 
(Anne). 1 

It was mentioned continually in class discussion that the one who has power 
does not relinquish it easily. Students saw women’s struggles as reflective of 
the larger fight against injustices that society perpetuates. In Jean’s words, “So- 
ciety doesn’t like sudden change. It prefers to keep doing the same tired things 
and holding the same tired beliefs, even if they are wrong.” She also recognizes 
that it is these forces that sometimes give rise to a process of accommodation: 
“Unfortunately social forces make us accommodate to situations that many times 
we do against our will.” 

The first two novels my students read were Kate Chopin’s The Awakening 
and Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God. After journal writing 
and class discussion of our responses to the individual texts, I asked students to 
write an essay in which they compared Edna of Awakening and Janie of Eyes. I 
asked them to define the nature of each woman’s search for personal freedom 
and self-definition. They were to consider the protagonists’ worlds, and their 
particular circumstances — the time, place, way of life, and codes of conduct, 
etc., that govern their lives. 2 That is, they were to consider the relationship of 
individuals to their cultural contexts. 



“The Rebellious Conviction of Their Spirits” 

Many students expressed the view that “self-realization, self-definition and . . . 
personal freedom are processes that everyone aspires to.” They also asserted 
that for women the process is much more difficult because of the way “they 



86 



Joyce C. Harte 



have been socialized.” Students acknowledged that “gender roles, ethnicity, 
societal views, pressures and the time in which a person lives affect this pro- 
cess” (Jon). 

Students read, discussed, and wrote about The Awakening and Their Eyes 
Were Watching God as the stories of two women: Edna Pontellier, a white woman 
who, in the words of Linda, an Asian American young woman, “lived in a world 
in which man’s expectations and morals override woman’s personal inclina- 
tions and desires” and Janie Starks, a black woman who “is pushed into her first 
marriage by a grand historical scheme called slavery.” Nevertheless, these two 
women want to “discover themselves as women, as human beings through their 
own choices; not anyone else’s” (Nora). 

Students described many commonalities between Edna and Janie, such as 
their similar personal needs. Each woman seeks freedom, personal growth, and 
sexual passion. Alice asserts that both Janie and Edna “experience a general 
oppressiveness and lack of nurturance and understanding in their marriages” 
because “they both are with men that see them as figures and possessions.” 
Similarly, for both of them, Anne says, there is an “early lesson in the futility of 
dutiful marriage.” Marriage serves to deaden and stifle the voices of these women. 
Leonce Pontellier and Joe Starks treat their wives as if they cannot think, talk, 
or make decisions on their own: “Leonce reproached his wife with her inatten- 
tion, her habitual neglect of the children. ... If it was not a mother’s place to 
look after children, whose on earth was it?” (Chopin 5). As Nora asserts, “he 
does not think he is part of the commitment.” Jody Starks deemed Janie less 
than human: “Somebody got to think for women and chillun and chickens and 
cows” (Hurston 67). But, Janye says “Janie knew it wasn’t true. . . . She knew 
Jody only got his power as a ‘man’ because he didn’t dare come up against 
another man ” 

In addition, Edna and Janie have hidden talents — Edna for painting and Janie 
for shooting (hunting), and they both have trouble swimming. And, Alice says, 
“If the ocean offers the contemplation that brings answers to the questions of 
the soul then it is symbolic that the two protagonists find themselves confront- 
ing the water” 

As adolescents, both Edna and Janie were questioning, and both authors use 
images of nature to describe the dreams of Edna and Janie for personal and 
sexual liberation. Janie was a “questioning young girl wondering about love 
and seeing it symbolically in bees, flowers, and blooming pear trees,” Nora 
says. And Jon concurs: “Janie is an adolescent who is full of hopes, dreams, 
romantic notions and questions ” At sixteen, Janie was “seeking the beauty of 
blossoming sexuality”: 

She was stretched on her back beneath the pear tree soaking in the alto 

chant of the visiting bees, the gold of the sun and the panting breath of the 




97 



Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



87 



breeze. . . . She saw a dust-bearing bee sink into the sanctum of a bloom; 
the thousand sister-calyxes arch to meet the love embrace and the ecstatic 
shiver of the tree from root to tiniest branch creaming in every blossom 
and frothing with delight. (Hurston 1 1) 

Janie seeks this vision of fulfillment. 

Similarly, in The Awakening when Edna talks about her childhood, she ex- 
presses her desire for freedom when she ran away from the oppression of a 
church service: 

I was just walking diagonally across a big field. My sun-bonnet obstructed 
the view. I could only see the stretch of green before me, and I felt as if I 
must walk on forever, without coming to the end of it. I don’t remember 
whether I was frightened or pleased. (16) 

Edna kept this adolescent view of open possibilities buried deep within her. In 
the words of Debbie, she “chiseled into the conventional cores of her stiffling 
[sic] society” in search of that dream, and failing, “enhanced the flavor of her 
life with the salted waters of the sea.” 

Students also commented on the women’s “unusual circumstances” concern- 
ing fertility and motherhood. Alice remarks that “Janie has three marriages and 
no children, all the while being symbolized with blooming and fertile pear trees. 
Edna ends up killing herself because she cannot have the complete personal 
freedom that she wants because of her children.” Florence agrees with this view, 
saying that “Edna viewed the . . . kids in her life as a burden and an infringe- 
ment on her freedom.” 

Yet while Edna and Janie both ask “Who am I?” and while both are “striking 
in their similarities,” due to the circumstances and prevailing conditions, they 
are “just as dramatic in their differences” (Alice). These differences are evident 
in the social tones pervading the novels. Two aspects of these differences that 
student responses focused on were class and racial identity. 

Edna and Janie’s socio-economic backgrounds are different even though stu- 
dents acknowledged that both “move either down or up in social and/or eco- 
nomic class” (Alice). According to Florence, a Senegalese student, Edna, an 
“upper crust lady, and the daughter of a father who owned a Mississippi planta- 
tion, had many opportunities. . . . She was opportuned [sic] with the basic ne- 
cessities ... for a white southern middle class woman Edna’s position in the 
society is one of privilege. As a white Anglo-Saxon woman, she never ques- 
tions her privilege and status in the society. Her search for self is not compli- 
cated by the color of her skin. Anne’s response illustrates this view: 

Edna indulges in her lifestyle as a birthright, and although she moves to the 
tiny apartment, she rejects social mores through adultery, not through giv- 
ing up a lot of financial security. 




Q ft 

O J 



88 



Joyce C. Harte 



Meanwhile, students saw Janie’s struggle “to come into her own” as compli- 
cated by the fact that she is black. She must struggle against the historic and 
social realities of her world and against her grandmother’s stifling view that 
“De nigger woman is de mule uh de world so fur as Ah can see” (14). Janye 
says: “Nanny wanted Janie to see there is no such thing as love for the black 
woman and that she better be smart and marry a ‘rich’ man.” Florence agrees: 
“As an African American in the depths of Florida, Janie is bom into poverty as 
a granddaughter of a black ex-slave.” Her life “is one of pain and struggle.” 
Alice, an African American young woman, observes, “Growing up black in a 
white household being called everything but her name (which is even a slave 
name by circumstance) . . . Janie has to fight against being ‘de mule of de 
world.”’ Janie lacks status and economic security. At Nanny’s insistence, she 
marries Logan Killicks and moves into the economic security of “sixty acres 
and a house” (20). 

Janie does move up in socio-economic status, but in her search for growth 
and self-actualization, she is willing to give up economic status. With Tea Cake, 
Nora says, Janie “is able to learn a little of everything about life, such as pov- 
erty, love, and survival.” They do so within a “rich environment where they 
share different experiences with different kinds of people.” Anne shares this 
view. She says that “Janie ... is much more soulful to me, much more of a 
mentor spirit. . . . She shuns the materialistic view her grandmother placed on 
her Janie walks her road . . . corougeously [sic].” 

It was in how each woman sought to define self and personal freedom that 
students saw the greatest difference between these heroines. Students were also 
divided in their allegiances; some admired Janie, some admired Edna. Some 
students saw Janie’s quest as the more traditional, since she finds the personal 
freedom that comes with self-realization and empowerment through love and 
community: 

At the end of the novel Janie is experienced and wise, she finds out “about 
living fuh herself.” She is contemplative and comfortable with herself. She 
had loved. And that was what she wanted. (Alice) 

Janie was an inspirational character because she reached her goal without 
being dragged through the gutter as a black prostitute or as a mammy clean- 
ing some white person’s house. (Sanya) 

Janie is 

conditioned by a desire to break poverty and subjugation and yet in spite of 
this she sustains a romantic vision of life. (Linda) 

Two responses crystalize the positions of the students. Anne says that Edna 
“has her experiences, her awakening, and decides that the only way to honor its 
insistence is through a drowning freedom.” But Anne sees the main difference 
between these “rebels” as being one man, Tea Cake: 



■ 99 



Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



89 



Vergible Woods saved Janie and Edna had to save herself. Did Edna ever 
find a man to stroke her hair, look at her other than fas] a lace doll-woman? 

The answer is no. Edna had herself and autonomy in the end. Yet her soci- 
ety wouldn’t condone, and “the children appeared before her like antago- 
nists” so she took the final gutsiest exit, sans love, without an ultimate 
sharing of that autonomy . . . Edna never finding her Teacake, dies stunted 
through her awareness, pained in her own truth . . . Janie has the strength to 
persevere because ... a man had looked at her at the same exact level and 

loved her anyway Janie had the memory of that bliss of shared equality 

to keep her strong, to imprint a constant and secret smile upon her face, 
and she receives the gift of sharing it with Phoeby. 

Jason, on the other hand, has a different perspective on the two women’s 
quests. Even though he acknowledges similarities, he feels that “they do not 
compare overall in the development of themselves and in the way they define 
selfhood.” He thinks (and several of the women also share his view) that Janie 
appears to be “hung up on her sexual wants and needs as a gross misrepresentation 
of love” Jason believes that “had Janie and Joe remained sexually active ... it 
would have taken a longer time for [Janie] to develop her emotions and her- 
self.” Jason argues that with Jody Starks’s death Janie grows somewhat self- 
reliant, but it is only when Tea Cake steps into Janie’s life that the process is 
consummated. He recognizes that “the friendship between them was essential 
in their development as lovers.” With Tea Cake, Janie literally and figuratively 
lets her hair down. He allows her to express, feel, and think for herself. He 
encourages her to be her own person. She finds her “pear blossom” love with 
Tea Cake. 

But Jason admires and “respects” Edna Pontellier because as a “Virginia 
Woolf type, she needed space and time to develop and define herself” He sees 
Edna as “a victim of a common syndrome in which a person runs blindly from 
one bad situation into . . . another . . . [that] is not necessarily bad, but ... is not 
suited for who she is . . . and who she will become.” He quotes from the novel to 
support his point of view. 

Edna’s children are important to her, but not as important as her self. When 
the motions of marriage cease to exist, she, like Janie, finds her voice and as- 
serts herself. From this point on, Edna knows that her obligation is to herself 
“first and foremost ” prompting her husband Leonce to say, “She’s got some 
sort of notion in her head concerning the eternal rights for women” (Chopin 
65). Jason says that it was with these words that 

I realized how I respect Edna so much more than Janie. Janie was prepared 
to be a wife and succumb to the standards set for a woman as long as she 
had love. Even if her preconceived notion of love (which led her to marry 
Joe Starks) didn’t exist, she still played the woman’s role while she was 
with Tea Cake. Granted she was a stronger person and more thoughtful, 
but she was still the wife and homemaker standing by her man’s side. 



o 

uc 



00 



90 



Joyce C. Harte 



Edna, on the other hand, he argues, 

was not willing to give in. She needed to spread her wings and soar . . . 
being a housewife didn’t fit in. Edna needed to define herself for herself, 
not for Leonce, her father, sister or Robert. There comes a point when a 
person has to stop what there [sic] doing and look at what it is they’re 
doing and ask themselves if they’re doing it for themselves. . . . Edna de- 
fined Edna and would be someone that I would like to know. 

But Anne embraces both of these “rebels” whom she considers as the “lead- 
ers yesterday, today, and tomorrow.” She chooses two quotes from the text that 
she feels exemplify the “grit” and the “rebellious conviction of their spirits ” 
Edna speaks to Mademoiselle Reisz: 

“Painting!” laughed Edna. “I am becoming an artist. Think of it! . . . Show 
me the letter and play me the Impromptu. You see that I have persistence. 

Does that quality count for anything in art?” (68) 

And Janie finds the voice to speak up and out to Joe Starks: 

“Naw, Ah ain’t no young gal no mo’ but den Ah ain’t no old woman nei- 
ther. Ah reckon Ah looks mah age too. But Ah’m uh woman every inch of 
me, and Ah know it.” (74) 

The next two books we read were Mariama Ba’s So Long a Letter (Senegal) 
and Zee Edgelfs Beka Lamb (Belize). These two novels portray females (one 
older and one younger) who struggle to find a voice and redefine a self against 
traditional customs and norms such as religion and oppressive colonial values. 
As the assignment for these two novels, I asked students to focus on one of the 
characters that they found interesting or relevant. I asked them to describe the 
ways in which the modem or the traditional worlds affected the character’s 
behavior, paying attention to the differing expectations about marriage, family, 
and the roles of men and women. 

Ba’s short epistolary novel depicts Ramatoulaye, a Muslim woman, mother, 
and schoolteacher of Senegalese descent who is mourning her husband’s death, 
which according to Islamic custom she must do for four months. According to 
Carmen, a Hispanic student, “this religious custom keeps women under a man’s 
foot. A woman can revolt against a man but how can a woman revolt against 
God?” Through her long letter to her best friend Aissatou, Ramatoulaye “rum- 
mages through her life as she tries to interpret her status as a wife, mother, and 
woman in a culture dominated by strong patriarchal Islamic values” (Carmen). 

In her letter, Ramatoulaye, who is described by one student as “beautiful, 
noble, courageous, wise, loving, intelligent, educated,” recounts how, after 
twenty-five years of marriage, her husband Modou leaves her and takes a co- 
wife who is the same age as their teenage daughter and how Ramatoulaye chooses 
to stay in the marriage. Student responses revealed that despite the man’s “subtle 




101 



Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



91 



intelligence . . . embracing sensitivity . . . readiness to help . . . and ambition 
which suffered no mediocrity” (Ba40), according to Alice he is always “able to 
hold the idea of another wife as an option allowed by Islamic religion.” It comes 
down to what is advantageous to the man and, “with his advancing age and 
Ramatoulaye’s too, Modou needs someone like the young Binetou whose beauty 
and youth was advantageous to his maturing image” (Alice). 

For this reason, students celebrated Ramatoulaye’s coming to voice at the 
moment she rejects the proposal of marriage from her brother-in-law, Tamsir, 
and breaks the silence her “voice has known for thirty years” (Ba 58). Jason 
says: “When Ramatoulaye speaks up and out at Tamsir, it reminded me of Janie 
finally giving it to Joe Starks. The only thing I could think of, as it excited me, 
was ‘YOU GO GIRL.’” 

But not everyone applauded Ramatoulaye’s decision to remain Modou’s wife. 
They viewed her act as one of conformity. Nora says: 

With Ramatoulaye I was disappointed and in some moments annoyed. Al- 
though she refuses two marriage propositions after her husband abandons 
her, she gives too much credit to Modou. . . . From my point of view a man 
like him does not deserve to be mentioned by his wife. This is something 
so common in our daily lives. Many women do not separate from their 
husbands even if their relation is in chaos, because they believe that this is - 
a cross that God has given them. 

Aissatou, on the other hand, whose husband Mawdo also takes a young co- 
wife, chooses not to stay. She divorces her husband and leaves with her chil- 
dren. Several students liked her uncompromising stance and decision to break 
away from the traditional ways of doing things. Nora commented: 

Aissatou shows through her strong decision that she deserves respect. She 
does not allow herself to have pity for a man who had no respect for their 
union, commitment, and love. 1 admire her integrity, intelligence, and her 
pride for detaching herself from a sick environment and succeeding on her 
own. 

Florence, a Senegalese student, agrees. She identifies with Aissatou because 
she herself is a child of a polygamous marriage. Florence says: 

Personally, as a product of a culture and society where polygamy was prac- 
ticed, I greatly admired the strength, courage and personality of an African 
woman to resist the norms, customs and traditions of the village. ... Po- 
lygamy should not be encouraged because it helps to destroy families, cre- 
ates rifts between loved ones, breaks up relationships, dehumanizes women, 
enslaves and above all, treats women as objects of bed instead of human 
beings. 

While Ramatoulaye faces her crisis in mid-life, Beka Lamb depicts a young 
Belizean girl whose struggles to define a sense of self parallel her country’s 




92 



Joyce C. Harte 



struggle to break the yoke of oppressive colonial ideals. The colonialists’ effort 
to create a “better society” through imposition of their religious and cultural 
values lead to a clash of ideas and cultural beliefs. Fourteen-year-old Beka 
struggles to find her own identity between the traditional creole culture repre- 
sented by her Granny Ivy and the new imperialist culture represented by the 
Catholic Academy. Student responses focused on how the colonial world of- 
fered education which “served to expand the opportunities available to Belizeans, 
but it took away more than it offered in the way of oppressive values and op- 
pressive religion which affected ...the whole country negatively.” At one point, 
Beka says to Sister Gabriela, one of her teachers: “Sometimes I feel bruk down 
just like my own country, Sister. I start all right but then I can’t seem to con- 
tinue” (115). Students discussed some of the reasons for this feeling of “bruk 
down,” which they recognized as stemming from the race and class discrimina- 
tion inherited from colonialism and illustrated in the following exchange: 

“You think Milio will marry you when you graduate, Toycie?” 

“He said so,” Toycie replied. 

“Panias [Hispanics] scarcely ever marry creoles like we, Toycie.” (46) 

Student responses and discussion also focused on gender issues and the way 
traditional religion is again used to socialize girls into rigid conformity. Sister 
Virgil, the European principal of the Academy, is there to instill the colonial 
values and standards of morality for the girls: “As young ladies you must walk 
always with an invisible veil about you so as not to unleash chaos upon the 
world” (Edgell 91). 

One student, Angela, described Sister Virgil as “the stonewall of traditional 
belief.” Such a belief said that girls must be virginal in order to avoid hellfire — 
a result of Eve’s sin. This colonial world of high moral values offers to ex- 
change the image of Eve, a sinner, for the Virgin Mary, an acceptable role model. 
Thus, when Beka’s friend Toycie becomes pregnant, she not only feels “ashamed 
and dirty” (90), she is also expelled from school. Toycie suffers a nervous break- 
down and attempts suicide. Emilio, the boy responsible for the pregnancy, is 
not expelled from school. As Nora explains, “Beka sees her friend Toycie be- 
trayed by the man who made her pregnant and by the traditional society rules 
that blame a woman instead of giving her support.” 

The novel shows that among the Belizeans pregnancy outside of marriage is 
common. This, however, is not seen as a social stigma in the eyes of the people. 
As Granny Ivy says, “It’s sad if you lost your virginity unmarried and to the 
wrong man, but if you lose it, you lose it. There’s no need to degrade yourself’ 
(Edgell 135). 

But for Sister Virgil, Angela argues, “Religion has instilled a dark cold real- 
ity .. . which doesn’t seem realistic, since ... it may be understood that the 
sheltered life a nun leads, gives way to a sheltered interpretation of life.” In this 




103 



Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



93 



interpretation women are the ones who must learn to control their emotions. 
Angela goes on: 

A nun is the traditional and most ancient of submissive roles a woman can 
opt for. . . . Her sheltered, parish-maintained world did not expose her to 
the ever changing situations of the world. For example, financial strife, the 
obligation to family (with or without offspring), the effects of being a woman 
in a small town without any strings to pull. Sister Virgil has never experi- 
enced the painful struggle everyday women experience. By taking [the] 
habit, I believe she gave that all up before she really knew what being a 
woman was about. Therefore on the subject, Sister Virgil loses creditabil- 
ity [sic]. 

It seems that Sister Virgil’s conscience is composed [of] everything but her 
own. Throughout the novel, Sister Virgil never expressed an idea that was 
conceived from personal experience or belief. Her submission to the catholic 
blinders made her fail to see the modern problems . . . which . . . not only 
concern the modesty of a young girl. It concerns the education of young 
people as a whole, to be more aware, not modest and naive. This modem 
day happening is the true cause of the vulnerability that women experi- 
ence. 

Sister Virgil’s submission to a male based ideology (Catholicism) shad- 
owed any effort she might have had [sic] to understand the women of Belize. 

Her traditional way of thinking is really just a male interpretation of the 
proper conduct of women. Structure, discipline, shame, obedience, are the 
male influenced teachings Sister Virgil holds dear. Teachings that contra- 
dict the struggle and progress of modern day communities and especially 
modem women. 

In the final assignment for the course, entitled “Perspectives and Insights,” I 
wanted students to take a new critical stance towards the events in the novels. I 
wanted them to synthesize the experiences reflected in the novels and write an 
essay in which they made some general point about the ability of society to 
impose behavior and the power women have to shape the conditions of their 
lives. I asked them to draw on the essays of Alice Walker and Virginia Woolf to 
enhance their perspectives. 

While student responses focused on varied social forces controlling women’s 
lives across cultures, I will quote selected snapshots from Anne’s paper that I 
think demonstrate the personal and liberatory value of these novels for stu- 
dents: 



There are three closely-knit themes that tie these readings together, cour- 
age, wisdom and the satellite [sic] for truth . . . they go beyond the suffer- 
ing that was birthright for each character, the pains, the struggles. These 
stories have purpose.. .they teach the woman reader that it won’t be easy, 
but perseverance is the only catalyst for change, and change must happen 
for woman united to become whole. 




134 



94 



Joyce C. Harte 



They tell the reader of woman’s ultimate need for equality and personal 
power.. .they tell the woman reader to fight for herself yet makes it clear 
that it is up to her to do, and no one else can suffer for her or gain her 
dignities. 

Freedom is a collective movement. . . . Truth, through the wisdom of these 
amazing authors, is personal. Once fought for it may be shared, just like 
Janie and Phoeby, Ramatoulaye and Aissatou, Edna and Mademoiselle Reisz 
(then the ocean), Alice Walker and her mother, Shakespeare’s sister and us 
.... That is why these novels impacted with affirming knowledge project 
the reader, prod the reader, to find her (or his) own force; power and truth 
in her (his) time and place. These stories don’t hand it over. They force it 
into hungry hands. 

Conclusion 

I began this essay by drawing on my own experience as a colonial reader of 
English canonical texts. Because of the hallowed status of those “great books” 
from which our realities were erased and a pedagogy which demanded awe and 
reverence for the authority of these texts, we were constructed as passive stu- 
dents who imbibed literature unquestioningly. Education was indeed, in novel- 
ist Beryl Gilroy’s apt description, “suitable indoctrination” (195). 

As America continues to expand and become more global, we can no longer 
afford to allow education to be indoctrination. We have to be cognizant of Freire’s 
reminder that in order to demythologize and demystify what counts as tradition 
and knowledge, the learning experience must be “an invitation to make visible 
the languages, dreams, values and encounters that constitute the lives of those 
whose histories are often actively silenced” (65). 

As the excerpts show, my students engaged and critically responded from 
perspectives that were uniquely their own. They empathized, actively questioned, 
and identified the cultural and historical forces that silence and repress. As they 
read these women’s texts, my students reflected on and tried to clarify their own 
beliefs. They felt empowered to make changes in their own lives and in the 
world. One young woman came to my office to discuss the impact of these 
women’s texts on her personal life. She informed me that she had decided to 
leave her married lover. Another told me that she had been in an abusive mar- 
riage, but had never found the courage to leave. The courage of the women in 
our readings allowed her to find her own. The sole young male student in my 
class wrote a note thanking me for introducing him to these texts. 

I do not know if these young women followed through with their decisions, 
but I do know that when texts are not treated as static containers of “timeless” 
truths which students are to approach as awed communicants, and when they 
are given the freedom to test their assumptions and respond to texts in a 
variety of ways and from the diversity of their lives, then they become active, 




0 



Teaching and Learning across Cultures 



95 



conscious, and aware human beings striving for change. They can now meet, 
connect, and enter into conversation with Austen, Faulkner, Shakespeare — not 
with blindness but with critical awareness and expanded visions. They can now 
identify aspects of their own humanity. 

In order to transform our classrooms into interactive places, we can draw on 
a variety of socio-cultural theory and teaching practices. I use a reader- response 
combined with a feminist approach because it enables students to begin articu- 
lating and integrating their life experiences with texts. Feminist theory in par- 
ticular stresses the need for classrooms to be places of collaborative, cooperative, 
and interactive dialogue where students are enabled to use their personal loca- 
tions and intellectual experiences to transact with literature. 

Notes 

1 . All excerpts are from students’ writing, and I have preserved students’ exact forms. 
See epigraphs. 

2. My assignments are adapted from Schriner (in Berlin and Vivion). 

Works Cited 



Ba, Mariama. So Long a Letter. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1981. 

Berlin, James, and Michael J. Vivion, eds. Cultural Studies in the English Classroom. 
Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook, 1992. 

Chopin, Kate. The Awakening. New York: Avon, 1982. 

Edgell, Zee. Beka Lamb. Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1982. 

Freire, Paulo. Education for Critical Consciousness. New York: Continuum, 1969. 

Gates, Henry Louis Jr. “Goodbye Columbus? Notes on the Culture of Criticism.” Ameri- 
can Literary History 3 (1991): 7 1 1-12. 

Gilroy, Beryl. “I Write Because . . . ” Caribbean Women Writers: Essays from the First 
International Conference. Ed. Selwyn R. Cudjoe. Wellesley: Calaloux; Amherst: U 
of Massachusetts P, 1990. 195-201. 

Greene, Maxine. “The Passions of Pluralism: Multiculturalism and the Expanding Com- 
munity.” Journal of Negro Education 61 (1993), 250-261. 

Hirsch, E.D. Jr. Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know. Boston: 
Houghton, 1987. 

Hurston, Zora Neale. Their Eyes Were Watching God. New York: Harper and Row, 1990. 

Loomba, Ania. Gender, Race , Renaissance Drama. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1989. 

Maher, Frances, and Kay Thompson Tetreault. The Feminist Classroom. New York: Ba- 
sic, 1994. 

Rich, Adrienne. “On Teaching Language in Open Admissions: A Look at the Context.” 
The Uses of Literature. Harvard English Studies 4 (1973): 257-273. 




96 



Joyce C. Harte 



Rosenblatt, Louise. Literature as Exploration. 1937. Reprint New York: Barnes and Noble, 
1968. 

.The Reader, the Text , the Poem: The Transactional Theory of the Literary Work 

Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1978. 

Schriner, Delores. “One Person, Many Worlds: A Multi-Cultural Composition Curricu- 
lum.” In Berlin and Vivion. 95-1 1 1. 

Schweikart, Patrocinio. “Reading Ourselves: Toward a Feminist Theory of Reading.” 
Gender and Reading. Ed. Elizabeth A. Flynn and Patrocinio Schweikart. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins UP, 1986. 

Smith, Barbara. “Toward a Black Feminist Criticism.” All the Women Are White, All the 
Blacks Are Men, But Some of Us Are Brave. Eds. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell-Scott, 
and Barbara Smith. New York: Feminist Press, 1982. 

Tompkins, Jane. Sensational Designs. New York: Oxford UP, 1985. 

Walker, Alice. In Search of Our Mothers’ Gardens. Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
1983. 

Woolf, Virginia. “If Shakespeare Had Had a Sister.” A Room of One's Own. 1929. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1957. 43-259. 



o 

ERIC 

ijfflinaffamiaaa 



107 



6 Remembering as Resistance in the 
Literature of Women of Color 



Brenda M. Greene 
Medgar Evers College, CUNY 



Writers (especially American writers) . . . often disavow the notion of a 
“literary duty” of political consciousness . . . but I do have a duty, beyond 
telling a good story or drawing a convincing character. My duty is to give 
voice to continents, but also to redefine the nature of American and what 
makes an American. In the process, work like this by myself and others 
will open up the canon of American literature. 

— Bharati Mukherjee, “A Four-Hundred- Year-Old Woman” 



Woman, African American, mother, teacher/scholar, I live in multiple worlds, 
multiple spaces. I am an American but I do not see myself at the center of the 
American experience. I find myself reflecting on what it means to be an Ameri- 
can, for as an African American woman in higher education, I do not see my- 
self represented in America’s perception of itself. I experience that amorphous 
space which Latina scholars call “the borderlands” and that dilemma which Du 
Bois calls a “double consciousness.” Constructed by my race, I am constantly 
reminded that I cannot be at the center of America’ s reality, and as such I have 
felt a sense of duality and a sense of alienation from the world of my cultural 
roots, the world of mainstream America, and the world of academia. This dual- 
ity and alienation began to manifest themselves when I entered primary school, 
the real world of school. During those years, I moved back and forth between 
these multiple worlds and spaces, and I searched for others, who like me, lived 
on the borderlands. As I now reflect on those years, I realize that this searching 
was the result of my unconscious attempt to reconnect those fragmented parts 
of myself. 

I was able to articulate the double consciousness and marginalization I felt 
when I entered college and encountered other black students who had had simi- 
lar experiences. I recognized in these students the multiple spaces and worlds 
they occupied. Through their stories, I learned how they had explored the 
historical, spiritual and cultural dimensions of their roots to transform their 
realities into ones which placed them at the center rather than on the margins of 

97 




103 



98 



Brenda M. Greene 



society. As I read history, literature, philosophy, psychology, and sociology, I 
began to see myself represented, and I began to understand the complexity of 
my role as an African American woman in this society. I began to understand 
that I lived what bell hooks calls “a particular reality” ( Feminist Theory 2), a 
reality which enabled me to look both from the outside in and from the inside 
out. 

Like me, female writers of color live “particular realities.” In their roles as 
women of color, they live in multiple spaces, spaces which are not constricted 
by boundaries, spaces which overlap and shift, spaces which are defined and 
redefined by constructs of race, ethnicity, gender, and/or geographical loca- 
tions. Bharati Mukherjee’s quotation above expresses the challenges facing these 
writers. In these multiple spaces, they create fiction which provides America 
with multiple perspectives of itself. 

The characters created by female writers of color cross cultural boundaries 
and live complicated lives which symbolize the conflicts experienced by those 
who live on the borderlands. These characters live in worlds where they move 
from the center to the margin and back again, worlds where the boundaries of 
gender, race, ethnicity, and geographical space shift as characters embark on 
personal journeys and face issues such as the lingering legacies of colonialism 
and slavery, the pervasiveness of racism and sexism, and the survival of their 
peoples in a world which exploits and oppresses them economically, socially, 
and politically. As these characters confront these issues, they find themselves 
drawing on their history and remembering their religious and cultural roots, 
and like the students I encountered when I first entered college, they come to 
realize that the reconstruction of their multiple selves and their survival as well 
as the survival of their peoples are tied to looking within and beyond to em- 
brace the historical, spiritual and cultural dimensions of their lives. 

bell hooks’s concepts of “critical fiction” and “marginality as site of resis- 
tance” offer a critical framework for reading the fiction of women of color. In 
her essay, “Narratives of Struggle,” hooks describes critical fiction as that fic- 
tion which seeks to deconstruct ‘conventional’ ways of seeing reality and to 
challenge dominant and hegemonic ways of reading by compelling audiences 
to read and respond in ways that will transform the way they think (57). It is a 
fiction which provides America with a lens to view itself critically, to see itself 
from the perspective of those who because of politics, racism, sexism, and eth- 
nocentrism have been labeled the “other.” The characters in critical fiction cre- 
ate “sites of resistance” and live “particular realities.” These sites of resistance, 
as stated in hooks’s essay “Marginality as Site of Resistance,” nourish one’s 
capacity to resist and provide one with the critical perspective to see, create, 
and imagine alternative worlds. Thus, a reading paradigm framed around the 
constructs of “critical fiction” and “sites of resistance” enables us to examine 
the extent to which complicated characters in the fiction of women of color 



Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



99 



challenge and transform their reality and provide readers with alternative per- 
spectives for viewing the world. 

The writers selected for discussion in this paper call themselves African 
American, Caribbean American, Native American, and Chinese American and 
have all written at least one work in the last twenty years which reveals a con- 
cern with “remembering.” Their narratives illustrate how women use the con- 
struct of remembering as a way to reconnect their fragmented selves and as a 
form of resistance. Each writer portrays female characters who cross geographi- 
cal, racial, and ethnic boundaries and who grow, persist, and survive by draw- 
ing on the history, traditions, and stories of their cultural backgrounds. However, 
these stories should not be viewed as the representative sample of a particular 
body of work from one ethnic group; rather they should be examined as repre- 
sentative of voices which have been marginalized from the American literary 
canon and which provide alternative renderings of the American literary expe- 
rience. These are voices which after years of invisibility, repression, and silenc- 
ing are demanding to be heard, voices which must now be included as we move 
towards a redefinition of American literature. Although each of these writers 
has written several texts, I have chosen for the purposes of this paper to discuss 
only one text of each author. The writers are Marita Golden and Octavia Butler, 
(African American), Michelle Cliff, Elizabeth Nunez, and Cristina Garcia (Car- 
ibbean writers), Linda Hogan (Native American), and Amy Tan (Chinese Ameri- 
can). 



Marita Golden’s Migrations of the Heart 

Writer Marita Golden begins her memoir Migrations of the Heart with the fol- 
lowing acknowledgments: 

To my father, who told me the stories that matter. 

To my mother, who taught me to remember them. 

These words establish for the reader the value of remembering for Marita, who 
is the narrator and protagonist. In her words, her father bequeathed to her “gold 
nuggets of fact, myth, legend” (3). He armed her with the conviction to remem- 
ber, “unfolded a richly colored tapestry,” and warned her “never to forget its 
worth” (3). When her father dies, Marita reflects on how his death stripped her 
“of a connection to the past, made it impossible to dare think of the future” (5 1 ). 
Her mother’s death, however, strengthens her spirit. She reflects on how her 
mother had left her with “no houses but had bequeathed instead the legacy of a 
restless, courageous spirit” (39). This courageous spirit enables Marita to en- 
dure the migrations of the heart. 

Marita’s migrations of the heart continue throughout her college years. The 
memories of her father and mother guide her, and as she reaches young adult- 




110 



100 



Brenda M. Greene 



hood at the height of the black cultural nationalist movement, she immerses 
herself in reading and studying the history and culture of African peoples. Upon 
her completion of college, she enters graduate school as a journalism major at 
Columbia University, and her need to connect with her past and culture contin- 
ues to manifest itself when she begins a relationship with a Nigerian student. 
Marita marries this student and migrates to Nigeria, a place that symbolizes for 
her a journey “home.” Ironically, in Nigeria she finds herself faced with the 
dilemma of being “the other.” An African American in a country where the 
majority are African, she feels connected because of her ancestral roots and 
race yet alienated because of her culture and gender. The conflicts that emerge 
as she attempts to adjust to life in Nigeria reveal the complexities that arise 
when one crosses boundaries of ethnicity, culture, and language. 

Although Golden’s text is autobiographical, it does not simply recount her 
past life. It follows a narrative structure which uses dialogue, tension, and con- 
flict to reveal the paradoxes faced by many African Americans who traveled to 
Africa in the 1960s and 1970s in search of their roots and home. A knowledge 
of the socio-cultural context of that period is helpful in understanding the issue 
with which Golden was dealing. African Americans had participated in the civil 
rights struggle and during the black cultural nationalist movement had asserted 
their rights and demanded to be heard. They renamed themselves personally, 
and as a collective group they took trips “home” to Africa in search of their 
roots. Golden was in the midst of this black cultural revolution, and her story 
exemplifies the stories of many who attempted to reconnect with their past. 

Marita, like many who took the trip “home,” realizes how American she is. 
Living in America as an African American woman, she has lived in multiple 
worlds. She embodies both the culture of African Americans and mainstream 
American culture. In moving to Nigeria, she attempts to adapt to another cul- 
ture — one where attitudes concerning family, relationships, and the role of 
women differ. However, because she cannot give up her American self, she 
feels marginalized in Nigeria. In America, her cultural framework is defined by 
the intersections of race, ethnicity, class, and gender in an American culture. In 
Nigeria, these elements come together and create a Nigerian cultural frame- 
work of which she cannot be a part. Marita’s husband, Femi, warns her: 

It’s not enough for you to love me. You can’t love me alone. You must love 

my mother, my father, my family. ... It will not be easy. . . . Americans do 

not know this love. In my family we owe everything to everyone else. . . . 

Can you accept that burden? . . . Honor me with that kind of love? (56-7) 

She comes to realize that she cannot do what Femi asks. Her experience in 
Nigeria enables her to connect with her past and to look at herself without the 
constraints defined by white America. In Nigeria although she is a black woman 
in a country where the majority are black, she refuses to allow herself to be 




Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



101 



defined by the role adapted by many Nigerian women, one which is subordi- 
nate to men. She realizes that she is in a cultural environment where male chil- 
dren, in particular, are valued and belong to the father. In short, she defines the 
role of the male/female relationship and the role of the child differently. 

Faced with not being able to adjust to different cultural values and norms, 
Marita returns to America where the particularity of her existence immediately 
confronts her. She finds herself in Boston, a place where racial tensions have 
flared and where the divisions by ethnic groups remind her of the tribal divi- 
sions within Nigeria. These racial tensions and conflicts exist in America and 
are a continual part of Marita’s reality. She has tried to escape from this reality, 
but she cannot. She must live with difference and face racism. 

Marita’s migrations bring her face to face with what it means to be a single, 
black, professional, woman/mother in white America. She examines her migra- 
tions to Africa and her return to America, and she confronts her fears of being 
alone and emotionally and spiritually disconnected from herself and from her 
past. In doing so, she realizes that she cannot fill the emotional and spiritual 
void in her life by escaping to another place or by living in the shadow of an- 
other person. Africa offers her a tie to her ancestral roots and America situates 
her in a complicated present. Her connection of the fragmented parts of her life 
occurs when she comes to terms with the fact that being an African American 
woman means that she has to live with paradoxes (as described by Nunez in her 
essay in this volume). She has had to search for her roots and come to the 
realization that as an American black woman, she lives in multiple spaces and 
endures a particular kind of reality. She cannot be defined by one culture. Re- 
membering the history, traditions, and stories passed on to her enables her to 
acknowledge all parts of herself. 



Octavia Butler’s Kindred 

bell hooks’s aphorism, “Remembering makes us subjects in history; it is dan- 
gerous to forget” (“Narratives” 54) provides an excellent premise for reading 
and interpreting Octavia Butler’s novel Kindred. This novel takes the form of a 
slave narrative; however, Butler moves beyond the traditional slave narrative by 
creating a character who lives in 1976 Los Angeles and who travels back in 
time over a span of years which range from 1815 to 1865. Dana, the central 
character, is called back in time when Rufus, her master and her ancestor who 
fathers a child who will become her great aunt, needs her. In her travels, Dana 
participates in the lives of her future ancestors and witnesses the inhumanity 
and brutality of slavery. 

Butler uses the slave narrative genre to illustrate why Dana must remember. 
In going back, Dana comes to understand herself and to resolve the dilemmas 





102 



Brenda M. Greene 



she feels in her personal life. By remembering and playing a role in the family 
of her ancestors, she ensures the survival of her ancestors and thereby her own 
survival. 

While in slavery, Dana is subjected to emotional and physical abuse. The 
first words in the prologue of the novel establish the extent of this abuse. “I lost 
an arm on my last trip home. My left arm. And I lost about a year of my life and 
much of the comfort and security I had not valued until it was gone” (9). Dana’s 
need to continue to return to Rufus is revealed when she asks herself: “Was that 
why I was here? Not only to insure the survival of one accident-prone small 
boy, but to insure my family’s survival, my own birth?” (29). Her survival is 
necessary and the final words in the epilogue epitomize why Dana must un- 
dergo this experience. When visiting the site of the plantation where her ances- 
tors lived, Dana questions her husband Kevin: “Why did I even want to come 
here. You’d think I would have had enough of the past.” Kevin replies: “You 
probably needed to come for the same reason I did ... To try to understand. To 
touch solid evidence that these people existed” (264). 

Butler complicates this slave narrative prototype in many ways. Unlike tra- 
ditional slave narratives where one primarily gets a first-hand account of the 
brutal and inhuman treatment of slaves by their masters, this one presents alter- 
native perspectives for why so many appeared to have withstood slavery. Dana 
comes to understand that silence was a weapon for survival. By observing what 
happens to the slaves on the plantation, she questions her assumptions about 
those slaves whom the militants of the 1960s would have labeled “passive” or 
“Uncle Toms.” 

Tess, the house slave who has been in the family for years, survives because 
she does not want to die. Dana notes that Tess “had done the safe thing — had 
accepted a life of slavery because she was afraid” (145). Tess avoids what hap- 
pens to Alice, Dana’s future aunt. After running away, Alice is brought back 
“bloody, filthy, and barely alive” (145). Alice responds to Dana, who is nursing 
her back to health: “Think you know so much . . . Why didn’t you know to let 
me die” (160). Thus, in reflecting on the actions of Tess and Alice, Dana real- 
izes that the ability to survive in the midst of the horrors of slavery takes a 
special kind of courage — a courage which involves the personal sacrifice nec- 
essary for her and her family to survive into the twentieth century. 

Dana’s symbiotic relationship with Rufus further complicates the narrative. 
Rufus is both her master and future ancestor. Furthermore, when Kevin, her 
white husband in twentieth-century Los Angeles travels back with Dana and is 
placed in the position of master, he begins to resemble Rufus and to talk like 
him. This blurring of the roles of Kevin and Rufus symbolizes both the possible 
conflicts experienced by Dana and by those in interracial relationships as well 
as the anguish and anxiety experienced by those black women who were forced 
to succumb to the desires of white men/masters. The ultimate oppression expe- 




113 



Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



103 



rienced by these women was rape; when Dana is confronted with this violation, 
she resists and makes a choice to end the oppression that Rufus bestows upon 
her and her future ancestors. In making this choice, she liberates herself and 
ensures the survival of her family. She also appears to resolve the conflicts that 
she feels with respect to her white husband Kevin. 

Butler’s placing of Dana in a biracial marriage foreshadows the exploration 
of black and white relationships during the time of slavery and into the 20th 
century. It allows us to see the interdependent nature of these relationships. 
Although she is black, Dana’s roots can be traced back to a white plantation 
owner who depends on her for his survival. His survival is connected to her and 
the other slaves, just as her survival depends on keeping him alive. The lives of 
blacks and whites are intertwined, and as Toni Morrison points out in Playing 
in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination , when one reads the litera- 
ture of America, one is reading stories which reveal the nature of racial relation- 
ships in this society. The presence or absence of blacks in American literature 
underscores the ways in which race is constructed by both black and white 
writers. 

In remembering her past, Dana comes to understand her present. She learns 
to live with what Nunez (in this volume) calls a “paradox of irreconcilable 
differences.” Her identity is not fixed but fluid, and she learns to live in multiple 
worlds which cross boundaries of race, time, and geographical space. Because 
of her first-hand experience with American slavery, she gains a deeper under- 
standing of this “paradox of irreconcilable differences” and of what it means to 
be a black woman in America. She realizes that her remembrance of the past 
has created a site for surviving in the present and for resisting the destruction of 
her people. 

Michelle Cliff’s Abeng 

The title of Michelle Cliff’s novel Abeng immediately situates the story and the 
reader in the past and on the island of Jamaica. “Abeng” is an African word 
meaning conch shell. The abeng was used to call in the slaves from the fields 
and was also used by the Maroon armies to pass messages. Cliff, through her 
nonlinear manipulation of time and space, moves the reader back and forth 
through time as she provides an historical perspective for understanding the 
struggles of the peoples of Jamaica from pre-slavery through colonial times and 
as she recounts the coming-of-age story of Clare Savage, a twelve-year-old 
middle-class mulatto girl in colonial Jamaica. 

The presence of multiple spaces in Clare’s life and the dilemmas facing her 
become readily apparent at the beginning of the novel. Clare and her family 
attend the morning service of the Presbyterian church (Mr. Savage’s place of 



O 

ERIC 



114 



104 



Brenda M. Greene 



worship), which has a black and white middle-class congregation, and the 
evening service of the Tabernacle of the Almighty (Mrs. Savage’s place of wor- 
ship), which has a predominantly black congregation. These places of worship 
symbolize the paradox with which Clare lives. She is caught between two ways 
of worshipping God and her parents symbolize two races and two ways of look- 
ing at the world. 

Clare’s father, James Arthur Savage (Boy), views himself as white and is the 
descendant of a white plantation owner who, upon learning that freedom for his 
slaves is forthcoming, decides that he would rather burn than free his slaves — 
so he sets fire to the plantation. “Boy” Savage is mesmerized by things related 
to the supernatural. He turns to religion at an early age and loves to tell stories 
of the great exploits and adventures of peoples from other lands. In the words of 
Clare, “Mr. Savage was caught somewhere between the future and the past — 
both equal in his imagination” (22). 

Clare’s mother, who is black, descends from the Freemans. The Freemans 
have lived close to the land and have worked it. Clare’s grandmother (Mrs. 
Freeman) lives in the deep country. She owns land and is well-respected in her 
village. She has a knowledge of traditional songs, rituals, and herbs used by 
African peoples, and she passes this knowledge on to her daughter. Thus, the 
Savages and the Freemans represent opposite ends on a continuum of Carib- 
bean lifestyles. 

The selection of the names “Savage” and “Freeman” also symbolizes the 
conflicts that permeate Clare’s life and the lives of many in her culture. “Sav- 
age” symbolizes the harsh treatment which whites inflicted upon their slaves. 
In addition, Clare notes how the Savages have perceived themselves: 

The definition of what a Savage was like was fixed by color, class, and 
religion, and over the years carefully contrived mythology was constructed, 
which they used to protect their identities. When they were poor, and not 
all of them white, the mythology persisted. (29) 

Clare’s father, thus, represents a group of people who distinguish themselves 
from those who are of a different race, class, and religion. Yet he marries a 
Freeman, foreshadowing the conflicts and paradoxes of Clare’s life. “Freeman,” 
on the other hand, connotes freedom, civility, and humanity; it is a name which 
symbolizes the desired goal of those who were enslaved. Clare, a Freeman and 
a Savage, must live with the connotations of these two names. 

Clare’s conflicts are heightened by her friendship with Zoe, a girl from the 
back country who symbolizes all that Clare is not. Zoe is dark skinned and of 
the low-income working class. Clare comes to love Zoe, and in so doing she 
confronts that part of herself which has been insensitive to the ways, attitudes, 
and values of people who come from a different class. In loving Zoe, it is as if 
Clare confronts her alter ego. 




115 



Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



105 



Cliff’s interweaving of the history of the island adds another dimension to 
this coming-of-age novel. Throughout the novel, we get historical accounts of 
the struggles of the Arawaks and the Maroons as they attempt to resist slavery 
and colonialism. We see how slavery and colonialism affect the psyche of 
Caribbean peoples — people like James Arthur Savage and other middle-class 
mulattos who have difficulty accepting their mixed identity and acknowledging 
how their people and island have been exploited. We see how class and race 
affect the ways in which students in school are treated. Those of darker com- 
plexions attend different schools. Clare is kept apart from her dark-complex- 
ioned friend Zoe who is from the country and whose mother is a market woman. 
Cliff’s text thus provides us with an alternative historical perspective on the 
slavery and colonialism practiced in those countries of the Americas which 
were “discovered.” Her perspective, a critique of slavery and colonialism, re- 
minds us that although many Indians and Africans were killed, there were also 
many who resisted. 

The protagonist Clare also carries within her a history of struggle. Like her 
ancestors who persisted and resisted, she must persist and acknowledge all parts 
of herself. Like Marita in Migrations of the Heart and Dana in Butler’s Kin- 
dred , Clare must learn to live with contradictions. She must learn to live on the 
borderlands, and she must cross the boundaries which her parents have estab- 
lished. She must confront both parts of herself in order to grow. If she does not 
accomplish this, she will be silenced like her mother or live on the edge of 
fantasy and reality like her father. 

The novel closes with a dream in which Clare and Zoe are fist-fighting and 
Clare hits Zoe in the eye, an act that symbolizes Clare’s struggle with that other 
part of herself. In struggling with Zoe, her alter ego, she confronts the black 
part of herself. The narrator, in describing Clare’s dream, informs us that “she 
had no idea that everyone we dream about we are” (166). Thus, although Clare 
is not consciously aware of why she has a fight with Zoe, this dream and fight 
foreshadow the internal struggle which she must engage in if she is to connect 
those fragmented parts of herself. Cliff reminds us that Clare’s identity, like 
Marita’s and Dana’s, is not fixed, but formed and represented by multiple spaces. 

Elizabeth Nunez’s When Rocks Dance 

Elizabeth Nunez, like Cliff, creates a novel which depicts the effects of slavery 
and colonialism on the peoples of early twentieth-century Trinidad. In her novel 
When Rocks Dance, slavery has ended, but British colonialism and racism en- 
sure that its legacy remains. Over time the peoples of Trinidad — Arawaks, Caribs, 
East Indians, Africans, and Chinese — have struggled to gain wealth and power. 
Although sugarcane is a major staple, the plantations continue to be the havens 





106 



Brenda M. Greene 



for poverty and oppression. Cocoa, also a staple central to the economy, is dis- 
placed with the discovery of oil. The path out of this poverty is the acquisition 
of land; this quest for land and what one must do to acquire it becomes a major 
theme in Nunez’s novel. 

Nunez begins her novel with an epigraph from John Oliver Killens’s Black 
Man ’s Burden: 

We need our own myths and legends to regain our lost self-esteem, our 
regard for each other as a people capable of working together to move the 
mountains that stand before us. (7) 

Myths and legends have for centuries been the means by which peoples carry 
their cultural traditions, rituals, and values. These myths and legends cross eth- 
nic and racial boundaries and come in many forms. What is considered myth in 
one culture is viewed as religion in another. This need for people to have their 
own myths and legends provides a framework for reading and interpreting 
Nunez’s novel. 

The central character, Marina, is the daughter of a British plantation owner 
and a black Trinidadian woman, Emilia. Marina and Emilia must learn to go 
back to the “old ways,” to follow the laws of their ancestors. They must not 
forget nor ignore the past, for this knowledge will help them to gain control 
over their future. Emilia is determined that her daughter Marina should inherit 
her father’s land, and when she finds herself still landless and in poverty after 
the death of the British plantation owner, she resolves that her daughter should 
marry someone who will enable her to acquire land. Thus, Marina marries An- 
tonio, a biracial man who faithfully practices Catholicism and who is the son of 
a defrocked Jesuit priest and a black woman. This marriage comes to symbolize 
the conflict between traditional African religion and Western Catholicism, a 
conflict which Marina must face as she chooses to fulfill her mother’s dream 
and desperately attempts to conceive children who will inherit their father’s 
land. 

In her determination to have children and to acquire land, Marina defies the 
boundaries of Western Catholicism and seeks the counsel of a Warao Indian 
and obeah woman. Her seeking of advice from those connected with the spiri- 
tual world and with the rituals of African religion illustrates the journey that 
Marina must take. Like Clare in Abeng, who is also a person of mixed blood, 
Marina must recover that part of herself which is black. In acknowledging the 
power of obeah, she accepts its presence in her life. This acceptance of obeah, 
a traditional religion practiced in the Caribbean by people of African descent, 
enables her to resist the forces which have kept her and her mother landless and 
to ultimately regain her land. Her remembrance of things past ensures her sur- 
vival into the future. 

Like Cliff, Nunez weaves into her narrative a description of the historical 
causes and consequences of slavery and colonialism in Trinidad. In doing so, 



ii? 



Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



107 



she provides an alternative view of the history of the island. The reader learns 
how the Portuguese who came to the island were not only seeking religious 
freedom, but were attempting to escape the plagues that were raging through- 
out their land. Further, their ships often carried cargoes of slaves. Thus, the 
Portuguese who were escaping religious persecution were participants in the 
slave trade and brought to the Caribbean not only slaves, but diseases such as 
cholera and yellow fever. 

Nunez also describes how slavery and colonialism upset the spiritual bal- 
ance between nature, the land, and people. She notes: 

The island was populated then and was to be populated later by a people 
who approached life’s mysteries not with an intellect disengaged from their 
oneness with nature, but with minds opened to truths whispered to them 
from the sea, the earth, the animals, the birds, the fish. ( 119 ) 

Nunez’s novel is, thus, both a critique of slavery and colonialism and a story 
of the ways in which people transform their reality by establishing sites of re- 
sistance. Marina is representative of those who approach life’s mysteries with a 
sense of the spiritual balance between nature, the land, and the people. In order 
for Marina to regain her land, she opens her minds to the “truth” and remem- 
bers the myths and the legends of her people. Thus, despite the legacies left by 
slavery and colonialism, she is able to establish a site of resistance and trans- 
form her reality. 

Cristina Garcia’s Dreaming in Cuban 

Cristina Garcia’s novel Dreaming in Cuban is the story of several generations 
of the del Pino family. Through dreams, letters, poems, monologues, and flash- 
backs of different members of the family, Garcia uses the theme of remember- 
ing to weave the family’s story together. The story begins with a dream. Celia 
del Pino, the matriarch of the del Pino family, sits in her wicker chair on a beach 
in north Cuba and scans the horizon. Having just learned that her husband has 
died, she watches as he emerges from the water and invites her into the water. 
As she grieves for him, she reflects on the lives of three generations of her 
family, a family which has suffered emotionally and physically, endured many 
losses, and been divided as a result of the politics of the Cuban revolution. 

The Cuban revolution is the catalyst that fragments the family and sends it in 
varying directions. Each member of the family goes his/her way and charts his 
or her own individual course for survival. Throughout the years of her mar- 
riage, Celia has held on to the memories of her lost lover by writing letters to 
him. When she and her husband become more and more estranged, he places 
her in a mental institution, and upon her release she actively becomes involved 
in the revolution. Lourdes, Celia’s daughter, emigrates to New York, opens up 
several bakeries, and becomes excessively overweight, using food to attempt to 







108 



Brenda M. Greene 



restore the losses she feels in her life. Celia’s daughter Felicia turns to men and 
then to scinteria, a traditional, syncretic religion practiced by the Cuban people. 
Javier, Celia’s only son, turns to the world of the academy and subsequently 
loses himself, his wife, and his daughter. Celia’s granddaughter Pilar, an artist, 
rebels against the capitalist attitude adopted by her mother and turns to music 
and art to address the emptiness she feels in her life. 

By providing the reader with the dreams and reflections of individual mem- 
bers of the del Pino family, Garcia gives us alternative perspectives on the revo- 
lution and on the varying ways in which it has impacted the lives of the Cuban 
people. The character who emerges as the most complicated and paradoxical is 
Pilar. 

Pilar symbolizes the person on the borderlands. She lives with contradic- 
tions. Frustrated by her life in New York, she dreams of her grandmother, and 
heads for Cuba to see her. The following words epitomize her despair in New 
York and her relationship with Celia, her grandmother. 

Even though I’ve been living in Brooklyn all my life, it doesn’t feel like 
home to me. I’m not sure Cuba is, but I want to find out. If only I could see 
Abuela Celia again, I’d know where I belonged. (58) 

Pilar’s dreams of her grandmother and her longing to see her grandmother 
symbolize a psychic relationship between the two women. When Pilar is finally 
able to return to Cuba, she reflects on the idea that her grandmother leaves her 
a legacy, “a love of the sea and the smoothness of pearls, an appreciation of 
music and art and a disregard for boundaries” (176). Her grandmother instills 
confidence in her, and she in turn provides her grandmother with a desire to 
pass on her memories to her granddaughter. Celia cannot form this connection 
with her daughters, but with her granddaughter she is able to form a spiritual 
bond. She tells her granddaughter, “Women who outlive their daughters are 
orphans. . . . Only their granddaughters can save them, guard their knowledge 
like the first fire” (222). 

Garcia’s depiction of the psychic relationship between Pilar and her grand- 
mother reveals the cyclical nature of life, a concept also found in Native Ameri- 
can literature. In this novel, Celia’s last letter to her lover clearly illustrates that 
the memories of the grandmother will live on in the granddaughter and that the 
granddaughter will continue the tradition of the grandmother. 

My dearest Gustavo. . . . My granddaughter, Pilar Puento del Pino, was 
born today. It is also my birthday. 1 am fifty years old. I will no longer write 
to you, my amor. She will remember everything. (245) 

Pilar, the child of contradictions, the child on the borderlands, cannot re- 
solve her inner conflicts until she connects with her grandmother. And to do 
this, she must cross the boundaries of space and time. She must capture that 
Cuban part of herself and merge it with an American self to form a new identity, 




Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



109 



one which cannot be defined by one culture, race, ethnicity, or religion. Like 
Marita in Migrations who travels to Africa, Dana who travels to nineteenth- 
century America in Kindred, Clare in Abeng who psychologically travels to the 
time when Jamaica was peopled with Arawaks and Maroons, and Marina who 
travels to the obeah woman in When Rocks Dance, Pilar must go back to her 
roots in order to go forward and understand all aspects of her multiple selves. 

Pilar’s site of resistance cannot be created in Cuba; it must be created in 
America, a place where she must struggle with the dilemmas of living in mul- 
tiple spaces. Remembering her Cuban roots enables her to create a site of resis- 
tance in America, and to thereby transform her reality. 



Linda Hogan’s Mean Spirit 

The reasons for remembering take on a different nature in Linda Hogan’s novel 
Mean Spirit. In this historical novel, we see how the white man’s ravishing of 
the land and Osage peoples affects their spiritual and physical world and results 
in their destruction. Her novel is a true testament to bell hooks’s statement that 
“remembering makes us subjects in history; it is dangerous to forget” (“Narra- 
tives” 54). Through Hogan’s story, we see how the oil-rich lands of Native 
Americans were systematically taken away through corruption, murder, and 
arranged marriages. The central characters of this novel, the Graycloud family, 
in attempting to hold onto their land, call upon their ancestors and seek the 
advice of elders. 

Hogan uses an episodic, circular structure to tell her story. There are no 
divided chapters, and Hogan moves the reader in and out of the lives of the 
Osage people. The reader watches as the Osage people in the valley begin to 
learn the ways of the white man and return to the ways of the “Indians” when 
they re-enter the hills. Through this nonlinear structure, we come to understand 
the importance of harmony between the land, people, and nature and to know 
that the “Indians” of the Osage community understand that their survival de- 
pends upon maintaining a harmony between their spiritual and physical worlds. 

The narrative follows the story of the Graycloud family as they resist at- 
tempts to have their oil-rich land taken from them. The setting is 1922 Okla- 
homa, and the collective spirit and efforts of this family work to ward off the 
total downfall of their peoples. They refuse to accept the prophecy that the 
white man will infringe on their peace and take everything away, and in their 
attempts to preserve themselves, they believe that they must learn the ways and 
adapt some of the customs of the white man. Lila Blanket, one of the Osage 
“Indians” from the Hills, tells her daughter, “Some of our children have to learn 
about the white world if we’re going to ward off our downfall” (6). This strat- 
egy, however, undermines Native American values, for it violates the “Indian” 
belief that the natural balance between man and earth must be respected and 



O 

ERIC 



120 



110 



Brenda M. Greene 



maintained. A statement by Reverend Joe Billy epitomizes the catastrophic re- 
sults that this thinking brings. In a sermon, Reverend Billy states that “the In- 
dian world is on a collision course with the white world” (13). Thus, although 
the “Indians” attempt to adapt to the ways of the white man, the results are 
devastating, and Reverend Billy’s warning becomes prophetic, symbolizing the 
future of the Osage peoples as a tribal nation. The tragic consequences of their 
adaptation to the white man’s value system become magnified when Grace 
Graycloud, the richest “Indian” woman among the Osage peoples, is murdered. 

As the novel continues, we see how the combined forces of deceit, greed, 
and corruption in the government contribute to the exploitation of Native Ameri- 
can rights, more murders, mysterious fires, and deep extended grief among the 
“Indian” people. The “Indian” response to this is silence. They have learned 
that this is the key to their survival. When the government cheats one of their 
tribal members out of his money there is silence, for the 

“Indians” knew, from history itself, that it was a smart thing to keep silent 
on the affairs and regulations of Washington, to be still and as invisible as 
possible. They might be cheated, but they still had life, and until only re- 
cently, even that was not guaranteed under the American laws, so they 
remained trapped, silent, and wary. (63) 

Throughout the novel, the visions and forces of the spiritual world serve as 
guides for the “Indians,” who face continuous obstacles. As they confront these 
obstacles, they seem to gamer more strength and more perseverance to do what 
they can to ensure their personal and collective survival. Horse, the elder who 
keeps an historical account of the trials and tribulations of his peoples, decides 
that he will add to the Holy Bible what is missing. The words which he adds are 
a message to the Osage people and to those who have mistreated them. He 
warns the people to live gently with the land and to remember that their spirits 
are in harmony with nature and with the universe. 

Hogan’s novel provides the reader with an alternative historical perspective 
for how and why Native Americans were made invisible. Hers is a story which 
seldom gets told and which powerfully illustrates the need to remember. Those 
who do not remember will fail to break the silence and the pattern of self- 
destruction. As in the novels of Golden, Butler, Cliff, and Nunez, the Hill “Indi- 
ans” of Hogan’s novel realize that their survival depends on acknowledging 
their past, a past which their peoples must draw upon to define their mission 
and to continue their journey into the present. It is a journey which cannot defy 
the laws of land and nature. 




Amy Tan’s The Joy Luck Club 

Amy Tan’s The Joy Luck Club is a journey in remembering. In this novel, the 
central characters use the telling of stories as a way to overcome the obstacles 



Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



111 



they face in their current lives. Thus, remembering through the sharing of memo- 
ries becomes a way that immigrant Chinese American women create sites of 
resistance which ensure that their first-generation Chinese American daughters 
will survive. 

Jing Mei Woo, the daughter of Ann Mei, takes her mother’s place in the Joy 
Luck Club, an act that affirms their spiritual connection; as her mother’s daugh- 
ter, Jing Mei Woo symbolizes an aspect of her mother’s own true nature and 
self. Placed in this situation, Jing Mei Woo realizes that she does not truly know 
her Chinese mother, and we see how, through remembering her mother’s sto- 
ries, Jing Mei comes to know her mother and thereby to know another aspect of 
herself. 

Tan’s novel is cyclical in structure, beginning and ending with Jing Mei tak- 
ing the place of her mother. She has the task of telling her long lost sisters the 
story of her mother’s life. When she protests to her aunts and to her mother’s 
friends that she does not know her mother, they reply: 

Not know your mother? . . . How can you say? Your mother is in your 
bones! . . . Tell them stories she told you, lessons she taught, what you 
know about her mind that has become your mind. ( 31 ) 

According to feminist critic Trinh T. Minh-ha, “Storytelling, the oldest form 
of building historical consciousness in the community, constitutes a rich oral 
legacy, whose values have regained all importance recently, especially in the 
context of writings by women of color” (481-82). Tan enriches her novel by the 
telling of stories. Through the stories told by mothers to their daughters, daugh- 
ters learn to avoid the pitfalls of greed and selfishness, to be respectful and 
patient, and to persevere despite pain. Through the daughters’ stories, we learn 
what it is like to grow up as a hyphenated American and to live in multiple 
spaces, culturally, ethnically, and geographically. We see how the Chinese 
American identity is not static, but fluid. Like other persons of color, Chinese 
Americans must live with contradictions, and remembering the stories of the 
past helps give them the ability to persist and resist. 

This ability is the enduring characteristic that most women in Tan’s novel 
possess. Linda Jong recounts how she sacrifices her life to keep her mother’s 
promise of accepting the village matchmaker’s choice of the son of a family 
more wealthy than hers. She sacrifices herself for a period of time and devises 
a plan that will help her to regain her lost self. Waverly Jong, her daughter, 
recounts how she was six when her mother taught her the art of invisible strength. 
Waverly learns that the strongest wind cannot be seen and thereby learns to 
focus on the acquisition of an invisible strength as she competes in chess matches. 
Rose Hsu Jordan also learns to be strong like the wind. Her mother tells her that 
a girl is like a young tree and carries a strength within her. Like the young tree, 
the girl will grow straight and tall if she listens to her mother who is beside her. 
Her mother warns her, however, that those who listen to others grow crooked 





112 



Brenda M. Greene 



and weak and fall to the ground with the first strong wind. These women do not 
survive; they retreat to the innermost part of their minds where they live out the 
remainder of their days. This is what happens to Ying Ying St. Clair. Ying Ying 
recounts how she kept her mouth closed so that her selfish desires would not 
fall out. She recognizes at an early age that in order to survive, she must hide 
her true and real self; however, the result of her hiding causes her to lose both 
her voice and her mind. Those who are strong and who hold on to their true 
nature survive. They are the ones who are able to create sites of resistance, 
places where they can imagine and plan for alternative worlds, dream of their 
future and the future of their children, and escape the oppression resulting from 
planned marriages in a traditional patriarchal Chinese society which continu- 
ally devalues women. 

The construct of remembering in Tan’s novel bridges the gap between two 
worlds, those of the past and the present. Through bringing the past to the present, 
the immigrant Chinese mothers are able to exist in two worlds and to endure the 
complexity of living in two cultures. Through the use of story, each Chinese 
immigrant mother symbolically transfers an awareness of the complexity of 
living in two cultures. As each daughter recounts and relives the stories told to 
her by her mother, she gains new insight into her mother and into the relation- 
ship between her mother and herself. In doing so, she comes to appreciate the 
value of her mother’s stories and is able to attempt to define ways in which her 
life can be made more meaningful by this knowledge. Like the characters in the 
narratives of Golden, Butler, Cliff, Hogan, Nunez, and Garcia, remembering 
causes the mothers and daughters of Tan’s novel to confront themselves and 
thereby to confront their true strengths and weaknesses. 



Conclusion 

In her text Black Women, Writing, & Identity: Migrations of the Subject , Carole 
Boyce Davies writes that black women’s writing “should be read as a series of 
boundary crossings and not as a fixed, geographically, ethnically or nationally 
bound category of writing” (4). Boyce Davies maintains that to attempt to inter- 
pret or theorize about black women’s writing in relation to specific geographi- 
cal or ethnic states is to define this writing from narrow and marginalized spaces. 
Black women exist all over the world, and the word blackness has different 
connotations in different parts of the world. In the United Kingdom, for ex- 
ample, blackness is not solely related to skin color or race. In addition, it has to 
do with class, position, or marginality in society and includes Asians, Arabs, 
and Latinos. Therefore, if one recognizes that black women’s writing crosses 
geographical boundaries, then interpretations about the subject of black women’s 
texts will involve more complex and more complicated theories. 




123 



Remembering as Resistance in the Literature of Women of Color 



113 



Boyce Davies’s concept of black women’s writing as fluid and shifting across 
boundaries also applies to writing by women of color. The writers discussed in 
this paper come from different races and ethnic groups and create texts that 
may be read and studied as narratives which form a nexus where race, class, 
gender, and history converge to create situations whereby characters use re- 
membering as a way to gain knowledge of themselves and as a form of resis- 
tance to oppression, exploitation, racism, colonialism, and sexism. The characters 
in these texts transform their realities into ones which acknowledge the frag- 
mentation, marginalization, and spiritual and emotional voids in their lives. They 
create sites of resistance which enable them to live with contradictions and 
dilemmas, with what Nunez calls paradoxes. In living their lives on the border- 
lands, they exist in multiple spaces and move back and forth between the center 
and margins of society. Although they exist in these multiple spaces and worlds, 
they have a common need to tell their stories, to tell the truth, to resist — as the 
Latin American writer Claribel Alegria puts it, to “assume and take on the role 
of historians, politicians, sociologists, and teachers” ( 106 ). 

By entering the texts of these writers into a conversation on rethinking Ameri- 
can literature, we validate the need to include and expand our reading, discus- 
sion, and study of female writers of color in our English classrooms and the 
need to rethink, redefine, and reshape our paradigms for interpreting the litera- 
ture of contemporary women of color. The texts discussed here provide readers 
with a framework to perceive American literature in more complicated ways. 
American literature is not bound by the borders of the United States; it includes 
the Caribbean, Central America, South America, and all of North America. These 
texts cannot be defined by one genre, structure, theme, or form. They are non- 
linear and shift across history and geography. Some have ambiguous endings 
and are cyclical in nature. Others provide alternative perspectives on history. 
They center women’s lives and focus on subjects who cross cultural boundaries 
of race, ethnicity, class, and gender. These texts cause us to rethink American 
literature. 



Works Cited 

Alegria, Claribel. “Latindad and the Artist Critical Fictions: The Politics of Imagina- 
tive Writing. Ed. Philomena Mariani. Seattle: Bay Press, 1991. 486-91. 

Butler, Octavia. Kindred . 1979. Boston: Beacon, 1988. 

Cliff, Michelle. Abeng. New York: Penguin, 1984. 

Davies, Carole Boyce. Black Women , Writing, & Identity: Migrations of the Subject . 
New York: Routledge, 1994. 

Garcia, Cristina. Dreaming in Cuban. New York: Ballantine, 1992. 

Golden, Marita. Migrations of the Heart. 1983. New York: Ballantine, 1987. 




124 



114 



Brenda M. Greene 



Hogan, Linda. Mean Spirit. 1990. New York: Ballantine, 1992. 

hooks, bell. Feminist Theory from Margin to Center. Boston: South End, 1984. 

.“Marginality as Site of Resistance.” Out There: Marginalization & Contempo- 
rary Culture. Eds. Russell Ferguson et. al. Cambridge: MIT, 1990. 341-43. 

.“Narratives of Struggle. ” Critical Fictions: The Politics of Imaginative Writing. 

Ed. Philomena Mariani. Seattle: Bay Press, 1991. 58-61. 

Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. Cam- 
bridge: Harvard UP, 1992. 

Mukherjee, Bharati. “A Four-Hundred-Year-Old Woman.” Critical Fictions: The Poli- 
tics of Imaginative Writing. Ed. Philomena Mariani. Seattle: Bay Press, 1991. 24-28. 

Nunez, Elizabeth. “A Fusion of Cultures: The Complexities of the Caribbean Character 
in Literature.” Rethinking American Literature. Eds. Lil Brannon and Brenda M. 
Greene. Urbana: NCTE, 1997. 71-80. 

. When Rocks Dance. New York: Ballantine, 1986. 

Tan, Amy. The Joy Luck Club. New York: Ballantine, 1989. 

Xrinh T. Minh-ha. “Grandma’s Story.” The Woman That I Am: The Literature and Cul- 
ture of Contemporary Women of Color. Ed. D. Soyini Madison. New York: St. Martin’s, 
1994.486-91. 







7 Crossing Cultural Boundaries with 
Leslie Marmon Silko’s Ceremony 



Robert O’Brien Hokanson 
Alvemo College 



In today’s classroom, as in today’s society, “multiculturalism” is a loaded term, 
one whose meaning depends on who is invoking it and to what end. For my 
purposes here, I want to talk about multiculturalism not so much as a theoreti- 
cal concept or political agenda, although it surely is both, but as a fundamental 
reality of life in the dynamic and diverse society of the United States. As Shelley 
Fisher Fishkin, author of Was Huck Black?, observed in a column for The 
Chronicle of Higher Education, “‘Traditional’ American culture has always been 
multicultural. Our teaching must take into account our increasingly complex 
understanding of what our common culture is and how it evolved.” Given this 
reality — and this challenge — the key question for teachers and students is not, 
“Are you ‘for’ or ‘against’ multiculturalism?” but rather, “How can we best 
understand and respond to our shared circumstances?” 

It is in addressing this question — the real question that we all (students, 
teachers, citizens) face — that I’ve turned to Leslie Marmon Silko’s novel Cer- 
emony (1977). I’ve found Ceremony to be a particularly valuable text not only 
because it vividly depicts contemporary Native American culture but also be- 
cause it is about the broader phenomenon of crossing cultural boundaries. Crit- 
ics like Paula Gunn Allen, Kenneth Lincoln, and James Ruppert have done 
some excellent work on the role of Pueblo Indian tradition in Silko’s novel, but 
less attention has been paid to its representation of the interaction among Na- 
tive, Anglo, and Mexican cultures. It is in this interaction that Ceremony mod- 
els ways of understanding and responding to the “multicultural” world in which 
we all live, and I use Silko’s novel to help my students learn not only about 
contemporary Native American literature but also about the dynamics of 
multiculturalism in literature and society. 

Through Tayo, a young WW II veteran, and those who help him in his quest 
to heal himself and the land, Silko presents an image of an Indian culture that is 
rooted in tradition but constantly changing and adapting to the contemporary 
world. These changes are principally represented in terms of the intersection 
and interaction of cultures. Tayo himself is a “half breed” — Laguna, white, and 




115 



116 



Robert O * Brien Hokanson 



perhaps part Mexican — and his mixed and multiple identity mirrors that of the 
American Southwest, where three cultures (and more) have clashed, blended, 
and sometimes co-existed for hundreds of years. In this, Tayo’s story is a mi- 
crocosm of the broader story of historical and cultural change. “You are part of 
it now,” the Mexican dancer Night Swan tells Tayo after their sexual encounter, 
confirming his role as one who crosses cultural boundaries. As the novel un- 
folds, it becomes clear that it is only through recognizing and then affirming his 
role in the wider multicultural drama of the Southwest — and beyond — that Tayo 
can regain a sense of himself and restore the land around him. Like the overlap- 
ping cultures it presents, the text of Ceremony is also a hybrid, mingling songs 
and stories from Pueblo Indian tradition, the style and techniques of contempo- 
rary American fiction, and the conventions of the coming-of-age novel into a 
rich weave of storytelling. 

As a writer, Leslie Marmon Silko herself embodies the dynamics of a 
multicultural society. Silko is of mixed ancestry (Laguna, white, and Mexican), 
and she has written forcefully about the multicultural reality of life in the United 
States. In an essay entitled “Fences Against Freedom,” she critiques the notion 
of “race” as a fixed, absolute category and its use as a political tool in shaping 
immigration policy and the policing of the U.S. -Mexican border. Recalling her 
upbringing at Laguna, she contrasts the contemporary politics of race with the 
inclusive worldview she learned as a child: 

My parents and the people of the Laguna Pueblo community who raised 
me taught me that we are all one family — all the offspring of Mother Earth — 
and no one is better or worse according to skin color or origin. ... It was 
not so easy for me to learn where we Marmons belonged, but gradually I 
understood that we of mixed ancestry belonged on the outer edge of the 
circle between the world of the Pueblo and the outside world. (9) 

This place on the margin between worlds is also where Tayo resides. Through 
Tayo and other figures who embody cultural interaction, Ceremony shows us 
that no borders are permanent and impermeable, and that only through recog- 
nizing this fact can we fully understand the world and our place in it. 

In this way, Silko’s novel helps students see “multiculturalism” as adynamic 
process rather than an either/or proposition. Ceremony demonstrates how dis- 
tinctions blur and boundaries shift — not into a melting pot of forgetfulness but 
into a wider, more comprehensive vision. These are vital insights for my stu- 
dents and me as we work toward a fuller understanding of what “American” 
literature is and has been. The interplay among a multiplicity of cultures and 
cultural forms in Ceremony makes it clear that we need to register the complex 
cultural matrix of texts as completely as we can rather than simply pigeonhol- 
ing them as “Native American” or “Mexican American” or “white.” Ceremony 
also works against the tendency of readers to either reduce difference to sameness 



ERIC 12? 

imiflaffHEffliiaa 



Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Marmon Silko ’s Ceremony 



117 



or dismiss what is “other” as foreign and unintelligible, a tendency that Helen 
Jaskoski has observed in her teaching of Native American literature (53). By 
keeping Tayo, and the novel as a whole, rooted in the belief system of the Pueblo 
peoples, Silko maintains a sense of what is unique to his outlook and circum- 
stances even as he embarks on the kind of quest for identity that is found through- 
out literature. Students can then compare their own sense of identity to Tayo’s 
without losing sight of the fact that his predicament is neither identical to or 
entirely different from theirs. 

In teaching Ceremony, then, I aim to engage the students in my American 
literature course in a process of reading that opens up notions of culture and 
identity in the way Greg Sarris describes in his discussion of how to promote 
critical thinking and cultural understanding among diverse students: 

Reading, like all classroom activity, must be seen and promoted as some- 
thing that continues and recreates culture both in the ways its practices 
alter and maintain previous methods for continuing and recreating culture 
and in the ways it helps individuals negotiate personhood “in a world of 
multiple and conflicting demands.” (196-97) 

As Sarris and many others have noted, such a process is rarely simple and often 
uncomfortable, but because Ceremony itself models a dynamic conception of 
individual identity and cultural tradition, it can do much to help students under- 
stand the dynamics of diversity throughout American literature and culture. 



As the prose narrative of Ceremony opens, Tayo’s life — and that of the Pueblo 
generally — is dangerously out of balance. He has returned from the war in the 
Pacific deeply troubled by his experiences, and the crippling drought at Laguna 
reflects his individual dis-ease. The holistic worldview of Pueblo tradition has 
become a nightmare, it seems, as he can’t shake the vision of his Uncle Josiah 
among the Japanese soldiers his unit killed in the Philippines or the feeling that 
his prayer for the jungle rain to end has been fulfilled on the parched reserva- 
tion. The depth of Tayo’s estrangement from Pueblo beliefs is registered in his 
reaction to seeing Japanese American women and children at the Los Angeles 
train depot after his release from the Veterans’ Hospital: ‘“Those people,’ he 
said, pointing in the direction the women and children had gone, ‘I thought they 
locked them up’” (18). The connection with the Japanese he had sensed in the 
Philippines is now abhorrent to him, and he falls back on distinguishing himself 
from “those people” as a refuge from such an inclusive vision. Tayo’s challenge 
in Ceremony is to (re)discover what he is a part of— and then to act on this 
knowledge. Over the course of the novel, he learns that he is indeed part of a 
larger cultural process, a larger story, that encompasses and even goes beyond 
embracing his Native American heritage. 





8 



118 



Robert O ’ Brien Hokanson 



Two key figures in Tayo’s process of learning and healing are Night Swan 
and Betonie, each of whom represents a departure from “pure” Indian blood- 
lines and traditions yet proves to be a crucial catalyst in preparing him for the 
part he will play in the unfolding story. Tayo first meets Night Swan because his 
Uncle Josiah is having an affair with her — with the disapproval of Tayo’s aunt 
and the gossips of Laguna and to the derision of the people of Cubero, where 
Night Swan lives. Night Swan appears to be merely an aging whore who’s come 
to the end of her road in the flat above Lalo’s bar, but she is clearly much more 
than that to Josiah — and to Tayo. 

In an encounter before he goes to war, Night Swan gives Tayo a glimpse of 
the larger process he fully understands much later. She has noticed that, like 
herself, Tayo embodies the crossing of cultural boundaries: 

“I have been watching you for a long time,” she said. “I saw the color of 
your eyes ” 

Tayo did not look at her. 

“Mexican eyes,” he said, “the other kids used to tease me.” (99) 

Like his lighter skin, Tayo’s eyes have always marked him as a “half-breed,” 
drawing whispers and ridicule from both Indians and Anglos. Night Swan 
counters his shame with the novel’s first statement of a multicultural ethic: 

“They are afraid, Tayo. They feel something happening, they can see some- 
thing happening around them, and it scares them. Indians or Mexicans or 
whites — most people are afraid of change. They think that if their children 
have the same color of skin, the same color of eyes, that nothing is chang- 
ing.” She laughed softly. “They are fools. They blame us, the ones who 
look different. That way they don’t have to think about what has happened 
inside themselves.” (99-100) 

Tayo doesn’t respond to this insight, but Night Swan insists on its importance: 
“You don’t have to understand what is happening. But remember this day. You 
will recognize it later. You are part of it now” (100). Tayo’s sexual encounter 
with Night Swan affirms his role in the process of cultural interaction and change 
that his own mixed ancestry represents. Her multicultural vision also gives him 
an alternative to the shame and confusion he feels as a “half-breed.” Rather than 
an individual aberration or outcast, Night Swan would have Tayo see himself as 
part of a larger, inexorable tide of change. As Kenneth Lincoln has noted, in 
Ceremony “the mixed breed is living testimony to the transitions, the changes, 
the old ways evolving consistently into new variables” (248). Helping my stu- 
dents recognize this process in Silko’s novel helps them better understand the 
thoroughly “mixed” quality of American literature and culture generally 
because they come to see change and diversity as the norm rather than the 
exception. 



Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Martnon Silko’s Ceremony 



119 



For Tayo, however, the multicultural vision Night Swan expresses is blurred 
by the horrors of his experiences in the war, just as the knowledge of Indian 
beliefs Tayo gained from his Uncle Josiah as a child is obscured by the pressure 
to conform to the white world view he faced at school. It is only after he returns 
to Laguna that these memories, and the lessons they hold, come back to him. 
Yet these recollections alone aren’t enough to heal Tayo or the land. Neither is 
the Scalp Ceremony, the traditional way of reintegrating warriors into the fabric 
of the universe after they had killed or touched dead enemies. “There are some 
things we can’t cure like we used to,” the Laguna medicine man Ku’oosh tells 
Tayo. “Not since the white people came” (38). Tayo finds himself in a double 
bind: The traditional ritual has lost its power to heal warriors who fight a mod- 
em, mechanized war, but the connection between him and the land remains 
strong enough that his praying for the rain to end in the jungles of the Philip- 
pines has resulted in a drought at Laguna. 

On Ku’oosh’s recommendation, Tayo’s family sends him to Betonie, a Na- 
vajo medicine man whose contemporary variations on traditional rituals have 
earned him both distrust and grudging respect among the Indians of the region. 
Like Night Swan, Betonie defies social conventions and cultural boundaries. 
He lives in a traditional hogan overlooking Gallup, site of the annual Indian 
Ceremonial staged for tourists and a “border town” where Indians come off the 
reservation in search of work and alcohol. Betonie doesn’t talk or act the way a 
medicine man “should,” but his explanation of why he lives where he does 
reveals a broader, more comprehensive perspective like the one Night Swan 
had also expressed: 

“It strikes me funny,” the medicine man said, shaking his head, “people 
wondering why I live so close to this filthy town. But see, this hogan was 
here first. Built long before the white people ever came. It is that town 
down there which is out of place. Not this old medicine man.” (118) 

Tayo then recognizes something he shares with Betonie — hazel eyes. “Mexi- 
can eyes,” Tayo had called them when Night Swan had noticed his, and Betonie 
acknowledges Tayo’s glance by saying, “My grandmother was a remarkable 
Mexican with green eyes” (119). Like Tayo and Night Swan, Betonie is part of 
“it” — part of the process of cultural interaction and change that Tayo is only 
beginning to understand. 

When Tayo steps into Betonie’s hogan, he finds an array of “medicine,” both 
traditional and contemporary, that overwhelms him. Along with bundles of roots 
and twigs and bags of dried herbs and tobacco, he sees bundles of newspapers, 
piles of telephone books from around the country, and a collection of Coke 
bottles carefully arranged around the circular space of the hogan. “He wanted 
to dismiss all of it as an old man’s rubbish, debris that had fallen out of the 




120 



Robert O’Brien Hokanson 



years,” Silko writes, “but the boxes and trunks, the bundles and stacks were 
plainly part of the pattern: they followed the concentric shadows of the room.” 
Betonie sees Tayo’s distress and reassures him: 

“Take it easy,” he said, “don’t try to see everything all at once.” He laughed. 

“We’ve been gathering these things for a long time — hundreds of years. 

She was doing it before I was bom, and he was working before she came. 

And on and on back down in time.” (120) 

Here Betonie is referring to the string of women and men who kept the ceremo- 
nies alive across the generations — men and women who also embodied the dy- 
namics of cultural growth and change. Two of these people were his grandfather, 
the Navajo medicine man Descheeny, and his grandmother, the “remarkable 
Mexican” who gave him his green eyes. 

Still tom between worldviews, Tayo nearly reaches the point of defying 
Betonie and denying the pattern that the medicine man says is unfolding around 
him, but he catches himself with an insight into his illness and that of the land 
around him: 

He wanted to yell at the medicine man, to yell the things the white doctors 
had yelled at him — that he had to think only of himself, and not about the 
others, that he would never get well as long as he used words like “we” and 
“us ” But he had known the answer all along .... Medicine didn’t work 
that way, because the world didn’t work that way. His sickness was only 
part of something larger, and his cure would be found only in something 
great and inclusive of everything. (125-26) 

Here Tayo begins to understand and embrace his role in the larger story, the 
“ceremony” Betonie has described to him. Like Betonie’s ceremonies, this one 
brings together ancient elements and contemporary circumstances. 

Betonie helps Tayo recognize that connections and change — not boundaries 
and stability — are the norm. He tells Tayo that his grandmother had in fact 
insisted he attend Sherman Institute, the Indian school in Riverside, California, 
as part of his education as a medicine man because “It is carried on in all lan- 
guages now, so you have to know English too” (120). The ceremonies have 
always been changing, if only in subtle variations, Betonie explains, and the 
circumstances of the contemporary world make even more substantial changes 
necessary: 

“At one time, the ceremonies as they had been performed were enough for 
the way the world was then. But after the white people came, elements in 
this world began to shift; and it became necessary to create new ceremo- 
nies. I have made changes in the rituals. The people mistrust this greatly, 
but only this growth keeps the ceremonies strong. 

“She taught me this above all else: things which don’t shift and grow 
are dead things.” (126) 



Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Marmon Silko’s Ceremony 



121 



Betonie’s vision is not only one of fluidity and change but also one that 
stresses the connections between things rather than boundaries or distinctions. 
He uses this comprehensive vision to explain to Tayo that his problems, and 
those of the Indian peoples generally, are part of a larger scheme that goes 
deeper than the clash of Native and Anglo cultures. The larger conflict, Betonie 
says, is between the “witchery,” a fundamental force of evil and death, and 
those who would counter it: 

“That is the trickery of the witchcraft,” he said. “They want us to believe 
all evil resides with white people. Then we will look no further to see what 
is really happening. They want us to separate ourselves from white people, 
to be ignorant and helpless as we watch our own destruction. But white 
people are only tools the witchery manipulates; and I tell you, we can deal 
with white people, with their machines and their beliefs.” ( 132 ) 

At this point, the text shifts to a story of how white people were the product of 
a contest among Indian witches — an ironic reversal of the notion of white pri- 
macy and superiority — and Betonie begins the rituals that will broaden and 
sharpen Tayo’s vision of himself and the world. The narrative of Tayo’s time 
with Betonie is also interwoven with a series of verse accounts of Indian myths. 
These stories of Hummingbird and Fly, Coyote, and the Bear People all involve 
transformation and the return of captives or exiles — themes that resonate strongly 
with Tayo’s predicament and Betonie’s healing rituals. 

Tayo has a glimmer of a more comprehensive vision after Betonie’s initial 
series of ceremonies. Looking out over the landscape, he senses connections he 
hadn’t recognized before: “He took a deep breath of cold mountain air: there 
were no boundaries; the world below and the sand paintings inside became the 
same that night” (145). This sense of interconnection between inside and out- 
side, between ritual and reality, is epitomized by the story of Descheeny, Betonie’s 
grandfather, and that “remarkable Mexican woman” who was his grandmother. 
Their story is a kind of parable of what happens when different cultures meet, 
and it informs Tayo’s situation as well as Betonie’s. 

As Betonie tells it, a group of Navajo hunters found a girl in a tree outside a 
Mexican settlement one night. They took her with them, but something about 
her hazel green eyes frightened them and they went to Descheeny for help. 
Despite the objections of his wives, Descheeny takes the Mexican girl in, and 
he soon discovers that she herself is working against the same cosmic witchery 
that he confronts — that she is part of the essential variation in the ceremony: 

“He had been watching the sky before she came, the planets and constella- 
tions wheeling and shifting the patterns of the old stories. He saw the tran- 
sition, and he was ready. . . . 

“He reasoned that because it was set loose by witchery of all the world, 
and brought to them by whites, the ceremony against it must be the same. 




132 



122 



Robert O'Brien Hokcinson 



When she came, she didn’t fool him for long. She had come for his cer- 
emonies, for the chants and the stories they grew from. 

“‘This is the only way,’ she told him. ‘It cannot be done alone. We must 
have power from everywhere. Even the power we can get from whites.’” 

( 150 ) 

This is the pattern, the story, that Betonie, Night Swan, and Tayo enact. Each of 
them, like Descheeny and the Mexican girl, represents a transgressive Other or 
outsider who crosses cultural boundaries, and it is this figure that keeps the 
culture vital and helps it adapt to a changing, even threatening, world. This is 
another point where Ceremony is particularly valuable as a model of multicultural 
practice. Silko’s novel makes it abundantly clear that change is the norm — that 
borders won’t hold — and that our best response is to try to understand and em- 
brace our role in it. 

At the end of his ceremonies for him, Betonie reasserts the role Tayo must 
play in the larger story: “This has been going on for a long long time now. It’s 
up to you” (152). With this, Tayo returns to Laguna and finds himself on an- 
other drinking binge with his buddies Leroy and Harley. Only this time he is 
able to put his actions, and theirs, in a broader context — the fundamental sense 
of loss and broken connections that no amount of alcohol can fully obliterate. 
“Old Betonie might explain it this way,” Tayo thinks, “there were transitions 
that had to be made in order to become whole again, in order to be the people 
our Mother would remember” (170). Following this insight, the narrative shifts 
to the story of Kaup’a’ta, the Gambler, who tricks his victims into gambling 
away all that they have, even their lives, until he is outwitted by the Sun, who 
succeeds in freeing his children, the storm clouds, from Kaup’a’ta. Like the 
other myths of recovery and renewal in the novel, this one parallels Tayo’s 
individual circumstances and connects them to a wider cultural context. 

With a fuller sense of his place in the traditional and contemporary “story,” 
Tayo begins to fulfill Betonie’s vision of his role in the new ceremony by set- 
ting out to recover Josiah’s Mexican cattle, which disappeared while he was at 
war. These cattle — a cross between a tough Mexican variety and the meatier 
Hereford of the North— are also “half-breeds,” ones Josiah hoped would adapt 
well to the conditions at Laguna, and another symbol of cultural interaction and 
change. Tayo finds the cattle on land owned by Floyd Lee, a white rancher who 
has attempted to cordon off “his” land with a steel fence. Cutting this fence so 
he can drive his family’s cattle through becomes an extended metaphor of break- 
ing through the stereotyped distinctions and divisions from which he and so 
many others have suffered: 

Why did he hesitate to accuse a white man of stealing but not a Mexi- 
can or an Indian? ... He knew then he had learned the lie by heart . . . only 
brown-skinned people were thieves. . . . 

The lie. He cut into the wire as if cutting away at the lie inside himself. 

The liars had fooled everyone, white people and Indians alike; as long as 




133 



Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Marmon Silko’s Ceremony 



123 



people believed the lies, they would never be able to see what had been 
done to them or what they were doing to each other. ... He stood back and 
looked at the gaping cut in the wire. If the white people never looked be- 
yond the lie, to see that theirs was a nation built on stolen land, then they 
would never be able to understand how they had been used by the witch- 
ery. (190-91) 

In cutting through Floyd Lee’s fence, Tayo not only opens a way to regain his 
family’s cattle but also aligns himself with the inexorable process of change 
that works against fixed boundaries and distinctions. 

Tayo’s decision to embrace his role in the ceremony Betonie had envisioned — 
his decision to pursue the missing cattle — also leads him to a deeper sense of 
himself as an Indian through his relationship with the mountain spirit Ts’eh. 
Like his fleeting encounter with Night Swan, Tayo’s more extended relation- 
ship with Ts’eh teaches him about the connections between himself and the 
world around him. This time, however, he more fully understands the signifi- 
cance of his lessons, and Ts’eh offers him more thorough, intimate knowledge 
of Native traditions. These insights range from where and how to gather roots 
and plants to the workings of the cosmic witchery manifested in Emo, the most 
brutal of the embittered war veterans at Laguna, who has renounced his Indian 
heritage in favor of a twisted combination of flag-waving and machismo. 

When Tayo chooses to confront the evil Emo represents, he plays out his 
role in the larger story, the larger ceremony, of the struggle between the forces 
of change and life and those of stasis and death. This climactic episode takes 
Tayo to an abandoned uranium mine and, mindful of the proximity of Los Alamos 
and White Sands, to an insight that broadens his understanding to encompass 
not only his Indian heritage and his role in the story of cultural change in the 
Southwest but also the common predicament of all human beings in the nuclear 
age: 



There was no end to it; it knew no boundaries; and he had arrived at the 
point of convergence where the fate of all living things, and even the earth, 
had been laid .... From that time on, human beings were one clan again, 
united by the fate the destroyers planned for all of them, for all living things; 
united by a circle of death that devoured people in cities twelve thousand 
miles away, victims who had never known these mesas, who had never 
seen the delicate colors of the rocks which boiled up their slaughter. (246) 

For Silko, this widest circle of connection is a final rebuttal to any notion of 
“us” and “them,” and it is a chilling reminder of what is ultimately at stake in 
our attempts to understand and live with each other. 



The multicultural ethic of Ceremony is a legacy of its roots in Native American 
tradition as well as a mark of its place in the “American” story of an emergent 
national culture that encompasses a multiplicity of ethnic traditions. Silko 



124 



Robert O’Brien Hokanson 



challenges us to take this notion of cultural pluralism seriously, and to embrace 
the changes it entails rather than continue to fool ourselves about who and what 
we are. In this respect, she, like Betonie, plays the role of what Cornel West 
calls a “critical organic catalyst,” someone who stays “attuned to the best of 
what the mainstream has to offer — its paradigms, viewpoints, and methods — 
yet maintains a grounding in affirming and enabling subcultures of criticism” 
(36). Beyond this, however, Silko also helps us understand that a multicultural 
ethic is about more than mainstream and subculture. Here she addresses the 
concern raised by John Mentzos that too much multicultural work centers on 
the two-way relationship between “mainstream” white society and some “Other,” 
rather than examining and promoting relationships among various communi- 
ties of color. In Ceremony , the dynamics of cultural interaction play out among 
three cultures which themselves prove to be mixed and various. As we’ve seen, 
the novel works against fixed notions of “us” vs. “them,” stressing instead the 
multiple and shifting layers of individual and cultural identity. David L. Moore 
examines this dynamic sense of identity and culture from a poststructuralist 
perspective in an essay on Ceremony and the poetry of Ray Young Bear. He 
characterizes the “postcolonial praxis” of these writers as being marked by 
relationality rather than dichotomy, agency rather than determinism, and 
positionality rather than marginality (393). Though my American literature stu- 
dents tend not to discuss Ceremony in such terms, our work with the novel does 
leave them with an understanding of the possibilities the novel presents for 
broader connections, action, and change. 

For my students and me, a key element of the cultural awareness Ceremony 
promotes is not only this kind of multicultural ethic but also a multicultural 
aesthetic. We’ve learned that we’re not necessarily doing anything “wrong” if 
we find hints of Eastern philosophy or Christian imagery in a novel by and 
about a Native American. Likewise, we’ve learned that we can talk about such 
elements of the text as its time shifts, Tayo’s sense of alienation, and his quest 
for wholeness in terms of both “white” and “Native” cultural traditions— but 
that the cultural matrix of a work like Ceremony is more than a two-way street. 
Equally productive lines of inquiry also include considering the role of Mexi- 
can culture (which is itself a hybrid of indigenous and European cultures) in the 
novel and the Southwest generally and examining the role of gender in the book 
in the light of Paula Gunn Allen’s thesis about the feminine in American Indian 
traditions. 

The nature of Ceremony's multicultural aesthetic makes me wary of ap- 
proaches to the novel that too rigidly oppose Native and Western traditions — or 
that would take Silko to task for being too closely tied to the forms and ideol- 
ogy of the dominant culture. Shamoon Zamir, for example, has criticized Cer- 
emony for adopting a transcendent, ahistorical sense of myth that “aligns Silko’s 
narratives not so much with their traditional sources of Pueblo oral culture as 




Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Marmon Silko ’s Ceremony 



125 



with Western high modernism’s reactionary appropriation of a global mythol- 
ogy of sacrificial rejuvenation” (400). He goes on to compare the novel’s cli- 
mactic scene of Tayo resisting the urge to kill Emo with the mythological method 
of T. S. Eliot’s The Waste Land. Rather than find fault with Silko for such 
intertextual connections, I encourage my students to consider them in the light 
of the novel’s multicultural aesthetic. It is certainly worthwhile to discuss the 
risks of Silko’s incorporating “Western” notions of myth and the quest plot into 
her multicultural method, and it is essential to be clear about what defines Na- 
tive American belief systems and how they are different from Western ones, but 
the ultimate point of a work like Ceremony is that such distinctions inevitably 
break down. The broader lesson I want my students to learn from this is that 
although we need to be informed and precise about cultural differences, Cer- 
emony teaches us that such distinctions, and the cultural forms we associate 
with them, constantly shift and blur. 

One way I’ve tried to reinforce this point has been to draw on the work of 
other contemporary artists who share an aesthetic that crosses multiple cultural 
boundaries. We’ve listened to recordings by John Trudell, a former American 
Indian Movement activist who performs socially engaged songs/poetry with 
the backing of a rock band and traditional Native American singers, and watched 
an “MTV Unplugged” poetry slam featuring performers who speak from and 
about a multiplicity of cultural traditions. These “multicultural” works not only 
demonstrate the interaction of cultures but also cross borders between genres as 
well as elite and popular culture. 

Another fruitful approach to Ceremony in my classes has been to highlight 
the process of cultural mediation that James Ruppert describes in his work on 
the novel. Ruppert has shown how the juxtaposition of the prose narrative of 
Tayo’s story with Pueblo myths in verse form results in “not only an increased 
appreciation of the Native worldview by non-Native audiences but also an evo- 
lution of Native worldview through that ‘constant interaction between mean- 
ings’ which characterizes Bakhtinian dialogism” (“Dialogism and Mediation” 
130). For Ruppert, Ceremony challenges its readers to transform their cultural 
frameworks in much the same way that Tayo learns he must transform his out- 
look in order to adapt to a dynamic and diverse world (“Reader’s Lessons” 84- 
85). I, in turn, challenge my students to think of this kind of mediation as a 
three- or four-dimensional process, rather than one that is necessarily limited to 
the intersections of Native and Anglo cultures, and to focus on those moments 
in the novel that present scenes of such cultural interaction. 

The challenges, rewards, and frustrations of “multicultural” work are ever 
present in my teaching of Ceremony , and I try to remember that my approach to 
teaching needs to address not only the diversity of the material I present but 
also the diversity of my students. As Greg Sarris notes in recounting his use of 
storytelling in teaching Native American literature, no one approach will work, 



o 

ERIC 



13G 



126 



Robert O'Brien Hokanson 



or work the same way, for every classroom setting (157). By concentrating on 
the dynamics of crossing multiple cultural boundaries, I aim to open up our 
discussions of Ceremony to the wide range of students I find in my classes. 
Although my students tend not to be very well acquainted with Native Ameri- 
can culture, they do know a lot, often more than they realize, about living in a 
multicultural society. Making room for their knowledge of and experience with 
“multiculturalism” in our work with Silko’s novel has proven well worth the 
time and effort. I’ve also found it tremendously helpful to learn from my col- 
leagues, either through hall conversation or such valuable sources as Mary A. 
Dilg’s essay “The Opening of the American Mind: Challenges in the Cross- 
Cultural Teaching of Literature,” which deals directly and practically with is- 
sues of preparation, classroom dynamics, and the role of the white teacher in 
the culturally diverse classroom. 

Whatever the challenges and conflicts inherent in crossing cultural bound- 
aries in the classroom, Silko’s “Fences Against Freedom” reminds us what’s at 
stake in the attempt. Her essay recalls not only the inclusive worldview she 
learned as a child but also the realities of racism in her life today. As a person of 
mixed ancestry, Silko herself has had several run-ins with the Border Patrol, 
and she now travels the southern route between Tucson and Albuquerque with 
apprehension — and anger (59). This anger is reflected in her latest novel, Alma- 
nac of the Dead (1991), an encyclopedic account of life along the border that 
tempers Ceremony's promise of renewal and wholeness. Indeed, Silko’s more 
recent work serves as a useful counterpoint to Ceremony — a reminder of how 
far American society has yet to progress in making the ideal of cultural plural- 
ism a reality. 

Whether we live on the border or not, as “Americans” in the 1990s, we, like 
Tayo, are all part of “it” now. The drama of crossing cultural boundaries is one 
we can and must enact each day. Through its mixing of cultural forms and its 
story of individual growth and cultural change, Silko’s novel provides students 
and teachers with a model of “multiculturalism” that is both more vivid and 
more deeply meaningful than abstract lectures or media sound bites. With mod- 
els such as this, we can continue to rethink American literature in profound and 
fruitful ways. 



Note 

I would like to thank my students at Alvemo College for continuing to enrich my under- 
standing of “multiculturalism” and “American” literature. 



Crossing Cultural Boundaries with Leslie Mormon Silko ’s Ceremony 



127 



Works Cited 

Allen, Paula Gunn. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in American Indian 
Traditions. Boston: Beacon, 1986. 

Dilg, Mary A. “The Opening of the American Mind: Challenges in the Cross-Cultural 
Teaching of Literature.” English Journal 84.3 (1995): 18-25. 

Fishkin, Shelley Fisher. “The Multiculturalism of Traditional Culture.” The Chronicle of 
Higher Education 10 March 1995: A48. 

Jaskoski, Helen. “Teaching with Storyteller at the Center.” Studies in American Indian 
Literature 5. 1 (1993): 5 1-61 . 

Lincoln, Kenneth. Native American Renaissance. Berkeley: U of California P, 1983. 

Mentzos, John. “Hypocrisy at the Heart.” Colors (September-October 1994): 14-17. 

Moore, David L. “Myth, History, and Identity in Silko and Young Bear: Postcolonial 
Praxis.” New Voices in Native American Literary Criticism. Ed. Arnold Krupat. Wash- 
ington: Smithsonian Institution, 1993. 370-95. 

Ruppert, James. “Dialogism and Mediation in Leslie Silko’s Ceremony ” The Explicator 
51.2(1993): 129-34. 

. “The Reader’s Lessons in Ceremony ” Arizona Quarterly 44. 1 (1988): 78-85. 

Sarris, Greg. Keeping Slug Woman Alive: A Holistic Approach to Native American Texts. 
Berkeley: U of California P, 1993. 

Silko, Leslie Marmon. Ceremony. 1977. New York: Penguin, 1986. 

. “Fences Against Freedom.” Hungry Mind Review 3 1 (Fall 1994): 9, 20, 58-9. 

West, Cornel. “The New Cultural Politics of Difference.” Beyond a Dream Deferred: 
Multicultural Education and the Politics of Excellence. Eds. Becky W. Thompson 
and Sangeeta Tyagi. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1993. 1 8 — 40. 

Zamir, Shamoon. “Literature in a ‘National Sacrifice Area’: Leslie Silko’s Ceremony 
New Voices in Native American Literary Criticism. Ed. Arnold Krupat. Washington: 
Smithsonian, 1993. 396-415. 





8 Mirrors, Windows, and Prisms: 
Teaching Asian American Literature 
in the P.R.C. and the U.S.A. 



Mary Louise Buley-Meissner 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 

The transformative power of Asian American literature makes it one of the most 
dynamic literatures in the ongoing cultural development of this country. As 
novelist Cynthia Kadohata asserts, “The main obligations writers have are to 
learn their craft and to keep themselves on fire. Only by fulfilling these obliga- 
tions can they tell stories that bum” (xv). Stories, I would add, that bum through 
our minds to change how we know the world, that make us see and feel — from 
the inside out — what human beings are capable of doing (at their best, at their 
worst, in the everyday drama of their lives). As Garrett Hongo observes in his 
introduction to Under Western Eyes: Personal Essays from Asian America, the 
most compelling narratives often are “written against social silencing, but emerg- 
ing from deep personal silences dedicated to reflecting on moral, political, and 
identity issues” (22). What does it mean to be an American of Asian heritage? 
To be a second- or third- or fourth-generation American who is regarded as a 
“foreigner” in this country? To be an American whose history is missing from 
this country’s grand narratives of its destiny — with little or no mention in stan- 
dard history books of Angel Island, the Chinese Exclusion Act, antimiscegena- 
tion laws, labor strikes, internment camps, court appeals for justice, and so on? 
How does it feel to be “raced” by others whose superiority depends on your 
inferiority? To be “erased” by others who say, “Now that I’ve gotten to know 
you, I don’t think of you as Korean (or Indian or Laotian)”? Asian American 
literature incisively addresses such issues, burning through stereotypes to com 
found and challenge us with its redefinitions of identity, difference, and com- 
munity. 1 

Yet Asian American literature is compelling for another, equally important 
reason. In Garrett Hongo’s words, it often enacts “an arrest of the practical 
mind so that the mind of memory and imagination can then be engaged, calling 
forth the purpose of taking pure pleasure in the meditative act of writing itself’ 
(22). Pure pleasure, yes, that is also what animates Sui Sin Far’s essays, Hisaye 
Yamamoto’s short stories, and the work of so many other authors. Their integ- 
rity is inseparable from their artistry. Whatever insights they offer, they depend 



128 





Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



129 



on us to be attentive to silences within stories, stories within silences, the lan- 
guages of the emotions and the senses. Recollecting experience, they re-form it 
through storytelling that transcends (yet is made true by) the characters who 
come to life on the page. 2 When we enter into that life, anything can happen. 
And that is why I would like to tell you about my experiences teaching Asian 
American literature in both the People’s Republic of China and the United States. 

My main purpose will be to show how students come to appreciate that lit- 
erature through an approach emphasizing its artistry, rhetoricity, and historical 
background. By artistry, I mean the conceptual and stylistic interrelationship of 
the fundamental elements of fiction: point of view, characterization, plot, scene, 
and theme. As King-kok Cheung (Articulate) remarks, Asian American litera- 
ture rarely has been given the “close reading” accorded canonical literature, so 
that its deconstruction seems counterproductive — a point reinforced by other 
scholars such as Elaine Kim, Amy Ling, and Sau-ling Cynthia Wong. By refer- 
ring to the rhetoricity of that literature, I mean to highlight its intentionality — 
its persuasive appeals and strategies. For I believe that Asian American 
authors — like all authors of world literature 3 — transform our perceptions of self, 
society, and culture. In “The Politics of Knowledge,” Edward Said observes, 
“The attempt to read a text in its fullest and most integrative context commits 
the reader to positions that are educative, humane, and engaged” (312). Read- 
ing in that way, inevitably we are guided by the choices authors have made in 
creating the word-woven worlds we are invited to enter. As to the historical 
background of Asian American literature, I realize that it is crucial to any seri- 
ous study of authors’ achievements. Elaine Kim emphasizes that fact in her 
pioneering work Asian American Literature: An Introduction to the Writings 
and Their Social Context , explaining that sociohistorical knowledge “can mean 
the difference between understanding a work and completely misunderstand- 
ing it” (xviii). In sum, I believe that students have much to gain from attention 
to the texts and contexts of Asian American literature — to the artistry, rhetoricity, 
and historical background which make it uniquely appealing and worldly. 

This essay describes the reading experiences of students at Shanghai Inter- 
national Studies University (where I recently taught multicultural literature as a 
Fulbright professor of American Studies) and the University of Wisconsin-Mil- 
waukee (where I regularly teach Asian American literature). For cross-cultural 
comparison and contrast, I also will refer more generally to Chinese and Ameri- 
can students’ attitudes toward literature, based on four years of teaching at Chi- 
nese schools and eight at UWM. 4 One of the most striking differences between 
the two groups of students relates to their basic conceptualization of literature’s 
value. The Chinese students that I have met consistently describe “serious” lit- 
erature as significant because it “mirrors” life in objective, realistic, verifiable 
terms. 5 They respect authors who “stand outside” society in order to reflect its 
problems and progress back to citizens in need of enlightenment and moral 



0 

ERIC 



140 



130 



Mary Louise Buley -Meissner 



instruction. “Great” authors are those who go beyond “personal” interests to 
address issues affecting society as a whole. They encourage ordinary people to 
face the hardships of life without losing heart; no matter how much they them- 
selves have suffered, they are not bitter. Perhaps the most important lesson they 
offer is that of learning from experience. Thus, “world-class literature” inspires 
readers to confront their own reflections and realize what they must do for 
society’s advancement. The most influential literary doctrine in China remains 
Mao Zedong’s “Talks at the Yan’an Forum on Literature and Art,” which de- 
mands that literature serve politics in carrying out the Party leadership’s aims 
(Duke, Blooming; Link, Stubborn). Of course, innovative writers have tested 
the limits of that dictum (Barme and Minford; Kinkley ; Lee, “Beyond”; Wang), 
but it remains powerful in determining what is published, taught, and accorded 
official respect. In addition, Chinese students tend to accept the classical Chi- 
nese view of literature as a subset of history (Plaks), therefore subject to assess- 
ments of its factuality and enduring truth-value. From ancient times through the 
present, “the fundamental affinity of literature, morality, and politics” (Link, 
Roses 17) has been the basic standard for determining literature’s value. 

My American students, in contrast, frequently regard literature as an array of 
“windows” through which they can observe other people’s lives. Selecting vari- 
ous windows to open or close, they can maintain a certain distance from what 
they see. In their view, the transparency of literature makes it possible to “look 
through” books at the world — a distinctly different quality than the reflectivity 
admired by Chinese. If either the subject or style of literature seems “obscure,” 
they tend to be skeptical about its significance. Unlike Chinese students, they 
do not look to literature for direct guidance in life. If authors seem to “moral- 
ize,” American students are likely to be uninterested. In general, they appreci- 
ate portrayal of clearly motivated “characters in action” rather than illustration 
of socially instructive themes. Most American students that I have taught do not 
expect history or politics to be important in determining literature’s value. 

The closest Chinese word to the English “study” — xue — means “to analyze 
the merits of a meritorious person and model your behavior after his” (Schoenhals 
25). “Great” works of literature are to be studied in China because they are 
exemplary in every way: politically, socially, morally, stylistically. “Popular” 
literature also should express “correct” attitudes, but its status is lower because 
it is not as ideologically or artistically refined. Only when Chinese students 
read “great” literature do they analyze word-by-word, line-by-line in order to 
explicate its lessons. Similarly, only in English classes do American students 
“take everything apart” to “dig out the meaning.” Outside of school, Chinese 
and American students find reading much more enjoyable. As many have told 
me, they “get into books” which are believable yet unpredictable, surprising but 
nonetheless “true to life.” Could that also happen in school? My experiences at 



Mirrors , Windows , £wc/ Prisms 



131 



SISU and UWM suggest that it can — if students are given the opportunity to 
read in new ways. 

At SISU, however, students initially were extremely resistant to reading the 
multicultural anthologies, Visions of America and Imagining America (Brown 
and Ling), which I had selected (and shipped from the U.S.) for an American 
Studies course, “Cross-Cultural Perspectives on American Experience.” None 
of the students ever had heard of the authors whose work I planned to discuss. 
Names they recognized and respected in American literature were Stephen Crane, 
Mark Twain, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway — “major authors” whose 
books reflected “major social concerns” of their times. These and other “great 
men” exemplified “honesty and courage in showing us how to live.” (The only 
books by American women that students knew were Alice Walker’s The Color 
Purple and Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind , both praised for exposing 
racism.) When students were told that we would be reading stories and essays 
by American authors such as Bharati Mukheijee (of Indian heritage), Bienvenidos 
Santos (Filipino), Kim Yong Ik (Korean), and Tahira Naqvi (Pakistani), they 
protested, “Are these authors really American? What’s the point of reading their 
work if we’ve never heard of them before?” Students were certain that unknown 
meant inconsequential. In their view, “minority” authors necessarily were of 
“minor” importance. Because such authors did not belong to the “main cul- 
ture,” they were “too narrow” in outlook, inevitably biased and inescapably 
personal. They had no “widely applicable lessons” to offer, only descriptions of 
their own “small comer” of society. In sum, the entire enterprise of studying 
their work seemed suspect. 

Here it should be noted that all of these students (eleven women and seven 
men) were enrolled in the American Studies program to earn an advanced teacher- 
training certificate. They had been selected and sent to SISU by their schools so 
that they could enhance their English language skills (reading, writing, listen- 
ing, speaking) through a two-year program in literature, history, and econom- 
ics. All of them were English teachers with two to ten years of experience at 
commercial colleges, technological and government institutes, teachers’ col- 
leges, or universities. As part of a national campaign to improve instruction in 
English (and other in-demand subjects), they were preparing to become “model 
teachers” (an official accolade), who would carry “advanced knowledge” back 
to their schools. With few exceptions, however, they had not studied — or prac- 
ticed — English extensively since graduating from college. (It is not uncommon 
for Chinese teachers of English to use English infrequently, mainly because 
instruction tends to emphasize grammar and syntax.) 

Throughout middle school and college, they had excelled in English through 
word-by-word, sentence-by-sentence analysis of the “language points” (par- 
ticularly the grammatical rules) illustrated by their texts. In studying American 



0 

ERiC 



142 



132 



Mary Louise Buley-Meissner 



literature, most had read only excerpts or summaries intended to highlight the 
authors’ ideologies. For every book on the national standardized curriculum, 
these teachers had learned the “correct” interpretation. For example, Fitzgerald’s 
The Great Gatsby reflected “the corruptness of the American Dream,” and 
Hemingway’s The Old Man and the Sea showed how “man must fight to sur- 
vive.” Through a series of increasingly competitive exams (only 5 percent of 
middle school students in China go on to college), they had proven their mas- 
tery of language and literature. Now I expected them to develop a new approach 
to new authors, emphasizing their own interpretations of characters, events, and 
themes. No wonder they protested, “You expect too much!” 



Two Asian American authors evoked especially strong responses from the SISU 
students: Sui Sin Far (1865-1914) and Hisaye Yamamoto (b. 1921). These “mi- 
nority” authors proved to be highly interesting to students as we analyzed themes 
and styles suggesting the interrelationship of artistry, rhetoricity, and history. In 
reading Sui Sin Far’s autobiographical “Leaves from the Mental Portfolio of an 
Eurasian” (originally published in 1909), they were most impressed by her in- 
tegration of personal and social concerns. Through class discussion of her es- 
say, they concluded that she “reformed the meaning of ‘personal’ to make it 
powerful” by representing her own life as a catalyst for social change. In 
“Leaves,” Sui Sin Far describes her evolving sense of bicultural identity through 
a series of increasingly painful episodes. The second oldest of fourteen chil- 
dren, she grows up in poverty, but suffers the most from doubting that anyone 
fully accepts her. With a Chinese mother and an English father, she soon real- 
izes that others regard her as an “interesting little creature” (Brown and Ling, 
Visions 23). At six years old — when her family moves from England to the 
United States — she encounters the first Chinese person (other than her mother) 
that she has ever seen and “recoil[s] with a sense of shock.” However, when she 
is taunted with “Chinky, Chinky, Chinaman, yellow-face, pig-tail, rat-eater,” 
she fights back and proclaims, “I’d rather be Chinese than anything else in the 
world” (23-24). Yet even with this victory, she feels as if she is a stranger to 
both of her parents, who remain silent on the question of her identity. By age 
eighteen, Sui Sin Far has read every book she can find on China and the Chi- 
nese. By her early twenties, she establishes a successful career as an investiga- 
tive reporter, becoming so well known in Chinese communities that they owe 
“an everlasting debt of gratitude to Sui Sin Far for the bold stand she has taken 
in their defense” (27). Throughout her life, however, Sui Sin Far realizes that 
she does not completely fit in anywhere. Chinese know that she is different 
because she does not speak their language; among other people, she feels even 
more out of place. 



143 



Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



133 



Sitting next to her at dinner, her employer remarks, “Somehow or other ... I 
cannot reconcile myself to the thought that the Chinese are humans like our- 
selves. They may have immortal souls, but their faces seem to be so utterly 
devoid of expression that I cannot help but doubt.” Other people at the table 
agree, adding: “A chinaman is . . . more repulsive than a nigger. . . .They always 

give me such a creepy feeling 1 wouldn’t have one in the house.” Sui Sin Far 

knows that her life will be easier if she remains silent — for everyone has as- 
sumed she is “white” — but her conscience forces her to speak out: “The Chi- 
nese may have no souls, no expression on their faces, be altogether beyond the 
pale of civilization, but whatever they are, I want you to understand that I am — 
I am a Chinese” (Brown and Ling, Visions 28). Before long, she leaves town for 
another job. Wherever she travels — America, Canada, Jamaica — Sui Sin Far 
hopes that people will accept her as an individual. But whether or not they do, 
she continues to speak out for the humanity of the Chinese. 

Students were deeply impressed by Sui Sin Far’s pride in her Chinese iden- 
tity, pointing out to me that her 1909 essay was published when China itself 
was in great political turmoil. (The Republic of China was not formed until 
1 9 1 1 ; the People’s Republic of China was established in 1 949.) As one student 
speculated, “In China, Sui Sin Far might have joined the May Fourth Move- 
ment for democracy.” They also shared her pride in Chinese culture’s superior- 
ity to all other cultures — a superiority taken for granted by virtually all Chinese 
students that I have met. Thus, they were pleased to learn that Sui Sin Far led an 
extraordinary life in America, producing not only first-rate journalism (e.g., 
“The Chinese Woman in America” and “Chinese Workmen”), but also the first 
book of fiction by an Asian American, the short story collection Mrs . Spring 
Fragrance . 6 Her achievements stand out even more against the anti-Chinese 
racism of her era. To help students grasp the significance of her work, I ex- 
plained that tens of thousands of Chinese men had emigrated to the United 
States in the 1850s through the 1870s to toil in gold mining, railroad construc- 
tion, and agricultural development. These sojourners to “Gold Mountain” had 
left a country ravaged by civil war, foreign aggression, political corruption, and 
the natural disasters of flood and famine. As Ronald Takaki details in Strangers 
from a Different Shore , their labor supported their families in China and sub- 
stantially contributed to America’s growth as a self-sufficient nation. But when 
the stock market crashed in 1873 and an economic depression set in, the Chi- 
nese were blamed for soaring unemployment rates. The U.S. government’s re- 
sponse was the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act, the first national act to target and 
exclude immigrants by race. This legislation was criticized by civic and reli- 
gious leaders (Baldwin; The Other Side; Townsend), but to no avail; in 1902, it 
was renewed for another ten years. 7 Chinese already in this country had virtu- 
ally no legal rights or legal protection. 8 As the popular press editorialized and 



134 



Mary Louise Buley -Meissner 



pulp fiction warned the American public, “[The Chinese are] poisoning the moral 
atmosphere, tainting society, undermining the free institutions of this country, 
degrading labor, and resisting ... all efforts to remove them. . . . Good people, 
what shall be done?” (qtd. in Wu, 32). 

In reading “Leaves” against its historical background — which was new and 
disturbing to everyone in class — students could see that Sui Sin Far’s “per- 
sonal” and “political” concerns are inseparable. Her narrative does not merely 
reflect social issues, but instead re-presents them imaginatively. For example, 
she recalls (as if it is a recurring experience) “meeting] a half Chinese, half 
white girl. Her face is plastered with a thick white coat of paint and her eyelids 
and eyebrows are blackened so that the shape of her eyes and her whole expres- 
sion is changed” (Brown and Ling, Visions 30). Sui Sin Far explains that the girl 
is desperately trying to pass as Spanish in California, but one student inter- 
preted the passage in this way: “Perhaps it is the author who has a split identity 
in a split society.” 

Throughout “Leaves,” Sui Sin Far skillfully integrates artistry and rhetoricity, 
so that questions about her own life illuminate issues of cross-cultural signifi- 
cance. “Individuality is more than nationality” (33), she insists — not only for 
herself, but for any and all people denied their rights on the basis of their race. 
Reading “Leaves,” students gained new understandings of the relationships be- 
tween literature and politics, art and rhetoric, history and truth. As one of them 
suggested, “Literature tells the truth in its own way. It takes in history and poli- 
tics. But it tells its own story.” 



Why are you interested in reading Asian American literature? At UWM, I ask 
students this on the first day of a course that introduces them to American au- 
thors of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Indian, and other Asian heritages. Most 
students have never heard of Sui Sin Far, Hisaye Yamamoto, or any other au- 
thors included in the course; most are enrolled to satisfy the university’s “cul- 
tural diversity” requirement for graduation. 9 However, I am always curious to 
learn what they expect. Different groups of students provide different answers, 
of course 10 , but here are some recurring responses: “Asia has always seemed 

mysterious to me, so I would like a glimpse of it I would like to understand 

how Asians think, especially because few Americans know anything about this 
minority. ... I enjoy American literature courses because they let me look into 
other people’s lives, and I expect this ‘special interest’ course to do the same. . . . 
I would like to find out why Asian American literature is becoming popular, 
even though I am not Asian myself.” These responses suggest basic assump- 
tions that students bring to the course: Asian American literature will reveal 
“East” to “West” (a division analyzed by Said in Orientalism ), making a “mys- 
terious” culture more familiar without taking away its exotic appeal. Moreover, 



14 5 



Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



135 



it will explain to Americans what it means to be “Asian” — defined by ideas 
particular to that singular group. Students also assume that the experience of 
reading Asian American literature should conform to the already familiar expe- 
rience of reading American literature (one being subsidiary to the other). No 
special knowledge should be required for a “special interest” course; anyone 
should be able to learn something from it, even though Asian American authors 
appeal mainly to “Asian” readers. Overall, “Asian” seems to stand in students’ 
responses for alien and unassimilatable, defining the course as the study of 
“foreign” literature. 

However, some students answer “Why are you interested in Asian American 
literature?” quite differently. Japanese, Indian, Laotian, and other Asian Ameri- 
can students often remark, “I hope to learn more about my own identity, espe- 
cially what ‘Asian’ and ‘American’ mean in my life.” African American, Hispanic, 
and American Indian students frequently note, “It’s important to me to learn 
more about what other minorities have experienced in this country, including 
how they have survived.” In contrast to students hoping for a guided tour of 
“Asia,” they want to see America (and their own place in it) more clearly. Of 
course, serious interest in the study of literature is not determined by ethnicity 
or race. In fact, I have found that students in China and America alike come to 
be remarkably flexible and creative in their thinking about literature — even if at 
first they might seem close-minded. 

For example, a major revelation for many UWM students is that Asian Ameri- 
can literature is written by American authors who address American experience 
(not exclusively, but predominantly). It is not written by Chinese about China, 
or by Japanese about Japan. Another surprise to many students is learning that 
Asian Americans are not a homogeneous group. As Lisa Lowe explains, “From 
the perspective of the majority culture, Asian Americans may very well be con- 
structed as different from, and other than, Euro-Americans. But from the per- 
spective of Asian Americans, we are perhaps even more different, more diverse 
among ourselves . . .”(27). The circumstances of emigration (historical, politi- 
cal, economic), identifications with the “homeland,” degrees of assimilation, 
regions of settlement, social memberships, educational attainments — these and 
certainly other elements of experience defy any attempt to decide what is “es- 
sentially” Asian American. However, many scholars of Asian American litera- 
ture and history are convinced that “National, historical, and even class 
distinctions recede in the light of the experience of difference within a white- 
dominated society” (Lim and Ling, Reading 4; see also Lowe; Sumida; Wong 
Reading). For some Asian Americans at some moments in American history, 
racial identity has been “involuntary, unerasable, full of burden,” as it was for 
Japanese Americans during World War II (Lim, “Ambivalent” 26). In any case, 
that identity is irreducibly complex — varying from individual to individual, yet 
undeniably influenced by collective experience. So the term “Asian American” 





136 



Mary Louise Buley -Meissner 



should be recognized as a strategic one, employed for intellectual and political 
resistance against oppression. As Sau-ling Cynthia Wong emphasizes, its appli- 
cation to literature serves “an emergent and evolving textual coalition” ( Read- 
ing 9), extending from early immigrants’ songs and poetry to contemporary 
novels and plays. 11 

It cannot be assumed, however, that history ever provides a “correct” read- 
ing of literature. History itself must be scrutinized for its biases and revised to 
incorporate new perspectives on our country’s development. For example, al- 
though Asian Americans have been here for over 150 years, they have been 
rendered invisible and silent by their exclusion from far too many accounts of 
America’s economic, cultural, and political advancement. To redress this injus- 
tice, scholars of Asian American history have documented the participation of 
Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Filipino, Indian, and other Asian Americans in shap- 
ing our national character (e.g., Chan Asian; Cordova and Canillo; Daniels; Lee 
Asian ; Lee Quiet; Min; Okihiro;Takaki; Yung). Even revisionary history, how- 
ever, cannot explain literature in any direct, incontestable way; nor does litera- 
ture “prove” whether or not history should be accepted as true. Both are subject 
to interpretation; both are forms of storytelling (Canary and Kozicki; White). 
Yet literature is by nature more exploratory than investigative, more tentative 
than conclusive. It speaks to us more personally, and asks us to respond in kind. 



As students become more familiar with Asian American literature, they soon 
realize its themes are meaningful across cultures. Students in both China and 
America, for example, have been deeply affected by Hisaye Yamamoto’s “Sev- 
enteen Syllables,” the tragic story of a Japanese American woman in the 1930s 
who briefly leads a double life. Living on an isolated California farm, Tome 
Hayashi has fulfilled her responsibilities as wife, mother, and worker for many 
years without protest. Every day she labors beside her husband in the fields, 
picking and boxing tomatoes for a cannery. Without fail, she quietly attends to 
Mr. Hayashi ’s needs, looks out for their fifteen-year-old daughter, Rosie, and 
keeps their house in order. But for three months, the dutiful Tome becomes the 
independent Ume Hanazono, eloquent writer of beautiful haiku. Late at night, 
sitting alone at the kitchen table, she tries her best to “pack all her meaning into 
seventeen syllables only, which [are] divided into three lines of five, seven, and 
five syllables” (Yamamoto 8). Without neglecting her family, she soon becomes 
“an extravagant contributor” (9) under her pen name to the haiku section of a 
Japanese-language newspaper. Mr. Hayashi never comments on her work, and 
Rosie (who knows as little Japanese as her mother knows English) cannot un- 
derstand it. Then one day an unexpected visitor, the haiku editor of Mainichi 
Shimbum, arrives with news for Tome: she has won first place in a poetry com- 
petition. “Believing and not believing, pleased and overwhelmed” (16), Tome 



Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



137 



accepts her prize — an exquisite Hiroshiges print — and invites the editor to tea. 
But Mr. Hayashi only exclaims to Rosie, “Ha, your mother’s crazy!” Soon he 
sends Rosie to bring her back to the fields. And when Tome asks for a minute 
more, Mr. Hayashi’s anger explodes “exactly like the cork of a bottle popping” 
(17). He marches into the house, pushes the editor out, seizes his wife’s prize, 
and throws it to the ground. To Rosie’s shock, he smashes it with an axe, pours 
kerosene over it, and sets it afire. Certain that “his act of cremation [is] irrevo- 
cable,” he then returns to the fields. Watching “the dying fire,” Rosie cannot 
believe what has happened, but her mother calmly asks, “Do you know why I 
married your father?” 

Rosie then hears that “Her mother, at nineteen, had come to America and 
married her father as an alternative to suicide” (18). Tome had been in love with 
the eldest son of a wealthy family; they carried on their affair secretly because 
her own family was poor (her father was a gambler and alcoholic). When she 
became pregnant, her lover already was engaged to someone else. Completely 
degraded in her family’s eyes, Tome gave birth to a stillborn son. At that time, 
seventeen years ago, she wrote to a sister in America, threatening to kill herself 
unless she could leave Japan. The sister arranged a marriage with “a young man 
of simple mind [and] kindly heart,” who never learned of Tome’s past. Tragic as 
this story is, she tells it “perfectly,” as if she has “memorized it by heart, reciting 
it to herself so many times that its nagging vileness [has] long since gone” (19). 
Rosie’s only response, however, is “I would have liked a brother.” Tome’s final 
plea — “Promise me you will never marry!” — brings Rosie to tears, but not to 
understanding of what she has heard. 

Discussing their initial reactions to “Seventeen Syllables,” Chinese students 
sympathized with Tome because “she lost her dreams” and “she had to go back 
to a lonely life.” Nonetheless, many thought Mr. Hayashi “deserved more pity 
because he suffered more.” A majority of our class (five out of seven men and 
six out of eleven women) agreed on these points: the husband was “cheated out 
of a happy life” in his arranged marriage; his destruction of Tome’s prize was 
“wrong but understandable”; and Tome should have tried harder to be “a good 
wife and a good mother.” They also thought her life as Ume the poet was “fated 
to fail” because it was “too selfish, too private, just for herself.” The other stu- 
dents also pitied Mr. Hayashi, but they did not believe Tome should be treated 
so cruelly. As one woman protested, “Tome did her best in a difficult situation. 
Writing haiku is not wrong! When her husband took away her prize, he took 
away the beauty of her life. Now what will she have left?” As we continued to 
discuss “Seventeen Syllables,” I realized that no singleminded concept of “Chi- 
nese tradition” or “Chinese culture” could explain students’ views. (For cer- 
tainly tradition and culture always are in flux, always in the process of being 
formed.) They themselves had enrolled at SISU for reasons that could be con- 
sidered “selfish”: personal advancement, higher social status, the opportunity 




138 



Mary Louise Buley -Meissner 



to qualify for study overseas. Those who had the most sympathy for Tome ques- 
tioned whether or not their own hopes were too high. As one woman wondered, 
“If you want more than being a mother and a wife, will you always be lonely? 
Can poetry fill up Tome’s life?” In contrast, those who criticized Tome most 
severely were determined not to let their own lives be disrupted. One student’s 
remarks, for example, seemed to describe himself as much as Tome’s husband: 
“He has to keep things in order. That is not his choice. It is his duty.” 

Reading “Seventeen Syllables ” Chinese students initially were disappointed 
that Yamamoto did not explain how the characters should be judged. In effect, 
they wanted the story to reflect Yamamoto’s lessons on life back to them. Her 
artistry and rhetoricity, however, are so tightly interwoven that the experience 
of reading the story finally seems more important than anything else. For ex- 
ample, the story is told not by Tome, but by her daughter, Rosie, who under- 
stands very little of her parents’ unhappiness. The story is filled with silences 
external and internal: out on the tomato fields, where everyone works “as effi- 
ciently as a flawless machine” (16); inside the house, where the only sound is 
the mother’s “midnight scribbling with pencil on scratch paper” (9); within the 
family, where words are measured against the risk of being misunderstood. 
Rosie does not question this way of life, but she tries to escape it through fan- 
tasy and infatuation. On the way home from visiting friends, when her parents 
do not speak to each other in the car, she pictures their “green pick-up crumpled 
in the dark . . . three contorted, bleeding bodies, one of them hers” (12). Kissed 
by seventeen-year-old Jesus Carrasco, a hired hand on the farm, Rosie falls “for 
the first time entirely victim to a helplessness delectable beyond speech ... [a] 
terrible, beautiful sensation” (14). Ironically, Rosie has no idea that her mother’s 
own emotional life is much more tumultuous. Even at the end of “Seventeen 
Syllables,” when Tome confesses the shame of her loveless marriage, Rosie’s 
thoughts return to Jesus’s touch. Words fail to bring mother and daughter closer 
together, yet the silence between them has been broken. If Tome cannot escape 
her own fate, at least she has tried to change Rosie’s. 

Teaching in both China and America, I have found that when students care- 
fully attend to Yamamoto’s creative interplay of character, plot, and point of 
view, they recognize that the rift between mother and daughter is no less impor- 
tant than the tension between husband and wife. As one Chinese student ob- 
served, “When I reread the story, I see how desperate Tome is for Rosie to have 
a different life. Tome puts her whole life into seventeen syllables, but Rosie 
shouldn’t have to.” Noting that Tome’s stillborn son would have been seventeen 
years old if he had lived, another Chinese student remarked, “When Tome 
watches her poetry prize burning up, she goes through her son dying again. She 
didn’t get a new life in America. She didn’t get a new life as a poet. She watches 
all of her hopes burning up.” Making such connections, students could see that 
Yamamoto is centrally concerned with portraying Tome in her full complexity 



O 

ERLC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 




Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



139 



as mother/wife/poet. Judging Tome or her husband is not the point of “Seven- 
teen Syllables.” 

American students, however, usually are initially critical of both characters. 
They expect to look through the “window” of the story into lives which can be 
evaluated by their own standards of “right” and “wrong” behavior. They casti- 
gate the husband for his “completely irrational actions,” and they cannot under- 
stand why the wife is “so submissive, as if she has no will of her own.” They 
want to know why she stays in such an unhappy situation: “If she wants a differ- 
ent life, she should pack up and get out.” As for Rosie, “She should get out of 
there as soon as she can. She has to have her own life.” Wherever I have taught, 
however, students have developed new insights as they have learned about the 
historical background of “Seventeen Syllables.” Arranged marriages — such as 
that between Tome and her husband — were not unusual for the issei, the first 
generation of Japanese immigrants. Before the 1924 Asian Exclusion Act, young 
Japanese men came to work for plantations, farms, railroads, and canneries in 
the United States. When they had secured employment, they often sent for “pic- 
ture brides” who had been matched with them through an exchange of photos 
and background information. Couples met for the first time in the United States, 
then settled down to raise families. As King-kok Cheung points out, by 1930, 
the American-born nisei (the second generation) outnumbered the issei ( Hisaye 
5). Japanese farms — such as the one depicted in “Seventeen Syllables” — sub- 
stantially contributed to the country’s agricultural development, but the Alien 
Land Law Act of 1913 barred “aliens ineligible for citizenship” from buying 
land or leasing it for more than three years. Anti-Asian racism culminated in the 
World War II internment of 1 10,000 Japanese and Japanese Americans (two- 
thirds of whom were U.S. citizens), confiscation of their homes and businesses, 
disintegration of families, and destruction of communities. Not until 1952 could 
Japanese become naturalized citizens. For many Japanese Americans, the in- 
ternment symbolizes an alienation which has not ended (e.g., Houston; 
Murayama; Okada; Sone; Uchida; Yamada). 

“Seventeen Syllables” is set in the 1930s, before Japanese families were 
forced into Manzanar, Tule Lake, and the other camps. Learning what lies ahead, 
however, Chinese and American students recognize the tragic desperation in 
Mr. Hayashi’s life. No matter how hard he tries to make his farm as productive 
as possible, he will lose it. In fact, it is not his to own, regardless of his labor. 
His wife is a stranger to him; his daughter is by birth a citizen of the country 
calling him “alien.” Thus, students realize that Mr. Hayashi is enraged not only 
by his wife’s independence, but by all that he has lost in coming to America. 
Similarly, they realize that Tome is caught up in circumstances affecting many 
issei women in America. She cannot simply “pack up and get out.” She has only 
one sister in America, few friends, and nowhere to turn if she leaves home. 
Rather than passivity, she demonstrates extraordinary strength of character in 



O 

ERIC 



150 



140 



Mary Louise Buley- Meissner 



fulfilling her responsibilities as wife, mother, and worker. As for Rosie, stu- 
dents can see that many difficult decisions lie ahead for her. Like many other 
nisei, she must find her own way to be Japanese and American in a country 
where her parents can never fully belong. 

Historical background to Asian American literature is useful to all students, 
but American students in particular are sometimes shocked by what they learn 
about their own country. In every class at UWM, comments like the following 
are common: “I never studied anything about the camps before. I feel angry 
about what happened and why I didn’t learn about it before.” (The average age 
of UWM students is 27.) Yamamoto herself was interned in Poston, Arizona, 
where she edited the camp newsletter. For fifty years, she has been writing short 
stories about Japanese American experience with a voice Cheung describes as 
“at once compassionate and ironic, gentle and probing” (Introduction xiv) in its 
exploration of ordinary people’s lives. Yet an anthology of her stories was not 
published in the United States until 1985; and the first collection of scholarly 
essays on her work was not assembled until 1994. 12 In an interview, Yamamoto 
once claimed that she “didn’t have any imagination” and “just embroidered on 
things that happened” (Crow 74). 13 However, she is now widely recognized as a 
pioneering author of the Japanese American literary tradition. 



Attentive to artistry, rhetoricity, and history, we can read in ways that open up a 
spectrum of compelling possibilities. Each of us will learn something different, 
for each of us will hold the prism of literature up to a different light and at a 
different angle (according to when, how, and why we are reading). As the writer 
Tobias Wolff observes, “We need to feel ourselves acted upon by a story, out- 
raged, exposed, in danger of heartbreak and change. Those are the stories that 
endure in our memories, to the point where they take on the nature of memory 
itself. . . . [The best stories] inscribe themselves forever on the reader’s moral 
being, and bring the world into sharper focus” (viii). In that way, perhaps, lit- 
erature becomes history, a re-collection or re-presentation of experiences that 
define our individuality and humanity. Authors such as Sui Sin Far and Hisaye 
Yamamoto ask that we look again — more closely and carefully — at life’s po- 
tential to enrage, exhilarate, or completely surprise us. Who we are, what we 
believe and why, how we hope to live with others — these are concerns drawing 
us into the study of Asian American and all world literature. As we read, we 
remember: bitterness tasted, hopes realized, silence endured . . . .Yet, as Wolff 
points out, “the experience of something read can form us no less than the 
experience of something lived through” (viii), literally changing our minds by 
weaving into our memories intricate, vivid images of other people’s pains, joys, 
and sorrows. Reading Asian American literature, I believe, can unravel us — and 
it can help to make us whole. 



O 

ERIC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



151 



Mirrors, Windows, and Prisms 



141 



Notes 

1 . For surveys of primary and secondary works, see Cheung and Yogi; Kim (Asian); 
Ling (Between); and Wong (Reading). Two excellent introductory anthologies are Grow- 
ing Up Asian American (with selections from 1912 through 1993), ed. Hong, and Charlie 
Chan Is Dead: An Anthology of Contemporary Asian American Fiction, ed. Hagedom. 

2. As my remarks suggest, I consider fiction and literary nonfiction (e.g., creative 
essays and memoirs) to be more alike than different in their narrativity. For discussions 
of this view, see Anderson, Eagleton, and Warnock. 

3. World literature, in my view, appeals to readers across cultures, who will under- 
stand it in their own variously complex ways. 

4. In China, I have taught as a “foreign expert” at Yangzhou Teachers College (1982- 
84) and as a Fulbright professor at Beijing Teachers College (1986-87) and Shanghai 
International Studies University (1993-94). During that time and in 1992, I lectured at 
other Chinese schools and conducted research on teacher education (“Teachers,” “Teach- 
ing”)- 

5. For ongoing research, I have kept detailed notes on class discussions at SISU and 
UWM. Other material quoted in this essay includes SISU students’ midterm examina- 
tions, their final take-home examinations, UWM students’ daily journals, their final take- 
home examinations, and notes from conferences with students at both schools. Students 
have given permission for this use of their work. 

6. Amy Ling has done extensive research to give Sui Sin Far’s work the critical 
attention that it deserves ( Between , “Chinese,” “I’m”). With Annette White-Parks, Ling 
recently edited Mrs. Spring Fragrance and Other Writings. The first full-length study of 
Sui Sin Far’s work is White-Parks’s Sui Sin Far/Edith Maude Eaton: A Literary Biogra- 
phy. 

1 . For comprehensive discussion of anti-Asian immigration policies, see Sucheng 
Chan’s research (Asian, “Exclusion”). 

8. However, Asian immigrants and Asian American citizens have a long history of 
fighting for their legal rights in court (Chan, Entry, Okihiro; Takaki). 

9. Undergraduates must take a three-credit “cultural diversity” course to satisfy the 
General Education Requirements for graduation; it can be selected from a wide range of 
humanities and social science courses addressing ethnic and/or racial issues. 

10. Students at UWM, a Midwest urban university mainly drawing students from 
within the state, cannot be assumed to “typify” American students any more than those 
at SISU “typify” Chinese students. Students from different regions of the country, dif- 
ferent social and economic backgrounds, and so on, may have different expectations in 
reading Asian American literature for the first time. By describing my students’ chang- 
ing attitudes, I hope to encourage the expansion of literary imagination among all stu- 
dents — and their teachers. 

1 1. For commentaries on the early history of Asian American literature, see Chin 
(“Come”); Him et al.; Horn; Wong (“Politics”). 

1 2. The first anthology published was Seventeen Syllables: Five Stories of Japanese 
American Life (Tokyo: Kirihara Shoten, 1985). In 1988, Kitchen Table Women of Color 
Press published Seventeen Syllables, a collection of fifteen stories. In 1994, Rutgers 
University Press published Hisaye Yamamoto: Seventeen Syllables, a collection of criti- 
cal essays edited by King-kok Cheung. For critical commentaries on Yamamoto’s work, 
see also Cheung (Articulate); Kim (Asian); and Wong (Reading). 




152 



142 



Mary Louise Buley-Meissner 



1 3 . Yamamoto also has said that “Seventeen Syllables” is loosely based on her mother’s 
life (Cheung, “Interview” 86). 



Works Cited 

Anderson, Chris, ed. Literary Nonfiction : Theory , Criticism , Pedagogy : Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois UP, 1989. 

Baldwin, Mrs. S. L. Must the Chinese Go? 3rd ed. New York: H. B. Elkins, 1890. 

Barme, Geremie, and John Minford, eds. Seeds of Fire . Hong Kong: Far Eastern Eco- 
nomic Review Ltd., 1986. 

Brown, Wesley, and Amy Ling, eds. Imagining America: Stories from the Promised 
Land. New York: Persea, 1991. 

. Visions of America: Personal Narratives from the Promised Land. New York: 

Persea, 1993. 

Buley-Meissner, Mary Louise. “Teachers and Teacher- Education: A View from the 
People’s Republic of China.” International Journal of Educational Development 11.1 
(1991): 41-53. 

. “Teaching American Literature in China: Learning How Students Read and 

Respond.” English Education 22.3 (1990): 192-99. 

Canary, Robert H., and Henry Kozicki, eds. The Writing of History: Literary Form and 
Historical Understanding. Madison: U of Wisconsin P, 1978. 

Chan, Sucheng. Asian Americans: An Interpretive History. Boston: Twayne, 1991. 

, ed. Entry Denied: Exclusion and the Chinese Community in America , 1882- 

1943. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1991. 

. “The Exclusion of Chinese Women, 1870-1943” In Chan, ed. 94-146. 

Cheung, King-kok. Articulate Silences: Hisaye Yamamoto , Maxine Hong Kingston, Joy 
Kogawa. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993. 

, ed. Hisaye Yamamoto , “ Seventeen Syllables New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers UP, 

1994. 

. Interview with Hisaye Yamamoto. In Cheung, ed. 71-86. 

. Introduction. In Yamamoto, xi-xxv. 

Cheung, King-kok, and Stan Yogi, compilers. Asian American Literature: An Annotated 
Bibliography. New York: MLA, 1988. 

Chin, Frank. “Come All Ye Asian American Writers of the Real and the Fake.” The Big 
Aiiieeeee!: An Anthology of Chinese American and Japanese American Literature. 
Ed. Jeffery Paul Chan, etal. New York: Meridian, 1991. 1-92. 

Cordova, Joan May T., and Alexis S. Canillo, eds. Voices: A Filipino American Oral 
History. Stockton: Filipino Oral History Project, 1984. 

Crow, Charles L. “A MELUS Interview: Hisaye Yamamoto.” MELUS 14.1 (1987): 73- 
84. 

Daniels, Roger. Asian America: Chinese and Japanese in the United States since 1850. 
Seattle: U of Washington P, 1988. 

Duke, Michael S. Blooming and Contending: Chinese Literature in the Post-Mao Era. 
Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1985. 



153 



Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



143 



Eagleton, Terry. Literary Theory: An Introduction . Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1983. 

Hagedom, Jessica. Charlie Chan Is Dead: An Anthology of Contemporary* Asian Ameri- 
can Fiction. New York: Penguin, 1993. 

Him, Mark Lai, et al. Island: Poetry and History of Chinese Immigrants on Angel Island , 
I9I0-J940. 1980. Seattle: U of Washington P, 1991. 

Horn, Marlon K. Songs of Gold Mountain: Cantonese Rhymes from San Francisco 
Chinatown. Berkeley: U of California P, 1987. 

Hong, Maria, ed. Growing Up Asian American. New York: Avon, 1993. 

Hongo, Garrett, ed. Under Western Eyes : Personal Essays from Asian America. New 
York: Anchor Original Books/Doubleday, 1995. 

Houston, Jeanne Wakatsuki, and James D. Houston. Farewell to Manzanar. San Fran- 
cisco: Houghton Mifflin, 1973. 

Kadohata, Cynthia. Introduction. American Eyes. Ed. Lori M. Carlson. New York: Holt, 
1994. 

Kim, Elaine H. Asian- American Literature: An Introduction to the Writings and Their 
Social Context. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1984. 

Kinkley, Jeffrey C., ed. After Mao: Chinese Literature and Society, I978-J98I. Cam- 
bridge: Harvard UP, 1985. 

Lee, Joann Faung Jean, ed. Asian American Experiences in the United States: Oral His- 
tories of First to Fourth Generation Americans from China , the Philippines , Japan , 
India , the Pacific Islands , Vietnam and Cambodia. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1991. 

Lee, Leo Ou-fan. “Beyond Realism: Thoughts on Modernist Experiments in Contempo- 
rary Chinese Writing.” Worlds Apart: Recent Chinese Writing and Its Audiences. Ed. 
Howard Goldblatt. Armonk, NY: Sharpe, 1990. 64-77. 

Lee, Mary Paik. Quiet Odyssey: A Pioneer Woman in America. Ed. Sucheng Chan. Se- 
attle: U of Washington P, 1990. 

Lim, Shirley Geok-lin. “The Ambivalent American: Asian American Literature on the 
Cusp.” In Lim and Ling, eds. 13-32. 

Lim, Shirley Geok-lin, and Amy Ling, eds. Reading the Literatures of Asian America. 
Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1992. 

Ling, Amy. Between Worlds: Women Writers of Chinese Ancestry ?. New York and Ox- 
ford: Pergamon, 1990. 

. “Chinese American Women Writers: The Tradition behind Maxine Hong 

Kingston.” Rethinking American Literary * History. Ed. A. LaVonne Brown Ruoff and 
Jerry W. Ward Jr. New York: MLA, 1990. 219-36. 

. “I’m Here: An Asian American Woman’s Response” New Literary* History 19 

(1987): 1-16. 

Link, Perry, ed. Roses and Thorns: The Second Blooming of the Hundred Flowers in 
Chinese Fiction , 1979-1980. Berkeley: U of California P, 1984. 

. Stubborn Weeds: Popular and Controversial Chinese Literature After the Cul- 
tural Revolution. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1983. 

Lowe, Lisa. “Heterogeneity, Hybridity, Multiplicity: Marking Asian American Differ- 
ences.” Diaspora: A Journal of Transnational Studies 1.1 (1991): 21—44. 

Mao Zedong. “Talks at the Yan’an Forum on Literature and Art.” Trans. Bonnie S. 
McDougall. Ann Arbor: Center for Chinese Studies, U of Michigan P, 1980. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




144 



Mary Louise Buley -Meissner 



Min, Pyong Gap, ed. Asian Americans: Contemporary Trends and Issues. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995. 

Murayama, Milton. All I Asking For Is My Body. 1959. San Francisco: Supa, 1975. 

Okada, John. No-No Boy. 1957. Seattle: U of Washington P, 1976. 

Okihiro, Gary Y. Margins and Mainstreams: Asians in American History and Culture. 
Seattle: U of Washington P, 1994. 

The Other Side of the Chinese Question: Testimony of California’s Leading Citizens. 
San Francisco: Woodward, 1886. 

Plaks, Andrew, ed. Chinese Narrative. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1977. 

Said, Edward. Orientalism. New York: Vintage, 1971. 

. “The Politics of Knowledge.” Race, Identity and Representation in Education. 

Ed. Cameron McCarthy and Warren Crichlow. New York: Routledge, 1993. 306-14. 

Schoenhals, Martin. The Paradox of Power in a People’s Republic of China Middle 
School. Armonk, NY: Sharpe, 1993. 

Sone, Monica. Nisei Daughter. Seattle: U of Washington P, 1953. 

Sui Sin Far (Edith Eaton). “Chinese Women in America.” The Land of Sunshine 6.2 
(1987): 62. 

. “Chinese Workmen in America.” The Independent 3 July 1913: 56-58. 

. “Leaves from the Mental Portfolio of an Eurasian.” The Independent 21 Jan. 

1909: 125-32. 

. Mrs. Spring Fragrance. Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1912. 

. Mrs. Spring Fragrance and Other Writings. 1912. Ed. Amy Ling and Annette 

White-Parks. Urbana and Chicago: U of Illinois P, 1995. 

Sumida, Stephen H. “Afterword.” In Hong, ed. 399^-05. 

Takaki, Ronald. Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian Americans. New 
York: Penguin, 1989. 

Townsend, L. T. The Chinese Problem. Boston: Lee and Shepard, 1876. 

Uchida, Yoshiko. Desert Exile: The Uprooting of a Japanese-American Family. Seattle: 
U of Washington P, 1982. 

Wang, David Der-wei. Running Wild: New Chinese Writers. New York: Columbia UP, 
1994. 

Wamock, John, ed. Representing Reality’: Readings in Literary Nonfiction. New York: 
St. Martin’s, 1989. 

White, Hayden. “Introduction: The Poetics of History” Metahistory : The Historical 
Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1973. 

White-Parks, Annette. Sui Sin Far/Edith Maude Eaton: A Literary Biography. Chicago 
and Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1995. 

Wolff, Tobias, ed. The Vintage Book of Contemporary American Short Stories. New 
York: Vintage, 1994. 

Wong, Sau-ling Cynthia. “The Politics and Poetics of Folksong Reading: Literary Por- 
trayals of Life under Exclusion.” In Chan, ed. 246-67. 

. Reading Asian American Literature: From Necessity to Extravagance. Princeton, 

NJ: Princeton UP, 1993. 

Wu, William. Yellow Peril: Chinese Americans in American Fiction, 1850-1940. Hamden, 
CT: Archon, 1982. 



Mirrors , Windows, and Prisms 



145 



Yamada, Mitsuye. Desert Run: Poems and Stories. Latham, NY: Kitchen Table Women 
of Color Press, 1988. 

Yamamoto, Hisaye. Seventeen Syllables. Latham, NY: Kitchen Table Women of Color 
Press, 1988. 

Yung, Judy. Chinese Women of America: A Pictorial History . Seattle: U of Washington 
P, 1986. 





9 Father Martinez: Folk Hero or 
Dangerous Infidel? Rereading 
Willa Cather’s Death Comes 
for the Archbishop 

Judith Beth Cohen 
Lesley College 



It is time to take Death Comes for the Archbishop off the shelf, out of the 
library hush reserved for masterpieces and read it actively as part of the 
multi-ethnic conversation it seeks to dramatize. 

— Bette Weidman, “Willa Cather’s Art in Historical Perspective” 



“That’s the worst ‘good’ novel ever written,” said New Mexican wood-carver 
Charles Carillo. “Willa Cather told many lies in that book about 
nuevomexicanos. ” 

I was in New Mexico to team-teach a new course titled, “Traditions and 
Cultures: The History, Literature, Arts and Ecology of the Southwest,” devel- 
oped as part of an Interdisciplinary Studies Master’s program at Lesley College 
in Cambridge, Massachusetts. A midwestemer by birth and New Englander by 
choice, I, along with my Cambridge-based colleagues, would be learning with 
our students. Under the guidance of local experts, we would examine rare In- 
dian pottery and weavings in the locked vaults of the School of American Re- 
search, climb the canyons of Georgia O’Keeffe’s beloved Ghost Ranch, and 
watch mesmerized as the Santo Domingo Pueblo Indians celebrated their an- 
nual com dance. Santa Fe and its environs would be our primary text, inter- 
preted for us by New Mexican historians, artists, and ecologists. Along with 
our reading, we would experience the diverse cultures of the region first-hand. 

We were sitting under the cottonwood trees at El Rancho de Las Golondrinas, 
a living museum of Hispanic culture outside Santa Fe, when Carillo attacked 
the novel I had assigned as a core text. Only the night before I had lectured on 
Cather’s visual images, her use of historical sources, and her emphasis on the 
interaction between the land and the people who lived on it — precisely the themes 
of our course. At that unnerving moment of cultural collision, I was unprepared 
to defend my choice of this “despised” required reading. 

Carillo, himself an anthropologist, santero (carver of wooden saints), and 
member of the Penitentes (a Catholic brotherhood), traced the history of folk 
art tradition that produces the colorful figures found in village homes and 

146 



0 

ERIC 



157 



Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



147 



churches. These doll-like weeping virgins and saints reminded me of the Native 
American kachina figures. The relationships Carillo described between New 
Mexican Catholics and their saints seemed similar in quality to the Pueblo Indi- 
ans’ attitude toward their spirits. Indeed, for many of mixed blood, and many 
converted Native Americans, traditional practices and Catholicism coexist with- 
out conflict. Carillo explained how the scarcity of priests in what was then north- 
ern Mexico led to the formation of these lay brotherhoods and sisterhoods, still 
active today. In Cather’s novel, we’d encountered the schismatic Penitentes and 
their bloody rituals, presented as backward, ignorant and misguided. Yet this 
artist/academic represented the Brotherhood as a respected living tradition that 
merged art and spirituality. 

In Death Comes for the Archbishop Cather recounts the story of French Bishop 
Lamy’s drive to establish the Catholic Church in northern Mexico just after the 
territory was conquered by the United States in 1 848. Cather’s protagonist Jean 
Latour is a fictionalized version of the historical Bishop Lamy, whose statue 
stands before the Santa Fe cathedral. However, Father Martinez of Taos, the 
renegade priest who refuses to outlaw the Penitentes, has no fictional mask. It 
appears that Cather did not consider the indigenous figure important enough to 
merit the protection of an invented name. She treats Padre Martinez’s subjuga- 
tion and excommunication as the Bishop’s “victory.” In his talk, connecting 
New Mexican folk art with religion and history, Carillo insisted that Father 
Martinez was not the womanizing demon Cather had depicted, but an impor- 
tant leader who had educated the Mexican poor and had taken a strong stand 
against the U.S. invasion. 

As we toured the nineteenth century farm’s water mills, threshing houses, 
and Morada de la Conquistadora (meeting house of the Penitente Brotherhood) 
Carillo’s complaint dogged me. Cather’s stereotyped images of race and gender 
had given me ample opportunities for noting the limits of her perspective, but 
questioning her presentation of Father Martinez hadn’t occurred to me. We New 
Englanders might know something about Native American culture; certainly 
we were eager to visit the pueblos, see the colorful rugs and pottery, and attend 
religious dances, but we were terribly uninformed when it came to Hispanic 
culture. My problem was not my failure to critique Cather’s historical accuracy, 
for the questions themselves would never have formed had I not been immersed 
in the culture she wrote about. The awakening hit me: the classic trope of inno- 
cence lost. Now that my chosen text had become a weapon in the culture wars, 
I was faced with a conflict very much alive nearly seventy years after the book’s 
publication. 

As our students fanned out to work on their research, I had my project to do. 
While they interviewed present-day santeros about their craft, spent time with 
native women working to prevent wife battering on the San Il’defonso pueblo, 
or collected historical documents for an American Studies course on Colonial 




1 58 



148 



Judith Beth Cohen 



New England, I searched for information about the real Father Martinez. In the 
critical accounts I had consulted before going to New Mexico I’d found no 
mention of the Martinez controversy. Reviewing the book for the New York 
Times in 1927, Henry Longan Stuart worried that Cather’s fictionalized history 
could be “laying down snares for the feet of generations to come . . . quite ready 
to take the word of so fascinating a writer in matters of fact as well as of fancy” 
(Stuart 245). Interested in blurred genres myself, and more inclined to think of 
history as stories handed down by those in power, I dismissed this criticism as 
conservative grousing. But in New Mexico, Cather’s deliberate distortion of 
history for her own artistic purposes became a moral issue. Her much praised 
novel had long been controversial in the Hispanic community, generating as 
much venom as Twain’s Huckleberry Finn does for some African Americans. If 
Cather’s account of Father Martinez was not simply unflattering, but full of 
inaccurate allegations capable of shaping readers’ versions of New Mexican 
history, then it would be irresponsible not to offer competing views. 

First, I reminded myself just why I had selected the novel. The course bibli- 
ography included readings in history, anthropology, art, and ecology, assigned 
by my colleagues, and I was limited to one literary selection. Cather’s novel 
seemed perfect for a number of reasons. Her freewheeling use of history and 
her creation of a non-dramatic form she called “a narrative,” composed of a 
prologue and nine distinct books (Woodress 399), gives her novel a collage-like 
quality that seemed almost postmodern to me. We were asking our students to 
understand history, artistic production, and the physical environment, not as 
separate subjects, but as fully interrelated. Hadn’t Cather done just that herself, 
drawing from both historical and visual sources to produce her innovative novel? 
And didn’t Archbishop contain material on the three cultures we would be ex- 
ploring in New Mexico: Anglo/European, Native American, and Hispanic? True, 
Cather’s protagonist might be a refined French priest, but she shows how 
ethnicities intermingled in the New World to produce a unique cultural fusion. 

Soon after arriving in New Mexico, Father Latour finds the oriental sound of 
an old bell especially pleasing. When he learns that it was brought to Mexico 
from Spain and dates back to 1 356, he comments on the Catholic appropriation 
of a Muslim custom: “The Spaniards handed on their skill to the Mexicans, and 
the Mexicans have taught the Navajos to work silver; but it all came from the 
Moors” (45). For most of us, this cultural layering becomes invisible. On my 
own travels through southern Spain, I learned that much “Spanish” architecture 
and design actually derived from a mixture of Moorish and Jewish Middle Eastern 
influences. Thus, I was especially pleased with Cather’s attention to details that 
defy a monolithic or static interpretation of ethnicity. 

Furthermore, Cather believed that Archbishop was her best novel. Both a 
critical and commercial success, the book is also a culmination of her long 
interest in the southwest (Woodress 391). Though not a Catholic herself, she 





Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



149 



used the story of the Church’s establishment in northern New Mexico as a way 
of exploring themes that interested her — for example, how a refined individual 
can thrive in a remote, western landscape. She was also expressing the 1920s 
efforts to create a distinctive American culture from its many ethnic strands. 
The freshness of the American presence in New Mexico during this period gave 
her an open canvas for crafting a unified culture in what she considered to be a 
disorganized, wild place (Weidman 61). Her interest in the Church was not 
based on its religious beliefs but rather on its organizational unifying purpose 
(Weidman 55). 1 

In her visits to New Mexico she had heard stories about Bishop Lamy, the 
first Catholic Archbishop of the American territories, and felt as if he were “a 
personal friend” (Woodress 393). No doubt she identified with the cultured 
Frenchman who misses the gardens, cuisine, and comforts of his homeland. His 
lonely labor in devotion to his chosen vocation probably struck her as similar to 
her own life as a dedicated artist. Cather enthusiastically read an obscure ac- 
count of The Life Of The Right Reverend Joseph P. Machebeuf by an admiring 
priest named Howlett. This book gave her the model for Father Valliant, Bishop 
Latour’s warm, folksy, lifelong friend, who becomes his assistant in New Mexico 
(Woodress 393). Whereas Latour is depicted as formal, cool, and reserved, 
Valliant is more expressive and more connected to the humble people he serves. 
The idealized friendship between two men probably allowed Cather to inject 
autobiographical elements based on her relationship with her companion, Edith 
Lewis. 

In addition to the Howlett book, Cather read letters written by the first French 
missionary priest in northern Mexico, and “at least eight or ten other volumes 
on the southwest” (Woodress 403). 2 Cather was often the guest of Mabel Dodge 
Luhan, the New York writer who relocated in Taos, married a Taos Indian and 
urged many artists and writers (D.H. Lawrence among them), to discover the 
wonders she found in her new home. Along with Cather’s reading and her own 
observations, stories she heard from Tony Luhan also became incorporated into 
her book (Smith 105). Since Lois Rudnick, Mabel Dodge Luhan’s biographer, 
would be lecturing our group at the Luhan house in Taos, here was yet another 
connection between the Archbishop and our course agenda. 

Almost as strong as the novel’s historical themes are its visual elements. My 
own images of New Mexico and the southwest come almost entirely from Geor- 
gia O’Keeffe’s paintings of deserts and canyons, and Willa Cather’s descrip- 
tions, as vivid as O’Keeffe’s paintings. In Archbishop , Santa Fe is “a thin 
wavering adobe town ... a green plaza ... at one end a church with two earthen 
towers that rose high above the flatness” (22). Cather captures the spectacular 
desert/sky relationship: “The great tables of granite set down in an empty plain 
were inconceivable without their attendant clouds, which were a part of them, 
as the smoke is part of the censer, or the foam of the wave” (95). She takes 




160 



150 



Judith Beth Cohen 



readers inside a secret Indian cave, where Latour hears “one of the oldest voices 
of the earth” in “the sound of a great, underground river, flowing through a 
resounding cavern” (130). We’re transported to the sky Pueblo of Acoma; here 
the Indians “bom in fear and dying by violence for generations, had at last 
taken this leap away from the earth, and on that rock had found the hope of all 
suffering and tormented creatures — safety” (97). We travel to the Navajo’s Can- 
yon de Chelly and learn of their belief “that their old gods dwelt in the fastness 
of that canyon; like their Shiprock, it was an inviolate place, the very heart and 
center of their life” (293). Finally, Cather explains why the Catholic Cathedral 
in Santa Fe, built in 1861 and graced with its statue of Bishop Lamy, looks like 
a French church accidently dropped into the desert. 

Cather mentioned three different visual sources that inspired the way she 
approached Archbishop. As a student in Paris, she was attracted to the frescos 
of Puvis de Chavannes in the Pantheon. In separate panels, they show the life of 
St. Genevieve, who led her people to victory over the Huns in 45 1 . Cather s 
decision to write an episodic narrative showing the life of a “modem saint,” full 
of little details rather than big dramas, was inspired by this work, painted in the 
1870s (Woodress 399, Keeler 252). Another French painter, Jehan Georges 
Vibert’s “The Missionary Story” gave her the idea for the book’s prologue 
(Woodress 402). Finally, Hans Holbein’s “The Dance of Death,” a series of 
woodcuts from the end of the sixteenth century, shows how death comes to all 
no matter how high their station in life. It even pictures a skeleton coming to 
claim an archbishop. Cather’s style is similar to that of a woodcut, which cuts 
away excess material, “leaving only clean, simple lines” (Woodress 403). 

Since our course included the study of both indigenous art and the modern- 
ists drawn to the southwest, I had asked students to record the images they 
noted and compare their own to Cather’s. I urged them to notice how her im- 
ages worked on more than the pictorial level: monotonous red sand-hills the 
shape of haycocks, the priest kneeling before a cruciform tree, goats leaping 
from a stream like arrows speeding from a bow. I hoped they would see how 
meaning came from images, both in the lightning and animal motifs on Pueblo 
pottery, as well as the pages of novels. 

I could forgive Cather for depicting Native Americans as childlike and primi- 
tive, or Mexicans as lazy and profligate. She was a product of the views and 
racial attitudes of the late twenties. In historical context, her insights about Na- 
tive Americans seem progressive. Though he doesn’t doubt his mission to bring 
the true light of the church to “antediluvian” Indians and wild, dissolute Mexi- 
cans, the Bishop is awed by the mystery and depth of the Indians’ beliefs. When 
he celebrates mass at the Acoma pueblo, and again when he takes refuge in a 
cave with his Indian guide Jacinto, he questions his ability to bring Catholicism 
to these ancient people, so far beyond his reach. He admires their way of pass- 
ing “through a country without disturbing anything; to pass and leave no trace, 
like fish through the water, or birds through the air” (233). 



Father Martinez : Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



151 



When Cather portrays Mexicans she is less generous, and when it comes to 
Father Martfnez she seems to have dipped her portrait brush in tar. A turning 
point in Bishop Latour’s mission to gain control of all the parishes comes in his 
climactic confrontation with Father Martfnez in Book Five (Woodress 398). 
Cather depicts the “powerful old priest” as a devilish opponent. She pictures 
him on horseback with high boots and spurs, a wide Mexican hat and great 
black cape around his shoulders, “an enormous man ... his head ... set defi- 
antly on a thick neck.” He has “brilliant yellow eyes,” “full florid cheeks,” and 
a mouth “the very assertion of violent, uncurbed passions and tyrannical self- 
will; the full lips thrust out like the flesh of animals distended by fear or desire” 
(141). “Dictator” of the parishes of northern New Mexico, he has the native 
priests “under his thumb” (139). Cather repeats the rumor that Martinez insti- 
gated the 1 847 revolt of the Taos Indians in which American Governor Bent and 
a dozen other white men were killed. She tells us that Martinez profited from 
the affair by promising the captured Indian rebels he would intervene on their 
behalf if they deeded him their lands. While he was away, they were hanged, 
and Martfnez “now cultivated their fertile farms which made him quite the rich- 
est man in the parish” (140). Cather also gives credence to rumors about the 
priest’s many illegitimate children. After Martfnez cuffs a ten-year-old for his 
failure to kneel or remove his hat, he excuses his rough treatment, calling the 
boy “my own son” (143). Bishop Latour finds Martinez’s disordered house 
overrun by serving women and large yellow cats which the priest feeds from his 
plate (144). 

While she presents him as the stereotype of the sensual, dark “other,” Cather 
does allow Martfnez to speak for himself. He argues with the Bishop about 
celibacy, which 

“may be all very well for the French clergy, but not for ours . . . Celibate 
priests lose their perceptions. No priest can experience repentance and for- 
giveness of sin unless he himself falls into sin, is broken, experiences for- 
giveness and rises to a state of grace . . . Otherwise, religion is nothing but 
dead logic.” (146) 

Cather may side with the French Bishop, but she makes the native priest a 
worthy opponent whose views merit our attention. He defends his living church, 
which is not “a dead arm of the European church” but a religion “that grew out 
of the soil” independent of Rome’s authority (147). In a crucial passage, he 
warns the Bishop; 

“You know nothing about Indians or Mexicans ... If you try to introduce 
European civilization here and change our old ways, to interfere with the 
secret dances of the Indians...or abolish the bloody rites of the Penitentes, 

I foretell an early death for you.” (148) 

He advises Latour to study the native traditions before he begins his re- 
forms. The dark things forbidden by your Church are a part of Indian religion. 



ERIC 




162 



152 



Judith Beth Cohen 



You cannot introduce French fashions here” (148). Despite his “vulgar long 
teeth” (148), and his snoring “like an enraged bull” (149), Martinez neverthe- 
less sings the mass beautifully. The Bishop even admits to himself that “rightly 
guided, this Mexican would have been a great man. He had an altogether com- 
pelling personality, a disturbing mysterious, magnetic power” (150). Like other 
powerful literary villains, Martinez is a complex man. Though Cather makes 
him livelier and more fascinating than the Bishop himself, her sympathies are 
clear. Another renegade priest, Martinez’s crony Lucero, has a deathbed dream 
of his old friend burning in hell (171). Despite Cather’s disdain for him, 
Martinez’s anticolonialist warning has powerful resonance today. If his words 
reach beyond the confines of the text to comment on the folly of the Church’s 
authoritarian position, why is Cather’s portrait of Martinez so problematic? 

When I turned to sources that considered the priest from a native New Mexi- 
can perspective, I found a very different story. That Cather’s novel has been 
quoted by historians, and that her account of life in New Mexico during the 
American military occupation is considered accurate, outrages these scholars. 
(I recalled the 1927 reviewer’s warning that I had so easily dismissed.) Accord- 
ing to Ray John de Aragon, a New Mexico historian, Father Martfnez was one 
of the most significant cultural figures of northern New Mexico: “When the 
Padre’s lips parted, it was said drops of compassion, love and justice spilled 
forth” (125). It galls de Aragon that Cather and the French Bishops were so 
ignorant as to think they were bringing Catholicism to New Mexico, when “the 
Catholic Church had been firmly entrenched in New Mexico for 350 years” (de 
Aragon 139). E. A. Mares, another New Mexican historian, has made it his 
mission to raise public awareness about the realities of Father Martinez’s life. 
He was curator for an exhibit about Martfnez at the Millicent Rogers Museum 
in Taos, which included the publication of an essay collection offering new 
perspectives on the priest’s life (1988). Mares wrote and performed a one- man 
play, 1 Returned and Saw Under the Sun: Padre Martinez of Taos (1989), in 
which the priest takes on both Bishop Lamy and Willa Cather and insists on 
setting the record straight. These writers reject Cather’s characterization of 
Martfnez and present a context for understanding the Lamy/Martfnez dispute 
on which the novel turns. The priest’s rebellion, when viewed through indig- 
enous eyes, makes Cather’s artistic treatment more than creative license. Though 
Latour is a stand-in for the historical Lamy, Martfnez is himself in the novel; 
surely she would be sued for libel in today’s climate. 

To understand this dispute, we must step back from the mid-nineteenth- 
century setting. As I walked through the Taos pueblo, where Native Americans 
have lived continuously for more than two thousand years, I felt the same “reli- 
gious silence” Cather noted. She describes the two communal houses “shaped 
like pyramids, gold-colored in the afternoon light, with the purple mountain 
lying just behind them,” and the “gold colored men in white burnouses . . . still 



Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



153 



as statues,” the people whom “Coronado’s men . . . described ... as a superior 
kind of Indian” (150-151). 

I could imagine the place in the sixteenth century, when Juan de Onate led 
his mixed band of soldiers and friars north into this remote territory and dis- 
turbed seventy pueblos of indigenous people speaking four distinct language 
groups. (Today only eighteen pueblos remain.) Following the establishment of 
Santa Fe in 1610, the Franciscan friars created a network of missions in the 
pueblos, determined to banish the native kachina dancing and kiva ceremonies 
they considered to besaw devil worship. While most Pueblo people accepted 
Catholicism, they wanted to retain their own faith as well, comfortable with a 
fusion that made sense to them. Gradually, the treatment they received became 
intolerable: forced labor, paid tributes, and violence against their Indian Holy 
Men led to an Indian rebellion unique in the New World. The independent, 
unorganized pueblo peoples united under Pope, a Tewa religious leader who 
had been imprisoned by the Spaniards. In 1680, they drove the Spaniards out of 
Santa Fe all the way back to the El Paso area (Simmons 47-57). For the first 
time in the colonial world, an indigenous people had successfully rebelled against 
an occupying power. Though Don Diego de Vargas reconquered New Mexico 
twelve years later, the Spanish colonists had learned from their errors. Under 
the new regime, they allowed the native peoples more autonomy and left the 
ceremonial kivas undisturbed (Mares, “Many Faces” 21). Compared to the fate 
of Native Americans in New England, who had undergone wholesale slaughter 
and defeat in King Phillip’s War (1675-1676), the Pueblo people fared better, 
which helps explain why they are still such a strong cultural presence in New 
Mexico (Simmons 73). 

From these early days, intermarriage between the indigenous people and the 
Spanish settlers was creating a distinctive New Mexican Indohispanic people, a 
fusion of Native American, and Mexican/Spanish Catholic cultures. Father 
Martinez lived through three distinct historical periods in New Mexico — Span- 
ish rule, Mexican rule, and finally U.S. possession and military occupation. The 
historical evidence shows him to be a community leader, concerned for the 
welfare of the poor, who understood and defended grass roots Catholicism 
(Mares, “Many Faces” 18). He was bom to a ranching family in Abiquiu, New 
Mexico, in 1793, a time when the Spanish Empire was on the verge of collapse 
and the successful American and French revolutions were stimulating a new 
sense of democratic possibility. Martinez married as a young man, but after his 
wife died in childbirth, he went off to a seminary in Durango and was ordained 
a secular priest in 1822 at age twenty-nine (de Aragon 127). With Mexico now 
independent of Spain, Martinez returned to open a coeducational school in his 
home in 1826 when educating girls was very unusual. With his own printing 
press, he advocated for the rights of the native peoples, defending them against 
exploitation by American trappers. He called for the preservation of the buffalo, 



o 

ERIC 



1S4 



154 



Judith Beth Cohen 



so the Indian people would have their own source of livelihood (de Aragon 
137). 

With the Franciscan friars almost gone, priests were scarce. To fill the void, 
the Penitente Brotherhood and its women’s equivalent, the Carmelitas, were 
founded. The Brotherhood met in their secret moradas. Each year they carried 
out the bloody practice of self-flagellation during Holy Week as a form of pen- 
ance, a ritual that continues today. When Bishop Lamy demanded that they be 
disbanded, Martinez, who understood their origins, defended the Brotherhood. 
They’d learned these traditional rituals from the Franciscan friars, but the prac- 
tice of self-flagellation can be traced back to St. Anthony of Egypt in 356 A. D. 
(de Aragon 1 3 1 ). To the native Indohispanic people, these rites were part of the 
landscape, much like the secret dances and rituals observed by the Pueblo 
peoples. 

Just as he defended the Penitente rituals, Martinez also resisted the Bishop’s 
efforts to destroy the wood-carved santos that decorated the village churches. 
Like the Pueblo artisans, the traditional santeros produced their work anony- 
mously. The purpose of their art was spiritual, and individual artists did not 
seek recognition — another concept that must have seemed strange to the Euro- 
pean clergy. Mares faults Bishop Lamy for destroying much of this folk art 
because of his personal repulsion for the crude, bloody figures. Many were 
replaced with bulky plaster-of-paris statues which Mares calls “bathrobe art” 
(Mares, I Returned 51). In village churches like the Sanctuary at Chimayo the 
colorful bultos (three-dimensional figures) and retablos (flat figures) are vivid 
and memorable. Collectors now pay large prices for sad looking Christ figures 
and red- cheeked virgins, each figure with its own distinct personality. In regard 
to the santos , Cather’s fictional Bishop is more tolerant than the historical Lamy. 
Latour finds them “more to his taste than the factory-made plaster images in 
his mission churches in Ohio” (Cather 28), surely a reflection of Cather’s own 
taste. 

Lamy’s cathedral, seen by Willa Cather as his triumphant achievement, con- 
tributed to the struggle between the Bishop and Father Martinez. Mares points 
out that people were used to a barter economy and would trade com or animals 
in exchange for Baptism or marriage ceremonies. During the time of the early 
Church fathers, church leaders were expected to subsidize the Indian and Mexi- 
can communities, rather than exacting money from the poor. After Mexican 
independence, a general anti-clerical feeling caused resentment against tithing 
and Martinez wrote against the practice. Bishop Lamy issued a Circular in 1 854 
imposing a new tithe under pain of excommunication. Mares sees this demand 
as the Bishop’s way of forcing poor Catholics to finance his new cathedral, an 
architectural venture the local people could not understand or support. To them, 
the old adobe Cathedral of St. Francis (“a mud-pie palace,” to Lamy) was beau- 
tiful to its worshipers (Mares, I Returned 50). 



0 

ERIC 



165 



Father Martinez : Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



155 



De Aragon rejects the charges that the Taos priest was a sensualist or fa- 
thered illegitimate children. In fact, he claims that Martinez used his own pub- 
lications to denounce immorality and cohabitation (130). Mares speculates that 
the reason there are so many people with the surname of “Martinez” around 
Taos is that the Padre adopted many orphans and gave them his own name. 
Furthermore, there is no historical evidence that Martinez was associated with 
the Taos rebellion and execution of Governor Bent in 1 847 (Mares, “Many Faces” 
27). The priest actually served on the Territorial Assembly and was elected its 
president after the Taos uprising (Mares, I Returned 45). It would have been 
preposterous, Mares argues, to make the fomenter of such a rebellion head of a 
government council. Furthermore, Padre Martinez was such an expert on canon 
law that Bishop Lamy consulted him often and asked for his assistance on legal 
briefs (de Aragon 142). It would be more accurate to represent Martinez as a 
peacemaker and healer than an instigator. These New Mexico historians argue 
that he justly opposed the American military occupation Bishop Lamy sup- 
ported, for under its policies people lost their landgrants, their native clergy, 
and centuries of tradition (de Aragon 144). They see Martinez as a liberator in 
the tradition of other great Mexican liberators. 

Another glaring historical discrepancy concerns Cather’s representation of 
Father Vaillant, the Bishop’s assistant, depicted as a loveable, rough-hewn 
charmer: 

Even the thick-blooded Mexican half-breeds knew his quality at once. If 
the Bishop returned to find Santa Fe friendly to him, it was because every- 
body believed in Father Vaillant — homely, real, persistent, with the driving 
power of a dozen men in his poorly-built body. (Cather 38) 

The real Machebeuf abused his authority and violated canon law by reveal- 
ing secrets disclosed in the confessional. Though Martinez brought this to the 
Bishop’s attention, he ignored the complaints (de Aragon 141). Finally, feeling 
his age at sixty-three, Martinez offered to resign over his many conflicts with 
Lamy provided that he be allowed to pick his own successor, a request the 
Bishop also ignored. Lamy sent Machebeuf to Taos to read the excommunica- 
tion orders before Martinez’s own congregation. The Padre’s refusal to be 
defrocked and his defiance as he continued to serve his parishioners must be 
seen in this context. What Cather represents as the Bishop’s triumphant victory 
over a local heretic, these revisionist historians see as an unjust colonialist usur- 
pation. 

Cather’s treatment of another historical figure shows how easily she for- 
gives evil if the doer is an American as opposed to a Mexican. She presents the 
scout Kit Carson as “thoughtful and alert”; he is “reflective, has a capacity for 
tenderness” (75). Carson’s Mexican wife is devout, and if he is illiterate it is 
probably an accident. To Bishop Latour, Carson is a man like himself, with 




T : O' * 



156 



Judith Beth Cohen 



standards and loyalties, who lives by a code, and the two men have “a long 
friendship” (75). As for Carson’s savage slaughter of the Navajos trapped in 
Canyon de Chelly, Cather calls it “misguided,” but she justifies it thus: “Carson 
was a soldier under orders, and he did a soldier’s brutal work” (294). Hispanic 
readers may see a further unintended parallel here, that the Bishop himself is 
another soldier doing his own “brutal work” for a greater cause. Though 
Martinez’s alleged crimes of rebellion and profligacy seem insignificant by 
comparison, Carson remains a hero in the novel, while Father Martinez bums in 
hell (171). 

The research on Father Martinez, prompted by post- 1960s concerns over 
racial equality and civil rights, was clearly unavailable to Willa Cather. Should 
we then assume that she was limited entirely by the perspective of her own 
sources? Patricia Clark Smith of the University of New Mexico at Albuquerque 
argues that Cather could have known there were two sides to the Martinez/ 
Lamy controversy. Mabel Dodge Luhan, in her 1937 memoir Edge of Taos 
Desert , wrote about a later French priest who nearly spoiled the beautiful adobe 
church in Taos. Fortunately, this Father Joe was unable to touch the lovely church 
in Rancho de Taos or we would never have had O’Keeffe’s powerful images of 
that adobe building (Luhan 84). There the community still gathers each year to 
put a fresh coat of the mud-mixture on their beloved church. Luhan repeats 
many of the same stories about Father Martinez that appear in Cather’s novel: 
that he was a lady’s man who might have incited the Taos revolt and benefitted 
from the Indians’ land. But her critical picture of Father Joe — so similar to 
Lamy in his coldness, insistence on tithes, and dislike of the santos — make him 
seem closer to the historical Lamy than to Cather’s invented Bishop (Luhan 88- 
90; Smith 104). If Cather absorbed stories from Luhan, she was selective, for 
Luhan reveals a very different attitude toward the Penitentes than we get from 
Cather. Luhan wrote: 

There seemed to be a happiness in the Mexican life, due to the Penitente 
exorcisms, wherein they flayed themselves, unconsciously perhaps, to di- 
minish the accumulated bitterness and despair that they could not pour out 
upon us. They came out of these ceremonies refreshed. . . . they drew their 
own blood, identifying themselves with Jesus Christ, who died for them, 
and who is still dying for them in their flesh. (Luhan 81) 

Mary Austin, a writer who had settled in New Mexico and lent Cather her house 
while she was working on Archbishop , was appalled by Cather’s book. In her 
autobiography she wrote that the building of the French cathedral in a Spanish 
town was a calamity and that the local culture had never gotten over it (Smith 
106). Though these differences may be about political rivalries between the 
writers, Smith feels that Cather’s decision to take the French Archbishop’s side 
was a conscious one, that she must have been aware of other views of Father 
Martinez (Smith 107). 3 




IS? 



Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



157 



Despite Cather’s clearly condescending stance toward people of color, Smith 
believes she underwent a change in attitude as she completed her novel. The 
book’s conclusion shows a more ambivalent attitude toward the Bishop’s mis- 
sion in New Mexico. Archbishop Latour prefers to die in Santa Fe rather than 
return to France: “in the Old World he found himself homesick for the New” 
(274). At the end of his life, he expresses a nostalgic regret for the vanishing 
purity of the land he has helped to colonize. Just as the colonial forces he repre- 
sented destroyed the culture it tried to “save,” the cathedral he labored all his 
life to construct becomes his own tomb. Smith finds the irony here inescapable. 
Whether or not Cather intended it, Smith reads her celebration of this outsider’s 
victory as an indictment of the colonization process (Smith 121-122). Cather’s 
greater tolerance comes through as the Bishop rejoices that he “lived to see two 
great wrongs righted ... the end of black slavery, and the Navajos restored to 
their country” (292). In his final return to Santa Fe, Cather pictures him enter- 
ing the city on horseback, wrapped in his Indian blanket, gazing at his Ro- 
manesque Cathedral, an image of cultural fusion that seems closer to the 
multicultural reality of the southwest. 

Cather’s emerging ambivalence toward colonialism can be examined in light 
of the novel’s quest to bring a unifying culture to New Mexico’s various ethnic 
groups. Bette S. Weidman argues that by having the Bishop forsake his native 
France to die in the New World, Cather is rejecting the limits of the European 
past in favor of a new culture and new ethnicity. Though the Cathedral may be 
French in style it represents a fusion, made with stones from the New World 
(Weidman 61). 

In the controversy over Father Martinez, I stumbled upon an ideal “contact 
zone” (to use Mary Louise Pratt’s phrase). I was nudged into reading Cather’s 
novel not as a simple narrative, but as a document of cultural collision between 
Europeans and indigenous Indohispanic people. The novelist must be free to 
exercise her imagination when dealing with history. As a fiction writer myself, 
I don’t hesitate to play freely with memories and experience. However, the 
claim that allegiance to an artistic purpose frees one of any responsibility for 
accuracy crumbles. At the very least, through the simple gesture of an invented 
name, Cather could have given Martinez the same degree of literary respect she 
offered Lamy and Machebeuf. 

The next time we ran the course, I prepared a packet of readings to accom- 
pany the novel. These included an excerpt from the E. A. Mares play with Fa- 
ther Martinez speaking in his own voice, and another from Mabel Dodge Luhan’s 
memoir where we get a fuller view of local customs through the eyes of another 
outsider, an Anglo woman married to a native man. Students would read Cather’s 
novel in context “as part of the multi-ethnic conversation it seeks to dramatize” 
(Weidman 68). By expanding the reading to include complicating texts, I could 
examine the novel’s virtues while accurately presenting the passionate revul- 
sion it inspired in generations of nuevomexicanos. 



158 



Judith Beth Cohen 



To help students focus on their own process of research and meaning-mak- 
ing in such a complex environment, I also assigned Jane Tompkins’s article, 
‘“Indians’: Textualism, Morality and the Problem of History.” She records her 
personal journey through secondary and primary sources, as she searches for a 
“true” account of Indian/Puritan relations in seventeenth-century New England. 
Her essay offers students a parallel view of their own region as a basis for 
comparison with the southwest. More important than content is the process 
Tompkins so clearly describes; she critiques her own poststructuralist skeptical 
perspective, coming to regard it as one more point of view as distinct and also 
as limiting as that of the Puritans or Indians. In discussing the shortcomings of 
a purely perspectival approach to history, she argues that we must piece to- 
gether the story as best we can “believing this version up to a point, that version 
not at all, another version almost entirely, according to what seems reasonable 
and plausible, given everything else that I know” (76). Her honesty as she 
struggles to reconcile the many voices she encounters serves as a model for 
students in their own research projects. 

Along with the Tompkins reading I shared my own discoveries about Father 
Martinez. My encounter with the material hinged on the mediating concept of 
place . With the place itself as my primary text, and indigenous people as my 
guides, my reading of Cather was altered, expanded, and challenged. I could 
better understand the ongoing dialectic between identity politics as expressed 
in the Hispanic community, and the fused multi-ethnic identity created from the 
diverse potpourri of Spanish, French, Native American, Mexican, and Anglo 
influences. Teachers may not have the luxury of traveling to Santa Fe to teach 
Death Comes for the Archbishop, but when assigning a novel so deeply embed- 
ded in an historical time and place, we can make the place itself a text by bring- 
ing visual and historical materials into the classroom. Above all, we can include 
the voices of those who have a stake in the material so we do not repeat the 
errors of colonialism in our teaching. 



Notes 

1 . For a more complete discussion of Death Comes for the Archbishop as a novel of 
acceptance and reconciliation that views Cather as an inheritor of Hawthorne’s art in her 
treatment of American themes, see Weidman. Weidman also suggests Native American 
N. Scott Momaday’s novel House Made of Dawn (1966) as a good tandem reading 
along with Cather’s novel. I would add novels by Hispanic writers: Rudolfo Anaya’s 
Bless Me Ultima (1972) and Ana Castillo’s So Far From God (1993). 

2. Woodress mentions J. B. Salpointe’s Soldier of the Cross, the Catholic Encyclo- 
pedia, H. H. Bancroft’s History of New Mexico and Arizona, and books by Charles 
Loomis and Ralph Twitchell. Clearly, none of these writers is indigenous. 

3. Smith offers a persuasive argument comparing Latour to Odysseus, and Father 
Martinez to Circe. She suggests that the Circe story “impelled [Cather] to turn Martinez 
into more of a sensualist” than any of her sources warranted (1 1 8). 



Father Martinez: Folk Hero or Dangerous Infidel? 



159 



Works Cited 

Cather, Willa. Death Comes for the Archbishop. 1927. New York: Vintage Books, 1971. 

de Aragon, Ray John. “Padre Antonio Jose Martinez: The Man and the Myth.” In Padre 
Martinez . 125-151. 

Keeler, Clinton. “Narrative without Accent: Willa Cather and Puvis de Chavannes.” Criti- 
cal Essays on Willa Cather. Ed. John J. Murphy. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1984. 251-257. 

Luhan, Mabel Dodge. Edge of Taos Desert: An Escape to Reality. 1937 . Albuquerque: U 
of New Mexico P, 1965. 

Mares, E. A. “The Many Faces of Padre Antonio Jose Martinez: A Historiographic Es- 
say.” In Padre Martinez. 18-47. 

Mares, E. A. I Returned and Saw Under the Sun: Padre Martinez of Taos. A Play. Albu- 
querque: U of New Mexico P, 1989. 

Padre Martinez: New Perspectives from Taos. Taos, NM: Millicent Rogers Museum, 
1988. 

Pratt, Mary Louise. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation. New York: 
Routledge, 1992. 

Rudnick, Lois. Mabel Dodge Luhan: New Woman , New Worlds. Albuquerque: U of New 
Mexico P, 1984. 

Simmons, Marc. New Mexico: An Interpretive History. Albuquerque: U of New Mexico 
P, 1988. 

Smith, Patricia Clark. “Achaeans, Americanos, Prelates and Monsters: Willa Cather’s 
Death Comes for the Archbishop as New World Odyssey.” In Padre Martinez. 101 — 
123. 

Stuart, Henry Longan. Rev. of Death Comes for the Archbishop by Willa Cather. New 
York Times Book Review 4 September, 1927: 2. Critical Essays on Willa Cather. Ed. 
John J. Murphy. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1984. 244-247. 

Tompkins, Jane. ‘“Indians’: Textualism, Morality and the Problem of History” ‘ Race / 
Writing and Difference. Ed. Henry Louis Gates Jr. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1985. 59- 
77. 

Weidman, Bette. “Willa Cather’s Art in Historical Perspective: Reconsidering Death 
Comes for the Archbishop. In Padre Martinez. 48-70. 

Woodress, James. Willa Cather, A Literary Life. Lincoln: U of Nebraska P, 1987. 



o 

ERIC 



.170 



Ill Negotiating Differences 



10 Negotiating Difference: Teaching 
Multicultural Literature 



Patricia Bizzell 
College of the Holy Cross 



I’m going to begin by assuming that we want to teach multicultural literature. 
That is, I don’t want to try here to make the case for doing so. Also, I’d like to 
stipulate a definition of “multicultural” that is as broad as possible, to include 
diversities of gender, social class, and sexual preference, as well as race and 
ethnicity. I’d also like to define “literature” broadly, to include not only fiction 
and poetry but also sermons, eulogies, autobiographies, histories, and more. 

My main goal in this essay is to address two of the problems that typically 
attend teaching multicultural literature: how to select and group multicultural 
readings, and how to integrate literary and rhetorical approaches in teaching 
multicultural literature (or, teaching literature in the writing class and writing in 
the literature class). 



I 

One problem concerns how to select and group multicultural readings in an 
English course. You might select solely on the basis of personal preference. 
This approach has the advantage of enabling you to teach to your strengths — I 
suspect most of us teach better when we are teaching texts that we like. But 
basing your selections on personal preference can give students the idea that 
reading multicultural literature is nothing but a matter of preference, so that if it 
happens not to appeal to their personal tastes, they are free to ignore it. On the 
contrary, I’d like to think that studying multicultural literature is a responsibil- 
ity for citizens in a multicultural democracy. So I’m leery of selecting on the 
basis of my personal preference alone, although it may enter into a selection 
process that also involves other criteria. 

Another option would be to select readings on the basis of the students’ 
personal preference. It seems to be common wisdom in composition studies 
that students will be more seriously engaged with readings that they themselves 
select. Of course, one problem with this approach is the same problem I noted 

163 



0 



164 



Patricia Bizzell 



above in talking about choosing according to the teacher’s personal preference. 
Elevating preference can seem to trivialize the objects of study. 

Furthermore, I’m not sure that it is always true that students like their own 
choices best. Students do not always know about the texts that will most inter- 
est them. I’ve found, for example, that many African American students do not 
know the work of any antebellum Black writer other than Frederick Douglass — 
but they are very excited to discover Maria Stewart, David Walker, and more. 
Again, I’m leery of relying solely on the students’ personal preference, although 
I would make it one factor in my selection process. I like the idea of presenting 
students with an array of texts that I’ve found, inviting them to contribute some 
choices of their own to the array, and then deciding collectively which ones we 
will study. 

The basis of selection that I think is most important is local and national 
significance. That is, I would select on the basis of what cultures are repre- 
sented in the school, and the town, and on the basis of what might be considered 
“major works” of multicultural literature of national significance, such as 
Frederick Douglass’s autobiography. Choosing in this way has the great advan- 
tage of putting study on an appropriately serious and professional basis, while 
allowing for a very wide variety of texts to be read. 

Of course, this approach also has several liabilities. It involves you in mak- 
ing potentially controversial decisions about course content — but I think it’s 
our professional responsibility to make these decisions. Also, it may involve 
you in research to assemble the appropriate texts, but this, too, is our profes- 
sional responsibility — and a task to which students might very well contribute. 

Having decided on the criteria to govern text selection, however, we still 
have to consider how to group the texts we and our students have chosen. The 
traditional method of grouping, of course, is by literary period. For example, 
you might select readings from a traditional category such as “American Re- 
naissance” and add several slave narratives. This has the advantage of enabling 
you to retain a structure that may be familiar from your own professional train- 
ing, that may employ syllabi with which you are already comfortable — requir- 
ing only a few modifications — and that may allow you to continue to teach 
many “old favorite” canonical texts along with a few new, multicultural ones. 

A major disadvantage here, however, is that this approach leads to a “tokenist” 
treatment of multicultural texts. It isn’t only that you won’t be likely to teach as 
many of them if you cling to traditional categories where they are not included; 
it’s also that these categories are defined by aesthetic criteria that may not be 
best suited to appreciating the beauties of multicultural texts. For example, slave 
narratives such as Harriet Jacobs’s Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl have 
rhetorical designs on their audiences that are anathema in the critical consider- 
ation of canonical texts such as Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter. To 
really appreciate what Jacobs is doing, the old critical categories must be busted 
up. 




Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature 



165 



Furthermore, it doesn’t really solve the problem to create new literary-pe- 
riod categories that focus on multicultural literature — replacing the “American 
Renaissance” with the “Harlem Renaissance,” for example. Instead of tokenizing, 
such categories have a tendency to ghettoize multicultural literature and to dis- 
guise its profound influences on American literature as a whole. 

Another approach to grouping readings — one that has been very popular in 
composition anthologies — is to arrange them by supposedly universal themes. 
You might choose a theme such as “coming of age,” for example, and select a 
group of texts from different cultures that all appear to focus on this theme. In 
theory, this approach has the advantage of putting all the readings on an equal 
footing — unlike the traditional literary period approach, which tends to privi- 
lege the canonical — and it allows a very wide range of selection. 

A serious disadvantage to this approach, however, is that it tends to mini- 
mize, or even trivialize, cultural difference. Students may indeed be encour- 
aged to note differences in each culture’s treatment of common themes, but the 
common theme itself pushes the ultimate conclusion that “underneath these 
differences we’re all alike,” a conclusion to which students often rush all too 
eagerly because it excuses them from dealing with the most profound aspects 
of cultural difference. Furthermore, the common theme itself might reflect one 
culture’s preferences without acknowledgment — e.g., not all cultures are equally 
interested in discussing gender roles. 

Some might wish to argue, though, that this approach encourages tolerance 
for cultural differences among the students. I’m not sure that this is always true. 
The “universal themes” approach has a tendency to produce collections of read- 
ings that focus on painful experiences, that often depict people of color as vic- 
tims, and that can make a reader feel as if an emotional response is being extorted. 
Students who are members of the cultural group depicted in such a story can be 
acutely embarrassed by classroom discussion of these episodes; and students 
who are not group members can be severely alienated, depressed, and “turned 
off’ to the point of rejecting, rather than embracing, any message of tolerance. 

I think Mary Louise Pratt’s concept of the “contact zone” offers the best 
paradigm for grouping multicultural readings. Pratt uses the term “to refer to 
social spaces where cultures meet, clash, and grapple with each other, often in 
contexts of highly asymmetrical relations of power, such as colonialism, sla- 
very, or their aftermaths as they are lived out in many parts of the world today” 
(34). In “Contact Zones and the Structure of English Studies” (1994), I have 
commented on the usefulness of Pratt’s concept to English studies, arguing that 
“this concept can aid us both because it emphasizes the conditions of difficulty 
and struggle under which literatures from different cultures come together (thus 
forestalling the disrespectful glossing over of difference), and because it gives 
us a conceptual base for bringing these literatures together, namely, when they 
occur in or are brought to the same site of struggle or ‘contact zone’” (166). I’ve 




174 



166 



Patricia Bizzell 



suggested that the United States is a “congeries of overlapping contact zones” 
and that “‘multiculturalism , in English studies is a name for our recognition of 
this condition of living on contested cultural ground, and our desire to represent 
something of this complexity in our study of literature and literacy” ( 166 ). 

Pratt also offers some specifics on kinds of assignments we’d give in teach- 
ing the literature of a contact zone: 

exercises in storytelling and in identifying with the ideas, interests, histo- 
ries, and attitudes of others; experiments in transculturation and collabora- 
tive work and in the arts of critique, parody, and comparison (including 
unseemly comparisons between elite and vernacular cultural forms); the 
redemption of the oral; ways for people to engage with suppressed aspects 
of history (including their own histories); ways to move into and out of 
rhetorics of authenticity; ground rules for communication across lines of 
difference and hierarchy that go beyond politeness but maintain mutual 
respect; a systematic approach to the all-important concept of cultural 
mediation. (40, Pratt’s emphasis) 

Applying this concept to grouping multicultural texts, what you would do is, 
first you would pick your contact zone or historical moment, one particularly 
relevant to your town or region or one — like the internment of Japanese Ameri- 
cans during World War II — that clearly has national implications. Then, make 
your selections from among the texts already grouped there, brought to the 
contact zone by their authors. A contact zone is a historical moment when dif- 
ferent groups contend for the power to say what’s going on, what it all means, 
what should happen next; so you look at texts produced by these different groups 
for this contention and implicit (or often explicit) dialogue with each other. 

For example, instead of teaching a course on the “American Renaissance,” 
teach a course on fiction and non-fiction texts addressed to the antebellum de- 
bate over slavery or over “woman’s place.” You could include canonical texts 
such as Herman Melville’s Benito Cereno or Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The 
Blithedale Romance , but include them as voices in a dialogue with other writ- 
ers from other perspectives, such as William Apess or Margaret Fuller. 

It might be objected, however, that organizing a course around a contact 
zone amounts to propagandizing. By choosing scenes of unequal power struggles, 
we could be said to raise moral issues, and perhaps even to promote liberal 
political solutions, which might be regarded as out of place in the classroom. In 
response, I would argue that the main aim in teaching literature of a contact 
zone is not to prove that injustice took place, but rather to examine how all sides 
engaged issues rhetorically. And because the focus is on all sides, diverse views 
will be represented much more than they usually are in our liberal-biased an- 
thologies — more selections will have to be included that are conservative or 
even racist or sexist. 

I do not, however, disavow all designs on my students’ moral and political 
development. As I have argued in “Power, Authority, and Critical Pedagogy” 



O 

ERJC 



175 



Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature 



167 



(1991), I think there is a legitimate place for the teacher’s authority to raise 
moral issues. I am willing to use my power as a teacher to urge students to 
consider the issues raised in a contact zone, and I would hope to be able not to 
indoctrinate but to persuade them to my values of social justice, as I have ar- 
gued elsewhere (1992): 

I find myself in somewhat the same position as the ancient Greek rhetori- 
cian Isocrates. Like postmodern skeptics, he debunked teachers of his day 
who claimed to be able to foretell the future — that is, who claimed to give 
their students a set of values guaranteed to apply in all times and places. . . . 
Isocrates nevertheless did propose to teach virtue— virtue derived not from 
some transcendent realm but, rather, from the traditions of his community; 
indeed, according to postmodern skepticism, community should be the 
source of all values. Isocrates argued that while he could not guarantee to 
change — that is, to compel — his students, he could attempt to influence 
them — that is, to persuade them to adopt the values deemed most praise- 
worthy in his community. His authority as a teacher of virtue would thus 
be established rhetorically. (6) 

Of key importance in this position is that I speak not for my own personal 
values but for values I try to show are sanctioned by the community I and my 
students share — and contingent on debate. I show this both by the historical 
record (choosing contact zones in the past) and by my own openness to being 
persuaded (for example, as a non-Catholic, I’ve been changed by my Catholic 
students’ views on abortion). 



II 

Another problem in teaching multicultural literature has to do with its place in 
literature classes as opposed to composition classes. Actually, I don’t think there 
should be any opposition here. I don’t think there should be any difference 
between the way we teach our literature classes and the way we teach our writ- 
ing classes. What I want students to do is to study rhetorical strategies of per- 
suasion in readings from a variety of genres, fiction and non-fiction (“literature”), 
and also to practice rhetorical strategies in a variety of writings of their own 
(“composition”). To maintain this position, I have to make two arguments: that 
literature should be taught in the composition class, and that writing should be 
taught in the literature class. 

The issue of literature in the composition class boils down to the issue of the 
“content” of the composition class — a much neglected subject. Let me begin by 
stipulating that “content,” for purposes of this essay, means “what students in 
writing classes are writing about.” I know it is a current truism in composition 
studies that insofar as writing courses have content, the “content” is informa- 
tion about writing processes. This truism implies that we think we can separate 



O 

ERIC 



176 



168 



Patricia Bizzell 



the teaching of writing from what students are writing about; and it is because 
of this supposed separation that we think we can avoid talking about what stu- 
dents are writing about, and teach “only” composing processes. 

Contemporary theories of learning, reading comprehension, and composing 
all suggest that in order to write about something, students have to integrate it 
with what they already know and thus construct their own interpretation of it. 
This integration is what made classical rhetoricians such as Isocrates — whom I 
mentioned before on the topic of virtue — hope that exposure to good values 
would affect students’ values; and it is also what made them think that effective 
rhetoricians would need to draw on knowledge that their audience shared. Now 
we would say that this process of integration is the very process of learning; 
without it, neither reading comprehension nor written composition can take 
place (see, e.g., Petrosky). 

So whatever students are reading in the writing class, whether it be their 
classmates’ papers or the selections in an anthology, they are perforce learning 
about it. If they weren’t, they wouldn’t be able to write about it. Another way to 
put this would be to say that writing teachers are teaching students the knowl- 
edge content of whatever they are reading, whether this is the teachers’ inten- 
tion or not. And teachers are commenting on the students’ use of this content in 
their writing, unless teachers never comment on anything other than grammar 
mistakes. Even if the teacher is able to preserve a seeming separation between 
composing and content in comments such as, “You need more evidence here to 
make your argument about killing all homosexuals more convincing,” even here, 
the teacher is commenting on how the student has handled the knowledge con- 
tent of the essay. 

So I think we should ask ourselves what we are teaching by the choices we 
make about what students are to write about. There seems to be a range of tacit 
answers to this question in the course contents currently in use. For example, 
some writing courses use anthologies that attempt to illustrate for students the 
conventions of academic discourse, with writing samples from various disci- 
plines; or the knowledge content of academic literacy, with “great books” se- 
lections. I don’t want to spend time here discussing the pros and cons of this 
approach, which has been subsumed in the lengthy discussion in composition 
studies over whether or not students should be taught academic discourse. Let 
me just say here that I find these kinds of readers rather elitist — too exclusion- 
ary of multicultural content and the students’ own cultural resources. 

To address this difficulty, you might take the approach that content should 
be whatever the students choose to write about. If the content is the students’ 
choice, then presumably they can draw on whatever cultural capital they bring 
to class. No one will have a disadvantage based on the prior knowledge he or 
she possesses. This approach is sometimes pursued with the aid of anthologies 
that present content that all people, whatever their resources of cultural capital, 



Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature 



169 



are presumed to share, that is, selections about various aspects of personal life 
that “everyone” is presumed to have experienced, such as childhood or school- 
ing; or more formal belletristic meditations on issues supposed to be of current 
concern to “everyone,” such as gender relations or race relations. In other words, 
these anthologies are organized around what I called the “universal themes” 
approach (above), and exhibit some of the same problems I have already pointed 
out. 

This reading does not seem to be assigned in order to convey necessary knowl- 
edge content, but rather simply to serve as a prompt for the students to develop 
their own writing. For example, an anthology selection on Native American 
marriage customs might be used to stimulate students to reflect on bonding 
patterns in their own communities, without much attention to whether this reading 
is teaching them anything about Native Americans. 

True, these anthologies usually include selections from a variety of ethnic, 
racial, and cultural groups. There may be some intent to encourage tolerance by 
giving students more information about different social groups — but I have al- 
ready discussed the problems with this hope. The most widely accepted theo- 
retical justification for the diversity of these readers, however, is that they 
maximize the chances that all the diverse students in the class will see their 
cultural capital legitimated in the academy. 

While this is a worthy goal, I am troubled by some problems here. For one 
thing, this is a somewhat essentialized approach to what students might want to 
read and how they might want to write. The assumption seems to be that al- 
though tolerance may be a valuable but secondary by-product, the main reason 
the selections by, let’s say, Latina/o writers are there in the anthologies is to 
legitimate the cultural capital of Latina/o students, and so on. This approach 
tends to close off discourse possibilities for the students thus essentialized, as 
Victor Villanueva and bell hooks, for example, have both testified. They explain 
that their writing styles have been enriched by a variety of sources: Villaneuva 
draws on classical sophistic rhetoric, which he links historically to his own 
Puerto Rican heritage; hooks asserts her right to speak in a variety of voices, 
not only the Black English Vernacular that a college writing teacher regarded as 
her “authentic” voice. 

Moreover, in a class where the content focus is on the individual sensibility 
and on personal responses to experience, there is an inevitable tendency to teach 
students how to feel, teaching them what representations of their experiences 
are going to seem sophisticated and persuasive. For example, as Bruce Herzberg 
and I have argued, this tendency can be observed in the choices writing teachers 
made for what student essays to include in the anthology What Makes Writing 
Good. In some courses, the responsibility for responding to representations of 
experience is placed on the students themselves, but these situations may be no 
less oppressive, as majority views of how people should behave get imposed on 





170 



Patricia Bizzell 



everyone in the class. This kind of schooling of the emotions borders on op- 
pressive surveillance. 

I would like to propose the contact zone concept, which I discussed above, 
as a better approach to defining the content of the composition course, an ap- 
proach that I hope meets some of these objections. I suggest that we attempt to 
devise materials with the idea in mind of educating our students to be effective 
communicators in a multicultural democracy. 

One advantage to this approach is that it provides a rationale not only for 
making the materials multicultural, but also for avoiding essentializing these 
materials. Students will see their own cultural capital legitimated in the acad- 
emy; but at the same time, they will have the opportunity to familiarize them- 
selves with a wide range of materials, so that they will be able not only to 
increase their own repertoire of discourse practices but also to increase the range 
of practices, employed by others, that they can understand. The students will be 
able to develop personal styles, but with both the freedom to range over a vari- 
ety of cultural practices in developing these styles, and the responsibility to 
communicate across cultural boundaries both within and outside the classroom. 

Another advantage to this approach is that it is properly rhetorical, focusing 
on strategies for communicating both within various groups and across cultural 
boundaries. This approach encourages the study of discourse location or dis- 
course community, a useful analytic tool in the variety of discourse situations a 
multicultural democracy presents. 

In addition to being multicultural and rhetorical, course content should also 
be historical. The United States has always been a multicultural country, and 
the rhetorical strategies of many groups have developed their richness over time, 
through experiences of negotiating difference at various moments in American 
history. Therefore, to appreciate the fullest range of these rhetorical strategies, 
some attention to their historical development is needed — as can be gained by 
grouping materials around a contact zone from the past. Moreover, I would 
argue with Fredric Jameson that effective democratic communication, as well 
as other forms of political action, require that people be able conceptually to 
locate themselves in history, to see their relationships to their own and other 
groups in the past, present, and future. (He calls this kind of knowledge “cogni- 
tive mapping.”) 

The materials for such course content could vary widely as to genre, from 
argumentative public speeches to intimate personal narratives, and including 
visual texts as well. I would want any collection to include contemporary mate- 
rials, just to emphasize the relevance of course activities to contemporary life; 
but I think it is necessary for rhetorical richness that contemporary materials be 
linked to the powerful rhetorical traditions from which they have developed. 
I’ve found in my own classes that it is especially empowering for student writ- 
ers from oppressed social groups to learn that people like themselves have been 





179 



Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature 



171 



using language against oppression with eloquence, and some practical success, 
for a long time. This vista of a rhetorical tradition of their own can offer more 
courage for present struggles than exhortation to a misplaced middle class indi- 
vidualism, asking them to stand alone on bitterly contested contemporary rhe- 
torical turf with no more protection than their “own opinions.” 

Let me illustrate by briefly describing a composition course I taught in the 
fall 1 993 semester that employed materials of the kind I am describing. Most of 
the students in this class would be classified as basic writers if Holy Cross 
sorted composition students according to such categories (we don’t). I assembled 
materials centering around the debate in antebellum America on the meaning of 
the phrase “all men are created equal” from the Declaration of Independence. 
This phrase became a bone of contention in the increasingly heated debates 
over slavery in the period. We read selections from the writings of both Euro- 
pean American defenders and African American attackers of slavery, compar- 
ing their rhetorical uses of the Declaration and the ways they played off of each 
others’ arguments. We also read materials supplied by the students: contempo- 
rary opinion pieces on race relations that echoed arguments found in the nine- 
teenth-century readings. 

For example, slavery defender David Christy argued that “all men are cre- 
ated equal” was never intended to mean all people, but only people like those 
who signed the Declaration, namely white men of the upper social classes. In 
contrast, abolitionist Charles Langston argued that African Americans’ partici- 
pation in the American Revolution testified to their inclusion in the promises of 
the Declaration, and that resistance to slavery actually built upon Revolutionary 
ideals. In effect, African American rhetoricians disinherited white defenders of 
slavery, and depicted themselves as the true descendants of the revered found- 
ing fathers. Rhetoric scholars Celeste Michelle Condit and John Louis Lucaites 
have argued that our contemporary interpretation of the phrase “all men are 
created equal” to include all people is in fact largely the result of the powerfully 
successful efforts of these African American rhetoricians. 

My students wrote and shared a variety of assignments working over these 
difficult and lengthy readings: they summarized the arguments, analyzed and 
compared the writers’ rhetorical strategies, and tried their own powers in writ- 
ing assignments that challenged them, for example, to rewrite the opening para- 
graph of the Declaration of Independence as one of our authors would have 
done it, explaining the changes they made, or to explain how any writer should 
address the problem of speaking to two audiences at the same time, those who 
agree and those who disagree, illustrating from the work of one of our authors. 

I won’t say that we were always able to live up to my high hopes for the 
course, but still, there were some exciting moments in student papers. For ex- 
ample, when asked to compare the rhetorical strategies of slavery defenders 
Christy, George Fitzhugh, and Albert Bledsoe, Tawanya, an African American 



O 

ERIC 



130 



172 



Patricia Bizzell 



student, pointed out that these writers contradict themselves when, on the one 
hand, they claim that enslaved people are not well educated enough to take care 
of themselves if free, and, on the other hand, deny them access to education. 
She not only noted the failure of these writers’ attempts to sound reasonable 
and humane, but she also commented on the intertextuality of the rhetoric. She 
attacked Christy, chronologically the latest writer, because he didn’t notice the 
contradictions in the work of his earlier colleagues but repeated many of them 
instead. 

Thus, the literature content of this course clearly helped my students to de- 
velop their rhetorical powers. Furthermore, this course is distinguished from 
courses I teach in American literature only by the proportion of reading to writ- 
ing: in writing courses, we write more and read less, and in literature courses, 
vice versa. This brings me to my second argument, namely, that writing should 
be taught in every literature course. 

It’s everybody’s job to teach writing, not just the writing faculty’s (indeed, 
not just the English faculty’s, as writing across the curriculum programs have 
shown). I know that some literature faculty still maintain that teaching writing 
is beneath them and should be “taken care of’ in first-year composition courses, 
but they’re simply wrong. For one thing, these literature faculty are teaching 
writing already, if they assign any writing at all. They may just be teaching it 
badly, if they don’t give it any explicit attention informed by scholarship in 
composition studies. Furthermore, writing can and should be taught at any level, 
and even students who have excelled in a first-year composition course can still 
improve. Indeed, I think no one ever finishes learning to write; I know I haven’t. 

Some literature faculty are coming to recognize that they need the help of 
writing pedagogy. As confessed by Jane Tompkins in her 1990 essay “Peda- 
gogy of the Distressed,” literary scholars have usually taught lecture-fashion, 
maximizing their own dazzling performances, minimizing student discussion, 
and ignoring student writing altogether. Now Tompkins and others announce 
with great fanfare pedagogical discoveries that teachers in composition studies 
have been working over for years. (For excellent critiques of Tompkins’s essay 
by Susan Jarratt and Elizabeth Flynn, see Olson.) 

Composition studies has reversed the order of traditional literature teaching 
for some time, putting student writing first, encouraging student discussion, 
and finding ways to reduce our own authority and efface ourselves (indeed, 
almost too much so, as I suggested above in my discussion of authority and 
teaching “virtue”). Among the topics literature teachers need to learn are these: 
how to coach the writing process, especially how to generate ideas in response 
to reading; how to push the idea of writing processes as recursive, foregrounding 
revision; how to encourage collaborative work; how to sensitize students to 




181 



Negotiating Difference: Teaching Multicultural Literature 



173 



different audiences and give them practice writing for different audiences; how 
to get students personally invested in research papers; and more. 

This folding together of literature and composition is being facilitated, I think, 
by the emergence of “rhetoric” as a master term in both fields, as well as both 
fields’ interest in cultural studies. I’d add that I’d like to see composition studies 
following literary studies’ lead in new historicism, as well. But I don’t have 
space to go into these topics here. 



I believe we must teach multicultural literature organized according to histori- 
cal-moment contact zones, and fully integrate teaching literature and teaching 
writing. My hope for the outcome of this project, on which literature faculty 
and writing faculty should collaborate, is that teachers and students alike will 
come to see difference more as an asset than a liability. 

To illustrate what I mean, let me conclude with a rereading of the Bible story 
of the Tower of Babel. In those days, there was no cultural diversity — the story 
says human beings all spoke the same language. Agreeing so well, they were 
well able to mobilize their resources and build a tower reaching toward heaven. 
God was displeased by the arrogance of this project. To stop it, says the story, 
God made the people speak different languages. God created cultural diversity. 

Now usually, we think of this creation of different languages as a punish- 
ment for an evil deed (building the tower). Presumably, it’s a punishment be- 
cause the change from pre-Babel linguistic unity is seen as a painful loss. That’s 
like thinking of linguistic and cultural diversity in the United States today as a 
“problem” or “liability.” 

But what if we think of God’s act of creating different languages for the 
people in the story not so much as a punishment, but as a remedy? They got into 
trouble because they agreed too much. There was no “outsider,” no one from a 
different culture, to question what they were doing and to persuade for a differ- 
ent perspective. On this reading, God decided that what the people needed was 
diversity, to help keep them out of trouble, to provide moral checks and bal- 
ances. 

That’s how I’d like for us to think of cultural diversity in the United States 
today — it’s a remedy for social injustice, a tremendous creative asset. I hope we 
can convey this valuing of difference to our students by teaching multicultural 
literature as I’ve suggested, foregrounding the negotiation of difference. And 
maybe, through that, we can see social justice increase in the United States and 
the world — that’s my biggest hope of all. 



Ill 




182 



174 



Patricia Bizzell 



Works Cited 

Bizzell, Patricia. ‘“Contact Zones’ and the Structure of English Studies.” College En- 
glish 56(1994): 163-69. 

. “The Politics of Teaching Virtue.” ADE Bulletin 103 (Winter 1992): 4-7. 

. “Power, Authority, and Critical Pedagogy.” Journal of Basic Writing 1 0 ( 1 99 1 ): 

54-70. 

Bizzell, Patricia, and Bruce Herzberg. Rev. of What Makes Writing Good: A 
M ultiperspective. Eds. William E. Coles Jr. and James Vopat. College Composition 
and Communication 37 (1986): 244—47. 

Condit, Celeste Michelle and John Louis Lucaites. Crafting Equality: America's Anglo- 
African Word . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1993. 

hooks, bell, ‘“when i was a young soldier for the revolution’: coming to voice. In Talk- 
ing Back: thinking feminist, thinking black . Boston: South End Press, 1989. 10-18. 

Jameson, Fredric. “Cognitive Mapping.” In Marxism and the Interpretation of Culture . 
Eds. Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg. Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1988. 347-57. 

Pratt, Mary Louise. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession 91. New York: MLA, 1991. 
33-40. 

Petrosky, Anthony. “From Story to Essay: Reading and Writing.” College Composition 
and Communication 33 (1982): 19-36. 

Olson, Gary, ed. Philosophy , Rhetoric, Literary’ Criticism: ( Interviews. Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois UP, 1994. 

Tompkins, Jane. “Pedagogy of the Distressed.” College English 52 (1990): 653-60. 

Villanueva, Victor. “ Ingle's in the Colleges.” In Bootstraps: From an American Academic 
of Color. Urbana: NCTE, 1993.65-90. 



183 



1 1 Teaching American Literature as 
Cultural Encounter: Models for 
Organizing the Introductory Course 



Marjorie Pryse 
University at Albany, SUNY 



During the past decade I have created and revised a course guide for instructors 
that in its most recent version (1994) is titled Teaching with the Norton Anthol- 
ogy of American Literature, Fourth Edition 1 . Although I have imagined myself 
in armchair conversation with colleagues at geographically distant institutions, 
it was not until the 1 994 NCTE Summer Institute for College Teachers at Myrtle 
Beach on “Rethinking American Literature” that I had an opportunity to meet 
face to face with instructors who reported that they had used the various edi- 
tions of the course guide as part of their class preparation. In this essay I have 
expanded some of my thinking in Teaching with the Norton Anthology of Ameri- 
can Literature, hoping to continue conversations from the Summer Institute and 
to address other colleagues who have never taught with the Norton Anthology 
of American Literature {NAAL) and therefore may not even know that Teaching 
with the NAAL exists. 

In writing the first two editions of what I originally titled a “course guide” to 
teaching American literature, the model I used assumed that the instructor had 
already read the literature, knew the historical and critical “territory,” and could 
serve as a knowledgeable guide for students entering that territory for the first 
time. In the late 1990s, such a metaphor for instruction in the American litera- 
ture classroom no longer makes as much pedagogical sense as it did even five 
years ago, for two reasons. First, the range and diversity of texts taught in Ameri- 
can literature classrooms across the nation (and increasingly included in the 
fourth edition of NAAL and other anthologies, such as the Heath) have altered 
our understanding of the territory of American writing, and the categories and 
characteristics of this writing are subject to debate. Which works should appear 
in any “canon” of “great American” texts? In a critical climate that promotes 
reexamination of the very body of knowledge that constitutes the teaching field 
of American literature, we would do our students a disservice by presenting 
authors and texts standard to anthologies published a decade or longer ago as if 
these anthologies still represented American literature. Second, in light of the 
changing shape of this body of knowledge, a pedagogy that required the 

175 



0 




184 



176 



Marjorie Pryse 



instructor to maintain a fiction of expertise would carry with it several hazards. 
It would rule out introducing students to new or newly discovered works from 
the past or from writers who trace their literary and historical origins to non- 
Euro- American sources, at least to the extent that most instructors in the Ameri- 
can literature classroom have not yet become experts in this literature. An 
American literature course built on the premise that the instructor serves as a 
guide remains useful only to the extent that we work to overcome our own 
limitations. 

If we make it clear at the outset that the body of knowledge we know as 
American literature has changed and is in the process of further change and that 
we are willing to “get lost” with our students — to paraphrase Robert Frost’s 
“Directive” — in order to “find ourselves” again, then the concept of instructor- 
as-guide is reinvented in a more vital and flexible way. Indeed, the exploration 
of American literature itself becomes an encounter in which students recognize 
both that the texts they read may alter their conception of “American” and that 
this altered sense may contribute to new configurations of what has been known 
as American literature. 

The new “literature to 1620” sections in the fourth edition of NAAL and 
several other anthologies of American literature bring the concept of encounter 
directly into the pedagogy of the American literature course. Mary Louise Pratt 
uses the term “contact zone” to refer to “social spaces where cultures meet, 
clash, and grapple with each other, often in contexts of highly asymmetrical 
relations of power, such as colonialism, slavery, or their aftermaths as they are 
lived out in many parts of the world today.” She observes that the Stanford 
University course Cultures, Ideas, and Values (CIV), which “centered on the 
Americas and the multiple cultural histories (including European ones) that 
have intersected here,” itself became a contact zone in which students as well as 
texts brought “radically heterogenous” reception to the intersection of these 
multiple histories and various “American” stories. In such a course, she writes, 
“we were struck ... at how anomalous the formal lecture became,” at how 
“impossible” and “unimaginable” became “the lecturer’s traditional (imagined) 
task — unifying the world in the class’s eyes by means of a monologue that rings 
equally coherent, revealing, and true for all.” 2 Pratt’s description of “the arts of 
the contact zone” may characterize the experience of other classrooms in which 
the instructor takes seriously the concept of encounter. Ultimately, more is at 
stake than encounters on the page; what American literature reveals to students 
about their own lives, myths, and histories invites intellectual encounters in 
classroom discussion as well, and in the alchemical process of such discussion, 
the changing shape of American literature anthologies becomes a catalyst, not a 
fixative. 

Organizing the American literature course, like the process of anthology re- 
vision, requires choice: what to add and what to delete to make room for new 



185 



Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



177 



texts, new voices. These choices are themselves informed by the following fac- 
tors: new scholarship, especially on women and minority men who have writ- 
ten American texts; developments in literary and critical theory; the extent of 
perceived relationship between cultural texts and social contexts; and increas- 
ing freedom to acknowledge the literary value of texts that traditionalists have 
not considered high culture — such as diaries, oral literatures, political writing, 
and regional fiction. Indeed, the very debates concerning the inclusion of cer- 
tain authors and texts in the literary canon — and in the American literature class- 
room — may themselves be viewed as a struggle between the high culture of 
American literature traditionally defined and an increasingly populist sense of 
the function and value of American literary representations. The study of Ameri- 
can literature demonstrates the series of radical inventions and interventions 
that produced government documents as well as creative texts, that constituted 
acts of autobiography as well as ethnography, that emerged as myths and counter- 
myths reflective of their particular age and the aging of American culture. Like 
the society it in part reflects, the scholarly and teaching field of American lit- 
erature is also an invention (initially, by tum-of-the-century historians 3 ) as well 
as the site of national, cultural, and political intervention. Teaching American 
literature as an encounter between the inventions of the past and the cultural 
interventions of the present becomes a useful metaphor for pedagogy, building 
as it does from the earliest records of the encounter between native peoples and 
Europeans (the explorers and the exploiters, the recorders and the critics). 

Conceiving of teaching American literature as an encounter for undergradu- 
ate students raises a series of questions. How do any of us create a course out- 
line that will guide, but not dictate, students’ approach to American literature; 
that will allow the instructor a sense of mastery without precluding exploration 
of new material; and that further makes it possible to manifest the pleasures we 
find in any given work, along with a collective sense of the aesthetic? How do 
we create a course that may be required for students who then enter the class- 
room without themselves having experienced choice? Are there ways to teach 
American literature that can help all students perceive themselves as members 
of a culture that includes them? Many students expect to be “taught” American 
literature as if it were a body of finite knowledge, a collection of accepted read- 
ings to be assimilated. Identifying the conceptual framework by which an in- 
structor has chosen to organize the course encourages students to read, think, 
speak, and write from the perspective they bring with them, as they simulta- 
neously learn to locate that perspective within a larger context. But the larger 
context always includes other perspectives, other ways of organizing an Ameri- 
can literature course. 

Over the years I have tried various models of course organization and have 
become convinced of the value of choosing some model — hoping to help stu- 
dents clarify what initially appears to be the “boggy, soggy, squitchy picture” of 




178 



Marjorie Pryse 



American literature, especially as they experience it in a two-volume anthol- 
ogy. 4 A model of course organization provides the coherence of an organizing 
principle from which students may risk moving beyond the known to writers 
they might otherwise find alien — because they write in a different century, out 
of an ethnic background other than the students’ own, from the point of view of 
another gender, or by means of experimenting with language or genre. The 
models by which I have variously organized American literature courses since 
the late 1970s include the historical approach, the “major authors” approach, 
the literary- traditions approach, and the inclusion approach. To someone from 
outside the profession, these four models might seem politically neutral and in 
some sense equally valid choices for course organization. But within depart- 
ments and professional organizations like the National Council of Teachers of 
English, the American Literature Association, and the Modem Language Asso- 
ciation, these approaches have come to be associated with points on a cultural 
spectrum of representation that spans from the more traditional and conserva- 
tive models on the side of the historical and “major authors” approaches, to 
more liberal and even radical models of American culture on the side of the 
literary- traditions and the inclusion approaches. In light of the NCTE Summer 
Institute, I have reexamined the models I have used and suggest here ways in 
which the historical, “major authors,” and literary-traditions approaches might 
all, like the inclusion approach, become cultural encounters in the classroom. 



The Historical Approach 

Most anthologies of American literature are organized according to the chro- 
nology of the authors’ birth dates, and many of us write schedules of required 
reading that are more or less chronological and thus basically follow the order 
represented in the anthology. But mere chronology does not produce a perspec- 
tive on literary history, and many instructors would argue that it is impossible to 
understand literature without placing it in its historical context. The historical 
approach makes room for students to ask questions that interest them about the 
writers’ lives; about the ethnic, literary, geographical, and political environ- 
ments within which they wrote; and about the ideologies or religious beliefs 
that influenced their cultural expression. 

In practice, this can mean choosing texts that have a connection to specific 
historical events. The events themselves can generally inform the presentation 
of readings on the syllabus, provide a focus for background discussion, and 
give students the basis for asking questions in class or for selecting essay top- 
ics. One advantage to this approach for a course that may focus on the litera- 
tures of early encounter or the colonial period is that it allows students to locate 
literary works in the context of an American history course they may also be 
taking, or have taken, as part of a core or general education requirement. For the 




187 



Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



179 



post-Civil War period and into the twentieth century, in which American litera- 
ture proliferates with a diversity of voices, themes, and degrees of connection 
to historical moments, the instructor can focus on the development of an Ameri- 
can literature and on both the individual writers and the aesthetic movements 
that produced it as events of historical significance in their own right. Note, 
however, that during the last twenty years the discipline of history has itself 
become transformed by the social historians and the scholars who have created 
the subdiscipline of women’s history. Like these transformations in the disci- 
pline of history, the attempt to locate literature in its historical context actually 
produces an effort that is far from traditional. Furthermore, in the context of 
increasing awareness of the social construction of American literature itself as a 
field of study 5 , and of literary movements as equally socially constructed 6 , an 
unexamined historical approach may actually obscure for students the role that 
social and cultural assumptions play in identifying what we understand as sig- 
nificant and “historical” events. 

The historical approach does offer the coherence of parallelism; in the broad 
sweep of a survey course, Puritanism and modernism become equivalent terms 
to the extent that they form discrete sections in course organization. Such a 
course sketches for students the “isms” of American literary study: from Euro- 
pean colonialism to Puritanism, deism, transcendentalism, regionalism, real- 
ism, naturalism, modernism, and postmodernism. Questions emerge from such 
a model: As they read specific works, what connections can students find be- 
tween ideologies that suggest a worldview (such as Puritanism and deism) and 
others that are more philosophical and aesthetic in their focus (such as tran- 
scendentalism and realism)? At the same time, to what extent do particular writers 
enhance, subvert, or simply ignore the assumptions of their age? Class discus- 
sion and analysis of individual texts can usefully challenge the apparent subor- 
dination of writers and works to categories on a syllabus. Such a framework for 
course organization can provide a set of definitions that students may be willing 
to challenge. Puritanism, for example, becomes a useful umbrella concept in 
discussing many of the writers in the 1620-1820 period; however, a number of 
frequently anthologized writers in the same period had no relation to Puritan 
thinking, and there are others — Hawthorne is the notable example — in later 
periods who continued to examine Puritanism in their works. Similarly, coming 
to terms with the concept of modernism can help students understand many of 
the thematic and aesthetic choices writers make in the 1914—1945 period, but 
what happens to the concept if you ask students to consider the “modernism” of 
Whitman and Dickinson? Or if you ask them to explain the persistence of inter- 
est in traditional themes and lyric forms in many poets who wrote during the 
“modem” period? 

One difficulty the historical model creates rests in this same apparent paral- 
lelism of course organization. Writers who do not fit the general pattern 



O 

ERIC 



188 



180 



Marjorie Pryse 



become more difficult to include in the syllabus unless the historical approach 
includes a counterpoint. The literature of witness and encounter in writers like 
Bartolome de las Casas, Bernal Diaz del Castillo, and even Samuel de Champlain 
offers a different perspective than the mainstream accounts of the literature of 
colonial expansion in the writings of Christopher Columbus, Heman Cortes, or 
John Smith. And while texts of witness and encounter truly “historicize” the 
literature of European colonialism, the status of such writers and works is ef- 
fectively marginalized by the historical model, particularly the model that orga- 
nizes a course around the series of ideologically and aesthetically marked 
categories (the “isms” listed above) that the scholarly and teaching field of 
American literature has, in its own creation, marked out as the mainstream. 

A consideration of the list of other issues and categories around which Ameri- 
can literature may be organized confirms the effective marginalization of cer- 
tain writers and texts. Such a list includes, among others: Native American songs 
and oratory; “other” colonial writers such as John Woolman who were not Pu- 
ritans; writers who considered the issue of slavery, the treatment of Native 
Americans, or the lives of American women over the course of two or more 
centuries; and the literature of the Harlem Renaissance. Furthermore, entire 
categories of writers and texts that might otherwise fit the model become 
marginalized, as instructors over the course of a survey have little time to differ- 
entiate between regionalism and “local color” writing, or even to include re- 
gionalism at all because realism includes several “major authors” (and long 
works of fiction that take up a lot of space on the syllabus). 

Even a cursory discussion of the issues and specific problems involved in 
choosing a historical model of course organization reflects the difficulty in view- 
ing it as a “traditional” or “default” model. Rather, the historical approach cre- 
ates a number of opportunities for the instructor to call into question the 
inclusiveness of categories of American literary history as well as to raise other 
questions concerning the development of “American” writing that we may not 
have thought about when we were students. Why does the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence have the power it has? Does it reflect the power of particular groups 
as well as the disenfranchisement of others? To stimulate discussion on this 
question, the instructor may include Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s 1848 “The Dec- 
laration of Sentiments,” Frederick Douglass’s “The Meaning of July Fourth for 
the Negro,” and the Cherokee Memorials as part of a discussion of Jefferson’s 
text. How might certain works believed to influence the course of history — 
such as Thomas Paine’s “Common Sense,” Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom's 
Cabin, or W. E. B. Du Bois’s The Souls of Black Folk — redefine our sense of 
literary history? Further, if we should all have been exposed to modernist and 
postmodernist thinking and writing by virtue of having been bom in the mid- to 
late-twentieth century (as the chronological development of American litera- 
ture may seem to imply to students), then why do some Americans still think, 





Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



181 



write, or read as Puritans or nineteenth-century women? To what extent does 
our national literature speak for all of us, and to what extent does it record the 
thinking of a very few? 

The historical approach, carefully examined, helps undergraduates explore 
the possibility that what they are reading may have significance for the devel- 
opment of their own identity — or cluster of identities — as Americans. It helps 
them find their own place in the history of American expression as our literature 
reflects that history — and with a sense that the historical approach itself is sim- 
ply one way of telling a story about the body of texts we loosely term American 
literature. 

The “Major Authors” Approach 

In terms of pedagogical choice, presenting the American literature course as a 
study of single figures or “major authors” makes it possible to read more of 
each writer’s work, to spend more class time discussing each writer, and to 
encourage in students more sustained contemplation and appreciation of each 
writer — all powerful reasons to retain “major authors” as a model for course 
organization. It does not have to eliminate the historical context or the literary 
history within which any given writer wrote, although the course design does 
emphasize the development of each writer’s individual career and relegates his- 
torical and cultural context to the background. 

As part of choosing texts for a major authors course, an instructor might find 
it useful to think through his or her own criteria for “major.” Some of these 
criteria might include the following: (1 ) appeals to a variety of readers (“univer- 
sality”); (2) wrote works that influenced more than one other major author; (3) 
contributed an acknowledged “masterpiece” to American literature; (4) sus- 
tained a literary career beyond a single tour de force, or beyond middle age; (5) 
pioneered or innovated in subject matter, literary tradition, technique, or genre; 
(6) gained recognition as “major” by literary critics and historians; or (7) has 
“stood the test of time” — which may be decoded as having been regularly taught 
in undergraduate courses and thus would be removed from survey anthologies 
at the publisher’s peril. However, scrutiny of these or any other criteria for es- 
tablishing an author as “major” will demonstrate their arbitrariness. 

The concept of the universal and wide appeal loses persuasiveness when we 
consider how readily and for how many centuries white males of European 
descent — many of whom have controlled the power of cultural definition and 
the means to create a mass market — have dominated the pattern for such uni- 
versality. The concepts of influence (on other “major authors”), acknowledged 
“masterpiece,” and recognition by critics all exist within a circular and circum- 
scribed evaluative field. For these criteria, we are using unexamined and unde- 
fined concepts of “major author” in effect to establish the category. And the 





182 



Marjorie Pryse 



concepts of sustained literary career and pioneering innovation merely allow 
for critical fashions to dictate who is “in” and who is “out” of the canon. Herman 
Melville’s Moby-Dick is canonized for its innovation and critics have estab- 
lished their own reputations debating the question of whether or not the work 
may be considered a novel. Other American fictions, such as Sarah Ome Jewett’s 
The Country of the Pointed Firs or Mary Austin’s The Land of Little Rain raise 
similar questions — but do not achieve Melville’s length and do not embed their 
segments in a short narrative about hunting and killing a mythic animal. (The 
prospectors for gold in Austin’s work encounter only mirage.) White American 
women writers and African American writers rarely achieve canonical status. 
Even Ralph Ellison, despite the acknowledgment that Invisible Man is long and 
innovative, may be questioned because his total lifetime production was small. 
Toni Morrison, with her Nobel Prize and her novel Beloved, achieves “major 
author” status among her contemporaries — but she is still alive. Some of the 
words we might casually use to explain our choices of certain writers over oth- 
ers — great, universal, enduring — can actually obscure the process of literary 
evaluation or the critical and political construction of an author’s reputation. 
For illuminating insight into the politics of construction or reconstruction of a 
“major American author,” see Jane Tompkins’s discussion of the politics of 
Hawthorne’s literary reputation in Sensational Designs 7 , and Lawrence 
Schwartz’s book, Creating Faulkner’s Reputation. 

To work critically, a major authors model should also raise questions con- 
cerning the process by which an author becomes “major” 8 : How does an author 
become “major”? Who decides? Is the question open to debate? Is there a hand- 
book that establishes the criteria for nomination to the canon of “major au- 
thors,” or does the acceptance of a particular author reflect the opinions of readers 
over time? If so, which readers? Why do there appear to be so many major 
authors in one period (such as 1820-65) and so few in others (such as 1620- 
1820)? Why, in a period where so many authors wrote from such a wide range 
of identities and geographic regions (such as 1865-1920), do we continue to 
focus on only a few (e.g., Clemens, Howells, and James)? How do students 
discover authors not included in the anthology or the course? Can we be certain 
that we would not consider any of them “major”? To what extent does the term 
“major author” imply size — length of novels or poems, number of novels or 
poems over a lifetime? What does a writer of short works such as stories or lyric 
poems have to do — or more likely, what do the critics have to do for such a 
writer — in order to earn for him or her the distinction “major author”? 

The very process of trying to construct a list of “major” American authors 
for consideration in the classroom reflects the challenge — as well as the possi- 
bilities — of teaching with the “major authors” model. The smaller the number 
of authors to be included in the course, the greater the difficulty of making the 
justification to traditional colleagues for including white women or minority 




Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



183 



men or women writers. For example, if we survey the entire field of American 
literature and want to choose only five writers on whose “major” status scholars 
would agree, we might end up with the following list: Hawthorne, Melville, 
Clemens, James, and Faulkner. Such a list omits poetry and drama as genres — 
as well as significant works by many other authors arguably considered “ma- 
jor.” A more profitable approach to choosing a list for a “major authors” course 
would include expanding the number of authors as much as time permits, thereby 
making room for alternatives. Another approach would involve rethinking the 
category of “major” altogether, recognizing the arbitrariness the category rep- 
resents, and choosing some writers for such a course that not only challenge 
assumptions about the phrase “major author” but also introduce students to 
minority and women writers whose work indeed has become capable, espe- 
cially by the late twentieth century, of “major” influence on American culture. 

Rethinking not only American literature but also the category of “major au- 
thor” produces a wider list of writers from which to choose in constructing a 
“major authors” course. Such a list would include the five writers I have cited 
above as well as many other European American males — Emerson, Whitman, 
Frost, Eliot, O’Neill. Such a list might also include, in addition to Dickinson 
and Wharton (often the only women included in a “major authors” course), 
Stowe, Jewett, Chopin, Chesnutt, Cather, Hurston, Hughes, Brooks, Wright, 
Malamud, Ellison, Welty, and Rich — among still others. Complicating the no- 
tion of “major author” calls into question the very category — and yet, such 
complication brings the “major authors” model to life in the classroom. Per- 
haps one of the ultimate challenges in teaching the “major authors” course is 
helping students break down any associations they may have that major always 
equals “European American” or “male” and that white women or Native Ameri- 
can or African American writers — because they appear as a numerical minority 
in the anthology, or because they wrote only short works in short forms — are 
always “minor” authors. 



The Literary Traditions Approach 

Implicit in the framework of the literary-traditions approach is a certain plural- 
ity: students will study more than one tradition because American literature as 
we understand it in the late twentieth century has combined several, sometimes 
recognized as the cultural productions of predominantly women writers 
(“woman’s fiction,” regionalism, sentimentalism ) 9 or of particular racial or eth- 
nic groups (the slave narrative; literary expression of the Harlem Renaissance; 
Jewish and immigrant fiction; labor, protest, and populist literature). 

This approach raises its own questions: How does any given tradition begin? 
How do historical, social, political, and market forces contribute to or inhibit 
the formation and development of the tradition? Is the tradition imitative or 




184 



Marjorie Pryse 



self-invented? What are its distinctive genres? Who are its exemplary figures? 
What constitutes its range of themes? What is its relation to oral or folk tradi- 
tions? What formal, cultural, or thematic connections exist between any two 
literary traditions? And how do we define the boundaries of single traditions? 
To what extent does any given American writer express a self-conscious sense 
of inclusion within or exclusion from a particular literary tradition? Is the con- 
cept of literary tradition (and the concept of a plurality of literary traditions) 
invented by the writer or by the teacher-critic? While racial or ethnic origin and 
regional identity, gender, and class experience may define boundaries or cat- 
egories of authors and works in particular literary traditions, how permeable are 
these boundaries, and are there some writers who defy (or reject) categoriza- 
tion — either by their own disclaimers or by their thematic concerns? Are there 
some writers who belong to more than one literary tradition in such a way as to 
call into question the usefulness of the very concept of literary tradition? (Afri- 
can American women writers, in particular, may belong to several literary tradi- 
tions at once.) And after we have examined the disparate parts that form the 
whole of American literature, does it still make any sense at all to talk about 
“an” American literature ? 10 

The approach problematizes the concept of the universal. Without denying 
the existence of human commonalities that cross boundaries of ethnic, gender, 
or regional perspectives, the implied plural ism of the literary-traditions approach 
may challenge the existence of any central point of view by which many stu- 
dents define their own value and identity. Such an approach shifts the center of 
classroom discourse away from the European American male tradition, chal- 
lenges the concept of mainstream, and invites new questions. The experience of 
reading as integral to a literary tradition writers whom literary historians have 
referred to as “minor” or “minority” may initially disconcert students who iden- 
tify themselves as members of a cultural mainstream, who value “universals” in 
literature, or who insist that humanism ought to erase the ethnic, gender, re- 
gional, or class identity of the author. Perhaps it is particularly difficult for 
European American students eighteen to twenty-two years old to participate in 
an intellectual process that will require them to entertain a “minority” perspec- 
tive at a time in their lives when they are trying to achieve their own intellectual 
and emotional maturity (their “majority”). But even European American and 
male authors have written some of their best work from within the perspective 
of marginality. In The Mark and the Knowledge: Social Stigma in Classic Ameri- 
can Fiction , I examined works by Hawthorne, Melville, Faulkner, and Ellison 
to show how American writers often achieve their capacity for vision through 
the experience of feeling marked, alienated, or stigmatized. Such writers, along 
with Thoreau, Whitman, and Clemens, suggest that, beginning in the nineteenth 
century, being a poet or a fiction writer was itself enough to marginalize an 
American white man, and one concept of literary tradition might include those 
white male writers who focused on themes of marginality. 



O 

ERfC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



i 



qq 



Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



185 



An instructor might want to discuss the differences between, for example, 
Henry David Thoreau’s choice to write from the isolation of Walden Pond and 
to embrace eccentricity and Frederick Douglass’s imposed outsider perspective 
as slave and heroic fugitive. For European American men, choosing marginal- 
ity often helps them focus their individual vision. But they begin to write with a 
sense of their literary authority that minority writers do not share. Minority 
writers, on the other hand, must work to transcend the apparent limitations of 
marginality — that they do not see themselves as possessing literary authority 
and, instead, feel silenced by European American male culture — in order to 
write at all. Who knows what individual writers within minority literary tradi- 
tions might have accomplished in American literary history without the burden 
of social stigma? In the literary traditions of African American male and female 
writers, Charles Chesnutt and Zora Neale Hurston are significant figures, for 
both of these writers were able to locate some other source than the Christian 
God for their own creativity; the same holds true for Native American writers. 
For Chesnutt and Hurston, writing out of the perspective of black folk life (or, 
for Native Americans, of myth and spirituality) allowed them to imagine a source 
for storytelling authority that was accessible to them — through the traditional 
figure of the story-telling conjure woman or man in the black community — 
and, thereby, to disengage the silencing function of Puritan and patriarchal ty- 
pology. 

Engaging students in comparative discussions of the sources of literary au- 
thority available to European American male writers and to writers from other 
traditions represented by American literature can help them break pervasive 
associations, inherited from the Puritans, that only white males have the author- 
ity to speak — for others as well as for themselves. It can also lead them to think 
in new ways about their own nascent authority — as thinkers, speakers, and writers 
in the classroom. When they see African American and European American 
(and in contemporary literature, Latina and Asian American) female authors 
finding the authority to write, they locate the models they may need to break 
their own silence. The classroom discussion that results when students reflect 
on the struggle for expression in others can ease the isolation and alienation 
white women and minority students often feel, and it can dissolve the indiffer- 
ence to literary study for many students enrolled in a “required” course. Stu- 
dents — whatever their gender or ethnic origin — learn to view cultural power as 
something they may not necessarily inherit, but can discover in themselves. 

In practical terms, the literary -traditions approach initially involves identify- 
ing the particular traditions the instructor wishes to present and the relative 
amount of syllabus space to allot to each. Once that decision is made, then 
within each tradition, the instructor makes choices of specific writers for inclu- 
sion and exclusion. This framework eliminates the necessity of weighing the 
relative significance of, say, Hurston and Hemingway. The instructor may need 
to choose among Faulkner, Fitzgerald, and Hemingway, or to teach shorter texts 



186 



Marjorie Pryse 



because of the limitations of classroom time. But the instructor can reserve the 
question of Hurston’s significance for that part of the course in which students 
can read Phillis Wheatley, Harriet Jacobs, Nella Larsen, Alice Walker, and/or 
Toni Morrison; or she can locate these writers among a plurality of women’s 
traditions in poetry and prose. 

Another practical question involves how to order the traditions on the sylla- 
bus. If an instructor begins with the white male tradition, will that once again 
set up white male experience and expression as the norm, all others as mar- 
ginal? White women, and men and women from minority traditions, have writ- 
ten in full awareness of the literary productions of European American men, 
and one way to organize the course is to remain roughly chronological but to 
discuss the earliest writers in each literary tradition as they emerge. For ex- 
ample, early readings can introduce students to all of those texts that estab- 
lished origins in several literary traditions: Native American creation stories, 
and works by William Bradford or Edward Taylor, Anne Bradstreet, Phillis 
Wheatley, and Frederick Douglass." Later, the instructor may group polemical 
or political writers from several traditions: Jonathan Edwards and Thomas 
Jefferson, Margaret Fuller and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, William Apess and 
Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin), Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. 
Du Bois or Anna Julia Cooper. At any point in the course, the instructor may 
group writers from several traditions according to genre or theme. This method 
does not preclude students from making specific connections between writers 
from different traditions who wrote at about the same time, and it does create a 
literary context within each tradition that will help students avoid setting mi- 
nority and women writers “against” white male writers or viewing the Euro- 
pean American male tradition as seminal simply because white males were 
granted (or granted themselves) cultural authority at an earlier historical mo- 
ment. 

However an instructor decides to present the literary traditions — chrono- 
logically or by means of groupings — it may help students to create a visual 
mapping of individual writers within their historical period. As an example based 
on available texts within one anthology (. NAAL ), Figure 1 organizes major fig- 
ures in European American, African American, Native American, Hispanic/ 
Latino(a), and Asian American literary traditions both by tradition and accord- 
ing to chronology. 

The Inclusion Approach 

In examining each of the previous approaches to organizing the American lit- 
erature course, I have already raised a number of questions that teaching from 
the inclusion approach foregrounds. Even so, adopting inclusion as a model of 




195 



Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



187 



organization does differ even from the literary-traditions approach by assuming 
that literary texts are written within social, historical, political, and economic 
contexts — indeed, that social and material conditions affect the writing of the 
text as much as if not more than the individual character of the author. Con- 
versely, the inclusion approach also asserts that literary texts themselves affect 
the very social and cultural contexts from which they emerge. Therefore, much 
more is at stake than simply including a few white women writers, or a few 
writers — men and women — from minority groups, if the instructor is commit- 
ted to presenting an inclusive American literature. In effect, the inclusion ap- 
proach becomes a survey of the ways in which gender, race, class, region, and 
sexual orientation intersect in the literary work, as well as the way in which the 
text, in its representations of these categories of cultural analysis, thereby con- 
structs the reader. Gender, race, class, region, and sexual orientation become 
categories by which society organizes hierarchies of status and value and which 
literary texts either inscribe or critique. 

The approach assumes that literary texts contribute to constructing these 
cultural hierarchies, that this occurs even if the literary work (or author) ap- 
pears to be unconcerned with politics or ideology, and that students read from 
within structures of value whether or not they are aware of doing so. The ap- 
proach leads to its own questions: How does a given work represent the mate- 
rial lives of the lyric voices or the characters it depicts? What cultural ideologies 
underpin this representation, and what interests does the representation serve? 
How might the voices or characters in the literary work have responded to their 
own representation? Teaching an inclusive American literature moves consid- 
erably away from the formalism of the New Critics’ “close reading” approach 
to criticism and pedagogy, but argues that students still need to read closely and 
that the study of writers and texts develops their ability to “read” their culture 
critically. Ultimately, the inclusion approach sets up an encounter between stu- 
dents and the culture in which they live as represented by American literary 
texts. 

The approach further assumes that any exploration of the question “What is 
American literature?” requires helping students bring into focus the particular 
strategies by which U.S. society has established and maintained its social hier- 
archies. What is “American” about American literature thus becomes the extent 
to which these literary texts both reflect and construct — and more rarely, cri- 
tique — social and cultural values that privilege Americans of Anglo-European 
origin, the masculine gender, propertied persons of some wealth, and the per- 
spectives of the Northeast region and heterosexual orientation over all others. 
The “inclusion” approach both adds writers to the syllabus and makes it pos- 
sible to explore the social construction of white male subjectivity in texts by 
male writers of Anglo-European origin — a theme that traditional studies of 
American literature have obscured. 




VOLUME 1 



Tradition 


To 1620 


1620-1820 


1820-1865 


Euro- American 


Columbus 


Bradford or Taylor 


Irving 


Male 


Bari owe 


Edwards 


Emerson 




Champlain 


Franklin 


Hawthorne 




Smith 


de Crevecoeur 


Poe 






John Adams 


Thoreau 






Jefferson 


Whitman 

Melville 


Euro- American 




Bradstreet 


Fuller 


Female 




Rowlandson 


Stowe 






Ashbridge 


Dickinson 






Abigail Adams 


Davis 


African-American 




Equiano 


Douglass 


Male 








African-American 




Wheatley 


Jacobs 


Female 








Native Americans 


Stories of the 


Occom 


Cherokee 




Beginning of 




Memorials 




the World 




Apess 


Hispanic Male 


Casas 

Cortes 

Diaz del Castillo 
Cabeza de Vaca 






VOLUME 2 






American 


American 






Prose since 


Poetry since 


Tradition 


1865-1914 1914-1945 1945 


1945 


Euro- American 


Clemens Frost 


Williams 


Warren 


Male 


Howells or Stevens 


Malamud 


Berryman 




Dreiser or Williams or Bellow 


Lowell 




Adams Eliot 


Miller 


Merrill 




James O’Neill 


Mamet 


Ashbery or 



Crane Fitzgerald Wright 

Faulkner 
Crane 

O 

ERIC 

iifliflaffHEaaaa 



197 



Tradition 


1865-1914 


1914-1945 


American 
Prose since 
1945 


American 
Poetry since 
1945 


Euro- American 
Female 


Jewett 
Chopin 
Freeman or 
Austin 
Gilman 
Wharton 


Cather 

Stein 

Lowell 

Yezierska 

Moore 

Porter 

Taggard 


Welty 

O’Connor 

Oates 

Beattie 


Bishop 

Levertov 

Rich 

Plath 


African-American Washington 
Male Chesnutt 

Du Bois 


Toomer 

Brown 

Hughes 

Wright 


Ellison 
Baldwin 
A. Wilson 


Hayden 

Baraka 

Harper 


African-American 

Female 




Grimke 

Hurston 


Walker 


Brooks 

Lorde 

Dove 


Native American 
Male 


Native 
American 
Oratory 
Eastman 
Oskison 
Chants and 
Songs 


Black Elk 


Momaday 


Ortiz 


Native American 
Female 


Bonnin 
Chants and 
Songs 




Silko 

Erdrich 




Latino 








Rios 


Latina 






Chavez 


Cervantes 


Asian- American 
Male 








Lee 


Asian- American 
Female 








Song 



Figure 1 . Suggested Readings: Organized by Race, Nationality, and Gender. Repro- 
duced from Teaching with the Norton Anthology of American Literature, Fourth Edition 
(1994). Copyright © 1994 by W. W. Norton and Company, Inc. Reprinted with permis- 
sion of the publisher. 




190 



Marjorie Pryse 



One of the controversial features of the inclusion approach is that it calls 
into question the idea (proposed by E.D. Hirsch among others) that to be cultur- 
ally literate, readers must read certain “classic” works that other readers will 
also have read . 12 The conceptual framework for such a course moves into the 
foreground writers and texts as well as themes and genres that literary criticism 
and history have marginalized. Such themes might include, for example, the 
immigrant experience; family relationships and attitudes toward children; race, 
segregation, and slavery; and gender issues of women’s lives, work, and vision. 
Such genres might include recognition of literary modes and forms indigenous 
to the United States and its particular history, for example, the literature of 
witness and encounter in the pre-colonial period, the slave narrative, folk litera- 
ture, feminist writing, nineteenth-century regionalism, African American fic- 
tion and poetry, Jewish fiction, Southern fiction, Beat poetry, feminist poetry, 
and protest and political poetry. Some indigenous genres are more problematic 
in terms of critique and sometimes, if not always, work to reinforce cultural 
stereotypes. For example, to problematize the concept of indigenous genres as 
resistance, introduce students to humor of the old Southwest, Indian captivity 
narratives, and “local color” fiction. The very concept of lesbian or gay litera- 
ture is itself contested at the end of the twentieth century. Does the category 
include writers believed to be lesbian or gay, whether or not the writers them- 
selves ever discussed sexual orientation? Does it include any writer whose work 
raises questions concerning what Adrienne Rich has called “compulsory het- 
erosexuality,” or who has produced specific works of interest in the study of 
cultural representations of lesbian and gay experience? 

Rethinking American literature clearly requires us to rethink our models of 
course organization as well. It also asks us to contemplate the role of the Ameri- 
can literature classroom in helping our society to confront and resolve its social 
and cultural dilemmas. American literature may not directly address public policy 
issues, but it provides formative ground within which readers of all ages and 
especially undergraduate students — who enter our classrooms before they fully 
enter society — can develop a perspective concerning the significance of litera- 
ture and the humanities to American life. Any American literature course be- 
comes provisional to the development of such perspective, representing less 
what Robinson Jeffers called in his poem “Shine, Perishing Republic” a “thick- 
ening to empire” and more what Adrienne Rich describes in “Diving Into the 
Wreck” as “a book of myths / in which” more and more “our names [do] ap- 
pear.” Or it represents what Michael Harper has termed “History as Apple Tree” 
(in a poem of the same title), in which American myth becomes “my own myth: 
/ my arm the historical branch, / my name the bruised fruit, / black human 
photograph: apple tree.” Models for organizing an inclusive American litera- 
ture course — however that principle becomes interwoven with historical fea- 
tures, with notions of “major author” and literary tradition — add the image of 





Teaching American Literature as Cultural Encounter 



191 



cultural encounter to the book of myths and human photographs that depict 
what “American” literature has come to mean at the turn of the twenty-first 
century. 



Notes 

1 . This article draws on and expands from Marjorie Pryse, Teaching with the Norton 
Anthology of American Literature, Fourth Edition, copyright © W.W. Norton & Com- 
pany, Inc. 1994. The entire course guide, which includes detailed syllabi and questions 
for student papers and exams, is available from W. W. Norton. This excerpt/reworking is 
reprinted with permission of the publisher. 

2. See Pratt, 34, 39. 

3. See Shumway. 

4. This phrase, which appears early in Moby-Dick when Ishmael arrives at the Spouter- 
Inn, locates indeterminacy as part of Herman Melville’s vision. I like to think that Melville, 
along with several other “classic” and “canonical” American writers, would himself 
have refused to participate in canon-formation — except, of course, as it has produced a 
market for his work. 

5. See Shumway. 

6. See, for example, Kaplan, and Trachtenberg. 

7. See especially chapter 1. 

8. This question is related to the larger question of the canonization process, one 
raised widely by critics and scholars during the past twenty years; for a useful discus- 
sion of these issues, see Lauter. 

9. See Baym, Woman ’s Fiction, Fetterley and Pryse; and Dobson. See also Fetterley’s 
essay in this volume. 

10. See Gregory Jay’s essay in this volume and “The End of American’ Literature.” 

1 1 . The fourth edition of NAAL has included Native American creation myths as part 
of its “Literature to 1620” section, even though these myths cannot be “dated” as such — 
thereby offering the opportunity to begin an American literature course with the expres- 
sion of the people who first inhabited the Americas. 

12. See both Hirsch and the challenge to Hirsch by Knoblauch and Brannon. 



Works Cited 

Baym, Nina. Woman's Fiction: A Guide to Novels by and about Women in America , 
1 820-1 870. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1978. 

Baym, Nina, et al., eds. Norton Anthology of American Literature , 4th ed. New York: 
Norton, 1995. 

Dobson, Joanne. “Sex, Wit, and Sentiment: Frances Osgood and the Poetry of Love.” 
American Literature 65 (1993): 631-48. 

Fetterley, Judith, and Matjorie Pryse. American Women Regionalists 1850-1910: A Norton 
Anthology. New York: Norton, 1992. 



0 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



230 



192 



Marjorie Pryse 



Hirsch, E. D. Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1987. 

Jay, Gregory. “The End of ‘American’ Literature: Toward a Multicultural Practice.” Col- 
lege English 53 (1991): 264-80. 

Kaplan, Amy. The Social Construction of American Realism. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 
1988. 

Knoblauch, C.H., and Lil Brannon. Critical Teaching and the Idea of Literacy. Ports- 
mouth, NH: Boynton Cook, 1993. 

Lauter, Paul. Canons and Contexts. New York: Oxford UP, 1991. 

Pratt, Mary Louise. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession 91. New York: MLA, 1991. 
33 — 40. 

Pryse, Marjorie. The Mark and the Knowledge: Social Stigma in Classic American Fic- 
tion. Columbus: Ohio State UP, 1979. 

. Teaching with the Norton Anthology of American Literature, Fourth Edition. 

New York: W. W. Norton, 1994. 

Schwartz, Lawrence H. Creating Faulkner’s Reputation.The Politics of Modem Liter- 
ary Criticism. Knoxville: U of Tennessee P, 1988. 

Shumway, David. Creating American Civilization: A Genealogy of American Literature 
as an Academic Discipline. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1994. 

Tompkins, Jane. Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction 1790- 
1860. New York: Oxford UP, 1985. 

Trachtenberg, Alan. The Incorporation of America: Culture and Society in the Gilded 
Age. New York: Hill and Wang, 1982. 





12 But, Is It Good Enough to Teach? 



Frances Smith Foster 
Emory University 



It was not very long ago that I had a hallway conversation with a colleague who 
told me that he was quite eager to add an African American text to his Modem 
American Fiction course, but he had been unable to identify a text that could 
compare favorably with those on his syllabus. It would be unfair (and it would 
certainly prove embarrassing to his African American students), he asserted, if 
his syllabus included writing by minorities that was obviously inferior to that 
of the other literature in the course. My colleague asked if I could suggest an 
author or a title that was good enough to teach in company of Fitzgerald’s The 
Great Gatsby, Hemingway’s The Old Man and the Sea , and Steinbeck’s The 
Grapes of Wrath. At the time I was not taken aback by his request. I suggested 
Ellison’s Invisible Man. “Too difficult,” he replied. This class, he said, was 
designed to attract high enrollments of general-interest readers and thereby 
ensure that Spenser, Milton, and Chaucer would continue to be offered for the 
majors. I furrowed my brow and suggested Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes 
Were Watching God , Richard Wright’s Native Son y James Baldwin’s Go Tell It 
On the Mountain , or anything by Alice Walker or Toni Morrison. “Ah, Toni 
Morrison,” he responded, “maybe she’ll do. Can you recommend something of 
hers I can read over the summer? Maybe I can use her next year.” 

The building in which the English department offices were located was con- 
structed as two squares connected by a single passageway on each floor. At the 
far extreme of one square was the “ladies’” restroom and at the far extreme of 
the other was the “men’s,” so there was by necessity a lot of passing in the 
hallways. I recall another corridor conversation with another colleague. He taught 
children’s literature and was in the process of ordering his books for the com- 
ing semester when he discovered that M.C. Higgins , the Great was no longer in 
print. He was quite put out about it. How could one of the very few triple-crown 
winners — Newbery, Boston Globe/Hom Book, and National Book Awards — 
be allowed to go out of print? He wouldn’t be able to include an African Ameri- 
can text this semester. “Virginia Hamilton [the author of M.C. Higgins], has 
published at least twenty-five books — several others have won major prizes,” I 





193 



194 



Frances Smith Foster 



reminded him. “Are they all out of print?” He hadn’t thought of that, he con- 
fessed; though he’d been teaching M.C. Higgins ; the Great for several years 
now, he was not familiar with Virginia Hamilton’s other books. He decided that 
he’d have to read more of her works sometime soon and perhaps, if M.C. Higgins 
were not reprinted, he would find a substitute. 

I think I should hasten here to assure you — for what it’s worth — that these 
conversations did not take place at my current academic home. Yet, these are 
not made-up incidents, and they are not atypical. There are many other ex- 
amples I could recite. But these will serve to illustrate two things. One, these 
were the “good guys,” professors who were competent, responsible, and inno- 
vative, colleagues who agreed that the curriculum should be diversified and 
who were not unwilling to try to do their part. And two, I “understood” and 
sympathized with their problem — it was one that I entertained when I con- 
structed my courses in American autobiography, young adult fiction, introduc- 
tion to literature, and other “mainstream” or semi-mainstream courses. I, too, 
was concerned about how to cover all that needed to be covered and still in- 
clude previously ignored literary pieces, about how to identify a representative 
work that was “good enough to teach” instead of, or in concert with, The Edu- 
cation of Henry Adams, The Chocolate War, or Oedipus Rex. 

I do not know exactly how or when it began to dawn on me that if we were 
not asking the wrong question, we were at least misinterpreting IT — that in 
trying to choose an African American text we were asking what we did not 
routinely ask about European American texts. We were adopting criteria which, 
if applied to all our syllabi selections, might totally change what we teach, how 
we teach it, and why. Now, this is not to say that “But, is it good enough to 
teach?” is an unacceptable or irrelevant question — on the contrary, perhaps we 
should ask of every selection not only is it “good enough” but is it “the best” 
text to teach? Actually, “But is it good enough to teach?” is a question long 
overdue and one with which we’ve had limited experience. 

I do know that that question did not occupy a prominent place in my aca- 
demic training. As a student I generally assumed that if a work appeared in the 
anthology, if it were by a particular author, or if it were being taught to us, it 
was “good enough.” If it seemed odd or uninteresting, I looked to my professor 
to explain what assumptions underlay the text, what interpretative techniques I 
needed to learn in order to appreciate it. As a beginning professor, the texts I 
chose to teach were partly determined by what I thought I could teach with 
authority. I leaned toward the texts that I thought I knew best, which were mostly 
the genres, authors, and titles that I had been taught, or those that were similar 
enough to them that I could readily apply the methods and information I did 
know. For me, as for many, my syllabi were also determined by what was in the 
Norton anthology or what text was sort of simple enough to be “done” in one or 
two class meetings. Such pragmatism led me to include “A Rose for Emily” and 





But, Is It Good Enough to Teach? 



195 



“Dry September” and not “The Bear” or Absalom, Absalom /, to select The Scarlet 
Letter over Moby-Dick. Sometimes, particularly before I got tenure, the ques- 
tion was “Which text is least likely to create controversy?” Catcher in the Rye, 
Sons and Lovers, and Ulysses were less likely to attract concern than Are You 
There, God? Jt *s Me, Margaret; Lolita; or Naked Lunch. Had I been asked about 
my criteria, I would have answered, I think, directly from the first lecture in my 
introduction to literature course: I was about the business of presenting the best 
thoughts of the best minds complemented by representative examples of move- 
ments, trends, and concerns, and concluding with an example of a new and 
innovative writer — a “current classic,” if you will. In practice, I was presenting 
what was available, what was familiar, and what fit the schedule. 

I don’t generally get requests for “an” author or “a” text these days. The 
Canon Busters have created anthologies sufficiently inclusive to include poems 
by Phillis Wheatley and excerpts of Frederick Douglass’s Narrative . Publishers 
make available in paperback all of Hurston’s and Wright’s and Walker’s and 
Morrison’s works. And I suspect that these days “But is it good enough to teach?” 
would be considered a hostile question about writings by individuals from pre- 
viously excluded groups. Yet I think that this question is an important one. It 
should be taken as a “leading question,” an interrogative serve or an opening 
bid, perhaps. An appropriate response would be (1) What are you trying to 
teach? (2) What are the course goals? (3) Why do you want to teach it? and even 
(4) Why are you teaching? “Good enough” depends in part upon how you in- 
tend to use it. If it replaces a particular work, then why was that work in the 
course and can the new one fulfill that function as well or better? For example, 
if the goal is to demonstrate the progressive plot structure — exposition, rising 
action, denouement — one shouldn’t use Jean Toomer’s Cane. On the other hand, 
if one wishes to consider the interface between the “naturalistic” movements 
and imagism, or wants an episodic, 1920s text set in a particular region of the 
United States, exemplifying a carefully blended experimental mixture of real- 
ism, romanticism, local color, and Gothic, then Cane could easily replace 
Winesburg, Ohio, or it could work as a companion piece to compare and con- 
trast ways in which Jean Toomer and Sherwood Anderson — two writers of the 
same ilk, writers who were in fact friends as well as colleagues — influenced 
one another. Similarly, Robert Hayden, Melvin Tolson, or Ralph Ellison works 
better in a unit with T.S. Eliot and Ezra Pound than would Countee Cullen, 
Angelina Grimke, or Chester Himes. 

“Good enough” is also influenced by your own ability: Do you know enough 
to teach it? Are you willing to learn? Or from another side, “good enough” 
depends also upon the students in the class and which of their needs and atti- 
tudes you’re trying to influence. And here I want to preach one small sermon! 
The proportion or the existence of particular “ethnic” or cultural representa- 
tions in the curriculum should not depend upon the ethnic or cultural composi- 




196 



Frances Smith Foster 



tion of the class. It is very curious to me that the appearance of African Ameri- 
cans, or Laotians, or Puerto Ricans, or other people of color triggers concerns 
that their absences do not. And yet, the percentage or existence of Jewish or 
Catholic students, Greek pagans, or Elizabethan playgoers does not determine 
whether one teaches Bellow, Joyce, Sophocles, or Shakespeare. If Jewish stu- 
dents can read and respond to Paradise Lost ; if Protestants can appreciate Por- 
trait of the Artist as a Young Man , if twentieth-century readers can learn from 
and love The Odyssey, The Canterbury Tales, or The Bostonians, then can they 
not also learn from and appreciate Middle Passage, The House on Mango Street, 
The Kitchen God's Wife, and Farewell to Manzanarl It is not the Mexican Ameri- 
can students only who benefit from a consideration of the literary potential of 
code switching and the use of the vernacular. It is not the Native American 
student only who should recognize that repetition and indirection have aes- 
thetic function and value or that the roles of the tricksters Coyote and Raven are 
not exactly like those of the tricksters Anansi and Br’er Rabbit. The Japanese 
American students are not the only ones who should know how the concentra- 
tion camps of the 1940s affected the literary production of those who experi- 
enced that dislocation — or even the basic fact that such a travesty indeed occurred 
in these United States. In other words, it is not simply the traditionally excluded 
who need and have a right to learn about more than one culture, class, or condi- 
tion. Students of the political and economic majority — even if their status as a 
numerical majority were not being seriously eroded — deserve to know them- 
selves in relation to those who share and have shared this earth, this life, and 
this language. My title, my question, begins with “But” because I assume that 
folks attending this particular conference have, to some extent, accepted the 
idea (or certainly are willing to entertain the notion) that what we have tradi- 
tionally been taught is not the total literary production, perhaps not the most 
artistic or technically sophisticated, maybe not even the best representative of 
the time, place, or circumstance. (“Buts” do not want to close off discussion, 
they invite it.) I want a conversation that reviews what “IT” means, that asks if 
“good enough” is too minimal a standard, and that identifies what we are teach- 
ing when we don’t teach certain things. But first, I want to suggest that we may 
need to back up and ask ourselves again, “Do we really want to teach IT?” 

I take as my theme the first words of Toni Cade Bambara’s The Salt Eaters: 
“Are you sure, Sweetheart, that you want to be well?” (3). The idea that I want 
to explore is, why try a cure without considering the costs and side effects of the 
therapy unless it is a “life-threatening emergency”? Or to try another medical 
metaphor: When I tried to help my friends identify a “good enough” author or 
text without examining the origins and intensity of their concerns, I was apply- 
ing a cold compress to an aching head. It was not necessarily wrong, but it may 
have masked symptoms and delayed recognition of a more fundamental 
dis-ease. 



O 

ERLC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 




Bat, Is It Good Enough to Teach ? 



197 



And yet, my impulse was the kind that is common to those of us who — for 
whatever reason — find ourselves — or want ourselves to be — part of the 
multicultural movement: we folks who know ourselves to be AGAINST censor- 
ship and FOR the politics of diversity; we good, brave, and clear-sighted indi- 
viduals who know what e pluribus unum is really supposed to mean, who believe 
that the strength and the survival of the United States of America must come 
from all races, cultures, classes, creeds, genders, etc., working and living in 
harmony but keeping our integrity, composing together something like a quilt — 
more aesthetically pleasing, larger, and more useful than any could be alone. 

In training graduate students and consulting with English departments, and 
in being a teacher myself, I am becoming increasingly concerned about the 
implications of inclusive politics, about how the many attempts to rethink Ameri- 
can literature are not working as well as they should — in part — because too 
many of us are trying to include each and all into the existing “center.” I tried to 
think of efficient and effective ways to explain what I mean. (I considered ap- 
propriating scientific terminology — ”we confuse admixtures with amalgams.” 
I thought that a domestic metaphor would be appropriately subversive — my 
best was “The inclusive curricula as commmonly practiced is rather like adding 
corn to biscuit dough and calling it cornbread.”) It was fun, but I decided to be 
scholarly and just casually demonstrate my diverse reading patterns. In 
“ ‘Othered’ Matters: Reconceptualizing Dominance and Difference in the His- 
tory of Sexuality in America,” Ann duCille states that we tend to employ a 
methodology which “merely appends the ‘othered’ to already existing analyti- 
cal paradigms rather than fundamentally altering the ideological assumptions 
that inform those frameworks” ( 103 ). 

In The Salt Eaters , the healer Minnie Ransom recognizes that what has made 
Velma sick won’t be reversed with two aspirins, a more varied diet, or a sum- 
mer of leisure. So she begins her healing session with the primary question: 
“Are you sure, Sweetheart, that you want to be well?” It holds for us, also. We 
cannot re-form American literature by consuming fewer words by dead white 
men, increasing our intake of women’s texts, and adding a new category or two 
to our literary plates. Yet, as teachers and scholars, we have favored additives. 
Most of us have tried to ADD ONE, to ADD ON, and usually (as with my 
colleagues) planned to start this new regime — one day soon. (In frustration, a 
few have added, then subtracted, and returned to their old habits.) In “The End 
of ‘American’ Literature” Gregory S. Jay makes some cogent remarks on the 
problems of inclusion, and other essays in this volume raise other aspects of 
this issue. So, I think I can be brief on these points. 

ADD ONE. “Inclusive” folk like, or feel obligated, to add one of each — or, 
if space or time is short, one to represent the others. So, Harriet Jacobs or Zora 
Neale Hurston, Toni Morrison or Terry McMillan, Audre Lorde or Angela Davis 
become “The” African American writer on the syllabi of women’s literature 





198 



Frances Smith Foster 



classes and in the critical conversations. These “superblackwomenwriters” are 
sometimes expected to satisfy the requirements for diversity of class, race, poli- 
tics, gender, and genre. Ann Plato, Anna Julia Cooper, Ann Allen Shockley, or 
Sherley Anne Williams are conflated in footnotes of “see also’s .” Poets, drama- 
tists, writers for young adults, and many males are not even mentioned. 

We may, and should, extend this example to include the ADD ONE COURSE 
concept. For African American literature, adding one course requires that we 
attempt to cover 250-plus years in one semester or quarter. We may consider 
also the ADD ONE FACULTY MEMBER idea, wherein the announcement of 
an opening or the call for recommendations hardly needs much deconstructing 
to understand that their ideal addition would be a black, woman-identified se- 
nior scholar or a Spanish speaking Native American from Minnesota. But I 
think the point is made: the ADD ONE approach is simply inadequate. 

Next, by ADD ON I mean to include a text INTO a curriculum while exclud- 
ing its literary context, its criticism, its theory or aesthetic. I also mean evaluat- 
ing a text from another culture or from another perspective as if it were simply 
another effort to meet a universal objective, or judging IT by a set of assump- 
tions inappropriate or marginal to its intentions, concerns, or expectations. As 
an example, consider the situation that Judith Fetterley describes in her intro- 
duction to Provisions: A Reader from Nineteenth-Century American Women . 
Remember her example of Lyle Wrighf s objection to the subjects “missed” in 
early U.S. fiction. As Fetterley points out, Wright’s lament for the absence of 
stories concerning the “masted schooners and flying clippers, stagecoaches . . . 
railroads . . . The frontier pushing westward . . . Trails . . . being blazed to the 
Pacific, etc.” (8) is predicated upon assumptions that are gender biased. Fetterley 
suggests that his comments can be useful because Wright does at least catalog 
some of the subjects about which most women did not write. But I believe it 
takes a resisting reader to do this, and too often our resistance is too low. Gen- 
erally, when a bias is unmarked or is familiar — maybe even shared — we accept 
rather than analyze. We repeat rather than translate. 

The problem of getting well is compounded when the treatment is inappro- 
priate. And all too often in the case of scholarship on nontraditional literatures, 
prescriptions are too quickly and carelessly offered. Again, Fetterley has pro- 
vided us with a close enough example when she describes the “contempt” im- 
plicit in 

the cavalier approach to facts when the subject is mid-nineteenth-century 
women writers. So pervasive is the sloppiness that one must perforce con- 
clude that those who write on this material feel not simply that they will 
not endanger their reputation as scholars by such carelessness, but rather 
that were they to take this material seriously enough to perform even the 
most minimal tasks of scholarship, this accuracy would endanger their repu- 
tations. In brief, the material is too trivial for scholarship .... Particularly 
appalling is the combination of factual sloppiness with a tone of absolute 
authority. (21) 



o 

ERIC 



20 ? 



But , Is It Good Enough to Teach? 



199 



Yet, how are we to know when to question the doctor, especially when we 
are “the doctor”? One common mistake is to abandon too quickly or to fail to 
use standard diagnostic procedures or professional expertise. For example, one 
can argue that because Cassie in Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom's Cabin 
hid in the attic and worked a diabolic plan to run her master crazy, then Cassie 
should be seen as the Gothic model for Linda in Incidents , which was published 
a few years later. However, one does this only by ignoring genre definitions (in 
this instance by conflating fiction with autobiography) and by failing to re- 
search even casually an author’s life or aesthetics. Or one could cite Frances 
Harper’s “Eliza Harris” as evidence that Harper was so moved by Stowe’s por- 
trayal in the novel that she tried to match it in poetic form. The assumption that 
Stowe is the ur-author and Harper is one of her apprentices falters, though, if 
we consider that both Harriet Beecher Stowe and Frances Harper were appro- 
priating an actual — and often repeated — incident that occurred at Ripley, Ohio. 
To ADD ON with the assumption that we already know how to read, interpret, 
describe, or apply IT is dangerous and degrading. 

An equally irresponsible stance is to abandon all responsibility for under- 
standing and interpreting or to neglect to determine what relevant literary meth- 
odology there is for dealing with “Other” literatures because we’ve discovered 
that to Others we are also Others. Chagrined and apologetic, some of us mur- 
mur that “Since I’m not X, I can’t possibly know.” We resort to summarizing 
what a prominent “scholar” has said or to confiding our “feelings” about liter- 
ary experience. While our personal feelings are important, sometimes even to 
the matter at hand, confessing is not professing. This stance betrays itself very 
simply, I think. How many of us are, or have students who are, nineteenth- 
century factory workers? How many of us are confused because our mother has 
married our father’s murderer? Yet we know and expect others to appreciate 
Life in the Iron Mills and Hamlet. Or, how much credence would we allow men 
who say they can’t teach Emily Dickinson, George Sand, or Katherine Anne 
Porter because they are not English, French, or Southern women? If that is too 
facile or simplistic a dismissal of what I consider fraudulent displays of 
positionality politics, then several essays in this volume discuss or demonstrate 
the problems of such an approach with more detail and more seriousness. It is 
my contention that exposure to noncanonical literature reacts with arrogance, 
ignorance, and rationalization to make great discomfort for us all. And it is my 
suggestion that whether it is indeed an insidious infection of ethnocentricity 
that makes us feel we need not learn any more about the subject we propose to 
teach, or if it is the press of programmatic concerns that pushes us to read too 
hastily or to rely upon inappropriate secondary sources — the result is about the 
same. 

The decision to teach from a multicultural perspective — to rethink and to re- 
present American literature — requires more knowledge than most of us have, 
and perhaps more extensive therapy than we’re willing to endure. For example, 




Q O 
G U 



200 



Frances Smith Foster 



how can we be expected to know that Incidents is a slave narrative that employs 
fictive strategies and not the historical romance that it resembles? How would 
we know to place both Stowe’s and Harper’s “Eliza Harris” within its larger 
historical and literary contexts when we did not know they existed? When 
noncanonical writers, the events of which they write, and the strategies and 
techniques by which they convey their visions are not included in the usual 
reference works, how do we educate ourselves? And since the politics of 
positionality are a distinct improvement over the professions of objectivity or 
universality that gave rise to them, how and when do we know whose authority 
to accept and the extent to which we must/should relinquish our own? 

As a beginning, I suggest that we be very careful about privileging the read- 
ings and assumptions of European or European American theorists to interpret 
and assess the literary productions of those who are not of or about that 
Eurocentric enterprise. Assessing texts by “Others” using criteria based upon 
different models, showing no evidence of being acquainted with scholarly dis- 
course in professional journals devoted to “Other” literatures, consistently ig- 
noring the contributions of African American, Latino/Latina, Asian American, 
and Native American critics and theorists is indefensible. By the same token, 
rejecting the contributions of a twentieth-century white Southern male scholar 
on the literary productions of a black New England female slave is also biting 
off one’s nose to spite one’s face. It is — and here I am employing the African 
American rhetorical strategy called “signifying” — as indefensible as a graduate 
program that gives no serious consideration to any literary approaches or criti- 
cism practiced prior to 1980. Yet, look at the bibliographies and footnotes in 
most professional literature and see how extensive or diverse the textual samples 
or citations for such discussions are. 

The third possibility that I mentioned — the procrastination syndrome of “in- 
tending to” or “being willing to, if. . .” — generally manifests itself in ADDING 
NONE or, even more embarrassing, TRYING ONE, then reverting to the habits 
of the past, teaching what is easier to serve up and to digest. This is to be less 
than honest with ourselves and our students; it is to abdicate our responsibility 
as scholars and critics. You see, we can no longer claim not to have realized that 
white educated men were not the only ones who wrote or were published. But 
each semester or quarter that we postpone diversifying our syllabi, our cur- 
ricula, or our faculties is another quarter of allowing our students to persist in 
such ignorance — or perhaps more likely, allowing them to continue to believe 
that we are less knowledgeable than they are. For in reality, many of our stu- 
dents now see, live near, like, and even love at least one or two “Others.” And in 
those pockets where personal contact with people of various races, classes, sexual 
orientations, etc., does not occur, popular media have introduced them to Arsenio, 
Geraldo, and Roseanne. In fashion and speech, in music and dance, even white 
heterosexual middle-class males are aware of and in fact imitating Others. Our 
students recognize that creativity in language and variation of social perspec- 




But, Is It Good Enough to Teach? 



201 



tive do exist. They listen attentively to the commentary of rap and hip-hop art- 
ists. They memorize the narratives of storytellers such as Eddie Murphy as well 
as the multitude of verbal wizards that appear regularly on “Def Comedy Jam.” 
Airport bookstores and supermarket checkout lines stock The Color Purple , 
Beloved , and Waiting to Exhale. The longer we procrastinate about diversifying 
our literature courses, the more evidence our students have of our own mori- 
bundity. So we’ve got to do something — if we want to be (and do) well. 

But if not adding ONE or adding ON, then what? Hayden White and others 
have stated, we must “change our attitudes with respect, not only to our object 
of study . . . and to the methods of historical analysis and representation which 
we have inherited . . . but also to the whole question of the theories, methods, 
and modes of representation we should use in an inquest that is just as much 
into ourselves and our age as it is into” any enterprise, literary or otherwise 
(127). In theory I agree, but in practice it is not something most of us can do 
overnight. To change paradigms, to fundamentally alter the construction of our 
institutions is a task that seems to exceed my present abilities and inclinations. 
It certainly demands time and energy already seriously reduced by the demands 
of budget cuts, larger classes, and other measures. Just gearing up for new courses 
or getting ready to responsibly teach familiar books calls for more time than 
most of my days have. 

To change our attitudes may require discomfort, maybe even reconstructive 
surgery. In my own case, I came to this profession via a love for and an attrac- 
tion to literature as it was taught to me and as I understood it, even felt it. I 
recognized some overlooked areas and validated my own career choice by fo- 
cusing upon African American literary productions. I’m doing well and making 
a contribution. Am I sure that I really want to be any more well than this? Even 
if I were to say “YES” loudly and sincerely, another question would remain: 
How much more can I learn and do and be well? Am I in danger of spreading 
myself so thin that I am not good enough to teach? I don’t know. But I have 
begun my therapy by accepting the obvious. 

The study of literature, like most areas of intellectual inquiry, has been irre- 
vocably altered by social, political, economic, technical, and perhaps spiritual 
changes. We will never again be confident that we can recognize or “master” 
the best thoughts of the best minds. We can neither read nor can our libraries 
afford to buy all the good books available. As teachers and as scholars we need 
to shift our attention from passing on a tradition to focusing upon ways of know- 
ing, from interpreting the symbols in a text to understanding the entire text as 
symbolic. In effect, we need to shift our attention to include methodology, pro- 
cess, production — and yes, even theory. But we must avoid mistaking process 
for product. We should not substitute discussion about literature for literature 
itself. (And if we really value and respect language, we’ve got to learn to read 
more accurately and to write and speak more clearly about what we are read- 
ing.) 



ERIC 




202 



Frances Smith Foster 



One way that I’m trying to do this is to include my students more clearly in 
the process of the course. I present goals in the syllabus and invite them to 
record their own. From time to time we calibrate. I give ideas on how I intend to 
evaluate our success (“By the end of this course . . .”) and I try to construct 
projects and exams that reflect these goals. I explain why I’ve selected certain 
texts and mention others I’ve excluded. I try to demonstrate or identify the 
literary approaches I’m using, explaining as best I can the various “rules” and 
assumptions we construct in this discipline. 

I have also accepted the idea that no one group, professor, or reader can 
know or learn or convey all of the “ITs”. I am drawn more and more to collabo- 
rative efforts, to literary study as a shared enterprise. This is not to be confused 
with the open classrooms of the 1970s, when all our feelings, opinions, fanta- 
sies were “equal.” But it is influenced by some of that, because I am a product 
of those moments when New Criticism met historicism, when African Ameri- 
can literature was being rediscovered and reinvented, and when teachers were 
students also. I talk to my colleagues more. I exchange syllabi and course visits. 
I read their exam questions and their publications and send notes: What . . . ? 
Why . . . ? What about . . . ? I assign writings and projects designed to incorpo- 
rate investigation and analysis (the good ole research paper revisited). For ex- 
ample, introductory literature courses require two library projects; and toward 
the end of the course — as a final even — I ask students, given my goals for this 
course, which text should be replaced with what and why? 

“But, is it good enough to teach?” I end by answering this question with 
another question, a question that for me must precede and accompany any oth- 
ers: “But, do you really want to (have to) teach IT?” Or, “Are you sure, Sweet- 
heart, you really want to be well?” 



Works Cited 

Bambara, Toni Cade. The Salt Eaters. New York: Vintage, 1981. 
duCille, Ann. “‘Othered’ Matters: Reconceptualizing Dominance and Difference in the 
History of Sexuality in America.” Journal of the History of Sexuality 1 (1990): 102— 
27. 

Fetterley, Judith, ed. Provisions: A Reader from Nineteenth-Century American Women. 
Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1985. 

Jay, Gregory S. “The End of ‘American’ Literature: Toward a Multicultural Practice.” 
College English 53(1991): 264-8 1 . 

White, Hayden. “The Nineteenth-Century’ as Chronotype.” Nineteenth-Century Con- 
texts 11 (1987): 1 19-29. 




211 



13 Teaching the Rhetoric of Race: 
A Rhetorical Approach to 
Multicultural Pedagogy 



John Alberti 

Northern Kentucky University 



In “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?”, an address given significantly on 
July 5, 1852, Frederick Douglass turns aside from his anti-slavery argument to 
address a profoundly rhetorical question about the ultimate efficacy of that ar- 
gument: 

But I fancy I hear some one of my audience say, it is just in this circum- 
stance that you and your brother abolitionists fail to make a favorable im- 
pression on the public mind. Would you argue more, and denounce less, 
would you persuade more, and rebuke less, your cause would be much 
more likely to succeed. (369) 

Douglass is speaking as a lecturer here; but every lecturer is also a teacher, and 
the point Douglass is making about the relation of logic and rhetoric, of argu- 
ment and persuasion, has pedagogical implications for the multicultural litera- 
ture classroom in general and for the discussion of race in particular. Douglass’s 
rhetorical dilemma is shaped by what W. E. B. Du Bois would later famously 
characterize as the doubleness of African American identity, a sense of both 
belonging to and yet also standing as the antithesis to a dominant, Euro-cen- 
tered American culture (Du Bois 8-9). The teacher in the multicultural class- 
room also encounters a question of doubleness relating to the perceived 
connections or disconnections between the diverse texts being taught and the 
instructor, between the students and the texts, and between the students and the 
teacher. This doubleness is nowhere more fraught with tension, but as a result 
also nowhere more important to confront, than in the matter of race. In this 
essay, I wish to argue for an approach to pedagogy I call “cultural rhetoric” as a 
means both of framing the analysis of race and ethnicity in the classroom and of 
understanding the roles pedagogy and the teaching of American literature itself 
play in the reification or resistance to constructions of race and racial oppres- 
sion. 

I first need to clarify my use of the term “rhetoric ” a notoriously ambiguous 
term, both in denotation and connotation. An older, more institutionally tradi- 




203 



204 



John Alberti 



tional sense of the word calls to mind either conventional composition classes 
in “persuasive” writing or the scholarly study and compilation of forms and 
tropes, often using the classification systems developed by the great classical 
rhetoricians. From such a formalist perspective, the speech acts that Douglass 
places under scrutiny — “argue” and “denounce” “persuade” and “rebuke” — 
can and should be defined according to specific sets of formulae, devices, and 
tropes, each clearly discernible from the others and each in a sense transhistorical, 
so that a rebuke in ancient Athens can be understood as essentially the same 
phenomenon as in early nineteenth-century America. Over the last twenty years, 
however, “rhetoric” has been revived, transformed, and modified by develop- 
ments in both composition and literary theory. No single new consensus defini- 
tion has emerged, but my own use of the term follows those theorists who use it 
to refer to the study of language as social action rather than static construct. 
This is a poststructuralist view of rhetoric based on (1) an understanding of 
linguistic and other sign systems as both constitutive as well as expressive of 
human desires and ideas and (2) the deconstruction of the opposition between 
the individual and the social, between “personal” meanings and the linguistic 
code used to convey those meanings. Such a perspective starts from the propo- 
sition by M. M. Bakhtin that “verbal discourse is a social phenomenon — social 
throughout its entire range and in each and every of its factors, from the sound 
image to the furthest reaches of abstract meaning” (259). 

The stress here is on language use as an activity, as a form of what Jane 
Tompkins calls “cultural work.” Thus, such an approach focuses on intention 
and strategy in the analysis of language uses, but not in the sense of regarding 
language as simply a neutral tool used by a given speaker or writer to achieve 
certain predefined ends. Again, as Bakhtin puts it: 

There are no “neutral” words and forms — words and forms that belong to 
“no one”; language has been completely taken over, shot through with in- 
tentions and accents. For any individual consciousness living in it, lan- 
guage is not an abstract system of normative forms but rather a concrete 
heteroglot conception of the world. All words have the “taste” of a profes- 
sion, a genre, a tendency, a party, a particular work, a particular person, a 
generation, an age group, the day and hour. Each word tastes of the context 
and contexts in which it has lived its socially charged life; all words and 
forms are populated by intentions. (293) 

For Bakhtin, then, “As a living, socio-ideological concrete thing, as heteroglot 
opinion, language, for the individual consciousness, lies on the borderline be- 
tween oneself and the other” (293). As we shape language, language shapes us 
in a dialectical process that is inherently social, diverse, and dynamic. Compo- 
sition, whether we mean the encoding process we call writing or the decoding 
process we call reading, thus involves negotiation and conflict among what 
Gregory Jay refers to as “heterogeneous representational forces” (“American” 



o 

ERfC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



- 0-1 

i. 



3 



Teach ing the Rhetoric of Race 



205 



240). As a result, every speech act invokes not just the particular intentions and 
meanings of a single individual but the entire network of socially constructed 
values, identities, and world views we call ideology. The complex interplay of 
specific speech acts with the socially-constituted systems of linguistic meaning 
thus serves as the site of ideological conflict and transformation. As Terry 
Eagleton defines it, rhetoric refers to “grasping language and action in the con- 
text of the politico-discursive conditions inscribed within them” (168). Rheto- 
ric in this sense means the active discursive manifestation and transformation 
of ideology. 

A cultural rhetoric approach helps us to understand how the rhetorical frus- 
trations Douglass expresses in his speech derive from ideological frustrations 
over the social construction of racial identity. The quote from Douglass above 
leads into a section where he works to expose for his audience the contradiction 
between the racial logic used to dehumanize the slaves ideologically and the 
judicial logic informing the slave laws used to maintain the practice of slave 
labor: 

Must I undertake to prove that the slave is a man? That point is conceded 
already. Nobody doubts it. The slaveholders themselves acknowledge it in 
the enactment of law, for their government. They acknowledge it when 
they punish disobedience on the part of the slave .... What is this but the 
acknowledgment that the slave is a moral, intellectual and responsible be- 
ing? (369) 

The legal apparatus of slavery excludes slaves from the body politic on the 
basis of a cultural belief system that excludes the slave from the category of 
“human.” Yet, that very same legal structure includes sanctions on slave behav- 
ior dependent on the inclusion of slaves in the categorical definition of human- 
ity. However, simply pointing out this seeming problem in logic is not to solve 
it; indeed, part of Douglass’s point is that he is telling — or teaching, to rein- 
force the connection with pedagogy — his audience nothing new. (“That point is 
conceded already”) The problem is not one of insufficient knowledge but of 
repressed knowledge; more specifically, the problem lies at the connection be- 
tween knowledge and power. The “truth” of black inferiority does not provide 
the foundation in reality for the erection of a system of slave labor; instead, the 
desire to maintain an oppressive social system drives the construction of racial 
identity. The construction of racial identity and racist thought is not a “mistake” 
easily corrected through better reasoning but a motivated rhetorical activity. 
Douglass’s problem is, as a result, deeply rhetorical, rhetorical in the cultural 
sense, in that it hinges on the discursive processes of ideological maintenance 
and transformation. Systems of “logic” are themselves implicated in these dis- 
cursive structures. Thus, Douglass collapses the distinctions between arguing 
and denouncing, persuasion and rebuke, “logic” and “emotion” and asserts that 
“At a time like this, scorching irony, not convincing argument, is needed” (371). 




■ 214 



206 



John Alberti 



As Gregory S. Jay points out, however, Douglass’s use of irony is not simply 
a function of language narrowly defined but is a component part of the entire 
performative context of Douglass’s public appearances: 

As a speaking subject, Douglass constantly trades on the shock value of 
his eloquent literacy, on the irony of his appearance and speech. Dialecti- 
cally, one cannot understand Douglass without recognizing his humanity, 
and to recognize his humanity is to transform the history and category of 
the “human” as his era conceives it. (“American” 241, emphases his) 

As a result, there is no part of Douglass’s performance or his argument which is 
not rhetorical in the cultural sense, both implicated in and transformative of 
socio-ideological constructions of race, humanity, logic, and justice. The terms 
“implication and transformation” are crucial, because in this speech Douglass 
both invokes a given sense of what humanity means to his audience (“moral, 
intellectual and responsible being”) and attempts a total transformation of that 
sense. In the words of Valerie Smith, “Douglass . . . attempts to articulate a 
radical position using the discourse he shares with those against whom he speaks” 
(27). Smith also describes the dangers of this approach in her critique of 
Douglass’s use of the rhetoric of the “self-made man” in his autobiography: 
“What begins as an indictment of mainstream practice actually authenticates 
one of its fundamental assumptions” (27). As Bakhtin points out, however, 
Douglass has no choice but to face these dangers, for he has available to him no 
discursive tradition and no language not already “shot through with intentions 
and accents.” Any language he uses brings with it a complex and conflicted 
ideological history. Rhetoric involves not so much controlling as negotiating 
among these socio-ideological forces. 

In deconstructing the logic of race slavery in order to assert the humanity of 
African Americans, for example, Douglass has to consider in what ways such 
an argument might potentially also reinscribe, simply through reference to them, 
the very categories of race that not only justify race slavery but that also rein- 
force the sense of social complacency and security certain members of his audi- 
ence may feel in their “white” identity, whatever their personal attitudes about 
abolition may be. At the same time, the “scorching irony” produced by the 
entirety of his rhetorical performance threatens that complacency and thus risks 
alienating his audience by suggesting the instability of racial and even human 
identity. In her reading of Douglass’s speech, Priscilla Wald argues that by 
foregrounding the reality of his disenfranchisement and contrasting it with his 
(self) evident humanity, Douglass brings about an anxious recognition in his 
white audience that the rights supposedly recognized by the government as 
“inalienable” and “self-evident” are in fact subject to government conferral and 
modification: 



Teaching the Rhetoric of Race 



207 



Embodying the alienability of natural rights — and the consequent denial 
of his personhood defined by those rights — the disenfranchised pointed to 
the power of government to violate its sacred trust. The bestowal of citi- 
zenship and protection of liberties that were the recognized tasks of the 
law seemed to collapse into a conferral of personhood from which even a 
white native-born American man might well worry that he may one day be 
excluded as other groups were already excluded. (19) 

This may well be a lesson his audience might not want to learn. 

Douglass’s self-reflexive consideration of his speech as rhetorical speech 
act suggests that the pedagogical implications of the rhetorical approach I am 
advocating here go beyond simply another version of textual analysis to a con- 
sideration of the rhetorical dimension of the pedagogical act itself, along with 
the disciplinary and institutional structures which form the context for peda- 
gogical performance. This self-reflexivity is especially crucial in terms of teach- 
ing the rhetoric of race and ethnicity. If we regard race and ethnicity themselves 
as rhetorical rather than absolute constructs — that is, as context-specific discur- 
sive practices operating within larger ideological frameworks — then race and 
ethnicity become no longer issues of outside themes that we then bring to the 
study of literature, but constitutive elements of the institutional study of litera- 
ture. To teach literature is to engage in the construction of and critique of race 
and ethnicity. By extension, as Wald makes clear, such an activity deals with 
our and our students’ most deeply-held beliefs and anxieties about our own 
identities and social status, thus forcing a conscious awareness of our collective 
implication in the construction and reproduction of a system of racial identity 
and privilege that some may wish to keep repressed. 

The academic study of American literature has from (before) the beginning 
always already been a part of the larger ideological project of the construction 
of a specifically racial/ethnic national identity, as David Shumway extensively 
and persuasively documents in his Creating American Civilization (see also 
Lauter). At the end of that work, Shumway considers various proposals to counter 
these traditional discursive constructions of national racial identity. While 
Shumway makes various critiques of such programs on theoretical grounds, his 
main reservations seem, not surprisingly, to be more practical: the difficulty, 
unlikeliness, and therefore undesirability of waiting for large-scale institutional 
change; that is, a radicalizing of the entire disciplinary or university structure 
(Shumway 345-59). 

I certainly do not wish to argue against the drafting of long-term, radical, 
and theoretically comprehensive manifestos for such change; indeed, such in- 
tellectual work is crucial if multiculturalism means to be more than another 
version of curricular reform. But the rhetorical approach I am suggesting here — 
the emphasis on pedagogy as provisional, strategic action conducted in the 





208 



John Alberti 



context of larger ideological contests — serves as a way of following Douglass’s 
example of considering the relation of the particular discursive act to these larger 
activist programs. 

Again, by discursive act, I mean not just the texts listed on the syllabus but 
the entire pedagogical context, including the placing of the text on a syllabus, 
the very use of a syllabus and the pedagogical conventions implied by such a 
document, the assignment of the text and assignments related to the text, the 
demographics of the classroom, the institutional site of instruction, and so forth. 
If a certain version of poststructuralism questions the distinction between text 
and commentary, between “primary” and “secondary” texts, then that question- 
ing extends to the classroom as well, where from the rhetorical perspective I am 
suggesting here, “teaching” the text is not supplementary to but a constitutive 
part of the “text” itself. For example, if I have assigned Douglass’s speech in a 
literature class, the textual experience of the students, the experience relevant to 
the rhetorical analysis I propose, consists of Douglass’s written text, those por- 
tions of the text I highlight as “significant” and therefore worthy of close atten- 
tion, my pedagogical commentary on these significant passages, the institutional, 
historical, and social context, the reactions and commentaries of other students, 
as well as Douglass’s text as material object — whether it is read in an anthology 
of “American” literature, African American literature, Great Speeches of the 
Nineteenth Century, or a photocopied duplicate. 

Such an approach offers an important perspective on the rightfully vexed 
question of who can teach what, or the propriety and politics of non-minority 
faculty studying and teaching minority literature. This question involves impor- 
tant issues of appropriation, assimilation, and colonization, as it should. The 
question of which of these issues might apply — or, perhaps more accurately, 
the degrees to which they apply to my teaching of the Douglass text — can be 
addressed by asking the “rhetorical” questions of teaching: What? To whom? 
Where? For what purpose? 

Sometimes teachers identified with or identifying themselves as “non-mi- 
nority” will ask the question, “Can I teach Frederick Douglass?” in order, on 
some level at least, to receive blanket permission to do so. However, the most 
helpful answer to this question might be, “So who’s stopping you.” The prob- 
lems with blanket permission are many, but perhaps the most relevant is that the 
desire for such permission can obviate the need for the ideological analysis of 
the particular rhetorical situation. Let me give you an example of such an analy- 
sis of my experience teaching “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” 

I might begin by describing my class to you, but such a description is already 
part of the process of analysis, not preliminary to it. I could also begin with 
historical context and argue that one reason for my teaching the Douglass text 
is that we have no African American faculty in our department — indeed, we 




217 



Teach ing the Rhetoric of Race 



209 



have fewer than ten African American faculty at the entire university. In other 
words, if non-African American faculty don’t teach African American litera- 
ture, it might not get taught. An analysis of the cultural rhetorical situation, 
however, demands more than just a static explanation; indeed, the explanation 
itself is a rhetorical act. Am I telling you about the state of minority hiring at my 
school in order to excuse myself, for example, or perhaps to demonstrate my 
sensitive awareness of the poor progress of affirmative action in my depart- 
ment? The answers to these questions — or even the asking of them — are ulti- 
mately more useful to me than you, for they force me to consider my pedagogy 
as discursive action. Is my teaching African American literature compensating 
for and thus exacerbating our problems in hiring practice, or is it part of an 
effort to push those problems toward a critical mass? The attempts to answer 
these questions move me from seeking justification in some absolute, ahistorical 
sense to considering the relation of these particular pedagogical actions to larger 
scholarly and activist goals. 

Above, I used the term “white-identifying” deliberately, because such a phrase 
focuses further attention on my description of the pedagogical situation in ways 
similar to Douglass’s concerns above. Let’s say I describe my classes as largely 
white, with one or two “non-white” — usually African American — students per 
class. Such a statement I would regard as true, but certainly not neutral. As the 
example of Douglass demonstrates, by describing the racial identity of my stu- 
dents I am in some crucial sense reifying discursively those identities. Consider 
the implications for the not uncommon pedagogical question a teacher like myself 
might ask in such a situation: How do I make sure that black students feel 
welcome in my class, or that they don’t feel marginalized? But such questions 
of course already presuppose racial identities, and, what’s more, some kind of 
racial solidarity between me and the “white” students in class from which other 
students might feel alienated. In short, by asking the question in the way I’ve 
asked it, I’ve already obviated the possibility of answering it. 

This is not to suggest, however, some naive color-blind approach to the class- 
room, e.g., I’ll just pretend there’s no such thing as race . 1 After all, another, 
properly rhetorical answer to the question “How do I make sure that black stu- 
dents don’t feel marginalized?” is to ask “What country are you living in to 
think that deeply ingrained social structures of racial marginalization can be 
left at the classroom door?” Regardless of how I may identify my students, as 
soon as I walk into the classroom the first day of class many if not all begin 
identifying me right away as “white,” and it is this social dimension of racial 
identification that matters most, that is most the concern of a cultural rhetorical 
approach. As Douglass is pointing out — or at least, as he is pointing out in the 
rhetorical uses to which I am putting his text — race is rhetorical, not deter- 
mined by logic, but precedent to and determinative of a certain kind of logic. 




2 



-3 O 
IlO 



210 



John Alberti 



Racial identification is a discursive, rhetorical action that occurs over and over 
again every day in American society, in ways both repressive and resistant, 
reactionary and radical. 

Thus, rhetoric can describe not only the act but also the goal of pedagogy, a 
pedagogy that through the awareness of its own use of cultural rhetoric encour- 
ages or even requires the same awareness in students, just as Douglass’s speech 
can be read as demanding recognition not only of his own humanity but also of 
the provisional, politically dependent nature of his audience’s humanity. If the 
only way to erase black marginality is by the total transformation of the ra- 
cially-based social order, then a key element of that transformation is discur- 
sive. The development of cultural rhetorical awareness can be effected through 
the deconstruction of racial identity, through the defusion of marginality by 
destabilizing the discursive foundation of racial identity. But, as the vexed ex- 
ample of Douglass also shows, such a project also entails constructing an un- 
derstanding of the forces motivating a desire to maintain reified social identities, 
to repress awareness of the way our own discursively-constructed identities are 
“shot through with intentions and accents.” 

I’ve begun American literature classes, for example, by problematizing my 
own racial identity in rhetorical terms as a way of introducing the larger ques- 
tion of how we in fact “know” our racial identities. In discussing both the insta- 
bility and the power of categories of racial, gender, and class identities, I ask the 
class to think about what categories they placed me in as soon as I walked into 
the room. If they saw me, as many do, as a “white man” (the more popular 
media term is now “white male”), on what basis did they make that determina- 
tion? My strategy, of course, is to ask what seems like a stupid question, ex- 
ploiting my authority as professor to foster suspicion, skepticism, and perhaps 
a little bit of anxiety. In a series of deliberately rhetorical questions consciously 
patterned after Douglass, I problematize various ways one might answer my 
question through appeals to some objective or self-evident reality by pointing 
to the variability and therefore instability of the body itself (whether through 
the vagaries of genetic mutation; the violence of disease, accident, or surgery; 
or the evolution and revolution of the discursive systems that constitute our 
naming and thus understanding of the body). 

Again, my purpose is not simply to deny my white or male identity, or even 
to take a vote on it, but to focus on the social, discursive, and rhetorical dimen- 
sions of that identity, and of all racial, gender, and class identity. My lecture 
(for that’s what it is) is deliberately provocative, but its provocativeness is based 
on the rhetorical point made by Douglass: that no matter how much I protest 
against racial classification, such protest occurs in the rhetorical context of the 
viewers’ gaze, a gaze I know already traps me into a racial identity. This gaze is 
a source of power for the audience, but it is a power that traps and inscribes 
them as well. If one of the purposes of Douglass’s text was to open up for his 




0 



Teaching the Rhetoric of Race 



211 



audience the discursive practices that constitute the ideology of humanity for 
his audience, then one of my purposes is not so much to deny as to resist white 
identity, and in particular, to resist the building of community between me and 
my students on the basis of racial solidarity. 

It’s important to keep in mind that I offer this example not as a universally 
useful exercise or goal but as a highly contingent strategy. The building of com- 
munity on the basis of racial solidarity can be, as we know, a powerful act of 
resistance; but not all acts of racial solidarity are equal, nor are all the contexts 
in which individual racial identity is constructed. Jay, for example, describes a 
very different rhetorical situation when he discusses his experiences at the Uni- 
versity of Alabama in the early 1980s, teaching Douglass in classes more inte- 
grated than mine and finding himself in the absurd situation of being a “white” 
instructor teaching African American students about race in America in a school 
only recently desegregated (“The End” 16). Nor should my teaching strategies 
become compensatory in the sense of lessening the pressure to diversify our 
faculty; indeed, the cultural rhetorical approach emphasizes the rhetorical di- 
mension of affirmative action: the powerful statement made not just by a stated 
commitment to affirmative action but also by the hiring of African American, 
women, and minority faculty. 

It could still be objected, though, that my strategy of racial distancing, of 
seeking to subvert white racial solidarity between myself and the class, could 
work as a gesture of denial, a means of declaring myself “white, but not white 
like them,” therefore abdicating my responsibility as role model for students 
who would potentially identify with me. For example, I’ve had a white female 
student ask me for my reaction “as a white male” to affirmative action. In this 
case it could be argued, and in fact I would agree, her racial and gender classifi- 
cation of me created a rhetorical space to make a reply against type, indicating 
support for rather than fear of racial and gender equality. And this is in fact what 
I did, but I was still troubled by the sense in which it is the very reification of 
racial and gender identity (and concomitant suppression of class identity) that 
exacerbates what is now tiresomely and obsessively referred to as “white male 
anger.” 

Clearly, the discursive creation of identity involves a process of identifica- 
tion, both the determination of who I am and who you are, and who is part of 
my group and who isn’t. There’s not enough space here to enter into a lengthy 
discussion of identity politics, except to stress that the cultural rhetoric approach 
suggests a strategic rather than absolute use of the politics of identity, a use 
based on the instability of the discourse of identity, an instability tied to vari- 
ability of context. This strategic use of the instability of racial identity can be 
used to investigate the connections between knowledge and power, connections 
that inform the rhetoric of race by getting at the anxiety over social status de- 
scribed above by Wald. Such a discussion moves the question of slavery out of 



O 

ERIC 



220 



212 



John Alberti 



the category of historical curiosity, making it part of an ongoing socio-ideologi- 
cal discursive struggle over identity and power. 

One component of this strategy in the context of Douglass is to examine 
student reactions to his texts in terms of the difference between identity and 
sympathy. Many white-identifying students in my classes will, in journal re- 
sponses, express sympathy and often admiration for Douglass, but less often a 
sense of identity. Douglass refers to this distinction between sympathy and iden- 
tity, or rather, we can use Douglass’s works to explore this distinction through 
consideration of the title of the first version of his autobiography (or maybe the 
first of his autobiographies): Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass , an 
American Slave. We can construct easily enough an ideological contradiction 
operating in the epithet, “American Slave,” but we can push this contradiction 
beyond the opposition between America as simultaneously land of the free and 
land of bondage to the term “slave” itself, and in particular the absent term of 
opposition that would define that term: slave as opposed to what? Many will 
suggest “free” in an abstract political sense, but how does that translate into the 
specific social and historical context of Douglass’s rhetorical situation? Ac- 
cording to Ann Kibbey and Michele Stepto, for example, “Precisely because 
Douglass always felt himself subject to the economic and social conditions in 
which he lived, he defines freedom ... as something achieved at a particular 
place and time, within a particular economic and social structure, and not as a 
sheer act of personal will by an isolated individual in defiance of his circum- 
stances” (168). Freedom, in other words, always operates in Douglass’s text in 
a rhetorical sense; from the perspective of cultural rhetoric, such a reading does 
not so much designate a unique feature of Douglass’s work as it does a recogni- 
tion of the inevitable social history of the term, a history that suggests that any 
definition of freedom is “something achieved at a particular time and place, 
within a particular economic and social structure.” 

For pedagogical purposes, the rhetorical approach to the discussion of what 
freedom means in Frederick Douglass involves strategic questions concerning 
the socio-ideological context within which we choose to frame that discussion, 
a choice inextricably linked to the exigencies of the particular pedagogical con- 
text. In my own situation, again, as I construct the demographic context, I teach 
largely all white-identifying classes. Many of the students are working class to 
lower-middle class, most work full- or part-time to finance their educations, 
many are first-generation college students, and about forty percent are “non- 
traditional,” that is, over the age of twenty-five. Given the critical emphasis 
many of the students (and the institution as well, in its official pronouncements) 
make between their education and their economic futures, I often take the cue 
presented by the term “American Slave” to discuss “freedom” in the economic 
context of slavery as a particular system of labor exploitation by asking what 
the difference is between a slave and a worker (or, as Herman Melville puts it in 



o 

ERIC 



221 



Teaching the Rhetoric of Race 



213 



Moby-Dick , “Who aint a slave?” [6]). Such a seemingly simple question can 
lead to a deeper consideration of the ideological arguments over this question 
that served as the discursive matrix within which the historical struggle against 
slavery took place, and which connect that struggle with larger arguments over 
the transformation of labor within the development of industrial capitalism. 
(We alter the context for class discussion in interesting ways, for example, by 
pointing out that while Douglass was a contemporary of Lincoln, both were 
contemporaries of Marx as well.) 

In fact, many reactionary antebellum defenders of slavery tried to co-opt 
radical analyses about capitalist labor exploitation in order to construct an argu- 
ment contrasting a supposedly paternalistic system of chattel slavery with a 
cold and heartless Northern system of “wage slavery.” To co-opt is not to con- 
tain, however, and such arguments also inadvertently revealed the historical 
connections between the development of racist ideology in the South and the 
desire to obviate the formation of class solidarity among African and European 
laborers. (See especially Zinn and Morgan on the formation of systems of he- 
reditary racial slavery in seventeenth-century Virginia.) More pointedly, such a 
rhetorical tack, focusing on the relative merits of chattel and wage slavery, threat- 
ens to unhinge that racist ideology, a point Wald argues that Douglass seizes on 
in his Fourth of July speech: “What, he asks implicitly, keeps the government 
from making white men slaves?” (89). In fact, one of the most notorious de- 
fenders of slavery, George Fitzhugh, made this implicit question explicit by 
arguing that slavery should not be solely based on race, but that the “benefits” 
of being slaves should be extended to poor whites as well. At this point, for the 
white-identifying student, Douglass in particular and slaves in general are not 
so comfortably “Other,” and thus are not simply objects of sympathy and pity 
(as well as sources of hostility and defensiveness over imputations of guilt for 
supposedly “past” injustices). 

Some instructors might worry that all this sounds like going far afield from 
the Douglass text, but such a worry stems from thinking of the text as an au- 
tonomous verbal icon and not, as I have been arguing, a rhetorical construct 
implicated and interwoven within larger socio-ideological discursive structures. 
These larger structures, however, are only manifested in particular texts. The 
relationship, in other words, is dialectic and not derivative. There is not a sepa- 
rate, static ideological world the texts draw on for material; ideologies are al- 
ways constructed, reproduced, and transformed in particular, motivated rhetorical 
acts we call texts. As a result, such an approach never properly takes us “away” 
from or “outside” of the text. Douglass’s story in the Narrative, for example, of 
the conflict he experienced as an African American slave working alongside 
immigrant Irish carpenters in Baltimore is not a tale of racist brutality “informed” 
by the kinds of rhetorical ideological maneuvers over the relations of slavery, 
labor, and race outlined above; rather, it is itself one such maneuver. 




■ '222 



214 



John Alberti 



Similarly, as I have argued, our pedagogical practice is also implicated in the 
process of socio-ideological formation. I have argued here about the need to 
resist the formation of racial solidarity on the basis of whiteness in the class- 
room, but a rhetorical strategy aimed at resisting a certain kind of solidarity at 
the same time creates a kind of discursive pressure to construct solidarity dif- 
ferently, and again Douglass’s Fourth of July speech serves as strategic evi- 
dence. The speech, both in its title and its initial delivery on the fifth of July, 
deliberately foregrounds the Fourth of July as the ideological enterprise in the 
formation of nationalist identity it was and is, an enterprise forming that iden- 
tity along racial lines and a process that Douglass wishes to interrupt and to 
redefine, both by claiming for himself and other African Americans the right to 
participate in this enterprise and by laying out the conditions through which 
such an identity may — and may not — be constructed. Douglass’s discursive 
deconstructions of the concepts of whiteness and of the Enlightenment concept 
of humanity rhetorically insert themselves between the desire of white-identi- 
fying listeners and readers to respond with a sympathy that maintains racial 
reification and the necessity to reconfigure personal and therefore social iden- 
tity. Similarly, the teaching of Douglass’s text in my classroom is part of a 
rhetorical strategy to problematize identity as a way of reconstructing identity, 
whether around constructions of social class or around our common situation 
and situatedness as rhetorical actors, both shaping and shaped by discursive 
ideological practices. 

In Playing in the Dark , Toni Morrison’s collection of essays based on an- 
other explicitly rhetorical performance, her delivery of the William E. Massey 
Sr. Lectures in the History of American Civilization at Harvard University in 
1990 , she addresses the necessity of confronting the rhetorical dimension of the 
construction of race: 

Race has become metaphorical — a way of referring to and disguising forces, 
events, classes, and expressions of social decay and economic division far 
more threatening to the body politic than biological “race” ever was. Ex- 
pensively kept, economically unsound, a spurious and useless political as- 
set in election campaigns, racism is as healthy today as it was during the 
Enlightenment. It seems that it has . . . assumed a metaphorical life so 
completely embedded in daily discourse that it is perhaps more necessary 
and more on display than ever before. (63) 

My purpose in this paper has been to follow the leads of both Douglass and 
Morrison in considering what the rhetorical dimension of the construction of 
race has to offer to the construction of multicultural pedagogy, and to argue that 
one way to resist the dilution of multiculturalism into a harmless pluralism or 
worse, simply a marketing strategy, is to see the multicultural project itself as 
inherently rhetorical, as a discursive action aimed at the reconstruction of ide- 
ology. As both Bakhtin and Douglass teach us, neutrality is not an option. 





Teaching the Rhetoric of Race 



215 



Note 



1 . For a discussion of how supposedly “color blind” pedagogical practices can actu- 
ally reinforce racism by refusing to address the connections between race and privilege, 
see Sleeter. 



Works Cited 



Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays . Trans. Caryl Emerson and 
Michael Holquist. Austin: U of Texas P, 1981. 

Douglass, Frederick. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass , An American Slave . 
Cambridge: Belknap P of Harvard UP, 1988. 

. ‘ What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” The Frederick Douglass Papers. 

Series One. Volume Two. New Haven: Yale UP, 1982. 359-88. 

Du Bois, W. E. B. The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Library of America, 1 990. 

Eagleton, Terry. Against the Grain: Essays 1975-1985. London: Verso, 1986. 

Fitzhugh, George. “Southern Thought.” The Heath Anthology of American Literature. 
Ed. Paul Lauter. 2nd Edition. Vol. 1. Boston: D. C. Heath, 1994. 1913-922. 

Jay, Gregory S. “American Literature and the New Historicism: The Example of Frederick 
Douglass.” boundary 2.17 (1990): 21 1-42. 

. “The End of ‘American’ Literature: Toward a Multicultural Practice.” The Canon 

in the Classroom: The Pedagogical Implications of Canon Revision in American Lit - 
erature. Ed. John Alberti. New York: Garland, 1995. 3-28. 

Kibbey, Ann and Michele Stepto. “The Antilanguage of Slavery: Frederick Douglass’s 
1845 Narrative .” Critical Essays on Frederick Douglass. Ed. William L. Andrews. 
Boston: G. K. Hall, 1991. 166-91. 

Lauter, Paul. Canons and Contexts. New York: Oxford UP, 1991. 

Melville, Herman. Moby-Dick. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern UP and the 
Newberry Library, 1988. 

Morgan, Edmund. American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Vir- 
ginia. New York: W. W. Norton, 1975. 

Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1993. 

Shumway, David R. Creating American Civilization: A Genealogy of American Litera- 
ture as an Academic Discipline. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1994. 

Sleeter, Christine E. “How White Teachers Construct Race.” Race, Identity , and Repre- 
sentation in Education. Ed. Cameron McCarthy and Warren Crichlow. New York: 
Routledge, 1993. 157-171. 

Smith, Valerie. Self-Discovery and Authority in Afro-American Narrative. Cambridge: 
Harvard UP, 1987. 

Tompkins, Jane. Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction. New 
York: Oxford UP, 1985. 

Wald, Priscilla. Constituting Americans: Cultural Anxiety and Narrative Form. Durham* 
Duke UP, 1995. 

Zinn, Howard. A People ’s History of the United States. New York: HarperPerennial, 1 980. 




14 Homeless in the Golden Land: 
Joan Didion’s Regionalism 



Louise Z. Smith 

University of Massachusetts-Boston 



Not in the least an Americanist, I will prudently not rush into unfamiliar regions 
of this volume’s conversation. Americanists may debate the definitions and the 
literary history of “realism,” “regionalism,” and “local color,” but I will not. I 
will trust Judith Fetterley’s “treasonous” assertions that “regionalism [is] a fic- 
tion characterized, indeed inspired, by empathy” but that realism, particularly 
“local color” writing, “ratifies the hegemony of the ‘national’ as a standard 
against which the local can be measured and found wantingf,]” found “quaint 
or queer” or freaky (889-890). “[E]mpathy primarily as a model of the relation- 
ships of ‘persons’ with differing amounts of cultural power” (890) lies near the 
heart of hermeneutics, a region where I feel more at home. Empathy is one 
element of the “understanding” that Hans Georg Gadamer calls the “fusion of 
horizons.” Knowing that readers cannot transplant themselves from their present 
into someone else’s present, let alone past, he urges 

not covering up this tension [between a text and each reader’s present] by 
attempting a naive assimilation but consciously bringing it out Histori- 

cal consciousness is aware of its own otherness and hence distinguishes 
the horizon of tradition from its own. (273, my italics) 

In other words, through empathy one can recognize and to some extent under- 
stand the “other” without trying to erase, elevate, or subordinate it. 

Empathy also undergirds the bridges of reception study, what Gadamer’s 
student Hans Robert Jauss calls Rezeptionsdsthetik , linking two “regions” of 
interpretation: literary and cultural. In both these regions, “rational certainty” is 
not a matter of mirror accuracy but of “conversation between persons” leading 
to “edification,” that is, leading to “new, better, more interesting, more fruitful 
ways of speaking” about connections between our own culture and a distant 
(“exotic”) culture or historical period and about connections between seem- 
ingly incommensurable disciplines and vocabularies (Rorty 1 56-57, 360). Even 
if some Americanists dispute Fetterley’s use of “regionalism” to mean “empa- 
thy,” they may accept the basic idea that rhetorical hermeneutics — the analysis 
of the tropes various communities of interpreters use and of how they use them, 

216 




Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion ’s Regionalism 



217 



that is, of what “counts” as a significant and persuasive interpretation — links 
the interpretation of literature with the interpretation of cultural conventions 
(Mailloux 167-70). You can’t have rhetoricity without empathy. A genre well 
suited to expressing empathy, says Fetterley, is the sketch, which makes it pos- 
sible to tell stories about “elderly women with bristling chins,” each of whom 
turns out to be not a “freak” but a “neighbor with a story and a secret and 
feelings,” who lives “a ritualized and sacramental life” in a “world elsewhere” 
(884-87). So, I believe, does that other marginalized genre: the essay. 

“Regionalism” and Reception Theory 

Though Joan Didion’s prose — flinty in detail, spare in commentary — may not 
spring to mind as a fount of empathy, I want to look at the “world elsewhere” in 
“On Going Home.” Since the Norton Reader s second edition (1969) included 
it, the essay has remained a staple of college composition anthologies (for ex- 
ample William Smart’s Eight Modern Essayists [5th ed., 1990] and Janet 
Marting’s The Voice of Reflection [1995]). “Home” in this essay is a region: 
geographically Sacramento rather than Los Angeles; psychologically a terrain 
for “guerrilla warfare” between generations who, nevertheless, join ranks as 
“we” against “Joan’s husband”; historically a moment from which to see “other” 
Californias in 1954, 1910, 1900, and 1846. Didion was born in 1934 and pub- 
lished “On Going Home” in 1967. The essay is now older than many of its 
student readers, more and more of whom, as commuting students, have not yet 
left home. In 1997, they cannot live through their readings of this essay as their 
elders did back then nor as we may today, through memory. The “baby” to 
whom Didion couldn’t give “ home for her birthday” is now in her thirties, and 
late ’60s apocalypse has given way to the fin de siecle. The essay’s explicit 
literary allusions — “the question of whether or not you could go home again” 
echoing the title of Thomas Wolfe’s 1940 novel, the question of what sense a 
young girl “in an ‘amateur-topless’ contest” could “possibly make of, say, Long 
Day’s Journey Into Night” (1955) — are addressed to “those of us who are in our 
30’s now,” in 1967. To “us” these titles had “the effect of ‘romantic degrada- 
tion’ for which my generation strived so assiduously.” But for younger readers, 
the Norton Reader's, seventh edition (1988) began to footnote the play as “a 
powerful domestic tragedy” (70); to young readers in 1997, the titles are ob- 
scure, their “romantic degradation” quaint. Today’s textbooks seldom invoke 
the regional. Instead, psychologically oriented reader-response questions ac- 
company this and other frequently anthologized essays by Didion (like “Dream- 
ers of the Golden Dream” and “On Keeping a Notebook”). Such questions focus 
on intergenerational themes in one’s own family, on one’s own processes of 
leaving home or not, returning or not, on comparing one’s own family rituals to 
those of Didion’s family, on explaining why one sympathizes with Didion or 





218 



Louise Z. Smith 



her husband or her brother. Formal and psychological reader-response seldom 
engages readers with regions beyond their own classrooms or with historical 
moments preceding their own in a work’s reception. 

Yet “America” changes. When Didion wrote “On Going Home,” Paul Simon 
and Art Garfunkel sang of “Counting the cars / On the New Jersey turnpike, / 
They’ve all come to look for America” (“America”). But the nationally tele- 
vised June 17, 1994, police pursuit of O. J. Simpson in his white Ford Bronco 
down the L. A. freeway strikes Sonia Maasik and Jack Solomon, editors of the 
textbook California Dreams and Realities (1995), as a “peculiarly Californian 
drama,” what Fetterley (after Baym) terms a story of “beset manhood” (879). 
The editors ask, 

Which better reflects the truth behind the California dream: the self-in- 
vented celebrity who climbed from poverty to the summit of fame and 
fortune or the emerging image of a man driven by violence .... If the 
California dream totters, can the American dream be far behind? (1) 

As one “myth” of California, they select Didion’s “Notes from a Native Daugh- 
ter” (1965), a more explicit account than “On Going Home” of why Sacra- 
mento, rather than L.A. and San Francisco, “w California” (19). Both essays 
(and others by Didion) recreate a “ritualized and sacramental life” in a “world 
elsewhere.” 

Worlds elsewhere always refer to worlds here. As “here” changes, so do 
they. Reception theory examines these contrasts in two ways: by describing 
“the historical moment of the work’s appearance,” and by reconstructing its 
original readers’ “pre-understanding of its genre from the form and themes of 
already familiar works” (Jauss 23). By reconstructing “the horizons of expecta- 
tions in the face of which a work was created and received in the past,” scholars 
can both discover “how the contemporary reader could have viewed and under- 
stood the work” and examine the interaction of that reader’s understanding with 
our own (Jauss 28-29, my italics). We need to examine several moments (“the 
synchronic cross-section of the literary production of a historical point in time 
necessarily implies further cross-sections before and after” [38]), but there are 
historical reasons why we should not take the scientific-sounding term “cross- 
section” too literally (Smith “Beyond”). Readers “here” can never know pre- 
cisely, but can more or less understand empathically, what readers “elsewhere” 
expected or how they responded. Nor are historical “periods” completely dis- 
tinct; indeed, anachronism is both inevitable and useful in teaching (McGillivray; 
Smith “In Search”). Using reception theory, we can ask about the regionalism 
in “On Going Home,” about the kinds of empathy — of community and of genre — 
the essay embodies, about what kinds of cultural work the essay did for its 
original readers and for others since then, and about what inviting today’s stu- 
dents to read it may mean. 



O 

ERIC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



22 ? 



Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion s Regionalism 



219 



Readers “from places like Toronto” and Other Regions 

The New York Times Magazine , The American Scholar , Holiday , and Vogue had 
published Didion’s earlier work, but none of them published “On Going Home.” 
Nor did The Nation (to whose rejection letter the essay refers). With this essay, 
The Saturday Evening Post inaugurated 

a new feature, “Points West” — a column of commentary from the Los An- 
geles vantage point of John Gregory Dunne and his wife, Joan Didion. 
Dunne, 35, a former Time editor, has written for the Post on such diverse 
subjects as baseball, race riots, and the struggles of a labor organizer [Cesar 
Chavez]. Joan, a novelist ( Run River) has reported from New York to Ha- 
waii on murder, lost love, and Christmas puddings. (240 [June 3, 1967]:3) 

How sweet. Notwithstanding Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique (1963), 
the Post 9 s editors still cheerfully inhabited a region where the serious male jour- 
nalist of articles on manhood “beset” in sports, politics, and business had a 
surname but “his wife,” who wrote of melodramatic and sentimental affairs 
(her novel Run River [1963] was about adultery and murder in a California 
family) could be called “Joan.” Biographical commentaries relating the couple’s 
collaboration on “Points West” to the shaky mental and physical condition in 
which Didion had recently moved with Dunne from New York to California 
(Henderson 1-16; Winchell) only return us to psychological regions. If instead 
we ask about readers’ expectations, we find that Didion recognized at least two 
distinct audiences. As she reflected the year after “On Going Home” first ap- 
peared, some readers who knew her earlier work were shocked to find her pub- 
lishing in the Saturday Evening Post : 

Quite often people write me from places like Toronto and want to know 
* (demand to know) how I can reconcile my conscience with writing for The 
Saturday Evening Post ; the answer is quite simple. The Post is extremely 
receptive to what the writer wants to do, pays enough for him [sic] to be 
able to do it right, and is meticulous about not changing copy. ( Slouching , 
xii-xiii) 

What was there about the Post that some readers expected to be at odds with 
Didion’s “conscience”? Her phrase “places like Toronto” evokes what Fetterley 
would call a “nationalist” frame of mind, one in which urbane, high-brow read- 
ers see themselves as central and normative — “here.” “Elsewhere,” we might 
infer, there are “places like Sacramento” where small town, middle-browed 
readers (even Fetterley’s “elderly women with bristling chins”) see their reflec- 
tions in Norman Rockwell’s Post covers. Yet Didion publishes in the Post for 
squarely middle-class reasons: the pay is good, she picks her own subjects, and 
they leave her prose alone. Autonomy — financial and editorial- — means more to 
her than political or class alliances do, and she expects readers of Slouching 




220 



Louise Z. Smith 



Towards Bethlehem to understand that. But since “Toronto” readers in 1967 
had no way of knowing the explanation Didion would give in 1968, reception 
theory tells us simply to register their moral indignation both with authors who 
publish in the Post and, implicitly, with its readers. 

What of those “Sacramento” readers? Some of them undoubtedly read the 
same things as “Toronto” readers. Didion’s short story “Coming Home” began 
with this epigraph: 

Folks just get a yearning sometimes to go back home again to the empty 
room, settle down with a bottle of Pernod and a few phenobarbs, and start 
a good quarrel. ( Saturday Evening Post 237 [July 11, 1964]: 50) 

That’s not “Sacramento” but indeed New York, where in “Coming Home” two 
ad writers who are married to each other bicker about how her work in Califor- 
nia keeps them apart, who pays for her dress from Bendel, his apparent affair in 
her absence, and his not wanting the baby they’re expecting (whom she imag- 
ines will resemble not its parents but the Beech-Nut baby in the ad she tacks up 
beside her bed). The story’s romantic watercolor illustration shows a wistful 
young woman brushing her long hair; vintage Ladies' Home Journal , it bears 
little relation to the young wife’s feeling of “pointlessness so keen that it verged 
upon despair” (52). Psychological reader-response would note that this story’s 
conflict between career and domesticity reflects Didion’s own at this period. 
Reception theory, though, draws our attention to surprises (“negations”) of read- 
ers’ expectations: in 1963 The Feminine Mystique and in its wake “Coming 
Home” in 1964, heralded radical feminism’s attack on Rockwellian values in 
the 1970s, and perhaps not incidentally, the Post's demise in 1969. If Didion’s 
publishing in the Post surprised “Torontons,” then “Pernod and phenobarbs” 
surprised “Sacramentons .” 

What did “Torontons” and “Sacramentons” find in the Post alongside “On 
Going Home”? This “cross-section” reveals one moment in the essay’s recep- 
tion: an antiphonal relation between Didion’s “personal” essay and more “his- 
torical” pieces echoes a dialogue between biography and history within the 
essay itself. Defying complaints in the May 20 Letters column that a bathing 
suit feature (Sharon Tate in “Sexy Little Me”) belongs in Playboy, not the 
Rockwellian Post , the cover pictures a young woman in a “Nude Look” bathing 
suit. This teasing mischief bizarrely sets off real malevolence: bold letters an- 
nounce the final installment of Jean-Francois Steiner’s Treblinka . Within the 
essay, likewise, the persona finds in her dresser drawer “a bathing suit I wore 
the summer I was 1 7” and an old letter, about which she muses “there is no final 
solution for letters of rejection from The Nation ...” The euphemism for 
Treblinka’s function (a Nazi death camp’s “final solution” to “the Jewish ques- 
tion”) bathetically expresses adolescent disappointment. Yet the adult persona 
can see her experience from two vantage points. From one, she re-experiences 
her rejection as a nascent author (it felt like “romantic degradation”) and for a 





Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion’s Regionalism 



221 



moment she becomes tone-deaf to the Holocaust’s tragic vocabulary. From the 
other, she recalls having strived “assiduously” for that “degradation” and places 
her “rejection” within an historically longer and wider perspective. From this 
vantage point, she distinguishes those of her generation who can’t go home 
again (those with “the sentimental and largely literary baggage with which we 
left home in the ’50’s”) from the post-war baby boomers who don’t need or 
want to (“the children bom of the fragmentation after World War II” for whom 
that sentimental baggage is “irrelevant”). It would be easy for a reader to dis- 
miss someone who seeks a “final solution for letters of rejection from The Na- 
tion ” as hopelessly self-involved, but the dialogue of naivete with wisdom in 
“On Going Home” — reflecting the magazine cover’s juxtaposition of sass and 
tragedy — is more empathic than dismissive: like Fetterley’s “elderly women 
with bristling chins,” this woman has “a story and a secret and feelings.” Under- 
standing supersedes judgment. 

Right after Didion’s essay comes V. S. Naipaul’s article “What’s wrong with 
being a snob?” He explains his preference for the honest snobbery of England’s 
old regime over the Liberals’ empty talk of “the romance of the ‘classless’ soci- 
ety,” talk that is no “compensation” for England’s contemporary social and eco- 
nomic decay (12, 18). “On Going Home” likewise opens by contrasting social 
regions — called “Sacramento” and “Los Angeles” — through the pronouns “we” 
and “he.” Sacramento identifies the persona (“We live in dusty houses . . . filled 
with mementos quite without value to [her husband]”) and restricts her talk to 
“people we know who have been committed to mental hospitals, and people we 
know who have been booked on drunk driving charges” and to other subjects 
colored by romantic degradation and obsolescence. These nobody bothers to 
explain to her husband, whose exclusion she reiterates: . . my husband’s in- 

ability to perceive . . “. . . my husband in turn does not understand . . . “Nor 
does he understand that ... we are talking in code about the things we like best” 
(my emphases). Yet by the penultimate sentence she leaves behind the inverse 
snobbery of “the things we [her family] like best” and redefines “we” as herself 
with her husband and baby in Los Angeles: . . but we live differently now ...” 

She makes neither region the “norm” but quietly notes their differences, reveal- 
ing what Fetterley calls a “ritualized and sacramental life” in a Sacramento that, 
at least for now, must be a “world elsewhere.” 

Differences between “elsewhere” and “here” in “On Going Home” are pro- 
jected onto the national scene in Stewart Alsop’s “Can Anyone Beat LBJ?” Two 
page-wide photographs show a housing tract (captioned “The average voter 
these days is middle class, lives in a suburban development, and worries about 
property values”) and a 1930’s breadline (captioned “Candidates today need 
the crabgrass vote, not the ‘forgotten man’ of the Depression”) (28-29). Didion’s 
family in Sacramento also “worries about property values” (“we talk about sale- 
leasebacks and right-of-way condemnations” which “my husband” does not 
understand). But their Sacramento, though as yet unmarked by “suburban de- 



£30 



o 

ERIC 



222 



Louise Z. Smith 



velopment is not safe from “crabgrass” concerns: as Alsop knows— even if 
“we” in Sacramento do not yet — property is the concern of the “average voter” 
in both old Sacramento and Los Angeles. The stable way of life Didion’s family 
cherishes is already vanishing into the Vietnam era evoked throughout the maga- 
zine. Indeed, Robert F. Kennedy’s stoic question, “Who knows where we’ll all 
be six years from now?” (qtd. in Alsop 20)— in retrospect made poignant by his 
assassination in 1968 and by actress and cover-girl Sharon Tate’s murder by 
Charles Manson in 1969 — expresses the sense of disintegration implicit in 
Didion’s tentative closing: “I promise to tell [the baby] a funny story. Promises 
kept belong to the “Sacramento” frame of mind; promises made, but subject to 
change, belong to “Los Angeles.” 

The preservation of “ritualized and sacramental life” enters this issue of the 
Post through an article on Bruton Shires (horses): 

Behind [the Shires] marched the ghosts of a million gallant war horses in 
full panoply of armor; horses of plow and wagon and dray; horses drag- 
ging gun carriages over field[s] . . . and into valleys. The Shires belonged 
to ... a part of history that had to go on living. (44) 

But “On Going Home” brims with images of history lost. The family’s grave- 
stones are “broken, overturned in the dry grass,” and untended: “My mother 
shrugs.” The “teacups hand-painted with cabbage roses and signed ‘E.M.,’ my 
grandmother’s initials” are not passed on: “I return them to the drawer.” The 
persona cannot give her baby “home,” that is, a sense of her cousins and of 
rivers and of her great-grandmother’s teacups,” so she substitutes “a xylophone 
and a sundress from Madeira,” anonymous artifacts from regions “elsewhere” 
that have no particular meaning for anyone in “On Going Home.” “Here” in 
L.A., the “ritualized and sacramental” has, as yet, no place. 

Reception study helps us understand some of the “regions” within which 
readers in 1967 encountered “On Going Home.” Didion’s “Torontons,” the 
“Sacramentons,” and other groups of readers I have not identified could see the 
interplay between her essay and this issue of the Post — nudity and Treblinka, 
topless dancing and “final solution,” property and crabgrass, FDR s and RFK s 
promises and family promises, preservation and entropy — from what Jauss calls 
differing “horizons of expectations.” (If I had more space, I would offer you 
other “cross-sections,” noting that earlier in the spring of 1967 the Post had 
offered readers excerpts from Dwight Eisenhower’s autobiography, Memories 
of My Boyhood (April 8), articles on “Crime in Chicago” and on Lester 
Maddox (April 22), on the investigation in New Orleans of a plot to kill John 
F. Kennedy and on Sharon Tate’s career (May 6), and on “The First Year of 
Medicare” (May 20); and I would explore what other “regions”— “Abilene,” 
“Chicago,” “Atlanta,” “New Orleans,” “Hollywood,” and “Washington” — they 
might imply.) These earlier “horizons” enable “us” today— be “we” Peace Corps 
returnees, Vietnam vets, older and younger “Dead Heads,” Granolas, Trekies, 



231 



Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion ’ s Regionalism 



223 



Techies, Generation X, whoever — to know some of 1967’s readers better, to 
move beyond reader-response’s formalist and psychological interests and into a 
broader historical perspective, to realize (if some of “us” haven’t already) that it 
wasn’t Gen X’s tragic hero, Kurt Cobain, who wrote “Things fall apart; the 
center cannot hold; / Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world” or who asked 
fearfully, “And what rough beast, its hour come round at last, / Slouches to- 
wards Bethlehem to be born?” 



Sacramento and Slouching Towards Bethlehem 

Yeats’s “The Second Coming” (1920) is one of two epigraphs of Slouching 
Towards Bethlehem (1968), the essay collection that includes the revised ver- 
sion of “On Going Home” which textbooks reprint. The other is Miss Peggy 
Lee’s: “I learned courage from Buddha, Jesus, Lincoln, Einstein, and Cary 
Grant.” These stark contrasts — Yeats with Peggy Lee, Buddha with Cary Grant, 
religion with performance, high culture with jazz and film — might recall the 
Post's cover contrasting Treblinka with the “Nude Look.” What might Peggy 
Lee’s statement mean? That in a Yeatsian apocalypse, the slight in stature de- 
vote daily acts of courage to accomplishing tasks of dubious importance — in- 
cluding, presumably, the writing of essays? That in an apocalypse the courage 
of historical acts becomes indistinguishable from that of theatrical acts? Is Yeats’s 
title turned into a joke about Didion’s essays making their second appearance? 
Does Didion’s implied audience relish an intellectual tease? Or are they the 
obtuse readers who failed to grasp that in describing life in the Haight-Ashbury 
district of San Francisco (first in “Hippie Generation” in the Saturday Evening 
Post 240 [September 23, 1967]: 25-31, and later as the essay “Slouching To- 
wards Bethlehem”) she was “talking about something more general than a hand- 
ful of children wearing mandalas on their foreheads,” readers whose “feedback” 
was “so universally beside the point” that she became convinced that “nobody 
out there is listening” and that, therefore, “writing is an irrelevant act” (xi-xii). 
These readers, in other words, lacked empathy. What these obtuse readers did 
not grasp was that 1967’s “Haight-Ashbury” is a “region” in Fetterley’s sense, 
quite different from the regions of “On Going Home,” yet all the same a “ritual- 
ized and sacramental life” that Didion wanted readers to see from the inside and 
to understand. 

One way to explore the “ritualized and sacramental life” in “On Going Home” 
is through another “cross-section” in the essay’s reception: Didion’s own 
reception of the 1 967 original as implied by her 1 968 revision. Like other “cross- 
sections,” this one can give only partial information; we cannot see the revi- 
sions she erased. Strikingly, Didion deletes the name “Sacramento” and substi- 
tutes more general phrases (“in the central valley of California,” “their house,” 
and “my father’s house” in the opening paragraph, “home” in the third, and an 




232 



224 



Louise Z. Smith 



exchange of “the indirect Sacramento way” for “the oblique way my family 
talks” in the fourth). Rhetorically, these substitutions shift attention away from 
the literal place and towards relationships (what Fetterley calls regionalism’s 
“model of relationships of ‘persons’ with differing amounts of cultural power” 
[890]). These revisions may be a remedy for readers’ failure to see a region — 
“Sacramento,” “Haight-Ashbury,” or some other “elsewhere” — as “something 
more general” (xii), as a model of relationships for “us” to understand (in 
Gadamer’s sense of reaching out towards “fusion of horizons”) rather than just 
a locally colorful neighborhood of freaks for “us” normal people to point at, 
scorn, or scold as “other.” 

The other revisions are all additions, most intensifying ideas already there. 
Just before the end of the first paragraph, she emphasizes her husband’s exclu- 
sion from conversation. (“My brother refers to my husband in his presence, as 
‘Joan’s husband.’”) In the second paragraph, the added third through sixth sen- 
tences dramatize family tensions (she weeps after phoning home); near the end, 
the added phrase “of ‘dark journey’” intensifies “of ‘romantic degradation.’” In 
the third paragraph, a list of places where the past lurks (“engendered by meet- 
ing the past at every turn, around every comer, inside every cupboard”) and the 
phrase “meet it head-on” augment the tension of confrontation. In the fourth, 
another dramatization (“not only because he is full of news of what by now 
seems to me our remote life in Los Angeles, people he has seen, letters which 
require attention”) forms a transition from “we” identifying her with the Sacra- 
mento family to “we” identifying her with the L.A. family (“we live differently 
now”). In the last paragraph, a phrase (“would like to give her a picnic on a river 
with fried chicken and her hair uncombed”) amplifies the persona’s experience 
of “home,” that which she cannot give to the baby. These amplifications enable 
readers to see more deeply into the “world elsewhere.” 

There is only one explicitly historical revision, and to understand it we need 
to combine the “cross-section” of Didion’s revision with another “cross-sec- 
tion”: “On Going Home” in relation to some of the other essays reprinted in the 
1968 collection. Didion adds this sentence to the third paragraph; 

Nor is there any answer to the snapshots of one’s grandfather as a young 
man on skis, surveying around Donner Pass in the year 1910. 1 smooth out 
the snapshot and look into his face, and do and do not see my own. 

Many readers in 1968 and many more today might overlook this allusion. But 
“we” who read California history or who grew up in old California families like 
Didion’s know that in 1846 members of the Donner-Reed party were caught in 
deep snow, starved, and survived by eating their own dead (Whitman). In “On 
Morality” (1965), Didion describes growing up with “wagon-train morality”: 

my own childhood was illuminated by graphic litanies of the grief await- 
ing those who failed in their loyalties to each other. The Donner-Reed Party, 



233 



Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion ’s Regionalism 



225 



starving in the Sierra snows, all the ephemera of civilization gone save that 
one vestigial taboo, the provision that no one should eat his own blood kin. 

. . . We were taught . . . that they had somewhere abdicated their responsi- 
bilities, somehow breached their primary loyalties, or they would not have 
found themselves helpless in the mountain winter . . . , would not have 
failed. ( Slouching 158-159) 

In other words, “wagon-train morality” belongs to the frame of mind Fetterley 
calls “realism,” one in which “normal” people — who shoulder our “responsi- 
bilities” and sustain our “primary loyalties” and therefore “would not have 
failed” — can safely condemn them: the “abnormal” and “freakish” cannibals, 
the “others.” Yet, gazing into her father’s snapshot, she must confront the possi- 
bility of being a descendent of the survivors, who in extremis did and did not 
see their own faces in those objects of “primary loyalties,” the friends whom 
they consumed. In “Notes from a Native Daughter” (1965), she states this pos- 
sibility explicitly: “Did not the Donner-Reed Party, after all, eat its own dead to 
reach Sacramento?” (i Slouching 176). To see and not see her face in her father’s 
snapshot is simultaneously to acknowledge and to deny this possibility, neither 
only to deplore nor only to defend cannibalism but to empathize with those who 
made agonizing choices. With empathy comes humility (“some hint of the mon- 
strous perversion to which any human idea can come”) but also a paradoxical 
insistence that except for “our loyalties to those we love — what could be more 
arrogant than to claim the primacy of personal conscience?” (161). Today read- 
ers can learn that even these loyalties, enacted in places like Auschwitz as “self- 
ishness extended to the person closest to you . . . appropriately called ‘us-ism’” 
(Levi 80), can also become monstrous. In the “fusion of horizons” I am sketch- 
ing, “worlds elsewhere” — two Sacramentos (the 1910 snapshot, the daughter’s 
view of it), Treblinka, Auschwitz — are joined ethically and hermeneutically 
through empathy. 

Homelessness can be hermeneutically good. If Didion actually could “go 
home again” in solidarity with “wagon-train morality” and with manifest des- 
tiny pointing towards Sacramento, she would be a realist glorifying the “devel- 
opment” of California as novelists have done. If she were completely estranged 
from “home,” she would adopt a naturalist realism like that of Frank Norris 
(Didion “The Golden Land”). As a realist, she would want to see her face in her 
father’s (embodying a heritage of toughness and responsibility); as a naturalist 
she would not (her father’s face would reflect his ancestors’ ruthlessness). Ei- 
ther way, she would understand less because — either in defending or in deplor- 
ing — she would sacrifice understanding that “our town” isn’t always the norm 
and a “world elsewhere” isn’t just locally colorful, quaint and queer. By both 
“seeing and not seeing” her face in the Donner Pass snapshot, by inhabiting and 
not inhabiting Sacramento and Toronto and L. A. and Treblinka and other “worlds 
elsewhere,” Didion becomes a regionalist both ethically and hermeneutically. 
Without setting up hierarchies and declaring norms, she respects differences. 



234 -- 




226 



Louise 2. Smith 



That is what reception theory — with its historically grounded, imaginative “fu- 
sion of horizons” that still preserves the sense of “difference” — fosters. As Yeats 
wrote, “The best lack all conviction, while the worst / Are full of passionate 
intensity” To “lack all conviction” does not lead necessarily to quietism. One 
chooses and acts as best one can with empathy, trying to curb the “passionate 
intensity” of reductive “us-ness .” The best are regionalists. 



Regionalism, the Prose Sketch and the Essay 

There are many other ways to make connections between the revision of “On 
Going Home” and other essays in Slouching Towards Bethlehem , and that kind 
of cross-section, like the one we made between the original essay and the issue 
of the Post in which it appeared, would further define a significant moment in 
the essay’s reception. But instead, I’d like to turn to genre, that is, to reception 
theory’s reconstruction of readers’ “pre-understanding of [a work’s] genre from 
the form and themes of already familiar works” (Jauss 23). From readers in 
“Toronto” and “Sacramento,” we can turn now to those in “New York”: the 
professional reviewers. They reveal a three-stranded “cross-section” of expec- 
tations vis-a-vis journalism, New Journalism, and the essay. 

Journalism shaped some readers’ “pre-understanding of the genre” of Didion’s 
essay: 

Journalism by women is the price the man’s world pays for having disap- 
pointed them. Here at their best are the unforgiving eye, the unforgetting 
ear, the concealed hat-pin style. But behind this poses the Joan Didion we 
might have had if we deserved her: the quiet, round-eyed child . . . [who] 
could still respond — if only she ever ran across it — to old-fashioned wagon- 
train idealism .... Instead, grimacing over old dreams and lost innocence, 
she rummages through her bureau drawers, coming up with the bathing 
suit she wore at 17 and her grandmother’s hand-painted tea cup. The musk 
of lost values and a faint essence of self-pity hover in the air. (Maddocks 

ID 

Realists in the “man’s world” of journalism have no truck with “wagon-train 
idealism” (note the substitution of “idealism” for Didion’s word, “morality”). 
This reviewer expects a more robust sensibility and firmer convictions; he asso- 
ciates Didion’s “faint essence of self-pity” with women’s more general disap- 
pointment in men. If “journalism by women” differs from his “man’s world” 
journalism, his must be the norm: a “concealed hat-pin” (like a “bristling chin”) 
must be quaint, queer, freakish. 

The “man’s world” of New Journalism (a mixture of reportage with personal 
viewpoint) met Didion’s work with mixed “pre-understandings.” In 1965, she 
had written that fiction — by Pynchon, Friedman, Vonnegut, and Heller — lacks 
the “skill at contrivance [which] is the excitement” of both excellent novels and 
excellent films. Their fiction, she says, portrays “this outrageous world we live 




Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion f s Regionalism 



227 



in” by employing a style of “outrageous improvisation.” But to her this style is 
a “stunt,” an “erosion of technique” that does not necessarily produce “authen- 
tic” writing (“Questions”). Now, printed on the very same page with Maddocks’s 
scathing dismissal of “journalism by women,” appeared an opposing view of 
New Journalistic fiction. A reviewer of Norman Mailer’s Armies of the Night 
praises its “pugilistic prose ” its “authenticity” of reconstruction of the march 
on the Pentagon, its “headlong, self-indulgent monologue,” and “the arrogance, 
outrageousness, extravagance, irony, and sometimes underlying likableness of 
the writing”(Nordell). In other words, a personal point of view brought to bear 
on the “eventful” in the “man’s world” of realism is praiseworthily “authentic,” 
but not when brought to bear on worlds with whom Maddocks and Nordell feel 
no empathy. Even though Didion does not want to be a New Journalist, they’re 
not going to let her! Other reviewers, however, saw her as one of the New Jour- 
nalists. One reviewer saw in Slouching Towards Bethlehem's theme of atomiza- 
tion an historical dimension (“The past, for most of us, is a special 
self-deception”) (Simonds). Another praised her sensibility; for him, her “per- 
sonality does not self-indulgently intrude itself on her subjects, [but] it informs 
and illuminates them,” and her style offers “some of the best prose written to- 
day in this country” (Wakefield). Like other New Journalists, Didion is con- 
cerned with the historian’s position both outside and inside the “eventful”; unlike 
them, her prose style is quietly precise. Scholars’ analyses also emphasize these 
two features (Mallon 43; Strandberg; Coale 162; Chabot; Muggli; Anderson 
133-73). 

Still other readers’ “pre-understandings of genre” are shaped by the essay in 
belles lettres. In 1981 Jerzy Kosinski characterized her work in terms distinct 
from those of New Journalism: “She is always at the center, our quintessential 
essayist,” and a later commentator remarks that her “essays are shaped by her 
perception of the fictionality of our governing models of national and personal 
identity and by her inability to abandon or reformulate them” (Carton 35, 50). 
The essay and the prose sketch are similar genres. Recall that Fetterley distin- 
guishes two genres in nineteenth-century American fiction. The major genre is 
the realist novel, wherein the “eventful” for women is marriage, for men the 
triumph (sometimes hollow) over whatever forces “beset” them. The 
marginalized genre is the prose sketch, wherein the conventionally “eventful” 
gives way to other relations and actions (885). A neighboring genre, marginalized 
in scholarship until being recently revived by the daily fare of writing courses 
(Rygiel, McCord, Atkins 3-17), is the essay. Theodor Adorno’s contrast of the 
article and the essay (in “The Essay as Form”) has become well known, and it 
seems to me parallel to Fetterley’s contrasts between realism and regionalism, 
between novel and sketch. In a nutshell, what Adorno says is an article has 
conviction galore, proves its case with passionate intensity disguised as objec- 
tivity, seems “airtight” and complete but actually ignores inconsistencies and 
counter-evidence. But an essay “speculates,” zig-zags along trusting to “luck 




23.8 



228 



Louise Z. Smith 



and play” as it follows first one and then another and another line of thought to 
where each breaks down, “stops when it feels finished rather than when there is 
nothing more to say” (3-4). Like “On Going Home,” an essay and a prose sketch 
“promise” another view, another story: you could see “elderly women with bris- 
tling chins” this way, and these other ways. 

Regionalism and Meaning 

Journalists, old and New, are in business to persuade an audience that, as Walter 
Cronkite always said, “That’s the way it is.” So are realist novelists. But region- 
alists have a different agenda. Didion seems to me to be a “resisting reader” of 
her experience, perhaps less resisting it from the outside in ways Fetterley dem- 
onstrates in The Resisting Reader (1977) than investigating its self-contradic- 
tions (or “self-transgressions”) in ways Shoshana Felman undertakes in What 
Does a Woman Want? (1993). These self-contradictions in experience produce 
homelessness. In Slouching Towards Bethlehem , going home is a dream and 
California is a “golden land . . . because no one remembers the past” (4) be- 
cause “every day the world is born anew” (28), perpetually a “promised land” 
(31). In a John Wayne movie, what seizes her imagination is the “bend in the 
river” where she locates “the shimmering border between the town’s constraints 
and freedom” (3 1 ), between a world “here” and a “world elsewhere.” That “shim- 
mer” and a kind of “white writing” (“Why I Write”) cleansed of asserted mean- 
ings are what her conscience demands (as in Mailer’s novel The Deer Park , 
“ when the world stands clear in the dead white dawn”) because in her world 
meanings jostle and collapse like figures in “a painting by Hieronymous Bosch” 
(161 italics original). Essays collected in The White Album (1979) disclaim 
meaning: “I am telling you only how it was” (207). 

In whiteness and shimmer, the essays resemble Mark Rothko’s paintings. 
From 1940 until his death in 1970, Rothko painted rectangles. As Leo Bersani 
and Ulysse Dutoit describe them, these are universally “rectangles of different 
colors and of roughly similar size, painted over a third color that may have 
originally covered the entire canvas” (98). Paint fills the canvas except for a 
very narrow, shimmering edge, sometimes the white canvas and sometimes the 
background color, as if this edge is “perhaps a way of announcing a belief in the 
possibility of a subject” but the critique of clear boundaries subverts this belief 
(104-105). Rothko’s use of very narrow (“vibratory”) chromatic intervals fo- 
cuses perception on nonnarrative elements: 

There is a relation here, but because its terms are almost identical it would 
be difficult to give a narrative account of that relation. The lighter and the 
darker yellows relate by nearly reflecting each other, they have no story to 
tell other than that of an inaccurate replication. (118 italics original) 



ERIC 



23 ? 



Homeless in the Golden Land: Joan Didion’s Regionalism 



229 



No writer can be as laconic as a painter, but Rothko’s work seems to me virtu- 
ally an illustration of Didion’s regionalism of homelessness. She sees and does 
not see her father’s face; Rothko sees and does not see rectangles. If Rockwell 
painted an identifiable region, Rothko paints the idea of “regions”; he seems 
uncertain about their borders while nevertheless believing in their existence. 
Local color realism, as Fetterley explains it, clearly defines borders between 
nation and “other,” normal and quaint; regionalism sees the nuances of color, 
the shimmer of boundaries. In lacking “all conviction,” it reaches out herme- 
neutically towards others seeking a “fusion of horizons.” 



Works Cited 



Adorno, Theodor W. “The Essay as Form” Notes to Literature I. Trans. Sherry Weber 
Nicholsen. (New York: Columbia, 1991): 3-23. Trans, of “Der Essay Als Form.” 
Noten zur Literatur I. (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1958): 5-49. 

Alsop, Stewart. “Can Anyone Beat LBJ?” Saturday Evening Post 3 June 1967: 20. 

Anderson, Chris. Style as Argument: Contemporary American Nonfiction. Carbondale: 
Southern Illinois UP, 1988. 

Atkins, G. Douglas. Estranging the Familiar: Toward a Revitalized Critical Writing. 
Athens: U Georgia P, 1992. 

Bersani, Leo, and Ulysse Dutoit. Arts of Impoverishment: Beckett , Rothko, Resnais. 
Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1993. 

Carton, Evan. “Joan Didion’s Dreampolitics of the Self.” Western Humanities Review 
40.4 (1986): 307-328. In The Critical Response to Joan Didion. Ed. Sharon Felton. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1994. 35—5 1 . 

Chabot, C. Barry. “Understanding Interpretive Situations.” Researching Response to 
Literature and the Teaching of Literature: Points of Departure. Ed. Charles R. Coo- 
per. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1985. 22-32. 

Coale, Samuel. “Didion’s Disorder: An American Romancer’s Art.” Critique : Studies in 
Modern Fiction 25 (1983-84): 160-70. 

Didion, Joan. “Coming Home.” Saturday Evening Post. 1 1 July 1964: 50-55. 

. “The Golden Land.” New York Review of Books. 21 October 1 993: 85-94. 

. “On Going Home” Saturday Evening Post. 3 June 1967: 8-9. 

. “Questions About the New Fiction.” National Review 30 November 1965: 1 1 00- 

1102 . 

. Slouching Towards Bethlehem. New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux, 1968. 

. The White Album. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979. 

Felman, Shoshana. What Does a Woman Want? Reading and Sexual Difference. Balti- 
more: Johns Hopkins UP, 1993. 

Fetterley, Judith. “Not in the Least American: Nineteenth-Century American Regional- 
ism.” College English 56 (1994): 877-95. 

. The Resisting Reader: A Feminist Approach to American Fiction. Bloomington: 

Indiana UP, 1977. 




230 



Louise Z. Smith 



Gadamer, Hans Georg. Truth and Method. Garret Barden and John Cumming, eds. New 
York: Crossroad, 1986. 

Henderson, Katherine Usher. Joan Didion. New York: Ungar, 1981 . 

Jauss, Hans Robert. Towards an Aesthetic of Reception. Ed. Robert Holub. Minneapolis: 
U of Minnesota P, 1982. 

Levi, Primo. The Drowned and the Saved. Trans. Raymond Rosenthal. New York: Vin- 
tage, 1988. 

Maasik, Sonia and Jack Solomon, eds. California Dreams and Realities: Readings for 
Critical Thinkers and Writers. Boston: Bedford, 1995. 

McCord, Phyllis Frus. “Reading Nonfiction in Composition Courses: From Theory to 
Practice.” College English 47.7 (1985): 747-62. 

McGillivray, Murray. “Creative Anachronism: Marx’s Problem with Homer, Gadamer’s 
Discussion of ‘The Classical,’ and Our Understanding of Older Literatures,” New 
Literary History 25 (1994): 399-413. 

Maddocks, Melvin. Rev. of Slouching Towards Bethlehem by Joan Didion. Christian 
Science Monitor 16 May 1968: 1 1. 

Mailloux, Steven. Interpretive Conventions: The Reader in the Study of American Fic- 
tion. Ithaca and London: Cornell UP, 1982. 

Mallon, Thomas. “The Limits of History in the Novels of Joan Didion.” Critique: Stud- 
ies in Modern Fiction 21 (1979-80): 43-52. 

Marting, Janet, ed. The Voice of Reflection: A Writer's Reader. New York: HarperCollins, 



Muggli, Mark Z. “The Poetics of Joan Didion’s Journalism.” American Literature 59 
(1987): 402-21. 

Naipaul, V. S. “What’s wrong with being a snob?” Saturday Evening Post 3 June 1967: 
12, 18. 

Nordell, Robert. Rev. of Annies of the Night by Norman Mailer. Christian Science Monitor. 
16 May 1968: 11. 

Rorty, Richard. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1979. 

Rygiel, Dennis. “On the Neglect of Twentieth-Century Nonfiction: A Writing Teacher’s 
View.” College English 46 (1984): 392-400. 

Simon, Paul, and Art Garfunkel. “America.” Bookends. Columbia, KCS 9529, 1968. 

Simonds, C. H. “Picking Up the Pieces.” National Review 4 June 1968: 558-59. 

Smart, William, ed. Eight Modern Essayists. 5th ed. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990. 

Smith, Louise Z. “Beyond the ‘Imaginary Museum’: Interested Readings, Interesting 
Tropes.” Rhetoric, Critical Theory, Cultural Studies. Ed. William E. Cain. New York: 
Garland, 1996. 83-98. 

. “In Search of Our Sisters’ Rhetoric: Teaching Through Reception Theory.” Prac- 
ticing Theory in Introductory College Literature Courses. Eds. James M. Cahalan 
and David B. Downing. Urbana: NCTE, 1991. 72-84. 

Strandberg, Victor. “Passion and Delusion in A Book of Common Prayer . ” Modern Fic- 
tion Studies 27 (1981): 225-42. 

Wakefield, Dan. Review: Slouching Towards Bethlehem by Joan Didion. New York Times 
Book Review2\ July 1968: 8. 

Whitman, Ruth. Tamsen Donner: A Woman's Journal Cambridge: Alice James Books, 
1977. 

Winchell, Mark Royden. Joan Didion. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1980. 



1995. 





15 Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars: 
Students Teaching Themselves the 
Conflicts 



James S. Laughlin 

Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 



While debates over the literary canon may seem like old news to academics, the 
culture wars seem to flare anew with each fresh round of funding in Washing- 
ton and with each new publication by controversial spokespersons like William 
Bennett and Harold Bloom. Nor is it old news to our literature students, who, 
encountering the word “canon,” wonder how it slipped by the writer’s spell 
check. It may be “critical commonplace,” as Charles Bazerman claims, “that 
disciplines are socially and rhetorically constructed and that academic knowl- 
edge is the product of sociolinguistic activities advancing individual and group 
interests” (61), but it’s far from commonplace among my students. Informed of 
the meaning of canon and of the controversy which surrounds it, students’ reac- 
tions are often of the “what’s the big deal?” variety. After all, most can count on 
one hand the number of non-white or non-male writers they know, let alone 
have read in school. Their experience leaves them incapable of imagining what’s 
at stake. 

An Absence of Practical Applications 

“A really clear vision,” says Gerald Graff, “would see that when what educated 
persons should know is deeply disputed, the dispute itself becomes part of what 
educated persons should know” (44). Graff’s solution to this difficulty in Be- 
yond the Culture Wars has had a considerable influence in our profession over 
the last few years. Many have done their best to revise their syllabi and to 
reenvision the literature course as a place where they can “teach the conflicts” 
to their students. And many departments have tried to reconceive their enter- 
prise, as my own department at Virginia Tech did in 1 993 when, led by a teacher/ 
administrator who was influenced by Graff’s book, it revised “coverage” courses, 
such as its heavily enrolled American Literature sequence. Here’s the strategy 
recommended for these new courses, taken from the department’s revised Fac- 
ulty Handbook: 



0 



240 



231 



232 



James S. Laughlin 



In suggesting that we organize our sophomore-level core courses as con- 
versations, then, we are attempting to hold before our students one aspect 
of the larger culture in which we find ourselves — setting it before them, 
letting them listen to voices quarrel and respond and backtrack, encourag- 
ing them to learn what’s at stake and to have their own say. (33) 

However, despite my department’s week-long faculty development work- 
shop designed to assist teachers in making these changes, I continue to see 
colleagues struggling to imagine just how to flesh out this new model. The 
courses many have created more closely resemble polite parlor conversations 
than they do the heated and spirited debates Graff advocates as a way to engage 
apathetic students. Nor do I believe my colleagues are alone. While many still 
find in Graff’s model a powerful impetus for reimagining literary education, its 
translation into actual practice has stumped most teachers. Even Graff himself 
has recently noted that “the question of practical application has persisted” among 
teachers trying to imagine just how they might begin teaching the conflicts “on 
an actual Monday morning in a roomful of actual undergraduates” (Foreword 
v). 

Rereading Beyond the Culture Wars , I find it no wonder that the question has 
persisted, for in it Graff includes very little actual discussion of classroom prac- 
tice or of the kind of writing that might help develop students’ critical capaci- 
ties. I see only two moments where he lets us inside his class. In the first, he 
relates his revised approach to teaching Heart of Darkness . After a page of 
explanation listing all of the essays and articles students read to familiarize 
themselves with conflicting appraisals of the novella (critical articles about 
Conrad, racism, colonialism, and the place of politics in the arts), and after 
noting the debates he stages between himself and invited colleagues, Graff ends 
with this statement: “To make sure my students enter the debate rather than 
watch passively from the sidelines, I assign a paper on it or ask them to prepare 
class presentations in which they give their views” (30). 

Thus in one sentence, written almost as an afterthought it seems to me, we 
get the only real mention of what students actually do in the classroom. The 
model we have here seems like a pluralized version of the “standard story” that 
Graff rejects later in the book, a story that “implies that the business of teaching 
literature is basically simple: Just put the student in front of a good book, pro- 
vide teachers who are encouraging and helpful, and the rest presumably will 
take care of itself’ (72). In the pluralized version, Graff’s students are put in 
front of many books. They get a wealth of conflicting interpretive essays and 
other reading material thrown their way, with the result that they’re somehow 
educated on the conflict. 

In the one other description of his students’ work, Graff mentions distribut- 
ing a Harper's article on opposing readings of “Dover Beach” and listening to 
students take sides. Some of his students voluntarily followed up this exercise 



Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



233 



by bringing in editorials on the culture wars, proof to Graff that “students’ inter- 
est in the discussion was greatly heightened” (59). However, the fact that the 
editorial writers were attacking Graff, their teacher, goes a long way toward 
explaining their enthusiasm. He quips, “There is nothing like being bashed in 
the morning paper for your kind’s crimes against the humanities for stimulating 
a provocative discussion in your afternoon class.” (59). 

For those of us not blessed with such fame (or infamy), the practical ques- 
tion of how to help our students actively enter into this debate goes unanswered. 
Certainly, bringing in for discussion hotly debated public issues related to the 
work of the class makes sense. No doubt all of us do this at times. Over the 
years my students have examined the controversy over the Mapplethorpe ex- 
hibit while wrestling with the related question of “what is literature ” have seen 
the Senate debate over the Gulf War placed alongside Thoreau’s “Civil Disobe- 
dience,” and have read conflicting arguments about bilingual education to supple- 
ment their reading of Richard Rodriguez’s Hunger of Memory, to name just a 
few examples. Sometimes students respond enthusiastically. But sometimes, as 
with the Mapplethorpe example, they are largely silent, uninterested — despite 
the loudness of the confrontational voices they are overhearing. My best stu- 
dents, and certainly upper-level English majors, can be motivated through my 
choice of intriguing supplementary material. But many of us are teaching lower- 
level non-majors in universities and community colleges who honestly don’t 
see the point of listening to these intellectuals drone on about literary matters. 



The Conditions of Engagement 

If we analyze Graff’s own epiphany with Heart of Darkness we can see what 
the problem is with a method that has the teacher bringing the conflict to the 
students. In Beyond the Culture Wars , the central moment Graff relates in his 
development from a traditional teacher of literature to a teacher of literary con- 
flicts involves his radical reconsideration of Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Dark- 
ness. Graff tells us that he has frequently assigned this novella since he began 
teaching in the mid-1960s and that he had always presented it “as a universal 
parable of the precarious status of civilized reason in a world overly confident 
of its having outgrown the primitive and the irrational” (25). But his reading of 
Chinua Achebe’s essay on Conrad, “An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad’s 
Heart of Darkness,” changed all that. The evidence Achebe was able to amass 
and the logic of his argument charging Conrad with a deeply offensive “dehu- 
manization of Africa and Africans,” challenged Graff’s conception of the work: 

In short, I was forced to rethink not just my interpretation of Heart of 

Darkness but my theoretical assumptions about literature. First, I was forced 

to recognize that I had theoretical assumptions. 1 had previously thought I 



o 



242 



234 



James S. Laugh l in 



was simply teaching the truth about Heart of Darkness, “the text itself.” I 
now had to recognize that I had been teaching an interpretation of the text, 
one that was shaped by a certain theory that told me what was and was not 
worth noticing and emphasizing in my classroom. I had been unable to see 
my theory as a theory because I was living so comfortably inside it. (29- 
30) 

Graff’s experience with Heart of Darkness is instructive in helping us an- 
swer the key question “How does one become engaged?” or put another way, 
“What conditions lead one to be receptive of new ideas and new ways of think- 
ing?” In Graff’s case, we can see that he was predisposed to care about what 
Achebe had to say regarding Heart of Darkness because he cared about the 
book. He’d read it and chosen it for his students for years, returning to it as a 
familiar favorite, as one sits down to view a favorite old film with a companion 
who has never seen it or directs a friend to listen with pleasure to a classic love 
song on the radio. Because he cared, he found that he had to respond to the 
challenge of Achebe’s interpretation, just as we’d respond if our movie com- 
panion hated our favorite film or our friend found our chosen song demeaning 
toward the opposite sex. Note, for example, how twice in the passage quoted 
above Graff uses the verb “forced,” emphasizing that he felt he had no choice 
but to respond. 

These crucial conditions — of caring about something over time, of living 
comfortably with it, of experiencing a discomforting challenge that forces re- 
consideration, and of formulating a response to that challenge — are far from 
replicated when we bring the conflicts to our students in the form of literary 
disputes very few of them care about. Overhearing virtually any argument or 
heated exchange can perk up an audience a bit; no doubt we should expect more 
energy in a class where conflicts are aired versus a class where received wis- 
dom is placidly transferred from teacher to students. But real change, real intel- 
lectual challenge that forces a reconsideration of assumptions and provides the 
opportunity to reconceive them along the lines of Graff’s experience with Heart 
of Darkness, is unlikely to occur for most students in a classroom in which we 
teach them the conflicts. 

Teaching the conflicts, then, while seeming to be an empowering pedagogy 
that involves students in their learning, can too easily be fitted into a traditional 
model of dissemination, of one-way knowledge-passing from the teacher to the 
learner. What we need to design instead is a way for students to experience a 
challenge in an area of interest and comfort for them, to come upon complexity 
and controversy themselves, and to work their way through the implications of 
the new knowledge they gain — in writing and in discussion — toward a revised 
relationship with their subject. 

A tall order? Yes. But one approach suggests itself: reversing the agents of 
communication so that instead of teachers bringing their disciplinary conflicts 
to students, it is the students who bring their conflicts to the teachers. In other 





Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



235 



words, we can more fully activate our students by directing them to areas of 
disagreement in their own non-academic world that have parallels to the dis- 
putes in the academic world we would ultimately have them examine. 

But where can we locate fields of interest for students which at the same 
time allow us to make complex connections to our discipline’s culture battles? 
One answer is to turn to popular culture. Graff himself mounts a spirited and 
intelligent defense of the study of popular culture in English studies in Beyond 
the Culture Wars. (His discussion joins such a lengthy list of equally persuasive 
cases for the value of cultural studies that I believe it unnecessary to add my 
own here.) But he appears to have in mind solely the inclusion of popular works 
of literature alongside the more traditional works taught in the discipline. I be- 
lieve there are other forms of popular culture that can work extremely well to 
engage students and raise issues that speak productively to conflicts in the hu- 
manities. 

An Intelligent Investment 

In my most recent literature class, it was a collaborative writing assignment on 
popular culture that provided my students the opportunity to teach themselves 
the conflicts firsthand in an area of personal significance and then apply their 
learning to a semester’s worth of reading and writing in an Introduction to Ameri- 
can Literature course. The assignment, completed largely out of class over the 
first three weeks of the course, required students to select up to 1 25 songs which 
would form the table of contents of an imaginary music anthology representing 
the best of rock and roll. In addition, each collaborative group had to explain 
and defend these choices, as most any anthology does, in a carefully crafted 
preface. 

Many, I’m sure, would register objections to assigning such an unusual project. 
Let me respond to three familiar objections before turning to a full discussion 
of the assignment. 

Why sacrifice valuable time in an already crowded course for this kind of a 
diversion? In fact, the kind of project I advocate here demands a relatively 
small investment when we consider the potentially large dividends. Completed 
within the first few weeks of the course, a time when many classes are still 
revving their engines, the project required that only two and a half classes be 
devoted to it (with one and a half classes given to the valuable discussion of the 
project’s results described later in this article). During these weeks, class pro- 
ceeded normally. Students read, completed journals, and discussed American 
literature. Or perhaps it did not proceed normally; I perceived an ease of com- 
munication and frequency of participation early on, attributing it to the fact that 
students had been formed into project teams immediately and then required to 
sit in these teams in class. 




244 ' 



236 



James S. Laughlin 



How much relevance does such an odd critical exercise really have to the 
multicultural debate? Quite a bit, actually. The resistance and opposition which 
have greeted various forms of popular culture over the years bear much resem- 
blance to the outcry against the inclusion of new voices in the chorus of the 
Great Tradition. The rise of movies, television, and Pop Art, changes in fashion, 
the development of new popular musical forms like jazz, rock, and rap — all 
have in their turn reawakened the cultural debate that seems ever ready to stir in 
America, a debate aimed at defining and redefining the nation’s collective past, 
present, and future. A look at the history of popular music reveals much that 
sounds familiar to veterans of academia’s culture war, as the following two 
passages make clear: 

The history of popular music is littered with examples of opposition to and 
condemnation of new forms (new to the Anglo-American mainstream, that 
is) of Afro-American and Afro-American influenced music and culture — 
from ragtime in the 1 890’s to rap in the 1990’s. In every case the dynamics 
of this opposition and condemnation have been similar. The music is ‘infe- 
rior’ (if it can be graced with the term music at all) and perceived as endan- 
gering preferred moral standards. (Bennett 1) 

The attitudes underlying such [gender] distinctions provide a partial expla- 
nation as to why women’s roles in the music industry have frequently been 
overlooked and downplayed in many rock histories. If women performers 
(or songwriters, DJ’s, managers, etc.) are only seen as exceptional because 
they are women, this justifies the relegation of women-in-rock to an obliga- 
tory chapter, where their contributions are acknowledged but are also por- 
trayed as being a step removed from the history as a whole. (Gaar xii) 

Interesting parallels also exist between debates over the canon in English 
departments and debates over the canon in music departments. Glenn Gass, 
composer and Assistant Professor of Music at Indiana University, notes that 
courses in rock are increasing and refueling the debate over what music is wor- 
thy of study: 

Seeing Rock and Roll next to Symphonic Literature and Music Apprecia- 
tion in course listings must seem like a nightmare come true for more tra- 
ditionally minded faculty members whose view of culture involves a refined 
sensibility that must be learned and earned. Rock courses are still waging 
the same struggle for acceptance that jazz studies faced on their way to 
becoming standard offerings, and facing the same prejudices that view 
“popular” as synonymous with cheap, crude, and unrefined. . . . Rock’s 
assault on academia mirrors a heightened interest in world music and 
ethnomusicology and a general acknowledgment of the need to move be- 
yond the near religious canonization of Western (white male) art music 
that has been the entire focus of musical higher education. (94) 

The relevance, then, is clear and instructive, helping students to recognize cross- 
disciplinary developments in the advancement and contestation of knowledge. 





Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



237 



But isn't this a rather roundabout way of engaging students with the litera- 
ture? Perhaps so, but then the roundabout way may be necessary. Returning to 
Graff, we can see that he believes it is, for the story of his own breakthrough as 
a reader is a roundabout experience. In Culture Wars he writes at length of his 
encounter with Huckleberry Finn , of how time spent researching the book paid 
off when he returned to reread it. “Getting into immediate contact with the 
text,” he writes, “was for me a curiously triangular business; I could not do it 
directly but needed a conversation of other readers to give me the issues and 
terms that made it possible to respond” (70). As knowledge-making creatures, 
we proceed by making sense of the unknown in terms of the known. Thus the 
richer our base of comparable experience, the greater our success in critically 
examining a new encounter. 



An Unusual Assignment 

I wish I were able to say I knew all of the above about greater student involve- 
ment, about rock’s history, and about the internal debates of music departments 
when I devised this project for my students. I didn’t. (My students would help 
me to see these things, and one group’s written preface supplied me with the 
Gaar passage quoted above.) What I did recognize was that I might be able to 
get at the canon controversy by giving them hands-on practice in canon-build- 
ing. Such a simulation would allow students to get behind the finished product 
of an anthology and experience a bit of the sticky process of selecting works 
and justifying their artistic merit. Why rock music? Most students, I guessed, 
would have a measure of expertise in the field of popular music of the past 
decade, an expertise that they were unlikely to have in any other artistic field. 
(“Expertise” seems the right word here, given my relative ignorance of the con- 
temporary music scene. Such a project guaranteed that they would be teaching 
me about present conflicts in this field.) And, at a time when “classic rock” and 
other “oldies” stations fill the airwaves, I assumed a number of students would 
even have a fair knowledge of music prior to the past decade (“Classic rock,” 
notes Glenn Gass, “is history to [my students], their Great Tradition” [99]). 
Further, the pleasure of selecting and advocating for one’s favorite bands and 
artists would, I hoped, energize the students beyond the traditional academic 
assignment (such as researching and reporting on the culture wars, or writing 
an agree/disagree response to the canon controversy). Finally, I had been seek- 
ing a collaborative project for the class, and this seemed an ideal situation, a 
clear instance of a group’s work being able to go beyond the work of any indi- 
vidual, since inevitably different musical tastes and knowledges would be join- 
ing forces. 

Worried as I get over the potential value and success of any new assign- 
ments, I make it a practice to attempt my own (at the least sketching an outlined 



0 




238 



James S. Laughlin 



approach, writing an introductory paragraph, or producing a very rough draft) 
before distributing them to students. In the case of this assignment, attempting 
a rough table of contents for such an anthology was a true enlightenment, mak- 
ing quickly apparent just how many and complex were the concerns that the 
editors of such a work would need to address. Among those concerns: 

• How does one define rock and roll? Does rap fall under that term? Soul? 
Pop? 

• At what historical point does one begin such an anthology? 

• How does one group or order such a collection? Alphabetically? Chrono- 
logically? By sub-genre? 

• What criteria ought to guide selection? Artistic merit? Record sales? Mu- 
sical influence? Cultural impact? 

These kinds of questions found their way into the final draft of the assign- 
ment (see Appendix). Students were requested to discuss them in a four- to six- 
page introduction addressed to a hypothetical editor at a major publishing 
company. Additionally, I was soon convinced that I’d need to confine students 
to American rock music — a daunting task in itself — rather than burden them 
with sifting through the history of British rock as well. What seemed like a high 
number of songs (I decided groups could include up to 125) quickly filled up. 

It takes only a small leap for a teacher to recognize how the above questions 
might be translated and applied to an analysis of the canon controversy or to a 
critique of literary anthologies. It would take a larger leap for most students. In 
order to ensure that leap, I included a third requirement to follow the compila- 
tion of a table of contents and the drafting of an introduction or preface. In a 
final two- or three-page reflection, each group would link the work they did to 
issues of canon formation, discussing how their specific experiences in con- 
structing a rock canon might enable them to comment on the formation of, and 
controversy over, the literary canon. All of these concerns were to find their 
way into the collaborative project I assigned. But, as always, I could not foresee 
all of the intriguing possibilities the assignment raised. Students’ final projects 
and whole class discussions would go beyond what I could imagine. 



From “It’s So Easy” to “AH Shook Up” 

“It was a fun first session,” one student reflected in her journal on her group’s 
brief first meeting. Her group of four noted how the assignment went beyond 
the “normal boring type we usually get,” then proceeded to quickly brainstorm 
a lengthy list of individual artists and bands. She records that they soon recog- 
nized their list was thin on 1950s artists and bands from the “psychedelic six- 



id 

ERLC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



247 



\ 



Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



239 



ties.” The group decided to assign two members the task of library research on 
1950s rock and roll, while two others would try to fill in the gap on psychedelic 
music. Further, they decided to work independently for now, reconvening in 
five days’ time to share research and their individual compilations of the top 
one hundred songs of American rock. 

In that follow-up meeting, the group learned not only the range of their mu- 
sical tastes (something they no doubt got an inkling of in their first session 
brainstorm), but how different were their organizational schemes and their ra- 
tionales for inclusion. One member, for instance, grouped songs by theme, an- 
other by decade. A third member relied heavily on a book listing the Billboard 
charts’ top hits. The fourth argued for the influence of a group’s sound on future 
music or the number of times a song had been remade as a measure of its impor- 
tance. A blues enthusiast, this fourth member also argued for the inclusion of 
blues songs as a crucial influence in the development of rock. Writing after this 
second meeting, the same student lamented “basically, we know we’ve got a lot 
of work left to do.” 

From the record of journals, final projects, and class discussions, it appears 
each group experienced the increasing complexities of the task. Significant dif- 
ferences in song selection and organization mark the final group projects I re- 
ceived. In comparing tables of contents, for instance, a reader first notices their 
differing starting points. While three groups begin with the expected icons of 
1950s rock (Elvis, Chuck Berry, Bill Haley), another group starts earlier with 
Nat King Cole, and one group, claiming blues, white folk music, and jazz as the 
three sources of rock music, reaches all the way back to 1 927 for two influential 
songs: Jimmie Rodgers’s “Blue Yodel No. 1,” and Blind Lemon Jefferson’s 
“Matchbox Blues.” Organizational schemes run from simple chronological 
grouping (“Rock: 1975-1979”), to musical category (“Bubble Gum,” Classic 
Rock, Heavy Metal), to thematic clustering (“Party Hop Songs,” “She’s the 
Most,” “Cool, Daddy, Cool”). Most groups included rap, but one group found it 
necessary to “tighten our definition of rock music and eliminate certain styles 
such as rap music and faddish or Top 40 music.” One group found it essential to 
include a section called “British & Foreign Rock in American Culture: 60s/ 
70s;” another included the song “Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds,” arguing that 
“the history of Rock and Roll, American or otherwise, would be drastically 
different without the Beatles.” 

Criteria for selection also varied widely, prompting discussion and debate in 
the groups. One group used a book of Billboard's top hits to help them decide 
which songs to put in the collection, but went further by including the music of 
such artists as The Grateful Dead and Jimmy Buffet who they felt, despite not 
making the charts, had a significant “cult” following that justified inclusion. 
Another group decided against including record sales in their decisions “be- 
cause often times they can be misleading. Trends and teen fads can often throw 



o 



240 



James S. Laughlin 



off record sales” and lead to the kind of overnight hits the group felt offered no 
lasting contribution to rock’s history. One group avoided “the biggest songs of 
a decade,” focusing upon “influential and radical music that continued to ex- 
pand and revolutionize American rock-n-roll.” Cultural and historical illumina- 
tion was the objective of at least two groups. “Our goal in making this anthology 
was to achieve the diversity upon which America has made its name,” wrote 
one group. Another group stressed that their aim was “not only to give the lis- 
tener an appreciation of the music, but also to give him or her an understanding 
of society at the time each work was made,” a textual orientation akin to Jane 
Tompkins’ suggestion that we replace an “is it any good?” judgment with “the 
notion of literary texts as doing work, expressing and shaping the social context 
that produced them” (200). 

As if the assignment were not difficult enough, one group created their own 
challenges. A group of five young women decided to compile a history of women 
in rock and roll. It was a challenge that demanded considerable research to 
move beyond such figures as Diana Ross, Janis Joplin, Tina Turner, and Ma- 
donna and to uncover lesser-known women like Big Mama Thornton, LaVem 
Baker, Ruth Brown, and Joan Armatrading. Their work would lead to signifi- 
cant insights into the gendered nature of rock and roll and the male-dominated 
view of rock’s history. 

Making the Text Visible 

Intending to explore the canon wars during the semester, I had deliberately 
chosen an anthology as our primary text. It is our anthologists and their pub- 
lishers, after all, who are in the business of what John Rodden has called “selec- 
tive enshrinement” (504) — selecting and promoting particular versions of the 
“best and most representative work” of certain literary periods. And it is largely 
through anthologies that our students become familiar with (at least excerpts 
of) canonical works. The course, then, would not only be about interpreting 
individual works, but about interpreting the text itself and the version of Ameri- 
can literature it transmitted to this generation of readers. I chose the second 
volume of The Heath Anthology of American Literature (1990) because, like 
many recent collections, it promoted itself as a “‘reconstructed’ American lit- 
erature text” (Lauter xxxiv), announcing its desire to include a mix of canonical 
and non-canonical writings and to “represent as fully as possible the varied 
cultures of the United States” (xxxii-xxxiv). My hunch was that its inclusions 
and distinct organizational units might appear sufficiently strange to students to 
prompt questions about the apparatus itself as well as its individual works. 

Thus, when we were able to discuss the submitted rock anthologies as a 
whole group (I cut-and-pasted, distributing provocative and representative 
passages along with several quite different tables of contents), much of our 



ERIC 



249 



Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



241 



discussion aimed at crossing the bridge between the work they’d done and the 
work the editors of our literary anthology appeared to have done. Their com- 
mon experience led to surprising agreement on a number of important points. 
Among the most salient insights we arrived at after one and a half periods of 
discussion, written reflection, and argument (heated at times, as when two stu- 
dents accused me of “worshipping” 1 950s rock and of insisting that they do the 
same): 

• Categorization is necessary but limiting. As one group phrased it in the 
reflective third section of their project, “In anthologies of music and lit- 
erature, the only way to take an enormous field and put it into a coherent 
form is to break it down into smaller pieces. The problem is that some 
excellent works are so unique that they do not really fit into any category.” 
The placement of a song would likely affect how one listened to that song, 
the class concluded. 

• The point marking the beginning or ending of any period of study is con- 
troversial, even arbitrary. Some would choose 1927 as the entry point to 
rock and roll, others, 1956. Similarly, our second semester of American 
Literature commenced in the year 1865, the Civil War conveniently divid- 
ing the two-semester sequence. Did the war in fact radically change the 
direction of American literature, one student asked? 

• Several students noted the presence of more minority artists in rock’s more 
recent years. And the inclusion of more women, my experts on women 
rockers noted, pointing out the great difficulty early seventies hard rock 
performers like Fanny (the first-ever all-female rock band to sign with a 
major label), Deadly Nightshade, and Suzie Quatro had in achieving suc- 
cess in what was still considered a “male arena.” We pointed to parallels in 
recent multicultural textbooks and discussed cultural assumptions about 
which gender would be most likely to produce rebellious rock anthems in 
the field of music, or works of “serious intellectual merit” and “universal 
appeal” in the field of literature. 

• The “best” or most representative works in any field are not self-evident, 
but are produced through a complex, highly subjective process of selec- 
tion involving such factors as individual tastes and preferences as they 
have been molded by a compiler’s membership in a particular race, class, 
age, gender, nation, and field of study, among other affiliations. “Different 
tastes were rampant throughout our project,” one group stated. They found 
it necessary to assign each member a piece of the puzzle. “One imagines 
that [an editorial board] is run the same way,” they concluded. 

• The absence of British rock falsifies the story of American rock, said a 
member of the group that included British rockers in its anthology. The 



ERIC 




242 



James S. Laughlin 



class came to recognize that crucial developments, styles, and influences 
crossed the ocean and redefined rock’s possibilities for many American 
artists. 

• Access to resources is a factor affecting which voices are heard and pro- 
moted to prominence in the industry. To be heard a song must be recorded, 
promoted, and played (on both the radio and television, these days); to be 
read, a book must be published, promoted, and reviewed. One group re- 
flected that while “rock music did spread over a wide array of cultural and 
ethnic backgrounds ... we found that it paralleled the typical literary 
canon in that there are small bands and hidden talents that do not have the 
means, power, or money to make it into mainstream rock-n-roll.” The group 
noted that they’d need greater access to lesser-known labels to truly define 
American rock. 

The above insights informed much of our work throughout the semester as 
we read, discussed, and wrote about a mix of traditionally anthologized and 
non-traditional works, ranging from Stephen Crane, William Faulkner, T.S. Eliot, 
and Marianne Moore, to Abraham Cahan, Sterling Brown, Meridel LeSueur, 
and Tom Whitecloud. What our rock project had helped us gain was a shared 
vocabulary and experience through which to consider the cultural, historical, 
political, economic, and aesthetic dimensions of canon formation. Such a basis 
was especially important, I would argue, for a critical analysis of a revisionist 
text like The Heath Anthology of American Literature , since the tendency in an 
age of political correctness is for most college students to uncritically applaud a 
text that so clearly announces its inclusive nature. (One student I had, a senior, 
told me that this was the third English course she’d taken which included a 
variety of traditionally marginalized voices, but the first where she was not 
expected to cheer those voices.) Like James C. Raymond, I want students to 
question the notion that the selections of these latest anthologies “are less rep- 
rehensible than those in earlier anthologies because they, the new ones, result 
from a catholic and inclusive motive rather than an ideology of exclusion” (83). 
“There is always and necessarily,” Raymond reminds us, “an element of cul- 
tural and political aggression in every anthology” (83). 

Since students had grappled with complex matters and had completed this 
critical work early in the semester, I was able to engage them in a range of 
significant questions which may have led nowhere prior to the project. Why, for 
example, did the editors of our anthology begin this second volume with a group- 
ing of eight women writers under a section entitled “The Development of 
Women’s Narratives”? Is their inclusion justified by the fact that women wrote 
most of the popular best-sellers in the middle of the nineteenth century? How is 
this different from choosing songs based on Billboard's charts? We also consid- 
ered how the long relegation of these eight women, along with most minority 



0 

ERLC 



O 
& 



-3 



Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



243 



authors, to marginal or “regional writer” status in the study of literature might 
have parallels in the music business, where women rockers and minority artists 
were for a time excluded from what was understood to be a white male enter- 
prise. Even inclusion, as Annette Kolodny argues, may still lead to 
marginalization, if writers are treated as “anomalous” cases for editors to “bracket 
off’ in new categories (297). Similarly Michael Omi argues that in the field of 
popular music, “race and race consciousness has defined, and continues to de- 
fine, formats, musical communities, and tastes” (458). Omi notes that popular 
music genres act as “thinly veiled racial categories” and that “black performers 
who want to break out of this artistic ghettoization must “cross over ” a contem- 
porary form of “passing” in which their music is seen as acceptable to white 
audiences (459). Access to resources and promotional power are at stake, Omi 
stresses, since categorization and segregated airwaves affect play lists, listening 
market shares, and advertising contracts. A similar ghettoization may be dis- 
cerned in the field of literature. Pound and Eliot speak for “modern man”; 
Langston Hughes and Gwendolyn Bennett speak for Harlem. 

A host of fresh questions — some teacher-posed, some student-generated — 
continued to surface as we proceeded through our course text, each of them 
now visible as a direct result of our music project. Why choose Twain’s “The 
War Prayer” and bypass his more famous humor pieces? How do we hear 
Gilman’s “The Yellow Wallpaper” differently when grouped with W. E. B. 
Du Bois, Standing Bear, and Upton Sinclair in a section entitled “Issues and 
Visions in Post-Civil War America”? What arguments might be advanced for 
and against the inclusion of Native American ghost dance songs and Chinese 
immigrants’ graffiti? What would those who argued for the inclusion of British 
rock in their anthology have to say about studying T.S. Eliot solely alongside 
American poets when he himself noted (in The Criterion of January, 1930) that 
no poet in America or England could serve as a model for him, and that happen- 
ing upon the work of the French symbolist poets “affected the course of my 
life” (Ellmann 448)? Why was Meridel LeSueur’s 1939 novel The Girl , which 
chronicles the lives of working-class women during the Depression, not pub- 
lished until 1978? How might students’ difficulties in categorizing the explo- 
sion of musical styles in the 1990s illuminate the choice of the Heath editors to 
revert to a simple organization by genre of those works published after 1945? 

As I expected, my own reading selections for the course came into question. 
Students wanted to know why I chose this work or author and not that one, what 
criteria I used, and how I organized the course. It was challenging but refresh- 
ing to be honest and open about the choices I made, and my attempt to articu- 
late the reasons for those choices was self-enlightening. It was enlightening for 
students as well; devoting some class time to responding to student questions 
like these is not, as some might argue, self-indulgent. As Jacqueline Bacon 
reasons, “A pedagogical approach that highlights the contingency of decisions 





244 



James S. Laughlin 



of text selection allows students to view course syllabi within the context of 
their wider reading” (505, see also Hogan 189). 



Signs of Uncertainty and Success 

And so all of our questions were answered and we went on to lead full, happy 
lives. In fact, of course, we raised more questions than we could answer, and we 
left untouched many dimensions of the canon debate and the larger culture wars. 
Nor did I expect profound enlightenment in my students in the three-week pe- 
riod they devoted to the rock project. But I did expect to help them develop a 
fuller awareness of the ways knowledge is organized in the academy and in the 
publishing industry. I did expect to foreground some complexities of a disci- 
pline that too often seems, for students, to have been shaped by the invisible 
hand of God, or, as David Richter phrases it, “sifted by time: only the greatest 
and the most universal had survived” (2). I did expect to shake things up a bit 
too, to cause the kind of disequilibrium which can lead to intellectual growth. 
The signs of that disequilibrium were inscribed in students’ writing, as, for 
instance, in one group’s schizophrenic reflections on the possibility of an ob- 
jective standard of greatness. While one paragraph asserts that “given a greater 
distance to evaluate current works, it would be possible to realize what is truly 
American Rock Music,” the very next maintains “it is true that anthologies are 
totally subjective.” 

How, or whether, each of this group’s members has gone on to work out 
these conflicting positions is beyond me. But the persistence of students’ refer- 
ences to their music project throughout the course, the heightened level of class 
discussions, and the sophistication of their written work — in, for example, ques- 
tioning and disagreeing with literary critics and in pushing the analysis of indi- 
vidual works beyond explication to a range of cultural issues — all affirmed the 
value of involving students in this non-traditional assignment. It is my hope that 
they exported this learning and trained it critically upon other fields of study, 
where the play of competing ideologies similarly shapes disciplinary knowl- 
edge. 



Final Observations and Possibilities 

While I believe this particular assignment ought to prove successful in other 
classrooms, the basis for its success suggests alternatives. First, the assignment 
is a simulation, a kind of assignment that, along with the case study, is popular 
in such fields as business and marketing, but seldom seen in the literature class. 
Since the literature courses I teach are populated by non-majors, many of them 
business majors, such a simulation, conducted collaboratively, is likely to be 



ERiC 



253 



Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



245 



more familiar and certainly more comfortable than the traditional essay assign- 
ment in literary criticism. By approximating actual, operational conditions, simu- 
lations work against a common student perception of assignments as intellectual 
exercises completed for the benefit of the teacher. (For the same reasons, case 
studies might also be promisingly pursued. For example, local controversies 
over the censorship of certain literary works in public schools might be intro- 
duced to students, who could read, interpret, and research the work in order to 
join the debate.) 

Secondly, the success of the rock and roll project had, I’ve no doubt, much to 
do with students’ enthusiasm for exploring popular culture. Rock, then, needn’t 
be the only area toward which to send students. Other popular compilations 
might work nicely — the top fifty Hollywood films, television’s finest shows, 
the greatest sports teams or individual athletes of an era. As noted earlier, dis- 
agreements over the cultural value of these popular forms parallel academia’s 
battles over a multicultural curriculum. The crucial steps in any of these kinds 
of assignments, of course, are to require that students make explicit the intellec- 
tual assumptions that underlie their choices and method of structuring their 
collections, and that they reflect critically upon the relevance of the activity for 
an understanding of the current literary debate it foregrounds. 

In his introduction to Falling Into Theory , David Richter illustrates the way 
students’ everyday interests and concerns can open into surprising territory: 

Two teenagers arguing about whether one of their teachers is open-minded 
or wishy-washy, or about whether it is a band’s material or performance 
technique that makes it so great, can get quickly to the edge of some region 
of theory, where fundamental questions about values and quality, means 
and ends, public and private experience are raised. (8) 

I have argued that we need to see this capacity for interest and lively engage- 
ment as a resource in our literature classrooms, that while I continue to see the 
value of Gerald Graff’s call to teach the conflicts, to begin by thrusting our 
disciplinary debates on students may not be the most effective method. Alterna- 
tively, we can build on students’ interests in and familiarity with popular culture 
conflicts by devising inventive ways for them to teach themselves the conflicts 
in their own world before turning to consider the related conflicts in ours. 



o 



254 



246 



James S. Laughlin 



Appendix 



Collaborative Essay: Anthology of American Rock Music 

You have just been given the go-ahead by Random House to compile an anthol- 
ogy of American Rock Music. It will be an audio anthology of between 100 and 
1 25 songs (presented on eight CDs) spanning the history of American rock and 
roll. Each of you will be part of a group of four to six people who will act as 
compilers and editors of the anthology. Your written work will be to provide 
James S. Laughlin, chief editor of the Music Division, with the following: 

1 . A Table of Contents; 

2. A four- to six-page introduction to the anthology in which you discuss the 
following kinds of things: 

• Your group’s conception of the project. (How did you define your subject? 
What did you hope the anthology would accomplish, and for whom?) 

• The nature of any concerns, issues, hesitations, problems, or difficulties 
you encountered along the way. What were they and what accounted for 
them? 

• The basis for inclusion. This might include such things as what criteria 
guided selection. (Was it artistic merit, popularity by record sales, or what?) 

• Your explanations/justifications/defenses of inclusions or omissions which 
may be questionable or controversial. By skillful argument you might jus- 
tify highly unusual, radical, or unorthodox choices. 

• Your rationale for grouping or ordering the collection as you did. 

In addition to your work for Random House, your group will compose a two- to 
three-page reflection addressed to your English instructor, Jim Laughlin, on 
how this project speaks to the issue of canon formation in literature. What in- 
sights into the subject of the literary canon can you make as a result of complet- 
ing this work? Why do you believe there has been such controversy and vehement 




Beyond Beyond the Culture Wars 



247 



argument in literary and political circles in recent years over the question of 
who is and who isn’t taught and read? Are these arguments just a matter of 
different tastes, or different ideologies, or what? Should you even care? If so, 
why? 



Purpose 

What seems at first glance to be a strange and inappropriate assignment for a 
class in American Literature may in fact be usefully applied to the course. As 
the syllabus states, we’ll be taking issue with canon formation in this class, a 
concern very much at the forefront of literary studies today. By involving you 
in the nitty gritty of selecting, organizing, and justifying an anthology, I believe 
you’ll more fully understand the current debate over the canon and multicultural 
education. By choosing a subject in which most of you have considerable knowl- 
edge, even expertise, I hope to reproduce some of the same concerns that face 
experts seeking to make selective judgments in the literary field. 

Procedure 

As the syllabus indicates, your group project will be handed in to me on Thurs- 
day, January 28. We’ll spend part of two periods in class working in groups on 
the project. Of course, you’ll want to meet as a group outside of class to work 
some more. Individual groups will decide how best to proceed and how to coor- 
dinate the effort to involve all members. Certain people may be responsible for 
certain time periods or artists. One or more people may be responsible for li- 
brary research. Some may be fact finders and organizers, others might handle 
the final writing. You decide. The group will receive one grade, no matter the 
differences in individual contributions. If you perceive that one or more of your 
group members are not pulling their weight, please let me know in writing at 
least one week prior to the due date. Please feel free to seek my help at any 
stage in the process. 

Grading 

As a music buff and child of the rock era, I will be very curious to see your song 
and artist choices. But as an evaluator I will pay closer attention to your four- to 
six-page introduction to the audio anthology. And I’ll pay closest attention to 
the final two or three pages, in which you demonstrate how effectively you can 
transfer what you’ve learned into the sphere of literary studies. I’ll be looking 
for your awareness of the complexities of the issues, concerns, and problems 




258 



248 



James S. Laughlin 



raised by such a project. As always, I’ll privilege thoughtful content over form, 
but the two are never fully separable. Please turn in clean, professionally edited 
work that engages a reader through its effectively languaged ideas. 



Works Cited 

Bacon, Jacqueline. “Impasse or Tension: Pedagogy and the Canon Controversy.” Col- 
lege English 55 (1993): 501-514. 

Bazerman, Charles. “From Cultural Criticism to Disciplinary Participation: Living with 
Powerful Words.” Writing , Teaching , and Learning in the Disciplines. Eds. Anne 
Herrington and Charles Moran. New York: MLA, 1992. 61-68. 

Bennett, Tony, et al. Rock and Popular Music: Politics, Policies , Institutions. London: 
Routledge, 1993. 

Department of English, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Faculty Hand- 
book 1994-1995 . Blacksburg: VPI&SU, 1994. 

Ellmann, Richard, and Robert O’Clair, eds. The Norton Anthology of Modem Poetry. 
New York: Norton, 1973. 

Gaar, Gillian. She's a Rebel: The History of Women in Rock and Roll. Seattle: Seals, 
1992. 

Gass, Glenn. “Why Don’t We Do It in the Classroom?” Present Tense: Rock and Roll 
and Culture. Ed. Anthony DeCurtis. Durham: Duke UP, 1992. 93-100. 

Graff, Gerald. Beyond the Culture Wars. New York: Norton, 1992. 

. Foreword. Falling Into Theory. Ed. David H. Richter. Boston: St. Martin’s, 

1994. 

Hogan, Patrick Colm. “Mo’ Better Canons: What’s Wrong and What’s Right About 
Mandatory Diversity.” College English 54 (1992): 182-92. 

Kolodny, Annette. “The Integrity of Memory: Creating a New Literary History of the 
United States.” A merican Literature 57 (1985): 291-307. 

Lauter, Paul, et al., eds. The Heath Anthology of American Literature. Vol. 2. Toronto: 
Heath, 1990. 

Omi, Michael. “In Living Color: Race and American Culture.” Signs of Life in the U.S.A.: 
Readings on Popular Culture for Writers. Eds. Sonia Maaskik and Jack Solomon. 
Boston: St. Martin’s, 1994. 449-61. 

Raymond, James C. “Authority, Desire, and Canons: Tendentious Meditations on Cul- 
tural Literacy.” Conversations: Contemporary Critical Theory and the Teaching of 
Literature. Eds. Charles Moran and Elizabeth F. Penfield. Urbana: NCTE, 1990. 76- 
86 . 

Richter, David H. Falling Into Theory. Boston: St. Martin’s, 1994. 

Rodden, John, “Reputation, Canon-Formation, Pedagogy: George Orwell in the Class- 
room.” College English 53 (1991): 503-30. 

Tompkins, Jane. Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction 1790 - 
1860. New York: Oxford UP, 1985. 



16 Teaching Others: A Cautionary Tale 



Joseph F. Trimmer 
Ball State University 



I slump in my swivel chair and stare out the window. My right hand rests on the 
grey forms I have stacked on my desk. Uneasily,! thumb their ragged edges. I 
know what they are: 

COURSE AND INSTRUCTOR EVALUATIONS 

Course English 389: Multicultural Literature 

Instructor: Trimmer 

I know (or suspect) what they will say, so I resist reading. Instead, I muse about 
my reading last semester. It had been glorious. From my little carrel in the 
basement of Bracken Library, I had mounted an expedition through the litera- 
ture and history of other cultures. The stories were riveting. The histories unset- 
tling. Like most travelers, I was enchanted by the exotic, baffled by the ordinary, 
but convinced I was learning. And when I returned from my journey, I had a tale 
to tell. I told it in English 389: Multicultural Literature. 

At first my students seemed mesmerized as I mapped the new worlds I’d 
found. By midterm they seemed merely silent. Something was dreadfully wrong. 
I revised my tale, adding all sorts of glitter and spice from my incredible jour- 
ney. A few students played along, smiling when they were supposed to. The rest 
preferred not to. They came to class, wrote the exams, but they had withdrawn. 
Each day I added more glitter and spice, hoping to lure them back. But they 
simply stared into their books, thumbed the pages and waited for the hour to 
end. I had lost them, but I didn’t know why. 

I look at my desk. The answer should be in the forms. I shuffle and stack 
them, take a deep breath, and start reading. 

The first few are reassuring, even complimentary: 

Dr. Trimmer seems to know a lot about literature. 

He’s very enthusiastic about different cultures. 

He explained why we need to know about other cultures. 

Toward the middle of the stack, they seem restive, confused. 




/T* 

258 



249 



250 



Joseph F. Trimmer 



Professor Trimmer assumed we knew things about literature we didn’t. 

He was interested in different cultures, but he didn’t make them interesting 
to me. 

He talked about different customs, but I just couldn’t follow him. 

Then, near the bottom, come the bad reviews — full of anger and disappoint- 
ment: 



The instructor spent so much time covering the stories he didn’t get to the 
cultures. 

He went off on tangents talking about stuff that wasn’t in the stories. 

He never accepted our opinions because we didn’t have enough background. 

The criticism cuts through the compliments confirming my worst suspicions. 
I stare out the window and slump deeper into despair. This was supposed to be 
my dream course. That was the point of last semester’s seclusion. The search 
for compelling texts. The research on cultural contexts. The braiding of each 
into a coherent syllabus. I could barely contain my enthusiasm as I introduced 
the semester’s reading. Even when the trouble started, I was inspired by the 
challenge. I was at the top of my form. Or so I thought. Now, as I sit staring out 
my window, I know my students are right. I failed. But like me, they don’t seem 
to know why. I reshuffle the forms and read them again. I’m still confused. 
Their comments are incomplete and contradictory. 

I swivel away from the window and stare up at my shelves. Row upon row of 
multicolored books. Perhaps the answer is up there. In those texts that taught 
me about literature and culture. 

On the top shelf, stacked side by side, are the anthologies of W. W. Norton 
and Company. I pull down a tome and flip a few pages. The handwriting in the 
margins — malformed yet vaguely familiar — recalls the student who bought the 
book and tried to read it. I replay a few scenes from that old story: 

The Bookstore. I stand in the middle aisle weighing the claims of the first 
volume of the Norton Anthology of World Masterpieces: “Enormous. Expen- 
sive. Do they charge by the pound? The paper is so thin. Like Mom’s Bible. 
Two thousand pages. In one semester? And what about Volume Two?” 

The Dorm. I sprawl on my bed sampling my purchase: “Everybody’s from 
Greece, Italy, or England. So why do they call it World Masterpieces ? 
Everybody’s listed under some ISM. Is that what makes them Masterpieces ? 
The intros cite headlines — wars, treaties, kings. Then switch to features — themes, 
fashions, trends. The bios read like obits. Born. Wrote such and such a story. 
Such and such a poem. Died. Is that all? The works remain. The short ones. 
Arranged by date. Explained by notes.” 

The Class. I listen to my teacher revise his syllabus, again , dropping and 
adding assignments in the second semester of what he calls lickety-split world 
lit: “I spent yesterday covering ‘Grecian Urn,’ so we’re behind again. We’ve got 
to make it into the twentieth century. Go over the intro on Romanticism .” Skip 



Teaching Others : A Cautionary Tale 



251 



Goethe and Pushkin. Drop Shelley. Add the first Browning and the last Whitman. 
Read all of Dickinson. They’re short” Like my classmates, I smile, make a few 
calculations, and convert the revisions into survival strategies. “The intro is a 
waste unless he writes Romanticism on the board. Browning and Whitman will 
probably be on tomorrow’s quiz. Keats and Dickinson will definitely be on the 
midterm.” 

I close the tome and slide it back in its slot on the top shelf. The double 
volumes loom over my desk. I stare at their spines, remembering my quarrels 
with the lessons they taught me: 

Literature is canonical. An official list of authors and titles has already been 
approved for study. This list may shift slightly, from time to time, as certain 
items gain or lose favor, but its essential pattern is fixed. It represents what 
generations of scholars consider the best that has been thought and said. “Should 
I read anything else?” Certainly! Especially the longer works by the approved 
authors. “What about the others — those not on the list?” That might be useful. 
Then you’d understand why they didn’t make it. But the approved list is so 
long. Why waste your time on apocrypha? “What’s that?” Minor stuff. Bad 
poems. Strange stories. Literature that doesn’t fit. 

Literature is universal. The intros teach you about the literary periods. The 
bios teach you about the author’s life. They’re helpful, but not crucial. Read the 
texts. The “masterpieces.” They deal with universals — aspects of the human 
condition in every time and place. “What about writers from different cultures?” 
Exactly ! They live in different cultures, but write about common themes — grow- 
ing up, facing challenges, adjusting to defeat. “What happens when they write 
about those themes differently, or write about completely different themes?” 
Some writers do write about the unusual. Refer to local customs. That’s cov- 
ered in the footnotes. But if they focus too much on local issues they don’t 
make it. They’re not world masterpieces. They lose the general reader. “Who’s 
that?” You, me, people like us. 

Literature is sequential. The best way to cover literature is to follow the 
sequence. Start with the Classics. Work through the Renaissance, the Enlight- 
enment, and the Romantics. Then on to the Modems. “Why can’t I start with 
the Modems and go back?” You could, I suppose, but then you’d miss the sense 
of historical change. You know, cause and effect. “Did Chaucer cause 
Shakespeare?” Of course not! The evolution of literature has multiple causes 
and effects. “Does literature evolve? Does it get better?” Not necessarily. There 
are changes. Innovations. Stream of consciousness. Magical realism. “Where 
do innovations come from?” Different cultures. “Don’t different cultures have 
their own historical sequences? Their own causes and effects?” Of course. But 
you can’t cover everything. You have to pick the best. “Doesn’t picking the best 
break up the sequence?” That’s what anthologies are for. To make new sequences 
so local cultures don’t get in the way. 







252 



Joseph F. Trimmer 



I tilt back in my swivel and release a respectful whistle. The logic seems 
infallible. Anthologies plus surveys equals coverage. Ah! There was the sacred 
word. Coverage . What did it mean? When I covered something did I learn it, 
protect it, or conceal it? And what about the uncovered ? My questions direct me 
to the bottom shelf and the book that reshaped my teaching and learning. I 
stretch past the forms to retrieve Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man. It rests comfort- 
ably in my hand, cracking open to a page covered by underlines and annota- 
tions. A map of the uncovered. 

It was the 1960s. I had passed exams, finished the dissertation, and found a 
job only to be assigned a course on a subject I knew nothing about — Black 
American Literature. At first, I was disappointed. Why can’t I teach the master- 
pieces I had been taught? Then I was angry. Why didn’t they cover this stuff in 
graduate school? Finally I settled in and looked around. I came up with a few 
names — Wright, Baldwin, Ellison. I had read Native Son in a graduate seminar 
in “Literary Naturalism.” It was mentioned as a minor example of the form. I 
had taught “Stranger in the Village” in Comp 101. All graduate TAs had to 
follow the departmental syllabus. 

Invisible Man was a different story. I had picked it up at a used-book sale 
and started reading it on study breaks. After a few pages, I was mesmerized. In 
a secluded basement, illuminated by 1,369 lightbulbs illegally wired to 
Monopolated Light and Power, the invisible man told me what he had done to 
become so black and blue. This was the underground history of American cul- 
ture. The unofficial version that never made it into the anthologies. I could 
recognize the broad outlines of the plot — growing up, facing challenges, ad- 
justing to defeat — but I knew I was missing the heart of the story. The jive, the 
jokes, the inside stuff — the stuff I didn’t even know was inside stuff. 

What to do? I sat in my office trying to concoct a syllabus out of three texts. 
I arranged and rearranged them, hoping they would cohere but knowing they 
wouldn’t. Especially Ellison. How could I teach a book filled with riddles I 
couldn’t solve? Suddenly that seemed like a solution. I was young and desper- 
ate. So I took a chance. 

I smiled nervously as I walked into class. Black students packed the front 
rows. A few white students had found seats in the back. “This is English 354. A 
Survey of Black American Literature. My name is Trimmer. . . . Let’s begin 
with the obvious. I’m white. I don’t know much about Black American Litera- 
ture. But I have read one book that might help us. Ralph Ellison’s Invisible 
Man. For now, it’s our syllabus. We’re going to read it together. Very slowly. 
There’s a lot of stuff in this book I don’t understand. There’s probably a lot of 
stuff in this book you won’t understand. Let’s see if we can help each other. If 
you have a question, ask it. If you come across something you think we ought to 
know, tell us. We’ll need to do a lot of research. But we can add what we find to 
our syllabus. We’ll probably be all over the map. But I hope you’ll stick it out. 



O 

ERLC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



m -rvi 

c,'o: s 



Teaching Others: A Cautionary Tale 



253 



By the end of the semester, we may know how to survey Black American Lit- 
erature.” 

We did stick it out. Nervous at first. Testing each other. Asking questions 
about every page. None of us claimed to have the answers. Some suggested 
answers. Some suggested alternatives. Others tried to find common ground. 
Like Ellison’s narrator, all of us — teacher and students, black and white — were 
naive, misguided, and misinformed. We bumped into assumptions or fell over 
expectations before we could identify the puzzle we were trying to solve. But 
together we crisscrossed the official and unofficial curriculum of Black America, 
introducing ourselves to the rich cultural contexts evoked by Ellison’s novel. 

History — the causes of slavery, the effects of segregation. 

Sociology — the power of class, the promise of passing. 

Anthropology — the significance of masking, the sources of folktales. 

Religion — the rhetoric of sermons, the reasons for spirituals. 

Politics — the conscription by unions, the betrayal by communism. 

Art — the rhythms of jazz, the meaning of blues. 

Biography — the stories of those people whose lives punctuate Ellison’s 
tale: Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington, Marcus Garvey, and 
W. E. B. Du Bois. 

We also introduced ourselves to the history of African American literature. 
Ellison helped us piece together the complicated traditions of slave narrative, 
plantation verse, renaissance poetry, and protest fiction. In some cases, this se- 
quence appeared separate but slightly unequal, offering subtle variations on 
traditional themes. In others, it appeared revolutionary, introducing dramatic 
innovations that challenged established patterns. In both cases, we were fasci- 
nated by this other literature and Ellison’s place in its history. Students became 
specialists, exploring the dynamics of particular periods, recommending texts 
for our expanding syllabus, and teaching each other how their research could 
enrich our reading. Indeed Invisible Man created space for: Up from Slavery , 
The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man, The New Negro, Cane, Their Eyes 
Were Watching God, Native Son, Notes of a Native Son, and Montage of a Dream 
Deferred. 

And, of course, we introduced ourselves to Ellison. In essays and interviews, 
he told us about his childhood in Oklahoma, his education at Tuskegee Insti- 
tute, and his evolution as a writer amidst the intellectual crosscurrents of New 
York and Rome. In particular, he told us about how his understanding of cul- 
tural diversity encouraged him to read and respond to the multiple literatures of 
his heritage: 

The act of writing requires a constant plunging back into the shadow of the 
past where time hovers ghostlike. When I began writing in earnest I was 
forced ... to relate myself consciously and imaginatively to my mixed 
background as American, as Negro American, and as a Negro from what in 




2 . 62 : 



254 



Joseph E Trimmer 



its own belated way was a pioneer background. More important and in- 
separable from this particular effort was the necessity of determining my 
true relationship to that body of American literature to which I was most 
attracted and through which, aided by what I could learn from the litera- 
tures of Europe, I would find my own voice, and to which I was chal- 
lenged, by way of achieving myself, to make some small contribution, and 
to whose composite picture of reality I was obligated to offer some neces- 
sary modifications. ( Shadow and Act. New York: Random House, 1964. 
xvi-xvii). 

Despite, or perhaps because of, our modifications to “English 354: A Survey 
of Black American Literature,” the course was judged an enormous success. On 
their Course and Instructor Evaluation Forms, students joked about the teacher’s 
inauspicious beginning and inexpensive book list, but switched quickly to brag- 
ging about what they had learned by reading new literary texts and researching 
different cultural contexts. I’m not sure we covered the history of Black Ameri- 
can Literature. In fact, I’m pretty sure we didn’t. We took too many wrong 
turns, spent too much time in back alleys, to stay on the main road. But accord- 
ing to Ellison, that’s “how the world moves. Not like an arrow, but a boomer- 
ang” (J Invisible Man . New York: Random House, 1952. 5). What we failed to 
cover, we tried to illuminate. And in the process, we discovered that culture was 
more complicated than wars, treaties, and kings; that literature was more inno- 
vative than themes, fashions, and trends; and that cross-cultural education worked 
best when students from different backgrounds taught one another. 

Or at least that’s what the students said they learned. I learned something 
else. I didn’t like winging it across uncharted territory. I felt like a fool, inca- 
pable of responding to my students’ questions. I felt like a fraud, manipulating 
them to search for their own answers. I felt like Rinehart, Ellison’s rascal of 
illusion, exploiting the confusion and misperception of others. English 354 was 
a fluke. I had caught good students in a good semester and they had liked being 
in charge of their own learning. But such trickery was not teaching. Someone 
had to take charge. Someone had to know the answers. 

During the next thirty years — as I aged gracefully into expertise, teaching 
the masterpieces of American lit — I took charge. It was easy. Because the books 
were written by and about people like me, I knew the answers. I didn’t use an 
anthology. English 354 had taught me too much about the complexity of litera- 
ture and culture to settle for that choice. But I used the idea of an anthology to 
demonstrate the limitations of conventional literary instruction. I selected indi- 
vidual texts to challenge the authority of the canon. I analyzed suppressed nar- 
ratives to contradict the ubiquity of universal. And I introduced all sorts of 
glitter and spice to complicate the logic of sequence. It took a lot of work, but I 
did my job. The students did theirs. And everybody seemed happy. At least 
nobody said anything. 

Which brings me to the ’90s and my semester of seclusion in the basement 
of Bracken Library. Like that of the invisible man, my “hibernation [was] a 



Teaching Others: A Cautionary Tale 



255 



covert preparation for a more overt action” (. Invisible Man 1 1). Once again, I 
had been assigned a course in a subject I knew nothing about — multicultural 
literature. To be accurate, my quarrels with the Norton Anthology of World 
Masterpieces had taught me something about the “multiculturalism” of “world 
literature ” My teaching of Black American Literature had also taught me some- 
thing about the multicultural character of “minority literature.” And during my 
years as an expert on the masterpieces of American Literature, I had read a few 
novels by some of America’s most gifted minority writers. In sum, I had read 
enough to know that I didn’t know very much. 

The syllabus for English 389, Multicultural Literature, required me to cover 
Native American, African American, Asian American, and Chicano literature 
and culture. Given my expanded conception of literature and culture, and my 
exalted commitment to informed teaching, I was not about to take a chance 
with an old trick. So I prepared and prepared and prepared. And at the end of 
my hibernation, I was loaded for bear. 

I made four trips from my carrel to my study, carefully unloading the books 
and books and books about books onto the lower shelves I had reserved for my 
new multicultural library. During Christmas vacation, I re-read the best of the 
lot as I drafted and revised my syllabus. Throughout the Spring Semester, par- 
ticularly once the trouble started, I read them again — looking for information to 
inspire my silent students. I did what I thought every good teacher should do. I 
taught myself to be an expert on the subject I was supposed to teach. So why 
had I failed? 

I push away from my desk to widen my perspective, scanning the shelves 
from top to bottom, from double-volume anthologies to multicultural library. I 
adjust and re-adjust my eyes, trying to focus on the big picture. Suddenly, that’s 
all it is — a big picture. Splashes of color against a field of white. The stories of 
how I had been taught and what I had learned blur into an abstract painting, 
titled “My Education.” 

I look back at the forms on my desk. They were incomplete, contradictory, 
and confusing, but they were close. They didn’t know how to say it exactly , but 
they said it. My education had interfered with their learning. They knew I knew 
something about literature: Dr. Trimmer seems to know a lot about literature. 
Professor Trimmer assumed we knew things about literature we didn't. The 
instructor spent so much time covering the stories he didn't get to the cultures. 
They knew / knew something about different cultures: He's very enthusiastic 
about different cultures. He was interested in different cultures, but he didn't 
make them interesting to me. He went off on tangents talking about stuff that 
wasn't in the stories. They simply wanted a chance to learn something about 
multicultural literature for themselves: He explained why we needed to learn 
about other cultures. He talked about different customs , but I couldn't follow 
him. He never accepted our opinions because we didn't have enough back- 
ground. 



256 



Joseph F. Trimmer 



I rub my eyes. Then look again at the forms on my desk and the books on my 
shelf. In between, in the shadows, an answer hovers, ghostlike, in my study. My 
seclusion made me an expert on literary and cultural difference. My expertise 
prevented my students from exploring literary and cultural difference. I was so 
inspired by my tale, I silenced my students. They wrote the exams, but had no 
tale to tell. 

I stare out my window, again. I think about the invisible man: How many 
times will I have to learn the same lessons? How many times will I repeat the 
same mistakes? How much painful boomeranging of my expectations will I 
have to endure before teaching and learning make sense? I try to sort it all out, 
salvaging a few answers from my failure. The first two are commonplace, the 
result of old quarrels with anthologies and surveys: 

1. Literature and culture are too complex to be collected in anthologies. 

2. Literature and culture are too conflicted to be covered in a coherent mas- 
ter syllabus. 

The third is controversial, the result of my inexperience with new material: 

3. Literature and culture don’t have to be covered. But they can be illumi- 
nated by examining the contexts evoked by individual texts. 

The last two are conjectural, the result of my inability to teach what I had learned: 

4. Multicultural literature was not a product , a new body of information to 
be packaged into double volumes and transmitted by super scholars. 

5. Multicultural literature was a process , a new method of inquiry that en- 
couraged students to mount their own expeditions through the history 
and literature of other cultures. 

My sorting prompts a smile. My dream course had been spooked by a famil- 
iar demon. I had been tricked by that master magician — myself. The official 
explanation was “I was doing my job.” The unofficial explanation was “I was 
showing off.” The students had put up with me in class, but, given the opportu- 
nity, they had put me down in the forms. They were impressed with what I had 
learned. But in the worlds of multicultural literature there is too much to learn, 
too much to question, for one person to take charge of all the answers. Like me, 
they wanted to explore and map the history and literature of other cultures. Like 
me, they wanted to investigate and teach others what they had discovered. 

I thumb the forms and think of Ellison: “‘Ah,’ I can hear you say, ‘so it was 
all a build-up to bore us with his buggy jiving. He only wanted us to listen to 
him rave!’ . . . But only partially true” {Invisible Man 439). I stack and re- 
shuffle the forms. As I scan the comments, I get the message: “Stick it out. Give 
us a chance. Who knows but that, on the lower frequencies, we speak for you.” 





Index 



Abeng (Cliff), 103-105, 109 
abolitionism 

literature of, 10-11 
women’s rights linkage of, 12-14 
Absalom, Absalom ! (Faulkner), 195 
Achebe, Chinua, 233-234 
Adams, Abigail, 12-13, 24, 26 
Adams, John, 12-13 
Adorno, Theodor, 227 

Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (Twain), 39, 
148,237 

affirmative action programs, 19, 20 
African Americans 

asserting humanity of, 205-206 
cultural contributions of, 24, 236 
exclusion of, 27 
journeys to Africa, 100-101 
literary criticism among, 27 
literature 

parallel reading of, 5 1 
renaissance poetry of, 253 
scope of, 198 
teaching of, 252-255 
marginalization of, 53, 209 
rhetorical strategies of, 200 
women 

oppression of, 56 
on margins of society, 97-99 
writings of, 1 12-1 13 
African heritage 

in Caribbean islands, 74-76, 77-78, 104 
study of, 100-101 
African religion, 106 

Against the Grain: Essays (Eagleton), 205 
age, hierarchies based on, 43 
Alegria, Claribel, 1 13 
Alien Land Law Act (1913), 139 
Allen, Paula Gunn 

on feminine in American Indian traditions, 
124 

heritage of, 65-66 n. 3 
mythic perspective of, 66 n. II 
on Native American culture, 1 15 
parallel reading of, 51, 65 
personal experiences of, 66 n. 9 
self-definition of, 59-62 



Almanac of the Dead (Silko), 126 
Alsop, Stewart, 221-222 
American Indians. See Native Americans 
American literature. See also literature 
course guide for, 175-177 
course organization models, 177-178 
as ideological project, 207-208 
new definitions of, 5 1 
study of “isms,” 179, 250 
text selection 

historical approach to, 178-181 
inclusion approach to, 186-191 
literary traditions approach to, 183-186 
major authors approach to, 181-183 
and unAmerican literature, 32-33, 34, 37-38, 
39, 47-48 

“American Literature and the New Histori- 
cism: The Example of Frederick 
Douglass” (Jay), 206 
American Literature Association, 178 
American Narcissus , The: Individualism and 
Women in Nineteenth-Century American 
Fiction (Warren), 52 
American Renaissance, 164 
American Women Regionalists, 1850-1910 
(Fetterley and Pryse), 35 
Anderson, Sherwood, 195 
Annie John (Kincaid), 76-77 
anthologies 

chronological organization of, 178, 251 
course guides for, 175-176 
footnotes in succeeding editions, 217 
limitations of, 254, 256 
politics of, 242 

selective enshrinement by, 240 
student analysis of, 240-244 
student creation of, 237-240 
student views of, 250-251 
with traditional themes, 168 
with universal themes, 169-170 
“Anthology of American Rock Music” 
(collaborative essay), 246-248 
Antilles, The: Fragments of Epic Memory 
(Walcott), 72, 78-79 
antimiscegenation laws, 128 
anti-Semitism, 18 



257 





258 



Index 



antislavery movement. See abolitionism 
Anzaldua, Gloria, 51 , 56-59, 62, 65-66 n. 3, 
67 n. 14 

Apess, William, 13, 166, 186 
Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World 
(Walker), 1 1 

Are You There, God? It's Me , Margaret 
(Blume), 195 
Armatrading, Joan, 240 
Armies of the Night (Mailer), 227 
arranged marriage, 137, 139 
art 

fiction inspired by, 1 50 
of Native Americans, 154 
article, essay contrasted with, 227 
“Arts of the Contact Zone” (Pratt), 166 
Asian American Literature: An Introduction to 
the Writings and Their Social Context 
(Kim), 129 
Asian Americans 
culture of, 135-136 
historical background of, 139-140 
internment of, 128, 139, 140 
literature 

American study of, 134-136 
Chinese study of, 129-134 
cross-cultural aspects of, 136-140 
historical background of, 128-129 
teaching of, 255 

Asian Exclusion Act (1924), 139 
assimilation, 18-19,21-22,57 
attitudes, changing, 201 
Austin, Mary, 156, 182 
authenticity, rhetoric of, 50, 58, 62, 64, 66 n. 5 
authority, challenges to, 53-54, 254 
Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man 
(Johnson), 253 

Awakening, The (Chopin), 83, 85-90 



Ba, Mariama, 83, 90 
Bacon, Jacqueline, 243-244 
Baker, Houston, 27 
Baker, LaVem, 240 
Bakhtin, M. M., 204, 214 
Baldwin, James, 193, 252 
Bambara, Toni Cade, 196 
Baraka, Amiri, 28 
Bardes, Barbara, 14 
Bauman, Richard, 59 
Baym, Nina, 34-35, 52-53 
Bazerman, Charles, 23 1 
Beatles, 239 

Beka Lamb (Edgell), 83, 90, 91-93 
Bell, Michael, 35-36 
Bellow, Saul, 196 
Beloved (Morrison), 1 82, 20 1 



Benito Cereno (Melville), 166 
Bennett, Gwendolyn, 243 
Bennett, William, 23 1 
Bent, Charles, 151, 155 
Berlant, Lauren, 16 
Bersani, Leo, 228 

Beyond the Culture Wars (Graff), 231-232, 
233-235, 237 
Bhabha, Homi K., 62-64 
bias 

in education, 5-6 

in text selection, 198-199 
bicultural identity, 132-133, 135 
bigotry, 18, 20 
Billboard magazine, 239 
biracial relationships, 102-103, 132-133, 153 
Bizzell, Patricia, 165-167 
black cultural nationalist movement, 100 
Black Man 's Burden (Ki liens), 1 06 
Black Power Movement, 53 
Black Women, Writing, & Identity: Migrations 
of the Subject (Davies), 112-113 
Bledsoe, Albert, 171-172 
Blithedale Romance, The (Hawthorne), 166 
Bloom, Harold, 231 
Bonnin, Gertrude Simmons (pen name: 
Zitkala-Sa), 186 
borderlands, 97, 1 13 

Borderlands/La Frontera: The New Mestizo 
(Anzaldua), 57-59, 62 
border policing, 1 16 
Bostonians, The (James), 196 
Bradford, William, 186 
Bradstreet, Anne, 186 

British empire, 74-75. See also colonialism 

British Guiana, 81 

Brodhead, Richard, 36 

Bronte, Charlotte, 77 

Brooks, Van Wyck, 8, 183 

Brown, Ruth, 240 

Brown, Sterling, 242 

Brown, William Wells, 1 1, 26 

Buffett, Jimmy, 239 

Bush, George, 7 

Butler, Octavia, 101-103, 105, 1 10, 112 



Cahan, Abraham, 242 
California Dreams and Realities: Readings 
for Critical Thinkers and Writers (Maasik 
and Solomon), 218 
Cane (Toomer), 1 95 
canon 

challenging authority of, 254 
classroom practice in, 237-238, 240 
critiquing, 33-35 
debate over, 175, 177, 231, 236 





Index 



259 



in music departments, 236 
and myth of America, 52-53 
narrowing of, 8 
politics of, 33 
student analysis of, 242 
student views of, 25 1 
tokenism in, 33 
Transcendentalism in, 5 1 
Canons and Contexts (Lauter), 8 
Canterbury Tales, The (Chaucer), 1 96 
Caputi, Jane, 62 

Caribbean nations, 7 1-79, 105-1 07. See also 
under individual nations 
Carillo, Charles, 146-147 
Carmelitas, 154 
Carson, Kit, 155-156 
Catcher in the Rye (Salinger), 195 
categories 

in anthologies, 241 
of literary traditions, 184 
marginalization as, 180 
for traditional text selection, 164-165 
Cather, Willa, 39, 146-158, 183 
Catholic Church 

in conflict with African religion, 106 
in conflict with Native American religions, 
151-152 

in New Mexico, 147-157 
Ceremony (Silko), 115-126 
Champlain, Samuel de, 180 
change, as norm, 120, 122-123 
Chase, Richard, 8 
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 1 93 
Cheney, Lynne, 34 
Cherokee Memorials, 180 
Chesnutt, Charles, 183, 185 
Cheung, King-kok, 129, 139, 140 
Chicano/Chicana literature, 5 1 , 57-59, 255 
Chinese American women, 1 10-1 12 
Chinese culture, 133 
Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), 128, 134 
Chinese immigrants, 133-134 
“Chinese Woman in America, The” (Sui), 133 
“Chinese Workmen” (Sui), 133 
Chocolate War, The (Cormier), 194 
Chopin, Kate, 83, 85, 183 
Christy, David, 171-172 
Chronicle of Higher Education, The , 1 15 
“Church Mouse, A” (Freeman), 43 
“ Cihuatlyotl Woman Alone” (Anzaldua), 56- 
57 

“Circus at Denby, The” (Jewett), 42, 44 
“Civil Disobedience” (Thoreau), 233 
Civil Rights Act (1964), 20 
Civil Rights movement, 25-27 
“Civil Wars” (Jordan), 53-54, 55, 56 
class. See social class 



O 




classroom 

debate in, 232-233, 236 
demographics of, 208-209 
moral issues engaged in, 1 66 
multiculturalism in, 203 
racial identity in, 208-209, 210-21 1 
Clemens, Samuel Langhome (pen name: Mark 
Twain), 183, 184 

Cliff, Michelle, 103-105, 1 10, 1 12 
Clinton, Bill, 7 

Clotel, or The President's Daughter (Brown), 

11 

Cobain, Kurt, 223 
cognitive mapping, 170 
Cole, Nat King, 239 
collaborative writing 

anthology of American rock music project, 
237-240, 246-248 
encouragement of, 172 
popular culture assignment for, 235 
colleges. See higher education 
colonial cultures, 74-75, 81-82, 92, 94 
colonialism 

Cather’s indictment of, 157, 158 
in Jamaica, 105 
legacies of, 98 
in New Mexico, 153 
in Trinidad, 105-107 
Color Purple , The (Walker), 1 3 1 , 20 1 
Columbia Literary } History of the United 
States, 36 

Columbus, Christopher, 180 
“Coming Home” (Didion), 220 
coming-of-age stories, 75, 103-105, 1 16 
“Commitment to Theory, The” (Bhabha), 62- 
63 

“Common Sense” (Paine), 180 
communal identity, 58 
communication 

across cultural boundaries, 28, 5 1 , 64, 170 
among ethnic communities, 65 n. 1 
composition 

coaching process of, 172 
course content for, 167-172 
curriculum of, 171 

teaching in literature classes, 163, 167-168, 
172-173 

Condit, Celeste Michelle, 171 
conflict 

among religions, 106, 151-152 
teaching, 231-234 
Conrad, Joseph, 232, 233-234 
conscience, 225 

Constituting Americans : Cultural Atixiety and 
Narrative Fonn (Wald), 206-207 
Constitution of the United States, 10, 26 
contact zone concept, 165-167, 170, 173, 176 



268 



260 



Index 



“Contact Zones and the Structure of English 
Studies” (Bizzell), 165-166 
conventional wisdom, 32, 98 
Cooke, Rose Terry, 40^1 
Cooper, Anna Julia, 186, 198 
Cortes, Hem4n, 1 80 
Country Doctor, A (Jewett), 35-36 
Country of the Pointed Firs, The (Jewett), 35- 
36,37-39,42,44,46,182 
course guide, 175-177, 188-189 fig. 1 
course organization models, 177-178, 190 
Crane, Stephen, 131, 242 
Creating American Civilization: A Genealogy 
of American Literature as an Academic 
Discipline (Shumway), 207 
Creating Faulkner's Reputation: The Politics 
of Modern Literary Criticism (Schwartz), 
182 

Crick Crack Monkey (Hodge), 75-76, 77 
critical capacity development, 232 
critical fiction, 98 

cross-sections, 218, 220, 222, 223, 224, 226 

Cuban revolution, 107-109 

Cullen, Countee, 195 

cultural discord, 5 

cultural gaps, 112 

cultural hierarchies, 187 

cultural identity 

blurred distinctions of, 125 
components of, 4-5 
crisis of, 8 

in literature courses, 251, 255-256 
literature’s affirmation of, 83-84 
of mixed-race children, 132-133, 135 
preservation of, 1 9 

cultural interaction, 115-116, 118, 124, 125- 
126 

cultural pluralism, 124, 126 

cultural rhetoric, 203-204, 205-207, 210, 212 

cultural separatism, 12 

cultural translation, theory of, 62-64 

Cultures of Letters (Brodhead), 36 



“Dance of Death, The” (Holbein), 150 
Davies, Carole Boyce, 112-113 
Davis, Angela, 197 
Deadly Nightshade (rock band), 241 
de Aragon, Ray John, 152, 155 
Death Comes for the Archbishop (Cather), 
146-158 
debate 

in classroom, 232-233, 236 
over canon, 175, 177, 231, 236 
over identity politics, 18 
over multiculturalism, 3-5 
over slavery, 166, 171-172 



Declaration of Independence 
in composition curriculum, 171 
and Indian tribes, 13 
Jefferson’s language in, 8-1 1 
King’s usage of, 26 
Lincoln’s usage of, 26 
on property, 1 2 
revision of meaning, 8 
and women’s rights movements, 13-17 
“Declaration of Sentiments, The” (Stanton), 
180 

Declarations of Independence: Women and 
Political Power in Nineteenth-Century 
American Fiction (Bardes and Gossett), 
14 

Declaring Independence : Jefferson, Natural 
Language , and the Culture of Perfor- 
mance (Fliegelman), 9 
Deephaven (Jewett), 32, 39, 42, 44 
“Def Comedy Jam” (television show), 20 1 
democracy, rhetoric of, 55 
Derrida, Jacques, 9 

Dialogic Imagination, The: Four Essays 
(Bakhtin), 204 

Diaz del Castillo, Bernal, 180 
Dickinson, Emily, 179, 183, 199 
Didion, Joan, 217-222, 223-225, 226-227, 
228 

Dilg, Mary A., 126 
discrimination, 19-20 
diversity, politics of, 197 
“Diving Into the Wreck” (Rich), 190 
double consciousness, 97 
Douglass, Frederick 

King’s parallels to, 25-27 
Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, 
an American Slave, 195, 212, 213 
rhetoric of, 205-215 
study of, 164, 186, 253 
Thoreau contrasted with, 185 
“What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?”, 

1 1 , 1 80, 203-204, 208, 2 1 3-2 1 4 
Dreaming in Cuban (Garcia), 107-109 
Dred Scott decision (1857), 7, 28 
Du Bois, W. E. B., 97, 180, 186, 203, 243, 253 
duCille, Ann, 197 
Dunbar- Nelson, Alice, 41-42, 44 
Dunne, John Gregory, 219 
Dutoit, Ulysse, 228 



Eagleton, Terry, 205 
economic assimilation, 21 
economics 
globalization of, 4 
of racism, 1 1-12 
of slavery, 212-213 





Index 



261 



of wage labor, 12 
Edgell, Zee, 83 

Edge of Taos Desert (Luhan), 1 56 
Edgeworth, Maria, 36 
education 
biases in, 5-6 

in colonial settings, 74, 81-82, 94 
defunding of, 7 

identity politics in, 19-20, 22-23 
as indoctrination, 82, 94 
as vehicle of change, 83 
Education of Henry Adams, The (Adams), 194 
Edwards, Jonathan, 186 
Eisenhower, Dwight, 222 
Eliot, T. S., 125, 183, 195, 242, 243 
“Eliza Harris” (Harper), 199 
Ellison, Ralph 

and African American criticism, 27-28 
literary status of, 182, 183 
literary tradition approach to, 184 
parallel study of, 67 n. 15 
study of, 193, 195,252-256 
tactics of, 23-25 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 
heritage of, 65-66 n. 3 
literary status of, 183 
parallel study of, 54, 57, 61 , 66 n. 4, 67 n. 

15 

self-reliance doctrine of, 42, 44, 52 
on society’s dictates, 66 n. 6 
Transcendentalism of, 51-52 
Emigrants, The (Lamming), 74 
emotional abuse, of slaves, 102 
empathy, 44-45, 47, 216-217 
encounter concept, 1 76, 1 87. See also contact 
zone concept 

“End of ‘American Literature,’ The: Toward a 
Multicultural Practice” (Jay), 37, 197 
equality 

achievement of, 17 
Jefferson’s statement of, 9 
moral basis of, 14 
eras, criteria for bracketing, 241 
essay genre, 217, 226-228 
essentialism, 18, 24 
ethnic communities 

communication among, 65 n. 1 
individual connections with, 56-57 
ethnicity 

aspirations affected by, 86 
as category of literary traditions, 1 84 
demands based on, 59 
and self-determination, 56 
ethnocentrism, 98, 199 
European American male tradition, 184-186 
exclusionary politics, 4, 5 
expectations, horizons of, 218, 222 



faculty, expansion of, 198 
Falling Into Theory (Richter), 245 
Fanny (rock band), 241 
Farewell to Manzanar (Houston and 
Houston), 196 

Faulkner, William, 183, 184, 185, 242 

Feidelson, Charles, 52 

Felman, Shoshana, 228 

Feminine Mystique, The (Friedan), 219, 220 

feminism 

attack on Rockwellian values, 220 
and canon critique, 34-35 
and Declaration of Independence, 14-15 
as economic crisis scapegoat, 19 
Feminist Classroom, The (Maher and 
Tetreault), 84 
feminist criticism, 84 

“Fences Against Freedom” (Silko), 116, 126 
Fern, Fanny, 15-16, 27 

Fetterley, Judith, 35, 36-37, 40, 198, 216-217, 
227-228 
fiction 

art as inspiration, 150 
condescension toward people of color, 1 57 
historical accuracy in, 146-148, 149-150, 
152-158 
of protest, 253 
by women of color, 97-98 
Fields, Annie Adams, 32 
Fields, James T., 32 
Fishkin, Shelley Fisher, 1 15 
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 131, 132, 185, 193 
Fitzhugh, George, 171-172,213 
Fliegelman, Jay, 9 
“Foreigner, The” (Jewett), 47^18 
“Four-Hundred- Year-Old Woman, A” 
(Mukherjee), 97 
freedom 

personal, 87-88 
rhetorical sense of, 2 1 2 
of speech, 7 

student concerns of, 85-86 
women’s claim to, 16-17 
Freeman, Mary Wilkins, 38-39, 41, 43, 48 
Friedan, Betty, 219 
Frost, Robert, 1 83 
Fuller, Margaret, 14, 166, 186 
fusion of horizons, 216, 229 



Gaar, Gillian, 236 
Gadamer, Hans Georg, 216 
Garcia, Cristina, 107-109, 1 12 
Garcia Marquez, Gabriel, 79 
Garfunkel, Art, 218 
Garvey, Marcus, 253 
Gass, Glenn, 236 



ERIC : 270 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



262 



Index 



Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., 27, 83 
gender 

aspirations affected by, 86 
as category of literary traditions, 1 84 
demands based on, 59 
hierarchies based on, 43-44 
rhetorical dimensions of, 210 
and self-determination, 56 
stereotyped images of, 147 
wages based on, 16-17 
George III, King of England, 9-10, 13, 14 
“Gettysburg Address” (Lincoln), 25-26 
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 243 
Gilroy, Bert, 94 
Girl , The (LeSueur), 243 
Gitlin, Todd, 21 
global economics, 4 
Going to the Territory (Ellison), 27 
Golden, Marita, 99-101, 1 10, 1 12 
Gone with the Wind (Mitchell), 131 
Gossett, Suzanne, 14 

Go Tell It On the Mountain (Baldwin), 193 
Graff, Gerald, 231-235, 237, 245 
Grandmothers of the Light: A Medicine 
Woman ’5 Sourcebook (Allen), 61-62 
Grapes of Wrath, The (Steinbeck), 193 
Grateful Dead, The, 239 
Great Gatsby, The (Fitzgerald), 132, 193 
Greene, Maxine, 81, 83, 85 
Grimk£, Angelina, 13-14, 195 
Guyana, 81 



Hall, Stuart, 64 
Hamilton, Virginia, 193-194 
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 199 
Harlem Renaissance, 165, 180 
Harper, Frances, 200 
Harper, Michael, 190 
Harper's, 40 
Harris, Wilson, 72 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 164, 166, 179, 183, 

184 

Hayden, Robert, 195 

Heart of Darkness (Conrad), 232, 233-234 
Heath Anthology of American Literature , The, 
7, 240, 242, 243 

Hemingway, Ernest, 131, 132, 185, 193 
heritage, 65-66 n. 3. See also African heritage 
Heroism and the Black Intellectual (Watts), 24 
Herzberg, Bruce, 169 
higher education 

identity politics at, 19-20 
multiculturalism in, 7 
radicalization of, 207-208 
Himes, Chester, 195 



Hirsch, E. D., 190 
Hispanic culture, 158 

historical approach, to text selection, 178-181 
historical background, in literature, 129, 140 
historical fiction, accuracy in, 146-148, 1 49— 
150, 152-158 
history 

in course content, 170 
differing interpretations of, 5 
perspectival approach to, 158 
“History as Apple Tree” (Harper), 190 
Hodge, Merle, 75-76, 77 
Hogan, Linda, 109-1 10, 112 
Holbein, Hans, 150 
holistic worldview, 61, 117 
Homer, 77-78 
Hongo, Garrett, 1 28 
hooks, bell, 98, 101, 109, 169 
Hoover, J. Edgar, 27 
horizons 

of expectations, 218, 222 
fusion of, 216, 229 

House on Mango Street, The (Cisneros), 1 96 
Howlett (priest and author), 149 
Hughes, Langston, 183, 243 
Hunger of Memory t (Rodriguez), 233 
Hurston, Zora Neale 

literary status of, 183, 185 
literary tradition approach to, 186 
self-definition of, 83, 85 
study of, 193, 195, 197 

ideas 

generation in response to reading, 172 
teaching receptivity to, 234 
identity politics. See also politics 
debate over, 1 8 
in education, 19-20, 22-23 
in Hispanic community, 158 
limitations of, 22 
pervasiveness of, 3-5 
rhetorical approach to, 21 1-212 
shift away from, 24 
ideology, 59, 205 

“If Shakespeare Had Had a Sister” (Woolf), 84 
“I Have a Dream” (King), 25-28 
“Image of Africa, An: Racism in Conrad’s 
Heart of Darkness” (Achebe), 233-234 
imagination, 61, 81-82 

Imagining America: Stories from the Promised 
Land (Brown and Ling), 1 3 1 
immigration 
of Chinese, 133-134 
and cultural identity crisis, 8 
government policy on, 116 





Index 



263 



imperialism, 74-75. See also colonialism 
Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (Jacobs), 
164,199,200 
inclusion 

politicsof, 197-198, 243 
teaching rationale for, 239, 240 
and text selection, 186-191 
independence, quests for, 52 
Indian Nullification of the Unconstitutional 
Laws of Massachusetts Relative to the 
Marshpee Tribe (Apess), 13 
“‘Indians’: Textualism, Morality and the 
Problem of History” (Tompkins), 158 
individualism, 52, 54-55, 60-61, 64 
information highway, 4 
innocence lost theme, 1 47 
In Search of Our Mothers * Gardens (Walker), 
84 

interactive pedagogy, 83-84 
interconnections, recognition of, 120-121 
intercultural dialogue, 28, 170 
intergenerational themes, 217 
internment camps, 128, 139, 140 
interracial relationships, 102-103, 132-133, 
153 

intersubjective identity, 53-57, 65 
In the Castle of My Skin (Lamming), 74 
“In the Name of Wonder: The Emergence of 
Tall Narrative in American Writing” 
(Wonham), 45 — 46 

Invisible Man (Ellison), 23-25,27, 182, 193, 
252 

/ Returned and Saw Under the Sun: Padre 
Martinez of Taos (Mares), 152 
Irving, Washington, 45, 46 
Isocrates, 167, 168 
issei, 139 



Jackson, Jesse, 28 
Jacobs, Harriet, 164, 186, 197 
Jamaica, culture of, 103-105 
James, Henry, 32-33, 183 
Jameson, Fredric, 170 
Jane Eyre (Bronte), 77 
Japanese American culture, 136-140 
Jaskoski, Helen, 1 17 
Jauss, Hans Robert, 216, 222 
Jay, Gregory S., 37, 197, 204-205, 206, 21 1 
Jeffers, Robinson, 190 
Jefferson, Blind Lemon, 239 
Jefferson, Thomas, 8-10, 10-11, 17,26, 186 
Jewett, Sarah Ome, 32, 35-37, 39, 42-44, 46- 
48, 182-183 
Joplin, Janis, 240 

Jordan, June, 51, 53-56, 65-66 n. 3, 66 n. 5 



journalism, 226-227 

Joyce, James, 196 

Joy Luck Club , The (Tan), 110-112 



Kadohata, Cynthia, 128 
Keating, AnaLouise, 66 n. 9 
Keats, John, 71 

Keeping Slug Woman Alive: A Holistic 
Approach to Native American Texts 
(Sarris), 127 
Kennedy, John F., 222 
Kennedy, Robert F., 222 
Kibbey, Ann, 212 
Killens, John Oliver, 106 
Kim, Elaine, 129 
KimYong Ik, 131 
Kincaid, Jamaica, 75, 76-77 
Kindred (Butler), 101-103, 105, 109 
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 24, 25-28 
King Phillip’s War, 153 
Kitchen God’s Wife, The (Tan), 196 
Kolodny, Annette, 243 
Kosinski, Jerzy, 227 



Lamming, George, 74 

Lamy, Jean Baptiste, 147, 149, 152, 154-157 
Land of Little Rain, The (Austin), 182 
language, use as activity, 204-205 
Larsen, Nella, 186 
las Casas, Bartolom6 de, 1 80 
Lauter, Paul, 7-8, 33-34 
“Leaves from the Mental Portfolio of an 
Eurasian” (Sui), 132-134 
lecture-style teaching, 172 
Lee, Peggy, 223 

“Legend of Sleepy Hollow, The” (Irving), 46 
legends, 106 

LeSueur, Meridel, 242, 243 
Life in the Iron Mills (Davis), 199 
Life of the Right Reverend Joseph P. 

Machebeuf, The (Howlett), 149 
Lincoln, Abraham, 25-26 
Lincoln, Kenneth, 115, 118 
Lind, Michael, 19 
Ling, Amy, 129 
literary canon. See canon 
literary regionalism. See also regionalism 
perspective changes by, 42-43, 44 
readership of, 40-4 1 
sketch form of, 38-39 
as unAmerican, 35-37 
women storytellers in, 41-42, 46 
literary traditions approach, to text selection, 
183-186 



o ^ST COPY AVAILABLE 

ERIC 



264 



Index 



literature. See also American literature 
artistry in, 129, 140 
broader definition of, 163 
of Caribbean islands, 72-79 
classical Chinese view of, 130 
classic works of, 190 
confinement by anthologies, 256 
cultural interaction in, 118 
dialogic theory of, 59-61 
discussion vs. reading of, 201 
ethnic-specific traditions of, 50-5 1 , 64 
identity themes in, 63-64 
of Mexican Americans, 57-59 
of Native Americans, 51, 59-62, 255 
sequential approach to, 251 
student views of, 25 1 

teaching in writing classes, 163, 167-168, 
172-173 

as window on life, 130 
local color genre, 35-36, 44, 216 
Lolita (Nabokov), 195 

Long Day’s Journey Into Night (O’Neill), 217 
Loomba, Ania, 82 
Lorde, Audre, 197 
Love in the Time of Cholera (Garcia 
Marquez), 79 
Lowe, Lisa, 1 35 
Lucaites, John Louis, 17 1 
“Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds’’ (Beatles), 
239 

Luhan, Mabel Dodge, 149, 156, 157 



M. C. Higgins , the Great (Hamilton), 193-194 
Maasik, Sonia, 218 
Machebeuf, Joseph P., 155, 157 
McMillan, Terry, 197 
Madame Bovary (film), 84 
Maddocks, Melvin, 226-227 
Maddox, Lester, 222 
Madonna (performer), 240 
Maher, Frances, 82-83, 84 
Mailer, Norman, 227 
major authors approach, to text selection, 
181-183 

Malamud, Bernard, 183 

Malcolm X, 24, 28 

Manson, Charles, 222 

Mao Zedong, 130 

Marcus, Jane, 33 

Mares, E. A., 152, 154, 157 

“Marginality as Site of Resistance” (hooks), 

98 

marginalization 
of African Americans, 53, 209 
as category of literature, 180 
of Native Americans, 53 



and regionalism, 42 
transcending limitations of, 1 85 
of women, 53 

Mark and the Knowledge, The: Social Stigma 
in Classic American Fiction (Pryse), 184 
marriage 

arranged, 137, 139 
stifling of women’s voices, 86 
Martinez (priest of Taos), 147-148, 151-158 
Marxism, 24, 25 
masculinity 

Chicano literature dominated by, 58 
in literature, 34-35 
and violence, 48 
Matthiessen, F. O., 8, 52 
Mean Spirit (Hogan), 109-1 10 
medicine men, 1 19-120 
medicine women, 61-62 
“Melodramas of Beset Manhood: How 
Theories of American Fiction Exclude 
Women Authors” (Baym), 52-53 
Melville, Herman, 52, 166, 182, 184, 191 n. 4 
Memories of My Boyhood (Eisenhower), 222 
Mentzos, John, 1 24 

Mexican Americans, 56-59. See also Chicano/ 
Chicana literature 
Mexicans 

cultural interaction of, 115 
culture of, 1 24 

inaccurate depictions of, 150-152 
Middle Passage (Johnson), 1 96 
Migrations of the Heart (Golden), 99-101 , 

105, 109 

Milton, John, 79, 193 
Mimic Men, The (Naipaul), 73, 77 
minorities, anthology inclusion of, 242-243 
“Miss Beulah’s Bonnet” (Cooke), 40-41 , 44- 
45 

“Missionary Story, The” (Vibert), 150 
Mrs. Spring Fragrance (Sui), 133 
Mitchell, Margaret, 131 
Mohy-Dick (Melville), 182, 191 n. 4, 195 
modernism, 179 

Modem Language Association, 178 
Momaday, N. Scott, 67 n. 15, 158 n. 1 
Montage of a Dream Deferred, 253 
Moore, Marianne, 242 
Morada de la Conquistadora, 1 47 
moral issues, 166, 167 
Morrison, Toni 

and cultural struggle, 28 
Ellison as forerunner of, 24 
literary status of, 1 82 
literary tradition approach to, 186 
on racial relationships, 1 03 
rhetorical dimensions of, 214 
study of, 193, 195, 197 




O 3 



3 



Index 



265 



“MTV Unplugged,” 125 
Mukherjee, Bharati, 97, 98, 131 
multicultural, definitions of, 163 
multicultural aesthetic, 124-126 
multiculturalism 
calls for, 28 

Ceremony as model of, 122 
in classroom, 203 
debate over, 3-5, 20-2 1 
definitions of, 50-5 1 
dialogic theory of, 64 
as dynamic process, 1 16 
flexibility in, 64 
in higher education, 7 
outlook of, 22 

and politics of diversity, 197 
as reality of life, 1 15 
as separatism, 51, 64 
multicultural literature, 249, 255, 256 
multicultural texts 
bases for selection, 163-164 
connection with teachers and students, 203 
grouping of, 165-167 
rationale for using, 170 
Murphy, Eddie, 201 
Murray, Albert, 28 
myths 

in Ceremony, 121 
cultural traditions in, 106 
Native American perspective of, 60-62, 66 
n. 11 



Naipaul, V. S.,73,77, 221 
Naked Lunch (Burroughs), 195 
Naming Our Destiny (Jordan), 55-56 
Naqvi, Tahira, 131 

Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, 
an American Slave (Douglass), 195, 212, 
213 

“Narratives of Struggle” (hooks), 98 
narrators, in regional fiction, 45^6 
National Council of Teachers of English, 175, 
178 

National Endowment for the Humanities, 34 
nationalism, 24, 47 
Native Americans 
art of, 1 54 

cultural interactions of, 1 15-1 16 
exploitation of, 109-1 10 
inaccurate depictions of, 150 
literature of, 51, 59-62, 255 
marginalization of, 53 
mythic perspective of, 60-62, 66 n. 11 
myths in Ceremony, 121 
religions of, 106, 151-152 
spirituality of, 109-1 10, 154 



storytelling of, 1 16, 125-126 

of Taos pueblo, 150, 152-153, 155-156 

as writers, 1 83 

Natives of My Person (Lamming), 74 
“New England Nun, A” (Freeman), 38-39 
New Journalism, 226-227 
New Mexican culture, 146-149, 150-153, 
156-158 

New Negro, The (Locke), 253 
Nigerian culture, 100-101 
nisei, 139 
nonconformity, 57 
Nordell, Robert, 227 
Norris, Frank, 225 

Norton Anthology of Literature, 1 75- 1 76, 1 9 1 
n. 4 

Norton Anthology of Wo rid Masterpieces, 250, 
255 

“Notes from a Native Daughter” (Didion), 
218,225 

Notes of a Native Son (Wright), 193, 252, 253 
Notes on the State of Virginia (Jefferson), 1 1 
Nunez, Elizabeth, 103, 105-107, 110, 112, 

113 



obeah, 106 

Odyssey (Homer), 77-78, 1 96 
Oedipus Rex (Sophocles), 1 94 
O’Keeffe, Georgia, 146, 149, 156 
Old Man and the Sea, The (Hemingway), 132, 
193 

Omeros (Walcott), 77-78 
Omi, Michael, 243 
Onate, Juan de, 153 
O’Neill, Eugene, 183 

“On Going Home” (Didion), 217-219, 220- 
222, 223-224, 226, 228 
“On the Walpole Road” (Freeman), 38, 48 
“Opening of the American Mind, The: 
Challenges in the Cross-Cultural 
Teaching of Literature” (Dilg), 126 
oral tradition, 59-61, 1 1 1 
Other 

assessment of, 200 

crossing cultural boundaries, 122-123 
empathy with, 216 

multicultural literature’s focus on, 124 
stereotypes of, 151 

“‘Othered Matters: Reconceptualizing 

Dominance and Difference in the History 
of Sexuality in America” (duCille), 197 
Overcrowded Barracoon, The (Naipaul), 73 



Paine, Thomas, 180 
Paradise Lost (Milton), 79, 196 





266 



Index 



parallelism, 179-180 

parallel studies, 51, 54, 57, 61, 66 n. 4, 67 n. 

15 

Parrington, Vernon Louis, 8 
particular realities, 98 
Parton, Sara (pen name: Fanny Fern), 15 
“Passions of Pluralism, The: Multiculturalism 
and the Expanding Community” 

(Greene), 83 
patriotism, 22, 24 

Pearl ofOrr’s Island, The (Stowe), 45 
“Pedagogy of the Distressed” (Tompkins), 172 
Penitente Brotherhood, 146-147, 154 
personal computers, global universality of, 4 
physical abuse, of slaves, 102 
pigeonholes, of cultures, 1 16 
Plato, Ann, 198 

Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the 
Literary Imagination (Morrison), 24, 
103,214 

“Poem About My Rights” (Jordan), 56 
“Poet, The” (Emerson), 61 
political correctness, 3, 6-7 
politics. See also identity politics 
of anthologies, 242 
of canon, 33 
of curriculum, 6 
of diversity, 197 
of exclusion, 4, 5 
of inclusion, 197-198, 243 
of positionality, 199-200 
of recognition, 28 

“Politics of Knowledge, The” (Said), 129 
“Politics of Teaching Virtue, The” (Bizzell), 
167 

poor people’s campaign, 27 
Pope (Tewa religious leader), 153 
popular culture, in student assignments, 235 
Porter, Katherine Anne, 199 
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, A 
(Joyce), 196 

Portugese colonialism, 107 
positionality, politics of, 199-200 
postcolonialism, 3-4 
Pound, Ezra, 195, 243 
power, 23, 45, 85 

“Power, Authority, and Critical Pedagogy” 
(Bizzell), 166-167 

“Praline Woman, The” (Dunbar-Nelson), 41- 
42,44 

Pratt, Mary Louise, 165-166, 176 
“Prieta, La” (Anzaldua), 58-59 
Problem of American Realism, The (Bell), 35- 
36 

prose sketch, 227 
protest fiction, 253 

Provisions: A Reader from Nineteenth- 



Century American Women (Fetterley), 
198 

Pryse, Marjorie, 35, 36-37, 40, 175, 184 
psychic literature, 60 
Pueblos, holistic worldview of, 117 
Puritanism, 179 



Quatro, Suzie, 241 



race 

as category of literary traditions, 1 84 
hierarchies based on, 43, 44 
inclusive views of, 116 
rhetorical dimensions of, 210 
stereotyped images of, 147 
race-class-gender catchphrase, 20-21 
racial/ethnic national identity, 207 
racial identity 

in classrooms, 208-209, 210-21 1, 252 
and personal freedom, 87-88 
strategic use of, 2 1 1 -2 1 2 
racial prejudice, 21, 132-133 
racism 

against Asian Americans, 139 
economic motives for, 11-12 
living with, 101 
pervasiveness of, 98 
rise of, 18 

in Trinidad, 105-107 
rainbow coalition, 28 
Rancho de Las Golondrinas, El, 146 
rape, 56, 103 
Raymond, James C., 242 
Reader, the Text , the Poem , The (Rosenblatt), 
84 

reader-response pedagogy, 84, 94 
readers 

empathy lack of, 223 
expectations of, 219-220 
feedback from, 223 
Reagan, Ronald, 7, 1 8 
realism, 35-37 
realist novel genre, 227, 228 
reality, connected with ritual, 121 
reception theory, 216, 217-218, 220, 222, 226 
regionalism. See also literary regionalism 
definitions of, 2 1 6-2 1 7 
and meaning, 228-229 
and reception theory, 2 1 7-2 1 8 
regional realism, 35 
relationships 

’ interracial, 102-103, 132-133, 153 
models of, 224 
religions 

of Caribbean nations, 106 





Index 



267 



conflicts among, 106, 151-152 
of Cuban people, 108 
of Indohispanic people, 154 
of Native Americans, 106, 109-110 
religious customs, 90-9 1 , 92-93 
Renker, Elizabeth, 34 
resistance, sites of, 98, 113 
Resisting Reader, The: A Feminist Approach to 
American Fiction (Fetterley), 35, 228 
revisionism, 5, 155, 242 
rhetoric. See also cultural rhetoric 
in composition classes, 171-172, 173 
definitions of, 203-205 
of Douglass, 205-2 1 5 
and identity politics, 211-212 
rhetoricity, in literature, 129, 140 
Rhys, Jean, 78 

Rich, Adrienne, 83, 183, 190 
Richter, David, 244, 245 
rights, 16, 206-207. See also women’s rights 
movements 

ritual, connected with reality, 121 
ritualized and sacramental life, 221, 223 
Robinson, Lillian, 33 

rock music, student anthology of, 237-240, 
246-248 

Rockwellian values, 219-220 

Rodden, John, 240 

Rodgers, Jimmie, 239 

Rodriguez, Richard, 233 

Roman Catholic Church. See Catholic Church 

Romero, Laura, 36 

Room of One ’s Own, A (Woolf), 84 

Rosenblatt, Louise, 81, 84 

Ross, Diana, 240 

Rothko, Mark, 228-229 

Rudnick, Lois, 149 

Ruppert, James, 115, 125 

Rutherford, Jonathan, 63 

“Sacred Hoop, The: A Contemporary 
Perspective” (Allen), 60 
Said, Edward, 129 

Salt Eaters, The (Bambara), 196, 197 
Salzman, Jack, 65 n. 1 
Sanchez-Tranquilino, Marcos, 58 
Sand, George, 199 
santeria, 108 
Santos, Bienvenidos, 131 
S arris, Greg, 117, 125-126 
Saturday Evening Post, The, 219-220, 222, 
223 

scapegoating, 19, 20 

Scarlet Letter, The (Hawthorne), 39, 164, 195 
Schwartz, Lawrence, 182 
Schweikart, Patrocinio, 84 
“Second Coming, The” (Yeats), 223 



o 




self, fixed notions of, 64—65 
self-definition, 51-52, 59-62, 83, 85-90 
self-determination, 53-56 
self-realization, 85 
self-reliance, 42, 53 
“Self-Reliance” (Emerson), 51, 54 
Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of 
American Fiction 1 790-1 860 
(Tompkins), 182 

separatism, multiculturalism as, 51 
“Seventeen Syllables” (Yamamoto), 136-140 
sexism, 98 

sexual liberation, 86-87, 89, 92-93 
sexual preference, 55-56, 59 
Shadow and Act (Ellison), 27, 28, 254 
Shakespeare, William, 196 
Shanghai International Studies University, 
129-134, 141 n. 10 

She’s a Rebel : The History of Women in Rock 
and Roll (Gaar), 236 

“Shine, Perishing Republic” (Jeffers), 190 
Shockley, Ann Allen, 198 
“Short Note to My Very Critical Friends and 
Well-Beloved Comrades, A” (Jordan), 66 
n. 5 

Shumway, David, 207 
signifying, 200 

Silko, Leslie Marmon, 67 n. 15, 115-126 

Simon, Paul, 218 

Simpson, O. J., 218 

Sinclair, Upton, 243 

“Sister Liddy” (Freeman), 41 

sketch form, 38-39, 217, 227 

slave narratives, 101-103, 164,200, 253 

slavery 

antebellum defenders of, 213 
and Constitution of United States, 10-11 
debate over, 166, 171-172 
economics of, 2 1 2-2 1 3 
in Jamaica, 103-105 
legacies of, 98 
legal apparatus of, 205 
rhetorical discussion of, 205-207, 211-212 
slaves 

abuse of, 1 02 

citations of Declaration of Independence, 
10-11 

rape of, 1 03 

Slouching Towards Bethlehem (Didion), 219- 
220, 223, 226-227, 228 
Smith, Barbara, 84 
Smith, Henry Nash, 52 
Smith, John, 180 
Smith, Patricia Clark, 156, 157 
Smith, Valerie, 206 
social class 

as category of literary traditions, 1 84 



276 



268 



Index 



cultural composition of, 195-196 
demands based on, 59 
hierarchies based on, 43 
and personal freedom, 87-88 
rhetorical dimensions of, 210 
social convention, rejection of, 5 1 , 57 
social determinism, 25 
social disempowerment, 21 
society 

aspirations affected by, 86 
dictates of, 66 n. 6, 93 
socio-ideological forces, 204, 206, 212, 214 
Solomon, Jack, 218 
So Long a Letter (Ba), 83, 90-91 
Sons and Lovers (Lawrence), 1 95 
Sophocles, 196 

Souls of Black Folk, The (Du Bois), 1 80 

Spanish colonialism, 153 

Spenser, Edmund, 193 

spirituality, 62, 154 

Standing Bear, 243 

Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 14, 180, 186 

Steinbeck, John, 193 

Steiner, Jean-Francois, 220 

Stepto, Michele, 212 

stereotypes, 147, 151 

Stewart, Maria, 164 

storytelling 

in Native American literature, 1 16, 125-126 
by women of color, 1 1 1 
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 45, 180, 183, 199, 

200 

Strangers from a Different Shore (Takaki), 133 
Stuart, Henry Longan, 148 
students 
Chinese 

literature viewed by, 129-130 
resistance to multicultural literature, 131 
connections with multicultural texts, 203 
critical capacity development in, 232 
engagement with literature, 130, 235, 237 
focus of, 85 

reading preferences of, 164 
tapping expertise of, 237 
teacher evaluations by, 249-250, 255-256 
Sui Sin Far, 128, 132-134, 140 
Sundquist, Eric, 36 



Takaki, Ronald, 133 

“Talks at the Yan’an Forum on Literature and 
Art” (Mao), 130 
tall tale genre, 45-46 
Tan, Amy, 110-112 
Tate, Sharon, 222 
Taylor, Edward, 186 



teachers 

connections with multicultural texts, 203 
expertise needed by, 176, 195-196 
racial identity of, 208-209, 210-21 1, 252 
reading preferences of, 1 63- 1 64 
student evaluations of, 249-250, 255-256 
teaching 

of conflict, 231-234 
goals of, 195 
lecture-style of, 172 

from multicultural perspective, 199-200 
of organizational schemes, 239, 240 
relevance of assignments, 236 
rhetorical questions about, 208 
self-reflexivity in, 207 
traditional dissemination model of, 234 
Teaching with the Norton Anthology of 
American Literature, Fourth Edition 
(Pryse), 175, 188-189 fig. 1 
Tetreault, Kay Thompson, 84 
text selection 
analysis of bias, 198-199 
assessment of multicultural perspective, 
199-200 

bases for, 163-164 
criteria for, 194—195 
historical approach to, 178-181 
inclusion approach to, 186-191, 193-194 
literary traditions approach to, 1 83- 1 86 
major authors approach to, 181-183 
procrastination in, 200-201 
teaching of, 243-244 
traditional categories of, 164-165 
universal themes for, 165 
Their Eyes Were Watching God (Hurston), 83, 
85-90,193,253 
Thelma and Louise (film), 84 
“Thinking about My Poetry” (Jordan), 54 
Thoreau, Henry David 
heritage of, 65-66 n. 3 
and marginality, 184 

parallel study of, 54, 57, 61, 67 n. 15, 185, 
233 

self-definition of, 51-52 
on society’s dictates, 66 n. 6 
Thornton, Big Mama, 240 
time travel, 101-103 
tokenism, 33, 164-165 
Tolson, Melvin, 195 
Tompkins, Jane, 81, 158, 172, 182, 204 
Toomer, Jean, 1 95 

“To(o) Queer the Writer” (Anzaldua), 58, 67 
n. 14 

“Toward a Black Feminist Criticism” (Smith), 
84 

Tradition, the Writer and Society (Harris), 72 



o 

ERIC 

hfliflaffHHaaaa 



27 ? 



Index 



269 



traditional customs 

rebellion against, 90-93 
Transcendentalism, 51, 52-53, 54, 57 
Treblinka (Steiner), 220 
tribal literatures, 59-62 
Trilling, Lionel, 8 
Trinh T. Minh-ha, 50, 1 1 1 
Trinidad, culture of, 71-72, 105-107 
Trudell, John, 125 
Truth and Method (Gadamer), 216 
Turner, Tina, 240 
Twain, Mark, 131, 148,243 



unAmerican literature, 32-35, 37-38, 39, 47- 
48 

Uncle Tom ’s Cabin (Stowe), 1 80, 1 99 
Under Western Eyes: Personal Essays from 
Asian America (Hongo), 1 28 
universalism, 8-10, 17-18 
universal themes, 165, 169-170 
universities. See higher education 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 129, 
134-136, 141 n. 9, 141 n. 10 
Up from Slavery (Washington), 253 



“Vanishing Americans: Gender, Empire, and 
New Historicism” (Romero), 36 
Vargas, Diego de, 153 

Verbal Art as Performance (Bauman), 59-60 
Vibert, Jehan Georges, 1 50 
victimhood, 54 

Victoria, Queen of England, 76 
Vietnam War era, 27, 222 
Villanueva, Victor, 169 
violence, 22, 48, 56 

Visions of America: Personal Narratives from 
the Promised Land (Brown and Ling), 
131 

visual imagery, 146, 149-150 

wage labor, 12, 16-17 
wage slavery, 213 
wagon-train morality, 224-225 
Waiting to Exhale (McMillan), 201 
“Waking Up in the Middle of Some American 
Dreams” (Jordan), 55 
Walcott, Derek, 71-72, 77-79 
Wald, Priscilla, 206-207, 21 1-212, 213 
Walden (Thoreau), 51, 61 
Walker, Alice 

Chinese students’ knowledge of, 131 
and cultural struggle, 28 
literary traditions approach to, 186 
parallel study of, 67 n. 15 



0 




study of, 84-85, 93, 193, 195 
Walker, David, 1 1, 24, 26, 27, 164 
“War Prayer, The” (Twain), 243 
Warren, Joyce, 52 
Washington, Booker T., 186, 253 
Was Huck Black? (Fishkin), 1 15 
Waste Land, The (Eliot), 125 
Watts, Jerry, 24, 25 
Weidman, Bette, 146, 157 
Welty, Eudora, 183 
West, Cornel, 28, 124 
Wharton, Edith, 183 

What Does a Woman Want? (Felman), 228 
What Makes Writing Good: A 

Multiperspective (Coles and Vopat), 169 
“What’s wrong with being a snob?” (Naipaul), 
221 

“What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” 
(Douglass), 1 1, 180, 203-204, 208, 213- 
214 

Wheatley, Phillis, 186, 195 
When Rocks Dance (Nunez), 105-107, 109 
White, Hayden, 201 
White Album, The (Didion), 228 
Whitecloud, Tom, 242 
“White Heron, A” (Jewett), 37, 39, 45 
white racial solidarity, 21 1 
white supremacy, 19 
Whitman, Walt, 67 n. 15, 179, 183, 184 
“Why Don’t We Do It in the Classroom” 
(Gass), 236 

Wide Sargasso Sea (Rhys), 78 
“Willa Cather’s Art in Historical Perspective” 
(Weidman), 146 
Williams, Sherley Anne, 198 
Winesburg, Ohio (Anderson), 1 95 
Wolfe, Thomas, 217 
Wolff, Tobias, 140 
women 
of color 

fiction by, 97-98 
storytelling by. 111 

common life circumstances of, 62, 84-85 
exploring perceptions of, 84 
journalism by, 226-227 
marginalized by American individualism, 

53 

marriage stifling voices of, 86 
in music industry, 236, 241 
nationalism for, 47 
oppression of, 85 
property rights of, 16 
as protagonists, 38-39, 99 
self-definition quests of, 83, 85-90 
self-determination of, 93-94 
as storytellers, 41-42, 46 



278 



270 



Index 



struggle for power, 85 
violence against, 48, 56 
wages of, 16-17 
writers 

anthology inclusion of, 242-243 
impact of, 83-84, 94-95 
literary status of, 182 
writing traditions of, 35-36 
Women Reading Writing: Self- Invention in 
Paula Gunn Allen, Gloria Anzaldua, and 
Audre Lorde (Keating), 66 n. 9 
women’s rights movements 
abolitionist linkage of, 12-14 
and Declaration of Independence, 13-17 
Women’s Movement, 53 
Women’s Rights Convention (1848), 14-15 
Wong, Sau-ling Cynthia, 129, 136 
Wonham, Henry B., 45^16 
Woolf, Virginia, 84, 93 
Woolman, John, 180 

World War II, and Japanese Americans, 139 



World Wide Web, 4 

Wright, Richard, 24, 183, 193, 195, 252 
writers 

of Caribbean, 72-79 

criteria for major status, 181-183 

ethnic connections of, 57 



xenophobia, 18, 21 



Yamamoto, Hisaye, 128, 132, 136-140 
Yeats, William Butler, 223 
“Yellow Wallpaper, The” (Gilman), 243 
You Can ’t Go Home Again (Wolfe), 217 
Young Bear, Ray, 1 24 



Zamir, Shamoon, 124-125 
Zitkala-Sa, 186 




279 



Editors 




Lil Brannon is professor of English and director 
of the Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learn- 
ing at the University at Albany, SUNY. Her most 
recent book, Critical Teaching and the Idea of 
Literacy (with C.H. Knoblauch), was published 
in 1993. 




Brenda M. Greene is professor of English and 
chair of the department of languages, literature, 1 
communications, and philosophy at Medgar Evers 
College, CUNY. She is currently conducting re- 
search on the literature of women of color. Her re- 
cent essays include “Addressing Race, Class, and 
Gender in Their Eyes Were Watching GocT in En- 
glish Education (December 1995) and “Reinvent- 
ing the Literacy Text: Student Writers at Work” in 
When Writing Teachers Teach Literature: Bring- 
ing Writing to Reading (1995). 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



o 

ERLC 



280 



271 



Contributors 



John Alberti is assistant professor of English at Northern Kentucky University. He is 
editor of The Canon in the Classroom : The Pedagogical Implications of Canon Revi- 
sion in American Literature (1995). 



Patricia Bizzell is professor of English and director of the college honor program at the 
College of the Holy Cross. Her most recent book, Negotiating Difference (with Bruce 
Herzberg), was published in 1995. 

Mary Louise Buley-Meissner is associate professor of English at the University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee; she has also taught and carried out cross-cultural research at 
several universities in the People’s Republic of China. She is returning to China to 
complete research on a book about social and political changes in Chinese teachers’ 
lives. 

Judith Beth Cohen is associate professor in the Adult Baccalaureate College at Lesley 
College in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and an associate of the Bard College Institute 
on Writing and Thinking. She has published a novel, Seasons ( 1 984), and numerous 
short stories. 



Judith Fetterley is professor of English and women’s studies at the University at Al- 
bany, SUNY. She is the author of The Resisting Reader: A Feminist Approach to 
American Fiction (1978) and of Provisions: A Reader from 19th-Century American 
Women (1985). With Joanne Dobson and Elaine Showalter, she founded the Rutgers 
University Press American Women Writers series. She is fiction editor of the femi- 
nist literary journal Thirteenth Moon and serves on the editorial boards of American 
Literature and Legacy. 

Frances Smith Foster is professor of English and women’s studies at Emory Univer- 
sity. She has edited a number of works in African American and women’s literature, 
including the Oxford Companion to African American Literature (1997), the Norton 
Anthology of African American Literature (1996), and Minnie* s Sacrifice, Sowing 
and Reaping, Trial and Triumph: Three Rediscovered Novels by Frances Ellen Watkins 
Harper (\ 994). She is author of Witnessing Slavery: The Development of Ante-Bellum 
Slave Narrative ( 1 994) and Written by Herself: Literary Production by African Ameri- 
can Women, 1746-1892 (1993). 

Joyce C. Harte teaches at the Borough of Manhattan Community College, CUNY. Her 
most recent publication was “Caribbean Literature as Catalyst in the Composition 
Classroom” (with Keith Gilyard and June D. Bobb) in Voices in English Classrooms 
(1996). 



273 



er|c best copy available 



281 



274 



Contributors 



Gregory S. Jay is professor of English at the University of Wi scon sin-Mi lwaukee. His 
essay also appears in his most recent book, American Literature and the Culture 
Wars, published by Cornell University Press (1996). 



AnaLouise Keating is associate professor of English at Eastern New Mexico Univer- 
sity, where she teaches courses in multicultural U.S. literature and directs the compo- 
sition program. Her book, Women Reading Women Writing: Self-Invention in Paula 
Gunn Allen, Gloria Anzaldua, and Audre Lorde, was published in 1996. 

Janies S. Laughlin, a former instructor in the English department and a writing consult- 
ant in the writing-across-the-curriculum program at Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University, is now a management consultant in Massachusetts. 



Elizabeth Nunez is professor of English at Medgar Evers College, CUNY, and director 
of the National Black Writers Conference and the college’s honors program. A native 
of Trinidad, Nunez has published articles on Caribbean writers including Jean Rhys, 
Phyllis Shand Alfrey, Jamaica Kincaid, Merle Hodge, V.S. Naipaul, and George Lam- 
ming. She is author of the novel When Rocks Dance (1986). 

Robert O’Brien Hokanson is assistant professor of English and writing coordinator 
for the communication competence department at Alvemo College, Milwaukee, Wis- 
consin. He has published articles on American poetry and is currently developing 
curriculum and pedagogy for a first-year communication course. 



Marjorie Pryse is professor of English and women’s studies at the University at Al- 
bany, SUNY. She is co-editor (with Judith Fetterley) of American Women Regional- 
ly, 1850-1910(1992). 



Louise Z. Smith is professor of English at the University of Massachusetts-Boston. 
Since 1992 she has been editor of College English. Her most recent work, “Beyond 
the ‘Imaginary Museum’: Interested Readings, Interesting Tropes,” appears in 
Reconceptualizing American Literary/Cultural Studies: Rhetoric, History, and Poli- 
tics in the Humanities, edited by William E. Cain (1996). 



Joseph F. Trimmer is professor of English at Ball State University, where he teaches 
courses in writing and cultural studies. His books include The National Book Awards 
for Fiction: An Index to the First Twenty-Five Years (1978), and (with Tilly Warnock) 
Understanding Others: Cultural and Cross-Cultural Studies and the Teaching of Lit- 
erature (\992). In the summer, he teaches at the Martha’s Vineyard Summer Institute 
on Teaching and Writing. 




This book was typeset in Times Roman by Electronic Imaging . 
Typefaces used on the cover were Caslon Antique and Caslon 540 . 
The book was printed on 50-lb . Lynx by Versa Press. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



283 



Rethinking American Literature 



har is “American literature,” and how do our definitions of 



this category affect our teaching? These questions form the 
basis of Rethinking American Literature, an anthology of essays 
inspired by the NCTK Summer Institutes for Teachers of 
Literature. In the spirit of the Summer Institutes, this collection 
unites theory and practice, providing teachers with a window on 
current debates over canon formation, ethnicity, representation, 
and pedagogy. 

Part I, Reshaping American Literature, argues for the 
recovery and teaching of often overlooked writers and works such 
as slave narratives, oral and written literatures ot Native Americans, 
and nineteenth-century women regionalists. Part II, Crossing 
Cultural Boundaries, expands the range ot discussion with essays 
on Caribbean, African American, Asian American, and Latino writ- 
ers. Part III, Negotiating Differences, explores issues ot pedagogy, 
including making students aware of debates in the field and decid- 
ing what and how to teach. With essays by noted scholars, includ- 
ing Judith Fetterley, Patricia Bizzell, Elizabeth Nunez, Gregory 
Jay, and Joseph Trimmer, Rethinking American Literature is a timely 
resource for literature teachers concerned with re-envisioning 
American literature for a multicultural classroom. 

Sat tonal (.on n at of Ir/t/ln r.\ of b.n^lisfi 

tilt U: Km ) on f\ on ft, I / fount, 1 1 tin ois 0 / So i-ioyfi 

Trtcpho tic: / -St to - 6 tj - ()J <V { or jij- j S- 1 Sj o 

l \ \b stir. hnp’.Uvrvrv'. in tc. 




t 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



O 





