DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 440 795 



RC 022 381 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Kitchen, Richard S.; Velasquez, Diane Torres; Myers, John 
Dropouts in New Mexico: Native American and Hispanic 
Students Speak Out. 

2000-04-00 

35p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association (New Orleans, LA, April 
24-28, 2000) . 

Reports - Research (143) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 
MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indians; Dropout Prevention; Dropout Rate; 
♦Dropouts; ♦Educational Needs; Ethnic Groups; ♦Hispanic 
American Students; Poverty; Secondary Education; ♦Secondary 
School Students; ♦Student Attitudes; Student School 
Relationship 

♦American Indian Students; Native Americans; ♦New Mexico 



ABSTRACT 



This paper provides an overview of drtpout rates in New 
Mexico and reports the perceptions of Hispanic and Native American students 
on dropout-related issues. New Mexico has the third highest dropout rate in 
the nation. Over 7,500 students in New Mexico drop out each year, and many 
schools lose 30-50 percent of their students. Dropout rates are particularly 
alarming for Hispanics, African Americans, and Native Americans. In every 
ethnic group, males are more likely to drop out than females. Data tables 
present 1995-96 dropout rates for grades 9-12 by year, ethnic group, and 
gender and for grades 7-8 by ethnic group. A short literature review 
discusses the high national Hispanic dropout rate, regardless of 
socioeconomic class, immigrant status, or home language; the role of cultural 
discontinuity and racism in the high Native American dropout rate; the 
influence of poverty and social inequities on dropout rates; and evidence 
that school-related reasons contribute most to student decisions to drop out. 
Interviews with Hispanic and Native American students and parents at three 
New Mexico middle schools revealed some common themes: that teachers were 
uncaring, biased against students* cultures, and insensitive to students' 
difficulties at home; that school felt like a prison; and that friends, 
parents, extracurricular activities, and hands-on learning motivated students 
to stay in school . Effective dropout prevention strategies are described 
relating to teacher professional development, teacher support networks, the 
school environment, educational policy, community involvement, and research. 
An appendix briefly summarizes 30 dropout prevention programs in New Mexico. 
(Contains 40 references . ) (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



^ 0 2 2 3 8 r 



f 



yn 

G^ 

r-* 

o 



s 



Dropouts in New Mexico: Native American and Hispanic Students 

Speak Out 

Richard S. Kitchen & Diane Torres Velasquez 
University of New Mexico 

John Myers 
OISE 



Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association 
April, 2000 

New Orleans, Louisiana 



U.S. DEPARTMENT EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
imorove reproduction quality. 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



/<" '( f rJae^ 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



kErIc 

' USBIS&aSES 



2 

BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 






Hispanic and Native American Dropouts in New Mexico 

Richard Kitchen, Diane Velasquez, and John Myers 
New Mexico Research and Study Council 
College of Education 
University of New Mexico 

Executive Summary 

In this report, the dropout crisis in the United States and in New Mexico is 
introduced. In the United States, it is expected that as many as 25% of all fifth graders will 
not graduate from high school (Mann, 1986; Rumberger, 1987). Studies have found that 
social economic class is the best predictor of who drops out of high school. In New 
Mexico, disproportionate numbers of Hispanics and Native Americans dropout. Data on 
dropouts in New Mexico from 1995-96 confirms that more males than females dropout in 
grades 9-12 across every ethnic group. 

Reasons are suggested for why Hispanics and Native Americans leave high school 
at exceedingly high rates in New Mexico. Students from three middle schools in different 
regions of the state give their insights into why their friends and family members left school 
before graduating or are considering dropping out. Parents from one of the schools also 
contribute their opinions about what more schools can do to decrease the dropout rate. 

Other sections in the report provide ideas about what teachers and schools can do to 
address the dropout problem. District, state and national policies are discussed vis-a-vis 
dropouts. How community-based organizations, business, and the larger community 
support programs for students at risk of dropping out is also discussed. Finally, the need 
for further research on the issues that affect dropouts and the development of innovative 
programs to prevent students from leaving school before graduation is discussed. The 
report concludes with a listing of prevention and intervention programs throughout New 
Mexico that are proving to be particular effective at decreasing the dropout rate. 




3 



Dedication 



This report is dedicated to all of the students at “Soaring Eagle Middle School,” 
“Monterey Middle School,” and “El Rey Middle School” who shared with us some very 



personal stories about their lives. 



Introduction 



The high incidence of school dropout in the United States is a serious concern for 
parents, educators, politicians, and the general public. Because of rapid technological 
advances, education is crucial for preparing a knowledgeable, skilled, and flexible work 
force for the advanced industrial economy of the United States. Education prepares 
workers for immediate participation in the nation’s economy and represents a long-term 
investment in the economic welfare of the country. The consequences of dropping out are 
hfe-long and life-altering for the individual, and threaten the effectiveness of the economy 
and the stability of society. 

According to No More Excuses: The Final Report of the Hispanic Dropout Project 
(HDP), a student who drops out of high school is more likely to be unemployed, more 
hkely to earn less when employed, and more likely to raise a family in poverty, thus putting 
the next generation at risk of dropping out, and repeating this cycle (U.S. Department of 
Education, 1998a). High dropout rates lead to increased unemployment, increased demands 
on social services, and a less skilled work force (Rumberger, 1987). The employment 
possibilities for a high school dropout are greatly restricted (U.S. Department of Education, 
1998a, p. 6). For example, dropouts in 1982 were twice as likely to be unemployed (42%) 
compared to 1982 high school graduates (23%) (Rumberger, 1987). The effects on an 
individual’s lifetime earnings are even more dramatic: for Hispanic students, the projected 
loss in lifetime earnings for dropouts is $47.9 billion for the class of 1998 (U.S. 

Department of Education, 1998a). 

But education should not be seen strictly in its relation to the economy; the 
capability of education to advance the social well-being of the United States and promote 
democratic values are also essential. Social peace in the United States is predicated on the 
possibility that all citizens, regardless of their economic and social status, can improve their 
lives. The dropout problem also threatens the future of American political institutions. The 
demands of democratic governance require an educated and well-informed citizenry to make 




3 



5 



knowledgeable decisions about the increasingly complex social and political problems faced 
by contemporary society. 

In this report, we describe a variety of issues that affect dropouts in New Mexico, 
while including a listing of programs being used throughout the state that have proven 
successful in both intervening and preventing students from dropping out of school. Data 
on school dropouts in the United States and New Mexico is initially presented to frame the 
problem. While exploring the factors that influence students to dropout of school, we 
provide insights from students from three middle schools located in different parts of the 
state who shared with us their ideas about what schools and society can do to address the 
dropout issue. Finally, what more we need to know about dropouts is considered. 

Before proceeding, an explanation of the term dropout is necessary. The common 
usage of “dropout” signifies a student who leaves school before earning a diploma. This 
definition is interpreted differently by school districts by how they calculate the dropout 
rate. Schools differ on important data gathering methods such as how grades are used to 
count dropouts, the time span when dropouts are counted, and the definition of an absence. 
Frequently, accurate information about why students dropout of school is unavailable. 
Despite the difficulties that school districts have classifying and tracking dropouts, as many 
as 400 students are dropping out of school in New Mexico everyday and not returning to 
complete their high school diplomas (Bingaman, 1998). This statistic clearly illustrates that 
the dropout problem is acute in New Mexico’s schools. 

Data on Dropouts in the Nation 

Some researchers predict that in the United States, it can be expected that as many as 
25% of fifth graders will not graduate from high school (Mann, 1986; Rumberger, 1987). 

An ambitious study of high school dropouts which tracked a 1980 cohort of 30,000 high 
school sophomores over six years, the High School and Beyond (HS&B) study found that 
social economic class is the strongest predictor of who drops out of high school (Barro, 



1984). The study documented that 22% from the lowest quartile and 8.9% from the highest 
quartile drop out (Rumberger, 1987). Among students in the lowest income quartile, 

Whites drop out considerably more often than African-Americans and Hispanics. However, 
in the highest income quartile, significantly fewer Whites drop out than others. According 
to Fine (1991), this data demonstrates that “wealth provides a substantially more efficient 
educational buffer for whites than for students of color” (p. 22). 

The HS&B study also found that tracking or ability grouping was also associated 
with dropout rates (Barro, 1984). Overall, 26% of students in low-ability groups dropped 
out compared to only 3% of students in the high-ability groups. Ability grouping or 
“tracking” has resulted in students having varying access to educational opportunities 
(Oakes, 1985). With respect to disability, minority students are more likely to be placed in 
special education programs than Whites (Gartner & Lipsky, 1987). Though PL 94-142 
mandates parental involvement in the evaluation and placement of children in special 
education programs, Gartner and Lipsky (1987) found that parents were not involved in the 
development of Individualized Education Programs in 70% of the student cases surveyed. 

The HS&B data (Barro, 1984) also indicates that young women drop out less 
frequently than young men across ability groups, especially in the higher quartiles (Barro, 
1984). However, the study found that young women report dropping out for “family 
concerns” significantly more often than young men (37% of females versus 5% of males). 
Pregnancy, parenting, and marriage are much more disruptive of the education of young 
women than of young men (Fine, 1991). The HS&B study found that 50% of young 
mothers (compared to 30% of young fathers) drop out, and that as many as 75% of those 
married and parenting leave high school before graduating (Barro, 1984). 



Data on Dropouts in New Mexico 




5 



7 



New Mexico has the third highest dropout rate in the nation (Abeyta & Borgrink, 
1997). Over 7,500 students in New Mexico dropout each year, and many schools lose 
between 30% and 50% of their students. The dropout rate is particularly alarming because 
of who is dropping out. In the state of New Mexico, the rate of Hispanic, African American 
and Native American high school incompletion, without obtaining a diploma or equivalency 
certificate such as a GED, has reached alarming levels. In a study completed by the New 
Mexico State Department of Education of the 1995-96 dropout rates of students throughout 
the state, it was discovered that across grades 9-12, Hispanics, African Americans, and 
Native Americans had the highest dropout rates of 10.8%, 10.6% and 8.6% respectively 
(see Table 1). The dropout rates for Asians and Whites were 6.5% and 5.9%, respectively. 

TABLE 1: 1995-96 DROPOUT RATES BY ETHNICITY, GRADES 9-12 



Ethnicity 9th Grade 10th Grade 11th Grade 12th Grade 



African American 


8.5% 


12.0% 


10.0% 


7.1% 


Asian 


7.7% 


5.0% 


5.9% 


5.6% 


Hispanic 


5.9% 


10.2% 


9.7% 


7.5% 


Native American 


8.2% 


9.7% 


6.9% 


5.6% 


White (Anglo) 


6.0% 


5.5% 


5.8% 


4.6% 



Source: New Mexico State Department of Education, Dropout Study 1995-96 



Students were also dropping out earlier than in the past, often in middle and junior 
high. Data of the dropout rates for students in grades 7 and 8 in 1995-96 indicate that 
African Americans dropped out at the highest rates, while more Hispanic students dropped 
out than students from any other ethnic group (see Table 2). 




6 



8 



TABLE 2: 1995-96 DROPOUT RATES BY ETHNICITY, GRADES 7 & 8 



Ethnicity 


Number of 
Dropouts 


Membership* 


Dropout Rate 


African American 


39 


1,155 


3.4% 


Asian 


4 


453 


0.9% 


Hispanic 


673 


24,243 


2.8% 


Native American 


163 


5,854 


2.8% 


White (Anglo) 


446 


20,562 


2.2% 






*40th day 
memberships 





Source: New Mexico State Department of Education, Dropout Study 1995-96 



Data from the 1995-96 academic year illustrates that males were more likely than 
females to dropout of school in New Mexico in every ethnic groups (see Table 3). 
Hispanic females had the highest dropout rate in their gender group. Hispanic males 
dropped out at higher rates than males in the other ethnic groups. 



TABLE 3: 1995-96 DROPOUT RATES BY ETHNICITY AND GENDER, 

GRADES 9-12 



Ethnicity 


Gender 


Number of 
Dropouts 


Membership* 


Dropout Rate 


African American 


Female 


100 


1,007 


9.9% 




Male 


124 


1,105 


11.2% 


Asian 


Female 


32 


499 


6.4% 




Male 


37 


570 


6.5% 


Hispanic 


Female 


1,993 


19,896 


10.0% 




Male 


2,410 


20,824 


11.6% 


Native American 


Female 


380 


5,141 


7.4% 




Male 


493 


5,019 


9.8% 


White (Anglo) 


Female 


969 


17,996 


5.4% 




Male 


1,218 


19,224 

* 40th day 
memberships 


6.3% 



Source: New Mexico State Department of Education, Dropout Study 1995-96 



er|c 



7 



9 



An Introduction to Hispanic and Native American Dropouts in New Mexico 

While dropouts are Native American, White, Black, Hispanic, and Asian, the 
majority are poor and members of a minority group. Data from the 1995-96 school year 
indicates that disproportionately large numbers of Hispanic (4,403) and Native American 
(873) students dropped out of school in New Mexico (Abeyta & Borgrink, 1997). This 
section briefly introduces some of the issues that are influencing excessive numbers of 
Hispanics and Native Americans to dropout of New Mexico’s schools. 

High school completion rates have been steadily increasing for the total school-age 
population over the past 25 years; the completion rate for Hispanics, however, has remained 
constant at a level significantly lower than the total population, and lower than other race- 
ethnicity groups. Nationally, the Hispanic dropout rate has stayed between 30 and 35 
percent, compared to 15 to 17 percent for the total population (U.S. Department of 
Education, 1998a). Socio-economic class is an important factor in predicting dropouts, and 
holds true for Hispanics as well. However, when socio-economic class is controlled for, 
Hispanics still have a higher probability of dropping out than non-Hispanics (U.S. 
Department of Education, 1998a). In other words, middle class and upper-middle class 
Hispanics are more likely to dropout than non-Hispanic, middle and upper-middle class 
students. Furthermore, data indicates that the high dropout rates for Hispanic students 
holds regardless of immigrant status or home language (U.S. Department of Education, 
1998a). This means that recent immigrants from Latin America and second and third 
generation Hispanics are both dropping out at high levels, as are Hispanic students who 
speak English at home and those who speak Spanish in the home. 

According to the Hispanic Dropout Project (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a), 
many Hispanic students are pushed out of schools. They attend schools with below- 
average physical conditions and educational resources, and often encounter personal 
prejudices and demeaning treatment from school personnel. Under these conditions, 
dropping out becomes a viable option rather than remaining in an institution where one is 

O ' 8 

ERIC 



10 



unwanted and held in disregard. As one student remarked, “The American Dream is not 
for me. Why bother?” (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a) 

Though dropout rates vary by community, there is widespread agreement that the 
dropout problem for Native Americans is serious and complex, rooted in cultural, societal, 
and socio-economic conditions. Among the reasons cited to explain the dropout problem in 
Indian country include cultural preservation and resistance (Dehyle, 1992), cultural 
discontinuity (Reyhner, 1992; Backes, 1993; Garrett, 1995), and power relations within 
schools (Ledlow, 1992; McLaughlin, 1994). 

The study of Native American culture is complex because, contrary to common 
perception. Native American culture is not homogenous (Garrett, 1995). In the United 
States, there are 252 languages spoken by 505 federally recognized tribes, and 365 state 
recognized tribes (Garrett, 1995). In addition, there is variety in the degree to which the 
traditional cultural values are transmitted in the home, and the tribal customs are practiced in 
the community. Despite the differences, similarities exist in the way that Native Americans 
interact with the ‘mainstream’ culture. 

Dehyle (1992) found that maintaining cultural integrity through resistance to 
schools was an important factor in Navajo and Ute decisions to dropout. The four-year 
ethnographic study of Navajo and Ute school dropouts included 1,489 student subjects, 
hundreds of ethnographic interviews, and school and community observations. Students 
with strong identities as “Navajo,” generally developed in the home and community, were 
more likely to resist the school and attempt to preserve their identity. 

Cultural discontinuity, described as “when two worlds collide” (Garrett, 1995, p. 
192) has become an increasingly common explanation for Native American school dropout, 
as well as for other language-minority students. Dropout is viewed as a result of the 
intersection of mainstream American culture and Native American culture, where the 
inherent differences lead to conflict, and ultimately to high rates of dropout among minority 
culture students (Reyhner, 1992). According to Garrett (1995), the major cultural 



ERIC 



9 



11 



differences include family relationships, the conception of property, and the values of 
sharing and community (as opposed to individualism and competition). Ledlow (1992) 
asserts that the research evidence for cultural discontinuity as an explanation for why 
students leave school is inconclusive and inadequate. In her work, she cites racism and 
discrimination against Native Americans as a more prevalent reason why Indian youth leave 
school before graduation. 



Confrontine Discrimination and Poverty in the United States 

Some scholars espouse the need for an anti-racist pedagogy in schools to counter 
entrenched societal and institutional racism (see for example, Thompson, 1997). Others 
argue that more attention needs to be given to the mass media which does far more to 
propagate racism, ethnic stereotypes and sexism than schools (Bartolome & Macedo, 
1997). Finally, many scholars (see for example, Kozol, 1967) have highlighted that 
minority schools have fewer resources, older facilities, and poorly trained teachers in 
contrast to white, suburban schools. Clearly, society’s inequities are mirrored in the 
schools. Apple (1996) writes that; 

We must cease framing the question of how to respond to educational 
failures— and high school dropouts, in particular— so that the only 
solutions (in the form of teachers’ practices, students’ achievement, and 
legislators’ policies) either entirely blame or completely credit the 
students, the teachers, and the schools for outcomes like dropout rates. 

The assumption that we will find long-term answers to the dropout 
dilemma and to the realities of poverty and unemployment by keeping our 
attention within the school, is dangerously naive. Lasting answers will 
require a much more searching set of economic, social, and political 
questions and a considerably more extensive restructuring of our social 
commitments. Further, these will need to be accompanied by the 
democratization of our accepted ways of distributing and controlling 
jobs, benefits, education, and power. Until we take these larger economic 
and social contexts as seriously as they deserve, we shall simply be 
unable to respond adequately to the needs of youth in this country, beyond 
providing an endless series of short-lived placebos, (p. 70) 

Apple continues by discussing how beyond the rhetoric of widespread economic 

growth in the United States is “a reality of crisis, an economy that increases the gap 




10 



12 



between rich and poor” (1996, p. 7 1). One out of every seven Americans lives below the 

poverty line and one out of every four children under the age of 6 lives in poverty (Ellwood 

& Summers, 1986). According to Marian Wright Edelman (1994) of the Children’s 

Defense Fund, the bottom line issue that must be resolved in the United States is poverty: 

Child poverty stalks its survivors down every avenue of their lives. It 
places them at greater risk of hunger, homelessness, sickness, physical or 
mental disability, violence, educational failure, teen parenthood, and 
family stress, and deprives them of positive early childhood experiences 
and the adolescent stimulation and creative outlets that help prepare 
more affluent children for school and then college and work .... It is a 
miracle that the great majority of poor children stay in school, do not 
commit crimes, and strive to be productive citizens in a society that 
guarantees them a prison bed if they fail (for over $30,000 a year) but 
refuses to provide them a Head Start (for less than $3,800 a year) or a 
summer job (for less than $1,400) to help them succeed, (p. xvii) 

Ultimately, addressing the reasons why students dropout of school requires not only 

changing schools and expanding educational opportunities for all students, but also requires 

a commitment to abolishing poverty and restructuring our economic priorities. Apple 

(1996) believes that we must “challenge the social Darwinist assumptions that stand behind 

so much of our economic system” (p. 89). He writes that the poor and unemployed have 

not earned their plight. Instead, the economic system, with its emphasis on profit no matter 

what the social cost, has generated inequities in society. From this perspective, solutions to 

the high dropout rates require that we face this economic reality. At the very least, funding 

formulae for schools should overallocate to poor districts precisely because of the myriad 

and complexity of problems these districts face (Fine, 1991). 



Dropout Prevention and Intervention 

Michelle Fine (1991), in a comprehensive study of dropouts in New York City, 

depicted what public education represents to many students: 

Low-income adolescents are telling us, in their words and in their 
absence, that educational structures, policies, and practices that may 
appear benign don ’t work. If a student has family or community 
responsibilities that can ’t wait or can ’t be forgotten until 3:00; if he or 
she doesn 't enter school speaking standard English or has a disability; if 
his or her community, values, and heritage are discrepant from those 




11 



13 



represented in the faculty, the texts, and the curriculum at large; if a high 
school degree seems to be of questionable value; or if the world around 
him or her is fdled with social fractures along race/ethnic, class, and 
gender lines, public education as currently practiced fails. 

For these students, the opportunity to a public education is hollow. It 
asks them to abandon family and community responsibilities; to sacrifice 
language, identity, and pride; to ignore the pain and suffering they 
witness around them and the culture and pleasure they take comfort in; 
and to deny fundamentally all that sits between their dreams and their 
circumstances, between the ideologies they so want to believe and the 
contradictions they so need to confront, (p. 2 1 ) 

In short, Fine’s work informs, us that schools need to be more flexible to recognize 
adolescents’ familiar and community responsibilities, as well as more supportive of 
students’ cultural and linguistic identities. According to the United States Department of 
Education (1998b), 77% of the reasons students cited for dropping were school-related 
problems. The most common reasons students report for leaving school included: failure 
or inability to get along with teachers (68%); dislike of school (46%); inability to get along 
with other students or felt they did not belong in school (40%); suspended or expelled 
(25%); and felt unsafe (10%). Though some of the reasons given by students for dropping 
out were family or job-related, the school-related reasons for dropping out of school were 
most commonly cited by students. Many students fall behind in their coursework (U.S. 
Department of Education, 1998a) and feel defeated in school. Others simply find schools 
to be unsafe and inhospitable places (Bingaman, 1998). 

The focus in this section is on practical steps that can be taken to address the 
dropout problem. Interviews with students at three middle schools in different regions of 
New Mexico are presented to highlight the issues that affect students’ decisions to stay in 
school or dropout. Students were interviewed in small groups at El Rey Middle School in 
southeastern New Mexico, Soaring Eagle Middle School in the western part of the state, and 
Monterey Middle School in northern New Mexico. A small group of parents were also 
interviewed at El Rey Middle School. The schools were selected for the study because they 
reflect the diversity of this land of enchantment. The population of El Rey is predominantly 
White and Hispanic, Soaring Eagle is composed almost entirely of Native American 




12 



14 



students, and Monterey is majority Hispanic. All interview sessions took place with a 
random group of students at each school. In this way, it was ensured that a variety of 
students — low- and high-achieving, male and female, Hispanic, Native American and White- 
“Would share with us their perspectives about why their friends, cousins, brothers and 
sisters, and sometimes even the students themselves dropped out or considered dropping 
out of school. 

The Students 

A common theme that emerged from our interviews with the students was their 
belief that their teachers were mean, uncaring and biased against their cultures. Students at 
Soaring Eagle and Monterey middle schools complained that teachers called them 
embarrassing names that were degrading. Students at Soaring Eagle said that it was not 
uncommon for teachers to call them names like “hillbillies,” and to make comments like 
“you’re not the only Native Americans.” At Monterey Middle School, students described 
how teachers and security guards stereotyped them as “delinquent,” and as a result, they 
were not encouraged to do better in school. In general, these students perceived that they 
were treated more unfairly than the good kids and that teachers really did not care about 
them. According to one student, the teachers pretended to like him, but they actually did 
not. 

Many of the students discussed how they were dealing with a variety of issues at 
home and how their teachers “don’t understand what you’re going through.” At Soaring 
Eagle, students explained that many students dropped out because of the problems that their 
friends were dealing with in the home. Many were faced with alcoholism, abuse, violence, 
divorce and other issues. They did not think that their teachers understood these issues and 
were insensitive to the difficulties that they were handling at home. For some students, 
school was a refuge from a bad home situation. 




13 



15 



Students at El Rey spoke about how their school felt like a prison. Many 
classrooms lacked windows and security cameras were being installed throughout the 
school to track drug trafficking and gang activity. They also described how the police were 
now present on campus, both in the school building and outside “circling the school.” We 
wondered about the messages that such heightened security gave the students. What are we 
communicating to students who enroll in debilitated school buildings, regularly have classes 
with more than 30 other students, study in libraries with out-of-date collections, and attend 
schools with sophisticated security apparatuses? 

Students at all three schools discussed how their friends, parents, extracurricular 
activities, field trips, and hands-on learning motivated them to stay in school. At El Rey 
Middle School, several students said that friends and their parents kept them going to 
school. Students at all three schools indicated that they went to school to be with then- 
friends. All also discussed how their parents expected them to stay in school. “My parents 
would kill me if I didn’t go to school,” said one student at El Rey. Students at Soaring 
Eagle talked about the value of organizations like the MESA program that offered them 
opportunities to participate in a variety of activities. Athletics were also commonly cited by 
students at the three schools as a big motivator to stay in school. The parents interviewed at 
El Rey said that their children were extremely concerned about keeping their grade point 
averages high enough to remain eligible for sports. Frequently, students said school was 
boring and that they wanted to go on more field trips. In all of our interviews, students 
expressed unanimous support for experiential learning. They felt that this sort of learning 
was interesting and the most relevant to them. Honor students at Monterey Middle School 
discussed the importance of “hands-on” activities to keep students interested in learning. 
Students wanted to be actively involved in the learning process. 




14 



16 



Parents and Families 



A common stereotype about minority families is that the parents are indifferent to 

the children’s education and do not want to become literate in English. Parents are often 

characterized as “ignorant, poor, products of bad schools, in conflict with their children, and 

in general, culturally deprived,” (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a). However, the 

authors of The Hispanic Dropout Project (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a) observed 

Hispanic parents acting like any other parents of school children: they worked with schools 

and community organizations, valued learning, and supported their children in school: 

Many high-risk children and their parents are blamed and not treated 
with respect by educators. Highest risk students and their parents are 
very responsive to genuine and meaningful offers of help despite cultural, 
language, and economic barriers. Larson & Rumberger (1995, p. 21) 

The parents at El Rey Middle School were quite articulate about the importance of 

parents being involved in their children’s lives. They felt welcomed by teachers at El Rey 

and believed that more parents should become involved at the school and, at the very least, 

support their children at extracurricular activities. One parent summarized her beliefs 

succinctly: “if parents don’t care, the kids don’t care.” Certainly, many parents are busy 

trying to make a living, but these parents were adamant that they can still make an effort to 

occasionally attend sporting events their children are participating in, and generally take an 

interest in their child’s life. One parent said that she believes too many parents blame 

schools and society in general for their children’s problems. She thinks parents need to 

“stop blaming teachers and schools” and start taking more responsibilities for their 

children’s well-being. 

One parent from El Rey expressed concern that teachers were not properly 

preparing her children for the academic demands of high school: 

My concern is next year she 's [her daughter] going to be in high school 
and if she doesn 't get her basics now, then when she 's going to be in high 
school she 's not going to know it, or she ’s going to be behind. I don ’t 
think that’s good for them. 




15 



17 



The parents were also aware that some of the teachers at El Rey were teaching 

subjects that were not their primary areas of expertise: 

I won ’t mention any names, but I just fee I like some of these teachers that 
we hired are not hired for the position they should be in. I just feel like 
one of my daughters is not learning anything, and she’s in an honors 
class. And I feel like she needs to be where she can learn something. 

Students at Soaring Eagle Middle School discussed how they felt stressed. They 

described the economic difficulties their families were dealing with, the fights they 

witnessed between their parents, and how drinking and dmg abuse were common in their 

homes. They also said they knew many adults who were in jail and that murder in their 

community was not uncommon. The economic and social problems faced in Native 

American communities is well-documented in the United States. School faculty and staff 

need to consider these issues and how they impact their students. 

New Mexico Senator Jeff Bingaman (1998) advocates providing courses for parents 

and support groups to help address students’ needs and to support students’ academic 

progress. He believes that a primary goal of these programs should be to further the 

development of students’ self-esteem. In addition, educational programs provide parents 

with training in literacy and work skills. Senator Bingaman (1998) emphasizes that these 

programs are intended to make the potential benefits of staying in school apparent both to 

parents and their children. 

Teachers 

Many studies have found that teachers play a vital role in keeping students in school 
by taking an interest in the students as individuals. Uncaring teachers are often cited as a 
major reason why students drop out (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a). Clearly, the 
teacher’s role is crucial in stemming dropouts. 

Alternative programs are often cited as beneficial for potential dropouts because of 
their focus on giving students individual attention and developing personalized relationships 
between teachers and students. According to a student at Monterey Middle School, good 



teachers relate well to students and understand where they are coming from. Good teachers 
take the time to talk to their students and they are there for the students when the students 
need help. Students at all three sites complained that many of their teachers did not care 
about them, were out to get them, were unprepared to teach, and were even abusive. One 
student from Soaring Eagle described how some of his teachers called him degrading 
names and made derogatory comments about his tribe’s culture. He said he wants to have 
more Navajo teachers. Our experiences at the three schools made it clear to us that students 
felt very strongly that too many of their teachers were unfamiliar with many of their cultural 
traditions. Certainly, staff development needs to focus on preparing teachers and 
administrators to work in multicultural settings. Ongoing workshops need to be available to 
school personnel that validate diverse students’ cultures and languages. These efforts are 
vital in New Mexico where the majority of students come from minority populations. 

Teachers can engage in ongoing professional development activities with the support 
of colleagues and others over sustained periods of time. Deborah Meier boasts about 
Central Park East in east Harlem that, “it’s its own staff development project’’ (p. 109, 
1995). Central Park East has gained renown as a model for how a low-achieving, inner-city 
high school with a high dropout rate can be transformed into a high-achieving school with 
almost a non-existent dropout rate. Meier, the principal at Central Park East during its 
renaissance, believes that it is vital for teachers to have access to continued and sustained 
professional development activities (1995). An integral part of the daily schedule at Central 
Park East included time for teachers to meet to support each other’s professional growth. 
Time is established and used by teachers to meet regularly. In studies of the Third 
International Mathematics and Science Study, Stiegler and Hiebert (1997) described how 
Japanese teachers work together on mathematics lessons continually, refining and 
improving both their curriculum and instructional techniques. . , 

The built-in teacher support network at Central Park East counteracted’ a culture of. 
teacher isolation that is common in schools, especially at the secondary level. When 




17 



19 



possible, teachers in the same subject area or teachers interested in doing cross-disciplinary 
work together need to be placed in adjacent classrooms to increase opportunities to 
collaborate on curriculum and instruction. If schools are going to implement higher 
academic standards, teachers will need more opportunities to collaborate and support one 
another. 

Schools 

While students at El Rey Middle School described that their school felt like a 
prison, students at Monterey Middle School attended classes in an antiquated, dilapidated 
building. Our interview session at Monterey was held in a classroom used for home 
economics. Students explained that none of the appliances in the room functioned, making 
it impossible for them to do even basic cooking. Though the facilities at Soaring Eagle 
Middle School appeared to be in good physical condition, an issue at the school was that 
most, if not all, of the teachers were recruited from outside of the community. As noted in 
the previous section, a student at Soaring Eagle wanted more Navajo teachers at the school. 
Clearly, ongoing efforts to recruit and retain more Native Americans and Hispanics into 
teaching need to be continued and intensified. 

If students, parents, and teachers are the most important people to affect an 
individual’s decision to dropout, then schools are the setting where the dropout problem can 
be prevented. The research conducted by The Hispanic Dropout Project (HDP) concluded 
that “schools do matter in the lives of its students,” (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a, 
p. 31). The five characteristics that HDP found in successful schools are: 1) high academic 
and behavioral standards; 2) clear conveyance of these standards to the students; 3) 
facilitation of close relationships with adults; 4) demonstration of the connection between 
school and future work or college education; and 5) keeping the families informed (1998a, 
p. 33). 




18 



20 



After meeting with hundreds of students throughout the country, the authors of the 
HDP found that Hispanic students overwhelmingly want to learn, value education, and work 
at doing well in school (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a). Nevertheless, negative 
stereotypes have often led to a lowering of academic expectations to match the perceived 
deficiencies of Hispanic and Native American students. All students, not just an elite few, 
deserve access to a high-quality education. 

A variety of programs focus on providing services to young children to support their 
early academic development. Head Start is frequently cited (see for example. Grant 
Foundation, 1988) as the prototype program for providing a comprehensive mix of 
educational, social, medical, dental, nutritional and mental health services to low-income 
preschoolers and their families. Many academic programs in elementary schools focus on 
developing children’s literacy skills. National programs such as “Success for All” (SEA) 
have proved extremely successful for improving children’s literacy skills at a rapid pace. 
While this program has been criticized for its inflexibility, teachers follow rigid scripts 
during instruction, early elementary students in SEA programs have consistendy 
demonstrated increased proficiency on reading tests. 

In smaller schools, teachers mold closer relationships with their students. By 
working with 80 students each day instead of 150 (not uncommon at the secondary level), 
teachers can more effectively meet students’ personal and academic needs. Studies have 
found that smallness is especially beneficial for at-risk students who have been shown to be 
more involved and to achieve at higher levels at schools in which students can form close 
relationships with teachers (Oxley and McCabe 1990, Summers and Wolfe 1976, Wehlage 
et al. 1987). Working with fewer students allows teachers to have a greater understanding 
of their students’ content knowledge. In small schools then, it is more possible to structure 
curriculum and instruction to the individual needs of students. 

The HDP also recommends that schools and the community create stronger links 
between school and work (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a). Though this does not 




19 



21 



entail tracking students into vocational training programs, the report does recommend 
creating more flexible scheduling so that students can work while still continuing their 
education. Programs such as the Summer Training and Education Program (STEP) and 
Career Explorations (Fine, 1991) integrate employment experience, attention to personal and 
health problems, and basic academic skills instruction for potential dropouts in New York 
City. This combination of work, “life skills,” and academic remediation was evaluated as 
especially effective for undermining the typical summer loss of skills in reading and 
mathematics. Students in the program also demonstrated increased contraceptive 
knowledge (Fine, 1991). 

District. State, and National Policies 

Policies at the national, state, and local levels can have an effect on whether students 
stay in school or dropout. Clearly, the state needs to provide dedicated financial support for 
effective dropout intervention and prevention programs. As school districts implement new 
strategies to stem student dropout, tested as well as untried approaches need to be supported 
while studies are undertaken to investigate the effectiveness of programs. Senator 
Bingaman (1998) has also articulated the importance of accurate reporting of dropout 
statistics. He believes that the state should establish policies that would require school 
districts to provide annual and four-year data on students that could be reported to the 
public in a comprehensive manner. 

Another persistent problem is that incentives that ‘push’ students out of school are 
common in some districts. The practice of basing school funding on a one-time student 
census is an example; once the census numbers are taken, there is no longer any incentive 
for the school to retain students, and in fact, it is to their economic advantage to allow 
students to leave. This practice is particularly prevalent in overcrowded and underfunded 
schools (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a). Senator Bingaman has articulated the need 
to reward schools for keeping students in school (Baker, 1999). 



Fine (1991) writes that districts committed to decreasing the dropout rate will need 
time to design and implement new programs, must be allowed the flexibility to change these 
programs and to make mistakes, and most importantly, will have to commit resources for the 
long-term for these programs to be effective. The evaluation of how successful districts are 
addressing the dropout issue could include assessment of the degree of community 
involvement in schools, parents’ sense of being welcomed, whether or not schools in the 
district reflect upon their practices (e.g., retention and promotion policies, suspension and 
discharge practices, tracking, services provided, and special education placement), and how 
effective staff development efforts are by the district on issues of race, class, gender, 
disability, and sexual orientation (Friend, 1989). 

Community-Based Organizations. Business, and the Larger Community 

At the local level, non-government groups such as community-based organizations 
or the local business community can provide supplementary help to prevent smdents from 
dropping out of school. They can provide help in the area of school-to-work transitions and 
basic job training, serving their own interest in the quality of their workforce. In addition to 
job training, community organizations could support school-based child care for teenage 
mothers (Fine, 1991), and create programs for mentoring, tutoring, and scholarships for 
college (U.S. Department of Education, 1998a). The community can also support youth 
programs that sponsor extracurricular programs (Bingaman, 1998). Students at Soaring 
Eagle said that there was no place for them to go in their community for recreation after 
school. They articulated that many of their friends were getting into trouble simply because 
they had nothing else to do. Plainly, directed activities in the community are beneficial for 
teenagers once the school day is over. 

In Appendix A, a sample of programs that are designed to decrease the dropout rate 
throughout New Mexico is provided. Many of the programs listed are supported by local 
communities and businesses. For example, a partnership between Albuquerque Public 



In Appendix A, a sample of programs that are designed to decrease the dropout rate 
throughout New Mexico is provided. Many of the programs listed are supported by local 
communities and businesses. For example, a partnership between Albuquerque Public 
Schools and the Hispano Chamber of Commerce grants financial support for students to 
enroll in college and helps place students in the workplace. In Roswell and Carlsbad, 
community members serve in the schools as tutors, mentors, and reading partners in a 
program called HOSTS. Other programs that demonstrate how communities and 
businesses can partner with schools to lower the dropout rate include the Career 
Development Program. This program in Las Cruces includes paid work experiences for 
juniors in high school. 

Research and Development 

The Hispanic Dropout Project recommends that much research and development of 
new, innovative programs to prevent students from dropping out of school is needed (U.S. 
Department of Education, 1998a). New programs as well as existing progr ams should be 
empirically tested for efficacy to accomplish their goals. This is important because the 
current research is fragmentary and studies tend to focus on issues in isolation. More 
studies need to link how specific intervention programs keep students in school. These 
studies and their findings should be widely published and disseminated (U.S. Department 
of Education, 1998a). 

President Clinton and Secretary of Education Riley have made higher standards a 
priority in schools across the country (U.S. Department of Education, 1998c). This 
strategy may have an undesired impact on traditionally disadvantaged groups such as 
Hispanics, Native Americans, Limited English Proficiency (LEP) students, and other 
groups with high dropout rates. Higher academic standards may increase the dropout rate 
unless concurrent strategies are developed and implemented to support students who are at- 
risk of dropping out. Studies indicate that tougher school standards and grade retention 



O 

ERIC 



22 



24 



lead to an increased incidence of student dropout (McDill, Natriello & Pallas; 1985, 1986). 

Despite research that suggests that retention of students at the same grade level for 
consecutive years “confers no lasting benefit” to students, retention has become quite a 
popular practice (Natriello, 1998, p. 15). Among the alternatives to retention, include: 
year-round schools (Ordovensky, 1988), evening and weekend classes, ungraded classes, 
tutoring by “at-risk” youths for younger students (Riessman & Collins, 1987), cooperative 
learning (which is particularly effective with low- to median- achieving students: see 
Johnson et al., 1985; Neumann, 1987), the accumulation of credits rather than the rigid 
promotion (or not) from grade to grade in high school, and two years of schooling with the 
same teacher or class to ensure consistency and continuity (Fine, 1991). 

Concluding Comments 

Ultimately, there is no single method for decisively preventing students from 
dropping out of school. The dropout problem is a complex, social phenomena that is 
intimately tied to individual people and their relationships with students, teachers, school 
personnel, role models, and family. There are, however, numerous strategies and methods 
which will greatly increase the likelihood of students staying in school (see Appendix A for 
listing of programs throughout New Mexico). National, state and local policies cah make a 
difference by creating conditions that lessen the difficulties for groups in school that have a 
high risk of dropping out. In all of the reports on dropouts, the most common theme for 
solutions to the problem is manifesting a personal interest in the individual personality, 
interests, and life of the student. Words like respect, attention, awareness, encouragement, 
and pride were commonly used both in the reports and by the students that were 
interviewed as part of The Hispanic Dropout Project (U.S. Department of Education, 
1998a). Until all children are perceived as being worthy of attention, and essentially 
worthy of a good education and a good life, school will continue to be a place where certain 
children are sorted and discarded. 




23 



25 



References 



Abeyta, P., & Borgrink, H. (1997). Dropout Study 1995-96. Santa Fe: New Mexico State 
Department of Education. 

Abeyta, P., Forrer, K., & Travelstead, J. (1997). The New Mexico 1996-97 
Accountability Report. Santa Fe: New Mexico State Department of Education. 

Apple, M.W. (1996). Cultural Politics and Education. New York, NY: Teachers College 
Press. 

Backes, J.S. (1993). “The American Indian High School Dropout Rate: A Matter of 
. Style?” Journal of American Indian Education, 16-29. 

Baker, D. (1999). “Senator: Set High Goals for N.M.” Albuquerque Journal, 49, February 
18, A8. 

Barro, S. (1984). The Incidence of Dropping Out: A Descriptive Analysis. Washington, 
D.C.: Economic Research, Inc. 

Bartolome, L.I., & Macedo, D.P. (1997). “Dancing with Bigotry: The Poisoning of Racial 
and Ethnic Identities.” Harvard Educational Review, 67, 2, 222-246. 

Bingaman, J. (1998). New Mexico Dropout Prevention Handbook. 

Dehyle, D. (1992). “Constructing Failure and Maintaining Cultural Identity: Navajo and 
Ute School Leavers.” Journal of American Indian Education, January, 24-47. 

Edelman, M.W. (1994). “Introduction.” In A. Sherman, Wasting America’s Future: The 
Children ’s Defense Fund Report on the Costs of Child Poverty. Boston: Beacon Press. 

Ellwood, D.T., & Summers, L.H. (1986). “Poverty in America.” In S.H. Danziger & D. 
Weinberg, (Eds.), Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 78-105. 

Fine, M. (1991). Framing Dropouts: Notes on the Politics of an Urban Public High 
School. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Friend, R. (1989). “Homophobia and Education: Student Outcomes.” Paper presented at 
the 42nd annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association, May 8, San 
Francisco, California. 

Garrett, M.W. (1995). “Between Two Worlds: Cultural Discontinuity in the Dropout of 
Native American Youth.” The School Counselor, 42, 186-195. 

Gartner, A., & Lipsky, D.K. (1987). “Beyond Special Education: Toward a Quality 
System for All Students.” Harvard Educational Review, 57, 367-395. 

Johnson, D.W., Johnson, R.T., Roy, P., & Zaldman, B. (1985). “Oral Interaction in 
Cooperative Learning Groups: Speaking, Listening, and the Nature of Statements Made 
by High-, Medium-, and Low-Achieving Students.” Journal of Psychology, 119, 4, 
303-321. 




24 



26 



Kozol, J. (1967). Death at an Early Age. New York, NY; Bantam Books. 

Larson, K., & Rumberger, R. (1995). “Doubling School Success in Highest-Risk Latino 
Youth; Results from a Middle School Intervention Study.” In R.F. Bracier, & G.G. 
Ramos (Eds.), Changing Schools for Changing Students (157-179). Santa Barbara, 
CA; UC Linguistic Minority Research Institute. 

Ledlow, S. (1992). “Is Cultural Discontinuity an Adequate Explanation for Dropping Out?” 
Journal of American Indian Education, May, 21-35. 

Mann, D. (1986). “Can We Help Drop-Outs; Thinking About the Undoable.” Teachers 
College Record 87 (Spring), 307-323. 

McDill, E.L., Natriello, G., & Pallas, A.M. (1985). “Raising Standards and Retaining 
Students; The Impact of the Reform Recommendations on Potential Dropouts”, Review 
of Educational Research, 55, 4, 415-433. 

McDill, E.L., Natriello, G., & Pallas, A.M. (1986). “A Population at Risk; Potential 
Consequences of Tougher School Standards for Student Dropouts”, American Journal 
of Education, Eehrmry , 135-181. 

McLaughlin, D. (1994). “Critical Literacy for Navajo and Other American Indian 
Learners.” Journal of American Indian Education, 47-58. 

Mehan, H. (1997). “Contextual Factors Surrounding Hispanic Dropouts.” Hispanic 
Dropout Project Paper #1. 

Meier, D. (1995). The Power of Their Ideas: Lessons for America from a Small School in 
Harlem. Boston; Beacon Press. 

Natriello, G. (1998). “Failing Grades for Retention.” The School Administrator, August, 
14-17. ^ 



Neumann, F.M., & Thompson, J.A. (1987). Effects of Cooperative Learning on 

Achievement in Secondary Schools: A Summary of Research. Madison, WI; National 
Center on Effective Secondary Schools. 

Oakes, J. (1985). Keeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality. New Haven, CT; 
Yale University Press. 

Ordovensky, P. (1988). “Year-Round Schools Score.” USA Today, February 15, p. 10. 

Oxley, D., & McCabe, J. (1990). Restructuring Neighborhood High Schools: The House 
Plan Solution. New York; Public Education Association and Bank Street College of 
Education. 

Reyhner, J. (1992). “American Indians Out of School; A Review of School-Based Causes 
and Solutions.” Journal of American Indian Education, May, 37-55. 

Riessman, F., & Collins, S. (1987). “The New Opening for a Full Employment 
Movement.” Social Policy, 17, 3, 2-4. 

Rumberger, R. (1987). “High School Dropouts; A Review of Issues and Evidence”, 
Review of Educational Research, 57(2). 




25 

27 



Stiegler, J.W., and J. Hiebert. (1997). “Understanding and Improving Classroom 

Mathemadcs Instruction, An Overview of the TIMSS Video Study.” Phi Delta Kappan, 
Sept. 

Summers, A., & Wolfe, B.L. (1976). “Which School Resources Help Learning? 
Efficiency and Equity in Philadelphia Public Schools.” IRDC Bulletin 11: 1-17. 

Thompson, A. (1997). “For: Anti-Racist Education.” Curriculum Inquiry, 27:1, 7-44. 

Wehlage, G.G., Rutter, R.A. & Tumbaugh, A. (March 1987). “A Program Model for At- 
Risk High School Students.” Educational Leadership 45: 70-73. 

United States Department of Education. (1998a). No More Excuses: The Final Report of 
the Hispanic Dropout Project. Washington, DC. 

United States Department of Education (1998b). Office of Educational Research & 
Improvement. Washington, DC. 

United States Department of Education (1998c). Improving Opportunities: Strategies from 
the Secretary of Education for Hispanic and Limited English Proficient Students (A 
Response to the Hispanic Dropout Project). Washington, DC. 




26 



28 



A ppendix A: Dropout Prevention Programs in New Mexico 



Information about dropout prevention programs throughout New Mexico is 
provided in this section. We would like to acknowledge Senator Bingaman’s office for 
compiling the programs listed here (1998). We contacted each program to update or revise 
the information given in Senator Bingaman’s report. We have simply reproduced the 
section on preventive programs from Senator Bingaman’s report if no changes to the 
programs were reported to us. 

Statewide 

Alternative High Schools. (505) 827-6508 

There are at present 22 recognized alternative high schools in the State, located in 
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, Santa Fe, Hobbs, and Deming. Alternative high schools are 
generally small schools with programs tailored to fit the needs of a range of students, 
including pregnant teens, students who have been suspended or expelled from school, and 
students who are former dropouts. 

New Mexico MESA. (505) 262-1200 

New Mexico MESA attempts to make college a realistic goal for 3.400 New Mexico 
students in grades 6 through 12. Students participate in science and mathematics activities 
and are eligible for incentive awards. 

GRADS. (505) 827-2370 

GRADS serves 650 teen parents and 250 children in 22 high schools around New Mexico. 
The program supports students through a variety of methods and has been especially 
successful at lowering repeat pregnancies among its students. 



O 

ERIC 



27 



29 



Talent Search. (214) 880-3048 

Talent Search is part of the TRIO Program supported by the U.S. Department of 
Education. Operating through funded projects in Portales, Roswell, and Albuquerque, 
Talent Search is working with students in grades 6 through 12 to encourage first-generation 
college students to continue their education. 

Upward Bound. (214) 880-3048 

Providing more intensive services than Talent Search, Upward Bound is another TRIO 
Program that is currently supporting five university-based awards that operate in 
Albuquerque, Roswell, Portales, Las Vegas and Las Cruces. Six week summer programs 
on campuses help familiarize hundreds of New Mexico students with college-level work 
and experiences. 

Boys and Girls Club. (505) 247-1553 

The Boys and Girls Club provides a safe place for youth from disadvantaged circumstances 
to learn and grow. They concentrate on offering programs and activities to keep youth off 
the streets after school and on the weekends. 

Big Brothers/Big Sisters. (505) 837-9223 

Big Brothers/Big Sisters of Central New Mexico, Inc. is an incorporated, non-profit 
agency which has provided one-to-one mentoring services to youth for nearly 30 years. 

The program currently serves 500 children a year, with a professional case management 
staff to screen volunteers and children and monitor matches. 



Re: Learning NM. (505) 983-0404 

This program focuses on retraining teachers for work in alternative high schools and with 
at risk youth. It teaches teachers new methods of instruction. 



Albuquerque 



Project Succeed. (505) 831-6038 

Operated by Albuquerque’s Youth Development Inc, Project Succeed serves approximately 
500 high school students at eight area schools through smaller class size, counseling, and 
after-school work programs. It has an 87% retention rate for individuals most at risk of 
dropping out. 

Choices Program. (505) 842-9003 

This school-to-work program at Bernalillo High School, Del Norte High School, Cibolla 
High School and Albuquerque High School is the product of a partnership between the 
school district and the Hispano Chamber of Commerce. The program opens doors to 
college and the workplace. 

LULAC Middle School Initiative. (505) 243-3787 

Students in grades 7 and 8 are at a crucial developmental stage, and this program works 
with 200 Hispanic students to make college part of their vision for the future. 

Puente Project. (505) 873-8347 

Technical Vocational Institute (TVI) has partnered with an elementary school with more 
than 90% low income students to increase awareness of mathematics and science education 
and careers. More than 100 4th graders at East San Jose Elementary school visit the TVI 
campus and participate in follow-up activities provided by TVI. 

Project Success. (505) 827-1213 

Funded through the federal National Early Intervention Scholarship and Partnership 
Program and coordinated by the New Mexico Commission on Higher Education, Project 
Success works with 400 students from nine elementary schools. 




29 



31 



Project Achieve. (505) 831-6038 

This project targets at-risk 7th and 8th graders at Ernie Pyle Middle School in Albuquerque. 
A health educator goes to the school and works with the students in the areas of 
mathematics, English, and personal health. 

Futures for Children. (505) 821-2828 

Futures for Children began in 1968 as the Friendship program to help Native American 
students. The program provides mentors for students to assist them increase their self- 
esteem, build self-reliance, and gain skills to become active community members. 

College Bound Program. (505) 837-7562 

This program focuses on grades 3 through 5, primarily at schools where dropout rates are 
the highest. Approximately 800 to 1,000 of the 1,500 students being served are located in 
Albuquerque. A core element of the program includes assigning a college or vocational 
student to work with a classroom for a semester sharing experiences of college life. 

ORALE. (505) 277-5183 

The ORALE project (“Offering Resources and Learning Empowerment”) pairs college 
students from UNM with at-risk high school students from four APS high schools. More 
than 150 students are now participating and the program has shown success in increasing 
grade advancement. 

Farmington 

Rocinante High School. (505) 599-8627 

Rocinante High School is an alternative school that provides flexible opportunities for at- 
risk students who wish to complete high school but cannot do so in a traditional 




30 



32 



environment. Rocinante uses a modular schedule and houses students ages 15 and up, 
with no limit on age. There were over 60 graduates in 1998. 

Day Reporting School. (505) 599-8650 

Farmington Day Reporting School is a cooperative effort between Farmington Municipal 
Schools and the Farmington Boys and Girls Club. The school targets approximately 28-36 
students, grades 7-12, that have been suspended from regular programs in the Farmington 
Municipal School system. Students are on a modular schedule. 

Santa Fe 

Students Offering Services. (505) 428-1736 

A federal grant is supporting Students Offering Service, a program in three Santa Fe 
schools that is bringing Americorps volunteers together with approximately 300 at-risk 
students. Mentoring by undergraduate students focuses on making positive educational 
choices. 

Santa Fe SER Academy. (505) 473-0428 

Started in 1993 as the Youth Empowerment Strategies project, a Department of Labor grant 
resulted in the creation in 1996 of the Santa Fe SER Academy, an alternative high school 
program co-located with Service Employment Redevelopment (SER), and Santa Fe Jobs 
for Progress, Inc. The Academy is a school-to-work program serving approximately 250 
at-risk students. 

ACAT. (505) 989-5507 

Approximately 100 Santa Fe students, grades 9-12, are served by this program. Students 
earn regular high school credits in all subjects (except mathematics) in a team-taught 
interdisciplinary program. Media literacy is the program core through which academics are 




31 



33 



taught. Special projects include TV, video, sound production, music composition and 
desktop publishing as electives. There is a mandatory 2 hour/week community service 
requirement. 

At-Risk Training Program. (800) 456-2673 ext. 6578 

This masters degree program is offered through the School of Education at the College of 
Santa Fe which is designed to train future teachers interested in working with at-risk youth. 
The program provides training in methods of instruction for alternative schools. 

Roswell and Carlsbad 

University High School. (505) 625-8245 

Established in 1984 to serve at-risk students, this program provides a variety of 
instructional approaches to suit diverse student needs, with an emphasis on empowering 
students to be responsible for their own education. 

Success for All. (505) 625-8156 

Roswell was the first district in the state to adopt the Success for All model of school 
reform and dropout prevention using federal Title I funding. Over 500 schools nationwide 
have adopted the model, which focuses on improving elementary school children’s reading 
proficiency. 

Coalition for Youth. (505) 627-6978 

The Roswell school system is one of several that have conducted the Benson Survey, 
through which a community’s developmental assets are assessed. In May of 1996, more 
than 4,000 students grades 6 through 12 provided information that created a “snapshot” of 
the County and led to the establishment of a non-profit organization called Coalition for 
Youth. 




34 



32 



Career Search. (505) 625-8100 

This project currently serves 25 9th graders enrolled in the Roswell Independent School 
District. It offers career search and exploration courses which include work site visits, 
classroom instruction and an orientation to college with an emphasis on continuing 
education on the campus at ENMU. 

Educational Talent Search. (800) 243-6687 ext. 201 

There are approximately 1,000 participants, grades 6 through 12. All students participating 
are low-income and potential first-generation college students. Talent Search provides 
counseling and support services such as tutoring and mentoring to encourage and assist 
potential first-generation college youth to gain access to higher education. 

HOSTS. (505) 625-8249 

HOSTS (Helping One Student To Succeed) is a strategy that brings members of the 
community into the school to serve as tutors, mentors and reading partners for students 
identified as needing extra help. The community partners come to the school once a week 
and work one-on-one with a specific child. 

Las Cruces. Gadsden, and Cohre 

Valued Youth. (210) 684-8180 

The Coca Cola Valued Youth program pairs 18 at-risk students at Snell Middle School and 
Cobre High School with 50 at-risk students at Bayard Elementary School in need of 
academic tutoring. Operating since 1984, the program has been implemented and evaluated 
at dozens of schools in Texas and other states with dramatic effects. 



35 




33 



REBA 



U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Nahonal Ubrary of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Informatbn Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 

1. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 


7LEKA 


ERIC 




Title. Aie<A) 


Author(s): s. Icrrrfi ^ Mve-r^ 


Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 


II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



.M *c«»lc ^SSTm «,U tt««SMta EW^SSiL^^S^ W. «*,. 

reprodurtion release is granted, one of the fbllmving notioes is SSSSnt ^ ^ “** ‘‘ocument, and. if 






Tlw impto Mckarriwwn belowwa be 
eOba dleelLB Wlldooumanti 

PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



Jb^. 






^\®_ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAt RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Lavttll 

t 




The aampto MIclw ahown beknv wOl be 
fiffboed to al Laval lAdecumenta 


The sampla eilelwr ehoan belDw w« be 
■nixed to all Level 2B documents 


PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 








<b^ 




c/’ 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCAHONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


2A 




2B 


Laval 2A 

i 


Level 2B 
□ 


□ 



Omcktw^ofimti^nknnB^pmnUaM 
Mid tfnmlnMtoi In inioniliclw or ottMT 
ERIC «chM midta (a«. Mactail^ Mtf 
oopy* 



hnm far Laval 2A relaaM, ptnnttinp 
and fin ntfowftcttt end fin 

ilacireid c medli far ERIC arcMvilco ll ecBon 
autocrftaraonly 



Chacli fwra tor Laval 2B ratease. pennNtfng 

wpwduefion find feaem&igaon In fille r ^ 










Ckaomglhoese oe Assessmemt amd Evataatnom 



March 2000 

Dear AERA Presenter, 



University of Maryland 
1129 Shriver Laboratory 
College Park, MD 20742-5701 

Tel: (800) 464-3742 
(301)405-7449 
FAX: (301)405-8134 
ericae@ericae.net 
http://ericae.net 



Congratulations on being a presenter at AERA. The ERIC Clearinghouse on Assessment and 
Evaluation would like you to contribute to ERIC by providing us with a written copy of your 
presentation. Submitting your paper to ERIC ensures a wider audience by making it available to 
members of the education community who could not attend your session or this year's conference. 

Abstracts of papers accepted by ERIC appear in Resources in Education (RIE) and are announced to over 
5,000 organizations. The inclusion of your work makes it readily available to other researchers, provides a 
permanent archive, and enhances the quality of RIE. Abstracts of your contribution will be accessible 
through the printed, electronic, and internet versions of RIE. The paper will be available full-text, on 
demand through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service and through the microfiche collections 
housed at libraries around the world. 



We are gathering all the papers from the AERA Conference. We will route your paper to the 
appropriate clearinghouse and you will be notified if your paper meets ERIC's criteria. Documents 
are reviewed for contribution to education, timeliness, relevance, methodology, effectiveness of 
presentation, and reproduction quality. You can track our processing of your paper at 

http://ericae.net. 

To disseminate your work through ERIC, you need to sign the reproduction release form on the 
back of this letter and include it with two copies of your paper. You can drop of the copies of 
your paper and reproduction release form at the ERIC booth (223) or mail to our attention at the 
address below. If you have not submitted your 1999 Conference paper please send today or 
drop it off at the booth with a Reproduction Release Form. Please feel free to copy the form 
for futurejor additional submissions. 

Mail to: AERA 2000/ERIC Acquisitions 

The University of Maryland 
1 129 Shriver Lab 
College Park, MD 20742 



Sincerely, 




Director, ERIC/AE 



ERIC/AE is a project of the Department of Measurement, Statistics and Evaluation 
at the College of Education, University of Maryland. 



