DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 462 216 



RC 023 241 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda. 
Department of Education, Washington, DC. 

2001 - 00-00 

55p.; Produced by the Research Agenda Working Group under 
the direction of a Federal Interagency Task Force. Working 
Group members are from the Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement; Office of Indian Education; Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, Office of Indian Education Programs; 
Administration for Native Americans; National Indian 
Education Association; National Congress of American 
Indians; National Congress of American Indians; and Native 
American Rights Fund. Expert Committee composed of National 
Educational Research Policy and Priorities Board and 
National Advisory Council on Indian Education. Prepared with 
William Strang and Adrienne von Glatz (Westat) . 

For full text: http://www.indianeduresearch.net/agenda.pdf. 
Reports - Evaluative { 142 ) 

MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Academic Achievement; Academic Standards; Alaska Natives; 
*American Indian Education; American Indians; *Culturally 
Relevant Education; Early Childhood Education; Educational 
Assessment ; Educational Needs ; *Educational Research; 
Elementary Secondary Education; Native Language Instruction; 
*Outcomes of Education; Participatory Research; *Research 
Needs; Special Education; Teaching Methods 
*Research Priorities 



ABSTRACT 



Executive Order 13096 gave the U.S. Department of Education 
the responsibility for developing a research agenda for American Indian and 
Alaska Native education. The Department established a working group composed 
of various government agencies and American Indian groups, committees, and 
associations, that solicited ideas and comments from Native and non-Native 
educators and researchers. This report focuses on the educational research 
topics determined by the working group to have the highest priority over the 
next several years. Several basic premises and assumptions permeated both the 
research literature and the suggestions made to the working group: the need 
for research to focus on success, to respect tribal sovereignty, and to be 
sensitive to tribal differences; the need for detailed national data; and 
suggestions concerning methodology and researchers. The priority research 
topics are presented within six general categories: 1) educational outcomes 
of American Indian and Alaska Native students; 2) Native language and 
culture; 3) teachers, schools, and educational resources; 4) American Indian 
and Alaska Native students with special needs; 5) early childhood educational 
needs of Native children; and 6) educational standards and assessment. Each 
category includes general statements about the state of current knowledge, a 
presentation of the priority research topics along with examples of specific 
study questions, and suggestions for research activities and specific 
studies. An appendix includes Executive Order 13096 and lists of members of 
the interagency task force, research working group, and expert committee. 
(Contains 63 references.) (TD) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education 
Research Agenda 



Research Agenda Working Group 



With: 



William Strang (Westat) 
Adrienne von Glatz (Westat) 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Oftice of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 



i document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated m thisdocu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 





BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page i 



Table of Contents 



Introduction 1 

Developing the Research Agenda 2 

Organization of this Report and Sources for Other Project Materials 3 

Basic Assumptions and Premises 4 

Major Underlying Themes 4 

Research Methods and Issues 6 

Research Priorities for American Indian and Alaska Native Education 9 

Educational Outcomes of American Indian and Alaska Native Students 10 

Priority Research Topics 12 

Suggested Studies 12 

Native Language and Culture 16 

Priority Research Topics 18 

Suggested Studies 20 

Teachers, Schools and Educational Resources 21 

Priority Research Topics 23 

Suggested Studies 23 

American Indian and Alaska Native Students with Special Needs 27 

Priority Research Topics 28 

Suggested Studies 28 

Early Childhood Educational Needs of Native Children 32 

Priority Research Topics 33 

Suggested Studies 35 

Educational Standards and Assessments 36 

Priority Research Topics 37 

Suggested Studies 37 

References 40 

Appendices 

1 Executive Order 13096 46 

2 Interagency Task Force Members 50 

3 Research Working Group 51 

4 Research Agenda Expert Committee 52 




3 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education 
Research Agenda 



Introduction 

The U.S. Department of Education, imder the direction of a Federal Interagency Task 
Force, was given the responsibility for developing a research agenda for American Indian and 
Alaska Native education in response to Executive Order 13096, American Indian and Alaska 
Native Education. Section F of the Executive Order requires the development and 
implementation of this agenda to improve the educational achievement and academic progress 
for American Indian and Alaska Native students. The Executive Order specifies further that 
the education research agenda wdl: 

1 . Establish baseline data on academic achievement and retention of American Indian 
and Alaska Native students in order to monitor improvement; 

2. Evaluate promising practices used with those students; and 

3. Evaluate the role of native language and culture in the development of educational 
strategies. 

This report responds to the Executive Order. It summarizes the current state of 
research and describes the research topics that should be given the highest priority at the 
federal level for research to be conducted over the next several years. Running throughout the 
discussions of the research topics are considerations of appropriate research methods and 
approaches and the clear demand from Native* educators, leaders, and parents that researchers 
develop information that can be applied now. 

In January 2001, the Secretaries of the Departments of Education and the Interior 
submitted a “Comprehensive Federal Indian Education Policy Statement” to the President in 
response to one of the requirements of Executive Order 13096. The Policy Statement, which 
had been approved by their agencies as well as by the Federal Interagency Task Force 
established by the Executive Order, highlights the importance of high-quality research and 
information: 

The Federal agencies will develop comprehensive baseline data concerning the 
effectiveness of Federal efforts to improve the educational achievement and progress 
of American Indians and Alaska Natives and encourage the creation of new 
knowledge regarding best practices and the impact of Native language and culture on 
the education of American Indians and Alaska Natives (Federal Interagency Task 
Force, 2001, p. 4). 

The Policy Statement included five implementation steps; the fourth step is - 



* hi this report. Native is used interchangeably with the phrase American Indian and Alaska Native. Indian 
or Alaska Native is used separately when the reference is specific, and quotations from other authors 
frequently use Indian interchangeably with Native. 




4 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 2 



Federal Agencies shall report data and conduct studies related to the education 
performance and progress of American Indian and Alaska Native students that are of 
high quality and provide appropriate benchmarks and measurable objectives for 
improving the six goals of &e Executive Order (Federal Interagency Task Force, 2001, 
p. 5). 

This research agenda report follows a notable line of other reports that made their 
recommendations and left their influence on researchers and educators. In 1997, a large 
number of Indian organizations and individual tribes pressed the federal government to 
develop a comprehensive Indian education policy. In the preface to their “red book,” they 
reminded the federal government: 

The history of Indian education has been difficult. The Meriam Report (1928) and the 
Kennedy Report (1969) documented the failure of formal education and called for 
more Indian involvement, control, and relevancy in the educational process. The 
Indian Nations At Risk Task Force (1991) recognized “twenty years of progress 
during the 1970-80s, but concluded that Indian conmnmities were “nations at risk” 
educationally. The White House Conference on Indian Education (1992) reached 
similar conclusions and made specific recommendations for improvement 
(Comprehensive Federal Indian Education Policy Statement, March 1997, p. i). 



Developing the Research Agenda 

The development of the research agenda was assigned to the U.S. Department of 
Education’s Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) and Office of Indian 
Education (OIE) by Executive Order 13096. These offices estabhshed a working group to 
carry out the assignment. The working group’s members represented major offices within the 
U.S. Department of Education and, through a Memorandum of Understanding, also included 
the Office of Indian Education Programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of 
the Interior. Other members of the working group included representatives from the 
Administration for Native Americans (within the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services), National Indian Education Association (NIEA), the National Congress of American 
Indians (NCAI), and the Native American Rights Fund (NARF). The working group 
established an Expert Committee composed of representatives from OERI’s Nationd 
Educational Research Pohcy and Priorities Board (NERPPB) and from the National Advisory 
Coimcil on Indian Education (NACIE). 

The objective of most of the working group’s activities was to identify a limited set of 
high-priority research topics that could serve as a framework and guide for federally 
sponsored research over the next decade. The working group solicited ideas and comments in 
general from Native and non-Native educators and researchers, and the group specifically 
sought suggestions for high-priority research topics. In all, the working group gathered well 
over three hundred imique suggestions, which were subsequently organized in terms of their 
central focus, combined and recombined along common themes, and refined based on 
information gathered from other working group activities 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 3 



Deciding which research topics to emphasize involved hstening carefully to several 
hundred people, reading and summarizing the research hterature, and analyzing federal data 
collection activities. Ideas and comments were solicited at a series of Regional Partnership 
Forums, which were convened by the Interagency Task Force, at a National Research Agenda 
Conference sponsored by the working group, through a tear-off comment page on a project 
brochure, through a visitor comment page on a web site developed by the working group, and 
through attendance at numerous national and regional meetings of Native educators and 
researchers. In addition, four papers were commissioned on central issues from noted Native 
researchers, and two other respected Native researchers were tasked with developing a 
literature review. Federal data collection systems were reviewed to determine their status and 
utility for addressing research priorities. 

The purpose of the research agenda project was to identify research priorities, not to 
hst the universe of possibilities, so the sorted and combined hst of suggestions was distributed 
for several review iterations by all working group members and the expert committee to assign 
priorities. The final set of topics was discussed in a series of focus groups with educators and 
Native parents. The chief loss from the process of winnowing down from a large number of 
potential topics to just a few is that, inevitably, some of the imique details of people’s 
suggestions get sifted out in the search for common strands. 

One of the most significant themes that emerged from researchers, educators, and 
parents in Indian coimtry was an eagerness to see research translated into practice. A 
consistent recommendation to the federal government was to fund research that focuses on 
effective educational practices and ways to implement them. 



Organization of this Report and Sources for Other Project Materials 

The balance of this report focuses on the education research topics determined by the 
working group to be the highest priority for research efforts over the next several years. That 
discussion begins with several basic premises and assumptions that speared to permeate both 
the research literature as well as the suggestions made to the working group. The larger 
portion of the report consists of presentations of the priority research topics. They have been 
organized within six general categories: (1) educational outcomes of American Indian and 
Alaska Native students; (2) Native language and culture; (3) teachers, schools, and 
educational resources; (4) American Indian and Alaska Native students with special needs; 

(5) early childhood educational needs of Native children, and (6) educational standards and 
assessments. The discussion within each category begins with general statements about the 
state of current knowledge, continues with a presentation of the priority research topics along 
with examples of what could be termed specific study questions, and concludes with 
suggestions for suggested research activities and specific studies. The report’s appendix 
includes Executive Order 13096 and lists of Interagency Task Force, research working group, 
and expert committee members. 

This report summarizes the working group’s conclusions. Details about the working 
group’s activities and copies of most of the products resulting from them can be foimd on the 
web site that was developed for the project and that now serves a larger role in disseminating 
research on American Indian and Alaska Native education. For example, that site contains the 
papers commissioned for the project, summarizes the National Research Agenda Conference, 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 4 



provides the literature and federal data systems reviews, and presents several iterations of the 
research topics and questions suggested to the working group. The research agenda web site, 
which is now supported by the Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 
(CRESS), can be foimd at www.indianeduresearch.net . The site also contains numerous link s 
to other sources of information and to organizations active in American Indian and Alaska 
Native education. 



Basic Assumptions and Premises 

This research agenda proceeds from a set of basic assumptions about conducting 
research in Indian country. These assumptions are divided into two groups. The first group is 
basic premises, which we have termed major imderlying themes, as to how research on 
American Indian and Alaska Native education should be approached; the second is concerned 
with premises about the research methods that should be used. 



Major Underlying Themes 

Research should include a focus on success. While understanding the educational 
and social barriers facing American Indian students is important, too often research has 
focused solely on “deficits” within Native communities. At present, educators and 
administrators are eager for information about best practices. Examples of educational 
success abound in Indian coimtry and future research should attempt to understand and 
disseminate the essential elements of successful schools, programs, pedagogy, and curricula. 
Certainly this does not mean that researchers should seek only good news. For one thing, 
studies of successful practices carry with them the implicit recognition that some practices are 
not successful, and those unsuccessful practices should also be identified as part of larger 
efforts of school reform and improvement. For another, good research often requires 
comparisons and controls, even when the purpose is to identify and vaUdate best practices. 

Most of the research on American Indian and Alaska Native students has been 
conducted by non-Native researchers and, historically, has been permeated by a perspective 
that American Indian and Alaska Native culture is somehow less sophisticated and valued 
than euro-centric culture. Thus, when American Indian and Alaska Native students do not 
perform as well on some measures as do white students, the fault is laid at the feet of their 
Native culture - not the schools. Sometimes the fault is ascribed to the “learning style” of 
American Indian and Alaska Native children, a concept distinct from “culture” but related to 
it. It is not clear from the literature, however, that the distribution of American Indian and 
Alaska Native children on measures of learning style differs greatly from that of other 
children. One of the primary ways this cultural perspective colors the r esearch is through the 
implementation of standards and assessments for American Indian and Alaska Native students 
that focus on the educational goals of the larger society, without also incorporating the 
perspectives of Native communities and parents. 

A recurring theme in the American Indian and Alaska Native education research 
hterature is that measures of academic success - particularly standardized tests - provide 
misleading indicators because they are based on assumptions of the majority culture. As 
evidence, critics of standardized measures point to particular items that are simply unhkely to 




7 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 5 



be known by children from rural Native cultures. The point is not always made, however, that 
such items are not necessarily valid measures, nor is it clear that Native children lack the 
competence to answer such items provided that they have had the opportunity to learn about 
them. 



Researchers must respect tribal sovereignty. Federally recognized tribes maintain 
sovereignty over many of their activities. How sovereignty has been defined has varied 
through time, with the current era being one in which Native peoples have strongly promoted 
their rights, and the federal government has sought to accommodate them. Public and pohtical 
support for Native curricular and instructional approaches has wavered back and forth 
throughout American history (Lomawaima, 1999; Szasz, 1999; Tippeconnic & Swisher, 

1992). Researchers, Native or non-Native, need to respect tribal rights and work actively with 
the tribes and villages to conduct research in such a way as to be responsive to local concerns 
and to seek to produce findings that can be used locally. 

When research is conducted on American Indian or Alaska Native students within 
tribal or village settings, it is essential that the researchers involve and gain the active support 
of the community. This would include tribal review of research designs and instruments, as 
well as access to final data. Increasingly, tribes are asserting their rights in this area, and 
many have developed formal or informal research regulations or policies governing research. 
Whether or not such policies exist, the involvement of native communities in the research 
process will help ensure “high-quahty research guided by locally meaningful questions and 
concerns” (Lomawaima, 2000, pp. 14-15). When research includes Native American children 
as a focus in large-scale studies, such as when national samples are augmented with additional 
Native children to permit separate analysis, it may be impractical to seek to work with each 
tribe. In these situations, researchers should seek the advice and support of such groups as the 
National Advisory Committee on Indian Education and work closely with the Office of Indian 
Education Programs (U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs) and the Office 
of Indian Education (U.S. Department of Education). Ideally, in these cases, experienced 
Native researchers should be part of the study teams. However, expertise should remain an 
essential basis for research decisions and for inclusion on research teams. 

Respecting tribal sovereignty also does not mean that researchers should fail to 
incorporate where appropriate what has been learned from studies of the education of non- 
Native children or of Native children in other tribes or communities. On one hand, it is not 
clear under what circumstances research conducted on students in general can be vahdly 
apphed to American Indian and Alaska Native students because of the unique circiunstances 
faced by Native students. On the other hand, it also is not clear that research on students in 
general cannot be validly applied to American Indian and Alaska Native students in most 
circumstances. 

Research needs to be sensitive to tribal differences. Considerable cultural, 
linguistic, economic, historical, and social differences exist among the Native peoples of 
North America. Further, there are important differences in legal standing between federally 
recognized and unrecognized Indian tribes and between American Indians and Alaska Natives. 
Proposed research should take the fact of these differences into account, especially in designs 
for large-scale studies that will involve multiple tribes and villages. 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 6 



National studies that seek to explain differences among students need to go beyond 
offering a single “American Indian or Alaska Native” choice on the race/ethnicity item. In 
particular, those studies should seek detailed information about the social and economic 
conditions within which the student was raised, find out whether the student has at least one 
parent who is a registered tribal member, and ask for the name of the tribe. 

Where the student has lived and for how long also may be imp ortant background 
information that may reinforce or reduce the importance of tribal identity. Most Native 
children do not attend a school on a reservation at any given time. In 1997-98, according to 
the National Center for Education Statistics’ (NCES) Common Core of Data, about 534 
thousand American Indian or Alaska Native students were enrolled in pubhc elementary or 
secondary schools. The Office of Indian Education Programs of the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(U.S. Department of the Interior) reports fewer than 10 percent attend reservation schools, 
with about 50 thousand students in 185 schools in 1998-99. In fact, the majority of American 
Indian and Alaska Native students attend public elementary or secondary schools where they 
are in the minority. According to NCES’ Common Core of Data, 46 percent of Native 
students attend schools where minorities make up more than half the enrollment, and only 28 
percent attend schools where Native children are in the majority. Mobility rates are high, 
moreover, and a student attending an urban school one year may be in a tribal school during 
the next year and then in a public school near the reservation after that. Family mobility 
varies by reservation, with - as examples - 27 percent of Navajo reservation, 41 percent of 
Osage reservation, and 57 percent of Agua Caliente reservation residents in 1985 not living in 
the same house in 1990 (Census of Population and Housing, 1990). 



Research Methods and Issues 

Determining what to study, where, and how is politically and ethically charged. 
Certainly the history of educational research involving American Indian and Alaska Native 
students and their communities has predominately been directed by outsiders and, even if not 
the intent, has often focused on “deficits” rather Aan strengths. To a certain extent, of course, 
educational research in general has tended toward the negative by emphasizing standardized 
test scores, which can almost always be better than they are. But the situation in Native 
communities has traditionally been more extreme in that outsiders frequently have looked not 
only at achievement and other measures of performance, but have selected norms for 
comparison based primarily on students from middle class, non-Native American 
backgrounds. 

Of equal concern is that too much of the research on Native students and schools has 
had limited applicability outside the situation and context that was studied because samples 
have sometimes been very small or were selected from a unique population. This situation is 
certainly not unique to research involving the education of American Indians and Alaska 
Natives, but the field clearly needs more large-scale studies involving generahzable samples if 
it is to provide optimal guidance about the nature of problems and the suitabihty of potential 
solutions. Further, research has focused on the roughly 10 percent of Native students who 
attend reservation schools or the approximately 17 percent who attend off-reservation schools 
where American Indians or Alaska Natives are in the majority. The educational experiences 
of most Native children have not been extensively studied. One of the most important 
observations to emerge from the process leading to this research agenda is that more resources 




9 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 7 



need to be applied to this area, and some of those resources need to be concentrated on larger 
and more inclusive studies than have been possible in the past. 

Detailed national data are needed. Most of the research on Native students takes 
advantage of the clustering of many of them in or near reservations, whether in BIA-funded 
schools or local pubhc schools, and less emphasis is placed on the substantial proportion who 
live in areas where Aere may be few if any other Native students in their classes. Although 
concentrating on schools on or near reservations has made it possible to study phenomena 
such as “learning styles” in isolation, it also may have made Native students look much more 
ahke than they are. Further, locally focused studies that find Native students performing at 
lower levels than members of other racial/ethnic groups are often conducted in schools with 
inexperienced teachers, crumbling buildings, and few resources. More widely based studies, 
or simply studies with sufficient cases to take other explanatory variables into account, could 
have the effect of largely eliminating or attenuating associations between academic outcomes 
and race/ethnicity. 

There have been several deliberate attempts to learn more about Native students and 
their schools from a national perspective in the last decade. The Schools and Staffing Surveys 
conducted by NCES have, since the mid-1990s, made it possible to look at schools with high 
proportions of American Indian and Alaska Native students in detail, and the report cards 
submitted to OIEP by BIA-funded schools provide a wealth of data about school-level 
resources and aggregated student outcomes. However, at the national level, major studies 
usually cannot allocate their resources to obtaining adequate data on American Indian and 
Alaska Native students to enable anything more than combining Native students into the 
“other” race/ethnicity category. Recent exceptions have been the National Longitudinal Study 
of Schools (NLSS) and the Early Childhood Longitudinal Surveys (ECLS). NLSS is a U.S. 
Department of Education study that examines the effects of school reforms; it includes an 
augmented sample of 110 schools with relatively high enrollments of Native Americans. 
ECLS, supported by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), consists of two 
parallel studies; the first, ECLS-K (for kindergarten cohort) follows a sample of children from 
about age 3, and ECLS-B (for birth cohort) follows children from birth. ECLS-B includes an 
augmented sample of Native American children, but ECLS-K does not. In addition, NCES’ 
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), because of its large sample sizes and, 
since the early 1990s, state-specific samples, permits fairly detailed analysis. However, even 
those large-scale surveys and assessments do not permit inter-tribal comparisons, and the 
sample sizes do not often allow other breakdowns of Native children. 

Existing data address some arguably important education outcomes, particularly 
academic achievement in reading and math and educational attainment, but there is a larger set 
of educational outcomes - academic and non-academic - that is poorly covered now. New 
data may be needed when existing data systems are not based on large enough samples of 
American Indian and Alaska Native students or particular outcomes are not included. The 
Department of Education should consider conducting a large-scale descriptive study of Native 
education that would gather sufficient data on students, families, educators, and schools to 
permit statements about what conditions at each of those levels are associated with one or 
more outcomes. Such a study would be the first comprehensive effort to look at these 
questions together since the national study by Fuchs and Havighurst in 1972. 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 8 



Definitional issues should be resolved by American Indian and Alaska Native 
tribes. Accurate identification of Native people is an important prerequisite to conducting 
valid research, and tribes should take the lead in resolving these contentious issues. One of 
the problems faced by national surveys is that they usually call for self-reported race/ethnicity 
information. The bases on which individuals make judgments about themselves are not clear. 
This ambiguity parallels the ambiguity of blood quantum and other measures for deter mining 
tribal membership or eligibility for federal programs. For educational research, a fundamental 
concern is accurate specification of the population of interest; that has not been the case for 
most national studies that involve American Indian and Alaska Native students. For many 
studies, such as those of Native children in schools on reservations or in Alaska Native 
villages, self-identification or identification by teachers or staff is a reasonable procedure. 
However, when studies call for comparing schools on their proportions of Native students or 
for comparing children based on race/ethnicity, merely using self-identification or 
teacher/staff identification is inadequate. At the least, for students (or others) who indicate 
“American Indian or Alaska Native” on a form, there should be a follow-up question on tribal 
enrollment or village residence. 

Research on Native students should involve researchers with demonstrated 
knowledge of Native culture(s). There is a growing cadre of highly qualified American 
Indian and Alaska Native researchers, academics, and graduate students interested and trained 
in education research. These individuals have important skills and perspectives to bring to 
bear on educational and research issues related to Native co mmuni ties. Federal agencies 
should encourage the continued growth in numbers and in the levels of knowledge and 
expertise of this group to help ensure the availabihty of researchers who can demonstrate an 
understanding of the cultural contexts of the proposed research agenda, and agencies should 
encourage Native researchers to participate actively in these studies. For example, a research 
structure and approach that make good sense in many situations is to have local Native 
researchers conducting research within their own tribal settings as part of multi-site, single- 
design studies administered nationally. Such a structure ensures sensitivity to local culture 
and conditions and can permit valid inter-tribal comparisons. 

Research quality should receive a high priority. The Federal Interagency Task 
Force’s Comprehensive Policy Statement on Indian Education calls for “studies related to the 
educational performance and progress of American Indian and Alaska Native students that are 
of high quahty. . . " (Federal Interagency Task Force, 2001 , p. 4). High quality requires 
adhering to accepted research standards and, in cross-cultural research, a key standard is 
knowledge of the culture and language of the groups whose institutions are being studied. 
Contractors and grantees conducting research proposed by this agenda should be able to 
demonstrate knowledge and understanding of American Indian and Alaska Native culture(s) 
and languages(s) wherever appropriate. In judging proposals and evaluating research on 
American Indian and Alaska Native education, adherence to accepted research standards and a 
demonstration of an imderstanding of cultural contexts of the proposed research should both 
be weighted heavily. 

Generalizable research findings are needed. American Indians and Alaska Natives 
have been studied extensively by Native and non-Native researchers using ethnographic 
techniques suitable for small concentrated populations, but what aspects of those studies may 
be generahzed is not clear. This is the case because of differences between and among tribes, 
villages, eras, hving conditions, and other local characteristics. Single case ethnographies can 




li 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 9 



provide valuable information about behaviors and outcomes within a specific context, but our 
overall level of knowledge may be better served by multi-site studies. The key concern is not 
the nature of the data collection method, but the power, precision, and generahzabihty of the 
sample. When “case studies” are conducted of single entities or a small number of them, 
whether schools, communities, or reservations, they should use methods to ensure that the 
findings are valid and generalizable. 

A clearinghouse focused on Native education is needed. Currently, the results of 
research related to American Indian and Alaska Native education are gathered and 
summarized by the Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools (CRESS), operated 
by the Appalachia Educational Laboratory. The visibihty of their Native education activities 
needs to be increased, which could be accomplished through simply adding a parallel, 
“virtual” clearinghouse devoted to Native education. Such a move would send a clear si gn al 
to American Indians and Alaska Natives that their education issues are recognized as being 
important and are not simply a subset of the issues faced by students in rural or small schools. 

The clearinghouse on Native education should also be assigned responsibihty to 
identify baseline data on outcomes and track changes. Some of this would involve serving as 
a data repository for national assessments and large-scale studies, such as the National 
Assessment of Educational Progress, Census reports, and ongoing surveys by the Indian 
Health Service, the Office of Juvenile Justice, and others to permit one-stop access by 
researchers to basic information. The clearinghouse should also be proactive in seeking 
information from non-federal sources, such as state assessment results, about the outcome 
status of Natives. The data from all sources would be disseminated through digests and other 
clearinghouse publications and by posting data and linkages to data sets on the world wide 
web. The web site created by the working group, i.e., www. indianedures earch. net , and now 
managed by CRESS, could be used for this purpose. 



Research Priorities for American Indian and Alaska Native Education 

The priority research topics are presented in this section organized within six general 
categories. The categories are (1) educational outcomes of American Indian and Alaska 
Native students; (2) Native language and culture; (3) teachers, schools, and educational 
resources; (4) American Indian and Alaska Native students with special needs; (5) early 
childhood educational needs of Native children, and (6) educational standards and 
assessments. The current status of research related to each general category, based on the 
literature review and other working group activities, is briefly summarized first. Then the 
priority research topics are listed along with examples of several study questions. The study 
question examples are there to illustrate the range of specific questions that could be raised for 
the research topics; they should not be viewed as precluding finding answers to other study 
questions related to the research questions.^ Several suggested studies conclude the discussion 
for each category. 



^ Many more possible study questions are presented on a topic-by-topic basis on the working group’s web 
site, i.e. . www.indianediu~esearch.net . 




12 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 10 



Educational Outcomes of American Indian and Alaska Native Students 

The literature suggests that, on average, American Indian and Alaska Native students 
tend to demonstrate lower achievement levels than members of other groups. NAEP results 
for fourth graders show that American Indians and Alaskan Natives score below basic levels 
in reading, math, and history. Other differences exist between the American Indian and 
Alaska Native population and the general population in educational attainment. For example, 
while ^proximately 75 percent of the total population had a high school degree or even more 
education in 1990, this proportion was ^proximately 66 percent for American Indians and 
Alaska Natives (Census Bureau, 1990). American Indian and Alaska Native students are also 
less frequently college bound, and their SAT and ACT scores are lower than national no rms 
(Swisher & Tippeconnic, 1999, p. 297). 

Several factors can be advanced to account for these differences. Poverty rates among 
American Indians and Alaska Natives are higher than among the general population; in 
female-headed households, for example, the poverty rate was 50 percent for this population, 
while it was 31 percent for the entire population in 1989 (Census Bureau, 1990). Providing 
educational services in rural areas is subject to numerous problems including poor access to 
services, limited resources, transportation problems, and under-utUization of existing 
resources. Moreover, because most American Indian and Alaska Native students attend public 
schools where they may be in the minority, rather than those supported by the BIA, their 
cultural and linguistic differences are frequently overlooked. Indeed, according to much of 
the literature, the central issue underlying the educational disparity is the poor fit between the 
tribal or village culture of Native American students and the western culture of school 
systems. This pervades many aspects of education, and can include culturally biased 
curriculum, teaching methods, and assessments and tests. 

More importantly, researchers also have found that American Indian and Alaska 
Native students can compare favorably with the members of other groups. Students ^pear to 
do particularly well in situations where the students’ culture is valued, or where Native parents 
are actively involved. Two studies illustrate these points. 

LeVeque (1994) conducted a two-year case study of Native student educational 
attainment in an urban public school and found Aat Native students did as well or 
better than the district mean on standardized tests, their dropout rate was only 10 
percent, participation on the honor roll was 30 percent, 90 percent graduated from high 
school, and at least 36 percent of the students pursued postsecondary degrees after 
graduating. Although the sample is too small and restricted to generalize beyond the 
case, the patterns were consistent within the school and were also supported by related 
findings. For example. Native students were found to participate equally in the regular 
school programming received by every student, there were no observable differences 
in patterns of interaction with school personnel, overall behavior was indistinguishable 
from other non-Native students, and none of the Native students spoke their Native 
language. One of the key findings in LeVeque’ s study was the notion of parental 
choice. Parents of Native students who succeeded in the largely Anglo co mmuni ty 
"choose" to assimilate and adapt to mainstream standards. These same parents were 
also actively involved in developing cultural programs that "positively identified 
Native students as Native Americans and assisted parents in recapturing and 




13 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 1 1 



redefining what it meant to be a Native American in an off-reservation setting" (p. 18). 
Because of the limitations of this study, it should be rephcated on a much larger 
sample of students across schools in several settings. 

Huff (1997) cited a study comparing tribally controlled, BIA, and pubhc schools. 
Comparing the educational aspirations of high school seniors at tribal schools, BIA 
schools, and public schools, 74 percent of the tribal schools’ seniors expected to attend 
college at some time in the future, while just 68 percent of the seniors at BIA and 
pubhc schools planned to go to college. Moreover, tribal school students scored 
higher on achievement tests than the BIA students. "Indian-controlled schools 
succeed because they function with the culture, norms, and traditions of Indian 
communities and subsequently engage parents as formidable alUes in the educational 
mission" (Huff, 1997, p. 53). 

Several themes emerged from reviewing the literature, discussing the issues with 
experts in the field, and considering the range of suggested research questions. These include: 

■ Educational outcomes should be considered broadly, encompassing such traditional 
outcome measures as academic achievement and educational attainment, but also 
special education placement rates, secondary education program enrollments, 
commimity participation, substance abuse and delinquency rates. Native language and 
English language competencies, health and fitness levels, and other measures of the 
outcomes of American education. Whenever practical, representatives of individual 
Native communities and parents should play significant decision making roles in 
determining which outcomes are most important to them, and they should be involved 
in determining which outcomes to measure in evaluations or research projects. 

■ By tracking measures of educational outcomes over a two-decade period, it may be 
possible to establish trends that will, in turn, permit more accurate attribution of 
effects between general societal changes and specific programs and reforms. After all, 
school-based formal education is not the only thing going on in the fives of Native 
children, their families, and their tribes or villages. The past two decades have seen 
changes in communications, employment opportunities, residential options, pubhc and 
individual health issues, and many other areas that probably have affected educational 
outcomes. 

■ Comparisons of educational outcomes within the population of American Indian and 
Alaska Native students may be very useful. For example, comparisons could be based 
on school governance, proportion of Native students in a school, urban or rural 
residence, tribal affiliation, etc. Because of the uniqueness of the American Indian and 
Alaska Native population in America, comparisons to other racial/ethnic groups may 
not have much value, but comparisons on the basis of other demographic variables, 
such as poverty levels, may help explain the outcome patterns noted for Native 
students. It is important to know how American Indian and Alaska Native students 
rate on measures of educational outcomes, but it is also important to understand the 
reasons why some of them rate higher than others. Some of those reasons probably 
include differences among individuals, such as physical health, aptitude for and 
interest in schooling, and living conditions, opportunities and fife experiences. Other 




14 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 12 



reasons certainly may include educational programs, school conditions, levels of 
teacher experiences, and instructional resources. 

■ Substantial resources have been devoted to developing and implementing new 

education programs, reform initiatives, teacher-training programs, assessment systems, 
and other changes that have improving students’ status on educational outcomes 
among their goals. Short-term gains are frequently noted, but often the promising 
practices that appear to produce them are not evaluated over the long term. Fiuther, 
educational approaches that look good on paper or in lab settings may never be 
implemented as designed, so they are never really evaluated at all. Finally, even when 
they are adequately assessed, there are few mechanisms for efficiently transplanting 
the effective practices to other settings, especially to isolated or rural schools. 



Priority Research Topics 

The table on the following page presents four priority research topics for this general 
category of educational outcomes for Native students. It is important to reiterate that these 
topics are at about the same level of priority, i.e., none is inherently at a higher priority level 
than another. For each research topic, several examples of possible study questions are 
provided. The examples of study questions are not meant to limit or define the scope of the 
priority topics, rather they suggest the range of study questions offered by informants 
throughout this project. 



Suggested Studies 

We need to know much more about the current status of Native students on a range of 
outcome measures and about the individual, family, community, classroom, and school factors 
that explain differences among students. Such information is essential to finding effective 
solutions to recurrent shortfalls by some students on some measures. The studies suggested in 
this section would help find those solutions by addressing the priority research topics. 

■ The Department of Education should conduct a large-scale study of Native education. 
The study would gather data from Native students, their families, and their schools, 
and the study would place those data within the contexts of the communities in which 
the students live. The purpose of the study would be to describe the educational 
experience of Native students in sufficient depth and with sufficient scope to permit 
comparisons among students of different tribes and different demographic and cultural 
backgrounds. While it is not reahstic to expect representative samples of students 
from each federally recognized tribe, it is possible to structure a sample that would 
ensure adequate coverage of 8-10 major regional tribal groupings with roughly s imil ar 
cultural heritages, e.g.. Southeastern, Northern Plains, Pacific Northwest, Alaskan 
Aleuts, etc. Such a sample also would ensure adequate coverage of BIA and tribal 
schools, pubhc schools with Native enrollments of 25 percent or larger, and Native- 
focused public charter or private schools. 




15 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 13 



Educational Outcomes for American Indian and Alaska Native Students 



Priority Research Topics 


Examples of Possible Study Questions 


Status of American Indian 
and Alaska Native students in 
terms of academic 
achievement, and status 
changes in the last two 
decades. 


What are levels of achievement on standardized assessments (e.g., 
NAEP) for American Indian and Alaska Native students by grade 
level/age, state, type of school (public, tribal, BIA), and tribe, and how 
have those levels changed over the last 10 years? 20 years? 


What factors influence American Indian and Alaska Nativ'e student 
achievement (personal characteristics, mobility rates, attendance rates, 
language proficiencies, test factors, school programs, support services, 
etc.)? 


Status of American Indian 
and Alaska Native students in 
terms of educational 
attainment, and status changes 
in the last two decades. 


What are levels of attainment for American Indian and Alaska Native 
students by state, type of school (public, tribal, BIA) and tribe, and how 
have those levels changed over the last 10 years? 20 years? 


What is the drop out rate among American Indian and Alaska Native 
students, and what factors (personal characteristics, mobility rates, 
attendance rates, language proficiencies, grade retention rates, programs, 
support services, etc.) arc contributing to the drop out rate? 


What arc rates of postsecondary matriculation and graduation for 
American Indian and Alaska Native students by state, type of secondary 
school (public, tribal, BIA), field of postsccondary study, type of 
postsecondary^ institution, and tribe? 


What factors influence American Indian and Alaska Native students' 
educational attainments and graduation rates (personal characteristics, 
family characteristics, motivation, mobility rates, elementary-secondary 
grade retention, high school program, postsccondary field of study, 
programs, support services, etc.)? 


Status of American Indian 
and Alaska Native students on 
other education-related 
outcomes, such as job skills 
and readiness, health and 
fitness, substance abuse, etc. 


What is the status of Indian and Alaska Native students on health-related 
measures such as teenage pregnancy rates, substance abuse, participation 
in sports or active recreation, etc ? 


What arc delinquency rates for American Indian/Alaska Native students, 
and how have those rates changed over the last 10 years? 20 years? 


To what extent do American Indian/ Alaska Native students participate 
actively in the lives of their communities? What are levels of civic 
awareness and participation? 


Best practices and reform 
models that have been 
demonstrated to be effective 
in enhancing academic 
achievement, attainment 
and/or other education-related 
outcomes of American Indian 
and Alaska Native students. 


How is student achievement affected when curriculum and instruction 
are guided by locally authenticated, aligned content standards and 
student performance assessments incorporate high expectations based on 
tribal history and culture? 


What are effective practices for reducing the American Indian and 
Alaska Native drop out rate and for serving those whom have already 
dropped out? 


What drug and alcohol prevention programs or counseling services are 
successful in decreasing failure and drop out rates among Native 
populations? 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 14 



Students would be sampled by classroom in the sampled schools, and they could be 
selected from grades 4, 8, and 12 (the same grades used by the National Assessment of 
Educational Progress) to gain a rich cross-sectional perspective. Data from schools 
would include information about teacher backgrounds and other characteristics, 
instructional methods and resources, family support and involvement, and Native- 
focused activities and curriculum. In addition to asking parents about attitudes toward 
schooling in general and about their children’s schools in particular, parents would 
also be asked about their mobihty and reasons for moving, language backgrounds and 
patterns of use, attitudes about the importance of preserving their language and 
culture, and the goals they see for their children. Community-level information would 
include availability of informal Native education opportunities as weU as basic 
economic and demographic data. Analysis would be both within level, e.g., 
relationships among gender, course-taking patterns, and educational aspirations, and 
across levels, e.g., school-level support of parent activities and students’ attitudes 
toward school. 

■ The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), which is supported by the 
National Center on Education Statistics (NCES) is generally recognized as the single 
best source of information at a national level of what our children know. Native 
students, when their results are broken out at ah, usuaUy have a lower average rank on 
the scales than students from other racial ethnic groups. Several re-analyses of NAEP 
would provide more useful information than those average scale scores: (1) 
information about the distribution of Native students on the scales focusing on how 
many score in the top range, with subsequent work to identify the high scorers’ 
distinguishing characteristics; (2) how the scale score distribution has varied through 
time and across subjects; (3) how scale scores vary based on teachers’ ratings of the 
student’s English-language competencies; school-level measures of poverty (e.g., free 
and reduced price lunch), and similar school and student variables included in the 
NAEP analysis files. Another useful study would be to conduct an item analysis of 
NAEP reading or other content tests to determine their potential validity as measures 
of educational achievement for students raised in multicultural environments. 

■ With a specific oversampling of the Indian population funded through a supplement 
provided by the Office of Indian Education, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study - 
Birth Cohort will provide a valuable resource for understanding the relationships 
among health and nutritional issues, family characteristics, and early educational 
experiences (e.g.. Head Start) and readiness for and initial success in school. The data 
sets from this NCES study will begin to be available in 2003. Until then, the 
Kindergarten cohort baseline data sets are available including restricted files that 
explore special education issues and the effects of participation in Head Start. 

Although the Kindergarten cohort data sets do not include an augmented sample of the 
Indian population, they will provide useful data on high-poverty, rural populations. 
Both cohorts would be excellent sources for graduate student and faculty research and 
analysis grants. 

■ Research needs to be conducted to identify proactively the characteristics and 
experiences that contribute to the academic success of Native students. One 
possibility is to analyze data from NCES’ National Postsecondary Student Aid Study 




17 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 15 



(NPSAS), which contains some information about background characteristics as well 
as data about how the students are paying for college. Although the number of Native 
students each year is too small for detailed analysis, it is possible to pool Native 
students from several of the surveys and compare their cWacteristics to those of 
Native students overall. Similar analyses could be conducted with another national 
survey conducted annually - the American Freshman survey — by the Higher 
Education Research Institute at the University of Califomia-Los Angeles. This survey 
collects outcomes data such as grades, SAT scores, and study habits, along with 
financial aid and family background data. Another possibility is to conduct intensive 
surveys with American Indians and Alaska Natives who are successful, with 
appropriate case controls or comparison groups. For example, surveys could be 
conducted with members of the American Indian Science and Engineering Society 
(AISES) or with members of the National Indian Education Association. While these 
intensive surveys cannot be used to answer general questions about success in school, 
they could provide insights about whether the characteristics or experiences that 
correlate with success as measured by membership in professional organizations have 
changed through time and whether some of those characteristics can be made part of 
the educational experiences of Native children. 

■ The reasons for dropping out of school can be explored through the data sets of the 
National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS:88), which began with a cohort of 8*** 
graders in 1988. Follow up surveys for this NCES study were conducted in both 
grades 10 and 12, and special efforts were made to track school leavers, both those 
who moved to other schools and also those who dropped out. The dropouts were 
administered a questionnaire focused on their reasons for dropping out. The numbers 
of Native students in the baseline and first two follow up surveys are large enough for 
detailed analysis of student-level, family, and school data in a search for the reasons 
for dropping out of school. 




18 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 16 



Native Language and Culture 

Probably no subject in this field generates more interest and discussion than the idea of 
structuring education for American Indian and Alaska Native students aroimd the concepts 
and language that he at the core of tribal or village culture. This might involve much more 
than adding an instructional module here or there or providing high school students with a 
Native language elective, rather it may require treating formal and informal education 
holistically. Research generally supports the premise that students do well when their culture 
and language are incorporated into their education. 

There appear to be at least two approaches in the views of educators and parents about 
the proper role of Native language and culture in the school. The first perspective, which 
generally appears in situations where the tribe or village controls the school and all or nearly 
all the students are local, is that the tribe’s or village’s language and culture ought to be 
pervasive and structure the overall educational experience. This perspective does not exclude 
having the students master English or the subject matter that is expected of students in 
majority culture schools, but it puts a premium on local ways of knowing. The second 
perspective appears where Native students are not in the majority in the schools and Native 
parents are only one strand among the voices seeking to shape the school’s approach. In this 
second perspective, the objectives appear to be more limited although no less imp ortant; that 
is, the school should respect the cultures of its Native students, support and promote the search 
by Native students to imderstand who they are in a multicultural world, and provide 
opportunities for those students and the students from other backgroimds to learn about Native 
languages and cultures. The goal in this second perspective is to increase pr maintain the 
students’ attachments to their own culture and, thereby, strengthen their sense of self-worth 
and personal value. A corollary goal of the second perspective is to teach non-Indian students 
about Indian cultures and history, and to instill respect for these cultures. 

Researchers have not focused on long-term outcomes for Native students who are 
educated in situations where their languages and cultures structure their overall educational 
experiences. This is largely because there are very few situations of Native language and 
culture-based education that have been in place for long, and also because such longitudinal 
studies can be very expensive and difficult to manage. Neither has there been sufficient 
research on how to undertake the reconfiguration of the education system that would be 
needed to reach the point where Native culture and language are at the base of education, 
particularly in the face of the opposition of some parents, educators, and others in the 
commimity. Further, although Native culture may have some elements that are both 
widespread across tribes and villages and that also set American Indians and Alaska Natives 
apart from white culture, it is not certain which of those common elements are most imp ortant 
educationally, particularly in settings, such as urban schools, where children from many tribes 
and many non-Native cultures may share the same classroom. 

A renewed focus on American Indian and Alaska Native self-determination has 
resulted in a resurgence of political efforts to reestablish the role of traditional ways of living 
and commimicating in the educational system (Association of Co mmuni ty Tribal Schools, 

1996; National Indian School Boards Association and Bureau Effective Schools Team, 1998; 
Tippecoimic, 1999; Yazzie, 2000). Two notable publications in the early 1990s — Indian 
Nations at Risk: An Educational Strategy for Action (October, 1991) and the Final Report of 




19 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 17 



the White House Conference on Indian Education (May, 1992) -- identify as a national 
priority the need to retain Native language and culture as central elements in educating Native 
youth (Demmert, 1994). Despite those pohtical judgments, Deyhle and Swisher (1997) 
maintain that, until recently, most education research has actually contributed to efforts to do 
away with the application of Native language(s) and culture(s) in schools and Native 
communities. 

The pohtical sentiments have had some research support, although much of the 
research has been limited in applicability because it has rehed on small or unique samples. 
Willeto (1999) documents that the retention of traditional cultural traits does not hurt students' 
chances for academic success. In her study of 451 Navajo youth in 1 1 schools on the Navajo 
reservation, she found that students who participated in Navajo traditional activities and spoke 
the Navajo language did as well academically in school as those who were more assimilated 
and participated less. Specifically, she found no support "for the argument that traditionalism 
had a negative effect on academic success of Navajo young people" (p. 13). Her findings 
echoed those of Cummins (1996), who reviewed the literature on minority education and 
found that students with a strong sense of cultural and personal identity were more likely to 
have academic success. Cleary and Peacock (1998) interviewed 60 teachers of Indian students 
and interpreted these interviews as confirming the conclusion that traditional culture has a 
positive role, rather than a negative or no role, in developing academically successful Indian 
students. 

There is also some research evidence that language and cultural concerns can affect 
non-academic learning outcomes for American Indian and Alaska Native students that extend 
beyond the classroom to have a positive influence on the community. No single study has had 
sufficient size and scope to be individually persuasive; however, when taken as a whole, the 
studies suggest that when the schooling process promotes language and culture, it can be one 
of several important components that enable American Indians and Alaska Natives to foster 
the personal growth necessary to engage in sustainable community and economic 
development (Edwards et al., 1994; Freeman et al., 1995; Pewewardy, 1998). Further, these 
studies have provided support for tribal school personnel and Native community leaders to 
advocate for Native language and culture as being properly at the heart of preparing youth to 
lead productive and meaningful hves (Batchelder & Markel, 1997). 

There was anecdotal evidence presented at the National Research Agenda Conference 
and during the focus groups that not all Native parents support the view that schools have a 
role in teaching Native language and promoting Native culture. These parents reportedly 
believe that devoting scarce school time to those topics means less time is spent by their 
children on learning what they will need to know to survive in the white man’s world. How 
widespread this contrary perspective actually is and under what circumstances it arises are 
unknown, but the perspective does appear to be the view of a minority. 

In summary, while there is some evidence that educational reform in Indian country 
benefits from the use of culturally appropriate curriculum and instruction oriented to meet the 
needs of Native students, much of the hterature describes small studies that are not 
generalizable, and too httle has been done in the field to avoid potential bias from publishing 
only the good news. Further, the studies of language and culture are often conducted without 
looking for alternative explanations and the relationships of curriculum change to other 
factors. Despite the possible benefits of language and culture in school reform, it is unlikely 



O 

ERIC 



20 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 18 



any measurable impact will be made over time unless teachers are adequately trained, quality 
curricula are developed, and sufficient funding is secured to develop sustainable progr amming 
(Demmert, 1994). 

Several themes emerged from reviewing the literature, discussing the issues with 
experts in the field, and considering the range of suggested research questions. These include: 

■ There is not a single, commonly shared view as to what is meant by “relevant 
language and culture.” Different individuals may have very different views about 
“how much” or “which elements” is necessary to create a culturally relevant learning 
environment, and those individuals’ perspectives may vary based on the situations 
faced by a given set of children. 

■ It is particularly important to ask whose culture or whose language is to be the base of 
a culturally relevant learning environment. There are hundreds of tribes and villages 
within the country and, while they may share many cultural characteristics, the 
language differences among them can be great. For American Indian or Alaska Native 
students who attend school on their reservations or in their own villages, the issue is 
how to balance their own language and culture with that of the larger society. For 
American Indian and Alaska Native students attending schools off the reservation and 
especially in cities, the issue expands to how to incorporate languages and cultural 
themes appropriately into an Enghsh-language, majority culture situation. This 
becomes more complicated when several distinct tribes or villages are represented and 
even more with the presence of international cultures in the school. 

■ In the dispersed system of American public schools, it is not always clear where power 
or authority resides in different situations. Individual schools, local districts, state 
education agencies, courts at various levels, and agencies of the federal government 
have overlapping responsibilities. For schools on reservations, however, the 
predominant questions of power and authority revolve aroimd shifting notions of tribal 
sovereignty and the nature of the trust relationship of the tribe with the federal 
government. The past few decades have seen tribes gaining more power over their 
schools, and one key result has been an upsurge in interest in reformulating the 
educational experiences in tribal schools based on tribal culture and language. 

■ Some Native languages are no longer used, and their last speakers may have died. 
Others may have only a few speakers remaining, and the languages are primarily used 
in rituals. Still others, of course, thrive with thousands of speakers. An emerging 
issue is, when a tribe has sanctioned the effort to seek to revitahze its language, 
determining what is an appropriate role for schools to take in helping bring it back to 
life. Only when that issue is addressed is it appropriate to ask about what methods in 
schools are effective in doing so. 



Priority Research Topics 

The table on the following page presents two priority research topics for this general 
category of Native language and culture. It is important to reiterate that these topics are at 
about the same level of priority, i.e., neither is inherently at a higher priority level than the 




21 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 19 



Native Language and Culture 



Priority Research Topics 


Examples of Possible Study Questions 




What are the various meanings of the concept "relevant language and 
culture" and who defines the meaning within or for schools? 




What is the status of the incorporation of Native languages and culture 
into American Indian and Alaska Native education? 


Effects on educational 
outcomes for students and 


How many American Indian/Alaska Native students speak their Native 
language in the home, by grade level, type of school, tribe, community 
characteristics, etc ? 


schools of incorporating 
American Indian and Alaska 
Native language and culture 
into the school curriculum. 


How many American Indian/Alaska Native students receive at least 
some of their instruction in school in their Native language, by grade 
level, type of school, state, tribe, community characteristics, etc.? 




How docs the use of Native language and culture within the school 
influence reservation and off-reservation American Indian and Alaska 
Native youth in their educational attainment, self-perception, social and 
cultural identity, and career choices? 




What effect docs the implementation of discrete Native studies and 
language curriculum units have on American Indian/Alaska Native 
students' academic performance, attendance, and self-esteem? 




What have we learned from the experience of the Maori in New 
Zealand and Native Hawaiians in establishing language and cultural 
immersion programs, and is it appropriate to generalize the 
information? 


Best practices demonstrated as 
effective for implementing a 


What arc the best ways to incorporate culturally relevant (and that take 
American Indian/Alaska Native diversity into account) materials and 
methods into off-reservation schools? 


culturally relevant learning 
environment, and identification 
of factors that serve as barriers 
or facilitators for 
implementation. 


What are effective approaches for providing cultural support to 
American Indian and Alaska Native students in multi-ethnic, multi- 
cultural schools'^ 


What are effective approaches for use by non-Nativc teachers for 
utilizing Native language and culture as part of their daily instruction? 




What are effective approaches for overcoming the barriers to 
incorporating Native language and culture in the classroom? How do 
those approaches differ depending on school governance, local history, 
and other factors*^ 




OO 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 20 



other. For each research topic, several examples of possible study questions are provided. 
The examples of study questions are not meant to limi t or define the scope of the priority 
topics, rather they suggest the range of study questions offered by informants throughout this 
project. 



Suggested Studies 

To understand how schools have responded to requests either to place Native language 
and culture at the heart of the educational experience or to demonstrate support for and respect 
for them calls for large-scale descriptive studies to c^ture the big picture and also for more 
focused studies that look at a relative handful of co mmuni ties and schools. 

■ The large-scale survey suggested in the discussion of studies for educational outcomes 
also could gather substantial information to address priority research topics related to 
language and culture. In particular, that study would identify the types and 
pervasiveness of Native language and culture in the curriculum and permit 
correlational analysis with school and community characteristics and with Native 
parents’ attitudes toward and involvement with their children’s education. Particularly 
interesting analyses would look at the relationships among tribal homogeneity of the 
student population, the racial/ethnic characteristics of the teachers, and the extent of 
Native language and culture pervasiveness in the learning environment. 

■ Comparative case studies of schools with large Native enrollments would permit 
detailed understanding of the dynamics of creating and maintaining community/tribal 
support for Native language and culture initiatives in the school. A series of case 
studies, using a common research design to permit cross-case analysis, would look at a 
sample of BIA schools, tribal schools, public schools with 25 percent or higher Native 
enrollments, and Native-focused private or charter schools. The school sample also 
could be divided to represent elementary, secondary, and k-12 schools. In addition to 
observing classes and other activities, and interviewing teachers and school and 
district administrators, the researchers would be responsible for gathering local data on 
student performance, reviewing local policies and agreements, and meeting with 
parents and tribal/community leaders. One outcome of this study would be a set of 
models or options for other schools to consider, and a logical follow up to this study 
would be to fund the rephcation of particularly promising models and conduct 
formative research of start up and implementation at the new sites. 

■ There is continuing value in understanding particular events and situations where 
tribes, villages, or other Native communities seek to reform their educational system. 
Focused case studies or even random assignment research designs could be employed 
to understand the local barriers and facilitators of change and the effects of new 
initiatives. Such studies should be undertaken with the full cooperation of the affected 
community and should ideally incorporate local Native researchers whenever possible. 
Such studies could prove particularly valuable if reform efforts by several different 
tribes were studied using parallel methods during the same time period. 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 21 



Teachers, Schools and Educational Resources 

What happens to young people as students ultimately depends on their encounters with 
their schools, individual teachers, the curriculum and materials, and how those encounters 
relate to their own capabilities, interests, motivations, and experiences. There is httle 
disagreement that many American Indian and Alaska Native children, whether they live on 
reservations, in small villages, or in major urban areas, attend schools that lack resources, are 
in need of repair, and are overcrowded. Many of the teachers of these children are not from 
their own communities, and large numbers are inexperienced and teach in the schools for only 
a year or two. According to data from NCES’ Schools and Staffing Survey, 1993-94, fewer 
than 0.8 percent of the nation’s public school teachers are American Indians or Alaska Natives 
(compared to about 1.1 percent of the students), and they are less likely than white or African 
American teachers to have advanced degrees or certificates and are more likely to be in their 
first ten years of teaching. 

Native students in small rural secondary schools may have very few electives or 
advanced classes available to them. For example, according to transcript data summarized as 
part of NCES’ 1998 High School Transcript study. Native high school students earned fewer 
Carnegie units than members of any other racial/ethnic group in mathematics, science, and 
foreign languages. The more advanced the classes (e.g., mathematics beyond algebra or 
science beyond general introductions), the greater the disparities. Further, commercially 
available classroom materials are likely to reflect lives far removed culturally and 
economically from the ones they experience on their reservation or village. 

Teachers, Native as well as non-Native, are frequently blamed for the comparatively 
lower performances and attainments of Native students, although they are rarely credited for 
the successes achieved by most American Indian and Alaska Native children. Among the 
criticisms aimed at teachers in comments made at the national research agenda conference and 
during the focus groups are that many of them are non-Native, they are often relatively young 
and inexperienced, they do not stay at the school for long, they have httle contact with the 
local Native community, they usually do not understand Native culture in general and the 
culture and language of the children they are teaching in particular, and they hold negative 
stereotypes about the capabilities of Native learners. 

Recruiting and retaining teachers to teach in rural American Indian and Alaska Native 
communities is a long-standing problem. Inexperienced teachers and teachers faced with new 
situations need time to learn and adjust, and the high rate of teacher turnover in reservation 
schools contributes to educational problems in these schools. In addition, staff turnover 
creates a loss of institutional memory that can help maintain successful teaching practices and 
prevent the repetition of past mistakes. A similar problem exists with reservation school 
administrators. The scope of the problem can be seen from Plank's (1993) study of Navajo 
schools where he reported a yearly teacher turnover rate ranging from a low of 25 percent to a 
high of 57 percent, with 77 percent of the new teachers getting no orientation to Navajo 
education. Self-reported data from BIA schools suggest that teachers in reservation schools 
have made significant strides in the last few years. For example, between the 1996-97 and 
1 999-2000 school years, the percentage of teachers who were technologically “proficient” or 
“advanced” grew from 39 to 67 percent (Office of Indian Education Programs, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, 2001). 



American Indian and Alaska Native EdtJcation Research Agenda 



Page 22 



Widely accepted strategies to improve American Indian and Alaska Native student 
learning outcomes include increasing the number of Native teachers and increasing the 
number of teachers, Native as well as non-Native, who are properly trained to meet the needs 
of Native students (Banks, 1999; Indian Nations at Risk Task Force Report, 1991; Pavel, 

1995, 1999b; U.S. Department of Education, 1995, 1997; White House Conference on Indian 
Education, 1992). As is the case for most areas of research on Native education, most of the 
studies that have been conducted about teachers have involved small samples and possibly 
unique situations. Nonetheless, the studies tend to express some consensus. Teachers’ 
knowledge of Native language and culture can positively influence schools, students, and 
communities (Friesen &, Orr, 1998). A properly trained teacher could develop trusting 
relationships with students (Paradise, 1994) and make the difference between promoting 
negative stereotypes and portraying realistic and empowering views of Native peoples 
(Brophy, 1999). Based on their experiences with the University of Alaska's Cross-Cultural 
Education Development Program, Lipka et al. (1998) recommend increasing the number of 
minority teachers, helping them form support groups, involving elders and other commimity 
members in those groups, and establishing ties to other groups, including indigenous educators 
elsewhere and even to mainstream teachers once the local community has a clear educational 
agenda mapped out. 

The increasing demand for but very short supply of Native teachers requires a 
concerted effort similar to addressing the need for more minority teachers nationwide (Lewis, 
1996). One way this need is being addressed is through a new program funded through the 
Office of Indian Education’s (OIE), U.S. Department of Education, professional development 
program to provide support for Native Americans to become certified teachers. Through 
OIE’s "Indian Teacher Corps" initiative, 1,000 Indian teachers over a five-year period will be 
trained to take positions in schools that serve schools with significant Indian student 
populations. 

It is important to continue to investigate programs that prepare teachers to improve the 
learning outcomes of American Indian and Alaska Native youth. Too often, however, the 
need for more and better-trained teachers can be accepted as a panacea that does not address 
the systemic structures that create unacceptable classroom environments for Native students 
and their teachers. Both Native and non-Native teachers probably would benefit from 
educational reform that encompasses the need to address systemic issues wi thin the school, 
community, and society. 

Several themes emerged from reviewing the hterature, discussing the issues with 
experts in the field, and considering the range of suggested research questions. These include: 

■ Turnover appears to be high among teachers and administrators in schools serving 
large proportions of American Indian and Alaska Native students. It is important to 
understand the factors that account for this (e.g., geographic isolation, relative pay, 
self-perceptions of ineffectiveness, school resources, etc.), so that strategies to counter 
high turnover will be correctly targeted. It is also important to investigate further the 
relationships of staff turnover to student outcomes, since much of the presumed 
negative effects are based on just a few small studies. 




25 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 23 



■ Recent initiatives to expand the number of American Indian and Alaska Native 
teachers should be observed carefully not only to understand better the incentives tha t 
work to draw new individuals into the profession, but what it takes subsequently for 
them to stay in the profession and in the schools that need them. 

■ Many teachers in schools serving large proportions of American Indian and Alaska 
Native students are not from the communities they serve. Although teacher-training 
processes in general are well documented, the specific processes through which 
teachers are trained to work with children from Native communities are not. Further, 
there is little research on how new, non-Native teachers can be supported and 
mentored effectively once they are in their schools. 

■ The conditions faced by schools on or near reservations or Alaskan villages parallel 
those faced by many small, resource-poor, rural schools. It is important to ensure that 
the general problems faced by small, rural schools in terms of programs and resources 
are considered, especially for the schools that enroU large proportions of American 
Indian or Alaska Native students. 

■ The school may be seen by many Native Americans as an alien institution forced upon 
them by the majority society with assimilation as its goal. For large numbers of 
American Indians, their experiences with school involved being uprooted from their 
families to be sent to a boarding school where their language and customs were 
denigrated. Against this backdrop, schools on or near reservations often find it 
difficult to get parents involved in the school or the formal school-based education of 
their children. 

■ More work is needed to identify the characteristics of urban schools serving American 
Indian and Alaska Native students that are related to achievement and attainment. In 
particular, researchers should look at charter schools that are established for Native 
students as well as at other public or private schools vwth high (i.e., 25 percent or 
higher) Native enrollments. 



Priority Research Topics 

The table on the follovwng page presents three priority research topics for this general 
category of teachers, schools, and educational resources. It is important to reiterate that these 
topics are at about the same level of priority, i.e., none is inherently at a higher priority level 
than another. For each research topic, several examples of possible study questions are 
provided. The examples of study questions are not meant to limit or define the scope of the 
priority topics, rather they suggest the range of study questions offered by informants 
throughout this project 



Suggested Studies 

The priority study topics in this area revolve around teachers and generating effective 
parent involvement. For teachers, the issues are recruitment, retention, and training. The 
large-scale survey suggested to address some of the priority study topics for educational 




26 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 24 



Teachers, Schools, and Educational Resources 



Priority Research Topics 


Examples of Possible Study Questions 


Effective methods for 
developing, recruiting, and 
retaining qualified teachers 
for schools with large 
American Indian or Alaska 
Native enrollments. 


\Vhat are the characteristics of teachers in reservation schools and in off- 
reservation schools with high enrollments of American Indian and 
Alaska Native students? 


Which methods are most effective for recruiting and retaining qualified 
teachers to work at schools with high American Indian and Alaska 
Native student enrollments? 


How can states and districts support and motivate members of the Native 
community, particularly those now serving as classroom aides, to enter 
teacher-training programs? 


In what circumstances, if any, should teacher qualifications differ for 
Native and non-Native teachers in schools serving large proportions of 
American Indian and Alaska Native students? 


Effective and replicable 
teaching approaches, models, 
etc. for enhancing outcomes 
for American Indian and 
Alaska Native students. 


What aspects of pre-service and in-service development activities are 
most effective in preparing and supporting teachers in working with 
American Indian and Alaska Native students? 


What instructional practices have been demonstrated to be effective in 
helping American Indian and Alaska Native students achieve 
academically in reservation, off-reservation, and urban schools? 


What are the relationships between levels and types of resources 
available in schools serving American Indian and Alaska Native students 
(by school governance and locale) on staff stability, parent and 
community involvement, and other school and student level outcomes? 


To what extent and for what purposes arc distance/remote learning 
methods used in schools serving American Indian and Alaska Native 
students, by grade level, type of school, community characteristics, and 
tribe? 


Best practices for promoting 
positive parent or community 
involvement in schools 
serving American Indian and 
Alaska Native students. 


To what extent are parents of American Indian and Alaska Native 
students involved in their children's schools, and how does the extent of 
parent involvement vary by grade level, school governance, percentage 
Native enrollment, teacher, administrator, and community 
characteristics, and tribal differences? 


To what extent are American Indian and Alaska Native communities 
involved in their children's schools and how does the extent of 
community involvement vary by grade level, school governance, 
percentage Native enrollment, teacher, administrator, and community 
characteristics, and tribal differences? 


What are some barriers that limit collaboration between schools and 
community based organizations? What are some factors that enhance 
and strengthen collaboration? 


How do the various governance entities responsible for the education of 
American Indian/Alaska Native students, particularly in tribal or BIA 
schools, work together? 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 25 



outcomes and Native language and culture would also be useful for this category. Other 
suggested studies involve case studies to describe best practices and reanalyses of U.S. 
Department of Education data sets. 

■ The characteristics, educational backgrounds and other professional qualifications, 
experience, training, etc. for teachers can be addressed through a large-scale 
descriptive study. In part, the Indian School Teacher Questioimaire used in the 
Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS) provides much of this information, but without 
the additional information from students and famthes, the relationships between 
teacher variables and other variables caimot be explored. 

■ An ongoing concern is the quahty and content of pre-service training provided by 
schools of education to prospective teachers. A series of case studies of schools of 
education in states with large numbers and large percentages of Native students (e.g., 
Alaska, Arizona, Montana, etc.) would assess the content of training related to 
understanding the cultures and languages of Natives in the state, the requirements for 
learning that material, and how those factors related to state requirements for 
certification and district hiring practices. The schools of education would be selected 
to be broadly representative of the institutions in the affected states, and data 
collection would include policy and requirements reviews, course content reviews and 
class observation, and interviews with faculty, students, and a small sample of teacher- 
recruitment persoimel in school districts with high Native enrollment percentages. 

■ It is easy to say there should be more Native teachers. The statement begs the 
questions, however, of how to interest talented Native high school students to consider 
and prepare for postsecondary education, how to help students in poverty pay for that 
education, how to expand support for tribal colleges and universities, and how to 
support cultural minorities within large institutions. Further, once a Native teacher 
begins her/his career, it is essential'to find out what districts and schools do to retain 
that teacher. One ^proach to answering these questions is to conduct a retrospective 
survey of current and former Native teachers to learn their motivations and supports. 
Another is to identify school districts that appear to be effective in promoting the post 
secondary option for their Native students and/or in hiring and retaining Native 
teachers and then conduct open-ended interviews to identify hypotheses about best 
practices that could subsequently be tested using more focused methods. 

■ As a general rule, parental involvement in their children’s education and their schools 
tends to be associated with more success on outcome measures for students and for 
their schools. For Native parents, especially American Indians, however, schools have 
not always been seen as community institutions, and some parents do not feel 
welcome. Further, because of the shortcomings of the formal school-based education 
received by many Native parents, they are not in position to help their children or 
model behaviors. Through the large-scale descriptive study, schools that report being 
successful in promoting active parental involvement (and where the parents tend to 
agree), should be selected for case studies to describe their methods. 

■ The Office of Indian Education is currently conducting the “Pilot Sites Initiative,” in 
which resource needs are being identified in nine schools. As needs are identified. 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 26 



agencies that can help meet the needs are involved. It would be useful to collate the 
information across sites so that overall resource needs and the abilities of agencies to 
meet them can be estimated. To refine the estimates of needs, national data could be 
used either from the large-scale descriptive study proposed in prior sections or NCES’ 
Schools and Staffing Survey. 




29 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 27 



American Indian and Alaska Native Students with Special Needs 

American Indian and Alaska Native students ^pear to be over represented in special 
education and compensatory/remedial classes and under represented in classes for gifted or 
talented students. The reasons for these patterns may include in^propriate assessment tools, 
factors related to the nature of the schools attended by American Indian and Alaska Native 
students, prejudice or other unjustified expectations, learning styles of American Indian and 
Alaska Native students, a higher incidence of disabihty, or others. Because special-program 
assignments that are made early in schooling may have significant effects on decisions made 
later by and for students, it is important to understand the representation patterns more fully. 

Stone and Gridley (1991) studied test bias and found a significant possibihty of over- 
and under-prediction of academic achievement for American Indian and Alaska Native 
students, suggesting that Native students might be referred to special education programs at 
proportionally higher rates than white students as a result of misclassification. Wright, 
Hirlinger, and England (1998) surveyed 128 pub he school districts in Oklahoma that had at 
least 1,000 students and at least five percent Indian student enrollment and found that 
American Indians were significantly over-represented in programs for low-achievers and 
under-represented in gifted programs. Results from NCES’ Schools and Staffing Survey in 
1993-94 found that about 10 percent of Native students received special education services in 
schools with 25 percent or more Native enrollment, which is roughly the national rate. At the 
same time, 17.5 percent of the students in BIA schools were in special education (U.S. 
Department of Education, 1997). Data reported by BIA’s Office of Indian Education 
Programs for the most recent years have generally indicated that between 8,000 and 9,000 
students in BIA schools (16-18 percent of the total enrollment) were receiving special 
education services. 

A survey by Faircloth (2000) of schools with 50 percent or higher Native enrollments 
found that principals were particularly concerned with the need for effective models for use 
with Native students with disabilities. In part, this was seen as reflecting the larger need for 
vahdated, effective models of education for Native children in general (Tippeconnic, 

Faircloth, & Stout, 2000). 

Several themes emerged from reviewing the literature, discussing the issues with 
experts in the field, and considering the range of suggested research questions. These include: 

■ Many American Indian and Alaska Native students are not fluent in standard English. 
As a result, written assessments used for screening or confirming the need for special 
services may not produce vahd results. It is important to determine the extent to 
which the disproportional representation patterns in special and compensatory 
programs are a function of poor measurement tools. 

■ It also is important to investigate the referral processes leading to formal assessments 
to determine whether teachers’ expectations of performance tend toward downplaying 
the strengths of American Indian and Alaska Native students and emphasizing any 
weaknesses. Prejudice in the classroom may be rare or common (the non-research 
literature on Native education often asserts that it is pervasive), but the effects of any 
prejudices should be identified so they can be corrected. 



er|c 



30 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 28 



■ Native students do not appear to be over-represented in special education in most 
schools; rather, Native students in BIA schools appear to account for much of the 
over-representation. 

■ Native students are under-represented in gifted and talented programs and it is 
important to explore the reasons why. High poverty schools, especially rural schools, 
tend not to offer such programs. Low expectations of teachers may also be a factor. 

■ Some students, of course, do have disabilities or other conditions that qualify them for 
special education programs, and some students are gifted or talented by almost any 
definition. It is important to find out if the students who should be in the special 
programs are indeed identified and served and if the services are appropriate and of 
high quality. 



Priority Research Topics 

The table on the following page presents two priority research topics for this general 
category of Native students with special needs. It is important to reiterate that these topics are 
at about the same level of priority, i.e., neither is inherently at a higher priority level than the 
other. For each research topic, several examples of possible study questions are provided. 

The examples of study questions are not meant to limit or define the scope of the priority 
topics, rather they suggest the range of study questions offered by informants throughout this 
project. 



Suggested Studies 

The studies to be conducted in this area range from assessing the validity and 
instruments commonly used in confirming special education needs of American Indian and 
Alaska Native students to a study of BIA schools to understand why they identify such large 
percentages of Native students for special education. In addition, work being conducted by 
the U.S. Department of Education in this area should be monitored. For example, a current 
study sponsored by the Office of BiUngual Education and Minority Languages Affairs is 
exploring the relationships between lack of fluency in standard EngUsh and assignment to 
special education classes. This Descriptive Study of Services to Limited English Proficient 
Students replicates a study of the same name completed early in the 1990s. As another 
example, the Office of Special Education Programs is gathering information on the nature of 
disability and percentages of students served by race/ethnicity. 

■ The apparent over-representation of American Indian and Alaska Native students in 
special education in BIA schools can be studied through surveys or on-site interviews 
The first step is to determine the range of the percentage of Native students served in 
special education based on the annual “report cards” submitted to BIA by the schools. 
Second, three or four pairs of schools - one high percentage, the other low, but that 
otherwise are as similar as possible - could be selected for further study. Either 
through detailed, open-ended telephone interviews or short site visits, differences in 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 29 



special education assessment tools or procedures could be identified. Instruments or 
procedures that are related to very high or very low placement rates should be 




32 



Amcncan Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 30 



American Indian and Alaska Native Students with Special Needs 



Priority Research Topics 


Examples of Possible Study Questions 


Personal, social, and 
educational characteristics of 
American Indian and Alaska 
Native children in special, 
compensatory, and gifted or 
talented education programs, 
and best practices for valid 
assessment of special needs. 


What are the causes of disproportional Native student representation 
in programs for students with special needs (e g., student 
characteristics - such as learning styles, invalid assessment practices, 
teacher beliefs and practices, etc.)? 


Are Native students with special needs identified and served in 
appropriate programs? 


What are effective policies, procedures, and practices for 
appropriately identifying Indian students with disabilities? 




What are effective approaches for teaching American Indian and 
Alaska Native students with disabilities, and to what extent are 
teachers currently using these approaches? 


Effective practices for 
working with American 
Indian and Alaska Native 
students with special 


Are alternative education programs available to meet the needs of 
American Indian and Alaska Native students who have not been 
successful in mainstream schools? What are the characteristics of 
successful alternative education programs? 


How are teachers prepared to work with American Indian and Alaska 
Native students with special needs? 


educational needs. 


How are the Bureau of Indian Affairs/Office of Indian Education 
Programs, the United States Department of Education, tribes, and 
states preparing or influencing the preparation of teachers and 
administrators to implement the provisions of the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act effectively? 




To what extent are gifted and talented programs available to Native 
students? 




33 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 3 1 



evaluated in detail to determine the possibility that they may be responsible for 
assignment errors. A somewhat similar study, but using the Common Core of Data to 
identify schools for the project, could be conducted in public schools. For this similar 
study, however, a useful target would be placement in compensatory programs or 
gifted or talented education programs. 

■ Sometimes commonly used assessment tools contain subtle biases that can lead to 
assignment errors. It would be useful to conduct detailed psychometric and linguistic 
analyses of instruments that are widely used to screen or place Native students in 
special programs. 

■ Data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study - Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) should 
be examined for relationships between prenatal exposure to alcohol and subsequent 
learning difficulties. 




34 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 32 



Early Childhood Educational Needs of Native Children 

American Indian and Alaska Native children ^pear to be less prepared on average to 
begin their first years of school than children in other American racial/ethnic groups. 

Although national studies of early childhood and school readiness have not included large 
enough Native American samples to provide a comprehensive picture, small-scale education 
studies and research in other fields suggest that poverty, relatively poor health and weU-being, 
limited Enghsh proficiency, and lack of access to resources disproportionately affect 
American Indian and Alaska Native children. 

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2000) reported 69 percent of 
Native American women received prenatal care during the first trimester in 1998 compared to 
83 percent of women nationally. The CDC also reported that the rate of sudden infant death 
syndrome, which is the leading cause of death for Native American infants, was over twice 
that of white, Hispanic, or Asian infants, and that Native American infants were 3 times as 
likely as the general population to die from an accident, and 4 times as hkely to die from 
pneumonia or influenza (CDC, 2000). According to the Indian Health Service (IHS, in 1993, 
the death rate of American Indian children aged 1 to 4 was 2.2 times larger than for all races, 
and 2.5 times larger than for white children, with accidents as the leading cause of death for 
Native children at a rate 2.9 times as high as all children (IHS, 1997). 

In addition to health-related factors, which are closely tied to high levels of poverty 
and rural residence, many Native children also enter school with low levels of English 
proficiency. According to the 1993-94 Schools and School Staffing Survey, about one-third 
of the Indian students in BIA/tribal schools spoke a language other than English in their 
homes, and a similar percentage was identified as having hmited English proficiency (U.S. 
Dept, of Education, 1997). A report of the Department of Education (1999) entitled Start 
Early, Finish Strong indicated that children from high poverty areas are coming to school with 
vocabularies of approximately 3,000 words compared to their counterparts from affluent 
homes who come with 20,000 word vocabularies. According to the 1993-94 Schools and 
Staffing Survey from NCES, about 2.1 milhon students (about 5 percent) are hmited English 
proficient. 

Many studies have demonstrated that early childhood programs are hnked to 
substantial improvements in cognitive, social and emotional development, and can give low 
SES children some of the opportunities to prepare for school that higher income children have 
(Gomby et al., 1995; National Research Council, 2001). Research in early childhood 
programs has shown the importance of comprehensive programming, which meets social, 
emotional, physical, and cognitive needs (Nissani, 1990). 

Several national programs target the disadvantages faced by young Native American 
children. Head Start provides a wide range of services to low income preschoolers. Head 
Start places importance on education that is individualized for the community served; health, 
including immunizations, medical, dental, mental health, and nutritional services; parent 
involvement, and social services. As of May 1997, American Indian Head Start had 131 
funded grantees, located in 25 states. Many are tribally operated, and integration of Native 
language and culture into the curriculum is encouraged. Even Start has shown positive 
outcomes on measures such as “parental expectations for children’s academic success, and 




35 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 33 



enhanced utilization of other commimity, social, health, and education services” (Barnett, 
1995). The tribal Even Start program combines adult hteracy, early childhood education, and 
parenting education services for parents and their children from birth through age seven for 
Native American famihes (U.S. Department of Education, 1997). 

Three themes emerged from reviewing the literature, discussing the issues with experts 
in the field, and considering the range of suggested research questions. These include: 

■ There appears to be little question that the conditions and experiences of early 
childhood affect children’s readiness for and subsequent success in elementary and 
secondary education. Yoimg Native American children appear to rank lower on most 
measures of school readiness than the children of other racial/ethnic groups, although 
comprehensive national studies have not dehneated the full relationships among 
backgroimd factors, readiness levels, and school success for American Indians and 
Alaska Natives. Further, while national programs such as Head Start have operated on 
reservations for years, it is not clear what early childhood services are available to the 
large majority of Native children who live off the reservation and how or whether they 
are adapted to the unique needs of those children. 

■ Public health data for Native American children suggest widespread problems possibly 
stemming from a combination of inadequate service availabihty and lack of 
knowledge and awareness of healthful behaviors. The data, on low rates of prenatal 
care, for example, could stem from both causes. Further, the data suggest there may 
have been insufficient efforts to provide wellness education to school-aged children 
and their parents that would, for example, lead to more Native women seeking 
prenatal care or greater attention by parents and other adults to sources of potential 
accidents, at least through time. At the same time, it is not clear from the data whether 
the public health problems are primarily reservation-based, rural in general, or also 
occur in towns or cities. 

■ American Indian and Alaska Native children’s transitions from early childhood 
programs (or no program at all) to kindergarten or the first grade appear to be more 
difficult than for the average American child, although there is certainly reason to 
believe that any limited English chUd from a resource-poor family and commimity 
would face many of the same problems. 



Priority Research Topics 

The table on the following page presents two priority research topics for this general 
category of early childhood educational needs. It is important to reiterate that these topics are 
at about the same level of priority, i.e., neither is inherently at a higher priority level than the 
other. For each research topic, several examples of possible study questions are provided. 

The examples of study questions are not meant to limi t or define the scope of the priority 
topic, rather they suggest the range of study questions offered by informants throughout this 
project. 



O 

ERIC 



36 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 34 



Early Childhood Education Needs of Native Children 



Priority Research Topics 


Examples of Possible Study Questions 


Status of infant and pre- 
school-age American Indian 
and Alaska Native children on 
school readiness domains. 


How are Native children’s health and well-being related to rural 
(reservation and non-reservation), suburban, small town, large city, etc. 
residence? How does this relationship compare with the overall 
population? 


How must early childhood programs be structured so that they foster the 
fundamental skills that children are expected to have when they enter 
school? 


How effective are early childhood programs and activities for Native 
American children in promoting readiness for school? 


Programs and services 
available for infants and pre- 
school-aged American Indian 
and Alaska Native children. 


To what extent do Indian children and their families in reservation, rural, 
urban, and other settings have early childhood education opportunities 
available to them? 


How can a network of tribal early childhood programs that addresses 
issues, resources, and action plans be organized? 


What early childhood education programs and activities appear to 
promote effective use of English as a second language? 


How can early childhood programs accommodate American Indian and 
Alaska Native children with disabilities? 


What methods are effective in promoting health and wellness among 
American Indian and Alaska Native families? 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 35 



Suggested Studies 

The National Education Goals Panel (1997) identified five independent domains that 
collectively make up school readiness. These include (1) physical well-being and motor 
development; (2) social and emotional development; (3) approaches toward learning (such as 
curiosity, cooperativeness, and persistence); (4) language development, and (5) cognition and 
general knowledge. In general terms, the research that is needed should address the current 
status of Native children within those domains and identify effective practices for helping 
those children move successfully past the barriers into a successful school career. 

■ The most significant study for this topic is already underway. The Early Childhood 
Longitudinal Study - Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) is being conducted for NCES. This 
longitudinal study will track 15,000 children from birth during the year 2000 (and 
actually a bit before) through the end of the first grade. The Office of Indian 
Education provided supplementary funding for an augmented sample of more than 
1,000 Native children. NCES is gathering data related to each of the domains 
identified by the National Education Goals Panel, and its study contractor is working 
with Tribal governments and other Native organizations to ensure sensitivity to local 
issues and to follow local data collection requirements. Data from the baseline survey 
should begin to be available in 2003, and it should prove invaluable for Native 
researchers who seek to imtangle the interrelationships among personal characteristics, 
family backgroimd, conmumity, early childhood services, and success in making the 
transition to school. These data should be of particular use for faculty and graduate 
student research. 

■ ECLS-B is gathering extensive information about the characteristics of yoimg children 
during the years they pass from infancy through the first grade. It would be valuable 
to conduct parallel research on programs that appear to be particularly successful in 
helping yoimg Native American children make successful transitions into formal 
schooling. These could be identified either through the characteristics of the programs 
themselves (i.e.. Head Start programs based on proportion of Native enrollment, use of 
Native language, etc.) or based on secondary evidence of their success (e.g., high 
proportions of American Indian and Alaska Native students rated as performing well 
in early elementary grades). Case studies, with ^propriate case controls or 
comparison groups, would be an appropriate method, with the focus being on 
identifying effective practice. 




38 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 36 



Educational Standards and Assessments 

Throughout the country, students - Native and non-Native — are facing an 
unprecedented series of high-stakes tests to determine their levels of proficiency on academic 
standards established at the national, state, or local level. Although the assessments are often 
formally designed to rate schools or teachers, it is the students who are tested, and news 
accounts frequently focus on their successes or failures rather than those of their institutions or 
instructors. Further, many of the assessments do directly affect the students; successfully 
moving on to the next grade or graduating may be a function of how well they do. 

The purpose of setting standards and assessing performance is not to punish children; 
rather it is to ensure that educators are accountable for the product they are providing. When 
students do well, the results are considered strong evidence that educators are doing their jobs 
well, and when the students do poorly, then they are being let down by the educational system. 
Fox (2000) sees the emphasis on standards and accountabihty as a significant lever for 
improving education for Native children; the risk is that the students will get blamed for the 
failures of the systems that are - presumably - set up to benefit them: 

The standards-based reform effort can help to improve Indian education with new 
standards and assessment; however, as has h^pened in the past, the game of blaming 
the victim may occur. In order for this reform to really work for Indian students, 
schools must see themselves as accoimtable for providing the educational program and 
support necessary for Indian children to meet the standards. States and the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs must see themselves as accountable for providing the technical 
assistance, training and support that schools need for them to improve instruction and 
provide the educational program that students must have to meet the standards (Fox, 
2000, p. 9). 

The standards set for American Indian and Alaska Native students and the assessments 
used to measure them can depend on the type of school they attend. BIA-funded schools may 
use a standards and assessment system developed at the national level, or they may choose to 
use the system developed by and for the state in which the school resides. Public schools 
usually do not have the option of selecting among systems and have to use the one ^proved 
for their state or district; thus, American Indian and Alaska Native students, their parents, and 
their advocates in these schools also have no choice. It is not clear to what extent 
representatives of American Indian and Alaska Native co mmuni ties or tribal governments 
were involved in deciding upon the standards and assessments to be used in their states or why 
some BIA- funded schools have opted to go with their state’s system rather than the national 
one. It is also not clear, of course, what the differences for Native students and their schools 
will be in the long term as a result of those decisions. 

The literature recommends that educational reform be systematically addressed in the 
classroom - over a sufficient period of time and with sufficient resources - to meet the 
learning needs of Native students. With the recent emphasis on statewide standards, it is 
becoming particularly important for Native educators to decide how to assess the performance 
of their students (Fox, 2000). There seems to be considerable agreement on the importance 
for teachers to be aware of potential cultural and language factors when assessing academic 
achievement in the classroom (Banks, 1997). Fox (1999) explains that "we must try new 



O 

ERIC 



39 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 37 



methods of assessment that are being created, including the Learning Record, a system 
adopted by BIA-fimded schools, and we must evaluate proposed methods to find the best 
ways to assess the learning of Indian students" (p. 162). Cultural bias (due to not factoring in 
Native language and cultural issues) is to be avoided "to ensure the cultural validity and 
reliability of information obtained" (Mclnemey, 1998, p. 1) 

Three themes emerged from reviewing the hterature, discussing the issues with experts 
in the field, and considering the range of suggested research questions. These include; 

■ It is unclear what imintended effects high-stakes testing programs will have on 
students, particularly American Indian and Alaska Native students or others from 
similarly high-poverty, language minority, or culturally isolated groups. Particularly 
when the tests are used to restrict grade promotion or secondary school graduation, the 
high stakes could serve to motivate some and discourage other students. 

■ Developing standards and assessment systems is also one of the ways communities 
can make their views known about what they feel are the important goals of education. 
Some American Indian and Alaska Native communities have taken advantage of the 
situation to establish their own standards and procedures for assessing them, but many 
others have not, including American Indians in urban areas. 

■ Assessments may focus primarily on basic skills attainment - the lowest common 
denominator of educational outcomes - or they may seek to measure students against a 
metric of what they should know. In this context, American Indian and Alaska Native 
educators and tribal leaders call for including Native language and culture in the 
curriculum; it is not clear how those elements can be assessed as part of a larger 
assessment process. 



Priority Research Topics 

The table on the following page presents two priority research topics for this general 
category of educational standards and assessments. It is important to reiterate that these topics 
are at about the same level of priority, i.e., neither is inherently at a higher priority level than 
the other. For each research topic, several examples of possible study questions are provided. 
The examples of study questions are not meant to limit or define the scope of the priority 
topics, rather they suggest the range of study questions offered by informants throughout this 
project. 



Suggested Studies 

The purpose for establishing and implementing standards and assessment systems is to 
make educators accountable for what children learn. When students do not perform up to the 
standards estabhshed for them, the focus should turn to finding what aspects of the 
educational process are not working. Sometimes, of course, the assessment tools themselves 
are accused, and other times, the students are blamed. Because of the importance of the 
current emphasis on implementing high-stakes testing, it is important to find out school, 
district, state, and - in the case of BIA schools - federal responses to poor performance. 




40 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 38 



Educational Standards and Assessments 



Priority Research Topics 


Examples of Possible Study Questions 




How much variation in standards is there across schools with large 
American Indian and Alaska Native enrollments, and what standards and 
assessment systems are used with most American Indian/Alaska Native 
students? 




What can we learn from the implementation of the ‘Alaska standards”? 




Which assessments and tests have been validated with an American 
Indian and Alaska Native student population? 


Characteristics of standards 
and assessment systems for 
schools with large 
enrollments of American 
Indian and Alaska Native 
students that are effective in 
improving performance and 
address the unique needs and 
situations of those students. 


To what extent and in w^hat circumstances are American Indian and 
Alaska Native students receiving appropriate standards-based 
instruction? 


How are the purposes and goals of education defined by parents and 
tribal governments? How^ do these purposes compare to the outcomes of 
education codified in existing standards? 


What are appropriate report cards or evaluations for schools and teachers 
serving Native students? How have BIA schools implemented the 
‘‘Learning Record” approach to assessment and w^hat are the 
implications? 




What is status of schools with large Native enrollments, including BIA- 
funded schools, with regard to sanctions as a result of lack of progress 
toward meeting standards? 




What are the major differences between assessments and standards 
systems developed by and with input from Native educators and those 
developed by non-Native educators? 




To what extent is it necessary to consider various levels of acculturation 
within communities and schools, so that standards arc flexible enough to 
accommodate all students? 


Best practices for 
implementing standards and 
assessment systems for 
schools with large 
enrollments of American 
Indian and Alaska Native 
students. 


Are professional development (including in-service and pre-service) 
programs for administrators and teachers focused on standards and 
assessment processes? 


To what extent and how are Native communities, tribes, villages, etc. 
involved in developing and implementing standards and assessment 
systems? 




What impacts have tribal codes of education or tribal departments of 
education (e.g.. Rosebud, Navajo, etc.) had upon the development, 
implementation, and evaluation of standards and assessment systems? 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 39 



■ A descriptive survey of a sample of schools with high Native enrollment percentages 
would be useful to obtain perspectives on what content and performance standards are 
in place and what assessment procedures and instruments are being used. The schools 
would be selected from several states with relatively large Native percentages, from 
BIA schools as well as regular pubhc schools and private or charter schools. The 
survey would also collect several years’ data - to the extent such data are available - 
about percentages of students in the school, by race/ethnicity, who did not meet the 
standards and what impact these percentages have on dropout rates. The survey would 
also request information about steps taken by the schools to improve the performance 
of low-scoring students. 

■ It would be useful to obtain and disseminate information about practices used in some 
schools with high Native enrollment percentages that appear to make a substantial 
difference in promoting high performance on high-stakes assessments. Case studies 
should be conducted in high-performing schools or schools that have shown marked 
improvements, with appropriate comparison schools, to identify what factors are 
associated with success. 




42 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 40 



References 



Association of Community Tribal Schools. (1996). Our children, our schools, our tribes: 
Thirty years of local control in Indian education 1966-1996. Sisseton, SD: Author. 

Baker, P., et al. (1994). Tribal governance and economic development of American Indian 
nations. Tribal Colleges, 6(20), 26-31. 

Banks, J. (1999). An introduction to multicultural education (2nd edition). Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon. 

Banks, S. (1997). Caregiver and professional perceptions of assessment practices and vahdity 
for American Indian/Alaska Native families. Journal of American Indian Education, 37(1), 
16-44. 



Barnett, W.S. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and school 
outcomes. The Future of Children, 5(3). 

Batchelder, A. & Markel, S. (1997). An initial exploration of the Navajo Nation's language 
and cultural initiative. In Reyhner, J. (Ed.), Teaching Indigenous languages (pp. 239-247). 
Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University. 

Brophy, J. (1999). Elementary students learn about Native Americans: The development of 
knowledge and empathy. Social Education, 63(1), 39-45. 

Cantoni, G. P. (1997). Keeping minority languages ahve: The school's responsibihty. In 
Reyhner, J. (Ed.), Teaching Indigenous languages (pp. 1-9). Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona 
University. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). Prenatal care for live births. 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs. 

Cleary, L. M. & Peacock, T. D. (1998). Collected wisdom: American Indian education. 
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Crawford, J. (1997). Best evidence: Research foundations of the Bilingual Education Act 
Washington, DC: National Clearinghouse for B ilin g ual Education. 

Cummins, J. (1996). Negotiating identities: Education for empowerment in a diverse society. 
Ontario, CA: California Association for Bihngual Education. 

Demmert, W. (1994). Blueprints for Indian education: Languages and cultures. Charleston, 
WV: Appalachia Educational Laboratory, Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools. 

Deyhle, D. & Swisher, K. G (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native 
education: From assimilation to self-determination. In Michael W. Apple (Ed.), Review of 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 41 



Research in Education (Vol. 22, pp. 113-194). Washington, DC; American Educational 
Research Association. 

Edwards, E. D., et al. (1994). Community organizing in support of self-determination within 
Native American communities. Journal of Multicultural Social Work, 5(4), 43-60. 

Faircloth, S. (October 2000). A survey of the special education knowledge and skills of 
principals in BIA, tribal and pubhc schools with 50 percent or more American Indian/Alaska 
Native student population. Presented at the Aimual Conference of the National Indian 
Education Association, Sioux Falls, SD, October 30, 2000. 

Federal Interagency Task Force (January, 2001). Comprehensive policy statement on Indian 
education. U.S. Department of Education and U.S. Department of the Interior. 

Fox, S. J. (1999). Student assessment in Indian education or what is a roach? In Swisher, K. 

G. & Tippeconnic, J. (Eds.), Next steps: Research and practice to advance Indian education 
(pp. 161-178). Charleston, WV: Appalachia Educational Laboratory. 

Fox, S. J. (2000). Standards-based reform and American Indian/Alaska Native education. 
Presented at National Indian Education Research Agenda Conference, Albuquerque, NM, 

May 2000. <www.ed.gov/nativeamericanresearch> 

Freeman, K., et al. (1995). Ojibway, Mohawk, and Inuktitut ahve and well? Issues of identity, 
ownership, and change. Bilingual Research Journal, 19{\), 36-69. 

Friesen, D.W. & Orr, J. (1998). New paths, old ways: E?q)loring the places of influences on 
the role of identity. Canadian Journal of Native Education, 22(2), 1 88-200 

Fuchs, E. & Havighurst, R. J. (1972). To live on this earth: American Indian education. 

Garden City, NY : Doubleday. 

Gomby, D., Lamber, M., Stevenson, C., Lewit, E., & Behrman, R. (1995) Long-term 
outcomes of early childhood programs: Analysis and recommendations. The Future of 
Children, 5(3). 

Huff, D. J. (1997). To live heroically: Institutional racism and American Indian education. 
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Indian Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1997). Indian Health 
focus: Youth. Washington, DC: author. 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force (1 991). Indian nations at risk task force: An educational 
strategy for action: Final report of the Indian Nations at risk task force. Washington, DC: 

U.S. Department of Education. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 343 753. 

Institute for Government Research (1928). The Problem of Indian Administration: Report of a 
Survey Made at the Request of Honorable Herman Work Secretary of the Interior. (Also 
known as iheMerriam Report). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. 




44 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 42 



LeVeque, D. M. (1994). Culture and parental in f luence on achievement among Native 
American students in Barstow Unified School District. Paper presented at the National 
Meeting of the Comparative and International Educational Society, San Diego, March 1994. 

Lewis, M. S. (1996). Supply and demand of teachers of color. Washington, DC: 

Clearinghouse on Teaching and Learning. 

Lipka, J.; Mohatt, G.; & the Ciulistet Group. (1998). Transforming the culture of schools: 
Yup'ik Eskimo examples. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Lomawaima, K. T. (1999). The unnatural history of American Indian education. In Swisher, 
K. G. & Tippeconnic, J. (Eds.), Next steps: Research and practice to advance Indian 
education ^p. 1-32). Charleston, WV: Appalachia Educational Laboratory. 

Lomawaima, K. T. (Spring 2000). Tribal sovereigns: Reffaming research in American Indian 
education. Harvard Education Review, STpring 2000, 1-21. 

Mclnemey, D. M. (1998). Multidimensional aspects of motivation in cross-cultural settings 
and ways of researching this. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Education Research Association, San Diego, CA. 

National Congress of American Indians and National Indian Education Association (March 
1997). Comprehensive Federal Indian Education Policy Statement, Washington, DC and 
Alexandria, VA: authors. 

National Education Goals Panel (1997). Reconsidering children's early development and 
learning: Toward common views and vocabulary. Washington, DC: author. 

National Indian School Boards Association and Bureau Effective Schools Team. (1998). 
Leadership beyond the seventh generation II: A tool for everyone reforming schools to be 
more effective so all children will learn. Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta K^pa International, 
Center for Effective Schools. 

National Research Council (2001). Eager to learn: educating our preschoolers . Committee 
on Early Childhood Pedagogy. Bowman, B. T., Donovan, M. S., &. Bums, M. S. (Eds.) 
Washington, D.C: National Academy Press. 

Nissani, H. (1990). NCBE focus. Occasional Papers in Bilingual Education, 2, Summer 
1990. 

Paradise, R. (1994). Spontaneous cultural compatibility: Mazahua students and their teachers 
constmcting busting relationships. Peabody Journal of Education, 69(2), 60-70. 

Pavel, D. M. (1995). Comparing BIA and tribal schools with pubhc schools: A look at the 
Year 1990-91. Journal of American Indian Education, ii(5), 10-15. 

Pavel, D. M. (1999b). Schools, principals, and teachers serving American Indian and Alaska 
Native students. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 




45 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 43 



Pewewardy, C. (1998). Will the "real" Indians please stand vcpl Multicultural Review, 7(2), 
36-42. 



Plank, G. A. (1993). The school-leaving of non-Navajo educators in the interior of the Navajo 
Nation. Journal of Navajo Education, i0(2), 26-34. 

Platero, P.R., Brandt, E.A., Witherspoon, G., & Wong, P. (1986). Navajo students at risk: 
Final report for the Navajo area student dropout study. Window Rock, AZ: Navajo Division 
of Education. 

Ridone, P. (1988). Achievement motivation and academic achievement of Native American 
students. Journal of American Indian Education, 25(1), 1-7. 

Senate Special Committee on Indian Education (1969). Indian Education: A National 
Tragedy. (Also known as the Kennedy Report). Senate Report 91-501, 9T‘ Congress. 

Stone, B. J., & Gridley, B. E. (1991). Test bias of a kindergarten screening battery: Predicting 
achievement for white and Native American elementary students. School Psychology Review, 
20(1), 132-139. 

Swisher, K. G. & Tippeconmc, J. W. (Eds.). (1999). Next steps: Research and practice to 
advance Indian education. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools. 

Szasz, M. C. (1999). Education and the American Indian: The road to self-determination (3'^*' 
Edition). Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 

Tippeconnic, J. (1999). Tribal control of American Indian education: Observations since the 
1960s with impHcations for the future. In Swisher, K. G. & Tippeconnic, J. (Eds.), Next steps: 
Research and practice to advance Indian education (pp. 33-52). Charleston, WV: Appalachia 
Educational Laboratory. 

Tippeconnic, J., Faircloth, S. & Stout, J. (May, 2000), Addressing the education of American 
Indian and Alaska Native students with disabilities. Prepared for National Conference on 
Developing a Research Agenda for American Indian and Alaska Native Education, 
Albuquerque, NM. 

Tippeconnic, J., & Swisher, K. G. (1992). American Indian education. In Alkin, M. C. (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of educational research (pp. 75-78). New York: Macmilhan. 

U. S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (1995). 
Characteristics of American Indian and Alaska Native education: Results from the 1990-91 
schools and staffing survey, NCES 95-735. Washington, DC: author. 

U. S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics (1997). 
Characteristics of American Indian and Alaska Native education: Results from the 1993-94 
and 1990-91 schools and staffing survey, NCES 97-451. Washington DC: author. 




46 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 44 



U.S. Department of Education, Planning and Evaluation Service (1997). National Evaluation of the 
Even Start Family Literacy Program. Washington, DC: author. 

U.S. Department of Education (1999). Start Early, Finish Strong. Washington, DC: author. 

U. S. Department of the Interior, Office of Indian Education Programs (2000). BIA 2000 Fast 
Facts. Washington, DC: author. 

White House Conference on Indian Education. (1992). Final Report of the White House 
Conference on Indian Education. Washington, DC: White House Conference on Indian 
Education. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 353 124. 

Willeto, A. A. A. (1999). Navajo culture and family influences on academic success: 
Traditionalism is not a significant predictor of achievement among young Navajos. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 38(2), 1-21. 

Wright, D. E., Hirlinger, M. W., & England, R. E. (1998). The politics of second generation 
discrimination in American Indian education. Incidence, explanation, and mitigating 
strategies. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey. 

Yazzie, T. (1999). Culturally appropriate curriculum: A research-hased rationale. In Swisher, 

K. G. & Tippeconnic, J (Eds.), Next steps: Research and practice to advance Indian education 
(pp. 83-106). Charleston, WV: Appalachia Educational Laboratory. 

Yazzie, T. (2000). Holding a mirror to “eyes wide shuf’: The role of Native languages and 
cultures in the education of American Indian students. Presented at National Indian Education 
Research Agenda Conference, Albuquerque, NM, May 2000. 
<www.ed.gov/nativeamericanresearch> 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 45 



Appendix 



1. Executive Order 13096 

2. Interagency Task Force Members 

3. Research Working Group Members 

4. Research Agenda Expert Committee Members 




43 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 46 



1 Executive Order 13096 



THE WHITE HOUSE 
Office of the Press Secretary 



For immediate Release 
August 6, 1998 

EXECUTIVE ORDER 13096 

AMERICAN INDIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE EDUCATION 

By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of 
America, in affirmation of the imique political and legal relationship of the Federal Government 
with tribal governments, and in recognition of the unique educational and culturally related 
academic needs of American Indian and Alaska Native students, it is hereby ordered as follows: 

Section 1 . Goals. The Federal Government has a special, historic responsibility for the education 
of American Indian and Alaska Native students. Improving educational achievement and academic 
progress for American Indian and Alaska Native students is vital to the national goal of preparing 
every student for responsible citizenship, continued learning, and productive employment. The 
Federal Government is committed to improving the academic performance and reducing the 
dropout rate of American Indian and Alaska Native students. To help fulfill this commitment in a 
manner consistent with tribal traditions and cultures. Federal agencies need to focus special 
attention on six goals: (1) improving reading and mathematics; (2) increasing high school 
completion and postsecondary attendance rates; (3) reducing the influence of long-standing factors 
that impede educational performance, such as poverty and substance abuse; (4) creating strong, 
safe, and drug-free school environments; (5) improving science education; and (6) expanding the 
use of educational technology. 

Sec. 2. Strategy. In order to meet the six goals of this order, a comprehensive Federal response is 
needed to address the fragmentation of government services available to American Indian and 
Alaska Native students and the complexity of inter-governmental relationships affecting the 
education of those students. The purpose of the Federal activities described in this order is to 
develop a long-term, comprehensive Federal Indian education policy that will accomplish those 
goals. 

(a) Interagency Task Force. 

There is established an Interagency Task Force on American Indian and Alaska Native Education 
(Task Force) to oversee the planning and implementation of this order. The Task Force s hall 
confer with the National Advisory Council on Indian Education (NACIE) in carrying out activities 
under this order. The Task Force shall consult with representatives of American Indian and Alaska 
Native tribes and organizations, including the Nation^ Indian Education Association (NIEA) and 
the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), to gather advice on implementation of the 
activities called for in this order. 

(b) Composition of the Task Force. 

(1) The membership of the Task Force shall include representatives of the Departments of the 
Treasury, Defense, Justice, the Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, Healffi and Human 
Services, Housing and Urban Development, Transportation, Energy, and Education, as well as the 




49 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 47 



Environmental Protection Agency, the Corporation for National and Community Service, and the 
National Science Foimdation. With the agreement of the Secretaries of Education and the Interior, 
other agencies may participate in the activities of the Task Force. 

(2) Within 30 days of the date of this order, the head of each participating agency shall designate a 
senior official who is responsible for management or program administration to serve as a member 
of the Task Force. The official shall report directly to the agency head on the agency's activities 
imder this order. 

(3) The Assistant Secretary for Elementary and Secondary Education of the Department of 
Education and the Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs of the Department of the Interior shall co- 
chair the Task Force. 

(c) Interagency plan. 

The Task Force shall, within 90 days of the date of this order, develop a Federal interagency plan 
with recommendations identifying initiatives, strategies, and ideas for future interagency action 
supportive of the goals of this order. 

(d) Agency participation. 

To the extent consistent with law and agency priorities, each participating agency shall adopt and 
implement strategies to maximize the availability of the agency's education-related programs, 
activities, resources, information, and technical assistance to American Indian and Alaska Native 
students. In keeping with the spirit of the Executive Memorandmn of April 29, 1994, on 
Govemment-to-Govemment Relations with Native American Tribal Governments and Executive 
Order 13084 of May 14, 1998, each participating agency shall consult with tribal governments on 
their education-related needs and priorities, and on how the agency can better accomplish the goals 
of this order. Within 6 months, each participating agency shall report to the Task Force regarding 
the strategies it has developed to ensure such consultation. 

(e) Interagency resource guide. 

The Task Force shall identify, within participating Federal agencies, all education-related 
programs and resources that support the goals of this order. Within 12 months, the Task Force, in 
conjimction with the Department of Education, shall develop, publish, and widely distribute a 
guide that describes those programs and resources and how American Indians and Alaska Natives 
can benefit from them. 

(f) Research. 

The Secretary of Education, through the Office of Educational Research and Improvement and the 
Office of Indian Education, and in consultation with NACIE and participating agencies, s hall 
develop and implement a comprehensive Federal research agenda to: 

(1) establish baseUne data on academic achievement and retention of American Indian and Alaska 
Native students in order to monitor improvements; 

(2) evaluate promising practices used with those students; and 

(3) evaluate the role of native language and culture in the development of educational strategies. 




50 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 48 



Within 1 year, the Secretary of Education shall submit the research agenda, including proposed 
timelines, to the Task Force. 

(g) Comprehensive Federal Indian education pohcy. 

(1) The Task Force shall, within 2 years of the date of this order, develop a comprehensive Federal 
Indian education policy to support the accomplishment of the goals of this order. The policy shall 
be designed to: 

(A) improve Federal interagency cooperation; 

(B) promote intergovermnental collaboration; and 

(C) assist tribal goveriunents in meeting the unique educational needs of their children, including 
the need to preserve, revitalize, and use native languages and cultural traditions. 

(2) In developing the policy, the Task Force shall consider ideas in the Comprehensive Federal 
Indian Education Policy Statement proposal developed by the NIEA and the NCAI. 

(3) The Task Force shall develop recommendations to implement the policy, including ideas for 
future interagency action. 

(4) As appropriate, participating agencies may develop memoranda of agreement with one another 
to enable and enhance the ability of tribes and schools to provide, and to coordinate the delivery 
of. Federal, tribal. State, and local resources and services, including social and health-related 
services, to meet the educational needs of American Indian and Alaska Native students. 

(h) Reports. The Task Force co-chairs shall submit the comprehensive Federal Indian education 
policy, and report annually on the agencies' activities, accomplishments, and progress toward 
meeting the goals of this order, to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. 

Sec. 3. Regional partnership forums. The Departments of Education and the Interior, in 
collaboration with the Task Force and Federal, tribal. State, and local government representatives, 
shall jointly convene, within 18 months, a series of regional forums to identify promising practices 
and approaches on how to share information, provide assistance to schools, develop partnerships, 
and coordinate intergovernmental strategies supportive of accomplishing the goals of this order. 
The Departments of Education and the Interior shall submit a report on the forums to the Task 
Force, which may include recommendations relating to intergovernmental relations. 

Sec. 4. School pilot sites. The Departments of Education and the Interior shall identify a 
reasonable number of schools funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and public schools 
that can serve as a model for schools with American Indian and Alaska Native students, and 
provide them with comprehensive technical assistance in support of the goals of this order. A 
special team of technical assistance providers, including Federal staff, shall provide assistance to 
these schools. Special attention shall be given, where appropriate, to assistance in implementing 
comprehensive school reform demonstration programs that meet the criteria for those programs 
established by the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related 
Agencies Appropriations Act, 1998 (Pubhc Law 105-78), and to providing comprehensive service 
delivery that connects and uses diverse Federal agency resources. The team shall disseminate 
effective and promising practices of the school pilot sites to other local educational agencies. The 




51 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 49 



team shall report to the Task Force on its accomplishments and its recormnendations for improving 
technical support to local educational agencies and schools funded by the BIA. 

Sec. 5. Administration. The Department of Education shall provide appropriate administrative 
services and staff support to the Task Force. With the consent of the Department of Education, 
other participating agencies may provide administrative support to the Task Force, consistent with 
their statutory authority, and may detail agency employees to the Department of Education, to the 
extent permitted by law. 

Sec. 6. Termination. The Task Force established under section 2 of this order shall terminate not 
later than 5 years from the date of this order. 

Sec. 7. General provisions. This order is intended only to improve the internal management of the 
executive branch and is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or 
procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or 
instrumentaUties, its officers or employees, or any other person. This order is not intended to 
preclude, supersede, replace, or otherwise dilute any other Executive order relating to American 
Indian and Alaska Native education. 



WILLIAM J. CLINTON 

THE WHITE HOUSE, 
August 6, 1998. 




52 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 50 



2 Interagency Task Force Members 

Executive Order 13096 established an Interagency Task Force to oversee the planning and 
implementation of the order. The Task Force membership includes representatives from federal 
departments and agencies. It is to confer with the National Advisory Council on Indian Education 
and consult with representatives of American Indian and Alaska Native tribes and organizations. 



Michael Cohen (Co-chair) 

U.S. Department of Education 

Maria Hernandez 

U.S. Department of Agriculture 

Marcia Warren 

U.S. Department of Commerce 

Cynthia Johnson 
Corporation for National Service 

Bob Ray 

U.S. Department of Defense 

David Beauheu 

U.S. Department of Education 

Anni Whatley 

U.S. Department of Energy 

Ted Key 

U.S. Department of Housing & Urban 
Development 



Kevin Cover (Co-chair) 

U.S. Department of the Interior 

Gerald Gipp 

National Science Foundation 
Jane Stutsman 

National Science Foundation 
Marc Brenman 

U.S. Department of Transportation 

Lynda de la Vina 

U.S. Department of Treasury 

Michael Springer 

U.S. Department of Treasury 

Vicki Thornton 

U.S. Department of Energy 

Marlene Regelski 
Environmental Protection Agency 



Jackie Johnson 

U.S. Department of Housing & Urban 
Development 

William Mehojah 

U.S. Department of the Interior 



Patricia Lee-McCoy 

Department of Health & Human Services 
Marlene Echohawk 

Department of Health & Human Services 



Mark Van Norman John Cheek 

U.S. Department of Justice National Indian Education Association 



Tim Jaranko 

U.S. Department of Justice 

Anna Goddard 

U.S. Department Df Labor 

Charles Archambault 
U.S. Department of Labor 



Melody McCoy 

Native American Rights Fund 

Jack C. Jackson, Jr. 

National Congress of American Indians 




53 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 51 



3 Research Working Group 

David Beaulieu 

Office of Indian Education 

U.S. Department of Education 

David Boesel 

National Education Library 
U.S. Department of Education 

Joyce Caldwell 

Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
Services, U.S. Department of Education 

John G. Chapman 

Budget Service 

U.S. Department of Education 

John Cheek 

National Indian Education Association 

David Cleary 

Budget Service 

U.S. Department of Education 

Brian Colhoff 

National Indian Education Association 



Thomas M. Corwin 

Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of 
Elementary and Secondary Education 
U.S. Department of Education 

Tim D'Emilio 

Office of Bilingual Education and Minority 
Languages Affairs, U.S. Department of 
Education 
Grace Diuan 

Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
Services, U.S. Department of Education 

Lorraine Edmo 

Office of Indian Education Programs 
U.S. Department of Education 

Beth Franklin 

Planning and Evaluation Service 
U.S. Department of Education 



Charles Geboe 

Bmeau of Indian Affairs 

U.S. Department of the Interior 

Dalton Henry 

Bmeau of Indian Affairs 

U.S. Department of the Interior 

Jack Jackson 

National Congress of American Indians 
Ama Kanegis 

National Congress of American Indians 
Edith McArthur 

National Center for Education Statistics 
U.S. Department of Education 

Melody McCoy 

Native American Rights Fimd 

Wilham Mehojah 

Director, Office of Indian Education Programs 

Bmeau of Indian Affairs 

U.S. Department of the Interior 

Eileen O'Brien 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
U.S. Department of Education 

Heather Rieman 

Budget Service 

U.S. Department of Education 

Ken Ryan 

Administration of Native Americans 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 

Karen Suagee 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
U.S. Department of Education 

Victoria Wright 

National Congress of American Indians 



ERIC 



54 



American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda 



Page 52 



4 Research Agenda Expert Committee / 

^The research agenda Expert Committee provides advice to the working group. The Committee is 
inade up of representatives from the National Advisory Coimcil on Indian Education and the 
Natiomil Educational Research Policy and Priorities Board. 



Rosemary Ackley Christensen 
v.National Advisory^ Coimcil on Indian Education 
Green Bay, WI 

Kenji Hakuta 

National Educational Research Policy & Priorities Board 
Stanford, CA 

Robert W. Marley 

National Educational Research Policy & Priorities Board 
Wichita, KS 

Janine Pease Pretty on Top 

National Advisory Council on Indian Education 

Crow Agency, MT 

?■ 

Sherry Red Owl 

National Advisory Council on Indian Education 
Mission, SD 

Rick St. Germaine 

National Advisory Council on Indian Education 
Cambridge, MA 



ERIC 



55 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 





This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



