ED 373 951 



RC 019 773 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
CONTRACT 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS. 



Clarke, Ardy Sixkiller 

OERI Native American Youth at Risk Study. 
Montana State Univ., Bozeman. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), 

Washington, DC. 

30 Mar 94 

R117E10215 

183p. 

Reports - Research/Technical (143). — Information 
Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC08 Plus Postage. 

^American Indian Education; Dropout Research; 
>v DropoutsJ Elementary Secondary Education; Grade 
Repetition; >v High Risk Students; *High School 
Graduates; Poverty; ^Reservation American Indians; 
Self Esteem; Social Support Groups; Student 
Alienation; Student Attitudes; Student School 
Relationship; Substance Abuse; *Teacher Expectations 
of Students; Truancy 
Vf Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This report examines personal, cultural, school, and 
family factors that contribute to the decision of American Indian 
students to remain in school until graduation or to drop out. A 
140-item questionnaire, the Native American School Study, was 
completed by 165 participants who had either graduated or dropped out 
of school during 1989-91. Respondents lived on reservations in 
Montana, North Dakota, and South Dakota. In addition, 76 graduates 
and 37 dropouts were interviewed -at length. Factors examined in the 
questionnaire and interview included substance abuse by self or 
family members, peer pressure, trouble with the law, self-esteem, 
teen pregnancy, family structure, socioeconomic status, parent 
education, academic achievement, teacher attitudes and expectations, 
school attendance, abuse by school personnel, tribal self-identity 
and pride, discrimination and racism, and bilingualism. Results 
-ndicate that respondents who dropped out of school demonstrated 
significant differences from graduates in self-esteem, frequency of 
skipping school, teacher expectations and attitudes, and grade 
retention. During interviews, the themes of poverty, self-esteem, and 
teacher attitudes repeatedly surfaced. Graduates frequently reported 
that family expectations (particularly those of the mother and 
grandmother) kept them in school. This report contains a lengthy 
literature review; recommendations to educators, policymakers , 
parents, and Indian communities; and many references in endnotes. 

(sv) 



>V >V >V >V Vc >V >V >V >V >V >V >V >V >V >V >V Vc >V >V >V >V * >V >V >V rt >V >V >V * i< >V >V >V >V >V >V >V >V >Vrt >V >V >V Vc >'c >V >V >V >V >V Vc >V Vc Vc >V >V >V Vc >V >V >V >V >V >V 

>v Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
* from the original document . >c 



» 



V ► • 



8 
R 

CO 

a 

UJ 



OERI Native American 
Youth At Risk Study 



Ardy SixkiUer Clarke 
213 Reid Hall 
Montana State University 
Bozeman, Montana 59717 



March 30, 1994 



«ER1C ^ 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 
2 



Offica of Educational ffeMtrch ar« Improvement 
«UC*T,OHAL c R^U« E S,N^MAT,ON 

Thtt docjnwAt hat baan raafoducad aa 
racfevad from tha pafton of orgamiation 
o# «o>«atift9 »t 

" ' ' 7* « h «"0t* baa* mada to improva 
ifoowctw quality 

• ^omtaofviawofepimonaitataointhiadocu- 
mani 00 not nacaaaamy raptaaant official 
OCMI poatt«n or policy 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 

Chapterl 

Dropping Out in America: A National Dilemma 1 

The Minority in Our Schools 3 

Summary . • 5 



Chapter 2 

American Indian Dropouts: What the Statistics Say 6 

What the Statistics Say 7 



Chapter 3 

What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 11 

What Researchers Say About Indian Dropouts 12 

The Correlates Associated with Dropping Out 13 

• Correlate One: Personal Problems of American Indian Youth 14 

Substance Abuse 14 

Alcohol Use and Abuse 15 

Other Drug Use and Abuse 17 

Problems with the Law 20 

^ Juvenile Delinquency 21 

9 Cultural Differences and Crime 23 

The Justice System and the American Indian 24 

Self-Esteem/Self-Identity 26 

Self-Esteem 26 

Self-Identity 28 

0 Peer Pressure 30 

Mental Health/Suicide 31 

Pregnancy ± • 34 

Correlate Two: Family Background and Dropping Out 35 

Socioeconomic Status 35 

Parents* Educational Level 37 

Child-Rearing Practices 37 

Single-Parent Families 40 

Dysfunctional Families 41 

Correlate Three: School Factors 43 

Bilingualism 43 

Cultural Differences/Cultural Discontinuity 48 

Academic Achievement/Failure Including Grade Retention and Tracking .... 53 

Attendance: Truancy/ Absenteeism/Detention/Expulsion 56 

Teacher Attitudes and Expectations 58 

Racism, Discrimination, and Prejudice 67 



,er!c 



Chapter 4 

The Study . 72 

0 Introduction 72 

Purpose of the Study 73 

Data-Gathering Methods and Procedures 74 

| . Description of the Population 76 

• Chapters 

The Findings 87 

Univariate Analyses 88 

Drinkers: Dropouts vs. Graduates 88 

Structure of Indian Family 90 

^ Graduates vs. Dropouts 91 

Self-Esteem 93 

Peer Pressure 94 

Academic Achievement 96 

Teacher Expectations . . . 97 

^ Teacher's Cultural Awareness 99 

Skipping School k _ ... 100 

Parent's Educational Level 102 

Pregnancy . 104 

Sexual Assaults 105 

Retention in School 106 

0 Discrimination 107 

Sexual Relationships 108 

Marijuana Usage , 108 

Multivariate Analysis Ill 

Interviews 116 

Chapter 6 

What Do the Findings Mean? 117 

Univariate Analyses 117 

m Self-Esteem 117 

W Skipping School 118 

Teacher Expectations .118 

Retention 119 

Conclusions 119 

Multivariate Analyses 121 

% Alienation as the Discriminant between Dropouts and Graduates 122 

A Theory of School Alienation 122 

Conditions of Poverty 124 

Summary 125 



< er|c 



Chapter 7 

Using the Past as a Path to the Future , . 127 

A Final Note .138 



Notes 

Chapter 1 139 

Chapter 2 - 142 

Chapter 3 144 

Chapter 6 177 

Chapter 7 178 



Chapter 1 

Dropping Out in America: A National Dilemma 



Until the last half of the 1980s, the terms at-risk and high-risk were not used 
as descriptors in literature about dropouts. As the terms imply, much of the 
literature today seeks to identify the at-risk student or the potential dropout before 
he/she leaves school in an effort to provide intervention strategies. 

Generally, researchers identify three types of at-risk students: (1) children who 
come from different cultural backgrounds or minority students, (2) children from 
limited English-speaking families, and (3) children from poor families. 1 Henry I ;vin 
described at-risk students as those defined in past literature as being educationally 
disadvantaged. He characterized these students as: 

. . . those who lack the home, and community resources to benefit from 
conventional schooling practices. Because of poverty, cultural obstacles, 
or linguistic differences, they tend to have low academic achievement and 
high dropout rates. Such students are heavily concentrated among 
minority groups, immigrants, non-Engl : r,h speaking families and 
economically disadvantaged populations. 2 

Levin's characterization of at-risk youth is a popular one. Throughout the research, 
"at risk" is often another code for "culturally deprived" and is frequently no more 
than the continued relabeling of disadvantaged students. 

Research in the 80s has contributed significantly to the public's perception of 
dropouts and has been responsible for the recognition of the depth of the problem; 
however, much of the literature addresses the dropout problem and its future impact 
on the country. 

Concern over the political and economic future of the country is not new. As 
early as the 1970s, researchers predicted that the absolute numbers of at-risk students 
and the degrees of their disadvantage would increase in the nation's schools within 
the next 20 years. Many researchers noted concerns about the growing, youthful 
minority population in America and the lack of success of minorities in school. 
Based on an analysis of the U.S. population, Harold Hodgkinson projected that by 



Dropping Out in America; A National Dilemma 



the year 2000, one-third of the nation's school children will be minority. Other 
research showed that dropout rates vary significantly by ethnicity and class and that 
these rates are the highest among American Indians, Blacks, and Hispanics. One 
national study examined the dropout rate from the sophomore to senior year using 
ethnic classifications and revealed that the dropout rates ranged from a low of'3.1% 
for Asian Americans to a high of 29.2% for American Indians. White, students 
dropped out at a rate of 12.2%, Blacks at 17%, and Hispanics at 18%. More recent 
research reports that 8.9% of students from the highest socioeconomic class dropped 
out of school, while 22.3% of the dropouts came from the lowest socioeconomic 
class. These studies serve to demonstrate that the dropout problem in America is not 
restricted to the poor, inner-city minority youth, but that it is diverse in ethnic as 
well as class characteristics. 3 

Much of the literature on at-risk students or dropouts speaks to the impact of 
the problem on the country and society in general. It has been noted that youth who 
drop out are more likely to become economic burdens on society and are more likely 
to require public assistance. Business leaders and policy makers alike predict that 
the public will pay heavily for the high proportion of youth who drop out, creating 
an increased need for social and welfare programs. Educators argue, often 
unsuccessfully, that the investment required for dropout prevention would be 
substantially less than the eventual loss in productivity to the nation. 4 

Considerable attention has been paid to the labor market and the at-risk student. 
In the past, an economy existed to provide an orderly transition from dropping out 
to entry into numerous labor occupations. Such an economy no longer exists; 
therefore,, dropping out of school often leads to no employment, or to 
underemployment in low-paid, often part-time jobs. Other researchers suggest that 
General Educational Development (GED) certificate-holders do not do as well in the 
labor market as high school graduates. In 1986, the United States Accounting Office 
reported that males who drop out of high school are estimated to earn $441,000 less 
during their lives than males who are high school graduates. Given the low salaries 
earned by dropouts across their working career, the nation stands to lose $71 billion 
in social security predicated on a 25% dropout rate. 5 



Dropping Out in America: A National Dilemma 



3 



Some researchers have reported that not only are high school dropouts expected 
to be a massive drain on society through their dependence on welfare programs, but 
they are more likely to be involved in juvenile courts and prison systems. Since 
I960, delinquency rates of teenagers have increased by 130%. In fact, it has been 
demonstrated in some research that failure to graduate from high school is a 
predictor of adult criminal activity. 6 

Other research points to a number of social problems in American society 
which place youth at risk. In 1984, the Alan Guttmacher Institute reported that each 
year 1.1 million teenage females become pregnant. Approximately 40% of the 
females who drop out of school do so for reasons related to pregnancy and marriage; 
however, the majority (6C%) of females drop out for a variety of other reasons. In 
1986, the National Center for Health Statistics reported that between 1950 and 1984, 
the rate of suicide among individuals between the ages of 15 and 24 had increased 
by 178%. Research has consistently demonstrated that the relationship between 
inappropriate attitudes toward health and self are strongly related to dropping out of 
school. In 1988, the University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research reported 
that 58% of high school seniors have had experience with illicit drugs and that the 
increasing drug of choice is cocaine. The Institute also found that nearly two-thirds 
of high school seniors reported using alcohol. 

The Minority in Our Schools 

Schools in America are geared to success, not failure. Historically, minority 
students from their earliest school experiences have been labeled as potential failures, 
their language criticized, and their origins suspect. Some researchers report that 
certain indigenous minorities have developed a culture of resistance to school and 
suggested that an "apathetic dominant society 11 has historically excluded the American 
Indian from the dominant culture. This in some ways has become a double-edged 
sword in that frequently American Indians have chosen to exclude themselves, thus 
exacerbating the situation. 7 

Research clearly indicates that Blacks, Hispanics, and American Indians are 
more frequently alienated by school than Asian Americans and other new immigrants. 



8 



Dropping Out in America: A National Dilemma 



In fact, it has been found that Asians and new immigrants regard the school 
experience as a major path to success. Some researchers maintain that the nation's 
tolerance of exceedingly high dropout rates among certain minority groups is a 
manifestation of a social strategy designed to keep minorities out of the political 
decision making process. Given the fact that the typical high school dropout 
participates minimally in the political stricture, they are less likely to become 
involved in political decision-making as adults and are therefore far less able to shape 
their own fates. 8 

There has been inadequate justification in the research for the differential 
achievement levels among minorities. Some researchers present genetic or biological 
factors as an explanation for minority underachievement. Others maintain that 
cultural factors along with socioeconomic structural factors provide an adequate 
explanation. It may be that students' resistance to learning should be viewed as 
rejection of the cultural values of the school and society; if they perceive the school 
as oppressive and destructive of their culture, the effects on students are devastating: 9 

Several researchers report that the use of culturally and linguistically congruent 
instructional approaches smooths the transition from school to home, whereas others 
suggest that such approaches are culturally incongruent or meaningless. 10 

Many researchers conclude that minority youth experience more factors 
associated with dropping out than the general population, such as poverty, school 
failure, dropping out, family problems, and involvement in the criminal justice and 
social welfare systems. In addition, they note that minority youth are more likely 
to come from families or environments with high rates of drug and alcohol abuse; 
therefore, they have a greater chance of residing under conditions that are conducive 
to dropping out of school. 11 

Two researchers, Signithia Fordham and John Ogbu, examined Black students 1 
underachievement in school and proposed "Active kinship" as a framework for 
understanding how a sense of collective identity enters into the process of schooling 
and affects academic achievement. The fear of being accused of "acting white" 
causes social and psychological situations which diminish Black students* academic 
efforts and leads to underachievement and, in many cases, dropping out. 12 There is 



Dropping Out in America: A National Dilemma 



5 



some evidence to support that a similar force is at work with American Indian 
students. 

Current research on dropouts in America demonstrates the diverse racial, 
ethnic, and class characteristics of at-risk youth. Most studies have inaccurately led 
us to believe that dropping out is only linked to minority populations. Recent 
research reveals that the problem is much more widespread. 

Summary 

The current focus upon dropouts in America is undoubtedly timely. However, 
in American Indian educational circles, this issue is not a new concern. Historically, 
American Indian students have dropped out of school at higher rates than any other 
minority group in America. Despite the seriousness of the problem, little attention 
has been given to empirical analysis of the problem. Instead, many writers and 
researchers have offered explanations for the lack of success of American Indian 
students that fall into four major categories: (1) cultural differences between 
American Indians and the white system, (2) social disorganization within tribal 
groups and families, (3) poor self-concept of the American Indian students, cr 
(4) low socioeconomic status. 13 

This study will seek to go beyond the generally accepted premises of cultural 
discontinuity and the "within child" deficit models of home and family and will 
examine not only the factors often attributed to dropping out, but will include factors 
generally not discussed in American Indian dropout research. For example, there is 
some evidence that American Indian students do poorly in school because of racial 
bias, discrimination, and ambivalence on the part of teachers. Historically, 
underachievement on the part of American Indian students may have resulted because 
white teachers and administrators refused to acknowledge that American Indian 
students were capable of intellectual achievement. Subsequently, American Indians 
began to doubt their own potential and began to define academic success as a "white 
man's" prerogative. As a result, American Indian students began to discourage their 
peers from emulating the "white man's" academic success by shaming those who 
were successful. 



10 



Chapter 2 



American Indian Dropouts: What the Statistics Say 



When it is considered that our schools are placed among a wild 
people, who, from the oldest down to the youngest, have never 
known any control, but have lived independent, idle lives, with no 
higher law than the whim of the moment, that Indians unfriendly 
to civilization are constantly instilling into the minds of our pupils 
suspicion and dissatisfaction, and that 'all outside' seems as home 
to an Indian child habituated to a wild, roving life, and that the 
runaway is never at a loss, therefore, where to flee to, we may 
congratulate ourselves that our losses by desertion have been no 
more than they have been J 

Despise all the research, we know very little about what makes some American 
Indian students successful in school and what makes others fail. We know even less 
about the American Indian female dropout. We do know, however, that dropout rates 
among American Indian youth have been historically the highest of any minority 
group and that the American Indian is the poorest, has the lowest educational level, 
lives in the worst housing, has the shortest life expectancy, and is the most poorly 
nourished minority group in the nation. Furthermore, we know that American 
Indians have the highest infant mortality rate among all ethnic minority groups in 
America. In 1970, L. Madison Coombs reported that "Indian people have been 
badly miseducated, have not progressed educationally, and, as a result are at the 
absolute bottom of the barrel among the country's ethnic minorities and socio- 
economically disadvantaged groups." 2 The situation, as described by Coombs, has 
not changed dramatically in the past 20 years. Others have suggested that the 
ramifications of the lack of education among American Indians guarantees the 
continuation of poverty and the demise of the American Indian people. 3 



11 

« 



American Indian Dropouts: What the Statistics Say 



7 



What the Statistics Say 

In 1959, the Bureau of Indian Affairs conducted a study on Indian dropouts in 
Bureau boarding schools and concluded that a majority of Indian students drop out 
because of "poor adjustment to school." This category was defined as: over-aged, 
homesickness, parental request, AWOL, and drinking. Students themselves indicated 
that they dropped out of school because of "financial need" and a "dislike of school. " 
Some students indicated they dropped out because they disliked the teachers or that 
the teachers were not interested in them. Many of the dropouts reported that they 
were unable to take part in the social life of the school or to participate in extra- 
curricular activities. A number of the dropouts reported being harassed and 
embarrassed by other students because of financial needs. 

A 1966 study of American Indian students in federal schools showed that not 
only were the dropout rates high, but that in some schools the dropout rates were 
traditionally and consistently high, and in others few students finished the eighth 
grade. 4 

In 1968, the Northwest Regional Laboratory conducted a study on dropouts and 
reported that the largest percentage of dropouts cited lack of encouragement from the 
home as the major cause for dropping out; however, lack of encouragement from the 
school also ranked as a major cause for dropping out. Other causes mentioned 
included: poor financial and home conditions, lack of financial support, misbehavior 
resulting in expulsion or jail, irrelevancy of school to life, and problems with alcohol 
or drugs. 5 

Estimates of American Indian dropout rates vary from study to study; however, 
there is overwhelming evidence that American Indian students claim the distinction 
of the highest dropout rate among all ethnic groups. 6 

In 1969, the Senate Subcommittee Hearings on Indian Education reported the 
national dropout rate for Indian school children in all types of schools to be about 
60%. In 1973, the Washington State Commission on Civil Rights estimated that the 
dropout rate for American Indians ranged somewhere between 38% and 60%. The 
National Advisory Council on Indian Education (1974) listed dropout rates in Nome, 



12 



American Indian Dropouts: What the Statistics Say 



8 



Alaska at 90%, in Minneapolis at 62%, and in parts of California at 70%. Tins was 
at a time when dropout rates nationally had peaked at 25%. 

Recent statistics offer little improvement. Testimony at the Governor's 
Conference in Rapid City, South Dakota, in 1989 reported the dropout rate for the 
Lakota Sioux Indian students (located on nine reservations) in that state at "more than 
50 percent." The State Department of Education in Wyoming (1988) listed the 
projected American Indian dropout rate within that state at 57.2% as compared to the 
state average for non-Indians at 20.4%. The state of Montana, which has nine 
language groups and seven reservations, does not report statewide data; however, 
reports from individual school districts within the state range from 85% to 14%. 
Theodore Coladarci reported on one high school district m Montana where, in 1980, 
60% of the American Indian students (who comprised 90% of the district's student 
population) dropped out of school. The dropout level for non-Indians in the state of 
Montana is less than the national average, hovering at or near 12%. 7 

Currently the American Indian dropout rate has been reported at 65-30% 
nationally depending upon which study one reads. Regardless, this places American 
Indian youth with the highest high school dropout rate of any ethnic minority group 
in the country. Researchers have also reported that Indian students who attend 
boarding schools have especially high dropout rates. 8 

In a national study, High School and Beyond, it was reported that of all ethnic 
groups in America, the dropout rates for American Indians were the highest at 
29.2%. Most American Indian educators, however, use caution when quoting this 
statistic. The study addressed what happened to students from their sophomore to 
senior years. 9 Educators who work with American Indian students recognize that a 
high percentage of American Indian dropouts never get to the tenth grade, dropping 
out somewhere between the seventh and ninth grade levels. A Los Angeles dropout 
study found that 14% more males left school earlier than females and that the 
common reason noted for dropping out among eleventh and twelfth graders Was 
over-age. On the other hand, a Montana study explored factors relating to American 
Indian dropouts and reported that the decision to drop out was most often related to 
teacher-student relationships and teacher attitudes. 10 



13 



American Indian Dropouts: What the Statistics Say ■> 9 



A 1986 study of Ok ! ahoma City Public Schools reported that the most frequent 
time for students to drop out of school was during the ninth or tenth grade. Of the 
dropouts, over half were from families with a low socioeconomic background and 
the students' most frequent reason for . dropping out was lack of interest. 
Achievement scores of the Oklahoma City dropouts also indicated a history of below 
average achievement. Jerry Cavatta reported that male students dropped out more 
frequently than females and that American Indian students, at least in New Mexico, 
experienced their highest dropout rate during the tenth grade. In a subsequent study, 
Cavatta reported that American Indian students experienced their highest dropout 
rates during the ninth grade. 11 

In 1984, researchers reported the seriousness of the dropout problem among 
American Indians using the status of New Mexico youth as an example: 

New Mexico can serve as a microcosm of the conditions of Native 
Americans in the United States as a whole. . . . Thirty-two percent of 
young Native Americans aged 16 to 19 were neither working nor 
attending school. Less than half of Native Americans older than 25, in 
fact, had completed high school, compared to more than three-fifths of 
New Mexico's Blacks and almost three-fourths of whites. Native 
Americans, indeed, were the only racial/ethnic group in the state whose 
median level of education was below high school graduation. 12 

Karen Giles argued that cultural conflict is a major factor contributing to 
dropping out: 

As the child becomes increasingly aware of cultural and racial 
. differences, he falls progressively below grade level norms. When the 
adolescent Indian internalizes his/her differences, feelings of inferiority 
and hopelessness corrode and disintegrate once-held dreams for a positive 
future. . . . The Indian's eventual reaction to this cultural differentiation 
often manifests itself as alienation, poor self-image, withdrawal and, in 
a word, dropout. 13 

The social and economic implications of the American Indian dropout have had 
little impact on the nation as a whole and have therefore received less attention by 
economists, educators, and politicians. The federal government, which is responsible 
for the funding of education for American Indians, even to varying degrees in public 
schools, has not chosen to publicly make an issue of the failures of an education 
system under its supervision. Politicians, who do not view the American Indian 



14 



American Indian Dropouts: What the Statistics Say 



10 



population as a strong political force, have long ignored the issue. American Indians 
themselves, in the last two decades, can share part of the blame for participation in 
an educational system which has perpetuated failure among their people. 

Norbert Hill, an Oneida educator, reported that the American Indian high 
school dropout rate exceeds 65% nationally and that between 75-93% of post- 
secondary Indian students drop out; he pointed out that these statistics are only for 
students who leave school, and suggested that there are hundreds who "effectively 
. drop out of school and physically never miss a day. " Hill attributed dropping out 
to apathy and anomie: 

Our survivors as well as our dropouts of the formal education system 
have been forced into compliant, obedient roles which delimit the skill 
and confidence to manage the complexity of their lives and our 
future . . . The dropout problem is a problem of the dysfunctional 
education system which marginalizes students because of a narrow and 
discriminatory, social, political and economic agenda. 14 



«er|c 



15 



Chapter 3 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



Life for Indian adolescents is not easy. They are faced with 
poverty, poor educational systems, prejudice from the majority 
culture, and in general a disheartening outlook for the 
future. . . . It will be extremely difficult to change the future of 
these young people — to offer them a reasonable chance for 
personal and economic success. 1 

In a national longitudinal study of eighth grade students in 1988, Harold 
Hodgkinson identified eight major factors contributing to the dropout problem for 
American Indian youth, including: 

1. Twenty-nine percent (29%) of the Indian eighth graders had repeated 
a grade at least once. 

2. Nineteen percent (19%) of the Indian eighth graders expected to drop 
out of school before graduating. 

3. Eleven percent (1 1 %) of the eighth grade Indian students missed five 
or more days of school during a four-week period. 

4. Only 17% of the eighth grade Indian students were planning to enroll 
in a college preparatory curriculum, as compared to 37% for Asian 
Americans, 31% for whites, 25% for Black Americans, and 22.5% 
for Hispanics. 

5. Thirty-one percent (31%) of the Indian students reported living in 
single-parent homes, as compared to 17% of the white children. 

6. Limited English was reported by 8.6% of the Indian students, as 
compared to 8.8% for Hispanic students, 7.1% for Asians, and 1.6% 
for Black Americans. 

7. Fifteen percent (15%) of the eighth grade Indian students reported 
having an older sibling who had dropped out of school. 



d6 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



8. Nineteen percent (19%) of the Indian students reported being home 
alone more than three hours a day. 2 

In many ways, American Indian students who drop out mirror the larger society 
of student dropouts. They come from a distinct ethnic group; they are often from 
low income families; they frequently come from one-parent homes; the educational 
levels of their parents and older siblings often stop short of high school completion; 
they have often experienced repeated failure in school; they may be the products of 
dysfunctional families and physical and emotional abuse; they may come from homes 
where a language other than English is spoken; they may come from a family where 
drug and alcohol abuse is present; they may become pregnant during their adolescent 
years; and they may have experienced a variety of forms of racism, stereotyping, or 
discrimination from early childhood. On the other hand, many of the students who 
stay in school and graduate and even complete college come from identical 
backgrounds. 

What Researchers Say About Indian Dropouts 

Most of the literature on American Indian education and the dropout problem 
has been confined to qualitative, ethnographic studies. A common theme throughout 
the research addresses the cultural differences and/or "cultural deprivation" of the 
American Indian child, the racial biases of white teachers, the negative self-image 
of American Indian children, drug/alcohol abuse, and language barriers. 3 American 
Indian students have often been the subject of cross-cultural research in which a 
comparison of the American Indian cultural values and the dominant American 
cultural values is made. Often this research suggests that American Indian students 
fail in school because of a value system which is different than the ideology within 
the school system. Other researchers maintain that the educational goals of schools 
are fashioned toward competitive achievement orientation of the American middle 
class and the attainment of material wealth. There is some evidence to support the 
fact that American Indians are willing to compete with their own past performances, 
but not with the performance of others. One researcher reported that while 
American Indian students often desire material things, the means to the end is vague, 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



13 



and that the delayed and obscure rewards of education are not associated with 
academic achievement in school. Some have gone so far as to maintain that 
scholastic competition is not valued in rnany American Indian homes, and thus failure 
in school is a given. Still other researchers have addressed the patterns of 
socialization of American Indian students and how they differ from the white 
dominant society, further undermining the American Indian child within the school 
setting. 4 

The Correlates Associated with Dropping Out 

There are literally hundreds of sources in the literature which discuss American 
Indian dropouts; however, there is relatively little research that addresses the reasons 
for dropping out. Nationally, there are three general correlates identified with 
dropping out. One correlate addresses personal problems of youth which tend to be 
independent of class and family background, including: 

► substance abuse (alcohol and/or other drug use and abuse), 

► problems with the law, 

► low self-esteem/lack of self-identity, 

► peer pressure, 

► mental health problems such as depression (suicidal tendencies), and 

► pregnancy. 

A second correlate shows the relationship between dropping out and family 
background, including: 

► socioeconomic status, 

► educational level of parents, 

► child-rearing practices, 

► single-parent families, and 

► dysfunctional families (including child abuse). 

The final correlate addresses school factors, including: 

► bilingualism, 

► cultural differences/cultural discontinuity, 

► academic achievement/failure including grade retention and tracking, 

► attendance: truancy /absenteeism/detention/expulsion, 

► teacher attitudes and expectations, and 

► racism, discrimination, and prejudice. 



ERLC 



18 



What Makes American Indian Students fit Risk? 



14 



It is important to examine the research related to the three major correlates 
addressed in dropout literature (personal problems, family background, and school 
factors) which are often attributed to the failure of American Indian youth. More 
importantly, however, a review of this literature serves to demonstrate that for each 
major correlate and subtopic area, many of the studies overlooked the complex nature 
of school failure for American Indian youth. For example, simply correlating 
alcohol abusing parents with dropping out, does not mean that such individuals will 
drop out; yet a student with such a home background will often be targeted as high 
risk by educators relying upon common identifiers of high-risk youth. Similarly, 
students who do not possess these common identifiers are often overlooked, although 
they may be at risk as well. Furthermore, an examination of past research 
demonstrates the notion that dropping out is often explained by pointing to factors 
inherently wrong with the child and not the system. This is particularly true of 
research conducted on American Indian dropouts. 

Correlate One: 
personal problems of american indian youth 

A number of factors have been identified as personal problems of youth at risk 
of dropping out of school. These factors (substance abuse, problems with the law, 
low self-esteem, peer pressure, mental health problems, and teen pregnancy) impact 
a high percentage of American Indian youth, if not directly, often indirectly. A 
review of the literature in each of these areas is pertinent to understanding the 
research conducted into the world of the American Indian child. 

Substance Abuse 

Substance abuse is clearly a problem among American Indian youth, as is the 
case with other racial and ethnic groups including the mainstream, dominant society 
youth. Some research indicates that American Indian youth are particularly at risk 
due to biological predispositions as well as environmental factors where a high 
percentage of the adult population drinks or uses drugs. An examination of the 
research conducted in this area provides insight about the use and abuse of alcohol 



19 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



15 



and drugs among American Indian adolescents and why some researchers suggest that 
substance abuse contributes to dropping out. 

Alcohol Use and Abuse 

Alcohol is clearly the most abused substance among American Indian youth and 
has been linked to the high rates of suicide, accidents, crimes, dropping out, and 
birth defects. Over 75% of deaths among the American Indian population are related 
to alcohol abuse. 

Still, there are tremendous gaps in the research about the extent and nature of 
alcohol abuse among American Indian youth, and much of the research conducted 
before 1983 is characterized as inconclusive, lacking in detail, and inadequate for 
either theoretical or practical purposes. Furthermore, it was conducted on adult 
males rather than adolescents. 

The most extensive study about American Indian adolescents and alcohol has 
been conducted by researchers at Colorado State University. They have reported that 
more than a third of American Indian adolescents use marijuana and alcohol on a 
regular basis, compared to 5% regular users among non-Indians. 5 

Other researchers have reported that Indian youth often begin using alcohol 
between the ages of 11 and 13 and that between 56% and 89% of Indian youth from 
most tribes report experimentation with alcohol. 6 

Adult substance abuse is common and visible on the reservations, exposing 
American Indian youth to negative adult role models. Reportedly there is a strong 
correlation between parental drinking and student drinking, and children who have 
older siblings who drink are more likely to abuse alcohol and drugs. Some 
researchers have observed a statistically significant relationship between high levels 
of family drinking and alcohol abuse of children in later life, whereas other 
researchers maintained that substance abuse may not be regarded as deviant behavior 
among American Indian youth due to the frequency of exposure in their daily lives. 7 

Two studies in Montana found alcohol to be a major factor in the high dropout 
rates among American Indian males. In a survey of seven reservations in Montana, 
33% of the juveniles ages 9-12 were regular drinkers and alcohol abuse was listed 



20 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



16 



as the main reason why one in every two American Indian students in Montana did 
not graduate from high school. In another Montana study, approximately one-third 
of the dropouts reported peer pressure in the use of drugs and alcohol as a salient 
factor in the decision to drop out of school. Other researchers have reported that 
heavy drinking was the reason why one in two American Indian students nationwide 
never finish school. 8 

Some researchers have suggested that drinking patterns among Indian 
adolescents point to the stresses of acculturation and maintain that Indian youth have 
negative self-identity as a result of their acculturation experiences. Generally, the 
highest levels of alcohol abuse occur among American Indian adolescents who are 
acculturated and identify with non-Indian values, and the lowest levels of abuse have 
been found among students who express an adaptability to both Indian and non-Indian 
values. It is generally believed that American Indian adolescents from tribal groups 
with strong cultural identification are less apt to be involved in substance abuse. 9 

There is little research on alcohol abuse and American Indian women or girls. 
One researcher wrote: 

In the case of women, the attitude is quite different. In some situations and 
among some groups women are also under pressure to drink. In general, 
however, the woman who does not drink is respected and the woman who 
drinks is criticized. 10 

One important consideration in the relationship of Lakota males and females 
is the pressure of the peer group for the male to continue drinking. This behavior 
often leads to the xdissolution of the male/female relationship. There is some 
indication that the male/female drinking relationships begin in the adolescent years, 
although it is reported that women drink less than men. 11 

It is well known that adolescent drinking is common among neglected children, 
and that children with drinking parents often drink with them. It has been estimated 
that approximately 50% of married couples drink, with 40% of those marriages 
ending in divorce. The loss (death) of a relative is often an acceptable occasion for 
adolescent drinking, but it is generally noted that heavy drinking by teenagers occurs 
at high school weekend parties and that the drinking remains intermittent until the 
student graduates or drops out of school. 



21 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



17 



Researchers have also found that there is a great deal of social pressure to 
drink. This pressure is often applied in the form of joking or teasing. According 
to Joyce Stevens, who conducted a study on drinking among the Blackfeet for her 
master's thesis: 

Not to drink with a group is a public indication that one wishes not to be 
associated with its members which, in turn, is an indication that these 
individuals are of inferior station, since traditionally one avoided 
association with one's social inferiors. 12 

A number of researchers have reported strong peer support for substance abuse 
and. have observed strong relationships between peer associations and alcohol 
involvement. In addition, there is a strong indication that peer groups among 
American Indian youth not only sanction drinking, but expect it. 13 

Other influences related to drinking among American Indian youth have been 
suggested. Some researchers have attempted to show the relationship of culture and 
the use of alcohol and suggest the rationale for drinking among the Sioux is linked 
to the concept of "power." Among the Sioux, the search for power was a process 
of self-actualization. Through religious ceremonies, which included fasting, the 
senses were altered to bring about a vision. It has been suggested that drinking 
substitutes for the visionary experience; however, most American Indians disregard 
such theories. Others have related the high incidence of alcohol abuse to instability 
in the home and family or the exorbitant amounts of free time, which results in 
substance abuse as a means of coping with boredom among reservation youth. 14 

More than any other minority group in America, Indian adolescents suffer from 
more substance-related problems, such as unemployment, trouble with the law, 
increased morbidity and mortality, lack of opportunity, hopelessness, poverty, and 
dysfunctional families. How these factors contribute to dropping out among 
American Indian females is discussed in Part II of this book. 15 

Other Drug Use and Abuse 

Most research has shown that Indian youth on the reservations use drugs more 
frequently than non-Indian youth, particularly marijuana, inhalants, and stimulants; 
however, reliable research on drug use and abuse among American Indians is not 



22 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



readily available in most cases. A few studies have indicated the seriousness of the 
problem. 16 

Drug abuse and dependence have been reported to be the fourth most frequent 
reason for Indian Health Service (IHS) outpatient visits and that those under the age 
of 39 account for 72% of the visits. Research among military inductees from ages 
17 to 22 indicate a higher rate of drug use among Indians when compared to other 
racial and ethnic groups. After alcohol, marijuana is the next most popular drug 
among American Indian youth. Although studies indicate that there is a wide inter- 
tribal variation, between 41% and 62% of American Indian adolescents have tried 
marijuana as compared to 28% to 50% of other youth. 

In a study of marijuana use among American Indian and Caucasian youths, 
researchers concluded that whereas drug attitude was the best predictor of drug 
involvement for white adolescents, grade level and peer group patterns were the 
strongest predictors of the level of Indian youth involvement: 

Certainly the Indian youth is faced with many of the same pressures of 
adolescent life that confront his or her Caucasian counterpart. But there 
are more. He or she is a minority group member growing up in a hostile 
social environment. A growing awareness of the limitations and 
restrictions that society has placed on him or her — combined with 
conflicts involving parents, peers and the law about drugs — may result in 
lowered perceptions of the risks of marijuana smoking. The end product 
of these processes conceivably is an isolated, frustrated, disoriented 
individual who might turn to drugs as an escape from both a disintegrating 
and depressing aboriginal world, and an uncaring and disinterested outside 
world. 17 

In an IHS survey, 59% of Indian seventh to twelfth graders in 1985 reported 
marijuana use. Other researchers have observed a lifetime preference for marijuana 
at twice the level of non-Indians and that marijuana use approaches the level of 
alcohol in the adult Indian populations. 

Inhalant abuse has been identified as a problem in American Indian 
communities and in BIA boarding schools. Widespread gasoline sniffing among 
American Indian children has been reported. This problem has most often been 
identified with younger children to whom other drugs are not available, generally 
occurring at about the same time as cigarette smoking. American Indian youth 
reportedly have the highest prevalence rates of usage. It is estimated that 17-22% 



23 



of Indian youth use inhalants compared to 9-11 % tor non-Indians. Between 1983-85, 
the use of inhalants decreased among Indian youth, although it continued to be more 
prevalent than in the non-Indian population. Recent research, however, has reported 
an increase in inhalant abuse. 18 

The prevalence of inhalant abuse is a majof concern in that adolescents who 
begin substance abuse with inhalants are more likely to become involved with more 
serious drugs than those whose first experimentations were with alcohol or 
marijuana. 19 

There have been some suggestions that the American Indian culture bears a 
relationship to the use of drugs among the youth. Most American Indian tribes, like 
other native cultures, practice rituals of healing which have included drug use; 
however, these drugs have rigidly prescribed roles in religious and healing 
ceremonies. Tobacco, for example, was a ceremonial, not a recreational drug in 
early American Indian traditions. There is no place in the traditional American 
Indian cultures for the recreational or personal use of drugs, and such explanations 
for drug use among American Indian youth should be discounted. As noted by 
Lewayne Gilchrist et al., "High levels of drug and alcohol use are not the result of 
anything inherent in Indian tradition." 20 

Although culture may in fact contribute to drug and alcohol use, the impact of 
culture on different groups must be considered carefully. For example, some 
observers note that "angry Anglo youth" tend to be. more deviant and use drugs more 
frequently. In contrast, studies show that "angry American Indian youth" most often 
have greater pride and self-esteem and are less likely to use drugs. In fact, it has 
been found that whereas marijuana use among whites related to liberal attitudes, it 
was not so for Indian youth. 21 

Likewise, it has also been suggested that American Indian youth take drugs 
because of the stress created by acculturation in the Anglo society or cultural 
conflict. However, much research clearly shows that the same factors causing drug 
abuse among other minority groups in the United States cause high drug use among 
American Indian youth, including peer pressure, poverty, racism, family problems, 
and dysfunctional behaviors. For example, it has been found that young Indian youth 



24 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



readily shared their drugs and alcohol since the major reasons for their use of these 
substances were social ones and peer group acceptance/pressure. These findings are 
consistent with other racial groups in the U.S. 22 

A number of researchers have noted strong support for drug use among peer 
groups. It appears that Indian youth are confronted with a dual problem of having 
many peers who encourage them to use drugs and many others whado not stop them 
from using drugs. It is generally agreed that peer use, peer attitudes, and peer 
acceptance are probably the greatest determinants in drug use by Indian youth. 
Dysfunctional families also appear to be a strong influence in drug abuse among 
adolescents. 23 

It has been noted that inhalant abuse is most prevalent in isolated communities 
including Indian reservations, suggesting that drugs arc often a solution to boredom 
for Indian youth. 24 

Problems with the Law 

In 1775, Benjamin Franklin wrote in Poor Richard's Almanac: "The savages 
have a society where there is no force, there are no prisons, no officers to compel 
obedience or inflict punishment." 25 The lack of crime among the American Indian 
tribes has often been reported by missionaries and historians, who came into contact 
with Indians prior to the reservation system. A number of tribes had codes of justice 
which required that a tribal member must repay for an injury or a wrong caused 
another tribal member. Stan Steiner noted that the Indian "owed no debt to society" 
as such. Instead, an indemnity was paid which was thought of as justice to the 
wronged, not as punishment for the wrongdoer. However, as Steiner noted, this 
situation has changed since post reservation days: 

Long ago these laws of the ancients ceased to govern the Indians. The 
legal codes of the modern tribes are ruled and judged by the rituals and 
laws of the white men, or by imitations. Economically and politically the 
needs of the dominant society have been successfully imposed upon the 
tribes — and the tribal morality has had to accede to these. . . . Laws, in 
any event, are enforced that require Indians to conform to the necessities 
of technological life. And they do, at least on the surface. 26 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



21 



Research is vague, conflicting, and in many cases nonexistent about American 
Indian youth and their problems with the law. The majority of arrest rates on or 
near reservations are the result of excessive drinking or driving a car while 
intoxicated. Similarly, automobile accident records involving citations and 
sometimes resulting in death for drivers and passengers are frequently reported as 
the consequence of alcohol. Domestic fights, or simply "fighting," are among the 
second highest cause for arrests on the reservations. And although violence in the 
form of "fighting" or "quarreling" is regularly recorded, even among the youth, 
violence rarely results in murder, maiming, or serious injury to another individual. 

A number of researchers have (demonstrated the correlation between dropping 
out of school and juvenile delinquency. Others, have found that failure to graduate 
from high school is a predictor of adult criminal behavior. Research on American 
Indians indicates that not only are their arrest rates higher than the population at 
large, much of the research reveals that the high arrest rates off the reservation are 
often closely related to discrimination, racial prejudices, or behaviors which may be 
acceptable within the Native culture but unacceptable to mainstream society. 

The Indian arrest rate per 100,000 population is 12 times that of the white race 
and three times that of the Black race. 27 One writer pointed out appalling facts about 
American Indians and the prison system, including: (1) one of three Indians will be 
jailed in their lifetime; (2) every other Indian family will have a relative die in jail; 
and (3) in areas where Indians live, despite the fact that they may be the minority, 
they often represent the majority of arrests. One county in Nebraska with an Indian 
population of 28% but with a county arrest record which was 98% American Indian. 
The National Clearinghouse on Alcoholism has indicated that almost 100% of all 
crimes for which an Indian is incarcerated were committed under the influence of 
alcohol. 28 

Juvenile Delinquency 

Uniform Crime Reports, which is published annually, indicates that delinquency 
rates for American Indians are higher than for the general American population; 
however, this generalization should be treated with extreme caution as the majority 

2G 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



22 



( ERLC 



of court appearances for Indian youth are for relatively minor offenses. When ? 
comparing juvenile delinquency rates in the nation as a whole, American Indian 
youth have the lowest rate for serious offenses. 

Very little research has been published on juvenile delinquency or crime within 
the contemporary American Indian culture; however, some researchers have found 
th.it delinquency rat-s are higher when compared to the general population but that 
offenses committed by Indian youth are misdemeanors or petty offenses. Other 
studies have found that alcohol played a major role in Indian delinquency; still others 
related social and economic problems to crime. 29 

Some of the research on American Indian delinquency has been conducted in BIA 
boarding school settings. An examination of rule violations among three tribal groups 
of students in a southwestern boarding school found that violations were consistently 
related to tribal background. Sixty-four percent (64%) of the violations involved the use 
of alcohol. The authors suggested that their findings supported a tribal cultural deviance 
interpretation of Indian crime and delinquency rather than family disorganization or 
failures of socialization. The most frequent categories of offenses for reservation youth 
were drunkenness and disorderly conduct. Unlike the high rate of auto theft among 
juveniles in the general population, this category was extremely low on the reservation. 30 
Other studies on boarding school populations have found that delinquent 
behavior increased with exposure to cultural conflict. For example, in an Alaska 
Native boarding school, violence and anti-white militancy increased when the Native 
school was consolidated with a town high school. 31 

Other attempts at explaining the highly inordinate rates of juvenile offenses 
have been related to alcohol. In fact, the public versus private nature of Indian 
adolescent drinking "parties," in part, seems to explain the high arrest rate among 
Indian youth. Others have suggested that the youthfulness of the Indian population 
contributes to delinquency. Seventy percent (70%) of the American Indian 
population is below the age of 30, which would account for higher rates of crime 
relative to other populations, which are older. 32 

Researchers have found that fear of afrest from using drugs is often a deterrent 
for white youth, but that just the opposite is true in dealing with American Indian 



27 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



23 



youth. American Indian youth are unlikely to accord much respect for drug control 
laws which they define as the "White man's law." This attitude is a result of lack 
of full integration by the Indian into the white society. It is often suggested that the 
high racial visibility off the reservation and close community life serve as primary 
controls to limit and deter juvenile delinquency, and in reservation communities with 
increased juvenile delinquency it may be the result of the loss of communal 
discipline. It is a well-known fact that although the nuclear family members guide 
children in good behavior, they do not force them, as coercion is alien to Indian 
familial traditions. 33 

A study on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming compared Anglo and 
Indian self-reports of delinquency among high school students and found that they did 
not differ significantly, except that Indian girls ran away from home more frequently 
than white girls and Indian boys reported more school-centered offenses than white 
boys. However, Indian youth court appearances were about five times as high as the 
generr? U.S. rate, although the Indian youth in the study did not engage in more 
delinquent acts than the whites. A vast majority of the appearances were for 
misdemeanors. 34 

Cultural Differences and Crime 

There is some evidence that a cultural phenomenon exists within the Native 
cultures among Indian youth in their teens to early twenties. This group, which is 
characterized as "people who like to raise hell" by one researcher, refers to youth 
who engage in activities that carry a risk of encountering trouble or adversity. These 
difficulties are not only physical dangers, but also include legal entanglements. This 
self-identified group did not engage in these activities all of the time, but during their 
leisure hours they tended to look for "the action" which was found in bars and at 
drinking parties. They asserted their toughness by possessing qualities for effective 
fighting, including strength, speed, coordination, and mastery of fighting techniques. 
The researcher concluded that often what results in trouble with the law for 
American Indians is acceptable behavior within their culture, but unacceptable to the 
mainstream culture. This premise is generally accepted by researchers who point out 



28 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



24 



that American Indians are often arrested for alcohol-related behavior that they 
consider socially and morally acceptable but that the dominant society considers 
unacceptable and deems illegal. Therefore, it can be concluded that the arrest rates 
of American Indians indicate intercultural discontinuities as well as other factors. 35 
Vandalism by American Indian youth has been explained by some as a conflict 
between the white man's obsession with the value of material objects and the Indian's 
indifference to material things. It has been maintained- that material objects have 
little value to Indians and that parents will watch passively as their children vandalize 
objects. Others have suggested that the vandalism in school is a "testing of reality" 
in that the authorities tell the Indians that the school is "theirs," but that American 
Indian youth doubt the statement and as a result they expose the pretense by engaging 
in vandalism of the school and school property. 36 

The Justice System and the American Indian 

Administration of justice constitutes an area where Indians have reportedly 
encountered significant civil rights problems. There have been a number of studies 
which have involved the administration of justice by law enforcement officers. For 
example, the South Dakota Advisory Committee (SDAC) of the U.S. Commission 
on Civil Rights found evidence of selective law enforcement, harassment, searches 
without cause, and discourtesy toward Indians by police officers. Further, studies 
have revealed allegations of abuse of Indian prisoners in jail. There have also been 
allegations that some towns and cities, where Indians are routinely arrested, use 
Indian prisoners as cheap labor. 

Other practices of the criminal justice system that serve as disadvantages to 
American Indians have been studied. In the Dakotas, studies showed that Indians are 
not as likely to become jurors because juries are selected from voter registration lists 
or licensed drivers lists. 37 Results of studies indicated that lawyers believe the 
routine exclusion of Indians from juries negatively affects the ability of Indians to 
receive a fair trial. Studies in border towns near reservations showed disparate 
patterns in fines and sentencing to the detriment of American Indians. In the state 
of Washington, for example, arrest rates are reportedly higher among American 



2.9 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



25 



Indians than any other racial group and Indians in that state are the least successful 
group regarding parole situations. It has also been documented that Indians in most 
states receive longer sentences than whites. 38 

Most crime related activities among American Indians are often attributed to 
"marginality." Indian males in their 20s or early 30s, who are experiencing 
problems with social adjustment and tension and drink alcohol, are most likely to be 
arrested. Discrimination within the justice system is also a major problem. Two 
researchers studied the types of sentences given to whites and Indians and concluded 
that the differences in sentencing were related to ethnicity. In other words, an 
American Indian is more likely to receive a harsher sentence than a white. 39 

Given the research, this writer contacted administrators in state prisons in 
Wyoming, Montana, and South Dakota (three states with large Indian populations and 
the location of this study) to determine if there was a disparity among Indian and 
non-Indian prison populations and to identify data on the education level of prisoners. 
Responses to inquiries varied considerably, from helpfulness to indifference. 
According to 1988 Wyoming State Penitentiary statistics, American Indians represent 
5.3% of the prison population, which is more than twice the Native population (2%) 
in the state. Of the American Indians imprisoned, 58% had not received a high 
school diploma. The American Indian population in the South Dakota prison system 
is approximately 35 % of the total prison population, which is more than five times 
the total Indian population of the state (approximately 6%). No data were available 
on the educational level of the prisoners; however, over 50% were reported to be 
involved in a voluntary GED program. The state of Montana reports that 
information concerning ethnicity of the state's prison population is strictly voluntary 
and detailed records of the American Indian prison population or their educational 
levels were unavailable. 

There is little data regarding delinquency on the reservation, and what is 
available is often subject to varied interpretations. Informal discussions with police 
officers and judges indicate, however, that a high percentage of the American Indian 
youth do encounter problems with the law, and adults incarcerated in state prisons 
have more often than not dropped out of high school. When consideration is given 



30 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



26 



to the studies which demonstrate disparity of treatment of Indians by law enforcement 
officers and the court system, and the cultural acceptance of behaviors considered 
inappropriate to mainstream society, American Indian youth become even more at- 
risk. 

Self-Esteem/Self-Identity 

Success in school is often highly correlated to self-concept and self-identity. 
Research generally indicates that American Indian students have lower self-esteem 
than students from other racial/ethnic groups and that they have more difficulty in 
establishing ethnic and tribal self-identity and pride in their Indianness. 

Self-Esteem 

Poor self-esteem has frequently been attributed to the failure of American 
Indian children in school. Howard Bahr et al. described the problem of poor self- 
esteem of American Indian youth: "There is much evidence that Indian students feel 
despair, disillusionment, alienation, frustration, hopelessness, powerlessness, 
rejection, and estrangement, all elements of negative views of the self." Other 
researchers have discovered that Indian youth had far less conviction that they could 
affect their own environments and futures than other racial groups: 40 

Many of the studies on self-esteem and the American Indian have compared the 
American Indian child to a white counterpart. This research consistently reports that 
American Indians have lower scores on conventional tests of self-esteem than 
whites. 41 Other researchers argue that such differences are misleading because the 
attributes assessed by the self-esteem tests are important to white students, but not 
to American Indian children. Some researchers report that dropping out of school 
results in short-term improvement in self-esteem. 42 

Others have suggested that American Indian children are unable to cope with 
feelings of inferiority and hopelessness, the result of increasing awareness of cultural 
and racial differences, and therefore drop out of school before graduation. 43 

Estelle Fuchs and Robert Havighurst concluded in a national study of American 
Indian youth that the great majority of Indian youth saw themselves as competent 



31 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



27 



individuals within their social world. Their study showed that American Indian 
youth look to their futures with optimism and hope and that there was no evidence 
that they suffered from feelings of alienation, frustration, and hopelessness. 44 In 
another study, a high majority of Indian youth saw themselves as competent 
individuals within their own social world but demonstrated some self-doubts in the 
non-Indian world: 

The self-esteem and self-concept data from our study indicates that the 
great majority of Indian youth see themselves as fairly competent persons 
within their own social world. This social world is characterized for the 
majority of these young people by Indianness and by poverty. If they come 
into contact with expectations by teachers or others from the social world 
of the urban-industrial and middle-class society, we should expect them to 
show some self-doubts about their competence, and we should expect their 
self-esteem score to be lowered. 45 

In a 1970 study on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota, the Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory was used with American Indian adolescents and 
it was concluded, when comparing this experimental group with a control group of 
white adolescents from the same area, that the Oglala Sioux youth consistently 
revealed feelings of rejection, depression, and paranoia, and that they were more 
socially, emotionally, and self-alienated than the control group. 46 

Clearly the issue of self-esteem and the American Indian has received 
considerable study, but few researchers have attempted to identify the differences 
between males and ' males. In general, most researchers agree that low achievement 
in school leads to low self-esteem, which increases the chances of absenteeism, 
dysfunctional behaviors, and dropping out of school. 

Research on American Indian youth tends to indicate that students show a 
decline in self-concept with increasing age. Some studies indicate that full-blood 
Indians achieve at lower rates than mixed-blood Indians. One study of Oglala Sioux 
students found that the greater the degree of Indian blood, the greater the chances 
that a student would have feelings of depression, alienation, and rejection. Another 
researcher reported in a study conducted on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South 
Dakota that full-blood Indians, who often look more "Indian" than those of 



32 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



28 



mixed-blood, faced more discrimination at school and in the job market. Thus, some 
researchers maintain that self-esteem is lower for fiill-bloods than for mixed-bloods. 47 
Harold Hodgkinson reported that 19% of eighth grade students expect they will 
drop out of high school. He noted that expectations are self-fulfilling promises, 
especially among -youth. Therefore, such expectations no doubt contribute to 
dropping out. 48 

Self-Identity 

According to American Indian writer, Darcy McNickle, the treatment of the 
Indian from the time of the European colonization to the present day has resulted in 
the loss of Indian ethnic, tribal, and self-identity. 49 Erik Erikson described identity 
formation in adolescence as dependent upon a youth's ability to integrate 
identifications from previous experiences with his/her current drive, abilities, and 
opportunities. He maintained that vital to obtaining a sense of self-identity formation 
was the assurance that there is consistency between an individual's self-image and 
the image others have of the individual. According to Erikson, developing a sense 
of self-identity is so vital to the adolescent that there is no feeling of being alive 
without it. Therefore, should an adolescent feel that his/her environment deprives 
him/her of those forms of expression which allow development of a self-identity, the 
child may resist with the strength and courage of a cornered, wild animal which 
could result in delinquent or psychotic behaviors. 50 

Other researchers on Indian identity indicate that Indian youth go through a 
period of identity diffusion and describe the young American Indian as the "marginal 
man," fitting into neither the white nor Indian culture. 51 One educator observed: 

The cultural impact has taken its toll in obstructing the development of the 
young Sioux personality. The young Sioux people meet the demands of the 
dominant culture with a passive resistance. This in itself, however, causes 
hostility, withdrawal, and a general feeling of rejection. They cannot turn 
back and are not motivated to go forward. They are truly caught between 
the cultural stresses of the old world and the new. 52 

George Spindler and Louise Spindler maintained that the Indian personality 
type, which they referred to as "reaffirmative native/ was ambivalent to the white 



33 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



29 



culture. Fred Voget noted that certain Iroquois, whom he called "native modified," 
were alienated from the dominant culture and that they made no attempt to identify 
with either the American or Canadian culture. 53 

Assimilation is associated closely with the. concept of Indian identity. 
Assimilation may be divided into three stages: acculturation, social integration, and 
amalgamation. Acculturation is defined as the process whereby Indians adopt white 
cultural traits; social integration as increased interaction between Indians and whites; 
and amalgamation as the biological mixing of the two races, especially through 
marriage. Total assimilation occurs when an Indian identifies himself/herself as a 
member of the white society. 54 

Other researchers have noted that Indian youth who seem to succeed are either 
total traditionalists or totally acculturated: 

There is a failure in psychosocial development of Indian adolescents. That 
failure is the non-resolution of the identity crisis. Its determinants are the 
failure to provide an atmosphere of psychohistorical meaningftilness and 
personal worth in being Indian. 55 

Some researchers report that, in contrast to white children, American Indian 
children demonstrate more of an emphasis on family ties in self-identity tests, greater 
emphasis on traditional customs and beliefs, and less emphasis on formal education 
and on material possessions. 56 

Studies of urban Indian youth and self-identity present some interesting 
conclusions. In order to resolve their identity crisis, urban Indian youth generally 
take three directions: polarization of Indian youth toward the white model, 
polarization of Indian youth toward Indian traditions, or a synthesis of the two 
models. Many youth resolve identity conflict through the synthesis of the two 
models, but in order to do this, the Indian youth has to be able to maintain ties with 
adult Indians and relatives and, at the same time, establish positive relationships with 
significant white adults and peers. 57 

In a longitudinal study of Oglala Sioux students, Indian adolescents who 
internalized the social values of white middle class America in terms of school 
achievement and the "Calvinist work ethic" found this ideological framework 
inappropriate when applied to themselves and their lives. It was found that Indian 

34 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



30 



students reacted with pessimism to the prospect of work and achievement when 
confronted with the poverty and dependence on the reservation and the stereotyping 
of the Indian in the media. 58 

In another study, academically high-achieving Indians were found to be more 
similar to whites in their value orientation than low-achieving Indians. The study 
concluded, however, that "Indian" is more valued among Indian youth than "white" 
is among white youth. 59 

There is some indication that the Civil Rights movement and the Indian 
activism of the late 60s and the 70s have resulted in a search for Indian identity. 
Results of these efforts can be seen in curriculum and other techniques throughout 
schools with Indian enrollments. One researcher suggested that one of the first signs 
in the search for Indian identity was the return to long hair among young Indian 
males which "may uniquely be identified as Native American" because of their 
ancestral heritage. Renewed religious ceremonies, including the Sun Dance among 
Northern Plains tribes, have also been attributed to the search for Indian identity. 60 

Peer Pressure 

Peer pressure is often cited in the literature as having a negative impact on at- 
risk students and may in fact contribute to students engaging in a number of 
dysfunctional behaviors, including dropping out of school. 

Some researchers point to peer influences among, American Indian tribal 
groups, which involve a pattern of self-grouping at work, wherein youth with 
common problems and needs (including those with low self-esteem) congregate 
together and share mutual experiences. In many cases, these peer groups encourage 
others within the group to drop out of school. 61 

In a Montana study, over one-third of the American Indian students reported 
dropping out of school due to a desire to be with other dropouts. Others have 
suggested that American Indian youth, heavily exposed to negative adult role models, 
are influenced as well to participate in activities which often lead to drinking or 
dropping out. Adolescent drinking among the Oglala Sioux has been viewed as a 
group reinforced behavior. "Older younger" adults make drinks available to 



35 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



school-aged friends and relatives and drinking among urban Sioux adolescents is a 
social activity rather than a solitary one. 62 

Strong peer group support for drug use has also been found among American 
Indian youth by a number of researchers. Other researchers have noted that the 
behaviors and attitudes of young male Indians are tied closely to socialization 
patterns which are reinforced by peer groups. The "warrior syndrome," which has 
been discussed in several ethnographic monographs, continues to present day and 
includes powerful sanctions for American Indian youth. 63 

Rosalie Wax noted, in a study of Oglala Sioux boys, that loyalty of the 
adolescents was to their peers and not their teachers in school. She reported that 
students joined in a series of devices: unanimous inattention, inarticulate responses, 
whispered or pantomime teasing of students called upon by the teacher, and refusal 
to go to the blackboard. She noted that these activities were a result of need for 
social approval by peer groups. Others have found that mutual rejection by teachers 
and students results in strong peer groups that lack adult supervision. 64 

Mental Health/Suicide 

Mental health problems have been a strong interest of those who have 
researched Indian education. Studies from the mid-30s throughout the 60s sought to 
dispel the theory that American Indian children were mentally incompetent. In a 
1936 report on a mental hygiene survey of eastern Oklahoma Indian children, 
children who had been previously diagnosed as "mentally defective" were identified 
as not suffering from antisocial behavior, but rather a lack of opportunity. Other 
research showed that the overt fears of Dakota Sioux children were no different than 
rural white children. Most researchers agreed that lack of opportunities, rather than 
predisposed attitudes and motivations, were responsible for the barriers to social and 
economic development for Indian children. 

Others studied personality disorders among Indian students and reported that 
mobility of families and the necessity to conform to changing standards led to 
confusion and disorganization of the child's personality. 



36 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



32 



Some researchers have suggested that American Indian children perform lower 
academically than whites because they suffer higher emotional disturbances; that is, 
poor school performance may be an effect rather than a cause of mental disorder. 
Other researchers found that low-achieving students exhibited low self-esteem and 
anomie and one report stated that 75% of the children in an Alaskan boarding school 
had emotional problems. 65 

Such studies suggest that American Indian children, when they enter school, 
are exposed to cultural discrepancies. Under such conditions they are either labeled 
as shy and non-competitive by the majority culture, or they are considered rebellious, 
destructive, and aggressive. 

The amount of research on suicide and the American Indian illustrates the 
magnitude of the problem. Official statistics on suicide rates among American Indian 
youth, however, are conflicting and in many cases inaccurate. Estimates have been 
made setting the rate at two to seven times as high as in the majority of society, and 
yet it is important to note that the suicide rate varies from tribe to tribe. Most 
researchers reported that approximately one in every 200 Indian youth attempted 
suicide and that the suicide rate is four times as high for Indians as for non-Indians. 

Unlike mainstream society where the risk of suicide increases with age, Indian 
suicide is mostly confined to younger people, with the vast majority occurring 
between the ages of 15 and 39 but peaking at age 20. Researchers have also noted 
different patterns of suicide: females commit or attempt suicide by ingesting drugs 
and toxins, often as a result of an argument with a significant other. On the other 
hand, Indian females commit suicide at about half the rate as other American women. 
Several researchers have attributed familial disorganization as a major contributor 
to suicide among young Indian males. Others have also noted that more than one 
caretaker before the age of 15, arrests, losses by divorce or desertion, and attending 
a boarding school at an early age were all factors in suicide among young males. 66 
One major study on adolescent suicide concluded: 

The data presented clearly indicate statistically significant differences 
between individuals who commit suicide and the control group. The 
subjects in the suicide group were cared for by more than one individual 



37 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



33 



during their developing years, while control subjects were almost always 
cared for by a single individual. The primary caretakers of the suicide 
group had significantly more arrests during the time they were care takers v 
of the subjects. The suicide group also experienced many more losses by 
desertion or divorce than the control group. The individuals who suicided 
were arrested more times in the years prior to their suicide than were the 
controls. . . . Many of the completed suicides were sent off to boarding 
school at a significantly earlier age . . . and they were also sent more 
frequently to boarding schools. ... All of the data point to a chaotic and 
unstable childhood. 67 

A high percentage of suicide attempts occur in conjunction with alcohol or 
following crimes against friends or relatives and other misfortunes as a result of 
drinking. 68 t 

Cultural conflict and social disorganization has also been linked with suicide. 
Suicide and suicide attempts among Indian youth are often precipitated by domestic 
quarrels and marital strife within one's family. Some discredit the idea that the 
suicide rate is directly related to the kind of schooling that American Indian children 
received and suggest that the suicides rates are closely correlated with disorganized 
family life, alcoholism, and loss of friends or relatives by death. There is some 
evidence that the destruction of self-esteem has led to suicide as well as alcoholism 
and homicide. 69 

"Cluster suicides" (one suicide triggers other suicides) are reported to be higher 
among American Indian youth. Alcohol seems to be one major cause; yet suicide 
rates are lower today than during the peak years of 1970-77. 

Despite the plethora of research on suicide and the American Indian, suicide 
remains a major concern of educators working with Indian youth. Although research 
exists, progress in preventive techniques and strategies is often questionable. Five 
years ago, this writer worked with an American Indian school district where 23 
suicides had been attempted; three were successful. The suicide victims were eighth 
and ninth graders. More recently, this writer was on an Indian reservation where 
two teenage boys had committed suicide. In response to a request from a parent, this 
writer met with her son, a friend of the deceased teenagers. During our 
conversation, the young man revealed that he regarded his friends who committed 
suicide as courageous. "They are my heroes," he said. 



38 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



34 



Pregnancy 

Unlike other ethnic groups in the U.S., little data exist on the percentage of 
American Indian girls who leave school due to premature pregnancy. Most needs 
assessments conducted by school districts on Indian reservations speak to the need 
for sex education and alternative educational programs for teenage mothers. Many 
American Indian schools offer alternative programs for the pregnant teen, including 
home-schooling programs, child care programs, and some have even experimented 
with nursery school programs for the children of teenage mothers. National statistics " 
report that 40% of the girls who drop out of school do so due to pregnancy, and 
there is no reason to suspect that the American Indian female statistics would be 
different. In fact, there have been reports that would indicate teen pregnancy is 
higher among American Indian females. One school district in Montana reported that 
16 of the 23 female students in the eleventh and twelfth grades were pregnant. One 
small South Dakota reservation community (150 population) reported that 27 females 
between the ages of 14 and 20 were pregnant. In addition, there are many reports 
of girls who have two and three children before the age of 19, which is consistent 
with national data. Organizations such as the Children's Defense Fund and the 
Center for Population Options, who have developed programs for teenage mothers, 
view teen pregnancy as the result of the lack of sufficient options. In the case of the 
American Indian girl, the lack of a promising future may, in fact, contribute to the 
high rate of pregnancy. 

Bea Medicine, a Dakota Sioux anthropologist, cited an example of cultural 
socialization pressure among Sioux males and females that may contribute to teen 
pregnancy. According to her, Sioux females are not fully recognized as mature 
women until they have produced a son, % and males feel inadequate until they have 
fathered a son. Medicine pointed out: 

Giving birth to a child is somehow equated with adulthood . . . this 
status is extended to the increasing numbers of 13 and 14-year old girls 
who produce illegitimate children. The Dakota phrase *towa cinea 
tayesnf (literally, 'whose child no one knows') which was a 
tremendous mark of shame several generations ago, does not have great 
significance in present day systems of social control. 70 



39 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



35 



Of primary concern to American Indian educators are statistics that speak to 
the number of fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) and fetal alcohol effects (FAE) children 
being born on the reservations. There is a wide range in the incidence of FAS 
among tribes, from 1.3 per 1,000 live births among the Navajo to 10.3 among the 
Plains tribes, many of which are located in South Dakota, Montana, and Wyoming. 71 

Michael Dorris, in his recent best seller, The Broken Cord, reported that on 
some Indian reservations, Indian social workers maintain that one-fourth to one-third 
of Indian children are affected by fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) or other fetal alcohol 
effects (FAE). 72 

Although research is almost nonexistent on. pregnancy and its impact on 
dropping out among American Indian females, there is no- question that premature 
pregnancy is the cause of a high percentage of girls leaving school early. The 
severity of the problem for American Indian girls and its implications for their 
futures and the futures of their children has not been researched. 

Correlate Two: 
family background and dropping out 

Various factors within the family background have often been discussed in 
terms of American Indian students* failure in school. Research indicates a high 
correlation between dropping out and socioeconomic status of the family. Other 
researchers have suggested that one-parent families, dysfunctional families, child 
abuse, and child-rearing practices have high correlations to school failure. This 
section will discuss each of those factors and their relationship to the American 
Indian student. 

Socioeconomic Status • 

American Indians are the most poverty-stricken ethnic group in the nation 
according to the 1990 U.S. census figures. In fact, the statistics indicate a growing 
trend of economic inequality among minorities over the past decade. More than half 
of Indian households earn less than $20,000 annually and Indian children are three 



40 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



36 



times more likely to live in poverty than white children. In addition, the census 
figures show that Indians have the highest unemployment rate in the country. 73 

It is currently reported that 38% of Indian children live below the poverty line. 
Throughout the literature, many researchers rioted the poverty conditions of the 
Indian child. 74 Other researchers have reported that Indian students come to school 
poorly clothed and malnourished. Estelle Fuchs and Robert Havighurst noted that 
the majority of Indian students are reared in poverty-stricken families and that 
poverty is a disadvantage to school achievement. 75 A 10-year study of Indian 
students in California reported that not only were there high dropout and truancy 
rates, but there was a high incidence of health problems, much of which was 
attributed to crowded living conditions and isolation. 76 Several studies have indicated 
that the government-supported hot lunch programs increased school attendance among 
Indian students because of inadequate food in the home environment. Others have 
found that low levels of achievement are associated with low economic and social 
levels. 77 

The economic conditions of reservation life are very precarious. 
Unemployment among American Indians in 1980 was listed at 65% in Wyoming and 
64% in South Dakota, as compared to 7% and 6%, respectively, for whites. On one 
reservation where this study was conducted, 85% of the jobs were held by females. 
Among the Northern Plains tribes, male employment often falls into the category of 
ranching, farming, arts, and crafts. Women are more likely to work in clerical, 
educational, and social service areas. 78 

A BIA study of 635,000 American Indians living on or near reservations in 
1989 showed that one-third were unemployed and over one-third of those who were 
employed earned less than $7,000 per year. 79 

It is evident that more American Indian children are growing up in poverty than 
any other racial/ethnic group in America. Unemployment plagues tribal groups 
throughout the country. That poverty and dropping out of school are regarded as 
highly correlated to socioeconomic status is a matter of concern in Indian country. 
Children who are labeled as coming from "disadvantaged" homes due to poverty may 
have one strike against them before they begin school. 



41 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



37 



Parents 9 Educational Level 

Some researchers have attributed the low educational levels of the American 
Indian adult population to the poverty levels. Again, reports varied from tribe to 
tribe; however, available statistics indicate that the high school graduation level of 
adult Indian populations on some reservations is as low as 27%, compared to the 
national average for non-Indians of 86%. A study conducted in 1981 of 4,000 
American Indian adults revealed literacy scores, as measured by the Adult 
Performance Inventory (API), lower than any other ethnic or racial group excluding 
recent immigrants. 80 Scores of American Indian participants were comparable to 
those from underdeveloped nations. It was also reported that 59% of the adult Indian 
population had neither a high school diploma nor a GED; Of adults over the age of 
25, 16% have less than five years of schooling. 81 

Researchers repeatedly show the correlation between socioeconomic status of 
families and students dropping out of school. Estelle Fuchs and Robert Havighurst 
reported that school achievement and socioeconomic status of the family proved to 
be more influential than school characteristics, except in the cases where the family 
cannot provide much help to the student because of lack of education. Specifically, 
they were addressing the issues of poverty and illiteracy on the part of the parents 
as contributing to an environment nonconducive to learning, such as the absence of 
books and reading materials in the home and a quiet place to study. In such cases, 
they maintained that the school may actually compensate to some extent, maintaining 
that many Indian parents have little formal education, resulting in their children 
becoming more dependent upon the school for academic instruction than children 
from families where parents .an assist them with their education. 82 

Whether or not the educational level of parents is a major factor to dropping 
out has not been fully researched. 

Child-Rearing Practices 

Child-rearing practices of Native tribal groups are noted throughout the 
literature as one of the major conflicts between home and success in school. In 



42 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



38 



1634, a Jesuit priest, Father le Jeune, described the frustration of disciplining Indian 
children in his missionary school: 

. . . these Barbarians cannot bear to have their children punished, not 
even scolded, not being able to refuse anything to a crying child. They 
carry this to such an extent that upon the slightest pretext they would 
take them away from us, before they were educated. 83 

Researchers have noted that although the political and economic structures of 
the American Indian culture have largely been destroyed, child-rearing practices and 
personal relationship ■„ have undergone a slower transformation. Such practices which 
are characterized by permissiveness and indulgence with little stress on 
noncompetitive behavior are at odds with the school setting. 84 

Other researchers have discussed child-rearing practices of Indians: 

Children are punished relatively seldom by parents. Instead, they are 
warned, when they are naughty, that people will talk about them. Or they 
are warned of punishment by supernatural beings. . . . Thus much of the 
children's experience of punishment comes from outside the home and 
comes from persons whom they do not love. 85 

Bernard Spilka maintained that child-rearing practices of American Indians tend 
to foster failure in schools for Indian children, including three particular problems: 
(1) a preschool environment at home that does not include or display the early 
educational teaching by parents, common in white middle-class homes; (2) materials 
in school that are alien to Indian children; and (3) teacher/child relationships which 
are quite different than those experienced outside of school. He suggested that this 
discrepancy between home and school resulted in the feeling of alienation and 
negative attitude toward school. 86 

Other researchers have found that Indian children are taught self-control by 
their parents, that parental focus allows children to learn for themselves, and that 
physical punishment is rare. They have also observed that authority figures are 
distributed among many people in the family and that individual autonomy and 
collective group responsibility encourage control over oneself and not over others. 
As such, Indian children are most often disciplined as a group rather than 
individually. 87 



43 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



39 



Some researchers maintain that culturally-different children often come to 
school where there i c a different expectation of behavior than was established in their 
home. Thus, children act in ways that are judged as appropriate at home, but in 
school, discover that their behavior is inappropriate. 88 For example, interruption of 
parents and other adults by the Indian child is not considered misbehavior, but in 
school the teacher labels such behavior as inappropriate. One study of American 
Indian children in school and in community life, identified nonacceptance of "student 
talk" by teachers in early grades as a determinant of failure for Indian students. The 
researcher noted that because different standards were experienced in the home and 
the school, students began very early exhibiting "learning difficulties and feelings of 
inferiority/ This phenomenon was attributed to child-rearing practices. 89 

Some researchers have suggested that parents are perceived to be the strongest 
influence on a student's school work. One study of Cree families reported that 
educational success for children was important, but that the Cree culture and heritage 
was equally important. Others reported that Indian parents internalized feelings of 
inferiority that affected their children's academic performance. On the other hand, 
others found little difference between parental behavior and student attitudes about 
education in Indian and non-Indian students. 90 

Dick Little Bear, a Northern Cheyenne educator, maintains that the exclusion 
of Indian parents from the education of their children by federal government policies 
has not worked and has created a mistrust for education: 

Indian parents were systematically excluded from participation in the 
education of Indian youth. Excluding Indian parents ... has made 
Indian parents very suspicious of modern American education. . . . 
This misuse of education produced education-hating Indians. Schools are 
still associated with punishment and deprivation. . . . 91 

Other researchers have noted that behavior which the non-Indian culture often 
regards as "apathy" is actually a traditional reluctance on the part of parents to 
interfere in the affairs of others, including their own children. Permissiveness on 
the part of Indian parents has been the subject of a number of studies. 92 On the 
Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, one researcher found that Arapaho parents 
thought their children should make up their own minds about whether they should go 



44 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



to college, while another concluded that the permissive attitude in the Shoshone home 
was a detriment to academic achievement. 93 

Some researchers note that child-rearing practices indirectly encourage 
substance abuse among American Indian youth and target the laissez-faire 
child-rearing practices, which were long-established Siouan cultural edicts, as 
fostering parental tolerance of substance abuse. 94 Others note that Indian children 
often go unsupervised for long periods of time, thus escaping effective controls in 
the home. Faced with controls in the school, American Indian children often react 
by disobeying at first, skipping school, and finally dropping out. 

In a study of Blackfeet children, obedience to elders is demanded, but 
otherwise the child has a wide range of personal choices and autonomy. Efforts at 
controlling the child take the form of lectures rather than physical force or threats. 95 

The research is relatively clear that traditional child-rearing practices, which 
have survived at a time when other aspects of the culture have diminished or 
changed, impact the American Indian child's life tremendously. Furthermore, 
research supports that acceptable behaviors within the home are often unacceptable 
in the school, thus creating a feeling of disorientation in young children, and may 
result in dropping out in later years. 

Single-Parent Families 

It has been reported in various demographic studies conducted on American 
Indian tribes that anywhere from 24% to 50% of American Indian youth are growing 
up in homes with only one parent. In a report based on 1980 census data, it was 
found that 25% of American Indian children were growing up in single-parent homes 
as compared to less tlnn one-fifth of children in the population as a whole. These 
data, which are often falsely reported or not reported at all, refer to the absence of 
a husband, spouse, br father of the child in the home. 96 It is important to note, 
however, that in a high percentage of American Indian homes, the child is not 
growing up in an environment that is devoid of other adults. Due to family 
relationships and the extended family structure of American Indian tribal groups, a 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



41 



high percentage of students grow up in homes where other relatives or friends are 
living in the household. 

Again, data are inconclusive about the number of American Indian children 
who are growing up in one-parent households. National statistics report that one in 
every four children in this country are born to single mothers. There is no reason 
to believe that this statistic is any lower for American Indian children. The 
difference, however, does occur in the fact that American Indian children may not 
be growing up in a family with one adult because of the tendency of American Indian 
households to include a number of friends and relatives living in the home. 

Dysfunctional Families 

The institution of the American Indian family has been drastically altered over 
the years. Many children suffer from unpredictable home environments which 
include loss in their family through divorce, separation or desertion, arrest of 
parents, domestic quarrels, other marital strife, and alcohol abuse. In a study of one 
Indian group in which rapid change and breakdown in extended nuclear families had 
occurred, there was a high suicide rate among the youth. 97 

Some researchers have observed that the traditional community and family 
structures are decreasing among American Indians. Others have noted that among 
some tribes the continued involvement of the men in sharing alcoholic beverages and 
their participation in peer groups beyond adolescence has proven counterproductive 
to the family and marriage and leads to marital discord among American Indians. 98 

Although child abuse and neglect among Native populations has received 
considerable attention in the last decade among social service workers and health care 
providers, 99 little research exists on the subject. Part of the problem is created by 
inaccurate reporting, lack of community cooperation, and inconsistent definitions of 
child abuse and neglect. 100 Within American Indian community, these problems are 
further complicated by cultural variations. 101 One educator suggests that child abuse 
and neglect among American Indian populations is often defined in a cross-cultural 
context whereby "such behavior is somehow made understandable and, hence, 
acceptable." 102 

46 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



42 



Studies on child abuse and neglect reveal a number of findings. In a small 
Alaskan village, one study reported that nearly all children in the community were 
neglected, and attributed the neglect to the absence of the traditional child-caring 
practices that had disappeared. 103 Sixty-nine percent (69%) of the referrals to Indian 
child welfare programs are reportedly due to physical abuse, neglect, and 
abandonment. 104 

There appears to be a wide variation in the incidences of child abuse and 
neglect among tribes. Approximately 50% of the child abuse cases and 80% of the 
child neglect cases are related to alcohol abuse. In a study among the Cheyenne 
River Sioux, sexual abuse was found to be less frequent than the national average, 
but physical abuse was more serious and often resulted in the death of a child. 
Others have reported that neglect occurs more frequently among American Indians 
than any other group in America. 105 

One researcher reported, in a study among the Blackfeet, that babies and young 
children are given small amounts of alcohol when the adults are drinking. 106 Phyllis 
Old Dog Cross reported that the amount of violence against women, alcoholism, 
abuse and neglect by women against their children and aged relatives has increased 
in the American Indian community. 107 In a study of families of neglected Navajo 
children, researchers found that the families had a significantly higher percentage of 
single, widowed, or divorced mothers than a non-neglected control group. 108 Other 
researchers 109 pointed to the deterioration of the family, which was once the 
cornerstone of Indian society, as one of the problems facing American Indian youth 
today. 

Child abuse and neglect is often concentrated in dysfunctional families, often 
characterized by multiple problems, including suicide, homicide, desertion, alcohol, 
educational problems, and health problems. 110 Alcohol abuse is related to almost 
every deviant behavior among American Indians. 111 A study of abuse and neglect 
cases at a Southwest Indian health hospital which served 12 reservations, reported 
that alcohol abuse was present in 85% of the neglect cases and 63% of the abuse 
cases. In 65% of the cases, child abuse and neglect occurred simultaneously. The 
study also showed that children were likely to be abused by more than one person 



47 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



43 



in the family, that girls were more likely to be abused than boys, and that 30% of 
the abused/neglected children had a history of disability or handicap. 1,2 

The research on American Indian students consistently reports that home 
environment has a major impact on the success of students in school. The research 
is also clear that children who abuse alcohol and drugs, children who commit 
suicide, and children who drop out of school often come from homes where the 
parent is absent or the parent has little or no control. 

Correlate Three: 
school factors 

A number of factors relating to school have been studied by researchers in an 
attempt to identify the reasons for lack of success and/or success of Indian students. 
Until the 1980s, the majority of this research focused on the deficit model; that is, 
the behaviors, characteristics, and cultural differences that the child brought with 
him/her to school were the accepted explanations for poor academic achievement, 
absenteeism, and dropping out. This research will be reviewed in that it has a major 
bearing, even today, on the way schools deal with children. At the same time, this 
writer will review current literature which seeks to identify the school's role in 
students dropping out of school. 

This section will address the factors related to school which include: 
bilingualism/limited English proficiency; cultural differences/cultural discontinuity; 
academic achievement/failure including grade retention, course failure, and tracking; 
attendance including truancy, absenteeism, detention, and expulsion; teacher attitudes 
and expectations; and racism, discrimination, and prejudice. 

Bilingualism 

In 1899, a well-known magazine editor wrote that the American Indian should 
learn English as a protection against the white man: 

It is well that [the Indian] should learn to read and write, and get what 
comprehension he can of this nation's laws and genius, and acquire our 
language — all of these things being valuable to him chiefly as some 
protection against being robbed by our rascals. 1,3 



48 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



44 



From the beginning, the European settlers, and later the U.S. government, have 
attempted to bring the Indian into the mainstream of America through education. In 
the 1880s, the Bureau of Indian Affairs issued orders that the English language was 
to be the language of instruction: 

The main purpose of educating them is to enable them to read, write, and 
speak the English language and to transact business with English-speaking 
people. . . . Every nation is jealous of its own language, and no nation 
ought to be more so than ours, which approaches nearer than any other 
nationality to the perfect protection of its people. True Americans all feel 
that the Constitution, laws, and institutions of the United States, in their 
adaptation to the wants and requirements of man, are superior to those of 
any other country. . . . Nothing so surely and perfectly stamps upon an 
individual a national characteristic as language. 114 

Thus the decision to obliterate Indian languages and to replace them with 
English was approached as a nationalizing purpose. Government officials and 
educators rejected the notion of coexistence of English and the Indian languages as 
compatible with nationhood. Furthermore, it was suggested that the use of English 
among American Indians would create patriotism and loyalty and somehow facilitate 
national integration. Obviously the assault on the Indian languages and culture has 
produced over the years a legacy of bitterness and hatred among Indian tribes. 
Government policies which imposed alien standards on Indians and forced separation 
of parents and children induced both hostility and subtle resistance. Force had to be 
used to keep students in school as illustrated in the following report: 

I have at all times assisted the Superintendent in keeping the school filled 
up with pupils, and sometimes have had to send the police over the 
reservation to gather up the scholars; also have had to frequently send the 
police after the larger boys, who would run away from the schools. . . . n5 

Accounts of the unjust treatment of Indian students can be found throughout the 
literature, but the ban on the use of the Native languages appears almost ludicrous 
at times: 

The schools the children were forced to attend were strict and authoritarian 
beyond what anyone not incarcerated would put up with today. They were 
also, although perhaps not intentionally, cruel. Children were rarely 
allowed to go home to visit their families; moreover, upon arrival at the 
boarding schools, they were forbidden to speak their native languages and 
were required to remain silent until they could speak English. That one 



49 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



45 



could learn to speak by remaining silent is a pedagogical triumph not 
readily encountered. 116 

The policy of the government toward Indian languages was not without its 
critics, and the BIA often found itself in the position of defending its strategies from 
the growing number of complaints against the English-only rule. In response to such 
criticism, Commissioner of Indian Affairs Atkins stated: 

To teach Indian school children their native tongue is practically to exclude 
English, and to prevent them from acquiring it. This language, which is 
good enough for a white man and a black man, ought to be good enough 
for a red man. ... Is it cruelty to the Indian to force him to give up his 
scalping knife and tomahawk? Is it cruelty to force him to abandon the 
vicious and barbarous sun dance, where he lacerates his flesh and dances 
and tortures himself even unto death? 117 

The Native languages continued to be banned from BIA schools until the 1930s 
and 1940s, when some action was taken to provide the use of the language as well 
as instruction in the language to Indian students: 

It has not been many years since the use of the native language was 
forcibly discouraged in government schools, and native dialects were often 
held up to ridicule. . . . Under the present administration the native 
languages have come to be recognized, not as encumbrances and 
impediments to the progress of the native peoples, but as definite tools to 
be fitted into the educational program. 118 

r 

This strategy was shortlived, however, and was discontinued with the advent of 
World War II. 

It was not until the 1960s that bilingual education became an issue with Indian 
children. Testimony before the House of Representatives Subcommittee on 
Education concerning the Bilingual Education Act pointed out: 

When you come to the Indian child, given what seems to be the fact that 
he cherishes his Indian status to a remarkable extent, and given the fact that 
his cultural patterns are markedly different from those of the dominant 
American group, he is not simply cheated out of a language that does not 
matter internationally anyway, he is not just damaged in school: he is 
almost destroyed. As a matter of fact, historically, that is what we tried 
to do with them: destroy them. All you have to do is read the accounts to 
know that. 119 

In 1968, the Bilingual Education Act, which was Title VII of the Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act, was passed. This act was a compensatory education 



50 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



46 



program for "disadvantaged M non-English speaking students. In 1974, the low- 
income provision was removed, and in 1978, the act was amended to include funding 
for Limited English Proficiency (LEP) Indian children and the participation of up to 
40% of monolingual English speakers so that the programs did not segregate 
students. The act was amended in 1984 to fund maintenance and transitional 
programs, which emphasized the development of English language skills in non- 
English speaking students. 

Even today, many Indian children begin school with little or no skills in the use 
of the English language. The Human and Civil Rights Committee of the National 
Education Association (1983) reported that 25% of American Indian children begin 
school unable to speak English. Although the majority of Indian children in the 
country may speak English, and often only English, it is important to note that it is 
usually a substandard English, which is not the English of the classroom and of 
textbooks. Judgments about lack of intelligence are made about people who do not 
use standard English, such as: 

A chiid who uses correct language is presumably neat, polite, well 
groomed and a paragon of virtue, whereas a child who uses incorrect 
language probably falls asleep in church, plays hooky from school, 
dissects cats and takes dope. 120 

The language handicap for Indian students appears to increase as they move through 
school. The loss of the Native languages is one of the most critical issues 
confronting tribes and has been attributed to a breakdown in communication between 
children and their grandparents and the subsequent loss of heritage. 121 

Some researchers report that Indian students in South Dakota who speak their 
Native language are not as high achievers in school as those students who are 
English-only speakers. Others have tested the linguistic maturity of Indian students 
and found lower patterns of development than those of white children. 122 On the 
other hand, in a study of Canadian Indians and Metis, inadequate exposure to English 
instead of the use of their Native languages was found to be at the root of language 
problems. 123 

It has been noted that often Indian children make satisfactory progress in school 
until they reach the fourth grade. The explanation for this phenomenon lies in the 



51 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



fact that the textbooks in the first three grades are written in "talking" or 
conversational vocabulary, while upper-grade texts shift to a "comprehension" 
vocabulary. 124 

L. Madison Coombs reported on a study of 14,000 Indian students and 
concluded: 

Investigation of the data reveals an amazingly consistent relationship 
between the degree of Indian blood and pre-school language on the one 
hand and level of achievement on the other. With only one exception, the 
smaller the amount of Indian blood in a group and the greater the amount 
of English spoken prior to school entrance, the higher the group 
achieved. 125 

Even on reservations where English, and English only, is the language, there 
are still the problems of low achievement, high dropout rates, and absenteeism. It 
may be that the language problem is a symptom rather than the cause of scholastic 
failure. A number of schools have incorporated the use of the Native language into 
the curriculum. Probably the most famous is the Rock Point Community School on 
the Navajo reservation. Graduates of this school test out on English language 
standardized achievement tests as superior to Indian students who have not had 
bilingual education. 126 In Chicago's bilingual-bicultural Little Big Horn High School, 
dropout rates were reduced from 95% for American Indian students to 11%. 127 
Many researchers maintain that students do better in school if their language and 
culture are a part of the school's curriculum. 128 

Bilingual education is controversial on many reservations. Often tribal 
members and teachers join forces in preventing the use of Native languages in the 
classroom, and yet there is reportedly no tribe that has used the Native language as 
a substitute for the English language nor have they let the Native language restoration 
outrank the importance of teaching English. 129 

Over the years, language has played an important role in success in school. 
Most linguists agree that the truly bilingual child (fluent in two languages) has higher 
achievement in school than children who speak or understand two languages at 
varying degrees. American Indian children who often understand, but do not speak, 
the Native language and often enter school using substandard English, present a 
different situation for teachers that clearly warrants further research. 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



Cultural Differences/Cultural Discontinuity 

Most researchers agree that Indian children are affected by both the white and 
Indian cultures. Some scholars maintain that Indian children are often torn between 
two cultures. Others point out that some students accept one culture and reject the 
other, whereas many maintain that Indian students attempt, often unsuccessfully, to 
participate in both cultures, but since they are so very different and contradictory, 
they must develop the skills to compartmentalize their behaviors dependent upon the 
society in which they are functioning. This individual is often referred to as 
bicultural. 

Erik Erikson noted in his observations of Sioux children that the traditional 
enculturation process must be recognized so that the transition to school may be 
based on the Indian child's childhood. 130 A number of studies have discussed the 
consequences of formal education and the cultural conflict arising from the child 
being educated in a traditional society and the school setting. 131 

Estelle Fuchs and Robert Havighurst cited family background as being a 
handicap to school achievement for Indian students. In their national study, they 
were not only speaking to a family background with low economic status and low 
educational levels of the parents, but they were also addressing the degree to which 
American Indian parents continued cultural and Native language practices in the 
home. They maintained that family background influences success for Indian 
students in that the Indian culture is often discontinuous with the demands of 
schooling. They included such characteristics in the Native culture that are in 
conflict with the urban-industrial culture: close family solidarity, support for 
relatives, belief in the values of a tribal tradition, belief in tribal religion, and a 
tribal language. These values, they pointed out, are sometimes in conflict with the 
competitive and individualistic achievement demanded in schools. 132 

Others have maintained that there are considerable differences between the 
Indian culture and the white culture which have resulted in conflict for the Indian 
child: namely, to stay with the traditions and accept the old ways or to give up their 
values and suffer hostility from friends and family and join the white society which 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



49 



does not welcome them. For example, in the Indian culture there is very little 
consideration of the future. Children grow up in an environment where the adults 
live for the here and now. This strongly affects success in school and vocational 
choices. Furthermore, adolescents growing up on a reservation find that their culture 
and way of life can only be lived on the reservation, which for many of them means 
subsistence on welfare with few material comforts. If they leave the reservation, 
they find that any departure from the traditional way of life, such as refusing to share 
one's paycheck, will result in hostility from relatives and friends. 133 

The traditional cultural values allow for an enormous amount of independence 
for Indian youth. Many observers maintain that somewhere between the ages of 8 
and 10, Indian youth begin making decisions about where they will go to school, who 
they will live with, and when they will eat. It is not uncommon for parents to know 
nothing of the whereabouts of their children, although the absence of parenting is a 
more recent occurrence in the culture. As a result of lack of parental guidance, the 
decisions made by young Indians tend to be based on the need for immediate 
gratification. 134 

Rosalie Wax reported that alcohol abuse among Indian students was embedded 
in a broad social milieu within the culture. She maintained that self-determination 
which promotes individual autonomy fosters parental tolerance of adolescent 
substance abuse. She further noted that even though adults may personally 
disapprove of drinking, it is assumed that the individual must take care of 
him/herself, and therefore adults do not intervene in adolescent drinking. 135 In 
general, there is a social acceptance of drinking as a shared recreational activity, 
which serves as a means for self-expression and assertion of ethnic identity. 136 It has 
been reported that the Indian is allowed to do almost anything when drinking, as the 
drinker knows the alcohol, and not the drinker, will be blamed for the behavior. 
This behavior serves to advertise to non-Indians that the drinker can still "act Indian" 
in a way that the majority society cannot influence. 137 

Other researchers cited cultural conflict as an explanation for Indian students' 
failure in school. 138 They suggested that Indian youth do poorly in school because 
the educational system historically has served as a battleground in the confrontation 



54 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



SO 



between the Indian and white worlds. Since schools are typically the purveyors of 
white values and Indian ones are excluded, Indian students, who are raised with more 
traditional values, tend to drop out. A study of the effects of acculturation on 
intergroup competition and cooperation among Indian and non-Indian children found 
that Indian children who attend an in- grated school become more competitive and 
that non-Indians in an integrated school become more cooperative. 139 

Others have addressed social disorganization as a serious problem for American 
Indian youth. They noted that Western culture has led to rapid social change and the 
breakdown in traditional sociocultural systems, which has resulted in a rapidly 
changing, disorganized system where the values and roles are unclear. This 
situation, according to many researchers, has created an environment which is 
predisposed toward self-destruction. As such, cultural conflict is a source of stress 
for Indian youth in the schools. The pressure is both overt and covert. In the school 
and media there is pressure to acculturate and become "more like everyone else in 
America," but at the same time there is pressure from within the culture to "remain 
an Indian." 140 This results in a situation wherein the Indian is caught between two 
different existences and is marginal in each. 

Brewton Berry contended: 

There are some who maintain that the Indian today possesses a civilization 
of great antiquity, to which he is deeply attached, and which he is 
determined to perpetuate. He has succeeded thus far. . . . The school, the 
Indian rightly suspects, is a device for hastening his assimilation, and he 
resists it as best he can by withdrawal, indifference, and non- 
cooperation. ... At the other extreme there are those, including some 
Indians, who conclude that the old cultures have been shattered and can 
never be revived J 41 

A considerable amount of research 142 has reported that mid-adolescence is the 
age when young people become exposed to the stress of cultural conflict. Joseph 
Trimble et al. observed, "Indians persist both as heterogeneous culture groups and 
as a separate segment of American society. " 143 As a result, Indian youth demonstrate 
a lack of integration into either the traditional Indian or modern-day American life. 
Other research illustrates, however, that cultural conflict does NOT inevitably result 
in passivity or aggression. Although living in both cultures may create risk, it can 



55 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



51 



also create opportunity. The individual who masters this situation can move between 
cultures and incorporate elements of both. 144 

A number of researchers have sought to explain the reasons for the American 
Indian child's problems with school as cultural conflict. One researcher summed up 
his findings somewhat succinctly by referring to the Indian student as the "marginal 
man." In defining, the marginal man, he explained that this was "a person who 
participates in two different cultures without being totally committed to, or accepted 
by, either." 145 

Much of the literature on the American Indian dropout treats the significance 
of cultural discontinuity between school and home as an explanation for the high 
dropout rate. In response to this explanation, many scholars have suggested that 
"culturally relevant" curriculum will alleviate the high dropout problem. 

The cultural discontinuity hypothesis is predicated on the assumption that 
culturally based differences within the Indian students' homes and the Anglo culture 
of the school leads to conflicts and ultimately failure and dropping out by students. 146 

John Ogbu, an anthropological theorist, is very critical of the cultural 
discontinuity theory as an explanation for minority student failure in schools. 147 He 
notes that although the theory sounds quite plausible, since cultural differences have 
implications for human behavior, anthropologists are making such suggestions prior 
to any serious ethnographic research in the schools. Perhaps his strongest criticism 
of the cultural discontinuity theory is its failure to explain the success of immigrant 
minority children in American schools, who experience cultural discontinuity between 
home and school at least as severely : as the experiences of American Indians and 
Blacks. 

Although little research explicitly supports the cultural discontinuity theory, there 
is a plethora of research that posits cultural conflict, cultural differences, and cultural 
discontinuity as the explanation for failure and makes assumptions about the need for 
cultural relevance in curriculum. In a Milwaukee study of urban Indian dropouts, 
one researcher applied the cultural discontinuity theory and stated: 

Considering the disproportionately high Native American dropout rate, one 
can reasonably assume that certain culturally-based Indian characteristics 
exist that clash with the urban public school environment. 14 * 



56 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



52 



Many scholars assume that cultural discontinuity between the Indian culture and 
the school culture causes academic failure, and thus creates a dissonance within the 
student resulting in dropping out. Several researchers have conducted interviews 
with students specifically about the importance of cultural relevance in the schools. 
One Montana study reported that high school dropouts cited the lack of relevance of 
the school curriculum both in terms of future employment and the Indian culture as 
a reason that significantly influenced their decision to leave school. 149 Another 
study of urban American Indian students found that both parents and students felt the 
schools to be "culturally insensitive." 150 Other researchers have related students' 
participation in traditional culture to their failure in school. 151 Despite the plethora 
of research available on cultural conflict and cultural discontinuity, cultural relevance 
is rarely defined in the literature, and if it is, the definitions are as varied as the 
tribal groups represented. Yet lack of a culturally relevant curriculum is frequently 
suggested to be a major factor to dropping out among American Indian youth. 

When explaining cultural differences as a major contributor in dropping out, 
it is important to look at research claiming that being bilingual and being traditional 
are assets for American Indian students. Some researchers have found that a student's 
firsc language (Native language) is not a determinant to success in school. In fact, 
it has been found that students who are bilingual are less likely to drop out of school. 

Of particular importance, however, is that students from less traditional homes 
drop out at higher rates. In a study of urban American Indian adolescents in 
Phoenix, Arizona, the majority of dropouts reported positive attitudes toward school, 
although it was noted that some dropouts felt pushed out of school by academic and 
discipline problems. Although this group blamed factors within the school as 
contributing to their dropping out, the majority regretted their decision to leave. 152 

In a study of Navajo and Ute school leavers, Donna Deyhle found that Navajo 
students who came from traditional homes, spoke their Native language, and 
participated in traditional religious activities did not feel that the school curriculum 
was inappropriate for Indians. On the other hand, she found that Ute students who 
came from less traditional homes felt the school curriculum was not relevant to 
Indian students. Again, the latter group experienced the highest dropout rates. 



57 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



53 



Deyhle commented, M A culturally non-responsive curriculum is a greater threat to 
those whose own cultural 'identity' is insecure." 153 

Although culture may be a significant factor in whether a student succeeds or 
fails in school, it may be that the student's cultural background and not the school 
curriculum is more significant. There is some evidence that a strong sense of 
cultural identity provides a student with a significant advantage in school. 154 This 
idea, which contradicts the theory that the more "white" or "acculturated" a student 
is, the more advantaged he/she may be in the school setting, is an extremely 
important issue in indian education. It may 6e that the more traditional students, 
who have a strong self-identity and tribal-identity, do better in school and that the 
students who are less traditional are more likely to resist school and to see less 
relevance in the curriculum. This may be a far more significant factor when 
examining the factors for success and failure in school. 

Academic Achievement/Failure 
Including Grade Retention and Tracking 

Research on academic achievement is varied in nature. Early researchers often 
attributed low achievement among American Indian students to inferior mental 
abilities. Some maintained that test bias was a contributing factor, whereas others 
have seen a direct correlation between socioeconomic status and achievement. 

Early studies on the intellectual abilities of American Indians tended to report 
inferior native ability. A number of early researchers supported a cultural difference 
theory to explain American Indian intelligence and concluded that American Indian 
children were mentally inferior. 155 Since 1935, however, most researchers have 
supported the theory that American Indian children are as mentally competent as 
other racial groups. 156 

However, research on American Indian students reveals a negative correlation 
between years spent in school and academic achievement. 157 In other words, the 
achievement of American Indian children declines with every year they are in school. 
This phenomenon, which reportedly occurs at about age nine, has been labeled the 
"cross-over phenomenon." Specifically, prior to age nine, Indian students perform 



58 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



54 



academically as well as white children, but performance begins to deteriorate in third 
grade. After this, they fall behind white students. 158 One study of Oglala Sioux 
indicated that students exhibited a cross-over phenomenon, whereby the students 
achieved satisfactorily until the sixth grade. After the sixth grade, there was a 
gradual decline in student performance. 159 

Schools throughout the United States use standardized tests to measure school 
success. Critics of standardized testing report that emphasis on such tests produces 
a built-in failure for minority students and points to the cultural bias of such tests as 
an inappropriate method for determining a student's knowledge and ability. 160 One 
criticism that is often directed against standardized tests is their language bias. 161 
For example, American Indian students may have different cognitive styles than the 
particular cognitive style required by the test. In order to guarantee culturally fair 
standardized tests, it may be necessary to accept a variety of responses rather than 
a single response. Most researchers consistently find that American Indian students 
score lower on almost all standardized measures of achievement than do other ethnic 
minority groups. In 1958, L. Madison Coombs et al. reported that American Indian 
children score below the national average on achievement tests and consistently score 
below non-Indian students. 162 This condition has not changed significantly over the 
past three and a half decades. John Bryde found that among a group of Oglala Sioux 
students on the Pine Ridge Reservation, the students scored slightly above the 
national norms at the fourth and fifth grade levels, but that their performance 
dropped far below the national norm by the seventh and eighth grades. He explained 
this phenomenon by suggesting that American Indian students at about the sixth or 
seventh grade become aware of being "Indian," along with experiencing the feeling 
of alienation and rejection , which destroys their self-esteem, thus impacting their 
desire to achieve in school. 163 

A number of studies have focused on the mathematical and verbal abilities of 
American Indian students and have concluded that Indian students have math skills 
superior to white students. 164 Other researchers have reported that bilingual 
instruction not only results in improved skills in language, but in mathematics as 
well; however, American Indian youth are less able than non-Indian adolescents in 



59 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



55 



estimating time. 165 In a study of 172 non-Indian students and 88 Cheyenne Indian 
students on a multiple-choice test which asked students to select the amount of time 
required to complete a given activity, results indicated that non-Indian children 
scored significantly higher on the test at each of the grade levels tested. 166 

Some researchers, pointing to the fact that mixed-bloods do better on 
achievement tests than full-bloods, suggest that schools are designed around white 
values more consistent with those who are more assimilated or mixed-blood. John 
Bryde maintained that lack of achievement by American Indian students in school is 
psychological. He reported that alienation and conflict between the white and Indian 
cultures become more focused in adolescence and cause personality disturbances 
which block achievement. 167 Others reported that mixed-bloods had higher 
achievement and greater popularity than full-bloods and that alienation in school 
increased as achievement declined. 168 

There are a number of examples of the misuse of standardized tests. 169 Perhaps 
one of the greatest concerns for educators of minority students is using tests to define 
success or failure. Since A Nation at Risk, 170 schools throughout the country have 
been encouraged and even mandated to raise academic standards. These standards, 
which are closely tied to test results, may, in fact, force more students to leave 
school early. For example, higher standards defined in terms of testing results will 
no doubt result in more students being retained in a grade, and students retained in 
a grade and over-age students are more likely to drop out of school. 171 Research has 
clearly shown that retention in a grade does not benefit students. 172 Even retention 
in kindergarten is not beneficial to students. More and more, researchers are 
suggesting that retention in grade results in students being "pushed out" of school 
rather than dropping out. Some researchers have even reported that when schools 
push out at-risk youth, they inevitably look better in the public eye since the average 
test scores are higher. 173 

Recent literature on dropping out is based in part on research on schools that 
effectively teach the at-risk student. According to this research, it is not the 
student's background, but rather the school's response to the student, that determines 
success in school. Gary Wehlage and Robert Rutter reported that the process of 



60 



becoming a dropout is complex, because the process of rejecting an institution must 
be accompanied by the belief that the institution has rejected the person. Their work 
has focused on the ways that a student's negative school-based experiences can 
accumulate to the point where the student makes the decision that "school is not for 
me" and subsequently drops out. 174 

The literature also has reported that potential dropouts have a history of school 
failures. They tend to be over-age for their grade due to failures. Many are 
frequently suspended from school and are often absent or truant. Gary Wehlage and 
Robert Rutter suggested that as a student's negative experiences accumulate, 
problems develop which cannot be solved because of lack of coping skills. Thus, 
problems in one area often lead to problems in another. 175 They maintained that the 
American Indian child who comes from one cultural setting is thrown into a school 
setting of the mainstream culture which may result in a "values clash." This creates 
a situation of marginality whereby the American Indian child lives on the margins 
of two cultures, having loyalties to both, but not being a member of either one. 
Other researchers have proposed that when the American Indian child enters school, 
the child's loyalties are toward the parents' values, and that in school the child 
encounters new values. If the child perceives that his/her values are not understood 
or appreciated by the school, or if the child is unable to appreciate the new values 
encountered, conflict often arises. The student then rebels by dropping out, failing 
courses, or skipping school."' 76 Some researchers observed that being successful in 
school can create dissonance for the American Indian student: 

The native student who aspires to success is faced with the difficult and 
often dissonant task of marching to more than one drum. The dilemma 
of not rejecting one's own rich, cultural heritage while preparing to be 
successful in a context which at best ignores or at worst contradicts 
such a heritage along with its inherent values and ethics is not a simple 
one. 177 

Attendance: Truancy /Absenteeism/Detention/Expulsion 

Although statistics on truancy, suspension, and absenteeism vary from one 
American Indian school district to another, interviews with school administrators in 

61 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



57 



Wyoming, Montana, and South Dakota indicate that absenteeism and truancy is a 
major problem. 

The National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 provided some insight into 
the absentee problem. The study reported that 11% of American Indians in the 
eighth grade missed five or more days of school during a four-week period, as 
compared to less than 10% for Asians, whites, and Black Americans. Harold 
Hodgkinson concluded that missing large numbers of school days contributed to the 
high dropout rate for American Indians. 178 Indian educator, Dean Chavers reported 
that absenteeism among Indian students runs as high as 25%, compared to the 
national rate of 7%. He noted that often 10- to 15-year-olds -stay home to babysit 
younger siblings. 179 

Hal Gilliland noted that tardiness and absenteeism among American Indian 
youth are often the result of home situations and suggested that teachers try to 
understand the situation and work to improve it rather than criticize the student: 

Many Indian children are continually in trouble for excessive tardiness 
or absence. Tardiness is usually the fault of the parents rather than the 
child. If the home does not run by an urban time schedule, it may be 
almost impossible for the child to always be on time. If a girl is the 
O'.ily baby sitter when her mother has to be gone, responsibilities at 
home must come before school. The school needs to work with the 
home to try to solve these problems, but if children are continually 
scolded, punished, or harassed for something they cannot do anything 
about, they cannot be blamed if they make little effort to improve in 
those or other ways. 180 

It appears that one of the reasons many at-risk youth dislike school is that they 
are frequently placed on in-school detention or expelled from school. In a study of 
dropouts conducted by the Children's Defense Fund, it was found that 25% of all 
dropouts had been expelled from school before they dropped out and that another 
20% had been identified as having behavior problems by their teachers. 181 

Two national panels, the National Board of Inquiry into Schools and the 
National Commission on Secondary Education for Hispanics, reported that the 
majority of school expulsions are the result of nonthreatening behavior. The most 
common infractions included: "defiance of authority," "chronic tardiness," "chronic 
absence," and "profanity or vulgarity." The negative effect of expulsion was 



62 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



58 



addressed by the panels as ineffective in encouraging discipline and further alienated 
students from school by keeping them out of class. It was also found that in many 
schools, due process was neglected and a student's explanation meant very little. In 
addition, the panels found that minority students are three times js likely to be 
expelled than white students and that in integrated schools, minority students 
constitute a disproportional number of the expulsions. 182 

Although detention, which is generally in the form of in-school, three-day 
suspensions, is less frequent, most detentions appear to be the result of absenteeism, 
tardiness, and truancy, further promoting problems of non-class attendance such as 
failure of classes, low achievement, and retention in grade. This system may 
contribute to what Gary Wehlage and Robert Rutter referred to as the rejection of the 
school by the individual student, because the school has already rejected the 
individual. 183 

Although some studies have indicated that absence from school may not impact 
achievement as much as some researchers have maintained, it appears that being 
absent or being placed in detention or expelled can, in fact, become habit forming 
and may lead to dropping out of school. 

Teacher Attitudes and Expectations 

The quality and motivations of teachers working with American Indian children 
have been the subject of much debate. The first teachers were missionaries who 
sought to Christianize and convert their charges. This group was followed by 
government-contracted teachers who were employed to assimilate the Indian child 
into the white society. Neither group had knowledge of, or a particular interest in, 
the American Indian culture or language. It was not until the 1930s that the federal 
government required contracted teachers to have a four-year teaching degree. 

Personal accounts of Indian Service teachers reported recruitment of 
undesirable staff by the government bureaucracy in school and dormitory facilities. 184 

Throughout the history of Indian education, scholars and writers have noted the 
difficulty in recruiting and retaining qualified, committed teachers. Even today, the 
BIA reports a 50% turnover rate every two years among its professional staff. 185 



63 



Some researchers suggest that the school and teachers are potential sources of 
emotional stress for Indian children. They have pointed to Jack of Indian role 
models and curricula at odds with the child's Native culture. One Montana educator 
noted that teachers often refer to American Indian students as being disadvantaged, 
and was quick to point out that Indian students are often at a disadvantage in 
classrooms where the teacher does not know the culture or lacks the understanding 
to adapt instruction to meet the needs of culturally different children. He suggested 
that: 

Teachers' actions and attitudes should never imply that one culture is 
superior to. another. The purpose of education is not to turn all 
students into middle class citizens, or carbon copies of the 
teacher. . . . 186 

Others have noted that Indian children have little chance of being exposed to Indian 
teachers who can act as role models. Less than 15% of teachers of American Indian 
students are themselves American Indian, and this figure is cut by three-fourths at 
the high school level. 18 '' 

A number of researchers have attributed the historically poor achievement of 
Indian students to white teachers who are unable or unwilling to pay attention to the 
cultural background and values of American Indian students: 

Teachers who come to the reservation day schools often know little about 
the children they are going to teach. . . . Teacher orientation and training 
sessions pay scant attention to Indian cultural values or to problems which 
the teacher may encounter with children . . . who have different values and 
know different experiences. 188 

In a study of Indian students in New Mexico's public schools, it was 
determined that although white teachers were aware of the differences in language 
and customs, they were not aware of the more subtle, intangible differences such as 
values and attitudes. 189 Other researchers have presented similar views: 

. The school, representing the mainstream values, seeks to assimilate the 
Indian pupil rather than respect his identity and accommodate him in ihe 
curriculum. It rhetorically expounds the vaunted pluralism of America, but 
refuses to practice it in the classroom. 190 

Hal Gilliland cautioned teachers about making assumptions concerning their students: 



64 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



Teachers moving into Native American communities tend to assume that 
because the people have accepted modern ways of life, the old culture is 
lost. . . . Since each Native American tribe is a unique group, teachers 
cannot assume any student believes or follows all the values ot a 'typical 
Native culture' or follows the patterns of the non-Native society. Students 
are somewhere in between, usually nearer one end of the scale than the 
other. 191 

Dick Little Bear, a well-respected Northern Cheyenne bilingual educator, 
maintains that there is a need for teachers on Indian reservations to work with 
parents: 

One reason for that need is that most of those who teach Indian students are 
non-Indians from the dominant society, Most of their teacher training has 
been monocultural, with the middle-class forming their socioeconomic 
norm. However, teachers need ,to realize that when they teach Indian 
students they are not teaching the norm and that the students they are 
teaching are being impacted daily by a dynamic culture. 192 

Estelle Fuchs and Robert Havighurst maintained that school achievement was 
not important to Indian students or their parents because they could not directly relate 
education to the future opportunity for success. They noted specifically that whereas 
white middle class students seem to view school achievement as an important part of 
their total identity, Indian students view school achievement as a separate activity 
which does not influence their view of themselves. They concluded that the 
often-held opinion that school performance and self-concept, which appears important 
within the white culture, does not hold true for Indian students. 193 

Many researchers have stressed the need for informing teachers about cultural 
differences among their students. 194 Others have noted that Indian children are 
predisposed to learning cooperatively in groups rather than competitively as 
individuals, and point out that Indian children placed in the "spotlight" or singled out 
will withdraw. 195 Anthony Brown concurred with this theory, reporting that 
Cherokee Indian children were more cooperative and less competitive than an Anglo 
comparison group. 196 A number of researchers have proposed that classroom 
organization and structure that emphasizes individual competitiveness rather than 
group cooperation adversely affects the achievement of students. 197 Other 
investigators have reported that American Indian children often observe an activity, 
then review the activity in their heads until they are certain they can perform the task 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



61 



before undertaking it. 198 Because of the incongruities suggested by the researchers 
regarding learning styles and cultural attitudes of American Indian children and the 
school environment, a number of educators endorse classroom organization which 
promotes cooperation-rather than one with a more competitive structure. 199 

Other researchers endorse the modification of classroom teaching techniques 
to accommodate the learning styles of Indian students, suggesting that American 
Indian education has traditionally emphasized attitudes on self-reliance, respect for 
nature and wisdom, generosity, and personal freedom, and. that teachers must 
consider these characteristics. 200 

Some researchers have found that American Indian children passively resist 
authority, follow directions submissively, observe activities passively, and complain 
about school regimentation, rules, and regulations. 201 Rosalie Wax reported that 
problems encountered by Oglala Sioux boys reflected a culture which stressed loyalty 
and dependence on peers, physical recklessness, and impetuousness. She maintained 
that Sioux boys did not hold values required for success in school, and noted, "Not 
only is he ignorant of how to buck the rules, he doesn't even know the rum \" 202 

Historically, passivity in the classroom among Indian children has been 
expected. The 1928 Meriam Report found that Indian children were forced to remain 
quiet and that the majority of the schools had locked rooms used for isolating and 
containing unruly students. 203 Donna Deyhle reported that Indian students are 
expected to sit passively in the classroom, to read and memorize information, and 
to listen to lectures. 204 Jim Cummins reported that most teachers use a passive 
method of instruction in the classroom. 205 In return, passivity is expected of students 
and those who do not comply are often disciplined in terms of suspensions, 
promoting again the pushing-out concept often interpreted as dropping out. There 
is some evidence suggesting that passive teaching strategies are widely used in "low 
tracking" classes, where minority students are commonly placed. Compensatory 
programs like Chapter I have often been criticized as providing mechanical, passive 
instruction which results in student boredom, decreased motivation, and lack of 
interest. 206 In Donna Deyhle's study, she reported that Indian students often 
described boredom with remedial classes and uninteresting subject matter. 207 A 1989 



66 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



62 



study of Alaskan education asked high school seniors why their peers dropped out 
of school. Consistently, students blamed unsupportive teachers, inability to 
memorize information required to pass courses, and boredom. 208 

Although it is commonly assumed that Indian students who drop out are failing 
academically, a study of Navajo at-risk youth reported that the academic achievement 
of dropouts did not differ significantly from those who remained in school and 
graduated. In fact, 45% of the dropouts had a B or better grade average. 209 

Historically, tracking has been used with American Indian students. Part of 
this dates back to the early beliefs held by missionaries/teachers that Indians were 
lazy, that basic skills in spelling, reading, writing, and arithmetic were sufficient, 
and that a strong academic education for Indians promoted nothing more than 
indolence. 210 Therefore, teachers who have low expectations of Indian students have 
repeatedly counseled students into vocationally-oriented curricula. This "tracking," 
which is more commonly associated with secondary schools, results in a substandard 
education for students and leads to lower-class jobs and eventually lower-class status 
as adults. 211 Research has demonstrated repeatedly that teachers treat lower-tracked 
students differently than high-tracked students. When one considers that over 40% 
of Indian youth are in the lowest quartile on achievement test scores in math, 
reading, science, and history, and less than 10% are in the upper quartile, it is clear 
that tracking impacts a vast majority of Indian students. 212 One researcher has gone 
so far as to suggest that tracking students into vocational education programs 
segregates poor minority students in an effort to preserve the academic curriculum 
for middle and upper class students. 213 While this may not be the same reason in a 
reservation school, it is possible that teachers support tracking into vocational 
programs for academically deficient students so that they may be left unencumbered 
to teach the "good" students. Good in this sense is meant both to imply academic 
achievement as well as passivity. 

A number of researchers have suggested that the parochialism of the teaching 
staff in American Indian schools inhibits the learning of students: 

Many of the teachers at the elementary level are middle-aged wives of men 
who have farms in the vicinity. They have lived in the area for a number 
of years, or in some cases all of their lives, and are acquainted with the 



6? 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



Indians' behavior and their 'shortcomings/ They are not idealistic and are 
not surprised at anything the Indians do. 214 

Other researchers feel that teachers* attitudes toward Indian students are critical 
to success in school: 215 

A teacher's attitude is . . . contagious. ... A teacher who can earn the 
respect of Indian students and who can show them that they are respected 
for what they are is well on the road to giving those children success in 
school. . . . Too many teachers and other well-intentioned individuals look 
at the physical surroundings in which Indian students live, the prejudice 
they face, their problems in school, and they sympathize. They feel sorry 
for them. These students do not need sympathy; they need something to 
be proud of. Pity and pride do not go together. 216 

Much attention is given in the literature to the attitudes of teachers toward 
Indian children. Some researchers have found that white teachers often demonstrate 
contempt for Indian students while, on the other hand, many teachers sincerely like 
their Indian students. 217 Estelle Fuchs and Robert Havighurst found that Indian 
adolescents held more favorable attitudes toward their teachers than Anglo-American 
students. However, they also noted that there was a considerable amount of hostility 
among Indian students toward teachers whom they perceived as being prejudiced or 
racist against Indians. 218 

On the other hand, a 1990 report which compared ethnic students' attitudes 
toward teachers found few Indian students report that they feel teachers are really 
interested in them, nor did they feel that their teachers listened to them. In addition, 
Indian students reported unfair discipline from teachers. 219 Donna Deyhle also 
reported in a study of Navajo and Ute students that students complained about 
teachers who did 'not care about them or help them and suggested that minimal 
attention by the teacher was interpreted by students as rejection. 220 

Dick Little Bear noted that in the teacher-parent interaction, Indian parents are 
often judged in relation to historical circumstances by the teachers: 

Stereotypes and nrisconceptions have been the lot of Indians since their 
first contact with Europeans. Many non-Indians continue to rely on 
these stereotypes and misconceptions — often conftising them with 
truth — which categorize Indians in the worst possible manner. 221 

He noted, too, that this problem is not just confined to non-Indian teachers: 



68 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



. . . even if teachers are Indian, they may be urban Indians with little 
or no knowledge about reservation cultures . . . even if teachers are 
from the reservation they may have unquestioningly accepted the values 
of the dominant society as being superior to those of the Indian. 222 

Hal Gilliland maintained that many teachers have unrealistic expectations of 
students: 

They give them he rework and penalize them if they do not get it done, 
without considering the home situation. ... It is unrealistic to expect 
parents and extended family members who do not read for recreation, 
who see little relevance between school and 'life/ and who have little 
or no knowledge of the subject the child is studying, to shut off the TV 
and devote time to helping or even encouraging the child. 223 

Robert Coles pointed out in his three-volume work, Children of Crisis, that 
many children enter school without obvious psychological problems but don't do well 
in school because they are labeled as coming from so-called "disadvantaged" or 
"deprived" homes by teachers. Because of the socioeconomic status of their families, 
Coles suggested that students coming from poor homes are expected to fail by 
teachers, administrators, and other individuals involved in the operation and policy 
making of the school: 

They come from poor homes. They don't eat good food; and indeed 
many physicians and nutritionists and neurophysiology would argue 
that a faulty diet, low in critically important vitamins, minerals and 
proteins, causes serious damage to an infant's brain, so that eventually 
he comes to school retarded, not by an accident or disease or injury, 
but the repercussions of a nation's social and economic problem, which 
becomes a very personal, everyday problem for millions of families. 
Yet even if poor parents can provide their children with decent meals 
and adequate medical care and suitable clothes . . . Does the mother 
give her children a sense of confidence, or do she and her husband feel 
discouraged about life most of the time? . . . Mothers who live in 
broken-down, rat- infested tenements, who never quite know when the 
next few dollars will come, have little energy left for their children. 
Life is grim and hard, and the child simply has to find out. He does, 
too; he learns it and learns it and learns it. He learns how to survive 
all sorts of threats and dangers. He learns why his parents have given 
up on school, why they may have tried and fallen flat on their faces. 
He learns about things like racial hatred . . . whether he is an insider 
or an outsider, whether people like storekeepers or property owners or 
policemen treat his family with kindness and respect or with suspicion 
if not out-and-out contempt. 224 



69 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



65 



In the book, Pygmalion in the Classroom, the authors reveal that the 
preconceptions of teachers serve as self-fulfilling prophecies for students. 225 Teacher 
perceptions and expectations negatively affect achievement in American Indian 
children. Research demonstrates that poor ard minority students are 
underrepresented in gifted and talented programs and college-bound curricula ard 
overrepresented in special education and vocational programs. 226 

The question arises about the qualities of teachers that contribute to their 
negative perceptions of the American Indian student's ability. One study compared 
teachers' family of origin socioeconomic status with the perceptions they had about 
the school and students where they worked. 227 The researchers found that teachers 
who came, from families with high socioeconomic status held lower expectations for 
minority students. Further, it was found that teachers' values affect their evaluation 
of student performance. 

The power of teachers' perceptions on student performance is dramatically 
demonstrated throughout the research. 228 In a longitudinal study of Black children, 
it was found that kiudergarten teachers made evaluations of a student's expected 
abilities based on physical appearance, language style, and socioeconomic status of 
the child's family. Without any regard to students' academic abilities, teachers 
placed students into three groups based on perceptions of whether or not they were 
"fast learners." It is important to note that the "fast learners" were perceived by the 
teacher to be clean, well-dressed, spoke standard English, interacted verbally with 
the teacher, and had families who were not on welfare. 229 

When an examination is made of how teachers treat "fast learners" as opposed 
to "slow learners" with regard to the amount of time spent on engaging children in 
the teaching/learning process, giving help and providing opportunities, it is easy to 
understand why the gap between fast learners and slow learners increases with each 
year in school. 

Researchers of the dropout phenomenon have consistently reported that student 
retention is associated with the increased probability of dropping out rather than 
improved chances for graduation. In fact, research indicates that dropouts are five 
times more likely to have been retained in one grade, and students who have been 



70 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



retained in two grades have nearly a 100% probability of dropping out. 230 When one 
considers that 29%u of American Indian students have already been retained by the 
eighth grade, it is understandable why so many Indian students are at risk. 

According to a Gallup poll, 72% of the U.S. public favors stricter grade 
promotion standards. 231 And yet, Thomas Holmes, from the University of Georgia, 
recently conducted a synthesis of research on 63 controlled studies where students 
were retained and found that in 54 of the studies, the students who were retained 
actually performed more poorly on average than if they had not repeated a grade. 232 

There is considerable evidence that children perceive retention as 
punishment. 233 In fact, one researcher found that children rated repeating a grade 
more stressful than "wetting in class" or being caught stealing. The only two events 
identified by children as being more stressful than repeating a grade were "going 
blind" or "losing a parent." 234 

Basically, researchers have not been able to determine why retention doesn't 
work. Some have suggested that the negative emotional effects of repeating a grade 
inhibit subsequent learning. Others speculate that repeating the same material is an 
ineffective means of instruction. 

Studies have found that when parents believe their children are smarter than 
other children, these children do better than other children. 235 If children are 
retained, it is likely that parents doubt their children's abilities. Thus, if parents' 
positive beliefs have positive academic outcomes for children, it follows that negative 
beliefs about ability would have negative academic outcomes. In fact, studies have 
shown that parents are more likely to focus on children's ability during the first half 
of the school year to a preoccupation with retention during the second half of the 
year. 236 

Even though the research is inonsistent about teacher attitudes, expectations, 
and tracking and retention, it is obvious that the teacher plays a major role in the 
lives of students in how they are treated and whether they are tracked or retained. 



71 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



67 



Racism, Discrimination, and Prejudice 

The placement of American Indians on reservations, where in many cases they 
were forbidden to leave and interact with non-Indians, was legislative racism 
sanctioned by the federal government. The removal of Indian children from their 
home environment and placement in boarding schools further suggested that the 
Euro-Americans considered their values, laws, and culture superior to that of the 
American Indian. There is a plethora of literature available on the prevailing attitude 
of the government throughout history in regard to the American Indian. The Indian 
was regarded as a savage to be eliminated or converted to the white man's way of 
thinking. This "civilization" of the Indian has resulted in a myriad of adjustment 
problems for subsequent generations of American Indians. 

At a very early age, children become aware of racial differences. Several 
studies indicate that by the time children reach the age of five, they have a clear 
knowledge of racial differences. The American Indian child has often been made to 
feel that he/she is different from and inferior to the mainstream society, and because 
of these circumstances it is often difficult for the Indian child to develop coping skills 
adequate to meet the demands of society. 237 

A number of studies have been conducted on race and self-perceptions of 
children. In a study of whites, Mexican- Americans, Black Americans, and American 
Indians, it was found that each ethnic group saw its race very favorably as a whole 
and saw the other groups less favorably. Other researchers studied Indian and white 
students to learn how they looked upon each of the two cultures and found that 
although Indian students rated their culture more favorably, they did not seem to 
identify with one culture more than the other. Socioeconomic status or social class 
appears to make a difference in establishing group or ethnic identity. Middle class 
children showed higher rates of racial rejection than did other social classes. 238 

There has been little research conducted on racism, discrimination, and 
prejudice within and/or among American Indian groups and/or American Indians and 
non-Indians within the school setting; and yet racism, prejudice, and discrimination 
clearly exist and may, in fact, be contributors to lack of success of students in the 
school setting. 



72 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



Prior to Euro-American contact, all indigenous people were. "full-blooded," so 
to speak. Indigenous North Americans specifically defined themselves in terms of 
their sociocultural membership, such as Lakota, Arapaho, Cheyenne, or Blackfeet, 
rather than in terms of a racial group. Although "intertribal" marriages occurred 
during this period, the tribal societies were able to accommodate the influx of new 
memberships from other indigenous groups. All of this changed with the coming of 
the white man, who brought to the new world the concept of race and through 
intermarriage the introduction of "mixed-bloods" into the tribal societies. 

One needs to look no further than the boarding schools which were established 
to "civilize" the American Indian to find examples of racism that developed within 
tribal societies. Mary Crow Dog, a student at the St. Francis Boarding School, 
commented that the degree of Indian blood became a strategy for favoritism and 
acceptance and pitted students against students: 

In a school like this [St. Francis Boarding School], there is always a 
lot of favoritism. Girls who were near- white who came from what the 
nuns called 'nice families/ got preferential treatment. They ... got 
to eat ham or eggs and bacon . . . they got easy jobs while the skins 
[reference to individual with higher degree of Indian blood] . . . always 
wound up in the laundry room ... or we wound up scrubbing the 
floors and doing all the dishes. The school therefore fostered fights 
and antagonism between whites and breeds. 239 

One researcher who studied Navajo and Ute students reported the issues of 
racism and cultural maintenance as important factors in contributing to students 
dropping out of school prematurely and noted that there is considerable conflict 
between a number of factions in the school. Reportedly, there was conflict between 
non-Indians and Indians, Navajos and Utes, traditional Navajos and acculturated 
Navajos, etc. The researcher noted that when issues of racism are coupled with 
academic difficulties, students are often victims of school experiences that are 
negative. In addition, it was noted that many Indian students who are successful are 
often berated by their peers for acting like whites and are looked down on by their 
friends and families. 240 

Today there is considerable disparity in the proportion of full-bloods and 
mixed-bloods within tribal groups. The federal government, under the auspices of 



73 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



69 



the BIA, officially recognizes the American Indian as an individual who is one- 
quarter Indian blood or more. This strategy has resulted in keeping the aggregate 
number of American Indians at less than 1% of the overall population in the United 
States and thus reduces any political power that the population may have in terms of 
elections, lobbying power, etc. Further, this strategy has provided a legitimate 
means for the government to avoid providing educational support to students in 
reservation schools who do not meet their blood quantum criteria. 

Thus, limited federal resources allocated by the federal government in meeting 
its obligations to American Indian tribal groups has resulted in tribal resolutions and 
constitutional amendments that enforce race codes as defined by the BIA on their 
own populations. This has resulted in excluding members who are less than one- 
fourth blood from any benefits (including children) in order that the "real Indians" 
may benefit. Thus the question of American Indian identity has. fueled the historical 
"divide and conquer" strategy by pitting Indian against Indian within their own tribal 
groups and among other groups. Some American Indian leaders have made efforts 
to unite their people by pointing out that these issues are not only historical, but a 
part of colonialism practiced by the government even today. Tim Giago, editor of 
the Lakota Times, questioned: 

Don't we have enough problems trying to unite without . . . additional 
headaches? Why must people be categorized as full-bloods, mixed- 
bloods, etc? Many years ago, the Bureau of Indian Affairs decided to 
establish blood quanta for the purpose of [tribal] enrollment. At that 
timer blood quantum was set at one-fourth degree for enrollment. 
Unfortunately, through the years, this caused the Indian people on the 
reservation to be categorized and labeled. . . . [This] situation [was] 
created solely by the BIA, with the able assistance of the Department 
of the Interior. 241 

To illustrate further the impact that blood quantum criteria has had upon 
individuals and Indian tribes, the words of Russell Means, American Indian 
Movement (AIM) activist, are quite pertinent: 

... we have Indian people who spend most of their time trying to 
prevent other Indian people from being recognized as such, just so that 
a few more crumbs-crumbs from the federal table— may be available 
to them, personally. I don't have to tell you that this isn't the Indian 
way of doing things. The Indian way would be to get together and 



74 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



demand what is coming to each and every one of us, instead of trying 
to cancel each other out. We are acting like colonized peoples, like 
subject peoples. 242 

Dr. Frank Ryan, an American Indian educator, began during the early 1980s 
questioning the blood quantum criteria of the federal government for educational 
benefits to students and denounced it as "racist policy." He called for an abolition 
of federal guidelines on the issues of Indian identity without lessening the federal 
obligations to individual and tribal groups. 243 Other Indian leaders have suggested 
that the federal blood-quantum policies can be described as no less than genocide in 
their implications. Josephine Mills, a Shoshone activist, charged: 

There is no longer any need to shoot down Indians in order to take 
away their rights and land . . . legislation is sufficient to do the trick 
legally. 244 

Perhaps there is no policy adopted by the federal government that is as racist 
as the blood quantum criteria. It has certainly served to exacerbate tensions among 
Indian people and has created divisiveness within tribal groups. One historian noted: 

Set the blood quantum at one-quarter, hold to it as a rigid definition of 
Indians, let intermarriage proceed as it had for centuries, and 
eventually Indians will be defined out of existence. When that 
happens, the federal government will be freed of its persistent tt Indian 
problem." 245 

Certainly, one needs to look no further than the population figures of the past 
two decades to discover that the numbers of full-bloods are decreasing. For 
example, 65% of ail American Indian males today marry non-Indian women. Among 
American Indian females, marriage to non-Indians is at 62%. 246 As of 1970: 

. . . three-fifths of all births registered as Indian list both parents as 
Indians [of varying degrees of Indian blood]. More than one-fourth of 
the remaining Indian births had only an Indian mother, and IS percent 
had only an Indian father. 247 

If Indian tribes continue to allow the "divide and conquer" strategies to be 
enforced in terms of ethnic identification, then racism, discrimination, and prejudice 
are assured of continuation on Indian reservations. Schools and school children are 
often the most affected, not only in terms of the quality of educational programs that 
are offered, but in terms of how the individual child deals with his/her own self- 

75 



What Makes American Indian Students at Risk? 



71 



identity and tribal-identity and how racism, prejudice, and discrimination at the hands 
of their "own kind" contribute to their success or lack of success in school. Perhaps 
the answer for tribal groups can be found, in part, by the experience of the 
Cherokee: 

In developing a new tribal constitution in the 1970s ... the Cherokee 
Nation of Oklahoma established no minimum blood quantum for 
membership. Instead, one must only trace descent along Cherokee 
lines. . . . This comparatively generous definition has expanded the 
Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma population: in the mid-1970s there were 
only about 12,000 enrolled Cherokee ... in 1985 there were over 
64,300. There are still full-blood and traditional Cherokee, despite the 
myth in Oklahoma and elsewhere, of Cherokee assimilation. . . . They 
continue in the 1980s, insulated from American society by the much 
larger number of mixed bloods and less traditional Cherokee. . . .This 
allowed the [nation] to reestablish itself after virtual * dissolution 1 and 
to achieve political power in Oklahoma. 248 

Although incidences of racism, prejudice, and discrimination vary from one 
geographical region to another and one reservation to another, there are a number 
of studies which seem to support the idea that the more "white" a student appears 
(mixed-bloods), the more acceptable that student is to mainstream society. In the 
long run, this acceptability is defined in terms of more opportunities in school and 
employment. Therefore, the questions of racism, discrimination, and prejudice, 
whether practiced within the tribal groups or among mainstream society, appear to 
have a major impact on American Indian youth. 



76 



Chapter 4 



The Study 



Introduction 

This study was conducted through the funding of a 28-month (which included 
a 10 month extension) OERI grant beginning in September, 1991, and ending 
December 1994. As originally proposed; it had been the intent of the researcher to 
collect data from 1,000 participants graduating or dropping out from 1979-1989. 
During negotiations, the program officer rejected those years as including students 
who were "too far removed from school" to allow for a valid study. It was agreed 
that the study would include only students who had graduated or dropped out from 
1989-1991, to allow for a "more recent recollection" of their high school events. 
This decision significantly reduced the potential participant population. The original 
proposal called for a participant group of 1,000 with a 7556 return of the initial 
questionnaire. In actuality, the researcher identified 250 potential participants. 
Fifty-one of those students (20%) had either moved from the reservation, could not 
be located after numerous attempts, or had died. One hundred and ninety-nine 
students were eventually contacted and asked to participate in the study; 165 of that 
group returned the questionnaires resulting in an 83% return. 

Initially, the researcher attempted to identify an equal number of graduates and 
dropout participants; however, when this proved impossible, participants were chosen 
on the basis of the year they did or should have graduated (1989, 1990, or 1991). 
This resulted in 108 graduates participating in the study, 55 dropouts, and two who 
failed to identify either graduation or dropping out. 

Since the researcher had identified four major correlates: personal factors, 
cultural factors, school factors, and family factors and their subsets; the program 
officer requested that one item be added which had not been included in the original 
proposal: abuse of students by teachers. Items related to this variable were added 
to the questionnaire and were included in the questionnaire. 



72?7 



The Study 



73 



In addition to the change in the population group and the addition of a variable 
regarding teacher abuse of students, one other change was recommended by the 
program officer. The researcher had proposed the use of a multiple regression 
statistic as a part of the analysis. During the negotiations, the grants officer 
recommended the use of a discriminate analysis. 

All three of the conditions for funding, as requested by the program officer 
who negotiated the grant, were met. Since the time of the grant award, this 
researcher has worked with Dr. Oliver Moles, as the program officer. Dr. Moles, 
who was not involved in the initial revision/negotiation of the giant, has been 
extremely supportive of this study and has provided guidance to the researcher 
through the 28-month period. No further changes were made to the project. 

Purpose of the Study 

The purpose of this study, Youth at Greater Risk: A Study of Native Americans, 
was twofold: 

1. To identify the factors that keep Native American students in school 
(graduation). 

2. To identify the factors that result in their leaving school prematurely 
(dropping out). 

The following hypotheses guided this study: 

► There is no significant difference between the mean scores of the dependent 
variables for high school graduates or high school dropouts. 

► It is possible to discriminate between high school graduates and high school 
dropouts using the dependent variables (personal factors, family 
background, school factors, and cultural factors). 

In reporting the study herein, it is important to note the following factors: 

► Participants were American Indian males and females residing on 
reservations. 

► Participants had either graduated or dropped out of school during 1989, 
1990, or 1991. 

► Participants were from American Indian tribal groups in Montana, North 
Dakota, and South Dakota and are commonly referred to as the Northern 
Plains Tribal groups. 



78 



Data-Gathering Methods and Procedures 

School administrators from each of the reservations assisted the researcher in 
identifying the populations on their respective reservations. Due to mobility, 
approximately 20% of those originally identified no longer resided on the 
reservation. All participants who were available were personally contacted by the 
administrator and researcher and requested to participate hi the study. The 
researcher was identified and each participant was asked if he/she would be willing 
to be involved in a randomly selected group to bf; interviewed by the researcher. All 
participants agreed. 

Both the questionnaire and the interview instrument were designed using the 
most current research on gender, at-risk youth, graduates, and high school dropouts. 
The instruments included sections on the correlates most often identified as relating 
to success or the lack of success in school. Figure 1 illustrates those correlates. 



Figure 1* Correlates and subsets 



Personal Factors 


Family Factors 


Substance Abuse 


Family Composition 


Peer Pressure 


Socioeconomic Status 


Trouble with the Law 


Parental Education Levels 


Low Self-esteem 


Olde* Sibling (dropout or graduate) 


Teen Pregnancy 


Substance Abuse 


School Factors 


Cultural Factors 


Academic Achievement 
Teacher Attitudes 
Teacher Expectations 
School Attendance 
Abuse by School Employee 


Tribal Self-identity/Pride 
Discrimination, Racism 
Bilingualism 



79 



The Study 



One hundred ai : ^ty-five participants completed the Native American School 
Study (NASS), which is a 140 item questionnaire. This questionnaire collected 
demographic data as well as data on each of the four identified correlates: personal 
factors, family background, school factors, and cultural factors. 

Seventy-six of the graduates were selected to be interviewed and 37 of the 
dropouts were interviewed. All interviews were conducted by the researcher and 
principle investigator, Dr. Ardy Sixkiller Clarke. 

The interview allowed for the flexibility of the participants to respond freely 
am ; in depth to the questions, to express their responses in their own words and in 
their own way, and to clarify or explain at length any responses. An "open ended - 
interview" process was used. For example, each participant was asked a series of 
predesigned questions that could have been answered "yes," "no," "I don't know," 
"I can't remember," or "I prefer not to talk about that topic." If the respondent 
answered "yes" or "no," the researcher took the time to ask further questions, which 
probed for more information, feelings, attitudes, perceptions, and opinions. If the 
participant responded, "I prefer not to talk about that topic," the researcher honored 
the response and moved on to the next question. 

All questionnaires were completed anonymously by the individuals and in 
private. All interviews were conducted at the convenience of the participants. Forty 
percent (40%) of the interviews were conducted in private homes, 20% in an 
institutional environment such as a school conference room or counselor's office, 
15% were conducted at a job site and the remaining were conducted at a setting 
selected by the participant, such as a restaurant, a relatives house, a park, etc. 

Prior to conducting the interviews, the researcher spent approximately 40 
minutes discussing the purpose of the study and other questions from the participant. 
Generally, this period included rather informal discussions of common acquaintances, 
relatives, and friends, and responding to questions about the researcher's career and 
personal life. 

The interviews ranged in length from fifty minutes to an hour and a half, 
depending upon the individual's willingness and/or inclination to respond to the 
questions. At no time did the researcher move on to another series of questions 

60 



before the participant had ceased discussion of a specific topic. In addition, the 
interviews were not scheduled within a specific time frame. This avoided the 
problem of "hurrying" a participant. In many cases, the interviews were very 
emotional, but at no time was an interview terminated by the participant. 

All interviewees gave permission for the interviews to be taped. Notes were 
also taken by the researcher. 

All interviewees were assured anonymity of individual and tribal group as a 
condition for participation. 

Description of the Population 

Participants in the study came from five reservations and three states. 
Approximately 60% of the participants were female and almost half of all the 
respondents spoke their Native language and half did not (see tables 1-3). 



Table 1. Gender of respondents. 



Gender 


Frequency 


Percent 




Male 


58 


- 35.2 




Female 


97 


58.8 




No response 


10 


6.1 




Table 2. Reservations of respondents. 


Reservation 


Frequency 


Percent 




Blackfeet 


29 


17.6 




Cheyenne River 


37 


22.4 




Fort Belknap 


30 


18.2 




Fort Berthod 


49 


29.7 




Fort Peck 


12 


7.3 




No response 


8 


4.8 





81 



The Study 



77 



Table 3. Respondents who speak native language, 



Native language 


Frequency 


Percent 


Speakers 


76 


46.1 


Non-speakers .< 


82 


49.7 


No response 


7 


4.2 


While 53 % of the participants came from a two parent home, 25 % were reared 


in a home with one parent; the ' remainder lived mostly with other relatives (see 


table 4). Nearly 21 % of the females reported getting pregnant while in high school 


(see table 5). 






Table 4. Family structure of respondents. 




Family structure 


Frequency 


Percent 


One parent home 


41 


24.8 


Two parent home 


88 


53.3 


Lived with grandparent 


20 


12.1 


Lived with other relative 


6 


3.6 


Lived with non-relative 


1 


.6 


No response 


9 


5.5 


Table 5. Teen parent. 


Teen parent 


Frequency 


Percent 


Yes 


34 


20.6 


No 


129 


78.2 


No response 


2 


1.2 



Although 79% of the participants reported coming from non-alcohol abusing 
families, 62% reported using alcohol while in high school (see tables 6 and 7). This 
may serve to explain the reason why over 16% of the participants were incarcerated 
while in 'jail and 23% reported being in trouble with the law (see tables 8 and 9). 



82 



The Study 



78 



Table 6. Adolescent use of alcohol. 



Alcohol use 


Frequency 


Percent 


Used alcohol 


102 


61.8 


Did not use alcohol 


59 


35.8 


No response 


4 


2.4 


Table 7. Respondents from alcohol abusing homes. 


Alcoholic homes 


Frequency 


Percent 


Children of abusers 


30 1 


18.2 


Children of non-abusers 


130 


78.8 


No response 


5 


3.0 


Table 8. Respondents who were in trouble with the law while in high school. 


Respondents 


Frequency 


Percent 


In trouble 


38 


23.0 


Not in trouble 


122 


73.9 


No response 


5 


3.0 


Table 9. Respondents who were incarcerated while in high school. 


Respondents 


Frequency 


Percent 


Yes 


27 


16.4 


No 


134 


81.2 


No response 


4 


2.4 



Forty-nine percent (49%) of the participants reported that their mother had 
graduated from high school; while only 40% had fathers who had graduated. Thirty- 
two percent (32%) came from homes where an older sibling had dropped out (see 
tables 10-12). 



S3 



The Study 



79 



Table 10. Educational attainment of mother for respondents. 



Level Frequency 


Percent 


Graduate 81 
Non-graduate 77 
No response 7 


49.1 
46.7 
4.2 


Table 11. Educational attainment of father for respondents. 


Level Frequency 


Percent 


Graduate 66 
Non-graduate 94 
No response 5 


40.0 
57.0 
3.0 


Table 12. Respondent's older sibling a dropout. 


Sibling Frequency 


Percent 


Dropout 53 
Non-dropout 109 
No response 3 


32.1 
66.1 
1.8 


The majority of the participants (53%) reported living in a bicultural home 


(both cultures used equally) and, approximately half reported that both their parents 


and they (the participants) spoke their Native language; whereas 72% reported that 


their grandparents spoke the Native language (see tables 13-15). 




Table 13. Native language ability of respondent's parents. 




Language use Frequency 


Percent 


Native language spoken 78 
Native language not spoken 82 
No response 5 


47.3 
49.7 
3.0 


Table 14. Native language ability of respondent's grandparents. 


Language use Frequency 


Percent 


Native language spoken 119 
Native language not spoken . 41 
No response 5 


72.1 
24.8 
3.0 



4 ° 

TRIG 



S4 



The Study 



80 



Table 15. Family description* 



Family Description 


Frequency 


Percent 


Traditional/mostly Native culture 


36 


21.8 


Contemporary/mostly white culture 


31 


18.8 


Bicultural/used both cultures 


88 


53.3 


No response 


10 


6.1 



Forty percent (40%) of the participants reported coming from poverty or a low- 
income home environment, however 57% reported having a mother who worked 
outside the home (see tables 16 and 17). 



Table 16. Socio-economic status of respondent's family. 



Income levels 


Frequency 


Percent 


High 


11 


6.7 


Average 


83 


50.3 


Low 


65 


39.4 


No response 


6 


3.6 


Table 17. Respondent's mother worked outside the home. 


Employment status 


Frequency 


Percent 


Working mother 


94 


57.0 


Non-working mother 


64 


38.8 


No response 


7 


4.2 



Although 62% of the participants reported using alcohol, other substance abuse 
was prevalent as well. Thirty-five percent (35%) used marijuana, 14% used 
inhalants, and 66% smoked cigarettes while in high school (see tables 18-20). 



Table 18. Use of marijuana by respondents. 



Usage 


Frequency 


Percent 




Used marijuana 


58 


35.2 




Did not use marijuana 


104 


63.0 




No response 


3 


1.8 





S5" 



The Study 



81 



Table 19* Use of inhalants by respondents. 



Usage 


Frequency 


Percent 


Used inhalants 


23 


13.9 


Did not use inhalants 


139 


84.2 


No response 


3 


1.8 


Table 20. Tobacco usage by respondents. 


Tobacco use 


Frequency 


Percent 


Smoked cigarettes 


108 


65.5 


Did not smoke 


54 


32.7 


No response 


3 


1.8 



Additionally, 49% reported being involved in premature sexual activity while 
in high school and 9% reported being victims of sexual assauit/rape from peers, 
relatives or friends (see tables 21 and 22). Nearly 13% of the participants reported 
being sexually abused by a school employee (see table 23). 



Table 21. Premature sexual activity by respondents. 



Premature sex 


Frequency 


Percent 


Yes 


80 


48.5 


No 


82 


49.7 


No response 


3 


1.8 


Table 22. Respondents reporting sexual assault/rape. 


Assault/Rape 


Frequency 


Percent 


Yes 


14 


8.5 


No 


147 


89.1 


No response 


4 


2.4 



86 



The Study 



82 



Table 23. Respondents reporting abuse by school employees. 



Abuse by school employee 


Frequency 


Percent 


Physical abuse 


28 


7.0 


Sexual abuse 


21 


12.7 


Verbal abuse . 


42 


25.5 



Of the participants, nearly 23% had been retained at least one year in school 
(see table 24). 



Table 24. Respondents retained in school. 



Retention 


Frequency 


Percent 


Yes 


37 


22.4 


No 


124 


75.2 


No response 


4 


2.4 



Discrimination and racism clearly plays a heavy role in the life of American 
Indian adolescents. Seventy-three percent (73%) of the participants reported being 
discriminated against, 44% admitted to fighting over racist comments directed at 
them and 15% felt they had been jailed unjustly because they were American Indian. 
Thirty-eight percent (38%) of the respondents reported that they believed their lives, 
would have been "easier" had they not been born Indian (see table 25). Seventy- 
seven percent (77%) reported that they believed their teachers to be prejudiced 
against American Indians (see table 26). 



Table 25. Respondents reporting discrimination/racism in their lives. 



Factor 


Frequency 


Percent 


Life would have been easier if not born an Indian 


62 


37.6 


Got into fight over racist comments directed at you 


73 


44.2 


Sought revenge over racist comments directed at you 


39 


23.9 


Discriminated against because you were an Indian 


120 


72.7 


Arrested unjustly because you were an Indian 


24 


14.5 



S7 



The Study 




83 


Table 26. Reported teacher attitudes by respondents. 


Attitudes 


Frequency 


Percent 


Teachers prejudiced 


127 


77.0 


Teachers unapproachable 


85 


51.5 


Teachers humiliated student 


74 


44.8 


Teachers insensitive to Indian culture 


43 


26.1 


Teachers i snored student in class 


71 


43.0 


Teachers had favorite students 


108 

J. V/VJ 


65 5 


Teachers favored white students or Indians 


73 


44.2 


who were part white 






Teachers didn't care if you learned 


68 


41.2 


Teachers favored students whose parents had 


72 


43.6 


money or position in the community 






Teachers prejudged students by older siblings 


42 


25.5 



Despite the fact that the graduates outnumbered the dropouts almost two to one 
in this study, neither group felt positive about their teachers as can be noted in table 
26. Not only did they report that their teachers were prejudiced, but 52% found 
them unapproachable, 65% felt that teachers used favoritism, 44% felt teachers 
favored students whose parents had money or position, 44% felt teachers favored 
white students over American Indian students, and 45% reported being humiliated 
by teachers. Forty-one percent (41 %) felt that teachers "didn't care if they learned. " 

When participants were given a list of factors for dropping out of school or 
staying in school and graduating, the four most important factors for staying in 
school as reported by the graduates were: mother expected me to graduate (76%), 
wanted to make a good life for self (62%), school was personally important (61%), 
and had high expectations of self (59%) (see table 27). 



88 



The Study 



84 



Table 27. Graduates' reasons for staying in school. 







jt crwcni 


School important personally 


100 


60. 6 


Friends influenced me to graduate 


33 


20.0 


Wanted to get a good job 


89 


53.9 


Wanted to make a good life for myself 


102 


. 61.8 


Had high expectations of myself 


92 


55.8 


Felt good about myself in school 


63 


38.2 


Liked making good grades 


71 


43.0 


Mother expected me to graduate 


81 


73.0 


Father expected me to graduate 


68 


41.2 


Grandmother expected me to graduate 


60 


36.4 


Grandfather expected me to graduate 


59 


35.8 


Wanted an education so I could help my 


73 


44.2 


family 






Parents were very involved in my education 


45 


27.3 


Parents would have never permitted my 


- 69 


41.8 


dropping out 






Parents cared about my grades 


73 


44.2 


Parents helped with homework 


31 


18.8 


Parents were very aware of my activities 


. 55 


1>3.3 


Parents had rules for my behavior 


67 


40.6 



When the dropouts were asked the same questions, none of those factors 
surfaced. In fact, the reasons for dropping out were not related to positive self- 
image or positive family relationships. Two major areas surfaced among dropouts: 
negative family situation and negative teacher/student relationships. Over 18% of 
the students who dropped out reported poverty as the reason. Fifteen percent (15%) 
reported that they were forced to grow up too fast, 12% quit school to get away from 
home, and over 7% reported quitting school and running away because they were 
aoused. The other major reason(s) involved the school and the teachers: no teacher 
believed in me (16%), school was boring (15%), teachers ignored me (15%), 
teachers did not like me (14%), teachers didn't care (14%), and teachers expected 
me to drop out (see table 28). 



S3 



The Study 



85 



Table 38. Dropouts' reasons for leaving school prematurely. 



Factor 


Frequency 


Percent 


No teacher believed in me 


1*7 

27 


10. 5 


Teachers expected me to drop out 


n 

25 


110 
1 5.y 


Always getiing inio trouoie in scnooi 


1 1 
15 


7.o 


oKippcu scnooi a lot 


LI 


ii/i 
15 A 


iNoi interested in scnooi 


25 


1 1 A 

13. v 


ocnooi was Donng 


1 A 

24 


1 A C 

14.5 


Teachers didn't care 


io 

23 


13. 9 


Failed a lot of classes 


1 1 
13 


7.8 


Got blamed for things in school I did not do 


1 A 

10 


£L A 

6.0 


Suspended from school and didn't go back 


16 


9.7 


My friends dropped out and I followed them 


14 


8.4 


School administrators were out to get me 


10 


6.0 


Never saw value in a high school education 


19 


11.5 


Had no friends in school 


14 


8.4 


Teachers did not like me 


23 


13.9 


Teachers made fun of me and my lack of 


20 


12.1 


abilities 






Teachers singled me out and humiliated me 


21 


10.7 


Teachers ignored me 


24 


14.5 


I got married 


8 


4.8 


Associated with "wrong crowd" and lost 


21 


10.7 


interest in school 






Started drinking alcohoi and lost interest in 


23 


13.9 


school 






Started using diags and lost interest in school 


15 


9.1 


I was forced to grow up too fast and lost 


32 


15.3 


interest in school 






I quit school to get away from home 


19 


11.5 


I was abused at home and I quit school and ran 


12 


7.2 


away 






My family was very poor and I quit school to 


30 


18.2 



get a job 



As a final item on the questionnaire, students were asked to "express in their 
own words" what they believed to be the three most important reasons for dropping 
out or staying in school. For students who dropped out, poverty surfaced as the 
most important reason for dropping out. Many of them wrote about not having 



90 



The Study 



86 



money for school supplies or school activities, having to help out their family either 
by taking care of younger siblings, grandparents, etc.; inadequate clothing; or having 
to work (mostly ranch work) in order to help out. The second and third most often 
given reasons centered around the insensitivity of teachers and the lack of a caring 
environment within the school. Participants responses ranged from "I felt ashamed 
in school," simply "teachers," "I was too old and in grade school," "teachers told 
me I was dumb or stupid," "racism from school staff," "boring teachers that didn't 
care," to "school didn't fit my life style and no one helped me to make it fit." 

Graduates on the other hand cited "mothers' and grandparents'" expectations 
of staying in school and graduating most frequently. A "strong belief in self" 
surfaced as the second major reason for staying in school. The idea of "getting a 
good job" was the third most important reason for staying in school. 



91 



Chapter 5 



The Findings 



At-risk behavior is a complicated phenomenon. The literature highlights a 
variety of factors that may influence it. Individually, these factors may contribute 
to dropping out of school; and collectively, they may interact to synergistically 
increase the likelihood of dropping out. Numerous variables that could contribute 
to Native American students dropping out of school were collected in the Native 
American School Study survey. Selected variables from this instrument were 
grouped in the areas of Personal Problems, School Factors, Family Factors, and 
Cultural Issues. Two separate types of analyses were then conducted. 

The first set of analyses consisted of univariate analyses. In univariate 
analysis, the impact of one or more independent variable on one dependent variable 
is assessed. Each of the dependent variables in these analyses were from a set of 
items that reflected Personal Problems, School Factors, and Cultural Issues. Several 
separate one-way analysis of variance were conducted. In analysis of variance, the 
sample is divided into groups on an independent variable to investigate if the means 
of the groups differ on the dependent variable. The strength of this statistical 
procedure for this study was that it allowed an indepth analysis of various variables 
that were hypothesized to have an impact of at-risk behavior. However, the 
limitation of this approach is that the variable is analyzed in isolation of the 
complicated context in which it actually operates in society. 

Therefore, multivariate analysis was also conducted. Multivariate techniques 
allow for the simultaneous analysis of more than one dependent variable. In this 
process, the interaction of several dependent variables is examined. In this study, 
variables from the four areas were arranged into groups to see if they could be used 
to discriminate between dropouts and those who stayed in school. 



"92 



The Findings > 88 

Univariate Analyses 

Numerous one-way analysis of variances (ANOVA) were calculated. The 
dependent variables in each of these analyses were one of the variables from the list 
of Personal Problems, School Factors, or Cultural Issues. Personal Problems 
included such items as: being a teen parent, having trouble with the law, self- 
esteem, substance abuse, and having sexual relationships. School Factors included: 
skipping school, being retained in school, and being abused by a school employee. 
Cultural Issues related to being from a traditional/bilingual/contemporary family, 
cultural discontinuity, and wishing that one was not born an Indian. In this study, 
the participants were grouped on the following independent variables: school 
completion for students who drink alcohol, the structure of the Indian family, high 
school completion, self-esteem, peer pressure, academic achievement, teacher 
expectations, the cultural awareness of the teacher, skipping school, parent's 
educational level, pregnancy for females, sexual assaults or rape, retention in school, 
discrimination, sexual activity, and marijuana usage. For each of the independent 
variables, an ANOVA was calculated for each item in the set of dependent variables. 

Drinkers: Dropouts vs. Graduates 

On the survey, respondents were asked if they had used alcohol while in high 
school. In addition, they were identified as either those who had graduated from 
high school or those who had dropped out of high school. Therefore, the sample 
was divided into two groups of those who drank alcohol while in high school and the 
group who had drank but dropped out of school. No significant differences were 
found in the areas of getting pregnant while in school (F = 2.57, df = 1/95, p .= 
.11), getting in trouble with the law while in high school (F = .68, df = 1/95, p = 
.41), abused by school employee (F = 2.96, df = 1/95, p = .09), liking the way 
you looked as a teenager (F = 2.64, df = 1/97, p = .11), sniffing or huffing (F = 
2.92, df = 1/97, p = .09), having sexual relationships while in school (F = .59, 
df = 1/97, p = .45), playing sports (F = 2.53, df = 1/99, p = .12), being a 
traditional dancer (F = .14, df = 1/99, p = .71), being unsure of what it meant to 



93 



The Findings 



89 



be Indian (F — .03, df = 1/99, p = .87), and wishing you were not born an Indian 
(F « 1.45, 1/99, p « .23). 

However, significant differences were found on four variables (see Table 1). 
Those who dropped out of school skipped school much more than those who did not; 
on a four-point scale ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, Seldom, and Never, the 
dropouts indicated that they skipped much more than the graduates. Only 20% of 
the graduates had been retained in school while 57% of the dropouts had been held 
back at least one year in school. Significantly more of the dropouts (72%) smoked 
marijuana as compared to only 45% of the graduates who reported using the drug. 
While nearly 65% of the entire group had sexual relationships in school, more 
dropouts (73%) were sexually active than graduates (62%). 



Table 1 . ANOVA of significant risk factors for graduate and dropout drinkers* 



Source 


SS 


4f 


MS 


F 


P 






Skipping School 






Between 


13.157 


1 


13.157 


16.694 


.001 


Within 


75.659 


96 


.788 






Total 


88.816 


97 












Retained in 


School 






Between 


1.024 


1 


1.024 


5.439 


.022 


Within 


18.078 


96 


.188 






Total 


19.102 


97 












Smoked Marijuana 






Between 


1.337 


1 


1.337 


5.551 


.021 


Within 


23.122 


96 


.241 






Total 


24.459 


97 










Premature Sexual 


Relationships 






Between 


.480 


1 


.800 


4.667 


.033 


Within 


10.080 


98 


.103 






Total 


10.560 


99 









94 



The Findings 



Structure of Indian Family 

Respondents were asked to describe their family when they were growing up. 
The choices were (1) traditional in such ways as speaking the native language, 
observing the tribal culture, and respecting the traditional religion; (2) contemporary 
and leaning more toward the white culture; and (3) bicultural in accepting both the 
Indian and white cultures and in feeling comfortable in both worlds. When they 
were grouped by the response to this item, no significant differences were found in 
the areas of skipping school (F = 1.12, df = 2/144, p = .33), getting pregnant 
while in school (F = 1.75, df = 2/144, p = .17), getting in trouble with the law 
while in high school (F = 1.14, df = 2/144, p = .32), being retained in school 
(F = .37, df = 2/144, p = .69), abused by a school employee (F = 1.61, 
df = 2/144, p = .31), liking the way you looked as a teenager (F = .02, 
df = 2/148, p = .98), smoking marijuana (F = 2.71, df = 2/148,/; = .07), sniffing 
or huffing (F = .33, df = 2/148, p = .72), having sexual relationships while in 
school (F = .82, df = 2/148,/? = .44), being sexually assaulted or raped while in 
school (F = 1.25, df = 2/148,/? = .29), and playing sports (F = .40, df = 2/152, 
p = .67). 

However, differences were found on three variables (see Table 2). More of 
the traditional group (36%) were traditional or fancy dancers in pow wows than were 
the bicultural group (24%) or the contemporary group (10%). Closely related to this 
was the identity crisis expressed by the contemporary group; 52% of this group felt 
unsure about what it meant to be an Indian while only 22% of the traditional group 
and 27% of the bicultural group felt that way. Likewise, 35% of the contemporary 
group wished that they had not been born an Indian while only 17%.of the traditional 
group and 16% of the bicultural group felt this way. 



The Findings 



91 



Table 2. ANOVA of significant risk factors and family structure* 


Source 


SS df MS 


F 


/> 




ParticiDate in Traditional Culture 






Between 


1 . 1 Oh a . J OZ 


^.Z / O 




Within 


27.0G; 152 .178 






Total 


28.168 154 








Unsure What it Meant to be Indian 






Between 


1 . / 1 / Z .OJO 




01 ft 

.UlO 


Within 


31.419 152 .207 






Total 


33.135 154 








Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


.930 2 .465 


2.963 


.050 


Within 


23.870 152 .157 






Total 


24.800 154 







Graduates vs. Dropouts 

Differences were also examined between the graduates from high school and 
the dropouts. Of the 156 who indicated this status, 116 were graduates and 40 were 
dropouts. No significant differences were found in the areas of getting in trouble 
with the law while in high school (F = .98, df = 1/151, p = .32), being abused by 
a school employee (F = 1.30, df = 1/151, p = .26), smoking marijuana (F = 3.43, 
df = 1/156, p = .07), having sexual relationships while in school (F = 1.20, 
df = 1/156, p = .28), being a traditional dancer (F = .85, df = 1/160, /> = .36), 
being unsure of what it mean* to be Indian (F = .56, 4f = 1/160, p = .45), and 
wishing you were not born an Indian (F = .36, df = 1/160, /; = .54). 

However, differences were found on seven variables (see Table 3). As when 
only the drinkers were considered, the dropouts skipped more school than the 
graduates; on the four-point scale ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, Seldom, and 
Never, the dropouts (1.92) indicated that they skipped more than the graduates 
(2.71). More dropouts (43%) were retained in school than graduates (18%). More 



«er|c 



96 



The Findings 



Table 3. ANOVA of significant risk factors for graduates and dropouts. 



Source 


ss 


df 


MS 


F 


P 


_ 




SkiDDine 


School 






Between 


18.587 


1 


18.587 


19.290 


.001 


witnin 


148. 387 


154 


.964 






Total 


lfifi 074 
i vivi. y i *t 


155 












Got Preenant 






Between 


1.060 


1 


1.060 


9.540 


.002 


WT !*1*Sm 

Witnin 


IT 111 

17.1 13 


154 


.111 






Totnl 


18 17^ 

1 O. 1 ID 


155 












Retained in School 






Between 


1.898 


1 


1.898 


11.100 


.001 


witnin 


26.327 


154 


.171 






Total 


28.224 


155 












Liked 


Self 






Between 


1.611 


1 


1.611 


7.585 


.007 


Within 


32.716 


154 


.212 






Total 


34.327 


155 










Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 


• 




Between 


.566 


1 


.566 


4.576 


.034 


Within 

wunin 


19.043 


154 


.124 






Total 


19.609 


155 












Sexuallv Assaulted/Raped 






Between 


.680 


1 


.680 


8.935 


.003 


Within 


12.102 


159 


.076 






Total 


12.783 


160 












Plaved Snorts 






Between 


2.610 


1 


2.610 


11.269 


.001 


Within 


36.819 


159 


.232 






Total 


39.429 


160 









97 



The Findings 



93 



of this group (27%) also got pregnant while in school than graduates (18%). In 
addition, the graduates had a better self-image while in school; nearly three-fourths 
(73%) liked the way they looked during their teen years while half (50%) of the 
dropout group did not like their appearance. Perhaps these selfrconcept indicators 
are related to reasons that more dropouts (25%) sniffed inhalants than graduates 
(11%) or that more dropouts (20%) were sexually assaulted or raped than graduates 
(5%). Drastic differences also existed between the two groups in relationship to 
school sports; 64% of the graduates indicated that they played sports while in school 
while only 35% of the dropouts had. 

Self Esteem 

The self-esteem of the dropout group and graduate group were eaqh 
investigated. No significant differences were found between those with good self- 
esteem and those with low self-esteem in the dropout group: skipping school (F = 
.90, df = 1/37, p = .35), getting pregnant while in school (F = .39, df = 1/37, 
P = .54), getting in trouble with the law while in high school (F = .01, df = 1/37, 
p = .92), being retained in school (F = .59, df = 1/37, p = .45), being abused by 
a school employee (F = .01, df = 1/37, p = .91), smoking marijuana (F = .10, 
df = 1/38, p = 76), sniffing or huffing (F = .00, df = 1/38, p = 1.00), having 
sexual relationships while in school (F = 2.60, df = 1/38, p = .12), being sexually 
assaulted or raped while in school (F = 00, df = 1/38, p = 1.00), playing sports 
(F = .42, df = 1/38, p = .52), being a traditional dancer (F = 1.54, df = 1/38, 
p = .22), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = .42, df = 1/38, p = 
.52), and wishing you were not born an Indian (F = 1.27, df = 1/38, p = .27). 

Similarly, differences in only two variables were found in the graduate group 
(see Table 4). No significant differences were found in the areas of getting pregnant 
while in school (F = .10, df = 1/110, p = .76), getting in trouble with the law 
while in high school (F = 3.38, df = 1/110, p = .07), being retained in school 
(F = 1.21, df = 1/110, p = .27), being abused by a school employee (F = 2.49, 
rf/= 1/110,/? = .18), smoking marijuana (F = .18, rf/ = 1/116,/? = .67), sniffing 
or huffing (F = 2.69, df = 1/116, p .10), having sexual relationships while in 



98 



The Findings 



94 



school (F « .11, df = 1/116, p = .74), being sexually assaulted or raped while in 
school (F = 1.67, <// = 1/116, /> = .20), playing sports (F = 1.67, <// « 1/117, 
/? = .20), being a traditional dancer (F « .001, 4f = 1/117, /? = .98), and being 
unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = .27, df = 1/117, /? = .61). 



Table 4. ANOVA of significant risk factors and self-esteem of graduates. 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


P 






SkiODinc School 






Between 


6.532 


1 


6.532 


7.224 


.008~ 


Within 


103.080 


114 


.904 






Total 


109.612 


115 












Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


.748 


1 


.748 


4.989 


.027 


Within 


17.080 


114 


.150 






Total 


17.828 


115 









Significant differences were found for two variables. On the four-point scale 
ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, Seldom, and Never, the graduates with low 
self-esteem (2.33) indicated that they skipped more school than graduates with good 
self-esteem (2.86). More in the low self-esteem group (32%) than in the good self- 
esteem group (14%) wished that they had not been born an Indian. 

Peer Pressure 

The respondent's reaction to peer pressure was measured by an item which 
asked them to describe themselves as a teenager in relationship to others. Their 
choices included (1) I generally did not go along with the crowd, (2) I generally went 
along with the crown even when I didn't want to, and (3) I never really ran around 
with a crowd. When divided by peer pressure, the group differed on three variables 
(see Table 5). No significant differences were found in the areas of getting pregnant 
while in school (F = .83, df = 2/148, p = .44), being abused by a school employee 
(F = 1.24, df = 2/148, p = .29), liking the way you looked as a teenager 



99 



The Findings 



95 



(F = 1.73, df = 2/151, p = .18), smoking marijuana (F = 1.01, df = 2/151, /> = 
.35), sniffing or huffing (F = 2.20, df = 2/151, p = .11), being sexually assaulted 
or raped while in school (F = 2.52, df = 2/151, p = .08), playing sports 
(F = 1.72, df = 2/155,/? = .18), being a traditional dancer (F = .87, 2/155, 
/> « .42), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = 1.13, df = 2/155, p = 
.33), and wishing you were not born an Indian (F = 1.75, df = 2/155, p = .18). 



Table 5. ANOVA of significant risk factors and peer pressure. 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


P 






SkiDDine School 






Between 


8.478 


2 


4.239 


4.051 


.019 


Within 


158.015 


151 


1.046 






Total 


166.494 


153 












Trouble with 


the Law 






Between 


1.929 


2 


.964 


5.456 


.005 


Within 


26.694 


151 


.177 






Total 


28.623 


153 










Premature Sexual 


Relationships 






Between 


1.417 


1 


.709 


2.890 


.050 


Within 


37.024 


151 


.245 






Total 


38.442 


153 









However, like several other analyses, the groups differed in relationship to 
skipping school. On the four-point scale ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, 
Seldom, and Never, the group that went along with the crowd (2.23) skipped more 
school than those that never ran with the crowd (2.61) and those that did not go 
along with the crowd (2.79). Those that never ran with the crowd (10%) got in less 
trouble with the law than those who did not go along with the crowd (27%) and those 
that went along with the crowd (36%). Those that went along with the crowd (59%) 
were more sexually active than those who never ran with the crowd (45%) and those 
who did not go along with the crowd (36%). 



100 



The Findings 



96 



Academic Achievement 

The respondents were grouped according to their level of academic 
achievement. The three groupings were (1) above average with mostly A's and B's, 
(2) average with mostly B's and C's; and (3) below average with D's and below. 
Differences were found in four areas (see Table 6). No significant differences were 
found in the areas of getting pregnant while in school (F = .26, df = 2/148, p » 
.77), getting in trouble with the law while in high school (F = 2.31, df = 2/148, 
p = .10), being abused by a school employee (F = .31, df = 2/148, p = .74), 
liking the way you looked as a teenager (F = 2.02, df = 2/153, p = .14), smoking 
marijuana (F = .11, 4f = 2/153, p = .90), having sexual relationships while in 
school (F = .75, df = 2/153, /> =' .48), being sexually assaulted or raped while in 
school (F = .49, df = 2/153, /; = .62), playing sports (F = 2.67, rf/ = 2/157, p = 
.07), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = 2.23, df = 2/157, /; = .11), 
and wishing you were not born an Indian (F = 1.30, df = 2/15V, = .28). 



Table 6. ANOVA of significant risk factors and academic achievement* 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


P 






SkiDDine School 






Between 


9.926 


2 


4.963 


4.839 


.009 


Within 


156.914 


153 


l.«26 






Total 


166.840 


155 












Retained in 


School 






Between 


1.545 


2 


.773 


4.618 


.011 


Within 


25.602 


153 


.167 






Total 


27.147 


155 










Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 






Between 


.863 


2 


.431 


3.522 


.032 


Within 


18.746 


153 


.123 






Total 


19.609 


155 










ParticiDate in Traditional Culture 






Between 


1.750 


2 


.875 


5.058 


.007 


Within 


26.474 


153 


.173 ' 






Total 


28.224 


155 









101 



The Findings 



97 



However, the three groups differed in the amount of school they skipped. On 
the four-point scale ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, Seldom, and Never, the 
lowest group in academic achievement (1.62) skipped more school that the highest 
academic group (2.78) and the average academic group (2.48). While 50% of the 
low academic group had been held back at least one year in school, only 10% of the 
highest academic group and 26% of the average group had been retained. Although 
sniffing inhalants is not widespread among Indian people, 38% of the low academic 
group had used inhalants while only 6% of the high academic group and 18% of the 
average group had. More of the lowest academic group (48%) participated as a 
traditional or fancy dancer than the average academic group (19%) or the highest 
academic group (38%). 

Teacher Expectations 

Much literature in the field of education addresses the issue of teacher 
expectations for students. The respondents in this study were asked to indicate if 
their teachers set high expectations for them to succeed in school. When divided 
between those whose teachers set high expectations and those whose teachers did not, 
differences were found on seven variables (see Table 7). No significant differences 
were found in the areas of getting pregnant while in school (F = 1.10, df = 1/151, 
p = .30), being retained in school (F = 3.51, df = 1/151, p = .06), liking the way 
you looked as a teenager (F = 3.28, df = 1/156, p = .07), smoking marijuana 
(F = .61, df = 1/156, p = .44), being a traditional dancer (F = 2.57, df « 1/160, 
p = .11), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = 1.69, df =1/160, p = 
.20), and wishing you were not born an Indian (F - .45, df = 1/160, p = .50). 

However, significant differences were found for several variables. On the 
four-point scale ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, Seldom, and Never, the group 
that had lower teacher expectations (2.32) skipped more school than those that had 
teachers with high expectations (2.67). Those with low teacher expectations (32%) 
got in more trouble with the law more than those with high teacher expectations 
(18%). More of those with low teacher expectations (42%) were abused by school 
employees than those with high teacher expectations (17%). Low teacher 
expectations (24%) were also associated more with inhalant use than high teacher 
expectation (6%) was. Those with low teacher expectations (58%) were more 



102 



The Findings 



98 



Table 7. ANOVA of significant risk factors and teacher expectations. 



Source 


SS 


df MS 


F 


P 

Mr 






Skipping School 






Between 


4.3*0 


1 A CAC 

1 4.595 


A O A C 

4.346 


.039 


Within 


159.653 


151 1.057 






Total 


164.248 


152 










Trouble with the Law 






Between 


.755 


1 .755 


A t\f\f\ 

4.099 


Aif 

.045 


Within 


27.807 


151 .184 






Total 


28.562 


152 








Abused bv School Employees 






Between 


2.326 


1 2.326 


12.105 


.001 


Within 


29.020 


151 .192 






Total 


31.346 


152 








Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 






Between 


1.183 


1 1.183 


9.730 


.002 


Within 


18.359 


151 .122 






Total 


19.542 


152 








Premature Sexual RelationshiDs 






Between 


.863 


1 .863 


1 a 0*7 

3.487 


.064 


Within 


37.385 


151 .248 






Total 


38.248 


152 










Sexualiv Assaulted/Raped 






Between 


.424 


1 .424 


c /ice 
5.455 


.021 


Within 


12.359 


159 .078 






. Total 


12.783 


160 










Plaved Sports 






Between 


2.078 


1 2.078 


8.844 


.003 


Within 


37.351 


159 .235 






Total 


39.429 


160 







The Findings 



99 



sexually active than those with high teacher expectations (43%). More of those with 
low teacher expectations (14%) were sexually assaulted or raped than those with high 
teacher expectations (4%). Finally, those with high teacher expectations (68%) were 
more involved in school sports than those with low teacher expectations (45%). 
Thus, teacher expectations is significantly related to a wide variety of student factors. 

Teacher's Cultural Awareness 

Respondents were also asked if their teachers were sensitive to their Indian 
culture. The choices were (1) mostly no, (2) very few, and (3) mostly yes. 
Differences were found in five areas (see Table 8). No significant differences were 
found in the areas of getting in trouble with the law while in high school (F = .26, 
df = 2/111,/? = .78), being retained in school (F = 1.13, df = 2/111, /> ^ .33), 
liking the way you looked as a teenager (F = 2.36, df = 2/116, p = .10), smoking 
marijuana (F = .07, df = 2/116, p = .93), sniffing or huffing (F = .70, df = 
2/116, p = .50), being sexually assaulted or raped while in school (F - 1.53, df = 
2/116, p = ,22), playing sports (F = 2.22, df = 2/117, p = .11), being a 
traditional dancer (F •= .96, df = 2/117, p = .39), and being unsure of what it 
meant to be Indian (F = 1.88, df = 2/117, p = .16). 

As with so many other independent variables, a difference was found in the 
amount of school skipped. Those with the teachers who were sensitive to the Indian 
culture (2.75) skipped less school than those for whom most of their teachers (2.22) 
or very few (2.66) were sensitive. None of the students with sensitive teachers got 
pregnant while in school while 20% of those wth mostly insensitive teachers and 
19% with very few sensitive teacher indicated they got pregnant while in school. 
Almost none of the group with sensitive teachers (4%) were abused by school 
employees while |8% of those with very few sensitive teachers and 42% with mostly 
insensitive teachers were abused. Those with insensitive teachers (66%) and those 
with very few sensitive teachers (47%) were more sexually active than those with 
sensitive teachers (28%). More of those students with mostly insensitive teachers 
(32%) wished they had not been born an Indian than those with very few (15%) or 
mostly sensitive (11%) teachers. 



104 



The Findings 



100 



Table 8. ANOVA of significant risk factors and teacher's cultural awareness. 



Source 


SS 


4f 


MS 


F 


p 






Skipping School 






Between 


5.821 


2 


2.910 


3.087 


.050 


Within 


104.644 


111 


.943 






Total 


110.465 


113 












Got Pregnant 








Between 


.762 


2 


.381 


3.178 


.045 


Within 


13.789 


115 


.120 






Total 


14.551 


117 










Abused bv School Employee 






Between 


2.828 


2 


1.414 


8.142 


r\r\ t 

.001 


Within 


19.277 


111 


.174 






Total 


. 22.105 


113 










Premature Sexual Relationships 






Between 


2.333 


2 


1.166 


4.938 


.009 


Within 


27.398 


116 


.236 






Total 


29.731 


118 












Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


.977 


2 


.489 


3.039 


.052 


Within 


18.814 


117 


.161 






Total 


19.792 


119 









Skipping School 

In addition to using the frequency of skipping school as a dependent variable, 
it was also used as an independent variable. The four groupings for rate of skipping 
school were (1) frequently, (2) sometimes, (3) seldom, and (4) never. The groups 
differed on six variables (see Table 9). No significant differences were found in the 
areas of getting pregnant while in school (F = .57, df = 3/149, p = .63), being 
abused by a school employee (F = 1.01, df = 3/149, p = .37), being sexually 
assaulted or raped while in school (F = 1.18, df = 3/151, p = .32), playing sports 



105 



The Findings 



> 



101 



(F = 1.11, df = 3/154, p = .35), being a traditional dancer (F = .37, df = 3/154, 
p = .78), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = 1.73, df = 3/154, p = 
.16), and wishing you were not born an Indian (F = .82, df = 3/154, p = .48). 

Table 9. ANOVA of significant risk factors and skipping school. 
Source SS df MS F p 



Trouble with the Law 



Between 
Within 
Total 



Between 
Within 
Total 



Between 
Within 
Total 



Between 
Within 
Total 



Between 
Within 
Total 



Between 
Within 
Total 



2.195 
7.555 
9.750 



2.135 
9.349 
11.484 



1.623 
10.861 
12.484 



3.491 
9.869 
13.360 



1 

62 
63 



2.195 
.122 



18.017 



.001 



Retained in School 



1 

62 
63 



2.135 
.151 



Liked Self 

1 1.623 
62 .175 
63 

Smoked Marijuana 

1 3.491 
62 .159 
63 



Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 



1.541 
6.193 
7.734 



1 

62 
63 



1.541 
.100 



Premature Sexual Relationships 

1.367 1 1.367 

13.771 63 .219 

15.138 64 



14.162 



9.266 



21.932 



15.431 



6.255 



.001 



.003 



.001 



.001 



.015 



106 



The Findings 



102 



The groups that frequent; (43%) and seldom (47%) skipped school got in 
trouble with the law more than the group that sometimes (23%) and the group that 
never (5%) skipped school. -The group that frequently (47%) skipped school had the 
most students who had been held back a year in school, and the group that sometimes 
(28%) skipped had the second largest group. Those that seldom (5%) and never 
(9%) skipped school had very few who had ever been retained in school. About half 
of those who frequently (52%) and sometimes (58%) skipped school liked the way 
they looked as teenagers; however, most of those who seldom (79%) and never 
(85%) skipped school were satisfied with their appearance. Those who frequently 
(61%) skipped school smoked marijuana much more than those who sometimes 
(39%), seldom (25%), or never (12%) skipped. Likewise, those who frequently 
(35%) skipped school used inhalants more than those who sometimes (17%), seldom 
(11%), or never (3%) skipped. Those who frequently (57%), sometimes (60%), or 
seldom (48%) were more sexually active than those who never (26%) skipped school. 

Parent's Educational Level 

When the respondents were grouped according to whether their father was a 
high school dropout, differences were found on three variables (see Table 10). No 
significant differences were found in the areas of skipping school (F = .21, df = 
1/150, p = .65), getting pregnant while in school (F = 2.58, df = 1/150, p = .11), 
getting in trouble with the law while in high school (F = 2.03, df = 1/150, p = 
.16), being retained in school (F = 3.13, df = 1/150, p = .08), being abused by a 
school employee (F = .08, df = 1/150, p = .78), liking the way you looked as a 
teenager (F = .16, df = 1/154, p = .69), smoking marijuana (F = .81, df = 1/153, 
p = .37), sniffing or huffing (F = 1.22, df = 1/154, p = .27), having sexual 
relationships while in school (F = .24, df = 1/154, p = .63), being sexually 
assaulted or raped while in school (F = .009, df = 1/154, p = .93), and playing 
sports (F = 3.16, df = 1/158, p = .08). 

Traditional qualities were associated with students whose father had graduated 
from high school. More students whose father had graduated (33%) were traditional 
dancers than students whose fathers had dropped out (16%). More students whose 



107 



The Findings 



103 



father had dropped out (38%) were unsure of what it meant to be an Indian than 
students whose father had graduated (22%). Likewise, more students whose father 
had dropped out (25%) wished they had not been born an Indian than those whose 
father had graduated (12%) from high school. 



Table 10.' ANOVA of significant risk factors and father's educational level. 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


P 




Participate in Traditional Culture 






Between 


1.171 


1 


1.171 


6.782 


.010 


Within 


57.273 


158 


.173 






Total 


28.444 


159 










Unsure What it Meant to be Indian 






Between 


.995 


1 


.995 


4.766 


.031 


Within 


32.998 


158 


.209 






Total 


33.993 


159 












Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


.591 


1 


.591 


3.827 


.052 


Within 


24.403 


158 


.154 






Total 


24.994 


159 









The respondents were also grouped according to whether their mother had 
graduated from high school. A difference was found on only one variable (see 
Table 11). As with those whose father had graduated, more students whose mother 
had graduated (33%) were involved as traditional dancers than those whose mother 
had not graduated (13%). No significant differences were found in the areas of 
skipping school (F = .10, df = 1/148, p « .75), getting pregnant while in school 
(F = .49, df = 1/148, p = .50), getting in trouble with the law while in high school 
(F = .08, df = 1/148, p = .78), being retained in school (F = 2.71, df = 1/148, 
p = .10), being abused by a school employee (F = .90, df = 1/148, p = .34), 
liking the way you looked as a teenager (F = .08, df = 1/153, p = .78), smoking 
marijuana (F = .33, df = 1/153, p = .56), sniffing or huffing (F = .83, df = 
1/153, p = .34), having sexual relationships while in school (F = .76, df = 1/153, 



108 



The Findings 



104 



p « .39), being sexually assaulted or raped while in school (F = .03, df = 1/153, 
p as .86), playing sports (F = 2.44, # = 1/156, p - .12), being unsure of what it 
meant to be Indian (F « .53, = 1/156, /> = .47), and wishing you were not born 
an Indian (F = 1.55, df = 1/156, /> = .22). 



Teble 11. ANOVA of participation in traditional culture and mother's 
educational level. 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


P 


Between 


1.634 


1 


1.634 


9.547 


.002 


Within 


. 26.701 


156 


.171 






Total 


28.335 


157 









Pregnancy 

The females were divided into those who got pregnant while in high school and 
those who did not. Of the 95 females responding to this item, 20 indicated they had 
gotten pregnant during that time. Differences were found on four variables (see 
Table 12). No significant differences were found in the are?s of skipping school 
(F a= 1.60, df = 1/90, p = .21), getting in trouble with the law while in high school 
(F = .04, df = 1/90, p = .84), being retained in school (F = 1.20, df = 1/90, p = 
.28), being abused by a school employee (F = .75, df » 1/90, p » .39), liking the 
way you looked as a teenager (F = 1.76, df = 1/93, p » .19), smoking marijuana 
(F = 1.34, df = 1/93, p = .25), sniffing or huffing (F « 3.32, df = 1/93, /7 = 
.07), playing sports (F = 2.57, df = 1/94, p = .11), and being unsure of what it 
meant to be Indian (F = 1.76, df = 1/94, p = .19). 

Not surprisingly, those who got pregnant were more sexually active (75 %) than 
those who were less sexually active (32%). Likewise, those who got pregnant (35%) 
had been sexually assaulted or raped more than those who did not get pregnant (7%). 
None of those who had gotten pregnant were traditional dancers while 27% of those 
who did not get pregnant participated in traditional dancing. More of those who had 
gotten pregnant (35%) wished that they had not been born an Indian than those who 
did not get pregnant (11 %). 



109 



The Findings 



Table 12. ANOVA of significant risk factors for females and pregnancy. 



Source 


SS 




MS 


F 


P 




Premature Sexual 


Relationships 




- 


Rpfwppn 


1 2.919 


1 


2.919 


1 J .Ji*0 


. \J\J 1 


Within 


20.070 


93 


.216 






Total 


22.989 


94 










Sexuallv Assaulted/Raped 






DCIW WWll 


1.268 


1 


1.268 


1 O 7QA 


.UUl 


Within 


9,217 


93 


.099 






Total 


10.485 


94 










Participate in Trad 


itional Culture 






RptWPPTl 
UVItt WWII 


1.123 


1 


1.123 


7 19ft 


nno 


Within 


14.667 


93 


.158 






Total 


15.790 


94 












Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


.935 


1 


.935 


7.433 


.008 


Within 


1L697 


93 


.126 






Total 


12.632 


94 









Sexual Assaults 

Fourteen respondents from the total group indicated that they had been sexually 
assaulted or raped while in school. This group differed from the other respondents 
on three variables (see Table 13). Nearly four-fifths (79%) of this group had been 
abused by school employees as compared to 24% of the other group. They (36%) 
also used inhalants more' than the other group (13%). They (86%) also were more 
sexually active than the other group (48%). No significant differences were found 
in the areas of skipping school (F = .10, df = 1/150, p = .75), getting in trouble 
with the law while in high school (F = .32, df = 1/150, p = .58), being retained 
in school (F = .00, df = 1/150, p = 1.00), liking the way you looked as a teenager 
(F = 2.03, df = 1/156, p = .16), smoking marijuana (F = 3.19, df = 1/156, p = 
.09), being a traditional dancer (F = 2.18, df = 1/159, p = .14), being unsure of 



110 



what it meant to be Indian (F = 1.24, df = 1/159, p - .27), and wishing you were 
not born an Indian (F = 2.68, df = 1/159, p = .10). 



Table 13. ANOVA of significant risk factors and sexual assault or rape. 



source 


SS 


df 


MS 


r 


P 




Abused bv School Employee 






Between 


3.829 


1 


3.829 


20.990 


.001 


Within 


28.273 


155 


.182 






Total 


32.102 


156 










Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 






Between 


.682 


1 


.682 


5.579 


.019 


Within 


18.949 


155 


.122 






Total 


19.631 


156 










Premature Sexual 


RelationshiDs 






Between 


1.857 


1 


1.857 


7.701 


.006 


Within 


37.379 


155 


.241 






Total 


39.236 


156 









Retention in School 

Those who had been held back a year in school differed from those who had 
not been retained on two variables (see "^able 14). These 36 individuals got in more 
trouble with the law (42% vs 19%) and used inhalants (34% vs 9%) more than those 
who had not been retained. No significant differences were found in the areas of 
skipping school (F = .35, df = 1/151, p = .55), getting pregnant while in school 
(F = .06, df = 1/151, p = .81), being abused by a school employee (F = .16, df 
= 1/151, p = .69), liking the way you looked as a teenager (F = .22, df = 1/156, 
p = .64), smoking marijuana (F = .54, df = 1/156, p = .46), having sexual 
relationships while in. school (F = 3.19, df = 1/156, p = .08), being sexually 
assaulted or raped while in school (F = 1.54, df = 1/158, p = .22), playing sports 
(F = 1.54, df = 1/158, p = .22), being a traditional dancer (F = .47, df = 1/158, 
p = .49), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = .13, df = 1/158, p = 
.72) , and wishing you were not born an Indian (F = .15, df = 1/158, p = .70). 



ill 



The Findings 



107 



Table 14. ANOVA of significant risk factors and retention in school. 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


p 

Mr 






Trouble with 


the Law 






DClWCCll 


1.447 


1 


1.447 


O 111 

o.233 


r\r\ c 

.005 


Within 


27.414 


156 


.176 






Total 


28.861 


157 










Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 






Between 


1.644 


1 


1.644 


14.239 


.001 


Within 


18.008 


156 


.115 






Total 


19.652 


157 









Discrimination 



Three-fourths of the respondents indicated that they felt they had been 
discriminated against because they are Indian. Those who have felt this 
discrimination differed from those who have not on two variables (see Table 15). 
On the four-point scale ranging from Frequently, Sometimes, Seldom, and Never, 
the group that has experienced the discrimination skipped less school than the group 
that has not been subject to the discrimination. The group being discriminated 
against (26%) also has more members who have wished that they had not been born 
an Indian than the group without discrimination (3%). No significant differences 
were found in the areas of getting pregnant while in school (F = .24, df = 1/151, 
p = .62), getting in trouble with the law while in high school (F = .09, df = 1/151, 
p = .77), being retained in school (F = .71, df = 1/151, p = .40), being abused 
by a school employee (F = 1.73, df = 1/151, p = .19), liking the way you looked 
as a teenager (F = .004, df = 1/156, p = .95), smoking marijuana (F = .005, df = 
1/156, p = .95), sniffing or huffing (F = .03, df = 1/156, p = .87), having sexual 
relationships while in school (F = 2.77, df = 1/156, p = .10), being sexually 
assaulted or raped while in school (F = .09, df = 1/156, p = .77), playing sports 
(F = .002, df - 1/160, p = .97), being a traditional dancer (F = .06, df = 1/160, 
p = .80), and being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = 3.40, df = 1/160, 
p = .07). 



112 



The Findings 



108 



Table IS. ANOVA of significant risk factors and discrimination. 



Source 

U \J 111 w 


SS 


4f 


MS 




o 

y 






Skipping School 






Between 


5.613 


1 


5.613 


4.405 


.037 


Within 


198.767 


156 


1.274 






Total 


204.380 


157 












Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


1.570 


1 


1.570 


10.489 


.001 


Within 


23.348 


156 


.150 






Total 


24.918 


157 









Sexual Relationships 

Approximately half of the group indicated that they had sexual relationships 
while in school. When categorized on this variable, the group differed on six factors 
(see Table 16). No significant differences were found in the areas of skipping school 
(F ^ 3.63, df == 1/151, p = .06), being retained in school (F = 3.18, df = 1/151, 
p = .08), liking the way you looked as a teenager (F = 1.83, df = 1/156, p = .18), 
playing sports (F = .37, df = 1/160, p = .54), being a traditional dancer (F = .72, 
df - 1/160, p = .40), being unsure of what it meant to be Indian (F = .38, df = 
1/160, p = .54), and wishing you were not born an Indian (F = 2,18, df = 1/160, 
p = .14). Some of those who were sexually active in school got pregnant (19%). 
More of those who were sexually active got in trouble with the law (35% vs 13%), 
were abused by school employees (39% vs 17%), smoked marijuana (51% vs 20%), 
used inhalants (22% vs 8%), and were sexually assaulted or raped (15% vs 3%). 

Marijuana Usage 

Slightly over one-third (37%) indicated that they had smoked marijuana while 
in school. Those who used marijuana differed from those who did not on five 



113 



The Findings 



109 



Table 16. ANOVA of significant risk factors and sexual activity. 



Source 


SS df MS 


F 


P 




Got Pregnant 






Between 

UVVTT VVll 


.489 1 .489 


4.256 


.041 


Within 


17.684 154 .115 






Total 


18.173 155 








Trouble with the Law 






Between 


1 966 1 1.966 


11.309 


.001 . 


Within 


26.777 154 .174 






Total 


28.744 155 








Abused bv School EmDlovee 






Between 

IJW lr T> WWII 


1.949 1 1.949 


10.127 


.002 


Within 


29.641 154 .192 






Total 


31.590 155 








Premature Sexual Relationships 






Between 


3.776 1 3.776 


17.951 


.001 


Within 


32.397 154 .210 






Total 


36.17? 155 








Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 






Between 


.735 1 .735 


5.995 


.015 


Within 


13.874 154 .123 






Total 


19.609 155 








Sexuallv Assaulted/Raped 






Between 


.632 1 .632 


8.270 


.005 


Within 


12.151 159 .076 






Total 


12.783 160 






variables (see Table 17). Those who smoked marijuana got in more trouble with the 



law (41% vs 14%), used inhalants more (32% vs 3%), were more sexually active 



(71% vs 38%), were more unsure of what it meant to be Indian (45% vs 23%), and 
wished that they had not been born an Indian (30% vs 14%). No significant 
differences were found in the areas of skipping school' (F = .005, df = 1/151, 



114 



The Findings 



110 



P = .94), getting pregnant while in school (F = .69, df = 1/151, p = .41), being 
retained in school (F = .22, df = 1/151, p = ;64), being abused by a school 
employee (F = 1.15, df = 1/151, /> = .29), liking the way you looked as a teenager 
(F == .82, df = 1/156, p = .37), being sexually assaulted or raped while in school 
(F « 3.19, <// « 1/156, /; « .08), playing sports (F = .32, df*= 1/160, p = .58), 
and being a traditional dancer (F = .009, df = 1/160, /; = .92). 



Table 17. ANOVA of significant risk factors and marijuana usage. 



Source 


SS 


df 


MS 


F 


P 


• 




Trouble with 


i the Law 






Between 


2.790 


1 


2.790 


16.764 


.001 


- Within 


26.128 


157 


.166 






Total 


28.918 


158 










Sniffed or Huffed Inhalants 






Between 


3.056 


1 


3.056 


'28.868 


.001 


Within 


16.617 


157 


.106 






Total 


19.673 


158 










Premature Sexual 


Relationships 






Between 


4.028 


1 


4.028 


17.705 


.001 


Within 


35.720 


157 


.228 






Total 


39.748 


158 










Unsure What it Meant to be Indian 






Between 


1.792 


1 


1.792 


8.763 


.004 


Within 


32.107 


157 


.205 






Total 


33.899 


158 












Wished not Born Indian 






Between 


.879 


1 


.879 


5.734 


.018 


Within 


24.077 


157 


.153 






Total 


24.956 


158 









115 



The Findings 



111 



Multivariate Analysis 

Discriminant analysis is a statistical technique which allows the investigation 
of the differences between two or more groups in relationship to several variables 
simultaneously. In discriminant analysis as with other multivariate techniques, the 
emphasis is upon analyzing the variables together rather than singly. In this way, 
the interaction of multiple variables can be considered. 

Discriminant analysis can be used either to describe the way groups differ or 
to predict membership in a group. In this study, discriminant analysis was used to 
describe the combination of variables that could be used to distinguish the dropouts 
from the high school graduates. Thus, for purposes of analysis, the 165 respondents 
were placed in two groups. One group of 40 contained individuals who had dropped 
out of high school; this included those who had later returned to complete a GED. 
The other group of 125 was made up of those who had graduated from high school. 

Two criteria were used for judging the hypothesis that it is possible to 
discriminate between high school graduates and dropouts using variables related to 
Personal Problems, Social Factors, Family Factors, and Cultural Issues. The first 
criterion was that the discriminant function produced by the analysis had to be 
describable using the structure coefficients with a value of .3 or greater. The second 
criterion was that the discriminant function had to correctly classify at least 75% of 
the cases in the analysis. 

The first criterion was necessary because the formula for discriminant analysis 
produces a discriminant function regardless of whether the function is meaningful. 
The structure matrix contains the coefficients which show the similarity between each 
individual variable and the overall discriminant function. If several of the variables 
do not have a coefficient of at least .3, it is impossible to discern the meaning of the 
function. In analyses which use a large number of variables, it is possible to get 
functions which have high predictive ability but which correlate with so many of the 
variables that it is impossible to decipher the meaning of the function. Therefore, 
this criterion places a logical restriction on the interpretation of the statistical output 
which requires that it must have clarity in order to be used to support the hypothesis. 



116 



The Findings 



112 



The second criterion demands that the discriminant function account for a 
significant amount of variance before it can be used to support the hypothesis. Since 
the analysis contained two groups, the percentage of correct classification of cases 
into a group if placements were made randomly was 50%. The criterion level of 
75% is a 25% increase over a chance assignment. Thus, in order for the 
discriminant function to be acceptable, it had to account for at least one-half of the 
variance available over a chance assignment of individuals to a group. 

Together these two criteria require that the results of a discriminant analysis 
be meaningful before they can be used to support the hypothesis. Analyses which 
use a large number of variables can produce functions which have high classification 
percentages but which offer no clear descriptive power. On the other hand, some 
analyses produce functions which can be clearly described but which have low 
classification power. Therefore, in combination these two criteria require that the 
function be both clearly descriptive and highly accurate in order to be used to 
support the hypothesis. 

For purposes of the discriminant analysis, the respondents were divided into 
the dropout group and the high school graduate group. The set of discriminating 
variables used to predict placement in these groups consisted of Personal p roblerns, 
School Factors, Family Factors, and Cultural Issues. The area of Personal Problems 
contained items dealing with substance abuse, peer pressure, trouble with the law, 
self-esteem, and teen pregnancy. The area of School Factors was made up of 
academic achievement, teacher attitudes, teacher expectations, school attendance, 
abuse by school employees, teacher prejudice, and being retained a grade in school. 
Family Factors included family composition, socioeconomic status, parental 
educational level, graduation status of older siblings, bilingualism, and substance 
abuse. Cultural Issues related to tribal self-identification and pride, and experienced 
level of discrimination and racism. The analysis contained a total of 23 separate 
variables: Personal Problems-5, School Factors-7, Family Factors-7, and Cultural 
lssues-4. 

The pooled within-groups correlations are the correlations for the variables with 
the respondents placed in their groups of either dropouts or graduates. The pooled 

117 



within-groups correlation matrix of discriminating variables was examined because 
interdependencies among variables is important in most multivariate analyses. That 
is, in order for multiple variables to be included in an analysis, they should not be 
sharing variance; a high correlation indicates that variables are indeed accounting for 
the same variance. The within-groups matrix reveals how the discriminant function 
is related to the variables within each group in the analysis. The examination of the 
253 coefficients in this analysis^showed that all were at a sufficiently weak level to 
retain the variables in the analysis. Only 1 coefficient was at the .5 level; 5 were 
at the .2 level; 21 were at the .2 level; and the remaining 226 were all below the .2 
level. Thus, the variables in this discriminant analysis were not related to each other 
and consequently were not sharing a common variance. 

Stepwise selection was used to determine which variables added most to the 
discrimination between the dropouts and the graduates. Stepwise procedures produce 
an optimal set of discriminating variables. Although there are various methods of 
selecting variables for inclusion in the discriminant analysis, Wilk's lambda was 
chosen for this analysis because it takes into consideration both the differences 
between the groups and the cohesiveness within the groups. Because of its approach 
to variable selection, Wilk's lambda is commonly used in discriminant analysis 
studies in education. As a result of this stepwise procedure, 12 variables were 
included in the discriminant function. The following discriminating variables and 
their corresponding Wilk's lambda values were selected: Skipping school-. 93; 
Socioeconomic status when growing up-. 87; Used alcohol in school-. 86; Older 
sibling dropped out of school-. 83; Liked way looked as a teen-. 81; Got pregnant 
while in school-. 79; Had teachers sensitive to the Indian culture-. 77; Had teachers 
prejudiced toward Indian people-. 76; Retained or held back a year in school-. 75; 
Drinker in home resulted in lack of rest-.74; Peer relationships-. 74; and Academic 
achievement level-. 73. The other 11 variables included in the analysis did not 
account for enough variance to be included in the discriminant function. 

Standardized discriminant function coefficients are used to determine which 
variables contribute most to the discrimination between the groups. By examining 
the standardized coefficients, the relative importance of each variable to the overall 



118 



The Findings 



114 



discriminant function can be determined. The standardized coefficients for this 
function which discriminated the dropouts from the graduates were as follows: 
Skipping school (-.51); Liked way looked as a teen (.41); Got pregnant while in 
school (-.41); Socioeconomic status when growing up (.40); Used alcohol in school 
(.39); Older sibling dropped out of school (-.34); Had teachers sensitive to the Indian 
culture (.27); Retained or held back a year in school (-.26); Alcoholic abusing 
parents (.23); teachers who were prejudiced toward Indian students (.22); Peer 
relationships (.20); and Academic achievement level (.18). Thus, skipping school, 
self-esteem, pregnancy, socioeconomic status, and using alcohol contributed about 
twice as much as the other variables in discriminating between dropouts and 
graduates. 

The structure matrix contains the coefficients which show the similarity 
between each individual variable and the total discriminate function. The variables 
with the highest coefficients have the strongest relationship to the discriminant 
function. These coefficients are used to name the discriminant function because they 
show how closely the variable and the overall discriminant function are related. In 
a study such as this in which the discriminant analysis is used for descriptive 
purposes, this is the most important information related to discriminant functions 
which satisfy the acceptance criteria. This elevated importance stems from the fact 
that interpreting the structure matrix results in naming the process that distinguishes 
the groups from each other. Since the overall purpose of discriminant analysis is to 
describe the phenomenon that discriminates the groups from each other, this logical 
process of giving meaning to the discriminant function by interpreting the structure 
matrix is central and critical to the whole process. In this interpreting process, 
variables with coefficients of approximately .3 and above are generally included in 
the interpretation. 

Four variables had sufficient coefficients to be included in the interpretation of 
the meaning of the discriminant function. They were as follows: Skipping school 
(-.45), Liked self as a teen (.40), Socioeconomic status when growing up (.39), and 
Retained or held back a year in school (-.29). Since the coefficients for all four 
variables were similar, they carried equal weight in naming the discriminant function. 

119 



Based on the strength of these variables, this discriminant function was named 
ALIENATION. Alienation will be discussed at length in Chapter 6. 

The percentage of cases correctly classified shows how accurate the 
discriminant function was in grouping the respondents. This discriminant function 
was 79,4% accurate in classifying cases. It correctly placed 100 (80%) in the high 
school graduate group and 31 (77.5%) in the dropout group. Thus, the discriminant 
function is a 29.4% improvement over chance in predicting group placement. 
Consequently, it demonstrates that high school graduates and dropouts can be 
distinguished on the basis of demographic factors. 

The discriminant function which was used to classify the cases and which can 
serve as guide for predicting future placement of respondents into these groups was 
as follows: 

D = .53 (Socioeconomic status when growing up) - .47 (Skipping 
school) + .76 (Used alcohol in school) - .67 (Older sibling dropped out 
of school) + .82 (Liked way looked as a teen) - .98 (Got pregnant while 
in school) + .23 (Had teachers sensitive to the Indian culture) + .48 
(Had teachers prejudiced toward Indian people) - .54 (Retained or held 
back a year in school) + .47 (Drinker in home resulted in lack of rest) 
+ .22 (Peer relationships) + .31 (Academic achievement level) - 1.23. 

The group centroid for the high school graduate group was -.34, and it was 1.06 for 
the dropout group. The canonical correlation is a measure of the degree of 
association between the discriminant scores and the groups and was .52 for this 
study. When this is squared, it indicates that the groups explain 27% of the variation 
in the discriminant function. 

Thus, a discriminant analysis was calculated to test the hypothesis that it was 
possible to use a variety of variables related to Personal Problems, School Factors, 
Family Factors, and Cultural Issues to discriminate between high school graduates 
and dropouts. Because a recognizable discriminant function was produced which was 
accurate in classifying respondents into the correct group and which explains a 
substantial amount of variance, the hypothesis is accepted. 



120 



The Findings 



116 



Interviews 

Seventy-six of the graduates and 37 of the dropouts participated in one-on-one 
interviews with the researcher. The purpose of the interviews was to gain further 
insight into the reasons why students dropped out or graduated. 

As with the statistical analysis, a pattern of poverty, and teacher/school 
alienation emerged for the dropouts. For the graduates, a strong functional family 
with high expectations for graduation emerged. In addition, graduates had a good 
self-image and realized that an education was necessary for a good job. 

Clearly, school is not a positive environment for those students who dropped 
out and it would appear that poverty interacts in their lives and their parents lives to 
the degree that there is little encouragement coming from the home. Although school 
is not always pleasant for graduates and many of them reported teachers and the 
school environment in a very negative manner , graduates seem to overcome these 
problems by having a family that sets high expectations and reinforces the importance 
of an education. 



«er|c 121 



Chapter 6 



What Do the Findings Mean? 



The purpose of this study was twofold: 

► To identify the factors of high school success (graduation) 

► To identify the factors that lead to failure (dropping out) 

For the purposes of analysis, frequency distributions, one way analysis of 
variance (ANOVAS), and discriminate analysis were conducted. This chapter will 
discuss the results of the study. 

Interviews were also conducted which provided even further credence to the 
results of the statistical analysis. Although researchers in the past have often used 
interviews as an important source of information about dropouts, there has been a 
tendency to treat this information as less important. In this study, the interviews 
validated the results of the questionnaire and demonstrated a clear trend between 
what was reported on the questionnaire and what the participants actually said. 

Univariate Analyses 

Numerous one-way analysis of variances were calculated. The dependent 
variables in each of these analyses were one of the variables from the list of Personal 
Factors, School Factors, or Cultural Factors. The results showed that skipping 
school, low self-esteem, teacher expectations and attitudes, and grade retention were 
significant for dropouts. Throughout the study, Using various means of analyses, 
these four variables surfaced again and again. 

Self-Esteem 

Self-esteem is something everyone heeds. It increases our chances of happiness 
and enables us to cope with life's disappointments and changes. We need to have 
a good sense of self-worth in order to recognize our place in the world. Self-esteem 
is important to our psychological well-being and affects virtually everything we say, 



in 122 



What Do the Findings Mean 



do, and think. Success in school is often highly correlated to self-esteem. Research 
generally indicates that American Indian students have lower self-esteem than 
students from other j acial/ethnic groups and that they have more difficulty in 
establishing tribal self-identity and pride in their Indianness. 

This study clearly showed that low self-esteem is a critical factor in the lives 
of dropouts and that graduates have a significantly better self-image. 

Furthermore, it was evident that students with low self-esteem suffered from 
an identity crisis. They wished they had not been born an Indian, they believed their 
lives would have been better had they not been born an Indian, and they more often 
than not felt discriminated against by their teachers. 

Low self-esteem in dropouts seems to contrioute to a variety of other problems, 
such as skipping school, using inhalants and other substances, succumbing to peer 
pressure, and becoming more involved in premature sexual activities, which led to 
further problems. 

Skipping School 

Throughout the study, it was evident that students who dropped out of school 
begin a pattern of avoiding school. They leave because they do not have much 
success in school, they do not like school, they are bored, they have problems with 
teachers, or they are "humiliated" or "ashamed" because of lack of proper clothing, 
money for school supplies, or lack of money to participate in various school 
activities. For many of them, they eventually drop out and accept low paying jobs 
(generally ranch work or baby sitting) in order to help out their families or to gain 
independence from an abusive home life. 

Significant to this pattern of dropping out was the fact that students who 
skipped school felt that their teachers had very low expectations of them and were 
insensitive to the Indian culture. 

Teacher Expectations 

A number of researchers have attributed the historically poor achievement of 
Indian students to white teachers who are unable or unwilling to pay attention to the 



What Do the Findings Mean 



cultural background and values of American Indian students. Some researchers have 
found that white teachers often demonstrate contempt for Indian students. For the 
participants in this study, having an insensitive teacher made a significant difference 
in their lives. These students were more likely to skip school and were also more 
likely to be abused by school employees including teachers, more likely to become 
involved in using inhalants, and more likely to become sexually active. There were 
other significant differences between students who had sensitive, caring teachers and 
those who did not. Particularly, those students with insensitive teachers were more 
likely to have low self-esteem and were more likely to be held back a year in school 
by their teachers. 

Retention 

Research of the dropout phenomenon has consistently reported that student 
retention is associated with an increased probability of dropping out, rather than with 
improved chances for graduation. Students with retention in two grades have a 100% 
probability of dropping out. 

For this study, 57% of those who dropped out had been retained at least one 
year in school. Students with the lowest academic achievement were most likely to 
be held back in school. Participants who reported that their teachers were insensitive 
and uncaring or had low expectations of them were also more likely to be retained, 
and students with low self-esteem were most often retained a year or more in school 
by ti^ir teachers. 

Conclusions 

American Indian students who drop out of school, for the purposes of this 
study, demonstrate significant differences in self-esteem, skipping school, teacher 
expectations and attitudes, and grade retention from those who graduate. Three of 
these variables, (skipping school, teacher expectations and attitudes, and grade 
retention) are linked directly to the school itself. The other variable, low self-esteem 
in the case of dropouts, may in fact be a direct result of what has happened to the 
student while he/she is in school. Many researchers have noted that American Indian 



What Do the Findings Mean 



120 



youth tend to show a decline in self-esteem with increasing age. Research has also 
revealed a negative correlation between years spent in school and academic 
achievement. 

The most fundamental belief about schools is that teachers and students should 
develop a relationship of mutual respect and trust. Inherent in this belief is the 
concept that teachers must help students overcome any problems or barriers that they 
may have to being successful in school. Further, teachers should be accountable, 
they should be persistent and consistent with youth, they should practice an expanded 
role beyond that of classroom teacher, and their attitude should be enthusiastic and 
optimistic. 

Results of this study question whether those beliefs, behaviors, and practices 
are widely occurring in schools on Indian reservations. For those students who are 
successful, this may in fact be the case, but it does not appear to be happening with 
students who are at risk of dropping out. Thus, for discussion sake, let us consider 
the student who comes to school feeling good about himself or herself. By the time 
this student has reached the third grade (if other researchers are correct) this student 
has begun experiencing feelings of low self-worth, inadequacies, and alienation 
within the school environment. This may be because of self-perceived poor academic 
success or subtle or direct messages of failure, incompetency, or inadequacy from 
the teacher. It may come from the lack of attention paid to a student, the lack of 
interaction between the student and the teacher, the lack of reinforcement or 
encouragement. Whatever the case, suppose this student begins to doubt his/her own 
abilities which results in lowered self-esteem. By the time the student reaches junior 
high or high school, he or she may have been retained in grade level, further 
validating the child's failure. Skipping school often follows this pattern. , Children 
seek to avoid situations that make them uncomfortable and school is uncomfortable 
for students who are not successful. At the same time these events are occurring, 
the growing adolescent seems to suffer an identity crisis. It is at this stage that they 
begin asking questions about who they are. For the Indian adolescent, anger and 
rejection of being Indian is common. Without a support system in the school or at 
home to help young people through this period, many turn to peers, who like 



themselves are going through similar crisis: rejection of self and of schools that do 
not meet their needs. It is at this period, that peer pressure becomes the greatest. 
For many students, rebellion follows. They begin to experiment with drugs, 
drinking, and sex. Outside of school they feel good, but in school they feel bad. 
So they take the next step - dropping out. 

Graduates who participated in this study reported that family expectations 
(particularly those of the mother and grandmother) kept them in school. They 
further noted that a strong belief in themselves kept them in school. On the other 
hand, a significant number of the dropouts reported living in abusive homes, but also 
reported being abused by teachers and other adults in their lives. If this be the case, 
many of the dropouts have little support at home to compensate for their failure in 
school and their perceived low self-worth. Furthermore, children who are abused 
most often believe they are unworthy. To have teachers and school employees abuse 
you is a further validation of unworthiness. 

Dropouts seem to be caught up in a web of destruction brought on by a number 
of external forces. For too long, we have explained the failure of Indian students 
as a "within child" deficit. That is, the child fails in school because of the deficits 
he or she brings to school, such as substandard reservation English, cultural 
differences, dysfunctional homelife, and poverty. Thus, we have failed to look 
beyond these problems, because if failure is not the fault of the child, then it lies 
elsewhere. And that elsewhere may be the school. 

This discussion will be continued following a look at the findings of the 
multivariate analyses. 

Multivariate Analyses 

Discriminant analysis is a statistical technique which allows the investigation 
of the differences between two or more groups in relationship to several variables 
simultaneously. It can be used to describe the way groups differ or to predict 
membership in a group. In this study, discriminant analysis was used to describe the 
combination of variables that could be used to distinguish the dropouts from the high 
school graduates. Stepwise selection wa^ used to determine which variables added 



What Do the Findings Mean 



122 



mostly to the discrimination between the dropouts and graduates. Wilk's lambda was 
chosen for this analysis. Four variables had sufficient coefficients to be included in 
the interpretation of the meaning of the discriminant function. They included: 
skipping school, self-esteem, socioeconomic status, and retention in grade. Since the 
coefficients for all four variables were similar, they carried equal weight in naming 
the discriminant function. Based on the strength of these variables, this discriminant 
function was named ALIENATION. 

Alienation as the Discriminant between 
Dropouts and Graduates 

A Theory of School Alienation 

The concept of alienation has been used frequently to explain both individual 
and collective reactions to a vast array of social problems. Because alienation theory 
points to the contradictions in the social structure, the most commonly proposed 
functional model has been termed "strain theory," a cpncept best developed by 
Robert Merton (1968). In Merton's conceptualization, strain results from a gap 
between culturally prescribed goals and structurally or institutionally available means 
of achieving those goals. He perceives this gap as real and perpetual since cultural 
goals are universal, but access to the means for attaining those goals are not 
universal; rather they are stratified or differentially allocated across social groups. 
Stratification itself implies the scarcity of means and resources for attaining the 
means. Individuals who lack the means and resources often respond with a wide 
range of emotions from anger and rage to despair and disillusionment. Therefore, 
the compliant student who stays in school despite poor grades is found at one 
extreme, while the rule breaking, truant student is found at the other end. 1 

Recently, Farnworth and Leiber, in their study of factors that account for 
juvenile delinquency and other social deviance, including dropping out of school, 
have argued against previous researchers who have suggested that the perceived gap 
between educational aspirations and educational expectations is the source of 
alienation. 2 



What Do the Findings Mean 



In reference group theory may reside the solution to this debate. Reference 
groups are made up of the individuals or groups that an individual knows, knows 
about, or serves as role models, frames of reference, and standards of judgment and 
comparison in the formation of attitudes, self-esteem, and actions. Reference groups 
serve as both positive models and negative models. Reference group theory argues 
that a significant linkage exists between the social constructs and the definitions that 
emerge from teacher-student interactions and the likelihood that a student will fail. 

There are two types of reference group functions that produce distinct 
perceptions about a student's social world. They include comparative reference 
groups and normative reference groups. Comparative reference groups most often 
allow students to determine whether or not they are advantaged or deprived relative 
to other students. For example, when students compare their experiences to other 
students within their class, they may discover that other students receive more 
attention, are treated more favorably, receive more praise, etc. This leads to feelings 
of personal deprivation which results in feelings of anger and frustration and is acted 
out by skipping school, feeling unworthy, or sabotaging one's own future by failing 
to do homework and generally not doing well in school. Using different comparative 
reference groups may produce different perceptions. For example, the child who 
comes from poverty in comparing himself/herself with a student of higher 
socioeconomic means may discover that teachers have higher expectations of those 
students or trea them with more respect. As a result, the poorer student comes to 
question whether school is a place for low-income students; perhaps it is a place for 
affluent students. 

The perceptions of students who feel personal deprivation can be improved or 
enhanced in a negative or positive manner by the normative reference group. This 
group basically defines the expectations of students of different social status. In 
effect, they enforce the norms and as a result create a self-blame or system-blame 
explanation for why students fail. As a result, teachers blame students for their 
failure. The Native culture of Indian students has been used to explain their poor 
performance. Teachers have blamed students from poor families and from 
disadvantaged backgrounds for their shortcomings in school. Currently, students are 



What Do the Findings Mean 



being blamed for coming from one-parent homes. Students from families on AFDC 
and other welfare programs have repeatedly been blamed for the conditions of their 
families. 

Teachers can clearly serve as a significant reference group for Indian children, 
but the content of their messages seems to vary in part with their expectations. 
Indians students who drop out do not perceive their teachers as caring about them. 
They do not believe their teachers have anything but low expectations of them. 

There are those scholars who would lead us to believe that students who feel 
deprived are not aware of their deprivation or the gaps between their expectations 
and experiences. Like Seeman (1959, 1967, 1975), this researcher believes that 
American Indian students are aware of the gap between their expectations and 
experiences. Seeman suggested that alienation reflects feelings of powerlessness, 
meaninglessness, normlessness, isolation, self-estrangement, and cultural 
estrangement. 3 

Poverty and socioeconomic status which is so closely intertwined with reference 
group theory is a major problem for American Indian students. 

Conditions of Poverty 

Poverty for American Indian students is not just the socioeconomic status of 
family. It involves a whole range of behaviors often associated with reservation life 
and is often erroneously attributed by many experts to being "part of the Indian 
culture. " It is part of the everyday lives of a people who have remained the "poorest 
of the poor" throughout the history of this country. Poverty involves living in 
communities where alcoholism, drug abuse, lack of job opportunities, welfare, and 
inadequate housing is often the norm rather than the exception. 

Poverty is part of growing up in a family where the parents are preoccupied 
or even consumed by immediate survival needs, such as putting food on the table, 
providing shelter, and paying the utility bills-and have little energy left for loving, 
playing, nurturing, or teaching. It is a part of learning that if you are poor, you are 
often rejected— rejected by peers and rejected by your teachers. It is a part of 
learning that if you are poor, you settle for what others do not want. It is a part of 



What Do the Findings Mean 



125 



'ERIC 



learning that you do not expect much of yourself or of others. It is a part of not 
expecting to have a better life than your parents. It is a part of accepting that the 
schools are not going to teach you, and when they do not meet your needs, it only 
reaffirms your beliefs. 

Growing up poor places American Indian students at high risk of dropping out 
of school. Inadequate nutrition, clothing, and shelter contribute to their personal and 
family problems. Growing up poor often results in students not feeling very good 
about themselves. Growing up poor in many cases stifles motivation and dreams and 
results in broken promises and loss of will. 

Growing up the "poorest" of the poor, even on an Indian reservation where the 
average income is below the national poverty level, contributes to students leaving 
school prematurely. In fact, it may be the root of many of the problems students 
encounter in school. Yet rather than confronting the problem of poverty, 
anthropologists, researchers, and educators have chosen instead to mislabel the 
conditions of poverty as conditions of culture and have explained away many of the 
behaviors of students as an "Indian thing" rather than a "poverty thing." As a result, 
various remedies for the "cultural conflict" experienced by students in school have 
been devised, with little attention paid to the poverty conditions that have created the 
problems in the first place. 

Summary 

Of the 24 factors used to discriminate between dropouts and graduates, four 
factors kept surfacing: socioeconomic status, grade retention, skipping school, and 
self-esteem. When the factors were examined for significant differences, skipping 
school, self-esteem, grade retention, and teacher expectations and attitudes repeatedly 
surfaced. When the two groups were interviewed, socioeconomic status, self-esteem, 
and teacher attitudes surfaced as the primary trends of discussion. 

This study demonstrates that it is not the student who is failing, but schools 
that fail students. It is not the culture, nor cultural discontinuity that creates 
problems for students. The failure of students to succeed in school is brought about 
by external forces which attack the student's self-esteem, alienating him/her from the 



130 



What Do the Findings Mean 



126 



school environment. The majority of the dropouts in this study did not choose to 
leave school, they were driven out. The alienation of these students began very 
early, probably in kindergarten. As one bad experience was replaced by another, 
students began to feel anger, frustration, and lack of self worth. School was not a 
healthy place or a happy place for them. Some students who experience these 
negative events remain in school, but many others rebel. The dropouts simply made 
a decision that they could do without school. 



131 



Chapter 7 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



The American Indian child generally comes from a cultural environment where 
he/she understands his/her immediate world and his/her learning begins quite early. 
The child learns at a very young age what is important to his/her family, how he/she 
should behave in this familiar setting, and what is valued not only by his/her family, 
but by his/her relatives and the people within the community. None of this learning 
requires intellectual tools, structured rules, or punitive disciplinary methods. The 
child learns by observing, imitating, and practicing. 

On the other hand, at the age of five or thereabouts, the young American 
Indian child is thrown into another setting where he/she is asked to make a leap from 
" the familiar culture of the home to the unfamiliar culture of the school. The child 
is expected to do this without having any transitional or adjustment experiences. 
He/She has little assistance in formulating and understanding of what is expected in 
this new environment. More often than not, the child encounters teachers who do 
not take the time to facilitate a transition and thus becomes lost, confused, detached, 
frustrated, and angry. Furthermore, the student may encounter a system which labels 
him/her familiar mode of behavior as "aberrant" and one that needs to be corrected, 
without any understanding on his/her part as to why the behavior is suspect. 

Half of these five-year-olds who enter this school culture will survive, and 
sadly, half will not. To effect a positive change in these statistics, there are a 
number of basic approaches that all Indian schools should consider implementing. 
Some of these approaches may result in a reordering of priorities and resources, but 
if we are to reach at-risk youth, there is really no alternative. These approaches 
include: 

► Assure a school climate that promotes a positive, humanistic approach 
to dealing with children and their problems. 

► Employ only highly committed teachers who are willing to take on the 
roles of teacher, counselor, parent, and advocate and deal with the 



™ 132 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



128 



problems of the "whole child," including a sensitivity to the problems 
the child may be experiencing at home as well as at school. 

► A careful, extensive monitoring and supervision of daily instructional 
activities should be carried out. 

► Student and parent complaints should be investigated in a timely, 
impartial, and consistent manner. 

► Establish expectations where all children can succeed and where 
teachers are held professionally accountable for the success of 
students. 

► Identify and remediate academic failures of students at each grade 
level so that any such problems do not persist. 

► Offer night school and summer remediation programs for students who 
fall behind in their classes, regardless of the reason. - 

► Establish an alternative school, a "school within a school," with a 
faculty of four or five highly committed teachers who work with a 
limited number of students (approximately 50-60) so that the students 
will be involved in a nurturing, caring environment that tends not only 
to their academic needs but to their emotional, social, and 
psychological needs. 

► Work with community agencies including the tribal police and judicial 
system to help students from dysfunctional families or those in trouble 
with the law. 

► Establish a peer counseling program and a peer tutoring program so 
that older children may develop responsibility while working with 
younger children. 

► Establish rules that ensure a positive atmosphere and supportive peer 
culture. 

► Inform and provide in-service to teachers about the problems of the 
at-risk child and require them to be alert to student needs and 
problems and to report those concerns. 

► Establish a post-secondary planning program with the school using 
computer labs and in-class activities for mock employment situations 
and career exploration projects to motivate students to begin thinking 
about careers, post-secondary education, and employment. 



133 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



129 



► Form a community task force on at-risk students to determine how the 
community can help the schools in meeting the needs of students. 

Although the above list of components should be a minimum plan for meeting 
the needs of students, any reform in Indian education and effort to reduce the 
dropout rate should not proceed without an affirmation of what is really meant when 
we speak of Indian education. 

r 

The history of Indian education has basically reflected the goals and interests 
of American education in general. Currently, there is no evidence that Indian 
education is working on a broad scale. It has failed to provide teachers, managers, 
leaders, doctors, nurses, and other professional and technical personnel in sufficient 
numbers to allow tribes complete sovereignty or independence from experts outside 
the Indian community. It has not succeeded in keeping half of the students in school, 
let alone developing a citizenry that has an opportunity to be gainfully employed or 
* who can realize their dreams and be hopeful of a better future for their children or 
grandchildren. 

On the other hand, Indian education has succeeded to some degree in the 
construction of a new generation of Indians who have pulled themselves up from 
poverty and racism "by their own bootstraps," which is a crucial complement to 
those in power for the continuation of the present educational system. Educators and 
politicians have used the basic "bootstrap" mythology of individual advancement in 
defense of the inadequacies of Indian education. This approach has overshadowed 
many of the long-term problems that have existed, such as poverty, inadequate 
nutrition, poor health care, substandard housing, and an inadequately educated 
population, and has resulted in American Indians blaming themselves for their failure 
and personal conditions rather than protesting the causes of the failure and the need 
for restructuring Indian schools and Indian communities. 

Compounding the problem in Indian education is the fact that American Indians 
are a small minority in a nation of many larger minority groups, and fragmentation 
has resulted. In many cases, Indian school districts may have more non-Indians on 
the school board than Indians. In other cases, political districts and school districts 
have been gerrymandered in order to deter elections of American Indians to school 



134 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



130 



boards or to state governments. As a result, Indian schools often are not operating 
in the interest of the American Indians within their own communities, but promote 
the interests of those outside the Indian community. 

In 1966, Norman Chansky wrote about the "untapped good" of high school 
dropouts where he likened the dropout to a seed. In his analogy, he suggested that 
just as the seeds must have good soil and adequate moisture to sprout and flourish, 
so must the school provide a nurturing environment for children to learn. If weeds 
endanger the growth of the "sprouts," they must be eliminated; so must the problems 
endangering the child's success. In applying Chansky's philosophy to Indian 
education, it is time for Indian people to eliminate the "weeds" that have endangered 
tribal groups and the education of Indian youth since the beginning of their 
interaction with Euro- Americans. 1 

For starters, we must redefine Indian education from the perspective of Indians. 
We must develop an educational program that gives meaning to our lives as Indians 
and our culture, while at the same time instructing students in the underlying ideas 
of the American culture and providing the intellectual tools needed to survive in a 
contemporary, global society. 

We must listen to our youth. If there is to be a change in Indian education, it 
must involve them. Contemporary Indian youth are overburdened with the messages 
we have given them. On one hand, we tell them we want them to stay in school and 
do well, even go to college and graduate, but at the same time we tell them not to 
assimilate or they will be rejected by their own people. We tell them we want them 
to learn their own language, and yet as adults, we speak English to them- listing 
enumerable excuses why we do not speak or choose not to learn our own Native 
languages. We raise them to believe that they have a purpose in life and a 
responsibility to their people and fail to guide them in becoming responsible or in 
developing goals and purpose. 

We must listen to our elders who have experienced the past and tell us that 
Indian education today is no more than a continuation of the education of a century 
or two centuries or even three centuries ago. We must learn from them so that we 
will not continue to repeat the tragedies of the past. 



135 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



131 



We must challenge ourselves as Indian educators to question our roles within 
the schools. . Many of us, whether intentionally or unintentionally, have become 
caught up in a struggle between the Indian community and the non-Indian majority 
who administer our schools. In many cases we find ourselves not as advocates of 
our communities, but struggling to preserve a system that we know does not work. 

As tribal groups, we must challenge ourselves to make some very tough 
decisions about the direction of Indian education. We must decide; first of all, if the 
Native language is important to our cultural heritage and our identity; and if it is, we 
must devise a plan to ensure that it will not vanish within the next generation or two. 
It may be that many tribes will decide that language renewal and restoration is 
insignificant to their identity as a tribal people. If a tribe decides otherwise, it must 
set in motion a plan for language renewal where tribal members take the 
responsibility for developing it and causing it to flourish as a part of their identity. 
If the Native language is ecential, it should be taught in the schools from K-12, not 
as a foreign language, but as a language that children will be expected to learn and 
speak. In doing so, the adults must recognize that they cannot expect of their 
children what they are unwilling to do themselves. To expect the schools to be the 
sole purveyors of the language will most likely assure its demise. Therefore, major 
steps must be taken to assure that the tribe, the community, the parents, and the 
schools are involved. 

A redefined plan for Indian education will require a broad-based approach from 
Indian teachers, Indian administrators, Indian researchers, community agencies, tribal 
government, and youth and parents working together as a team. There is no one 
solution to the problems confronting Indian students or no one answer as to why 
students are dropping out; however, this study does identify four resiliency factors 
which may be used as a starting point for developing a dropout 
intervention/prevention program for American, Indian students. 

Key features of a comprehensive program must include commitment, 
coordination, awareness, allocation of resources, and individualized attention for 
American Indian students at risk. The first step is to make parents, teachers, 
administrators, and school board members aware of the problem and its causes and 



136 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future . 132 

consequences, as well as the resiliency factors common to students who are 
successful. With an understanding of the problem as well as the resiliency factors, 
educators and parents are in a better position to make a commitment to deal with the 
problems encountered by American Indian students. 

With these thoughts in mind, this writer offers the following recommendations 
for reducing the dropout rate for all American Indian students, male and female: 

► I believe that Indian schools should be restructured to include 
three "transitional phases 11 to enable students to adjust to the 
demands of an academic environment and to develop an 
understanding of themselves and what their tribal groups expect 
of them as adults. 

Although this recommendation will require that students spend an increased 
amount of time in completing a high school education, it would appear that the extra 
time spent would be offset by increased graduation rates, a better prepared work 
force, and a population of young people who have a good understanding of 
themselves and the needs of their tribes. 

These transitional phases would occur three times during the students' 
elementary and secondary years. The first phase would begin when students first 
enter schooi. Instead of a full year of kindergarten, students should enter school 
where they have an opportunity to learn how to interact, communicate, and respond 
to the expectations of an academic environment. During this period, parents and 
elders would work with the teachers in developing a school adjustment plan for 
Indian students, respective to both the culture of the home and the culture of the 
school. Teachers within the school would be required to implement teaching 
strategies that complement the learning environment of the home, while at the same 
time assuring that students have a period of time to experiment, explore, and adjust 
to the use of learning tools, such as books, paper, pencils, and crayons, and to 
improve communication skills to assure better student/teacher interaction. Once 
students leave this transitional phase and move into kindergarten, an emphasis should 
be placed on vocabulary development to better prepare them for the demands of 
reading and writing in the lower elementary years. 



tRiC 137 



The second transitional phase would occur at the end of the fourth grade prior 
to the time that students enter a middle school environment. From past experience, 
we know that American Indian students' test scores, achievement tests, and 
attendance begin to plummet during pre-adolescence. Discipline may become a 
problem. Attitudes may change. It is during this time that students experience 
increased negative messages from the school and teachers about their abilities and 
worth. As these messages accumulate, students begin to disengage from school It 
is also during this time that students are changing emotionally, physically, and 
psychologically. They are gaining independence and maturity. As they come to 
terms with their changing bodies and changing roles, their intellectual abilities, 
perceptions of themselves, their peers, their relationships, and their world begin to 
change as well. It is during this time of change for the students that schools should 
change as well. A transitional phase at this time should focus on the involvement of 
elders, responsible community leaders, parents, and teachers in resolving the 
conflicts experienced by pre-adolescents, while at the same time providing an 
opportunity for students to learn more about themselves and their culture. During 
this stage, female students could be guided by female elders and male students by 
male elders, who would teach them about the traditional gender roles within the 
society, their ceremonies, and tribal lore and history, while simultaneously using 
traditional counseling methods to allow for social and psychological adjustment. 

The third transitional phase would take place following the completion of the 
eighth grade. It would provide an opportunity for students to continue their training 
of traditional roles and expectations under the guidance of tribal elders, while also 
providing them with an opportunity to perfect their basic skills in math, reading, and 
writing. Completion of this phase would better prepare students to face the academic 
rigors of high school courses, while at the same time reinforcing their roles within 
a tribal community and helping them set goals for their roles 3: adults. 

It is the belief of this writer that such a school structure would not only allow 
students to be better prepared to handle the stresses of school and to be more 
academically prepared, but such a structure would also nurture the child's own 



138 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



134 



"spirituality" and tribal identity through the involvement with elders and other tribal 
people. 

► I believe that Indian schools should implement a thorough 
screening and employment process for personnel to guarantee that 
Indian students will no longer be subjected to psychological and 
physical abuse. This screening process would also assure that 
teachers who are employed have demonstrated excellence or the 
potential for excellence. 

Indian school districts should implement immediately a screening and 
employment process for all school personnel, whether professional, paraprofessional, 
or other support staff. This screening should not only include a thorough 
background check including references, but should require drug and alcohol testing 
of each potential employee. School boards should be especially discriminating when 
it comes to applicants who ricochet about Indian Country, from one reservation to 
another and from one Indian school to another, like stray bullets. Many of those 
individuals, who have been found incompetent or unworthy to serve in one Indian 
district, find employment in another Indian district. This is often the result of 
districts obtaining unchallenged resignations for the promise of providing future 
recommendations. In addition, it may be necessary that school boards implement a 
policy of a two-year "provisional employment" for all school personnel in order to 
determine if an individual is suitable to teach or work in a reservation setting. 
During that time, personnel would be required to become "culturally sensitive" 
through training and involvement within the community. Moreover, residency and 
involvement within the reservation community should be a requirement, not an 
option. Teachers who are unwilling or unable to comply with these expectations 
should be dismissed, or better yet, not employed in the first place. 

Further, Indian people should cease regarding the school system as an 
"employment bureau" where school board members are expected to reward family 
members and other constituents by providing employment within the school. Politics 
and family loyalties must cease to guide school policies and employment procedures. 

In addition, the number of Indian employees should be increased in the schools. 
Districts should seek out community elders and respected community persons who 



139 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



135 



can act in a professional capacity (such as traditional counseling) without the 
requirements of degrees and certification. Furthermore, Indian communities should 
aggressively seek out young people who demonstrate the interest in and potential for 
working with children, and provide opportunities for them to go to college and to 
obtain teaching degrees. 

The number of teachers, counselors, and administrators within the schools who 
are specifically trained to work with high-risk minority children should be increased. 
American Indians should demand that universities and colleges within their respective 
states respond to the needs of Indian education and boycott those who do not. 

In the event that a tribal college is located on a respective reservation, the 
school district, community, and tribal leaders should work toward assisting that 
college in developing four-year degree programs which would allow students the 
opportunity to remain at home and complete their college degrees. These students 
in turn would be more likely to stay within the community and serve in professional 
roles. 

► I believe that we should redesign school district policies that are 
aimed at keeping students in schools rather than keeping them out* 

A redesign of school district policies should involve school personnel as well 
as parents and students. , Many of the current policies regarding discipline, 
attendance, truancies, and tardies keep students out of school. School boards, 
teachers, and administrators should be aware that districts with too many rules are 
simply asking for those rules to be broken. In essence, districts and their personnel 
are sending out the message that "we expect you to misbehave." It should be 
emphasized that expectations among school personnel may actually constitute a self- 
fulfilling prophecy for children and that harsh disciplinary rules about suspension and 
expulsion may actually be interpreted by students as an invitation to dropout. 
Furthermore, disciplinary rules within the classroom that promote failing grades, 
such as the refusal to accept homework under certain conditions, should cease. 
Classroom discipline and management rules should be kept to a minimum and should 
facilitate the student's ability to move about the room and within the school in order 
to take care of personal and academic needs, as long as the student's behavior does 



140 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



136 



not interfere with or hurt his/her learning or another's learning. District and 
Classroom rules should allow students within a reservation community and school to 
-develop a classroom "family relationship This would encourage students to be 
supportive of each other and would allow them to work out problems jointly. In this 
way, they will learn that rules are important and in their own interest. 

► I believe we should implement an "Adopt-a-Student" program 
among the faculty, elders, and responsible community persons to 
assure that each at-risk child has a nonexploitative relationship 
with at least one adult on a daily basis. 

School districts cannot afford to ignore the research about Indian children 
which unquestionably demonstrates that children who succeed in school generally 
have at least one nonexploitative adult relationship. This individual would have the 
responsibility of encouraging the at-risk students, supporting them, and counseling 
them. Furthermore, when needed, this individual may be an advocate on the part of 
the students with the school and other teachers, and would assist in assuring that 
students are receiving proper services from other agencies. 

It cannot be assumed that these relationships develop on their own, nor can it 
be assumed that the students will initiate such relationships. Within a school setting, 
"adoptive students" could be assigned either through volunteering or random 
drawing. Teachers would then be trained in ways of supporting at-risk youth. As 
a result, the district could be assured that on a daily basis, there would be at least 
one adult providing positive attention to the at-risk child. Obviously, a critical 
element of such a plan would include teacher confidentiality with regard to the 
identity of the "adoptive student." For such a plan to work, the at-risk child should 
not know that s/he has been "chosen." 

The elder volunteers and community persons could serve as advisors and 
mentors to the students on an "as needed" basis, to assure that at-risk students have 
an advocate within the community as well as the school. Tribal advocates could help 
students in ways that teachers may not be able to help. For example, students who 
experience racism from their peers, or problems involving family loyalties, or other 
such problems directly related to their tribal identity may be best served by a tribal 
member. This plan would also allow for the further nurturing and motivation of the 



141 



Using the Past as a Patfr to the Future 



137 



student and may in fact complement the development of a "spirituality" found in 
students who are most likely to graduate from school. 

► I believe that Indian schools must establish a nontraditional 
curricula as an option for students who are at risk, and 
incorporate within the implementation process a strong dropout 
retrieval plan. 

Despite all the other recommendations that this writer has suggested, the fact 
is that there will always be a percentage of students who will remain at high risk and 
will not graduate unless other options are available to them. At this point, there is 
not a body of research that clearly substantiates that a "culturally relevant" curricula 
will actually make a difference in reducing the dropout rate of Indian students. 
However, a nontraditional curricula, with an individualized approach in courses like 
English and math, holds tremendous promise. In addition, the development of 
semester-long, self-paced course packets in required courses for students who are 
homebound due to illness or pregnancy, students who are in drug and alcohol 
rehabilitation programs, eic, holds great potential for keeping at-risk youth in 
school. The use of such a nontraditional curricula could also be combined with the 
use of cooperative learning components and "real-life" reservation examples and 
problems whenever possible. Students could be provided experiential educational 
opportunities where they would participate in programs within their communities 
such as assisting with an elderly program, a child care center, a Head Start program, 
or tutoring younger students in the school for credit toward graduation. Such 
experiences would not only give at-risk students a greater sense of purpose, but 
would also orient them to the needs of their communities and the world of work. 

Furthermore, reservation schools should establish a child care center within the 
school for students with children and offer special classes in child development, 
nutrition, and care, as well as counseling for teenage mothers. Specific to this 
training should be discussions regarding child abuse. This program should coincide 
with a program addressing the consequences and responsibilities of teen fatherhood. 

In addition to the nontraditional curricula, school districts should develop a 
plan for dropout retrieval which would encourage those students who have dropped 
out of school to return to school in a way that is nonthreatening to their self-esteem. 



142 



Using the Past as a Path to the Future 



138 



A Final Note 

In this chapter, I have tried to provide tribal leaders, school leaders, educators, 
parents, and community persons within Indian communities a forum for discussion 
and suggestions for re-evaluating and redefining Indian education. Perhaps as you 
critique these ideas, you will find that not all of the suggestions are appropriate to 
your schools or that there are other components that should be initiated in addition 
to those offered. It is my sincerest hope that this study and the results presented 
here will at best provide a basis for discussion about Indian education. 

We can no longer conceal student failure under the guise of cultural 
discontinuity or socioeconomic status of the family. We can no longer blame our 
children for their failures. We cannot continue to place the failure of the past three 
centuries on a government bureaucracy that has not always had our best interests at 
heart. We must be willing to protest and change the conditions of our schools and 
bring about the needed reforms on a community-by-community basis. 

Moreover, we should fight any attempts to define ourselves and our cultures 
by anything but those traits, values, traditions, and characteristics that have been 
passed down by our ancestors. To submit to or embrace outside interpretations 
serves no purposes but to fuel the fires of racial prejudices, lower our own self- 
worth, and inhibit the development and potential of ourselves and our children. 

In the end, it is up to us, as American Indian people, to hold ourselves 
accountable for what happens to our schools and in our schools during the next 
century. We should make it clear that those who are currently teaching in our 
schools and running our schools really have no choice except to accept the needed 
reforms. Admittedly, this may be considered a controversial plan of action, but if we 
as American Indians are serious about the education our children, we really have no 
alternative. 



143 



Chapter 1 Notes 



1. J.S. Catterall and E. Cota-Robies, "The Educationally At-Risk: What the 
Numbers Mean," Accelerating the Education of At-Risk Students (Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University, Center for Educational Research at Stanford, 1988), 6-7. 

2. H.M. Levin, The Educationally Disadvantaged: A National Crisis, 
Working Paper No. 6, State Youth Initiatives Project (Philadelphia: Public/Private 
Ventures, 1985), 1. 

3. Ibid.; H.L. Hodgkinson, All One System: Demographics of Education, 
Kindergarten through Graduate School (Washington, DC: Institute for Educational 
Leadership, 1985); S.S. Peng and R.T. Takai, High School Dropouts: Descriptive 
Information from High School and Beyond, Bulletin (Washington, DC: National 
Center for Educational Statistics, 1983), 1-9; A.J. Kolstad and J.A. Owings, "High 
School Dropouts Who Change Their Minds about School" (Paper presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the American Education Association, San Francisco, CA, April 
1986). 

4. J.L. Kaplan and E.C. Luck, "The Dropout Phenomenon as a Social 
Problem," Educational Forum 42 (1977): 41-56; H.M. Levin, The Educationally 
Disadvantaged: A National Crisis, Working Paper No. 6, State Youth Initiatives 
Project (Philadelphia: Public/Private Ventures, 1989). 

5. K. Polk, "The New Marginal Youth," Crime and Delinquency 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1984); P. Baker, "A Report on the National 
Longitudinal Surveys of Youth Labor Market Experience in 1982," Pathways to the 
Future, Report No. 4 (Worthington, OH: Ohio State University, Center for Human 
Resource Research, 1984); D. Mann, "Can We Help Dropouts?" Teachers College 
Record 87 (1986): 307-23. 

6. J.S. Catterall, On the Social Costs of Dropping out of School (Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University, Educational Policy Institute, School of Education, 1985); 
T. Thornberry, M. Moore, and R.L. Christian, "The Effect of Dropping out of High 
School on Subsequent Criminal Behavior," Criminology 23 (1985): 3-18. 



139 144 



Chapter 1 Notes 



7. F. Erickson, 'Transformation and School Success: The Politics and 
Culture of Educational Achievement/' Anthropology and Education Quarterly 18 
(1987): 335-56; K.N. Giles, Indian High School Dropout: A Perspective (Milwaukee: 
University of Wisconsin— Milwaukee, Midwest National Origin Desegregation 
Assistance Center, 1985); S.V. Goldman and R. McDermott, "The Culture of 
Competition in American Schools," Interpretive Ethnography of Education, ed. 
G. Spindler and L. Spindler (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1987). 

8. M. Gibson, "Punjabi Immigrants in an American High School," 
Interpretive Ethnography of Education, ed. G. Spindler and L. Spindler (Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1987); W. Mahood, "Born Losers: Dropouts and 
Pushouts," NASSP Bulletin 65 (1981): 54-57; H.M. Levin, The Costs to the Nation 
of Inadequate Education, Report to the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Equal 
Education Opportunity (Washington, DC: GPO, 1972); S. Bowles and H. Gintis, 
Schooling in Capitalist America (Nejv York: Basic Books, 1976); T.P. Carter, 
Mexican-Americans in School: A History of Educational Neglect (New York: College 
Entrance Examination Board, 1970). 

9. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day, eds., Native Americans 
Today: Sociological Perspectives (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 
1972); A.R. Jensen, Straight Talk about Mental Tests (New York: Free Press, 1981); 
L.M. Dunn, Bilingual Hispanic Children on the U.S. Mainland: A Review of 
Research on Their Cognitive, Linguistic, and Scholastic Development (Circle Pines, 
MN: AGS, 1987); J. Ogbu, Minority Education and Caste: The American System in 
Cross-Cultural Perspective (New York: Academic Press, 1978); H. Trueba, Raising 
Silent Voices: Educating the Linguistic Minorities for the 21st Century (New York: 
Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1988); F. Erickson, "Transformation and School 
Success: The Politics and Culture of Educational Achievement," Anthropology and 
Education Quarterly 18 (1987): 335-56. 

10. K.H. Au and C. Jordan, "Teaching Reading to Hawaiian Children: 
Finding a Culturally Appropriate Solution," Culture and Bilingual Classroom: Studies 
in Classroom Ethnography, ed. H. Trueba, G. Guthrie, and K. Au (Boston, MA: 
Newbury House, 1981); H. Trueba, Raising Silent Voices: Educating the Linguistic 
Minorities for the 21st Century (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, inc., 1988); 
R. Tharp and R. Gallimore, Rousing Minds to Life: Teaching, Learning, and 

145 



Chapter 1 Notes 



Schooling in Social Context (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988); J. 
Richards, "Learning Spanish and Classroom Dynamics: School Failure in a 
Guatemalan Maya Community," Success or Failure? Learning and the Language 
.Minority Student, ed. H. Trueba (New York: Newbury Publishers, 1987); N. 
Hornberger, "Iman Chay? Quechua Children in Peru's Schools," School and Society: 
Learning Content through Culture, ed. H. Trueba and C. Delgado-Gaitan 
(New York: Praeger Publishers, 1988); D. Deyhle, "Learning Failure: Tests as 
Gatekeepers and the Culturally Different Child," Success or Failure? Learning and 
the Language Minority Child, ed. H. Trueba (New York: Newbury Publishers, 
1987). 

11. G. Austin, Drugs and Minorities, NIDA Research Issues, Series 21, 
DHEW Pub. (ADM) (Washington, DC: GPO, 1977), 78-507; B. Hanson, "Drug 
Treatment Effectiveness: The Case of Racial and Ethnic Minorities in 
America— Some Research Questions and Proposals," International Journal of the 
Addictions 20 (1985): 99-137; P. Iiyama, M.S. Nishi, and B. Johnson, Drug Use and 
Abuse among U.S. Minorities (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1976); J.E. Trimble, 
A. Padilla, and C. Bell, Drug Abuse among Ethnic Minorities, NIDA Office of 
Science Monographs, DHHS Pub. (ADM) (Washington, DC: GPO, 1987), 48-1474; 
M.B. Tucker, "U.S. Ethnic Minorities and Drug Abuse: An Assessment of the 
Science and Practice," International Journal of the Addictions 20 (1985): 1021-47; 
J.W. Welte and G.M. Barnes, "Alcohol Use among Adolescent Minority Groups," 
Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol 48 (1987): 329-36; R. Wright and T.D. 
Watts, "Alcohol and Minority Youth," Journal of Drug Issues IS (1988): 1-6. 

12. S. Fordham and J.C. Ogbu, "Black Students' School Success: Coping 
with the 'Burden of Acting White,'" The Urban Review 18, no. 3 (1986): 176-206. 

13. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day, eds., Native Americans 
Today: Sociological Perspectives (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 
1972); J.F. Bryde, The Sioux Indian Student: A Study of Scholastic Failure and 
Personality Conflict (Vermillion, SD: Dakota Press, 1970); E.A. Fuchs and R.J. 
Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American Indian Education (Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 



146 



Chapter 2 Notes 



1 . Board of Indian Commissioners, Report to Congress, 1873 (Washington, 
DC: GPO, 1874), 114. 

2. L.M. Coombs, "The Indian Student Is Not Low Man on the Totem 
Pole," Journal of American Indian Education 9 (1970): 1. 

3. K.N. Giles, Indian High School Dropout: A Perspective (Milwaukee: 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Midwest National Origin Desegregation 
Assistance Center, 1985). 

4. M.L. Mizen, Federal Facilities for Indians: Tribal Relations with the 
Federal Government (Washington, DC: GPO, 1966). 

5. A.D. Selinger, The American Indian High School Dropout: The 
Magnitude of the Problem (Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory, 1968), ERIC ED 026-164. 

6; Ibid.; C.S. Owens and W.P. Bass, The American Indian High School 
Dropout in the Southwest (Albuquerque, NM: Southwest Cooperative Educational 
Lab, 1969), ERIC ED 026-195. 

7. T. Coladarci, "High School Dropout Among Native Americans," Journal 
of American Indian Education 23, no. 1 (1983): 15-22. 

8. D. Chavers, "Indian Education: Dealing with a Disaster," Principal 70, 
no. 3 (1991): 28-29; J. Crawford, "One-third of Navajos Drop out Annually," 
Education Week 1 (1986): 1-3; D. Little Bear, "Effective Language Education 
Practices and Native Language Survival," Effective Language Education Practices 
and Native Language Survival, ed. J. Reyhner (Proceedings of the Ninth Annual 
International Native American Language Issues [NALI] Institute, Billings, MT, 
8-9 June 1989); N. Hill, "American Indian Student Retention: Pedagogy and Self- 
Determination," Opening the Montana Pipeline: American Indian Higher Education 
in the Nineties, ed. D. LaCounte, W. Stein, and P. Weasel Head (Sacramento, CA: 
Tribal College Press, 1991), 46-53; National Center for Education Statistics, Analysis 
Report: Dropout Rates in the United States: 1988, Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, NCES 89-609 (Washington, DC: 



142 



Chapter 2 Notes 



GPO, September 1989); K.G. Swisher, M. Hoisch, and D.M. Pavel, American 
Indian/Alaska Native Dropout Study (Washington, . DC: National Education 
Association, 1991). 

9. S.S. Peng and R.T. Takai, High School Dropouts: Descriptive 
Information from High School and Beyond, Bulletin (Washington, DC: National 
Center for Educational Statistics, 1983), 1-9. 

10. W. Renfroe, Early School Leavers: High School Students Who Left before 
Graduating, Publication No. 428 (Los Angeles: Los Angeles Unified School District, 
Research and Evaluation Branch, 1983); T. Coladarci, "High School Dropout Among 
Native Americans," Journal of American Indian Education 23, no. 1 (1983): 15-22. 

11. M.M. McBee, Dropout Report for the 1985-86 School Year (Oklahoma 
City: Oklahoma City Public Schools, Department of Planning, Research, and 
Evaluation, 1986); J.C. Cavatta, New Mexico Dropout Study: 1981-82 School Year 
(Santa Fe, NM: New Mexico State Department of Education, Evaluation, 
Assessment, and Testing Unit, 1982); J.C. Cavatta and A.S. Gomez, New Mexico 
Dropout Study: 1983-84 School Year (Santa Fe, NM: New Mexico State Department 
of Education, Evaluation, Assessment, and Testing Unit, 1984). 

12. E. Currie and J.H. Skolnick, America's Problems: Social Issues and 
Public Policy (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1984), 187. 

13. K.N. Giles, Indian High School Dropout: A Perspective (Milwaukee: 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Midwest National Origin Desegregation 
Assistance Center, 1985), 6. 

14. N. Hill, "American Indian Student Retention: Pedagogy and Self- 
Determination," Opening the Montana Pipeline: American Indian Higher Education 
in the Nineties, ed. D. LaCounte, W. Stein, and P. Weasel Head (Sacramento, CA: 
Tribal College Press, 1991), 47, 51. 



148 



Chapter 3 Notes 



1. F. Beauvais, E.R. Oetting, and R.W. Edwards, "Trends in Drug Use of 
Indian Adolescents Living on Reservations: 1975-1983," American Journal of Drug 
and Alcohol Abuse 11 (1985): 228. 

2. H.L. Hodgkinson, The Demographics of American Indians: One Percent 
of the People-Fifty Percent of the Diversity (Washington, DC: Institute for 
Educational Leadership, 1990). 

3. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day, eds., Native Americans 
Today: Sociological Perspectives (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 
1972); M.L. Wax, R.H. Wax, and R.V. Dumont, Jr., Formal Education in an 
American Indian Community, Monograph (Kalamazoo, MI: The Society for the Study 
of Social Problems, 1964). 

4. K.N. Giles, Indian High School Dropout: A Perspective (Milwaukee: 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Midwest National Origin Desegregation 
Assistance Center, 1985); E. O'Malley, American Indian Education Handbook 
(Sacramento: California State Department of Education, 1982); J.W. Olson, "The 
Urban Indian as Viewed by an Indian Caseworker," The American Indian in Urban 
Society, ed. J.O. Waddell.and O.M. Watson (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 
1971); S.U. Philips, The Invisible Culture (New York: Longman Press, 1983). 

5. J.E. Trimble, A. Padilla, and C. Bell, Drug Abuse Among Ethnic 
Minorities, NIDA Office of Science Monographs, DHHS Pub. (ADM) (Washington, 
DC: GPO, 1987), 48-1474; E.R. Oetting, F. Beauvais, R. Edwards, M. Waters, J. 
Velarde, and G. Goldstein, Drug Use among Native American Youth: Summary of 
Findings (1975-1981), NIDA Project Report, Project No. 5, ROIDA1853 (Fort 
Collins, CO: Colorado State University, 1983). 

6. J.O. Okwumabua and E.J. Duryea, "Age of Onset, Periods of Risk, and 
Patterns of Progression in Drug Use among American Indian High School Students," 
International Journal of the Addictions 22, no. 12 (1987): 1269-76; F. Beauvais and 
E.R. Oetting, "Inhalant Abuse by Young Children, " Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: 
An Update, ed. R. Crider and B. Rouse, NIDA Research Monograph No. 85 



Chapter 3 Notes 



145 



(Washington, DC: GPO, 1988), 30-33; P.A. May, "Alcohol and Drug Misuse 
Prevention Programs for American Indians: Needs and Opportunities," Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol 47, no. 3 (1986): 187-95. 

7. J. Weibel and T. Weisner, The Ethnography of Rural and Urban 
Drinking Practices in California, Annual Statistical Analysis Report for the 
California Department of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Programs, Sacramento, CA, 
1980; E.D. Edwards and M.E. Edwards, "Alcoholism Prevention/Treatment and 
Native American Youth: A Community Approach," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 
10 (1988): 103-15, S. Schinke, G. Botvin, J.E. Trimble, M.A. Orlandi, L.D. 
Gilchrist, and V.S. Locklear, "Preventing Substance Abuse among American Indian 
Adolescents: A Bicultural Competence Skills Approach," Journal of Counseling 
Psychology 35, no. 1 (1988): 87-90. 

8. R. Lin, "The Promise and Problems of Native American Students: A 
Comparative Study of High School Students on the Reservation and Surrounding 
Areas," Journal of American Indian Education 25, no. 1 (1985): 6-16; R. Clawson, 
"Death by Drink: An Indian Battle," [Butte] Montana Standard, 7 January 1990, 
p. 5; T. Coladarci, "High School Dropout among Native Americans," Journal of 
American Indian Education 23, no. 1 (1983): 15-22; J.E. Trimble, A. Padilla, and 
C. Bell, Drug Abuse Among Ethnic Minorities, NIDA Office of Science Monographs, 
DHHS Pub. (ADM) (Washington, DC: GPO, 1987), 48-1474. 

9. L.B. Boyer, "Folk Psychiatry of the Apaches of the Mescalero Indian 
Reservation." Magic, Faith, and Healing, ed. A. Kiev (New York: Free Press of 
Glencoe, 1964); J.H. Hamer, "Guardian Spirits, Alcohol, and Cultural Defense 
Mechanisms," Anthropologica 11 (1969): 215-41; T.D. Graves, "Acculturation, 
Access, and Alcohol in a Tri-Ethnic Community," American Anthropologist 69 
(1967): 306-21; J.E. Trimble, A. Padilla, and C. Bell, Drug Abuse Among Ethnic 
Minorities, NIDA Office of Science Monographs, DHHS Pub. (ADMX (Washington, 
DC: GPO, 1987), 192; E.R. Oetting, F. Beauvais, and R. Edwards, "Alcohol and 
Indian Youth: Social and Psychological Correlates and Prevention," Journal of Drug 
Issues 18, no. 1 (1988): 87-101; P.A. May, "Substance Abuse and American Indians: 



150 



Chapter 3 Notes 



Prevalence and Susceptibility/' International Journal of the Addictions 17 (1982): 
1185-1209. 

10. E. Maynard, "Drinking as a Part of an Adjustment Syndrome among 
Oglala Sioux," Pine Ridge Research Bulletin 9 (1969): 40. 

11. R.A. White, "The Lower-Class 'Culture of Excitement' among the 
Contemporary Sioux," The Modern Sioux, ed. E. Nurge (Lincoln, NE: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1970), 175-97; J.O. Whittaker, "Alcohol and the Standing Rock 
Sioux Tribe, I: The Pattern of Drinking," Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol 
23 (1962): 468-79. 

12. J. A. Stevens, "Social and Cultural Factors Related to Drinking Patterns 
among the Blackfeet" (Master's thesis, University of Montana, Missoula, 1969), 55. 

13. W.C. Cockerham, M.A. Forslund, and R.M. Raboin, "Drug Use among 
White and American Indian High School Youth," International Journal of the 
Addictions 11 (1976): 209-20; C. Vanderwagen, R.D. Mason, and T.C. Owan, eds., 
IHS Alcoholism/Substance Abuse Prevention initiative: Background, Plenary Session, 
and Action Plan (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Indian Health Service, 1987); E.R. Oetting, F. Beauvais, and R. Edwards, "Alcohol 

■V. 

and Indian Youth: Social and Psychological Correlates and Prevention," Journal of 
Drug Issues 18, no. 1 (1988): 87-101; R. Carpenter, C.A. Lyons, and W.R. Miller, 
"Peer-managed Self-Control Programs for Prevention of Alcohol Abuse in American 
Indian High School Students: A Pilot Evaluation Study," International Journal of the 
Addictions 20, no. 2 (1985): 299-310. 

14. G. Mohatt, "The Sacred Water: The Quest for Personal Power through 
Drinking among the Teton Sioux," The Drinking Man, ed. L.C. McClelland, W.N. 
Davis, R. Kalin, and E. Wanner (New York: Free Press, 1972), 261-75; E.D. 
Edwards and M.E. Edwards, "Alcoholism Prevention/Treatment and Native 
American Youth: A Community Approach," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 10 
(1988): 103-15; A. Binion, C. Miller, F. Beauvais, and E.R. Oetting, "Rationales 
for the Use of Alcohol, Marijuana, and Other Drugs by Eighth Grade Native 
American and Anglo Youth," International Journal of the Addictions 23, no. 1 
(1988): 47-64. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



15. E.D. Edwards and M.E. Edwards, "Alcoholism Prevention/Treatment 
and Native American Youth: A Community Approach," Journal of Drug Issues 18, 
no. 10 (1988): 103-15; S. Schinke, M.Y. Bebel, M.A. Orlandi, and G. Botvin, 
"Prevention Strategies for Vulnerable Pupils: School Social Work Practices to 
Prevent Substance Abuse," Urban Education 22, no. 4 (1988): 510-19; D. Jones- 
Saumty, L. Hochhaus, R. Dru, and A. Zeiner, "Psychological Factors of Familial 
Alcoholism in American Indians and Caucasians," Journal of Clinical Psychology 39 

(1983) : 783-90; P.A. May, "Alcohol and Drug Misuse Prevention Programs for 
American Indians: Needs and Opportunities," Journal of Studies on Alcohol 47, no. 
3 (1986): 187-95; T.E. Malone, Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Black and 
Minority Health, Vol. 1: Executive Summary (Washington, DC: GPO, 1985); 
J. Trimble, "Drug Abuse Prevention Research Needs among American Indians and 
Alaska Natives," White Cloud Journal of American Indian Mental Health 3, no. 3 

(1984) : 22-34; F. Beauvais and S. LaBoueff, "Drug and Alcohol Abuse Intervention 
in American Indian Communities," International Journal of the Addictions 20, no. 1 

(1985) : 139-71. 

16. E.R. Oetting, F. Beauvais, and R. Edwards, "Alcohol and Indian Youth: 
Social and Psychological Correlates and Prevention," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 
1 (1988): 87-101; E.R. Rhoades, M. Marshall, C. Attneave, M. Echohawk, J. Bjork, 
and M. Beiser, "Mental Health Problems of American Indians Seen in Outpatient 
Facilities of the Indian Health Service, 1975," Public Health Reports 96, no. 4 
(1980): 329-35; P.A. May, "Alcohol and Drug Misuse Prevention Programs for 
American Indians: Needs and Opportunities," Journal of Studies on Alcohol 47, no.- 
3 (1986): 187-95. 

17. L.T. Winfree and C.T. Griffiths, "Youth at Risk: Marijuana Use among 
Native American and Caucasian Youths," International Journal of the Addictions 18, 
no. 1 (1983): 65. 

18. D. Moore, "Reducing Alcohol and Drug Use among Native American 
Youth," Prevention Pipeline 1, no. 5 (1988): 6-7; F. Beauvais, E.R. Oetting, and 
R.W. Edwards, "Trends in Drug Use of Indian Adolescents Living on Reservations: 
1975-1983," American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 11 (1985): 209-29; A. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



148 



Kaufman, "Gasoline Sniffing among Children in a Pueblo Indian Village," Pediatrics 
51 (1973): 1060-64; D.C. McBride and J.B. Page, "Adolescent Indian Substance 
Abuse: Ecological and Sociocultural Factors," Youth and Society 11, no. 4 (1980): 
475-92; J. Weibel-Orlando, "Substance Abuse Among American Indian Youth: A 
Continuing Crisis," Journal of Drug Issues! (1984): 313-35; T.J. Young, "Inhalant 
Use Among American Indian Youth," Child Psychiatry and Human Development 18, 
no. 1 (1987): 36-46; P. A. May, "Alcohol and Drug Misuse Prevention Programs for 
American Indians: Needs and Opportunities," Journal of Studies on Alcohol 47, no. 

3 (1986): 187-95. 

19. R. Crider and B. Rouse, eds., Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An 
Update, NIDA Research Monograph No. 85 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1988); E.R. 
Oetting, F. Beauvais, and R. Edwards, "Alcohol and Indian Youth: Social and 
Psychological Correlates and Prevention," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 1 (1988): 
87-101. 

20. L. Gilchrist, S. Schinke, J.E. Trimble, and G.T. Cvetovich, "Skills 
Enhancement to Prevent Substance Abuse among American Indian Adolescents," 
International Journal of the Addictions 22, no. 19 (1987): 871-72. 

21. L.T. Winfree and C.T. Griffiths, "Youth at Risk: Marijuana Use among 
Native American and Caucasian Youths," International Journal of the Addictions 18, 
no. 1 (1983): 53-70. 

22. M.D. Topper, "Drinking Patterns, Cultural Changes, Sociability, and 
Navajo Adolescents," Addictive Disease 1 (1974): 97-116; R.F. Bales, "Cultural 
Differences in Rates of Alcoholism," Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol 6, no. 

4 (1946): 480-99; F. Streit and M.J. Nicolich, "Myths versus Data on American 
Indian Drug Abuse," Journal of Drug Education 7 (1977): 117-22; E.R. Oetting, F. 
Beauvais, and R. Edwards, "Alcohol and Indian Youth: Social and Psychological 
Correlates and Prevention," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 1 (1988): 87-101. 

23. W.C. Cockerham, M.A. Forslund, and R.M. Raboin, "Drug Use among 
White and American Indian High School Youth," International Journal of the 
Addictions 11 (1976): 209-20; E.R. Oettini? and G.C. Goldstein, "Drug Use among 
Native American Adolescents," Youth Drug Abuse: Problems, Issues and Treatment, 



Chapter 3 Notes 



ed. G.M. Beschner and A.S. Friedman (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1979); 
C. Vanderwagen, R.D. Mason, and T.C. Owan, eds., IHS Alcoholism/Substance 
Abuse Prevention Initiative: Background, . Plenary Session, and Action Plan 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Indian Health 
Service, 1987); F. Beauvais and S. LaBoueff, "Drug and Alcohol Abuse Intervention 
in American Indian Communities," International Journal of the Addictions 20, no. 1 
(1985): 139-71; L.T. Winfree and C.T. Griffiths, "Youth at Risk: Marijuana Use 
among Native American and Caucasian Youths," International Journal of the 
Addictions 18, no. 1 (1983): 53-70; J. Weibel-Orlando, "Substance Abuse Among 
American Indian Youth: A Continuing Crisis," Journal of Drug Issues 2 (1984): 313- 
35; V. Garcia-Mason, Relationship of Drug Use and Self-Concept Among American 
Indian Youth (Ph.D. diss., University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1985); D.W. 
Swanson, A. P. Bratrude, and E.M. Brown, "Alcohol Abuse in a Population of Indian 
Children," Diseases of the Nervous System 31 (1971): 835-42; E.R. Oetting, F. 
Beauvais, and R. Edwards, "Alcohol and Indian Youth: Social and Psychological 
Correlates and Prevention," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 1 (1988): 87-101; 
T. Red Horse, "American Indian Families: Research Perspectives," The American 
Indian Family: Strengths and Stresses, ed. F. Hoffman (Proceedings of the 
Conference on Research Issues, Isleta, NM, 1980): 1-11; L. Longclaws, G. Barnes, 
L. Grieve, and R. Dumoff, "Alcohol and Drug Abuse Among the Brokenhead 
, Ojibwa," Journal of Studies on Alcohol 41, no. 1 (1980): 21-36. 

24. R. Crider and B. Rouse, eds., Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An 
Update, NIDA Research Monograph No. 85 (Washington, DC: GPO; 1988); E.D. 
Edwards and M.E. Edwards, "Alcoholism Prevention/Treatment and Native 
American Youth: A Community Approach," Journal of Drug Issues 18, no. 10 
(1988): 103-15; A. Binion, C. Miller, F. Beauvais, and E.R. Oetting, "Rationales 
for the Use of Alcohol, Marijuana, and Other Drugs by Eighth Grade Native 
American and Anglo Youth," International Journal of the Addictions 23, no. 1 
(1988): 47-64. 

25. Quoted in S. Steiner, The New Indians (New York: Harper and Row 
Publishers, Inc., 1968), 150. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



26. Ibid. ,151-52. 

27. C. Reasons, "Crime and the American Indian," Native Americans Today: 
Sociological Perspectives, ed. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New 
York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1972), 319-26; E. Lemert, "Drinking 
among American Indians," Alcohol, Science and Society Revisited, ed. E. Gomberg, 
H. White, and J. Carpenter (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1982). 

28. E.H. Richardson, "Cultural and Historical Perspectives in Counseling 
American Indians," Counseling the Culturally Different: Theory and Practice, ed. 
D.W. Sue (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1981); H.L. Hodgkinson, The 
Demographics of American Indians: One Percent of the People-Fifty Percent of the 
Diversity (Washington, DC: Institute for Educational Leadership, 1990). 

29. W:0. Farber, P. A. Odeen, and R.A. Tschelter, Indians, Law 
Enforcement, and Local Government (Brookings, SD: Government Research Bureau 
of South Dakota, 1957); M. Minnis, "The Relationship of the Social Structure of an 
Indian Community to Adult and Juvenile Delinquency," Social Forces 41 (1963): 
395-403; C. Reasons, "Crime and the American Indian," Native Americans Today: 
Sociological Perspectives, ed. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New 
York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1972), 319-26; E.M. Lemert, "The Use of 
Alcohol in Three Salish Indian Tribes," Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol \9 
(1958): 90-107; A.S. Riffenburgh, "Cultural Influences and Crime among Indian- 
Americans of the Southwest," Federal Probation 23 (1964): 38-46; E.P. Dozier, 
"Problem Drinking among American Indians," Quarterly Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol 27 (1966): 72-87; C. Trillin, "U.S. Journal: Gallop, New Mexico (Drunken 
Indians)," New Yorker, 25 September 1971, 108-14; M.A. Forslund and V.A. 
Cranston, "A Self-Report Comparison of Indian and Anglo Delinquency in 
Wyoming," Criminology 13, no. 2 (1975): 193-98; T.D. Graves, "The Personal 
Adjustment of Navajo Indian Migrants to Denver, Colorado," American 
Anthropologist 72, no. 1 (1970): 35-54; L. French and J. Hornbuckle, "An Analysis 
of Indian Violence: The Cherokee Example," American Indian Quarterly 3, no. 4 
(1977): 335-56. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



30. G.F. Jensen, H. Stauss, and V.W. Harris, "Crime, Delinquency, and the 
American Indian," Human Organization 36, no. 3 (1977): 252-57; M. Minnis, "The 
Relationship of the Social Structure of an Indian Community to Adult and Juvenile 
Delinquency," Social Forces 41 (1963): 395-403. 

31. J.S. Kleinfeld and J. Bloom, "Boarding Schools: Effects on the Mental 
Health of Eskimo Adolescents," American Journal of Psychiatry 134, no. 4 (1977): 
411-17. 

32. B. Mendelsohn and W. Richards, "Alaska Native Adolescents' 
Descriptions of Their Mental Health Problems" (Paper presented at the Eighth Joint 
Meeting of the Professional Associations of the U.S. Public Health Service, Phoenix, 
AZ, 1973); G.F. Jensen, H. Stauss, and V.W. Harris, "Crime, Delinquency, and the 
American Indian," Human Organization 36, no. 3 (1977): 252-57; P. A. May, 
"Substance Abuse and American Indians: Prevalence and Susceptibility," 
International Journal of the Addictions 17 (1982): 1185-1209. 

33. P. A. May, "Arrests, Alcohol, and Alcohol Legislation among an 
American Indian Tribe," Plains Anthropologist 20 (1975): 129-34; C.A. Heidenreich, 
"Alcohol and Drug Use and Abuse among Indian- Americans: A Review of Issues and 
Sources," Journal of Drug Issues 6, no. 3 (1976): 256-72; H.M. Bahr, B.A. 
Chadwick, and J.H. Strauss, American Ethnicity, (Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and 
Co., 1979); M. Minnis, "The Relationship of the Social Structure of an Indian 
Community to Adult and Juvenile Delinquency," Social Forces 41 (1963): 395-403; 
L.A. Ackerman, "Marital Instability and Juvenile Delinquency among the Nez 
Perces," American Anthropologist 73, no. 3 (1971): 595-603. 

34. M.A. Forslund, A Self-Concept Comparison of Indian and Anglo 
Delinquency in Wyoming (Laramie, WY: Governor's Planning Committee on 
Criminal Administration, 1974); M.A. Forslund and R.E. Meyers, "Delinquency 
among Wind River Indian Reservation Youth," Criminology 12, no. 1 (1974): 97- 
106. 

35. T.W. Hill, "Life Styles and Drinking Patterns of Urban Indians," Journal 
of Drug Issues 10 (1980): 257-72; J. Westermeyer, "The Drunken Indian: Myths and 
Realities," Psychiatric Annals 4 (November 1974): 29-36. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



36. G. MacGregor, Warriors without Weapons: A Study of the Society and 
Personality Development of the Pine Ridge Sioux (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1946); M.L. Wax, R.H. Wax, and R.V. Dumont, Jr., Formal Education in 
an American Indian Community , Monograph (Kalamazoo, MI: The Society for the 
Study of Social Problems, 1964); G.F. Jensen, H. Stauss, and V.W. Harris, "Crime, 
Delinquency, and the American Indian," Human Organization 36, no. 3 (1977): 252- 
57. 

37. South Dakota Advisory Committee (SDAC) of the U.S. Commission on 
Civil Rights, Liberty and Justice for All (Washington, DC: GPO, 1977). 

38. A. Randall and B. Randall, "Criminal Justice and the American Indian," 
Indian Historian 11, no. 2 (1978): 42-48. 

39. L. French, "An Analysis of Contemporary Indian Justice and 
Correctional Treatment," Federal Probation 44 (1980): 19-23; L.E. Williams, B.A. 
Chadwick, and H.M. Bahr, "Antecedents of Self-reported Arrest for Americans in 
Seattle," Phylon 40 (1979): 243-52; E.L. Hall and A.A. Simkus, "Inequality in the 
Types of Sentences Received by Native Americans and Whites," Criminology 13, no. 
2 (1975): 199-222. 

40. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day, eds., Native Americans 
Today: Sociological Perspectives (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 
1972), 140; J.S. Coleman, Equality of Educational Opportunity (Washington, DC: 
GPO, 1966). 

41. B.G. Rosenthal, "Development of Self-Identification in Relation to 
Attitudes toward Self in Chippewa Indians," Genetic Psychology Monographs 90 
(1974): 43-141; H.D. Thornburg, "An Investigation of a Dropout Program among 
Arizona's Minority Youth," Education 94 (1974): 249-65; R.A. Clifton, "Self 
Concept and Attitudes: A Comparison of Canadian Indian and Non-Indian Students," 
Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 12 (1975): 577-84; H.P. Lefley, 
"Acculturation, Child-Rearing, and Self-Esteem in Two North American Indian 
Tribos," Ethos 4 (1976): 385-401; G. Halpin, G. Halpin, and T. Whiddon, "Locus 
of Control and Self-Esteem among Indians and Whites: A Cross-Cultural 
Comparison," Psychological Reports 48 (1981): 91-98. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



42. R. Carlson, "On the Structure of Self Esteem: Comments on Ziller's 
Formulations," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 34 (1970): 264-68; 
R.C. Wylie, The Self-Concept, 2nd ed., rev. (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1979); G.G. Wehlage and R.A. Rutter, "Dropping Out: How Do Schools 
Contribute to the Problem?" Teachers College Record 87 (1986): 374-92; M. Fine, 
"Why Urban Adolescents Drop into and out of Public High School," Teachers 
College Record 87 (1987): 3. 

43. K.N. Giles, Indian High School Dropout: A Perspective (Milwaukee: 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Midwest National Origin Desegregation 
Assistance Center, 1985). 

44. E. A. Fuchs and R.J- Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American Indian 
Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

45. P.H. Dreyer and R.J. Havighurst, The Self-Esteem of American Indian 
Youth: The Personal-Social Adjustment of American Indian Youth (1970), ERIC ED 
045-273: 147. 

46. J.F. Bryde, The Sioux Indian Student: A Study of Scholastic Failure and 
Personality Conflict (Vermillion, SD: Dakota Press, 1970). 

47. J.F. Bryde, Modern Indians, National Institute of Mental Health 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1969); M.L. Wax, R.H. Wax, and R.V. Dumont, Jr., 
Formal Education in an American Indian Community, Monograph (Kalamazoo, MI: 
The Society for the Study of Social Problems, 1964). 

48. H.L. Hodgkinson, The Demographics of American Indians: One Percent 
of the People-Fifty Percent of the Diversity (Washington, DC: Institute for 
Educational Leadership, 1990). 

49. D. McNickle, Indians in the Land of Plenty (1965), ERIC ED 012-191. 

50. E.H. Erikson, Childhood and Society, 2nd ed. (New York: W. W. Norton 
and Co., 1963). 

51. J. Bynum, "Suicide and the American Indian: An Analysis of Recent 
Trends," Native Americans Today: Sociological Perspectives, ed. H.M. Bahr, B.A. 
Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1972) 367- 
77. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



154 



52. J.F. Bryde, The Sioux Indian Student: A Study of Scholastic Failure and 
Personality Conflict (Vermillion, SD: Dakota Press, 1970), 24. 

53. G.D. Spindler and L.S. Spindler, "American Indian Personality Types 
and Their Sociocultural Roots, " The Annals of the American Academy of Political and 
Social Science 311 (May 1957): 147-57; F. Voget, "Acculturation jt Caughnawaga: 
A Note on the Native-modified Group," American Anthropologist 53 (1951): 220-3.1. 

54. P. Roy, "The Measurement of Assimilation: The Spokane Indians," 
Native Americans Today: Sociological Perspectives, ed. M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, 
and R.C. Day (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1972), 225-39; L.C. 
White and B.A. Chadwick, "Urban Residence, Assimilation, and Identity of the 
Spokane Indian," Native Americans Today: Sociological Perspectives , ed. H.M. 
Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 
1972), 239-49. 

55. C. A. Hammerschlag, Identity Groups with American Indian Adolescents 
(1974), ERIC ED 098-451: 11. 

56. P. Katz, "Saulteaux-Ojibwa Adolescents: The Adolescent Process amidst 
a Clash of Cultures," Psychiatric Journal of the University of Ottawa 4 (1979): 315- 
21; D.M. George and R.D. Hoppe, "Racial Identification, Preference, and Self- 
Concept: Canadian Indian and White Schoolchildren," Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology 10, no. 1 (1979): 85-100; H. Saslow and M. Harrover, "Research on the 
Psychosocial Adjustment of Indian Youth," American Journal of Psychiatry 125 
(1968): 120-27. 

57. L.C. White and B.A. Chadwick, "Urban Residence, Assimilation, and 
Identity of the Spokane Indian," Native Americans Today: Sociological Perspectives, 
ed. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New York: Harper and Row 
Publishers, Inc., 1972), 239-49; R.M. Wintrob and P.S. Sindell, Education and 
Identity Conflict among Cree Indian Youth: A Preliminary Report (1968), ERIC ED 
039-063. 

58. N. Malbin, S. LaTurner, and B.A. Spilke, "Longitudinal Study of 
Educational Performance among Oglala Sioux Students" (Paper presented at the 



Chapter 3 Notes 



155 



Annual Meeting of the Rocky Mountain Psychological Association, Denver, CO, 
May 1971). 

59. M.M. Helper and S.L. Garfield, "Use of the Semantic Differential to 
Study Acculturation in American Indian Adolescents," Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology 2 (1965): 817-22. 

60. G. Leitka, "Search for Identity Creates Problems for Indian Students," 
Journal of American Indian Education 11, no. 1 (1971): 7. 

61. D. Vallo, Indian in the Red, U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, DHHS Pub. (ADM) (Washington, DC: GPO, 1980), 81-492; Y. Takie, P. 
Lynch, and G.M. Charleston, "To Drink or Not to Drink: The Indian Adolescent's 
Choice between Friends and Family," Journal of American Indian Education 27 
(1988): 1-9. 

62. T. Coladarci, "High School Dropout among Native Americans," Journal 
of American Indian Education 23, no. 1 (1983): 15-22; J. Trimble, "Drug Abuse 
Prevention Research Needs among American Indians and Alaska Natives," White 
Cloud Journal of American Indian Mental Health 3, no. 3 (1984): 22-34; E. 
Maynard, "Drinking as a Part of an Adjustment Syndrome among Oglala Sioux," 
Pine Ridge Research Bulletin 9 (1969): 35-51; R. Kuttner and A. Lorincz, 
"Alcoholism and Addiction in Urbanized Sioux Indians," Mental Hygiene 51 (1967): 
530-42. 

63. W.C. Cockerham, M.A. Forslund, and R.M. Raboin, "Drug Use among 
White and American Indian High School Youth," .International Journal of the 
Addictions 11 (1976): 209-20; D.C. McBride and J.B. Page, "Adolescent Indian 
Substance Abuse: Ecological and Sociocultural Factors," Youth and Society 11, no. 
4 (1980): 475-92; E.R. Oetting and G.C. Goldstein, "Drug Use among Native 
American Adolescents," Youth Drug Abuse: Problems, Issues and Treatment, ed. 
G.M. Beschner and A.S. Friedman (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1979); R.B. 
Hassrick, The Sioux: Life and Customs of a Warrior Society (Norman, OK: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1964); G. MacGregor, Warriors without Weapons: 
A Study of the Society and Personality Development of the Pine Ridge Sioux 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946). 



160 



Chapter 3 Notes 



64. R.H. Wax, The Warrior Dropouts (Lawrence, KS: The University of 
Kansas Press, 1967); M.L. Wax, R.H. Wax, and R.V. Dumont, Jr., Formal 
Education in an American Indian Community, Monograph (Kalamazoo, MI: The 
Society for the Study of Social Problems, 1964). 

65. F.N. Anderson, "A Mental Hygiene Survey of Problem Indian Children 
in Oklahoma," Mental Hygiene 20 (1936): 472-76; R. Wallis, "The Overt Fears of 
Dakota Indian Children," Child Development 25, no. 3 (1954): 185-92; D. Sydiaha' 
and J. Rempel, "Motivation and Attitudinal Characteristics of Indian School Children 
as Measured by the Thermatic Apperception Test," Canadian Psychologist 5a, no. 
3 (1964): 139-48; T.P. Krush, J. Bjork, P. Sindell, and J. Nelle, "Some Thoughts 
on the Formation of Personality Disorder: Study of an Indian Boarding School 
Population," American Journal of Psychiatry 122 (1966): 875; R.R. Cocking, 
"Fantasy Confession among Arapaho Indian Children," Journal of Genetic 
Psychology 114 (1969): 229-35; H. Saslow and M. Har rover, "Research on the 
Psychosocial Adjustment of Indian Youth," American Journal of Psychiatry 125 
(1968): 120-27; J.S. Kleinfeld and J. Bloom, "Boarding Schools: Effects on .... 
Mental Health of Eskimo Adolescents," American Journal of Psychiatry 134, no. 4 
(1977): 411-17. 

66. E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American Indian 
Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983); H. Gilliland, 
"The Need for an Adopted Curriculum," Teaching the Indian Child: A 
Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: Eastern Montana 
College, 1986), 1-11; P.A. May and L.H. Dizmang, "Suicide and the American 
Indian," Psychiatric Annals A, no. 9 (1974): 22-23, 27-28; M. Ogden, M.I. Spector, 
and C.A. Hill, Jr., "Suicides and Homicides among Indians," Public Health Report 
85 (1970): 75-80; L.H. Dizmang, "Suicide among Cheyenne Indians," Bulletin of 
Suicidology 1 (1967): 8-11; S.I. Miller and L.S. Schoenfield, "Suicide Attempt 
Patterns among Navajo Indians," International Journal of Social Psychiatry 17, no. 
3 (1971): 189-93; C. Frederick, Suicide, Homicide, and Alcoholism among American 
Indians, DHEW Pub. No. ADM 76-92, Department of Health, Education, and 
Welfare (Washington, DC: GPO, 1975); R.D. Conrad and M. Kahn, "An 



Chapter 3 Notes 



157 



Epidemiological Study of Suicide and Attempted Suicide among the Papago Indians," 
American Journal of Psychiatry 131, no. 1 (1974): 69-72; E.B. Harvey, L. Gazay, 
and B. Samuels, "Utilization of a Psychiatric-Social Work Team in an Alaska Native 
Secondary Boarding School," Journal of Child Psychiatry 15, no. 3 (1976): 558-74; 
L.H. Dizmang, J. Watson, P.A. May, and J. Bopp, "Adolescent Suicide at an Indian 
Reservation," American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 44, no. 1 (1974): 43-49. 

67. L.H. Dizmang, J. Watson, P.A. May, and J. Bopp, "Adolescent Suicide 
at Fort Hall Reservation" (Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Psychiatric Association, May 1970), 12. 

68. J.H. Shore, "Suicide and Suicide Attempts among American Indians of 
the Pacific Northwest," International Journal of Social Psychiatry 18, no. 2 (1972): 
91-96; J. Weibel-Orlando, "Substance Abuse Among American Indian Youth: A 
Continuing Crisis," Journal of Drug Issues 2 (1984): 313-35; J.A. Stevens, "Social 
and Cultural Factors Related to Drinking Patterns among the Blackfeet" (Master's 
thesis, University of Montana, Missoula, 1969). 

69. P.A. May, Suicide and Suicide Attempts on the Pine Ridge Reservation 
(Pine Ridge, SD: U.S. Public Health Service, Community Mental Health Program, 
1973); J.H. Shore, "Suicide and Suicide Attempts among American Indians of the 
Pacific Northwest," International Journal of Social Psychiatry 18, no. 2 (1972): 91- 
96; E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American Indian 
Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983); L.H. 
Dizmang, "Suicide among Cheyenne Indians," Bulletin of Suicidology 1 (1967): 8-11; 
H.L. Hodgkinson, The Demographics of American Indians: One Percent of the 
People-Fifty Percent of the Diversity (Washington, DC: Institute for Educational 
Leadership, 1990). 

70. B. Medicine, "The Changing Dakota Family and the Stresses Therein," 
Pine Ridg<> Research Bulletin 9 (1969): 11. 

71. P.A. May, "Epidemiology of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Among American 
Indians, of the Southwest," Social Biology 30 (1983): 374-87. 

72. M. Dorris, The Broken Cord (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, 
Inc., 1989). 



162 



Chapter 3 Notes 



158 



73. B. Anquoe, "Indians Fall in Poverty Stats," The Lakota Times, 29 July 
1992, p. 1. 

74. M.L. Mizen, Federal Facilities for Indians: Tribal Relations with the 
Federal Government (Washington, DC: GPO, 1966); S.R. Rist, "Shoshone Indian 
Education: A Descriptive Study Based on Certain Influential Factors Affecting 
Academic Achievement of Shoshone Indian Students, Wind River Reservation, 
Wyoming" (Master's thesis, Montana State University, Bozeman, 1961); R.J. Felber, 
"Factors Influencing the Educational Attainments of Indian Pupils in Sisseton, South 
Dakota" (Master's thesis, University of Wyoming, 1955); E.A. Parmee, Formal 
Education and Culture Change: A Modern Apache Indian Community and 
Government Education Programs (Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press, 1968); 
A. Yates, "Current Status and Future Directions of Research on the American Indian 
Child," American Journal of Psychiatry 144 (1987): 1135-42. 

75. E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American Indian 
Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

76. B.F. Lund, "A Survey of Comparative Achievement and Scholarship 
Records of California Indian Children in the Auburn Public Schools" (Master's 
thesis, Sacramento State College, 1963). 

77. H.J. Miller, The Effects of Integration of Rural Indian Pupils: Final 
Report (Washington, DC: Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of 
Education, 1968); G.A. Just, "American Indian Attitudes toward Education in Select 
Areas of South Dakota" (Master's thesis, University of South Dakota, Vermillion, 
1970). 

78. U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, 
Subcommittee on Employment and Productivity, Guaranteed Job Opportunity Act, 
100th Cong., 1st sess., S. Doc. 777, 3 March 1987 and 3 April 1987. 

79. U.S. Department of the Interior, American Indians Today: Answers to 
Your Questions, Bureau of Indian Affairs (Washington, DC: GPO, 1988); U.S. 
Department of the Interior, Indian Service Population and Labor Force Estimates, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (Washington, DC: GPO, 1989). 



163 



Chapter 3 Notes 



1S9 



80. R.L. Brod and J. ML McQuiston, "American Indian Adult Education and 
Literacy: The First Annual Survey," Journal of American Indian Education 1, no. 
22 (1983): 1-16. 

81 . U.S. Department of Commerce, "American Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts 
on Identified Reservations and in the Historic Areas of Oklahoma (Excluding 
Urbanized Areas)," 1980 Census of Population, U.S. Department of Commerce 
Report No. PC80-2-1D, Part 1 (Washington, DC: GPO, November 1985), 1-3. 

82. E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American Indian 
Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

83. Quoted in M.E. Layman, A History of Indian Education in the United 
States (Ph.D. diss., University of Minnesota, 1942), 21. 

84. B. Spilka, Alienation and Achievement among Oglala Sioux Indian 
Secondary School Students (1970), ERIC ED 945-225. 

85. R.J. Havighurst and B.L. Neugarten, American Indian and White 
Children: A Sociopsychological Investigation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1955), 79. 

86. B. Spilka, Alienation and Achievement among Oglala Sioux Indian 
Secondary School Students (1970), ERIC ED 945-225. 

87. S.U. Philips, The Invisible Culture (New York: Longman Press, 1983). 

88. J.F. Bryde, Modern Indian Psychology (Vermillion, SD: Institute of 
Indian Studies, 1971). 

89. S.U. Philips, "Participant Structures and Communicative Competence: 
Warm Springs Children in Community and Classroom," Functions of Language in 
the Classroom, ed. C.B. Cazden, V.P. John, and D. Hymes (New York: Teachers 
College Press, 1972), 392. 

90. W.L. Larson, A Comparative Analysis of Indian and Non-Indian Parents 9 
Influence on Educational Aspirations, Expectations, Preferences, and Behavior of 
Indian and Non-Indian Students in Four High Schools, AES Bulletin 660 (Bozeman, 
MT: Montana State Agricultural Experiment Station, 1971); A. Berger, "Nine 
Families and Forty Children," Journal of American Indian Education 12, no. 3 
(1973): 1-8; G. Anderson and D. Safar, "The Influence of Differential Community 



164 



Chapter 3 Notes 



Perceptions on the Provision of bqual Educational Opportunities/' Sociology of 
Education 40, no. 2 (1967): 219-30; H. Zenter, "Parental Behavior and Student 
Attitudes towards Further Training among Indian and Non-Indian Students in Oregon 
and Alberta," Alberta Journal of Educational Resources 9, no. 1 (1963): 22-30. 

91. D. Little Bear, "Teachers and Parents Working Together," Teaching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern Montana College, A 986), 223-25. 

92. H. Wolcott, A Kwakiuti Village and School (New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
and Winston, 1967); A. Joseph, R. Spicer, and J. Chesky, The lesert People 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949); D. Leighton and C. Kluckhohn, 
Children of the People (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948); G. 
MacGregor, Warriors without Weapons: A Study of the Society and Personality 
Development of the Pine Ridge Sioux (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946); 
H. Thompson, Education for Cross-Cultural Enrichment (Lawrence, KS: Haskell 
Institute, 1964). 

93. T. Garcia, "A Study of the Effects of Education on the Wind River 
Reservation" (Master's thesis, University of Wyoming, Laramie, 1965); S.R. Rist, 
"Shoshone Indian Education: A Descriptive Study fiased on Certain Influential 
Factors Affecting Academic Achievement of Shoshone Indian Students, Wind River 
Reservation, Wyoming" (Master's thesis, Montana State University, Bozeman, 1961). 

94. R.H. Wax, The Warrior Dropouts (Lawrence, KS: The University of 
Kansas Press, 1967). 

95. T.W. Hill, "Life Styles and Drinking Patterns of Urban Indians," Journal 
of Drug Issues 10 (1980): 257-72; J. A. Stevens, "Social and Cultural Factors Related 
to Drinking Patterns among the Blackfeet" (Master's thesis, University of Montana, 
Missoula, 1969). 

96. L. Kackingbird, "A Portrait of Indian People in Indian Lands," American 
Indian Journal 9, no. 2 (1986): 23-25. 

97. P. A. May and L.H. Dizmang, "Suicide and tht American Indian," 
Psychiatric Annals 4, no. 9 (1974): 22-23, 27-28. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



161 



98. G.C. Lang, "Survival Strategies of Chippewa Drinkers in Minneapolis," 
Central Issues in Anthropology 1, no. 2 (1979): 19-40; J. Westermeyer, "Options 
regarding Alcohol Use among the Chippewa," American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 
42 (1972): 398-403. 

99. C. Lujan, L. DeBruyn, P. May, and M. Bird, "Profile of Abused and 
Neglected American Indian Children in the Southwest," Child Abuse and Neglect 13 
(1989): 449-61; R.S. Fischler, "Child Abuse and Neglect in American Indians," The 
1HS Primary Care Provider 8 (1983): 1-7; R.S. Fischler, "Child Abuse and Neglect 
in American Indian Communities," Child Abuse and Neglect 9 (1985): 95-106; R. 
White and D. Comely, "Navajo Child Abuse and Neglect Study: A Comparison 
Group Examination of Abuse and Neglect of Navajo Children," Child Abuse and 
Neglect 5 (1981): 9-17. 

100. M. Pagelow, Family Violence (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1984). 

101. R.J. Gelles and J.B. Lancaster, eds., Child Abuse and Neglect: 
Biosocial Dimensions (New York: Aldine DeGruyter, 1987); K.A. Long, "Cultural 
Considerations in the Assessment and Treatment of Intrafamilial Abuse," American 
Journal of Orthopsychiatry 56 (1986): 131-36. 

102. C. Lujan, L. DeBruyn, P. May, and M. Bird, "Profile of Abused and 
Neglected American Indian Children in the Southwest," Child Abuse and Neglect 13 
(1989): 450. 

103. D. Jones, "Child Welfare Problems in an Alaskan Native Village," 
Social Service Review 43 (1969): 297-309. 

104. H. Ishisaka, "American Indians and Foster Care: Culture Factors and 
Separation," Child Welfare 57, no. 5 (1978): 299-307. 

105. R.S. Fischler, "Child Abuse and Neglect in American Indian 
Communities," Child Abuse and Neglect 9 (1985): 95-106; R. White, Navajo Child 
Abuse and Neglect Study (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University, Department of 
Maternal and Child Health, 1977); C. Wischlacz, J. Lane, and C. Kempe, "Indian 
Child Welfare: A Community Team Approach to Protective Services," Child Abuse 
and Neglect 2 (1978): 29-35. 



166 



Chapter 3 Notes 



162 



106. J. A. Stevens, "Social and Cultural Factors Related to Drinking Patterns 
among the Blackfeet" (Master's thesis, University of Montana, Missoula, 1969). 

107. P. Old Dog Cross, "Sexual Abuse: A New Threat to the Native 
American Woman," The Listening Post 6, no. 2 (1982): 17-23. Albuquerque, NM: 
Indian Health Service. 

108. L. Oakland and R.L. Kane, "The Working Mother and Child Neglect 
on the Navajo Reservation," Pediatrics 51, no. 5 (1973): 849-53. 

109. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day, eds., Native Americans 
Today: Sociological Perspectives (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 
1972); C.A. Heidenreich, "Alcohol and Drug Use and Abuse among Indian- 
Americans: A Review of Issues and Sources," Journal of Drug Issues 6, no. 3 
(1976): 256-72. 

110. 1. Berlin, "Psychopathology and Its Antecedents among American Indian 
Adolescents," Advances in Clinical Psychology 9 (1986): 125-51; J.E. Levy and S.J. 
Kunitz, "A Suicide Prevention Program for Hopi Youth," Social Science and 
Medicine 25 (1987): 931-40; A.M. Shkilnyk, A Poison Stronger than Love: The 
Destruction of an Ojibwa Community (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1985). 

111. T. Brod, "Alcoholism as a Mental Health Problem of Native Americans: 
A Review of the Literature, " Archives of General Psychiatry 32 (1975): 1385-91; H. 
Hoffman and A. Noem, "Alcoholism and Abstinence among Relatives of American 
Indian Alcoholics," Journal of Studies in Alcohol 36 (1975): 165-70; D. Jones- 
Saumty, L. Hochhaus, R. Dru, and A. Zeiner, "Psychological Factors of Familial 
Alcoholism in American Indians and Caucasians," Journal of Clinical Psychology 39 
(1983): 783-90. 

112. C. Lujan, L. DeBruyn, P. May, and M. Bird, "Profile of Abused and 
Neglected American Indian Children in the Southwest," Child Abuse and Neglect 13 
(1989): 449-61. 

113. C.F. Lummis, "My Brother's Keeper," Land of Sunshine 11 (1899): 

334. 



167 



Chapter 3 Notes 



114. U.S. Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Annual Report: Report of the CIA 
(Washington, DC, 1887), xxi. 

1 15. U.S . Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Annual Report: Report of the CIA 
(Washington, DC, 1894), 134. 

116. P. Weeks and J.B. Gidney, Subjugation and Dishonor: A Brief History 
of the Travail of the Native Americans (Huntington, NY: Robert E. Krieger, 1981), 
119. 

117. U.S . Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Annual Report: Report of the CIA 
(Washington, DC, 1887), xxiii-xxiv. 

1 18. H. Thompson, Education for Cross-Cultural Enrichment (Lawrence, KS: 
Haskell Institute, 1964), 408. 

119. B. Gaarder, Education of American Indian Children, Report presented 
at the Annual Conference of the Southwest Council of Foreign Language Teachers, 
El Paso, TX, November 1967, and in testimony before the U.S. House of 
Representatives Subcommittee on Education, Washington, DC, June 1967, ERIC ED 
018^299. 

120. M. Heatherington, How Language Works (Cambridge, MA: Winthrop, 
1980), 216. 

121. F. Ahenakew, "Text Based Grammars in Cree Language Education," 
Proceedings: Selected Papers and Biographies, ed. S. Weryackwe (Choctaw, OK: 
Sixth Annual International Native American Language Issues Institute, 1986), 1-3. 

122. K.L. Teissier, "A Study of South Dakota Indian Achievement 
Problems," Journal of American Indian Education 1, no. 3 (1962): 19-21; W.D. 
Conway, "A Transformational Analysis of the Written and Oral Syntax of Fourth, 
Sixth, and Eighth Grade Omaha Indian Children" Ph.D. diss., University of 
Nebraska, Lincoln, 1971). 

123. A.D. Bowd, "Some Determinants of School Achievement in Several 
Indian Groups," Alberta Journal of Educational Research 18, no. 2 (1972): 69-81. 

124. G. Blossom, "A New Approach to an Old Problem," Journal of 
American Indian Education 1, no. 2 (1962): 13-14. 



168 



Chapter 3 Notes 



164 



125. L.M. Coombs, The Educational Disadvantage of the Indian American 
Student (Las Cruces, NM: New Mexico State University, 1970), 60-61. 

126. W. Holm, "Community School Charts Achievements," Indian Affairs 
108 (1985): 2-4. 

127. K. Hakuta, Mirror of Language: The Debate on Bilingualism 
(New York: Basic Books, 1986). - 

128. W. Holm, "Community School Charts Achievements," Indian Affairs 
108 (1985): 2-4; K. Hakuta, Mirror of Language: The Debate on Bilingualism 
(New York: Basic Books, 1986); J. Cummins, "Empowering Minority Students: A 
Framework for Intervention," Harvard Educational Review 56 (1986): 18-36. 

129. W.L. Leap, "Roles for the Linguist in Indian Bilingual Education," 
Language Renewal among American Indian Tribes: Issues, Problems, and Prospects, 
ed. R. St. Clair and W. Leap (Rosslyn, VA: National Clearinghouse for Bilingual 
Education, 1982). 

130. E.H. Erikson, "Observations on Sioux Education," Journal of 
Psychology 7 (1939): 101-156. 

131. G. MacGregor, Warriors without Weapons: A Study of the Society and 
Personality Development of the Pine Ridge Sioux (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1946); R.J. Havighurst and B.L. Neugarten, American Indian and White 
Children: A Sociopsychological Investigation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1955); M.L. Wax, R.H. Wax, and R.V. Dumont, Jr., Formal Education in an 
American Indian Community, Monograph (Kalamazoo, MI: The Society for the Study 
of Social Problems, 1964). 

132. E.A, Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American 
Indian Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

133. P. Katz, "Saulteaux-Ojibwa Adolescents: The Adolescent Process amidst 
a Clash of Cultures," Psychiatric Journal of the University of Ottawa 4 (1979): 315- 
21. 

134. Ibid. 

135. R.H. Wax, The Warrior Dropouts (Lawrence, KS: The University of 
Kansas Press, 1967). 

/ 

169 



Chapter 3 Notes 



165 



136. B. Albaughand P. Albaugh, "Alcoholism and Substance Sniffing among 
the Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians of Oklahoma," International Journal of the 
Addictions 14, no. 7 (1979): 1001-7. 

137. J. Westermeyer, "The Drunken Indian: Myths and Realities," 
Psychiatric Annals 4 (November 1974): 29-36. 

138. W. Patton and E. Edington, "Factors Related to the Persistence of 
Indian Students at College Level," Indian Education 12 (1973): 19-23; M. Wienberg, 
A Chance to Learn: A History of Race and Education in the United States (London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1977). 

139. A.G. Miller, "Integration and Acculturation of Cooperative Behavior 
Among Blackfoot Indian and Non-Indian Canadian Children," Journal of Cross- 
Cultural Psychology 4, no. 3 (1973): 347-80. 

140. P.A. May and L.H. Dizmang, "Suicide and the American Indian," 
Psychiatric Annals 4, no. 9 (1974): 27. 

141 . B. Berry, The Education of American Indians: A Survey of the Literature 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1968), 70. 

142. E.H. Erikson, Childhood and Society (New York: W.W. Norton and 
Co., 1950); E.H. Erikson, "Observations on Sioux Education," Journal of 
Psychology 7 (1939): 101-56; H. Saslow and M. Harrover, "Research on the 
Psychosocial Adjustment of Indian Youth," American Journal of Psychiatry 125 
(1968): 120-27. 

143. J.E. Trimble, A. Padilla, and C. Bell, Drug Abuse Among Ethnic 
Minorities, NIDA Office of Science Monographs, DHHS Pub. (ADM) (Washington, 
DC: GPO, 1987), 2. 

144. S. Polgar, "Biculturation of Mesquakine Teenage Boys," American 
Anthropologist 62 (1960): 217-35; M. McFee, "The 150% Man: A Product of 
Blackfeet AcculturatiQn," American Anthropologist 70 (1968): 1096-1103. 

145. J. Bynum, "Suicide and the American Indian: An Analysis of Recent 
Trends," Native Americans Today: Sociological Perspectives, ed. H.M. Bahr, B.A. 
Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1972), 375. 



170 



Chapter 3 Notes 



156 



146. C.A. Bowers and D.J. Flanders, Responsive Teaching: An Ecological 
Approach to Classroom Patterns of Language, Culture, and Thought (New York: 
Teachers College Press, 1990); E. Jacob and C. Jordan, "Explaining the School 
Performance of Minority Students," Anthropology and Education Quarterly 18, no. 
4 (1987): 259-392; G.D. Spindler, "Why Have Minority Groups in North America 
Been Disadvantaged in Their Schools? " Education and Cultural Process: 
Anthropological Approaches, ed. G.D. Spindler (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland, 
1987), 160-72. 

147. J.U. Ogbu, The Next Generation (New York: Academic Press, 1974); 
J.U. Ogbu, Minority Education and Caste: The American System in Cross-Cultural 
Perspective (New York: Academic Press, 1978); J.U. Ogbu, "Cultural 
Discontinuities and Schooling," Anthropology and Education Quarterly 13 (1982): 
290-307; J.U. Ogbu, "Minority Status and Schooling in Plural Societies," 
Comparative Education Review 27 (1983): 168-90; J.U. Ogbu, "Variability in 
Minority School Performance: A Problem in Search of an Explanation," 
Anthropology and Education Quarterly 18 (1987): 312-34. 

148. K.N. Giles, Indian High School Dropout: A Perspective (Milwaukee: 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Midwest National Origin Desegregation 
Assistance Center, 1985), 2. 

149. T. Coladarci, "High School Dropoutamong Native Americans," Journal 
of American Indian Education 23, no. 1 (1983): 15-22. 

150. D.R. Eberhard, "American Indian Education: A Study of Dropouts, 
1980-1987," Journal of American Indian Education 19, no. 1 (1989): 32-40. 

151. E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American 
Indian Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

152. D.E. Milone, "American Indian Student Reasons for Dropping out and 
Attitude toward School" (Master's thesis, Arizona State University, Tempe, 1983). 

153. D. Deyhle, "Pushouts and Pullouts: Navajo and Ute School Leavers," 
Journal of Navajo Education 6, no. 2 (1989): 36-51. 

154. Ibid.; Platero Paperwork, Inc., Executive Summary: Navajo Area 
Student Dropout Study (Window Rock, AZ: Navajo Division of Education, the 



171 



Navajo Nation, 1986); for a discussion of traditional college students, see: R.L. Lin, 
"Perceptions of Family Background and Personal Characteristics Among Indian 
College Students/ Journal of American Indian Education 29, no. 3 (1990): 19-28. 

155. E. Rowe, "Five Hundred Forty-Seven and Two Hundred Sixty-Eight 
Indian Children Tested by the Binet-Simon Tests," The Pedagogical Seminary 21 
(1914): 454-68; O. Klineberg, "Racial Differences in Speed and Accuracy," Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology 22 (1928): 273-77. 

156. J. Rohrer, "Test Intelligence of Osage Indians," Journal of Social 
Psychology 16 (1942): 99-105; E. Evvard, "A New Concept on the Navajo," Journal 
of American Indian Education 5, no. 3 (1966): 1-17. 

157. J.F. Bryde, Modern Indians, National Institute of Mental Health 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1969); U.S. Senate, Indian Education: A National Tragedy- 
A National Challenge, Report of the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, 
Special Subcommittee on Indian Education, Report No. 90-501, 91st Cong., 1st sess. 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1969); R.H. Wax, The Warrior Dropouts (Lawrence, KS: 
The University of Kansas Press, 1967). 

158. E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American 
Indian Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983); H. 
Saslow and M. Harrover, "Research on the Psychosocial Adjustment of Indian 
Youth," American Journal of Psychiatry 125 (1968): 120-27. 

159. J.F. Bryde, Modern Indians, National Institute of Mental Health 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1969). 

160. R.W. Rhodes, "Standardized Testing of Minority Students: Navajo and 
Hopi Examples," Journal of Navajo Education 6, no. 2 (1989): 29-35; J. Oakes, 
Keeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1985); B.S. Bloom, All Our Children Learning (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1981). 

161. O.L. Taylor and D.L. Lee, "Standardized Tests and African-American 
Children," The Negro Educational Review 38 (1987): 67-80. 



172 



Chapter 3 Notes 168 

162. L.M. Coombs, R. Kron, E. Collister, and K. Anderson, The Indian 
Child Goes to School (Lawrence, KS: U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs, Haskell 
Institute, 1958). 

163. J.F. Bryde, Modern Indians, National Institute of Mental Health 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1969). 

164. K. Levensky, "The Performance of American Indian Children on the 
Draw-a-Man Test," The National Study of American Indian Education 1, no. 2 
(1970): 1-21; J.S. Kleinfeld, "Intellectual Strengths in Culturally Different Groups: 
An Eskimo Illustration," Review of Educational Research 43 (1973): 341-59; P. 
Suppes, J.D. Fletcher, and M. Zanotti, "Performance Models of American Indian 
Students on Computer-assisted Instruction in Elementary Mathematics," Instructional 
Science 4 (1975): 303-13; P. Rosier and W. Holm, The Rock Point Experience: A 
Longitudinal Study of the Navajo School Program (Washington, DC: Center for 
Applied Linguistics, 1980), ERIC ED 195-363. 

165. H.L. Bacon, G.D. Kidd, and J.J. Seaberg, "The Effectiveness of 
Bilingual Instruction with Cherokee Indian Students," Journal of American Indian 
Education 21 (1982): 34-43; B. Anderson, "A Comparative Study in Estimating 
Time," Journal of American Indian Education 19 (1980): 1-4. 

166. L. Burd, J. Dodd, and P. Grassl, "A Comparison of Reservation Native 
American and Public School Children's Time Estimation Skills," Child Study Journal 
11 (1981): 247-52. 

167. J.F. Bryde, Modern Indians, National Institute of Mental Health 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1969). 

168. J.N. Cress and J.P. O'Donnell, "Indiannness, Sex, and Grade 
Differences on Behavior and Personality Measures among Oglala Sioux Adolescents," 
Psychology in the Schools 11, no. 3 (1974): 306-9; B. Spilka, Alienation and 
Achievement among Oglala Sioux Indian Secondary School Students (1970), ERIC 
ED 945-225. 

169. V.P. Collier, "How Long? A Synthesis of Research on Academic 
Achievement in a Second Language," TESOL Quarterly 23 (1989): 509-31; J. 



173 



Chapter 3 Notes 



1(9 



Cummins, Empowering Minority Students (Sacramento, CA: California Association 
for Bilingual Education, 1989). 

170. National Commission on Excellence in Education, A Nation at Risk: 
The Imperative for Educational Reform (Washington, DC: GPO, 1983). 

171. L. Weis, E. Farrar, and H.G. Petrie, eds., Dropouts from School: 
Issues, Dilemmas, and Solutions (Albany, NY: State University of New York, 1989). 

172. L.A. Shepard and M.L. Smith, eds., Flunking Grades: Research and 
Policies on Retention (New York- Falmer Press, 1989). 

173. L.J. Bearden, W.A. Spencer, and J.C. Moracco, "A Study of High 
School Dropouts," The School Counselor 37 (1989): 113-20. 

174. G.G. Wehlage and R.A. Rutter, "Dropping Out: How Do Schools 
Contribute to the Problem?" Teachers College Record 87 (1986): 374-92. 

175. Ibid. 

176. L. Misiaszek, "The Cultural Dilemma of American Indians," Social 
Education 33, no. 4 (1969): 438-46; E.P. Dozier, "Toward a Background for the 
Teacher of Indian Students," Teaching Multi-Cultural Populations, ed. J.C. Stone 
and D P. DeNeir (New York: Litton Educational Publishing, 1971); B. Chadwick, 
H. Bahr, and j. Strauss, "Indian Education in the City: Correlates of Academic 
Performance," Journal of Educational Research 70, no. 3 (1977): 135-41; J.J. 
Westermeyer, "Indian Powerlessness in Minnesota," Society 10, no. 3 (1973): 45-52. 

177. S.W. Johnson and R. Suetopka-Duerre, "Contributory Factors in Alaska 
Native Educational Success: A Research Strategy," Educational Research Quarterly 
8, no. 4 (1984): 49. 

178. H.L. Hodgkinson, The Demographics of American Indians: One Percent 
of the People-Fifty Percent of the Diversity (Washington, DC: Institute for 
Educational Leadership, 1990). 

179. D. Chavers, "Indian Education: Dealing with a Disaster," Principal 70, 
no. 3 (1991): 28-29. 

180. H. Gilliland, "Discipline and the Indian Student," Teaching the Indian 
Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: Eastern 
Montana College, 1986), 232-41. 



Chapter 3 Notes 



170 



181. L. Olson and R. Edwards, Push Out, Step Out: A Report on California 
Public School Dropouts (Oakland, CA: Citizens Policy Center, 1982). 

182. J.M. Gonzalez, "Renegotiating Society's Contract with the Public 
Schools," Carnegie Quarterly, Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1985, 1-4. 

183. G.G. Wehlage and R.A. Rutter, "Dropping Out: How Do Schools 
Contribute to the Problem?" Teachers College Record 87 (1986): 374-92. 

184. G. Golden, Red Moon Called Me: Memoirs cf a Schoolteacher in the 
Government Indian Service, ed. C. Dryden (San Antonio, TX: Naylor, 1954); F.G. 
Iliff, People of the Blue Water (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1954); A.H. 
Kneale, Indian Agent (Caldwell, ID: Caxton, 1950). 

185. Office of Indian Education Programs, Report on BIA Education: 
Excellence in Indian Education through the Effective School Process, Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior (Washington, DC: GPO, 1988). 

186. H. Gilliland, "The Need for an Adopted Curriculum," Teaching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern Montana College, 1986), 5. 

187. R.J. Havighurst, "Indian Education since 1960," American Academy of 
Political and Social Science Annals 436 (1978): 13-26. 

188. E.S. Cahn, ed. Our Brother's Keeper: The Indian in White America 
(Washington, DC: New Community Press, 1969), 30. 

189. M. Zintz, The Indian Resc ch Study: The Adjustment of Indian and 
Non-Indian Children to the Public Schools of New Mexico (Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico, College of Education, 1960). 

190. G. Heath, Red, Brown, and Black Demands for Better Education 
(Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1972), 26. 

191. H. Gilliland, "The Need for an Adopted Curriculum," Teaching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern Montana College, 1986), 5-6. 

192. D. Little Bear, "Teachers and Parents Working Together," Teaching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern Montana College, 1986), 222. 

i/5 



Chapter 3 Notes 



171 



193. r \. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American 
Indian Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

194. E.P. Dozier, "Toward a Background for the Teacher of Indian 
Students/ Teaching Multi-Cultural Populations, ed. J.C. Stone and D.P. DeNeir 
(New York: Litton Educational Publishing, 1971); R. Evans and M. Husband, 
"Indian Studies in the Classroom, " Journal of American Indian Education 15 (1975): 
4-7. • 

195. F. Erickson and G. Mohatt, "Cultural Organization of Participation in 
Two Classrooms of Indian Students," Doing the Ethnography of Schooling, ed. G. 
Spindler (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1982); A. Brewer, "On Indian 
Education," Integrateducation 15 (1971): 21-23; B. Lockhart, Cultural Conflict: The 
Indian Child in the Non-Indian Classroom (1978), ERIC ED 195-379. 

196. A. Brown, "Cherokee Culture and School Achievement," American 
Indian Culture and Research Journal 4 (1980): 55-74. 

197. F. Erickson and G. Mohatt, "Cultural Organization of Participation in 
Two Classrooms of Indian Students, " Doing the Ethnography of Schooling, ed. G. 
Spindler (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1982); S.B. Heath, "Question at 
Home and at School: A Comparative Study," Doing the Ethnography of Schooling, 
ed. G. Spindler (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1982); R.V. Dumont, Jr., 
"Learning English and How to Be Silent: Studies in Sioux and Cherokee 
Classrooms," Functions of Language in the Classroom, ed. C.B. Cazden, V.P. John, 
and D. Hymes (New York: Teachers College Press, 1972). 

198. E. Longstreet, Aspects of Ethnicity (New York: Teachers College Press, 
1978); V.P. John, "Styles of Learning-Styles of Teaching: Reflections on the 
Education of Navajo Children," Functions of Language in the Classroom, ed. C.B. 
Cazden, V.P. John, and D. Hymes (New York: Teachers College Press, 1972). 

199. A. Brown, "Cherokee Culture and School Achievement," American 
Indian Culture and Research Journal 4 (1980): 55-74; R.E. Slavin, "Research on 
Cooperative Learning: Consensus and Controversy," Educational Leadership 47 
(1989): 52-54. 




200. T.C. Wildcat, "Notes on Native Education/ Canadian Journal of 
Native Education 9 (1981): 11-13; W.A. Scaldwell, J.E. Frame, and D.G. Cookson, 
"Individual Intellectual Assessment of Chippewa, Muncey, and Oneida Children 
Using the WISC-R" (Paper presented at the MOKAKIT Indian Education Research 
Conference, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 1984). 

201. N. Mickelson and C.G. Galloway, "Modification of Behavior Problems 
of Indian Children," Elementary School Journal 72 (1972): 150-55; G. Hurlburt, A. 
Henjum, and L. Eide, "A Comparison of Academic, Career, and Social Patterns of 
American Indian Students," Journal of American Indian Education 22 (1983): 17-23. 

202. R.H. Wax, "The Warrior Dropouts," Native Americans Today: 
Sociological Perspectives, ed. H.M. Bahr, B.A. Chadwick, and R.C. Day (New 
York: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1972), 149. 

203. L. Meriam, R.A. Brown, H. Cloud, E. Dale, E. Duke, H. Edwards, 
F. McKenzie, M. Mark, W.C. Ryan, Jr., and W.J. Spillman, The Problem of Indian 
Administration (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1928). 

204. D. Deyhle, "Pushouts and Pullouts: Navajo and Ute School Leavers," 
Journal of Navajo Education 6, no. 2 (1989): 36-51. 

205. J. Cummins, Empowering Minority Students (Sacramento, CA: 
California Association for Bilingual Education, 1989). 

206. D.G. Savage, "Why Chapter I Hasn't Made a Difference," Phi Delta 
Kappan 68 (1987): 581-84; F. Smith, Joining the Literacy Club: Further Essays into 
Literacy (Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1988). 

207. D. Deyhle, "Pushouts and Pullouts: Navajo and Ute School Leavers," 
Journal of Navajo Education 6, no. 2 (1989): 36-51. 

208. Senate Special Committee on School Performance, "Helping Schools 
Succeed at Helping All Children Learn," Fifteenth Alaska Legislature, Fairbanks, 
AK, 1989. 

209. P.R. Platero, E.A. Brandt, G. Witherspoon, and P. Wong, Navajo 
Students at Risk: Final Report for the Navajo Area Student Dropout Study (Window 
Rock, AZ: Navajo Division of Education, 1986). 



Chapter 3 Notes 



173 



210. L.B. Palladino, Indian and White in the Northwest: A History of 
Catholicity in Montana (Lancaster, PA: Wickersham, 1922). 

211. J. Oakes, Keeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1985). 

212. National Center for Education Statistics, Analysis Report: Dropout Rates 
in the United States: 1988, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. 
Department of Education, NCES 89-609 (Washington, DC: GPO, September 1989). 

213. J. Oakes, Keeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1985). 

214. F. Miller and D.D. Caulkins, "Chippewa Adolescents: A Changing 
Generation," Human Organization 23, no. 2 (1964): 152. 

215. E.D. Jackson, "The Teaching of English as a Second Language to 
Alaskan Native Children of Non-English Speaking Backgrounds on the Kindergarten 
and First Grade Levels" (Master's thesis, University of Washington, 1963); H. 
Gilliland, "Self Concept and the Indian Student," Teaching the Indian Child: A 
Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: Eastern Montana 
College, 1986), 62. 

216. H. Gilliland, "Self Concept and the Indian Student," Teaching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern Montana College, 1986), 62. 

217. E. A. Parmee, Formal Education and Culture Change: A Modern ApaChe 
Indian Community and Government Education Programs (Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press, 1968); M.J. Kennedy, "Contact and Acculturation of the 
Southwestern Porno" (Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1955); B.H. 
Goodman, "An Investigation of the Adjustment of the Apache Indians to the Public 
Schools of the State of Arizona" (Master's thesis, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
1951). 

'218. E.A. Fuchs and R.J. Havighurst, To Live on This Earth: American 
Indian Education (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1983). 

219. A.L. Hafner, National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988: A Profile 
of the American Eighth Grader, National Center for Education Statistics, Office of 



Chapter 3 Notes 



174 



Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education (Washington, 
DC: GPO, 1990). 

220. D. Deyhle, "Pushouts and Pullouts: Navajo and Ute School Leavers," 
Journal of Navajo Education 6, no. 2 (1989): 36-51. 

221. D. Little Bear, "Teachers and Parents Working Together," Teiching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern -Montana College, 1986), 223. 

222. ibid. 

223. H. Gilliland, "The Need for an Adopted Curriculum," Teaching the 
Indian Child: A Bilingual/Multicultural Approach, ed. J. Reyhner (Billings, MT: 
Eastern Montana College, 1986), 9. 

224. R. Coles, Children of Crisis, vol. 3: The South Goes North (Boston: 
Little, Brown and Company, 1971), 435-36. 

225. R. Rosenthal and L. Jacobson, Pygmalion in the Classroom (New York: 
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc., 1968). 

22o, W. Chunn, "Sorting Black Students for Success and Failure: The 
Inequity of Ability Grouping and Tracking," Urban League Review 11 (1988): 93- 
106. 

227. K. Alexander, D. Entwisle, and M. Thomson, "School Performance, 
Status Relations, and the Structure of Sentiment: Bringing the Teacher Back In," 
American Sociological Review 52 (1987): 665-82. 

228. K.L. Alexander and D.R. Entwisle, "Achievement in the First 2 Years 
of School: Patterns and Processes," Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development 53, no. 2, serial no. 218 (1988); R.D. Rist, "Student Social Class and 
Teachers' Expectations: The Self-fulfilling Prophecy in Ghetto Education," Harvard 
Educational Review 40 (1970): 411-51. 

229. R.D. Rist, "Student Social Class and Teachers' Expectations: The Self- 
fulfilling Prophecy in Ghetto Education," Harvard Educational Review 40 (1970): 
411-51. 



179 



Chapter 3 Notes 175 



230. Center for Policy Research in Education, Repeating Grades in School: 
Current Practice and Research Evidence, EA021686, U.S. Department of Education 
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1990), 2-8. 

231. A.M. Gallup, "The 18th Annual Gallup Poll of the Public Attitudes 
toward the Public Schools," Phi Delta Kappan, 68 (1986): 43-59. 

232. C.T. Holmes, "Grade Level Retention Effects: A Meta-Analysis of 
Research Studies," Flunking Grades: Research and Policies on Retention, ed. L.A. 
Shepard and M.L. Smith (New York: Falmer Press, 1989), 34-63. 

233. D.A. Brynes, "Attitudes of Students, Parents, and Educators toward 
Repeating a Grade," Flunking Grades: Research and Policies on Retention, ed. L.A. 
Shepard and M.L. Smith (New York: Falmer Press, 1989), 180-231. 

234. K. Yamamoto, "Children under Stress: The Causes and Cures," Family 
Weekly, Ogden [UT] Standard Examiner, 1980, pp. 6-8. 

235. J.E. Parsons, T.F. Adler, and CM. Kaczala, "Socialization of 
Achievement Attitudes and Beliefs: Parental Influences," Child Development 53 
(1982): 310-21. 

236. K.L. Alexander, D.R. Entwisle, D. Cadigin, and A. Pallas, "Getting 
Ready for First Grade: Standards of Deportment in Home and School," Social Forces 
66 (1987): 57-84. 

237. J. Porter, Black Child, White Child (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1971); T.F. Pettigrew, A Profile of the Negro American (Princeton, 
NJ: D. Van Nostrand Co., 1964). 

238. P.H. Dreyer and R.J. Havighurst, The Self-Esteem of American Indian 
Youth: The Personal-Social Adjustment of American Indian Youth (1970), ERIC ED 
045-273; E.E. Harris, "Racial and National Identities: An Exploratory Study in Self 
and 'We Group' Attitudes," Journal of Negro Education 34 (1965): 425-30. 

239. M. Crow Dog and R. Erdoes, Lakota Woman (New York: Grove 
Weidenfeld, 1990), 38. 

240. D. Deyhle, "Pushouts and Pullouts: Navajo and Ute School Leavers," 
Journal of American Indian Education 23, no. 1 (1989): 36-51. 



180 



Chapter 3 Notes 



176 



241. T. Giago, "Blood Quantum Is a Degree of Discrimination," Notes from 
Indian Country, Vol. 1 (Pierre, SD: State Publishing Company, 1984), 337. 

242. R. Means, Speech presented at the Law School of the University of. 
Colorado, Boulder, CO, 19 April 1985. 

243. F.A. Ryan, Working paper prepared for the National Advisory 
Committee on Indian Education, Paper No. 071279, Harvard American Indian 
Education Program, Harvard University Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, 
MA, 18 July 1979. 

244. V.I. Armstrong, I Have Spoken: American History through the Voices 
of the Indians (New York: Pocket Books, 1975), 175. 

245. P.N. Limerick, The Legacy of Conquest: The Unbroken Past of the 
American West (New York: W.W. Norton and Co., 1987), 338. 

246. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, "A Study of 
Selected Socio-Economic Characteristics of Ethnic Minorities Based on the 1970 
Census," American Indians, Vol. 3 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1974). 

247. U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Indian Health Care, 
OTA-H-290 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1986), 78. 

248. R. Thorton, American Indian Holocaust and Survival: A Population 
History since 1492 (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987), 199-200. 



181 



Chapter 6 Notes 



1. R.K. Merton, ed. Social Theory and Social Structure (New York: Free 
Press, 1968). 

2. M. Farnworth and M.J. Leiber, "Strain Theory Revisited: Economic 
Goals, Educational Means, and Delinquency," American Sociological Review 54 
(1989): 263-274. 

3. M. Seeman, "On the Personal Consequences of Alienation in Work," 
American Sociological Review 32 (1967): 273-285; M. Seeman, "On the Meaning of 
Alienation," American Sociological Review 24 (1959): 783-791; M. Seeman, 
"Alienation Studies," Annual Review of Sociology 1 (1975): 91-123. 



Chapter 7 Note 



1. N. Chansky, Untapped Good: The Rehabilitation of School Dropouts 
(Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1966). 



i7, iS3 



