DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 386 353 RC 020 245 

AUTHOR Fogwill, Lynn 

TITLE Literacy: A Critical Element in the Survival of 

Aboriginal Languages. Chapter 16. 
PUB DATE 94 

NOTE 21p. ; In: Alpha 94: Literacy and Cultural Development 

Strategies in Rural Areas; see RC 020 235. 

PUB TYPE Information Analyses (070) — Reports - Descriptive 

(141) 

EDRS PRICE MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Adult Education; American Indian Languages; *Canada 

Natives; ^Community Programs; Culturally Relevant 
Education; Cultural Maintenance; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Eskimo Aleut Languages; Foreign Countries; 
Inupiaq; ''Language Maintenance; '''Literacy Education; 
^Native Language Instruction 

IDENTIFIERS Endangered Languages; Na Dene; ^Northwest 

Territories 

ABSTRACT 

Six Aboriginal languages have been designated as 
official languages of the Northwest Territories (Canada) along with 
English and French. However, more than legislation is needed to 
support efforts to reclaim Aboriginal languages and culture. Both 
missionary schools and federally administered public schools 
(1940s _ 60s) disrupted the transmission of culture and language from 
one generation to the next. In the last decade, significant changes 
have occurred that return .control of education to the community level 
and support development of curriculum and materials in Aboriginal 
languages. Although Inuktitut is considered a highly viable language 
across the Arctic, Dene languages are declining in use and need 
aggressive intervention to ensure their survival. Three types of 
interventions are particularly critical. First, a new school system 
must meet the cultural and linguistic needs of children. Such 
interventions have included Inuktitut immersion programs that 
incorporate learning experiences from an Inuit cultural perspective, 
and the Dene Kede curriculum developed under the guidance of elders. 
Second, adults, especially young adults, must have opportunities and 
reasons to recover their language and culture. Community-based 
language and literacy programs in Coral Harbour (Inuktitut), Hay 
River Reserve (Slavey), Lutsel K'e (Chipewyan Dene), and Rae-Edzo 
(Dogrib Dene) illustrate factors contributing to success or failure 
of such programs. Finally, flourishing languages must adapt to new 
circumstances and technologies. With this in mind, the territorial 
literacy office has initiated a series of workshops to develop 
writers and encourage development of a Northern Aboriginal-languages 
literature. (SV) 



Vc Vc Vc it Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc it it it it it it it Vc it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it Vc Vc it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it Vr Vc it it it it V; Vc Vr Vr Vc Vc Vr Vc Vc Vr V; Vc Vr Vr Vr Vc Vr Vr 



ERIC 



228 ALPHA 94 



CO 

co 

GO 

CO 

Q 
W 



■ PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED 3Y 

~~~TY\ C \ mq 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) " 



In 



US DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
' »"« * >' t <n,i a' < r-ai wnv»a-. f a">1 -n" 



ERIC 



f Dl K A T!( >NAI HI rv.UHCl S IN'liHUAW'N 
( [ NT| R i| Hit i 



* t-o,fMs dl tl pi* .v [.(].>..,■* s -.'aifl r m«< < W 
f >| H p. *.*.<»• n. [B ... 



Chapter 16 

LITERACY: 
A CRITICAL ELEMENT 
IN THE SURVIVAL 
OF ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES 

Lynn Fogwill 
Adult Education 
Northwest Territories 
Yellowknife, Canada 



When I speak in my own language, I can go anywhere with it... I can express 
myself... my thinking... it means so much. In English, I have to flip through my file 
index of words... using the same words over and over again. My own language allows 
me to be like a mermaid in the sea; I can flip and twist and dive and breathe air and 
swim anywhere. (Fibbie Tatti. 1992) 

No matter how many speakers there are of a particular language, no matter how small 
the nation, these people have the right to their language and to have it survive and be 
carried on. 1 ("You Took My Talk", 1990. Page 69) 



A CULTURE ROOTED IN ORAL TRADITION 

In Canada's Northwest Territories 57000 people speak eight major different 
languages. Six of these languages, with a rich variation of regional dialects, are 
the ancient languages of the aboriginal people who form the majority of the 
population. The culture and language of the people was rooted in an oral 
tradition. Wisdom, knowledge, mores, survival skills and care of the land and 
the animals were passed from the elders to the children and youth through 
storytelling and the telling of legends and truths from the ancestors. 

English and, to a lesser extent, French are also spoken. These languages 
came to the Territories with the non-native people who came for whaling, 



229 



230 ALPHA 94 



trading, trapping, mining and to Christianize the population. English became 
the dominant language and culture of business and industry, of government, of 
the print and electronic media. 

In 1990, the Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories passed legisla- 
tion which made the eight languages official. For the first time in a Canadian 
province or territory, aboriginal languages were recognized and given equal 
status with the two dominant languages of the country. Passing the Official 
Languages Act gave the highest political recognition to the desire and desperate 
need of aboriginal people to reclaim and revitalize their languages and their 
culture. 

Their will to survive as a people pits their culture and language against the 
overpowering presence of a Southern, non-native, industrialized, urban cul- 
ture and language. The traditional, land-based language and culture of the 
people competes with a dominant language and culture, epitomized by Ameri- 
can television programs brought from Detroit, USA by satellite to the most 
isolated communities of 500 or fewer people. 

The legislation is important but legislation alone cannot ensure that the 
languages and the culture will survive into the next century. Intensive strat- 
egies are necessary to support the people in their efforts to reclaim their 
language and culture and literacy is a critical element of any survival strategy. 

BACKGROUND 

The Northwest Territories (N.W.T.) includes most of the Northern part of 
Canada. It has an area of 3,376,698 square kilometres, forms approximately one- 
third of the total land mass of Canada, is about the size of India and encom- 
passes three time zones. 

The N.W.T. is the only jurisdiction in Canada in which aboriginal people form 
the majority of the population. Fifty-eight percent of the population is of 
aboriginal ancestry; 35% are Inuit (sometimes referred to by others as Eskimos), 
16% are Dene (sometimes referred to by others as Indians), 7% are Metis. 

The Territories has the youngest population in Canada as well as the highest 
birthrate, nearly three times the national average. Approximately 45% of the 
population is under 20 years of age, while only 2% is over 65. 

The population of 57,000 is small compared to the land mass. People mostly 
live in 62 communities scattered across the land; although many people still 
spend some time in camps each year, living out on the land and following their 
traditional pursuits of hunting, fishing and trapping. Most of the communities 
are very small with fewer than 1000 people. There is one large city of 15,000, the 
capital Yellowknife, which has a majority non-native population. 

The smaller communities, which are populated by mostly aboriginal people, 
have the highest unemployment rates (27%), the lowest rate of participation in the 
labour force (84%), a very limited economic and transportation infrastructure and 

ERJC 4 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 231 



are dependent upon a domestic, traditional, subsistence economy. The few larger 
communities are much more developed, populated by mostly non-native peo- 
ple, experience very low rates of unemployment (7%) and have a dominant 
wage economy. 

Only in the last 20 years has some measure of local control of government, 
politics and economic activity come to the Northwest Territories. Until the late 
1960's the Territories were run by the central government from the Canadian 
capital of Ottawa. It was not until 1975 that there was an elected legislature that 
governed the Territories. Currently, the majority of the elected members of the 
Legislative Assembly are aboriginal people, as is the government (cabinet) 
which is elected by the members from amongst their own numbers. 

The aboriginal people, through their political organizations, have fought for 
rights, for recognition and for compensation through the courts and a process of 
long, complicated land claims negotiations. Three land claims have been negoti- 
ated and settled by the Inuvialuit (the Inuit of the Western Arctic), the Inuit of 
the Eastern and Central Arctic and the Gwich'in — the Dene of the Mackenzie 
Delta in the Western Arctic. Two other claims, by two other Dene groups, are 
currently in negotiation. These land claims provide some measure of self 
government for the people within their settlement region, control over the use 
of the land and resources within their region, and cash settlements. 

The Inuit land claim settlement provides for the division of the Northwest 
Territories into two regions. An Inuit homeland "Nunavut" will result, and the 
remainder of the existing Territories will become a new political entity. Major 
challenges in terms of constitutional development, methods of government and 
taking control of their political, social and economic destiny confront the 
aboriginal people in both of the proposed new territories. 

The Inuit form a clear majority of the population in all their communities 
while the Dene are in fact an overall minority in the Mackenzie Valley region 
they occupy. The impact of Southern, non-native culture has had a more intense 
impact upon the Dene than upon the Inuit. 

As a result of missionary activity, many of the traditional spiritual beliefs of 
both the Dene and the Inuit were lost. By the middle of the 19th century, the 
Dene had become dependent upon the fur trade for their livelihood. Whaling 
had an impact upon the Inuit but it did not create the same degree of economic 
dependence. In both cases traditional culture was changed, foreign diseases 
brought death, ancient family territories were disrupted, the traditional lifestyle 
was changed forever and entire aboriginal groups died out. In the last decade, 
the impact of the anti-fur movement in Europe has had a devastating impact 
upon the aboriginal people of the North, particularly the Inuit. For most 
communities and families, the fur trade was the only source of cash income and 
its disappearance has crippled their economies. 

Similar to many indigenous people around the world, the results of a colonial 
period have left a legacy of many problems. Most communities in the N.W.T. are 
confronted with a complex of interrelated problems. The N.W.T. has one of the 



232 ALPHA 94 



hiehest rates of suicide in Canada, incidents of family violence are extremely 
high and alcohol, drug and solvent abuse are major problems confronting every 
community. There is a serious lack of adequate housing in most comunto 
Lack of employment and welfare dependence have a deeply negative impact 
upon aboriginal people, especially the large population of young people in the 
smaller communities. 

HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF LANGUAGE & EDUCATION 

For tens of thousands of years the Dene and Inuit occupied the land and 
developed a complex and highly successful society. Culture, beliefs and values 
were passed from one generation to the next through oral tradition. The 
language was rich in its power to describe, express and ana yze. 

Elders, parents and other family members were responsible for the educator, 
of the children and for passing the cultural traditions from one generation to the 
next Children's education began at a very early age because they were included 
in the daily activities of the camp. Girls were taught to prepare skins and sew 
clothing by their mothers, grandmothers and aunts while the boys were taught 
to make tools for hunting and taught to hunt well by their fathers, grandfathers 
and uncles. As children achieved levels of competence they received respect 
from the members of the camp and became adults. 

Schooling in the N.W.T. can be described in three historical phases; the 
mission period from the mid-1800's to 1950, the federal government period from 
the mid-1940's to 1970 and the territorial government period which began in 1967. 

Formal schooling came to the North first with the missionaries in the 
Mackenzie Valley of the Western Arctic as early as the mid-1800's and in the early 
1940's in the Eastern Arctic. For the most part, the schools that were established 
were residential. Children were taken from their families to residential schools 
operated by either the Anglican or Roman Catholic church, often for as much as 

two thirds of the year. , . , „j 

In the residential schools they were immersed in a foreign language and 
culture and given a "basic education'. In the summers they were returned to 
their families and to the traditional camp life and culture. Frequently, in the 
residential schools, children were forbidden to speak their own language and 
their own culture was denigrated in the face of the Southern, "civilized culture 
of the teachers. 

The experience of the child in school was that of being judged within an J 

S he "time no u,t the answer to the question, but how to say it; am I saying ,1 
?!^"nd 'is being judged within a culture that conflicts with he^vvn.^ ^ 

At the best, children suffered from the strain of the terrible dichotomy 



Literacy & Aboriginal Laneuaee Survival 233 

between these two worlds. At the worst, the time they spent with their families 
and with their people was too little and they lost their language and their 
culture They returned home after completing their schooling, without the 
knowledge, skills and language that permitted them to participate in the life of 
their communities. The elders and the adults of the community had their 
traditional role of educator usurped and saw a schooling system, which alien- 
ated their children from them, take their place. 

The federal government established public schools in the late 1940's and early 
1950's and for the next several decades schooling was highly centralized, with an 
administration system far removed from the communities and the people it 
supposedly served. Although there continued to be residential schools, gradu- 
ally schools were established in communities as a flurry of building ensued. 
This also resulted in a growing, non-native bureaucracy to administer the 
schools. 

Families were encouraged to stay in the communities in order for their 
children to attend school. Eventually, most families chose to stay in a com- 
munity, although it disrupted the traditional way of seasonal camp life. Even 
though children were now able to stay with their families and attend school, 
traditional lifestyle gave way to settlement life, the lessons taught were im- 
ported from the South and the language and the culture was no longer passed 
from elders to children. 

Although control of education passed from the federal government to the 
government of the Territories in the mid-1960's, most of the teachers were still 
non-native people from Southern Canada. They often stayed only one or two 
years in a community and rarely developed a deep understanding of the culture 
and values of the children they taught and their families. Moreover, the 
curriculum and the teaching materials were from the non-native, urban culture 
of Southern Canada. 

Very few children did well in the educational system and their parents were 
alienated from it. Many parents saw little in the schooling system to value and to 
support. If their children succeeded in the elementary school within their 
community, they then had to go far from home to a residential school for their 
secondary education. To a large extent, the schooling system resulted in a loss of 
language and a loss of culture for several generations of children, particularly 
among the Dene. 

In 1982, the Legislative Assembly established a Special Committee on Educa- 
tion to inquire into problems and public concerns with the schooling system. 
The comments from parents and community leaders at public hearings with the 
Committee give eloquent testimony to the crisis in schooling that existed. 

The way 14-year-olds are treated in the traditional society and the way they are treated 
in the school is quite different. In the traditional society, they are treated as adults; in 
the school, they are not. 

(The) problem with kids dropping out is that they are caught in the middle. They 
cannot go out hunting, there are no jobs for them, they don't have an education. 



934 ALPHA 94 



Culturally, they are caught in the middle and can't support 

But we recognize the world is ^^nging, and the l^f^^J^t* ^fltet w'ifh^he 
children thelkills to make l ^ V '"S W „ B f 0 ^ e their children. It should not 

traditional education parents and elders St. « g, h , s foreign t0 their own. It 

SK^Car^S! 'a h s to how they want to live. 
We cannot afford to bury our language with our elders. 

disturbs me. 

L,„nin S: Trillion .nd Ch»8« »"""«" T """"'"' m * 

The s PKia ,c„ r; . tt e rerS c -^kk^esise 

and delivery of school.ng in the Terntone \ M °f ° control to the community 
intended to bring educational ^f^ZntZc^onlnd to make the 

t >r ass ^."^^^ » 

schools. Regional centres were , wioin ,i laneuaee and to support the 

implement and the impact is difficult to measure. 

THE CURRENT SITUATION 

Although there has been some progress towards community control of 
education, culturally-relevant curriculum and an increase B 

nine ' u t ,h Winal children who make it through school to gradua- 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 235 

hinders their ability to access training and wage employment. Because youth are 
such a large component of the population, the picture in most communities 
shows many undereducated, unemployed youth. Often they use neither their 
mother tongue nor English well. In many communities they are cailed the "walk 
abouts" as they aimlessly pass their days. Although the English literacy situa- 
tion amongst aboriginal people is a major concern, this paper is focused on the 
situation with the aboriginal languages. 

The loss of language for aboriginal people is alarming. Overall, 16% of 
aboriginal adults over the age of 15 years speak their native language only, 60% 
speak their own language and English as well, while 24% speak English only. 

Both Dene and Inuit elders, the traditional teachers, express deep concern 
that the children and youth are losing their language; that the language they 
speak is very poor and is mixed with English. The young people have lost the 
richness and complexity of their language and their ability to describe and 
communicate. Although 94% of Inuit 15 to 24 year olds speak their language, it is 
often a mixed Inuktitut and English with a great loss of words. 

The Inuit have a more deeply entrenched history of writing their language; 
77% can read their language and 74% can write it. Amongst the Dene only 16% 
can read their language and 11% can write it. The language of the Inuit can be 
classed as still vital r.nd highly viable, with a remarkable degree of homogeneity 
of the language across the circumpolar world from Greenland to Alaska. There 
is a relatively wide array of publications available in Inuktitut as compared to the 
Dene languages. 

Use of the Dene languages is declining. This is indicated by the fact that the 
percentage of 15 to 24 year olds ( 62%) who speak their language is substantially 
lower than the rate for older people (75%). Although some of the Dene lan- 
guages still have relatively large number of speakers left, others are in difficulty. 
The number of speakers of Gwich'in, the language of the people in the 
Mackenzie Delta, remaining is dangerously small. Even those languages which 
are not so seriously endangered are in need of aggressive intervention to ensure 
their survival. 



THE CHALLENGE 

language cannot be separated from the living culture from which it arises. The 
recognition of language is not just the recognition of a system of words, but of a 
unique perception of the world and of the peoples and societies which hold these 
perceptions. (The Report of the Task Force on Aboriginal Languages, 1986. Page 18.) 

The overall challenge is to ensure that in the Northwest Territories aborigina 
languages do not die out. The languages must survive in order to bridge the 
traditional and modern worlds that the people carry within themselves anc 
confront in their daily lives. 



J 



236 ALPHA 94 



According to the Canadian Assembly of First Nations, Inuktitut is a flour- 
ishing" language in need of prevention strategies to ensure its health and 
survival and the Dene languages are "enduring" languages in need of expan- 
sion strategies to ensure their continued survival. (Towards Linguistic Justice 
For First Nations, 1990) 

Within this overall challenge, there are three aspects that are particularly 
critical if the languages are to flourish. First, a new schooling system must 
provide an education that meets the cultural and linguistic needs of the children 
and their families in each community. The community school must become a 
part of the traditional passing of the culture and the language from one 
generation to the next. , 

Second, the damage and loss from the past must be undone. The adults, 
especially the young adults, must be provided with an opportunity and a reason 
to recover their language and culture. People need to see some value and to have 
the opportunity to integrate the traditions of the past with the life of the present 

and the future. , 

Third, the languages must not be relegated to languages of the past alone, 
because if they do they will die with the elders and their way of life The 
languages must become the living languages of the present, as comfortable and 
as expressive with computer technology, medical terminology and legislative 
writing as they always have been with the knowledge and wisdom of the land. 

EXPERIMENTS & ACTIONS TO MEET THE CHALLENGE 

The aboriginal people of the north are reaching for and taking control of the 
political, economic and social forces in their society. This is most obvious in the 
changes of the last two decades. In the beginning of aboriginal dominance in the 
political apparatus of government, in tha movement towards the settlement of 
land claims and the three successfully completed claims. 

Within this context of political and socio-economic change, the people have 
demanded change in the schooling of their children. At times there has been a 
conscious recognition and other times an intuitive understanding that prov.d- 
in* a more culturally relevant school program for children will not be enough. 
There must also be opportunities for adults to recover their language and their 
culture. There is also a deepening recognition that if the languages are not used 
in all aspects of everyday life, no amount of schooling or community program- 
ming will enable them survive. . 

Instinctively, there is an understanding that aboriginal languages and liter- 
acy must be an integral part of far: ily life, school life, business life, political life, 
community life. Therefore, the use of aboriginal languages, oral and written, 
must be promoted, encouraged and ensured an ongoing, integral place in the 
life of the community. 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 2S7 



Taking Back the Education of the Children 

As the administration of the schooling system was decentralized, parents 
were able to develop some control over the education of their children. They 
believed that the school had a responsibility to teach the children the language 
and to incorporate the cultural strength of the community into the child's 
learning experiences. 

Not all parents felt or feel this way. Many parents are so alienated from the 
school system that they do not care what is taught, how it is taught or whether 
their children attend. Many families are so troubled with violence and addic- 
tions, that education does not have a place in their daily lives. Some parents have 
learned their own school lessons all too well and believe that the best future for 
their children lies in them learning English well and becoming accomplished in 
all the skills required by modern Canadian society. They feel that learning the 
mother tongue and the traditional ways is not important and will hinder their 
children's chances of success. 

In spite of these obstacles, parents have formed community education 
councils to run the schools and a growing number of Northern, aboriginal 
teachers have joined them in designing and implementing significant changes 
to how children are educated. 

Initially; small interventions were tried. The elders were brought into the 
schools and the classrooms to teach the children traditional skills, to tell stories 
and make the mother tongue part of the school environment. Time was set aside 
in the school week for language lessons. The education councils designed land- 
based programs and the teachers took the children out to the bush or on to the 
tundra for a few days each year, so they could experience the lifestyle of their 
elders. 

The Board of Education for the Baffin region began immersion Inuktitut 
programs for elementary aged children and also determined that they would 
devote some part of the budget to publishing Inuktitut books for young 
children. 

In 1989 the Baffin Board of Education took a further step and developed an 
integrated curriculum that was more than a language or cultural program added 
on to the main purpose of school. They believed that thinking and learning 
needs to take place in the mother tongue of the lnuit before it can occur 
effectively in a second language. Piniaqtavut 5 develops learning experiences for 
children from an lnuit perspective. Materials are developed by lnuit in Inuktitut 
and the content begins with the experiences of the child within the family, the 
community and the culture. The philosophical base incorporates lnuit relation- 
ship with the sky, the sea, the land and the community. Learning experiences 
include land-based classes and returning to the elders their traditional role of 
teacher. 



11 



238 ALPHA 94 



Similar developments are gradually taking place with the Dene. After some 
years, it was obvious that teaching the language as a small part of the curriculum 
or having elders visit the school was not having enough of an impact. 

The philosophy behind Dene Kede, a Dene curriculum, begins with the Dene 
story of creation which 

"tells us that as human beings, we are dependent on the land for survival and that 
continued survival requires not simply knowledge of, but respect for all things on 
earth. The purpose of this curriculum is to give this perspective back to our children. 
There is a need to root ourselves in tradition not for tne sake of the past but for the sake 
of the future. Ou. children, with the gift of their culture, can work towards ensuring 
our future survival as well as the survival of humankind." (Dene Kede, 1992). 

Dene Kede was developed under the guidance of a council of elders. This fact is 
absolutely critical to the curriculum's authenticity and to the respect and validity 
it will have in the Dene communities. It is currently being implemented in the 
schools of the Western Arctic. However, there are still obstacles to overcome. 
The majority of the teachers are still not aboriginal or from the North. Some 
have actively resisted the Dene Kede curriculum; questioning how will they test 
the students and questioning its value in the education of the children. Others 
cannot bring the cultural background necessary to teach the curriculum. Until 
the majority of teachers in the school system are from the North and are 
aboriginal it will not be possible for aboriginal people to fully have control of the 
education of their children. 

There are further obstacles if the children do not have the language and 
culture reinforced in their families and community. There is a danger that their 
mother tongue will become just a subject taught in school unless it is a vital part 
of their everyday lives. 

There are several generations of adults who are not fluent or literate in their 
own language. This is especially true amongst the Dene, but there is a notice- 
able loss of language amongst young lnuit adults as well. These adults and 
parents speak a mixed mother tongue and English language at home and in the 
community. It is not the rich, complex language of the elders. Moreover, the 
mother tongue is not used in places of business, of recreation, or in local 
government. More than recovering control of children's education is needed. 

Undoing the Damage & the Loss 

Community-basei.; programs in aboriginal language and literacy develop- 
ment respond to the needs of adults to recover their language and rediscover the 
richness of their culture. Any project is developed and designed by people in a 
community to meet their particular needs, and then further developed and 
managed by a community-based organization, which is a political organization, 
an educational council, or sometimes a cultural organization. 

Since 1989-90 there have been projects in nearly half the communities. Some 
have been very successfully in meeting the needs of the community, others have 

\ 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 239 



faltered. The following vignettes provide a glimpse of some of these projects 
with some analysis of what factors have made them succeed or falter. 

Coral Harbour 

Coral Harbour is a very small lnuit community of 600 people on the coast of 
Hudson Bay. For the most part, the community is still very traditional in lifestyle 
but oyer the past four years, people in the community have organized a number 
of successful Inuktitut literacy projects. Each of the projects have interwoven 
with and supported the others, so that there is a sense that something whole and 
important is happening in the community. 

Probably the most critical component of language and literacy activity in the 
community over the years has been the Elder's Writing Project. Elders from the 
community have been involved in writing and publishing books on the history, 
traditions and culture of the Community and its people. The publishing of the 
books caused many of the younger adults in the community to place a new value 
on being fluent and literate in their own language. The books written by the 
elders provided Inuktitut language materials for the school children in their 
own dialect and about something that was of intense interest to them, their own 
community. 

A second component of the project, introduced a little later, brought Inuktitut 
language instruction into the adult (English language) academic upgrading 
program at the community college learning centre. Young adults, who were 
preparing for entry into the wage economy, received instruction in their own 
language, validating it as a language important for their adult work life. As part 
of their Inuktitut language program, these young adults worked with elders to 
write booklets on subjects that were of interest to the community. Thus more 
written material was made available in the language for the community to use. 
They researched the histories of the families who had settled in the community 
and developed family trees that linked them as a community and to other 
communities of lnuit. 

One component of the language and literacy work in the community that has 
had an immense impact has been the use of the community radio station which 
is controlled by the people in the community. Nearly everyone listens to it daily. 
The radio has been used to stimulate discussion on language issues; everything 
from how many different dialects are spoken in the homes of the community to 
what are the things people want to see written in the books and whether they 
should develop their community dictionary (they did). The tadio was also used 
for fun things like telling stories and holding language quizzes and contests. 
Use of the radio had a major impact in promoting the importance and value of 
the language in modern society. Last year more than 100 people regularly 
participated in the radio language programs. 

For a period of time in 1990 and 1991, the momentum slowed. There were no 



13 



240 ALPHA 94 

people who could or would get involved to coordinate the projects, so things 
stopped for a while. By late 1991, people came forward again and the projects re- 
started. In very small communities, this is not uncommon. There are a limited 
number of people who can provide leadership because of the harsh demands of 
the Northern traditional lifestyle and meeting the many needs of frequently 
troubled communities. In another community an entire literacy project came to 
a stop because nearly every woman in the community was engaged in making 
special craft items for the 1992 EXPO in Spain. They had an opportunity to earn 
some wages for a period of some months and all else became second priority. 

In Coral Harbour, the strength of the ongoing projects has been the consis- 
tent support and involvement of the elders and the sheer perseverance of a 
handful of individuals who would not give up. The creativity of the projects in 
using community radio and publishing meaningful materials ensured that 
language, oral and written, was deeply rooted in the life of the community. 

Hay River Reserve 

In Hay River Reserve, which is a very small South Slavey community of 200 
people near Great Slave Lake in the Western Arctic, there are a couple of 
exciting projects meeting with some success and some problems. From 1990 
until the spring of 1992 there was a very innovative Slavey literacy project in the 
community. The project was initiated by the commitment of one woman, deeply 
concerned about the loss of the Slavey language. She did the community 
research, convinced the Band Council to support her, prepared the funding 
proposals and put the program together. There were three main components: 
first, introducing a Slavey language component into the College English up- 
grading program; secondly, student-created projects that re-introduced written 
Slavey into community life; and thirdly, a desk-top publishing venture to create 
and publish Slavey language printed materials. 

The adult students involved in the project first worked with the instructor to 
improve their oral skills in their language and to learn to read and write it. Once 
they were confident of their language abilities, they consulted with people in the 
community, particularly the elders, in order to design projects for themselves 
that also would be meaningful for the community. Some of the students mapped 
the traditional hunting and fishing areas of the community with the traditional 
Slavey names, which had been replaced with English names. A large map was 
put up in the Band Council office and small maps that could be carried in the 
pocket were given to every member of the community. Reclaiming the names of 
places was very important to the community and especially the elders. 

The students also produced regular newsletters in Slavey and distributed 
them to every resident. The newsletter became an important part of community 
life. Some of the students chose to produce some simple books in Slavey for 
their own children and for the school. Others interviewed every member of the 



o 

ERIC 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 241 



community and produced a calendar in Slavey, in which every person's birthday 
was listed. 

At the same time as this project was happening, the Band Council was close 
to achieving a dream of many years. An alcohol and drug treatment centre was 
under construction in the community. People who seek treatment must either go 
to the capital, Yellowknife, or to Southern Canada and the political leaders of the 
community fought for years to build a facility in the region that they would 
control. As the construction of the building began, the leadership began to plan 
how the centre would operate. They are determined that the centre will be 
managed and staffed by people from the community and have put training 
programs in place so that personnel will be ready when the building is ready. 

They also believe that treatment programs are most effective if they provide 
the spiritual and cultural basis that leads to the healing of the whole person, and 
they decided that the treatment centre must operate in the Slavey language and 
initiated a project to develop Slavey terminology for the addictions treatment 
and counselling field. This work is now nearly completed and when the centre 
opens in the summer 1993, all counselling, all patient records, all documents 
will be in the Slavey language. 

However, the other project has come to a halt. The woman who was the single 
driving force behind the project accepted a job teaching in the nearby high 
school. She is still teaching Slavey, but the project she started in the community 
has ceased without her. In part, this is because there are very few people 
sufficiently fluent and literate in the language who could take over her role in 
the project. It is also because, as in other small communities, when a committed 
leader turns to another project, there is often no one immediately available who 
will pick up the work. Hay River Reserve has a group of committed people 
working towards a sober, healthy community in control of its own destiny. 
Speaking, reading and writing their language is part of working towards that 
reality; but if the people in the community are going to continue in their 
language and cultural recovery work, more language resource people are 
needed. 

Lutsel Ke 

Lutsel K'e is a small Chipewyan Dene community of 250. Like Hay River 
Reserve, in recent years the political leaders, the Chief and Band Council, have 
also placed great emphasis, at least verbally, on developing a sober and healthy 
community as well as developing the Chipewyan language, particularly in its 
written form. The Band Council aggressively developed a project and sought 
government funding for a Chipewyan literacy program for the community. 

Initially, a pilot project was developed to train two local women to be the 
teachers and to develop a learning program and materials that would meet the 
needs of the community. There were one or two long community meetings to 



Id 



242 ALPHA 94 



discuss the project. , .... 

Many of the elders were very disturbed about the new orthography writing 
system and wanted a return to the old syllabic writing system that they knew 
and could use. This is an issue in many of the Dene communities; the elders still 
use the old writing system taught by the missionaries while the children are 
learning the new system developed by Dene educators and linguists. The new 
writing system is here to stay but it causes splits in communities and separates 
the elders from the children. . 

The project in Lutsel K'e faltered very early and never took hold m the 
community. The difficulties began in the pilot phase. The trainer came from 
outside the community and used a whole language, language experience 
approach to teaching literacy. The women who were being trained wanted to be 
taueht and to teach in the very prescribed way that they remembered from their 
own schooling. From the beginning they made it very clear they would not use 
any of the methods they were being taught and they felt the pilot project was a 
failure and a waste of their time. 

Once the project itself started, there was one teacher who organized the 
teaching program, but there were no students. Although the Chief and Band 
Councillors had committed themselves and the staff to participate in the 
program, to be role models for the community, they never did. Too many other 
demands occupied their time. , , 

A few students came for a short time but they stopped attending. The teacher 
was experiencing personal problems at the time and lost her enthusiasm and 
commitment for the project. At the end, the only person who came for classes 
was the non-native adult education instructor who wanted to learn the lan- 
guage. 

Rae-Edzo 

Rae-Edzo is the largest Dogrib Dene community in the Western Arctic with a 
population of 1500 people. Many people in the community are fluent in their 
language but very few can read and write it. The community is the centre of 
Dogrib politics, economic activity, social and cultural life. 

About a vear ago a number of employers in Rae-Edzo came together to 
discuss the 'use of the Dogrib language in the workplace. They formed a 
committee to further explore the interest in Dogrib workplace language and 
literacy programs. The committee represents the band council, the community 
economic development agency, the hamlet council, the parish council, the 
friendship centre and the government offices. 

They conducted a needs assessment to determine the interest, commitment 
and support of employers and employees for Dogrib language use in the 
workplace. Twenty-two of the 26 employers in the community were supportive 
and response from employees was enthusiastic. Since most of the residents of 



lb 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 243 

the community are Dogrib speakers, people believed it was important to 
provide services in the language of the community. They noted that most 
workers in the offices spoke to each other in Dogrib when they were talking 
about personal or social matters, but many would switch to English when the 
subject matter was work-related. The staff at the nursing station believed they 
should be keeping patient records in Dogrib. Meetings of the Band Council or 
the Hamlet Council should be available in Dogrib as well as English. 

The needs assessment and subsequent report is a model currently being 
shared with other communities. The committee has now launched a Dogrib 
literacy program, establishing a model whereby employees have time off-from 
work one afternoon a week to go to class and give one evening of their personal 
time for class. 

The program has two goals. The first is to simply offer Dogrib language 
development and literacy classes for employees in the community. The second is 
to develop and standardize Dogrib terminology for modern office use and to 
share that standardized terminology with the other Dogrib communities. For 
example, the Dogrib (or any aboriginal) language does not have a word for fax 
machine or photocopier or computer. The language provides rich words and 
expressions for all the things of the traditional culture and lifestyle. Now, the 
people are developing and agreeing on the words to describe the modern work 
environment they also inhabit. 

The project so far appears to be very successful . There are a number of critical 
factors in the success of the project. The Dogrib language and culture in Rae- 
Edzo is very strong and there are quite a few resource people to share the roles 
of teaching and developing terminology. Dogrib people are a significant part of 
most workplaces generating a high degree of agreement on the importance of 
providing services in their language and ensuring their language is used in the 
workplace. There is a strong tradition of political leadership within the Dene 
Nation as a whole that comes from the Dogrib communities. But most impor- 
tantly, the project came about because those involved felt it was necessary and 
important and they were committed to participating. 

Using the Languages in New Ways 

Flourishing languages change constantly and adapt to new circumstances 
and new technologies. As oral tradition languages adapt to the changing 
circumstances of the modern North, they must become more than an expression 
of the past and of traditional culture. As aboriginal people take control of the 
political, economic, service and governmental sectors they will bring their 
languages into the workplace, whether the work is providing government 
services, expediting mining exploration, providing patient care or developing 
models of aboriginal self-government. 

Because the aboriginal languages of the Northwest Territories have only 



244 ALPHA 94 



recently developed as written languages, there is not a heritage of literature or 
written discourse. Creating a written literature is part of re-creating the lan- 
guages within a new context for ancient cultures. 

In the last decade there has been a great deal of effort put into recording the 
stories, legends, knowledge and truths of the elders who are the carriers of the 
history. These oral traditions projects have documented traditional medicine, 
traditional place names, traditional scientific knowledge and much more. Some 
of the stories have been illustrated and published for children for use in the 
schools. But there has not yet emerged a strong aboriginal language literature. 
There is a distinct danger that if the only written materials are stories and 
legends from the past, that the language and the culture will exist only in the 
past. 

In the last year, the Literacy Office has initiated a series of workshops to 
develop writers as one action to encourage the development of a Northern, 
aboriginal languages literature. 

In any workshop there must be three to four speakers of a language in order 
for them to work together, writing, reading their work to each other, brainstorm- 
ing, editing and re-writing. Each workshop usually brings together three 
language groups at once. The language of interaction within the wo - kshop is 
English — the common language between the participants as well as the 
language of the instructor. Each group of people participate in two workshops 
separated in time by several months to allow for reflection and ongoing writing. 
By the end of 1993 workshops in every language will be completed. 

The first book of writings from these workshops will soon be published and 
several more will result. They will be an important addition to the small number 
of books in aboriginal languages. 

Most of the participants are those who have written a lot in their language, 
transcribing stories from the elders, writing word and picture books for children 
and documenting traditional knowledge and skills. These have been language 
survival activities. Many of the participants have exclaimed that they have never 
thought of themselves as "writers" until they experienced the writing work- 
shops. For the first time they are deciding to v rite, in their language, poems, 
stories, books that come from their own experience and their own imagination. 

In addition to creating experiences that enable these people to begin writing 
freely, the workshops provides them with the models and experiences to deliver 
future workshops in their own regions for others. In the future, there will be 
support for more workshops delivered by the original participants to develop 
more writers. 

One of the greatest obstacles will continue to be the difficulties in getting 
aboriginal languages materials published. The North American recession is 
creating enormous difficulties for Canadian publishers, but even in the best of 
times they were not interested in publishing aboriginal languages books. There 
is too small a population and market for such books and publishing them is not 
cost-effective. One Northern publisher has, in partnership with some of the 



i er|c 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 245 



regional boards of education, published books for children in the aboriginal 
languages. 

Perhaps the single most important and difficult challenge facing the aborigi- 
nal people of the North is to create a viable publishing venture to publish books 
in their languages. 

REFLECTIONS ON THE ROLE OF LITERACY 

The message we received in school was that our language was not important. It was 
not taught. English was important and we were taught to speak and read and write 
English. So, to read and write a language makes it important. Reading and writing my 
language validates its importance and that is the point of literacy. (Fibbie Tatti. 1992) 

The experiences of the people of the Northwest Territories indicate that there 
are three important roles for literacy in the survival and re-vitalization of the 
aboriginal languages of the North. The first is validating the contemporary 
value of the languages; the second is preserving the traditions of the past for 
future generations; the third is re-creating the languages within a changing 
society. 

The act of using a written form of an aboriginal language begins to undo the 
damage of the past by validating its value as a language within the society, 
alongside the dominant language, English. Written material — books, stories, 
newspapers — in aboriginal languages counters the message from the past that 
only English is important and has value because it is written and people are 
taught to read and write it. 

The elders tell us that writing the language, writing down the stories, the 
history, the knowledge, the wisdom, the traditions, is the preserving role of 
literacy. It is necessary to prevent the culture and the language from disappear- 
ing. Writing the language allows the people to reach back to the people of 
thousands of years ago and to also reach forward to the people of the future. 
They have said that the wisdom, the culture, the traditions of the past can no 
longer be passed to the next generation through oral means alone. As the elders 
pass from us, we lose the experiences of the last generation to live totally the 
traditional lifestyle. If we tell their lessons and their stories in writing, that 
experience is not lost for us or for our children and their children. 

In addition to the validating and preserving role of literacy, there is the critical 
role of creating a changing language, an adapting language, a literature of a 
changing culture. In the face of an overwhelming English language culture, the 
aboriginal languages cannot afford to use the English words for fax machine or 
computer or pneumonia. Terminology must be developed that brings technol- 
ogy or foreign concepts and words within the language and culture of aborigi- 
nal people. In the face of newspapers, magazines and books in English, 
aboriginal languages literature and publishing is essential. There is little point 
in people learning to read and write their language unless there is material to 



246 ALPHA 94 



read and a publisher for the writing. The languages will flourish when they are 
used, orally and in written form, in every facet of community life; to keep 
patient records at the community nursing station, keeping records of Band 
Council meetings, to mark buildings and streets with signs as well as in the 
personal communications between individuals and within families. 

The aboriginal people of the North are involved in actions that address these 
three roles The work in the schools, to take back the education ot the children, is 
a major action to validate the language and the culture of the people, to preserve 
the traditional role of the elders and the adults as the teachers of the children and 
to create a school system that reflects the culture, both past and present. Until 
most of the teachers are from that culture and until the children experience their 
language and culture in the home and in the community as well as the school, 
the goal will not be reached. 

Community-based literacy projects also serve to validate the language and 
the culture of the aboriginal people alongside the dominant English language 
and culture. At their best, these projects provide actions and products that not 
only preserve the past for the present and future generations; they also provide 
materials and information that are important and useful to the people and create 
new uses for the language in the daily life and work of the community. The 
projects work well when the whole community is involved, but the elders are 
especially important. Even then, the projects are often fragile and operate on 
shaky ground because there are no longer enough people fluent as well as 
literate in the language. If one person leaves the community, falls ill, has a baby 
or takes a salaried job an entire project can falter. 

New ventures in writing and publishing books are the challenge of the 
future If children can participate in an education that reflects their heritage and 
culture; if the language is a changing, living, adapting part of the daily life of 
the community, then creating aboriginal languages literature will complete the 
circle. 

Notes & References 
REPORTS 

Learning, had.Uon and Change in (he Northwest frmtones, The Final Report , af Spwal 
Committee on Education, Northwest Territories Legislative Assembly, Yellowknife, N.W.T., Canada, 
1982. 

The Report of the Task For, ,• on Aboriginal Languages, Government of the Northwest Territories, 
Yellowknife, N.W.T., Canada, 1986. Page 18. 

Towards LmguiXh /iwtire For Fir>l Nations, Assembly of First Nations Education Secretariat, 
Ottawa, Canada, 1990. 

-Yuu Took My Utk": Ahongma/ i.KW and fmpowemu-nl .Fourth Report ot the Standing 

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs, House of Commons, Ottawa, Canada, 1990. p. 69. 

Dene Kede An Mucat/onaf Perspert/vc, Department Responsible for Education Culture and 

Employment Programs, Government of the Northwest Territories, 1992. 

/Wquvut fnti-gfJted Program, Baffin Divisional Board of Education. Iqaluit, N.W.T., 1989. 



A- 'J 



Literacy & Aboriginal Language Survival 247 



ORIGINAL MATERIAL 

Conversations with Fibbie Tatti, Slavey Language Project Coordinator. Department Responsible for 
Education, Culture and Employment Programs, 1992. 



21 



