DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 437 668 



CS 216 992 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

ISBN 

ISSN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Pierce, Kathryn Mitchell, Ed. 

Adventuring with Books: A Booklist for Pre-K- -Grade 6. 12th 
Edition. NCTE Bibliography Series. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, IL. 

ISBN- 0-8141- 0077-5 
ISSN-1051-4740 
2000 - 00-00 

631p.; Forward by Jane Yolen. For previous edition, see ED 
406 672. 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. Kenyon 
Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 00775-3050: $26.95 
members, $32.95 nonmembers). Tel : 800-369-6283 (Toll Free) ; 
Web site: http://www.ncte.org. 

Books ( 010 ) - - Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF03/PC26 Plus Postage . 

♦Adolescent Literature; Annotated Bibliographies; *Childrens 
Literature; Elementary Education; Fiction; Nonfiction; 
Picture Books; Poetry; Preschool Education; Reading 
Interests; *Reading Material Selection; *Recreational 
Reading 

Historical Fiction 



ABSTRACT 



Books that expand children's horizons and stimulate their 
imaginations are the focus of this 12th edition, an annotated bibliography of 
selected children's books published between 1996 and 1998. The 20 chapters in 
the book contain traditional and nontraditional categories of literature: 
Stories of the Universe: From Questions and Observations to Discoveries and 
Inventions; Our Changing World; Exploring Our Past; Families; Struggle and 
Survival; School Life; Literacy; Picture Books; Mathematics; Poetry; Fine 
Arts; Sports, Games, and Hobbies; The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, 
and Puzzles; Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible; African and 
African American Voices and Experiences; Asian, Asian American, and Hav/aii 
Pacific Voices and Experiences; Hispanic/Latino, Hispanic American, and 
Latino American Voices and Experiences; Native American Voices and 
Experiences; Gender Issues: Spunky, Clever, Caring, and Endearing Girls and 
Boys in Children's Literature; and Supporting Critical Conversations in 
Classrooms. New to this edition are extensive reviews of selected books, 
giving additional information on children's comments and reactions, ways the 
books have been used in the classroom, and other ideas about sharing the 
books with children. Introductions to each chapter (by the teachers, 
librarians, university faculty, school-age and university students, and 
parents who collaborated in choosing the books) share their processes, the 
issues they dealt with, and the decisions they made about the books in their 
section. Books are indexed by author, illustrator, subject, and title. (RS) 



o 

ERIC 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 437 668 



Adventuring with Books 

A Booklist for Pre-K— Grade 6 



12th' Edition 



' r/e I 'r . J 





















U.s. DEPARTWENT nt 

originaiing it- 

□ Mino, changes have been made <o 

in,p,overeproduchon quality. 



ollicialOEBI position^ 



^ . <1 ' . 

n- 



pP^;rA V I' 

Gp*#si^’ . • • '■.; 

'S- '? 

* \ 



^>Vr^ r.-i. 

■'.‘■■■■''•/dr.;’' ■ .2 



td 



'■ '“ ■ . ' TA'v • A G ' ' ' 

. V /•'PGi.v'.iji'' . ''*' V*.^'- -G5?ic 



- ^ 'dd A- 'G'“" ’ ’ ■■' .'t 'idv-Gi* 




i;i:,dpM 

‘•'1' - " V'f ^ ■ '* ■■ ^ /l^' A - 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



■ dotted' ' ; •, 

s;-;r^i;sn;0^ 

.-. 1 ..:-.'v,- ■* .-.'[f -1 

■ ■ ■ - ■ •>';,■{■• VV" ■ r:-3 ^ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



"■TlvjArvfG'' 



tSs^f 



VO 



? V) I 

oERLC 

r - I 



Kathryn Mitchell Pierce, Editor; with Cathy Beck, Dick Koblitz 
Shari Nelson-Faulkner, Anne O'Connor, Susan Wolf, and the 
Committee to Revise the. Elementary School Booklist 



Foreword by Jane Yolen 
NCTE Bibliography Series 



2 



RFST COPY AVAILABLE 






Adventuring with Books 



o 

ERIC 

hiaifiiifftaiTiTaaa 



3 



NCTE Editorial Board: Jacqueline Bryant, Kermit Campbell, Gail Wood, Xin 
Liu Gale, Sarah Hudelson, Jackie Swensson, Gerald R. Oglan, Helen Poole, 
Karen Smith, Chair, ex officio, Peter Feely, ex officio 

Committee to Revise the Elementary School Booklist 
1996-1999 

Kathryn Mitchell Pierce, Chair, Multiage Primary Teacher, Glenridge 
Elementary School 

Cathy Beck, Eighth-Grade English Teacher, Wydown Middle School 
Dick Koblitz, Multiage Intermediate Teacher, Captain Elementary School 
Anne O'Connor, Multiage Primary Teacher, Glenridge Elementary School 
Susan Wolf, Fifth-Grade Teacher, Glenridge Elementary School 

1998-1999 

Jan Keenoy, Fifth-Grade Teacher, Glenridge Elementary School 

Shari Nelson-Faulkner, Clayton Family Center Parent 

Joan VonDras, Fifth-Grade Teacher, Glenridge Elementary School 

1996-1997 

Susie Bargiel, Multiage Intermediate Teacher, Captain Elementary School 
All of the School District of Clayton in Clayton, Missouri 



A complete list of all contributors to this publication may be found on pages 



599 - 604 . 




Bibliography Series 



4 



Adventuring with Books 



A Booklist for Pre-K-Grade 6 
12th Edition 



Kathryn Mitchell Pierce, Editor, 

with Cathy Beck, Dick Koblitz, Shari Nelson-Faulkner, 
Anne O'Connor, Susan Wolf, and the Committee to Revise 
the Elementary School Booklist 



With a Foreword by 

Jane Yolen 



National Council of Teachers of English 

1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 



O 

ERIC 



5 



Prepress Services: Precision Graphics 
Production Editor: Kurt Austin 
Interior Design: Doug Burnett 
Cover Design: Tom Jaczak and Joellen Bryant 
Series Cover Design: R. Maul 

The cover illustration by Christopher Myers is from the cover of Harlem by 
Walter Dean Myers, illustrated by Christopher Myers. New York: Scholastic, 
1997. Used with permission. 

NCTE Stock Number: 00775-3050 

Foreword © 1999 by Jane Yolen, with permission of the author and the author's 
agents, Curtis Brown Ltd. All other text © 2000 by the National Council of 
Teachers of English. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of 
America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching 
of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point of 
view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the Board of 
Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of policy, 
where such endorsement is clearly specified. 

ISSN 1051-4740 

ISBN 0-8141-0077-5 




6 ‘ 



Patricia Tefft Cousin 
April 19, 1951-July 1, 1999 



Dr. Patricia Tefft Cousin touched our lives and gave us new ways to 
think about ourselves and others. She listened to us, told us stories, 
focused on our strengths and potential, and showed us how we could 
learn by working together. 

Pat taught us to make spaces for the voices of all children and to 
listen to their stories with care. She never stopped learning from her stu- 
dents or her friends. We celebrated learning and life with her in ways 
that changed us and gave us new appreciation for the power of teaching 
and caring. Her stories about children, and our stories about learning in 
her company, continue to create new possibilities for us and the children 
that are the center of our work. 

In her honor we hope Adventuring with Books will encourage oth- 
ers to listen carefully to children, to honor their stories, and to share 
with them the best stories we have to offer. We hope her life will inspire 
all of us to see collaboration as a way of learning with and for one 
another. 




7 



About the NOTE 
Bibliography Series 



:\e National Council of Teachers of English is proud to be part of a 



;radition that we want to share with you. In our bibliography 



series are four different booklists, each focused on a particular 
audience and each updated regularly These are Adventuring with Books 
(pre-K through grade 6), Kaleidoscope (multicultural literature for grades 
K through 8), Your Reading (middle school/junior high), and Books for 
You (senior high). Together these volumes list thousands of recent chil- 
dren's and young-adult trade books. Although the works included 
cover a wide range of topics, they all have one thing in common: 
They're good books that students and teachers alike enjoy. 

How are these volumes put together? The process begins when an 
educator who knows literature and its importance in the lives of stu- 
dents and teachers is chosen by the NCTE Executive Committee to serve 
as booklist editor. That editor then works with teachers and librarians 
who review, select, and armotate hundreds of new trade books sent to 
them by publishers. It's a complicated process, one that can last three or 
four years. But because of their dedication and strong belief in the need 
to let others know about the good literature that's available, these pro- 
fessionals volunteer their time in a way that is commendable and serves 
as an inspiration to all of us. The members of the committee that com- 
piled this volume are listed in the front of the book, and a complete list 
of contributing reviewers is included on pages 599-604. We are truly 
grateful for their hard work. 

As educators know, no single book is right for every reader or 
every purpose, so inclusion in this booklist is not necessarily an 
endorsement from NCTE. It does indicate that the professionals who 
make up the booklist committee feel that the work in question is worthy 
of teachers' and students' attention, whether for its informative or aes- 
thetic qualities. Similarly exclusion from an NCTE booklist is not neces- 
sarily a judgment on the quality of a given book or publisher. Many 
factors — space, time, availability of certain books, publisher participa- 
tion — may influence the final shape of the list. 




viii 



About the NCTE Bibliography Series 



We hope that you'll find this booklist a useful resource in discov- 
ering new titles and authors, and we hope that you will want to collect 
other booklists in the series. Our mission is to help improve the teaching 
and learning of English and the language arts, and we hope you'll agree 
that the quality of our booklists contributes substantially toward that 
goal. 



Zarina M. Hock 
Senior Editor 



Contents 



Acknowledgments xv 

Foreword: Mage/Image/Imagination xvii 

Jane Yolen 

Introduction xxi 

1 Stories of the Universe: From Questions and Observations 

to Discoveries and Inventions 1 

Books That Reflect an Inquiry Stance 2 

Other Criteria for Judging Books 3 

Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 5 

Health and Medicine 15 

Inventions, Discoveries, and Statistics 20 

Looking Closely at the Natural World 24 

2 Our Changing World 37 

Changes in the Natural World 38 

Changes in Our Physical World 57 

3 Exploring Our Past 61 

Histories and Herstories 65 

Historical Fiction 65 

Historical Nonfiction 79 

Stories of War 92 

Cultural Traditions 98 

Traditional Literature 98 

Cultural Practices and Celebrations 112 

4 Families 127 

Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, 

and Personal Narratives 130 



X 



Contents 



Family Experiences through the Ages 143 

Changing Family Structures 148 

Controversial Issues in Family Life 153 

Family Experiences around the World 157 

Life Stages and Milestones 162 

Relationships with Others 166 

5 Struggle and Survival 169 

Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 172 

Finding One's Own Identity 187 

Rites of Passage 191 

Family Hardship 196 

Making Peace with Family 199 

Catastrophe, Tragedy, and Hardship 200 

Animal Adventures 207 

Death Themes 211 

6 School Life 215 

High-Interest Series Books 216 

School Environment 218 

Humorous Situations in School 219 

Sharing Experiences and Talents with Others 221 

Friends and Bullies 223 

Teachers' Impact on Students' Lives 226 

Children Struggling with or Experiencing 

Academic Success 228 

Learning about Self within a Classroom Context 229 

Perspectives on Life Inside and Outside 

of the Classroom Context 231 

High-Interest Series Books 235 

7 Literacy 241 

Emergent Literacy 243 

Rhythm, Rhyme, and Repetition 245 

Concept Books 247 

ABC Books 250 

Beginning Chapter Books 253 




11 



Contents xi 



Series Books 256 

Emergent-Reader Books 256 

Beginning Chapter Books 258 

Books for Mature Readers 260 

Books for Reticent Readers 261 

Books about Literacy 263 

Storytelling Books 267 

8 Picture Books 271 

9 Mathematics 297 

Counting Books 298 

Problem-Solving Storybooks 302 

Math Concept Books 306 

10 Poetry 313 

Making the Ordinary Extraordinary 315 

People: Past and Present 322 

The Animal World 328 

The Natural World 332 

Transcending Cultural Boimdaries 338 

11 Fine Arts 345 

Music Books 347 

Rhymes, Chants, and Songs 347 

Books That Inspire Music 349 

Music Appreciation 352 

Drama Books 353 

Books That Inspire Drama 353 

How-to Drama Books 355 

Art Books 356 

Books That Inspire Art 356 

Books about Artists 360 

Art Appreciation 363 

Dance Books 365 

Books That Inspire Dance 365 

Dance Appreciation 367 



xii 



Contents 



12 Sports, Games, and Hobbies 369 

Sports 371 

Autobiographies 371 

Biographies 372 

Information Books 379 

How-to Books 383 

Fiction and Poetry 385 

Games 388 

Hobbies 390 

13 The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 395 

Lovely Language 398 

Language Play 401 

Riddles, Chants, and Poems 407 

Biographies and Autobiographies 

(of Authors, Books, and Characters) 411 

Mysteries 415 

14 Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 423 

Fantasy in the Schools 424 

Organization of This Chapter 425 

Picture Books 428 

Chapter Books 442 

15 African and African American Voices and Experiences 453 

Poetry and the Arts 456 

Inner Triumphs and Finding One's Identity 457 

Biographies and Heroes 458 

Family Life and Relationships 459 

Celebrations 460 

Exploring Our Heritage 461 

16 Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific 

Voices and Experiences 465 

Conflict and Memory 468 

Crossing Boundaries 469 

Relationships 470 




13 



Contents 



xiii 



Celebrations 471 

Creation and Preservation 471 

Inner Triumphs 472 

Voices of the Past 473 

17 Hispanic/Latino, Hispanic American, and Latino 

American Voices and Experiences 475 

Poetry and Song 478 

Comparing Diverse Cultures 478 

Folktales and Legends 479 

Cultural Foods 480 

The Power of Language and Literacy 480 

Concept Books 481 

A Sense of Community 481 

Heroes and History 482 

Life Passages 483 

18 Native American Voices and Experiences 485 

Our Changing World 488 

Exploring Our Past 488 

Families 493 

Struggle and Survival 493 

School Life 495 

Poetry 495 

Fine Arts 495 

Sports, Games, and Hobbies 495 

Fantasy 495 

Critical Conversations 495 

19 Gender Issues: Spunky, Clever, Caring, and Endearing 

Girls and Boys in Children's Literature 497 

Positive Role Models in History 500 

Fiction 500 

Nonfiction 501 

Positive Role Models in Contemporary Times 502 

Fiction 502 

Nonfiction 503 

Positive Role Models in Fantasy 503 



ERIC 



14 



XIV 



Contents 



20 Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 507 

Understanding Differences That Make a Difference 512 

Giving Voice to the Indignant Ones 518 

Taking Social Action 526 

Understanding How Systems of Meaning 

in Society Position Us 533 

Examining Distance, Difference, and "Otherness" 546 

Other Ideas for Text-Sets 554 

Child Labor and Children's Rights 554 

Literacy as Power 554 

Multiple Perspectives 554 

Author Index 555 

Illustrator Index 563 

Subject Index 569 

Title Index 585 

Contributors 599 

Editor 605 




15 



XV 



Acknowledgments 




'his edition of Adventuring with Books represents the work of a 



nationwide collaboration of teachers, librarians, university faculty. 



I school and university students, and parents. We wish to acknowl- 
edge and offer thanks for the work completed by the many groups across 
the country who have contributed chapters to this book, as well as to the 
schools and universities that supported their involvement in this project. 

We are equally indebted to the many publishers who so gener- 
ously supported this project by providing review copies of the books 
considered for inclusion in this volume. Without their ongoing and gen- 
erous support, such a project would not have been possible. 

The entire staff at NCTE — particularly Michael Greer, Karen 
Smith, Mario Welshons, Peter Feely and Kurt Austin — has supported us 
throughout this project, and Kirsten Dennison of Precision Graphics has 
provided expert assistance throughout the production process. We 
thank them for all of their efforts. 

Four other very important people have made significant contribu- 
tions to this project. Susie Bargiel worked with our editorial leadership 
team during the proposal and early design phases of the project, and we 
acknowledge her input. Joan Von Dras and Jan Keenoy joined the editorial 
leadership team for the final year of this project, assuming primary respon- 
sibility for one of the chapters in this book and lending their insights and 
expertise. Last, but certainly not least, Shari Nelson-Faulkner, a parent at 
The Family Center in our district, stepped forward as a volunteer to help 
us with extensive final manuscript preparations and then agreed to 
assume responsibility for a chapter added near the end of the process. 

Finally we are particularly grateful to the School District of Clay- 
ton, Missouri — to the school principals, who allowed us release time to 
work on this project and encouraged our participation; to Assistant 
Superintendent Linda Henke, who provided us with space for our 
books and funds for our summer work; to the Board of Education, 
which supported this and qther professional development experiences 
in the District; and to Dale Sechel, who single-handedly moved every 
box of books that arrived in the District, as well as every box that was 
repacked for shipment to one of the satellite groups around the country. 



Kathryn Mitchell Pierce 



ERIC 



16 



Foreword: 

Mage/Image/Imagination 



I want you to think of the word mage. 

What comes to mind? A pale old man with a long grey beard, 
wearing a midnight blue robe and a pointed hat spangled with stars? A 
magic maker. Is that what you see? You get five points for partial recog- 
nition, zero points for originality. 

Try again. 

Think of the word mage. The root is magus. Although that does 
mean magic maker, it does not specify the age. Why does that magic 
maker have to be old? Why not young? Like Ursula Le Guin's Ged in 
The Wizard ofEarthsea. Like Diane Duane's Nita and Kit in So You Want to 
Be a Wizard. Like the young Merlin in my book Passager. They are all 
child mages. 

Why does the magic maker have to be male? Why not female? 
Like Ozma of Oz. Like Patricia McKillip's Sybel in The Forgotten Beasts of 
Eld. Magic has no gender boundaries, certainly not in literature. 

Why does the magic maker have to be white? Why not brown? 
Ged is brown. Why not Hispanic? Kit is Hispanic. Why not Ghinese or 
Jewish or Native American or . . . 

This is a magic maker we are talking about. In a book. There are 
no rules, hard and fast, about magic makers here. 

Now think of the word mage. At this point, I hope you each have a 
new and different picture in mind. But add this to your portrait. The sec- 
ondary meaning of the word mage is "a person of wisdom and learning." 

How learned is a child? How wise? Where on the scale of wisdom 
is childhood? Is it at the beginning or at the end? Is naivete wisdom? Is 
innocence? Is a sense of wonder — that neotenic sense that only a few of 
us are able to carry into old age — a component of wisdom? And aren't 
the greatest children's books about the journey to wisdom, whether the 
main character is a child or an adult? 

I am asking you a lot of questions because in the getting of this 
particular wisdom, we must all seek the answers. Seeking — not get- 
ting — is a way of partaking in the magus inside. 




17 



xviii 



Foreword: Mage/Image/Imagination 



Let's move from the word mage to a word that soimds as if it is a 
cognate, but is not; the word image. What comes to mind? A picture? An 
idol? An icon? Full points if those were your guesses. The word means 
an artificial imitation or representation of the external form of any 
object. So a mage, doing magic (a mage's work), will work with images. 

When did you get it? I am not just talking about mages, I am 
describing a writer or an artist at work. Well, yes ... I write books that 
are artificial representations of life. The better I am, the more lifelike and 
the less artificial my work seems. 

But in that description I have left out the most important third 

step. 

Now think of the word imagination. It comes from the word image. 
And without such a thing, the mage is helpless. But what is imagina- 
tion? I believe it is wisdom fueled by wonder. It is wonder centered by 
wisdom. It is standing in the full suriilight and recalling the starry night. 
It is walking imder the cauldron of stars and remembering the blue slate 
of morning sky. 

It is story. 

We are story. We are images. We are all magi. 

And so are our children. 

In fact, humans are not just a bimdle of nerves and sinew and blood 
and bone. Such does not distinguish us from the rest of all the living crea- 
tures on earth. The human creature is made up of story. We can remember 
the past in story, reconstruct the present in story, foretell the future in story. 
Storying is our most distinctive ability. We can create images that laugh 
and cry and love and hate and lie and dissemble and plot and protest. We 
can invent purple trees and yellow skies and flying horses and talking 
wolves and heroic spiders and make them real. We can say a mouse is a 
child, a child falls down a rabbit hole, a rabbit goes against his mama's 
wishes into a garden, a garden rejuvenates an ailing boy, a boy grows up 
with a pack of wolves, or anything else we like. And those stories become 
part of children's lives and the lives of their own children to come. 



I get letters every day from my readers, but some stick out. 

Dear Ms. Yolen: 

I love the meddlefurs in your book OWL MOON. 

Love, Stacey 

When I wrote back to Stacey, I explained that in fact I didn't really 
know if there were any meddlefurs in OWL MOON. (Only I called them 
metaphors of course. I am nothing if not pedagogically soimd!) I 




18 



Foreword: Mage/lmage/lmagination 



xix 



explained to Stacey that writers didn't count metaphors or similes or 
dependent clauses or gerundive phrases as we write. We simply work 
hard at the most felicitous telling, hoping the reader will indeed fall 
through the words into the story 

Words are, in fact, quirky, ungracious, and often slippery little 
things that get in the way of the tale we are trying to tell. But it's all 
we've got to work with. And so, as Humpty Dumpty reminded Alice 
about words, "The question is which is to be master — that's all." 



P.S. I never heard back from Stacey. I do not know if she got lost in the 
struggle between pleasing her teacher and listening to a real live author. 
But Ido know that Stacey had not come up with the concept of meddle- 
furs on her own. Yes it was Stacey's pen on the paper, but her teacher's 
hand was clearly atop Stacey's. 

So how do we get to our children who may be struggling with 
stories in school and coming up only with dumbed-down mush or 
meddlefurs? 

How do we teach them to love reading? 

How do we give them that mantra: mage /image /imagination? 

Start with the ear. 

Caress it with story. Coax story past the outer ear and through the 
tympanum. Drum story into them. Read aloud until story has made its 
way along the labyrinth, until the youngsters can only follow that won- 
derful golden thread of story though the reading maze. 

For maze it is: dangerous, forbidden, strange, aweful in the old 
sense, and wonder-filled. 

As Lee Bermett Hopkins says in Let Them Be Themselves, "All chil- 
dren should be read to every day." 

Story will always surprise the young readers that way, even if 
they already know a particular story well. Because your voice will 
remake story for them. And when they get to read the story themselves, 
it will be yet another revelation. Every time we meet an old story, we 
meet it anew, investing it with our own needs, worries, fears. It is an old 
coat on new shoulders; each reader wears it differently. Or — as the great 
editor Ursula Nordstrom reminded one writer who was just starting to 
venture into the world of children's literature — "The children are new 
though we are not." 



All my life I have loved stories. Relied on stories. Respected them. 



O 

ERIC 



13 



XX 



Foreword: Mage/Image/hnagination 



I love stories — not predicates. Not verbs. Not comma splices and 
dangling participles. (Although I could enjoy a good round now and 
then arguing with friends about copyediting. And my novel The Wild 
Hunt stars a boy named Gerund who is a running, tumbling, skittering, 
falling presence.) 

How long have I loved story? Since forever. 

As a child, I used to curl up on the window seat of our Manhattan 
apartment reading volumes like The Phoenix and the Carpet and The Wind 
in the Willows and The Thirteen Clocks and every one of Andrew Lang's 
color fairy books. Reading so absorbed me that I never even heard what 
went on in the street four stories below. Even earlier, when we lived in 
Hampton Roads, Virginia, with my grandparents while my father was 
away in Europe saving the world from the Nazis, I read Babar and Made- 
line and Andy and the Lion and Ferdinand — that last book I must have 
taken out of the library a hundred times over. These stories defined me 
to myself. They were more than mere entertainment. They were precur- 
sors to my adult life and concerns. 

Education guru Frank Smith has said succinctly and wisely: "The 
brain is a narrative device that needs story." 

That need is so great, it has given humans the ability to be both 
story makers and story listeners, the two things leaning upon one 
another. 

That need is so great, we have all become magi, bringing to the 
world our greatest gift — stories. 



Jane Yolen 



For over three decades Jane Yolen has been delighting readers of all ages with a 
wide range of books from poetry and picture books to science fiction, high fan- 
tasy, and traditional tales. Whether it is unicorns and wizards or owls at night 
and the precious gift of water, Jane Yolen weaves words with magic to inspire, 
delight, and inform readers. 




20 



Introduction 



A s Jane Yolen explains in her foreword to this book, stories are our 
greatest gifts. Parents, teachers, librarians, and others important 
in the learning lives of children share the gift of story when they 
surround children with outstanding books to read. We do this because 
stories have the power to delight, inform, and inspire. Stories can lead 
us into new worlds and return us to ourselves as changed individuals. 
By inviting us to live through the eyes of characters, stories can make 
us more human (Huck, 1990). Adventuring with Books is an armotated 
bibliography of powerful stories that have the potential to impact 
children's lives and help redefine their futures. This potential to imag- 
ine, and to re-imagine, is the gift we offer when we share books with 
children. 

Our Goal 

Our goal in this project has been to build on the excellent work reflected 
in previous editions of Adventuring with Books by continuing to provide 
an armotated bibliography of books published for elementary children 
in the past three years (1996-1998). In addition, we specifically wanted 
to reach out to classroom teachers like ourselves by adding a further 
dimension to the reviews: We wanted to include children's comments 
and reactions, reflections on the ways we have used these books in 
our classrooms, and other ideas we had for sharing these books with 
children. 

To achieve this goal, we had to make a very difficult decision 
about the number of books we included and the amount of information 
we provided about each book. We found a compromise position: We 
have included extensive information about our favorite books in what 
we refer to as primary reviews, and we have included brief annotations 
for other worthy books in what we refer to as secondary reviews. This 
enabled us to include approximately the same number of books as were 
included in previous editions of Adventuring with Books, while being 
able to further develop the reviews of our favorite books. 



O 

ERIC 



21 



xxn 



Introduction 



The Process 

From the begirming, we felt strongly that this should be a collaborative 
project that included both school-based and university-based contribu- 
tors. We invited NCTE colleagues from across the country with expertise 
in particular areas of children's literature to create collaborative groups to 
review the books. These review committee leaders worked with teachers, 
librarians, university faculty, school-age and university students, and par- 
ents to establish the criteria used to select and review books, to create a 
working bibliography of books to be included in their chapters, to write 
the reviews of individual books, and to contribute to decisions about the 
overall structure of the finished book. These review committees func- 
tioned as special study groups focused on selecting, using, and reviewing 
the best books published for children in the past three years. They deep- 
ened their own understandings of literature published for children, and 
offered a depth and breadth to the project that could not have been 
achieved by a single committee working in a single geographic area. 

Each of these chapters, then, reflects the work of different commit- 
tees. In the introduction to each chapter, the committees share their 
process, the criteria they developed, the issues they grappled with as 
they selected and reviewed their books, and the decisions they made 
about the most supportive way of organizing the books in their chapter. 
We hope you will find their introductions as instructive as the book 
reviews themselves. 



Contents and Organization of the Book 

We spent considerable energy wrestling with the best organizational 
structure for this book. Traditionally this booklist and others like it have 
organized books based on established categories of literature for chil- 
dren. We used these traditional categories as a starting place for our 
own work. We also took into consideration the ways we search for and 
use books ourselves as classroom teachers. Although we often think 
about and group books by category or genre, more often we organize 
books around topics, themes, and broad concepts (Short and Harste 
1996). At times we select books to support readers in different phases of 
the learning-to-read process — books that could be considered support- 
ive texts for readers (Watson 1998). Our final table of contents reflects a 
blending of these approaches for organizing books. 

The table of contents evolved throughout the course of this proj- 
ect, too. When new books arrived, we tested our working table of con- 
tents by making decisions about which committee(s) should review 




22 



Introduction 



xxiii 



each book. When we found books that didn't seem to fit an 3 nvhere in 
our table of contents — or ever}rwhere — we made adjustments. Near the 
end of the three-year timeline for this project, we felt the need for an 
additional chapter. We had a large collection of high-quality picture 
story books that had not been claimed by any existing committee, and 
we didn't want these books to be overlooked. Shari Nelson-Faulkner, a 
parent from The Family Center in our district and a volunteer on this 
project, offered to work with other parents to review these books with 
their children and to create the "Picture Books" chapter. 

Creating an entire chapter devoted strictly to picture books 
sparked further decisions. Rather than cross-reference all picture books 
included in Adventuring with Books, we have chosen to indicate picture 
book at the end of the bibliographic entry for each picture book. 

Although the primary focus of this booklist is K-6, we have 
included many books that are appropriate for preK-8. The authors of 
the "Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms" chapter, through 
their example, led us to indicate sophisticated chapter book following the 
bibliographic entry for any books that may require additional consider- 
ation before being used with children. These were the books with 
mature themes or explicit content — books that the reviewers felt had 
significant merit, but that would be most accessible to children if medi- 
ated by a caring adult. 

Many of the best books defy categorization. Where appropriate, 
we have cross-referenced books in more than one chapter. The review 
appears only once and in the chapter where we felt the book would 
most commonly be included. The bibliographic information is included 
in other chapters where the book also seems topical, and a cross-refer- 
ence to the reviewed entry is included in boldface type at the end of the 
bibliographic information. 

The subject index at the end of the book is designed to assist read- 
ers interested in selecting books on other topics not included in the table 
of contents. 

Special Index Chapters 

We asked several of our review committees to assume primary responsi- 
bility for identifying, critiquing, and reviewing books representing groups 
that often have been underrepresented in literature published for children. 
We felt strongly that such books should not be segregated from other 
books in this volume, yet we wanted readers to be able to find easily infor- 
mation about such books. We created special index chapters to achieve this 
purpose. Therefore, while we have included an index chapter that lists all 



er|c 



23 



xxiv 



Introduction 



books in this voliime that address Native American experiences, the actual 
reviews of these books are included throughout Adventuring with Books in 
the appropriate chapters. So a book of Native American poetry would be 
listed in the bibliography for chapter 18, "Native American Voices and 
Experiences," while the review would be included in chapter 10, "Poetry." 
We are hopeful that this organizational structure will encourage greater 
use of these books in a broad range of contexts. The index chapters include 
chapter 15, "African and African American Voices and Experiences"; chap- 
ter 16, "Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific Voices and Experi- 
ences"; chapter 17, "Hispanic/Latino, Hispanic American, and Latino 
American Voices and Experiences"; chapter 18, "Native American Voices 
and Experiences"; and chapter 19, "Gender Issues: Spunky, Clever, Caring, 
and Endearing Girls and Boys in Children's Literature." The contributors 
for these chapters are listed on the appropriate chapter openers while the 
reviews they have written appear in other chapters throughout the book. 

The final index chapter has been handled differently. The authors 
of chapter 20, "Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms," invite 
us to view literature as an opportunity to engage children in the "what 
if" discussions that have the potential to challenge the status quo. 
Because the reviews of books included in this chapter are so specific to 
critical issues, we have chosen to include those reviews in the index 
chapter and to list the bibliographic entry in other chapters where 
appropriate. Many of the books included in this chapter have been 
reviewed in other chapters as well. In many instances we have chosen to 
include in this volume both reviews — the reviews in chapter 20 that 
highlight the kinds of critical conversations a book might stimulate, and 
the reviews in other chapters that explore the content of the book itself 
more deeply. In such cases, a cross-reference to the other review are 
included at the end of the annotation in each chapter. 

In the back of the book we have included more traditional indexes 
such as an "Author Index," an "Illustrator Index," and a "Subject Index." 
The book concludes with a complete list of contributors. 

How You Might Use This Book 

We hope the content and organizational structure of this book will be 
useful to parents, classroom teachers, librarians, and curriculum special- 
ists, as well as university faculty and students in child development, 
children's literature, reading, language arts, and curriculum. Those 
interested in genre study will want to check the table of contents to 
locate a chapter that highlights the particular genre they are interested 
in, and then check the subject index for additional related books. Those 




24 



Introduction 



XXV 



interested in theme studies or explorations of broad concepts will find 
an extensive list of popular themes and concepts in both the table of con- 
tents and the "Subject Index." We invite you to develop your own index 
chapters by listing the topics, themes, and concepts you search for most 
often along with the review numbers of books you find that address 
these topics, themes, and concepts. The blank pages at the end of the 
book may be a handy place to keep these notes. The additional space at 
the end of each chapter may provide a convenient place to list new 
books you find that fit into the various chapters. In other words, we 
hope that this volume serves as a living document for you — an invita- 
tion to organize the books you currently use, to consider new books we 
have foimd useful or new ways to use familiar books, and to make notes 
about newer books as they are published. 

Conclusions and an Invitation 

As with many curriculum projects or other projects of this scope, those 
directly involved in the decision-making processes and the develop- 
ment of the project itself learn a great deal along the way. Much of what 
is learned carmot be shared easily with others outside the group. For 
most of us, the experience of participating in a study group centered 
aroimd a particular group of books published for children has chal- 
lenged us to deepen our understanding of the role this literature plays 
in the lives of our children and in our classrooms, to broaden our knowl- 
edge of recently published books and trends in the publishing industry, 
to familiarize ourselves with new authors and illustrators, and to learn 
in the company of others who share our commitment to children and 
their literature. We invite you to form your own literature study 
groups — to meet regularly with friends and colleagues committed to 
using the best of literature for children, and to engage in your own col- 
laborative professional inquiries into literature and its role in the lives of 
children. We are certain, based on our own experiences, that you and the 
children with whom you work will benefit from the experience. 

Works Cited 

Huck, Charlotte. 1990. The Power of Literature. In Talking about Books: Creating 
Literate Communities, eds. Kathy Short and Kathryn Mitchell Pierce. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Short, Kathy, and Jerome C. Harste, with Carolyn Burke. 1996. Creating Class- 
rooms for Authors and Inquirers. 2nd ed. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Watson, Dorothy. 1998. Beyond Decodable Text: Supportive and Workable Lit- 
erature. Language Arts 74 no. 8: 635-643. 




25 




A. Vacuum Cleaners, Elaine Marie Alphin (1.32). B. A Drop of Water, Walter Wick 
(1.55). C. Bug Watching with Charles Henry Turner, Michael Elsohn Ross/Laurie A. 
Caple(1.51). 




26 best copy available 




1 



1 Stories of the Universe: 
From Questions and 
Observations to 
Discoveries and 
Inventions 

David J. Whitin 
Phyllis E. Whitin 

The authors wish to thank the following students enrolled in theM.A.T. 
Program at the University of South Carolina, 1998-1999, for their ini- 
tial reading of and comments on many of the books included in this 
chapter: Ami Abramson, Carly Bennett, Doris Cochran, Stephen 
Corsini, Tonnette Dantzler, Jill Darr, Angela Davis, Shelley Ducworth, 
Carmen Ervin, Mandy Eskew, Kristi Giles, Rachael Ginn, Gina Howell, 
Marion Kelly, Dana Matyjasik, Brenda Morton, Cynthia Rainey, Rita 
Raley, Amber Ray, Andrea Ribelin, Amy Schofield, Pauley Smith, Rob- 
bie Spruill, Beth Steffens, Erin Till, Kimberley Trotter, Barbara Watkins, 
and Susan Wilbanks. 

I n this chapter, readers will find books that address such topics as 
mysteries, explorations, and disasters; health and medicine; inven- 
tions, discoveries, and statistics; and looking closely at the natural 
world. Books about mysteries, explorations, and disasters include sto- 
ries about a Martian fossil on earth, the tragedy of the Titanic, and 
archaeological sites in Scotland and the American Southwest. Books 
that delve into issues of health include works that discuss the history of 
American medicine, present interviews with health professionals, and 
describe a teen's struggle with alcohol. Books that discuss interesting 
discoveries and inventions address such topics as the history of shoes, 
eyeglasses, and vacuums; important scientific discoveries such as light, 
magnetism, and radioactivity; the Internet; and different modes of 
transportation. Finally, books that focus on the natural world include 
those that provide a close examination of dirt and grime, a magical ride 



O 

ERIC 



27 



2 



Stories of the Universe 



inside a honeybee hive, and a zoological guide to the body systems of 
insects, fish, birds, and invertebrates. 

Books That Reflect an Inquiry Stance 

Too often science texts portray science as a clearly defined set of fixed 
beliefs that are merely transmitted from one generation to the next. In 
reviewing the books for this chapter, we paid particular attention to 
those books that showed science not as a static body of knowledge but 
rather as the outcome of an inquiring mind. This inquiring stance is best 
reflected in books that show that scientific activity involves curiosity, 
doubt, collaboration, and close observation. 

In Martian Fossils on Earth? (Bortz 1997), the author discusses this 
curiosity in the first sentence of the book: "Why are scientists so excited 
about a rock? Because scientists love the excitement of discovery, they 
sometimes love the search for answers even more than the answers 
themselves" (7). Questions about meteorite ALH 84001 form the frame- 
work of this fascinating scientific puzzle: How can we tell that it came 
from Mars? Where on Mars did it come from? How did it get to Earth? 
Did Martian microbes make these chemicals and crystals? What do 
these findings suggest about life in the universe? This same persistent 
inquisitiveness is also revealed in Bug Watching with Charles Henry 
Turner (Ross 1997). Turner was a premier African American entomolo- 
gist whose interest in bugs began when he was a small boy growing up 
in post-Civil War America. He was always asking questions and con- 
ducting experiments about the observations he made: Are bees color- 
blind? Do spiders construct webs based on instinct, or can they adapt 
the shape of the web to their surroundings? Can a cockroach learn by 
trial and error? This incessant questioning demonstrates to readers the 
inquisitive basis of scientific explorations. 

Of course, curiosity is a close cousin to careful observation. For 
this reason, we looked for books that portrayed the role of observation 
in scientific investigations. In Clyde Tombaugh and the Search for Planet X 
(Wetterer 1996), readers learn about a farm boy who discovers Pluto at 
the age of twenty-four. He accomplishes this feat by painstakingly 
examining hundreds of photographs, each containing 50,000 to 400,000 
tiny dots of light. He finally detects a slight movement of one of these 
dots by comparing several photographs, thereby discovering the exis- 
tence of our ninth planet. The power of close observation also is demon- 
strated by the spectacular photographs in A Drop of Water (Wick 1997). 
Wick uses his camera to stop the action of water and to show its various 
states in exquisite detail, such as the changing shape of a drop of water 




28 



Other Criteria for fudging Books 



3 



descending from the faucet. He uses time-lapse photographs to show 
condensation and evaporation. He magnifies intricately detailed snow- 
flakes and glistening drops of water on a spider's web. Looking at the 
ordinary in extraordinary ways highlights the benefits of noticing the 
little details of our world. 

According to Descartes, science is bom of doubting. We looked for 
books that captured this spirit by portraying science as a tentative, provi- 
sional endeavor. One of the best examples is Stone Age Farmers beside the 
Sea: Scotland's Prehistoric Village ofSkara Brae (Arnold 1997). Readers get a 
glimpse of the speculative work of archaeologists as these scientists try to 
piece together this puzzle from 3000 B.c.E. For instance, theories about the 
clothing worn have to be based on the tools that are found, and knowl- 
edge about plant foods is sketchy since these foods were not preserved. 
The reasons for the abandonment of the village remain unclear, although 
scientists offer several different hypotheses in this book. It is these miss- 
ing pieces of data and this construction of multiple theories that gives 
readers an insight into the tentative nature of scientific conclusions. 

Science is also a collaborative enterprise. If readers have ever 
entered the classroom of Ms. Frizzle, they will recognize this right away. 
In one of her recent explorations, entitled The Magic School Bus: Inside a 
Beehive (Cole 1996), the adventuresome Ms. Frizzle leads her students 
into the hive of a honeybee. As the children ask questions and write 
reports, the whole class benefits from their collaborative efforts. On this 
particular trip, the children wrote reports on where beeswax comes 
from, the dance of bees, why bees sting, and who's who in the hive. Col- 
laboration also can be found in Mission Earth (English and Jones 1996), 
where space technology is used to try to solve ecological problems on 
Earth. This book describes the collaborative NASA mission (in conjunc- 
tion with Italian and German scientists) in which special cameras and 
radar equipment were used to assess the ecological health of Earth. The 
radar probed beneath the sands of the Sahara to find clues about Earth's 
past climates and enable scientists to better predict future climatic con- 
ditions. Other equipment measured carbon monoxide pollution as it 
traveled through the atmosphere. Readers see that scientists grow 
through such collaborative ventures involving NASA engineers and 
astronauts and an international team of scientists. 

Other Criteria for Judging Books 

In addition to looking for these characteristics of scientific inquiry, we 
also used other criteria for judging the books in this section. First, how 
well do the photographs and illustrations complement and extend the 



O 

ERIC 



29 



4 



Stories of the Universe 



written text? For instance in Dinosaur Ghosts (Gillette 1997), an archaeo- 
logical mystery concerning the sudden disappearance of the dinosaur 
Coelophysis is depicted in an effective way. The author uses photo- 
graphs of the original archaeological site as well as imaginative illustra- 
tions of the dinosaurs themselves to describe both the actual setting and 
the proposed scientific theories. 

Second, how well do authors use metaphors or other comparisons 
to convey scientific principles or statistical information? In Funny Bones 
and Other Body Parts (Ganeri 1997), readers learn that skin is like a wetsuit 
and ligaments fimction like elastic bands. In The World in One Day (Ash 
1997), the author states that the number of aluminum cans discarded in 
the United States every day would be enough to build sixteen DC-10 air- 
liners. These are helpful comparisons for understanding. 

Third, how well do authors tell engaging scientific stories for 
younger readers? Sometimes the content can be trivialized or oversimpli- 
fied in books for younger children (e.g., explaining in a single sentence 
how volcanoes erupt). We looked for books that contained both language 
and content that preserved the integrity and complexity of the issue or 
concept. In this way the true nature of science is reserved not just for 
older students, but instead is made accessible to all students in an 
authentic, honest manner. A good example of this criterion is Space- 
busters: The Race to the Moon (Wilkinson 1998), in which readers live the 
excitement and danger of the Apollo 11 space mission to the moon. 

Fourth, how well do the inclusion of various details support the 
main points of the story? We looked for books in which details added 
focus and depth rather than distracted the reader. The Magic School Bus: 
Inside a Beehive (Cole 1996) is a prime example of a book in which details 
add depth to the discussion rather than detract from the story with 
unnecessary clutter. 

Finally, how well does the author invite the reader into the scien- 
tific conversation? We have noted several successful strategies. One tech- 
nique is to suggest experiments for students to try that are related to 
important concepts in the text. Books by Michael E. Ross offer excellent 
examples of this technique. Including primary sources is an effective tool 
for making historical stories come alive. In fust What the Doctor Ordered 
(Miller 1997), the author uses journal entries, woodcuts, and photo- 
graphs to depict the history of modern medicine. A sense of humor also 
engages readers with the text. In The Beginner's Guide to Animal Autopsy 
(Parker 1997), readers discover that sharks never need a dentist because 
these creatures continually grow new teeth, and penguins move quickly 
in the water by practicing the flapstroke, not the backstroke! Finally, 
allowing children the opportunity to tell the story is another effective 



O 

ERIC 



30 



Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 



5 



way to engage readers. In Stones, Bones, and Petroglyphs: Digging into 
Southwest Archaeology (Goodman 1998), students retell their experiences 
assisting archaeologists in trying to solve one of the great mysteries of 
Southwest archaeology. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 

Primary Reviews 

1.1 Arnold, Caroline (1997). Stone Age Farmers beside the Sea: Scot- 
land's Prehistoric Village of Skara Brae. Photographs by Arthur 
Arnold. New York: Clarion. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-77601-5. Chapter 
Book. 

Before the Egyptians built their pyramids and before the Chinese 
built the Great Wall, people lived at Skara Brae. One of Europe's 
oldest known prehistoric settlements, Skara Brae is located on a 
windswept island on the tip of Scotland. This book tells the story 
of this archaeological treasure that was first discovered in 1850. 
People lived at Skara Brae for about six hundred years, from 3100 
to 2500 B.c.E. It is imusual because it was a village of several fami- 
lies rather than a single family settlement. The book discusses the 
design of the village and how the buildings were built. Excellent 
photographs give readers a clear sense of how the village was 
organized. One of the strengths of this fascinating story is its hon- 
est portrayal of the tentative nature of archaeological conclusions. 
Speculation about the clothing worn is based on the tools that 
were foimd. Little is known about the plant foods that were eaten 
since these were not preserved. The reasons for burial with animal 
bones, and the mystery behind the rings of standing stones, are 
still imclear. Children may come away from this book with some 
of their own theories to explain the life and times of this intrigu- 
ing village from the past. 



O 

ERIC 



31 



6 



Stories of the Universe 



1.2 Bortz, Alfred (1997). Martian Fossils on Earth? The Story of 
Meteorite ALH 84001. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 72 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7613-0270-0. Chapter Book. 

"This book is about questions rather than answers," Fred Bortz 
states in the author's note. The book is framed by thirteen 
compelling questions that surround the yet unsolved mystery of 
Meteorite ALH 84001, which was discovered in Antarctica in 
1984. Although the biggest question — Does the meteorite hold 
evidence for life on Mars? — is especially debatable, scientists may 
have answered some of the others. For instance, scientists were 
able to measure the presence of gases inside the meteorite, which 
matched samples of gases found on Viking expeditions. However, 
Bortz warns, "Scientists are a very cautious group . . . They will 
say that the parent body is probably Mars." His honest skepticism 
serves as an impressive demonstration for readers. Real scientific 
inquiry involves making conjectures, conducting multiple tests, 
and accepting the tentativeness of theories that may crumble in 
the wake of new evidence. Despite the uncertainty of its conclu- 
sions, the book describes amazing technological tools and bril- 
liant work by scientists in understandable language. The text is 
supplemented with a glossary, index, and a recommended Web 
site to learn about new developments in this mystery. 

1.3 Branley, Franklyn M. (1998). Floating in Space. Illustrated by True 
Kelley. New York: HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06-025432-7. Pic- 
ture Book. 

One of the selections in the Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science 
series, this book presents key ideas about gravity and weightless- 
ness by inviting the reader to join a space voyage. The narrative 
text is simple and clear, and the large accompanying pictures and 
diagrams give additional information with touches of humor. The 
text explains that in space, people and objects can stay on a wall or 
ceiling if they remain undisturbed. Pictures show an astronaut 
standing upside down and another suspended sideways. Another 
diagram is labeled with a caption that reads, "Tray has magnets 
and velcro strips underneath so it can be attached to the table or 
even the wall." Although packed with information, the pages 
remain uncluttered. The book details the logistics of the astro- 
naut's daily routines (such as eating, sleeping, exercising, and 
going to the bathroom), work, and play. Young children will enjoy 
discovering that astronauts legitimize playing with their food as 



O 

ERIC 



32 



Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 



7 



they suspend liquid drops in the air or toss candy aloft before 
catching it in their mouths. They will also learn of the special chal- 
lenges and dangers presented by the need to repair the Hubble 
telescope. Although the book lacks a glossary and index, it is a 
valuable resource for children. 

1.4 Brewster, Hugh (1997). Inside the Titanic. Illustrated by Ken Mar- 
schall. Boston: Little Brown. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-316-55716-1. Picture 
Book. 

The tragic story of the Titanic is told through the eyes of some of 
the passengers who survived. Frank Goldsmith, age nine, was 
going with his parents to America, where his father hoped to find 
work in Detroit. In contrast to the Goldsmiths' third-class accom- 
modations, the Carter family enjoyed all the amenities of first- 
class travel. The Carters brought with them a new Renault 
automobile as well as a chauffeur. Although this contrast in 
socioeconomic status is made apparent, the preferential treatment 
given to first-class passengers during the filling of the lifeboats is 
not. Nevertheless, one of the strengths of the book is the large, 
cutaway illustrations that show boiler rooms, lounges, reception 
rooms, and engine rooms. Actual photographs of some of the 
crew and passengers, including some of the Goldsmiths and 
Carters, emphasize the human element of this story. Older stu- 
dents might enjoy reading a book that Frank Goldsmith wrote 
later in his life (listed in the recommended reading section) that 
describes his reflections about this tragic voyage. 

1.5 Cole, Joarma (1997). The Magic School Bus and the Electric Field 
Trip. Illustrated by Bruce Degen. New York: Scholastic. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-44682-7. Picture Book. 

In this latest edition of the Magic School Bus series, Ms. Frizzle 
and her class embark on one of their most exciting field trips yet — 
a journey to a power plant to learn about how electricity is made. 
As in their previous books, author Joanna Cole and illustrator 
Bruce Degen combine their talents to make the complex subject of 
electricity accessible to young readers. Through narrative, humor- 
ous conversation, and student research, they explain the composi- 
tion of atoms, current electricity, conductors, insulators, and 
lightning. Cole and Degen then take Ms. Frizzle and her students 
on an imaginary trip through a power plant to help readers learn 
about how steam, turbines, and magnetism produce electricity. As 



O 

ERIC 



33 



8 



Stories of the Universe 



Ms. Frizzle's class enters the town library through its electric cur- 
rent, readers learn about how a filament in a bulb produces light 
and how electric current produces heat and runs a motor. At the 
end of the book is a simple electricity game, as well as a list of fur- 
ther questions generated by Ms. Frizzle's students in order to con- 
tinue their hands-on approach to the study of electricity. This is an 
essential book for any classroom study of electricity. (See also 1.41 
for another book in this series.) 

1.6 Dewey, Jennifer Owings (1998). Mud Matters. Photographs by 
Stephen Trimble. New York: Marshall Cavendish. 72 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7614-5014-9. Chapter Book. 

This is a theme study of mud, filled with the stories of a mud lover. 
The author grew up in the West, where mud was a central part of 
her life. She enjoyed stomping through mud in a rainstorm, using 
it to build a miniature village, and inventing games with it. How- 
ever, the real strength of this book is that the author weaves 
together her own personal narrative with interesting stories from 
science and social studies. For instance, she describes finding a fos- 
sil in the mud as a yoimgster, then gives additional information 
about life in this part of the United States twenty million years ago. 
She tells of the nest-building activities of creatures who construct 
nests of mud, such as mud-daubing wasps, bam swallows, and 
cliff swallows. She relates the Hopi custom of mudslinging in 
which in-laws become acquainted by having a big mudslinging 
bash with each other! The author describes her foolhardy decision 
at age eleven to step into some quicksand, from which she barely 
escaped with her life. In this context, she reflects upon the many 
pioneer wagons that were swallowed up completely in large 
quicksand beds. The storytelling style of this book would make it 
an interesting read-aloud for upper-elementary school children. 

1.7 English, Jime, and Thomas D. Jones (1996). Mission: Earth: Voy- 
age to the Home Planet. New York: Scholastic. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
4871-7. Chapter Book. 

June English, scientific writer, and Tom Jones, mission specialist, 
collaborate to create a unique documentary of two NASA Space 
Radar Laboratory flights that collected data about Earth's chang- 
ing environment. Jones' daily journals capture both the wonder 
of space flight as well as the technology used to gather data. 
Readers will be amazed to learn how radar can "see" beneath the 




34 



Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 



9 



sands of the Sahara Desert by bouncing waves off deeper 
bedrock. The information gathered can give scientists clues about 
Earth's past climates, and perhaps help them better predict 
future changes in desert areas. Radar also can measure the total 
leaf area of Appalachian forests in North America, which helps 
scientists determine the amount of carbon dioxide that these 
trees can convert to oxygen. The second part of the book gives 
additional information about the six major environmental issues 
studied by the space missions and plans for future work. Radar 
graphics, spectacular photographs, diagrams, and an index add 
both beauty and clarity to the text. The combination of personal 
observations and scientific data offers a concerned but hopeful 
outlook on the environment and our planet's future. 

1.8 Ford, Harry (1998). The Young Astronomer. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2061-9. Picture Book. 

This book is a useful introduction to astronomy for the budding 
young stargazer. It begins with a brief history of astronomy and 
then devotes a two-page spread to each of the topics discussed, 
including the moon, the sun, comets, galaxies, and the movement 
of Earth in space. Each page begins with some background infor- 
mation about the topic and then describes some practical experi- 
ments, using everyday materials. Experiments include building 
tools such as telescopes and quadrants, constructing models of the 
solar system, and demonstrating scientific concepts such as a lunar 
eclipse or the expansion of the universe. The text explains how the 
scientific information of each chapter relates to the suggested 
experiments. In addition, the text, illustrations, and photographs 
are silhouetted against a white background, creating a crisp, 
uncluttered appearance. A strength of the book is the frequent invi- 
tations for readers to keep records of their observations, such as the 
phases of the moon, the location of sunspots, and the position of the 
planets. Charts with information about the stars and planets, and a 
list of useful addresses, are included at the end of the book. 

1.9 Fradin, Dennis (1997). The Planet Hunters: The Search for Other 
Worlds. New York: Margaret K. McElderry. 148 pp. ISBN: 0-689- 
81323-6. Chapter Book. 

How did people discover the planets of oior solar system? How 
likely is it that life exists somewhere beyond our solar system? The 
author discusses these two questions in this entertaining and highly 



O 

ERIC 



35 



10 



Stories of the Universe 



readable account. One of the strengths of the book is that it describes 
the discoveries of planets in their historical context. For instance, the 
author describes the prevailing religious views of the times, and fre- 
quently cites primary sources to convey a real flavor for the beliefs 
and personalities of the planet hunters. Journal entries, conversa- 
tions, engravings, and photographs make these planetary adven- 
tures enjoyable to read. The fervent battle between the Ptolemaic 
and Copemican systems for explaining the universe is discussed. 
The professional jealousy and competitiveness surrounding the 
discovery of Neptune in the 1840s helps to demonstrate the bitter 
human side of scientific discoveries. Another highlight of the book is 
the author's interview with ninety-year-old Clyde Tombaugh about 
his discovery of Pluto in the 1930s. The book ends with a look to the 
future and the discovery of one of the first known planets beyond 
our solar system. This is a fascinating resource that conveys the 
excitement and challenge of scientific research. 

1.10 Gibbons, Gail (1997). The Moon Book. New York: Holiday 
House. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8234-1297-0. Picture Book. 

Gail Gibbons is known for the clarity and simplicity of her begin- 
ning science books for children, and this book is no exception. She 
provides an informative and easy-to-follow introduction to 
Earth's nearest neighbor, the moon. The book contains basic infor- 
mation on the phases of the moon, solar and lunar eclipses, tides, 
craters on the moon, and lunar explorations. The large type and 
bold, bright illustrations work together nicely to explain each sci- 
entific concept. The explanation for the phases of the moon is par- 
ticularly well done. Readers see the changing shape of the moon 
in a series of nine rectangular blocks. Each block represents the 
shape of the moon as well as the position of Earth and the moon. 
Inviting children to keep moon journals is a natural extension to 
discussing this chart of the moon. Different stories and legends 
are included in the text and in an appendix at the end of the book. 
These brief stories might prompt children to investigate other 
tales about the moon. 

1.11 Gillette, J. Lynett (1997). Dinosaur Ghosts: The Mystery of 
Coelophysis. Illustrated by Douglas Henderson. New York: Dial. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1721-0. Picture Book. 

This book highlights one of the great dinosaur discoveries — and 
mysteries — of all time. Over 225 million years ago in New Mexico, 




36 



I Cx* 



Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 



11 



hundreds of speedy dinosaurs known as Coelophysis died quite 
suddenly. The arrangement of their bones yields some clues to the 
mystery of how and why these dinosaurs perished. One of the 
strengths of this book is that it demonstrates the tentative nature 
of scientific work. Each chapter focuses on a different theory that 
scientists have proposed to explain this mystery: Did the dino- 
saurs get stuck in the mud? Were their deaths caused by a volcano 
or a huge asteroid colliding with the earth? Did they drink some 
poisoned water? Did they die from a drought or a flood? Readers 
learn how scientists gathered evidence to support and then refute 
each of these theories. A current theory is shared at the end of the 
book, but with a word of warning that "scientists are always 
ready to change their ideas." The illustrations complement the 
mystery in an engaging way. Photographs depict the original 
excavation, and lifelike paintings of the dinosaurs capture their 
fateful last days. 

1.12 Goodman, Susan E. (1998). Stones, Bones, and Petroglyphs: 
Digging into Southwest Archaeology. Photographs by Michael 
J. Doolittle. New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 48 
pp. ISBN: 0-689-81121-7. Chapter Book. 

A group of eighth graders from Harmibal, Missouri, travel to the 
Four Corners region of the Southwest to help archaeologists solve 
a mystery. Ancestral Puebloans lived in the area for over a thou- 
sand years but then suddenly moved away around 1300 C.E. The 
question is, why? The students spend a week assisting archaeolo- 
gists in their work and also finding out about this ancient culture. 
The real attraction of this book is that it allows the voices of the 
children to tell the story. They learn to grapple with the uncer- 
tainty of archaeological work, such as surmising why potters used 
certain designs or why Puebloans built T-shaped doorways. They 
learn that "Archaeology isn't just finding stuff, it's finding out 
what it means." They learn about the pitfalls in interpreting 
ancient culture through the framework of their own values and 
customs. They gain a deep respect and appreciation for the hard 
work, skill, and inventiveness of the ancient Puebloans by engag- 
ing in some of the work of these people. The students build their 
own pithouse by using ancient building techniques, grind corn on 
a stone slab, start a fire by using friction, and make pottery. This 
book is an excellent resource for helping students view the world 
from an archaeologist's perspective. 



er|c 



37 



12 



Stories of the Universe 



1.13 Platt, Richard (1997). Disaster! Catastrophes that Shook the World. 
Illustrated by Richard Bonson. New York: DorUng Kindersley. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2034-1. Picture Book. 

This book gives a brief glimpse of twelve major disasters, includ- 
ing the eruption of the volcano on Mt. Vesuvius in 79 C.E., the Black 
Death of fourteenth-century Europe, the Great Fire of London in 
the seventeenth century, the disastrous blizzard that struck New 
York in 1888, the tidal wave that hit Japan in 1896, the earthquake 
that shook San Francisco in 1906, and the terrible flood of China in 
1935. A two-page spread is devoted to each disaster, and each story 
is enhanced by a wealth of photographs, drawings, and maps. The 
author effectively describes for readers why and how the disasters 
occurred without dwelling on the horror of the events. Thus, read- 
ers learn about the stages of a volcanic eruption, the birth of a bliz- 
zard, the cause of a tsimami, and the movement of tectonic plates. 
The last chapter points to some possible future disasters, such as 
rainforest destruction and the depletion of the ozone layer. The 
book does include one unfortunate comment made by the Lord 
Mayor of London, who initially was not alarmed by the fire and 
said "a woman could piss it out." Inclusion of this comment 
detracts from an otherwise informative text. 

1.14 Reid, Struan (1997). The Children's Atlas of Lost Treasures. 
Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 95 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0219-0. Chapter 
Book. 

If you are in search of lost treasure, you will enjoy these tales of 
intrigue. With stunriing photographs of some magnificent riches, 
this atlas chronicles the discovery of lost treasures from aroimd the 
world. The chapters are organized by topic and cover a wide range 
of stories. "Offerings to the Gods" tells of royal burials that have 
been imcovered, such as King Tut's tomb, the treasure of Mycenae, 
and the golden treasures from the tomb of Philip of Macedon. 
There are also chapters entitled "War, Piracy and Disasters," as 
well as "Riches from the Deep" and "Stolen Treasures." All of the 
stories demonstrate a natural integration of science, history, poli- 
tics, and religion. Each chapter begins with an introduction and a 
helpful map so readers are acquainted with the locations of these 
discoveries. The book concludes with some imsolved mysteries of 
buried treasure, such as the whereabouts of Captain Kidd's booty 
or the riches from the lost city of Atlantis. Occasionally there are 
explanations of the excavation process, such as the method of 



O 

ERIC 



38 



Mysteries, Explorations, and Disasters 



13 



recovering corpses of people and animals killed during the erup- 
tion of Mt. Vesuvius. These brief stories of mystery and adventure 
are sure to spark some children to do further research. 

1.15 Wilkinson, Philip (1998). Spacebusters: The Race to the Moon. 
New York: Dorling Kindersley. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2961-6. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Here is a book for young readers that tells the exciting story of 
Apollo 11 and the United States' first piloted expedition to the 
moon. One of the strengths of this book is the way it continually 
highlights the dangers that the astronauts faced throughout the 
mission. It discusses the dangers involved in navigating the land- 
ing craft so that it would avoid setting down in a large crater, the 
potential of moon dust exploding when it came in contact with 
oxygen (a theory proposed by some scientists at the time), the 
possibility of not reconnecting with the space module and being 
left on the moon, and the dangers of reentry. Color photographs 
and illustrations work well with the text to demonstrate the peril 
and adventure of this space expedition. Some of the photographs 
supplement the text with additional information, such as the 
labeled diagram of a spacesuit, a slice of a moon rock, and a close- 
up of the landing craft feet covered in gold foil to protect them 
from the cold. This is an action-filled tale that is made accessible 
to young readers without comprising the integrity of the writing. 

Secondary Reviews 

1.16 Becklake, Sue (1998). Space: Stars, Planets, and Spacecraft. Illus- 
trated by Brian Delf and Luciano Corbella. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2966-7. Picture Book. 

A liberal use of diagrams and illustrations helps reduce the den- 
sity of this information-packed resource. Many illustrations 
spread across two pages, adding to the text a sense of the vastness 
of space. The extensive number of topics covered — from planets, 
asteroids, and recent technological advances to theories about 
black holes — prevent in-depth coverage. Highlighted boxes and 
captions provide some additional details about selected topics. 
The book has an index, but no glossary. 

1.17 Johnson, Rebecca L. (1997). Braving the Frozen Frontier: Women 
Working in Antarctica. Minneapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8225-2855-X. Chapter Book. 




39 



14 



Stories of the Universe 



How cold is cold? Readers of Braving the Frozen Frontier might 
actually feel cold as they learn about women working in Antarc- 
tica. The intense cold seeps into everything these women do, 
whether they are studying algae, nematodes, Weddell seals, or 
Adelie penguins. The women range in occupation from biologists, 
graduate students, and high school teachers to pilots, electricians, 
heavy equipment operators, and carpenters. Close-up photos 
show the many layers of protective clothing the women must 
wear in order to survive the dangerous working conditions. This 
collection of stories about women scientists and employees of 
McMurdo Station will inspire readers to dream about nontradi- 
tional careers in uncommon places. 

1.18 Petty, Kate (1997). I Didn't Know That Dinosaurs Laid Eggs, and 
Other Amazing Facts about Prehistoric Reptiles. Brookfield, CT: 
Copper Beech. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0549-1. Picture Book. 

This introductory book presents facts about the appearance, size, 
and behavior of dinosaurs. The book contains a variety of interest- 
ing color illustrations, such as close-ups of nests, teeth, and feath- 
ers. It also shares with readers some unanswered questions about 
dinosaurs, for example, the cause of their extinction and their 
actual colors. The book has several drawbacks: there is no pro- 
nunciation key, there is a symbol for "fun projects" to do but only 
one is suggested, and some pages include too many technical 
terms for readers to follow. 

Another book in this series is: 

Petty, Kate (1997). I Didn't Know That the Sun Is a Star, 
and Other Amazing Facts about the Universe. Brook- 
field, CT: Copper Beech. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0567-X. Pic- 
ture Book. 

1.19 Wetterer, Margaret (1996). Clyde Tombaugh and the Search for 
Planet X. Illustrated by Laurie A. Caple. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-893-3. Picture Book. 

This book tells the story of a farm boy, Clyde Tombaugh, who dis- 
covered Pluto. Intended for early readers, the book begins with 
Clyde using his uncle's telescope for his first view of the moon. His 
fascination for the starry sky never left him; he later worked for the 
Lowell Observatory in Arizona, where at age twenty-four he dis- 
covered Pluto. The story celebrates Clyde's diligence in making 




40 



Health and Medicine 



15 



this discovery. The colorful illustrations also convey the persistence 
and determination of this yoimg scientist, who overcame many 
obstacles to fulfill his life's dream of becoming an astronomer. 

1.20 Wilson, Colin (1997). The Unexplained: Mysteries of the Uni- 
verse. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2165-8. 
Picture Book. 

This collection of some of the world's greatest mysteries, ranging 
from the Loch Ness monster to crop circles, tickles the imagination 
of the reader. Wilson is careful to expose documented hoaxes as 
well as to detail more credible work by scientists and researchers. 
The combination of facts and speculation challenges readers to 
come to their own conclusions. It seems that some of the accounts 
and photographs are included only for their sensational appeal, 
however. The book includes an index for quick reference. 

Other books in this series include: 

Wilson, Colin (1998). The Unexplained: Ghosts and the 
Supernatural. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 37 pp. 

ISBN: 0-7894-2819-9. Picture Book. 

Wilson, Colin (1998). The Unexplained: Psychic Pow- 
ers. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-7894- 
2820-2. Picture Book. 

Wilson, Colin (1997). The Unexplained: UFOs and 
Aliens. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 37 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7894-2166-6. Picture Book. 

Health and Medicine 

Primary Reviews 

1.21 Bauer, Marion Dane (1997). If You Were Born a Kitten. Illustrated 
by JoEllen McAllister Stammen. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80111-4. Picture 
Book. (See 13.1) 

1.22 Brown, Laurie K., and Marc Brown (1996). When Dinosaurs Die: 
A Guide to Understanding Death. Boston: Little Brown. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-316-10917-7. Picture Book. 

In simple language the authors explain the feelings that people 
have about death, and the different ways that people honor the 




41 



16 



Stories of the Universe 



memory of a loved one. Rather than tell a story to express these 
ideas, this book talks about these issues in a direct yet comforting 
way It discusses matter-of-factly that people's lives can be long or 
short, and can end in many different ways. The dialogue of child- 
like characters throughout the book expresses common reactions 
to death, including bad dreams, loss of appetite, and not believing 
that it really happened. Feelings of anger, worry, frustration, and 
sadness are all highlighted to show that "when someone dies 
there is no right or wrong way to feel." The illustrations depict 
reactions to the death of human friends as well as birds and 
household pets. The authors do an excellent job of describing a 
wide range of customs for honoring the deceased. They also share 
various beliefs about what comes after death, including reincar- 
nation and resurrection. This is a book that treats a delicate subject 
in a sensitive and respectful manner. 

1.23 Ganeri, Anita (1997). Funny Bones and Other Body Parts. Illus- 
trated by Steve Fricker and John Holder. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81187-X. Picture Book. 

"What am I made of?" is the opening question in this informative 
and entertaining book about the mechanics of the major human 
body systems. Supplementing the traditional table of contents is a 
pictorial guide composed of drawings of systems, such as the 
skeletal system, and a caption: "Find out about your funny bones 
on pages 10-11." A two-page spread is devoted to each system. 
The text has many technical terms, but they are explained in 
understandable ways. For example, "The bones at a joint are held 
is place by ligaments that are like elastic bands." The cartoonlike 
illustrations extend the use of analogies in the text by visually 
comparing body parts to mechanical devices. The book includes 
an index and foldout pages that invite the reader to identify the 
organs described throughout the book. The concluding section, 
"Amazing Body Parts," gives statistics and records (e.g., longest 
fingernails) that children also will enjoy. 

1.24 Lee, Barbara (1996). Working in Health Care and Wellness. 
Minneapolis: Lemer. 112 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-1760-4. Sophisticated 
Chapter Book. 

Readers of this book will step into the working lives of twelve 
professionals in the field of health care, ranging from the more tra- 




42 



Health and Medicine 



17 



ditional careers of registered nurse and paramedic to the less typi- 
cal acupimcturist. Each interview follows the same format: a 
description of the daily routine, including hours of work and the 
variety of daily tasks; a personal history describing the person's 
interest in the field and education; a discussion of the future of the 
profession and/or the person's thoughts about future employ- 
ment opportunities; and recommendations for readers who might 
aspire to similar careers. The professionals who were interviewed 
present an honest view of their work. Some describe the emo- 
tional stresses of their jobs, or bemoan the long hours of paper- 
work. On the other hand, they convey a spirit of dedication to 
their fields and an excitement about technological developments 
such as diagnostic scanners. The book also includes information 
boxes on various topics, a bibliography, and an index. It is part of 
the Exploring Careers series. 

1.25 Miller, Brandon Marie (1997). Just What the Doctor Ordered: The 
History of American Medicine. Minneapolis: Lerner. 88 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-1737-X. Chapter Book. 

Through the liberal use of primary sources, such as writings by sol- 
diers and explorers, historical drawings, and photographs, this fas- 
cinating history comes alive for today's reader. The opening story, 
documented by French explorer Jacques Cartier in 1535-1536, 
recounts how sailors suffering from mysterious symptoms were 
cured by following the advice of a Native American. The disease 
was scurvy, and the tree bark that cured them was rich in Vitamin 
C. In the pages that follow, the relationships among diet, basic 
hygiene, sanitation, and health are recurrent themes. We learn 
that physicians in the 1840s debated whether it was necessary to 
wash hands between surgeries on different patients. The author 
documents the fight against history's major diseases — yellow 
fever, tuberculosis, cholera, polio, and so forth — and leaves the 
reader contemplating today's battle with AIDS. A bibliography 
and index are included as reference tools. This book is part of the 
People's History series. 

1.26 Pringle, Laurence (1997). Everybody Has a Bellybutton: Your Life 
before You Were Bom. Illustrated by Clare Wood. Honesdale, PA: 
Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397-009-0. Picture Book. 

A bellybutton is more than a funny-looking mark on the stomach. 
A bellybutton is a reminder of the miraculous story of human 




43 



18 



Stories of the Universe 



development from a tiny cell to a baby ready to be born. The book 
says little about the actual birth and even less about how babies are 
conceived. Instead the author focuses on the amazing story of the 
development of a baby inside the mother's womb. He describes 
the function of the umbilical cord as it supplies rich nutrients, 
water, and oxygen. The book is told in second person so that read- 
ers can make a personal connection to the miracle of prenatal 
development. The gentle pencil and pastel pictures alternate 
between representations of the growing fetus and the expectant 
mother and older sibling. The illustrations convey the joy and 
excitement of pregnancy and the love of a caring family. 

1.27 Simon, Seymour (1996). The Heart. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-590-12120-0. Picture Book. 

The author takes advantage of the new machines that scientists 
are using to peer inside the human body and uses this technology 
to create a fascinating view of the heart. The colored images pre- 
sented in the book, taken with high-powered scanners, show a 
beating heart in action, red blood cells traveling through a blood 
vessel, and white blood cells surrounding and destroying germs. 
Other computer-enhanced images show the branching blood ves- 
sels in the lungs, as well as a remarkable illustration of a blood 
clot that depicts red blood cells and platelets trapped in a web of 
fibrin (connective tissue that begins to close the wound). Simon 
writes in his characteristic clear and direct way. He often uses 
descriptive comparisons that make the ideas accessible to readers, 
such as that the heart is as big as a fist and weighs as much as a 
sneaker, or that each person has more red blood cells (25 trillion) 
than there are stars in the Milky Way galaxy. The text and the pho- 
tographs work well together to convey a respect and appreciation 
for the mystery and miracle of the human body. 

A related book is: 

Simon, Seymour (1997). The Brain: Our Nervous Sys- 
tem. New York: Morrow. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14641-4. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Secondary Reviews 

1.28 Hawcock, David (1997). The Amazing Pull-out Pop-up Body in a 
Book. New York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894- 
2052-X. Picture Book. 




44 



Health and Medicine 



19 



This is a basic book for young readers on the human body that 
discusses bones, nerves, muscles, blood, and digestion. It uses 
helpful comparisons — for example, that nerve messages travel 
faster than a race car — so that children can better understand the 
statistical information. It also introduces some simple activities, 
such as a touch test for the arm and a tendon experiment for the 
hand. Diagrams of body parts superimposed on photographs 
effectively convey their location for young children. However, the 
large foldout of the body is difficult to manage and would have 
been more useful as a separate poster. 

1.29 Quigley, James (1997). Johnny Germ Head. Illustrated by JoAnn 
Adinolfi. New York: Henry Holt. 72 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5395-6. 
Chapter Book. (See 7.45) 

1.30 Rosenberg, Maxine (1997). Mommy's in the Hospital Having a 
Baby. Photographs by Robert Maas. New York: Clarion. 28 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-71813-9. Picture Book. 

The special wonders and worries of a soon-to-be sibling are sensi- 
tively addressed in this reassuring book. Through the informative 
text and numerous photographs, children will better imderstand 
their mothers' stay at a hospital, the appearance of newborns, 
breast and bottle feeding, and their own special privileges as 
older brothers and sisters. Advice is given gently, such as "to talk 
softly in the hospital so you won't wake up the babies and other 
moms who are taking naps." This book would be a helpful 
resource for parenting centers. 

1.31 Sanders, Pete, and Steve Myers (1997). Drinking Alcohol. Brook- 
field, CT: Copper Beech. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0573-4. Sophisticated 
Picture Book. 

A cartoon-format story about a teen's struggle with alcohol is 
paired with straightforward text in this comprehensive guide for 
adolescents. The book is designed for use as a discussion guide or 
as a resource for individual readers. Issues ranging from peer 
pressure to fetal alcohol S 3 mdrome are addressed in clear, read- 
able language. Advice for parents and other adults is included. 
Other resources include an index and a list of ten organizations to 
be consulted for additional support and information. 



ERIC 



45 



20 



Stories of the Universe 



Inventions, Discoveries, and Statistics 

Primary Reviews 

1.32 Alphin, Elaine Marie (1997). Vacuum Cleaners. Minneapolis: 
Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-57505-018-8. Chapter Book. 

The dreaded symbol of household chores becomes a star of engi- 
neering history in the hands of Elaine Marie Alphin. The text 
opens with a thorough description of the kinds of dust in the 
atmosphere — including pollen, dander, and smoke — as well as a 
discussion of the health dangers of dust and dust mites. Next the 
mechanics of modern vacuum cleaners are explained, accompa- 
nied by clearly drawn and labeled diagrams. The real treat of the 
book, however, comes in the next two chapters. Humans' battle 
with dust comes alive with numerous photographs and draw- 
ings of brooms, carpet beaters, carpet sweepers, vacuums, and 
their inventors. The text nicely demonstrates the old maxim, 
"Necessity is the mother of invention" by stressing how the limi- 
tations of one vacuum inspired the development of new technol- 
ogy. A section called "Vacs of the Future" shows how engineers 
continue to work for improvements in the cleaning field. Techni- 
cal terms, which are printed in boldface type, are fully explained 
in the glossary. The book also includes an index and directions to 
build a small vacuum. Children will enjoy creating their own 
working vacuum and seeing for themselves the mechanics of this 
important machine. 

1.33 Dunn, Andrew (1997). The Children's Atlas of Scientific Discov- 
eries and Inventions. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 96 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7613-0220-4. Picture Book. 

From the earliest of times people have been discovering and 
inventing new things in an effort to understand and control the 
world aroimd them. This book gives a comprehensive look at 
some of these major events. It distinguishes between discoveries, 
which reveal something that already exists (e.g., magnetism), and 
inventions, which involve creating something for the first time 
(e.g., bicycles and mousetraps). The book is divided into four 
main sections: "Technology and the Birth of Ideas," "Communica- 
tion and Travel," "Learning about Life" (medicine, genetics, dis- 
ease), and "Astronomy and Cosmology." In all chapters readers 
are given an historical look at major advances in these areas. For 



O 

ERIC 



46 



Inventions, Discoveries, and Statistics 



21 



instance, the history of time shows early timekeepers, ancient cal- 
endars, and our modern-day time zones. One of the strengths of 
the book is the use of numerous photographs (especially of arti- 
facts) and historical drawings and paintings. There are clearly 
explained diagrams throughout to illustrate some of the scientific 
concepts, such as the movement of the continental plates, the inte- 
rior of a cell, and the cycles of water and oxygen. This book gives 
an interesting perspective to the history of thought and ideas. 

1.34 Famdon, John (1996). What Happens When . . . ? You Turn on the 
TV? Switch on a Light? Mail a Letter? And Much More! Illus- 
trated by Steve Fricker and Mike Flarndon. New York: Scholastic. 
45 pp. ISBN: 0-590-84754-6. Picture Book. 

If you wanted light, water, or food two hundred years ago, you 
had to go get it and carry it in yourself. But today it seems all you 
need to do is flick a switch, turn on a faucet, or call a delivery 
service. On the opening page of this intriguing book, readers view 
a cutaway illustration of a house that shows the common daily 
occurrences that will be described, such as mailing a letter, watch- 
ing television, ordering flowers, and turning on the heat. Each 
page begins with an interesting question: Flow does rain get to 
your faucet? What happens to garbage? What's the secret of tele- 
vision? The book is well organized; each question is given a two- 
page spread, and the profuse illustrations and the step-by-step 
numbered directions make it easier for readers to follow each 
explanation. Two large foldout sections offer some additional 
information about mailing letters and making a pizza, such as 
how the International Date Line works (the letter is going from 
New York to Australia) and what parts of the world produce cer- 
tain ingredients for the pizza. This book certainly could serve as a 
catalyst for further reading about many topics. 

1.35 Mugford, Simon (1997). The Fantastic Cutaway Book of Rescue! 
Illustrated by Alex Pang. Brookfield, CT: Copper Beech. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0616-1. Picture Book. 

People are rescued from all kinds of dangerous situations. This 
book shows cutaway illustrations of various vehicles and equip- 
ment, such as rescue helicopters, fire engines, and numerous sub- 
mersibles. Readers learn what this equipment looks like, and how 
it is used to rescue people in trouble. It is this diversity of tools that 



O 

ERIC 



47 



22 



Stories of the Universe 



makes this book so appealing; for example, the book discusses 
vehicles and equipment to rescue a troubled diver deep beneath 
the ocean as well as a damaged space station high above the earth. 
The wide range of vehicles helps readers appreciate how these 
tools are adapted to address a specific need, such as the robot that 
is designed to dismantle terrorist bombs, or the lifeboat that will 
right itself if it should be capsized by rough seas. The vehicles are 
depicted in color illustrations as well as photographs that show 
the vehicle in operation. Parts of each vehicle are labeled so that 
readers can follow more easily the technical description in the text. 
At the end of the book there is a helpful chronology that details 
important landmarks in the history of rescue vehicles. 

Another book in this series is: 

Kirkwood, Jon, and Alex Pang (1997). The Fantastic 

Cutaway Book of Giant Buildings. Brookfield, CT: Cop- 
per Beech. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0615-3. Picture Book. 

1.36 Pedersen, Ted, and Francis Moss (1997). Internet for Kids! A 
Beginner's Guide to Surfing the Net. New York: Price Stern 
Sloan. 219 pp. ISBN: 0-8431-7937-6. Chapter Book. 

This well-organized beginner's guide to the Internet will draw 
children of all ages to the never-ending world of cyberspace. 
Readers are invited to join students Kate and Zack at Cyberspace 
Academy, where they are advised by the cartoon character Cyber- 
Sarge. For example, in the section on e-mail, CyberSarge suggests 
from the margins: "When telling someone your email address, say 
the word 'at' for the @, and say 'dot' instead of 'period.'" Through 
the entertaining medium of story, children learn step-by-step 
instructions to use the Internet easily, as well as sample projects to 
try. Computer language is highlighted in boldface type, and these 
terms are defined more thoroughly in sidebars on the same page 
and in the glossary. An index is also included. Topics include basic 
rules for surfing the Internet, recommended Web sites, writing 
and receiving e-mail, and the technology behind what users see 
on the screen. Although the book contains a great deal of informa- 
tion, wide margins and illustrations make it manageable for chil- 
dren. Parents and teachers will appreciate the section written 
especially for them, which addresses issues of safety and respon- 
sibility. A sample parent-child contract is included as a guide for 
wise use of this marvelous tool. 





Inventions, Discoveries, and Statistics 



23 



Secondary Reviews 

1.37 Hetherington, Tim, and Esther Labi, editors (1996). Essential 
Facts. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-1020-6. 
Picture Book. 

This pocket-sized resource serves as a mini-encyclopedia packed 
with tables, charts, maps, and statistics. Information is easy to 
access from a well-organized table of contents and an index. A 
two-page guide also aids the reader in using the book effectively. 
Sections include "The World Around Us" (solar system), "The 
Political World," "Technology," "Science," "Mathematics," and 
"People." The book serves as a handy research tool for locating 
basic information in a variety of areas. 

1.38 Kirkwood, Jon (1997). Cutaway Trucks. Brookfield, CT: Copper 
Beech. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0710-9. Picture Book. 

Children who love trucks will enjoy this basic book on these ve- 
hicles. It covers a wide variety of trucks, such as tankers, trailers, 
and dump trucks. It includes trucks for special places, for exam- 
ple, trucks for traversing the desert or a frozen lake. It discusses 
the different jobs that trucks might perform at a single building 
site: bringing gravel, dumping cement, or scraping the earth. Col- 
orful photographs and drawings are silhouetted against a white 
background and enhance the text's clarity. Labeled drawings 
identify important features of the trucks and are helpful in illus- 
trating the brief text on each page. 

Another book in this series is: 

Kirkwood, Jon (1997). Cutaway Firefighters. Brookfield, 

CT: Copper Beech. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0711-7. Picture 
Book. 

1.39 Nichelason, Margery G. (1997). Shoes. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 
48 pp. ISBN: 1-57505-047-1. Chapter Book. 

The history of shoes reflects not only fashion but the clever work 
of inventors who sought to make foot coverings practical and 
comfortable. This book addresses a wide range of topics, from the 
development of a last (shoe form), to the derivation of the word 
sabotage (peasants sometimes used wooden shoes, or sabots, to 
stomp on crops in vengeance against overbearing landlords). His- 
torical photographs, drawings, and highlighted sidebars add 
interest to the iriformative and entertaining text. The book also 



24 



Stories of the Universe 



includes a glossary, index, and suggested art projects with recy- 
cled shoes. 

This book is part of a series of household history books that 
also includes; 

Goldstein, Margaret (1997). Eyeglasses. Minneapolis; 
Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN; 1-57505-001-3. Chapter Book. 

Josephson, Judith Pinkerton (1998). Umbrellas. Min- 
neapolis; Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN; 1-57505-098-6. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Forthcoming books in the series will address other common 
household objects such as toasters, telephones, and doors. 

Looking Closely at the Natural World 

Primary Reviews 

1.40 Cobb, Vicki (1998). Dirt and Grime. New York; Scholastic. 32 pp. 
ISBN; 0-590-92666-7. Picture Book. 

This book takes a close look at what many people consider 
unpleasant, and unhealthy, parts of our world; dirt, grime (dirt 
stuck to surfaces), cobwebs, mold, germs, and garbage. However, 
Cobb describes these subjects in an informative way. She often 
adds mathematical facts that provide interesting detail, such as 
that the force of a sneeze has been clocked at more than one hun- 
dred miles per hour, or the exponential growth rate of bacteria. 
She points out some of the benefits of this microscopic world, 
such as the accidental discovery of penicillin in the midst of a 
study of mold, and the enormous contribution of fruit flies to 
genetic research. Another strength of this book is that it is filled 
with photographs taken with a high-powered electron micro- 
scope. Beautiful colors, patterns, and textures are revealed in this 
close-up look at dirt and grime. There are health lessons to be 
learned here as well, such as cleaning sponges and cutting boards 
to prevent the growth of bacteria. 

Another book in this series is; 

Cobb, Vicki (1997). Blood and Gore. New York; Scholas- 
tic. 32 pp. ISBN; 0-590-92665-9. Picture Book. 

1.41 Cole, Joanna (1996). The Magic School Bus: Inside a Beehive. 
Illustrated by Bruce Degen. New York; Scholastic. 48 pp. ISBN; 0- 
590-44684-3. Picture Book. 



er|c 



50 



Looking Closely at the Natural World 



25 



Are you ready for another ride? Ms. Frizzle and her class of young 
explorers are off again to investigate the hive of honeybees. 
Throughout their journey, important scientific concepts are con- 
veyed in a whimsical yet informative way. As with the rest of the 
books in the Magic School Bus series, the author tells two stories 
at the same time: the story of the students' trip into the hive, and 
the children's reports of what they are discovering along the way. 
Thus the children's writing helps move the text along and is a 
powerful demonstration that children's questions ought to drive 
authentic scientific research. The children's reports focus on some 
fascinating aspect of the bees, such as how they communicate 
(through smells as well as their dances), why they sting, and how 
they help flowers. The frequent use of drawings helps to convey 
many of these important ideas. Another appealing part of Cole's 
book is her sense of humor; there is a section on bee riddles, and 
there are constant word plays (a queen who lays fifteen hundred 
eggs per day receives an "eggs-cellent" rating). (See also 1.5 for 
another book in this series.) 

1.42 Esbensen, Barbara Juster (1996). Echoes for the Eye: Poems to 
Celebrate Patterns in Nature. Illustrated by Helen K. Davie. New 
York: HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024398-8. Picture Book. 
(See 10.41) 

1.43 Frasier, Debra (1998). Out of the Ocean. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-15-258849-3. Picture Book. 

Here is a story that makes readers look more closely at the beauty 
of their world. A mother and her daughter walk along the beach, 
admiring all that they see. The mother says the ocean can grant 
wishes. She proves her point by asking the ocean for sun and 
water each day, and each day she is granted these two beautiful 
gifts. The daughter asks if other treasures can be found. Together 
they look closely and find pelican feathers, skate egg pouches, 
and some shark's teeth. They also find human artifacts, such as 
broken glass, a pile of rope, and a beam from a sunken ship. As 
the book concludes, the daughter learns her mother's secret: 
There are treasures everywhere, and it's not the asking, but the 
remembering to look, that makes the difference. Detailed notes at 
the end of the book give excellent information about the objects 
found at the beach, from the life of sea turtles to the story of rafts 
abandoned by Cuban refugees. The dangers that humans pose to 




51 



26 



Stories of the Universe 



the environment also are discussed. The mixed-media collage 
illustrations of photographs and paper cutouts convey the splen- 
dor of the ocean in a magnificent way. 

1.44 Levy, Matthys, and Mario Salvadori (1997). Earthquake Games. 
New York: Margaret K. McElderry. 116 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81367-8. 
Chapter Book. 

The authors discuss the power and nature of earthquakes and vol- 
canoes in this accessible book for upper-elementary school stu- 
dents. The format of the book makes it an inviting resource. Each 
chapter begins with some scientific background, describes easy- 
to-follow experiments, and concludes with questions commonly 
asked by children. The simple black-and-white drawings and dia- 
grams are easy to follow and complement the scientific concepts 
being discussed in the text. Each chapter addresses different 
aspects of earthquakes and volcanoes: understanding the interior 
of the earth, the mystery of the 1811 earthquake in St. Louis, meas- 
uring the strength of earthquakes, the formation of tidal waves, 
engineering techniques to support buildings during earthquakes, 
and the causes of volcanoes. The experiments use common 
objects — such as blocks, cereal boxes, and even your hands — to 
effectively convey the processes described in the text. This is an 
excellent resource for understanding basic geological processes. 

1.45 Malam, John (1996). Highest Longest Deepest: A Fold-out Guide 
to the World's Record Breakers. Illustrated by Gary Hincks. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 41 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80951-4. Chapter 
Book. 

If you want to travel the world and explore the highest mountain, 
the deepest ocean trench, the biggest cave, and the longest coral 
reef, then this is the book for you! It covers many different aspects 
of the natural world, from volcanoes to deserts and from lakes to 
caves. Each brief chapter provides a variety of information in a 
visually appealing manner. For instance, in the chapter on the 
highest mountains, readers are treated to a foldout visual that 
compares the world's highest peaks. There are two helpful dia- 
grams that show how mountains are made and how the shape of 
mountains reveals their relative age. There are also several illustra- 
tions of animals that inhabit these high regions, such as the cham- 
ois, the ibex, and the high-flying Andean condor, which can 
withstand the fierce mountain winds. Throughout the book there 



ERIC 




Looking Closely at the Natural World 



27 



are animals depicted to show the diversity of life that exists even in 
these extreme conditions. Children might want to learn more 
about these animals and investigate how they have learned to 
adapt to these particular climates. One of the strengths of this book 
is that it goes beyond just listing statistical wonders to explain how 
such things as glaciers, lakes, and coral reefs came to be. 

1.46 Mason, Adrienne (1998). Living Things. Photographs by Ray 
Boudreau. Buffalo, NY: Kids Can. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-55074-343-0. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Young scientists will want to roll up their sleeves and gather 
materials for twelve experiments as soon as they open this bright 
guide to important ideas in life science. The investigations 
demonstrate that all living things need air, food, water, and a 
habitat. The plants and animals needed for the experiments were 
carefully chosen to show diversity: sow bugs, mealworms, 
humans, yeast, green plants, and flowers. The layout of the book 
is easy to follow. Each experiment covers a two-page spread, with 
a colorful photograph of children in action and sections labeled 
"You will need," "What to do," and "What's happening?" This 
third section gives the scientific explanation behind the results of 
the investigation in an accurate but simple way. Several experi- 
ments also feature a highlighted box that provides helpful hints or 
additional facts. For example, an explanation of metamorphosis 
accompanies instructions on raising mealworms. Several of the 
experiments result in a special product, such as baked bread, a 
book of pressed flowers, or alfalfa sprouts. Parents and teachers 
will appreciate the section of helpful hints for adults. The book 
also includes a simple glossary and an index. 

Other books in the Starting with Science series include: 

The Ontario Science Centre (1998). Plants. Photographs 
by Ray Boudreau. Buffalo, NY: Kids Can. 32 pp. ISBN: 1- 
55074-193-4. Picture Book. 

The Ontario Science Centre (1998). Solids, Liquids and 
Gases. Photographs by Ray Boudreau. Buffalo, NY: Kids 
Can. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-55074-195-0. Picture Book. 

1.47 Older, Jules (1997). Cow. Illustrated by Lyn Severance. Water- 
town, MA: Charlesbridge. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88106-957-4. Picture 
Book. (See 13.21) 




53 



28 



Stories of the Universe 



1.48 Orr, Katherine (1997). Discover Hawaii's Freshwater Wildlife. 
Aiea, HI: Island Heritage. 44 pp. ISBN: 0-89610-243-2. Chapter 
Book. 

An excellent nonfiction resource, Orr teaches us about Hawaii's 
freshwater community. Hawaii's unique water cycle allows the 
islands to flourish amidst its people, plants, and wildlife. As water 
falls onto the land, it changes the land's shape, giving each island 
its own distinct streams, valleys, and island formations. She invites 
readers to explore the world of the wildlife, insects, and waterfowl 
that thrive in and depend on these tropical freshwater communi- 
ties. Her illustrations are clear and inviting, and the information 
she provides is appropriate for older readers investigating water 
systems and communities throughout the United States. Because 
Hawaii's freshwater system is also very fragile, Orr challenges her 
readers to respect Hawaii's water so the islands can maintain a bal- 
ance with nature. She suggests helpful ideas for children that can 
help maintain this freshwater ecosystem. This book is part of a 
series of other discovery books about Hawaii. 

1.49 Orr, Katherine, and Mauliola Cook (1997). Discover Hawaii's 
Birth by Fire Volcanoes. Aiea, HI: Island Heritage. 44 pp. ISBN: 0- 
89610-245-9. Chapter Book. 

In her continuing Discover Hawaii series, Katherine Orr and 
coauthor Mauliola Cook invite readers to discover the wonders of 
Hawaii's volcanoes. In describing Hawaii's birth, they share both 
Hawaiian and scientific perspectives. The first Pol5mesians to dis- 
cover Hawaii told legends that spoke of its birth and develop- 
ment. Scientists theorize that Hawaii moves with the Pacific plate 
along a hot spot where molten rock spews out through Earth's 
crust. After billions of years of volcanic eruptions, the tallest 
peaks surfaced from the ocean, forming island chains. Over the 
next billion years, the islands underwent changes; gravity, weath- 
ering, and erosion wore away the islands, and plant and animal 
life thrived. At the end of an island's cycle, only guyots remain 
when the coral reef and tiny atoll is finally washed away. Bright 
illustrations enhance the text. Older readers will appreciate the 
book and become inspired to inquire further. 

1.50 Parker, Steve (1997). The Beginner's Guide to Animal Autopsy: 
The Hands-on Approach to Zoology. Illustrated by Rob Shone. 




54 



Looking Closely at the Natural World 



29 



Brookfield, CT: Copper Beech. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0702-8. Picture 
Book. 

Want to see a close-up of a chameleon from the inside out? Step 
inside the pages of this book to find detailed descriptions of the 
anatomy of more than thirty creatures. The book is divided into 
five chapters that group animals according to scientific classifica- 
tion, such as "Slithery-Slimies" (mollusks and crustaceans). A sep- 
arate guide to animal classification, a glossary, and an index are 
also helpful tools for the young researcher. A brief introduction 
outlines reasons why scientists dissect animals, such as to know 
more about how the body works and to learn how animals are 
related to one another. The author carefully points out that no ani- 
mal was harmed for the book's preparation. To keep from making 
the illustrations too gory, the animals are portrayed as either plas- 
tic toys or stuffed animals. The information is presented in an 
entertaining yet informative style, describing the crocodile's 
movement as a "two-speed swim" or the penguin's as "flapstroke, 
not backstroke." Information boxes further explain how various 
organs function, or address a common question such as, "Why are 
elephant ears so huge?" The book combines humor with facts, 
making it inviting to young readers and adults alike. 

1.51 Ross, Michael E. (1997). Bug Watching with Charles Henry 
Turner. Illustrated by Laurie A. Caple. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 
48 pp. ISBN: 1-57505-003-X. Chapter Book. 

Charles Henry Turner was a premier entomologist whose interest 
in bugs began when he was a small boy. His story is all the more 
remarkable because he was an African American growing up in the 
post-Civil War era. The strengths of this engaging biography are 
that it describes the prejudices that Turner encountered and over- 
came, but also celebrates his scientific thinking. Turner spent most 
of his life teaching as a high school science teacher even though he 
had the qualifications to teach at a university. Most universities at 
that time did not hire African American professors. Despite these 
hardships. Turner never lost his curiosity for the natural world and 
continued to conduct experiments and write about his research 
throughout his life. The book describes some of his experiments 
involving the shape of spiders' webs, the homing instinct of ants, 
the eyesight of bees (Are they color-blind?), and the intelligence of 
cockroaches (Can they learn by trial and error?). Side boxes 



er|c 



55 



30 



Stories of the Universe 



describe similar experiments that children can try. This biography 
wonderfully demonstrates the mind of a scientific thinker who 
looks closely, inquires, and keeps asking questions. 

1.52 Ross, Michael E. (1997). Flower Watching with Alice Eastwood. 
Illustrated by Laurie A. Caple. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 148 pp. 
ISBN: 1-57505-005-6. Chapter Book. 

If you want to know how to look at the world through the eyes of 
a botanist, come along with Alice Eastwood. This book retells the 
fascinating life of one of America's most well-known botanists, 
who spent her life documenting the plants and flowers of Col- 
orado and California. The author does an excellent job of detailing 
significant events in Eastwood's life, including a difficult child- 
hood, a brief teaching career, and her work at the Academy of Sci- 
ences in San Erancisco. One of the strengths of this book is the 
inviting way that the text and the illustrations work together. Eor 
instance, when readers learn of Eastwood's observation of the 
showy columbine flower, the two featured illustrations give infor- 
mation about that flower and tips on how to use a magnifying 
lens. When the text describes the field guides that Eastwood car- 
ried with her, the illustration gives an example of the kind of clas- 
sification key found in these guides and asks readers to test it out. 
There is a constant interplay between Eastwood's life and what 
children can do today to become naturalists in their own right. 
Eastwood remained active throughout her eighties, learning 
about a whole new group of flowers. Her life is a wonderful 
demonstration of a life-long learner. 

1.53 Ross, Michael E. (1997). Wildlife Watching with Charles East- 
man. Illustrated by Laurie A. Caple. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 48 
pp. ISBN: 1-57505-004-8. Chapter Book. 

One of the great naturalists of our time was bom in 1858. He was 
born a Sioux, but later converted to Christianity and adopted the 
name of Charles Eastman. His grandmother introduced him to 
the wonders of nature and taught him the art of being quiet in the 
woods. Readers can learn how to be invisible observers them- 
selves by following the accompanying tips in the text. One of the 
strengths of this book is the correlation of the life of Eastman and 
appropriate activities for children to pursue. Eastman's uncle 
taught him to look for the minute details. "Like a wolf," he said. 




56 



Looking Closely at the Natural World 



31 



"take a second look at everything." The accompanying box tells 
readers how to take a "Memory Walk" and learn how to notice. 
Readers also learn how to make alarm calls to attract curious ani- 
mals, analyze scats, recognize animal tracks, and read animal 
trails. These tips help readers feel what it's really like to be a natu- 
ralist. In addition, the book also describes the injustices delivered 
upon the Sioux and other Native American peoples by the federal 
government. In this way, Eastman's life is viewed in its historical 
and political context. 

1.54 Sauvain, Philip (1996). Oceans. Mirmeapolis: Carolrhoda. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 1-57505-043-9. Chapter Book. 

Did you know that if there were no oceans to warm the earth, the 
weather would be far too cold for human life to survive? This book 
provides an interesting introduction to the oceans of the world, 
explaining its special features, its movement, its creatures, and its 
hazards and potentials. It starts by distinguishing among oceans, 
seas, gulfs, and straits. Diagrams are interspersed throughout the 
text so that scientific ideas can be understood more easily. For 
instance, there are informative diagrams to show the shape of the 
ocean floor, the direction of ocean currents, and the location of 
plants and animals in the sea. Each two-page spread contains 
photographs and maps, as well as diagrams, to complement the 
written text. The format of each page also includes a box labeled 
"Geography Detective," and a box that contains additional infor- 
mation about the current topic. The latter box often has intriguing 
statistical information, such as the fact that the Pacific Ocean is so 
big that one could place all the land on the earth's surface there 
and still have enough room for a second Asia! Occasionally there 
are case studies that illustrate real-life applications of these ideas, 
such as the Zuider Zee reclamation project in the Netherlands. 

Another book in this series is: 

Sauvain, Philip (1996). Rain Forests. Minneapolis: Car- 
olrhoda. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-57505-041-2. Chapter Book. 

1.55 Wick, Walter (1997). A Drop of Water. New York: Scholastic. 
40 pp. ISBN: 0-590-22197-3. Picture Book. 

Spectacular photographs of water and an informative text make 
tids one of the most compelling science books for students of all 
ages. Evaporation, condensation, surface tension, and capillary 



er|c 



57 



32 



Stories of the Universe 



action are all illustrated with clear photographs and a simple text. 
The photographs capture the many fascinating transformations of 
water in magnificent detail. For instance, the elastic surface of 
water, known as surface tension, is shown through a series of six 
photographs as a drop of water falls from a faucet. A series of 
time-lapse photographs show the processes of condensation and 
evaporation through the use of kitchen silverware and glasses. 
Magnified photographs of snowflakes demonstrate their intricate 
and unique patterns. The photographs of the glistening drops of 
water on a spider's web are so sharp that readers can see the 
reflection of the landscape mirrored in each droplet. There are 
helpful suggestions at the end of the book for how to conduct 
some of the experiments shown in the text. Some of these include 
how to float a needle, make a rainbow with a garden hose, and 
use salt to show condensation around a particle. This is a book 
that is sure to fill readers with awe and respect for the earth's most 
precious resource. 

1.56 Winner, Cherie (1996). The Sunflower Family. Photographs by 
Sherry Shahan. Mirmeapolis: Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-57505- 
007-2. Picture Book. 

What do thistles, sagebrush, dandelions, and leafy lettuce aU have 
in common? All of these plants belong to the 25,000-member com- 
posite family, which is also known as the sunflower family. Much of 
the text is devoted to describing the life cycle of plants in this fam- 
ily, including sprouting, growth, reproduction, and seed dispersal. 
Technical terms are highlighted in boldface type, accompanied by 
phonetic pronunciation, and are included in the glossary. The index 
also is helpful. Another main purpose of the book is to document 
the enormous variety of these fascinating plants through stunning 
photographs and descriptive narration. Although readers will rec- 
ognize many common species, they also will marvel at plants as 
rare as the desert yeUowhead, which lives only on a twenty-acre 
area in central Wyoming. Winner presents convincing arguments 
for the need to protect rare and endangered plants by explaining 
their crucial role in ecosystems. She also devotes a section to 
describing the many uses of members of the composite family. 
Leaves from a plant called guaco, for example, can be thrown into a 
stream to stun fish so that they are easily caught. Readers will come 
away with a sense of appreciation for the diversity, beauty, and ver- 
satility of this family of plants. 




58 



Looking Closely at the Natural World 



33 



Secondary Reviews 

1.57 Barlowe, Sy (1997). 101 Questions about the Seashore. Mineola, 
NY: Dover. 54 pp. ISBN: 0-486-29914-7. Chapter Book. 

The questions addressed in this small volume are best suited to 
readers already quite familiar with the seashore. Although there is 
a wealth of information in the book, there is no index and it is diffi- 
cult to locate specific information from the chapter titles (e.g., "The 
Upper Seashore"). Some questions follow a form younger children 
might use (e.g., "What do seagulls eat?"). The primary intent of 
many others seems to be the introduction of key vocabulary (e.g., 
"What is an operculum?"). The accompanying black-and-white 
drawings are detailed. The book is scientifically accurate, but its 
audience is narrow. 

1.58 Fletcher, Ralph (1997). Ordinary Things: Poems from a Walk in 
Early Spring. Illustrated by Walter Lyon Krudop. New York: 
Atheneum. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81035-0. Chapter Book. (See 10.10) 

1.59 Fletcher, Ralph (1997). Twilight Comes Twice. Illustrated by Kate 
Kiesler. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84826-1. Picture 
Book. (See 10.1) 

1.60 Florian, Douglas (1998). Insectlopedia: Poems and Paintings. San 
Diego: Harcourt Brace. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201306-7. Picture Book. 
(See 10.32) 

1.61 Godktn, Celia (1998). What about Ladybugs? San Francisco: 
Sierra Club Books for Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87156-549-8. 
Picture Book. 

In this story a gardener learns the lessons of ecological balance. 
He was fond of ladybugs, but did not know the role they played 
in maintaining the natural balance in his garden. Consequently, 
he sprays a pesticide on his garden to control aphids. His garden 
deteriorates until he finally is informed of the value of ladybugs 
for keeping aphids in check. He reintroduces ladybugs in his yard 
and restores the beauty of his garden. The close-up illustrations 
help readers see the important role that insects play in nature's 
interdependent system. 

1.62 Johnson, Neil (1997). A Field of Sunflowers. New York: Scholas- 
tic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-96549-2. Picture Book. 




. S I" 



59 



34 



Stories of the Universe 



Through a series of color photographs and simple text, the reader 
is told the story of a field of sunflowers from planting to blooming. 
Parts of the story are explained quite well, such as the movement 
of the sunflower plants from east to west each day. However, 
another page on pollination contains too much technical vocabu- 
lary for young children. The photographs also are of varied qual- 
ity; some provide good close-ups of the plant, while many others 
are too dark. The fact that the farmer never harvests the sunflow- 
ers (he leaves them for the birds) seems a bit anticlimactic. 

1.63 Loewer, Peter, and Jean Loewer (1997). The Moonflower. Atlanta: 
Peachtree. 27 pp. ISBN: 1-56145-138-X. Picture Book. (See 7.17) 

1.64 Maass, Robert (1998). Garden. New York: Henry Holt. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8050-5477-4. Picture Book. 

Lovely photographs and a simple text tell the story of different 
kinds of gardens. After a brief introduction to gardens in general, 
the book describes the steps involved in planting a garden. It 
gives some important tips: tilling the soil, spacing the seeds, the 
benefits of compost and worms, and the use of poles and trellises. 
The photographs reflect a wide range of ages and ethnic groups. 
The overuse of the wide-angle lens, however, creates unnecessary 
distortions that detract from otherwise appealing compositions. 

1.65 Maynard, Christopher (1997). Why Do Volcanoes Erupt? New 
York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894-1532-1. Picture 
Book. 

This book is part of a series that features questions young children 
commonly ask about the natural world. This particular book con- 
tains eight questions and answers about Earth on two-page 
spreads. Although the intent of the book is commendable, there 
are often problems in the way the text is developed. Complex 
questions are answered in rather simplistic ways. Often other 
questions on the page are only distantly related to the main ques- 
tion. In other instances, the use of diagrams or the suggestion of 
some basic experiments would have made these concepts more 
accessible to younger children. 

Other books in this series include: 

Martin, Terry (1996). Why Do Sunflowers Face the Sun? 

New York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894- 

1120-2. Picture Book. 




60 



Looking Closely at the Natural World 



35 



Martin, Terry (1996). Why Does Lightning Strike? New 
York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894-1123- 
7. Picture Book. 

Maynard, Christopher (1997). Why Are Pineapples 
Prickly? New York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-7894-1530-5. Picture Book. 

Maynard, Christopher (1997). Why Are There Waves? 

New York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894- 
1531-3. Picture Book. 

1.66 Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw (1997). Apple Trees. Photographs by 
William Munoz. Minneapolis: Lemer. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-3020-1. 
Chapter Book. 

A series of appealing photographs complement a thorough descrip- 
tion of apples, from their growth through marketing. Technical 
vocabulary is accompanied by phonetic pronunciations in the text, 
and is defined in the glossary. The opening page conveys a didactic 
tone, however, inviting the reader to be a "word detective" by find- 
ing the listed vocabulary while reading. A two-page guide for 
adults at the end of the book gives instructions for questioning that 
might detract from the natural curiosity of the young readers for 
whom the book is intended. 

1.67 Sandved, KjeU B. (1996). The Butterfly Alphabet. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-48003-0. Picture Book. (See 7.28) 

1.68 Speed, Toby (1998). Water Voices. Illustrated by Julie Downing. 
New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22631-1. Picture Book. 
(See 7.19) 

1.69 Scheffler, Ursel (1997). Grandpa's Amazing Computer. Illustrated 
by Ruth Scholte van Mast. Translated by Rosemary Tanning. New 
York: North-South. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-55858-795-0. Chapter Book. 
(See 7.41) 

1.70 Stroud, Virginia (1996). The Path of the Quiet Elk. New York: 
Dial. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1717-2. Picture Book. (See 7.35) 

1.71 Yolen, Jane (1996). Sea Watch: A Book of Poetry. Illustrated by 
Ted Lewin. New York: Philomel. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22734-2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 10.50) 







61 






A. Anthology for the Earth, Judy Allen (2.1). B. Swift as the Wind: The Cheetah, Bar- 
bara Juster Esbensen/Jean Cassels (2.6). C. They Swim the Seas: The Mystery of Ani- 
mal Migration, Seymour Simon/Elsa Warnick (2.23). D. An Extraordinary Life: The 
Story of a Monarch Butterfly, Laurence Pringle/Bob Marstall (2,20). 




6 2 best copy available 







37 



2 Our Changing World 

Dick Koblitz 

Contributing reviewers included Susie Bargiel, Maureen Dietzel, 
Susan Flynn, Dick Koblitz, and Jane Soelhke. 



E arth and everything in the universe beyond our planet is in a con- 
stant state of change. Sometimes the changes seem to occur very 
slowly, as when a desert is formed over hundreds of thousands of 
years, or animals develop special adaptations that increase their chances 
for survival in a particular habitat. Sometimes changes occur very rap- 
idly, as when a tornado forms and within seconds changes the face of 
the landscape, or a sudden change in temperature causes water drops to 
form ice crystals and blanket a portion of Earth with white. Some 
changes create great beauty, such as the metamorphosis of a caterpillar 
into a butterfly, while others cause great destruction, such as the mass 
extinction of the dinosaurs. Often new life arises out of death and 
destruction, as when a tree falls in the forest and over time decomposes 
to enrich the soil where new plants can take root. Change is all around 
us every second of our lives. Children need to understand change in the 
world around them in order to better adapt themselves to an ever- 
increasing rate of human and global change, as well as to respect and 
appreciate the way nature works to continually recreate Earth and the 
world beyond. 

In this section, we review books that discuss the lives of plants and 
animals, life cycles, the balance of nature, endangered species and habi- 
tats, systems, and physical and earth science. More than two-thirds of the 
books we selected to include in this section are about mammals, reptiles, 
birds, and fish. Many of these books, as well as several we chose about 
plant life, also contain the themes of life cycles, the balance of nature, and 
endangered species and habitats. This was by far the largest grouping of 
books we reviewed, which indicates that books about animals continue 
to hold great interest for children of all ages, and that writers, illustrators, 
and publishers continue to respond to this interest. We found incredibly 
beautiful, well-researched, and well-written books about the monarch 
butterfly, the honeybee, the bald eagle, the bison, the cheetah, snakes, 
dinosaurs, and other well-known and little-known members of the ani- 
mal kingdom. Information about species and habitat destruction is a 
common theme in many of the books we selected. Several tell about the 




f 

• i ■ 



63 



38 



Our Changing World 



life cycle of a particular animal and its place in the balance of nature. We 
also found books about the life cycle of trees and the important role they 
play in our changing world. One unique book we included is an anthol- 
ogy of short stories, poems, and other writings over the past two thou- 
sand years that celebrate life in all its forms on our planet Earth. 

Around the theme of systems, we found several newly published 
books about the sky, weather, sun, moon, and stars. Some present fac- 
tual information while others tell about ancient myths and legends. Sev- 
eral books related to the plants and animals theme also include a 
systems theme, in particular books about honeybees and trees. New 
books about electricity, deserts, a lake, and an island will help young 
readers to understand the concept of change in our physical world as 
well as how some of these topics fit into a systems way of thinking. 

Because of the overlapping of the six themes in many of the books 
in this section, we decided to organize them into two broad categories — 
Changes in the Natural World and Changes in the Physical World. Most 
of the books in this chapter are nonfiction, although a few are fictional or 
include fictional stories. Several books were written in a storylike, narra- 
tive style that will draw children into the topic of the book and sustain 
their interest. The quality of illustrations, whether original artwork or 
photographs and diagrams, is extremely high in the books we selected 
to review. The research of the authors is meticulous, which shows a 
great deal of respect for their young audiences. Children have an inher- 
ent interest in the world around them, and the quality of books in this 
section will entertain as they teach children about our constantly chang- 
ing planet. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Changes in the Natural World 

See also the section entitled Looking Closely at the Natural World in 
chapter 1, "Stories of the Universe." 




64 



Changes in the Natural World 



39 



Primary Reviews 

2.1 Allen, Judy, editor (1998). Anthology for the Earth. Cambridge, 
MA: Candlewick. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-7636-0301-5. Chapter Book. 

This is a collection of more than forty writings by both well-known 
and unknown authors celebrating our planet Earth. The result is an 
impressive reminder of the complex and often delicate relation- 
ships that exist between humans, plants, animals, and Earth itself. 
Judy Allen has gathered short stories, poems, and other writings of 
people from many cultures throughout the past two thousand 
years who have spoken or written in defense of Earth. Joseph 
Bruchac, a Native American poet and storyteller, writes about an 
old man who gathers toads blinded by a car's headlights on a high- 
way. Nineteenth-century English novelist Thomas Hardy tells of 
two executioners carrying axes who fell a two-hundred-year-old 
tree in less than two hours. Even the Roman poet Ovid implored 
the world more than two thousand years ago to respect all animal 
life. The visual images of more than thirty illustrators accompany 
the various texts. Also included is a table of contents, indexes of 
authors and illustrators, and short biographies of each author. 

2.2 Bateman, Robert, and Rich Archbold (1998). Safari. New York: 
Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 316-08265-1. Picture Book. 

Take a safari through the game reserves of subsaharan Africa in 
this large format picture book for young and old readers alike. 
Former teacher, naturalist, and painter Robert Bateman has spent 
years studying, sketching, and painting the wild animals of the 
African grasslands and jungles. In his latest book, readers learn 
about the elephant, cheetah, lion, giraffe, wildebeest, gorilla, 
zebra, and many more of Africa's most endangered mammals. 
Large detailed paintings that are so realistic they look almost like 
photographs accompany the lean, easy to read text. The author 
provides basic information about each animal, as well as a high- 
lighted section on the a nim al's habitat, height, weight, length, 
food, and range. The endpapers are filled with Bateman's rough 
sketches of animals he has included in the book. The author 
makes a plea at the end for saving the habitats of these special and 
increasingly rare creatures. 

2.3 Bosveld, Jane (1997). While a Tree Was Growing. Illustrated by 
David O'Leary. New York: American Museum of Natural History 
and Workman. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7611-0540-9. Picture Book. 




O 



65 



40 



Our Changing World 



The life history from seed to maturity of a giant sequoia in Cali- 
fornia's Sierra Nevada Mountains is told against major events in 
human history, from the development of writing in China in 1500 
B.C.E. to the discovery of ice on the dark side of the moon in 1996. 
Sequoia-dendron giganteum are the largest and among the oldest 
living organisms on Earth. The story of the growth of one of these 
giants is juxtaposed against thirty-five hundred years of human 
history. Each page describes the growth of the tree, provides infor- 
mation about the animals and insects that live and feed off it, and 
discusses three historical events that occurred simultaneously, 
such as Tutankhamen becoming king of Egypt, the Greek poet 
Homer writing the Iliad and the Odyssey, the Chinese beginning to 
make books, Mohammed being born in Mecca, the French Revolu- 
tion occurring, and astronauts walking on the moon. Full-page 
paintings by artist David O'Leary illustrate the growth of the giant 
sequoia. Information about famous giant sequoia trees is provided 
at the end of the book, as is a pullout poster showing the mature 
tree with a timeline of historical events. This is an excellent book to 
help children begin to think about the temporal stability of nature 
in relation to the ever-changing events of human history. 

2.4 Bouchard, David (1996). Voices from the Wild: An Animal Sen- 
sagoria. Illustrated by Ron Parker. San Francisco: Chronicle. 72 
pp. ISBN: 00-8118-1462-9. Chapter Book. 

This anthology of twenty-five poems about various wild mam- 
mals and birds provides a lyrical and sensory description of these 
animals generally not found in fiction or nonfiction books. Writ- 
ten from the animals' point of view and in first person, these 
poems are organized into chapters focusing on the five senses of 
sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. The sense most important 
to each animal's survival determines in which chapter the poem 
appears. Each poem is illustrated with a full-page, color, limited- 
edition art print. This beautifully written and illustrated anthol- 
ogy provides an excellent means for integrating poetry into the 
study of animals and their characteristics. 

2.5 Desimini, Lisa, David Ricceri, Sara Schwartz, and Dan Yaccarino 
(1997). All Year Round: A Book to Benefit Children in Need. 
New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-36097-3. Picture 
Book. (See 13 . 3 ) 




66 



Changes in the Natural World 



41 



2.6 Esbensen, Barbara Juster (1996). Swift as the Wind: The Cheetah. 
Illustrated by Jean Cassels. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-531-09497-9. Picture Book. 

This narrative about the fastest-running land mammal is full of 
facts about the cheetah. Information about its speed, physical char- 
acteristics, habitat, and behavior are told in an easy-to-read prose 
style. The cheetah's hunting and reproductive habits are included 
in great detail. Jean Cassels' watercolor paintings of the cheetah 
and the African savanna are very detailed and evoke the majesty, 
speed, and unique feline qualities of this endangered species. 

2.7 Galan, Mark (1997). There's Still Time: The Success of the 
Endangered Species Act. Washington, DC: National Geographic. 
40 pp. ISBN: 0-7922-7092-4. 

Over a quarter of a century ago, the U.S. government took deci- 
sive action to protect native American plants and animals that 
were on the verge of extinction. The Endangered Species Act 
passed by Congress in 1973 has made possible the survival of 
many threatened and endangered species for future generations, 
from the bison and bald eagle to the Louisiana pearlshell mussel 
and Loch Lomand coyote thistle. Author Mark Galan tells the suc- 
cess stories of these and fourteen other American flora and fauna 
that have been rescued from extinction because of strict laws that 
have curtailed hunting and protected natural habitats. An easy- 
to-read and informative text, accompanied by many full- and 
double-page color photographs by National Geographic staff 
photographers, make this an invaluable resource book for any 
classroom study of American wildlife. A foreword by Secretary of 
the Interior Bruce Babbitt includes comments by children about 
the importance of preserving species diversity. 

2.8 Gibbons, Gail (1997). The Honey Makers. New York: Morrow 
Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-11386-9. Picture Book. 

This detailed, fact-filled, and richly illustrated picture book narra- 
tive tells the story of how honey is made. Begirtning with informa- 
tion about the physical characteristics of honeybees and their 
colonies, author-illustrator Gail Gibbons uses her meticulous 
research to provide a fascinating look at these very social insects. 
She describes the different kinds of honeybees, their reproductive 
habits, and their life cycle, and makes the complex process of col- 
lecting nectar to make honey easily understood to the reader. She 




67 



42 



Our Changing World 



also provides amazing facts that are sure to interest young read- 
ers, such as "to make one pound of honey, it takes nectar from 
over one million flowers." ITae book concludes with a description 
of how beekeepers manage beehives, including a Beekeeper's 
Yearbook. Special vocabulary is highlighted within the text and 
illustrations, making this an essential book for any study of bees 
or insects. Pair this book with Cole (1996), The Magic School Bus: 
Inside a Beehive (see 1.41). 

2.9 Gibbons, Gail (1998). Soaring with the Wind: The Bald Eagle. 
New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13730-X. 
Picture Book. 

The life cycle of the bald eagle is richly described in this informa- 
tive picture book with beautiful watercolor, colored-pencil, and 
black-ink illustrations. Readers learn about the physical charac- 
teristics, behavior, eating habits, and reproductive cycle of this 
majestic raptor, as well as Native American beliefs and mythology 
about the creature. The technique of interweaving special vocabu- 
lary into both text and illustrations is characteristic of much of the 
author's work and makes this book useful for research as well as 
pleasure reading. Information about the bald eagle's endangered 
status and efforts to ensure its survival have greatly increased the 
chances that this "warrior of the sky" will continue to soar with 
the wind as a symbol of strength, dignity, and freedom for all 
Americans. 

2.10 Hoffman, Mary (1998). Sun, Moon, and Stars. Illustrated by Jane 
Ray. New York: Dutton Children's Books. 74 pp. ISBN: 0-525- 
46004-7. Chapter Book. 

Mary Hoffman has collected twenty-one myths and legends of the 
sky, sun, moon, and stars from around the world and retold them 
in simple one- and two-page prose stories. From ancient Greece, 
Egypt, Japan, and China to aboriginal Australia and the Navajo 
nation come stories that explain the mysteries of what ancient 
peoples saw when they looked skyward from their homes on 
Earth. Included are the stories of the Egyptian twins Nut and Geb 
who became the sky and the Earth, Phoebus' son Phaeton who 
wanted to drive his father's golden chariot across the sky, 
Anancy's gift to his children for saving his life, and the seven 
beautiful sisters called the Meamei who became the constellation 
Pleiades. In addition to myths and legends, there are also facts 



ERIC 



68 



Changes in the Natural World 



43 



about the sky, navigation, the calendar, and the signs of the 
zodiac, as well as sunlore, moonlore, and starlore. Each page of 
text is generously illustrated by Jane Ray's brightly colored, jewel- 
toned pictures with highlights of silver and gold, including nearly 
a dozen full-page paintings. A bibliography gives the source of 
each myth and legend. 

2.11 Hoopes, Lyn (1997). Condor Magic. Illustrated by Peter C. Stone. 
Fairfield, CT: Benefactory. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-882728-95-5. Picture 
Book. (See 10.36) 

2.12 Lesser, Carolyn (1997). Storm on the Desert. Illustrated by Ted 
Rand. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-272198-3. 
Picture Book. (See 10.42) 

2.13 Ling, Mary, and Mary Atkinson (1997). The Snake Book. Pho- 
tographs by Frank Greenaway and Dave King. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894-1526-7. Picture Book. 

This is an essential book for snake lovers of all ages, or for any 
child studying or researching these reptiles. Each double-page 
spread contains a large, close-up photograph of a different snake 
with accompanying text set in various-sized print. There is a four- 
page foldout of a reticulated python in the middle of the book. 
The size and realism of the photographs make the snakes appear 
real and ready to slither off the pages. Beware if you are not a 
snake lover! An introduction provides general information on 
snakes. The last page contains small photographs of each of the 
one dozen snakes described in the book, with additional informa- 
tion about each one. 

2.14 Martin, Bill, Jr. (1998). The Turning of the Year. Illustrated by 
Greg Shed. New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
201085-8. Picture Book. (See 13.38) 

2.15 Matsumoto, Lisa (1996). Beyond 'Ohi'a Valley: Adventures in a 
Hawaiian Rainforest. Illustrated by Michael Furuya. Honolulu: 
Lehua. 35 pp. ISBN: 0-9647491-2-2. Picture Book. (See 14.32) 

2.16 Mora, Pat (1998). This Big Sky. Illustrated by Steve Jenkins. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-37120-7. Picture Book. 
(See 10.44) 



O 

ERIC 



69 



44 



Our Changing World 



2.17 Pfeffer, Wendy (1997). A Log's Life. Illustrated by Robin Brick- 
man. New York: Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80636-1. Picture Book. 

The cycle of life described in this story ironically begins as a 
tremendous oak tree nears death. It crashes to the earth in a thun- 
derstorm and becomes a life-giving force to the plants and ani- 
mals of the forest. As the log decays, it provides shelter for insects, 
slugs, salamanders, and other creatures. The wood and decaying 
leaves nourish fungi along with the animals, and in ten years the 
oak has become "a mound of rich, black earth." When a squirrel 
buries an acorn in this fertile bed, the cycle of life begins again. 
What makes the book especially compelling are the poetic lan- 
guage and dramatic illustrations. The reader can almost hear the 
activity of the insects: "In the spring click beetles snap and click 
their bodies and flip high in the air ..." The pictures are vivid and 
lifelike. Children will be fascinated to find that the illustrator used 
only watercolor paper, which she cut, painted, sculpted, and 
glued together. The resulting pieces look three-dimensional, with 
varying textures to show a bird's feathers, a salamander's wet 
skin, and spongy fungi. The text is arranged tastefully around the 
pictures. The result is a unified, harmonious whole, consistent 
with the theme of the wholeness of an ecosystem. 

2.18 Pirotta, Saviour (1997). Turtle Bay. Illustrated by Nilesh Mistry. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
37888-6. Picture Book. 

This book is a story of friendship. Jiro-san teaches Taro and Yuko 
how to fish and prepare for the coming of Jiro-san's dear old 
friends. They sweep and clean the nearby beach and wait for their 
arrival. At first, Yuko thinks Jiro-san is crazy because of the 
strange things he does. But when she sees the loggerhead sea tur- 
tles come ashore to lay their eggs in the sand, and then watches 
the baby turtles hatch and find their way back to sea, Yuko 
becomes convinced that Jiro-san is a wise man. This inspiring 
story represents a true respect and love for nature and the bridg- 
ing of generations. Further information about sea turtles is given 
at the end of the book. 

2.19 Prelutsky, Jack (1997). The Beauty of the Beast: Poems from the 
Animal Kingdom. Illustrated by Meilo So. New York: Knopf. 101 
pp. ISBN: 0-679-87058-X. Chapter Book. (See 10.39) 



O 

ERIC 



70 



Changes in the Natural World 



45 



2.20 Pringle, Laurence (1997). An Extraordinary Life: The Story of a 
Monarch Butterfly. Illustrated by Bob Marstall. New York: 
Orchard. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-531-30002-1. Chapter Book. 

Winner of the Orbis Pictus award for excellence in nonfiction writ- 
ing for children. An Extraordinary Life is the story of the life cycle of 
a monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus).Wntten as the story of the 
birth, development, migration, reproduction, and death of one 
monarch butterfly named Danaus, author Laurence Pringle has 
done extensive research on all aspects of the monarch's life and has 
paid meticulous attention to detail. Information about the 
monarch's metamorphosis from caterpillar to butterfly and subse- 
quent flight from a Massachusetts hayfield to the oyamel fir forests 
of central Mexico give the reader an appreciation for the migratory 
instincts of this beautiful orange-and-black insect. Facts about the 
physiology of the monarch and threats to its survival make the 
reader appreciate the unique and special qualities of this appar- 
ently fragile, but actually quite resilient, butterfly. The last two 
chapters of the book tell about efforts to save the monarch's over- 
wintering sites and how to raise monarch butterflies. Bob Marstall's 
colorful and detailed paintings illustrate the narrative-style text, 
including sidebars with additional illustrations, captions, labels, 
and maps. A table of contents, suggestions for further reading, and 
detailed index are included, as well as an e-mail address and Web 
site for additional information on the monarch butterfly. 

2.21 Rogers, Sally (1998). Earthsong. Illustrated by Melissa Bay Mathis. 
New York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45873-5. 
Picture Book. (See 11.19) 

2.22 Simon, Seymour (1997). Ride the Wind: Airborne Journeys of 
Animals and Plants. Illustrated by Elsa Warnick. Orlando, FL: 
Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-292887-1. Picture Book. 

The atmosphere that surrounds Earth is part of the natural habitat 
of many plants and animals. Renowned science writer Seymour 
Simon explains the migratory habits of numerous birds, bats, and 
insects and the windbome journeys of seeds and fruits in this first of 
a trilogy on migration. The life cycles of many airborne travelers are 
described as they journey through the air and ride the wind. Elsa 
Wamick's soft watercolor illustrations highlight the easy-to-read 
text and give a sense of flight and movement to the plants and ani- 
mals described. In a special section at the end of the book, the author 



O 

ERIC 



71 



46 



Our Changing World 



tells about the four main fl3ways on the North American continent 
and explains how radar is used to study bird and bat migrations. He 
explains how scientists recently have discovered that birds use the 
sun, the stars, and even the magnetic fields as a compass. Although 
many unanswered questions remain, scientists are learning more 
about the relationship between life cycles and migration. 

2.23 Simon, Seymour (1998). They Swim the Seas: The Mystery of 
Animal Migration. Illustrated by Elsa Warnick. Orlando, FL: Har- 
court Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-292888-X. Picture Book. 

In Ride the Wind: Airborne Journeys of Animals and Plants, Seymour 
Simon looked at the atmosphere that surrounds Earth as a high- 
way for many plants and animals. In this second informational 
picture book in his trilogy on animal migration, Simon looks at the 
oceans as highways for various marine flora and fauna. An 
informative, easy-to-read, and well-researched text tells the reader 
about tuna that migrate to warmer ocean waters to spawn. Eels 
from America and Europe migrate from freshwater ponds, lakes, 
and rivers to the seaweed of the Sargasso Sea near Bermuda every 
autumn to lay their eggs, yet no adult eel has ever been seen. Some 
elephant seals migrate thousands of miles each year, using differ- 
ent migration patterns depending on where they live. Elsa War- 
nick's beautiful watercolor paintings show the movement and 
diversity of all the travelers on the oceans' highways. Simon has 
included a special section at the end of the book that tells more 
about the ocean journeys of the plants and animals in the book. 

2.24 Swanson, Diane (1996). Buffalo Sunrise: The Story of a North 
American Giant. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books for Children. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-87156-861-6. Chapter Book. (See 3.102) 

2.25 Tanaka, Shelley (1998). Graveyards of the Dinosaurs: What It's 
Like to Discover Prehistoric Creatures. Illustrated by Alan 
Barnard. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7868-0375-4. Picture Book. 

Shelley Tanaka's newest book in the I Was There series is an essen- 
tial volume for any dinosaur enthusiast. Richly illustrated with full- 
color paintings by Alan Barnard and others, as well as diagrams, 
maps, and photographs of fossils and paleontologists at work, this 
well-researched account of three expeditions to Canada, Argentina, 
and the Gobi Desert is filled with some of the latest information 




72 



Changes in the Natural World 



47 



from the world's dinosaur graveyards. Each expedition is explained 
in informative, easy-to-read text that focuses on a paleontologist or 
paleontological team, their major new discoveries, and how these 
discoveries have changed long-held theories about dinosaurs and 
their way of Ufe. Each expository section is followed by a short fic- 
tional story that offers an explanation for each dinosaur's death. 
Although much has been learned about dinosaurs in the past 
twenty years, there stiU remain many unanswered questions about 
these long-extinct creatures. A prologue introduces readers to Ray 
Chapman Andrews, one of the first paleontologists to discover 
dinosaur fossils in Asia. An epilogue provides many possible rea- 
sons for the dinosaurs' extinction nearly seventy million years ago, 
and a world map highlights new dinosaur finds around the world. 
A glossary and suggested further readings also are included. 

2.26 Wright-Frierson, Virginia (1996). A Desert Scrapbook: Dawn to 
Dusk in the Sonoran Desert. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Unpaged. ISBN; 0-689-80678-7. Picture Book. 

Author-illustrator Virginia Wright-Frierson invites the reader into 
the world of the Sonoran Desert as she watches, sketches, collects 
feathers and rocks, and writes about the wonders she observes. 
The author's first-person narrative is intimate and honest: "I sit 
unseen on the rocks and sketch a herd of javalinas as they eat 
prickly pear pads and saguaro fruits. They leave a strong musky 
scent in the air." Richly detailed watercolor illustrations capture 
the vastness and intricacies of the desert, from expansive sunsets 
and thunderstorms to tiny quail eggs and cactus spines. Sketches 
and notes are included throughout the scrapbook. As the author 
explores and enjoys the desert alone, we find that she is a confi- 
dent, independent, and talented woman. This scrapbook provides 
readers of all ages with an excellent demonstration of careful and 
thorough investigation of nature. It would serve as an inspiration 
to readers to create their own special scrapbook. 

2.27 Wright-Frierson, Virginia (1998). An Island Scrapbook: Dawn to 
Dusk on a Barrier Island. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-689-81563-8. Picture Book. 

An artist and her daughter explore and study a barrier island off the 
North Carolina coast. Together they lead the reader to experience 
the diverse ecosystems found there, including a salt marsh, a fresh- 
water pond, a maritime forest, and an oceanfront beach. The reader 




73 



48 



Our Changing World 



learns about these diverse habitats through the author-artist's 
sketches, notes, and paintings. This beautiful picture book evokes 
the unique world of the island through the mother's and daugh- 
ter's joy of discovery on a perfect summer day Wright-Frierson's 
watercolor paintings of the various flora and fauna are luminous, 
and the sketches with accompanying notes are highly informative. 

Secondary Reviews 

2.28 Arnold, Caroline (1996). Bat. Photographs by Richard Hewett. 
New York: Morrow Junior Books. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-688-13726-1. 

This book is one in a series of baby animal books by award-winning 
author Caroline Arnold and award-winning photographer Richard 
Hewett. The author tells about two types of bats — a Mexican free- 
tail bat and a big, brown bat — ^both of whom live at a California 
wildlife center. The day-to-day activities of the bats. Tad and Gus; 
their endangered habitats; their physical characteristics; and the 
archeological history of the area are fully described. The full-color 
photographs make it easy to see every detail of a bat's body. 

2.29 Arnosky, Jim (1997). All about Rattlesnakes. New York: Scholas- 
tic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-46794-8. Picture Book. 

Fourteen of the most common rattlesnakes from around the world 
are described in this introduction to this usually fearsome reptile. 
The descriptions of the snakes are informational, telling about the 
many kinds of scales and markings, as well as how rattlesnakes 
camouflage themselves to blend into their environment. The book 
is filled with interesting as well as erroneous facts about rat- 
tlesnakes. In addition to being informational, the book tells the 
reader what to do and not to do when confronted by a rattlesnake 
while out hiking or camping. 

2.30 Asch, Frank (1998). Cactus Poems. Illustrated by Ted Levin. San 
Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200676-1. Picture 
Book. (See 10.47) 

2.31 Atlas of Animals: A Scholastic First Discovery Book (1996). New 

York: Scholastic. 36 pp. ISBN: 0-590-58280-1. Picture Book. 

More than fifty different animals are featured in this mini-atlas for 
young readers, from the bald eagle of North America to the polar 
bear at the North Pole. Colorful illustrations with see-through 
acetate pages show children an animal silhouette and allow them 



O 

ERIC 



74 



Changes in the Natural World 



49 



to take animals in and out of their habitats. The book is organized 
by continent, showing the shape of each continent on the globe 
and describing interesting facts about specific animals of that land 
mass. This is an outstanding first nature book for young children. 

2.32 Curtis, Patricia (1997). Animals You Never Even Heard Of. San 
Francisco: Sierra Club Books for Children. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-87156- 
594-3. Picture Book. 

What do the axolotl, caracal, jabiru, and markhar have in common? 
AH are unusual and little-known animals that scientists have classi- 
fied as in danger of becoming extinct. Each of the one dozen animals 
in this collection is described in an easy-to-read text, accompanied 
by a fuU-page color photograph. The introduction teUs readers 
about the reasons animal species are becoming endangered, and 
what scientists are doing to try to protect them. The status of each 
animal (rare, threatened, endangered) is highlighted, along with 
efforts to stabilize their populations. An index also is included. 

2.33 Dorros, Arthur (1997). A Tree Is Growing. Illustrated by S. D. 
Schindler. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-45300-9. 
Picture Book. 

This wonderfully illustrated informational picture book on trees 
provides readers a look at an oak tree through the seasons. Explana- 
tions of the tree's life cycle give the reader a sense of the importance 
that trees play in the ecology of Earth. Important vocabulary — such 
as cambium, photosynthesis, xylem, and phloem — is reinforced in the 
detailed, colored-pencil illustrations by botanist S. D. Schindler. 
Facts about oak trees are written on the sides of each double-page 
illustration. A section on leaf identification of popular trees also is 
included. 

2.34 Gibbons, Gail (1996). Deserts. New York: Holiday House. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-8234-1276-8. Picture Book. 

This book by well-known author-illustrator Gail Gibbons will 
entice young readers to learn more about desert ecosystems. 
Information about how deserts are formed is provided, with 
beautifully colored and detailed drawings that invite browsing 
and lingering. Each drawing is labeled with special vocabulary. 
Deserts of the world are listed and discussed, as well as the 
plants, animals, and human inhabitants that are found in desert 
regions. An imcluttered format with easy-to-read typesize lends 



ERIC 



V 



75 



50 



Our Changing World 



to the readability of the book. At the end is a page of intriguing 
facts about deserts. 

2.35 Hanna, Jack, and Rick A. Prebeg (1996). Jungle Jack Hanna's 
Safari Adventure. New York: Scholastic. 44 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
67322-X. Picture Book. 

In this picture book, the authors write about a month-long safari 
they organized in Kenya and Uganda. Color photographs and a 
simple text make the reader feel as though he or she is a member 
of the safari. Numerous animals of the savanna are described. 
Four pages of text and illustrations are devoted to the Masai, 
including pictures showing a Masai home, a yoimg girl milking a 
goat, and the colorful clothing of these indigenous people. Jack 
Hanna is director emeritus of the Columbus Zoo. 

2.36 Hodge, Deborah (1997). Whales: Killer Whales, Blue Whales and 
More. Illustrated by Pat Stephens. Buffalo, NY: Kids Can. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 1-55074-356-2. Picture Book. 

Presentation of numerous facts about whales — such as their dif- 
ferent types, how they move, how they soimd, how they protect 
themselves, and where they live — make this an excellent resource 
for yoimg readers interested in basic information about these gen- 
tle giants of the sea. The illustrations are clear and detailed, and 
the book is organized so that information can be found easily by 
any young researcher. At various intervals in the book, there are 
small boxes with a whale fact highlighted (indicated by a small 
outline of a whale with the words "whale fact" inside). This book 
is one in a series about different animals, including wild cats, wild 
dogs, and bears. 

2.37 Hopcraft, Carol, and Xan Hopcraft (1997). How It Was with 
Dooms. New York: Margaret K. McElderry. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-689- 
81091-1. Chapter Book. 

This is a true story about an African boy and his family, and how 
they befriend a cheetah cub named Dooms. The life of a young 
cheetah on the African plains is described in very accurate detail 
using dialect appropriate to this part of the world. Readers not 
only learn about the cheetah, but also about how people live in 
eastern Africa. The book features photographs from the family 
album of the cheetah cub. It is an excellent book to read aloud to 
primary-age children. 



O 

ERIC 



76 



Changes in the Natural World 



51 



2.38 Hunter, Sally M. (1997). Four Seasons of Com: A Winnebago Tra- 
dition. Illustrated by Joe Allen. Minneapolis: Lemer. 40 pp. ISBN: 
0-8225-2658-1. Picture Book. 

This photographic essay tells the history of corn, and depicts a 
season of corn by illustrating the cycle of planting, harvesting, 
drying the com, eating corn soup, and dancing the Green Corn 
Dance at the powwow. Twelve-year-old Russell learns the tradi- 
tions of corn from his grandfather. Russell, who lives away from 
the reservation, learns how the com connects him to the land and 
his culture. This essay explains how com is regarded as a gift and 
a food with sacred value. 

2.39 Johnson, Sylvia (1997). Ferrets. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 1-57505-014-5. 

Award winning children's author Sylvia Johnson introduces 
young readers to the world of ferrets with an easy-to-read text 
complemented by numerous color photographs. Although most 
of the book describes the domesticated ferret and how to care for 
it as a pet, the final chapter talks about the endangered black- 
footed ferret and its ecological link to the prairie dogs of the North 
American Plains. The book provides a good descriptive example 
of the balance of nature, and how human intervention has 
destroyed that natural harmony. 

2.40 London, Jonathan (1998). Phantom of the Prairie: Year of the 
Black-footed Ferret. Illustrated by Barbara Bash. San Francisco: 
Sierra Club Books for Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87156-387-8. 
Picture Book. 

In this informative and colorful picture book, a litter of black- 
footed ferrets is born in the springtime. One of the litter is called 
Phantom, and it is she who will lead her brothers and sisters 
through the abandoned prairie-dog burrow in which they were 
bom out into the tall — and sometimes dangerous — grasses of the 
prairie night. It is through the eyes of Phantom that the reader 
experiences the seasons of the prairie, and the vast world of the 
creatures that live there and are symbiotically linked in life and in 
death. Jonathan London's lyrical text flows like poetry, and Bar- 
bara Bash's sweeping double-page paintings of Phantom's world 
are vibrant. 




77 



52 



Our Changing World 



2.41 Macquitty, Miranda (1996). Amazing Bugs. Photographs by Andy 
Crawford and Geoff Brightling. New York: Dorling I^dersley. 44 
pp. ISBN: 0-7894-1010-9. 

The many fascinating facts about insects presented in this book 
will delight readers interested in the world of bugs. Three-dimen- 
sional models allow the reader to look inside an insect's body to 
see how its internal organs work. A clearly written text and color- 
ful photographs make this an excellent resource for any classroom 
or library. A table of contents and index are included. 

2.42 McMillan, Bruce (1998). Salmon Summer. Boston: Houghton Mif- 
flin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84544-0. Picture Book. 

Bruce McMillan's outstanding photography offers a rarely seen 
glimpse of Kodiak Island, Alaska. In this photographic essay, we 
get to know nine-year-old Alex, a native Aleut. Throughout the 
book, we see Alex's love for the outdoors and for fishing. Up-close 
photographic views help the reader to understand how salmon 
fishing is done. Pictures show other local animals that also feed on 
the salmon, including bears, eagles, foxes, magpies, and gulls. 
Finally, salmon is used to bait a line in order to catch much larger 
fish. A glossary of terms is included, as well as a bibliography for 
additional reading. 

2.43 Mercredi, Morningstar (1997). Fort Chipewyan Homecoming: A 
Journey to Native Canada. Illustrated by Darren McNally. Min- 
neapolis: Lerner. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8225-2659-X. Picture Book. 

Morningstar Mercredi (Chipewyan, Cree, and Metis) takes the 
reader and her twelve-year-old son, Matthew, on a summer jour- 
ney to the place of his Native American heritage. Fort Chipewyan. 
It is the oldest settlement in Alberta, Canada, and inaccessible by 
road. This summer, Matthew will experience the Chipewyan cele- 
bration called Treaty Days, a two-day event marking the 1899 
signing of Treaty Number 8 between the Chipewyan people and 
the Canadian government, which gave the Chipewyans reserva- 
tion land and hunting and fishing rights. On this trip, we take a 
boat ride on a river, try our hand at fishing, make traditional ban- 
nock bread, eat moose meat, see an eagle, and collect traditional 
medicinal herbs and roots. We also are invited to set fishnets and 
return the next day to "pull in the catch," and learn how to pre- 
serve the fish in the traditional way. We all come home with a bet- 
ter understanding of traditional Chipewyan life. 




78 



Changes in the Natural World 



53 



2.44 Miller, Debbie S. (1997). Disappearing Lake: Nature's Magic in 
Denali National Park. Illustrated by Jon Van Zyle. New York: 
Walker. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8027-8474-7. Picture Book. 

Nature's ever-changing panorama is the theme of this nonfiction 
picture book's narrative of a vernal ecosystem in Alaska's Denali 
National Park. The author describes the formation of Disappear- 
ing Lake, a temporary water system formed in the spring of the 
year as snow melts from the mountains and water drains into a 
meadow. The new lake provides an inviting and rich habitat for 
many animals and plants that are part of the web of life. As the sea- 
sons change, the lake gradually disappears and turns into a beauti- 
ful meadow. As winter approaches, the meadow itself disappears 
under a heavy blanket of snow. Double-page paintings of the flora 
and fauna that depend on this fragile ecosystem make this a very 
inviting book to read aloud, or for younger children to read them- 
selves. A section entitled "Field Notes" and an author's note at the 
end give additional information about Disappearing Lake and the 
wildlife to be found in and around it. 

2.45 Minor, Wendell (1998). Grand Canyon: Exploring a Natural Won- 
der. New York: Blue Sky. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-47968-7. Picture 
Book. 

The simple beauty of the Grand Canyon has come to life for chil- 
dren and adult readers alike, thanks to Wendell Minor's dedica- 
tion to illustrating nature for children. For twelve days. Minor 
recorded his daily encounters with the canyon's majesty and 
splendor in on-the-spot sketches and paintings, much like the 
artist Thomas Moran (1837-1926). In accompanying notes. Minor 
records his impressions alongside historical vignettes. "It's a nice 
journal," remarked Cody, age ten. "His words are like poetry." The 
book is filled with vibrant images of the canyon, graceful sketches 
of wildlife, and quiet reflections on the simplicity of nature. 

2.46 Moss, Cynthia (1997). Little Big Ears: The Story of Ely. Pho- 
tographs by Martyn Colbeck. New York: Simon & Schuster. 34 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80031-2. Picture Book. 

A baby elephant named Ely struggles to walk and survive in this 
true story of courage and determination. After many attempts at 
standing, Ely is able to straighten out his crooked legs. With hard 
work and practice, he slowly learns to walk. He gradually becomes 
better at walking, climbing, and swimrning, but has difficulty using 




79 



54 



Our Changing World 



his trunk. Eventually Ely learns that his trunk is important for eat- 
ing and drinking. Ely is determined to succeed and does so through 
perseverance. 

2.47 Nicoll, David, and Jane Donnelly (1996). Fearsome Hunters of the 
Wild. Illustrated by Ellis Nadler and Derek Matthews. Pho- 
tographs by Peter Anderson, Geoff Brightling, Frank Greenaway, 
Dave King, and Jerry Young. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894-1111-3. Picture Book. 

Eight animals of the land, sea, and air are featured in this large- 
print book for young readers, with two full-page labeled illustra- 
tions. Amazing facts about the tiger, cheetah, eagle, gray wolf, 
alligator, lion, shark, and polar bear provide an introductory look 
at these fearsome predators. Words that might be unfamiliar are 
defined in context. 

2.48 Otto, Carolyn (1996). What Color Is Camouflage? Illustrated by 
Megan Lloyd. New York: HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06- 
027094-2. Picture Book. 

This picture book for young readers discusses the topic of camou- 
flage in the animal kingdom in an easy-to-read narrative text aug- 
mented by colorful, labeled pictures. The author discusses the 
reasons for camouflage, as well as the difference between those 
animals whose physical characteristics and coloring help them to 
blend in with their surroundings and those who can actually 
change themselves to look like their surroundings. Part of the 
Let's-Read-and-Find-Out Science series, this book is labeled by 
the publisher as a Stage Two book that explores "more challeng- 
ing concepts for children in the primary grades" and includes 
"hands-on activities that children can do themselves." 

2.49 Philip, Neil (1996). Earth Always Endures: Native American 
Poems. Illustrated by Edward S. Curtis. New York: Viking. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-86873-6. Chapter Book. (See 10.56) 

2.50 Roop, Peter (1996). The Buffalo Jump. Illustrated by Bill 
Farnsworth. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN:0-873- 
58616-6. Picture Book. (See 3.99) 

2.51 Ryder, Joanne (1997). Shark in the Sea. Illustrated by Michael 
Rothman. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
688-14909-X. Picture Book. 



O 

ERIC 



80 



Changes in the Natural World 



55 



The combination of Joanne Ryder's descriptive, lyrical text and 
Michael Rothman's acrylic imderwater paintings invites readers 
to experience the natural habitat of the great white shark. As in 
the previous animal books in the Just for a Day series, a yoimg 
child is magically transformed into an animal — in this case a 
shark — and then allowed to see how this animal lives. Here the 
reader experiences the imderwater world of the ocean's most 
feared predator as it swims through the waters of the sea. With its 
keen senses and constant movement, the shark himts for prey and 
is finally successful. An author's note at the begirming of the book 
provides additional information about the great white shark. 

2.52 Silverstein, Alvin, and Virginia Silverstein (1997). The Mustang. 
Illustrated by Laura Silverstein Nunn. Rookfield, CT: Millbrook. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0048-1. Chapter Book. 

This fascinating and informative book for upper-elementary stu- 
dents looks at mustangs throughout history, from prehistoric 
times to the present. It clarifies often misunderstood facts, such as 
the difference between a wild horse and a mustang, the history of 
the mustang, and the habitat of the mustang through the ages. 
The author notes that the future of this endangered species is in 
jeopardy, and provides a list of names and addresses of several 
organizations that support the survival of the mustang. A table of 
contents, index, and a fingertip fact page are included, as well as 
suggested further readings. This book is from the Endangered in 
America series. 

2.53 Steiner, Barbara A. (1996). Desert Trip. Illustrated by Ronald Him- 
ler. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books for Children. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-87156-581-1. Picture Book. 

The wonders of a desert canyon come alive as a mother takes her 
young daughter on her first backpacking adventure. As they 
hike, they discover the imique variety of plants and animals that 
inhabit the fragile desert environment. The mother tells her child 
about each thing that she sees, also providing information about 
how native desert people once used what the desert offers. The 
strong female roles created by Steiner are impressive. Himler's 
rich watercolors are evidence of his many years of desert living, 
and his awareness of the subtle changes of light and color as the 
sun moves across the brilliant, clear desert skies. 




81 



56 



Our Changing World 



2.54 Stone, Lynn (1997). Cougars. Minneapolis: Lerner. 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8225-3013-9. Chapter Book. 

This is an easy-to-read, large-print chapter book on cougars. 
Information about cougars and their habitat show readers how 
the cougar successfully adapts to its environment and relates to 
humans. Authentic photographs of cougars in their natural sur- 
roundings will capture the attention of young children. A map, 
table of contents, glossary, and index make this a useful reference 
book. An added feature is a note to adults at the end of the book 
on how to share a book with children, including how to ask ques- 
tions and help children learn vocabulary. 

2.55 Swanson, Diane (1996). Buffalo Sunrise: The Story of a North 
American Giant. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books for Children. 
58 pp. ISBN: 0-87156-861-6. Chapter Book. (See 3.102) 

2.56 Taylor, Barbara (1997). Incredible Plants. Photographs by Geoff 
Brightling. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 44 pp. ISBN: 0-751-3- 
54996. Chapter Book. 

A clearly written text with annotations, illustrated cross sections, 
and detailed three-dimensional models provide information on 
plants from around the world. Readers can look inside the struc- 
tures of plants and explore how plant anatomy fimctions. Infor- 
mation on roots, stems, pollination, and plant defenses are clearly 
labeled and explained in detail. The author tells how all the differ- 
ent parts of a plant operate as a system, and how plants and 
humans live together and survive as living partners on Earth. A 
table of contents, glossary, and index are included. 

2.57 Van Camp, Richard (1997). A Man Called Raven. Illustrated by 
George Littlechild. San Francisco: Children's Book. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-89239-144-8. Picture Book. 

A contemporary story teaching respect for all life. A mysterious 
man confronts two young brothers after they injure a raven using 
their hockey sticks. The man tells the boys a story about a mean 
old man who hurt ravens and was punished by being turned into 
a raven. The raven can transform into a man again for only a short 
time in order to teach those who have forgotten that all life is 
sacred. The aura about this stranger who "smells of pine needles" 
and has "large, dark, piercing eyes" creates a sense of magic and 



ERIC 



82 



Changes in Our Physical World 



57 



mystery in this raven tale. Van Camp nicely blends traditional 
animal legends and folklore with today's Native American cul- 
ture and lifestyle. George Littlechild draws on his own Native 
American heritage in creating bold illustrations that complement 
Van Camp's text. Van Camp and Littlechild have collaborated on 
another stunning book about the Pacific Northwest, What's the 
Most Beautiful Thing You Know about Horses? (see 20.60). 

2.58 Viera, Linda (1997). Grand Canyon: A Trail through Time. Illus- 
trated by Christopher Canyon. New York: Walker. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-8027-8625. Picture Book. 

Linda Viera and Christopher Canyon have teamed up to bring the 
beauty and drama of the canyon to children. Shifting from bird's- 
eye, to mule's-eye, to lizard' s-eye views, the richly colored, 
acrylic-on-canvas illustrations invite the reader to witness the 
majesty of the Grand Canyon. Viera's text integrates information 
about the canyon's history, flora, wildlife, and human inhabitants 
in descriptions of the day's events. The layers in the geological 
evolution of the Grand Canyon are discussed at the end of the 
book, and an appendix contains an illustrated timeline of human 
interactions with this wonder of the world. An index may help 
elementary-aged readers use this book as a reference text as well. 

2.59 Yee, Tammy (1997). Baby Honu's Incredible Journey. Aiea, HI: 
Island Heritage. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89610-285-8. Picture Book. (See 
5.137) 

2.60 Yolen, Jane (1998). Snow, Snow: Winter Poems for Children. 
Illustrated by Jason Stemple. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 1-56397-721-4. Picture Book. (See 10.51) 

Changes in Our Physical World 

Primary Reviews 

2.61 Delano, Marfe (1998). Sky. Washington, DC: National Geo- 
graphic. 60 pp. ISBN: 0-7922-7047-9. Reference Book. 

An easy-to-read text and beautiful color photographs combine to 
form a reference book on the sky for- young children. Topics 
include air, weather, clouds, precipitation, storms, sim, planets, 
and stars. Much of the information is conveyed to the reader 
through the detailed captions accompanying the photographs. 



O 

ERIC 



83 



58 



Our Changing World 



drawings, and diagrams. A wonderful book to be read aloud or 
used for independent research. Sky introduces children to the 
wonders of the natural world around and above them. A table of 
contents, glossary, and index are included. Other books in 
National Geographic's Nature Library series discuss such topics 
as mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, plants, insects, and Earth. 

2.62 Kramer, Stephen (1997). Eye of the Storm: Chasing Storms with 
Warren Faidley. Photographs by Warren Faidley. New York: Put- 
nam. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-399-23029-7. 

The author tells the story of prize-wirtning, severe-weather pho- 
tographer Warren Faidley as he chases storms with his camera 
and tripod. Spectacular color photographs of lightning, thunder- 
storms, and tornadoes illustrate the text. Descriptions of various 
types of severe weather, as well as chapters on respecting storms 
and storm safety, make this book a useful reference for any in- 
depth study of weather. It also would be very informative for stu- 
dents interested in photography. A table of contents, glossary, and 
suggested further readings are included. 

2.63 Lauber, Patricia (1996). Hurricanes: Earth's Mightiest Storms. 
New York: Scholastic. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-590-47406-5. Chapter Book. 

Award-winning nonfiction writer Patricia Lauber tells readers 
everything they would want to know about hurricanes. In addi- 
tion to describing famous hurricanes such as Andrew, Camille, 
Iniki, Hugo, and the so-called monster storm of 1938, the author 
also gives a detailed account of how hurricanes are formed, with 
accompanying colored maps and diagrams. Pictures and descrip- 
tions of weather instruments such as the barometer, anemometer, 
and thermometer are included, as well as world names for hurri- 
canes. There are many photographs of the destruction and devas- 
tation caused by hurricanes. A table of contents, index, and a list 
of books for further reading also are provided. 

2.64 Locker, Thomas (1997). Water Dance. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201284-2. Picture Book. (See 10.43) 

2.65 Yolen, Jane (1997): Once Upon Ice, and Other Frozen Poems. 
Illustrated by Jason Stemple. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 1-56397-408-8. Picture Book. (See 10.46) 



O 

ERIC 



84 



Changes in Our Physical World 



59 



Secondary Reviews 

2.66 Bourgeois, Paulette (1997). The Sun. Illustrated by Bill Slavtn. 
Buffalo, NY: Kids Can. 40 pp. ISBN: 1-55074-158-6. Chapter Book. 

Young readers will enjoy learning facts about the sun in this 
question-and-answer book that is part of the Starting with Space 
series. Myths about the sun begin each of the four chapters, and 
Try It! sections tell about experiments children can do to reinforce 
concepts and learn more about the sun. A table of contents, index, 
and glossary are included. Other books in this series tell about 
the moon and Earth. 

2.67 Haddon, Mark (1996). The Sea of Tranquility. Illustrated by 
Christian Birmingham. Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-15-201285-0. Picture Book. 

This picture book is about a young boy and his love for the moon. 
He is captivated by the wonder of what it would be like to walk 
on the moon, and the reader sees the historic first landing on the 
moon through his eyes. Included in the story are the historical 
facts that led up to the Apollo XI flight by Neil Armstrong, Edwin 
Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. It reminds adult readers of what 
we were doing and where we were when astronauts first walked 
on the moon. 



O 

ERIC 



85 



The West 




An Illustrated History for Children 

With an Introduction by Stephen Ives and Ken Burns 





A. 



B. 






A. The West: An Illustrated History for Children, Dayton Duncan (3.83). B. We Have 
Marched Together: The Working Children’s Crusade, Stephen Currie (3.80). C. Minty: A 
Story of Young Harriet Tubman, Alan Schroeder/Jerry Pinkney (3.14). D. The Golden 
Sandal: A Middle Eastern Cinderella Story, Rebecca Hickox/ Will Hlllenbrand (3.130). 

86 



best COPY AVAILABLE 



3 Exploring Our Past 



Beth Berghoff 

Contributing reviewers included Beth Berghoff, Pamela Swinford, 
Denice Haines, Jenay Burck, and Ruby Clayton. 

earners live in the present and know best their own experiences. 



cultural groups, and social contexts. When teachers attempt to 



share with children the lessons of the past, they must begin with 
the children's current personal and social knowledge (Short, Harste, 
and Burke 1996). Learners who have adopted an inquiry stance never 
finish asking questions about their own identities and experiences. Each 
learner asks: Who am I? What matters to me? Why? How did I end up 
where I am? What is going to happen next? To a large extent, the 
answers to these questions come to us from the past — from the people 
who have lived their lives and have asked the same questions. We look 
to the past to understand the present and to change the future. 

The members of the review committee working on this chapter 
have attempted to assemble books that address questions that matter 
today as much as they did in the past — questions of identity, of being 
part of a larger whole, and of being affected by contexts and forces 
beyond our control. This chapter is filled with books that tell powerful 
stories that enable readers to learn vicariously. Although we cannot 
physically visit the past, a compelling narrative colored by a story- 
teller's moral imagination can enable us to learn by example, and to take 
to heart the author's gift of grace (Coles 1989). 

As the committee members worked on this chapter, we often 
commented on the richness of the texts available today. What counts as 
knowledge is changing. When we were in school, we learned about the 
past by memorizing specific bits of information and important concepts. 
We learned the same information that our peers did, out of textbooks 
that reduced history to lists of dates, events, and causes. Today there is a 
new way of knowing, what Eisner (1998) describes as productive diver- 
sity. Instead of seeking to transmit a uniform body of knowledge to stu- 
dents, today's educators need to operate on the assumption that there 
are many ways to see and describe any event or time period. Under- 
standing history depends on having multidimensional knowledge. 
Facts and dates have to be connected to stories of people's lives and his- 
torical accounts from varied perspectives, as well as to the art, music. 




62 



Exploring Our Past 



stories, images, and other cultural artifacts of the past. In contrast to our 
own education, the members of this committee believe that we should 
try to teach children that there is never a simple, one-dimensional expla- 
nation of the past. Instead we teach so that learners develop a repertoire 
of questions to ask about the past, and a habit of seeking a variety of 
perspectives. 

When teachers use multiple texts to explore the past, they can 
teach children to appreciate how writing is influenced by an author's 
identity and purposes. No two books written by different authors will 
offer exactly the same perspectives on the past. Writing is a process that 
forces an author to make decisions about what to present and what to 
leave out, about what sense to make of the world and how to communi- 
cate that perspective. When teachers explore with children the produc- 
tive diversity among authors, we teach them that any text tells as much 
about the author as it does about history. We teach them to ask about the 
cultural and historical frameworks of the authors, and to wonder about 
the nature of each author's research and sense of purpose in writing. We 
can do all this because the texts available to us today provide so much 
more information about these issues. Most of the books in this chapter 
provide background information about the authors and about their 
studies of history. There are forewords and endnotes that describe the 
primary resources used to gather information, or the stance or purpose 
of the authors. In many cases, we even get information about what the 
illustrators tried to contribute with their choice of media and images. 

As teachers or adults helping young people to locate and read 
books today, we have more opportunity to impact the ethical develop- 
ment of learners than did teachers of the past, who were locked into a 
textbook curriculum. As we choose books for a study or for reading with 
youngsters, we can choose according to our passions (Rief and Barbieri 
1995), to what we know about our learners, and to what we know about 
teaching the foundations of democracy. We have to be inquirers along 
with our students, learning to ask what we see and know differently 
from each perspective, and what essential questions need to be answered 
before we can rest assured that we know enough to act on our knowl- 
edge. In this age of information, we have to choose those texts that invite 
a community of learners to question what has been, what could be, and 
what each of us must do to make new possibilities become realities. 

As a committee, we looked for books that we believed could con- 
tribute to a productive diversity of knowledge and to inquiry into par- 
ticular time periods or cultures. We looked at historical fiction and 
nonfiction, and at traditional stories and descriptions of cultural tradi- 




88 



Exploring Our Past 



63 



tions of different groups of people. As we read and discussed books, we 
selected for this chapter those books that 

1. Created a rich vicarious experience. Because we cannot experi- 
ence the events of the past in an embodied way, we have to 
rely on vicarious experiences of the past. Wilhelm and Edmis- 
ton (1998) write about how readers can do this by getting 
inside a book — ^by adopting its perspectives and imagining 
that they are the characters. Readers can imagine the param- 
eters of the story's time and place, and step into a story world 
where they live the experiences of the characters in the story. 

We judged that a book had this quality when — as readers — 
we could not put it down, or when the experience of reading 
it was so compelling that we foimd ourselves thinking and 
talking about the book long after closing its pages. We also 
watched to see if this happened when we gave the book to 
readers in our classrooms, or read it aloud to our children at 
home. 

2. Offered a powerful ethical message. Some books or stories stood 
out because they delivered important lessons or raised signif- 
icant questions. For example. Minty (Schroeder 1996), a pic- 
ture book about the early life of Harriet Tubman, conveys the 
depth of Tubman's desire for freedom and her deliberate 
plans and actions in pursuit of it. She was only one woman 
with a dogged determination, but she changed many lives 
and eventually the course of history. Another such book was 
We Have Marched Together: The Working Children's Crusade 
(Currie 1997). The photographs in this book make the human 
rights discussed in it jump off the page. These books start 
needed conversations and force us to ask how people can live 
together in more ethical ways. 

3. Presented accurate information. Whether looking at fiction or 
nonfiction books, we asked ourselves whether the informa- 
tion presented by the authors was accurate. Some of the 
books have documentation to support the facts or explain the 
research that went into writing the book. We found this par- 
ticularly helpful. Many of the books in this chapter also were 
selected by other Adventuring with Books committees charged 
with reviewing books about particular cultural groups, and 
we respect their expertise in choosing books that accurately 
portray these cultures. 

4. Offered multiple layers of meaning. Many of our favorite choices 
in this chapter are books that are rich with layers of meaning. 

We selected picture books such as So Far from the Sea (Bunting 
1998) and Starry Messenger (Sis 1996) because their stories 
were complex, and their complexity was further enriched by 
the art. The illustrations in these books add depth of emotion 







89 



64 



Exploring Our Past 



and detail to the thought-provoking stories. Other books, 
such as Out of the Dust (Hesse 1997) or The Indian School (Whe- 
lan 1996), offered stories with many dimensions, including 
specific time periods, geographical locations, economic hard- 
ships, social relationships, government actions, and coming- 
of-age experiences. These books lend an understanding of the 
complexity of people's lives in times past, and invite students 
to think about the many types of information that can con- 
tribute to historical analysis. 

5. Provided a unique or connective perspective. We also included 
books that provided a fresh or uncommon perspective or 
seemed likely to help learners bridge the present and the 
past. We thought Kathryn Lasky's Hercules (1997), in which 
Hercules tells his story in the first person, would appeal to 
youngsters attracted to superheroes and action stories. We 
included several stories that highlight African American, 

Native American, or Hispanic American perspectives, as well 
as stories in which girls or women are the prominent charac- 
ters and history makers. In each case, we asked ourselves 
whether the text was likely to add something significant to 
our knowledge about a previous time, a past event, or a par- 
ticular cultural group. We looked for books likely to engage 
learners in using what they know about the present to think 
about the past. 

This chapter is divided into two major sections. The first section. 
Histories and Herstories, is filled with stories of the past that give 
insight into specific time periods, events, and cultural groups. These 
books are divided into three categories: Historical Fiction, Historical 
Nonfiction, and Stories of War. In the second section. Cultural Tradi- 
tions, readers will find texts that give insight into the past and other cul- 
tures in less direct ways. These texts contain the stories of different 
cultural groups, and explanations of the origins of their rituals and ways 
of life. Books in this section fall into the categories of Traditional Litera- 
ture and Cultural Practices and Celebrations. 

The breadth of books in this chapter is fascinating in and of itself. 
There is so much to know about the past and its impact on us, and there 
are so many authors trying to help us imderstand how we got to be who 
we are and to think as we do today. We hope these books help readers to 
relive the past, and to envision and build better tomorrows! 

Works Cited 

Coles, Robert. 1989. The Call of Stories. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Eisner, Eliot. 1998. The Schools We Need. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 



O 

ERIC 



90 



Histories and Herstories 



65 



Rief, Linda, and Maureen Barbieri, eds. 1995. All that Matters: What Is It We 
Value in School and Beyond? Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Short, Kathy, Jerome Harste, and Carolyn Burke. 1996. Creating Classrooms for 
Authors and Inquirers. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemarm. 

Wilhelm, Jeffrey, and Brian Edmiston. 1998. Imagining to Learn: Inquiry, Ethics, 
and Drama Integration through Drama. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Histories and Herstories 

See also the section entitled Family Experiences through the Ages in 
chapter 4, "Families." 

Historical Fiction 

Primary Reviews 

3.1 Benton, Amanda (1997). Silent Stranger. New York: Avon. 160 pp. 
ISBN: 0-380-97486-X. Chapter Book. (See 13.49) 

3.2 Carling, Amelia Lau (1998). Mama and Papa Have a Store. New 
York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2044-0. Picture Book. (See 4.97) 

3.3 Coleman, Evelyn (1996). White Socks Only. Illustrated by Tyrone 
Geter. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8075-8955- 
1. Picture Book. (See 20.10) 

3.4 Forrester, Sandra (1997). My Home Is over Jordan. New York: 
Lodestar. 163 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67568-X. Chapter Book. (See 20.11) 

3.5 Hesse, Karen (1997). Out of the Dust. New York: Scholastic. 227 
pp. ISBN: 0-590-36080-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 4.48) 

3.6 Holt, Kimberly Willis (1998). My Louisiana Sky. New York: 
Henry Holt. 132 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5251-8. Chapter Book. (See 4.66) 



O 

ERIC 



91 



66 



Exploring Our Past 



3.7 Jiang, Ji-Li (1997). Red Scarf Girl: A Memoir of the Cultural Rev- 
olution. New York: HarperCollins. 240 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027585-5. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 20.47) 

3.8 Lomas Garza, Carmen (1996). In My Family/En mi familia. 
Translated by Francisco X. Alarcon. San Francisco: Children's 
Book. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-89239-138-3. Picture Book. (See 4.14) 

3.9 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1998). Sister Anne's Hands. Illustrated by 
K. Wendy Popp. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2038-6. Picture Book. (See 20.3) 

3.10 McKissack, Patricia C. (1997). Run Away Home. New York: Scholas- 
tic. 160 pp. ISBN: 0-590-46751-4. Chapter Book. (See 5.79) 

3.11 Miller, William (1998). The Bus Ride. Illustrated by John Ward. 
New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-60-1. Picture 
Book. (See 20.26) 

3.12 Mitchell, Margaree King (1997). Granddaddy's Gift. Illustrated 
by Larry Johnson. Mahwah, NJ: BridgeWater. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-8167-4010-0. Picture Book. (See 20.27) 

3.13 Paterson, Katherine (1996). Jip: His Story. New York: Lodestar. 
ISBN: 0-52567-543-4. 181 pp. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

As this deeply moving story unfolds, readers meet Jip (short for 
gypsy), a young orphan who "fell" from a wagon as a two-year- 
old. As a result, Jip is being raised on a dreary mid-1800s Vermont 
poor farm along with an assortment of other unfortunate resi- 
dents. His kind, caring nature is revealed as he gently tends the 
animals and befriends the other residents. During his brief experi- 
ence in school, he is captivated by the story Teacher reads — Oliver 
Twist — and wonders whether he too has a loving parent some- 
where. Through his friendship with Teacher and her Quaker 
boyfriend, Jip learns that his mother was a runaway slave who 
was raped by her owner. Eventually Jip is forced to flee to Canada 
to escape a slave catcher. Paterson presents difficult and challeng- 
ing themes — abandonment, slave catching, loyalty, and poverty — 
through this readable and thought provoking book. 

3.14 Schroeder, Alan (1996). Minty: A Story of Young Harriet Tub- 
man. Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney. New York: Dial Books for 
Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1888-8. Picture Book. 



ERIC 



92 



Histories and Herstories 



67 



"Harriet Tubman is remembered as one of the bravest and most 
admired women in American history because of her tireless and 
daring work as a conductor on the Underground Railroad," 
author Alan Schroeder notes. In this beautiful and touching biog- 
raphy of Tubman's early years, Schroeder explains that Minty 
(Tubman's childhood name) was considered a "problem" slave. 
The author has taken basic facts about Tubman's life and created a 
memorable story of her early determination to be free. Pinkney's 
beautiful illustrations bring authenticity, realism, and dignity to 
the spirit of Minty, and to the family who loved her and taught 
her the skills she needed to survive. The author and illustrator 
notes add much to the historical perspective of the book, and the 
story makes a good Readers Theater text because the characters 
speak in dialect and the story is gripping. 

3.15 Stanley, Diane (1996). Elena. New York: Hyperion. 55 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7868-0256-1. Chapter Book. 

Diane Stanley recounts the true and remarkable story of a young 
Mexican girl and her struggle to achieve her dreams. Living an 
idyllic life in a quiet Mexican village, Elena, the youngest of five 
daughters, is not content to sing, dance, and sew as girls were 
expected to do in the early 1900s. She longs for an education, and 
the longing does not go away. It bothers her like a buzzing bee, 
always hovering about and coming right back whenever she 
brushes it away. Finally she talks the village priest into helping 
her learn to read and write, and she spends her pesos on books. 
Elena also chooses the person she will marry, contrary to the 
wishes of her father. Later she saves herself and her children from 
the revolution. Elena's education, her courage, and her determi- 
nation make this an unforgettable journey to freedom. When Jes- 
sica (age nine) read the book, she commented: "Elena had a good 
heart, and she made good choices. She was independent and 
made up her own mind. I think Mrs. Stanley wrote this book to 
show girls that you can choose for yourself." 

3.16 Stewart, Sarah (1997). The Gardener. Illustrated by David Small. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
32517-0. Picture Book. 

Stewart has created a gentle and memorable picture book about 
young Lydia Grace Finch. The year is 1835, and Lydia's parents 
are out of work. Lydia is sent to live with her ornery uncle, a 



er|c 



93 



68 



Exploring Our Past 



baker, in the big city. Before she leaves, she fills her suitcase with 
plants from her grandma's garden. Through the letters she writes 
home, we find a strong, confident young girl who works to keep 
her good humor as she explores places she can plant her flowers 
and vegetables. On July fourth. Uncle Jim is invited to the rooftop, 
where he is shown everything Lydia Grace has learned about 
beauty. This lovely story lends itself well to discussions about the 
virtues of this special young girl. David Small's black-ink, pastel, 
and watercolor illustrations are appealing. They capture the char- 
acters and provide interesting perspectives on the cityscape. 

3.17 Turner, Ann (1997). Mississippi Mud: Three Prairie Journals. 
Illustrated by Robert J. Blake. New York: HarperCollins. 44 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-024432-1. Picture Book. (See 10.22) 

3.18 Waters, Kate (1996). Tapenum's Day: A Wampanoag Indian Boy 
in Pilgrim Times. Photographs by Russ Kendall. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-20237-5. Picture Book. 

This book makes history come alive. The meticulous recreation of 
the Wampanoag's way of life is documented using current photo- 
graphic technology. Readers follow Tapenum, an eleven-year-old 
Wampanoag boy, through a day of hunting, fishing, and doing 
chores. Tapenum's first-person narrative provides insight into his 
determination to train and work hard so he can be recognized by 
his people as a pniese, a warrior-counselor. He has the support of 
many important people during his period of coming-of-age, 
including his parents, his friend Nootimis, and an elder named 
Waban. The book is the third in a trilogy that includes Sarah Mor- 
ton's Day: A Day in the Life of a Pilgrim Girl and Samuel Eaton's Day: 
A Day in the Life of a Pilgrim Boy. It is an intimate and accurate por- 
trayal of Native American life at the time of European coloniza- 
tion, complete with historical notes and a glossary of Wampanoag 
words. First graders learned so much from this book that they 
could dramatize the daily life of the tribe members. 

Waters, Kate (1989). Sarah Morton's Day: A Day in the 

Life of a Pilgrim Girl. Photographs by Russ Kendall. 

New York: Scholastic. ISBN: 0-590-42634-6. Picture Book. 

Waters, Kate (1996). Samuel Eaton's Day: A Day in the 

Life of a Pilgrim Boy. Photographs by Russ Kendall. 

New York: Scholastic. ISBN: 0-590-48053-7. Picture Book. 




94 



Histories and Herstories 



69 



3.19 Whelan, Gloria (1996). The Indian School. Illustrated by Gabriela 
Delosso. New York: HarperCollins. 89 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027077-2. 
Chapter Book. 

It is autumn 1839, and eleven-year-old Lucy is newly orphaned. 
She will go to live with Uncle Edward and Aunt Emma, mission- 
aries who run a mission school for Native American children in 
northern Michigan. Through Lucy, Whelan provides the young 
reader with some insight into the existence of Indian mission 
boarding schools as a part of American history and of federal 
policy to assimilate Native Americans into mainstream society. 
The experiences of Native American children — many of whom 
endured and survived traumatic separation from their families 
when they were as young as five years old — is palpable in the 
characters of Raven and Matthew. Raven defiantly resists con- 
formity and invisibility during her stay. "I cannot tell who I am if 
I look like everyone else," she insists, as she refuses to change 
into school dress. Raven's resistance, and her adherence to her 
strong Native American identity, intrigue Lucy. Raven's seem- 
ingly stubborn behaviors demonstrate to Lucy that there is much 
value in the Native American way of life. 

3.20 Wolff, Virginia E. (1998). Bat 6. New York: Scholastic. 230 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-89799-3. (See 20.43) 

Secondary Reviews 

3.21 Appelbaum, Diana (1997). Cocoa Ice. Illustrated by Holly Meade. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-33040-0. Sophisticated 
Picture Book. 

Two girls, one from Santo Domingo and the other from Maine, tell 
a cross-cultural story set in the late 1800s, when Yankee schooners 
brought ice and refined sugar to Santo Domingo in trade for cocoa 
and coffee beans. The two girls are linked by a sailor-uncle who 
carries bits of culture back and forth. Contrasting the warm colors 
of a tropical Caribbean island and the cool colors of a Maine win- 
ter, this book invites readers to find something in common among 
people from very different places. 

3.22 Armstrong, Nancy M. (1994). Navajo Long Walk. Illustrated by 
Paulette Livers Lambert. Boulder, CO: Roberts Rinehart. 128 pp. 
ISBN: 1-879373-56-4. Chapter Book. 



ERIC 



95 



70 



Exploring Our Past 



A good begirming book that offers an introduction to the Navajo 
and the Long Walk. This story begins with a young boy named Kee 
and his family, who Uve at their ancestral home before the U.S. Cav- 
alry rounds up the Navajo and moves them to Bosque Redondo, a 
government internment camp. Like many Navajo, Kee's family 
attempts to avoid captivity but later surrenders. The reader experi- 
ences their hardships and confusion on the Long Walk, their four- 
year stay at the Bosque Redondo, and their strength in overcoming 
hardships in order to survive. After the return to their ancestral 
home, Kee feels the best way to help his family is to learn about the 
white man, so he makes the decision to go to school. This book is 
part of the Council for Indian Education series. 

3.23 Birchman, David F. (1997). A Green Horn Blowing. Illustrated by 
Thomas B. Allen. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-12389-9. Picture Book. (See 11.13) 

3.24 Bruchac, Joseph (1998). The Arrow over the Door. New York: Dial 
Books for Young Readers. Illustrated by James Watling. 96 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-2078-5. Chapter Book. 

This story is based on a 1777 encounter between Native Americans 
in Saratoga Springs, New York, and a group of Friends (Quakers) 
in Easton, New York. The extensive author's note at the end of the 
book elaborates on this historical event within the framework of 
the Revolutionary War. Bruchac again writes a coming-of-age 
story in which Samuel, a Quaker boy, and Stands Straight, a young 
Abenaki boy, come to understand the meaning of peaceful coexis- 
tence — a concept that defies the actions of the Loyalists and Patri- 
ots of the day. Through this tale — which is told as only a good 
storyteller can— the reader gets a chance to look at both Quaker 
and Native American life from a fresh perspective. To discover 
more about storytelling, read Bruchac's Tell Me a Tale. 

Bruchac, Joseph (1998). Tell Me a Tale: A Book about 
Storytelling. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 140 pp. ISBN: 
0-15-201221-4. Chapter Book. 

3.25 Burks, Brian (1998). Walks Alone. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 128 
pp. ISBN: 0-15-201612-0. Chapter Book. 

This brief but realistic portrayal of the Warm Springs Apache 
around 1879 captures the physical hardship and loss they endured 




96 



Histories and Herstories 



71 



as they resisted removal to a reservation. Walks Alone is a teenage 
girl through whose experiences the reader senses the brutality and 
destruction of the Apache people just before the Battle of Tres 
Castillos. Although the author uses terse descriptions and easily 
read text, the tragedy of the story is not sacrificed. As Walks Alone 
is injured; suffers the death of her brother, grandmother, and fiance; 
and finally is captured and led away by Mexican soldiers, the hope- 
lessness of the Native American situation is mirrored through her 
perspective. The sources cited provide evidence of the author's 
research, and the information is presented through a courageous 
female protagonist who is to be revered by readers of both genders. 

3.26 Chambers, Veronica (1998). Amistad Rising: A Story of Freedom. 
Edited by Shelly Bowen and Allyn M. Johnston. Illustrated by Paul 
Lee. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201803-4. 
Picture Book. 

This book tells the true story of a man named Joseph Cinque, who 
was bom free and made a slave after being kidnapped from his 
homeland in Africa and imprisoned on the ship called Amistad. 
The book records Cinque's brutal experiences and documents his 
bravery throughout his ordeal. During the ensuing landmark tri- 
als centering on Cinque's right to freedom, John Quincy Adams, a 
key figure in American history, served as Cinque's ally. This pow- 
erful rendering of a historical occurrence should be used with 
other resources. 

3.27 Crook, Connie Brummel (1998). Maple Moon. Illustrated by Scott 
Cameron. Don Mills, Ontario, Canada: Stoddart Kids. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7737-3017-6. 

Crook has created an appealing tale of how Northeast Woodland 
Native Americans might have discovered maple syrup. A small 
boy accidentally discovers that sweet sap is dripping from a tree, 
but when he shows the elders of the tribe what is happening, the 
sap stops flowing. As the days become warmer, the sap flows 
again, and the tribe rejoices in the child's discovery. Cameron's 
oil-on-canvas illustrations convey a sense of nature and wood- 
land warmth. 

3.28 Cushman, Karen (1996). The Ballad of Lucy Whipple. New York: 
Clarion. 195 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72806-1. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 
(See 5.51) 



O 

ERIC 



97 



72 



Exploring Our Past 



3.29 Friedrich, Elizabeth (1996). Leah's Pony. Illustrated by Michael 
Garland. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397- 
189-5. Picture Book. 

When her family's farm is threatened by foreclosure during the 
Dust Bowl, Leah decides to sell her pony in hopes of helping her 
father. Through the ensuing sale, we learn about the penny auc- 
tions common during the Depression, in which a neighbor bid 
low on an item and no one else bid. The neighbor then gave the 
item back to the owner. This book invites a discussion of commu- 
nity solidarity and problem solving. 

3.30 Hall, Donald (1996). Old Home Day. Illustrated by Emily Arnold 
McCully. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-276896- 
3. Picture Book 

This book tells the story of a New Hampshire pond beginning 
thousands of years ago when there were only fish and animals in 
the environment. Eventually people came to live by the pond, and 
Blackwater Village flourished. Then people began to move away, 
and the village declined. In 1899, the governor of New Hampshire 
declared Old Home Week, and many past residents returned to 
reminisce and share stories of the simpler life. This book would be 
good as part of a set of change-over-time texts. 

3.31 Hamm, Diane Johnston (1997). Daughter of Sugua. Illustrated by 
Paul Micich. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 154 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
1477-2. Chapter Book. 

Ida is a ten-year-old Suquamish living in a small village on Puget 
Sound at the turn of the nineteenth century. Changes are occur- 
ring very rapidly for Ida, her parents, and her grandmother. Their 
coastal village is being abandoned as tribal members move to 
land allotments further inland to which they have been assigned. 
Ida's father is not a farmer, yet they will be expected to farm their 
new lands; Mother will have to quit her work because it will be 
too far for her to commute daily. Then Ida is informed that she 
will have to attend the boarding school for children who live too 
far from the village school. Grandmother is a comforting figure to 
Ida and her parents during this time. Appealing, realistic charac- 
ters give readers a chance to see, hear, and feel the heartbeat of the 
Native American people as they adjust and adapt to many of the 
changes that were imposed on them by treaties and federal man- 
dates during the late nineteenth century. 



O 

ERIC 



98 



Histories and Herstories 



73 



3.32 Hansen, Joyce (1997). I Thought My Soul Would Rise and Fly: 
The Diary of Patsy, a Freed Girl. New York: Scholastic. 202 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-84913-1. Chapter Book. 

Patsy, a young kitchen slave, secretly learns to read and write. 
When the Civil War ends, she keeps a diary detailing the changes 
that emancipation brings to her and other slaves. Patsy also 
teaches the plantation children the basic skills they need to exer- 
cise their newly-won freedom. Information about Hansen's use of 
primary historical documents such as diaries, oral histories, notes, 
photographs, engravings, recipes, songs, and maps helps to make 
the story authentic. 

3.33 Hearne, Betsy G. (1997). Seven Brave Women. Illustrated by 
Bethanne Andersen. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
688-14503-5. Picture Book. (See 4.47) 

3.34 Hest, Amy (1997). When Jessie Came across the Sea. Illustrated 
by P. J. Lynch. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
7636-0094-6. Picture Book. 

This is a simple immigration story with Cinderella-like qualities. A 
young girl from a village in Eastern Europe is chosen by her rabbi 
to make the journey to America to live with the rabbi's sister-in- 
law in New York. Thirteen-year-old Jessie makes the journey 
alone, earns her living by working in a dress shop, falls in love, 
sends money to her grandmother to come to America, marries, 
and lives happily ever after. The illustrations in the book are rich, 
with authentic detail and warm, memorable images. 

3.35 Hobbs, Will (1997). Ghost Canoe. New York: Morrow Junior 
Books. 195 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14193-5. Chapter Book. 

In this mystery, fourteen-year-old Nathan fishes for salmon and 
halibut and hunts seals and gray whales with the Makah, a whal- 
ing tribe in the Pacific Northwest. The story takes place in 1874 on 
the very tip of Washington's Olympic Peninsula, and things heat 
up when Nathan discovers clues to a lost Spanish treasure. Will 
Hobbs has researched extensively the geography, natural history, 
and human history of the Pacific Northwest. 

3.36 Howard, Ellen (1996) . The Log Cabin Quilt. Illustrated by Ronald 
Himler. New York: Holiday House. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8234-1247- 
4. Picture Book. 



ERIC 



99 



74 



Exploring Our Past 



This is a tender story about the hardships families faced when 
they moved west during the 1800s. Winter winds blow through 
the cracks of the cabin, and Pa should have been home hours 
ago. Elvirey has the good sense to stuff the cracks in the walls 
with quilt scraps, but this reminds everyone of their deceased 
mother. Fortunately good memories outweigh the painful. Pa 
returns home, and the family finds new courage and shared 
determination. 

3.37 Janeczko, Paul B. (1997). Home on the Range: Cowboy Poetry. 
Illustrated by Bernie Fuchs. New York: Clarion. 40 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8037-1910-8. Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 10.28) 

3.38 Johnston, Tony (1996). The Wagon. Illustrated by James E. Ran- 
some. New York: Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13457-2. Picture 
Book. 

This is the story of a little boy who grows up as a slave in the 
Carolinas. He quickly learns what slavery means by working for 
the master from dawn until dusk. He dreams that the wagon built 
by his father to carry slaves could one day become a gorgeous 
chariot. His dreams of freedom are inspired by the sun and nature 
that surround him. His grandmother encourages him to think of 
positive things to keep from losing hope. The story ends as the 
slaves are freed at the end of the Civil War. 

3.39 Littlesugar, Amy (1997). A Portrait of Spotted Deer's Grandfa- 
ther. Illustrated by Marlowe DeChristopher. Morton Grove, IL: 
Whitman. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8075-6622-5. Picture Book. 

George Catlin traveled the western frontier and painted portraits 
of Native Americans during the 1830s. In this story, young Spot- 
ted Deer wants his grandfather to sit for a portrait, but Moose 
Horn is concerned that having his portrait painted might take 
away his spirit. In this book, readers learn about Catlin and the 
tools he used in his work. The author's view is not necessarily 
that of Native Americans' in respect to Catlin and his work, a 
point teachers may wish to discuss with readers. 

3.40 Marrin, Albert (1996). Plains Warrior: Chief Quanah Parker and 
the Comanches. New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 
200 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80081-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 



Histories and Herstories 



75 



This book tells the story of Quanah Parker during the dramatic 
and tragic years in Native American history when tribes went 
from living free on the Great Plains to containment on reserva- 
tions. Throughout the narrative, the reader gets a view of the 
Comanche way of life and the influence of key historical events 
and people on that life. Marrin supports the text with photo- 
graphs, maps, quotes from the people involved, newspaper clip- 
pings of the times, government documents, journal entries, 
drawings, and sketches. 

3.41 Matcheck, Diane (1998). The Sacrifice. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 224 pp. ISBN: 0-374-36378-1. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book. 

This is a fast-moving, suspenseful story of a young Apsaalooka 
(Crow) girl. It was prophesied at her birth and that of her twin 
brother that one of them would become the great leader of their 
people. Her twin brother is presumed to be the Great One, and 
even after his death it is not recognized that she might be the Great 
One. After her father's death leaves her orphaned, the young girl 
sets out to avenge his death and prove that she is the prophesied 
Great One. When she is captured by the Pawnee, she receives an 
unexpected friendly welcome that causes her to be uneasy and 
distrusting. As her time with the Pawnee increases, so does her 
knowledge of her role in the Morning Star ceremony, and her fight 
for survival begins once again. The author's note provides brief 
background information on the Pawnee and Apsaalooka, the 
Morning Star ceremony, additional resources, and references. 

3.42 McCuIIy, Emily Arnold (1996). The Bobbin Girl. New York: Dial 
Books for Young Readers. 34 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1827-6. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. 

Rebecca, the bobbin girl, is a ten-year-old who goes to work in the 
textile mills of Lowell, Massachusetts, in the 1930s to help her 
struggling mother. The conditions in the mill are bad — loud 
machinery, unhealthy air, many injuries, and low wages. When the 
mill owners threaten to lower wages even more, the women at the 
mill stage a turnout. Even though the protest fails, Rebecca vows 
to continue the fight for better working conditions. (See also 20.30) 

3.43 McCuUy, Emily Arnold (1997). Starring Mirette and Bellini. New 
York: Putnam. 29 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22636-2. Picture Book. (See 5.128) 



O 

ERIC 



101 



76 



Exploring Our Past 



3.44 Pfitsch, Patricia Curtis (1997). Keeper of the Light. New York: 
Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers. 137 pp. ISBN: 0-689- 
81492-5. Chapter Book. 

Following the death of her father. Faith assumes the role of light- 
house keeper on the rocky coast of Lake Superior. Although Faith 
shows she is capable, her mother decides the family will move into 
town. Faith is stifled by the role expected of young women in 1872, 
and fears the lighthouse will not be well tended. Eventually a storm 
tempts Faith into rescuing passengers from a ship that has run 
aground, and she comes to understand her father and herself better. 

3.45 Pryor, Bonnie (1996). The Dream Jar. Illustrated by Mark Gra- 
ham. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
13062-3. Picture Book. 

When Valentina's family emigrates from Russia, everyone works 
to save coins to help the family purchase a small store. Valentina 
discovers she can teach English to immigrant adults in her neigh- 
borhood and helps to earn pennies for the family's dream jar. The 
detail found in the warm illustrations provides a realistic por- 
trayal of the immigrant experience for young readers. 

3.46 Riggio, Anita (1997). Secret Signs: Along the Underground Rail- 
road. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-555-6. 
Picture Book. 

This book is based on historical documentation of the struggles 
and hardships encountered by slaves in their quest for freedom 
during the Civil War. Told in narrative form, the story focuses 
on a deaf boy named Luke and his mother, who make sugar 
eggs to sell at the general store. Communicating in sign lan- 
guage, Luke and his mother formulate a plan to communicate 
with a little slave girl at the store. The plan is interrupted by a 
slave catcher, but through quick thinking Luke is able to distract 
the slave catcher and pass on to the little girl information about 
the next safe stop on the Underground Railroad. This book 
could be used with a variety of ages, but some background 
information on signing and the Underground Railroad would 
be needed for it to make sense to most children. 

3.47 Rumford, James (1998). The Island-below-the-Star. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-85159-9. Picture Book. 



102 



Histories and Herstories 



77 



This is the story of five brothers who use the stars to guide their 
voyage to the Hawaiian Islands. Each brother has a special skill, 
and together the brothers are able to follow a star through treach- 
erous storms and high waves to reach the island below the star. 
James Rumford's watercolors complement the poetic rhythm of 
the text, which is written in English and Hawaiian. Readers are 
enlightened about the historical origins of Polynesian migration 
more than fifteen hundred years ago. 

3.48 Ryan, Pam Munoz (1998). Riding Freedom. Illustrated by Brian 
Selznick. New York: Scholastic. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-590-95766-X. 
Chapter Book. 

This historical novel is based on the true story of Charlotte Park- 
hurst, a teenager who discovered she could do the things she 
wanted if she pretended to be a man. Charlotte, orphaned at an 
early age, struggles with the limited options open to women. She 
passes herself off as a boy to get a job working in a horse stable, 
and becomes an excellent stagecoach driver. In the mid-1800s, she 
moves to California where — as a man — she can own land and 
vote. Charlotte lives by the motto "You gotta do what your heart 
tells you," and her story provides insight into both the times and 
the spirit that shaped the United States. 

3.49 St. George, Judith (1997). Sacagawea. New York: Putman. 128 pp. 
ISBN: 0-399-23161-7. Chapter Book. 

Judith St. George provides young readers with a story about the 
strong and resourceful Shoshone woman, Sacagawea. The pri- 
mary focus of the book is the Lewis and Clark expedition. Readers 
will see how Sacagawea's extensive knowledge of the people, 
land, animals, and plants had a significant and positive impact on 
the expedition's success. This book is well researched. 

3.50 Swain, Gwenyth (1996). The Road to Seneca Falls: A Story about 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Illustrated by Mary O'Keefe. Minneapo- 
lis: Carolrhoda. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-947-6. Chapter Book. 

This well-written, fictionalized biography shows the strength and 
perseverance of Elizabeth Cady Stanton, a pioneer in obtaining 
equality for women throughout the country. The historical Stan- 
ton grew up in Johnstown, New York, in the 1820s, and accompa- 
nied her husband to the World Anti-Slavery Convention in 



; 



103 



78 



Exploring Our Past 



London. Here Stanton met Lucretia Mott, a Quaker minister who 
wasn't afraid to speak out. The two became friends, and eventu- 
ally organized the first Women's Rights Convention held in 1848 
in Seneca Falls, New York. 

3.51 Tunnell, Michael O. (1997). Mailing May. Illustrated by Ted Rand. 
New York: Greenwillow. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-688-12878-5. Picture Book. 

This unbelievable story is based on a real-life adventure in Idaho 
in the early 1900s. May's folks carmot afford a ticket for her to ride 
the train seventy-five miles to visit her grandparents, but they 
work out a deal with her postmaster-uncle that allows her to be 
"shipped" as a rail package — for fifty-three cents. This delightful 
story about creative problem solving lends itself to a study of life 
in this historical time period. The illustrations include many arti- 
facts such as period photographs and train tickets. 

3.52 Vick, Helen Hughes (1998). Shadow. Boulder, CO: Roberts Rine- 
hart. 128 pp. ISBN: 1-57098-195-7. Chapter Book. 

Shadow is the first book in Vick's new Courage of the Stone series, 
and is based on the prehistoric culture of the Sinagua people who 
inhabited the area of northern Arizona around 1180 C.E. Shadow, the 
female protagonist, is thirteen years old and has always taken a sub- 
servient role to her twin brother. Sun. Shadow senses danger, injury, 
and an evil presence pursuing her brother and father, both of whom 
are long overdue from a quarrying expedition. She packs a few 
things to take with her, and sets out on a journey filled with danger, 
mystery, and self-growth in the hope of finding Sun and Stone Gath- 
erer. This well-written, exciting plot provides lots of anthropological 
imagery as Shadow uses the tools, materials, and plants available to 
her to search for her father and brother, and eventually to nurse her 
injured father back to health. Her ultimate confrontation with the 
Spirit of Fear is one of personal growth, immense courage, and tri- 
umph over both evil and the restrictive female code of conduct that 
is a part of her culture. The book includes a map of Arizona and 
archaeological insights into the Sinagua. 

3.53 Wells, Rosemary (1998). Mary on Horseback: Three Mountain 
Stories. New York: Dial Books For Young Readers. 53 pp. ISBN: 0- 
803-72154-4. Chapter Book. 

Mary Breckenridge changed people's lives by starting the Frontier 
Nursing Service in rural Appalachian Kentucky. Trained as a 



104 



Histories and Her stories 



79 



nurse in World War I, and faced with the painful loss of her own 
children, Breckenridge turns her grief into positive action and 
begins riding into the hills on horseback to provide medical atten- 
tion to some of the poorest people in America. Three memorable 
characters tell touching stories of Mary's heroism. 

3.54 Williams, Rianna M. (1997). Mahealani and the King of Hawai'i. 
Illustrated by Jackie Black. Honolulu: Ka mea Kakau. 103 pp. 
ISBN: 0-9658621-0-0. Chapter Book. 

A historical account of two significant moments in Hawaiian his- 
tory — King Kalakaua's coronation and his fiftieth birthday. 
Although told within a Active context, the narratives are based on 
actual events in Hawaiian history carefully researched by the 
author. These events are told in a storylike format ideal for young 
readers. The preface and endnotes differentiate the real and fic- 
tional characters, and clarify the backgrounds of actual people. 

3.55 Yee, Paul (1996). Ghost Train. Illustrated by Harvey Chan. Emery- 
ville, CA: Groundwood. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88899-257-2. Sophisti- 
cated Picture Book. (See 4.61) 

Historical Nonfiction 

Primary Reviews 

3.56 Ancona, George (1997). Mayeros; A Yucatec Maya Family. New 
York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13465-3. 
Picture Book. 

Ancona gives a splendid historical overview of the blending of 
Mayan and Spanish traditions in the Yucatec Maya's lifestyle as 
he chronicles the daily lives of two children, Armando and Gas- 
par, and their family. Through the lens of his extraordinary cam- 
era, readers accompany Ancona on a visit to the Yucatan, the 
home of his grandparents, where he rediscovers the food, stories, 
music, and jokes of his childhood and ancestors. An author's 
note adds more historical details, and a glossary of Spanish and 
Yucatec words provides translations and pronunciations. This 
book could be used with Children of Yucatan by Frank Staub, also 
illustrated with full-color photographs, to provide an in-depth 
look at the Yucatan past and present. (See also 20.51) 

Staub, Frank J. (1996). Children of Yucatan. Minneapolis: 
Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-984-0. Picture Book. 



ERIC 



105 



80 



Exploring Our Past 



3.57 Brook, Donna (1998). The Journey of English. Illustrated by Jean 
Day Zallinger. New York: Clarion. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-71211-4. 
Chapter Book. (See 13.2) 

3.58 Bruchac, Joseph (1997). Lasting Echoes: An Oral History of 
Native American People. Illustrated by Paul Morin. New York: 
Harcourt Brace. 176 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201327-X. Sophisticated Chap- 
ter Book. 

Bruchac tells the story of Native Americans in the United States 
using their own words. Borrowing from speeches, letters, jour- 
nals, and other source materials, he documents the ideas of many 
different tribes and famous Native American leaders such as 
Geronimo and Sitting Bull. The result is a unique view of history 
from a Native American perspective. This book compresses a lot 
of history into a few short pages, beginning with the arrival of 
Europeans on the North American continent and continuing to 
the present. It also provides a compelling portrait of Native Amer- 
ican peoples. This book will be most accessible to older students 
with some sense of history. 

3.59 Cooney, Barbara (1996). Eleanor. New York: Viking. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-670-86159-6. Picture Book. (See 5.39) 

3.60 Dash, Joan (1996). We Shall Not Be Moved: The Women's Fac- 
tory Strike of 1909. New York: Scholastic. 165 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
48409-5. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 20.23) 

3.61 Egan, Ted (1998). The Drover's Boy. Illustrated by Robert Ingpen. 
Melbourne, Australia: Lothian. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-887734-52-X. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 

This haunting and hard-hitting story, accompanied by music and 
lyrics, describes the contributions of aboriginal women disguised 
as men to circumvent a law that forbade employment of aborigi- 
nal women as drovers. In some cases, as this story relates, love 
developed between the aboriginal drover "boys" and their white 
bosses. Gold-tone illustrations displayed in a scrapbook fashion, 
and large two-page illustrations of cattle drives, help readers 
understand the hardships of these courageous women. This book 
would provide opportunity for conversations about Aborigines, 
slavery, prejudice, and interracial families. 



106 



Histories and Herstories 



81 



3.62 Fisher, Leonard Everett (1997). Anasazi. New York: Atheneum. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80737-6. Picture Book. 

Fisher's first-rate anthropological study of the Anasazi clearly fills 
a void for intermediate readers. Inhabiting the Four Comers area 
of the southwestern United States more than two thousand years 
ago, these "ancient ones" left behind remnants of their culture in 
the form of cliff dwellings, tools, pottery, baskets, and petroglyphs. 
From what remains, we can only speculate as to their cultural tra- 
ditions and beliefs. However we are able to track changes in archi- 
tecture, diet, artifacts, and tools for daily use, as well as interactions 
and encounters with other native groups in the area. What remains 
of their civilization motivates us to ask more questions about their 
existence, and many questions are posed and answered in this text. 
Fisher's distinctive art in sepia tones gives readers a sense of time 
past. Additional information includes a parallel timeline of signifi- 
cant world events that occurred during the time of the Anasazi, as 
well as an area map of their cultural range. 

3.63 Gerstein, Mordicai (1998). The Wild Boy. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 39 pp. ISBN: 0-374-38431-2. Chapter Book. 

This poignant tale is based on the true story of Victor, the Wild 
Child of Aveyron, who was found in southern France in 1800. 
Through Gerstein's text and paintings, the events unfold as the 
boy is found by hunters, taken to the Institute for Deaf-Mutes in 
Paris, probed by doctors, and jeered at by cruel crowds. Those 
who try to communicate with him finally give up — all except a 
young doctor named Jean-Marc Itard. Realizing that Victor never 
learned to be a child, Itard and his empathetic housekeeper take 
the enigmatic young boy into Itard's home and tenderly care for 
him. Although he never learns to speak, Victor does learn to dis- 
criminate touch, hot, and cold; to wear clothing; and to help with 
chores like chopping wood. Children will be touched by this mov- 
ing story of this remarkable boy and his teacher, a story that calls 
to the wild child in us all. 

3.64 Hansen, Joyce (1998). Women of Hope: African Americans Who 
Made a Difference. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
93973-4. Picture Book. (See 20.12) 

3.65 Josephson, Judith Pinkerton (1997). Mother Jones: Fierce Fighter 
for Workers' Rights. Minneapolis: Lemer. 144 pp. ISBN: 0-8225- 
4924-7. Picture Book. (See 5.14) 



O 

ERIC 



107 



82 



Exploring Our Past 



3.66 Knight, Margy Bums (1996). Talking Walls: The Stories Con- 
tinue. Illustrated by Anne Sibley O'Brien. Gardiner, ME: Tilbury. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88448-165-4. Picture Book. (See 7.21) 

3.67 Macy, Sue (1996). Winning Ways: A Photohistory of American 
Women in Sports. New York: Scholastic. 217 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
76336-9. Chapter Book. (See 12.21) 

3.68 Meltzer, Milton (1998). Ten Queens: Portraits of Women of Power. 
Illustrated by Bethanne Andersen. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. 134 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45643-0. Chapter Book. (See 5.24) 

3.69 Millard, Anne (1998). A Street through Time: A 12,000- Year Walk 
through History. Illustrated by Steve Noon. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-789-43426-1. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

This book is an excellent resource for helping students under- 
stand the concept of history. It traces the changes that have taken 
place on a small stretch of land that borders a waterway, begin- 
ning with a Stone Age nomadic village and ending with a modem 
street. The depth of detail in the full-color illustrations makes this 
exploration of change over time a visual enterprise. Readers get 
some information through the print text, but most of what the 
book has to tell is conveyed through pictures and labels. Rather 
than tell readers what there is to know about each particular 
period in history, the author invites investigation with questions 
and hints about what to look for in each picture. 

3.70 Mochizuki, Ken (1997). Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story. 
Illustrated by Dom Lee. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880000-49-0. Picture Book. (See 20.28) 

3.71 Myers, Walter Dean (1997). Harlem. Illustrated by Christopher 
Myers. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-54340-7. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 10.19) 

3.72 Pinkney, Andrea Davis (1996). Bill Pickett: Rodeo-Ridin' Cow- 
boy. Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
Unpaged. ISBM: 0-15-200100-X. Picture Book. 

Bill Pickett was born to slaves in the 1800s and grew up south of 
Abilene, Texas. As a young boy, he wanted to learn all about the 
cowboys who passed by his parents' farm. He loved listening to 



108 '” 



Histories and Her stories 



83 



the stories told by his older cousins, who were trail-driving horse- 
men. Pickett set out to prove that he had what it took to be a cow- 
boy. Seeing some men trying to rope a calf, Pickett showed them 
how he had seen a bulldog bite the lip of a calf and hold it down. 
His adaptation of this technique became known as bulldogging. At 
fifteen, Pickett learned to lasso and ride, and set out, with great 
success, to find paying work as a cowboy. News of his skill soon 
spread throughout the West, and everyone wanted to see him per- 
form. Pickett was one of the first African American rodeo per- 
formers, but his fans focused on his skill, rather than on the color 
of his skin. Pickett made a living as a bulldogger and traveled 
aroimd the world, performing in all the famous rodeos, imtil his 
retirement. This engaging text includes many details and descrip- 
tions, and the illustrations richly complement the story. 

3.73 Pringle, Laurence (1998). One Room School. Illustrated by Bar- 
bara Garrison. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
56397-583-1. Picture Book. (See 6.3) 

3.74 Sis, Peter (1996). Starry Messenger. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-37191-1. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

This Caldecott Honor Book tells the story of Galileo in words and 
stunning pictures that capture the essence of his era in history. The 
author says that Galileo was born with stars in his eyes, and that 
he was a celebrated scientist imtil he discovered that the earth cir- 
cled the sun rather than the other way around. The story tells of 
Galileo's life from childhood through his final days as a prisoner of 
the church. Using seventeenth-century symbols and images and 
quotes from Galileo's own writings, the author allows readers to 
cross the boundaries of time and space to enter Galileo's world. 
The story unfolds on many levels simultaneously, making this a 
book that has appeal for adults as well as children. 

3.75 Tillage, Leon Walter (1997). Leon's Story. Illustrated by Susan 
Roth. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 107 pp. ISBN: 0-374- 
34379-9. Chapter Book. (See 20.18) 

Secondary Reviews 

3.76 Adler, David A. (1997). A Picture Book of Thurgood Marshall. 
Illustrated by Robert Casilla. New York: Dial Books for Young 
Readers. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1506-6. Picture Book. 



109 



84 



Exploring Our Past 



This book is about a well-known individual who fought for equal- 
ity for all Americans throughout his lifetime, Thurgood Marshall. 
One of Marshall's significant childhood memories was of having 
to memorize parts of the U.S. Constitution when he got in trouble 
at school. Later, this experience would serve Marshall well when 
he became a lawyer for the National Association for the Advance- 
ment of Colored People (NAACP). Marshall became the first 
African American to sit on the Supreme Court of the United States. 
This book tells his story in language accessible to young children. 

3.77 Arnold, Caroline (1996). Stories in Stone: Rock Art Pictures by 
Early Americans. Photographs by Richard Hewett. New York; 
Clarion. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72092-3. Picture Book. 

The author's insightful text and full-color photographs by Richard 
Hewett provide an exploration into the ancient art carved into rock 
walls and painted on stone surfaces. The area highlighted in this 
book is Ridgecrest, California. Ridgecrest is northeast of Los Ange- 
les in the Coso Range of the Mojave Desert. Native Americans 
used this site for thousands of years and created many designs, 
including abstract patterns and both small and life-sized pictures 
of people and animals. A glossary and a listing of other places to 
view rock art are included at the end of the book. 

3.78 Cha, Dia (1996). Dia's Story Cloth. Illustrated by Chue Cha and 
Nhia Thao Cha. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000- 
34-2. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

The hand-embroidered story cloth shown in the book describes 
the history of the Hmong people. The illustrations depict the jour- 
ney of the Hmong, from their origins in China centuries ago, 
through years of joys and hardships, and ending with the even- 
tual immigration of over 125,000 refugees to the United States 
after the Vietnam War. Though the story could be enjoyed by all, 
older audiences will better understand the historical relevance 
and struggle of the race. 

3.79 Ciment, James, with Ronald LaFrance (1996). Encyclopedia of the 
North American Indian. New York: Scholastic. 224 pp. ISBN: 0- 
590-22790-4. Reference Book. 

This resource book includes information on 143 different Native 
American tribal groups from the Arctic Circle through Central 
America and the Caribbean. The tribal groups are listed in alpha- 



Histories and Herstories 



85 



betical order, and each entry includes important information, peo- 
ple, and events unique to each particular group. This encyclopedia 
gives both historic and contemporary information. 

3.80 Currie, Stephen (1997). We Have Marched Together: The Working 
Children's Crusade. Minneapolis: Lemer. 88 pp. ISBN: 0-8225- 
1733-7. Chapter Book. 

Stephen Currie's chapter book explores the cruel hardships endured 
by child workers in Philadelphia in the early 1900s, and the coura- 
geous crusade of Mother Jones, the fiery labor leader who led an 
army of men, women, and child laborers aU the way from Philadel- 
phia to New York. Through vivid text, illustrated with photographs 
from the Library of Congress, the reader marches beside the chil- 
dren in their struggle for better working conditions. This book will 
raise discussions about many human rights issues. 

3.81 Czech, Kenneth (1996). Snapshot: America Discovers the Cam- 
era. Minneapolis: Lerner. 88 pp. ISBN: 0-822-51736-1. Chapter 
Book. 

Photography is taken for granted today, but students may begin 
to appreciate it more if they study this readable book about the 
history and impact of cameras. The stories show how the camera 
not only recorded history, but also impacted people's awareness 
of issues and conditions. The book is filled with black-and-white 
photographs spanning the decades between 1839, when the cam- 
era was invented, and World War II. 

3.82 Dewey, Jennifer Owings (1996). Stories on Stone: Rock Art: 
Images from the Ancient Ones. Boston: Little Brown. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-316-18211-7. Picture Book. 

This book introduces young readers to the rock art and petro- 
glyphs of the Anasazi people. Explaining places she visited in 
New Mexico as a child, Dewey takes the reader on a journey 
through her childhood and explains how her curiosity about the 
art symbols began. She uses colored-pencil illustrations to show 
many of the symbols that have been found, and explains these 
symbols with historical information about the Anasazi. 

3.83 Duncan, Dayton (1996). The West: An Illustrated History for 
Children. New York: Little Brown. 136 pp. ISBN: 0-316-92236-6. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 



Ill 



86 



Exploring Our Past 



This visual and informative narrative of the discovery and settle- 
ment of the American West is based on a PBS television documen- 
tary. It contains over 400 photographs that create a gripping 
journey through the turbulent history of the region. Its stories tell 
of people coming from all corners of the earth and highlight the 
tensions between European and native peoples. The book also 
touches on the experiences of Hispanic/Latino people, the Chinese, 
and African slaves in the United States. The American Library 
Association says, "This book is as sprawling, vast, and rich as the 
history and land it describes." 

3.84 Fleming, Candace (1996). Women of the Lights. Illustrated by 
James Watling. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
9165-3. Chapter Book. 

Since 1768, at least 250 women have served as lighthouse keepers 
on America's coasts. This book focuses on four of these coura- 
geous women: Ida Lewis, who was famous for her rescues; Kate 
Walker, who kept an isolated lighthouse for more than thirty 
years and saved more than fifty people; Hattie Colfax, who retired 
at age eighty; and Emily Fish, who made her lighthouse on a Cali- 
fornia peninsula a social and cultural center. 

3.85 Ganeri, Anita (1996). The Young Person's Guide to the Orches- 
tra. Compact disc narrated by Ben Kingsley. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201304-0. Picture Book. (See 11.20) 

3.86 Goodman, Susan E. (1998). Stones, Bones, and Petroglyphs: Dig- 
ging into Southwest Archaeology. Photographs by Michael J. 
Doolittle. New York: Atheneum Books for Yoimg Readers. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-81121-7. Picture Book. 

This photographic essay shows eighth graders exploring the 
Mesa Verde region of Colorado. These students are trying to 
determine why the ancestral Puebloan people who lived in the 
area for over one thousand years suddenly moved away. This 
book is a first-hand account of the science of archaeology, desert 
ecology, and ancient Native American skills. Numerous close-up 
photographs add to the information presented. The book ends 
with a glossary, and suggestions for further reading. 

3.87 Hampton, Wilbom (1997). Kennedy Assassinated! The World 
Mourns: A Reporter's Story. New York: Candlewick. 96 pp. ISBN: 
1-564-02811-9. Chapter Book. 




Histories and Herstories 



87 



Hampton was a brand new reporter when President Kennedy 
was assassinated, and his recollections of the experience are both 
personal and objective. The reader is carried through the minute- 
by-minute chronicle of the tragic events by Hampton's engaging 
narrative and collection of historic photographs. The overall effect 
of the book is powerful, bringing to life a shocking episode in 
American history. 

3.88 Haskins, James, and Kathleen Benson (1998). African Beginnings. 
Illustrated by Floyd Cooper. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-688-10256-5. Picture Book. (See 3.89 below) 

3.89 Haskins, James, and Kathleen Benson (1999). Bound for America: 
The Forced Migration of Africans to the New World. Illustrated 
by Floyd Cooper. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-688-10258-1. Picture Book. 

These two informative historical picture books for children, begin 
with the history of the empires of Africa prior to 1492 and con- 
tinue with the history of the Atlantic slave trade. From the coastal 
regions to the inland regions, from northern to southern Africa, 
and from the history of conquered regions to what these areas are 
called today, these books provide a comprehensive overview of 
the history of the African continent. Floyd Cooper's illustrations, 
along with historical photographs and portraits, assist in making 
the book's historical descriptions informative and comprehensi- 
ble for both children and adults. Both books include special sec- 
tions entitled "Milestones in African History" and "Bibliography 
Especially for Young People" to assist young readers in broaden- 
ing their knowledge of African and African American history. 

3.90 Igus, Toyomi (1998). i see the rhythm. Illustrated by Michele 
Wood. San Francisco: Children's Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-151- 
0. Picture Book. 

Paintings by Wood and text by Igus unite to create a colorful doc- 
umentary of the origins of African American music. From the 
sounds of Africa and the songs sung by slaves in the United States 
to the imagery of rap and hip hop, i see the rhythm is an informa- 
tive guide with factual timelines for young and old readers to 
enjoy. The colorful paintings, pages, and layouts all give the 
reader a feel for the music of each era. 



,L 113 



88 



Exploring Our Past 



3.91 Johnson, Dinah (1998). All Around Town: The Photographs of 
Richard Samuel Roberts. Photographs by Richard S. Roberts. 
New York: Henry Holt. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5456-1. Picture Book. 

Memorable experiences are seen through the eyes of self-taught 
photograher Richard Samuel Roberts in his explorations of the 
lifestyle and social life of African Americans in South Carolina in 
the early 1920s. These photographs tell the story of the many dif- 
ferent professions that were held by African Americans of this era, 
even though they were few in number. The black-and-white pho- 
tographs bring to life the pride and self-worth felt by their sub- 
jects. The text complements the images, usually by explaining 
them. This book, which could be used with a variety of age levels, 
contributes to readers' understanding of the American dream by 
bridging the past and the future. 

3.92 Johnson, Sylvia A. (1997). Tomatoes, Potatoes, Com, and Beans: 
How the Foods of the Americas Changed Eating Around the 
World. New York: Atheneum. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80141-6. Refer- 
ence Book. 

For those interested in both food and history, this book provides a 
valuable resource for scientific, historical, and cultural studies. 
Many foods originally grown only in the Americas were taken to 
other lands by early explorers. Readers learn how Native Ameri- 
cans used these plants, as well as the impact of these vegetables 
on other parts of the world as they became crucial to nutrition and 
world cuisine. 

3.93 King, Martin Luther Jr., (1997). I Have a Dream. New York: Scholas- 
tic. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-590-20516-1. Picture Book. 

Dr. Martin Luther King's leadership was fundamental to the Amer- 
ican Civil Rights movement's success in ending legal segregation 
in the South and other parts of the United States. In this book, the 
meaning of Dr. King's famous "I Have a Dream" speech is por- 
trayed by several well-known artists, who use their creative talent 
to illustrate the thoughts and emotions of the speech. The artwork 
is done in a variety of forms, and creates a bond of the ideas and 
feelings of many individuals. Just as Dr. King believed in nonvio- 
lence, the illustrations depict warmth, peace, love, and harmony 
for all people. This book should be used with other supportive and 
connective activities, and would be particularly appropriate for 
use at the upper elementary and middle school levels. 




Histories and Her stories 



89 



3.94 Lavender, David (1998). Mother Earth, Father Sky. New York: 
Holiday House. 117 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1365-9. Chapter Book. 

Through detailed descriptions, black-and-white illustrations, and 
photographs we learn about Puebloan culture, the interdepend- 
ency of man and environment, and adaptations made by the 
Pueblo people over the centuries. Topics covered include crop cul- 
tivation, irrigation, home building, spiritual life, the influence of 
the Spanish in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and the 
later influences of the Santa Fe Railroad and its threat to tradi- 
tional ways. This is a well-researched informational resource. 

3.95 Morris, Juddi (1997). Tending the Fire: The Story of Maria Mar- 
tinez. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising Moon. 113 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-654-9. 
Chapter Book. 

Maria Martinez, one of the best-known potters of all time, began 
making pottery as a child by making clay dishes for her play- 
house. She took lessons from her aimt, and later collaborated with 
her husband to perfect black-on-black pottery. Maria helped 
revive the dying art of pottery making and turned it into one of 
the enduring art forms of her tribe. During her life, she visited 
four presidents in the White House and demonstrated at world 
fairs and exhibitions. 

3.96 Parks, Rosa, and Jim Haskins (1997). I Am Rosa Parks. Illustrated 
by Wil Clay. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-1206-5. Chapter Book. 

This easy-to-read historical book contains information about the 
life struggles and hardships of Rosa Parks during her life in 
Alabama. Traveling home after work, this courageous African 
American woman refused to give up her seat on the bus to a white 
man who was standing. Parks was then arrested for defending 
what she believed was her right to remain seated. Through this 
book, young children are able to learn about the Civil Rights 
movement and how it impacted the lives of people then and now. 

3.97 Parks, Rosa, with Gregory Reed (1996). Dear Mrs. Parks: A Dia- 
logue with Today's Youth. New York: Lee & Low. 112 pp. ISBN: 1- 
880000-45-8. Chapter Book. 

How often do children have a chance to hear from an important 
figure in history? In this book, Rosa Parks shares the letters she 




90 



Exploring Our Past 



has written to children who wrote to her with questions. She pro- 
vides consistent, clear-headed thinking about how to be a force 
for positive change in society. In her life work and stirring mes- 
sages, readers can find the strength and courage to be leaders. 

3.98 Ryan, Pam Munoz (1996). The Flag We Love. Illustrated by Ralph 
Masiello. Watertown, MA: Charlesbridge. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
88106-846-2. Picture Book. (See 10.14) 

3.99 Roop, Peter (1996). The Buffalo Jump. Illustrated by Bill Farns- 
worth. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87358-616-6. 
Picture Book. 

The buffalo was essential to all aspects of Native American life 
among the Plains tribes, and many methods were used to capture 
them. The setting of this book is the Madison Buffalo Jump on the 
Blackfeet reservation in Montana. The text concerns who leads the 
buffalo to the jump, and how a yoimg boy's anger, jealousy, and 
courage lead to his personal growth and to his new name. Charg- 
ing Bull. Well-researched and sensitive portrayals of Native 
Americans by illustrator Bill Farnsworth complement Roop's tra- 
ditional narrative. 

3.100 Sherrow, Victoria (1997). American Indian Children of the Past. 
Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0033-3. Chapter 
Book. 

This very readable text, supported by period black-and-white pho- 
tographs, explains what life was like for Native children growing 
up during the eighteenth through the early twentieth centuries. 
Information presented includes homes, villages, beliefs, food, 
games, and some coming-of-age rituals. Chapters are divided into 
five geographical regions: Northeast Woodlands, Southeast, Plains, 
Southwest, and Northwest Coast. The book includes a table of con- 
tents, an index, source notes, a bibliography, and a list of suggested 
further readings. 

3.101 Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk (1997). The Apaches: A First 
Americans Book. Illustrated by Ronald Himler. New York: Holi- 
day House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1287-3. Picture Book. 

Sneve, a Dakota Sioux, writes about the Apache in this book that 
is one in a series about Native American tribes. The Apache 
nation was divided into six distinct tribes, and although their 




Histories and Her stories 



91 



dialects differed, they were able to understand each other and 
their lifestyles were similar. Sneve's research spans from creation 
stories to governing styles and from ceremonies to war and raid- 
ing. She also examines everything from encounters with white 
settlers to the reservation system to Apache life today. 

3.102 Swanson, Diane (1996). Buffalo Sunrise: The Story of a North 
American Giant. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books for Children. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-87156-861-6. Chapter Book. 

Bujfalo Sunrise is an informative book on the history and future of 
the buffalo. It begins with general data on the buffalo, such as 
appearance, size, ability, behaviors, and location. Although all 
Native peoples of the North American Plains were dependent 
upon the buffalo for their livelihood, Swanson focuses on the 
Blackfoot from Alberta and Montana during the 1870s. The Great 
Plains tribes' reverence for the buffalo is shown by its presence 
within their celebrations, ceremonies, stories, dances, and songs. 
The hunting techniques of these peoples contrast sharply with the 
European manner that brought the buffalo close to extinction. 
Today the buffalo survives on public lands, and laws exist to pro- 
tect the buffalo for the future. Peter Roop's The Buffalo Jump (see 
3.99) makes a nice companion book for students exploring the 
near-extinction of the buffalo. 

3.103 Viola, Herman J. (1996). North American Indians. Illustrated by 
Bryn Barnard. New York: Crown. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-517-59017-4. 
Chapter Book. 

An introduction to the pre-European cultures of Native American 
tribes from eight regional areas: the Southeast, the Southwest, the 
West, the Northeast, the Northwest, the Great Plains, the Subarctic, 
and the Arctic. Native North Americans are grouped together in 
these common cultural areas because of their proximity to each 
other and similarities in their languages and ways of life. This is an 
excellent resource to abolish the stereot 5 q?ical Great Plains image 
applied to aU Native Americans. It shows distinct cultural differ- 
ences among the tribes in terms of environment, shelters, diet, cere- 
monies, language, utensils, clothing, trade routes, etc. Current 
members of various tribes support the text with maps, photo- 
graphs of authentic artifacts, paintings, drawings, and essays. A 
timeline indicates some major events related to Native Americans, 
from Columbus' arrival in 1492 to the early 1900s. 





117 



92 



Exploring Our Past 



Stories of War 

See also chapter 5, "Struggle and Survival." 

Primary Reviews 

3.104 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-73570-X. Sophisticated 
Picture Book. (See 3.115) 

3.105 Bunting, Eve (1998). So Far from the Sea. Illustrated by Chris K. 
Soentpiet. New York: Clarion. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72095-8. Sophis- 
ticated Picture Book. 

With her little brother and parents, Laura walks through the now- 
deserted Manzanar Relocation Center where her father, grandpar- 
ents, and ten thousand other Japanese Americans were interned 
during World War II. Father tells his memories of war — how he 
wore his Cub Scout uniform to show he was truly American; how 
the United States took the family's home, possessions, and dig- 
nity; and how he believed Grandfather began dying the moment 
the soldiers came to take them away. Bunting's exquisite writing 
style is sensitive and gentle, yet vividly captures the harsh reali- 
ties of war. Striking black-and-white drawings juxtaposed with 
color illustrations take us between past and present, from the 
despair of wartime to the healing of moving forward. Readers of 
all ages will enjoy and appreciate this touching story. An excellent 
social studies resource for inquiry into different cultural perspec- 
tives on war. (See also 20.9) 

3.106 Fox, Robert Barlow (1997). To Be a Warrior. Sante Fe, NM: Sun- 
stone. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-86534-253-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Clay Walker, a young Navajo, wanted to be a warrior like the ones 
in the stories he learned from his grandfather. Like many of his 
peers. Clay left the reservation as a teenager to join the white 
world. Although his first experiences were troubling, eventually 
he was accepted into the U.S. Marines where he became a code 
talker in the Pacific during World War II. Simple yet emotionally 
powerful descriptions recount Clay's experiences with pain, 
destruction, and death. He does become a warrior, but in a world 
far removed from his pastoral beginnings. This novel is written 




Histories and Herstories 



93 



sensitively and boldly to hold the interest of young readers, with- 
out sacrificing the integrity of the book. Use this with Robert 
Daily's The Code Talkers: American Indians in World War II (1995). 

Daily, Robert (1995). The Code Talkers: American Indi- 
ans in World War II. New York: Franklin Watts. 64 pp. 

ISBN: 0-531-20190-2. Chapter Book. 

3.107 Giff, Patricia Reilly (1997). Lily's Crossing. New York: Delacorte. 
180 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32142-2. Chapter Book. 

Lily is relieved to be out of school and packing for the beach. She 
packs remembrances of her deceased mother, anticipating a won- 
derful summer with her grandmother and father at Rockaway on 
the Atlantic Ocean. It's 1944, and this fifth grader's life is about to 
be completely changed by World War II. Gift's historical fiction 
novel lets us see World War II through the eyes of a child who 
makes mistakes and has to live with the consequences. She learns 
the importance of family and of telling the truth as she finds a 
way to help a refugee boy from Hungary reunite with his sister. 
This book would make a nice complement to other World War II 
fiction such as Number the Stars and So Far from the Sea (see 3.105). 

Lowry, Lois (1990). Number the Stars. New York: Ban- 
tam Doubleday Books for Young Readers. 144 pp. ISBN: 
0-440-40327-8. Chapter Book. 

3.108 Kaplan, William (1998). One More Border: The True Story of One 
Family's Escape from War-Torn Europe. Illustrated by Stephen 
Taylor. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Groundwood. 61 pp. ISBN: 0- 
88899-332-3. Picture Book. (See 20.14) 

3.109 Lee, Milly (1997). Nim and the War Effort. Illustrated by Yangsook 
Choi. New York: Foster/Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-374-35523-1. Picture Book. 

Lee has created a sensitive and tender story set in San Francisco's 
Chinatown during World War II. A young Chinese American girl 
named Nim shows her courage, determination and resourceful- 
ness as she works to win a school paper-drive contest to help the 
war effort. Nim locates a huge source of newspapers, and must 
figure out how to get them to the school. Because of this effort, 
Nim misses Chinese school with her grandfather. This is a very 



. 119 



94 



Exploring Our Past 



serious offense. Nim explains to her grandfather why the paper 
drive is so important to her: "I wanted to bring honor to the fam- 
ily. Garland said an American would win the contest, and he was 
right. An American did win. I was bom here. I am the American 
who won." The colorful artwork in this picture book captures the 
lifestyles and family traditions of the era. 

3.110 Marrin, Albert (1997). Empires Lost and Won: The Spanish Her- 
itage in the Southwest. New York: Simon & Schuster. 216 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80414-8. Chapter Book. 

Marrin brings a personal flavor to this history of the American 
Southwest, beginning with Heman Cortes and the conquest of 
Mexico and ending with the Mexican War in 1847. The words and 
deeds of well-known figures such as Cabeza de Vaca and Coron- 
ado are balanced with the lives of ordinary, previously unknown 
people, as Marrin traces the influence of the Spanish heritage in 
the Southwest. The author's accounts of events such as the con- 
quest of the Pueblos and the Texas war for independence spare 
none of the often-gruesome details of conquest and life in the bru- 
tal desert environment. Carol Cribett-Bell, an intermediate school 
librarian, found the book to be a very readable nonfiction work 
that gives a fair summary of both sides of historical events and 
conveys the passion behind the fighting. The black-and-white 
illustrations, maps, journal excerpts, bibliography, and index 
make this volume an outstanding reference for research, as well 
as enjoyable reading. 

3.111 Paulsen, Gary (1997). Sarny: A Life Remembered. New York: 
Delacorte. 97 pp. ISBN; 0-385-32195 -3. Chapter Book. 

Sarny is a strong, determined young slave who flees the plantation 
near the end of the Civil War. She is seeking her two children, who 
have been stolen from her. An advantage she has as she seeks her 
children is the schooling she received from Nightjohn. The reader 
is given a glimpse of skirmishes during the waning weeks of the 
war, and is shown the terror of battle as seen through Sarny's eyes. 
Eventually she uses her education to set up schools for newly 
freed slaves. Once again, she faces difficulty as she is confronted 
by people determined to destroy her and the schools. This is a fast- 
paced, straightforward book typical of Paulsen's style. The simple, 
action-filled text makes it a good choice for many readers. 



ERIC 




Histories and Herstories 



95 



3.112 Robb, Laura (1997). Music and Drum: Voices of War and Peace, 
Hope and Dreams. Illustrated by Debra Lill. New York: Philomel. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22024-0. Picture Book. (See 10.20) 

3.113 Walker, Sally M. (1998). The 18 Penny Goose. Illustrated by Ellen 
Beier. New York: HarperCollins. 61 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027556-1. 
Chapter Book. (See 5.35) 

Secondary Reviews 

3.114 Balgassi, Haemi (1996). Peacebound Trains. Illustrated by Chris 
K. Soentpiet. New York: Clarion. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72093-1. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 

As Sumi and her grandmother sit on a hillside overlooking the 
railroad tracks. Grandmother shares memories of her escape on a 
train from Seoul during the Korean War. Detailed watercolor 
illustrations convey many elements of Korean culture, as well as 
the panic of women and children who often left everything 
behind while the men stayed to fight the war. 

3.115 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-73570-X. Sophisticated 
Picture Book. 

Wartime took away their father and grandfather. The children 
used medicinal herbs and sweet dried apples as their grandfather 
did before he was called to war. But soon the war was upon them 
and destroyed their village. They were forced to flee with a few 
belongings. An important story to help readers understand the 
struggles many Vietnamese had to endure to survive. Watercolor 
illustrations bring out the irmocence of children, and the harsh- 
ness of wartime. (See also 20.22) 

3.116 Comelissan, Cornelia (1998). Soft Rain: A Story of the Cherokee 
Trail of Tears. New York; Delacorte. 115 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32253-4. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

In this story of forced relocation. Soft Rain's Cherokee childhood 
is traumatically disrupted in 1838 when she and her mother are 
wrenched from their way of life to begin a walking journey 
toward the unknown West. Leaving behind all that they know, 
they endure physical hardship, the stench of sickness and death. 



121 



96 



Exploring Our Past 



and the painful loss of loved ones. Despite such challenges, this is 
also a story of strength, endurance, and hope. 

3.117 English, June, and Thomas D. Jones (1998). Scholastic Encyclope- 
dia of the United States at War. New York: Scholastic. 192 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-59959-3. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This chronicle of U.S. involvement in armed conflict explores the 
lessons of war and the role America has played in the worldwide 
struggle for justice and freedom. Each chapter is devoted to a spe- 
cific conflict, spanning from the American Revolution to the Gulf 
War. The authors are thorough, presenting for each conflict back- 
ground information, pivotal incidents, campaigns, personalities, 
the home front, public reaction, and a description of the aftermath 
of war. The format is lively, including song lyrics, maps, and illus- 
trations throughout. 

3.118 Harrah, Madge (1997). My Brother, My Enemy. New York: Simon 
& Schuster Books for Young Readers. 137 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80968-9. 
Chapter Book. 

This story comes from the year 1676, when fourteen-year-old 
Robert Bradford — determined to avenge the death of his family — 
joins a volunteer army composed of Virginia plantation owners. 
Robert, who tells the story in first person, is soon caught up in the 
action and chaos of Bacon's Rebellion. This book has plenty of 
action, but also deals with Robert's irmer struggle to do what is 
right. 

3.119 Lincoln, Abraham (1998). The Gettysburg Address. Illustrated by 
Michael McCurdy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395- 
88397-0. Picture Book. 

Michael McCurdy's scratchboard engravings dramatically illus- 
trate scenes from the Civil War, and enhance the power of the text 
of the Gettysburg Address. This simple black-and-white book 
demonstrates the power of words to remind us of what we have 
learned from the past. Its message comes through even though 
the language is from a different era. 

3.120 Mochizuki, Ken (1997). Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story. 
Illustrated by Dom Lee. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880000-49-0. Picture Book. (See 20.28) 



122 



Histories and Herstories 



97 



3.121 Murphy, Jim (1996). A Young Patriot: The American Revolution 
as Experienced by One Boy. New York: Clarion. 101 pp. ISBN; 0- 
395-60523-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This book offers a perspective on the Revolutionary War that will 
interest older readers researching the period. The author, Jim Mur- 
phy, has based the book on the memoirs of Joseph Plumb Martin, 
who actually enlisted to fight for the Americans when he was four- 
teen years old. Murphy skillfully weaves together the details of 
Joseph's experiences as a soldier and the broader context of histori- 
cal events. The book is richly illustrated with engravings, paint- 
ings, and documents from the period. 

3.122 Nivola, Claire A. (1997). Elisabeth. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-374-32085-3. Sophisticated Picture Book. 
(See 5.45) 

3.123 Reeder, Carolyn (1997). Across the Lines. Illustrated by Robin 
Moore. New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 220 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-81133-0. Chapter Book. 

The tension in this story begins in the first chapter, when Edward's 
family flees their plantation ahead of the Union Army and Simon, 
Edward's best friend and a slave, takes the opportunity to escape 
to freedom. During the span of a year, the boys face many hard- 
ships brought on by the Civil War, but each continues to learn 
about freedom and courage. Told alternately from Edward's and 
Simon's point-of-view, this story makes a good study of different 
perspectives. 

3.124 Viola, Herman J. (1998). It Is a Good Day to Die: Indian Eyewit- 
nesses Tell the Story of the Battle of the Little Bighorn. New 
York: Crown.lOl pp. ISBN: 0-517-70913-9. Chapter Book. 

A book of personal narratives regarding Sioux history and partici- 
pation in Indian wars — specifically the Battle of the Little Bighorn 
in 1876 — this is an excellent reference. The emphasis on Lakota 
eyewitness accounts allows young readers to see the other side of 
the picture. Despite that there were no survivors among Custer's 
men, and therefore no eyewitness accounts from that perspective, 
the account of this historical event is one-sided. This book illus- 
trates a clash of cultures for survival. Includes many bibliographic 
references, photographs, and a chronology from 1851 to 1890. 




*■ 



123 



98 



Exploring Our Past 



Cultural Traditions 

See also the section entitled Family Experiences Around the World in 

chapter 4, "Families." 

Traditional Literature 

Primary Reviews 

3.125 Aldana, Patricia, editor (1996). Jade and Iron: Latin American 
Tales from Two Cultures. Illustrated by Luis Garay. Translated by 
Hugh Hazelton. Toronto, Canada: Groundwood. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
88899-256-4. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This anthology of legends and myths from Latin America is divided 
into two sections: stories told by the indigenous people of the 
Americas, and stories of Spanish and Portuguese origin that were 
brought by the conquistadors but were forever changed by contact 
with the New World. The stories captivate the reader from begin- 
ning to end, portraying the violent suffering of vastly different cul- 
tures in conflict with each other and with nature — struggles that are 
best appreciated by mature readers. Young heroes and heroines, 
hunters, and volcano spirits populate the legends and creation sto- 
ries of the New World entries. From Europe come tales of witches 
and wicked sea captains, tragic lovers, and clever survivors. Luis 
Garay's characteristically somber pen-and-ink and watercolor illus- 
trations contribute to the emotional impact of these tales. 

3.126 Anaya, Rudolfo (1997). Maya's Children: The Story of La Llorona. 
Illustrated by Maria Baca. New York: Hyperion. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-7868-0152-2. Picture Book. 

In this story, Anaya recreates the traditional Latin American tale 
of La Llorona, a weeping woman who wanders the night in search 
of her children, whom she has killed. For generations, these sto- 
ries have been used to frighten children to hurry home. However, 
Anaya's La Llorona does not harm her children, revealing instead 
her maternal feelings and teaching a lesson about mortality. Maria 
Baca's double-page, dark-toned gouache paintings create a mys- 
terious atmosphere that supports the text, and prompted Arnold 
(age eight) to comment, "The pictures are kind of scary." This 
book might be used in a text-set with other versions of La Llorona, 
including Gloria Anzaldua's dual-language book, Prietita and the 
Ghost Woman/Prietita y La Llorona, which is gorgeously illustrated 
by Mayan artist Christina Gonzalez. Anzaldua's text presents a 




Cultural Traditions 



99 



more contemporary version of La Llorona that, together with the 
powerful imagery of the double-page illustrations, has encour- 
aged critical dialogue among students from first to fifth grade. 

Anzaldua, Gloria (1995). Prietita and the Ghost Woman/ 
Prietita y La Llorona. Illustrated by Christina Gonzalez. 

San Francisco: Children's Book. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-89239- 
136-7. Picture Book. 

3.127 Goble, Paul (1996). Remaking the Earth: A Creation Story from 
the Great Plains of North America. New York: Orchard. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-531-09524-X. Picture Book. 

In the author's note at the beginning of the book, Goble explains 
that the Bible, particularly Genesis, influenced Native American 
creation stories. Goble researched many versions of native Plains 
creation stories, searching for the core messages of stories told 
prior to the influence of missionary teachings. This story comes 
from the legends of the Algonquin, a language group that 
includes the Cheyenne, Arapaho, and Blackfeet tribes. Earth 
Maker was responsible for creating a new world after the crum- 
bling of the old world, which left behind only fishes and ani m als 
in the water crying for help. Earth Maker saves the animals and 
goes on to contour the earth, send down life-giving rain, and peo- 
ple the earth using clay from Grandmother Turtle's back. Earth 
Maker expects the buffalo and the people to live together in har- 
mony with all the creatures of his creation. 

3.128 Goldin, Barbara Diamond (1996). Coyote and the Firestick: A 
Pacific Northwest Indian Tale. Illustrated by Will Hillenbrand. 
San Diego: Gulliver. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200438-6. Picture Book. 

In the time before people had fire. Coyote allows the flattering 
remarks of his clan to move him to devise a plan to steal fire from 
the three evil spirits who guard it for themselves. His plan requires 
a relay race involving the help of Moimtain Lion, Deer, Squirrel, 
and Frog. This humorous pourquoi tale offers readers a daring 
adventure, as well as an explanation of why Coyote's friends look 
like they do today. Oil and oil-pastel illustrations strongly support 
the story, and add personality to the characters. The evil spirits are 
humorously scary, but would not frighten the very yoimg in a 
read-aloud setting. Author notes provide additional information 
on coyote tales. The illustrator notes his research of the Native 
Americans of the Pacific Northwest, who originally told this tale. 




125 



100 



Exploring Our Past 



3.129 Harper, Jo (1998). The Legend of Mexicatl/La leyenda de Mexi- 
catl. Illustrated by Robert Casilla. Spanish edition translated by 
Tatiana Lans. New York: Turtle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-890515-05-1 
(English) /1-890515-06-X (Spanish). Picture Book. 

It will be wonderful news to bilingual teachers that this legend is 
available in English and Spanish editions. The language is equally 
expressive and descriptive in both languages. This lovely picture 
book retells the legend of the origin of the Aztec people of Mexico. 
Mexicatl, the young hero, has heard since childhood of a valiant 
leader who will take his people from the harsh desert land to a 
place of cool waters and peace. After experiencing a wondrous 
vision, he leads his followers to their promised land. However, 
life is not harmonious in paradise; Mexicatl discovers that a "true 
leader" must not only be strong and courageous, but should 
never place himself above his own people. Lisa, a fourth grader, 
said, "He really cares about his people . . . and I also like the pic- 
tures." Robert Casilla's illustrations in realistic watercolors focus 
on Mexicatl and his actions, using a warm, earthy palette that 
emphasizes the primitive and harsh environment of the story's 
setting. Editions are available in both English and Spanish. 

3.130 Hickox, Rebecca (1998). The Golden Sandal: A Middle Eastern 
Cinderella Story. Illustrated by Will Hillenbrand. New York: Hol- 
iday House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-823-413314. Picture Book. 

Cinderella is a favorite story in many cultures, and this rich pic- 
ture book tells the Iraqi version of the tale. Maha, the beloved 
daughter of a fisherman, saves the life of a red fish who becomes 
her fairy godmother. Later, Maha loses her golden sandal as she 
leaves the henna (celebration) for a wealthy bride. This retelling is 
simple but eloquent, and Hillenbrand's illustrations, done on vel- 
lum with a variety of media, capture the essence of the unusual 
setting and the comic characters. Pair this book with Angkat: The 
Cambodian Cinderella. 

Coburn, Jewell Reinhart (1998). Angkat: The Cambo- 
dian Cinderella. Illustrated by Edmund Flotte. Arcadia, 

CA: Shen's Books. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-885008-09-0. Picture 
Book. 

3.131 Lester, Julius (1999). What a Truly Cool World. Illustrated by Joe 
Cepeda. New York: Scholastic. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-590-86468-8. Picture 
Book. 



126 



Cultural Traditions 



101 



Based on the story "How God Made the Butterflies" from the 
1969 collection Black Folktales, What a Truly Cool World takes the 
reader to heaven during the time of creation. While corrections 
are being made on the world, an angel named Shaniqua has an 
idea for bringing color into the world. Through hip hop language 
and colorful illustrations, heaven is portrayed as a pretty casual, 
down-home place. With the assistance of Joe Cepeda, Lester has 
brought a modern flavor to an old folktale that can be enjoyed 
both for the colorful humor in the story and the illustrations on 
each page. 

Lester, Julius (1992). Black Folktales. Illustrated by Tom 
Feelings. New York: Grove. 110 pp. ISBN: 0-802-132-42-1. 
Picture Book. 

3.132 Moreton, Daniel (1997). La Cucaracha Martina: A Caribbean 
Folktale. New York: Turtle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-890515-03-5. Pic- 
ture Book. 

This delightful retelling of a Caribbean folktale by Daniel More- 
ton takes the reader on a quest for the source of the beautiful noise 
that Cucaracha Martina, a ravishing cockroach, hears one night 
amidst the unpleasant sounds of the city. Martina scours the city 
for the source of the melodious sound, and she causes a sensation 
wherever she appears. A variety of city animals try to woo her 
with their songs, but Martina remains unmoved by all, rejecting 
each marriage proposal until she finds the source of the beautiful 
noise: a cricket. The two insects then live happily ever after. The 
humorous, computer-generated illustrations invite the reader to 
participate in the action of the city. Students will quickly join in 
with the reading of each animal's sound. The lovely cockroach 
Martina and other popular characters of Caribbean folktales also 
appear in Sehor Cat's Romance and Other Favorite Stories from Latin 
America. 

Gonzalez, Lucia M. (1997). Senor Cat's Romance and 
Other Favorite Stories from Latin America. Illustrated 
by Lulu Delacre. New York: Scholastic. 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
590-48537-7. Picture Book. 

3.133 Pollock, Penny (1996). The Turkey Girl: A Zuni Cinderella Story. 
Illustrated by Ed Young. Boston: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
316-71314-7. Picture Book. (See 14.11) 




127 



102 



Exploring Our Past 



3.134 Pomerantz, Charlotte (1997). Mangaboom. Illustrated by Anita 
Lobel. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-12957-9. 
Picture Book. (See 14.12) 

3.135 San Souci, Robert D. (1996). Pedro and the Monkey. Illustrated by 
Michael Hays. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-13743-1. Picture Book. 

A poor farmer named Pedro catches in his trap a monkey who is 
eating all of Pedro's com. Pedro threatens to sell the monkey as 
repayment for the money he has lost from the eaten com. The 
monkey begs for freedom, and in return promises to set up the 
poor farmer with the rich landowner's daughter. Although doubt- 
ful that the monkey could convince a rich landowner to give his 
daughter away to a poor farmer, Pedro lets the monkey go. 
Through many cunning deceptions, the monkey is able to con- 
vince the rich landowner that Pedro is wealthy, and thus deserving 
of his daughter in marriage. Although this story is similar to the 
various Puss in Boots versions told in many cultures, this retelling 
is based on Fansler's (1921) Filipino Popular Tales. Clothing and 
scenery, beautifully painted on canvas in pastel hues, provide an 
authentic view of traditional Filipino culture. 

Fansler, Dean Spruill (1921). Filipino Popular Tales, 
Collected and Edited, with Comparative Notes by 
Dean S. Fansler, Ph.D. Vol. XII of the Memoirs of the 
American Folklore Society. Lancaster, PA, and New 
York: American Folklore Society. 473 pp. Chapter Book. 

Perrault, Charles (1990). Puss in Boots. Translated by Mal- 
colm Arthur. Illustrated by Fred Marcellino. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-374-36160-6. 

3.136 San Souci, Robert D. (1998). A Weave of Words: An Armenian 
Tale. Illustrated by Raul Colon. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-531-30053-6. Picture Book. (See 14.34) 

3.137 San Souci, Robert D. (1998). Cendrillon: A Caribbean Cinderella. 
Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. New York: Simon & Schuster. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-8066-8-X. Picture Book. (See 14.11) 

3.138 Young, Ed (1997). Mouse Match: A Chinese Folktale. San Diego: 
Silver Whistle. 26 pp. ISBN: 0-152-01453-5. Picture Book. 



128 



Cultural Traditions 



103 



Although this is a retelling of a Chinese folktale, it is a familiar story 
told in one version or another in almost every culture. A father and 
mother mouse want to find the best husband possible for their 
daughter, and they go to great lengths to find this husband — to the 
sun, the clouds, the wind, and the mountains. In the end, they 
realize that what they are seeking is another mouse. They have 
failed to see the uniqueness and greatness in themselves and their 
friends. Young has chosen a unique format for this story. The 
pages of the book are really one long mural that has been folded 
accordion-style so that each fold brings the readers to a dis- 
cernible spread. When opened completely, the book depicts the 
story in one long continuum of color, collage, and mouse silhou- 
ettes. The back of the panel has the Chinese text for the story 
printed white-on-black. 

Secondary Reviews 

3.139 Ada, Alma Flor (1997). The Lizard and the Sun /La lagartija y el 
sol. Illustrated by Felipe Davalos. Translated by Rosa Zubizarreta- 
Ada. New York: Doubleday. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-385-32121-X. Pic- 
ture Book. 

In this dual-language book, Ada recounts in both English and Span- 
ish an old Mexican folktale in which the sun disappears and the 
days become gloomy. The animals go in search of the sun, and 
lizard persuades the sleepy sun to arise with promises of the liveli- 
est music and dancing. This explains the importance of the celebra- 
tion of the sun by many indigenous groups. Dark-chalk illustrations 
lend a mysterious quality and sense of authenticity to the text. 

3.140 Alameida, Roy (1997). Na Mo'olelo o ka Wa Kahiko: Stories of 
Old Hawaii. Honolulu: Best. 124 pp. ISBN: 1-57306-026-7. Sophis- 
ticated Chapter Book. 

Through a wide array of stories adapted from Dunford's The 
Hawaiians of Old, Alameida informs and entertains readers with 
forty-five tales of Hawaiian tricksters, voyagers, gods, parents, 
lovers, and warriors. Written for a fourth-grade level, this book 
teaches readers myths and legends about earth, fire, and water; 
beliefs and customs; plants; fish and fishponds; crafts; weapons 
and warfare; sports and games; and music and dance. Hawaiian 
translations are provided in the margins. A good social studies 
resource. 




129 



104 



Exploring Our Past 



Dunford, Betty (1995). The Hawaiians of Old. Illustrated 
by Aimee A. Kudlak. Honolulu: Best. 220 pp. ISBN: 0- 
93584-843-6. Chapter Book. 

3.141 Behan, Brendan (1997). The King of Ireland's Son. Illustrated by 
P. J. Lynch. New York: Orchard. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-531-09549-5. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Brendan Behan, an acclaimed Irish writer, brings alive this tale 
from Irish folklore about the adventures of three brothers on a 
quest for heavenly music and their father's wealth. This book 
begs to be read aloud, and children will be captivated by Lynch's 
lavish paintings. 

3.142 Ben-Ezer, Ehud (1997). Hosni the Dreamer: An Arabian Tale. 
Illustrated by Uri Shulevitz. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-374-33340-8. Picture Book. 

Hosni, a shepherd, is fascinated by stories of faraway cities. Finally 
he has a chance to travel, and he is entranced by the bustling city. 
Trusting his intuition, he uses his gold dinar to pay a wise man for 
a bit of wisdom. His friends make fim of him for not buying food 
or trinkets, but Hosni's wisdom saves his Ufe and changes his for- 
tune. Shulevitz's watercolors echo the muted colors of the desert, 
and make this a heartwarming storybook. 

3.143 Berry, James (1997). First Palm Trees: An Anancy Spiderman 
Story. Illustrated by Greg Couch. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81060-1. Picture 
Book. 

The prophet has seen in his dreams a tree that can give both 
shade and wine. The king wants to know how the tree will be 
created, and offers a reward to anyone who creates such a tree. 
Anancy Spiderman hears of the king's reward, and as always 
plots and schemes in order to get Sky-God to assist him in this 
creation. Being quite selfish, Anancy cannot see splitting his 
reward with the Spirits of Sun, Water, Earth, and Air, but agrees 
to do so, knowing that the tree cannot be created without them. 
When the palm trees finally emerge, many people from the vil- 
lage present themselves to the king as the rightful winner of the 
reward besides Anancy. Through the earthtoned illustrations 
created by Greg Couch, a modern image of Anancy Spiderman 
is presented in this story of how palm trees were created. 



130 



Cultural Traditions 



105 



3.144 Demi (1997). Buddha Stories. New York; Henry Holt. Illustrated 
by Demi. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4886-3. Picture Book. 

Beautifully illustrated in traditional Chinese gold ink with pen- 
and-brush on indigo vellum, this collection of ten Buddha tales 
originated some twenty-five hundred years ago. Each folktale is 
one page long, and ends with an explicitly stated lesson. The fate 
of each villain or triumphant character is clearly conveyed, yet 
because of the style of both text and illustration, this selection 
would best be shared with middle elementary and older students. 

3.145 Demi (1998). The Greatest Treasure. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-31339-8. Picture Book. 

The simple message of this book comes from a traditional Chinese 
tale. Li, a poor farmer, enjoys playing his flute for his family while 
his children sing and dance. When he suddenly becomes wealthy, 
he almost loses sight of the importance of peace of mind and sim- 
ple pleasures. Demi's Chinese artwork harmonizes with the story, 
making the book a delightful visual experience as well as a 
springboard for interesting discussions about wealth and its 
importance. 

3.146 Goble, Paul (1996). The Return of the Buffaloes: A Plains Indian 
Story about Famine and Renewal of the Earth. Washington, DC: 
National Geographic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7922-2714-X. Picture Book. 

In this traditional Lakota tale, the tribe is about to perish because 
of a lack of buffalo. Goble's illustrations reflect extensive research 
of various versions of the story and of Lakota Sioux parfleches, 
which he reproduced in the story from originals. He also visited 
Wind Cave National Park in Black Hills, South Dakota, to see and 
study the Breathing Hole, where the wind is said to be the source 
of breath for yet more buffalo. 

3.147 Goble, Paul (1998). La nina que amaba los caballos salvajes. 
Translated by Clarita Kohen. New York: Aladdin Paperbacks 
(Libros Colibri). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-81455-0. Picture Book. 

A Spanish translation of Goble's 1978 Caldecott winner. The Girl 
Who Loved Wild Horses. A Plains Indian girl's passion for horses is 
so great she prefers to live among them rather than stay with her 
people. Eventually it is believed that she actually turns into a 
horse herself. 



er|c 



131 



106 



Exploring Our Past 



Goble, Paul (1983). The Girl Who Loved Wild Horses. 

New York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-027-36570-0. 
Picture Book. 

3.148 Goldin, Barbara Diamond (1997). The Girl Who Lived with the 
Bears. Illustrated by Andrew Plewes. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
40 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200684-2. Picture Book. 

Bears, berries, and the Northwest Coast are all present in this 
retelling of a tale well known to indigenous people living in the 
Pacific Northwest. A young girl ignores warnings from her girl- 
friends and defies taboos by talking ill of the bears. Her friends 
run off, not wanting harm to come to them. The lost girl meets a 
handsome young man she assumes was sent by her father to res- 
cue her. However the man is really a bear who has the ability to 
switch between animal and human form. After a series of mysteri- 
ous events, the young man marries the girl and returns her to her 
people, although he must die to accomplish this. Humbleness and 
the importance of listening to elders are the lessons that flow from 
this skillful retelling. The facial expressions employed in the illus- 
trations add to the effect of the text. The notes at the end of the 
book provide evidence of extensive research by the author, as well 
as excellent resource material. 

3.149 Hausman, Gerald (1998). The Story of Blue Elk. Illustrated by 
Kristina Rodanas. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84512-2. 
Picture Book. 

Rich hues of blue, lavender, and earthtones create a natural set- 
ting for this story that celebrates the magic of music and the 
majesty of wildlife. This Pueblo story is of a boy who was born 
unable to make a sound. Blue Elk, his elk brother, helps the boy 
find his voice through a cedar flute. 

3.150 Kearns, Geri (1998). Snail Girl Brings Water: A Navajo Story. 
Illustrated by Richard Ziehler-Martin. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising Moon. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87358-662-X. Picture Book. 

Kearns, a Navajo storyteller, shares a Navajo creation myth in a 
well-crafted retelling that explains how water came to this world. 
When a flood forces the People to leave their homes and enter the 
Fifth World (where we live today), the People discover there is no 
fresh water in the new world. Someone must go back down and 



O 

ERIC 



132 



Cultural Traditions 



107 



bring up some pure water so First Woman can sing her song of 
magic and make the rivers grow. Otter, Frog, and Turtle try and 
fail, and it is Snail Girl who succeeds. From that day forward, the 
snail has carried the water bottle on its back and leaves bits of 
moisture on its trail as a reminder of the one who brought water 
to the earth. The cadence and language of the text is traditional in 
style, and the colorful illustrations support the text superbly. 

3.151 Kellogg, Steven (1997). The Three Little Pigs. New York: Morrow 
Junior Books. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-688-08731-0. Picture Book. (See 14.29) 

3.152 Ketteman, Helen (1997). Bubba the Cowboy Prince: A Fractured 
Texas Tale. Illustrated by James Warhola. New York: Scholastic. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-590-25506-1. Picture Book. (See 14.6) 

3.153 Kurtz, Jane (1996). Miro in the Kingdom of the Sun. Illustrated 
by David Frampton. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-395-69181-8. Picture Book. 

In this Inca tale from Peru, Kurtz substitutes Miro, an independent 
heroine, in place of the hero who searches for the healing waters of 
a mythical lake. The lake is protected by fearsome creatures that 
have prevented many brave young men from reaching the magic 
water. The woodcuts by Frampton, striking and bold, convey the 
terror of the heroine's quest by visually contrasting the diminutive 
Miro against the immense creatures who guard the lake. 

3.154 Lasky, Kathryn (1997). Hercules: The Man, the Myth, the Hero. 
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-786-80329-0. 
Picture Book. 

Hercules tells his own story in this book filled with daring adven- 
tures, heroics, and tragedies typical of mythology. The paintings 
that illustrate the story depict action-filled fight scenes and fright- 
ening beasts and goddesses. Children who crave superhero action 
will appreciate this book. 

3.155 Lewis, Paul Owen (1997). Frog Girl. Hillsboro, OR: Beyond 
Words. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-582-46003-5. Picture Book. 

Lewis, a native of Seattle, Washington, is well versed in the leg- 
ends and stories of the Haida, Tlingit, and other tribal settlements 
of the Pacific Northwest. Frog Girl, the heroine of the story, passes 




.- S' 



133 



108 



Exploring Our Past 



through the rites of passage, separation, initiation, and return 
when she is called to an adventure in a parallel world inhabited 
by frogs. This tightly woven story is supported by authentically 
detailed illustrations and large-print text. 

3.156 Malotki, Ekkehart (1996). The Magic Hummingbird. Illustrated 
by Michael Lacapa. Santa Fe, NM: Kiva. 40 pp. ISBN: 1-885772- 
0401. Chapter Book. 

This Hopi folktale tells of the people's struggle to survive after 
four years of drought. A young boy and his sister are abandoned 
in their village as their parents go elsewhere for food. The boy 
crafts a hummingbird, and the bird magically comes to life. 
Lacapa, an Apache, uses designs found in southwestern baskets 
and pottery. His colors and stylized kachinas fill the pages with 
geometric shapes and warm southwestern colors. See also 
Kristina Rodanas' Dragonfly's Tale for a related story of two Zuni 
children left behind but rewarded by the Corn Maidens. 

Rodanas, Kristina (1991). Dragonfly's Tale. New York: 

Clarion. 29 pp. ISBN: 0-395-57003-4. Picture Book. 

3.157 Martin, Rafe (1997). The Eagle's Gift. Illustrated by Tatsuro Kiuchi. 
New York: Putnam. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22923-X. Picture Book. 

In this retelling of an Inuit tale. Marten agrees to learn what 
Mother Eagle can teach and joyfully learns to sing, dance, and tell 
stories. When he is released, he builds a feast hall for his people, 
and they also learn the joy of celebrating with others through 
music and story. Rich oil paintings realistically portray both the 
warm and cool settings of this traditional tale. 

3.158 Max, Jill, editor (1997). Spider Spins a Story: Fourteen Legends 
from Native America. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising Moon. 63 pp. ISBN: 0- 
87358-611-5. Chapter Book. 

This collection of legends about Spider includes stories from 
Kiowa, Tewa, Zuni, Wiyat, Osage, Muskogee, Navajo, Achomawi, 
Cherokee, Hopi, Cheyenne, and Lakota nations. Spider represents 
many things, including a mentor, a trickster, a helpful ally, and a 
worker of miracles. Elders and tribal members tell most of the leg- 
ends. Each story includes good documentation and biographies 
of each author and illustrator. Five Native American artists have 
provided colorful and detailed illustrations for each legend. 



ERIC 




134 



Cultural Traditions 



109 



3.159 McDonald, Megan (1997). Tundra Mouse: A Storyknifing Tale. 
Illustrated by S. D. Schindler. New York: Orchard. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
531-30047-1. Picture Book. 

Yup'ik Eskimo story of two sisters out on the tundra collecting 
cotton-grass roots. At the urging of her younger sister, Elena 
tells the tale of Tundra Mouse through the Yup'ik tradition of 
storyknifing — an oral telling of a story that coincides with a pic- 
torial representation drawn on the ground with an implement. 
The story provides glimpses of Yup'ik Eskimos' modern life, tra- 
ditions, family structure, and respect for nature. Tundra Mouse is 
similar in theme to City Mouse, Country Mouse. 

Wallner, John (1987). City Mouse, Country Mouse & 

Two More Tales from Aesop. New York: Scholastic. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-590-41155-1. Picture Book. 

3.160 Miranda, Anne (1997). To Market, to Market. Illustrated by Janet 
Stevens. New York: Harcourt Brace. 36 pp. ISBN: 0-152-00035-6. 
Picture Book. 

A shopping expedition begins with the nursery rhyme, "To mar- 
ket, to market, to buy a fat pig. Home again, home again, jiggity 
jig!" This is the story of an endearing older shopper whose house 
fills with the unruly livestock that she brings from the market. As 
she and her home succumb to the ensuing chaos, she finally has 
an idea. She and her new acquisitions return together to the mar- 
ket to buy the ingredients for . . . vegetable soup! While the story- 
line is worthy and the rhyme fun to read, the real gift of this book 
is the truly incredible illustrations, which elicit laughter from chil- 
dren and adults alike. 

3.161 Nolan, Dennis (1997). Androcles and the Lion. New York: Har- 
court Brace. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-152-03355-6. Picture Book. 

Nolan retells and illustrates this 2,000-year-old tale of unusual 
friendship between a man and a lion. Androcles is a runaway 
slave who would rather feel the burn of the sun on his back than 
the sting of his master's whip. He takes shelter in a cave, where he 
meets a lion with a thorn in his paw. Androcles helps the lion, and 
his kindness is repaid years later when he and the lion meet again 
in the Roman arena. Their happy reunion convinces the spectators 
that both Androcles and the lion should be free at last. The tawny 




r, 



135 



110 



Exploring Our Past 



hues of the illustrations make the handsome lion and desert set- 
ting come alive. 

3.162 Paterson, Katherine (1998). Parzival: The Quest for the Grail 
Knight. New York: Lodestar. 127 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67579-5. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 14.53) 

3.163 Peterson, Julierme (1996). Caterina, the Clever Farm Girl: A Tale 
from Italy. Illustrated by Enzo Giannini. New York: Dial. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-8037-1181-6. Picture Book. 

In this refreshing Tuscan folktale, Caterina is invited to be the 
king's bride. Unfortunately, Caterina's wit and spunkiness pose 
problems for the king, as she often disagrees with his decisions. 
Finally the king orders her to "Take from the palace that which is 
most dear to you." Much to the king's surprise, he awakens in her 
bed on the farm! This is a satisfying tale with an appealing hero- 
ine. Giannini's ink and watercolor illustrations reflect the architec- 
ture and landscapes of Tuscany. 

3.164 Ramirez, Michael Rose (1998). The Legend of the Hummingbird. 
Illustrated by Margaret Sanfilippo. New York: Mondo. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-57255-232-8. Picture Book. 

Ramirez loved to hear his grandmother's stories about Puerto Rico, 
including the legend about how the himruningbird came to be. 
Brightly colored watercolor illustrations compliment the text. Older 
readers may be interested in this story for its parallels to Romeo and 
Juliet. The closing pages include information and photographs 
about the history and people of Puerto Rico, as weU as a brief discus- 
sion of transformation tales across indigenous American cultures. 

3.165 Rosen, Michael J. (1998). The Dog Who Walked with God. Illus- 
trated by Stan Fellows. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick: 40 pp. 
ISBN: 07636-0470-4. Picture Book. 

Based on a creation myth of the Kato (a small group of Athapakan 
from northern California), this story explains that our world 
emerged from such a dark, empty, watery place that even the Cre- 
ator needed a companion before setting foot on it. An author note 
defines the style of the poetic, repetitive text as similar to tradi- 
tional tellings recorded by anthropologists in 1906. Exquisite 
watercolor and pencil illustrations support the text well, and rein- 
force the importance of and respect for each creature and object 



Cultural Traditions 



111 



on Earth. The disappointingly small size of the illustrations limits 
the impact of the book. 

3.166 Schami, Rafik (1996). Fatima and the Dream Thief. Illustrated by 
Els Cools and Oliver Streich. New York: North-South. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-55858-653-9. Picture Book. (See 14.35) 

3.167 Stanley, Diane (1997). Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter. New York: 
Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14328-8. Picture Book. 

Rumpelstiltskin's daughter is definitely not intimidated by the 
greedy king, who demands that she spin straw into gold. Because 
she never learned the trick, she must use her intelligence to out- 
smart the ruler. This folktale emphasizes a clever female protago- 
nist, and is a story with a twist. Children will love comparing this 
determined daughter to her mother in the original story. 

3.168 Taylor, Harriet Peck (1997). When Bear Stole the Chinook: A Sik- 
sika Tale. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-10947-8. Picture Book. 

Illustrated with beautiful borders and detailed illustrations, this is 
a tale of how a poor Native American boy and his animal friends 
journey to the lodge of the Great Bear to release the chinook — the 
warm wind that melts the snow and brings spring. This tale also 
explains why bears hibernate. This well-researched tale is 
adapted from Fraser's The Bear Who Stole the Chinook: Tales from the 
Blackfoot. The Siksika, which means black-footed people, live in 
what is now southern Alberta. 

Fraser, Frances (1991). The Bear Who Stole the Chi- 
nook: Tales from the Blackfoot. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. 144 pp. ISBN: 0-295-97101-0. Chapter 
Book, (out of print) 

3.169 Van Laan, Nancy (1997). Shingebiss: An Ojibwe Legend. Illus- 
trated by Betsy Bowen. New York: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-395-82745-0. Picture Book. 

Shingebiss, a Little merganser duck, lived on the banks of Lake 
Superior. His planning and work enable him always to have plenty 
to eat in all seasons. One particularly bitter winter. Winter Maker 
was determined to prove more powerful than the duck. Despite 
great winds and cold, which froze the lake solid, Shingebiss refused 



■137 



112 



Exploring Our Past 



to see winter as an enemy. This Ojibwe legend keeps aUve the belief 
of its people that nature is a teacher, and Shingebiss — the spirit 
teacher who can change forms at any time — represents the impor- 
tance of conservation, resourcefulness, and perseverance. The bold 
woodblock prints add to the animation of Van Laan's narration. A 
glossary and author's note invite readers to imderstand the nature 
of the Ojibwe stories that have been passed down. 

3.170 Walking Turtle, Eagle (1997). Full Moon Stories: Thirteen Native 
American Legends. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. 47 
pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0225-1. Picture Book. 

Eagle Walking Turtle provides a written version of thirteen North- 
ern Arapaho legends that were told to him by his Grandpa Iron. 
Within each story, he shows the oral traditions of his family as he 
weaves together family memories, traditional customs, and the 
legend itself. Each story teaches lessons of the balance that exists 
in nature, and of the harmony that humans should have with the 
world around them. 

3.171 Yoimg, Ed (1998). The Lost Horse: A Chinese Folktale. San Diego: 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201016-5. 
Picture Book. 

This retelling of Chinese folklore enhances our realization that 
things always happen for a reason. Events that first appear good 
may turn out to be bad, and other events that appear bad may 
turn out to be good. Readers learn they must take every day as it 
comes, and make the most of every situation without concern for 
what the future will bring. The pastel-and-watercolor collage help 
the story come alive. Good for younger readers. 

Cultural Practices and Celebrations 

See also the section entitled Family Experiences through the Ages in 

chapter 4, "Families." 

Primary Reviews 

3.172 Ancona, George (1998). Fiesta Fireworks. New York: Lothrop, Lee 
& Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14817-4. Picture Book. 

Fiesta Fireworks depicts the celebration of San Juan de Dios, the 
patron saint of Tul tepee, Mexico. Readers follow Caren Reyes 
Urban, whose grandfather is a master fireworks maker, through a 




Cultural Traditions 



113 



day filled with delicious looking food that makes the children 
hungry, and colorful preparations for the fireworks explosions 
and parade. This book connects children to celebrations in their 
own lives. A student named Chris felt that this celebration 
reminded him of the Fourth of July in the United States, Jacqui 
was reminded of the local street fair because of the papier mache 
and food, and Briana said it reminded her of an art show. Sofia 
mentioned that she was like Caren because she too covered her 
ears during fireworks. The photographs are full of rich, cultural 
details that create good discussion opportunities. There is an 
author's note at the end of the book explaining more about the 
history of fireworks and of San Juan de Dios. 

3.173 Ancona, George (1998). Let's Dance! New York: Morrow Junior 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-16211-8. Picture Book. (See 11.57) 

3.174 Blue, Rose (1997). Good Yontif: A Picture Book of the Jewish 
Year. Illustrated by Lyrme Feldman. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0142-9. Picture Book. 

Good Yontif is a wonderfully rich picture book of a calendar year of 
Jewish celebrations. Conceived by Blue, the story is actually told 
through beautiful color illustrations by Lynne Feldman. Through 
Feldman's eyes, the reader is invited into the home of a Jewish 
family to enjoy the celebrations and accompanying rituals. From 
Rosh Hashanah at the beginning of the new year to the last cele- 
bration of Shabbat, the illustrator depicts the importance of fam- 
ily, tradition, and celebration in the life of eight-year-old Jacob. 
Preschool and elementary students who look closely at the paint- 
ings are bound to come up with rich similarities to their own fam- 
ilies. The endearing role of the grandmother and the birth of a 
new baby offer much opportunity for discussion. Each holiday 
page is named in both English and Hebrew. Blue completes this 
wordless book by giving additional background information on 
the holidays in the author's notes. 

3.175 Carlson, Lori Marie (1998). Sol a Sol: Bilingual Poems. Illustrated by 
Emily Lisker. Translated by Lyda Aponte de ZackUn. New York: 
Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4373-X. Picture Book. (See 10.52) 

3.176 Colon-Vila, Lillian (1998). Salsa. Illustrated by Roberta Collier- 
Morales. Houston, TX: Pihata. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55885-220-4. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 11.22) 



139 



114 



Exploring Our Past 



3.177 Erlbach, Arlene (1997). Sidewalk Games around the World. Illus- 
trated by Sharon Lane Holm. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0008-2. Picture Book. (See 12.42) 

3.178 Johnston, Tony (1997). Day of the Dead. Illustrated by Jeanette 
Winter. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-15-222863-2. 
Picture Book. 

Day of the Dead is a wonderful way to acquaint children with the 
Mexican custom of El Dia de los Muertos, celebrated on Novem- 
ber 2. Traditionally in Mexico and many Hispanic/Latino com- 
mxmities in the United States, families visit the cemetery to spend 
time with the souls of departed loved ones. This petite and color- 
fully illustrated text takes the reader along as one family prepares 
for their annual visit to the tombs of deceased relatives. As tradi- 
tional foods are prepared, anxious children beg for a little taste. 
"Esperense," they are told by the different family members 
preparing tasty tamales, mole, empanadas, and pan de muerto. 
"Wait," they are urged by relatives purchasing Calaveras de azucar 
and gathering flowers to take along on the night-long vigil at the 
graveyard. The brilliant acrylic illustrations rendered on a black 
backgroxmd were particularly appealing to students. Each page is 
widely bordered with images of traditional foods or symbols of 
the Day of the Dead. "The borders really add a lot to the book," 
remarked Allison (age eleven). 

3.179 King, Elizabeth (1998). Quinceanera: Celebrating Fifteen. New 
York: Dutton. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45638-4. Chapter Book. 

Elizabeth King has done an excellent job describing the biggest 
and most important celebration in the life of Hispanic girls: their 
fifteenth birthday. The book describes the quinceaheras of two 
girls — one from El Salvador and the other from Mexico — 
although both celebrations take place in California, against the 
backdrop of historic Spanish missions. A well-integrated text 
allows readers to vicariously experience the two quinceaheras 
while learning about the history of the celebration and the various 
forms it takes in different countries of origin. The presentation of 
King's vibrant photographs gives the book an albumlike quality, 
full of remembrances. Even the book jacket resembles a matted 
portrait. Middle-school girls like Xochitl, an eighth-grade student, 
enjoyed reading the book and recognized its practical side as well: 
"I shared the book with my mother and she liked it because it has 






140 



Cultural Traditions 



115 



ideas on how to organize my quinceanera." This book can be used 
for studies related to the themes of family, celebrations, and reli- 
gion, among others. 

3.180 Kleven, Elisa (1996). Hooray, a Pinatal/jViva! jUna pinata! New 
York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45606-8 
(English) /0-525-45606-6 (Spanish). Picture Book. (See 6.22) 

3.181 Kroll, Virginia (1998). Faraway Drums. Illustrated by Floyd 
Cooper. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-50449-1. 
Picture Book. (See 14.8) 

3.182 Lankford, Mary D. (1996). Jacks around the World. Illustrated by 
Karen Dugan. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0- 
688-13708-3. Picture Book. (See 12.43) 

3.183 Lomas Garza, Carmen (1996). In My Family/En mi familia. 
Translated by Francisco X. Alarcon. San Francisco: Children's 
Book. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-89239-138-3. Picture Book. (See 4.14) 

3.184 Luenn, Nancy (1998). A Gift for Abuelita: Celebrating the Day 
of the Dead/Un regalo para Abuelita: En celebracion del Dfa de 
los Muertos. Illustrated by Robert Chapman. Translated by Mario 
Lamo-Jimenez. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
87358-688-3. Picture Book. (See 4.15) 

3.185 Mora, Pat (1996). Confetti: Poems for Children. Illustrated by 
Ervrique Sanchez. New York: Lee & Low. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-880000- 
25-3. Picture Book. (See 10.53) 

3.186 Normandin, Christine, editor (1997). Echoes of the Elders: The 
Stories and Paintings of Chief Lelooska. New York: DK Ink. 40 
pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2455-X. Picture Book. 

Stunning illustrations of Northwest Native American art abound 
in this lavishly illustrated oversized book. Chief Lelooska was a 
master performer of Kwakiutl oral tradition and storytelling. Five 
traditional myths and legends are retold here with the intention of 
preserving their authenticity. Stories incorporate many traditional 
storytelling elements used in Native American tales, and accu- 
rately reflect the mythical traditions of the region. The author/ 
storyteller is an adopted member of the Kwakiutl tribe, and was 
known as a professional storyteller for over forty years. A compact 




141 



116 



Exploring Our Past 



disc is included so that the reader can hear the author's actual 
words, cadence, arid distinct pronunciations. Retellings on the 
compact disc do not duplicate the printed text; there are slight 
variations, serving as a reminder that stories evolve and change in 
their retellings. This was reviewed favorably in the School Library 
Journal and chosen as one of its Best Books for 1997. The stories 
revolve around common Northwest Coast themes such as the 
raven, loon, beaver, and thunderbirds. 

3.187 Ross, Kathy (1997). The Jewish Holiday Craft Book. Illustrated 
by Melinda Levine. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 96 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7613-0055-4. Picture Book. (See 12.51) 

3.188 Soto, Gary (1997). Snapshots from the Wedding. Illustrated by 
Stephanie Garcia. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399- 
22808-X. Picture Book. (See 4.25) 

3.189 Thomassie, Tynia (1996). Mimi's Tutu. Illustrated by Jan Spivey 
Gilchrist. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-44020-9. 
Picture Book. (See 11.60) 

Secondary Reviews 

3.190 Adoff, Arnold (1997). Love Letters. Illustrated by Lisa Desimini. 
New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590-48478-8. Picture Book. 
(See 10.23) 

3.191 Alarcon, Francisco X. (1997). Laughing Tomatoes and Other 
Spring Poems/Jitomates risuenos y otros poemas de primavera. 
Illustrated by Maya Christina Gonzalez. San Francisco: Children's 
Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-139-1. Picture Book. (See 10.60) 

3.192 Bartone, Elisa (1996). American Too. Illustrated by Ted Lewin. 
New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13279- 
0. Picture Book. 

During the time of European immigration to America, Rosie lives 
on a street in New York that has become much like her native Italy. 
When she is chosen to be the queen of the feast of San Gennaro, 
Rosie surprises everyone by dressing as the Statue of Liberty to 
show she is modem and American too. This break from tradition 
helps her family and community recognize and celebrate the 
American dream they have moved across the ocean to find. 



142 



Cultural Traditions 



117 



3.193 Bateson-Hill, Margaret, (1998). Shota and the Star Quilt. Illus- 
trated by Christine Fowler. New York: Zero To Ten. 32 pp. ISBN: 1- 
84089-021-5. Picture Book. 

Interweaving both contemporary and traditional life experiences, 
this story focuses on the universal theme of goodness, love, and 
friendship overcoming evil, power, and greed. Shota — a Lakota 
girl who has moved from the reservation to Minneapolis — and 
her friend Esther visit Shota's grandmother at Pine Ridge for the 
armual powwow. Just before departing, a letter comes to Shota's 
parents saying that their apartment will be destroyed to make 
way for more office buildings. During the visit, Shota learns of the 
significance of the star pattern on her own quilt, and her grand- 
mother helps the girls make a quilt symbolizing the love within 
their neighborhood. A complete Lakota translation accompanies 
the English text in this dual-language book. Both instructions for 
creating a star collage and cultural insights about the Lakota peo- 
ple and the star quilt enhance this book. 

3.194 Bunting, Eve (1997). Moonstick: The Seasons of the Sioux. Illus- 
trated by John Sandford. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-06-024804-1. Picture Book. 

Changes come both in nature and in the life of the Sioux people 
with each new moon of the Sioux year. Detailed, researched paint- 
ings show notches being made in a boy's counting stick, and give 
a glimpse into the tribe's way of living. Throughout the book, 
changes of seasons are echoed by changes in a boy as he journeys 
toward manhood. The book ends with the man reflecting on how 
his life and that of his tribe have changed. 

3.195 Bunting, Eve (1997). The Pumpkin Fair. New York: Clarion. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-395-70060-4. Picture Book. 

Filled with delightfully bright and humorous illustrations. The 
Pumpkin Fair is a story of beauty showing from the inside out. 
Tightly hugging the pumpkin she has grown herself, a little girl 
enters the pumpkin fair where she is awed by the many sights. 
When she wins the ribbon for "The best-loved pumpkin any- 
where!" the child exclaims, "How did they know? How did they 
see the way I felt inside of me?" This book is a wonderful autumn 
read-aloud book. 




143 



118 



Exploring Our Past 



3.196 Chin-Lee, Cynthia (1997). A Is for Asia. Illustrated by Yumi Heo. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30011-0. Picture Book. 
(See 7 . 32 ) 

3.197 Demi (1997). Happy New Year! Kung-hsi Fa-ts'ai! Illustrated by 
Demi. New York: Crown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-517-70957-0. Picture 
Book. 

Chinese New Year erupts in celebration from the pages of this 
information-packed book. All facets of the holiday are described, 
from the preparations tlrrough the Lantern Festival. Demi's char- 
acteristic tiny figures illustrate a text that offers definitions and 
explanations of the history, symbols, and rituals associated with 
the holiday. Readers of all ages will find this lively, colorful pic- 
ture book a useful reference tool. 

3.198 Dolphin, Laurie (1997). Our Journey from Tibet: Based on a True 
Story. Photographs by Nancy Jo Johnson. New York: Dutton Chil- 
dren's Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45577-9. Sophisticated Picture 
Book. 

Three young girls leave their homeland of Tibet to obtain not only 
religious freedom, but also the freedom to openly celebrate their 
Tibetan traditions and customs. They travel to nearby India, 
where they begin life anew. This is an extraordinary story of over- 
coming ones fears in search for freedom. The book contains a let- 
ter from His Holiness the Dalai Lama, as well as an afterword 
from Rinchen K. Choegyal, Minister-in-Charge of Education. 
Expressive photography adds richness to this unforgettable story. 

3.199 Erlbach, Arlene (1997). Happy Birthday, Everywhere. Illustrated 
by Sharon L. Holm. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7613-0007-4. Chapter Book. 

Birthdays are celebrated differently all over the world, and this 
book explores the traditions from nineteen countries. Children 
can learn new games — such as the clothesline game from Russia 
or the sheep and hyena game from Sudan — and try recipes like 
fairy bread from Australia and taartjes from the Netherlands. Spe- 
cial crafts are sprinkled throughout the book, one that will appeal 
to children of all ages. 

3.200 Goble, Paul (1997). Love Flute. New York: Aladdin. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-689-81683-9. Picture Book. 



144 



Cultural Traditions 



119 



The flute, which appears in love stories in many traditions, is the 
vehicle for a shy young man in this story to express his feelings to 
the young girl whom he has adored from afar. The author gives a 
simple description of the courting ritual practiced by many 
Native American tribes. The colorful and detailed illustrations are 
in Goble's traditional style, in which he only shows profiles of the 
characters' faces out of respect for Native American people. 

3.201 Hausman, Gerald (1996). Eagle Boy: A Traditional Navajo Leg- 
end. Illustrated by Cara Moser and Barry Moser. New York: 
HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06-021100-8. Picture Book. 

Hausman retells the story of the first Navajo traditional healing 
ceremony — the Eagle Way. A young boy dreams of flying with the 
eagles and is taken by Father Eagle to the Eagle Chief to learn the 
sacred dances and healing songs. After escaping the trickery of 
coyote and proving worthy of his new name, he returns to his 
home and grows up to be a great medicine man. 

3.202 Hickox, Rebecca (1997). Zorro and Quwi: Tales of a Trickster 
Guinea Pig. Illustrated by Kim Howard. New York: Bantam Dou- 
bleday Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-440-41183-1. 
Picture Book. 

Zorro and Quwi is a colorful picture book in the tradition of trick- 
ster stories from Peru. The central character, a guinea pig named 
Quwi, continually outsmarts a determined fox named Zorro. 
Splashy, bold, and vibrant colors fill double page spreads by illus- 
trator Kim Howard, enhancing the silliness and frivolity of the 
story. Despite the gratuitous use of a few common Spanish words, 
such as "Caramba," fourth graders loved hearing about Quwi's 
adventures as they attempted to predict how the guinea pig 
would get the better of the fox. Young readers enjoyed Zorro's 
gullibility as well as Quwi's cleverness. They giggled, for exam- 
ple, when Quwi — in order to marry a large (but rich) bride — 
tricks the fox into taking his place in a cage, and they howled with 
laughter when Zorro mistakes a bald head for a rock. 

3.203 Hobbs, Will (1997). Beardream. Illustrated by Jill Kastner. New 
York: Atheneum Books for Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
31973-8. Picture Book. 

The Bear Dance is still practiced as a spring ritual among the Ute 
people of Colorado. Will Hobbs pays tribute to the story behind 




•til' 



■I •, -r 

X 



145 



120 



Exploring Our Past 



this ritual in the beautifully told and illustrated Beardream. Short 
Tail, a young boy, becomes concerned that the Great Bear, 
endearingly referred to as "The One Going Around in the 
Woods," "old Honey Paws," and "Grandfather," has not yet 
made an appearance to welcome the arrival of spring. Short Tail 
goes in search of "Grandfather" and rouses him from a deep 
"beardream" of spring. In coming to awaken "Grandfather," 
Short Tail has acted respectfully, and he is rewarded with an invi- 
tation not only to see the bears dancing but to "dance with us to 
celebrate the end of winter." Short Tail joins the bear celebration, 
his own "beardream." He is then instructed to go back and tell 
his people how to do the bears' dance. Short Tail's people listen 
and learn, and "Grandfather" is assured that his instructions 
have been followed. 

3.204 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1997). Potlatch: A Tsimshian Celebra- 
tion. Photographs by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday 
House. 32 pp. ISBN; 0-8234-1290-3. Picture Book. 

Potlatch shows the importance of traditions and family cultures, 
as well as how the community works together to plan the four- 
day celebration. A thirteen-year-old boy narrates this story of a 
potlatch celebrated by the Tsimshian living in Metlakatla, Alaska. 
Beautiful photographs illustrate pottery, the interior of homes, 
and gifts being made. Also included in the book are maps of the 
area, historical photographs, and a glossary of terms. 

3.205 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1998). Celebrating Chinese New Year. 
Illustrated by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1393-4. Picture Book. 

Chinese Americans celebrate the Chinese New Year by participat- 
ing in a variety of traditions. Through actual photographs of one 
Chinese American family, readers learn how the Chinese prepare 
for the celebration, honor their ancestors, instill Chinese language 
and culture in their young, and prepare traditional dishes that 
symbolize prosperity, good luck, and rebirth. A glossary of terms 
defines and describes each Chinese tradition to help readers 
understand the significance of the Chinese New Year. 

3.206 Johnston, Tony (1996). The Magic Maguey. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-250988-7. Picture Book. 



146 



Cultural Traditions 



121 



The entire pueblo loves the giant maguey plant that grows near 
Miguel's Mexican adobe house. Yet the landowner plans to cut it 
down. Miguel's resourcefulness saves the plant. This story is told 
in cut paper, watercolors, and pastels. The book's message of love 
and community is suitable for all ages. This book lends itself to 
rich discussions of cultural differences and similarities, conserva- 
tion and recycling, and the needs of community over the needs of 
the individual. 

3.207 Kalman, Bobbie (1997). Celebrating the Powwow. New York: 
Crabtree. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-86505-640-4. Picture Book. 

Powwows are a family affair. Dancing regalia are designed for 
specific dances, and are the products of hours of embroidering, 
sewing, beading, and gathering. All family members may partici- 
pate, from the smallest child to the most respected and experi- 
enced elders. Most significant is that powwows have blended 
traditional format with modern ideas, and serve as a means to 
ensure the preservation and sharing of cultural activities. 

3.208 Kudler, David (1997). The Seven Gods of Luck. Illustrated by 
Linda Finch. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
78830-7. Picture Book. (See 14.9) 

3.209 Lee, Huy Voun (1995). In the Park. New York: Henry Holt. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4128-1. Picture Book. (See 11.42) 

3.210 Moreillon, Judi (1997). Singing down the Rain. Illustrated by 
Michael Chiago. Santa Fe, NM: Kiva. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-885772- 
07-6. Picture Book. 

With rhythmical text, the author captures the sense of oneness 
and respect for nature that underscores the beliefs of the desert 
people of southern Arizona. For centuries, the Tohono O'odam 
(also known as the Papago) have relied on the summer rains to 
sustain their crops. To ensure that the rains will fall again, the peo- 
ple gather annually to participate in a very special ritual: the 
saguaro wine ceremony. Instructions for presenting this story in a 
Reader's Theater format are included. 

3.211 Mott, Evelyn Clarke (1996). Dancing Rainbows: A Pueblo Boy's 
Story. New York: Cobblehill. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-65216-7. Pic- 
ture Book. 




147 



122 



Exploring Our Past 



By focusing on the Tewa celebration of the Feast of San Juan, Mott 
highlights the tribal preparations and family activities that pre- 
cede the yearly event. What is particularly pleasing about this text 
is the glimpse of contemporary family life. Andy Garcia has 
devoted his life to teaching tribal dances and participating in tra- 
ditional ceremonies, and the text and photographs show these tra- 
ditions being passed on to his grandson. Curt. To the Tewa, 
dances are a form of prayer that give strength and power. Some 
political and historical background is provided, including U.S. 
government restrictions placed on Tewa ceremonies. An abun- 
dance of color photographs and limited text make this a useable 
resource for young readers. 

3.212 Nichols, Richard (1998). A Story to Tell: Traditions of a Tlingit 
Community. Illustrated by Bambi D. Kraus. Minneapolis: Lemer. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2661-1. Picture Book. 

This beautiful photo essay, written and illustrated by Native 
Americans, invites readers to learn about the culture and history 
of the Tlingit people. Marissa, an eleven-year-old Tlingit girl, 
takes a trip with her grandmother to her family's ancestral home 
in Kake, a small Alaskan village. The easy-to-read text and exten- 
sive research by Nichols about Tlingit customs makes this book 
an excellent resource for young readers. The book is part of the 
We Are Still Here: Native Americans Today series (see 3.221 for 
other titles in the series). 

3.213 Philip, Neil (1996). Earth Always Endures: Native American 
Poems. Illustrated by Edward S. Curtis. New York: Viking. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-86873-6. Chapter Book. (See 10.56) 

3.214 Rendon, Marcie R. (1996). Powwow Summer: A Family Cele- 
brates the Circle of Life. Photographs by Cheryl Walsh Bellville. 
Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-986-7 (hard- 
cover)/ 1-57505-011-0 (paperback). Chapter Book. 

This contemporary book is about the Anishinabe, also known as 
the Ojibwe or Chippewa. The book is a chronology of several days 
in the Downwind family. Photographs show the private life of 
tribe members, and the preparation for a present-day powwow. 
The significance of family is brought out through discussions of 
how the family cares for family members, the larger community, 
and foster children. 



148 



Cultural Traditions 



123 



3.215 Purdy, Carol (1997). Nesuya's Basket. Illustrated by Paulette Liv- 
ers Lambert. Boulder, CO: Roberts Rinehart. 110 pp. ISBN: 1- 
57098-087-X. Chapter Book. 

Nesuya's Basket informs young readers about the culture of the 
Maidu, and exposes them to Nesuya's personal struggle to live up 
to the social expectations of her family and people. The Maidu 
culture revolves around a cycle of elaborate dance ceremonies, 
and these are woven into the story. This book is part of a series 
developed by the Council for Indian Education for use by Native 
American children. The author's authentic descriptions of village 
life and cultural ceremonies provide a powerful portrayal of the 
Maidu in the 1840s. 

3.216 Rosales, Melodye (1996). 'Twas the Night B'fore Christmas: An 
African-American Version. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
590-73944-1. Picture Book. 

This beautifully illustrated book depicts the Christmas holiday on 
a Southern plantation near the turn of the century. The story takes 
place on Christmas Eve at the Wetherbys' house as Dad quietly 
observes St. Nick going about his work. Readers experience the 
excitement of Christmas through the eyes of children and their 
father. The Southern dialect adds beauty and charm to this 
glimpse of American culture. 

3.217 Russell, Ching Yeung (1997). Moon Festival. Illustrated by 
Christopher Zhong-Yuan Zhang. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397-596-3. Picture Book. 

A Chinese girl celebrates with her extended family the traditional 
autumn holiday called the Moon Festival. Although it is a time of 
reunion, her parents are far away and she prays to Chang O, the 
mythical beauty who lives in the moon, that they will soon return. 
The sights, sounds, and smells of the celebration radiate from richly 
colored oil paintings. The customs of the Moon Festival might 
inspire young readers to further research this Chinese holiday. 

3.218 Silverman, Erica (1997). The Halloween House. New York: Far- 
rar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-33270-3. Picture 
Book. 

It's Halloween night, and two escaped convicts running from the 
police find refuge in what they think is a safe, abandoned house. In 



er|c 



149 



124 



Exploring Our Past 



actuality, the house is filled with aU kinds of scary creatures, includ- 
ing vampires, squirming worms, swooping bats, and chasing mon- 
sters. Kindergartner Colin loved this predictable book, which is a 
takeoff of the popular counting book. Over in the Meadow. 

Langstaff, John (1989). Over in the Meadow. Illustrated 
by Feodor Rojankosky. New York: Harcourt Brace. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-1567-0500-1. Picture Book. (Originally pub- 
lished in 1957 by Harcourt Brace with a musical score for 
voice and piano by Marshall Woodbridge.) 

3.219 Walton, Darwin M. (1998). Kwanzaa. Austin, XX: Raintree Steck- 
Vaughn. 21 pp. ISBN: 0-8172-5561-3. Picture Book. 

Kwanzaa is written especially for elementary students to enjoy. 
This book explains why and how this holiday is celebrated, fea- 
turing beautiful color photographs of each part of Kwanzaa. Chil- 
dren will learn that Kwanzaa is a very recent nonreligious holiday 
that began in the United States in 1966, and is celebrated by many 
people of African heritage who live in America. 

3.220 Warren, Scott (1997). Desert Dwellers: Native People of the 
American Southwest. San Francisco: Chronicle. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8118-0534-4. Chapter Book. 

This resource is a useful overview of the Native peoples who 
inhabit the southwestern region of the United States. Brief histori- 
cal information introduces each group, and then specific cultural 
distinctions are discussed. Dances, festivals, and creation myths 
for some tribes are included, as well as contemporary portraits of 
the people as they live today. The easy-to-read text is accompa- 
nied by color photographs taken by the author. 

3.221 Yamane, Linda (1997). Weaving a California Tradition: A Native 
American Basketmaker. Photographs by Dugan Aguilar. Min- 
neapolis: Lerner. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2660-3. Picture Book. 

Yamane focuses on the importance of sustaining Native American 
culture and beliefs through the teaching and maintaining of tradi- 
tional cultural arts. This photographic essay chronicles Carly Tex, 
an eleven-year-old basketweaver and member of the Western 
Mono tribe of central California, as she learns the traditional steps 
taken by weavers for gathering and preparing materials, and 
designing and weaving baskets. Considerable information about 



r - /' 



150 



Cultural Traditions 



125 



the steps in basketmaking is given, and the detailed drawings 
help readers to understand this portion of the text. Readers not 
only learn about the Mono culture, but also about how contempo- 
rary life is adversely affecting their weaving as pollution and resi- 
dential development deplete the natural areas where traditionally 
used bushes and grasses grow. The book is part of the We Are Still 
Here: Native Americans Today series. 

Other books in the series include: 

Braine, Susan (1995). Drumbeat . . . Heartbeat: A Cele- 
bration of the Powwow. Minneapolis: Lemer. 48 pp. 

ISBN: 0-8225-2656-5. Picture Book. 

Roessel, Monty (1993). Kinaalda: A Navajo Girl Grows 
Up. Minneapolis: Lerner. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-9641-5. 
Picture Book. 

Roessel, Monty (1995). Songs From the Loom: A Navajo 
Girl Learns to Weave. Minneapolis: Lemer. 48 pp. ISBN: 
0-8225-9712-8. Picture Book. 

Swentzell, Rina (1993). Children of Clay: A Family of 
Pueblo Potters. Illustrated by Bill Steen. Minneapolis: 
Lerner. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-9627-X. Picture Book. 



151 




A. Twins!, Elaine Scott/Margaret Miller (4.22). B. A Pillow for My Mom, Charissa 
Sgouros/ Christine Ross (4.124). C. A Ride on Mother’s Back: A Day of Baby Carrying 
around the World, Emery & Durga Bernhard (4.110). D. Happy Adoption Day!, John 
McCutcheon/Julie Paschkis (4.69). 





152 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




4 Families 



Cathy Beck 
Anne O'Connor 

le archetypal family personified in the school reading materials of 



/^ears past — which consisted of Mom, Dad, three kids, a dog, and a 



:at — no longer fits the face of most contemporary families. Today 
children in our classrooms come from diverse family structures. They 
don't necessarily live in a home where Father knows best. Mother waxes 
floors in high heels and pearls as a juicy pot roast simmers in the oven 
for the evening's meal, and cookies and milk await the children's return 
from school. Today's children live in single-parent, divorced, blended, 
or traditional families. Today's children continue to grapple with issues 
surrounding sibling rivalry and finding one's identity within the family. 
Many of today's children are fortunate enough to grow up in loving, 
caring homes, regardless of their economic, social, or racial status. Many 
more children grow up in fragile family environments in which racism, 
drugs, violence, abuse, poverty, and neglect play a significant role. 
Other children grow up in families ravaged by war and political con- 
flicts. These families may be immigrants or refugees, but they are cer- 
tainly living under challenging circumstances. 

Slowly the publishing industry has responded to the changing 
faces of families and their circumstances by providing books that pres- 
ent more diverse family circumstances.The books in this section present 
two powerful images of families. Many of these books celebrate the best 
of what families can provide to young children: security, loving family 
members, respect for individual differences and talents, and support 
during important life stages and milestones. Other books help children 
and adults make sense of the social, political, and personal challenges 
facing today's families at home and abroad. As we considered the books 
to be included in this section, the following criteria emerged: 

1. The book had to be well written and offer the best of the writer's 
craft in the particular genre in which the story is being told. The 
books in this section represent contemporary realistic fiction, 
historical fiction, biography, poetry, fantasy, and nonfiction, 
and include both picture books and chapter books. 

2. The characters — whether real or fictional — had to be richly devel- 
oped and believable. We wanted books about characters that 




153 



128 



Families 



children would fall in love with, or from whom they would 
learn or find inspiration. To accomplish this, authors needed 
to show readers how characters overcame obstacles in their 
lives, and the role that family played in their lives. 

3. The book needed to represent a diverse view of families and their cir- 
cumstances. We attempted to create a balance between contem- 
porary and historical families, and family experiences that 
reflect the racial, cultural, economic, and social diversity 
found in our society. In addition, we wanted to include fami- 
lies living in the United States, families emigrating to the 
United States, and families living elsewhere in the world. 

4. The book needed to represent the diverse family structures reflected 
in our society. Many of the books in this chapter show children 
living in traditional, two-parent families. Other books 
include single-parent families, blended families, adoptive 
and foster families, multiracial families, and families with 
same-sex parents. 

5. Those books that included controversial issues had to deal with these 
issues in honest ways. Not all families live happily ever after, 
and simple solutions to complex problems rarely exist in our 
world. We wanted to include books in which children grap- 
pled in realistic ways with real-life internal issues (e.g., alco- 
holism, violence, drugs, abuse, or neglect) and external issues 
(e.g., racism, persecution, war, or natural disaster). We wanted 
books with believable characters who responded to these 
issues in believable ways. 

6. Those books that included controversial issues had to offer a sense of 
hope or options for personal action. We rejected books that 
offered simplistic "just say no" solutions (even if they had 
happy endings) in favor of books that honored the complex- 
ity of the challenges encountered (even if everything didn't 
turn out all right at the end). We looked for books that 
showed children and families with hope, courage, and deter- 
mination willing to take social action on behalf of themselves, 
their families, or others. 

7. Books had to have the potential to inspire children, families, and 
those who care about them. We wanted books that included suc- 
cess stories, stories of overcoming all odds, and stories that 
offered visions of what could be in the future. 

Most of the books included in this chapter do not meet all of these crite- 
ria. They do, however, meet enough of these criteria that we considered 
them worthy of inclusion in this chapter on families. 

The books in this chapter are organized around several themes or 
concepts that we often use when studying families and family issues 
with students. The first — and largest — section. Family Stories: Fiction, 




154 



Families 



129 



Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives, includes the stories families pass on 
from one generation to the next and stories about everyday families 
involved in the business of living together. In Family Experiences 
through the Ages, readers will find books about families from a broad 
range of historical time periods. These books provide insights into family 
life during these periods of history, but also provide demonstrations of 
how families might respond to today's challenges. The section entitled 
Changing Family Structures highlights those books that reflect the vari- 
ety of family structures found in today's society, as well as the changes 
that families encounter with the arrival of a new sibling or parent. Family 
stories, because they deal with the most intimate social structure, often 
deal as well with the most private and controversial topics. In Controver- 
sial Issues in Family Life, readers will find books that deal explicitly with 
the most troubling of family events and circumstances. These are the 
books that most often require mediation by a caring adult as children 
attempt to make sense of the characters' lives and their own. Some expe- 
riences are common to all families, and others reflect the particular cul- 
tural, political, and geographical setting in which the family lives. In the 
section entitled Family Experiences around the World, readers will find 
books that highlight the common threads among all families, as well as 
those that celebrate the differences that make each community and cul- 
ture unique. In Life Stages and Milestones, readers will find books that 
show families celebrating and mourning together as the cycle of life 
plays out. In the final section. Relationships with Others, books stress the 
importance of appreciating the uniqueness of individual family mem- 
bers who add to the richness of daily lives. 

Well-written books that show realistic families dealing with real- 
life issues — both positive and negative — can help teachers, parents, and 
children come to understand the changing face of today's families. 
These books can help children living in supportive environments 
develop understanding and empathy for those living under harsh cir- 
cumstances. In addition, these books can help children in fragile fami- 
lies make sense of their experiences, while creating visions of new 
possibilities. Considering the lives of families from the past can help all 
of us make sense of what families endure today, and help us to realize 
the important role that families play in supporting young children. In 
many of the books reflecting struggle within families, a coirunon thread 
running through their pages is a striking optimism that love can exist — 
and even flourish — despite the family milieu. These books show charac- 
ters growing stronger as they face and overcome their family's issues. 




155 



130 



Families 



We hope children, and the important adults in their lives, will find joy 
and inspiration in these books. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Remews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, 
and Personal Narratives 

Primary Reviews 

4.1 Ancona, George (1998). Barrio: Jose's Neighborhood. San Diego: 
Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201049-1. Picture Book. 

Famed writer-photographer George Ancona provides glimpses of 
San Francisco's Mission District through photos of a young boy's 
daily activities. This picture book of colorful, energetic photo- 
graphs shows a lively, active community that generates wonder 
and invites the viewer to compare and contrast his or her own 
community to that of young Jose Luis. Mission District — "El Bar- 
rio" to its residents — has sheltered various immigrants in its long 
past and now is predominantly Spanish speaking. As Jose is pho- 
tographed walking and playing in his neighborhood, brightly col- 
ored murals depicting the struggle of its many immigrants can be 
seen on the walls of an elementary school, a woman's center, 
churches, and on fences. These works of art illustrate the hard- 
ships of immigrants not only in their homeland, but also in this 
country. Family and neighborhood celebrations occur in the 
streets and in the schools, with participants from many cultures. 
Here is a community where Jose Luis' family can retain their tra- 
ditions and customs, yet be able to witness the practices of other 
cultures. Third grader Allison said, "1 like it because in our class- 
room we are studying our barrio and 1 think it is a great book to 
read." "It is almost the same as our barrio," said Marina, her class- 
mate. "1 like all the photos." 



156 



Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives 



131 



4.2 Brown, Ruth (1997). Cry Baby. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45902-2. Picture Book. (See 11.24) 

4.3 Browne, Anthony (1998). Voices in the Park. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2522-X. Picture Book. (See 20.52) 

4.4 Bunting, Eve (1996). Going Home. Illustrated by David Diaz. New 
York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-026296-6. Picture Book. 

A family of farm laborers is returning to their hometown in Mex- 
ico for the Christmas holidays. The children — Carlos, Nora, and 
Dolores — are unsure of why they are taking the long trip to La 
Perla, and why their parents keep saying that they are "going 
home." Carlos asks his father why they left La Perla, and his 
father explains that they left for better work opportunities and for 
their children's futures. The voice of Carlos describes the family's 
trip through Mexico, and the small towns, people, and animals 
they see on their way to La Perla. There the family has a joyous 
reunion with their relatives. The children recognize their parents' 
happiness on returning to their roots, and begin to understand the 
significance of their parents' sacrifice. The illustrations by award- 
wirming artist David Diaz use photographs of traditional Mexi- 
can clay figures, superimposed with Rivera-like paintings and 
enclosed within black decorative frames. The artist also has cre- 
ated an original font for the text. Young readers who live in a 
close-to-the-border community, and who routinely travel to visit 
with families in northern Mexico, identified with many aspects of 
this story. This book could be part of a text-set on families, 
migrant labor, or homecomings. (See also 20.1) 

4.5 Bunting, Eve (1997). Twinnies. Illustrated by Nancy Carpenter. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-291592-3. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Parents and siblings of multiple-birth children certainly will enjoy 
Eve Bunting's playful look at twins and their impact on the fam- 
ily. In Twinnies, big sister tells us that the worst thing about having 
twin sisters is that there are two of them. They need two of every- 
thing, they take up lots of space, and they're "twice as much 
work" for Mom. When the family goes out for a walk or goes to 
the beach, the twinnies get all the attention. Big sister laments the 
fact that the twins are girls and that she's no longer Daddy's spe- 
cial girl. But she finds out that the twinnies also bring lots of joy 



157 



132 



Families 



and laughter to the family, and that her special place in her par- 
ents' hearts is secure. Nancy Carpenter's oil paintings capture 
both the delights and challenges of raising twins. 

4.6 Curtis, Gavin (1998). The Bat Boy & His Violin. Illustrated by 
E. B. Lewis. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80099-1. Picture Book. 

Reginald's father manages the team with the worst record in the 
Negro Baseball Leagues, and he needs a bat boy. However, Regi- 
nald wants to play the violin instead of chasing baseballs and pick- 
ing up bats. Forced to join the team, Reginald learns to appreciate 
his father's passion for baseball, while his father comes to value 
Reginald's passion for playing the violin. Lewis' watercolors 
evoke the 1940s, the Negro Baseball Leagues, and a world in which 
a boy's "fiddlin'" Schubert sonatas coexists with — and actually 
fosters — home runs. The use of vernacular dialogue ("'Startin' to 
get the hang of it, ain't you,' Papa says.") helps the book ring with 
authenticity. The book presents an expansive vision of what it 
means to be a male, an African American, a father, and a son. 

4.7 Dolphin, Laurie (1997). Our Journey from Tibet: Based on a True 
Story. Photographs by Nancy Jo Jolmson. New York: Dutton Chil- 
dren's Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45577-9. Picture Book. (See 3.198) 

4.8 Grambling, Lois G. (1998). Daddy Will Be There. Illustrated by 
Walter Gaffney-Kassell. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-14983-9. Picture Book. 

The loving relationship between father and daughter is celebrated 
in this engaging picture book. This nurturing relationship is pre- 
sented through everyday vignettes that portray the father as 
insightful and caring. Activities such as playing with blocks, 
pulling a wagon, watching ladybugs, and going to a boy's birth- 
day party effectively avoid gender stereotyping. The themes of 
caring, love, and respect are well developed through the father's 
interactions with his daughter. Young readers will appreciate the 
airbrush and watercolor illustrations that enhance this poetic 
book. The book provides a rich contextual background for dis- 
cussing family members and how they nurture one another. 

4.9 Herron, Carolivia (1997). Nappy Hair. Illustrated by Joe Cepeda. 
New York: Random House Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-679-87937-4. Picture Book. 




158 



Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives 



133 



When Brenda, a beautiful and proud African American girl, 
attends her family's backyard picnic, everybody talks about her 
nappy hair. It's the curliest, nappiest, kinkiest hair that anyone 
has ever seen. Although the family likes to tease Brenda, they 
marvel at the true meaning of this curly hair and its relevance to 
Brenda's African heritage. As the story is told through the words 
of Uncle Mordicai and other family members, it involves readers 
through the use of rhythmic chatter and exaggerated conversa- 
tion. The bold and lively illustrations enhance the text and add to 
the distinct character of the book. A wonderful lesson in pride 
and self-worth is taught by Brenda and her family through the 
text. Although this book has generated considerable controversy 
in a New York elementary classroom, we believe it can spark 
many discussions about various types of hair among different 
cultures, and become a vehicle to better understand the differ- 
ences as well as the universalities inherent in all kinds of families. 
See also 1 Love My Hair (8.61). 

4.10 Hesse, Karen (1996). The Music of Dolphins. New York: Scholas- 
tic. 181 pp. ISBN: 0-590-89797-7. Chapter Book. 

Mila, a feral child raised by dolphins, is picked up off the coast of 
Florida by researchers. Taken to a research lab, Mila is taught 
about the human world, including language, loneliness, territory, 
anger, and aggression. When Mila compares the world of the dol- 
phins to the human world, it is easy to see why she misses her 
dolphin family. The dolphins are a true family who care for one 
another unselfishly, appreciate one another's individuality, and 
depend on each other to sustain their community. Mila longs to 
return to her dolphin family even though she experiences conflict- 
ing feelings about her two worlds. Although Mila recognizes the 
advantages of a human life, she needs the nurturing environment 
of the dolphins to thrive and decides to return to the sea. 

4.11 Johnson, Angela (1997). Daddy Calls Me Man. Illustrated by 
Rhonda Mitchell. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531- 
30042-0. Picture Book. 

Angela Johnson, a Coretta Scott King Award winner, uses four 
short verses to communicate a little boy's feelings about his 
daddy, mama, and sisters. In each successive verse, a painting by 
his parents inspires Noah to compare his shoes to Daddy's, spin 
with his older sister, wonder about the moon, or share with his 




159 



134 



Families 



baby sister. Noah tells us that because he is a caring brother, 
"Mama calls me sweetheart and Daddy calls me man." With just a 
few words, Johnson conveys the strength and love that abounds 
in this family of artists. Mitchell's big, bold oil paintings present 
interesting perspectives as Noah lines up his shoes beside 
Daddy's or looks down on his baby sister in her playpen. 

4.12 Kroll, Virginia L. (1996). Can You Dance, Dalila? Illustrated by 
Nancy Carpenter. New York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
689-80551-9. Picture Book. 

Dalila and her grandmother share many wonderful times and 
experiences together. With her grandmother's help, Dalila is 
immersed in dancing, but finds it is not as easy as it seems. As she 
experiences the different forms of dance, she finally finds one 
through which she can express herself and her feelings. The 
warm, inviting illustrations in this picture book help to portray all 
of Dalila's feelings as she learns about dancing. 

4.13 Lachtman, Ofelia Dumas (1997). Leticia's Secret. Houston, TX: 
Pinata. 126 pp. ISBN: 1-55885-209-3. Chapter Book. (See 5.141) 

4.14 Lomas Garza, Carmen (1996). In My Family/En mi familia. Trans- 
lated by Francisco X. Alarcon. San Francisco: Children's Book. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-89239-138-3. Picture Book. 

This dual language book, awarded the Children's Book of Distinc- 
tion from the Hungry Mind Review of 1997, is a wonderful visual 
depiction of healings, celebrations, and family gatherings from 
Garza's childhood growing up in Kingsville, Texas. Her illustra- 
tions are detailed, clear, sharp, and colorful, affecting a folk-art 
style. A personal narrative explains each event and the people 
portrayed in her illustrations. This book will evoke vivid memo- 
ries for young and old, especially those from a Hispanic commu- 
nity. When Amanda, a second grader, saw the home remedy of 
burning the tip of a rolled-up newspaper inserted in the ear, she 
responded, "My tia does it when my tio's ear is plugged." In a 
question-and-answer section at the end of the book, Garza reveals 
that her work is her motivation — a way of demonstrating pride in 
her culture and healing the shame she was made to feel toward 
her culture and language while growing up. After reading her for- 
ward and hearing her answer questions pertaining to her art and 
personal life, children who feel culturally alienated may be able to 
relate to this artist and her work. 



d 



160 



Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives 



135 



4.15 Luenn, Nancy (1998). A Gift for Abuelita: Celebrating the Day 
of the Dead/Un regalo para Abuelita: En celebracion del Dia de 
los Muertos. Illustrated by Robert Chapman. Translated by Mario 
Lamo-Jimenez. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
87358-688-3. Picture Book. 

The special warmth of a grandmother-grandchild relationship 
and the rituals surrounding the Day of the Dead — a memorial cel- 
ebration common in many Mexican American communities — are 
carefully interwoven in this beautifully illustrated book. Rosita 
and her grandmother enjoy many hours together, filling their 
days with handicrafts, cooking, and gardening. When Abuelita 
becomes ill and dies, Rosita is beyond consolation. Her family 
comforts her and also respects her grieving, assuring her that her 
participation in the Day of the Dead preparations will ease her 
suffering and allow her to show how much she misses her grand- 
mother. Like any young child, Rosita misunderstands what her 
elders mean when they tell her that Abuelita will come back to see 
her, so she waits for a physical presence. Finally after much wait- 
ing, she feels a special warmth and a brush of wings on her cheek 
that let her know her Abuelita's spirit has received her love. 
Although this is Robert Chapman's first experience in book illus- 
tration, he is widely known as an artist who works with hand- 
made and cast papers. The illustrations provide a richly colored, 
highly textured celebration that adds even more layers of mean- 
ing to this wonderful story. The text is set on bordered pages fac- 
ing each illustration, with English given privilege in position. 
Both English and Spanish versions flow easily and naturally. Our 
young listeners (ages six, sevem, and eight) became noticeably 
hushed when Abuelita died. "I felt better when her grand- 
mother's spirit kissed her cheek," commented Emmalisa (age 
seven). Needless to say, the balance of the discussion was filled 
with grandmother stories. 

4.16 McKissack, Patricia C. (1997). Ma Dear's Apron. Illustrated by 
Floyd Cooper. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-81051-2. Picture Book. 

A young boy learns the days of the week by associating the color 
of the apron worn by his mother with certain days of the week. 
Conversations are kept alive between mother and son by the 
many questions he asks as he learns about life. This story is warm 
and sensitive, and provides a great experience for young readers. 



161 



136 



Families 



This award-winning book has splendid illustrations that bring 
out the life experiences discussed by mother and son, and the feel- 
ings shared between the two. 

4.17 Melmed, Laura Krauss (1997). Little Oh. Illustrated by Jim La- 
Marche. New York; Lothrop, Lee & Shepard /Morrow. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-14208-7. Picture Book. 

A gentle blending of acrylics and colored pencils unite with the 
text of this magical story-within-a-story, in which an origami doll 
comes to life. Created by a lonely artist. Little Oh surprises the 
woman when she awakes with the greeting, "Good morning. 
Mother." The two grow to know and love one another. During a 
venture to the marketplace. Little Oh becomes separated from her 
mother, escapes a dog's vicious attack, and befriends a protective 
swan. After many days, a man and his son find Little Oh, who has 
formed herself into the shape of a heart. They return the paper 
child to her mother, where she instantly becomes a real little girl. 
In this fairytale-like ending, the man, his son. Little Oh, and her 
mother become one family, living together in harmony. This story 
will captivate both young and older audiences alike. 

4.18 Numeroff, Laura J. (1998). What Daddies Do Best, What Mom- 
mies Do Best. Illustrated by Lynn Munsinger. New York: Simon 
& Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN; 0-689-80577-2. Picture Book. 

What do daddies and mommies do best? In this clever, pre- 
dictable language book for young children and their parents, we 
find out. There are really two stories here, one about what mom- 
mies do best, the other about what daddies do best. After finish- 
ing one story, the reader must close the book and flip it upside 
down in order to read the other story. We find in the book lots of 
simple and fun things both parents can do with their children. It is 
important to note that the activities are the same in both stories. 
Both mommies and daddies are seen playing in the park, reading 
to their child, watching a sunset together, and gardening. Mun- 
singer 's bright, colorful watercolor-and-ink illustrations feature a 
variety of appealing animal characters. This book reminds us all 
to spend time with the children in our lives. 

4.19 Rosa-Casanova, Sylvia (1997). Mami Provi and the Pot of Rice. 
Illustrated by Robert Roth. New York; Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN; 
0-689-31932-0. Picture Book. 



L' 



162 



Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives 



137 



A Puerto Rican grandmother called Mami Provi and her grand- 
daughter, Lucy, live on separate floors of the same apartment 
building. Lucy falls ill with chicken pox, and Mami Provi decides 
to make her arroz con polio, or chicken with rice. As the grand- 
mother climbs the stairs to Lucy's apartment, she smells foods 
from many different cultures cooking. She knocks on doors, offer- 
ing some of her arroz con polio in exchange for other delicious 
dishes. In the end, Mami Provi and Lucy enjoy a magnificent, mul- 
ticultural meal brought together by the grandmother's encoimters 
with all their friendly neighbors. Robert Roth's distinctive water- 
color illustrations provoked many positive comments. "I love 
painting with watercolors," commented Gabriel (age seven). The 
characters, portrayed in vibrant watercolor prints against simpli- 
fied backgrounds, add a special touch of neighborly warmth to 
the story. 

4.20 Sachar, Louis (1998). Holes. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
233 pp. ISBN: 0-374-33265-7. Chapter Book. (See 13.55) 

4.21 Saenz, Benjamin Alire (1998). A Gift from Papa Diego/Un regalo 
de Papa Diego. Illustrated by Geronimo Garcia. El Paso, TX: 
Cinco Puntos. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-938317-33-4. Picture Book. 

As Dieguito's birthday approaches, he hopes for a Superman cos- 
tume so he can fly from his home in El Paso, Texas, to visit his 
grandfather. Papa Diego, in Chihuahua, Mexico. He even prac- 
tices his reading by pouring over Superman comics that belonged 
to his father, in hopes of learning more about how to fly. His par- 
ents indulge him, and he receives his birthday wish, only to 
become frustrated and angry when he realizes the costume can't 
help him get to Papa Diego. However, Dieguito's parents have 
arranged for a special surprise visit from Papa Diego, culminating 
in a wonderful family scene that prompts students to share their 
own family experiences. The second graders who read this book 
were intrigued with the painted clay illustrations created by 
Geronimo Garcia. Derek (age seven) realized that after shaping 
the clay into figures, a photographer "took pictures of it." The stu- 
dents were pleased to see both Spanish and English texts on the 
same page, and were eager to try reading in both languages. The 
end pages include a brief glossary, and information about both 
author and illustrator that will help children imderstand more 
about how the book came to be. 




163 



138 



Families 



4.22 Scott, Elaine (1998). Twins! Illustrated by Margaret Miller. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80347-8. Picture 
Book. 

Twins! presents a lively look at twins that is informative for adults 
and children alike. Colorful photographs show the ins-and-outs 
of daily living with eight sets of preschool twins and their fami- 
lies. Scott points out qualities that are unique to twins, and those 
that are common to all children. Sharing toys and parents' atten- 
tion, and getting along with siblings, are issues for twins just as 
they are for any other child. Although identical and fraternal 
twins have much in common, it is particularly important to 
remember that each twin is still a unique individual. Scott's cre- 
ative use of text highlights special words, and asks questions that 
invite the child to interact with the text. The "Parent's Note" at the 
back of the book offers a helpful and frank discussion of how to 
help young children understand the phenomenon of twins. 

4.23 Shaw, Eve (1997). Grandmother's Alphabet. Duluth, MN: Pfeifer- 
Hamilton. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-57025-127-4. Picture Book. 

What a delightful, lively, and varied bunch of grandmothers we 
find in this inspiring book. Gone is the little old lady sitting in a 
rocker! Here bright pages show us grandmothers who are young 
and old; grandmothers who are Native American, Asian Ameri- 
can, and African American; grandmothers in wheelchairs, in air- 
planes, under the ocean, and in courtrooms; and grandmothers 
who are teachers, painters, nurses, and engineers. Predictable lan- 
guage describes a variety of careers on each page. For example, 
the "F" page reads as follows: "Grandma is a Florist creating 
lovely gifts from flowers. Grandma can be ... a firefighter, a 
forester, or a family counselor . . . and so can I." The illustrations 
beg to be studied, with their detailed borders often relating to the 
featured career and a small sketch at the bottom of each page 
showing tools used. A great book for career exploration. 

4.24 Sisalu, Elinor Batezat (1996). The Day Gogo Went to Vote. Illus- 
trated by Sharon Wilson. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-316-70267-6. Picture Book. (See 20.32) 

4.25 Soto, Gary (1997). Snapshots from the Wedding. Illustrated by 
Stephanie Garcia. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399- 
22808-X. Picture Book. 



ERIC 



164 



Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives 



139 



Gary Soto's book Snapshots from the Wedding is told from the per- 
spective of the wedding party's flower girl, Maya, using code- 
switching that alternates the use of English and Spanish in 
conversations. The text is written almost as if family members are 
reviewing wedding photographs to put in an album. Stephanie 
Garcia's unique double-page illustrations, which won her the Pura 
Belpre Illustrator's Award, enrich the text by combining Sculpy 
clay characters with real items such as crystal goblets, potato 
chips, and ribbon, photographed against lace backgrounds. The 
illustrations prompted one teacher to retell the story of her wed- 
ding to her bilingual kindergarten class, and will provide a simi- 
larly rich context for telling stories about the celebrations of many 
cultures. Gary Soto combines his typical code-switching with Jose 
Cepeda's richly colored illustrations in another favorite tale of 
family life. The Old Man and His Door. 

Soto, Gary (1996). The Old Man and His Door. Illus- 
trated by Joe Cepeda. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. 

ISBN: 0-399-22700-8. Picture Book. 

4.26 Steptoe, Javaka, editor (1997). In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall: 
African Americans Celebrating Fathers. Illustrated by Javaka 
Steptoe. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-880000-31-8. 
Picture Book. 

The thirteen poems in this collection portray strong, sensitive, 
proud, hard-working, gentle, talented, and loving fathers and 
grandfathers. Written by contemporary African American poets, 
each of the poems depicts in a different way the theme of the open- 
ing Ashanti proverb, "When you follow in the path of your father / 
You learn to walk like him." The influence of a father on a son is 
portrayed not only through the words of the poems, but also 
through Steptoe's mixed-media collages. By using found objects 
such as metal screening, dirt, fabric, and shells, combined with cut 
and tom paper and strong lines in chalk and ink, Steptoe conveys 
not only the bond between father and son but also the cultural 
influence of the African American's heritage. This intergenera- 
tional tie is expressed by Sonia Sanchez' closing poem, "I have 
looked into / My father's eyes and seen an / African sunset." 

4.27 Tillage, Leon Walter (1997). Leon's Story. New York: Farrar, Straus 
& Giroux. Illustrated by Susan L. Roth. 107 pp. ISBN: 0-374-34379- 
9. Chapter Book. (See 20,18) 




•V' ‘ ' 



f r 



165 



140 



Families 



4.28 Watts, Jeri Hanel (1997). Keepers. Illustrated by Felicia Marshall. 
New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-58-X. Picture 
Book. 

Kenyon loves baseball, and spends his spare time working on 
improving his baseball skills. Kenyon also loves hearing the sto- 
ries his grandmother tells. These are the stories of his people and 
his family that have been passed on through oral storytelling from 
generation to generation by the women designated to be the 
keeper of the stories. Kenyon adores these stories and wants to be 
the keeper, but is told that only females may pass on the tradition. 
Kenyon writes down the stories that he has heard so often and, as 
a special gift, presents them to his grandmother on her ninetieth 
birthday. The significance of story, the power of literacy, and the 
importance of who gets to tell the stories are themes that beg to be 
explored further. This is a lovely picture book done in acrylic and 
acrylic-oil on watercolor paper by Felicia Marshall. 

4.29 Wyeth, Sharon Dennis (1998). Something Beautiful. Illustrated 
by Chris K. Soentpiet. New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell. 30 pp. 
ISBN: 0-385-32239-9. Picture Book. (See 8.64, 20.8) 

Secondary Reviews 

4.30 Antle, Nancy (1997). Staying Cool. Illustrated by E. B. Lewis. 
New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8037- 
1876-4. Picture Book. 

Curtis is working out at his grandfather's gym. He wants to fight 
in the Golden Gloves boxing tournament to make his grandfather 
proud of him. Gurtis learns valuable lessons about life and self- 
control while he's in the boxing ring. The beautiful illustrations 
add warmth to this story about family, friends, and setting goals 
in life. 

4.31 Aylesworth, Jim (1998). Through the Night. Illustrated by Pamela 
Patrick. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80642-6. 
Picture Book. 

Driving north toward home during the early evening. Daddy 
travels through the quiet countryside and the bustling city think- 
ing of his wife and children who greet him when he arrives. 
Bright illustrations depicting the 1940s create an idyllic represen- 
tation of families of the past. 



it 



166 



Family Stories: Fiction, Nonfiction, and Personal Narratives 



141 



4.32 de Paola, Tomie (1996). Strega Nona: Her Story. New York: Put- 
nam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22818-7. Picture Book. (See 13 . 41 ) 

4.33 English, Karen (1998). Just Right Stew. Honesdale, PA: Boyds 
Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-487-8. Picture Book. 

To celebrate Big Mama's birthday, the whole family tries to cook 
her famous oxtail stew, but since no one knows the recipe, some- 
thing is missing! They try different ingredients but the stew still 
doesn't taste right. When Big Mama arrives for dinner, she adds 
the secret ingredient without telling her daughters what it is. Only 
her granddaughter knows the secret. This family story is funny, 
and will surely remind readers of special foods shared at family 
gatherings. 

4.34 Hru, Dakar! (1996). The Magic Moonberry Jump Ropes. Illus- 
trated by E. B. Lewis. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1754-7. Picture Book. 

Two sisters, April and Erica, love to jump rope, especially Double 
Dutch. When summer arrives, they can't wait to fill their days 
jumping rope, but they can't find any friends that will turn the 
rope for them. One afternoon. Uncle Zambegi returns from a trip 
to East Africa. He brings the girls a pair of beautifully dyed jump 
ropes as a gift. He tells them the ropes are magic and if they make a 
wish, it will come true. This is a great book full of traditional jump 
rope rhymes handed down through generations. The illustrator's 
beautiful watercolors will make readers yearn for summer! 

4.35 Hudson, Wade, and Cheryl Willis Hudson, compilers (1997). In 
Praise of Our Fathers and Our Mothers. East Orange, NJ: Just Us. 
131 pp. ISBN: 0-940975-59-9. Picture Book. 

This book was created to celebrate those who inspired Black writers 
and illustrators when they were children. In Praise of Our Fathers and 
Our Mothers explores the personal lives of more than forty Black 
artists through illustrations and essays that give honor to their care- 
givers. These stories of childhood memories, with illustrations that 
reflect the artists' interpretation of family and love, make up a 
unique book created by Black artists who have dedicated their tal- 
ents to children's literature. Also included is an article about the 
Pinkney family, as weU as an interview by artist Pat Cummings with 
the children of writer and author John Steptoe, who died in 1989. 



167 



142 



Families 



4.36 Igus, Toyomi (1996). The Two Mrs. Gibsons. Illustrated by Daryl 
Wells. San Francisco: Children's Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-135-9. 
Picture Book. 

Toyomi Igus recounts her childhood experiences growing up with 
two women, one African American and the other Japanese, who 
had their differences but who shared in their love of young Toy- 
omi. Igus describes the experience of playing dress-up with her 
Japanese mother, who places one of her kimonos on Toyomi, and 
her grandmother, who tops off her wardrobe by placing a big 
"Sunday-go-to-meetin"' hat upon her head, and explains how her 
mother and grandmother each told her how special the item was 
to them. This book shows how two cultures can meet and blend 
through the love of a little girl. 

4.37 Johnston, Tony (1996). Fishing Sunday. Illustrated by Barry Root. 
New York: Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13458-0. Picture Book. 

A grandson reluctantly goes fishing with his grandfather each 
Sunday. His grandfather's appearance and actions embarrass the 
grandson — the way he dresses, talks, and chants to the fishes. But 
then he notices how much the other fishermen respect him. He 
soon learns to appreciate his grandfather for his strengths — ^his 
wisdom, kindness, and zest for life. The grandson develops pride 
for his grandfather in this beautiful story that teaches us about 
valuing our elders. 

4.38 Mitchell, Barbara (1996). Red Bird. Illustrated by Todd Doney. 
New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-688-10859-8. 
Picture Book. 

Katie and her family live and work in the city. Every September, 
they pack their car and leave the city to attend the armual Nanti- 
coke powwow in southern Delaware, where they renew friend- 
ships and family ties. Author Barbara Mitchell takes young 
readers through the events of the weekend powwow, where hun- 
dreds of Native Americans from more than forty tribes celebrate 
their heritage through song and dance. Easy-to-read text and col- 
orful illustrations will keep the interest of young readers in this 
contemporary Native American story. 

4.39 Mitchell, Rhonda (1997). The Talking Cloth. New York: Orchard. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30004-8. Picture Book. 



‘V ■' * 



168 



Family Experiences through the Ages 



143 



When young Amber visits her Aunt Phoebe, she knows that she 
will always find surprises. Aunt Phoebe has a wonderful collec- 
tion of what some would call "junk," but Amber enjoys listening 
to the different stories about all the items. She especially likes the 
story about a piece of cloth that her aunt calls the "talking cloth." 
The beautifully colored cloth, with its African symbols, fills 
Amber's mind with a curiosity and longing to know all about the 
cloth. Aunt Phoebe and Amber share many loving conversations 
about the cloth. The oil paintings add a special touch to this book 
about family relationships and the sharing of family stories. 

4.40 Wells, Ruth (1996). The Farmer and the Poor God: A Folktale 
from Japan. Illustrated by Yoshi. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80214-5. Picture 
Book. 

The textured-silk surface illustrated with colored dyes helps to 
convey this humorous Japanese folktale, appropriate for any age. 
A farmer determines his misfortune is caused by the Poor God 
rather than through any fault of his own. The Poor God cleverly 
gets the bickering family members to work together to create the 
beautiful sandals that he has designed. Together the family pros- 
pers, questioning the Poor God's existence as they live in harmony. 

4.41 Yolen, Jane (1998). Nocturne. Illustrated by Anne Hunter. New 
York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201458-6. Picture Book. 

Another delightful book by Jane Yolen, Nocturne presents an invit- 
ing bedtime story that children can relate to with ease about 
exploring the backyard on a summer's night. Anne Hunter's pen- 
and-ink, watercolor, and colored-pencil illustrations immerse us in 
the blue velvet of night as Yolen's words take us on this adventure, 
with parent and child exploring the mysteries of the nocturnal 
world. With flashlight in hand, they view the star-filled night sky, 
the moths by the porch light, the lightning bugs blinking in the 
Queen Anne's lace, and the owl swooping from its perch high in a 
tree, before climbing into a cozy bed and drifting off to sweet 
dreams of nighttime creatures. A great way to end the day! 

Family Experiences through the Ages 

See also the section entitled Histories and Herstories in chapter 3, 

"Exploring Our Past." 



• 169 



144 



Families 



Primary Reviews 



4.42 



4.43 

4.44 



4.45 

4.46 



Calvert, Patricia (1998). Sooner. New York: Simon & Schuster. 166 
pp. ISBN: 0-689-81114-4. Chapter Book. 

The Bohannon family shows us a slice of Missouri farm life in the 
late 1860s. When Black Jack Bohannon abandons his family to fol- 
low General Jo Shelby into Mexico after the Civil War, thirteen- 
year-old Tyler finds himself in charge of the Bohannon farm. The 
struggles of Tyler, his mother Ellen, and his yoimger siblings 
show us what life was like in this time and place; eating raccoon 
and commeal mush fried in bacon grease, stocking the root cellar, 
and dealing with scalawags are part of everyday life. When Ellen 
remarries, Tyler takes off for fresh job opportunities and cheap 
land in the West. Eresh yet folksy dialogue creates images of farm 
life that will linger in readers' minds. 

Cushman, Karen (1996). The Ballad of Lucy Whipple. New York: 
Clarion. 195 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72806-1. Chapter Book. (See 5.51) 

Dorris, Michael (1996). Guests. Illustrated by Ellen Thompson. 
New York: Hyperion. 119 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-1108-0. Chapter Book. 

Adolescence is the time when questions arise about who we are, 
what we are supposed to be, and when we will be recognized as 
an adult. Guests is set in a Native American village somewhere in 
the Northeast during the early period of European colonization. It 
is a story of two friends. Moss and Trouble, and their struggle 
with responsibility, coming-of-age, and adjustment to internal 
and external change. Moss disagrees with his father about invit- 
ing strangers to a celebration dinner, and leaves his village. Trou- 
ble runs away from an abusive family situation, which she 
doesn't want anyone to know about, and is seeking some alone 
time. Oral tradition is used as a vehicle to provide imderstanding 
about individual and community responsibility and insights into 
how one finds himself or herself. The story contains important 
messages, and sensitively approaches the subject matter. 

Eriedrich, Elizabeth (1996). Leah's Pony. Illustrated by Michael 
Garland. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397- 
189-5. Picture Book. (See 3.29) 



Giff, Patricia Reilly (1997). Lily's Crossing. New York: Delacorte. 
180 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32142-2. Chapter Book. (See 3.107) 




170 



Family Experiences through the Ages 



145 



4.47 Hearne, Betsy G. (1997). Seven Brave Women. Illustrated by Beth- 
anne Andersen. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
14503-5. Picture Book. 

Heame writes of "aU the women in our family who made history by 
not fighting in wars." Each brief chapter depicts a woman's courage 
during wartime by immigrating to America, moving in a covered 
wagon, riding a horse with a regular saddle, establishing a women's 
hospital in India, working as an architect, and raising two small chil- 
dren alone. Heame learned these family stories from her mother, a 
library storyteller, and also learned that for every girl, "there are a 
million ways to be brave." Andersen's warm oil-paint illustrations 
enrich the text by depicting treasured family items. A thin pink rib- 
bon carried on each page throughout the book by a dove visually 
ties the author to her past. This book portrays a feminine, everyday 
side of the wars that often dominate history books and curriculum. 

4.48 Hesse, Karen (1997). Out of the Dust. New York: Scholastic. 227 
pp. ISBN: 0-590-36080-9. Chapter Book. 

In this 1998 Newbery Award winner, the voice of fourteen-year- 
old Billie Jo Kelby hauntingly tells the story of her family and the 
Oklahoma Dust Bowl through a series of narrative poems that cap- 
ture the era. She creates haunting images of her Oklahoma farm 
and family drowning in dust. These might be overwhelming if not 
for the lyrical language and the music flowing from Billie Jo's 
piano throughout the story. Billie Jo struggles with the accidental 
death of her pregnant mother, which she blames partly on herself 
and partly on her father Bayard. Billie Jo's hands, which become 
charred as she tries to save her mother, symbolize the emotional 
scarring she suffers as well as the scarring of the land by nature's 
fury. Billie Jo grows as she struggles through her adversity. In the 
end, this heroine attempts to run away, but realizes as she flees that 
she has developed the incredible resilience she needs to survive 
any hardships life could deal her. Hesse skillfully weaves histori- 
cal data throughout the text of the poems: bank closings, extreme 
poverty, the scourge of grasshoppers, the Dionne quintuplets, the 
Kilauea eruption, and the ever-present dust storms. This book is 
an excellent read-aloud and invites discussion about both histori- 
cal experiences and coming-of-age issues. 

4.49 Kaplan, William (1998). One More Border: The True Story of One 
Family's Escape from War-Tom Europe. Illustrated by Stephen 



171 



146 



Families 



Taylor. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Groundwood. 61 pp. ISBN: 0- 
88899-332-3. Picture Book. (See 20.14) 

4.50 Lee, Milly (1997). Nim and the War Effort. Illustrated by Yang- 
sook Choi. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-35523-1. Picture Book. (See 3.109) 

4.51 Stanley, Diane (1996). Elena. New York: Hyperion. 55 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7868-0256-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.15) 

4.52 Stewart, Sarah (1997). The Gardener. Illustrated by David Small. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
32517-0. Picture Book. (See 3.16) 

4.53 Woodtor, Dee Parmer (1996). Big Meeting. Illustrated by Dolores 
Johnson. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-31933-9. 
Picture Book. 

As the third week of August rolls around each summer, families 
come from far and wide, by train and car, across Pigeon Creek to 
arrive Down Home for the Big Meeting. Grandma and Grandpa 
welcome aunts, uncles, and cousins as they return for this joy- 
ous reunion. There's cooking and storytelling and getting ready 
for the Big Meeting. Dressed in their finest, the visitors head for 
the Little Bethel A.M.E. Church. Reverend Lomax speaks, the 
choir sings, and Grandpa leads the worshipers in a soulful ren- 
dition of "Amazing Grace." Delores Johnson illustrates the story 
using etchings and aquatints with watercolor and colored pen- 
cils. She captures the closeness of family, the spirit of the church 
meeting, and the joy of the reunion expressed in Woodtor's 
warmhearted text. 

Secondary Reviews 

4.54 Anderson, Leone CasteU (1997). Sean's War. Forreston, IL: Shadow- 
Play. 159 pp. ISBN: 0-9638819-5-7. Chapter Book. 

In this vivid picture of 1830s Illinois, twelve-year-old Sean Calla- 
han struggles to reconcile the different attitudes of his father 
Brady and his stepmother Ingrid. Brady's past encounters with 
Native Americans and the struggle to survive on the Illinois 
prairie have left him bitter and distrusting. Sigrid, a gentle Nor- 
wegian immigrant, is trusting and peaceful. As Brady and Sigrid 
continue to grow apart, Sean feels caught in the middle. 



172 



Family Experiences through the Ages 



147 



4.55 Bartone, Elisa (1996). American Too. Illustrated by Ted Lewin. 
New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13279- 
0. Picture Book. (See 3.192) 

4.56 Fleming, Candace (1996). Women of the Lights. Illustrated by 
James Watling. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
9165-3. Chapter Book. (See 3.84) 

4.57 Hest, Amy (1997). When Jessie Came across the Sea. Illustrated 
by P. J. L)mch. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
7636-0094-6. Picture Book. (See 3.34) 

4.58 Johnson, Paul Brett (1997). Farmers' Market. New York: Orchard. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30014-5. Picture Book. 

On summer Saturdays, Laura and her family load up their pickup 
truck with vegetables to take to the farmers' market. Laura spends 
the morning working with her family, and the afternoon exploring 
the market with her friend Betsy. This book includes rich, vivid, 
and colorful illustrations with a big center foldout of the market. 

4.59 Peck, Richard (1998). A Long Way from Chicago. New York: Dial 
Books. 148 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2290-7. Chapter Book. 

For seven consecutive summers from 1929 to 1935, Joey and his 
sister Mary Alice leave Chicago in August to spend a week with 
Grandma Dowdel in a small rural Illinois town. Each trip holds 
an adventure that over the years endears Joey and Mary Alice to 
their eccentric, free-spirited, but always loving grandmother. 

4.60 Pryor, Bormie (1996). The Dream Jar. Illustrated by Mark Gra- 
ham. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
13062-3. Picture Book. (See 3.45) 

4.61 Yee, Paul (1996). Ghost Train. Illustrated by Harvey Chan. Emery- 
ville, CA: Douglas & McIntyre. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88899-257-2. Pic- 
ture Book. 

After his accidental death, Choon-yi's father visits Choon-yi in a 
dream and asks her to draw the train that he helped build. When 
she meets the ghosts of her father's coworkers who also died in 
the accident, Choon-yi fully understands his last request. She 
burns the drawing at the village hilltop so the men's souls can 
find their way home. This story is based on a tale told by the Chi- 
nese people who settled on the West Coast in the early 1900s. 



ERIC 



173 



148 



Families 



Changing Family Structures 

Primary Reviews 

4.62 Boyd, Candy Dawson (1995). Daddy, Daddy, Be There. Illus- 
trated by Floyd Cooper. New York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
399-22745-8. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Daddy, Daddy, Be There is a beautifully crafted book in which chil- 
dren make a plea to their daddies to be there, not only for the big 
events but also for the day-to-day happenings that are the building 
blocks for a meaningful relationship between father and child. The 
text could serve as a handbook for all fathers. It says, "Be there, be 
my rock, be there for me when I need guidance." It points to the fact 
that neglect can have a powerful effect on children, and that neglect 
can take place in affluent families as well as poor ones. Floyd 
Cooper's use of soft, earthy colors in his illustrations creates a 
warm, enveloping aura that surrounds the reader with emotion. 

4.63 Dines, Carol (1997). Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. New York: 
Delacorte. 223 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32271-2. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book; adult mediation required. (See 20.53) 

4.64 Hausherr, Rosmarie (1997). Celebrating Families. New York: Schol- 
astic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-48937-2. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Hausherr presents a photographic gallery of fourteen different 
children and their families. Among the types of families included 
are the more common family structures such as a nuclear family, a 
single-parent family, a foster family, a stepfamily, an adoptive fam- 
ily, and a divorced family. Others that she includes are a biracial 
family, a homeless family, a family whose father is in prison, a fam- 
ily with a physically disabled mother, a family that lives in a coop- 
erative community, and a family with two mommies. Hausherr 
tells about the family members with whom each child lives, and 
describes some of the activities they enjoy in their daily lives. Love 
is the glue that binds all of these diverse families and gives each 
child cause to celebrate. Hausherr 's large color and black-and- 
white photographs are filled with vitality, and complement the 
informative and sensitive text. 

4.65 Hines, Anna Grossnickle (1996). When We Married Gary. New 
York: Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14276-1. Sophisticated Pic- 
ture Book. 




174 



Changing Family Structures 



149 



When We Married Gary is an autobiographical account of Hines' 
marriage to Gary, told through the eyes of her young daughter. 
This is Mama's second marriage, and Beth is old enough to 
remember when Daddy still lived with them. Gary brings laugh- 
ter and kisses to Mama, and welcomes the children into his life 
while acknowledging that they already have a father. The strong 
sense of reality comes through in believable dialogue and direct 
discussions of why Daddy doesn't live with them anymore. The 
watercolor and colored-pencil illustrations focus on the children 
and their family experiences during this time of transition, cap- 
turing the range of emotions and responses that might be typical 
of a joyful second marriage. 

4.66 Holt, Kimberly Willis (1998). My Louisiana Sky. New York: 
Henry Holt. 132 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5251-8. Chapter Book. 

Twelve-year-old Tiger lives with her Granny and her mentally 
disabled parents in a small town in Louisiana during the late 
1950s. Except for one friend who continues to stay by her. Tiger's 
peers shun her because of her family. Granny is the one who nur- 
tures her and loves her fiercely. With Granny's love and guidance, 
she gains confidence that she can handle things "one day at a 
time." This is a deeply moving novel of poverty, death, inspira- 
tion, and learning to live with situations that cannot be changed. 
It cleverly deals with a "first kiss" and with acceptance. "I never 
asked Granny about Momma again. But over the years I learned 
that Momma was like a child — happy when everything was going 
fine, upset if something stopped her fun." 

4.67 Ingold, Jeanette (1996). The Window. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
179 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201264-8. Chapter Book. (See 5.102) 

4.68 Johnson, Angela (1998). Heaven. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
138 pp. ISBN: 0-689-82229-4. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Living in Heaven, Ohio, doesn't mean that one is sheltered by the 
evils in life, but it is a place where things can heal over time. Ever 
since she was six, Marley has been going to the Western Union 
counter to send money to her Uncle Jack, someone she has known 
only through letters from across the country. Marley has memo- 
rized the code words for each day of the week — code words that 
Uncle Jack created so that, on his travels across the country with 
his dog Boy, he wouldn't have to show identification when he 




175 



150 



Families 



picked up the money she sent. After a series of bombings of Black 
churches in the South, Marley learns that her life is not what she 
thought it was and that Uncle Jack is not who she thought he was. 
Through the assistance of family and friends, Marley struggles to 
accept who she really is and begins to heal in Heaven. 

4.69 McCutcheon, John (1996). Happy Adoption Day! Illustrated by 
Julie Paschkis. Boston: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-55455- 
3. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Songwriter John McCutcheon, two-time Grammy nominee and 
winner of two Children's Album of the Year Awards, has created 
an endearing story about adoption. His lively verses express the 
delight of adoptive parents as they celebrate their child's adop- 
tion day and the birth of their family. This mom and dad make a 
multitude of preparations for baby, and travel abroad to bring 
their baby home. As baby grows, adoption day becomes a cher- 
ished celebration. Bright, colorful illustrations lend a cheerful and 
festive feeling to this joyful story. Notations for the lyrics are 
included. 

4.70 Rogers, Fred (1997). Stepfamilies. Illustrated by Jim Judkis. New 
York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-23145-5. Sophisticated Pic- 
ture Book. 

Stepfamilies is one in a series of Let's Talk About books by Fred 
Rogers. In his own inimitable style, Mr. Rogers talks to children 
about being a member of a stepfamily. In today's society, more 
and more children are dealing with divorce, single-parent fami- 
lies, and stepfamilies. Mr. Rogers discusses some of the changes, 
both positive and negative, that they may encounter when moms 
and dads remarry. He talks about the wide range of feelings chil- 
dren may have, and the importance of talking about these feelings 
with a trusted adult. He reassures children that in time, they can 
come to enjoy being with the members of their stepfamily and 
broaden their circle of belonging. Color photographs of several 
stepfamilies learning to live together complement the text. 

4.71 Russo, Marisabina (1998). When Mama Gets Home. New York: 
Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14985-5. Sophisticated Picture 
Book. 

Waiting for Mama to get home from work can be very hard. Help- 
ing big sister and big brother prepare the diimer and watching out 



176 



Changing Family Structures 



151 



the window help the little girl in this story pass the time. Then 
Mama arrives to finish the dinner and listen to her children take 
turns telling about their day at school. After a nice warm bath, 
Mama tucks the girl into bed and reads a story before turning off 
the lights and saying goodnight to her little "peach." This portrait 
of a single-parent family presents a caring, cooperative family 
that works together to get things accomplished, and enjoys 
spending time together. Young readers will delight in the full- 
color gouache paintings that Russo uses to illustrate her story. 

4.72 Wing, Natasha (1996). Jalapeno Bagels. Illustrated by Robert 
Casilla. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80530-6. 
Picture Book. 

Pablo cannot decide what kind of food to take for the Interna- 
tional Day Celebration at his school. The food is supposed to 
reflect his heritage, but Pablo comes from a multicultural family — 
his mother is Mexican American and his father is Jewish. Pablo's 
mother invites him to assist at the family bakery to help him make 
up his mind. As he and his mother make empanadas, change bars, 
and pan dulce, Pablo debates the merits of takings these foods to 
school. He helps his father make bagels and challah. Finally Pablo 
decides that jalapeno bagels would be perfect because they are a 
mixture of both his parents. The watercolor illustrations by Robert 
Casilla capture the textures of the ingredients so well that readers 
can almost smell what is baking in the ovens. The Spanish and 
Yiddish words are defined within the text, as well as in a glossary. 
Recipes at the end of the book were greeted with shouts of 
"Yummy!" and demands for a cooking center. 

4.73 Winthrop, Elizabeth (1998). As the Crow Flies. Illustrated by Joan 
Sandin. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-77612-0. Picture 
Book. 

Elizabeth Winthrop's touching picture book poignantly depicts a 
young boy's love for his father despite a separation of "two thou- 
sand miles as the crow flies." Michael, a second grader whose par- 
ents are apparently divorced, excitedly awaits the yearly visit of 
his father to Arizona from Delaware. For one whole week, 
Michael lives with his father at a hotel. Their brief time together is 
packed with both special and everyday activities such as perusing 
picture albums, taking hikes into the desert, and eating out. The 
depth of feeling between Michael and his dad is evident in their 



177 



152 



Families 



smiling, touching, and hugging, shown on nearly every page. At 
the same time, conflicting emotions are not avoided when 
Michael states his love for his parents, but his hate for the fact that 
they do not talk to one another. With the departure of Michael's 
father, there is parental agreement that Michael is now old 
enough to fly alone to Delaware in the summer. Samantha, an 
insightful fourth grader, said, "Even if someone lives far away, he 
still loves you." Joan Sandin's watercolor and pencil illustrations 
are expressive and supportive of the text. Despite the artist's resi- 
dency in Tucson, Arizona, the community she portrays is a bit 
stereotypical of the Southwest. However, there are also a few set- 
tings that the locals will recognize. 

Secondary Reviews 

4.74 Bauer, Joan (1998). Rules of the Road. New York: Putnam. 201 pp. 
ISBN: 0-399-23140-4. Chapter Book. 

Sixteen-year-old Jenna drives Mrs. Gladstone, the elderly owner 
of a successful chain of shoe stores, from Chicago to Texas. Jenna 
runs from her alcoholic father, and Mrs. Gladstone struggles with 
her son, who attempts a hostile takeover. Jenna's friendship with 
Harry Bender, the best salesman in the chain, gives her the deter- 
mination to confront her father and his alcoholism. 

4.75 Say, Allen (1997). Allison. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 
0-395-85895-X. Picture Book. 

Illustrated in Say's realistic watercolor technique, this selection 
presents a story about interracial adoption. When a young Japan- 
ese child named Allison receives a kimono from her grandmother, 
she becomes angry and pushes away her parents because she real- 
izes she is adopted. But through various events, she learns to 
appreciate their love and accepts them in her heart. Young chil- 
dren who face the same struggles as Allison will find this story 
empowering. 

4.76 Wong, Janet (1996). A Suitcase of Seaweed and Other Poems. 
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-689- 
80788-0. Chapter Book. 

This collection is based on the author's personal experiences 
growing up as an American of Korean and Chinese descent. 
Through Wong's poetry, readers learn of ethnic family traditions, 
clashes between being Asian and Asian American, and the inter- 



O 

ERIC 



178 



Controversial Issues in Family Life 



153 



section of cultural boundaries across ethnicities and generations. 
A delightful and eye-opening experience. 

Controversial Issues in Family Life 

See also the section entitled Family Hardship in chapter 5, "Struggle and 

Survival." 

Primary Reviews 

4.77 Bunting, Eve (1998). Your Move. Illustrated by James E. Ransome. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200181-6. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 5.71, 20.33) 

4.78 Fox, Paula (1997). Radiance Descending. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 101 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2467-3. Chapter Book. (See 20.2) 

4.79 Haddix, Margaret Peterson (1996). Don't You Dare Read This, 
Mrs. Dunphrey. New York: Simon & Schuster. 108 pp. ISBN: 0- 
689-80087-5. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 6.56) 

4.80 Haddix, Margaret Peterson (1998). Among the Hidden. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 153 pp. ISBN: 0-689-817700-2. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. 

This is an intriguing yet chilling look at the Garner family, who 
lives in a future American totalitarian society that allows only two 
children per family. Famines and drought producing global star- 
vation have resulted in government-controlled food production 
and population control. Twelve-year-old Luke, the third Garner 
son, is a "shadow child" hidden from the Population Police. He 
struggles to understand his life as his family pushes him farther 
into the shadows when land is cleared behind their house. Luke 
finally discovers Jermifer, another "shadow child." The Internet 
links Jen to eight hundred other shadow children, and she plans a 
rally to demand equal rights. After Jen is killed, Luke gives up his 
family in order to have a chance at life and to continue Jen's 
dream of equality. 

4.81 Hermes, Patricia (1998). Cheat the Moon. Boston: Little Brown. 
167 pp. ISBN: 0-316-35929-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

The folksy, authentic voice of main character Gabby Blakely tells 
the story of life with an alcoholic father. Gabby and her brother 
Will have learned to cope with Dad's inconsistent presence ever 



er|c 



179 



154 



Families 



since Mother's death three years earlier. Dad leaves on binges that 
sometimes last a month at a time. Gabby has developed a prag- 
matic approach to dealing with Dad: buy things they'll need 
while he's sober and working, and store them up for when he'll 
leave. Will has been scarred by Dad's temporary abandonment. 
When Dad is killed in a mill accident. Gabby and Will can no 
longer hope that their dad eventually will come home. Gabby 
confronts her fears of being abandoned, of having no one to 
depend on, and of emotionally connecting with others, and dis- 
covers her own inner strength. 

4.82 Howe, James (1997). The Watcher. New York: Atheneum. 172 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80186-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Each day, thirteen-year-old Margaret goes to the beach near her 
parents' rented cottage, sits at the top of the steps, watches the 
people, writes in her journal, and fantasizes a perfect family for 
herself to replace her physically and emotionally abusive father 
and her ineffective mother. Most chapters are prefaced with the 
fairy tale she creates as she tries to escape her life. We learn 
through four points of view that all our lives come up short when 
measured against our fantasies. The family Margaret imagines as 
perfect is falling apart as the parents contemplate divorce. The 
book ends on a more positive note as Margaret gets the help she 
so desperately needs. Thirteen-year-old Meredith said, "I think 
it's fascinating how most people think other people have such 
wonderful lives," when in fact they don't. 

4.83 LaFaye, A. (1998). The Year of the Sawdust Man. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 220 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81513-1. Sophisticated 
Chapter Book. 

Eleven-year-old Nissa, who is wise beyond her years, tries to cope 
with the changes in her life after her high-spirited mother aban- 
dons Papa and her in a small Louisiana town in 1934. In a voice 
reminiscent of Scout Finch, Nissa poignantly examines Mama's 
motives, character, and dreams, and searches for a way to maintain 
a spiritual connection with a mother who is unpredictable and 
impulsive. Nissa asks big questions in her quest to imderstand her 
relationship with her mother, and struggles with conflicting emo- 
tions. This first novel is a powerful look at the impact of abandon- 
ment and divorce. References to adultery and "baby making" make 
the book more appropriate for mature middle-school readers. 



180 



Controversial Issues in Family Life 



155 



4.84 Little, Mimi Otey (1996). Yoshiko and the Foreigner. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-32448-4. Picture 
Book. 

A young Japanese woman goes against her culture's customs by 
speaking and coming to the aid of a foreign American soldier who 
is lost in the city. Through their conversations, the foreign American 
learns about Yoshiko's family values and customs. He gives her 
special gifts — two fish for her father's fishpond, and the finest rice 
and wine for the family's ancestral shrine. When Yoshiko's father, 
Mr. Sasagawa, finally learns of their relationship, he warns Yoshiko 
of Americans' disregard for Japanese culture. But when he learns of 
the precious gifts from the foreigner given to the family in honor of 
their culture, and also that the foreigner has learned the Japanese 
language in order to ask Mr. Sasagawa's permission to marry 
Yoshiko, Yoshiko's father becomes convinced that the foreigner is 
truly sincere. A moving story of love and generosity that teaches us 
how to give of ourselves, embrace and appreciate cultures other 
than our own, and promote understanding through difference. 

4.85 Mazer, Norma Fox (1997). When She Was Good. New York: Schol- 
astic. 234 pp. ISBN: 5-590-13506-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

The Thurkill family lives in a run-down trailer outside a small 
town in the middle of New York State. Pamela has a long history 
of abuse: putting down her mother, intimidating her father, and 
physically abusing her sister Em. When their mother dies and 
their father remarries, Pamela and Em move into the city and Em 
becomes the focus of Pamela's brutality. After Pamela dies of a 
stroke during a physical attack on Em, Em's life is haunted by the 
lingering effects of Pamela's abuse and Pamela's ranting voice 
inside her head. Em gradually comes to terms with Pamela's 
death and Em's eternal hope that her life will change for the better 
becomes a reality. 

4.86 Mazer, Harry (1998). The Wild Kid. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
103 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80751-1. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Sammy, a twelve-year-old child with Down's Syndrome, runs 
away from home and gets lost deep in the woods. Here he encoun- 
ters Kevin, a wild child who escaped an abusive family that once 
locked him in a car trunk. Kevin has survived in the woods for a 
long time, eating garbage, stealing from cars in the cemetery, and 
living in a makeshift lean-to. Afraid he'll be discovered if Sammy 




181 



156 



Families 



goes back to his family, Kevin keeps him captive. Strangely, 
through a series of twists and turns in their relationship, Sanuny 
and Kevin become like brothers. Kevin teaches Sanuny an inde- 
pendence he'd never known before. Sanuny wants Kevin to come 
back to live in his home like real brothers, but Kevin knows he's 
too far removed from the mainstream to fit in. Mazer gives us a 
hard look at our most marginalized children. 

4.87 Rapp, Adam (1997). The Buffalo Tree. Asheville, NC: Front 
Street. 188 pp. ISBN: 1-886910-19-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 
(See 20.5) 

4.88 Spinelli, Jerry (1997). Wringer. New York: HarperCollins. 228 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-024913-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 5.82, 20.41) 

4.89 Thomas, Jane Resh (1996). Daddy Doesn't Have to Be a Giant 
Anymore. Illustrated by Marcia Sewall. New York: Clarion. 46 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-69427-2. Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 5.93) 

Secondary Reviews 

4.90 Draper, Sharon (1997). Forged by Fire. New York: Atheneum. 150 
pp. ISBN: 0-689-80699-X. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Gerald experiences neglect and abuse as his drug-addicted mother 
uses nontraditional methods to teach Gerald the hard lessons in life. 
This brutality is softened by Aunt Queen. Living with her, he expe- 
riences the strength and power of love and develops the inner core 
that will see him through the troubled times ahead. Mature themes 
make this a book more suitable for older middle-school readers. 

4.91 Grove, Vicki (1998). Reaching Dustin. New York: Putnam. 199 pp. 
ISBN: 0-399-23008-4. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 5.75) 

4.92 Krantz, Hazel (1997). Walks in Beauty. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. 
192 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-667-0. Chapter Book. 

This story depicts the life of a contemporary Navajo girl, Anita 
Whiterock, who encounters and works through issues relating to 
adolescence, school, family, and culture. The characters are repre- 
sentative of the different generations and perspectives that exist 
in her family. Her grandfather is the firm traditionalist connected 
to his land and animals, while her grandmother is more accepting 
of changes due to progress. Her mother is not handling her 
divorce well. She would not leave the reservation for the large 






182 



Family Experiences around the World 



157 



city, and still values family and tradition, but enjoys country 
dancing. Her father is the urban Native American living in far- 
away Albuquerque. Her yoimger sister is very social and, like her 
father, prefers a modern life. Anita values education and is a good 
student, and she relies on her family's traditional teachings to 
help her through difficult situations. An excellent resource to 
show the dynamics of modern reservation life. 

4.93 Wolf, Bernard (1997). HIV Positive. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45459-4. Sophisticated Picture Book. 
(See 5.121) 

Family Experiences around the World 

See also the section entitled Cultural Traditions in chapter 3, "Exploring 

Our Past." 

Primary Reviews 

4.94 Abelove, Joan (1998). Go and Come Back. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 177 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2476-2. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book. (See 20.50) 

4.95 Ancona, George (1997). Mayeros: A Yucatec Maya Family. New 
York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13465-3. 
Picture Book. (See 3.56, 20.51) 

4.96 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-73570-X. Picture Book. 
(See 3.115, 20.22) 

4.97 Carling, Amelia Lau (1998). Mama and Papa Have a Store. New 
York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2044-0. Picture Book. 

Carling draws on her own experiences as the child of Chinese 
immigrants growing up in Guatemala to write Mama and Papa 
Have a Store, her first book. Her story describes a day in the life of 
a young girl in her parents' general store, located in Guatemala 
City during the 1940s. The day begins with the clip-clop of the 
milkman's horse, and ends with the clic-clac of her father's aba- 
cus. Throughout the day, the reader experiences the comings and 
goings of the Spanish- and Mayan-speaking customers and the 
Chinese-speaking family members through the child's eyes. 




183 



158 



Families 



Indigenous people from the mountains come to purchase thread 
for weaving, street vendors take their posts along the sidewalks, 
and family members reminisce about their hometown in China. 
Mother prepares an array of traditional Chinese food for limch, 
served with warm com tortillas. "It's neat how there are so many 
different cultures. I'd like to live there," commented Miranda (age 
ten). Cultures and languages blend together as delightfully as 
the details and nuances of Carling's meticulous watercolor and 
gouache illustrations in this engaging book. 

4.98 Dabcovich, Lydia (1997). The Polar Bear Son: An Inuit Tale. New 
York: Clarion. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72766-9. Picture Book. 

Lydia Dabcovich has adapted and beautifully illustrated a version 
of the traditional Inuit tale of Kimikdjuaq, the polar bear. A lonely 
old woman who has been fending for herself for a long time finds 
a polar bear cub on the ice and takes him home. She names him 
Kinikdjuaq, which means "my son." As he grows, he learns to 
himt for her and becomes friends with the children in the village. 
Soon the woman has more than enough to eat and begins to share 
her wealth with the rest of the villagers. Her neighbors are jealous 
and Kimikdjuaq must leave. In the end, the bond between mother 
and son is stronger than the retribution of the villagers. Dab- 
covich gives a short explanation of Inuit life in the harsh Arctic 
environment of northern Canada and Alaska. She details how the 
story of Kunikdjuaq has been told and retold over centuries. 
Young children can read this easy-to-read picture book, but the 
story will appeal to readers of all ages. 

4.99 Egan, Ted (1998). The Drover's Boy. Illustrated by Robert Ingpen. 
Melbourne, Australia: Lothian. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-887734-52-X. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.61) 

4.100 Fleischman, Paul (1997). Seedfolks. Illustrated by Judy Pedersen. 
New York: HarperCollins. 69 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027471-9. Chapter 
Book. (See 7.66, 20.54) 

4.101 Garay, Luis (1997). The Long Road. Plattsburgh, NY: Tundra. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88776-408-8. Picture Book. (See 5.126) 

4.102 George, Jean Craighead (1997). Arctic Son. Illustrated by Wendell 
Minor. New York: Hyperion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0315-0. Picture 
Book. 






184 



Family Experiences around the World 



159 



When Luke is bom in the Arctic, he is given both an Eskimo and 
English name as is customary in the Inupiat Eskimo culture. 
Although Luke, or Kupaaq, is not an Eskimo, he learns to love the 
adventure and beauty of this land where the sun does not set in 
summer or rise in winter. As seen through the eyes of her grandson, 
Jean Craighead George shares insights into the daily life and culture 
of the Arctic inhabitants. Kupaaq discovers the ways of the Arctic 
land with the caring guidance of his friend Aalak, who named him. 
The unique lifestyle of the Inupiat people is sensitively portrayed 
with much substantive information to inform the reader about this 
geographic area of the world. The watercolor illustrations recreate 
the beauty of the colorful Arctic landscapes and wildlife. 

4.103 Jimenez, Francisco (1998). The Circuit: Stories from the Life of a 
Migrant Child. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico. 
134 pp. ISBN: 0-8263-1797-9. Chapter Book. (See 20.36) 

4.104 Luenn, Nancy (1997). Nessa's Fish. Illustrated by Neil Waldman. 
New York: Aladdin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-81465-8. Picture Book. 

Nessa and her grandmother go ice fishing and catch more than 
they can carry. Before resting for the night, they stack the fish and 
cover them with stones to keep away the foxes. Unfortunately, 
Nessa's grandmother becomes ill, and the next day Nessa must 
care for her grandmother and guard the fish from a fox, a pack of 
wolves, and a bear! Her family's teachings about these animals 
help her to calmly and bravely protect the fish that will feed the 
people in her camp. The simple, pastel illustrations appropriately 
convey Nessa's care for her grandmother, her respect for nature, 
and the remoteness of the environment. This book was the winner 
of the 1997 Parents' Choice Award. 

4.105 Parker, David (1998). Stolen Dreams: Portraits of Working Chil- 
dren. Minneapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2960-2. Chapter 
Book. (See 20.15) 

4.106 Springer, Jane (1997). Listen to Us: The World's Working Chil- 
dren. Toronto, Canada: Groundwood. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-88899-291-2. 
Chapter Book. (See 20.17) 

4.107 Stevens, Jan Romero (1997). Carlos and the Skunk/Carlos y el 
zorrillo. Illustrated by Jeanne Arnold. Translated by Patricia Hin- 
ton Davison. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87358- 
591-7. Picture Book. 




185 



160 



Families 



Jan Romero Stevens has written another engaging bilingual pic- 
ture book full of family love, laughter, and wisdom in a friendly 
Hispanic/Latino community. In this third sequel, Carlos is a little 
older and is concerned about impressing his good friend Gloria. 
While boasting he can catch a skunk safely by its tail, Carlos is 
sprayed with the animal's stench. By washing himself in a bath of 
tomatoes, he believes he has solved his smelly problem. Later while 
attending church, he realizes that he has overlooked something: his 
shoes. The odor wafts through the building causing people to 
sneeze, cover their noses, and end church services early. Once 
again, Carlos learns a lesson: "No puedes creer todo lo que te dicen; 
You can't believe everything you hear." Jan Romero Stevens fol- 
lows her story with a tasty recipe for tomato salsa. The English ver- 
sion is given a privileged position on the page, followed by an 
excellent, natural sounding Spanish translation. The rich language 
and homey wisdom is brought to life in the vividly colored oil illus- 
trations of Jearme Arnold, in her third collaboration with Stevens. 

4.108 Torres, Leyla (1998). Liliana's Grandmothers. New York: Farrar, 
Strauss and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-35105-8. Picture Book. 

Leyla Torres' story about Liliana and her visits with her two 
grandmothers, one down the street of her New England town and 
the other in faraway Colombia, is a heartwarming celebration of 
differences. As the pages alternate between the two locales, Torres 
describes how Liliana spends time with her equally loving, but 
very different grandmothers. Even the layout of the pages con- 
tributes to the contrasts and similarities of life in these two 
worlds. When Torres wishes to highlight parallel activities, she 
lays out both scenes on facing pages. When differences are the 
focus, each scene merits a double-page spread. For example, 
when Liliana visits her New England grandmother in the after- 
noon to read stories together, the illustration begins at the left and 
crosses the gutter, with text placement in the upper right. On the 
next double-page spread, we see Liliana taking an afternoon 
siesta with her Colombian grandmother, and the orientation of 
text and illustration is opposite that of the previous pages. At the 
same time, the gently hued watercolors lend cohesiveness to the 
book and an aura of love that Liliana shares with both older 
women. The role of the illustrations in this tale was not lost on 
Emmalisa (age seven), who followed even the most subtle details: 
"She must love her teddy bear. She takes it with her everywhere 




186 



Family Experiences around the World 



161 



she goes." Her careful observations prompted students to take a 
much closer page-by-page look, and share many personal stories 
about grandmothers. 

4.109 Zamorano, Ana (1996). Let's Eat! Illustrated by Julie Vivas. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-13444-2. Picture Book. 

Ana Zamorano and illustrator Julie Vivas tell the story of Mama 
preparing meals for her family. Each day of the week. Mama asks 
Antonio to call everyone to the table, and to Mama's dismay, each 
day someone cannot come to the table because he or she is busy. 
Ana Zamorano's predictable text in large font is easy for children 
in the primary grades to read. The recurring context alternates the 
Spanish names of popular regional cuisine, while Zamorano 
repeats the expression "|Ay que penal" ("What a pity!") each time. 
The children joined in quickly and later made use of this phrase as 
they reenacted the story in the dramatic play area. Julie Vivas' 
muted watercolor palette is typical of other stories that she has 
illustrated. She perfectly captures the expressions on the charac- 
ters' faces, as well as the diverse range of activity during their 
busy family meal times. This book would make a fine addition to 
a text-set about families or illustration techniques. 

Secondary Reviews 

4.110 Bernhard, Emery (1996). A Ride on Mother's Back, A Day of Baby 
Carrying around the World. Illustrated by Durga Bernhard. New 
York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200870-5. Picture Book. 

From the rainforest of central Africa to the mountains of 
Guatemala to the highlands of Papua New Guinea, mothers and 
fathers hold their babies as they go about their daily work. This 
delightful book, created by the husband-and-wife team of Emery 
and Durga Bernhard, shows the reader how parents around the 
world carry their most precious cargo. Some are cradled in shawls 
as mothers make tortillas, some ride in slings as fathers search for 
honey in tall fig trees, and some are cradled in the hoods of moth- 
ers' parkas. Colorful full-page gouache paintings on watercolor 
paper transport the reader around the globe. The author includes 
notes about the various people and cultures included in the book. 

4.111 Choi, Sook Nyul (1997). Yunmi and Halmoni's Trip. Illustrated 
by Karen Dugan. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
395-81180-5. Picture Book. 



^. 1 : 



187 



162 



Families 



Yunini travels with her grandmother from their home in New 
York to her Halmoni's homeland in Korea. Although she is 
excited about meeting family members, Yunmi becomes con- 
cerned that her Halmoni will not want to return with her when 
she sees how much she is loved and respected. As in the precursor 
to this book, Halmoni and the Picnic, Yunmi's insecurities about her 
grandmother are put to rest. Gentle watercolor illustrations con- 
tribute to intergenerational and intercultural understanding. 

Choi, Sook Nyul (1993). Halmoni and the Picnic. Illus- 
trated by Karen M. Dugan. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 31 
pp. ISBN: 0-395-61326-3. Picture Book. 

4.112 Ho, Minfong (1996). Hush! A Thai Lullaby. Illustrated by Holly 
Meade. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-09500-2. Pic- 
ture Book. 

A,Thai mother lovingly tucks her child into his hammock, but 
fears animal noises will prevent his sleep. She confronts a mos- 
quito, lizard, pig, water buffalo, and elephant, pleading with each 
one to "hush," so her baby can rest. Unbeknownst to his mother, 
her baby climbs, hides, swings from railings, and crawls back to 
bed while she is gone. Young children are sure to have stories of 
their own about being the only one awake in the house. 

4.113 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1998). Celebrating Chinese New Year. 
Illustrated by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1393-4. Picture Book. (See 3.205) 

4.114 Kudler, David (1997). The Seven Gods of Luck. Illustrated by 
Linda Finch. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
78830-7. Picture Book. (See 14.9) 

Life Stages and Milestones 

See also the sections entitled Cultural Traditions, Cultural Practices, and 

Celebrations in chapter 3, "Exploring Our Past," and Death Themes in 

chapter 5, "Struggle and Survival." 

Primary Reviews 

4.115 Farmer, Nancy (1996). A Girl Named Disaster. New York: Orchard. 
309 pp. ISBN: 0-531-08889-8. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 5.73) 



188 



Life Stages and Milestones 



163 



4.116 Giff, Patricia Reilly (1998). Rosie's Big City Ballet. Illustrated by 
Julie Durrell. New York: Viking. 73 pp. ISBN: 0-670-87792-1. 
Chapter Book. (See 11.61) 

4.117 Hest, Amy (1998). Gabby Growing Up. Illustrated by Amy 
Schwartz. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80573-X. Picture Book. (See 8.38) 

4.118 High, Linda Oatman (1998). Beekeepers. Illustrated by Doug 
Chayka. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397- 
486-X. Picture Book. 

What could be more hm than helping Grandpa take care of his 
beehives? After donning her beekeeper's garb, the young girl in 
this story follows Grandpa to the bee yard. Together they care for 
the hives and marvel as colorful, pollen-laden bees return to the 
hives. The adventure heightens when a swarm of bees approaches 
and settles on a branch overhead. For the first time ever. Grandpa 
hands her the swarm-gathering pole. Ever so carefully, she gently 
pulls and shakes the branch until the bees head for the hives. With 
their chores accomplished, they head back to the house. A proud 
Grandpa proclaims his granddaughter "a fine keeper of bees," 
and promises her the season's first chunk of honey. The golden 
glow of Doug Chayka's oil paintings captures the warmth of the 
special relationship shared by these beekeepers. 

4.119 Hobbs, Will (1996). Far North. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 
226 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14192-7. Chapter Book. (See 5.110) 

4.120 Kroll, Virginia L. (1997). Butterfly Boy. Illustrated by Gerardo 
Suzan. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397-371-5. 
Picture Book. 

Emilio's parents say that grandfather doesn't understand words 
anymore, but Emilio knows better. While he is reading to his 
grandfather out in the yard, Abuelo points his good hand at five 
butterflies fluttering near their white garage. Emilio and grandfa- 
ther spend the summer watching butterflies. Emilio eventually is 
able to get within inches of the butterflies, earning him the nick- 
name Butterfly Boy. Emilio finds the butterflies in a book. They are 
red admirals, and are attracted to bright white surfaces. Emilio and 
Abuelo anxiously await the arrival of the butterflies the following 
spring. Children will enjoy the happy ending to this story about 
the Butterfly Boy. Suzan uses bold watercolors for his imaginative 



b 



189 



164 



Families 



illustrations of this charming story about the special relationship 
between a boy and his ailing grandfather. 

4.121 Martinez, Victor (1996). Parrot in the Oven: Mi Vida. New York: 
HarperCollins. 216 pp. ISBN: 0-06-447186-1. Chapter Book. (See 
20.4) 

4.122 Rylant, Cynthia (1998). The Islander. New York: Dorling Kinders- 
ley. 97 pp. ISBN: 0-7894t92490-8. Chapter Book. 

Daniel Jennings records his boyhood life with his beloved grand- 
father on the island of Coquille off the coast of British Columbia. 
Daniel lives with his grandfather after his parents die. Daniel's 
chance encounter with a mermaid makes him the recipient of a 
magic key that helps him find injured birds and later an injured 
girl. When Grandfather dies unexpectedly, his Bible leads Daniel 
to investigate his family's history. Daniel's search hints that the 
mermaid is the spirit of Grandfather's sister Anna. During a vio- 
lent illness, Daniel asks Anna for help, and she sends him a puppy 
that becomes his family. Daniel falls in love with Franny, the little 
girl he saved as a young boy. Daniel's story reveals the mystical 
and spiritual nature of life, and the connections we weave to 
make us feel whole. 

4.123 Savageau, Cheryl (1996). Muskrat Will Be Swimming. Illustrated 
by Robert Hynes. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-87358- 
604-2. Picture Book. 

In this story, Cheryl Savageau (Abenaki/French) draws on her 
own childhood, when the place that she lived and all who lived 
there were called "Lake Rats." Her story is told through Jeannie, 
who fills the void in her life and defends the place that she loves 
with anger and hatred. Grandpa helps her not only to understand 
the motives of those who see her as different, but also to under- 
stand her own identity. By relating his own experience and the 
story of his people. Grandpa allows Jeannie to see that her Native 
American heritage provides her with the strength to stand proud 
and face the challenges of the outside world. Savageau's story is 
beautifully told, and demonstrates that stories from and of the 
past still have relevance for contemporary lives and experiences. 

4.124 Sgouros, Charissa (1998). A Pillow for My Mom. Illustrated by 
Christine Ross. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
82280-7. Sophisticated Picture Book. 




190 



Life Stages and Milestones 



165 



Charissa Sgouros tells the poignant story of a young girl whose 
mother has become seriously ill. The girl misses her mother and the 
time they shared together reading stories, telling jokes, and playing 
games. The girl uses scraps of fabric to make a soft pillow to com- 
fort her mother in the hospital. After Mother dies, the pillow serves 
to comfort the girl when she misses her mother the most. The sim- 
ple text deals with an emotionally charged event in a reassuring 
and life-affirming manner. Christine Ross has created lovely color 
illustrations that convey the sense of loss that the girl experiences, 
while showing that life goes on even in the face of such adversity. 

4.125 Yolen, Jane (1997). Miz Berlin Walks. Illustrated by Floyd Cooper. 
New York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22938-8. Picture Book. 

In Miz Berlin Walks, Jane Yolen tells the story of her own grand- 
mother, Fanny Berlin. Mary Louise, a yoxmg girl of six or seven, 
watches from her porch each evening as old Miz Berlin walks 
past, talking or singing to herself. When curiosity gets the better 
of her, Mary Louise leaves the safety of her porch and follows Miz 
Berlin who, without missing a beat, laxmches into one of her fan- 
tastic stories. Mary Louise continues to join Miz Berlin and is 
drawn into the tales she hears. When Miz Berlin dies, the reader is 
left with the notion that Mary Louise will continue the wonderful 
storytelling legacy of Miz Berlin. Warm and glowing oil-wash 
paintings by Floyd Cooper add to Yolen's story of intergenera- 
tional friendship and the power of storytelling. 

Secondary Reviews 

4.126 Carter, Dorothy (1997). Bye, Mis' Lela. Illustrated by Harvey 
Stevenson. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
374-31013-0. Picture Book. 

Children often learn many lessons in life at a tender age. They 
learn that many things that happen in life can be final. This picture 
book shows in a sweet and loving way that after someone dear 
dies, we gain comfort by sharing memories about them. These 
memories keep that person in our hearts. This story shares a 
yoxmg girl's memories about Mis' Lela, who took care of her while 
her parents worked. 

4.127 Garland, Sherry (1998). My Father's Boat. Illustrated by Ted 
Rand. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-47867-2. Pic- 
ture Book. 






191 



166 



Families 



A Vietnamese immigrant takes his young son out in his boat and 
teaches him to fish in the tradition of his own father. Vibrant 
seascapes done in watercolor, acrylics, and chalk provide a 
breathtaking backdrop for the fishing boat, and extend the mood 
created by the lyrical text. Love of family and one's life's work 
across three generations underlies this story that will be enjoyed 
by older as well as younger readers. 

4.128 Scheffler, Ursel (1997). Grandpa's Amazing Computer. Illustrated 
by Ruth Scholte van Mast. Translated by Rosemary Tanning. New 
York; North-South. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-55858-795-0. Chapter Book. 
(See 7.41) 

4.129 Wells, Rosemary (1996). The Language of Doves. Illustrated by 
Greg Shed. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1472-6. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 

On her sixth birthday, Julietta's grandfather gives her one of his 
homing pigeons. He also tells her the story of his life in a 
monastery orphanage, where he first began training homing 
pigeons, and how he used that training during the Great War. 
When Grandfather dies, the dove returns to Julietta with a mes- 
sage from him that will connect her to Grandfather forever. Gold- 
tone illustrations contribute to the warmth of the story. 

Relationships with Others 

Primary Reviews 

4.130 Bash, Barbara (1996). In the Heart of the Village: The World of 
the Indian Banyan Tree. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books for 
Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87156-575-7. Picture Book. 

The social, political, and ecological significance of the banyan tree 
to the life of a small village in India is made clear in a highly 
informative, yet lyrical, narrative text. A brief creation story intro- 
duces readers to the origins of the banyan tree, often called the 
Many-Footed One because its aerial roots become trunks and a 
single tree may eventually resemble a forest. Details about the 
interrelationship among animals, plants, and people show the 
daily life of the tree as a place for nesting, worshipping, bartering, 
conversing, giggling, jumping, sleeping, and imagining. Vivid 
watercolor paintings in double-page spreads further illuminate 
the importance of the tree in rural Indian culture. The presenta- 



ERiC 



192 



Relationships with Others 



167 



tion of the text in calligraphy generated by the author contributes 
to the visual appeal of a book that will fascinate readers of all ages 
who marvel at the wonders of our natural world. 

4.131 Eyvindson, Peter (1996). Red Parka Mary. Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada: Pemmican. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-921827-50-4. Picture Book. 

Canadian author and storyteller Peter Eyvindson brings to life the 
story of a seven-year-old boy and his older neighbor Mary in this 
heartwarming tale of friendship, appreciation, and reciprocal giv- 
ing. At first he is afraid to even walk by her house, but as time 
goes by and he gets to know her, the boy's opinion of Mary 
changes. Mary teaches him many traditional skills, and he begins 
to appreciate her cultural knowledge. As they trade Christmas 
presents, he comes to cherish the biggest gift of all. The colorful 
illustrations and easy-to-read text, make this book easily accessi- 
ble to readers in preschool through third grade. 

4.132 Hunter, Sally M. (1997). Four Seasons of Com: A Winnebago Tra- 
dition. Illustrated by Joe Allen. Minneapolis: Lerner. 40 pp. ISBN: 
0-8225-2658-1. Picture Book. (See 2.38) 

4.133 Pirotta, Saviour (1997). Turtle Bay. Illustrated by Nilesh Mistry. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
37888-6. Picture Book. (See 2.18) 

4.134 Plain, Ferguson (1996). Roily's Bear. Winnipeg, Canada: Pemmi- 
can. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-921827-52-0. Picture Book. 

Rally's Bear is an intergenerational story. Day after day, a young 
boy watches Roily, an elder in the village, as he sits on the fourth 
step of the Community Administration Building. One day, he 
decides to join Roily. The story continues as Roily tells about the 
time that he shot a bear. Illustrations are printed on deer-hide 
shapes. The illustrations, which contain elements of realism and 
mysticism, have a reddish-pink background with black-penned 
drawings. Ferguson was awarded the 1993 Commemorative 
Medal for his significant contributions to Canada. Ferguson is an 
Ojibwe author and artist from the Sarnia Indian Reserve in 
Ontario. His work is based on the Ojibwe culture. 



193 





A. Joan oMrc, Josephine Poole/Angela Barrett (5.29). B. Sarny: A Life Remembered, 
Gary Paulsen (5.114). C. Sammy's Story, David Kooharian (5,140). D. From Slave 
Ship to Freedom Road, Julius Lester/Rod Brown (5.18). 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



194 




169 



5 Struggle and Survival 

Jan Keenoy 
Joan Von Dras 
Susan Wolf 



F rom the beginning of humankind, struggle and survival have been a 
part of history. The human quest to understand our role on the 
planet and create an identity has given rise to a diversity of beliefs, 
cultures, and traditions. These differences have created challenges and 
struggles within and between groups of people, and within individuals 
themselves. The collection of books represented in this chapter draws 
from this diversity, inviting discussion and examination of our mutual 
relationships, struggles, and survival on this floating sphere we call Earth. 

Our review committee discovered that struggle, challenge, and 
survival have many faces and are present in a variety of scenarios. We 
decided not to limit ourselves to only the obvious struggles of human 
versus nature, human versus human, and human versus society, which 
are so prevalent in elementary-level literature. We sought books that 
also explored the silent conflicts that involve human versus himself or 
herself and human versus his or her destiny. We discovered that these 
conflicts might be experienced by a preschool child as easily as a pre- 
adolescent or any hero that we might emulate today. We did not, how- 
ever, abandon the more obvious struggles, for these hardships and 
challenges play an important role in promoting the strength and sur- 
vival of the human race. 

We selected a variety of books based on the following criteria: 

1. The book had to be well written and easily understood by young 
readers. Although the themes of inner struggle that we sought 
could be obscure and subtle, the words of the author needed 
to be clear so that they could direct the reader to make infer- 
ences and reach conclusions that went beyond the text. 

2. The characters needed to be realistic, authentic, and engaging. We 
felt that the theme of struggle and survival could best be tack- 
led if the reader felt a human kinship with the hero or hero- 
ine. From this kinship, a relationship of both empathy and 
sympathy might develop and draw the reader into the story, 
making the ensuing survival a victory for both the character 
and the reader. 



O 

ERIC 



195 



170 



Struggle and Survival 



3. The book had to have well-paced and efficient action, as well as 
lively description, that led readers to various high points and mini- 
climaxes in the story. We steered away from books with long- 
winded chapters that did not contain enough turning points 
to involve the reader. We realized that if the description gets 
too tedious or no gains are recognizable, the reader can 
become just an observer and may choose to check out of the 
struggle altogether. 

We maintained an open mind concerning struggle and survival 
themes, and used a variety of lenses in our exploration of these themes. 
We discussed the plots, characters, and themes of the books under 
review, and considered the various ways that teachers and others might 
categorize books in order to take a critical look at struggle and survival. 
We chose to organize the books in this chapter around broad topics and 
themes that we ourselves would use in addressing issues of struggle 
and survival with our students. Accordingly, the reviews in this chapter 
have been organized around the following themes: Bigger-than-Life 
Heroes, Heroines, and Events; Finding One's Own Identity; Rites of Pas- 
sage; Family Hardship; Making Peace with Family; Catastrophe, 
Tragedy, and Hardship; Animal Adventures; and Death Themes. 

Some of the books reviewed in this chapter contain epic themes of 
struggle and survival that occur in the context of war, environmental 
protection, civil rights movements, and enslavement. Other titles relay 
simple stories of family, neighborhood, friendship, and personal loss 
that convey equally moving messages about the strength of human 
courage and the growth that occurs from adversity. 

In Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events, readers will 
find profiles of individuals who have broken with societal tradition or 
expectation to pursue what is close to their heart. These role models 
invite young minds to see the struggles and victories of empowered 
individuals, and to consider how the lessons learned might influence 
their own lives. 

Many of these individuals discover their own identity in the con- 
text of struggling with social, political, personal, or medical issues. Sto- 
ries of personal growth can be found in the sections entitled Finding 
One's Own Identity and Rites of Passage. These are stories of breaking 
away from tradition and establishing a distinct persona, even when the 
family seems intent on instilling traditional roles and blending charac- 
ters into the continuum of family history. Each experience proves that 
the strength to persevere is built upon many small victories — and also 
that to be saved from the struggle would require being deprived of the 
victory. 




196 



Struggle and Survival 



171 



Families provide a strong base of support for individuals strug- 
gling with life's challenges, but they also can be a source of contention 
for individuals. Working together, families often can find the strength 
necessary to withstand significant hardships such as war, hatred, preju- 
dice, and oppression. Relationships may be either strengthened or sev- 
ered as the struggle to survive brings clarity to the essence of the human 
bonds built on trust, respect, and responsibility. Each struggle, whether 
in the wilderness or in the neighborhood, can lead to enlightenment 
because the place where courage resides and change takes place is 
always the same; that place is in the heart. Readers will find stories 
about family as a source of inspiration and conflict in Family Hardship 
and Making Peace with Family. In Catastrophe, Tragedy, and Hardship, 
readers will find individuals, families, and entire communities grap- 
pling with some of the worst that life has to offer, including natural dis- 
asters, war, and other significant losses. 

Some of the most endearing stories of our time capture the incred- 
ible journeys and heroic efforts of pets and animals in the wild. These 
stories of courage, devotion, bravery, and sacrifice offer opportunities 
for readers to reach inside themselves to find similar qualities. The selec- 
tions in Animal Adventures contain strong animal characters with the 
power to touch lives. Many are embroidered with the thread of hope and 
memory that runs through all stories of struggle. The animal characters 
are personified with emotions of fear, bravery, love, and dedication that 
can easily be identified by the young reader. These uncluttered stories 
invite readers to understand the nature of struggle and survival in sim- 
ple, direct terms where things almost always end happily ever after. 

With many adventures or struggles, death is always one possible 
outcome. Stories that address the death or near-death of a character 
allow readers to examine their own feelings and beliefs about death and 
dying. These feelings and beliefs are grounded in cultural traditions and 
reflect the diversity of people on our planet. The moving books in Death 
Themes provide fertile ground for examining the very core of our defini- 
tions of life. Death is not treated as defeat in these contexts. Death is a 
struggle with which each character must reckon. Those who are left 
behind can conquer the death of a loved one through memories and 
treasured stories. 

Each character in each book has a small story to tell about his or 
her own struggle for survival. It is through the collective strength 
demonstrated by these simple struggles for life, peace, happiness, and 
self-respect that the stories of world-changing heroes and heroines are 
forged. 



er|c 



197 



172 



Struggle and Survival 



In 1945, Franklin D. Roosevelt wrote, "Today we are faced with 
the preeminent fact that if civilization is to survive we must cultivate the 
science of human relationships, the abilities of all people of all kinds to 
live together and work together in the same world at peace" (undeliv- 
ered speech, on display at the Jefferson National Expansion Museum, St. 
Louis, Missouri). This statement rings as true today as it has in the past. 
Literature such as that reviewed in this chapter will keep the past from 
being forgotten and generate the important conversations, insights, and 
creative thinking that will enlighten present and future generations of 
humanity. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 

See also the section entitled Histories and Herstories in chapter 3, 
"Exploring Our Past"; the section entitled Books about Artists in chapter 
11, "Fine Arts"; the sections entitled Autobiographies and Biographies in 
chapter 12, "Sports, Games, and Hobbies"; and the section entitled 
Biographies and Autobiographies (of Authors, Books, and Characters) in 
chapter 13, "The Craft of Language." 

Primary Reviews 

5.1 Antle, Nancy (1998). Lost in the War. New York: Dial. 137 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-2299-0. Chapter Book. 

Lost in the War is a poignant, often graphic, story of a family trying 
to find normalcy years after the Vietnam War. Lisa and Jenny's 
mother is fighting to forget the atrocities and losses from the war. 
When Lisa's class studies the Vietnam War, the truth about Lisa's 
parents unfolds and the family transforms as a result. About that 
same time, the Vietnam Memorial is being dedicated in Washing- 
ton, D.C. As part of a class art and history project, Lisa also 
unveils a monument to the war and to her parents. Nancy Antle 



* L' 



198 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



173 



helps us understand the losses of both those who fought in the 
war and those who avoided fighting through her well-defined, 
multi-dimensional characters. This story of love, loss, and going 
on paints a vivid and historically accurate picture of the Vietnam 
War and the people who had to deal with its consequences. 

5.2 Archer, Jules (1998). To Save the Earth: The American Environ- 
mental Movement. New York: Viking. 198 pp. ISBN: 0-670-87121- 
4. Chapter Book. 

Archer chronicles the lives, philosophy, and struggles of four 
prominent environmentalists whose work has impacted the twen- 
tieth century. These well-told biographies are followed by a brief 
history of the environmental movement, a list of current environ- 
mental issues, and names and addresses of environmental organi- 
zations to join. As readers consider the lives of these four leaders, 
they can begin to understand how personal conviction and dedi- 
cation can turn the concerns of individuals into the causes of a 
generation. 

5.3 Cooper, Floyd (1996). Mandela: From the Life of the South 
African Statesman. New York: Philomel. ISBN: 0-399-22942-6. 
Picture Book. 

This gold-toned picture book relates the life of a child named 
Rolihlahla, who was to be a great leader for his people because he 
came from a line of great rulers. Although his father was de- 
throned and his family moved to another village, Rolihlahla was 
still seen as a child with a promising future. When he started 
school, he and the other African children were given English 
names. Rolihlahla's new name was Nelson Mandela. The older 
Mandela became, the more conscious he became of how unfair the 
conditions for Blacks were in South Africa. His awareness became 
so strong that he became active in the African National Congress 
(ANC). Mandela eventually became a strong voice in the ANC, 
and because of his stand for justice, he was imprisoned for twenty- 
seven years. This book takes the reader from the childhood of 
Rolihlahla and the imprisonment of Nelson Mandela to Mandela's 
release from prison and his election as president of South Africa. 

5.4 Currie, Stephen (1997). We Have Marched Together: The Working 
Children's Crusade. Minneapolis: Lerner. 88 pp. ISBN: 0-8225- 
1733-7. Chapter Book. (See 3.80) 



\ 



199 



174 



Struggle and Survival 



5.5 Dash, Joan (1996). We Shall Not Be Moved: The Women's Fac- 
tory Strike of 1909. New York: Scholastic. 165 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
48409-5. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 20.23) 

5.6 Dillon, Leo, and Diane Dillon (1998). To Every Thing There Is a 
Season. New York: Blue Sky. 34 pp. ISBN: 0-590-47887-7. Picture 
Book. 

Ecclesiastes has never been more beautifully represented than 
through the timeless art work of Caldecott winners Leo and Diane 
Dillon. Each turn of the page is a trip through history and culture. 
The diversity of civilization represented evokes a tapestry of time, 
from the vessel drawings of Greek civilization to the honor of sacri- 
fice in Aztec culture. This brief yet magnificent march through time 
is demonstrative of challenges and celebrations that transcend 
region and time. The simple yet luminous culminating drawing of 
Earth is supported with the text, "One generation passes away, and 
another generation comes: but the earth abides for ever." This pas- 
sage connects humanity's struggle with the cyclic and momentary 
existence of humans in a parade of time. Hands linked together 
across the book's end pages show common links through time and 
the human condition. Ecclesiastes brings an immortal rhythm to 
the work, a philosophical direction to our lives together, and a 
sense of what we share as a people across diverse cultures or reli- 
gions. The Dillons depict ancient cultures and their unique styles of 
art through varied media, giving authenticity to the time and peo- 
ple they represent. A section at the end presents insight into the ori- 
gin of each illustration and its meaning. 

5.7 Fleming, Candace (1996). Women of the Lights. Illustrated by 
James Watling. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
9165-3. Chapter Book. (See 3.84) 

5.8 Freedman, Russell (1996). The Life and Death of Crazy Horse. 
Photographs by Amos Bad Heart Bull. New York: Holiday House. 
144 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1219-9. Chapter Book. 

Using accounts from primary sources and ledger book picto- 
graphs that were drawn by a contemporary of Crazy Horse, Freed- 
man has created an intimate portrait of the famous Oglala Sioux 
warrior. Called "Our Strange One" by his own people. Crazy 
Horse was indeed a remarkable individual whose greatest 
achievement was defeating Custer at the Battle of the Little 
Bighorn in 1876. The author not only tells of Crazy Horse's deeds. 



200 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



175 



but also manages to convey his persona as a boy of dreams and a 
man of courage. Very few authors today write biographies for 
young readers with the depth of research that Freedman commits 
himself to, and his reward to readers is always one of fascinating 
discoveries and a surprising intimacy with the chosen subject. 
Included are an annotated bibliography and timeline of events. 
This book has received numerous awards, including School 
Library Journal Best Books List for 1997, Booklist's Editors' Choice, 
NCTBSS, and Teachers' Choice. A must for any school library. 

5.9 Gayle, Sharon Shavers (1997). Kai, A Big Decision, Africa, 1440. 
New York: Simon & Schuster. 71 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80990-5. Chapter 
Book. 

The Girlhood Journeys series offers this story of two African sisters 
who are sent from their village to the king's palace in the big city to 
seek food for their starving people during a drought. The older sis- 
ter falls in love with one of the king's young assistants to the court 
as he helps her prepare the food stores that will be taken to her vil- 
lage. The younger sister discovers the richness of the arts which 
the big city can provide, helping to develop her talent and interest 
in sculpture. Both sisters must struggle with their loyalty to their 
people and their responsibility to family and tradition. They must 
find a way to be respectful of their background and ties to the vil- 
lage, and also bravely address their own personal needs which the 
big city and their new acquaintances can best fulfill. The story 
takes place in 1440, but the theme of struggle and survival is 
timely today. This book offers a source of discussion for young 
female readers of the nineties as they plot their own life courses. 

5.10 Giff, Patricia Reilly (1997). Lily's Crossing. New York: Delacorte. 
180 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32142-2. Chapter Book. (See 3.107) 

5.11 Hansen, Joyce (1998). Women of Hope: African Americans Who 
Made a Difference. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
93973-4. Picture Book (See 20.12) 

5.12 Hesse, Karen (1997). Out of the Dust. New York: Scholastic. 227 
pp. ISBN: 0-590-36080-9. Chapter Book. (See 4.48) 

5.13 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1997). Buffalo Days. Illustrated by 
Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8234-1327-6. Picture Book. 



201 



176 



Struggle and Survival 



A terrific photographic portrayal of contemporary Native Ameri- 
cans and their enduring traditional relationship with the Ameri- 
can buffalo. Since the nearly endangered buffalo herds were 
reestablished on the western Plains, native people have become 
the caretakers and preservers of this animal that has played such a 
significant role in their culture and lifestyle. Readers are offered a 
glimpse at how a contemporary, multi-generational Crow family 
has adapted to technological changes while maintaining family 
and tribal traditions in their reliance on and care and respect for 
the buffalo. Hoyt-Goldsmith also gives readers an historical look 
at the buffalo and its significance to the Crow and other tribes of 
the region. This author consistently offers her readers an honest 
and objective look at the individuals about whom she writes, and 
the quality of this book is comparable to Pueblo Storyteller, Totem 
Pole, and Day of the Dead: A Mexican- American Celebration. 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1991). Pueblo Storyteller. Illus- 
trated by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 

30 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1094-3. Picture Book. 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1994). Day of the Dead: A 
Mexican-American Celebration. Illustrated by Lawrence 
Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 30 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8234-1094-3. Picture Book. 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1994). Totem Pole. Illustrated 
by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 32 pp. 

ISBN: 08245-1135-4. Picture Book. 

5.14 Josephson, Judith Pinkerton (1997). Mother Jones: Fierce Fighter 
for Workers' Rights. Mirmeapolis: Lemer. 144 pp. ISBN: 0-8225- 
4924-7. Chapter Book. 

Josephson's biography of Mary Harris Jones is a well-researched 
and documented account of a leading figure in the American 
labor movement. For six decades. Mother Jones was feisty and 
unflagging in her efforts to improve conditions among America's 
poor laborers. Although admired by miners, railroaders, factory 
workers, and their families, she was also feared and hated by 
owners. Mother Jones was fiercely devoted to efforts to improve 
conditions of working families and children. The book includes 
an author's preface that explains the inclusion of Mother Jones' 
inconsistent spellings and "peppery words," an index, a list of 
sources for quotations and historical facts, a bibliography, and 



202 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



177 



photo acknowledgments. Numerous photographs, newspaper 
headlines, letters, and sketches enhance the narrative. These fea- 
tures of nonfiction writing will help students to grasp the histori- 
cal context of this intriguing biography of the complex and 
dynamic Mother Jones. 

5.15 Jurmain, Suzanne (1998). Freedom's Sons: The Story of the Atni- 
stad Mutiny. Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-688-11072- 
X. Chapter Book. 

Freedom's Sons is the extraordinary story of a successful slave 
revolt. Fearing for their lives, fifty-three Africans aboard the 
Cuban slave ship Amistad revolted and killed the captain and 
other captors. Thinking they were headed back to Africa, the 
inhabitants of the ship — led by the charismatic leader, Cinque — 
zigzagged across the ocean until they were close to death. Finally 
in August of 1839, they landed in New York where slavery was 
illegal. Unfortunately they were apprehended and moved to Con- 
necticut, a slave state, where they were turned over to federal offi- 
cials. After many court battles, in which they were represented by 
former president John Quincy Adams, they were finally granted 
their freedom by the Supreme Court. This is a remarkable story of 
courage, perseverance, heroism, and victory at a time when most 
African Americans had no legal rights. 

5.16 Katz, William Loren (1997). Black Indians: A Hidden Heritage. 
New York: Simon & Schuster. 198 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80901-8. Chap- 
ter Book. 

This historical account for young readers gives comprehensive 
insight into the role of African Native Americans. A group often 
omitted from the history books, African Native Americans are 
those who have dual African American and Native American 
ancestry. Included within this historical overview are fascinating 
biographies of leaders, army scouts, frontiersmen, and outlaws. 
The stories of these individuals, which stretch from the earliest 
European landings to pioneer days, highlight the author's detailed 
research into the history of various groups and specific individu- 
als. The struggles of African Native Americans during the settling 
of the West are poignantly told as they search for freedom, land, 
and identity. Likewise insight is provided into African American 
slavery, as the book describes situations both before and after the 




203 



178 



Struggle and Survival 



emancipation of slaves. A much-needed perspective is provided in 
this book, which is illustrated with authentic photographs and 
early sketches. 

5.17 Krull, Kathleen (1996). Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph 
Became the World's Fastest Woman. Illustrated by David Diaz. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201267-2. Pic- 
ture Book. 

The life of Wilma Rudolph is an inspiring story of perseverance 
and inner strength despite overwhelming obstacles. Who could 
have imagined that the child doctors believed would never walk 
would become the first woman to win three medals in a single 
Olympics? Neither the life-threatening childhood illnesses, includ- 
ing polio, nor the crushing oppression of segregation could break 
Rudolph's will to run and drive to compete. This beautifully illus- 
trated book by David Diaz uses brown-tone photos as borders and 
acrylics, watercolor, and gouache on watercolor paper to visually 
carry us back to the childhood of Wilma Rudolph. The author's 
choice of words serves to make a lasting impression about this 
young person's journey to succeed despite all odds. 

5.18 Lester, Julius (1998). From Slave Ship to Freedom Road. Illus- 
trated by Rod Brown. New York: Dial. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1893-4. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Inspired by the artwork of Rod Brown, Julius Lester has written a 
unique book about slavery. Intense, almost surreal. Brown chroni- 
cles slavery from the departure of a people from Africa to the 
eventual freedom of an enslaved race. Lester allows the reader to 
experience the perspective of slave and oppressor through the use 
of "imagination exercises" that relate first-hand the horror, vio- 
lence, and humiliation of slavery and the strength, dignity, and 
honor of an oppressed people. Lester has used the power of 
Brown's work to discuss honestly and simply a period of history 
that must be told in order to foster the continued empowerment 
of a people and teach a lesson about the tragedy of inhumanity to 
others. As one young reader put it, "It really makes me think and 
puts me in their place." 

5.19 Levy, Maril 5 m (1996). Run for Your Life. Boston: Houghton Mif- 
flin. 217 pp. ISBN: 0-395-74520-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 
(See 20.37) 



204 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



179 



5.20 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1997). My Palace of Leaves in Sarajevo. 
Illustrated by Herbert Tauss. New York: Dial Books. 53 pp. ISBN: 
0-8037-2033-5. Chapter Book. 

Letters from Nadja to her cousin Alex in Minnesota reveal the 
story of Nadja's immersion in the terrible war in Bosnia. The let- 
ters, based on first-hand accoimts of interviews and experiences 
with Bosnian refugees, chronicle the disintegration of a peaceful 
city into a war zone filled with hatred and human cruelty. Amidst 
all of this is yoimg Nadja, who communicates the impact that liv- 
ing amidst warfare has on her life and her family. Writing the let- 
ters to Alex is cathartic to her, and in turn the care packages and 
letters from Alex help Nadja and her family maintain hope 
through hard times. The book's afterword gives the reader a brief 
history of the roots of this conflict in the aftermath of World War 
II. Additionally there is a glossary to aid with pronunciation and 
meaning, as well as addresses to which to send care packages. 
This is a book that reminds the reader to recognize that no nation 
is truly free of the potential for war, and to cherish peace. 

5.21 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1998). Sister Anne's Hands. Illustrated by K. 
Wendy Popp. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-8037-2038-6. Picture Book. (See 20.3) 

5.22 Lowry, Linda (1996). Wilma Mankiller. Illustrated by Janice Lee 
Porter. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-880-1. Chap- 
ter Book. 

This book conveys the spirit of Wilma Mankiller almost as well as 
her own autobiography, Mankiller, striking at the issues faced by 
the first woman chief of the Cherokee Nation. Matriarchal tribes 
don't necessarily encourage women to participate in the political 
arena, but Mankiller took on the challenge. Her strength and 
pride in her heritage are reflected in the political decisions she 
makes and in her sense of oneness with her people. Wilma 
Mankiller 's personal struggles, and her growth as a result of these 
struggles, serve as an inspiration for all people, native and non- 
native. The glossary contains a timeline of significant dates in 
Cherokee history, as well as in the life of Mankiller. The colorful 
illustrations and easy-to-read text make this book accessible to 
elementary-level readers. 



er|c 



205 



180 



Struggle and Survival 



Mankiller, Wilma, and Michael Wallis (1993). Mankiller. 

New York: St. Martin. 320 pp. ISBN: 0-312-20662-3. Chap- 
ter Book. 

5.23 McCully, Emily Arnold (1996). The Bobbin Girl. New York: Dial 
Books for Young Readers. 34 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1827-6. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. (See 3.42, 20.30) 

5.24 Meltzer, Milton (1998). Ten Queens: Portraits of Women of Power. 
Illustrated by Bethanne Andersen. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. ISBN: 0-525-45643-0. 134 pp. Chapter Book. 

Ten courageous women, leaders in their own civilizations over a 
two-thousand-year span of time, are revealed through the well- 
researched stories by Meltzer. From Cleopatra to Catherine the 
Great, the personalities, relationships, and impact of these phe- 
nomenally strong individuals help write women back into history 
and give readers a perspective on leadership and power not dic- 
tated by gender, but by intelligence and strength. This would be 
an empowering book to use in a discussion and comparison of 
feminism throughout recorded history. 

5.25 Mitchell, Margaree King (1997). Granddaddy's Gift. Illustrated 
by Larry Johnson. Mahwah, NJ: BridgeWater. LFnpaged. ISBN: 0- 
8167-4010-0. Picture Book. (See 20.27) 

5.26 Mochizuki, Ken (1997). Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story. 
Illustrated by Dom Lee. New York: Lee & Low. LFnpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880000-49-0. Picture Book. (See 20.28) 

5.27 Parks, Rosa, with Gregory Reed (1996). Dear Mrs. Parks: A Dia- 
logue with Today's Youth. New York: Lee & Low. 112 pp. ISBN: 1- 
880000-45-8. Chapter Book. (See 3.97) 

5.28 Pippen, Scottie, with Greg Brown (1996). Scottie Pippen: Reach 
Higher. Illustrated by Doug Keith. Dallas, TX: Taylor. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-87833-981-7. Picture Book. (See 12.2) 

5.29 Poole, Josephine (1998). Joan of Arc. Illustrated by Angela Barrett. 
New York: Knopf. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-679-89041-6. Picture Book. 

The miraculous story of Joan of Arc comes to life in a tale written 
for young readers. The strength and determination of this young 
woman who courageously departs on a divine mission is an 



20G 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



181 



inspiration to young girls, and a confirmation to young boys that 
the course of history has been influenced by strong individuals of 
both genders. Joan's selfless mission to liberate Orleans from the 
English and crown the King of France at Rhiems is supported 
with artwork that mimics a tapestry from days of old. A map of 
the region on the end pages provides geographic information 
about Joan of Arc's struggles. Although it ends in cruel tragedy, 
Joan's story communicates that the sacrifice of one individual can 
contribute dramatically to the course of humankind. 

5.30 Ryan, Pam Munoz (1998). Riding Freedom. Illustrated by Brian 
Selznick. New York: Scholastic. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-590-95766-X. 
Chapter Book. (See 3.48) 

5.31 Schroeder, Alan (1996). Minty: A Story of Young Harriet Tub- 
man. Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney. New York: Dial Books for 
Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1889-6. Picture Book. (See 
3.14) 

5.32 Shaughnessy, Diane (1997). Pocahontas: Powhatan Princess. New 
York: PowerKids. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8239-5106-5. Picture Book. 

Diane Shaughnessy's version of the well-known story of Poca- 
hontas expands somewhat on the life of this precocious ten-year- 
old. Young readers are offered images of the Powhatan people 
and their way of life before contact with the first early English set- 
tlers, including Captain John Smith. They learn that a natural 
curiosity may have led Pocahontas to become the communication 
mediator between her people and the English. The author por- 
trays the English desire for land and wealth against the constant 
possibility of starvation as the backdrop for John Smith's rescue 
from death by Pocahontas. They also learn that Pocahontas was a 
victim of captivity. It was during her captivity that Pocahontas 
became acculturated to the ways of her captors, taking the dress, 
language, and religion of the English. Her marriage to her English 
caretaker, John Rolfe, may have worked to improve the relation- 
ship between the Powhatans and English. Pocahontas, renamed 
Lady Rebecca, next traveled to the homeland of the English set- 
tlers. Although well-received by the English people, she died of 
smallpox, a disease unknown among her people. Today she is 
honored in America for her efforts in helping the English establish 
permanent settlements in America. 



I 



207 



182 



Struggle and Survival 



Other PowerKids Press biographies include: 

Shaughnessy, Diane (1997). Sequoyah: Inventor of the 
Cherokee Written Language. New York: PowerKids. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8239-5110-3. Picture Book. 

Shaughnessy, Diane (1997). Sitting Bull: Courageous 
Sioux Chief. New York: PowerKids. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
8239-5109-X. Picture Book. 

Shaughnessy, Diane, and Jack Carpenter (1997). Chief 
Joseph: Nez Perce Peacekeeper. New York: PowerKids. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8239-5111-1. Picture Book. 

Shaughnessy, Diane, and Jack Carpenter (1997). Chief 
Ouray: Ute Peacemaker. New York: PowerKids. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-8239-5108-1. Picture Book. 

Shaughnessy, Diane, and Jack Carpenter (1997). Saca- 
jawea: Shoshone Trailblazer. New York: PowerKids. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8239-5106-5. Picture Book. 

5.33 Stanley, Diane (1996). Elena. New York: Hyperion. 55 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7868-0256-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.15) 

5.34 Swain, Gwenyth (1996). The Road to Seneca Falls: A Story about 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Illustrated by Mary O'Keefe. Minneapolis: 
Carolrhoda. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-947-6. Chapter Book. (See 3.50) 

5.35 Walker, Sally M. (1998). The 18 Penny Goose. New York: Harper- 
Collins. 61 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027557-X. Chapter Book. 

This I Can Read Book tells a true story of the American Revolution 
that has been handed down by the descendants of young Letty 
Wright, a New England farmgirl in 1778. Letty and her family are 
forced to abandon their homestead in rural New Jersey because the 
British are raiding the local inhabitants to assert their control in the 
region. Letty is able to leave her belongings, but she cannot bear to 
think of her gander, Solomon, being harmed by the Redcoats while 
she is away. She writes the soldiers a note, asking them to spare the 
gander's life when they come upon Letty's family farm. Letty's 
family returns after the raids and the damage to Letty's farm is dis- 
couraging, but the message the soldiers leave is memorable and 
warm. This book for young readers is divided into four skillfully 
sequenced chapters that present an historically accurate scenario 
that is well told, interesting, and easy to understand. 



O 

ERIC 



208 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



183 



5.36 Weate, Jeremy (1998). A Young Person's Guide to Philosophy. 
Illustrated by Peter Lawman. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 64 
pp. ISBN: 0-7894-3074-6. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

"Why are we here? What does it mean to be human?" Human- 
kind has grappled with such questions for over three thousand 
years. Philosophers such as Thales, Socrates, and De Beauvoir 
spent their lives puzzling over universal ideas, and in the process 
influenced societal views, religious ideology, the sciences, and 
history itself. These individuals challenge our minds and bring 
about dialogue as we consider the larger questions of humanity. 
This book engages young readers in learning about these signifi- 
cant individuals and their ideas through well-developed intro- 
ductions supported by pictures and diagrams. This is a wonderful 
book to add to a classroom collection. 

Secondary Reviews 

5.37 Bruchac, Joseph (1998). The Heart of a Chief. New York: Dial Books 
for Young Readers. 153 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2276-1. Chapter Book. 

This story deals with Native American gaming and sports logos 
that use images of Native American culture. Bruchac, of Abenaki 
heritage, chose to tell the story on a fictitious reservation so as not 
to cause conflict with any specific tribe. Chris Nicola, a young 
Penacook boy, leaves the reservation to attend a public school 
where the sports logo is the Chiefs. At football games, war cries 
and tomahawk chants are used to cheer the team to victory. Chris 
is troubled by this, and seizes the opportunity to take up the issue 
for a school report and presentation. His leadership skills and 
agreeable personality are demonstrated by his ability to work 
with non-Native American children, and he is able to make a dif- 
ference at school and in his own life. This coming-of-age story is 
told with a sensitivity that only an insider to Native American cul- 
ture can deliver. 

5.38 Collins, David R. (1996). Farmworker's Friend: The Story of 
Cesar Chavez. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 80 pp. ISBN: 0-87614- 
982-4. Chapter Book. 

Intermediate readers who want to know more about the farmwork- 
ers' labor movement will enjoy this moving biography of Cesar 
Chavez. Seven chapters detail specific events in this hero's life, 
from his early days as a migrant laborer with his fairdly, through 




209 



184 



Struggle and Survival 



the years of community organization and the development of the 
United Farm Workers union, to his death as a result of his political 
activism. Black-and-white photographs portray Chavez and his 
labor movement in journalistic style. Complete with a list of con- 
tents, notes, a bibliography, and an index, this book is an excellent 
biographical source for teachers and older students, and a must for 
every middle-school library. 

5.39 Cooney, Barbara (1996). Eleanor. New York: Viking. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-670-86159-6. Picture Book. 

Eleanor Roosevelt is one of the "most remarkable and influential 
women this country has ever known." In this beautiful picture 
book, Cooney chronicles Roosevelt's triumphs. Always a shy, 
timid child, she was sent to live with her grandmother after being 
orphaned at age nine. Although her family was wealthy, it did not 
provide a happy or congenial setting for children. When Eleanor 
was sent to boarding school in England, she finally found people 
who truly cared about her and she began to realize her true poten- 
tial. Throughout her remarkable life, Eleanor Roosevelt never for- 
got the poor and disadvantaged. This biography is illustrated in 
Cooney's colorful style with meticulous attention to detail. 

5.40 Fuller, Sarah Betsy (1998). Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier: Censorship 
in School Newspapers. Springfield, NJ: Enslow. 128 pp. ISBN: 0- 
89490-971-1. Chapter Book. 

This book is part of the Landmark Supreme Court Cases series. In 
this case, students sued the Hazelwood School District on the 
grounds that their First Amendment rights had been trampled 
when the principal of their school would not print two pages of 
articles about the sensitive issue of teen pregnancy. The case was 
taken to the Supreme Court, where four years later a decision was 
made in favor of the school district. 

5.41 Ganeri, Anita (1996). The Young Person's Guide to the Orches- 
tra. Compact disc narrated by Ben Kingsley. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201304-0. Picture Book. (See 11.20) 

5.42 Matas, Carol (1997). The Garden. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. 102 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80349-4. Chapter 
Book. 




210 



Bigger-than-Life Heroes, Heroines, and Events 



185 



Ruth Mendelson, a survivor of the Buchenwald concentration 
camp, tells how she dealt with the death of her friends and ene- 
mies in bringing about the birth of the state of Israel. Much of the 
book shows how Mendelson and her friends transform their 
minds to kill the Arabs who are trying to make them leave their 
newfound homeland. They look at their sorrowful past where 
they lost so much of their family to the Nazis, and consider Israel 
their only hope for the future. 

5.43 McCuUy, Emily Arnold (1998). Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of 
the Nun's Kung Fu. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590- 
37487-7. Picture Book. 

The title page opens with a dramatic view of a village in China. 
Within the village, the reader is introduced to an aristocratic fam- 
ily of the Ming Emperor. As the dynasty is attacked, the 
Emperor's young daughter — who was well educated despite the 
attitudes toward women at the time — leaves the palace walls to 
find refuge in a Shaolin monastery. Impressed by her martial art 
ability, the monks — who are skilled in kung fu — welcome her to 
the monastery. They name her Wu Mei, which means beautiful 
warrior. So unfolds the true story of a strong young woman 
whose legacy is passed on to a young girl in trouble. This wonder- 
ful tale of strength and inner-balance discovered through medita- 
tion and self-reflection is inspiring. Gentle watercolor illustrations 
by the author create a sense of the serenity of nature, as well as the 
drama of peril. This is not only a tale of personal growth, but also 
a message of control of one's own destiny. 

5.44 Morey, Janet Nomura, and Wendy Dunn (1996). Famous His- 
panic Americans. New York: Cobblehill. 190 pp. ISBN: 0-525- 
65190-X. Chapter Book. 

This collective biography is a good resource for intermediate stu- 
dents who are seeking information on Hispanic Americans who 
have made positive contributions to our society. The book con- 
tains chapters on fourteen different people who represent His- 
panic cultures throughout the Americas and an interesting variety 
of professions including sports, politics, fashion, theater, educa- 
tion, business, science, and entertainment. Fully half of the biog- 
raphies are about women. Each chapter is approximately twelve 
to fifteen pages in length, and is written so that the reader has an 




211 



186 



Struggle and Survival 



understanding of the significance of the featured person. The 
black-and-white photographs and an index enhance this book. 

5.45 Nivola, Claire A. (1997). Elisabeth. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-374-32085-3. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

In this beautiful picture book, war is seen through the eyes of a 
child. A young girl is forced to flee the Nazis during World War II 
without her special doll, Elisabeth, or any other possessions. Years 
later through her own daughter, she is miraculously reunited 
with her doll. 

5.46 Philip, Neil, editor (1997). In a Sacred Manner I Live: Native 
American Wisdom. New York: Clarion. 93 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84981-0. 
Chapter Book. 

This edited book is a collection of speeches or portions of speeches 
that have been made by Native Americans. The speakers or writ- 
ers range from Chief Powhatan in 1609, to the contemporary Sioux 
medicine man Leonard Crow Dog in 1995. The editor points out 
that although there are huge differences among the Native Ameri- 
can people represented, they all live in a sacred manner. AU Native 
American nations live with respect for the environment, for the 
community, and for themselves. Black-and-white photographs 
accompany each speech. Each has a brief caption describing a 
Native American tradition or offering information about the 
speaker. Complete text and picture sources are listed, as well as 
suggestions for further reading. 

5.47 Pryor, Bonnie (1996). The Dream Jar. Illustrated by Mark Gra- 
ham. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
13062-3. Picture Book. (See 3.45) 

5.48 Zaunders, Bo (1998). Crocodiles, Camels and Dugout Canoes: 
Eight Adventurous Episodes. Illustrated by Roxie Munro. New 
York: Dutton. 48 pages. ISBN: 0-525-45858-1. Chapter Book. 

Motivated by the adventures of explorers, Zaunders composed a 
collection of adventures less commonly known. Each story begins 
with an interesting experience the explorer had, and then reveals 
the person's personality and the background that led to the 
adventure. This is a nice twist on the male-dominated topic of 
exploration. 



212 



Finding One's Own Identity 



187 



Finding One’s Own Identity 

See also the sections entitled Cultural Traditions: Cultural Practices and 

Celebrations in chapter 3, "Exploring Our Past," and Learning about 

Self within a Classroom Context in chapter 6, "School Life." 

Primary Reviews 

5.49 Bloor, Edward (1997). Tangerine. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 294 
pp. ISBN: 0-152-01246-X. Chapter Book. (See 13.50) 

5.50 Bruchac, Joseph (1997). Eagle Song. Illustrated by Dan Andrea- 
sen. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 80 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8037-1919-1. Chapter Book. 

Danny Bigtree's transition from the Mohawk Reservation on the 
U.S.-Canadian border to Brooklyn, New York, shows the difficul- 
ties experienced by a fourth-grade student in bridging the cul- 
tural gaps of living in two worlds. Making friends in a new school 
is never easy, but Darmy is plagued by stereotypes of Native 
Americans because of his long black hair. "Hey, Chief, going home 
to your teepee?" is the kind of remark this young boy faces on a 
daily basis. How he deals with this cruel teasing and manages to 
turn the situation around is a central issue in this book. Joseph 
Bruchac, of Abenaki/Slovak heritage, illustrates the influence of 
storytelling through the character of Danny's father. Bruchac also 
stresses the importance of self-esteem, and he credits his own 
grandfather with helping him gain his self-esteem in his autobiog- 
raphy, Bowman's Store. In Eagle Song, all the children are winners. 

Bruchac, Joseph (1997). Bowman's Store: A Journey to 

Myself. New York: Dial. 311 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1997-3. 

Chapter Book. 

5.51 Cushman, Karen (1996). The Ballad of Lucy Whipple. New York: 
Clarion. 195 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72806-1. Chapter Book. 

Arvella Whipple moves from Massachusetts to Lucky Diggins, 
California, in 1849 and opens a boardinghouse. The widow and her 
three children — Sierra, Butte, and twelve-year-old California 
Morning — all struggle to make a new life amidst the harsh realities 
of the mining camp. Book-loving California Morning longs to 
return to Massachusetts, and resists her mother's domineering 
manner by changing her name to Lucy Whipple. This exuberant 
story told through the eyes of Lucy presents two strong, deter- 







213 



188 



Struggle and Survival 



mined, and independent women and a cast of ragged, rough-hewn 
characters. The tall tales, yams, and rich vernacular language that 
fill the book make it a wonderful read-aloud: "Dag diggety! Git yer 
carcass off 'n my claim afore I bury my shovel in yer yella hair, you 
diggety dog. Spyin' on me!" The novel reflects much recent histori- 
cal research that highlights the roles that women played in settling 
the West. 

5.52 Dines, Carol (1997). Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. New York: 
Delacorte. 223 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32271-2. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book; adult mediation required. (See 20.53) 

5.53 Egan, Ted (1998). The Drover's Boy. Illustrated by Robert Ingpen. 
Melbourne, Australia: Lothian. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-887734-52-X. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.61) 

5.54 Hesse, Karen (1996). The Music of Dolphins. New York: Scholas- 
tic. 181 pp. ISBN: 0-590-89797-7. Chapter Book. (See 4.10) 

5.55 Keegan, Marci (1997). Pueblo Boy. New York: Viking. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-14-36945-7. Picture Book. 

Reprinted in paperback, this contemporary biography gives 
young readers an intimate portrait of a young boy growing up on 
the San lldefonso Pueblo in New Mexico. This photographic essay 
contains many color photos showing the boy engaged in social, 
family, and school situations that are typical for most children 
growing up in the United States today, as well as many activities 
that are unique to Native Americans living on reservations. A sin- 
cere and genuine portrait of a Native American boy growing up 
and managing the influences of two distinctive cultures in his life. 

5.56 Matcheck, Diane (1998). The Sacrifice. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 224 pp. ISBN: 0-374-36378-1. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book. (See 3.41) 

5.57 Savageau, Cheryl (1996). Muskrat Will Be Swimming. Illustrated 
by Robert Hynes. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-87358- 
604-2. Picture Book. (See 4.123) 

5.58 Thomassie, Tynia (1996). Mimi's Tutu. Illustrated by Jan Spivey 
Gilchrist. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-44020-9. 
Picture Book. (See 11.60) 



er|c 



214 



Finding One's Own Identity 



189 



5.59 Voigt, Cynthia (1996). Bad Girls. New York: Scholastic. 278 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-60134-2. Chapter Book. (See 6.31) 

5.60 Wilson, Nancy Hope (1997). Old People, Frogs, and Albert. Illus- 
trated by Marcy D. Ramsey. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
58 pp. ISBN: 0-374-35625-4. Chapter Book. (See 20.56) 

6.61 Wolff, Virginia E. (1998). Bat 6. New York: Scholastic. 256 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-89799-3. (See 20.43) 

5.62 Wyeth, Sharon Dennis (1998). Something Beautiful. Illustrated 
by Chris K. Soentpiet. New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell. 30 pp. 
ISBN: 0-385-32239-9. Picture Book. (See 8.64, 20.8) 

Secondary Reviews 

5.63 Bruchac, Joseph (1996). Children of the Longhouse. New York: 
Dial Books for Young Readers. 150 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1793-8. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Bruchac captures the essence of adolescent rivalry relevant in 
today's society. Feelings of insecurity and the need for power and 
recognition lead a fifteen-year-old Mohawk boy to seek revenge 
on a younger boy who overheard a conversation that was sure to 
destroy peace among the neighboring tribes. The younger boy, 
Ohkwa'ri, and his twin sister go to see their grandmother, who is 
the Clan Mother and perhaps the most important person in their 
Iroquois Clan Longhouse. Ohkwa'ti tells his story, and a council 
meeting soon follows. Quiet confrontation takes place here 
between the two boys, eventually leading to self-discovery and 
strength of character. A game of lacrosse, which originated with 
the Iroquois, is the means by which the boys are tested. Bruchac 
creates a story historically referenced in Longhouse society, and 
stresses the importance of oral tradition in teaching values, tradi- 
tions, and about life in general. The novel also presents a strong 
picture of women in Iroquois society, source material for an inter- 
esting discussion of women's roles today. 

5.64 Campbell, Ann Jeanette (1998). Dora's Box. Illustrated by Fabian 
Negrin. New York: Knopf. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-679-87642-1. Picture 
Book. 

"What if you had a box in which you could put everything evil 
and sad in the world?" So opens this tale of a young couple who 



215 



190 



Struggle and Survival 



want to shield their daughter, Dora, from all the pain in the world. 
In their attempt to create a world of only happiness and pleasure, 
they gather into the box all those things that might bring her pain 
and sadness, such as the sharp thorns from a bush or the sad tears 
of another child. Dora discovers the box and releases its contents, 
just as Pandora did. In the end, parents and child appreciate that 
one cannot know good without knowing evil, or truly appreciate 
joy without sorrow. 

5.65 Curtis, Gavin (1998). The Bat Boy & His Violin. Illustrated by E. B. 
Lewis. New York: Simon & Schuster. 27 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80099-1. 
Picture Book. (See 4.6) 

5.66 Gerstein, Mordicai (1998). The Wild Boy. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-374-38431-2. Chapter Book. (See 
3.63) 

5.67 Hines, Anna Grossnickle (1998). My Own Big Bed. Illustrated by 
Maru Watson. New York: Green willow. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15599- 
5. Picture Book. 

Hines has written a delightful book for young children about the 
challenge and excitement of moving from crib to bed. Watson's 
heartwarming illustrations of a beautiful young child make her 
seem alive within the pages. For each challenge the bed confronts 
her with she has a remedy that begins with "I can fix that!" The 
book closes with the advantages of having Daddy read bedtime 
stories and Mommy tuck in. This is a splendid look at the little 
struggles young children encounter, and can be used as a point of 
discussion about what other challenges are encountered as we 
grow. 

5.68 London, Jonathan (1998). At the Edge of the Forest. Illustrated by 
Barbara Firth. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
7636-0014-8. Picture Book. 

Snowy illustrations surround a story of a young boy and his fam- 
ily as they contend with life on a farm tending their livestock. 
When their sheep become threatened by a coyote, the father 
decides it is time for him to shoot the animal. The young boy dis- 
covers a den of coyote pups, and when his father sees that the 
coyote was just trying to feed its own family, he lowers the barrel 
of the gun. The message of this story is that all animals have fami- 




216 



Rites of Passage 



191 



lies they need to support and that peaceful alternatives to solving 
a problem need to be examined. 

5.69 Mazer, Harry (1998). The Wild Kid. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
103 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80751-1. Chapter Book. (See 4.86) 

5.70 Schami, Rafik (1996). Fatima and the Dream Thief. Illustrated by 
Els Cools and Oliver Streich. New York: North-South. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-55858-653-9. Picture Book. (See 14.35) 

Rites of Passage 

See also the sections entitled Cultural Traditions: Cultural Practices and 

Celebrations in chapter 3, "Exploring Our Past," and Life Stages and 

Milestones in chapter 4, "Families." 

Primary Reviews 

5.71 Bunting, Eve (1998). Your Move. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200181-6. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

In this story, a ten-year-old African American boy named Isaac 
wants to "hang out and do cool stuff" with a group called the K- 
Bones. Isaac must prove himself by pulling off a risky task that the 
Bones come up with. When an older gang of boys shows up with 
a gun, Isaac and his younger brother run. Isaac's decision not to 
join the group, and the lack of pressure from Kris, the K-Bones 
representative, leaves the door open to lots of "what if" scenarios 
that can provide opportunities for classroom discussion. Themes 
of trust, divorce, being home alone, gangs, vandalism, and guns 
abound in this beautiful picture book. The phenomenal true-to- 
life illustrations by James Ransome in oil paint on watercolor 
paper bring this story to life. (See also 20.33) 

5.72 Dorris, Michael (1996). Sees Behind Trees. Illustrated by Linda 
Benson. New York: Hyperion. 104 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0224-3. Chap- 
ter Book. 

A disability is not a handicap but rather an opportunity to find the 
talents one has to grow, build self-esteem, and become a responsi- 
ble human being. Dorris, of Modoc heritage, illustrates this mes- 
sage in a coming-of-age story. A young Native American boy 
named Walnut cannot see like others his age, and fears that he 
will not pass the shooting test required before he is given his adult 



Er|c 



217 



192 



Struggle and Survival 



name. However his mother discovers his problem and teaches 
Walnut to develop his sense of hearing, which eventually earns 
him the name Sees Behind Trees. Experiences with the weroance, a 
revered woman of the village, and her twin brother Gray Fire 
teach Sees Behind Trees the skills to survive on his own, the val- 
ues and traditions of his culture, and the responsibilities of adult- 
hood. This is a story to which adolescents of all cultures can relate. 

5.73 Farmer, Nancy (1996). A Girl Named Disaster. New York: 
Orchard. 309 pp. ISBN: 0-531-08889-8. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Nhamo, or "Disaster," is an eleven-year-old Shona girl who escapes 
her village in Mozambique rather than marry "a diseased man with 
several wives." She flees alone to Zimbabwe in search of her father. 
Nhamo's journey is a harrowing and marvelous one during which 
her physical toughness and emotional strength are severely tested. 
She is guided by luminous spirits, pilots a crude canoe over long 
stretches of water, encounters a witch, and lives among a herd of 
baboons. Nhamo's indomitable spirit and courage make the novel 
a natural companion to Julie of the Wolves and Island of the Blue Dol- 
phins. This rite-of-passage adventure ends happily with Nhamo 
embarking upon a new life. The spirit of her grandmother whispers 
to her, "We have a long way to go." The list of characters, map, glos- 
sary, and historical and cultural notes aid the reader in traversing 
the foreign territory of the novel. 

George, Jean Craighead (1972). Julie of the Wolves. 

New York: HarperCollins. 192 pp. ISBN: 0-06-021943-2. 

Chapter Book. 

O'Dell, Scott (1960). Island of the Blue Dolphins. New 

York: Houghton Mifflin. 192 pp. ISBN: 0-395-06962-9. 

Chapter Book. 

5.74 Fields, T. S. (1997). Danger in the Desert. Flagstaff, AZ: North- 
land. 126 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-666-2. Chapter Book. 

The terrain of the hot Arizona desert is the focus of much of the 
action and thrill of the plot in this adventure story. Two brothers, 
Robbie and Scott, are kidnapped at gunpoint by a frightening 
man who plans to kill them eventually. Instead he dumps them in 
the desert, far away from civilization and any help. These two 
boys learn to use their wits in order to survive the terrible heat, 
flash floods, poisonous critters, and lack of food and water. 




218 



Rites of Passage 



193 



Although Robbie and Scott do not get along at the story's begin- 
ning, they realize they must work together to live through this 
ordeal. Children were highly motivated to read the story because 
of the book cover, although the snake depicted there and in the 
interior illustration does not match the description given in the 
text. This book was chosen by school children as one of the Ari- 
zona Young Reader Award books for 1998. 

5.75 Grove, Vicki (1998). Reaching Dustin. New York: Putnam. 199 pp. 
ISBN: 0-399-23008-4. Chapter Book. 

Carly, set on winning the job of editor of the class newspaper, 
takes on the task of interviewing Dustin Groat, the class behavior 
problem. She soon realizes there's a reason Dustin has given up 
on school, and she makes a concerted effort to reach out to him — 
especially when she discovers that something she did in third 
grade contributed to his problems. When Dustin's family takes up 
arms against the government, Carly's family becomes involved in 
ways they never dreamed of, trying to help both Dustin and his 
sister. This is a powerful coming-of-age book that should provoke 
conversations about bullies, outcasts, and gun control. 

5.76 Johnson, Angela (1998). Songs of Faith. New York: Orchard. 103 
pp. ISBN: 0-531-30023-4. Chapter Book. 

Thirteen-year-old Doreen tells her story of life in a divorced fam- 
ily in Ohio during the summer of 1975 from her thoughtful, obser- 
vant, and often poignant point of view. "Everyone's going vvhen I 
really need them to just stay put," she says. Eventually she comes 
to terms with her divorced father in Chicago, her mother who is 
going to school, her friend Viola who has moved to Connecticut, 
and her older brother Bobo who stops talking. Her mother, who is 
working diligently on her master's degree, makes time to teach 
Doreen to have faith in love. She says, "You can't tear this kind of 
love away. Love and Faith. That's all it is." This is a story of love, 
faith, and the strength to keep going. 

5.77 Konigsburg, E. L. (1996). The View from Saturday. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 163 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80993-X. Chapter Book. 
(See 6.48) 

5.78 Martinez, Victor (1996). Parrot in the Oven: Mi Vida. New York: 
HarperCollins. 216 pp. ISBN: 0-06-447186-1. Chapter Book. (See 
20.4) 



219 



194 



Struggle and Survival 



5.79 McBCissack, Patricia C. (1997). Run Away Home. New York: 
Scholastic. 160 pp. ISBN: 0-590-46751-4. Chapter Book. 

This historical novel is set in the 1880s, a time when the Apaches 
are being relocated and white supremacist groups continue to 
threaten African Americans in the south. McKissack, a master sto- 
ryteller, connects these two events in this finely woven book. 
Sarah Crossman is an eleven-year-old girl who has both African 
American and Native American ancestry. She spots Sky, an 
Apache boy, escaping from a train bound for a reservation in 
Florida. Having heard the horror stories of slavery, Sarah is deter- 
mined not to turn the boy in. With the help of Sarah's mother. Sky 
is nursed back to health, and everyone — including her dog 
Buster — is smitten with him. When the family is about to lose 
their farm, Sarah comes up with an idea and Sky pulls them 
through. The closed-mindedness of the nation and the open- 
mindedness of Sarah's family is a powerful contrast in this excep- 
tional book. McKissack weaves into the narrative a speech given 
by Booker T. Washington, the famous Black educator, that shows 
how the members of one community were brought together 
through their experiences with terrorizing night riders, the un-cel- 
ebration of the Fourth of July, and the infestation of boll weevils 
on their farmlands. 

5.80 Paterson, Katherine (1998). Parzival: The Quest for the Grail 
Knight. New York: Lodestar. 127 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67579-5. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 14.53) 

5.81 Snyder, Zilpha Keatley (1998). Gib Rides Home. New York: Dela- 
corte. 247 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32267-4. Chapter Book. 

In tribute to the memory of her father who grew up in a Nebraska 
orphanage and was farmed out to neighboring ranches, Zilpha 
Keatley Snyder has written a moving account of an orphan boy's 
story in the early 1900s. Orphaned at age six, Gib Whittaker 
moves in to the Lovell House Home for Orphaned and Aban- 
doned Boys. Until he's eleven, he hangs on to his "hope dream" of 
belonging to a real family. He learns that his friend Georgie has 
been farmed out and might even be dead from the poor treatment 
he has received. Gib too is farmed out to a family that knew his 
family, but that has secrets that prevent Gib from belonging and 
feeling comfortable. His love of horses and Livy keep him going. 




220 



Rites of Passage 



195 



This is a heartbreaking story of a determined, bright, caring boy 
looking for a home and a family to love him. 

5.82 Spinelli, Jerry (1997).Wringer. New York: HarperCollins. 228 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-024913-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

What does it take to be a real man? A real boy? In the town of 
Waymer during the annual Pigeon Day Festival, men shoot thou- 
sands of pigeons as a fundraiser, and boys wring the necks of the 
wounded birds. Boys become wringers when they are ten years 
old, but nine-year-old Palmer does not want to be a wringer. He is 
torn between his disgust over the event and peer pressure to con- 
form. His confusion grows greater after he takes in a pigeon as a 
pet. This rite-of-passage tale explores the courage to resist local 
norms and societal pressure to do what one believes to be wrong. 
The moral dilemmas raised will promote intense classroom dis- 
cussion. (See also 20.41) 

5.83 Swarthout, Glendon, and Kathryn Swarthout (1997). Whichaway. 
Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. 104 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-675-1. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. 

This coming-of-age adventure story is set in the rough deserts of 
Arizona during the early half of this century. The main character is 
a fifteen-year-old boy named Whichaway, whose father is a tough, 
unemotional rancher who expects the same rugged attitude from 
his only son. However the boy more closely resembles his mother, 
an educated pioneer school teacher who had a tenderness for ani- 
mals and life before her untimely death. Whichaway decides to 
prove to his father that he is worthy of respect by riding solo out 
on the ranch to repair the windmills. Unfortimately he is injured 
by a dust devil while working on the windmill platform, and left 
stranded there with two broken legs. Trapped on the windmill, he 
is witness to cattle rustlers and shot at by a crazy prospector. Dur- 
ing this time, he decides how to help himself survive and reflects 
on his relationship with this father. In the end, Whichaway realizes 
his true inner strengths and comes to terms with his life. Originally 
published in 1966, this adventure story is an exciting book to read, 
with an interesting main character who undergoes changes and 
becomes a young man by the end. There are some colorful western 
expressions and cowboy lingo that may need clarification for read- 
ers, but that add much to the authenticity of the setting. 




221 



196 



Struggle and Survival 



Secondary Reviews 

5.84 Grimes, Nikki (1998). Jazmiit's Notebook. New York: Dial. 102 
pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2224-9. Chapter Book. 

Set in the 1960s in Harlem, Jazmin's Notebook is rich in both lan- 
guage and plot. Jazmin, a fourteen-year-old African American 
girl, fills her notebook with her own poetry and tells of her close 
calls with death, sex, and drugs. Jazmin lives with her sister 
because her mother is hospitalized in a state mental institution 
and her father is dead. Jazmin deals in an open-eyed and embrac- 
ing way with the problems of living with her sister, living in a 
rough neighborhood, trying not to be too nerdy, and coming-of- 
age. Nikki Grimes weaves strong figurative language into this 
beautiful and chaotic story of a girl fighting and succeeding on 
her way to adulthood. 

5.85 Klass, Sheila Solomon (1997). Uncivil War. New York: Holiday 
House. 162 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1329-2. Chapter Book. 

Asa Anderson is challenged by her overweight body, and by the 
cute new boy in her class who constantly makes fun of her. Asa 
rises to the occasion and uses her brains to fight back. She learns 
a lot about why her mother is so overprotective when her baby 
sister is born premature like she was. This book provides a rich 
context for discussing peer problems, family issues, and being 
overweight. 

Family Hardship 

See also the section entitled Controversial Issues in Family Life in chap- 
ter 4, "Families," and Perspectives on Life Inside and Outside of the 

Classroom Context in chapter 6, "School Life." 

Primary Reviews 

5.86 Balgassi, Haemi (1996). Peacebound Trains. Illustrated by Chris 
K. Soentpiet. New York: Clarion. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72093-1. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 3.114) 

5.87 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 73570-X. Picture Book. 
(See 3.115, 20.22) 



222 



Family Hardship 



197 



5.88 Bunting, Eve (1996). Going Home. Illustrated by David Diaz. 
New York: Cotier. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-026296-6. Picture Book. 
(See 4.4, 20.1) 

5.89 Fleischman, Paul (1997). Seedfolks. Illustrated by Judy Pedersen. 
New York: HarperCollins. 69 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027471-9. Chapter 
Book. (See 7.66, 20.54) 

5.90 Friedrich, Elizabeth (1996). Leah's Pony. Illustrated by Michael 
Garland. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397- 
189-5. Picture Book. (See 3.29) 

5.91 Lachtman, Ofelia Dumas (1997). Call Me Consuelo. Houston, TX: 
Arte Publico. 149 pp. ISBN: 1-55885-187-9. Chapter Book. 

When twelve-year-old Consuelo's parents both die in a car acci- 
dent, she is sent to the United States to live with her American 
grandmother. Although Consuelo's mother was Mexican and her 
father American, she has lived her entire life in Mexico. She des- 
perately misses her Mexican friends, warm tortillas, menudo, and 
her Spanish language. Consuelo resents the attempts of her 
grandmother to make her feel comfortable, and dreams of return- 
ing to live in Mexico. However once Consuelo meets some chil- 
dren her own age, she finds adventure and excitement in her new 
surroundings as the children try to solve the mysterious disap- 
pearance of household items from the neighborhood. By the 
story's end, they discover the culprit and Consuelo finds a new 
home for herself in America. This book is nicely formatted with a 
print size that is appealing to young readers, and simple blackl in e 
sketches scattered throughout that add a subtle, friendly feeling 
to the story. This is a sweet, fun story for children and offers the 
reader a strong and delightful Mexican American heroine. 

5.92 Pryor, Bonnie (1996). The Dream Jar. Illustrated by Mark Gra- 
ham. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
13062-3. Picture Book. (See 3.45) 

5.93 Thomas, Jane Resh (1996). Daddy Doesn't Have to Be a Giant 
Anymore. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 46 pp. ISBN: 0-395- 
69427-2. Picture Book. 

Jane Resh Thomas tells this story from the perspective of a young 
daughter who is facing the family struggles that result from her 




223 



198 



Struggle and Survival 



father's alcoholism. The little girl tells the reader of the happy 
times her family has at the beach, and contrasts those with the 
scary times when her father drinks whisky from a brown bag in 
the garage and frightens her with accusations that she is spying 
on him. The story tells of a family intervention where each mem- 
ber of the circle of family and friends confronts the girl's father 
with the problems that his drinking has caused in their relation- 
ships. Finally the little girl is asked to speak and she is fearful she 
will enrage her father, who has already produced a load of 
excuses for everyone else for his behavior. She simply tells him 
that he scares her when he shouts and shakes her, and all she 
wants is to sit on the porch and count fireflies with him. The story 
ends on a hopeful note, with her father participating in treatment 
and returning with the strength and resolve to not drink. This 
book would be helpful to young readers who are living in similar 
situations. It also would be beneficial as a literature extension for 
alcohol awareness programs because it illustrates the power of 
addiction and the impact that it has on family and friends. 

Secondary Reviews 

5.94 Hest, Amy (1997). When Jessie Came across the Sea. Illustrated 
by P. J. Lynch. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
7636-0094-6. Picture Book. (See 3.34) 

5.95 Kent, Deborah (1997). The Only Way Out. New York: Scholastic. 
185 pp. ISBN: 0-590-54081-5. Chapter Book. 

Faced with another round of chemotherapy after recovering from 
a previous battle with Hodgkin's disease, seemingly shy fourteen- 
year-old Shannon embarks on a journey to find Sister Euprasia, a 
healer. As she travels to New Orleans, she meets a variety of peo- 
ple and has experiences which help her realize her own determi- 
nation and inner strength. She comes to terms with her illness 
when she discovers that sometimes you have to go through strug- 
gles in order to become victorious over what challenges you. 

5.96 Mora, Pat (1997). Tomas y la senora de la biblioteca. Illustrated 
by Raul Colon. New York: Dragonfly. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-679- 
80401-3. (See 20.39) 

5.97 Rodriguez, Luis J. (1997). America is Her Name. Illustrated by 
Carlos Vasquez. Willimantic, CT: Curbstone. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880684-40-3. Picture Book. (See 20.7) 



224 



Making Peace with Family 



199 



Making Peace with Famiiy 

See also chapter 4, "Families." 

Primary Reviews 

5.98 Billingsly, Franny (1997). Well Wished. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 170 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81210-8. Chapter Book. (See 14.40) 

5.99 Creech, Sharon (1997). Chasing Redbird. New York: Harper- 
Collins. 261 pp. ISBN: 0-06-02698-7. Chapter Book. 

Newbery Medal-winner Sharon Creech's book. Chasing Redbird, is a 
beautifully written, thought-provoking story of Zinnia Taylor, an 
independent thirteen-year-old girl. Zinnia has too many brothers 
and sisters, and spends a lot of time in the "Quiet Zone" at her Uncle 
Nate and Aimt Jessie's home. Uncle Nate and Aimt Jessie's daugh- 
ter, Rose, died when Rose and Zinnia were little. Uncle Nate deals 
with this terrible loss by spending time in a special place where he 
can remember little Rose. When Aimt Jessie dies. Uncle Nate and 
Zinnia must each find their own way of dealing with their grief and 
of chasing their memories of "Redbird." Zinnia works through her 
grief by spending ten days alone clearing a mysterious trail — a trail 
that leads her to a boy named Jake, answers about family mysteries, 
and a deeper imderstanding of the love between parents and the 
love of a parent for a child. Shannon, a fifth-grade student, said she 
Uked the "mystery and romance" in Creech's book. 

5.100 Fox, Paula (1997). Radiance Descending. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 101 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2467-3. Chapter Book. (See 20.2) 

5.101 Holt, Kimberly Willis (1998). My Louisiana Sky. New York: 
Henry Holt. 132 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5251-8. Chapter Book. (See 4.66) 

5.102 Ingold, Jeanette (1996). The Window. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
179 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201264-8. Chapter Book. 

Fifteen-year-old Mandy survives an automobile accident that lolls 
her mother, but she is left blind and without immediate family in 
the wake of the wreck. Although her own mother had been put up 
for adoption at birth, the detective work of the social services 
agency allows Mandy to be placed in the home of her mother's 
imcles, in the large rural house in which Mandy's maternal grand- 
mother had lived as a girl. Mandy is plagued from the start by the 



225 



200 



Struggle and Survival 



confusion of her identity that resulted from the impulsive and 
unsettled childhood she experienced with her loving but unstable 
mother, her recent blindness, and the mystery behind her true fam- 
ily, which she is just beginning to unravel in her new environment. 
The plot is complicated by "visions" Mandy has as she stands 
before the attic window of her bedroom. Mandy simultaneously 
witnesses and experiences the emotions and adolescent crises of 
her maternal grandmother so that even in the darkness that 
envelops her, she begins to see the complexity of life, fate, and per- 
sonal choice. In this story of self-revelation. Ingold incorporates a 
realistic backdrop with her depiction of the special education mod- 
ifications for the blind at Mandy's high school, and Mandy's evolv- 
ing friendship with people who accept her physical challenge and 
encourage her to move forward to a more enlightened life than she 
ever embraced as a sighted person. This book is a rich source of 
discussion for preadolescents and young teens who are struggling 
with judgmental, shallow evaluations of the family members who 
have impacted their lives. 

5.103 Lee, Milly (1997). Nim and the War Effort. Illustrated by Yang- 
sook Choi. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-35523-1. Picture Book. (See 3.109) 

5.104 Mackel, Kathy (1997). A Season of Comebacks. New York: Put- 
nam. 116 pp. ISBN: 0 -399-23026-2. Chapter Book. 

In A Season of Comebacks, Molly resents the attention her older, 
talented sister Allie is getting from everyone in Brookdale, but 
especially from her father. Molly's father, who is Allie's baseball 
coach, will do just about anything to give Allie the wirming sea- 
son she deserves. When Allie's catcher is incapacitated and no 
other catcher is willing or able to handle the job, things fall into 
place and both the family and the team find out what is really 
important. 

Catastrophe, Tragedy, and Hardship 

Primary Reviews 

5.105 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-73570-X. Picture Book. 
(See 3.115, 20.22) 




226 



Catastrophe, Tragedy, and Hardship 



201 



5.106 Bunting, Eve (1998). So Far from the Sea. Illustrated by Chris K. 
Soentpiet. New York; Clarion. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72095-8. Picture 
Book. (See 3.105, 20.9) 

5.107 Cha, Dia (1996). Dia's Story Cloth. Illustrated by Chue Cha and 
Nhia Thao Cha. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000- 
34-2. Picture Book. (See 3.78) 

5.108 Dolphin, Laurie (1997). Our Journey from Tibet: Based on a True 
Story. Photographs by Nancy Jo Johnson. New York; Dutton Chil- 
dren's Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45577-9. Picture Book. (See 3.198) 

5.109 Garner, Alan (1998). The Well of the Wind. New York; Dorling 
Kindersley. 43 pp. ISBN; 0-7894-2519-X. Chapter Book. 

This is a simple tale of two infant children who are netted by a fish- 
erman as they float in a crystal box adrift in the sea. The fisherman 
dies and the two children must fend for themselves, which they do 
quite well imtil a wicked witch begins to meddle in their affairs. 
The witch tempts the boy child with promises of silver springs that 
offer continuous quenching of the thirst without the continuous 
fetching of water. She also lures him with reports of acorns of gold 
that will take care of the children's needs forever. All goes well 
imtil the brother goes to the Well of the Wind to fetch the magic 
white feathers that the witch has promised him. When he does not 
return, the sister sets out on a perilous adventure to find her 
brother. Her courage, perseverance, and love help her to rescue her 
brother and to win the precious diamond from the Well of the 
Wind. The surprise ending rewards the two of them not just for 
their courage, but also for their honesty and generosity. This tale is 
filled with rich visual images and action, and the abstract and 
poetic illustrations offer a source of discussion for yoimg readers. 

5.110 Hobbs, Will (1996). Far North. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 
226 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14192-7. Chapter Book. 

Gabe has relocated himself at a boarding school in the Northwest 
Territories of Canada to be near his father. Gabe's dad is a specula- 
tor who makes his living working the various Canadian booms — 
oil, gold, and diamonds — ^while Gabe lives back in Texas with his 
grandparents. Raymond Providence, a Native Canadian from a 
remote Dene village, is Gabe's reluctant and emotionally distant 
roommate. When Gabe's dad arranges for him to tour the scenic 
highlands of the Northwest Territories with a bush pilot, Gabe feels 



227 



202 



Struggle and Survival 



that he is finally going, to see the country that has lured him and his 
dad away from their home in the United States. Gabe is shocked to 
discover that Raymond and his elderly uncle Johnny Raven are also 
scheduled to fly the bush plane, because Ra 3 miond is quitting 
school to return to the Dene village. When the plane experiences 
engine trouble and the pilot is swept away into Virginia Falls, Gabe, 
Raymond, and Johnny Raven must survive the brutal "hammer" of 
cold arctic winds, ice, and snow that grip the Northwest Territories 
in November. Through their combined struggle, Gabe discovers 
friendship as Raymond begins to identify with his Dene heritage 
instead of fighting it. Johnny Raven, aged and feeble, is invigorated 
by the demands of the wilderness and is rejuvenated as he passes 
on to the younger generation the Dene culture and survival ethic. 
This story integrates the development of the characters with the 
geography and weather conditions of the Canadian Northwest, 
creating stunning visual images of ice, canyons, rapids, and frozen 
waterfalls that place the young reader at the scene. The definition of 
survival is demonstrated on several literal and symbolic levels. 

5.111 London, Jonathan (1998). Hurricane! Illustrated by Henri Soren- 
sen. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
08117-7. 

Drawing from his own life experiences as a "navy brat" living in 
Puerto Rico, London captures the closeness of family and commu- 
nity that can arise from disaster. From the beaches to the mountain- 
ous rain forests of El Yunque, we sense the increasing force of the 
storm as two young boys race from their snorkeling, through their 
hurricane preparations, to the shelter. Our Puerto Rican reviewer 
found some problems with this part of the story, noting, "It's 
almost impossible that these two Hds were playing at the beach, 
diving in pretty weather, and when they got back to the surface, 
the sky was black, and suddenly the hurricane was over them." 
She assured us that people of this island country are informed well 
in advance of such dangerous storms and are safely tucked away 
in shelters by the time they arrive. Nevertheless, the story is excit- 
ing and Sorensen's watercolors heighten the sense of danger. One 
primary teacher displayed posters of Winslow Homer's Bahamian 
hurricane scenes during the reading of this book. The children 
noticed the similarity in style, composition, and subject, and were 
sure that Sorenson must have been familiar with Homer's work. 
We also were struck by the diversity of faces among these Carib- 




228 



Catastrophe, Tragedy, and Hardship 



203 



bean people, reflecting the variety of appearances that is normal 
among such a racially mixed population. 

5.112 Myers, Walter Dean (1999). Monster. Illustrated by Christopher 
Myers. New York: HarperCollins Juvenile. 281 pp. ISBN: 0-06- 
028077-8. Chapter Book. 

This contemporary novel-as-screenplay relates the experiences of 
sixteen-year-old Steve Harmon, who is incarcerated and on trial 
for felony murder. The format of the novel is that of a reading 
movie — literally a visual "replaying" of Harmon's experiences 
that depicts the atmosphere of the courtroom, his conversations 
and experiences within the jail cell, the testimony of witnesses, 
and Harmon's own thoughts. The word monster rings out in Har- 
mon's head as he questions his own behavior. 

Notes: 

I couldn't sleep most of the night after the dream. 

The dream took place in the courtroom. I was trying 
To ask questions and nobody could hear me. I was 
Shouting and shouting but everyone went about their 
Business as if I wasn't there. I hope I didn't 
Shout out in my sleep. 

5.113 Parker, David (1998). Stolen Dreams: Portraits of Working Chil- 
dren. Minneapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2960-2. Chapter 
Book. (See 20.15) 

5.114 Paulsen, Gary (1997). Sarny: A Life Remembered. New York: 
Delacorte. 97 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32195 -3. Chapter Book. (See 3.111) 

5.115 Sachar, Louis (1998). Holes. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
233 pp. ISBN: 0-374-33265-7. Chapter Book. (See 13.55) 

5.116 Shahan, Sherry (1998). Frozen Stiff. New York: Delacorte. 151 pp. 
ISBN: 0-385-32303-4. Chapter Book. 

What began as a short camping and kayaking experience in the 
Alaskan wildemess turns into a survival adventure for two 
teenage cousins, Cody and Derek. After losing a kayak and part of 
their supplies, they realize that this is not the worst part. An 
advancing glacier is flooding the fjord, and although they are pad- 
dling, they are getting nowhere. On top of that they sense that 
something is following them. When Cody is blinded by the sim, 
Derek goes for help. Cody follows Derek and can't believe what 



223 



204 



Struggle and Survival 



she discovers. Both Derek and Cody are changed forever as a result 
of this experience outside of their comfort zone. This suspenseful 
story allows the reader to appreciate this wild, majestic area. 

5.117 Shange, Ntozake (1997). Whitewash. Illustrated by Michael 
Sporn. New York: Walker. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8027-8490-9. Sophis- 
ticated Picture Book. 

How would it feel to be painted white so you could see what a 
real "American" was like? Helene- Angel is whitewashed and her 
older brother Mauricio is beaten up by a white gang in this pow- 
erful story by Ntozake Shange. Even after the paint has been 
washed off, Helene- Angel says, "I could still see it. I could still 
taste fear in the back of my throat." Embarrassed and broken, 
Helene-Angel stays in her room until her grandmother demands 
that she come out. As she opens her bedroom door, her friends 
coax her to join them and pledge to stick together so "no one will 
dare bother you or anybody else." This emotion-laden book of 
trauma and triumph is beautifully illustrated by Michael Sporn, 
with art from the Carnegie Medal-winning video. (See also 20.16) 

5.118 Springer, Jane (1997). Listen to Us: The World's Working Chil- 
dren. Toronto, Canada: Groundwood. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-88899-291-2. 
Chapter Book. (See 20.17) 

5.119 Tunnell, Michael O., and George W. Chilcoat (1996). The Children 
of Topaz: The Story of a Japanese-American Internment Camp, 
Based on a Classroom Diary. New York: Holiday House. 74 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8234-1239-3. Picture Book. 

During World War II, a Japanese American teacher and her stu- 
dents kept a diary of their life in a relocation camp in Topaz, Utah. 
Facsimiles of their actual diary entries are accompanied by black- 
and-white photographs of the camp as well as background infor- 
mation placing the children's experiences in the context of the 
times. The children's everyday-life interests and concerns are con- 
trasted with the historical details about families being uprooted, 
torn apart, and imprisoned. Use this book with Yoshiko Uchida's 
well-told Journey to Topaz. 

Uchida, Yoshiko (1971). Journey to Topaz: A Story of 
the Japanese-American Evacuation. Illustrated by Don- 
ald Carrick. New York: Scribner. 149 pp. ISBN: 0-684- 
12497-1. Chapter Book. 



230 



Catastrophe, Tragedy, and Hardship 



205 



5.120 Walter, Virginia (1998). Making Up Megaboy. Illustrated by Kat- 
rina Roeckelein. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-0- 
7894-2488-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 20.55) 

5.121 Wolf, Bernard (1997). HIV Positive. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45459-4. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Wolf's remarkable photo essay focuses on the life of Sara, a young 
single mother who has been diagnosed with AIDS. Sara's ultimate 
decision to live her life as fully as she can impacts the lives of her 
two children, Jennifer and Anthony. Through intimate and 
unflinching photographs that cover a number of months. Wolf 
realistically captures the disappointments and agonies of AIDS as 
well as the healing, restorative power of love and family relation- 
ships. The book is warmly realistic rather than preachy, drawing a 
complex and strong picture of Sara and her struggles. 

5.122 Yee, Paul (1996). Ghost Train. Illustrated by Harvey Chan. 
Emerjrville, CA: Douglas & McIntyre. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88899- 
257-2. Picture Book. (See 4.61) 

Secondary Reviews 

5.123 Bledsoe, Lucy Jane (1997). Tracks in the Snow. New York: Holi- 
day House. 152 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1309-8. Chapter Book. 

Erin's best friends are her pets, so she is particularly attracted to 
her off-beat, artistic babysitter Amy, who claims all of the crea- 
tures in the woods outside of town to be her pets. When Amy fails 
to appear for a Thursday babysitting job with Erin, Erin is deter- 
mined to solve the mystery of Amy's disappearance and to dis- 
prove her parents' theory of Amy's irresponsibility. She uses an 
animal footprint project with an unsuspecting work partner from 
school to gain parental permission to search the woods outside 
town. An unpredicted blizzard traps the work partners in the 
maze of the forest, and Erin must trust her intuition, her love of 
Amy, and her survival skills to bring them through this danger. 
Erin gains confidence in her convictions and discovers her ability 
to develop personal relationships with people and not just pets in 
this story of friendship, problem-solving, and self-development. 

5.124 Cornelissan, Cornelia (1998). Soft Rain: A Story of the Cherokee 
Trail of Tears. New York: Delacorte. 115 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32253-4. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 3.116) 



er|c 



231 



206 



Struggle and Survival 



5.125 Curlee, Lynn (1998). Into the Ice. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 40 
pp. ISBN: 0-395-83013-3. Chapter Book. 

Into the Ice is a fabulous book about the often treacherous explo- 
ration of the Arctic area. From the Inuits who first crossed the 
Bering landbridge through the first flights into the Arctic, Curlee 
chronicles those who sought adventure, fame, information, 
and/or wealth. The book provides a dramatic vision of these 
explorers and the tremendous obstacles they had to battle every 
step of the way. 

5.126 Garay, Luis (1997). The Long Road. Plattsburgh, NY: Tundra. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88776-408-8. Picture Book. 

Drawing on his own experiences since leaving Nicaragua, Garay 
tells the story of a boy's difficult journey to another country. When 
civil war disrupts and threatens their lives, Jose and his mother 
are forced to flee their home. They walk north in search of refuge 
from the political unrest plaguing their homeland, taking buses 
and a plane once they reach the border. When they finally reach 
their destination in Canada, they encounter many new experi- 
ences, both frightening and encouraging. A shelter helps Jose's 
mother find work and a place to live. Once Jose starts school, they 
settle quickly and happily into their new lives. The heavily tex- 
tured artwork lends visual authenticity to this warm, but overly 
optimistic story of the immigrant experience. 

5.127 Johnson, Rebecca L. (1997). Braving the Frozen Frontier: Women 
Working in Antarctica. Minneapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8225-2855-X. Chapter Book. (See 1.17) 

5.128 McCully, Emily Arnold (1997). Starring Mirette and Bellini. New 
York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22636-2. Picture Book. 

This sequel to the Caldecott Medal winner Mirette on the High Wire 
takes the new high-wire partners, Bellini and Mirette, on tour 
around the world. In the original story, Mirette helps Bellini over- 
come his fear of falling as he instructs Mirette on the skills neces- 
sary to cross the tightrope. In this sequel, Mirette and Bellini are 
performing in Russia during the tyrannical rule of the czar. The 
two performers are saddened and outraged by the hopeless plight 
of the Russian people. When Bellini is at the height of their high- 
wire act, he encourages the suffering Russian people by publicly 
announcing that they will someday be as free as he is above them 



232 



Animal Adventures 



207 



on the tightrope. Bellini is arrested, and Mirette must make a 
courageous walk across the high-wire to aid in Bellini's escape 
from the Russian prison. This story mixes Russian history with 
the spirit and courage of Bellini and Mirette and their high-wire 
act. The soft, fuzzy illustrations set against the stark, impover- 
ished background of stony cold Russia will make a lasting 
impression on young readers who are learning of czarist Russia 
for the first time. 

McCully, Emily Arnold (1992). Mirette on the High 
Wire. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22130- 
1. Picture Book. 

5.129 Napoli, Donna Jo (1996). Trouble on the Tracks. New York: 
Scholastic. 190 pp. ISBN: 0-590-13447-7. Chapter Book. 

Thirteen-year-old Zach and his younger sister Eve are traveling 
an Australian train route called the Legendary Ghan into the cen- 
tral bush country. Their mother, an anthropologist on a research 
trip to the continent down under, has arranged for the children to 
travel unaccompanied on the two-day pleasure excursion while 
she studies the remains of an aboriginal settlement. The siblings 
find themselves in danger when they discover two men smug- 
gling an endangered cockatoo aboard the train. They are thrown 
from the train, marooned temporarily in the desert, picked up by 
a pirated train, and involved in the chase and apprehension of the 
smugglers all in the same day. This engaging and humorous 
adventure acquaints young readers with the geography of Aus- 
tralia and the peculiar expressions of Australian English in a con- 
versational and brisk style that moves quickly through this 
action-packed story. 

Animal Adventures 

Primary Reviews 

5.130 Brenner, Barbara, and Julie Takaya (1996). Chibi: A True Story 
from Japan. Illustrated by June Otani. New York: Clarion. 63 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-69623-2. Picture Book. 

The bright illustrations of watercolor-and-ink tell the true story of 
a Spotbill duck who moves into the middle of downtown Tokyo 
to make a home for her family. She and her ten fluffy ducklings 
survive the sometimes harsh realities of the urban city with the 




rj >- 



233 



208 



Struggle and Survival 



help of Mr. Sato, an elderly photographer, and the other caring 
people of Tokyo. This book contains additional information and 
facts on the pages following the story. 

5.131 Hansen, Brooks (1997). Caesar's Antlers. New York: Farrar, 
Strauss and Giroux. 218 pp. ISBN: 0-374-31024-6. Chapter Book. 

Caesar's Antlers contains two stories of struggle and survival that 
demonstrate the universal truths about such experiences, no mat- 
ter who is involved. Caesar is a Norwegian reindeer who has been 
entrusted with a special mission by the herdsmen who respect 
him above all the other reindeer. He is to search for two missing 
brothers from the tribe who have been on a hunt but have not 
returned in time for the winter migration — a sure sign that some- 
thing is wrong. He is harnessed with a sleigh filled with supplies 
should he find the brothers in peril in the deep woods. The other 
story is one of love and loss. Two sparrows who have mated for 
life in the deep woods are separated when the male sparrow dives 
at a colorful object he wishes to retrieve for his newborn young. 
The object is on a windowsill of a house, and the sparrow does not 
realize that the glass will obstruct the dive and injure him. He is 
rescued by a schoolgirl who is at the house for a visit, and she 
sneaks him in her baggage and takes him back to her school far- 
away to recuperate. When the reindeer passes through the woods, 
the female sparrow enlists Caesar's antlers as a nesting place so 
that she can travel the same woods on her search, while tending to 
her newborn young. The story demonstrates the responsibility 
and passion for life and love that must be factored into any strug- 
gle. Interesting characters are met along the way as the male spar- 
row attempts to leam to fly with the geese in order to wing his 
way back to the deep woods, and the reindeer must fend off the 
dangerous natural predators that seek to harm him and his spar- 
rows in their search. In the end. Brooks Hansen employs a magical 
scene that captures in a metaphorical dream the essence of hope 
that motivates perseverance in creatures of all shapes and sizes, no 
matter what the quest. This book offers engaging concepts for lit- 
erature discussion, both in its realistically portrayed struggles and 
in its fanciful special effects which lead to its grand climax. 

5.132 Johnson, Paul Brett, and Celeste Lewis (1996). Lost. Illustrated by 
Paul Brett Johnson. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531- 
08851-0. Picture Book. 



234 



Animal Adventures 



209 



Get out the tissues and be prepared for tears and lots of lost dog 
stories when children hear this story about a girl's search in the 
desert for Flag, her pet beagle. The story opens as the young girl 
narrator and her father begin their search by following tracks at a 
water hole. Johnson and Lewis present a text filled with hope and 
desperation, as the pair of protagonists begin each weekend's 
quest on an upbeat note and end their search on Sunday after- 
noons in dejection. The search goes on for a month, and fortu- 
nately for all it ends happily, but not without considerable trauma 
for Flag. As the story unfolds, Johnson shows us the girl's actions, 
thoughts, and feelings with text and sepia-toned, colored-pencil 
sketches on the right-hand pages. On the facing pages, full-color 
acrylic paintings show Flag's adventure and hardships as his con- 
dition gradually worsens from exposure to the elements, cactus 
thorns, and hunger. To those who live in the desert, this is an all- 
too-familiar tale — one that usually does not turn out this well. 

5.133 Yolen, Jane (1997). The Sea Man. Illustrated by Christopher 
Denise. New York: Philomel. 41 pp. ISBN; 0-399-22939-6. Picture 
Book. 

Jane Yolen's beautifully told story is based on her research of mer- 
maids. It is the story of a being — half man, half fish — who is 
caught in a fisherman's net in the mid-1600s. Although the rest of 
the crew wants nothing to do with the sea man. Lieutenant 
Huiskemp and his cabin boy Pieter suspect there is more to this 
creature. The lieutenant learns of the sea man's family, and "for 
his own little Jannine," hoists the sea man over the rail and into 
the water. After learning to communicate with the lieutenant, the 
sea man eventually returns the favor by saving the crew's lives. 
We learn that accepting others can open our eyes to truth and 
understanding. The powerful sketches by Christopher Denise 
add greatly to this intriguing story of friendship and adventure. 

Secondary Reviews 

5.134 Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds (1997). The Healing of Texas Jake. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 115 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81124-1. Chapter 
Book. 

This is story where cats are personified using humor and drama, 
realistic dialogue, and an action-packed plot. Marco and Polo are 
two house cats who have discovered the allure of street life in a 
loft in the market neighborhood near their home. The two house 



O 



235 



210 



Struggle and Survival 



cats must endure danger and threats to their lives by the mean 
gang of cats that patrol the dump, as well as the insults and taunts 
of Texas Jake, their leader. The clever interaction from a cat's-eye 
point-of-view, and the development of the characters' cat person- 
alities, will engage young pet lovers and offer a source for writing 
ideas that involves talking arumals and their adventures. 

5.135 Tudor, Tasha (1997). The Great Corgiville Kidnapping. New 
York: Little Brown. 39 pp. ISBN: 0-316-85583-9. Picture Book. 

Caleb Corgi is a young dog detective who suspects something is 
amiss when a large number of raccoons descend upon his town. 
His suspicions are borne out when the most celebrated rooster in 
town. Babe, is kidnapped. Caleb sets about finding Babe, which 
leads to a harrowing hot-air balloon ride that threatens to take both 
Babe and Caleb out to sea. This story is rich in detail, challenging 
vocabulary, and structural complexity, but is made understandable 
because of Tasha Tudor's marvelous illustrations and her story- 
telling technique. This book is a centerpiece for intermediate-grade 
lessons on sequencing, the use of context clues, cause and effect, 
and plot development because of its simple animal story premise 
and the elaborate, visual unfolding of the tale. 

5.136 Waite, Michael P. (1996). Jojofu. Illustrated by Yoriko Ito. New 
York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13660-5. 
Picture Book. 

Takumi, a young hunter, learns to put his unwavering faith in his 
brave dog, Jojofu. Jojofu becomes Takumi's eyes and ears, saving 
his doubting master from a landslide, jagged cliff, and giant ser- 
pent. This Japanese folktale, originally told in a Chinese-Japanese 
hybrid language, was taken from the ancient Ima Mukashi scrolls 
of 500 B.C.E.-1075 C.E., and is part of the beginnings of the Bud- 
dha's birth stories. 

5.137 Yee, Tammy (1997). Baby Honu's Incredible Journey. Aiea, HI: 
Island Heritage. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89610-285-8. Picture Book. 

Baby Honu begins his journey from Hawaii's sandy shores to find 
his ocean home. He faces and escapes the ghost crab, frigatebird, 
and humpback whale, all factual details about events that 
threaten endangered green sea turtles today. Yee draws in readers 
through her bright watercolor and soft pastel paintings of lus- 
cious tropical settings, soft baby sea turtles' eyes, and treacherous 




236 



Death Themes 



211 



endangering animal faces. Young readers will enjoy this adven- 
turous tale about Hawaii's sea turtles. 

Death Themes 

See also the section entitled Life Stages and Milestones in chapter 4, 

"Families." 

Primary Reviews 

5.138 Fleischman, Paul (1998). Whirligig. New York: Henry Holt. 133 
pages. ISBN: 0-8050-5582-7. Chapter Book. 

Whirligig by Paul Fleischman weaves music, history, geography, 
and astronomy into a story about how Brent Bishop's whirligigs 
changed other people's lives. When Brent's climb to be part of the 
high school's in-crowd proves disastrous, he decides to end it all 
on the highway. His life is not lost, but the life of Lea, an eighteen- 
year-old honor student, is. As retribution, her mother says she 
wants Brent to build four whirligigs in the comers of the United 
States in memory of Lea, whose death he caused. Unknown to 
him, these magical toys bring love to a schoolgirl, comfort to a 
soon-to-be street sweeper, and relief to a pushed fifth grader and 
an obsessed teenager. Making them doesn't erase the guilt, but 
allows him to arise from the ashes ready to begin his life again. 
Fleischman helps us to see that the world itself is a whirligig, con- 
necting time and place without us realizing it. (See also 20.24) 

5.139 Kimmel, Eric A. (1996). Billy Lazloe. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
37 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200108-5. Picture Book. 

Billy Lazloe was a bom sailor. He had survived many hardships 
on the ocean, and during his many years of seafaring, he had 
watched good men get eaten by sharks, get washed overboard, 
and be decapitated by cannibals. Billy was well known among 
sailors, for he was a fine musician and singer and he entertained 
the crew on the long ocean journeys. But Billy's favorite place in 
the world was back at his birth home on the Willamette River in 
Oregon. Once when he went there, he encoxmtered the magical 
appearance of Davy Jones. Davy Jones rose from his locker 
beneath the sea, and he gave Billy a sack of pearls for a promise to 
come with him and play his concertina to the inhabitants of the 
watery grave. Billy was able to postpone that performance in 
Davy Jones's locker for seven years, knowing all the while that his 



237 



212 



Struggle and Survival 



trip to the watery grave would probably be the end of his life on 
the sea. But this story has a surprise twist at the end, leaving the 
reader wondering if Billy chose to struggle and survive on the sea 
or to join his fellow sailors in Davy Jones's locker. 

5.140 Kooharian, David (1997). Sammy's Story. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2466-5. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Sammy's father wrote this tribute to his son, who battled a degen- 
erative disease that slowly and painfully took his young life. Writ- 
ten and illustrated in the form of a comic book, this metaphorical 
tale tells of Sammy's dreams as he lay on his death bed. He meets 
people in his dreams who invite him to come away, who assign 
him the quest of defeating the wicked Zargo, and who offer him 
support and encouragement in the ensuing struggle. He finally 
achieves his goals and finds himself in a peaceful environment 
where he feels confidence, health, strength, and freedom, but he 
wants to return to his parents. He is told by a gentle man that if he 
returns, it can only be to say goodbye, and that he will feel the ter- 
rible pain in his body again. Sammy agrees to the consequences 
and returns to the hospital room where his parents are hovering 
in dismay over his deteriorating condition. He remains just long 
enough to assure them that he will be all right, and then leaves his 
parents and the pain. Fifth graders who read this book were 
engaged and drawn to the colorful, graphic illustrations. They 
commented that they understood dying better from this book 
because it showed them that courage is required to die as well as 
to survive — something that had not occurred to them previously. 
This book offers food for thought and discussion as students 
struggle with the terms of mortality and the hope that must be 
found in the death of those we love. 

5.141 Lachtman, Ofelia Dumas (1997). Leticia's Secret. Houston, TX: 
Pinata. 126 pp. ISBN: 1-55885-209-3. Chapter Book. 

Rosario, an eleven-year-old girl from the San Fernando Valley, is 
trying to figure out why everyone in the family gives her cousin 
Leticia such privileged treatment, and why she visits more and 
more often. Despite her initial annoyance at the visits, a friend- 
ship grows between Rosario and Leticia. The two friends share 
many things, including a love of reading and writing and a scary 
nighttime adventure when Rosario learns that her now dear 
cousin is dying from cancer. Xochitl, an eighth grader, said with 



■ 



238 



Death Themes 



213 



joy and emotion, "El libro tiene muchos detalles, muchas historias 
en una. . . . Como muy latino, habla de que van a hacer tortillas, 
habla de las ninas, habla de que comian en el patio" ("The book 
has a lot of details, several stories in one. ... It is very Latin, it 
speaks of them making tortillas, it speaks of godmothers, and that 
they are on the patio"). This excellent chapter book, with some 
illustrations by Roberta Collier-Morales, is easy to read and 
touches topics such as jealousy, friendship, death, family, and 
school life in ways that will strike a note of authenticity in the 
hearts and minds of middle-school readers. 

5.142 Rylant, Cynthia (1996). The Old Woman Who Named Things. Illus- 
trated by Kathryn Brown. New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-15-257809-9. Picture Book. (See 8.55) 

Secondary Reviews 

5.143 McKelvey, Douglas Kaine (1996). The Angel Knew Papa and the 
Dog. New York: Philomel. 89 pp. ISBN: 0-399-23042-4. Chapter 
Book. 

Rich with similes, metaphors, and magical language, this book 
tells the story of survival on the frontier. It focuses on a seven- 
year-old girl who must survive a flood without her only living 
parent, her papa. She forgets her fear of drowning and her worry 
for her papa when she sees the angel. She is calmed by the still- 
ness with which the angel looks into her eyes, "A stillness without 
words and a stillness without questions, but a stillness with more 
meaning than all words that ever were spoken and all questions 
that were ever asked." 

5.144 Schneider, Antoni (1998). Good-bye, Vivi! Illustrated by Maja 
Dusikova. New York: North-South. 26 pp. ISBN: 1-55858-985-6. 
Picture Book. 

A family grows as a result of having Granny move in with her bird 
Vivi. As she shares the stories of her bird, the family — especially 
her grandson — ^begin to incorporate the bird into their own lives. 
When the bird dies one day, it is Granny who shows how powerful 
memories and shared stories can be to the healing process that fol- 
lows a death. This experience later helps the family cope with 
Granny's death. Dusikova's gently toned artwork supports a 
warm story of family, loss, and healing. 



239 



by Jamie Gilson 
lilustrated by Diane de Groat 





B. 




A. Bug in a Rug, Jamie Gilson/Diane de Groat (6.7). B. Thank You, Mr. Falker, Patricia 
Polacco (6.34). C. Yoko, Rosemary Wells (6.49). D. Rotten Teeth, Laura Simms/David 
Catrow (6.14). 




240 best copy available 





215 



6 School Life 

Cyndi Giorgis 

Contributing reviewers included Julie Carlton, Pennie Dye, 

Cyndi Giorgis, and Dottie Kulesza. 

M ost readers can relate to stories about school experiences. Many 
children value being able to see themselves in the books that 
they read, and stories about school life provide those connec- 
tions. Through reading and discussing school stories, students are able 
to relate to various situations that are presented in the stories and that 
they encounter in their own lives. These situations and connections may 
include knowing they are not alone in their desire to gain peer accept- 
ance, understanding they can overcome the challenges that learning can 
pose, realizing a teacher can make a difference in their life, or discover- 
ing that almost everyone has had an embarrassing moment at some 
point in his or her school life. 

The books selected for this chapter are primarily realistic fiction. 
Many books selected to be reviewed present humorous situations that 
are generally initiated by the main character in the story. Other books 
reflect the difficult lives that some students experience both inside and 
outside of the school context. Some of these stories of challenge and 
struggle feature real-life heroes and heroines. There are also a few books 
that present a realistic situation, but use as characters animals that talk 
and dress like humans. Finally a few poetry anthologies have been 
included that share schooling experiences through verse. 

Stories about school life also are written in a variety of formats. 
Readers will discover picture book formats that utilize text and illus- 
tration to create meaning; easy-to-read chapter books that use a con- 
trolled vocabulary to assist emergent readers; transitional chapter 
books that are generally aimed at students in grades 2 through 4; real- 
istic novels for intermediate-grade readers; and young-adult novels 
that present experiences appropriate for a middle-school audience. All 
of these formats are represented in books reviewed within this chap- 
ter, and are woven throughout the different categories. In addition, 
most of the books reviewed in this chapter contain illustrations 
regardless of whether the story was written in a picture book or chap- 
ter book format. 




241 



216 



School Life 



In organizing the chapter, the following categories were used: 

■ School Environment. This section includes poems, rhyming sto- 
ries, and informational books that highlight the physical aspects 
of school. 

■ Humorous Situations in School. In this section, readers will find 
contemporary realistic fiction and poetry that share the silly 
events and experiences students have in school. These books 
are sure to bring a chuckle to the reader. 

■ Sharing Experiences and Talents with Others. This section in- 
cludes stories about show-and-tell, talent shows, and science 
projects that students can relate to from their own school 
experiences. 

■ Friends and Bullies. Here readers will find books about getting 
along with others. These stories can be found in easy-to-read 
formats, as well as picture books and chapter books. 

■ Teachers' Impact on Students' Lives. This section includes both 
humorous and thought-provoking books that illustrate the role 
teachers play in students' lives. 

■ Children Struggling with or Experiencing Academic Success. 
This section includes books that focus on illiteracy, language 
differences. Attention Deficit Disorder, and other issues that can 
impact the learning process. 

■ Learning about Self within a Classroom Context. Here readers 
will find several books for older readers in which self-identify 
plays a key role in students' development. 

■ Perspectives on Life Inside and Outside of the Classroom Con- 
text. This section includes a variety of stories about how family 
life influences a child's approach to school life. 



High-Interest Series Books 

There are numerous high-interest series books being published today 
that appeal to students at all levels of reading ability. The topic of the 
books may be horror stories, such as those found in the popular Goose- 
bumps series by R. L. Stine, or they may relate experiences familiar to 
young girls, such as those found in The Baby-Sitters Club series by Ann 
M. Martin. There are also many high-interest books that are based on 
television shows, and that usually are adapted from the teleplay. 

High-interest books generally rely on a formulaic writing style 
that adds to the predictability of the plot. Parents and teachers fre- 
quently share predictable books with children early in a child's reading 
development. As children begin reading independently, they are drawn 
to books that have a predictable plot because there is security in know- 



u 



242 



High-Interest Series Books 



217 



ing the type of story they will find and the manner in which the plot will 
imfold. Throughout a series, the characters generally remain the same, 
although a new character may be introduced in a book for the purpose 
of conflict with the regular characters. Readers come to know the char- 
acters even though there is little character development. Students also 
understand that even though a character may be bad, he or she may 
possess some redeeming qualities. Beth (age ten) said, ”l like to read 
series books because you can follow the characters. If you read one book 
in a series and then another, you know the characters and it's easier to 
follow the story because the characters are familiar to you." 

High-interest series books have a role in children's ongoing liter- 
acy development as they provide an opportunity for students to be 
entertained. These books often do not contain the layers of meaning that 
warrant discussion among readers. However, as Katina (age twelve) 
stated, "The reason why I like to read popular books is because every- 
one is reading them. So if I ask[ed] someone and tried to start a conver- 
sation about the book, they [would] know what I am talking about and 
we could relate to each other and express our feelings about it." These 
books are enjoyable and encourage independent reading. Fortunately 
classroom teachers, librarians, and parents can further support chil- 
dren's literacy development by sharing other types of books, such as 
those reviewed throughout Aduentwnn^ with Books. 

The section entitled High-Interest Series Books contains a sam- 
pling of the numerous high-interest series books available for children. 
In this section, the title refers to the series title rather than one particular 
book, and readers should keep in mind that there may be as few as five 
books or as many as one hundred books in the series. Where entries 
indicate that a series was "created by" a particular author, this does not 
necessarily mean that the books currently being published in the series 
were written by that particular individual. The suggested reading level 
(RL) indicated at the end of the review is provided in order to assist 
readers in understanding the broad range and readability of these series 
books. Picture books and young-adult series novels generally do not 
indicate a reading level. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 



er|c 



243 



218 



School Life 



information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

School Environment 

Primary Reviews 

6.1 Hopkins, Lee Bennett (1996). School Supplies: A Book of Poems. 
Illustrated by Renee Flower. New York: Simon & Schuster Books for 
Young Readers. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80497-0. Picture Book. (See 10.3) 

6.2 Lindbergh, Reeve (1997). The Awful Aardvarks Go to School. 
Illustrated by Tracey Campbell Pearson. New York: Viking. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-85920-6. Picture Book. 

A fictional school environment is the setting for the chaos created 
by the aardvarks' visit to the animals' school. Each page cleverly 
integrates artifacts, activities, signs, pictures, and a list of words 
that all start with the selected letter of the alphabet. At the end of 
the book, the aardvarks, with a trail of destruction behind them, 
leave the reader to wonder what zaniness they will cause when 
they arrive at the zoo. Cartoon illustrations done in watercolor 
and pen-and-ink add to the frenzy and hilarity of the situation. 
This book is great for younger children due to its rhyming text 
and comical situation, but is appropriate for older readers as well 
due to the splendid vocabulary used. 

6.3 Pringle, Laurence (1998). One Room School. Illustrated by Bar- 
bara Garrison. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
56397-583-1. Picture Book. 

Author Laurence Pringle provides a factual account of his days in 
a one-room schoolhouse in the 1940s. Pringle reminisces about the 
last year of classes held in School 14 in rural New York before it 
closed its doors forever. The narration of a typical day helps 
explain how the teacher. Miss Shackelton, organized instruction to 
meet the needs of eighteen students from grades one through 
eight. "This is sort of like our multiage class where there are kids 
from different grades all in the same room," observed Michael (age 
nine). The author also provides historical background about the 
time period by including student activities that helped support the 
war effort, namely collecting milkweed seedpods for life pre- 
servers and scrap iron for tanks and ships. Many of the school's 




244 



Humorous Situations in School 



219 



activities weren't much different than those that take place today, 
which makes this a wonderful book for students to compare and 
contrast past and present schooling experiences. Garrison's colla- 
graph illustrations are primarily brown and white in appearance, 
and resemble photographs in an album. 

Secondary Reviews 

6.4 Lasky, Kathryn (1996). Lunch Bunnies. Illustrated by Marylin 
Hafner. Boston: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-51525-6. Pic- 
ture Book. 

It's the night before his first day in school, and Clyde is terrified — 
terrified of school lunchtime. He has spent time practicing with a 
tray, but he also has heard the stories of the cross lunch ladies, and 
he fears their wrath and his probable humiliation should he do 
even the slightest thing wrong. Hafner's gentle watercolor-and- 
ink drawings do justice to the young bunny's expressions of fear 
in an overwhelming situation, and of confidence gained through 
caring for others. 

Humorous Situations in Schooi 

Primary Reviews 

6.5 Clements, Andrew (1997). Double Trouble in Walla Walla. Illus- 
trated by Sal Murdocca. Brookfield, CN: Millbrook. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0306-5. Picture Book. (See 13.12) 

6.6 Dakos, Kalli (1997). Get out of the Alphabet, Number 2! Wacky 
Wednesday Puzzle Poems. Illustrated by Jenny Graham. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81118-7. Picture Book. 
(See 10.8) 

6.7 Gilson, Jamie (1998). Bug in a Rug. Illustrated by Diane de Groat. 
New York: Clarion. 69 pp. ISBN: 0-395-86616-2. Chapter Book. 

Richard's eccentric Aunt Narmie and Uncle Ken arrive in town for 
a short visit. Aunt Nannie has made Richard an enormous pair of 
bright purple pants that Richard must tightly hold onto in order 
to keep them up. When he is asked to pass out the mealworms in 
class for a science experiment, readers can predict what embar- 
rassing events might occur. Uncle Ken adds to the situation when 
he brings a pair of bright red suspenders to school for Richard. 
Uncle Ken decides to stay awhile in the classroom, sharing his 




245 



220 



School Life 



own brand of humor with Richard's classmates. De Groat's warm 
black-and-white drawings match the text's lighthearted mood. 
Many students will be able to reflect on a time when they were 
forced to wear silly clothing to school. This is a good book for 
reading aloud to students, or for those readers making the transi- 
tion into longer chapter books. 

6.8 Omerod, Jan (1996). Ms. McDonald Has a Class. New York: Clar- 
ion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-77611-2. Picture Book. (See 10.30) 

Secondary Reviews 

6.9 Cox, Judy (1998). Third Grade Pet. Illustrated by Cynthia Fisher. 
New York: Holiday House. 93 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1379-9. Chapter 
Book. 

This short chapter book provides a lot of laughs centered around 
the addition of a new classroom pet. Rosemary is horrified when a 
rat named Cheese becomes the class pet. When it is Rosemary's 
turn to take care of Cheese, she grows so fond of him that she 
decides to take him home. Black-and-white illustrations accom- 
pany the fast-moving text and add to the humorous situations 
that Rosemary creates in her efforts to protect Cheese. 

6.10 Hurwitz, Johanna (1998). Starting School. Illustrated by Karen 
Dugan. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 102 pp. ISBN: 0-688- 
15685-1. Chapter Book. 

Readers of Hurwitz's Class Clown series will recognize Lucas 
Cott's twin brothers, Marcus and Marius. The twins are placed in 
separate kindergartens and although they don't look at all alike, 
the two teachers are both familiar with their mischievous nature. 
The age of the twins is younger than the age of the perceived 
reader, but all children will delight in the antics and chaos created 
by the brothers. 

6.11 Lansky, Bruce, editor (1997). No More Homework! No More Tests! 
Kids' Favorite Funny School Poems. Illustrated by Stephen Car- 
penter. New York: Scholastic, 74 pp. ISBN: 0-590-58036-1. Picture 
Book. 

Lansky's introduction indicates that he asked over one hundred 
elementary school teachers to find the fifty funniest poems about 
school ever written. Poets such as Jack Prelutsky, Shel Silverstein, 
Colin McNaughton, and Kalli Dakos are included in this collec- 



246 



Sharing Experiences and Talents with Others 



221 



tion. This humorous anthology of poems tells about what really 
happens in school. 

6.12 Munsch, Robert (1998). Get out of Bed! Illustrated by Alan Daniel 
and Lea Daniel. New York: Scholastic. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-590-76977-4. 
Picture Book. 

Amy stayed up watching the late show; the late, late show; and 
even the later show. In the morning, family members carmot seem 
to wake sleepy Amy, so they decide to take her to school in her 
bed. The watercolor illustrations add energy to the activity going 
on, as Amy sleeps peacefully throughout the day. This humorous 
book is great for reading aloud, especially with small groups who 
can benefit from a closer look at the illustrations. 



Sharing Experiences andTaients with Others 

Primary Reviews 

6.13 Henkes, Kevin (1996). Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse. New York: 
Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-12897-1. Picture Book. 

Lilly loves school and her upbeat, positive teacher Mr. Slinger. 
One day, Lilly proudly brings her new purple plastic purse and 
flashy sunglasses to school. Because she is unable to contain her 
excitement about sharing them with her classmates, Mr. Slinger 
has no choice but to confiscate the items, much to Lilly's dismay. 
"I knew Lilly was gorma get in trouble when she didn't listen to 
the teacher and she kept goofing around," said Rachel (age six). 
Lilly's anger at her teacher turns to happiness again as she learns 
a thoughtful lesson. Henkes has a wonderful gift of telling a 
humorous yet realistic story with the right amount of emotional 
tug. His energetic and expressive watercolor illustrations will 
captivate readers. 

6.14 Simms, Laura (1998). Rotten Teeth. Illustrated by David Catrow. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-82850-3. Picture 
Book. 

Quiet, shy Melissa Hartman seeks her brother Norman's assis- 
tance in deciding what to take for show-and-tell. Her quest is to 
find "something kids would like.” Norman suggests the bottle of 
rotten teeth from their father's home dental office. Melissa's class- 
mates are intrigued with the teeth, but her teacher finds them inap- 
propriate for sharing with the class. Catrow's cartoon illustrations 



247 



222 



School Life 



are hilarious, and the aerial perspective of small Melissa and the 
sweating brow of her teacher create a heightened sense of visual 
humor. "I think rotten teeth would be disgusting but since Melissa 
made friends then maybe it was a good thing to bring to school 
after all," commented Danielle (age seven). 

Secondary Reviews 

6.15 Auch, Mary Jane (1998). I Was a Third Grade Science Project. 
Illustrated by Herm Auch. New York: Holiday House. 96 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8234-1357-8. Chapter Book. 

Brian "Brain" Lewis and his classmates decide to hypnotize a dog 
for their science project. Unfortunately it is Brian's friend Josh 
who acquires the hypnotic suggestion of being a cat, as evidenced 
by his newfound love of sushi and catnip. This hilarious novel is 
great for readers who are ready to move beyond beginning-to- 
read books. 

6.16 Duffey, Betsy (1998). Spotlight on Cody. Illustrated by Ellen 
Thompson. New York: Viking. 74 pp. ISBN; 0-670-88077-9. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Cody Michaels is desperate to find something he can do for the 
rapidly approaching third-grade talent show. He attempts com- 
edy without much success, and juggling is out of the question 
given the number of eggs he has broken. Cody turns to his par- 
ents for help, only to learn that their only talents are yodeling and 
clogging. When Cody attempts to cheer up his father, who is turn- 
ing 40, he discovers a talent that he did not realize he possessed. 
Humorous situations and lively pacing make this a realistic and 
appealing chapter book for intermediate-grade readers. 

6.17 Howe, James (1998). Pinky and Rex and the School Play: Ready- 
to-Read Level 3. Illustrated by Melissa Sweet. New York: Athen- 
eum Books for Young Readers. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-689-31872-3. Chapter 
Book. 

This latest addition to the Pinky and Rex series finds the two 
friends in direct competition with each other. Pinky wants to be an 
actor when he grows up, but when he convinces Rex to accom- 
pany him to tryouts, she is the one who ends up with the lead in 
the play. However, Pinky is able to resolve his differences with 
Rex, and even ends up saving the play from an awkward moment. 



248 



Friends and Bullies 



223 



6.18 Rockwell, Anne (1997). Show and Tell Day. Illustrated by Lizzy 
Rockwell. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06- 
027300-3. Picture Book. 

Bright, colorful illustrations complement this simple story about 
the joy of show-and-tell. A multicultural group of young children 
shares various items from home, or items that they have made or 
collected. The opposite page provides an illustration of where or 
how the child acquired the object. Rockwell's simple book is 
appropriate for preschool or kindergarten students. 



Friends and Bullies 

See also chapter 5, "Struggle and Survival." 

Primary Reviews 

6.19 Adoff, Arnold (1997). Love Letters. Illustrated by Lisa Desimini. 
New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590-48478-8. Picture Book. 
(See 10.23) 

6.20 Brisson, Pat (1997). Hot Fudge Hero. Illustrated by Diana Cain 
Bluthenthal. New York: Henry Holt. 72 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-4551-1. 
Chapter Book. (See 7.44) 

6.21 Glenn, Mel (1996). Who Killed Mr. Chippendale? A Mystery in 
Poems. New York: Dutton. 100 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67530-2. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. (See 10.27) 

6.22 Kleven, Elisa (1996). Hooray, a Pinata!/ (Viva! jUna pinata! New 
York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45606-8 
(English)/ 0-525-45606-6 (Spanish). Picture Book. 

In this story, available in separate English and Spanish editions, 
Clara goes shopping for a birthday pinata. Her friend Samson 
advises her to buy one in the form of a thundercloud monster. 
Clara, however, chooses a cute little puppy dog and spends the 
next several days treating it as a living pet. When party time draws 
near, Clara has become so attached to her pinata that she is reluc- 
tant to break it. Samson proves to be a good friend when he clev- 
erly comes to her rescue with his very special birthday gift — the 
thundercloud pinata. Our students easily related to Clara's prob- 
lem. "I remember when I didn't want to break my Batman pinata," 
said Nico (age nine). The scene with children playing with pinata 
parts at the conclusion of the story elicited even more pinata tales 





224 



School Life 



from listeners. The characters and scenery represent diverse ethnic 
backgrounds, all created in Kleven's unique collage style. 

6.23 Mayor, Salley (1997). You and Me: Poems of Friendship. New 
York: Orchard. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-531-33045-1. Picture Book. (See 10.18) 

6.24 Shange, Ntozake (1997). Whitewash. Illustrated by Michael 
Sporn. New York: Walker. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8027-8490-9. Picture 
Book. (See 5.117, 20.16) 

6.25 Shreve, Susan (1997). Joshua T. Bates in Trouble Again. New 
York: Knopf. 90 pp. ISBN: 0-679-98520-4. Chapter Book. 

This sequel to The Flunking of Joshua T. Bates and Joshua T. Bates 
Takes Charge finds the protagonist ready to go to fourth grade after 
having spent September through Thanksgiving repeating third 
grade. Joshua wants to change his hairstyle and clothing in order 
to be accepted without ridicule from class bully Tommy Wilhelm. 
Joshua even tempts fate by walking into class with a cigarette 
over his ear, and is eventually called to the principal's office for 
bringing a knife to school. This is a believable story about a boy 
who learns to stand up for himself so that he can be himself. 

Shreve, Susan (1984). The Flunking of Joshua T. Bates. 

New York: Knopf. 82 pp. ISBN: 0-679-84187-3. Chapter 

Book. 

Shreve, Susem (1993). Joshua T. Bates Takes Charge. New 

York: Knopf. 112 pp. ISBN: 0-394-84362-2. Chapter Book. 

6.26 Steptoe, John (1997). Creativity. Illustrated by E. B. Lewis. New 
York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-68706-3. (See 20.6) 

6.27 Vcm Leeuwen, Jean (1997). Amanda Pig, Schoolgirl. Illustrated by 
Ann Schweninger. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 48 
pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1980-9. Chapter Book. 

This amusing story of Amanda Pig's first day of school is written 
in an easy-to-read chapter book format. On the first day of school, 
Amanda makes a new friend who will not tell anyone her name. 
Amanda and her other friends entertain and coax Lollipop to tell 
her real name, but to no avail. Finally, after a fun-filled day at 
school with a patient and understanding teacher. Lollipop whis- 
pers her first name to Amanda. This delightfully told story pro- 
vides early readers with situations they can relate to, text they can 




250 



Friends and Bullies 



225 



read, illustrations that complement the text, and characters of 
some depth. 

Secondary Reviews 

6.28 Brown, Laurie Krasny (1997). Rex and Lilly Schooltime: A Dino 
Easy Reader. Illustrated by Marc Brown. Boston: Little Brown. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-316-10920-7. Chapter Book. 

Three short, funny chapters comprise this easy-to-read book fea- 
turing dinosaurs Rex and Lilly. Rex shares his new zoo imderwear 
during show-and-tell, trades lunches with classmates, and tries to 
assist Lilly when she gets stuck on a word. The watercolor illus- 
trations add humor to the controlled-vocabulary text. 

6.29 Carbone, Elisa (1998). Starting School with an Enemy. New York: 
Knopf. 103 pp. ISBN: 0-679-88639-7. Chapter Book. 

It is bad enough when Sarah has go to a new school for fifth 
grade, but it gets even worse when she has to confront Eric, an 
enemy who picks on her and humiliates her in public. Forhmately 
Sarah also makes a friend, Christina Perez, and they enjoy playing 
soccer and having fun until Sarah's obsession for getting revenge 
almost destroys her friendship. Sarah is sarcastic and at times 
insensitive, but she is portrayed with many redeeming qualities 
that will provide discussion for intermediate-grade students. 

6.30 Kline, Suzy (1998). Horrible Harry and the Drop of Doom. Illus- 
trated by Frank Remkiewicz. New York: Viking. 58 pp. ISBN: 0- 
670-85849-8. Chapter Book. 

This book, ninth in the series of stories about the students in Miss 
Mackle's class, finds Harry invited to Moimtainside Amusement 
Park at the end of the school year. Harry is excited about the day 
imtil he is told that the newest ride features a thirteen-story drop 
inside the elevator of a haimted hotel. Kline's writing is easily acces- 
sible and amusing for those readers venturing into chapter books. 

6.31 Voigt, Cynthia (1996). Bad Girls. New York: Scholastic. 278 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-60134-2. Chapter Book. 

Mickey Elsinger and Margalo Epps are two fifth graders whose 
friendship is portrayed through acts of loyalty, kindness, betrayal, 
and mischief. This perceptive and at times irreverent novel also 
provides a realistic view of preadolescent girls who are struggling 



Er|c 



251 



226 



School Life 



to establish their own self-identity amidst the enormous peer 
pressure foimd within this age group. Voigt's sequel, Bad, Badder, 
Baddest, continues the story of the two protagonists. 

Voigt, Cynthia (1997). Bad, Badder, Baddest. New York: 
Scholastic. 266 pp. ISBN: 0-590-60136-9. Chapter Book. 

Teachers’ Impact on Students’ Lives 

Primary Reviews 

6.32 Finchler, Judy (1998). Miss Malarkey Won't Be in Today. Illus- 
trated by Kevin O'Malley. New York: Walker. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
8027-8653-7. Picture Book. 

This sequel to Finchler and O'Malley's Miss Malarkey Doesn't Live in 
Room 10 finds Miss Malarkey with a high fever and too sick to go to 
school. As she begins to think about the various substitutes the 
principal might call (all of whom have funny, yet descriptive 
names). Miss Malarkey feels compelled to drag herself to school. 
She finds the class is calm rather than in chaos, but Miss Malarkey's 
fears resurface when she discovers that Ima Berpur was the substi- 
tute teacher. O'Malley's lively illustrations depict each character 
through their facial expressions and humorous traits. 

Finchler, Judy (1995). Miss Malarkey Doesn't Live in 
Room 10. Illustrated by Kevin O'Malley. New York: 
Whitman. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8027-7498-9. Picture Book. 

6.33 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1998). Sister Anne's Hands. Illustrated by 
K. Wendy Popp. New York: Dial Books for Yoimg Readers. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2038-6. Picture Book. (See 20.3) 

6.34 Polacco, Patricia (1998). Thank You, Mr. Falker. New York: 
Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-23166-8. Picture Book. 

Polacco shares a part of her own life in this fictionalized story 
about learning to read. Going to school was a challenging task for 
yoimg Trisha; children made fim of her, called her names, and 
made her feel dumb. Trisha was not getting the help she needed in 
order to learn how to read and eventually grew to hate school. 
Finally, her fifth-grade teacher, Mr. Falker, recognized her artistic 
gifts and helped her overcome her learning disability. Polacco's 
bold splashes of color capture Trisha's pursuit of knowledge about 
herself, the world aroimd her, and the joys of being a reader. 



252 



Teachers' Impact on Students' Lives 



227 



6.35 Seuss, Dr., and Jack Prelutsky (1998). Hooray for Diffendoofer 
Day! Illustrated by Lane Smith. New York: Knopf. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-679-89008-4. Picture Book. 

When Dr. Seuss (Theodor Geisel) died in 1991, he left behind four- 
teen pages of sketches and notes for a story about an unusually 
creative group of teachers, including Miss Bonkers. Jack Prelutsky 
and Lane Smith were asked by Seuss's editor to complete the proj- 
ect. The result is a whimsical story that celebrates individuality, in 
which the students pass a standardized test because they have 
been taught "how to think." Smith has incorporated many of the 
original Seuss sketches into his own illustrations, which ties the 
book together. Sharing with students the afterword, which 
explains how the book evolved, is helpful before reading the book 
to students. Students are able to gain an insight into both process 
and product, which in a sense is what the book is all about. 

6.36 Slate, Joseph (1996). Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for Kinder- 
garten. Illustrated by Ashley Wolff. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45446-2. Picture Book. 

It's the first day of school and as Miss Bindergarten arrives to 
unpack boxes, decorate walls, and ready the kindergarten room 
for her new class, each of her students prepares for the day as 
well. Alternating pages focus on the children and the teacher. The 
rhyming text introduces each student alphabetically by name: 
"Adam Krupp / wakes up. / Brenda Heath brushes her teeth." 
Ashley Wolff's bright illustrations in ink and watercolor-wash fill 
every spread with details that are amusing and, at times, touch- 
ing. This book has been a favorite not only for preschoolers antici- 
pating their arrival in kindergarten, but also for those students 
already there. 

6.37 Slate, Joseph (1998). Miss Bindergarten Celebrates the 100th 
Day. Illustrated by Ashley Wolff. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-46000-4. Picture Book. (See 9.33) 

Secondary Reviews 

6.38 Calmenson, Stephanie (1998). The Teeny Tiny Teacher: A Teeny 
Tiny Ghost Story. Illustrated by Denis Roche. New York: Scholas- 
tic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-37123-1. Picture Book. 



253 



228 



School Life 



This English folktale adaptation introduces readers to a teeny tiny 
teacher who takes her teeny tiny students on a teeny tiny walk, 
where she finds a teeny tiny bone and puts it into her teeny tiny 
pocket. Upon returning to the classroom, a loud voice demands 
the bone back. This story for younger children may be scary given 
the tone of the reader's voice. The bright illustrations in primary 
and secondary colors add to the schoolhouse setting. 

6.39 Krensky, Stephen (1996). My Teacher's Secret Life. Illustrated by 
JoAnn Adinolfi. New York: Simon & Schuster Books for Young 
Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80271-4. Picture Book. 

A young boy believes his teachers live at school, where together 
they participate in exercise routines, eat cafeteria leftovers, and 
listen to stories read by the librarian. When the boy sees his 
teacher Mrs. Quirk in the supermarket, trying on roller skates at 
the mall, and in the company of a little girl who closely resembles 
the teacher, he becomes highly suspicious that his teacher has a 
secret life. Bright watercolor illustrations show what school looks 
like after hours. 

Children Struggling with or Experiencing 
Academic Success 

Primary Reviews 

6.40 Cantos, Jack (1998). Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 154 pp. ISBN: 0-374-33664-4. Chapter 
Book. 

This poignant novel deals with Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) 
and the effect it can have, not only on the child who suffers from it, 
but also on parents, teachers, and classmates. Joey Pigza is wired, 
and even though he attempts to control his behavior, he still man- 
ages to swallow his house key, disrupt the class field trip, and lose 
a fingernail when he tries to sharpen his finger. Fortimately Joey 
encounters a caring teacher who realizes that the medication is not 
working and that Joey needs further medical evaluation. "There's 
a kid in my class like Joey and sometimes you know he's trying to 
be good but he just can't," remarked Aaron (age eleven). 

6.41 Hesse, Karen (1998). Just Juice. Illustrated by Robert A. Parker. 
New York: Scholastic. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-590-03382-4. Chapter Book. 
(See 7.76, 20.35) 



254 



Learning about Self within a Classroom Context 



229 



6.42 Little, Jean (1998). Emma's Magic Winter. Illustrated by Jennifer 
Plecas. New York: HarperCollins. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-06-025389-4. 
Chapter Book. (See 7.40) 

6.43 Senisi, Ellen (1998). Just Kids: Visiting a Class for Children with 
Special Needs. New York: Dutton. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45646-5. 
Picture Book. (See 20.59) 

Secondary Reviews 

6.44 Aliki (1998). Marianthe's Story: Painted Words; Marianthe's 
Story: Spoken Memories. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-15661-4. Picture Book. (See 7.74) 

6.45 Jimenez, Francisco (1998). La Mariposa. Illustrated by Simon 
Silva. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-81663-7. 
Picture Book. 

Francisco is unable to imderstand most of what his first grade 
teacher says, as he struggles to learn English in his new classroom. 
Francisco is intrigued by the caterpillar that is in the jar next to his 
desk, and begins to do some research into how they turn into but- 
terflies. Unable to read the words, Francisco instead reads the pic- 
tures and in turn creates his own story. The rich illustrations by 
Silva show the transformation of both caterpillar and child. 

6.46 Lauture, Denize (1996). Running the Road to ABC. Illustrated by 
Reynold Ruffins. New York: Simon & Schuster Books for Yoimg 
Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80507-1. Picture Book. 

The desire to learn is told through this lyrical tale. Before the sim is 
up, a group of Haitian boys and girls rim through the countryside 
and town to the school, where they will learn to read and write. 
The vibrant Caribbean colors and double-page stylized illus- 
trations provide a beautiful backdrop. 

6.47 Rodriguez, Luis J. (1997). America Is Her Name. Illustrated by 
Carlos Vasquez. Willimantic, CT: Curbstone. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880684-40-3. Picture Book. (See 20.7) 

Learning about Self within a Classroom Context 

See also the section entitled Finding One's Own Identity in chapter 5, 
"Struggle and Survival." 




255 



230 



School Life 



Primary Reviews 

6.48 Konigsburg, E. L. (1996). The View from Saturday. New York: 
Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 163 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80993- 
X. Chapter Book. 

In this 1996 Newbery Award winner, E. L. Konigsburg weaves a 
multilayered story of taking journeys, participating in contests, 
and finding confidence. A group of four sixth graders, who are 
intricately linked with one another through interesting circum- 
stances, find themselves on the Academic Bowl team vying with 
other teams for the championship. As their friendship develops, 
they begin having Saturday afternoon teas at the home of Julian, a 
team member from India. Mrs. Olinski, a paraplegic woman who 
has returned to teaching after a ten-year leave of absence, brings 
the children together to participate in the competitions. The rest of 
the students are diverse too, but the focus of the story is on their 
new understandings of mutual respect and kindness. The intri- 
cate plot and the format of the story — four short stories about 
each student woven into the larger story of the team's rise to 
fame — keeps readers eagerly turning pages. Kristen (age twelve) 
reminds readers that the book is told through the perspective of 
the four kids, and so even though the beginning is somewhat con- 
fusing, "hang in there because the way it weaves together is 
worth it." 

6.49 Wells, Rosemary (1998). Yoko. New York: Hyperion Books for 
Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7868-2345-3. Picture Book. 

Yoko's classmates make fun of the sushi and red-bean ice cream 
she brings for lunch each day, prompting her teacher to have 
International Food Day to learn about different types of food. 
Unfortunately Yoko's sushi goes untouched until Timothy de- 
cides to try the rice and raw fish — and finds it rather tasty. 
Encouraged by his reaction, Yoko's other classmates soon indulge 
and realize that sushi and red-bean ice cream are quite good. 
Wells' expressive watercolor illustrations capture the uniqueness 
of each character, along with a range of emotions. After reading 
Yoko to with her class, one first-grade teacher commented, "It is 
important for children to realize that culture extends beyond 
food to valuing each other for the diversity they bring to our 
classroom." 



256 



Perspectives on Life Inside and Outside of the Classroom Context 



231 



Secondary Reviews 

6.50 Fletcher, Ralph (1998). Flying Solo. New York: Clarion. 138 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-87323-1. Chapter Book. 

What would happen if the substitute failed to show up to teach a 
sixth-grade class? The students in Mr. Fabiano's class decide that 
they will run the class themselves according to the routine already 
established by their creative and well-liked teacher. Fletcher is 
able to capture the emotions of realistic characters who work 
through problems, both on a personal level as well as within the 
class structure. (See also 20.34) 

6.51 Mills , Claudia (1998). Standing Up to Mr. O. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 166 pp. ISBN: 0-374-34721-2. Sophisticated 
Chapter Book. 

This coming-of-age story set within the school environment focuses 
on the issue of animal rights. When Maggie McIntosh refuses to 
dissect worms, fish, and frogs in her seventh-grade biology class, it 
means receiving a grade of F instead of her usual A. Mills is able to 
present both sides of the argument in a compelling way that will 
force readers to make up their own minds as to the decision Maggie 
has taken against kHUng any Uving being. 

6.52 Nodelman, Perry (1998). Behaving Bradley. New York: Simon & 
Schuster Books for Young Readers. 232 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81466-6. 
Chapter Book. 

Bradley Gold narrates this tale set in Roblin Memorial High 
School. A Code of Conduct is to be drafted for the high school stu- 
dents, and Brad unwillingly volunteers to serve on the committee. 
However he decides that the document should include a code for 
teachers as well. Brad may appear to go on an endless tirade, but 
the reality of the politics and hypocrisy of administrators, teach- 
ers, and peers will befamiliar to anyone who has ever attended 
school. (See also 20.40) 

Perspectives on Life Inside and Outside 
of the Classroom Context 

See also chapter 4, "Families," and the section entitled Family Hardship 
in chapter 5, "Struggle and Survival." 




257 



232 



School Life 



Primary Reviews 

6.53 Creech, Sharon (1998). Bloomability. New York: HarperCollins. 
273 pp. ISBN: 0-06-026993-6. Chapter Book. 

Domenica Santolina Doone, or Dinnie for short, has lived in thir- 
teen states in twelve years as her father sought out new opportu- 
nities. Dinnie is given her own exciting opportunity when she is 
sent to the American School in Lugano, Switzerland, where her 
Uncle Max is the headmaster. During the year, Dinnie learns to 
ski and to speak Italian, and in the process begins to broaden her 
own view of the world and her understanding of others. Dinnie 
faces a difficult decision at the end of the school year: whether 
or not to return to her family in the United States. Creech's writ- 
ing is always thoughtful, and takes the reader on a journey of self- 
discovery right along with the main character. "I like how the 
character bloomed during the year which is just what the title of 
the book says, Bloomability," said Patricia (age twelve). 

6.54 Dines, Carol (1997). Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. New York: 
Delacorte. 223 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32271-2. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book; adult mediation required. (See 20.53) 

6.55 Grimes, Nikki (1997). It's Raining Laughter. Photographs by 
Myles C. Pinkney. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2003-3. 
Picture Book. (See 13.29) 

6.56 Haddix, Margaret Peterson (1996). Don't You Dare Read This, 
Mrs. Dunphrey. New York: Simon & Schuster Books for Young 
Readers. 108 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80097-5. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This young-adult novel offers a realistic view of a young girl 
whose life is in turmoil. When her English teacher Mrs. Dunphrey 
requires that each student keep a journal, Tish Bonner reluctantly 
agrees. Tish soon discovers that her teacher is willing to respect 
her privacy by not reading entries marked, "DO NOT READ." 
Tish then begins to write candidly about her abusive father, her 
severely depressed mother, and the many family responsibilities 
that have become hers. Finally Tish realizes that Mrs. Dunphrey 
may be the one person who can truly offer her hope. This brief, 
moving novel explores how one girl begins to deal with her prob- 
lems through journal writing. One middle-school teacher stated, 
"I had a young girl in my eighth-grade English class whom I dis- 
covered had some of the same difficulties as Tish. It really opened 
some doors for her . . . and for me in working with her." 



l' 



258 



Perspectives on Life Inside and Outside of the Classroom Context 



233 



6.57 Kline, Suzy (1998). Horrible Harry Moves up to Third Grade. 
Illustrated by Frank Remkiewicz. New York: Viking. 58 pp. ISBN: 
0-670-87873-1. Chapter Book. (See 7.55) 

6.58 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1996). Just One Flick of a Finger. Illustrated 
by David Diaz. New York: Dial. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1948-5. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 8.47, 20.38) 

6.59 Naylor, Phyllis Re)molds (1997). Outrageously Alice. New York: 
Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 133 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80354-0. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Alice is having a difficult time settling into eighth grade after find- 
ing it is not what she thought it would be. Alice livens things up in 
her personal appearance with a change of hairstyle and makeup, 
and in her social life by joining the explorer club. When she attends 
a bridal shower for an older woman, Alice is thrust into the midst 
of adult discussions about sensuality and making love. Growing 
up without a mother, who died when Alice was four, forces Alice 
to turn to her brother and father to answer her most direct and per- 
sonal questions. This is a must-read for preteens trying to handle 
the changes that creep into every aspect of their lives. Readers can 
see themselves through Alice's antics and the problems she and 
her friends face with family and peer relationships. Naylor's series 
of Alice books also includes Achingly Alice and Alice in Lace. "It's 
nice to read a book that is funny, but really shows how tough it is 
for girls growing up," noted Rebecca (age eleven). 

Naylor, Phyllis Re)molds (1996). Alice in Lace. New York: 
Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 139 pp. ISBN: 0-689- 
80358-3. 

Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds (1998). Achingly Alice. New 
York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 121 pp. ISBN: 
0-689-80355-9. 

6.60 Roberts, Willo Davis (1998). The Kidnappers: A Mystery. New York: 
Atheneum. 137 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81394-5. Chapter Book. (See 13.67) 

6.61 Scott, Arm Herbert (1996). Brave as a Mountain Lion. Illustrated 
by Glo Coalson. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395- 
66760-7. Picture Book. 

This is a well-written picture book that incorporates traditional 
Native American thought and actions in dealing with contemporary 




^ I 



259 



234 



School Life 



issues. Spider, a Shoshone child, has been selected by his teacher to 
represent his class in the school-wide speUing bee. Spider is afraid to 
go up on the gymnasium's stage in front of so many people. He 
seeks wisdom and advice from various family members: Father teUs 
him to pretend to be the bravest animal he can think of; Grand- 
mother tells him to be clever like the coyote; and his older brother 
tells him to be silent and stay cool like the spider from whom he got 
his name. Overcorning his apprehensions. Spider participates in the 
contest and conquers his fears. Especially pleasing are the true-to- 
Ufe scenes of family life at home, the close-ups of Spider with his 
father, and the interaction with his grandmother as she works on 
beadwork. Scott writes a well-told, believable story about a contem- 
porary Native American family with an academically successful 
male as the main character. 

6.62 Thomas, Rob (1997). Slave Day. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. 188 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80206-4. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. (See 20.42) 

6.63 Walter, Virginia (1998). Making Up Megaboy. Illustrated by Kat- 
rina Roeckelein. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-0- 
7894-2488-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 20.55) 

6.64 Winslow, Vicki (1997). Follow the Leader. New York: Delacorte. 
215 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32285-2. Chapter Book. (See 20.29) 

6.65 Wolff, Virginia E. (1998). Bat 6. New York: Scholastic. 230 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-89799-3. (See 20.43) 

Secondary Reviews 

6.66 Adler, David A. (1998). The Many Troubles of Andy Russell. 
Illustrated by Will Hillenbrand. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 136 
pp. ISBN: 0-15-201295-8. Chapter Book. 

Andy Russell is a fourth grader who wants to do well in school, 
but his mind is on a variety of other things: his pet gerbils have 
escaped, his friend Tamika needs a new foster home, and Andy 
has just found out that his mother is pregnant. Adler's accessible 
text works well with Hillenbrand's black-and-white drawings. 

6.67 Danziger, Paula (1998). Amber Brown Is Feeling Blue. Illustrated 
by Tony Ross. New York: Putnam. 133 pp. ISBN: 0-399-23 179-X. 
Chapter Book. 



260 



High-Interest Series Books 



235 



Amber Brown is faced with a major dilemma. Max, her mother's 
boyfriend, has invited them to Walla Walla, Washington, for Thanks- 
giving. However Amber's father is returning from a lengthy job 
assignment in Paris, and is anxious to take his daughter to New York 
City to see the Thanksgiving Day parade. Add to this a new girl at 
school by the name of Kelly Green, and readers familiar with the 
series will anticipate Amber's discovery of a positive solution to her 
problem. 

6.68 Haddad, Charles (1998). Meet Calliope Day. Illustrated by Steve 
Pica. New York: Delacorte. 150 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32518-5. Chapter 
Book. 

Calliope's father has died, which forces her mother to get a job and 
Calliope to go to the after-school program (ASP). Coupled with 
that, her teacher confiscates Calliope's pink vampire teeth, the 
police are trying to seize her rabbit Mortimer, and Calliope suspects 
the cranky neighbor Mrs. Blatherhom of being a witch. The humor- 
ous text is enhanced by Pica's black-and-white cartoon illustrations. 

6.69 Moss, Marissa (1996). Amelia Writes Again! Berkeley, CA: Tricy- 
cle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-883672-42-2. Picture Book. 

Ten-year-old Amelia receives a journal for her birthday, and pro- 
ceeds to record information and pictures about her life in and out 
of school. Readers gain insight into Amelia's personal thoughts 
and perceptions of others through humorous text and well-labeled 
ink-and-watercolor illustrations. A terrific example of how a jour- 
nal can become meaningful in a child's life. 

Another book about Amelia by this author is: 

Moss, Marissa (1998). Amelia Takes Command. Middle- 
ton, WI: Pleasant. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56247-789-7. Picture 
Book. 

High-Interest Series Books 

See also the section entitled Series Books in chapter 7, "Literacy." 

6.70 Applegate, K. A. Animorphs series. New York: Scholastic. 

Jake, Rachel, Tobias, Cassie, and Marco can't tell you who they are 
or where they live as it would be too risky, but readers do know 
that these characters are apt to morph into other life forms. The 
ending of each book sets up the next book in the series, and if 




261 



236 



School Life 



readers flip the pages they will see a small illustration on the right 
bottom corner morph as well. Peter (age ten) explained, "I like 
reading Animorphs because it always leaves you waiting for what 
happens next and they are fun books to read." RL 5. 

6.71 Bennett, Cherie. Pageant series. New York: Berkley Jam. 

Teen Spirit magazine is sponsoring four regional pageants across 
the nation in order to find a real girl to wear the crown. There are 
a series of books for each regional area, which includes to date 
midwestern girls, southern girls, and northeastern girls. RL not 
indicated. 

6.72 Berenstain, Stan, and Jan Berenstain. The Berenstain Bears series. 
New York: Random House. 

This series continues to be popular with parents and children. In 
each book. Sister Bear and Brother Bear learn a lesson related to 
issues such as sharing, fighting, and getting along with each other. 
RL not indicated. 

6.73 Betancourt, Jeanne. Pony Pals series. New York: Scholastic. 

There are several series such as this one which are focused on 
friendships built around the love of riding horses. RL 3. 

6.74 Brown, Marc, creator. Arthur Chapter Book series. Boston: Little 
Brown. 

Stories about Arthur and his friends are presented in a chapter 
book format for children ready to read independently. RL 3. 

6.75 Bryant, Bonnie. The Saddle Club series. New York: Skylark. 

Over eighty books in this series focus on Carole the horse lover, 
Stevie the practical joker, and Lisa who is a straight-A student. 
The common bond between them all is that they enjoy riding 
horses that are boarded at Pine Hollows Stables. RL 5. 

6.76 Campbell, Joanna. Thoroughbred series. New York: HarperCollins. 

Another series based on characters' love of horses. The four 
friends in this series include Ashleigh Griffin, Christine Reese, 
Samantha McLean, and Cindy McLean. RL 5+. 

6.77 Dadey, Debbie, and Marcia Thornton Jones. The Adventures of 
the Bailey School Kids series. New York: Scholastic. 



262 



High-Interest Series Books 



237 



The kids at the Bailey School find adventure and mystery both 
inside and outside of the classroom. Caprice (age 8) said, "I read 
Bailey School Kids because they are exciting to read over and 
over again. They talk about witches and mummies and I like 
that."RL3. 

6.78 Dubowski, Mark. Sabrina the Teenage Witch series. New York: 
Pocket. 

Adapted by Mark Dubowski from the television series, this book 
series takes readers on further adventures with Sabrina the 
Teenage Witch and her cat, Salem. RL 2. 

6.79 Hughes, Dean. Scrappers series. New York: Aladdin. 

A series that highlights the world of baseball as a team of nine 
kids fight for a shot at the championship. Each book includes Offi- 
cial Scrappers Trivia Trading Cards that feature facts about the 
game of baseball and its players. RL 2-6. 

6.80 Martin, Arm M. Baby-Sitters Little Sister series. New York: 
Scholastic. 

Martin, Ann M. The Baby-Sitters Club series. New York: Scholastic. 

These series by Arm M. Martin focus on a multicultural group of 
friends and their siblings. Martin chooses to bring out issues that 
are relevant to the age group intended for this series. "I like the 
Baby-Sitters Club books because they talk about girls my age and 
what they like to do. It also helps me through my life because they 
sometimes are going through what I am going through," said 
Cambria (age ten). RL 3^. 

6.81 Martin, Ann M. California Diaries series. New York: Scholastic. 

Written in a diary format, this series by Martin focuses on the 
problems of teenagers such as eating disorders, alcohol, friend- 
ship, stepparents, boyfriends, etc. Each book in the series deals 
with the problems of one of the characters, named Dawn, Sunny, 
Amalia, Maggie, and Ducky. RL 6+. 

6.82 Martin, Arm M. The Kids in Ms. Colman's Class series. New 
York: Scholastic. 

This series focuses on the students in Ms. Colman's class, and the 
various issues they face in their lives such as having to go to day 
camp during summer vacation. RL2. 






263 



238 



School Life 



6.83 Metzger, Steve. Dinofours series. Illustrated by Hans Wilhelm. 
New York: Scholastic Cartwheel. 

This series for young children combines dinosaur characters, all 
of whom are four years old, and their preschool experiences. RL 
not indicated. 

6.84 Pascal, Francine, creator. Sweet Valley High series. New York: 
Bantam Doubleday Dell. 

Stories of teenage twins, Elizabeth and Jessica Wakefield, who 
encounter all of the difficulties growing up with parents, teachers, 
and peers. RL 6. 

6.85 Pascal, Francine, creator. Sweet Valley Kids series. New York: 
Bantam Doubleday Dell. 

Stories about Elizabeth and Jessica Wakefield that take place in 
Sweet Valley Elementary. RL 2. 

6.86 Pascal, Francine, creator. Sweet Valley Twins and Friends series. 
New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell. 

This series provides a middle-school setting for Elizabeth and Jessica 
Wakefield. Also ties into the television program and web site. RL 4. 

6.87 Positively for Kids series. Dallas, TX: Taylor. (See 12.2) 

6.88 Rees, Elizabeth M. Heartbeats series. New York: Aladdin. 

This series for adolescents features artistic and romantic rivalries 
between the students who attend Dance Tech, a combined ballet 
and ballroom dancing school. RL not indicated. 

6.89 Rugrats series. New York: Simon Spotlight/Nickelodeon. 

These picture books are based on the popular television series 
and movie featuring the antics of the Rugrats characters. RL not 
indicated. 

6.90 Stine, R. L. Fear Street series. New York: Scholastic. 

Stine, R. L. Ghosts of Fear Street series. New York: Scholastic. 

Stine, R. L. Fear Street Sagas series. New York: Scholastic. 

Intended for older readers, Stine shares gruesome and terrifying 
horror stories for readers. Children wanting more information can 
access the Web site. RL not indicated. 



264 



High-Interest Series Books 



239 



6.91 Stine, R. L. Goosebumps series. New York: Scholastic. 

Stine, R. L. Goosebumps 2000 series. New York: Scholastic. 

Stine, R. L. Goosebumps Find Yourself series. New York: Scholastic. 

This enormously popular series provides horror, chills, thrills, and 
mysteries for readers. “I like to read books by R. L. Stine because 
his books are exciting, scary, and funny all at the same time," com- 
mented Justin (age eleven). RL 4. 

6.92 Two of a Kind series. New York: Harper Entertainment. 

These books are based on the television series featuring twins 
Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen. Illustrated with photographs from 
the television show. RLnot indicated. 

6.93 Warner, Gertrude Chandler, creator. The Adventures of Benny 
and Watch: A Boxcar Children Early Reader series. New York: 
Scholastic. 

These brief stories feature the four Alden children solving simple 
mysteries in a beginning-to-read format for yoimger readers. RL 
1-3. 

6.94 Warner, Gertrude Chandler, creator. The Boxcar Children series. 
New York: Scholastic. 

The four main characters of the original Boxcar Children book — 
Henry, Jessie, Violet, and Benny Alden — continue having numer- 
ous adventures while solving mysteries. Miss Warner passed 
away in 1979 after having written well over sixty books in the 
Boxcar Children series. "I like to read The Boxcar Children series 
because they are good mystery stories. They don't bore or confuse 
me," said Courtney (age nine). RL 3. 

6.95 Wishbone Classics series. New York: HarperCollins. 

The television canine takes readers through a variety of classics 
such as The Odyssey, Oliver Twist, Romeo and Juliet, and Franken- 
stein. At various times throughout the book. Wishbone tells read- 
ers what has happened in the story or the events that are yet to 
occur. "I like Wishbone because I like learning about the past and 
how they lived and what they did," said Abigail (age nine). RL 
3.5^.5. 



O 

ERIC 



265 




'E-W-E-L^ 





BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



A. Seedfolks, Paul Fleischman (7.66). B. The Case of the Lion Dance, Laurence Yep 
(7.62). C. Jewels, Belinda Rochelle/Cornelius Van Wright and Ying-Hwa Hu (7.91). D. 
The Moonflower, Peter and Jean Loewer (7.17). 







266 



241 



7 Literacy 

Carol Gilles 

Contributing reviewers included Marilyn Andre, Linda Aulgur, 
Carolyn Dye, Carol Gilles, Janice Henson, Veronica Lee, Jenine Loesing, 
MariBeth Loesing, Virginia Pfannenstiel, Pam Riggs, Sharon 
Schneeberger, Sharon Stemmons, and Shelli Thelen. 



F rank Smith (1978) once said, "We learn to read by reading" (97). In 
that sense, all books that children read are literacy books because 
they help children develop understanding, vocabulary, and fluency 
while entertaining or informing them. However there are some books 
that are especially helpful in teaching reading because they are interest- 
ing and have been written in ways that are particularly accessible to 
children. These books include predictable books, concept books, early 
chapter books, series books, short stories or high-interest books for reti- 
cent readers, books about literacy, and books that emphasize the art of 
storytelling. These are the types of books selected for this chapter. 

As our review committee selected outstanding titles, we looked 
for books that Dorothy Watson (1997) called "supportive texts." Eight- 
year-old Alvin helped Watson define supportive text when he said, "I 
can work this story." He explained a workable story was one that he 
liked "enough to try hard" (in Watson 1997, 635). Supportive texts entice 
readers as they offer the structures necessary to help them create mean- 
ing. Supportive texts include those that are predictable in their word 
patterns, syntax, concepts, or illustrations. They might rhyme or have a 
rhythm to them. They are also books in which the author gives readers 
clues to help with difficult concepts or words. 

After reading and examining himdreds of books, we decided on 
the following categorical system for organizing the books reviewed in 
this chapter: 

■ Emergent Literacy. This section includes wordless books, high- 
ly predictable books where the illustrations tell most of the 
story, and books with refrains that even young children quickly 
learn to mimic. 

■ Rhythm, Rhyme, and Repetition. In this section, we included 
predictable books that offer a challenge for more mature readers. 




■ .t' ’ •; 



267 



242 



Literacy 



■ Concept Books. This section includes books that support begin- 
ning reading by offering one concept that is developed through- 
out the book. We chose some concept books for beginning 
readers, and some for more mature readers. 

■ ABC Books. In this section, the reader will find books that 
younger readers can relate to, or books that are conceptual in 
nature for older readers. Although we examined many ABC 
books, we chose only a few. Many of the ABC books were 
attractive, but didn't support readers. 

■ Beginning Chapter Books. This section includes those books 
that offer a transition between I-can-read books with few words 
and many pictures, and more sophisticated literature. The latter 
still use a simple vocabulary, but the story line carries over into 
several chapters. 

■ Series Books. In this section, we included those books in which 
a character is repeated across many books by the same author. 
Many of the series books printed today are enjoyable, but are 
not high-quality literature. We chose for inclusion series that 
were written by respected authors and in which many of the 
books in the series were of higher quality. Series books are use- 
ful in the reading process because the characters, setting, and 
plot frequently are similar across the series. Because readers 
often will read all the books in the series, predicting and con- 
firming is made easier and the student can work on fluency. 
Books in this section have been subdivided into three cate- 
gories: Emergent-Reader Books, Beginning Chapter Books, and 
Books for Mature Readers. 

■ Books for Reticent Readers. In this section, we have included 
books that appeal to a broad range of readers, even those who 
may have difficulty reading. We also have chosen to put out- 
standing short stories here. Often older at-risk readers are intim- 
idated by long chapter books, but are eager to read good stories. 
The short-story books listed here contain outstanding stories 
that can be handled easily by older readers, or used as read- 
aloud texts. Some of the books in this section have strong subject 
appeal without sacrificing literary quality, enticing reluctant 
readers into the world of print. 

■ Books about Literacy. This section includes books that use a 
journal or letter format, and it also includes books that deal 
with the topic of learning how to read. 

■ Storytelling Books. We have included here books that either 
include references to storytelling or are composed of an oral 
story that has been written down. Storytelling is an old and 
honored tradition, and these books allow children to experience 
the tradition of storytelling across cultures. 




268 



Emergent Literacy 



243 



Works Cited 

Smith, Frank. 1978. Reading without Nonsense. New York: Teachers College. 

Watson, Dorothy. 1998. Beyond Decodable Text: Supportive and Workable 
Literature. Language Arts 74, no. 8: 635-643. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Emergent Literacy 

Primary Reviews 

7.1 Harris, Marian (1998). Tuesday in Arizona. Illustrated by Jim 
Harris. Gretna, LA: Pelican. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56554-233-9. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 8.37) 

7.2 Hoban, Tana (1997). Look Book. New York: GreenwiUow. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-14971-5. Picture Book. 

Tana Hoban has created another wordless book using nature pho- 
tographs. Readers are challenged to guess what picture will be 
revealed through the cutout. Beautiful color photographs of sun- 
flowers, cabbages, birds, a dog, pretzels, an ostrich, a lobster, a 
hippopotamus, and a butterfly help students appreciate nature. 
Students will naturally want to create their own version of this 
impressive book. In addition to discovering the photo in its 
entirety, one reviewer's kindergarten students began a discussion 
about the animals in various habitats. This book will spark talk in 
the classroom. 

7.3 Inkpen, Mick (1996). Everyone Hide from Wibbly Pig. New York: 
Penguin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-87489-2. Picture Book. 

This flap book was a definite first-grade favorite! The pigs play 
hide-and-seek, and Tiny Pig needs help choosing a good hiding 
place. Wibbly Pig begins his search and finds pigs under the towel, 
behind the towel, and in the shower. Soon all the pigs are found. 



ERIC 



269 



244 



Literacy 



and the troops begin a pig hunt for Tiny Pig. Will he be found? The 
best flap is saved for last! Children in one reviewer's class made 
their own flap books. Drawing the objects on the page, and then 
designing a flap that was part of the environment and large enough 
to cover the drawing, was a great problem-solving adventure. 

7.4 Tafuri, Nancy (1997). What the Sun Sees. New York: Greenwil- 
low. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14493-4. Picture Book. 

Nancy Tafuri explores the concept of the sun and moon with beau- 
tiful full-page colored-pencil, watercolor and black-ink illustra- 
tions that support the simple, repetitive text. The first half of the 
book investigates what the sun sees. Then the reader must turn the 
book over and upside down to discover what the moon sees. 
Emergent first-grade readers were intrigued by the layout, and 
wanted to talk about the book's format after the read-aloud ses- 
sion. The book encourages children to develop illustrations and 
text that explore their own concept of what the sun and moon see. 

Secondary Reviews 

7.5 Harter, Debbie (1997). Walking through the Jungle. New York: 
Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30035-8. Picture Book. 

The lush, colorful illustrations brimming with wildlife invite the 
reader to travel through the desert, the mountains, and the ocean, 
enjoying the animals and terrain of each habitat. The rhythmic 
rhymes of the book support the development of early readers. 
First graders enjoyed chanting along with this read-aloud book 
and finding animals in the various habitats. The book was a popu- 
lar choice during sustained silent-reading sessions, as well as a 
useful resource book for habitat or animal studies. 

7.6 Nicholson, Sue (1998). A Day at Greenhill Farm. New York: Dor- 
ling Kindersley. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2957-8. Picture Book. 

Early in the morning, the rooster at Greenhill Farm starts the day 
by waking all the farm animals with his cock-a-doodle-doo! This 
nonfiction picture storybook is an ideal resource for primary teach- 
ers to include in their classroom libraries. The simple, informative 
text describes the various animals on the farm, and allows young 
readers to use the book as a primary source for research. The book 
contains real-life photographs, and just the right amount of text. It 
is an invaluable tool for learning when studying the farm. 



Rhythm, Rhyme, and Repetition 



245 



Rhythm, Rhyme, and Repetition 

See also chapter 10, "Poetry"; and the section entitled Riddles, Chants, 

and Poems in chapter 13, "The Craft of Language." 

Primary Reviews 

7.7 Greene, Rhonda Gowler (1997). Barnyard Song. Illustrated by 
Robert Bender. New York; Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80758-9. Picture Book. 

The barnyard is alive with animal noises and cries until a bee with 
a contagious sneeze turns the song into sniffles and wheezes. 
Children love Bender's large colorful illustrations of a sick horse 
with a water bottle on his head, or the farmer giving medicine to a 
bee with an eyedropper. This book demands to be read and 
enjoyed multiple times. First graders chanted the repetitive parts, 
sang the book, dramatized the story with animal sound effects, 
put on a musical puppet dramatization, and added other animal 
characters. When one reviewer put the book out for individuals or 
groups to revisit, it stayed in constant use. 

7.8 Marsh, T. J., and Jennifer Ward (1998). Way out in the Desert. Illus- 
trated by Kenneth Spengler. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-87358-687-5. Picture Book. 

This book uses the tune of "Over in the Meadow" to introduce 
readers to different animals in the Sonoran desert. From the begin- 
ning lines, "Way out in the desert having fun in the sun, lived a 
mother horned lizard and her little toady ONE," readers are 
caught up in the rhyme and the vibrant illustrations. After two 
readings, this book became the favorite singing book of several 
groups of children during independent reading time. Kenneth 
Spengler used gouache on watercolor paper to create bold, double- 
page spreads that present the desert from animal-eye perspectives 
and that are often large enough for an entire class to enjoy them 
together. He hides a number in each illustration that matches the 
number in the verse, inviting children to revisit this book again 
and again. A glossary of the desert animals introduced in the book 
will help children become more familiar with the unique collection 
of desert animals presented here. Musical notation also is included 
for teachers and students who may not be familiar with the 
melody. 



ERIC 



271 



246 



Literacy 



7.9 Zamorano, Ana (1996). Let's Eat! Illustrated by Julie Vivas. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-13444-2. Picture Book. 
(See 4.109) 

Secondary Reviews 

7.10 Hazen, Barbara (1998). That Toad Is Mine! Illustrated by Jane 
Manning. New York: Harper Festival. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-694- 
01035-9. Picture Book. 

This book concerns two boys who are friends and who share every- 
thing, until they both decide they want a toad and can't figure out a 
way to share it. As they're fighting over the toad, it hops away. 
They resolve their dispute and become friends again. The story is 
written in rhyme and is easy to read. The pleasing watercolor illus- 
trations emphasize the relationship between the two friends. 

7.11 Jessup, Harley (1997). What's Alice Up To? New York: Penguin. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-87396-9. Picture Book. 

Do you like mysteries? As you read this book, use the clues to help 
the dog figure out what Alice is up to. As Alice's dog watches her 
gather a variety of items from around the house and yard, the dog 
and the reader naturally ask questions. Jessup's large, detailed 
illustrations add to the clues. A delightful, surprise ending tops off 
this unique mystery. 

7.12 Mahy, Margaret (1996). Boom, Baby, Boom, Boom! Illustrated by 
Patricia MacCarthy. New York: Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670- 
87314-4. Picture Book. 

Mahy uses onomatopoeia and repeated phrases to create a natural 
read-aloud book. When Mama ignores Baby to play her diddy- 
dum-drums, the farm animals creep, gallop, scuttle, trot, and 
amble into the kitchen and eat Baby's lunch. As the drums 
become silent, the animals retreat and Mama, finding Baby alone 
with a clean plate, is delighted. First-grade children loved the 
large, colorful illustrations and enjoyed repeating the phrase 
"boom-biddy-boom-biddy-boom-boom-boom!" 

7.13 Mayer, Marianna (1998). The Mother Goose Cookbook: Rhymes 
and Recipes for the Very Young. Illustrated by Carol Schwartz. 
New York: Morrow Junior Books. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15242-2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 12.56) 



272 



Concept Books 



247 



7.14 Reiser, Lynn (1998). Tortillas and Lullabies/Tortillas y cancionci- 
tas. Illustrated by Corazones Valientes. Translated by Rebecca 
Hart. New York: Greenwillow. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14628-7. Picture 
Book. (See 13.39) 

Concept Books 

See also the section entitled Math Concept Books in chapter 9, "Mathe- 
matics." 

Primary Reviews 

7.15 Harris, Pamela (1998). Hot, Cold, Shy, Bold: Looking at Oppo- 
sites. Toronto, Canada: Kids Can. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55074-153-5. 
Picture Book. 

This concept book focuses on opposites. The photographs and 
repetitive language enable many beginning readers to read this 
book after hearing it a few times. Children's and grown-ups' faces 
are used to introduce opposites such as hot/cold, shy /bold, 
hello /goodbye, old/new, and serious /funny. On each page one 
new word is introduced, supported by picture clues. The photo- 
graphs, rich in color and texture, appeal to yoimg children and 
adults. Emergent readers will find they can read this book quickly. 
Children also will enjoy making their own opposites books using 
photographs or magazine cutouts. 

7.16 Llewellyn, Claire (1997). Spiders Have Fangs and Other Amaz- 
ing Facts about Arachnids. Illustrated by Mike Taylor and Christo- 
pher Shield. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0610-2. 
Picture Book. 

Students will enjoy the bold, bright colors contrasted with a black 
backgroimd, which makes the spiders seem to move off the page 
of this book. In addition to providing the reader with useful infor- 
mation about arachnids, symbols indicate projects to try and true- 
false questions children may enjoy answering. Page borders give 
additional exciting information. The format is intriguing, with 
each page spread organized aroimd an "I didn't know that" state- 
ment, including "I didn't know that some spiders spit," "I didn't 
know that spiders have eight eyes," and "I didn't know that spi- 
ders change color." A table of contents, index, and glossary pro- 
vide an excellent opportunity to introduce the structure of 



O 

ERIC 



273 



248 



Literacy 



nonfiction books. Fascinating for fourth graders, younger readers 
were also captivated by this book. 

7.17 Loewer, Peter (1997). The Moonflower. Illustrated by Jean 
Loewer. Atlanta: Peachtree. 27 pp. ISBN: 1-56145-138-X. Picture 
Book. 

This concept book explores nature at night. As the moonflower 
blooms, crickets chirp, bats glide, fireflies flicker, and hawkmoths 
appear. The large, bright illustrations cover three-quarters of a 
page. The book has a melodic narrative line, as well as a column 
of factual information on each page. For example, the narrative 
says, "The fireflies of summer will soon begin to send their flash- 
ing codes, shining like flying sparklers," while the scientific sec- 
tion states, "Fireflies, or lightning bugs, use a blinking glow to 
communicate with each other. The male firefly flashes a special 
code that only female fireflies of the same species understand." 
The combination of fact, fiction, and lush illustrations appeals to 
many readers. 

7.18 Morton, Christine (1998). Picnic Farm. Illustrated by Sarah Bar- 
ringer. New York: Holiday House. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8234-1332-2. 
Picture Book. 

Gorgeous and bright pastel illustrations create initial interest in 
this picture book about children who visit a farm, and then go on 
a picnic. At the picnic, food is consumed from each of the farm 
crops or livestock the children saw on the first few pages. The 
book makes it very clear that the products are from the animals 
they saw. For example, the texts explains that the farmer spread 
out "A rug, a rug-of-wool from the sheep. At the picnic people eat. 
Eggs, eggs — laid by the hen. Honey, honey made by the bees." For 
early childhood classes studying food or farms, this concept book 
provides a beautiful resource that young children will return to 
often. 

7.19 Speed, Toby (1998). Water Voices. Illustrated by Julie Downing. 
New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22631-1. Picture Book. 

This book is an inspiring read-aloud full of riddles that are rich in 
imagery. Each riddle describes a different form of water that chil- 
dren enjoy, such as morningmist, sprinklerspray, and oceanwave. 




274 



Concept Books 



249 



One riddle asks: 

when your fingers wrinkle 

and the soap slips 

and the waves make little plishings 

and all the hard parts of the day 

go sailing off in cups and scoops, 

I hold you close in my lap 

Who am I? (Answer: Bedtime bath.) 

Downing's soft, flowing watercolors add to the wet experience. 
First graders spent a lot of time talking about the words and the 
pictures that were created in their heads. The discussion then 
turned to other water voices that weren't included in the book. 
After naming several, some of the students wrote riddles about 
them. 

Secondary Reviews 

7.20 Cabrera, Jane (1997). Cat's Colors. New York: Dial Books for 
Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2090-4. Picture Book. 

The simple, bright illustrations in this book intrigued children as 
they learned about colors. A kitten presents the question, "What is 
my favorite color? Is it green?" That question is repeated with var- 
ious colors throughout the story. At the end, the reader finds that 
the kitten's favorite color is orange because it is the color of her 
mother. Each page layout displays the background color in simple 
finger-paint style, with the kitten appearing on every spread. The 
predictable text is supportive and allowed one reviewer's special 
needs students to read the question on each page and identify the 
colors. 

7.21 Knight, Margy Burns (1996). Talking Walls: The Stories Con- 
tinue. Illustrated by Arme Sibley O'Brien. Gardiner, ME: Tilbury. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88448-165-4. Picture Book. 

A continuation of the award winning Talking Walls, this nonfiction 
picture book shares stories about walls that have been built to 
divide, protect, and enhance the lives of people. Readers will 
develop respect for various cultures by learning the cultural signif- 
icance of each wall, and the purpose and effort it took to construct 
it. This selection provides much potential for the investigation of 
culture and other aspects of social studies throughout the world. 




275 



250 



Literacy 



Knight, Margy Burns (1992). Talking Walls. Illustrated 
by Anne- Sibley O'Brien. Gardiner, ME: Tilbury. ISBN: 
0-88448-102-6. Picture Book 

7.22 Yaccarino, Dan (1997). Good Night, Mr. Night. San Diego: Har- 
court Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201319-9. Picture Book. 

This imaginative concept book about night is unusual and pro- 
motes discussion. The text describes Mr. Night brushing past the 
trees, closing the flowers, and quieting the animals. The stylized 
watercolor illustrations add to the feeling of security. During a 
study of day and night, one reviewer read this book to her first- 
grade class. They liked the imaginative view of night, and decided 
there should be a book about day starring a woman. 

ABC Books 

Primary Reviews 

7.23 Ada, Alma Flor (1997). Gathering the Sun: An Alphabet in Span- 
ish and English. Illustrated by Simon Silva. Translated by Rosa 
Zubizaretta. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-13903-5. Picture Book. 

Gathering the Sun is an alphabet book of original Spanish poems, 
accompanied by faithful English translations. Tire individual 
poems can stand powerfully by themselves. Each letter of the 
alphabet is represented by a poem that honors the lives of farm 
workers and their families. Simon Silvas' vibrant gouache illustra- 
tions show the hearts, homes, and cultures of the people who 
work the fields in scenes that will be recognized by anyone who 
has crossed the fertile valleys of our country. This book can be 
used in both primary and intermediate grades for many pur- 
poses, including learning the alphabet, studying poetic form in 
either language, and learning more about migrant workers. 

7.24 Dakos, Kalli (1997). Get out of the Alphabet, Number 2! Wacky 
Wednesday Puzzle Poems. Illustrated by Jenny Graham. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81118-7. Picture Book. 
(See 10.8) 

7.25 Ellwand, David (1996). Emma's Elephant and Other Favorite 
Animal Friends. New York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-525-45792-5. Picture Book. (See 11.35) 






276 



ABC Books 



251 



7.26 Pandell, Karen (1996). Animal Action ABC. Photographs by Art 
Wolfe and Nancy Sheehan. New York: Dutton. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
525-45486-1 . Picture Book. (See 13.22) 

7.27 Rosenberg, Liz (1997). A Big and Little Alphabet. Illustrated by 
Vera Rosenberry. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531- 
30050-1 . Picture Book. (See 13.24) 

7.28 Sandved, Kjell B. (1996). The Butterfly Alphabet. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-48003-0. Picture Book. 

World-renowned nature photographer Kjell B. Sandved once 
noticed the letter F on the wing of a tropical moth. So began his 
journey to find alphabet letters on butterfly and moth wings. The 
close-up color photographs in this book are vivid and textured. 
Each butterfly and moth species is correctly labeled on the bottom 
of the page, and is pictured in full in the upper-left comer. In addi- 
tion, the alphabet letter highlighted on each page, and the word in 
the verse that begins with that letter, are illustrated in the same 
color. For example, the C page states, "The rainbow gave to but- 
terflies / Spots of co/or just their size." Opposite the verse, one can 
see clearly the magnified C on the Christmas swallowtail butter- 
fly. This book will delight both older and younger readers. 

7.29 Schnur, Steven (1997). Autumn: An Alphabet Acrostic. Illus- 
trated by Leslie Evans. New York: Clarion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
77043-2. Picture Book. (See 13.9) 

7.30 Shannon, George (1996). Tomorrow's Alphabet. Illustrated by 
Donald Crews. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
13504-8. Picture Book. 

Instead of creating the traditional alphabet book, which matches 
picture to letter. Shannon has shown what an object might poten- 
tially become. For example, "F is for wheat — tomorrow's flour. T is 
for bread — tomorrow's toast. V is for paper — tomorrow's Valen- 
tine." Several features make this book appealing: simple, repetitive 
language; the letter and the key word in the same color; a consis- 
tent two-page layout; and simple, uncluttered illustrations that 
support the text. When one reviewer's first-grade students made 
an alphabet book using the same style, they carefully considered 
the potential of many objects in the world, such as M is for cows — 
tomorrow's milk. 




277 



252 



Literacy 



7.31 Wilbur, Richard (1997). The Disappearing Alphabet. Illustrated 
by David Diaz. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
201470-5. Picture Book. (See 13.27) 

Secondary Reviews 

732 Chin-Lee, Cynthia (1997). A Is for Asia. Illustrated by Yumi Heo. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30011-0. Picture Book. 

Organized as an alphabet book, this text takes readers to various 
Asian cultures to learn about their traditions, treasures, and sym- 
bolic events. These cultural events involve children, and the book 
explains how they take part in appreciating the uniqueness of their 
respective cultures by participating in these events. The descrip- 
tions on each page also are represented in the native language of 
the culture represented, maintaining the culture's authenticity and 
voice. Color and life jump off each page, making this an attractive 
book for young readers. 

7.33 Holtz, Lara Tankel (1997). Alphabet Book. Photographs by Dave 
King. New York: Dorling Kindersley Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894- 
2053-8. Picture Book. 

Young children love the adventure and interaction found in 
search-and-find books, and this book is no exception. In addition 
to finding many objects starting with the named letter ("Can you 
see sixteen starfish scattered in the sand?"), readers also are chal- 
lenged to solve riddles. The bright colors and clever arrangements 
will attract children of all ages, and based on how one reviewer's 
kindergarten class reacted, this book will be devoured by all chil- 
dren. The reviewer's kindergarten students talked about this 
book for weeks, and selected it as a favorite for the entire school 
year. 

7.34 Kusugak, Michael (1996). My Arctic 1, 2, 3. New York: Annick. 22 
pp. ISBN: 1-55037-505-9. Picture Book. (See 9.4) 

7.35 Stroud, Virginia (1996). The Path of the Quiet Elk. New York: 
Dial. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1717-2. Picture Book. 

Virginia Stroud, a Cherokee-Creek author and illustrator, has cre- 
ated an alphabet book that looks at life's connection with the earth. 
Looks Within, a young Native American girl living during the 




278 



Beginning Chapter Books 



253 



1880s, learns about the interconnectedness of everything on earth 
through her elder. Wisdom Keeper. Stroud assembles twenty-six 
ways for Looks Within to search out what the earth has to offer her. 
Each of the twenty-six letters is illustrated with a nature scene in 
Stroud's distinct artistic style. This book will hold the interest of 
students in kindergarten through third grade. 

7.36 Tobias, Tobi (1998). A World of Words: An ABC of Quotations. 
Illustrated by Peter Malone. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-12129-2. Picture Book. 

This unusual alphabet book features quotations that fit the whim- 
sical illustrations. Quotations range from Native American Ute 
sayings to the words of Edna St. Vincent Millay, Shakespeare, and 
Lucille Cliffton. Children will delight in discovering that Thomas 
Jefferson said, "I cannot live without books," while Kate Guess 
mused, "As a child, I had two copies of each of my favorite books: 
one for the bathtub, and one for dry land." Younger children will 
enjoy hearing these quotations and marveling at the bright full- 
color illustrations, while older children will enjoy reading this 
book independently. 

Beginning Chapter Books 

Primary Reviews 

7.37 Byars, Betsy (1997). Ant Plays Bear. Illustrated by Marc Simont. 
New York: Viking. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-670-86776-4. Chapter Book. 

In this companion book to My Brother Ant, Anthony and his 
brother demonstrate the loving relationship they share. For exam- 
ple, when Ant frantically wakes his brother because he hears 
someone tapping on the window, his brother patiently dispels all 
his wild imaginings of giants by explaining, "Everyone with very 
long legs is playing basketball." Finally Ant realizes a tree branch 
is responsible for the tapping, and both brothers go back to sleep. 
This Viking Easy-to-Read book (reading level 3) could be used as 
a bridge to longer chapter books. The vocabulary, amount of text, 
and story content are appropriate for early primary readers, who 
could read this book independently. 

Byars, Betsy (1998). My Brother Ant. Illustrated by Marc 

Simont. New York: Viking. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-14-038345-X. 

Chapter Book. 



ERIC 



279 



254 



Literacy 



7.38 Cosby, Bill (1998). Money Troubles. Illustrated by Varnette P. 
Honeywood. New York: Scholastic. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-590-16402-3. 
Chapter Book. 

Little Bill's dreams of purchasing a telescope so that he can 
become a famous astronomer change once he begins to realize 
what it will take to earn the remaining money to purchase it. The 
little jobs around the house and throughout the neighborhood 
don't raise the money quickly enough. Little Bill begins to collect 
recyclable cans from the street and bumps into a yoimg boy who 
is collecting cans to raise enough money to eat. Little Bill stops 
thinking about himself and turns his attention to establishing a 
food drive program at his school. He realizes that he will still 
become famous one day, but for now he is happy simply being 
recognized for such a good deed. Varnette P. Honeywood's color- 
ful illustrations assist new readers in comprehending the text. 

7.39 Lawlor, Laurie (1998). The Worst Kid Who Ever Lived on Eighth 
Avenue. Illustrated by Cynthia Fisher. New York: Holiday House. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1350-0. Chapter Book. 

Leroy, the bad-news kid from Eighth Avenue, is back! The Eighth 
Street gang watch him bury something (probably money), and 
they decide to become detectives to solve the crime. In six chap- 
ters, Lawlor spins a solid tale. The full-color illustrations and 
large print make this book accessible to beginning chapter-book 
readers. Second graders enjoyed reading this book independently, 
and also enjoyed it as a read-aloud text. They talked about mak- 
ing predictions about people, and about what could happen if one 
assumes too much about a person. 

7.40 Little, Jean (1998). Emma's Magic Winter. Illustrated by Jennifer 
Plecas. New York: HarperCollins. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-06-025389-4. 
Chapter Book. 

This is a simple story of a shy yoimg girl who is embarrassed to 
read aloud in front of the class, and a new neighbor who is afraid 
she won't be able to make friends, overcoming their fears. Large, 
attractive illustrations sprinkled throughout this book make it 
even more accessible for beginning chapter-book readers. When 
one reviewer read this book to second-grade girls, they especially 
appreciated the common fears that the girls conquered and their 
use of imagination as part of their play. Even within the con- 



280 



Beginning Chapter Books 



255 



straints of a limited vocabulary, the author manages to write with 
finesse. The characters are believable, and the story is interesting 
and easy to follow. 

7.41 Scheffler, Ursel (1997). Grandpa's Amazing Computer. Illustrated 
by Ruth Scholte van Mast. Translated by Rosemary Lanning. New 
York; North-South. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-55858-795-0. Chapter Book. 

When Ollie has an opportunity to visit his grandfather, he discov- 
ers that Grandpa doesn't know anything about computers, even 
though he could benefit from one because he is so forgetful. 
Grandpa shows Ollie nature's oldest computer — a seed. Not only 
does this book provide a look at the generational differences asso- 
ciated with using computers, it also makes a great addition to a 
text-set about plants. Although it is not a chapter book, it is very 
similar in format to early chapter books. This appealed to bud- 
ding first-grade readers eager to read chapter books. 

7.42 Walker, Sally M. (1998). The 18 Penny Goose. Illustrated by Ellen 
Beier. New York: HarperCollins. 61 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027556-1. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 5.35) 

Secondary Reviews 

7.43 Bauer, Marion Dane (1998). Bear's Hiccups. Illustrated by Diane 
Dawson Hearn. New York: Holiday House. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-8234- 
1339-X. Chapter Book. 

First graders ready for beginning chapter books enjoyed this 
book. They identified with the problem that bear and frog have 
sharing the pond that each has claimed as his own. The repetitive 
language in the text, such as "Otter was so hot he quit playing. 
Frog was so hot he quit croaking," supports begirming readers. 
Bauer also uses strong similes, such as "Tlie pond lay flat and still, 
like a scarf dropped in the grass." Hearn's large, comical illustra- 
tions add to the humor in the story. The large type and pictures on 
every page make this a good transitional text into chapter books. 

7.44 Brisson, Pat (1997). Hot Fudge Hero. Illustrated by Diana Cain 
Bluthenthal. New York: Henry Holt. 72 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-4551-1. 
Chapter Book. 

Bertie celebrates every personal victory with a hot fudge sundae. 
The three stories are funny, lifelike, and teach a lesson. In one. 



er|c 



281 



256 



Literacy 



Bertie needs to get his ball back from the yard of Mr. Meckleberg, 
a mean old man with a dog named Attila and a cat named 
Screamer. At the library, Bertie finds How to Make Friends in Five 
Easy Steps, and proceeds to try each step until he makes Meckle- 
berg his friend and retrieves his ball. Second graders appreciated 
how each story involved a hot fudge sundae. They liked the 
details the pen-and-ink drawings added to the stories. 

7.45 Quigley, James (1997). Johnny Germ Head. Illustrated by JoArm 
Adinolfi. New York: Henry Holt. 72 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5395-6. 
Chapter Book. 

Johnny Jarvis wants to be a doctor, so his parents buy him a 
microscope. Looking into the microscope, Johnny discovers that 
germs are everywhere! Johnny becomes obsessed with germs and 
needs to cure his phobia. This book complemented a second- 
grade unit on the human body, during which one reviewer's class 
talked about the immune system, various germs, and diseases. 
The black-and-white illustrations add drama to Johnny's phobia 
about germs. 

Series Books 

See also the section entitled High-Interest Series Books in chapter 6, 

"School Life." 

Emergent-Reader Books 

Primary Reviews 

7.46 Brown, Marc (1998). Arthur's Mystery Envelope. Boston: Little 
Brown. 58 pp. ISBN: 0-316-11546-0. Picture Book. (See 13.60) 

7.47 Frith, Margaret (1997). Mermaid Island. Illustrated by Julie Dur- 
rell. New York: Grosset & Dunlap. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-448-41618-2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 14.25) 

7.48 Rylant, Cynthia (1997). Mr. Putter and Tabby Row the Boat. Illus- 
trated by Arthur Howard. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-15-256257-5. Chapter Book. 

On a very warm day during the last few weeks of school, one 
reviewer read this book to her second and third graders. The chil- 
dren listened intently, and were able to see how each chapter led 



282 



Series Books 



257 



into the next. The children chimed in as she read similar sen- 
tences ("They sweated on the front porch," "They sweated in the 
kitchen," "They sweated under the oak tree)" and lines repeated 
across text ("It was a hot walk," "It was a sweaty walk," "It was a 
slow walk"). The children enjoyed the simple story of friendship 
between Mr. Putter and Mrs. Teasberry, and suggestions for 
things to do in the summer. Howard's pencil, watercolor, and 
pastel illustrations add humor to the story. Rylant's series of Mr. 
Putter and Tabby books concern everyday events with an eye to 
detail. 

7.49 Rylant, Cynthia (1998). Henry and Mudge and the Sneaky 
Crackers. Illustrated by Sucie Stevenson. New York: Simon & 
Schuster Books for Young Readers. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81176-4. 
Chapter Book. 

This is another popular series by Rylant. Mudge is Henry's 180- 
pound dog, who is also his best friend. In this book, Henry and 
Mudge are spying with their new spy kit when they came across a 
letter in code. They crack the code, leave a message in code, and 
eventually meet another boy-and-dog spy team. All the books in 
this series follow the same pattern. They focus on the Henry and 
Mudge relationship, and concern one specific event or day in their 
lives. The colorful, cartoonlike drawings support the text, and 
add even more humor to the series. Sixteen of these warm, 
humorous books have been published to date. Rylant has found a 
way to make beginning reading fun. 

7.50 Sloan, Peter, and Sheryl Sloan (1998). Machines in the Home. Lit- 
tleton, MA: Sundance. 8 pp. ISBN: 0-7608-3152-1. Picture Book. 

This is the first book in the Little Blue Readers series, forty nonfic- 
tion books designed for emergent to proficient readers. These 
informational books are leveled (stages one to four) and use full- 
color photographs and predictable sentence structure to support 
readers. For example, in this book, each page follows the struc- 
ture, "This machine picks up dirt. It is a vacuum cleaner." Books 
for higher reading levels have more complex sentences and more 
print on each page. Books throughout the series offer information 
that enhances science or social studies investigations with clear, 
bright photographs. This series will be useful for students who 
gravitate towards nonfiction. 



283 



258 



Literacy 



Secondary Reviews 

7.51 Kemp, Moira. Lift-the-Flap series. New York: Lodestar. 

Titles in this series include: 

Lift-the-Flap Chick (1998). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-67565-5. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Lift-the-Flap Kitten (1998). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-67564-7. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Lift-the-Flap Mouse (1998). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-67563-9. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Lift-the-Flap Puppy (1998). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-67566-3. Pic- 
ture Book. 

This series of interactive peek-a-boo books with sturdy flaps 
designed to endure many rough readings includes simple and 
predictable stories. Each book invites the reader to look for an ani- 
mal hiding in, under, and behind various items. Little eyes will 
love finally discovering the hidden animal on the last page. These 
interactive books will engage infants through toddlers. The sim- 
ple, predictable text quickly becomes familiar to children, so that 
they can chime in as the adult reads the story. 

7.52 Mitchell, Claudette, Grade Porter, and Patricia Tefft Cousin 
(1996). Jump-rope. San Diego: Arborlake. 8 pp. ISBN: 1-57518- 
0641-2. Picture Book. 

The Visions: African-American Experiences Young Reader series 
offers simple, predictable stories that highlight African American 
children. The topics concern daily life, such as playing basketball, 
getting ready for school, going to the swimming pool, or making 
sandwiches. Jump-rope celebrates the joy of rope jumping with 
friends: "Jump! Jump! Jump! Jump! You move out and I move in. 
Twist and turn and do it again." Clear, simple illustrations and 
predictable sentence structure offer support to emergent readers. 

Beginning Chapter Books 

Primary Reviews 

7.53 Giff, Patricia Reilly (1998). Rosie's Big City Ballet. Illustrated by 
Julie Durrell. New York: Viking. 73 pp. ISBN: 0-670-87792-1. 
Chapter Book. (See 11.61) 



284 



Series Books 



259 



7.54 Howe, James (1997). Pinky and Rex and the New Neighbors. 
Illustrated by Melissa Sweet. New York: Simon & Schuster. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80022-3. Chapter Book. 

In this series. Pinky and Rex have adventures based on childhood 
events, such as participating in a spelling bee, going to camp, hav- 
ing a new baby, and dealing with a bully. The characters are 
believable and childlike. In this book. Pinky and Rex are worried 
that a new boy their age who moves into the neighborhood will 
break up their special friendship. The events in the story ring true, 
and children can use Sweet's watercolor paintings, which accom- 
pany the text, to support their predictions. Part of the Ready-to- 
Read series, this is a level 3 reading alone book. It would be 
appropriate for proficient readers in grades 1 through 3, or a 
struggling reader in higher grades. 

7.55 Kline, Suzy (1998). Horrible Harry Moves up to Third Grade. 
Illustrated by Frank Remkiewicz. New York: Viking. 58 pp. ISBN: 
0-670-87873-1. Chapter Book. 

This early chapter-book series continues to show how well Suzy 
Kline knows third graders. Horrible Harry has been featured in at 
least nine of Kline's books. In this saga, Harry and his best friend 
Doug, now third graders, face school changes, more trouble from 
Sidney, and a mine adventure. The theme of school and practical 
jokes will strike a chord with children in second through fourth 
grade. Beginning chapter-book readers will enjoy the humor and 
the lifelike characters. 

7.56 Mills, Claudia (1998). Gus and Grandpa Ride the Train. Illus- 
trated by Catherine Stock. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-374-32826-9. Chapter Book. 

Books in the Gus and Grandpa series demonstrate warmth and 
affection between a boy and his grandpa. Whether they are bak- 
ing cookies, riding a train, or just thinking, they are a perfect 
team. The language in this book is simple, and the sentences are 
short. The line-and-wash illustrations complement the story, 
offering support to emergent readers. The following is an exam- 
ple of Mills' style that clearly demonstrates the tone of the story: 
"Gus felt his happy steam bubble over again. He and Grandpa 
forgot a lot of things. But Gus never forgot that he loved Grandpa. 
And Grandpa never forgot that he loved Gus." 



4. C 



2S5 



260 



Literacy 



7.57 Pippen, Scottie, with Greg Brown (1996). Scottie Pippen: Reach 
Higher. Illustrated by Doug Keith. Dallas, TX: Taylor. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-87833-981-7. Picture Book. (See 12.2) 

7.58 Scieszka, John (1996). Tut, Tut. Illustrated by Lane Smith. New 
York: Viking. 74 pp. ISBN: 0-140-36360-2. Chapter Book. (See 14.58) 

Secondary Reviews 

7.59 Christopher, Matt (1998). The Dog That Called the Pitch. Illus- 
trated by Daniel Vasconcellos. Boston: Little Brown. 38 pp. ISBN: 
0-316-14207-7. Chapter Book. (See 12.38) 

7.60 Costello, Emily (1998). On the Sidelines. New York: Skylark. 150 
pp. ISBN: 0-553-48645-4. Chapter Book. (See 12.39) 

7.61 Perez, Eduardo (1998). The Young Baseball Player. New York: Dor- 
ling Kindersley. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2825-3. Picture Book. (See 12.31) 

Books for Mature Readers 

Primary Reviews 

7.62 Yep, Laurence (1998). The Case of the Lion Dance: Chinatown 
Mystery #2. New York: HarperCollins. 214 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024447- 
X. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This series of books has some interesting components that enable 
the books to rise above the ordinary. The books are set in San 
Francisco's Chinatown, and use the complex social climate of the 
community as a backdrop for the mystery stories. In this book for 
more mature readers, money is stolen at the grand opening of a 
Chinese restaurant owned by the family of the narrator. The 
detectives solving the crime are teenage cousins and their eccen- 
tric aunt. Aunt Tiger Lily has been a star of martial arts action 
movies for many years, but the only kung fu she knows is what 
she learned from watching her male stunt double. The solving of 
the mystery is less important than the escapades of the young 
detectives. Good writing and the use of modern-day Chinese and 
American culture make this an interesting book to read. 

Secondary Reviews 

7.63 Christopher, Matt (1997). At the Plate with . . . Ken Griffey, Jr. 
Boston: Little Brown. 121 pp. ISBN: 0-316-14233-6. Chapter Book. 
(See 12.4) 



2S6 



Books for Reticent Readers 



261 



7.64 Long, Barbara (1997). Jim Thorpe: Legendary Athlete. Spring- 
field, NJ: Enslow. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-89490-865-0. Chapter Book. (See 

12 . 11 ) 

Books for Reticent Readers 

Primary Reviews 

7.65 Dingle, Derek T. (1998). First in the Field: Baseball Hero Jackie 
Robinson. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. 48 pp. ISBN: 
0-7868-0348-7. Picture Book. (See 12.5) 

7.66 Fleischman, Paul (1997). Seedfolks. Illustrated by Judy Pedersen. 
New York: HarperCollins. 69 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027471-9. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. 

This imusual collection of short stories is tied together by the 
theme of turning a trash-filled lot in Cleveland into a commimity 
garden. Kim, who wants to prove to her dead Vietnamese father 
that she is a farmer, begins the garden. She scrapes away the 
debris and plants three lima bean seeds. The garden has a trans- 
forming effect on all who choose to plant there: Gonzalo views his 
father as a worthy man for the first time; Maricela realizes the 
baby within her is a part of a grand life cycle; and Mr. Myles, an 
invalid in a wheelchair, is again able to care about living. The Gibb 
Street Garden creates a commimity out of strangers. Pederson's 
pen-and-ink drawings add to the reality of the book. Because each 
story is complete in itself and is also part of a larger whole, this 
book generates talk about community, lives in crisis, and what is 
important in our lives. The quick stories are powerful, yet use sim- 
ple language. A must read for older students! (See also 20.54) 

7.67 Huynh, Quang Nhuong (1997). Water Buffalo Days: Growing Up 
in Vietnam. New York: HarperCollins. 117 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024957- 
9. Chapter Book. 

In this sequel to The Land I Lost, Huynh Quang Nhuong once 
again takes us to Vietnam before the war. Readers share the 
adventure and excitement of a yoimg boy growing up in the ver- 
dant hills of Vietnam. We hear continuing stories of Tank, the 
water buffalo, who is strong, a fierce fighter, and a protector of 
Nhuong. Each story is complete in itself, but part of the larger 
story about the experience of growing up m a totally different cul- 
ture. Reticent readers will enjoy the short, complete stories that 




287 



262 



Literacy 



they are able to read in one sitting. This book is a good read-aloud 
text as well. 

Huynh, Quang Nhuong (1982). The Land I Lost: Adven- 
tures of a Boy in Vietnam. Illustrated by Vo-Dinh Mai. 

New York: Harper & Row., 115 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024592-1. 
Chapter Book. 

7.68 Kramer, S. A. (1998). Hoop Heroes. Illustrated by Ken Call. New 
York: Grosset and Dunlap. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-448-41883-5. Chapter 
Book. 

This book includes biographical sketches of four famous basket- 
ball players: Anfemee "Permy" Hardaway, Grant Hill, Stephon 
Marbury, and Patrick Ewing. TTie simple text moves as quickly as a 
basketball game. Kramer has included both the excitement of the 
NBA and personal information, such as that Marbury was so poor 
as a child that his family couldn't afford a couch or extra chairs. 
Readers who have difficulty will be interested in the Ewing section 
because he was not able to read when he started playing for 
Georgetown University, and was ridiculed by fans with taunts 
such as "Ewing Kant Read Dis." There is even a picture of him 
working with a tutor. This book should be of great interest to stu- 
dents who love basketball. 

7.69 Romero, Maritza (1997). Selena Perez: Queen of Tejano Music. 
New York: PowerKids. 24 pp. ISBN: 0-8239-5086-7. Chapter Book. 

This book is one of six in the Great Hispanics of Our Time series, 
and is written for readers in the third to fourth grades. Selena's 
brief life is explored in an easy-to-read format. This book works 
better as an informational book than as a story because it does not 
create much feeling and emotion about the main character. Each 
book in the series has a message for young people, and in Selena 
Perez the message is to stay in school and reach for your dream. 
Young girls lined up for this book because they thought the photos 
were wonderful and because they see Selena as a heroine. Other 
personalities in this series — Henry Cisneros, Ellen Ochoa, Joan 
Baez, Jaime Escalante, and Roberto Clemente — were less popular 
with students. Each book has the same easily understood format 
and includes a glossary, index, table of contents, large type, and 
photographs. Some of the more difficult words are printed in bold- 
face type with a phonetic pronunciation key in parentheses after 
the word, a feature that some readers may find distracting. Never- 



288 



Books about Literacy 



263 



theless this series offers young students a good option for research 
and reading about influential Hispanic /Latino people. 

7.70 Rosen, Michael J. (1997). The Heart Is Big Enough: Five Stories. 
Illustrated by Matthew Valiguette. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 198 
pp. ISBN: 0-15-201402-0. Chapter Book. 

Michael J. Rosen has compiled five stories about kids on the verge 
of adolescence. From Matthew, who has had a hip replacement 
and learns to swim with the dolphins, to Jonathan, who becomes 
a caretaker of pets and plants for an elderly lady named Sam, all 
of these characters discover the importance of caring. As Sam 
explains, "[W]hen it comes down to it. I'm only an old lady . . . 
and you're only a young man, and caring is caring because if you 
do, whatever creature comes into your life becomes a part of that 
caring, right?" These stories are humorous and filled with lessons 
about living. The simple style and content about people on the 
verge of adolescence make them just right for many students who 
are struggling readers. 

Secondary Reviews 

7.71 Brooks, Bruce (1997). Woodsie. New York: HarperCollins. 116 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-027349-6. Chapter Book. (See 12.36) 

7.72 Christopher, Matt (1997). Penalty Shot. Boston: Little Brown. 131 
pp. ISBN: 0-316-13787-1. Chapter Book. (See 12.37) 

7.73 Gutman, Bill (1996). Grant Hill: Basketball's High Flier. Brook- 
field, CT: Millbrook. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0038-4. Chapter Book. 
(See 12.16) 

Books about Literacy 

See also the section entitled Children Struggling with or Experiencing 

Academic Success in chapter 6, "School Life." 

Primary Reviews 

7.74 Aliki (1998). Marianthe's Story: Painted Words; Marianthe's 
Story: Spoken Memories. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-15661-4. Picture Book. 

Marianthe is a young Greek immigrant girl who does not know 
the language. Aliki portrays her difficulty fitting into the school 
culture, learning English, and then learning how to read and write. 



289 



264 



Literacy 



Aliki uses colored pencil and crayons to produce large, expressive 
illustrations that extend the text. He not only portrays the diffi- 
culty Mari faces with language barriers, but also the intelligence of 
her teacher, who initially lets her use art to tell her life story, and 
then words when she has been in the United States longer. Chil- 
dren love the format of the book. Part one of Marianthe's story 
ends about halfway through the book. For part two, the reader 
must turn the book over and begin at the back, and then end up in 
the middle again. Children who are new in the classroom and 
those who have encountered difficulty learning to read or write 
will find hope in this book. 

7.75 Grimes, Nikki (1998). Jazmin's Notebook. New York: Dial. 102 
pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2224-9. Chapter Book. (See 5.84) 

7.76 Hesse, Karen (1998). just Juice. Illustrated by Robert A. Parker. 
New York: Scholastic. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-590-03382-4. Chapter Book. 

just Juice is the story of nine-year-old Justus (Juice) Faulstitch, who 
is repeating third grade because she still can't read. Her mother is 
pregnant with a fifth child, her father cannot find steady work, 
and the family is about to lose their home. As the story unfolds, a 
persistent and caring teacher identifies Juice's learning disability 
and provides the help she needs to begin reading. This is a heart- 
warming story about a loving family and the power of literacy. 
Like most of Hesse's books, just Juice highlights a caring, real-life 
family living on the edge of poverty and the fringes of society. The 
strong family imit provides the supportive backdrop against 
which Juice demonstrates a growing sense of responsibility, over- 
comes childhood fears, and develops a greater understanding of 
and appreciation for members of her family. The book is liberally 
sprinkled with black-and-white line drawings that further 
develop the rich characters with memorable images from key 
events in the story. (See also 20.35) 

7.77 Mora, Pat (1997). Tomas and the Library Lady/Tomas y la senora 
de la biblioteca. Illustrated by Raul Colon. New York: Knopf 
(English) /Dragonfly (Spanish). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-679-80401-3. 
Picture Book. (See 20.39) 

7.78 Moss, Marissa (1996). Amelia Writes Again! Berkeley, CA: Tricy- 
cle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-883672-42-2. Picture Book. (See 6.69) 



200 



Books about Literacy 



265 



7.79 Polacco, Patricia (1996). Aunt Chip and the Great Triple Creek 
Dam Affair. New York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22943-4. 
Picture Book. 

Everyone in Triple Creek loves television except Aunt Chip, who 
has retired to her bed in protest. Books have been relegated to 
being used "for doorstops, to hold up roofs, to sit on, to eat off, to 
sleep under, to mend fences, to stuff potholes, to prop up sagging 
buildings and even to shore up the dam." As a result, the stories 
have been lost and the children — instead of playing, talking, or 
laughing — are watching television screens. Aunt Chip decides to 
rectify this travesty and begins to read to her nephew Eli. Soon 
Aunt Chip is reading to many children who, in an effort to find 
more books for her to read, remove the books from their structural 
positions in town. The resulting miracle causes the town to once 
again put reading back into the community. Polacco's intense, 
whimsical illustrations add even more fancy to this mythical tale. 

7.80 Polacco, Patricia (1998). Thank You, Mr. Falker. New York: Philo- 
mel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-23166-8. Picture Book. (See 6.34) 

7.81 Stewart, Sarah (1997). The Gardener. Illustrated by David Small. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
32517-0. Picture Book. (See 3.16) 

7.82 Swanson, Susan Marie, and Peter Catalanotto (1998). Letter to the 
Lake. New York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894- 
2483-5. Picture Book. 

On a cold, hard day in winter, Rosie begins writing a letter to the 
lake, a favorite place from last summer. As she thinks about the fun 
she had at the lake, she can see a hint of summer tucked somewhere 
in each gray, wintry scene. The contrast between the drab scenes of 
winter and the brilliant colors of summer remembrances makes it 
easy for children of all ages to follow the story. One reviewer's first 
graders were fascinated with the idea of writing a letter to a place. 
They especially liked the illustration at the end, where the lake 
seems to be looking at Rosie. Some of the children even decided to 
write a letter to a favorite place in response to this book. 

7.83 Wilson, Nancy Hope (1997). Old People, Frogs, and Albert. Illus- 
trated by Marcy D. Ramsey. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
58 pp. ISBN: 0-374-35625-4. Chapter Book. (See 20.56) 




291 



266 



Literacy 



Secondary Reviews 

7.84 Brown, Marc (1996). Arthur Writes a Story. Boston: Little Brown. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-10916-9. Picture Book. 

Arthur's homework assignment to write a story goes awry when 
he tries to incorporate everyone's ideas into his story. What starts 
out as a personal experience story about how he got his dog. Pal, 
ends up as a song-and-dance routine about Planet Shmellafint (it's 
hard to find words that rhyme with elephant!). The result is a 
stunned and speechless audience. Mr. Ratbum, his teacher, helps 
Arthur realize the best stories are the ones that are "important to 
you." One reviewer used this book to begin a primary writing 
workshop. The class talked about what made the puppy story the 
best story, including the fact that the episode happened to Arthur 
and that he knew about this event. The class also identified 
authors who write about things that happened when they were 
children, especially Tomie De Paola and Patricia Polacco. 

7.85 Numeroff, Laura J. (1998). What Daddies Do Best, What Mom- 
mies Do Best. Illustrated by Lynn Munsinger. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80577-2. Picture Book. (See 4.18) 

7.86 Walsh, Ellen Stoll (1997). Jack's Tale. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200323-1. Picture Book. 

Jack, a frog, doesn't want to be in a fairy tale. However the author 
convinces him, and soon he's dodging trolls and trying to save the 
princess. This simple story takes readers through the mechanics 
of story development. The illustrations contain charming multi- 
colored frogs on a white background. This book appealed to pri- 
mary children who had struggled to create their own fairy tales. 
They thought it was a good way to learn the important elements 
of a fairy tale. 

7.87 Williams, Suzanne (1997). Library Lil. Illustrated by Steven Kel- 
logg. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1698-2. Picture Book. 

This tall tale about a librarian strong enough to lift the bookmo- 
bile and mean enough to intimidate motorcycle gang members 
deserves a place next to Pecos Bill or Paul Bunyan. From birth, Lil 
was a reader, and it was natural for her to become a librarian. But 
she met her match when she moved to Chesterville, a community 
of couch potatoes who would rather sit and watch television than 



■Cr ! 

f- 

: ,• i, I 



292 



Storytelling Books 



267 



read. When a terrible storm cuts off all electricity, Lil has a chance 
to convince folks that reading is more fun than sitting in the dark. 
Steven Kellogg's humorous drawings add to the tail-tale nature of 
this story. This read-aloud book will keep children laughing, and 
perhaps checking out those books! 

Storytelling Books 

See also the sections entitled Histories and Herstories and Cultural Tra- 
ditions: Traditional Literature in chapter 3, "Exploring Our Past." 

Primary Reviews 

7.88 Mamchur, Carolyn (1997). The Popcorn Tree. Illustrated by Lau- 
rie McGaw. Toronto, Canada: Stoddart Kids. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
7737-2896-1 . Picture Book. 

Two simultaneous stories, "Peeps and Sighs" in brown tones, and 
colorful "Christmas Rains" on the opposing pages, merge in this 
unusual story. In "Peeps and Sighs," the brown-tone pages illus- 
trate the story of the ornaments lying dormant in Aunt Rosa's base- 
ment and wanting a new home, and how they come to be wrapped 
and sent to the children. In "Christmas Rains," we see Mrs. Finley 
and her children stringing popcorn for their Christmas tree while 
she once again tells them her childhood memories about special tree 
ornaments. After hearing the story, the children write to ask Aunt 
Rosa to send the ornaments to them to complete their tree. The 
ornaments arrive just in time to add magic to the tree, and every- 
thing is right for Christmas. The ornaments are happy to be in use, 
for they know the children will continue the tradition. When read 
aloud, this book encourages adults to be storytellers, and to share 
our tales as each item is brought out to decorate for the holidays. 

7.89 Mitchell, Rhonda (1997). The Talking Cloth. New York: Orchard. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30004-8. Picture Book. (See 4.39) 

7.90 Morin, Paul (1998). Animal Dreaming: An Aboriginal Dream- 
time Story. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
200054-2. Picture Book. 

In Animal Dreaming, we join a young boy named Merri as he hears 
from an elder named Gadurra how the earth was first shaped. 
The walkabout through aboriginal Australia proceeds through 
textured, earthy paintings. The storyteller focuses the reader's 




293 



268 



Literacy 



attention on the pictographs on the stone wall, while relating how 
land formations were created to make homes for the animals. 
Readers learn how each animal arrived, until "Before long each of 
the animals had made their home in the land. The animals were 
at peace. And from that day on when they dreamed, they lived 
their dreams." This book is an extraordinary account of how sto- 
ries help people know who they are and where they came from. 
From a story told to the author by Bill Neidjie, a Gagadu elder. 

7.91 Rochelle, Belinda (1998). Jewels. Illustrated by Cornelius Van 
Wright and Ying-Hwa Hu. New York: Lodestar. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-525-67502-7. Picture Book. 

Through Lea Mae's summer visit to her grandparents, students can 
experience the tradition of storytelling. As Rochelle says, "With 
each tongue, with each telling, the stories are saved. . . . Like dia- 
monds, sapphires, and rubies, the stories are like jewels to treasure 
forever." The stories about Lea Mae's family connect students to 
events of the past, and spark interest and curiosity about the stories 
of their families. After reading this book, first graders in one 
reviewer's classroom shared stories their parents told about things 
that had happened to them or to others in their family. Some of the 
children talked to grandparents about stories they remember being 
told as a child. As one of the children shared after a weekend visit 
to her grandparents, "I didn't know my family had so many jewels. 
I can't wait to go back and hear some more stories." 

Secondary Reviews 

7.92 Bertrand, Diane Gonzales (1996). Sip, Slurp, Soup, Soup/Caldo, 
caldo, caldo. Illustrated by Alex Pardo DeLange. Houston, TX: 
Pinata. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55885-183-6. Picture Book. 

By the time readers finish this dual-language treat, they likely will 
share Jeffrey's (age seven) opinion: "I can almost smell it cooking!" 
In a dual-language text that presents English and then Spanish on 
each page, readers follow the step-by-step preparation of caldo, a 
meat and vegetable soup, and take a trip with the story characters 
to a tortilleria where they see how tortillas are made. The English 
text is sprinkled with Spanish words that readers can interpret eas- 
ily within the context of the story. The words caldo, caldo, caldo are 
repeated on each page, inviting class participation in the story- 
telling. The detailed and colorful pictures by Alex Pardo DeLange, 




294 



Storytelling Books 



269 



using watercolors and ink, depict a loving family with cultural 
authenticity. After spying the recipe for caldo that follows the story, 
a multiage primary class researched their families' recipes for 
caldo, and then cooked up a pot of their own, each child contribut- 
ing an ingredient. 

7.93 Bouchard, David (1997). The Great Race. Illustrated by Zhong- 
Yang Huang. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7613- 
0305-7. Picture Book. 

Grandmother unfolds on the little girl's bed the tale of the Chinese 
zodiac, and gingerly picks up the paper cutouts of the animals. 
The paintings in this book capture the strength of the dragon, the 
cockiness of the rooster, and the cunning of the rat as they race 
with their nine other contenders to reach the Emerald City. A cal- 
endar is included in the closing pages, as we are reminded of 
Grandmother's wise saying, "It is not who wins that matters." 

7.94 Melmed, Laura Krauss (1997). Little Oh. Illustrated by Jim La- 
Marche. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard /Morrow. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-14208-7. Picture Book. (See 4.17) 

7.95 Van Leeuwen, Jean (1998). The Tickle Stories. Illustrated by Mary 
Whyte. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 29 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8037-2048-3. Picture Book. 

Snuggles, tickles, and bedtime giggles abound in this story about 
a grandpa who tells fanciful stories about when he was a boy as 
he tries to put his grandchildren to bed. The soft watercolors and 
Grandpop's stories take the adult reader back to all those family 
stories told by grandparents, great-aunts, and great-uncles. It 
reminds moms and dads of the importance of preserving our her- 
itage by sharing those family stories with our children. The book 
stimulates children to interview grandparents or older adults and 
hear their stories. 



ERIC 



295 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



A. Whoever You Are, Mem Fox/Leslie Staub (8.9). B. The Bootmaker and the Elves, 
Susan Lowell/Tom Curry (8.13). C. Baboon, Kate Banks/Georg Hallensleben (8.1). 
D, Squids Will Be Squids: Fresh Morals, Beastly Fables, Jon Scieszka/Lane Smith (8,20). 





296 




8 Picture Books 



Shari Nelson-Faulkner 

Contributing reviewers included Katherine Hawker, Beth Mayberry, 
Norma Nelson, and Shari Nelson-Faulkner. 

hildren who love to read usually discover the joy of books early 



through the exploration of picture books. These books are desig- 



nated as such because they are graced with illustrations, whether 
simple or lush, amateurish or masterful. However, one of their greatest 
values is that they introduce children to the wonder of language. Thus 
the text often bears primary responsibility for the quality of a picture 
book. Even in a book with little or no text, the quality of the book resides 
in the story it tells and the story the reader tells about it. The value of 
good artwork should not, of course, be dismissed. Beautiful or fascinat- 
ing art often is what draws a reader to a book, and it can greatly enhance 
the experience of a story. But sumptuous illustrations cannot rescue life- 
less text. In the best picture books, strong illustrations act together with 
compelling text to create a work of imalloyed pleasure. 

During the selection process, the members of our book review 
committee identified several characteristics shared by what we consid- 
ered the better-quality picture books. In many respects, our standards 
for what constitute good picture books coincided with our standards for 
good adult books. Good stories possess internal logic and characters 
that are well developed enough that their actions seem to flow naturally 
from their personality rather than from a preordained plot. These books 
demonstrate originality, believability, and adept use of language. In the 
best books, the story transfixes the reader from start to finish, encourag- 
ing the reader to invest herself or himself wholly in the act of reading. 

Of course, other considerations come into play when evaluating 
children's books. For example, one hallmark of a great picture book is 
that adults and children alike can enjoy it. This is important not simply 
because adults are the primary purchasers of picture books; any parent 
or teacher knows that a three-year-old child can endlessly pore over a 
book based on a television series and bought secondhand. But a book 
that truly excites both adults and children is a book more likely to be 
shared. These books present the best critical opportunity for passing on 
to children the joy of reading. 




272 



Picture Books 



Because the best picture books are those most likely to be shared 
intergenerationally, we believe a good picture book also must lend itself 
to oral reading. Some prose forces readers into a dull monotone and 
defies them to vary inflection. The meter of some verse falters or is forced 
to fit a rhyme scheme, either of which can jar the reader and auditor alike 
and reduce the pleasure of reading. Good prose may overflow with sim- 
ple, declarative sentences, or it may challenge the reader with long, com- 
plex sentences, but it always pleases the ear. Good verse is easily 
scannable, and either makes the verbal rhythm evident to all or allows 
itself to be read appealingly in several different ways. 

We did not find ourselves favoring any particular type of narra- 
tive or plot, but we did tend to shy away from trite themes or books that 
revisited ideas foimd in recently successful books. A few exceptions sur- 
prised us — for example, books such as Whoever You Are (Fox 1997) and 
Rosie's Fiddle (Root 1997), which built on well-worn themes but brought 
to those themes either something new or a rare degree of quality that 
elevated them beyond cliche. These we were pleased to include. 

One issue that arose several times during our committee's delib- 
erations was how to handle potentially disturbing texts. If a book is not 
appropriate for early readers and prereaders, those usually thought of 
as the market for picture books, can it be considered exemplary of its 
type? Picture books have never been exclusively the realm of soft, cozy 
images. So the first question we foimd that we needed to ask was, "For 
whom is this book intended?" Not every cartoon or text with pictures is 
intended for small children; some are not intended for children at all. 
Quality can be determined only when the age-group targeted by the 
book has been identified. The next question that we asked of a troubling 
book was, "What is worthwhile about this book?" Some books we read 
seemed pointlessly disturbing with no redeeming qualities, except per- 
haps a vague or misguided moral. Others, such as the controversial 
Arlene Sardine (Raschka 1998), presented excellent opportunities to 
introduce older elementary readers to literary concepts such as irony. 
We decided to include such books where merited, and to note in our 
reviews both the appropriate age group for the books and what we con- 
sidered to be valuable about them. 

This chapter does not include all current picture books of merit. 
Where appropriate, many were placed in other chapters to better enable 
librarians and educators to locate books dealing with certain issues or 
themes. But a simple, gentle story about a yoimg baboon's introduction 
to the world may not have much to do with the life of real baboons. And 



298 



Picture Books 



273 



not every picture book that features a talking animal fits the traditional 
genre of fantasy. This chapter provides a place for such books. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Primary Reviews 

8.1 Banks, Kate (1997). Baboon. Illustrated by Georg Hallensleben. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
30474-2. Picture Book. 

Soft, gorgeous paintings highlight this book about a baby baboon 
learning about the world. When little Baboon wakes up in the 
morning atop his mother's back, she begins introducing her son 
to the world. Being new to his environment. Baboon tries to grasp 
the larger picture by generalizing from his limited experience. So 
when, near the forest, his mother says, "Look. That is the world," 
Baboon assumes, "So, the world is green." Mother baboon gently 
instructs him, "Some of it." At each encounter with his surround- 
ings and the animals that inhabit it. Baboon's mother briefly but 
lovingly corrects or expands his assumptions, until on the last 
page she merely affirms Baboon's observation that, "Yes. The 
world is big." Graced by Georg Hallensleben' s densely colored, 
almost clay-like paintings. Baboon is one of those rare picture 
books in which text and illustrations equal each other in rich and 
deceptively simple beauty. 

8.2 Best, Cari (1997). Top Banana. Illustrated by Erika Oiler. New 
York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30009-9. Picture Book. 

Flora Dora dotes on her parrot Benny, and he adores her too. One 
day. Flora spots a beautiful orchid in a store window and brings it 
home. Now Benny finds he must share everything with the deli- 
cate plant — his music, his games, even Flora's devotion. Benny 
jealously thinks of ways he can get rid of his competition. But 



299 



274 



Picture Books 



when he finds Flora grieving because her beautiful orchid looks 
sickly, his compassion for Flora overcomes his jealousy, and Benny 
sets about saving his one-time rival. When he succeeds. Flora cele- 
brates by lavishing attention on Benny — attention that, for once, 
he does not mind sharing. In Erika Oiler's soft, pillowy -looking 
illustrations, muted colors fill the street scenes, while Flora and 
Benny and the home they share are suffused with warm, tropical 
colors that seem to flow from their love for each other. 

8.3 Blake, Robert J. (1997). Akiak: A Tale from the Iditarod. New 
York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22798-9. Picture Book. 

Akiak, a ten-year-old dog on a team running the Iditarod, is old 
for a competing sled dog. But Akiak has a talent for picking the 
best route, and her musher, Mick, would not want to leave her 
behind. Mick has no choice, however, when Akiak injures her 
paw and has to be flown back home. Akiak has other plans. 
Breaking free of her handlers, she heads down the trail many 
hours behind her team. When Akiak finally catches up with her 
team five days later, she saves them from running down the 
wrong trail, thereby enabling them to win the race. In Blake's 
painterly illustrations, the coolness of the colors convincingly 
conveys the coolness of the landscape. The story works on both an 
informational and inspirational level, with the rules and problems 
associated with sled-dog racing conveyed in a story about success 
through determination. 

8.4 Browne, Anthony (1998). Voices in the Park. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894-2522-X. Picture Book. (See 20.52) 

8.5 Buckley, Helen E. (1997). Moonlight Kite. Illustrated by Elise Pri- 
mavera. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
688-10931-4. Picture Book. 

Three monks in a crumbling monastery spend their days silently 
gardening, cooking, and mending, until one day a brother and sis- 
ter climb up their hill with a bright orange kite. As the hidden 
monks watch, the children fly their kite all day, until it gets caught 
in a tall tree. That night, the monks rescue the kite and fly it for 
hours, fondly remembering childhood. Returning the next day, the 
children find the kite retrieved and decide to leave it there again, 
just in case the unseen monks like to fly kites, too. Soon more chil- 
dren ascend the hill with their kites and fill the monastery with 




Picture Books 



275 



their laughter, causing the monks to smile in a shared joy. Elise Pri- 
mavera portrays the monastery as a dark and crumbling place 
imtil the arrival of the orange kite, which practically glows, light- 
ing up the landscape as well as the monks' hearts. 

8.6 Conrad, Pam (1996). The Rooster's Gift. Illustrated by Eric Bed- 
dows. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-023603-5. 
Picture Book. 

Pam Conrad spins a tale of talent, pride, and self-esteem in the 
daily life of a chicken coop. One night, very, very late, yoimg 
Rooster wakes with a powerful urge to go outside. Followed out- 
side by his disapproving sisters, he hops up to the top of the coop 
and crows. When light appears on the horizon shortly thereafter. 
Rooster's sisters stop scolding and stare in awe at the day they 
believe he has made. Before long. Rooster grows too proud of him- 
self to take time even to speak to his sisters. But one day Rooster 
does not wake in time, and the sim rises without him. Devastated 
by this revelation, Conrad's Rooster attains imprideful self-esteem 
only when he comes to a realistic self-assessment of his true talent. 
The expressiveness of the birds' faces, the richness of the colors, 
and the photographic composition of the paintings are a friendly 
and captivating complement to the heartwarming text. Pair this 
book with Chall's Rupa Raises the Sun (see 8.26). 

8.7 Coy, John (1996). Night Driving. Illustrated by Peter McCarty. 
New York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-2931-1. Picture 
Book. 

McCarty's simple, yet lush black-and-white pencil illustrations 
reflect the quiet beauty of this story of a father-and-son road trip. 
Excited to be on his first vacation to the moimtains, where he will 
get to sleep in a tent, the yoimg narrator has no trouble staying 
awake at the beginning of their all-night drive. The plot contains 
no momentous events. The text contains no elaborate metaphors. 
And yet the story conveys the feeling of an unforgettable journey, 
as the father quietly passes on little pieces of knowledge to his son. 
Although the soft edges of the illustrations and the 1950s automo- 
biles suggest the adult recollection of a warm childhood memory, 
the uncomplicated sentence structure and the immediacy of the 
first-person narration create a believable childlike perspective. 
This story richly conveys both the wonder of new experience and 
the confidence built up in a loving parent-child relationship. 



,301 



276 



Picture Books 



8.8 Egan, Tim (1997). Burnt Toast on Davenport Street. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-79618-0. Picture Book. 

In this laugh-aloud tale, two vaguely gentrified-looking dogs, 
Arthur and Stella Crandall, live a fairly ordinary life, spoiled only 
by the crocodile bullies on the corner. When a fly one day buzzes 
into the kitchen claiming to be a magic fly who will grant him 
three wishes, Arthur clearly is not impressed. Still he complies, 
offhandedly and sardonically, and in a few days forgets all about 
it. Then the Crandalls begin noticing some odd occurrences, and 
Arthur realizes that not only is the fly granting his wishes, but 
also that the fly has gotten his first two wishes mixed up. Wry and 
witty. Burnt Toast on Davenport Street should be read aloud to be 
fully appreciated. Over and over, Tim Egan demonstrates a 
humorist's feel for the cadence of dialogue, and his simple but 
stylized watercolors reemphasize the wry tone of the text. 

8.9 Fox, Mem (1997). Whoever You Are. Illustrated by Leslie Staub. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-20027-5. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Whoever You Are is the fam il iar and beloved story of how all chil- 
dren are valued despite an array of differences. As the author 
explains, "Joys are the same, and love is the same. Pain is the same, 
and blood is the same." Fox reminds us that we share not only 
happiness but also sadness, and she invokes deeper sensitivity 
than most in this genre. It is surprising that such a talented author 
has chosen to return to such common fair, but perhaps this offers 
testimony to our cultural longing for acceptance amidst our diver- 
sity. The incredibly rich illustrations by Staub provide another rea- 
son to return to this theme once again. The book itself creates a 
sense of inclusivity that makes it useful for a variety of settings, 
whether secular or religious. 

8.10 Jackson, Shelley (1998).The Old Woman and the Wave. New 
York: Dorling IGndersley. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7894-2484-3. Picture 
Book. 

Whimsical collages highlight this tale of an old woman who 
resents the wave perpetually hanging over her house. The wave 
loves the woman, dropping kisses on her and throwing her the 
occasional fish for supper. But the old woman is so afraid of get- 
ting dripped on that she goes around hunched over and squint- 



302 



Picture Books 



277 



ing, never noticing the wave's — or the world's — beauty. One day, 
she spies her beloved dog swimming at the top of the wave. She 
angrily rows her boat up the steep slope of water, retrieves her 
dog, and then looks around her. Much to her astonishment, the 
world seems a wondrous place from this vantage point. This story 
might not be quite so impressive if not for Shirley Jackson's fasci- 
nating artwork. A reader could study the collages for hours, iden- 
tifying and analyzing the use of text, maps, sheet music, and so 
on, over which Jackson paints and draws to create beautiful, inter- 
esting illustrations. 

8.11 Lee, Milly (1997). Nim and the War Effort. Illustrated by Yang- 
sook Choi. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-35523-1. Picture Book. (See 3.109) 

8.12 Lowell, Susan (1996). Los tres pequenos jabalies/The Three Lit- 
tle Javelinas. Illustrated by Jim Flarris. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-00319-4. Picture Book. 

Fans of Susan Lowell's special brand of humor will be delighted 
to know that her much-loved The Three Little Javelinas has been 
translated into Spanish and published in a dual-language version. 
The translators have successfully created a Spanish dialect acces- 
sible to Spanish speakers of all regions, while maintaining the 
spirit of the original version and the story's Southwestern roots. 
In this hilarious version of "The Three Little Pigs," three javelinas, 
or wild peccaries, build houses of tumbleweeeds, saguaro ribs, 
and adobe bricks. The brains of the pig family turns out to be the 
female javelina, who lights a fire in her wood stove just in the nick 
of time. The traditional wolf's role is played by the trickster in 
many of the region's indigenous tales, the coyote, who recalls his 
suffering at the hands of the javelinas with his every yowl in the 
desert nights. 

8.13 Lowell, Susan (1997). The Bootmaker and the Elves. Illustrated 
by Tom Curry. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30044- 
7. Picture Book. 

In typical Susan Lowell cowboy-tale style, the traditional story of 
"The Shoemaker and the Elves" is transformed into a rollicking 
Old West version sure to amuse any reader or listener. With all the 
hyperbole common to this genre, Lowell creates an unsuccessful 
bootmaker whose boots are "just plain ugly," and poor-fitting to 



er|c 



303 



278 



Picture Books 



boot. In predictable fashion, help comes from a pair of elves — 
mistaken for pack rats at first — who leave pair after pair of elabo- 
rately and outrageously decorated boots. Although no self-respect- 
ing real cowboy would ever be caught dead in a pair of the 
magically created boots, they appeal to an odd assortment of char- 
acters who come through the door of the shop. By the time the elves 
leave at the end of the tale, they are outfitted with their own tiny 
boots, embroidered with lucky clovers to complement their outfits 
of blue jeans, western-style shirts, hats, and socks — all tiny to be 
sure. Curry's paintings in acrylic drybrush on hardboard are car- 
toonish and full of whimsy, a perfect complement to this fun story. 

8.14 Pilkey, Dav (1996). God Bless the Gargoyles. New York: Harcourt 
Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-202104-3. Picture Book. 

Dark in color as well as theme, Dav Pilkey's emotionally wrench- 
ing book nevertheless has a strong, comforting power. Long ago 
people carved gargoyles to guard cathedrals, but over the cen- 
turies people have forgotten this and begxm to fear and detest the 
stone creatures. Broken-hearted and alone, the gargoyles continue 
to watch over the churches xmtil passing Chagall-like angels hear 
their grieving. The angels comfort the gargoyles and bring them 
to life, taking them along on their nightly flight over the earth and 
singing songs of healing. This song, from which comes the book's 
title, begins "god bless the rain, and the stormclouds that bring it" 
and continues to call down blessings on the dying, the grieving, 
the dreamers, and the outcasts. Although the song dwells on life's 
sadness, its acknowledgment and love for those in pain feels 
tremendously reassuring. It does not produce the facile answers 
of some other angel books, but respects the complexity — the 
despair as well as the joy — of life. 

8.15 Rael, Elsa Okon (1996). What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street. 
Illustrated by Marjorie Priceman. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80549-7. Picture Book. 

On her seventh birthday, a yoxmg Jewish girl learns about the 
blessing of giving and receiving when she attends her first "pack- 
age party," where food packages are sold to benefit friends in the 
old coxmtry. Sitting with her family, Zeesie notices men entering 
and leaving a room one at a time. Her father explains that each 
man leaves or takes money as he has ability or need, but no one is 






304 



Picture Books 



279 



to know which. When Zeesie sneaks into the forbidden room, she 
learns a lesson about her responsibility to her community. Marjorie 
Priceman's gouache illustrations emphasize family and commu- 
nity, and picture people leaning over to share food, kids running 
through the ballroom holding hands, and parents tending chil- 
dren. The only pictures not filled with the warm colors of a loving 
community are those of the money room, the one place where 
need is evident and the expression of love is necessarily private. 

8.16 Raschka, Chris (1998). Arlene Sardine. New York: Orchard. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-531-30111-7. Picture Book. 

This wonderful and disturbing book tells the story of a little fish 
who lives in a fjord with "ten hundred thousand friends" and 
wants more than anything to become a sardine. When she dies on 
a fishing boat less than halfway through the book, Arlene's dream 
is finally fulfilled. Raschka's beautiful, simple watercolors and 
hand-lettered text follow Arlene from her watery home to the 
deck of the fishing boat, and through the factory until she is 
packed in a can with her picture on it. From the book jacket, 
which offers the deceptive message "EASY-OPEN BOOK," 
through the factory, where the narrator speculates about the dead 
heroine's feelings, this book exudes a gentle and decidedly 
unheavy-handed irony. Passages such as, "Then she was smoked, 
delicately. She was delicately smoked. Delicately smoked was 
she," evoke similar passages in easy-reader books, giving stu- 
dents an opportunity to discuss parody and perhaps providing a 
springboard for creating their own. 

8.17 Rathmann, Peggy (1998). 10 Minutes till Bedtime. New York: 
Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-23 103-X. Picture Book. 

This new bedtime book by the author of Officer Buckle and Gloria 
and Good Night, Gorilla is short on text but full of delightful pic- 
tures. Before the title page, a uniformed hamster clicks on a Web 
site for a "10-Minute Bedtime Tour." Then, as the official story 
pages open, a boy with fuzzy slippers looks out the window 
while his uniformed hamster armounces, "They're coming," and 
his oblivious father, who is reading the newspaper, informs him, 
"10 Minutes till Bedtime." The rest of the book follows the boy 
and the arriving hamsters through various stages of getting 
ready for bed, punctuated by the boy's father counting down the 



er|c 



305 



280 



Picture Books 



minutes until bedtime. Although the book tells a simple story, 
readers of whatever age or reading ability could spend hours 
poring over the illustrations and following the antics of the many 
hamsters. A rare visual treat, 10 Minutes till Bedtime could become 
a bedtime classic. 

Rathmarm, Peggy (1994). Good Night, Gorilla. New 

York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22445-9. 

Rathmarm, Peggy (1995). Officer Buckle and Gloria. 

New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22616-8. 

8.18 Root, Phyllis (1997). Rosie's Fiddle. Illustrated by Kevin O'Mal- 
ley. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
12852-1. Picture Book. 

The devil challenges a talented fiddler to a duel in a well-executed 
rendition of a familiar formula. Rosie O'Grady's neighbors creep 
over to her farmhouse and hide behind the bushes just to listen 
whenever she plays. One day, hearing of her reputation, a well- 
dressed man with horns and a tail shows up and proposes a con- 
test: Whoever wins two out of three rounds gets to keep one thing 
that belongs to the other. Knowing what is really at stake, but 
undaunted, Rosie accepts. In keeping with the formula, each con- 
testant wins one of the first two rounds. But Rosie triumphs at last 
when she takes up her fiddle a third time and plays a tune to 
which even the devil must dance. In Kevin O'Malley's master- 
fully composed paintings, Rosie appears implacable and defiant, 
and the devil sly and very sinister. 

8.19 Rowe, John A. (1997). Smudge. New York: North-South. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-55858-788-8. Picture Book. 

With dark and often forbidding pictures, this book has the shad- 
owy feel and dry humor of a Dickens novel. Snatched up by a bird 
while drinking a bottle of milk, the infant Smudge soon finds him- 
self in a nest being used as a beak polisher by baby birds. Before 
long, they begin to treat him as one of the family, and he learns to 
chirp and ruffle himself — but not to fly. Smudge can only watch as 
his new family one day flies off without him. Next a dog grabs 
him and takes him home, where the cycle starts all over again. 
Eventually his mother finds him and carries him home, where 
everyone welcomes him and no one uses him for anything. 
Although on one level this book can be disturbing, the text and 




306 



Picture Books 



281 



the pictures of Smudge's true family also have a very loving feel 
to them. It could be useful as an introduction to tone. 

8.20 Scieszka, Jon (1998). Squids Will Be Squids: Fresh Morals, Beastly 
Fables. Illustrated by Lane Smith. New York: Viking. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-670-88135-X. Picture Book. 

Jon Scieszka presents a series of quirky fables about responsibility, 
safety, table manners, and self-importance with a humor that will 
appeal to both elementary students and adults. In Scieszka's fables, 
a grasshopper puts off his homework imtil the last minute. Ele- 
phant forgets to call home, a pessimistic squid misses out on fun, 
and Straw learns why it is not a good idea to play with matches. 
The morals at the end of each tale usually sidestep the issue at 
hand, thus cleverly avoiding preachiness while delivering extra 
laughs and presenting to teachers and parents a wonderful oppor- 
tunity to talk with children about what moral the children might 
assign to the stories. The misnamed "serious historical foreword" 
provides a brief, enlightening introduction to fable-writing, while 
the "very serious historical afterword" throws in a cautionary tale 
about Aesop that might get students thinking about the power of 
the pen. 

8.21 Shannon, David (1998). No, David! New York: Scholastic. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-590-93002-8. Picture Book. 

David Shannon presents life from a child's perspective in a 
remake of a book he wrote as a small boy. Most children will relate 
to little David, who does not seem to be able to keep out of trou- 
ble. Every time he starts having fim, his mother says, "No, 
David!" Lie is not allowed to draw on the wall, rim naked through 
the streets, play with his food, or jump on his bed. When he plays 
ball in the house and breaks a vase, David is sent to sit in the cor- 
ner. Shannon's sympathetic paintings do justice to the range of 
childhood feelings: the joy of play, the frustration of being told 
"no," the vulnerability in reaching to Mommy for comfort, the 
contentment in a parent's love. The bright illustrations are a 
visual treat, and the childlike simplicity of the figures and letter- 
ing supports the juvenile perspective. 

Secondary Reviews 

8.22 Asch, Frank (1998). Good Night, Baby Bear. New York: Harcourt 
Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200836-5. Picture Book. 



ERIC 



307 



282 



Picture Books 



Nature is calling Mother Bear to hibernate. Baby Bear, who has 
spent the entirety of his short life outside, neither understands nor 
likes this new situation. When Mother Bear takes Baby Bear into a 
cave to sleep. Baby Bear makes demands for something to eat, 
something to drink, and finally for the moon — demands that 
Mother Bear reacts to with frustration, creativity, and love. Mother 
Bear's exasperation and Baby Bear's restlessness are easily seen in 
the simple illustrations. 

8.23 Bliss, Corinne Demas (1997). Electra and the Charlotte Russe. 
Illustrated by Michael Garland. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 1-56397-436-3. Picture Book. 

Mama is having a tea party and sends her young daughter, Elec- 
tra, to the bakery to buy charlotte russes. When Electra is almost 
home, an accident mashes the whipped cream on top of the 
desserts, a fact she tries to cover up with disastrous results. Feel- 
ing guilty, she lies to Mama about what happened. Fortunately, 
after the guests leave, Electra learns that not only do mothers 
always know when you lie, but they also forgive. Michael Gar- 
land's soft illustrations complement the gentle story. 

8.24 Bogacki, Tomek (1997). Cat and Mouse in the Rain. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-31189-7. Picture 
Book. 

Cat and Mouse are friends who venture out on a cloudy day. As 
the rain begins to fall. Cat and Mouse decide to stay dry by hud- 
dling together under a leaf — until a frog tempts the careful ani- 
mals into the uncharted territory of mud puddles, where they 
find delight in splashing and water play. This lighthearted story, 
illustrated with vibrant brush strokes, encourages the reader to 
entertain risk and try new things. 

8.25 Brett, Jan (1997). The Hat. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
399-23101-3. Picture Book. 

As a curious hedgehog examines one of Lisa's woolen stockings, 
which has blown from her clothesline, the stocking becomes stuck 
on his prickles. To cover his embarrassment, he tries to convince 
his animal friends that the stocking is his new hat and that it is 
they who are lacking. Hedgie is so convincing that Lisa soon finds 
all of Hedgie's friends with a piece of her woolens on them. Jan 
Brett's characteristic illustrations grace the text. 




308 



Picture Books 



283 



8.26 Chall, Marsha Wilson (1998). Rupa Raises the Sun. Illustrated 
by Rosanne Litzinger. New York: Dorling Kindersley. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-7894-2496-7. Picture Book. 

Having walked arovmd her campfire every morning for over sixty 
years in order to raise the sim, Rupa needs a break. Her feet need 
to heal. When she is granted permission to sleep in one morning 
by the kind but clueless village elders, Rupa discovers herself 
finally free of her daily burden as the sim rises on its own. Rosanne 
Litzinger 's quirky gouache illustrations with primitively drawn 
characters of indeterminate race and culture lend a feeling of uni- 
versality to the text. Pair this book with Conrad's The Rooster's Gift 
(see 8.6). 

8.27 Denim, Sue (1997). The Dumb Bunnies Go to the Zoo. Illustrated 
by Dav Pilkey. New York: Blue Sky. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-84735- 
X. Picture Book. 

Fans of The Stupids will delight in the antics of the Dumb Bunnies, 
Momma, Poppa, and Baby Bunny. On an Octember [sic] morning, 
the Bunnies go off to the zoo, enjoy upside-down ice cream from 
Custard's Last Stand, cause a panic when they mistake a fluttering 
butterfly for an escaped lion, and let all the animals out of their 
cages. After being kicked out of the zoo, the family returns home to 
their new waterbed, a standard bed with an oscillating lawn sprin- 
kler attached. Older readers who take the time to explore such 
items as the copyright page and the jacket flap will be in for a treat. 
For example, they will learn that illustrator Dav Pilkey collabo- 
rated closely with Sue Denim (pseudonym — get it?). Use this title 
along with Miss Spider's New Car (see 8.44) and Detective Donut and 
the Wild Goose Chase (see 8.62) to explore visual pirns and literary 
devices. Readers also might be interested in two other related 
books by Pilkey, The Dumb Bunnies and The Dumb Bunnies' Easter. 

Pilkey, Dav (1998). The Dumb Bunnies. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-47709-9. Picture Book. 

Pilkey, Dav (1998). The Dumb Bunnies' Easter. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-20242-1. Picture 
Book. 

8.28 English, Karen (1998). Just Right Stew. Illustrated by Anna Rich. 
Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397-487-8. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.33) 



O 

ERIC 



309 



284 



Picture Books 



8.29 Ernst, Lisa Campbell (1996). Duke the Dairy Delight Dog. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80750-3. Picture 
Book. 

Lisa Campbell Ernst portrays prejudice and acceptance in this tale 
of a dog striving for a place to call home. Duke has lived on his own 
all his Life, but when he sees the mouthwatering Dairy Delight sign, 
he decides he will stay here forever. However Darla, the proprietor 
of Dairy Delight, does not like dogs, and her obsessive efforts to 
keep him away culminate in an accident that helps her see Duke 
through new eyes. Ernst's colorful illustrations will be familiar to 
readers of Ginger Jumps. 

Ernst, Lisa Campbell (1990). Ginger Jumps. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80652-3. 

8.30 Ernst, Lisa Campbell (1997). Bubba and Trixie. New York: Simon 
& Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-81357-0. Picture Book. 

Bubba the caterpillar is a nervous Nelly xmtil he meets Trixie, a 
confident ladybug with a crimped wing. Trixie convinces Bubba to 
accompany her on a tour of the garden, pointing out interesting 
sights and teaching him how to have fxm. Bubba soon grows con- 
tent and wishes for everything to stay exactly as it is forever. How- 
ever when he learns he is to turn into a butterfly, he becomes upset 
and afraid that he will lose his friend Trixie. Despite her assur- 
ances, Bubba settles into his cocoon with the firm conviction never 
to change. Of course he needn't have worried, for when spring 
arrives and the two friends awake, Trixie climbs onto Bubba, who 
is now a butterfly, and off they fly to touch the stars. Ernst's soft 
pastel illustrations are well-suited to this quiet story. The inclusion 
of facts about ladybugs and caterpillars makes this a useful sup- 
plement to an insect unit. The story line also would support a self- 
esteem xmit in combination with Mr. Bumble (see 8.43), A Bad Case 
of the Stripes (see 14.15), or The Very Hungry Caterpillar. 

Carle, Eric (1987). The Very Hungry Caterpillar. New 
York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-20853-4. Picture 
Book. 

8.31 Fleming, Candace (1997). Gabriella's Song. Illustrated by Giselle 
Potter. New York: Atheneum Books for Yoxmg Readers. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-689-80973-5. Picture Book. 




310 



Picture Books 



285 



Along the Grand Canal, a girl named Gabriella hears the song of 
the morning. She sings the song back to life itself, and the song 
carries. She sings to the baker, who sings to the widow, who sings 
to the gondolier. When Gabriella happens by the door of a frus- 
trated composer while singing her morning song, he hears the 
tune for which he has longed and his symphony pours forth. A 
delightfully affirming tale. 

8.32 Fleming, Denise (1997). Time to Sleep. New York; Henry Holt. 
Unpaged. ISBN; 0-8050-3762-4. Picture Book. (See 11.28) 

8.33 Franklin, Kristine L. (1996). The Wolfhound. Illustrated by Kris 
Waldherr. New York; Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN; 0- 
688-13674-5. Picture Book. 

Tapestry frames surround engaging illustrations in this story 
about a boy in Tsarist Russia. Pavel finds a dying wolfhound and 
brings it home to nurse it back to health. His father tells him that 
he must drive away the dog for fear someone will think it was 
stolen. Pavel understands the risk, but has a sense of compassion 
for the beautiful creature that ultimately is rewarded. Kristine 
Franklin spins a warm tale about concern for others and the 
courage to do good. 

8.34 Garay, Luis (1997). Pedrito's Day. New York; Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN; 0-531-09522-3. Picture Book. 

Pedrito longs for a bicycle, both to help his family deliver tamales 
to the market and for his own play. His family tells him he is too 
young for a bicycle, so Pedrito begins to save his own money for 
the bicycle from his shoeshine job. When his aunt sends him on an 
errand to get change for a bill she gives him, he is distracted by a 
game of soccer and loses the money. Chagrined, Pedrito returns to 
his aunt, explains what he has done, and repays her from his bicy- 
cle savings. The family, in turn, acknowledges his sense of respon- 
sibility by telling him that the entire family will help him save 
money for the bicycle. The lesson is a powerful one for Pedrito and, 
vicariously, for readers. Drawing from his Guatemalan origins, 
Garay's illustrations, done in paint with inked cross-hatching, 
depict a very poor family. It would be interesting to have children 
discuss the economic status of Pedrito's family and perhaps con- 
trast this book with others about Hispanic/ Latino families from 
different economic situations. 




311 



286 



Picture Books 



8.35 Gliori, Debi (1996). The Snow Lambs. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-20304-5. Picture Book. 

Dad, Sam, and Bess the sheepdog are bringing their herd of sheep 
to the barn one evening when a winter storm hits. After finally 
reaching the house, Sam becomes frightened for Bess, who is 
nowhere to be found. As Mom and Dad take care of and comfort 
Sam in the house, the opposing illustrations show Bess struggling 
to get a pregnant ewe back to safety. This tender story and its 
illustrations invite the reader to return many times. 

8.36 Grambling, Lois G. (1998). Daddy Will Be There. Illustrated by 
Walter Gaffney-Kessell. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-14983-9. Picture Book. (See 4.8) 

8.37 Harris, Marian (1998). Tuesday in Arizona. Illustrated by Jim 
Harris. Gretna, LA: Pelican. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56554-233-9. Pic- 
ture Book. 

There's no mistaking the true nature of a pack rat in this fun-loving 
tale from Marian and Jim Harris, an author-illustrator team. As an 
old miner's life goes from bad to worse in the space of a week, 
readers can follow the intricacies of his story by closely examining 
the illustrations. The text is minimal and full of puns, leaving read- 
ers lots of room to enjoy the book on both a literary and visual 
level. Jim Harris' detailed and textured watercolors convey much 
of the action, while the text connects each event to the next. The 
pack rat provides unity, causing mischief on every page but also 
holding the key to the miner's happiness in the end. Anyone who 
knows what an adorable nuisance a pack rat can be will examine 
each spread with anticipation. This book would be wonderful for 
emerging readers who are learning to use illustrations to support 
their reading. 

8.38 Hest, Amy (1998). Gabby Growing Up. Illustrated by Amy 
Schwartz. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80573-X. Picture Book. 

Gabby eagerly looks forward to being more grown-up, but like 
most children at her stage of life, she is an uncomfortable mixture 
of adolescent and child. Her mother clearly also feels uncomfort- 
able with Gabby changing, but her tolerance and Grampa's easy 
acceptance make the transition gentler for Gabby. The simple 



312 



Picture Books 



287 



lines and bright colors of Amy Schwartz's paintings are an appro- 
priate accompaniment to this simple, yet engaging story of a 
young girl's start down the road to adulthood. 

8.39 Hoberman, Mary Ann (1997). One of Each. Illustrated by Mar- 
jorie Priceman. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316- 
36731-1. Picture Book. 

Oliver Tolliver values simplicity. The brown dog lives all alone in a 
house containing only one of each item: one bed, one clock, one 
book, one chair. But a cat named Peggoty Small clearly disap- 
proves of this arrangement; Oliver's house has room for only one 
person, too. In this story, Caldecott Honor-winning illustrator 
Marjorie Priceman's bold, eye-catching pictures capture the cheer- 
ful spirit of a dog learning to share. 

8.40 Inkpen, Mick (1997). Nothing. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-531-30076-5. Picture Book. 

A tattered and worthless stuffed animal is left behind when a fam- 
ily moves. Alone in the empty attic, the stuffed animal yearns to 
discover its long-forgotten identity. A long and winding journey 
culminates when a friendly cat drops the stuffed animal onto the 
lap of Grandfather. Here the stuffed animal discovers that he is 
not "nothing"; he is the beloved stuffed animal that once sat in the 
grandfather's crib. 

8.41 Johnson, Angela (1997). The Rolling Store. Illustrated by Peter 
Catalanotto. New York: Orchard. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-531-30015-3. Pic- 
ture Book. 

As a little girl and her friend are about to start out with their 
wagon loaded with goodies, she is reminded of a story her grand- 
daddy would tell her about the Rolling Store. The Rolling Store 
would come to the countryside and people would come from 
miles around to buy things they needed and things they didn't 
need. This was a time to visit with friends and talk the day away. 
The warm and inviting pictures take you back to a time "when the 
world was still young," as granddaddy would say! 

8.42 Joosse, Barbara M. (1997). Nugget and Darling. Illustrated by Sue 
Truesdell. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-64571-9. Picture 
Book. 



313 



288 



Picture Books 



Barbara Joosse uses pets to illustrate this sweet story about jeal- 
ousy. Nell and her scruffy brown dog Nugget are best friends. But 
Nugget's discovery of an abandoned kitten threatens to jeopard- 
ize their close relationship when Nell starts showering affection 
on the kitten she names Darling, and Nugget feels left out. Sue 
Truesdell's cartoonlike watercolors ably capture Nugget's emo- 
tions as he sulks and mopes and longs for Nell's company and 
understanding. 

8.43 Kennedy, Kim (1998). Mr. Bumble. Illustrated by Doug Kennedy. 
New York: Hyperion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7868-0263-4. Picture Book. 

This is an inspiring story about Mr. Bumble — "the clumsiest bee 
that ever buzzed" — whose clumsiness and cowardliness sends 
him back to the hive empty-handed every time. Saved by thought- 
ful fairies, Mr. Bumble learns to fly with grace and courage. 
Applause from his peers and praise from the queen highlight his 
triumphant return to the hive. This story helps children learn 
about the process of overcoming obstacles to achieve a goal. The 
bees, fairies, and flowers have human faces, and their comic 
expressions are brought to life with the use of soft colors and tex- 
tures. Readers can relate to Mr. Bumble on many levels and will 
likely be cheering for him by story's end. 

Related books include: 

Kraus, Robert (1994). Leo the Late Bloomer. Illustrated 
by Jose Aruego. New York: HarperCollins. 30 pp. ISBN: 
0-064-4334-8-X. Picture Book. 

Lionni, Leo (1994). Cornelius. New York: Knopf. 32 pp. 

ISBN: 0-679-86040-1. Picture Book. 

8.44 Kirk, David (1997). Miss Spider's New Car. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-30713-4. Picture Book. 

David Kirk's familiar, brilliantly hued paintings highlight this lat- 
est installment of the Miss Spider saga, in which the friendly 
arachnid buys a car. Miss Spider knows right away what car she 
wants, but her husband Holley insists they shop around first. As 
they go from dealer to dealer, Holley finds most of the vehicles a 
little too daring. Finally Holley buys the car Miss Spider origi- 
nally wanted and surprises her with it as an acknowledgment 
that she was right all along. 



314 



Picture Books 



289 



8.45 Lodge, Bernard (1997). Tanglebird. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-84543-2. Picture Book. 

With his muted-color prints, Bernard Lodge evokes an earlier 
style of picture-book illustrations in this book about a ne'er-do- 
well bird. Nicknamed Tanglebird because of his inability to build 
a neat nest, this inept bird finally learns to weave from a young 
girl, who sends him off with her love and a bunch of colorful 
string. Back in the woods, Tanglebird amazes the other birds and 
pleases himself with his artfully woven nest, a tribute to persever- 
ance and friendship. 

8.46 Loomis, Christine (1997). Cowboy Bunnies. Illustrated by Ora 
Eitan. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22625-7. Picture 
Book. 

Playful paintings on plywood panels highlight fun, easy verse 
about a day in the life of cowboy bunnies. The meter is simple and 
a pleasure to read: "Cowboy bunnies / Wake up early / Ride their 
ponies / Hurly Burly." They are child bunnies, having fun imitat- 
ing the adult world. In the most endearing part of the book, the 
sleepy bunnies come home after a long day and get ready for bed: 
"Cowboy bunnies / In pajamas / Hug and kiss / Their cowboy 
mamas." 

8.47 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1996). Just One Flick of a Finger. Illustrated 
by David Diaz. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1949-3. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 

Lorbiecki and Diaz are to be commended for tackling a difficult 
topic with great finesse. The narrator is a youth with whom the 
audience will identify — a good guy who just wants to be cool. But 
when he wields his father's weapon and his friend is the acciden- 
tal victim, cool is changed forever. Although the resolution of the 
story verges on a happily-ever-after ending, the dangers are not 
diminished. The text is rhythmic, and the illustrations vivid. (See 
also 20.38) 

8.48 Machado, Ana Maria (1996). Nina Bonita. Illustrated by Rosanna 
Faria. Brooklyn, NY: Kane/Miller. 24 pp. ISBN: 0-916-29163-4. Pic- 
ture Book. 

The white rabbit wants to know how Nina Bonita became so 
black. The rabbit wants to know so he can become black too. The 




315 



290 



Picture Books 



adventuresome Nina Bonita gives the rabbit many answers, but 
none of them is true. The rabbit does not understand that he can- 
not be turned a color, but can only be bom a color. Each time Nina 
Bonita makes up another explanation for how she became black, 
the rabbit experiences another mishap. Once Nina Bonita's 
mother tells the white rabbit the truth, he stops chasing Nina for 
the answer and settles down happily with his own solution. The 
light pastel colors in the illustrations are accented by the beautiful 
tropical landscape, and contrast with the curious white rabbit and 
the beautiful little Black girl, Nina Bonita. 

8.49 McPhail, David (1998). The Puddle. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-36148-7. Picture Book. 

On a rainy day, a young boy playing in a puddle exercises his 
imagination. Enjoined by his mother not to get in any puddles, 
the boy decks himself out in rain gear and goes out to sail his boat. 
Once outside, a frog, an alligator, a pig, and an elephant decide to 
join the fun and make a mess. In his soft ink-and-watercolor 
paintings, David McPhail gently evokes the world of childhood 
make-believe. 

8.50 Miranda, Anne (1997). To Market, to Market. Illustrated by Janet 
Stevens. New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200035- 
6. Picture Book. (See 11.4) 

8.51 Modarressi, Mitra (1998). Monster Stew. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2517-3. Picture Book. 

Toothy beasts replace familiar characters in these three monstrous 
renditions of traditional fairy tales, such as "Peas," in which a 
princess proves herself unworthy to marry green Prince Thug- 
mond after making a fuss about a lumpy mattress. Happily the 
prince gets to marry his rough-and-tumble, non-royal best friend 
instead. Modarressi's watercolors manage to create monsters that 
are simultaneously fearsome and charming, and her tales succeed 
in being both more humorous and more morally satisfying to a 
modem audience than the origtna:ls. 

8.52 Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds (1997). "I Can't Take You Anywhere." 
Illustrated by Jef Kaminsky. New York: Simon & Schuster. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-689-31966-5. Picture Book. 



er|c 



-316 



Picture Books 



291 



Accident-prone Amy Audrey begs her relatives to take her with 
them when they go out. But when Amy falls into the fountain at 
the museum, spills water at the restaurant, or gets on the wrong 
escalator at the mall, they all say, "Amy Audrey, I declare! I can't 
take you anywhere!" Jef Kaminsky's brightly colored cartoons 
and big-eyed characters accompany this humorous story of a hap- 
less girl with whom many children will be able to identify 

8.53 Pinkney, Brian (1997). The Adventures of Sparrowboy. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81071-7. Picture Book. 

Henry, the neighborhood paperboy, loves to read the headlines 
and the comics before he delivers the paper. He enjoys reading 
about his favorite superhero, and he wonders what it would be 
like to become a superhero himself. He gets that chance when a 
sparrow lands in his path while he is riding his bike delivering 
papers. "ZAP" — Henry can fly like the sparrow! Children will 
enjoy seeing how an ordinary paperboy saves his neighborhood. 

8.54 Plourde, Lynn (1997). Pigs in the Mud in the Middle of the Rud. 
Illustrated by John Schoenherr. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-590-56863-9. Picture Book. 

The pigs are only the first of a series of animals that find their way 
into the mud in this rollicking farm tale. The animals cause a traf- 
fic problem for the Model-T Ford carrying Grandma and her fam- 
ily. Each family member in his or her turn attempts to move the 
accumulating tangle of animals. The story is delightfully written 
with rhythmic text. The concepts of sequence and accumulation 
are taught through captivating illustrations. 

8.55 Rylant, Cynthia (1996). The Old Woman Who Named Things. 
Illustrated by Kathryn Brown. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-257809-9. Picture Book. 

In this story about the risks of love, an old woman who has out- 
lived all her friends refuses to name anything that will not outlive 
her. When a stray puppy comes daily to visit her, she feeds it and 
sends it on its way. It is not until the dog fails to show up for sev- 
eral days that she realizes how attached she has become to the 
animal. Kathryn Brown's watercolor illustrations ably capture the 
frailty and resigned contentedness of an old woman afraid of 




'317 



292 



Picture Books 



being hurt by her own love, as well as her trepidation over com- 
mitting to a new friend who might one day leave her. 

8.56 Sandoval, Dolores (1996). Be Patient, Abdul. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN; 0-689-50607-4. Picture Book. 

Abdul is a seven-year-old boy from Freetown, Sierra Leone, who 
loves learning. His simple goal is to earn enough money to pay 
tuition and attend school. A series of minor challenges frustrates 
Abdul, and the adults in his family take turns encouraging him to 
"be patient, Abdul." As he works to learn patience, his minor set- 
backs are also the source for unexpected successes. 

8.57 Shannon, Margaret (1998). Gullible's Troubles. New York: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-83933-5. Picture Book. 

The title says it all as poor, trustworthy Gullible — who believes 
everything he hears — is sent for a visit with some rather unchari- 
table relatives. Gullible tries his best to fit in, asking to help his 
aunt bake a cake, trying to tidy up for his uncle, but each attempt 
to help goes awry. Taking advantage of his weakness, his relatives 
tell him many tales — tall and small — that frighten and confuse the 
poor little guinea pig into doing things like eating fifty non-moldy 
carrots (which he was told would make him invisible). Finally 
Gullible manages to hightail it home to the safety of his mother's 
embracing arms. A poignant reminder that no matter how far we 
roam, there is no place like home. 

8.58 Soto, Gary (1997). Chato y su cena. Illustrated by Susan Guevara. 
Translated by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy. New York: 
Putnam and Grosset. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-698-11601-1. Picture 
Book. 

Chato's Kitchen, a popular, humor-filled picture book with bold 
illustrations, is now available in Spanish. The translation employs 
rich, colorful language that demonstrates Gary Soto's deft use of 
code-switching and barrio expressions. Some expressions are not 
translated and, interestingly, the italicized words are not the same 
in each version. Chato, a local homeboy cat, invites a new neigh- 
bor family of mice over for dinner — dinner being the mice. As 
Chato and his pal Novio Boy create innumerable tasty dishes, the 
felines extend the invitation to one of the mice's old friends, 
Chorizo, from their former neighborhood. After hours of prepara- 



i| 



318 



Picture Books 



293 



tion and anticipation of a savory meal of succulent mice, the low- 
rider cats react in horror when they see their guests enter. Bilin- 
gual fourth graders chuckled and cheered when they realized that 
Chorizo is, in fact, a dog. Garret (age eight) gleefully said, "Those 
cats were bummed out 'cause they didn't get to eat the mice." 
Susan Guevara's richly colored, expressive paintings, outlined in 
black in the Mexican muralist style and spilling across double- 
page spreads, earned the Pura Belpre Illustrator Award for 1996. 

Soto, Gary (1995). Chato's Kitchen. Illustrated by Susan 
Guevara. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399- 
22658-3. Picture Book. 

8.59 Stanley, Diane (1996). Saving Sweetness. Illustrated by G. Brian 
Karas. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22645-1. Picture 
Book. 

Set against a western backdrop with thought-provoking illustra- 
tions, this tale follows the sheriff on his quest to save an orphan 
named Sweetness, who is running away from her evil caretaker. 
But as he struggles to "save Sweetness," he is repeatedly the 
recipient of her salvation. Here is a story depicting a young girl in 
the role of courageous and resourceful heroine. The story line may 
be familiar, but the well-written narrative and lovable characters 
are delightfully unique. 

8.60 Steig, William (1998). Pete's a Pizza. New York: Harper Collins. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-205157-1. Picture Book. 

It is raining, and Pete is upset. In an an effort to lighten his son's 
mood, Pete's fifty-ish father lays him down on the kitchen table 
and begins making Pete into a pizza. He kneads and tosses Pete, 
then covers him with oil, flour, cheese, and tomatoes (really check- 
ers). Along the way comes tickling, giggling, chasing, and hug- 
ging. Steig's familiar illustration style highlights the affection of 
family members for each other in this tribute to creative parenting. 

8.61 Tarpley, Natasha Anastasia (1998). I Love My Hair. Illustrated by 
E. B. Lewis. Boston: Little Brown. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-316-52275-9. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Kenyana narrates the bedtime ritual of getting her hair combed. 
She admits that sometimes it hurts. When the combing becomes 



O 

ERIC 



319 



294 



Picture Books 



too difficult. Mama stops combing to tell Kenyana why she is so 
fortunate to have the type of hair that she has. Through the well- 
defined illustrations of E. B. Lewis, each of Kenyana's hairstyles 
comes to life. From the spinning wheel that weaves a soft puffy 
bun that sits upon her head, to the pair of wings that are actually 
two open pigtails, Kenyana's hair is explained and celebrated. 
Kenyana tells how she feels about each hairstyle, and how some 
people make fun of her hairstyles while others (like her teacher) 
make her feel good about how she wears her hair. Pair this book 
with Herron's Nappy Hair (see 4.9). 

8.62 Whatley, Bruce, and Rosie Smith (1997). Detective Donut and the 
Wild Goose Chase. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
06-026604-X. Picture Book. 

The bumbling bear Detective Donut works to solve the case of the 
missing archeology professor, conveniently overlooking clues not 
only to the whereabouts of the professor, but also to the nature of 
the rare statue he's uncovered. Warm, funny illustrations contain 
visual puns that give the reader clues to the mystery, and to the 
identity of the nefarious kidnapper. Mouse, the detective's partner, 
is mentioned in the text only once, but the illustrations chart his 
assistance in solving the crime. Primary-age readers who catch the 
not-so-hidden bits of humor will respond well to this comical story. 
The mystery will also spark young detectives' interest, especially 
when used in conjunction with other detective tales designed for 
young readers such as Doug Cushman's The Mystery of King Karfu. 

Cushman, Doug (1996). The Mystery of King Karfu. 

New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-060-24796- 

7. Picture Book. 

8.63 Wood, Audrey (1998). Sweet Dream Pie. Illustrated by Mark 
Teague. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-96204-3. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 14.20) 

8.64 Wyeth, Sharon Dennis (1998). Something Beautiful. Illustrated 
by Chris K. Soentpiet. New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-385-32239-9. Picture Book. 

This inspirational story follows a little girl's journey to find some- 
thing beautiful in a neighborhood marred by the many signs of 
urban blight. She finds signs of hope in the relationships between 




320 



Picture Books 



295 



adults and children in her community, and from each she elicits 
"something beautiful." In her quest to find beauty, the little girl 
tells us how she transformed her space to create something beau- 
tiful. Rich illustrations bear witness to the challenge of life in 
urban America. (See also 20.8) 



321 




A. 



TEN DOGS IN THE WINDOW 

A Countdown Book by Clake MaSUiel 
Illustrated by Pamela Papaione 




C. 




B. 







D. 



A. One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical Folktale, Demi (9.13). B. City by Numbers, 
Stephen T. Johnson (9.3). C. Ten Dogs in the Window, Claire Masurel/Pamela Paparone 
(9.5). D. G is for Googol: A Math Alphabet Book, David M. Schwartz/Marissa Moss 

(9.26). 



O 

ERIC 



322 



BEST COPY AVAIU\BLE 






297 



9 Mathematics 

Carol Gilles 

Contributing reviewers included Marilyn Andre, Carol Gilles, 

Jenine Loesing, Marilyn Soucie, Shelli Thelen, and Beverly Vick. 

I n 1989, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics published 
Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics for grades 
K-12. Four of the standards apply to all grade levels: teaching mathe- 
matics as problem solving, teaching mathematics as commimication, 
teaching mathematics as reasoning, and teaching mathematical connec- 
tions. These standards signified a major shift in the way mathematics is 
viewed and taught in the classroom. 

The use of literature can assist children in meeting those goals and 
developing an appreciation for the power of mathematics in their lives. 
As Whitin and Wilde (1995) have noted, "Learners let go of rules and 
algorithms that don't make sense, but they hold on to stories" (xi). Sto- 
ries brings meaning into our lives, helping children to imderstand math- 
ematics rather than to memorize rules. Children's love for stories, and 
the social interaction that occurs when a teacher shares a story with a 
class, serve to engage children's interest in and build their confidence in 
their ability to use mathematics. Reading and sharing stories helps chil- 
dren make sense of mathematics as they encoimter mathematical prob- 
lems in a natural context. "Stories help learners see that mathematics is 
more than numbers on a page" (Whitin and Wilde 1995, 95). Approach- 
ing mathematics through literature also can help children make connec- 
tions among curricular areas. Stories can offer rich problem-solving 
situations for children to investigate, discuss, and solve, thus develop- 
ing their ability to reason and commimicate. Mathematics is often 
referred to as a language of its own. Through stories, children learn the 
vocabulary of mathematics in an authentic context. They hear, read, and 
write the words that help make sense of and relate mathematics to their 
daily lives. 

In choosing mathematics-related literature, it is important to 
remember that the book must first be good literature. Each book should 
be enjoyed as a story first; it should be read and reread, allowing chil- 
dren to respond through observation and prediction. Mathematics 
should be a part of the story rather than an interruption. The story also 
should allow for interpretation on several levels. Once the story is 



ERIC 



323 



298 



Mathematics 



enjoyed, the discussion about it that follows can aid in launching experi- 
ences that might further conceptual mathematical understanding. With 
careful guidance, these ideas may be used to supplement basic mathemat- 
ical thinking. As with aU good literature, learners should be encouraged 
to not only read mathematics-related literature, but also to listen to the 
ideas of others and to talk and write about their impressions of the story. 

The books reviewed in this chapter are organized into three broad 
categories. The first section includes Counting Books that develop and 
reinforce counting and number concepts. The second section contains 
Problem-Solving Storybooks. These books use a folktale, fairy tale, or 
other narrative to present a mathematical problem experienced by one 
or more of the characters which children can recognize and solve along 
with the characters. The third section includes Math Concept Books. 
These books investigate or present specific information about a mathe- 
matical concept. 

Works Cited 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, Conunission on Standards for 

School Mathematics. 1989. Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School 
Mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

Whitin, David J., and Sandra Wilde. 1995. It's the Story That Counts. 

Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief inf ormation about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Counting Books 

Primary Reviews 

9.1 Alda, Arlene (1998). Arlene Alda's 12 3: What Do You See? Berke- 
ley, CA: Tricycle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-883672-71-6. Picture Book. 

Through the use of photography, Arlene Alda artistically portrays 
numerals that appear all around us. Children are delighted to dis- 
cover the various numerals creatively hidden in each full-color 



324 



Counting Books 



299 



photograph. They first count up to ten and then count back again 
to zero. Each photograph depicts the shape of a numeral in an 
unexpected location. The numbers one through ten appear on 
each page of this wordless book, with the appropriate numeral 
highlighted. This allows children to compare the artists' numeral 
to the typed numeral on the page. Three appears as a banana peel, 
two as a swan, and ten is found in the reflection of the arch of a 
bridge. Using an artist's eye, children will see numbers in a whole 
new light and be challenged to find their own examples of num- 
bers in nature. 

9.2 Carlstrom, Nancy White (1996). Let's Count It Out, Jesse Bear. 
Illustrated by Bruce Degen. New York: Simon & Schuster Books 
for Yoimg Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80478-4. Picture Book. 

Jesse Bear is off for the day, and this time he is counting. From 
Band- Aids to bubbles, children are invited to count right along 
with Jesse. Each page shows the number written as a word, the 
corresponding numeral, and the objects to be counted. The story 
is told through cheerful rhyme that will have the children chant- 
ing. Each page uses the same counting pattern. First, the children 
count the objects, one, two, three, four. Then they are prompted to 
say that four and one more is five, thus introducing the concept 
that the next number in the sequence is one more than the previ- 
ous number. Young children will have fun helping this playful 
bear count to twenty. 

9.3 Johnson, Stephen T. (1998). City by Numbers. New York: Viking. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-87251-2. Picture Book. 

This striking companion volume to the Caldecott Honor book 
Alphabet City helps readers to see numbers in urban settings. New 
York City is the setting for these perceptive paintings. Using the 
ground rules that each number must be "in its natural position, 
out of doors or in a public space, readily accessible to everyone 
who looks carefully," Johnson takes readers on a journey to dis- 
cover the numbers one through twenty. We see the Manhattan 
bridge as a figure 4, while shadows form a 5 and wastebaskets 
form an 8. This book appeals to old and young alike, and it could 
be a companion to Arlene Alda's 1 2 3; What Do You See? (see 9.1). 

Johnson, Stephen T. (1995). Alphabet City. New York: 

Viking. Unpaged. ISPN: 0-670-85631-2. Picture Book. 




325 



300 



Mathematics 



9.4 Kusugak, Michael (1996). My Arctic 1, 2, 3. New York: Annick. 22 
pp. ISBN: 1-55037-505-9. Picture Book. 

In this number book, Inuit storyteller Michael Kusugak tells about 
the animals and people of Rankin Inlet, located near Hudson Bay 
in the Arctic region of Canada. Kusagak carries an animal theme 
through his investigation of the numbers one through ten, describ- 
ing arctic animals and their activities. At the bottom of each of 
page, the numbers are also printed in the Inuit alphabet. This easy- 
to-read, colorful picture book will delight yoxmger children learn- 
ing to count, and will interest older readers wanting to know more 
about the arctic habitat. 

9.5 Masurel, Claire (1997). Ten Dogs in the Window. Illustrated by 
Pamela Paparone. New York: North-South. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
55858-754-3. Picture Book. 

Ten dogs of all kinds and sizes wait in the window hoping for just 
the perfect home. The coxmtdown begins as, one-by-one, the dogs 
are chosen because "You're the perfect dog for me!" The language 
is rhythmic and repetitive, making it supportive for early readers. 
Children enjoy guessing which dog each customer will choose. A 
large numeral appears on each page, helping children develop 
numeracy. The bright illustrations will generate many stories about 
dogs or other pets readers have known, and children will cheer to 
find that all the dogs find their special homes. The final illustration 
shows the shopkeeper and ten cats in the window, providing a per- 
fect opportunity for children to tell or write their own sequel. 

9.6 McGrath, Barbara Barbieri (1998). The Cheerios Counting Book. 
Illustrated by Rob Bolster and Frank Mazzola, Jr. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-00321-6. Picture Book. 

It's time to munch Cheerios and read! In this book, children learn 
first to cormt from one to ten, and then to count to one hundred by 
tens. Each page shows the number written as a word, and the cor- 
responding numeral. Each number is brightly illustrated with 
Cheerios and pieces of fruit. The arrangement of the Cheerios 
could lead to the discussion of many mathematical concepts such 
as number patterns, groupings by tens, and even and odd num- 
bers. The text's strong rhyme invites the children to cormt along. 
This book is a great read-aloud. It will be hard to read this book 
without having a healthy Cheerios snack at hand! 



ERIC 



326 



Counting Books 



301 



Secondary Reviews 

9.7 Appelt, Kathi (1996). Bat Jamboree. Illustrated by Melissa Sweet. 
New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13882-9. 
Picture Book. 

The Bat Jamboree, starring fifty-five bats, has farm animals pack- 
ing into an old drive-in movie for the bats' program. The children 
in one reviewer's first-grade class counted along with the ever- 
increasing number of bats as they came out to perform. The great- 
est act was building the the Great Bat Pyramid, with ten acrobats 
on the base. The story ends with a prediction about next year's 
show, which "won't be over until the bat lady sings." The charm- 
ing illustrations add to the whimsical nature of the book. Several 
children in the reviewer's class wanted to see how many bats 
would be in pyramids with bases of different sizes. This counting 
book lead to a discussion of addition and patterns that absorbed 
first graders for days. 

9.8 Foglesong Guy, Ginger (1996). jFiesta! Illustrated by Rene King 
Moreno. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14331-8. 
Picture Book. 

Three young children search the market for toys and candies to fill 
a pinata for their fiesta. As they shop, they count the objects that 
go into their basket. In this dual-language counting book for 
young children, simple and predictable text in a large font invites 
shared reading experiences. Although Spanish is given preferen- 
tial placement on the page, beginning readers of any linguistic 
background will enjoy learning numbers in Spanish and English 
through the use of thus patterned-language book. Artist Rene King 
Moreno uses pastels, watercolors, and colored pencil to create 
illustrations that correspond closely with the text, supporting 
readers as they count along with the children in the story. 

9.9 Rankin, Laura (1998). The Handmade Counting Book. New York: 
Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2309-1. Picture Book. 

This book is both a counting book and an introduction to Ameri- 
can Sign Language. Through clear, vivid illustrations, the reader 
learns the hand signs for the numbers one through twenty, 
twenty-five, fifty, seventy-five, and one hundred. The illustrations 
on each page model the hand position required, and provide 
objects for children to count. An artist's note at the beginning of 



O 

ERIC 






. *< 



327 



302 



Mathematics 



the book gives the reader information about American Sign Lan- 
guage, and tips for using this book. 

Problem-Solving Storybooks 

Primary Reviews 

9.10 Axelrod, Amy (1997). Pigs Go to Market: Fun with Math and 
Shopping. Illustrated by Sharon McGinley-Nally. New York: 
Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-81069-5. Picture Book. 

This book is one of a series of adventures surrounding the Pig fam- 
ily and their problems. In this story, the Pigs are preparing for Hal- 
loween and discover to everyone's dismay that all the candy has 
been eaten before the big night arrives. The Pigs rush to the market 
to purchase more treats, and win a surprise shopping spree for 
being the one-millionth customer. Mrs. Pig dashes through the 
store grabbing up bags of candy while being cheered on by her 
family and other customers. The illustrations are bright, and 
show the pigs cavorting happily from page to page. At the end of 
the story, drawings of each purchase allow the reader to use mul- 
tiplication to compute how much candy the pigs collected at the 
market. 

9.11 Bauer, Joan (1996). Sticks. New York: Yearling. 182 pp. ISBN: 0- 
440-41387-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This chapter book examines the world of Mickey Vernon, a ten- 
year-old boy who has lost his father and who lives to play pool. 
He wants more than anything to win the ten- to thirteen-year- 
olds' nine-ball championship, and wear the champion shirt just 
like his father. In order to do that, he accepts the help of Joseph — 
an old, lost friend of his father — and learns first-hand about 
patience, practice, and winning. Mickey's friend Arlen introduces 
mathematics into the plot. Arlen is a math whiz who figures out 
how vectors can help Mickey's pool game, how to win the jelly- 
bean prediction contest, and how Mickey can use math to have an 
awesome science project. Intermediate-grade students will enjoy 
both the story and the mathematical concepts inherent in it. 

9.12 Bums, Marilyn (1997). Spaghetti and Meatballs for All. Illus- 
trated by Debbie Tilley. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
590-94459-2. Picture Book. 




328 



Problem-Solving Storybooks 



303 



Come to the party! Mr. and Mrs. Comfort plan a spaghetti-and- 
meatball dinner for thirty-two family members and friends. Mr. 
Comfort takes care of the menu, while Mrs. Comfort arranges for 
the tables and chairs needed to seat all the guests. As guests start 
arriving and pushing tables together, the trouble begins. Chil- 
dren quickly make the prediction that there will not be enough 
chairs for all, and chaos seems imminent. The exchanges become 
humorous as more and more guests arrive. "'Hey,' Mrs. Com- 
fort's brother's daughter's son said to his twin brother, 'that's my 
bread you're eating!"' The illustrations helpfully portray the 
activity of the party. Everyone pitches in to solve the problem. 
The tables are returned to their original locations, and the dinner 
is successful. At the end of the book. Burns includes information 
regarding this problem and additional ideas for mathematical 
puzzles. 

9.13 Demi (1997). One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical Folktale. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-93998-X. Picture Book. 

This mathematical folktale concerns an Indian raja who refuses to 
share the rice of the kingdom with his people during a time of 
famine. A village girl does a good deed for the raja, and in return 
asks for the simple reward of a grain of rice to be doubled each 
day for thirty days. The raja soon realizes the power of doubling, 
for on the thirtieth day, over 500 million grains of rice must be 
delivered to the girl. In all, the girl receives over one billion grains 
of rice, leaving no rice for the raja. When asked what she will do 
with the rice, she answers, "I shall give it to all the himgry peo- 
ple." This tale teaches the raja a lesson about fairness. A table at 
the end of the book helps children appreciate the power of dou- 
bling numbers. The rich color and detail of the illustrations reflect 
the Indian setting. 

9.14 Enzensberger, Hans Magnus (1997). The Number Devil. Illus- 
trated by Rotraut Susane Berner. Translated by Michael Henry 
Heim. New York: Metropolitan. 262 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5770-6. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

The most imfortimate thing about this amusing chapter book is its 
title. Some teachers and readers will be put off by the word devil in 
the title, and the devil that enters twelve-year-old Robert's 
dreams. However, this number devil shows Robert what math is 



329 



304 



Mathematics 



really about — zeros and ones, infinite numbers, probability and 
primes, and the Fibonacci sequence, just to mention a few items. 
Each chapter is another dream and another lesson presented in an 
interesting and easy-to-understand way For example, raising a 
number to a higher power is referred to as hopping, as in 2 x 2 = 4, 
2 X 2 X 2 = 8, and 2x2x2x2 = 16. Enzensberger is well known as 
one of Europe's intellectuals, and he writes with insight and great 
wit. This book is a good resource both for students, and for teach- 
ers looking for novel ways to present information. 

9.15 Murphy, Stuart J. (1998). Lemonade for Sale. Illustrated by Tricia 
Tusa. New York: HarperCollins. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-06-446715-5. Pic- 
ture Book. 

The neighborhood clubhouse is falling down, and a group of chil- 
dren decide something must be done to rebuild it. To earn money 
for the building materials, the children set up the traditional 
lemonade stand. The concept of graphing is introduced as the 
children record on a bar graph their profits from each day's sales. 
Children reading this book did notice that one part of the graph 
was missing in these illustrations: the title. The children are faced 
with declining sales on the fourth day, but solve their problem by 
working with a competing business. This book lends itself to a 
discussion of many economic concepts and storytelling about 
lemonade stands or business ventures in which children partici- 
pated. When one reviewer read this book aloud to her fourth 
graders, she found "It was a great spark for looking at and mak- 
ing graphs." 

Secondary Reviews 

9.16 Adler, David A. (1997). Easy Math Puzzles. Illustrated by Cynthia 
Fisher. New York: Holiday House. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8234-1283-0. 
Picture Book. 

These short math puzzles are interesting to investigate and solve. 
Every puzzle is presented briefly, and is supported by a black- 
and-white illustration. For example, the following puzzle is enti- 
tled Eggs for Breakfast: 

If it takes 3 minutes 
To boil 3 eggs for breakfast, 

How long would it take 
To boil 10 eggs? 



330 



Problem-Solving Storybooks 



305 



One reviewer used these problems as warm-ups during the 
home-to-school transition in the first grade. Children worked 
cooperatively or individually to solve these tricky problems. The 
reviewer encouraged them to examine the language carefully to 
find out what question was being asked. These problems pro- 
vided wonderful opportunities for children to exchange ideas, 
use vocabulary, and critically examine the language of mathemat- 
ical problems. 

9.17 Losi, Carol A. (1997). The 512 Ants on Sullivan Street. Illustrated 
by Patrick Merrell. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590- 
30876-9. Picture Book. 

This cumulative tale is from the Hello Math Readers series. The 
books were written with parents and children in mind. The text is 
very readable for young children, and the illustrations are colorful 
and bold. In this book, a young girl and her father plan a picnic on 
Sullivan Street. They are visited by one ant "who carried a crumb," 
two ants "with some pieces of plum," then four ants, eight ants, 
and still more ants. The number of ants keeps doubling until 
finally "512 ants all ready to dine, picked up the cake and got right 
in line." At the end of the story Marilyn Bums, an expert in ele- 
mentary mathematics curriculum, includes information and tips 
for parents to help their child understand the mathematical con- 
cepts involved. 

9.18 Murphy, Stuart J. (1997). Divide and Ride. Illustrated by George 
Ulrich. New York: HarperCollins. 33 pp. ISBN: 0-06-446710-4. Pic- 
ture Book. 

This book is part of the MathStart series. Eleven friends decide to 
go to a carnival. Over and over again, they must divide into 
groups in order to ride the various rides. When they divide by 
twos, they have one friend who needs a partner. They ask other 
children to join them for each ride to even out the pairings. The 
realistic illustrations aid readers in quickly identifying with the 
problems that arise during a day at the carnival. This book helps 
children work with the concept of division and remainders. Num- 
ber sentences are included to show how the problem was solved. 
There also is a strong friendship theme that children will want to 
discuss. The end of the book includes extension activities and sug- 
gestions for discussing the book with children. 




331 



306 



Mathematics 



9.19 Murphy, Stuart J. (1998). A Fair Bear Share. Illustrated by John 
Speirs. New York; HarperCollins. 33 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027438-7. Pic- 
ture Book. 

This is the delightful story of four little bears who are sent to col- 
lect nuts, berries, and seeds so mother can make her special blue- 
ribbon blueberry pie. Three of the bears do their fair share of 
gathering the necessary ingredients. When they return home, 
mother adds the nuts, berries, and seeds and finds there are not 
enough for the pie. The fourth bear is sad, and hurries out to col- 
lect her fair share so that all can enjoy the pie. The illustrations are 
alive and bright, capturing children's interest. The story could be 
read first as a story, skipping the pages showing how the seeds 
and other items are counted. The computation sections illustrate 
how objects can be grouped into tens and added easily, but may 
interrupt the flow of the story. 

9.20 Ziefert, Harriet (1998). Rabbit and Hare Divide an Apple. Illus- 
trated by Emily Bolam. New York: Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670- 
87790-5. Picture Book. 

Rabbit and Hare have an apple that both want, and realize that 
they are going to need to split it. Unfortunately Rabbit and Hare 
don't split the apple in half, and they begin to fight. Along comes 
Mr. Raccoon, who seems to think he can help solve their problem. 
This book introduces the basic concept of the fraction one-half. 
Children will naturally want to try cutting an apple in half after 
reading this book. This book from the Viking Easy-to-Read series 
has simple text supported clearly by the illustrations. 

Math Concept Books 

Primary Reviews 

9.21 Barrett, Judi (1998). Things that Are Most in the World. Illus- 
trated by John Nickle. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-81333-3. Picture Book. (See 13.11) 

9.22 Maganzini, Christy (1997). Cool Math. Illustrated by Ruta Dau- 
gavietis. New York: Price Stern Sloan. 95 pp. ISBN: 0-8431-7857-4. 
Chapter Book. 

This book contains a wealth of information for the older child. The 
work of mathematicians such as Pibonacci, Euler, and Pythagoras 



' '332 



Math Concept Books 



307 



are introduced to children through intriguing puzzles and prob- 
lems. The material is presented in an easy-to-find and easy-to- 
understand format. The presence and importance of mathematics 
in children's daily lives is uncovered as children learn about math 
facts and their relationship to items in nature. The material is so 
engrossing that some children don't believe they are learning 
mathematics! The pages are even numbered using mathematical 
equations. The book includes a glossary and index, making it even 
easier to find information. Adults will also be fascinated by the 
number patterns and puzzles contained in this book. 

9.23 McMillan, Bruce (1996). Jelly Beans for Sale. New York: Scholas- 
tic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-86584-6. Picture Book. 

Jelly Beans for Sale provides a mouthwatering introduction to basic 
money concepts. McMillan's colorful photographs of children 
enjoying jelly beans that they have purchased are filled with color 
and money concepts. The book begins with a young boy who has 
one strawberry jelly bean and one penny in his hand. Each photo- 
graph depicts a natural progression of coins — pennies, nickels, 
dimes, and quarters. At the end of this counting book, there is a 
history of jelly beans and a seven-day recipe for making them. 
There also is a discussion of coins, and a number to call for a free 
jelly bean kit, video, and jelly beans for teaching. 

9.24 Morgan, Rowland (1997). In the Next Three Seconds. Illustrated 
by Rod Josey and Kira Josey. New York: Lodestar. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
525-67551-5. Picture Book. 

Did you know that in the next three seconds loggers will cut 
down 199 trees? Each page of this book is covered with predic- 
tions and information about events that will occur in the next 
three seconds, minutes, hours, days, nights, weeks, months, years, 
decades, and centuries. Children are amazed and fascinated to 
read each prediction, and to think about each segment of time. 
The question inevitably arises: How does the author know this? 
Fortimately at the beginning of the book, the author describes 
how he went about making his predictions. This book will lead to 
many discussions surrounding his environmental predictions and 
their ramifications. An index and table of contents are included. 
The bright illustrations lead the reader's eye from one amazing 
prediction to another. 



333 



308 



Mathematics 



9.25 Neuschwander, Cindy (1998). Amanda Bean's Amazing Dream: 
A Mathematical Story. Illustrated by Liza Woodruff. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-30012-1. Picture Book. 

Amanda Bean loves to count, and she counts everything she sees 
from library books to pickles. One night, Amanda has a dream in 
which her counting gets out of hand. She dreams of eight bicycles 
ridden by sheep. As she tries to count the bicycle wheels and then 
the legs of the sheep, she discovers that for larger numbers, count- 
ing just does not work. Finally Amanda wakes up and realizes 
that multiplication is a faster and easier way of counting. The 
illustrations provide many opportunities for children to count 
along with Amanda, and clearly show the concept of multiplica- 
tion through the groupings of various objects. Marilyn Bums, an 
expert on elementary mathematics curriculum, has provided 
multiplication extension activities at the end of the book for teach- 
ers and parents. 

9.26 Schwartz, David M. (1998). G Is for Googol: A Math Alphabet 
Book. Illustrated by Marissa Moss. Berkeley, CA: Tricycle. 57 pp. 
ISBN: 1-883672-58-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

What's a googol? Read this book, and you'll discover there is both 
an easy way and a hard way to write this number. This mathemat- 
ics alphabet book for the older child presents information on 
many concepts, such as the googolplex, Fibonacci, the Konigsberg 
Bridge problem, and many more intriguing mathematics-related 
topics. The text is conversational, and the cartoonlike illustrations 
clearly demonstrate the concepts. The book presents information 
in such a way that readers will be eager to explore and test the 
relationships described. This book sparked many explorations for 
the fourth- and fifth-grade math clubs under one reviewer's guid- 
ance. Activities like the Mobius strip captured the children's curios- 
ity. The students' favorite extension of the book was investigating 
the appearance of numbers in the Fibonacci sequence in pinecones, 
pineapples, seashells, and other objects. An easy-to-use glossary is 
included for reference. 

Secondary Reviews 

9.27 Cristalsdi, Kathryn (1996). Even Steven and Odd Todd. Illus- 
trated by Henry B. Morehouse. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-590-22715-7. Ficture Book. 



334 



Math Concept Books 



309 



Even Steven carefully organizes his life using safe, even numbers. 
He has six cats, checks out four books, and even eats six pancakes. 
He is visited by his cousin Odd Todd, who wakes up at nine 
o'clock, knocks three times, and eats three pancakes. Children in 
one reviewer's class quickly noticed the difference between the 
characters, and began anticipating the problems that would arise. 
This book led to a discussion of even and odd numbers, but chil- 
dren also were quick to comment on the need to accept people dif- 
ferent from themselves. The children loved the emotion captured 
in the illustrations. This story is from the Hello Math Readers 
series. The stories are easy-to-read and were written for the parent- 
and-child audience. Maril 5 m Burns, an expert in elementary math- 
ematics curriculum, provides parents with activities at the end of 
the book for extending the mathematical concepts discussed. 

9.28 Harper, Dan (1998). Telling Time with Big Mama Cat. Illustrated 
by Barry Moser and Cara Moser. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201738-0. Picture Book. 

Big Mama Cat's day begins at 6:00 a.m. with a stretch. She must 
stay on schedule. At seven breakfast is served, and her busy day 
moves ahead. This delightful story tells about the day in the life of a 
family who owns a cat. Each page includes inviting text, a sturdy 
clock showing the current time, emd a warm watercolor illustration. 
Young children will enjoy opportunities to identify emd explore the 
times represented in the story. Time concepts represented in the 
book include even, half, quarter, and three-quarter hours. Children 
will be able to see the parallel between their own lives and that of 
Mama Cat's household. 

9.29 McGrath, Barbara Barbieri (1998). More M&M's Math. Water- 
town, MA: Charlesbridge. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-88106-993-0. Picture 
Book. 

More M&M's Math is a follow up to The M&M's Counting Book. This 
counting book extends the concepts presented in its predecessor. 
Learners are encouraged to graph, sort, and estimate using their 
candy. Concepts such as regrouping, multiplication, and repeated 
addition are presented. Problem-solving and critical thinking are 
encouraged as learners manipulate their M&M's using ordinal 
numbers (1st, 2nd, etc.). Students love this book, and it provides a 
wonderful way to launch a lesson introducing any of the above 
concepts. 



O 

ERIC 



335 



310 



Mathematics 



McGrath, Barbara Barbieri (1994). The M&M's Count- 
ing Book. Watertown, MA: Charlesbridge. 32 pp. ISBN: 
0-88106-854-3. Picture Book. 

9.30 Murphy, Stuart J. (1997). Just Enough Carrots. Illustrated by 
Frank Remkiewicz. New York: HarperCollins. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-06- 
026778-X. Picture Book. 

Murphy's MathStart books are clear, and present information in 
an easy-to-follow format with supportive, colorful illustrations. 
Just Enough Carrots introduces the basic math concepts oi fewer, 
same, and more. Rabbit, his mom. Elephant, and Bird are shopping 
at the grocery story. Rabbit can't understand why his mom is buy- 
ing so many peanuts and worms, when all he wants is some car- 
rots. After reading the story, one reviewer asked her students to 
follow the model of the book showing "our set, fewer, same, and 
more." Students used beans to create their own set, as well as one 
that had less, the same, and more. 

9.31 Murphy, Stuart J. (1998). The Penny Pot. New York: HarperCollins. 
33 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027606-1. Picture Book. 

Another MathStart series book. The Penny Pot is about a girl 
named Jesse who wants to have her face painted at a school fun 
fair, but does not have the necessary fifty cents. Fran, the art 
teacher and face-painter, encourages Jessie to wait for the money 
she needs. As children come to Fran with more than enough 
money, she encourages them to put extra pennies into the penny 
pot. Miguel, who wants to be a clown, adds three pennies, while 
Annie, who wants to be a monster, adds four. Finally Jesse waits 
long enough to retrieve the extra coins and get her own face 
painted. The whimsical illustrations show Jessie, Fran, and the 
children requesting the face painting, and display the coins men- 
tioned in the story. The book can be extended by talking about 
trading (regrouping) and shopping, or by making a coin game. 

9.32 Schletn, Miriam (1996). More than One. Illustrated by Donald 
Crews. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14102-1. 
Picture Book. 

This book looks at the concept one. First the reader sees one sun 
and one whale. The author then moves the reader to consider one 
pair of shoes, one team, one week, and other groups to see how 



336 



Math Concept Books 



311 



"one" can actually be more than one. This book sparks discussion 
and inspires story writing as children think of other situations 
where one group is greater than one. The illustrations are bold 
and bright, and enable the children to count along. 

9.33 Slate, Joseph (1998). Miss Bindergarten Celebrates the 100th 
Day. Illustrated by Ashley Wolff. New York: Penguin. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-525-46000-4. Picture Book. 

In preparation for the 100th day of school. Miss Bindergarten 
begins a variety of activities on the first day of school that her 
students clamor to join. Each student in Miss Bindergarten's class 
makes a poster that depicts a collection of one hundred, which 
they hang across the classroom on a clothesline and then share 
using repetitive language. For example, Gwen makes a poster of 
one hundred fingers and toes, while Wanda makes a lariat of one 
hundred rubber bands. Miss Bindergarten even makes a one- 
hundred-day punch, which of course is made with one hundred 
cherries. Rich discussions and many ideas for the concept of one 
hundred are introduced, and can easily be used to launch related 
lessons. 



337 




A. 






A, Opening Days: Sports Poems, Lee Bennett HopkIns/Scott Medlock (10.17). B. Con- 
fetti: Poems for Children, Pat Mora/Enrique O. Sanchez (10.53). C. The Great Frog 
Race and Other Poems, Kristine O’Connell George/Kate Klesler (10.2). D. in the Swim: 
Poems and Paintings, Douglas Florian (10.35). 



ERIC 



338 BEST COPY AVAIL&B1.E 




10 Poetry 



Amy McClure 

Contributing reviewers included Joan Bownas, Lisa Dapoz, 

Karen Hildebrand, Amy McClure, Peggy Oxley, Lillian Webb, 
and Lynda Weston. 

istening and responding to poetry provides wonderful opportuni- 



ties for children to appreciate the subtleties of language. Some of 



our most rewarding moments in teaching have occurred during lit- 
erature discussions in which poetry is the focus. Over time, the mem- 
bers of our review committee have developed criteria for determining 
what constitutes high-quality literature in this genre. Good poetry for 
children doesn't necessarily have to rhyme. However, it should focus on 
things that interest children, feature imagery that is within their experi- 
ence, and evoke thoughtful response. It can be humorous, but should 
respect the boimdaries of good taste. We hope this chapter provides you 
with some resources that meet these criteria. 

Our committee examined virtually every poetry book published 
between 1996 and 1998. We then field-tested the ones we thought would 
most appeal to children. During our monthly meetings, we discussed 
which books were instant hits and which ones took some teacher encour- 
agement to capture a group's interest. Thus children's preferences and 
interests were central to our decisions about what should be included in 
this chapter. However, we also strongly believed that only collections of 
well-crafted poetry should be included, so if a book appealed to children 
but wasn't good poetry, it was eliminated. 

We also worked hard to achieve balance and diversity. We searched 
for books that reflected various cultural perspectives. We included some 
from both established and emerging poets. We made sure books for dif- 
ferent age groups were selected. However, quality of writing always 
imdergirded our choices. For example, if a book featured an interesting 
cultural perspective but didn't appeal to children or meet our criteria for 
good poetry, it wasn't included. 

After selecting books for inclusion, we agreed upon categories by 
which to organize the chapter. One of the special delights gained from 
reading poetry is how it helps us see common, everyday things with 




339 



314 



Poetry 



new eyes. In the first section. Making the Ordinary Extraordinary, read- 
ers will find books that fit this description. In the section entitled People: 
Past and Present, we have included poetry that clarifies and illuminates 
our understandings of other people, both contemporary and historical. 
Because much children's poetry focuses on describing animals and 
nature, we decided it was important to have sections devoted to these 
topics. These books can be found in separate sections entitled The Ani- 
mal World and The Natural World. Finally the section entitled Tran- 
scending Cultural Boundaries highlights the poetry from diverse cultures 
that is now available to children. 

We trust that teachers won't use these books to teach formal 
poetic analysis or solely as an adjunct to other curricular activities. 
Rather we hope that expanding teachers' awareness of good poetry will 
help them become skilled at articulating what it is about a poem that 
makes it so appealing, and that this in turn will bring their students to 
love the genre. We hope that teachers will not reserve poetry for a spe- 
cial month of the year, but rather infuse the entire curriculum with the 
insights and perspectives only poetry can provide. 



Acknowledgment: We particularly appreciate the additional insights gained 
from working with the following colleagues: Becky Book, Dublin City Schools; 
Sarah Goldshall, Ohio Wesleyan University; Judy Markham, Columbus School 
for Girls; Kathleen Taps, Upper Arlington City Schools; and Joan Smith, West- 
erville City Schools. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

For other books that include poetic literature or language — such as 
songs, chants, and rhyming or rhythmic text — see also the section enti- 
tled Rhythm, Rhyme, and Repetition in chapter 7, "Literacy"; the sec- 
tion entitled Music Books: Rhymes, Chants, and Songs in chapter 11, 
"Fine Arts"; and the section entitled Riddles, Chants, and Poems in 
chapter 13, "The Craft of Language." 



340 



Making the Ordinary Extraordinary 



315 



Making the Ordinary Extraordinary 

See also the section entitled Looking Closely at the Natural World in 
chapter 1, "Stories of the Universe." 

Primary Reviews 

10.1 Fletcher, Ralph (1997). Twilight Comes Twice. Illustrated by Kate 
Kiesler. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84826-1. Picture 
Book. 

Kate Kiesler 's double-page oil paintings in pink and coral set the 
mood for this exquisite book of poetic prose that will appeal to all 
ages. Twilight is described as a crack that opens twice between 
night and day, while "Dusk gives the signal for night to be born" 
and "dawn is like a seed that will grow into daylight." Other 
phrases that will delight both children and teachers are, "Slowly 
dusk pours its syrup of darkness into the forest" and "Dawn 
slowly brightens the empty baseball diamond until it shines." 
Fletcher uses springtime and summertime descriptions of dusk 
and dawn. Children could try a similar format for fall or winter. 
Each illustration and accompanying text invite new writings, as 
well as personal memories of twilight encounters as reflected in 
the following poems written by upper-elementary students. 

Dusk 

The sun is falling 

The sky turns pink and orange 

And the water twinkles. 

The fish jump 
Just to see the colors 

Heather Shepherd 



Dawn 

From far out of no place 

The sun takes its fingertips 

And slides them across nighttime 

Like you brush your hair in the morning. 

Collin English 

10.2 George, Kristine O'Connell (1997). The Great Frog Race and 
Other Poems. Illustrated by Kate Kiesler. New York: Clarion. 40 
pp. ISBN: 0-395-77607-4. Picture Book. 



O 

ERIC 



341 



316 



Poetry 



A series of short, reflective poems show a young girl enjoying the 
seasonal pleasures of country life. The imagery is very child- 
oriented, and uses easily understood comparisons like a weeping 
willow that “weeps piles of tears for me to rake" and a wooden 
swing "pillowed with snow." Kiesler's realistic oil paintings bring 
to life each poem. Teachers can find in this collection many exam- 
ples of word-crafting to discuss with children. Polliwogs are de- 
scribed as "Chubby commas" "Huddled in puddles / snuggled in 
mud." Words are placed artfully to convey the rhythmic flight of 
Canadian geese: "See them sketching, stretching skyward. / Hear 
their lonely cry." Evening rain is described as "taking thin silken 
stitches / with strands of wet thread." Children may need help 
understanding some of the images. For example, when one 
reviewer read aloud from the book to her second graders, they 
were quite interested in events described in the poems but needed 
support appreciating the subtle aspects of word-crafting. We also 
thought the book might appeal only to middle-grade children. 
However we found that it continued to strike a chord with older 
students, as eighth grader Nate attested: "These poems are brisk 
and colorful stories about little things that make up the special 
feelings that surround you." 

10.3 Hopkins, Lee Bervnett, editor (1996). School Supplies: A Book of 
Poems. Illustrated by Renee Flower. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
36 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80497-0. Picture Book. 

The best part about beginning a new school year is buying new 
school supplies! Start your school year with the perfect poetry 
book that describes those new pencils, erasers, crayons, and more 
in unique and appealing ways. Lee Bervnett Hopkins selected six- 
teen lively poems that appeal to a wide range of ages, written by 
children's favorite well-known poets including J. Patrick Lewis, 
Jane Yolen, and Carl Sandburg. The bold watercolor and colored- 
pencil illustrations add a new dimension to the poems. A first 
grader commented on how the supplies "dance and fly through 
the pages." Another child noticed the personified pens and pen- 
cils with smiles on their "faces." Kimberleigh, a third grader, par- 
ticularly enjoyed how one poet described a paper clip as a 
monster, and the lines on a notebook page as "telephone wires." 
"I'll never look at those things the same way again," she declared. 
Her friend Amanda liked the poem "Ballpoint Pen" because it 
was graceful, and "Lunch Bag" because of the surprising ending. 



ERiC 



342 



Making the Ordinary Extraordinary 



317 



Before one reviewer read this book to her students, she filled a 
tote bag with all of the school supplies mentioned in the book. She 
asked a child to select a supply from the bag, then read the corre- 
sponding poem. The children had fun taking turns guessing 
which poem would be read next. Their favorite was "The Eraser 
Poem," by Louis Phillips. They enjoyed listening to their teacher 
trying to read aloud a poem that actually disappears off the page! 
A second reviewer did the same activity with her fifth graders 
with equally positive results. 

10.4 Prelutsky, Jack (1996). A Pizza the Size of the Sun. Illustrated by 
James Stevenson. New York: Morrow. 160 pp. ISBN: 0-688-13236- 
7. Chapter Book. 

Once again, Prelutsky unerringly shows he understands chil- 
dren's dreams, concerns, and interests. Poems about trying out 
new roller skates, contending with an overpopulation of gerbils, 
and concocting strange mixtures with a chemistry set speak to 
real children and their lives. Some of the poems play with words 
("Mrs. Misinformation," "The Puppy Made Off with My Slip- 
pers"), and some play with form ("A Triangular Tale," about a pie, 
is written in the shape of a pie slice.) Some poems are delightfully 
gross. Children likely will find this collection on their own due to 
its topics, predictable rhyme and rhythm, and Prelutsky's reputa- 
tion. However, it's also a great read-aloud text. One reviewer had 
her third graders read it on their own, then share requests. They 
particularly enjoyed those poems that were funny or had a sur- 
prise ending. Stephanie, a third grader, seemed to speak for them 
all when she said, "[This book] is good for kids of all ages because 
it has no violence in it . . . and it makes you laugh." 

10.5 Ridlon, Marci (1996). Sun through the Window: Poems for Chil- 
dren. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 64 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-454-1. 
Chapter Book. 

Selections from Ridlon's superb 1969 collection That Was Summer 
are integrated with new work. The poems focus on simple aspects 
of children's lives like snow, bad days, happy feelings, and puddle- 
jumping, making them readily accessible to a wide audience. Some 
poems — such as "Bad Day," "Angry," "My Brother Johnny," and 
"Melissa Melinda" — are reminiscent of A. A. MUne in topic and 
rhythm. Some make you giggle, while others remind you of smells 
and tastes. These poems speak directly to children, and many 



MB 

o 

ERIC i ^ 



318 



Poetry 



would work well for Reader's Theater or dramatic interpretation. 
All beg to be recited over and over. One reviewer's third graders 
particularly enjoyed "That Was Summer" and "Catching Quiet." 
Several wrote their own poems in response to "That Was Summer." 

Brian's Spring Poem 

Have you ever smelled spring? 

Well, I have and 
here are my memories. 

Have you ever gone out after it rains? 

Do you remember the smell of humidity? 

That was spring. 

Have you ever planted a garden? 

Do you remember the smell of dirt? 

That was spring. 

Have you ever climbed up in a tree house? 

Do you remember the smell of fresh wood? 

That was spring. 

So, do you remember spring now? 

Brian Sherman 



Summer's Here 

One day as I was climbing my friend's tree, 
I smelled the fresh air of summer. 

I heard the car beeping. 

I saw children playing. 

I smelled the red roses. 

I heard the birds singing. 

I heard the bee buzzing, and 
I smelled that summer was here. 

Heather Smith 



That Was Winter 

Have you ever tasted winter? 

Remember the hot chocolate burning. 

Snow melting, icicles falling, and candy breaking? 
That was winter. 

Have you ever touched winter? 

Remember the soft snow, fuzzy sweaters, 
hard bark, cold frost, and furry mittens? 

That was winter. 

Have you ever seen winter? 

Remember the snow falling, 

Christmas trees growing, and snowplows plowing? 
That was winter. 



344 



Making the Ordinary Extraordinary 



319 



Have you ever heard winter? 

Remember the sleds swooshing, 

boots scrimching, icicles breaking, and children playing? 

That was winter. 

' Have you ever smelled winter? 

Remember the cookies baking, 

candy canes crackling, and furnaces burning? 

That was winter. 

Scott Clouse 

This is a collection that, with teacher support, will delight a wide 
audience of children. 

McGiU, Mard (1961). That Was Summer. Illustrated by 
Mia Carpenter. Chicago: FoUett. 80 pp. ISBN: 0-695-88510- 
3. Picture Book. 

10.6 Schertle, Alice (1996). Keepers. Illustrated by Ted Rand. New York: 
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-688-11634-5. Picture Book. 

Alice Schertle is a crafter of words. Her poems, both humorous 
and poignant, are subtle, smooth-flowing, and written in a variety 
of forms and rhyme schemes. They added color and depth to vari- 
ous studies in one reviewer's class. "I really like 'The Better Beetle.' 
Read it again, please!" begged Bobby. "It's like a story poem," 
added Nicole, "and it rhymes." The beetle thinks he's better 
"because he's higher, but higher, the woodpecker can see you," 
explained Heather. The poem added an entertaining touch to an 
insect study, while warning against false pride. It was a favorite of 
the children, as was "Skeleton Key," a quizzical addition to the 
class' Halloween poetry collection. To begin a collection of dog 
poems and to introduce a book like Along Came A Dog, teachers can 
use "My Old Dog" who "doesn't move much anymore. / . . . Now 
he likes it best / to rest / here on the floor ..." Complemented by 
Ted Rand's drawings, this book is a keeper! 

Dejong, Meindert (1958). Along Came a Dog. Illustrated 
by Maurice Sendak. New York: Harper. 192 pp. ISBN: 0- 
06-440114-6. Chapter Book. 

10.7 Yoxmg, Ed (1997). Voices of the Heart. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-50199-2. Picture Book. (See 11.40) 



345 



320 



Poetry 



Secondary Reviews 

10.8 Dakos, Kalli (1997). Get out of the Alphabet, Number 2! Wacky 
Wednesday Puzzle Poems. Illustrated by Jenny Graham. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81118-7. Picture Book. 

It's wacky Wednesday, and the students in this book are having a 
wild time with the ABCs! There are letters on the clock and the 
number 2 sneaks into the alphabet. The letter I wants a perm so it 
will look more like an S. The letter Z shoves in line ahead of B. The 
bright, childlike gouache paintings offer clues to the riddles. Cele- 
brate wacky Wednesday in your own classroom. Your students 
will have fun finding all the crazy, mixed-up letters and numbers. 
What a wild, wacky way for young children to learn about the 
alphabet and numbers through poetry. 

10.9 Dotlich, Rebecca Kai (1998). Lemonade Sun and Other Summer 
Poems. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-660-9. 
Picture Book. 

From the taste of lemonade "splashing sunshine on frosty 
squares" to the feel of feet "touching the tickle of new grass," this 
collection celebrates the pleasures of summer. The images are 
fresh and original yet childlike, making the book appealing to 
many ages. We found it evoked much discussion and writing 
about children's favorite summer experiences. Fourth grader 
Abby particularly enjoyed "Jump Rope Rhyme" because of the 
catchy rhyme and rhythm, as well as how the names of various 
states are incorporated into the poem. She also liked "Sunflower" 
because of the description of these flowers as "garden kings with 
chocolate eyes." 

10.10 Fletcher, Ralph (1997). Ordinary Things: Poems from a Walk in 
Early Spring. Illustrated by Walter Lyon Krudop. New York: 
Atheneum. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81035-0. Chapter Book. 

A quiet, solitary walk in spring takes the reader through the woods 
and home again, observing small, often unnoticed objects — some 
in nature, and some not. This small book with pencil-sketch art- 
work and thoughtful metaphorical poetry could be shared with 
students before taking a "poetry walk" and looking for images in 
their own neighborhoods and forests in spring ... or summer, or 
fall, or winter. 



346 



Making the Ordinary Extraordinary 



321 



10.11 Hopkins, Lee Bennett, editor (1997). Song and Dance: Poems. 
Illustrated by Cheryl Munro Taylor. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80159-9. Picture Book. 

Hopkins blends the music of contemporary poets with more tra- 
ditional voices, creating a collection of poems full of joyful 
rhythms that make you want to dance and shout to the sky. Many 
of the images are very unusual and will expand children's think- 
ing about what can be called music and dance. The handcut and 
colored papers used in the illustrations are positioned so as to 
convey movement, effectively complementing the rhythmic feel 
of the poems. 

10.12 Katz, Bobbi (1997). Truck Talk: Rhymes on Wheels. New York: 
Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0590-69328-X. Picture Book. 

Many poems for younger children are story rhymes. This book is 
written in the form of individual poems about different kinds of 
trucks, such as ambulances, moving trucks, delivery trucks, and 
cement mixers. Accompanying each poem are several photo- 
graphs of the truck being described. Children love this book, and 
clamor for it to be read over and over. It is a good introduction to 
the poetic genre for young ones. 

10.13 Liatsos, Sandra Olson (1997). Bicycle Riding and Other Poems. 
Illustrated by Karen Dugan. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 30 pp. 
ISBN: 1-56397235-2. Picture Book. 

With poems rhymed and unrhymed, this book reminded children 
in one reviewer's class of events in their own lives, such as back- 
yard camping, playing in autumn leaves, and climbing trees. 
They enjoyed clapping a jump-rope rhythm to "Pumpkin Pick- 
ing," and singing "Sea Wave" to the tune of "Do Your Ears Hang 
Low?" They agreed that "Eating Blueberries" would make a nice 
introduction to Blueberries for Sal. Fourth graders also enjoyed this 
collection. Kelly liked "Bicycle Riding" because she thought "this 
poem expresses a child's feelings." Katie enjoyed "The Hero of 
Our Street" because "it leaves us in suspense." In addition to 
identifying with these lilting poems, the children also deepened 
their appreciation for poetry. 

McCloskey Robert (1948). Blueberries for Sal. New York: 

Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-17591-9. Picture Book. 



O 



347 



322 



Poetry 



10.14 Ryan, Pam Munoz (1996). The Flag We Love. Illustrated by Ralph 
Masiello. Watertown, MA: Charlesbridge. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-88106- 
846-2. Picture Book. 

This beautifully illustrated, patriotic poem presents the history 
and symbolism of our nation's flag. Pam Munoz Ryan writes fac- 
tual information at the bottom of each page to elaborate on the 
ideas presented in each poem. Find out who really sewed the first 
flag, who wrote the "Pledge of Allegiance," where the "Star- 
Spangled Banner" is displayed, and how many flags have been 
planted on the moon. Ralph Masiello's extraordinary oil paint- 
ings include Jesse Owens at the 1936 Olympics, the Abraham 
Lincoln funeral train, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Wash- 
ington, D.C., and the bombing of Ft. McHenry during the War of 
1812. This book belongs in classrooms all across America! 

People: Past and Present 

See also chapter 3, "Exploring Our Past." 

Primary Reviews 

10.15 Barnwell, Ysaye M. (1998). No Mirrors in My Nana's House. 
Illustrated by Synthia Saint James. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-15-201825-5. Picture Book. 

This stunning picture book portrays what it is like to see beauty 
through the eyes of a loved one and to grow up only seeing the pos- 
itive aspects of life. From one of the songs sung by the popular a 
cappeUa quintet Sweet Honey in the Rock, and written by one of the 
members of the group, this story explains how not having a mirror 
in the house changed the way one person thought of the environ- 
ment around her. No Mirrors in My Nana's House is brought to life 
through the brightly colored paintings of Synthia Saint James. This 
book includes a compact disc of the song sung by Sweet Honey in 
the Rock, along with a reading of the book by the author. 

10.16 Holbrook, Sara (1996). Am I Naturally This Crazy? Honesdale, 
PA: Boyds Mills. 48 pp. ISBN:l-56397-640-4. Chapter Book. 

Sara Holbrook's poems are funny, feisty, and full of the frustrating 
problems and exhilarating joys of children's lives. This book 
focuses particularly on the roUer coaster ride of emotions that kids 
experience growing up. Rejection, family squabbles, first love, 
making friends, and taking risks are all topics she addresses sensi- 



348 



People: Past and Present 



323 



tively and with a strong dose of humor. Her work helps children 
define who they are, and provides some guidance as they navigate 
their way through the world. One reviewer has watched Hol- 
brook, who is a gifted performer, share her poetry with students of 
all ages. They invariably respond with enthusiasm, clamoring for 
more. Teachers can use this collection along with I Never Said I 
Wasn't Difficult and Walking on the Boundaries of Change to stimulate 
discussion about feelings and issues in their students' lives. 

Holbrook, Sara (1996). I Never Said I Wasn't Difficult: 
Poems. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 48 pp. ISBN: 1- 
56397-390-2. Chapter Book. 

Holbrook, Sara (1998). Walking on the Boundaries of 
Change: Poems of Transition. Honesdale, PA: Boyds 
Mills. 64 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-737-0. Chapter Book. 

10.17 Hopkins, Lee Bennett, editor (1996). Opening Days: Sports Poems. 
Illustrated by Scott Medlock. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 35 pp. 
ISBN: 0-15-200270-7. Picture Book. 

This collection features poems about kids playing various sports, 
from karate to ice-skating to tennis. There is a nice balance between 
poems about boys and girls as well as diverse styles from free verse 
to rhymed quatrains. One reviewer read this book aloud to her third 
graders. Jane Yolen's "The Karate Kid" was particularly intriguing 
to them. Tiffany found the last stanza with its series of single words 
("Chop. / Kick. / Peace. / Power.") "awesome," and declared "she 
put in the perfect words to end it." When the reviewer asked if their 
favorites were the poems about their own preferred sports, the 
group responded with a resounding "no." John further commented, 
"I hked ones about my sport but I liked others too — like the 'Speed' 
one because it really captures your ears because of the words she 
picked." Adam liked the poem "Skiing" because of the line "I am 
the mountain and the mountain is me." "The poem just makes you 
want to go out and do it," he added. This would be a good book to 
read aloud and get children interested in poetry. The subject matter 
appeals to both genders, and the poetic styles are easily accessible to 
chQdren. We found only a few poems — like "Boyhood Baseball" 
and "Tomorrow" — that were a bit nostalgic, and that might require 
some explanation before they could be appreciated by most chil- 
dren. The reviewer's students thought the book would be a good 
model for children to write their own poems about sports. 




349 



324 



Poetry 



10.18 Mavor, Salley, editor (1997). You and Me: Poems of Friendship. 
New York: Orchard. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-531-33045-1. Picture Book. 

Mavor has selected work from Jack Prelutsky, Judith Viorst, 
Langston Hughes, Lucille Clifton, and others to explore the joys of 
friendship — including shared lemonade stands, red tennis shoes, 
favorite secret places, and playing in the snow. The full-color 
reproductions of fabric sculptures provide wonderful texture, and 
add a note of whimsical realism to the poems. One reviewer found 
that students particularly enjoyed the poems "Since Harma Moved 
Away" by Judith Viorst, and "My Natural Mama" by Lucille 
Clifton. Students also made spontaneous cormections to the many 
other books and poems about friendship. This book would be a 
fine addition to any elementary classroom collection. 

10.19 Myers, Walter Dean (1997). Harlem. Illustrated by Christopher 
Myers. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-54340-7. Pic- 
ture Book. 

A journey into the very heart and soul of Harlem. Walter Dean 
Myers' poetic words and his son Christopher's bold, collage 
gouache-and-ink illustrations make this book jump off the page 
with life. Myers relates the journey to Harlem "that started on the 
banks of the Niger / And has not ended" — much like the journey of 
his foster parents (to whom the book is dedicated), whose journey 
began in West Virginia before they moved to Harlem with three- 
year-old Walter. With historical references to Langston Hughes, Joe 
Louis, Malcolm X, and other great African Americans, the commu- 
nity of Harlem unfolds as "a place where a man didn't have to 
know his place simply because he was Black." The music, art, 
sports, literature, and people of Harlem through the years come 
alive in this 1998 Coretta Scott King award winner. Older students 
wiU enjoy this poem not only as a biographical peek into the 
author's childhood, but also to experience the rhythm and art that 
comprise the heartbeat of Harlem. 

10.20 Robb, Laura, editor (1997). Music and Drum: Voices of War and 
Peace, Hope and Dreams. Illustrated by Debra Lill. New York: 
Philomel. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22024-0. Picture Book. 

Fifth graders were unanimous in their expressions of identifica- 
tion with the emotion-packed words, images, and ideas evoked 
by the poems Robb chose to include in this anthology. They 
appreciated the various ages, backgrounds, and levels of experi- 



350 



People: Past and Present 



325 



ence with war represented by the poets whose works are 
included. Although the group of students concerned is almost too 
young to know about the last war in which the United States was 
involved, they were saddened by Matti Yosef's plaintive "I Don't 
Like Wars," and by the losses described in Amit Tal's "Father and 
Son." The unreal and numbing nature of distant wars described in 
"War Games" seemed like a "Calvin and Hobbes" comic strip to 
several of them. Robb provides relief by juxtaposing poems of 
hope and peace with those of sadness and loss. For example, 
"Birdsong," written by a child from the Terezin concentration 
camp, describes beauty in the world and says there is joy to be 
derived from knowing one is alive, while Mary O'Neill says 
"Hope is the light in the awful dark." Students both young and 
old will benefit from this unique look at the effects of war, and the 
uplifting words of hope expressed by this rich variety of poets. 

10.21 Steptoe, Javaka (1997). In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall. New York: Lee 
& Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-31-8. Picture Book. (See 4.26) 

10.22 Turner, Arm (1997). Mississippi Mud: Three Prairie Journals. 
Illustrated by Robert J. Blake. New York: HarperCollins. 44 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-024432-1. Picture Book. 

Amanda, Caleb, and Lonnie journey in a covered wagon with 
their mother and father across the breadth of America from Ken- 
tucky to the rich and promising land of western Oregon. Each 
describes his or her thoughts and observations in a series of free 
verse poems that create a multifaceted memoir in diary form. 
Amanda writes, we "sat in the back / looking out the puckered 
hole, / and I thought our wishes rose / to the sky like smoke." 
Through her eyes, we see disappointment and fear when the 
town they have all been waiting for is there and gone in a flash. 
"It's gone already, like a peppermint sliver / swallowed up 
whole." There are good times too — around the campfire after the 
day's journey is behind; when Columbia, their new sister, is born; 
and when a photographer takes a family portrait. There is fear 
when small sister Nell becomes ill, and sadness when Jake the 
dog "just wore out." Once they have arrived at their destination 
and settled in, Lormie dreams of the time when the "forest will 
come down. / Soon we'll start the orchard." Third graders with 
whom we shared this book appreciated the variety of voices 
describing the trip, and the hopes and dreams wrapped within 



O 

ERIC 



351 



326 



Poetry 



each poem. We think this is a book that, with teacher assistance, 
can be appreciated by many ages, particularly if used during a 
study of pioneers and westward expansion. 

Secondary Reviews 

10.23 Adoff, Arnold (1997). Love Letters. Illustrated by Lisa Desimini. 
New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590-48478-8. Picture Book. 

Love letters can be too sentimental for elementary age children, 
but we found that Adoff 's Love Letters were just right for the young 
listener or reader. Written in his well-known free verse style, the 
letters are addressed to a variety of people including Gram, Play- 
ground Snow Girl, Ms. Back Row, Teacher, Mom, and Hard Work- 
ing Dad. In a group of third graders, the writers among them 
quickly turned to composing letters after Love Letters was shared 
with them. The children's letter-poems were written most fre- 
quently to pets! Fifth graders also were intrigued by the idea of 
writing love letters to different kinds of people, and repeatedly 
asked to reread the book. Desimini's illustrations play well with 
Adoff's shape poems. Upon closer examination, the illustrations 
are a combination of unusual objects including yellow jackets, 
puzzle pieces, a Band-Aid, and pen springs. There is much to love 
in this book of poetry, and not only at Valentine's time. 

10.24 Aylesworth, Jim (1996). My Sister's Rusty Bike. Illustrated by 
Richard Hull. New York: Atheneum. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-689-31798-0. 
Picture Book. 

Imagine riding your sister's rusty bike all across the country, and 
the unusual people you might meet along the way. This book of 
rollicking verses was a favorite with one reviewer's class. "Oh, 
good, we love that book!" exclaimed Laura. "May we help you on 
the parts?" "I've read that book about one thousand times!" 
added Kailey. The children noticed the boy-girl sequential pat- 
tern, the narrator hidden in each picture, and the book's geo- 
graphical implications. They loved joining in on the rhyming 
refrain. With infectious rhythm and fun, this book draws children 
to poetry. 

10.25 Belafonte, Harry, and Lord Burgess (1999). Island in the Sun. 
Illustrated by Alex Ayliffe. New York: Dial Books for Young Read- 
ers. ISBN: 0-8037-2387-3. Picture Book. 



352 



People: Past and Present 



327 



The 1950s song by Harry Belafonte has been transformed into a 
colorful children's picture book celebrating the memory of Bela- 
fonte's love for Jamaica. The bright, colorful island illustrations 
that display both work and recreation on the island of the sun 
bring to life the imagery that is portrayed in the text. The illustra- 
tions and text counter many of the stereotypical images of 
Caribbean life. 

Oh, island in the sun. 

Willed to me by my father's hand. 

All my days I will sing in praise 

Of your forests, waters, your shining sand. 

10.26 Gerber, Carole (1997). Hush! A Gaelic Lullaby. Illustrated by Marty 
Husted. Danvers, MA; Whispering Coyote. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-879085- 
57-7. Picture Book. 

Flowing words and luminous seascapes brought immediate 
response from one reviewer's class as they followed the patterns 
and repeated refrains in Hush! Bobby commented on the cold feel- 
ing evoked by the words as the family prepared for a storm. All 
felt warmed by the final scene: family gathered by the firelight, 
and baby finally sleeping. Interesting to compare with Minfong 
Ho's Hush! A Thai Lullaby (see 4.112), this Irish lullaby is a beauti- 
ful marriage of artwork and poetry. 

10.27 Glenn, Mel (1996). Who Killed Mr. Chippendale? A Mystery in 
Poems. New York: Dutton. 100 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67530-2. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. 

A startling book of poetry from acclaimed poet Mel Glenn that 
presents not only an accurate look at high school life told through 
free-form poetry vignettes, but also weaves a murder mystery 
into the voices behind each poem. The reader gets a glimpse of the 
innermost thoughts and feelings of students, teachers, counselors, 
the police, and even the murderer as they deal with the crime. 
This book already has become a favorite with young adolescents. 
As eighth grader Vicki commented, "I think it was well written. It 
was real easy to read . . . and I like how the end of each poem 
leaves me hanging." 

10.28 Janeczko, Paul B., editor (1997). Home on the Range: Cowboy 
Poetry. Illustrated by Bernie Fuchs. New York: Clarion. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-1910-8. Sophisticated Picture Book. 




353 



328 



Poetry 



This collection is a new kind of book for the children's poetry 
market. Janeczko has selected nineteen poems that celebrate cow- 
boy poets and their lifestyles. Pencil-and-oil illustrations on col- 
ored paper enhance the mood of the poems, often portraying the 
solitary life of cowboys. This book is most appealing to middle- 
school and upper-elementary students. 

10.29 Medearis, Angela Shelf (1997). Rum-A-Tum-Tum. Illustrated by 
James E. Ransome. New York: Holiday House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8234-1123-5. Picture Book. 

This entertaining book depicts the daily activities of the French 
market in New Orleans. We hear the chants of the street vendors 
as they peddle their fruits, vegetables, and other wares. Market- 
goers listen to the rhymes of Creole women in red bandannas sell- 
ing baskets of pears and yellow bananas. The book is written from 
the perspective of one little girl as she listens to the vibrant beat- 
ing of the drum and the playing of the horns as a band marches 
past. She is encouraged to join in the fim, and the excitement con- 
tinues as everyone claps their hands, stomps their feet, and snaps 
their fingers to the beat. 

10.30 Omerod, Jan (1996). Ms. McDonald Has a Class. New York: Clar- 
ion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-77611-2. Picture Book. 

A primary class trip to the farm, using the well-known song's pat- 
tern and time, allows Jan Ormerod to showcase her humor, artistic 
skill, and knowledge of children. Twenty-four children are pic- 
tured at the farm and in the classroom, and the illustrations tell as 
much of the story as the words. We found ourselves giggling at the 
students' ever-so-typical antics, and the teacher is right in the mid- 
dle of all of the fun. This is a wonderful book to help kids recall 
their own class trips, and to introduce lyric writing for well-known 
tunes. We used this successfully with first through third graders. 

The Animal World 

See also chapter 1, "Stories of the Universe"; and chapter 2, "Our Chang- 
ing World." 

Primary Reviews 

10.31 Dotlich, Rebecca Kai (1996). Sweet Dreams of the Wild: Poems 
for Bedtime. Illustrated by Katharine Dodge. Honesdale, PA: 
Boyds Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-36397-180-1. Picture Book. 



354 



The Animal World 



329 



Bedtime, with all its accompanying rituals, is a special time of 
day. This book is in the form of imagined conversations between 
a sleepy child and a series of gentle creatures, in which the child 
asks each animal where it sleeps. Nuggets of factual information 
about each animal are tucked into the poems. The soft pastel- 
pencil illustrations help extend the cozy feel of the poetry. One 
reviewer used this book with a group of kindergarten and first- 
grade students, and found that they particularly enjoyed the 
rhymed, repetitive text and often joined in on the refrain, 'T cud- 
dle up tight / with sweet dreams of the wild, / and THAT'S 
where I sleep, / sleepy child." Haileigh commented that she liked 
the book because "it makes you feel warm and cuddly." She also 
enjoyed the interesting phrases, such as a cat "curled half-moon" 
and a mountain goat "wrapped in a shawl / of warm, wooly 
hair." This would be an excellent book to read with other collec- 
tions of nighttime poetry, such as When the Dark Comes Dancing. 

Larrick, Nancy (1983). When the Dark Comes Dancing: 

A Bedtime Poetry Book. Illustrated by John Wallner. 

New York: Putnam. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-399-20807-0. Chapter 

Book. 

10.32 Florian, Douglas (1998). Insectlopedia: Poems and Paintings. San 
Diego: Harcourt Brace. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201306-7. Picture Book. 

We think this is the best of Florian's animal poetry collections. 
Students in many classrooms delighted in the humorous verses, 
which combine playful humor and rhyme with subtle word play 
as they describe a range of creatures that creep, swoop, sting, and 
fly. Fourth grader Marc, for example, commented on how the 
words in "The Dragonfly" "give action so you can see in your 
mind what the dragonfly is doing." His classmates Kim and 
Megan particularly liked the way the words rhymed in several 
places, and how Florian portrayed the insects so it "sounded like 
the truth." Florian's watercolor illustrations, done on brown 
paper bags, provide a fitting accompaniment to the lighthearted 
tone of the poems. Children can use Florian's descriptions to 
write their own bug poems. Teachers can help them appreciate his 
playful use of form in "The Inchworm," as well as how he plays 
with the sounds of words in many of the other poems. This is an 
excellent complement to other insect poetry collections such as 
Fleischman's Joyful Noise and Hoberman's Bugs. 




355 



330 



Poetry 



Fleischman, Paul (1988). Joyful Noise: Poems for Two 
Voices. Illustrated by Eric Beddows. New York: Harper 
& Row. 44 pp. ISBN: 0-06-021852-5. Picture Book. 

Hoberman, Mary Ann (1976). Bugs: Poems. Illustrated 
by Victoria Chess. New York: Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
670-19454-9. Picture Book. 

10.33 Rylant, Cynthia (1996). The Whales. New York: Scholastic. 36 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-58285-2. Picture Books. 

The most popular poetry book in one reviewer's first-grade class- 
room was The Whales. When the reviewer first read this book 
aloud to the class, they had just begun researching whales. The 
children marveled at the vibrant acrylic illustrations, and enjoyed 
the sophisticated yet simple verse, which presents information 
from an aesthetic perspective. They reacted to this book with as 
much enthusiasm, as if they were on a real whale watch! Rylant 
wonders what the whales may be thinking or dreaming, and what 
their personalities are like. From the large fluke (tail) on the cover 
to the spattered whale silhouettes on the end pages, the whimsical 
artwork throughout the book is appealing to children and extends 
the contemplative mood of the poetry. Rylant's awesome tribute 
to these gentle giants of the sea will complement any classroom 
study of whales. 

10.34 Sierra, Judy (1998). Antarctic Antics: A Book of Penguin Poems. 
Illustrated by Jose Aruego and Ariane Dewey. San Diego: Har- 
court Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201006-8. Picture Book. 

Squeals of delight erupted when one reviewer introduced Antarctic 
Antics: A Book of Penguin Poems to a group of third and fourth 
graders. They were fascinated by penguins, and this book drew 
them in with its bright, colorful pictures by Jose Aruego and Ari- 
anne Dewey and its lively poetry. The children particularly enjoyed 
the visual and aural images of little penguins leaping into icy water 
for their first swim, belly-sliding on glaciers, and waiting patiently 
to be fed by Dad with regurgitated food. Fourth grader Katie, 
author of an in-depth penguin report, was particularly interested in 
this book, and enjoyed reading some of the penguin predator 
poems to her classmates and making them guess the animal. Her 
favorite poem was "Antarctic Anthem" because "[It] was beautiful 
. . . and ended the book good." This is an excellent book to provide 
a more aesthetic perspective on the study of the Antarctic region. 



O 

ERIC 



35G 



The Animal World 



331 



Secondary Reviews 

10.35 Florian, Douglas (1997). In the Swim: Poems and Paintings. San 
Diego: Harcourt Brace. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201307-5. Picture Book. 

This humorous collection features twenty-one poems about vari- 
ous sea creatures. Some of the animals are shown realistically, 
while others are depicted whimsically or, in some cases, absurdly. 
For example, a hummingbird is compared to a helicopter that 
hovers and hums. The picture that accompanies this poem por- 
trays the bird with blades for feet and helicopter wings. Children 
will enjoy the humorous descriptions, and can use them as a basis 
for creating their own whimsical animal poems and pictures. 

10.36 Hoopes, Lyn (1997). Condor Magic. Illustrated by Peter C. Stone. 
Fairfield, CT: Benefactory. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-882728-95-5. Picture 
Book. 

This beautiful book celebrates the ten-year project to increase the 
population of the endangered California Condor. Lyn Littlefield 
Hoopes' dynamic poem is factual, rhythmic, and filled with fasci- 
nating language. First-grade students enjoyed listening to her 
descriptions of the condor: "You eat sticky innards, and gutsy 
mush. / Your neck feathers bristle like a toilet brush." Hoopes 
chooses descriptive words and phrases a child can relate to: "Your 
wings open wide as a soccer goal." Stone's earthy illustrations 
have a textured quality to emphasize the California and Arizona 
canyon habitats of the condor. He also incorporates subtle Native 
American symbols into his paintings. The end of the story leaves 
one feeling hopeful about this endangered species. 

10.37 Levy, Constance (1996). When Whales Exhale and Other Poems. 
Illustrated by Judy La Braca. New York: Simon & Schuster. 42 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80946-8. Chapter Book. 

Using patterned, occasional, and irregular rhyme schemes. Levy 
examines interesting events in these appealing poems. "Suppose / 
you're in a forest place / . . . and find that you / are face to face / 
with two fresh / bear prints ..." To one reviewer's class, this was a 
reminder of Teddy Bear Day. "Worm Out" reminded Angela that 
when you save worms, "You're also saving the earth." Nicole 
noticed that the words ending each verse of "Wild Blueberries" "all 
rhyme and they're all the ends of the lines." Cassandra compared 
the fine, "the spinning mix that tricks the eye" in "On Rolling 



332 



Poetry 



Down Grassy Hills" with opening your eyes while underwater, 
saying, "it's all blurry!" With assonance, metaphor, and lovely lan- 
guage, Levy captures the imaginations of all who share these fresh 
new poems. 

10.38 Livingston, Myra Cohn (1997). Cricket Never Does: A Collection 
of Haiku and Tanka. Illustrated by Kees de Kiefte. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81123-3. Chapter Book. 

Not wishing to stop 

his chirping the whole night long 

Cricket never does 

More than fifty original haiku and tanka selections grace this little 
book. The imdersized book lends itself well to the short verses 
within its pages. One pen-and-ink illustration begins each chapter. 
The poetry selections are divided into four sections by the seasons 
of the year, providing a thoughtful glimpse of a year in verse. These 
tiny verses are engaging to older students, and offer a subtle invita- 
tion to try writing some of their own poetry using these forms. 

10.39 Prelutsky, Jack, editor (1997). The Beauty of the Beast: Poems 
from the Animal Kingdom. Illustrated by Meilo So. New York: 
Knopf. 101 pp. ISBN: 0-679-87058-X. Chapter Book. 

Over two himdred poems arranged by zoological category cele- 
brate the animal kingdom. Although some are humorous, many 
are serious and complex and provide a more introspective look at 
this topic. The images often are lush and vivid. Captured fireflies 
are described as "imprisoned fire," whales are said to have "hot, 
wild, white breath," and giraffes are "built silent and high; / orna- 
ments against the sky." Meilo So's soft, double-page watercolor 
illustrations teem with life. This is a book teachers can dip into for 
poems on a particular animal, pairing them with poems about the 
same animal from other collections. 

The Natural World 

See also chapter 1, "Stories of the Universe"; and chapter 2, "Our Chang- 
ing World." 

Primary Reviews 

10.40 Baylor, Byrd (1997). The Way to Make Perfect Mountains: Native 
American Legends of Sacred Mountains. Illustrated by Leonard 



• i 



358 



The Natural World 



333 



Ghana. El Paso, TX: Cinco Puntos. 62 pp. ISBN: 0-938317-26-1. 
Chapter Book. 

This collection of poems includes creation stories gathered from 
various southwestern Native American groups. The author's 
vivid descriptions transport the reader to the mysterious morm- 
tains of the Southwest. They tell of the importance the mormtains 
have, and the role they continue to play in the cultural traditions 
of the Apache, Yaqui, Tohono O'odam, Navajo, Hopi, Jicarella 
Apache, and Pima in Arizona; the Mohave in California; and the 
Zuni and other Pueblo groups in New Mexico. The black-and- 
white illustrations by Leonard F. Ghana, a Tohono O'odam artist, 
complement the magic of Baylor's words. The author's note is fol- 
lowed by an excellent list of references. This is a book for people 
of all ages. 

10.41 Esbensen, Barbara Juster (1996). Echoes for the Eye: Poems to 
Celebrate Patterns in Nature. Illustrated by Helen K. Davie. New 
York: HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024398-8. Picture Book. 

The author and illustrator combined their love of nature's repeat- 
ing patterns to create this book, which is a visual and auditory 
delight to the senses. Free verse, simile, assonance, and exquisite 
language are used to describe spirals, branches, polygons, mean- 
ders, and circles. For example, hurricanes "spin their terrible 
winds," a glacier is "a heavy unfolding / ribbon of snow and ice," 
and "musk oxen . . . spokes of a dark muscular / wheel ... a 
watchful compass rose." In one reviewer's class, Laura pointed 
out the images on facing pages: branches in trees and branches in 
the leaves, veins in hands and veins in lightning, etc. Many of her 
classmates made connections to patterns they'd noticed in nature 
and those they'd studied in a emit on sormd and the ear. Inspired 
by "Circles" — in which the author writes of ripples of water, 
"wider and wider they grow / out and out and out / from the 
quick splash to the shore" — Katie wrote the following poem: 

Song of the Water 

The Song of water is very swift. 

The song of water is a gift. 

When it's sprayed up, it does a brilliant dance. 

When the waves rise up, it speaks of a war. 

But then the water all washes up on shore. 

Katie Lambrecht 



O 



359 



334 



Poetry 



We think children will need some introduction to appreciate the 
subtle message of this book. But with teacher support, it can gen- 
erate rich discussion and delight with the many "echoes for the 
eye" that surround us. 

10.42 Lesser, Carolyn (1997). Storm on the Desert. Illustrated by Ted 
Rand. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN; 0-15-272198-3. 
Picture Book. 

This book provides a poetic picture of how desert plants and ani- 
mals respond to a rainstorm. It opens with a vivid description of a 
typical Sonoran desert landscape: a coyote "stretches and howls / 
to the wisp of a moon / . . . Startled bats swoosh into caves. / 
Scorpions scuttle under sticks." A storm is brewing, however, and 
using realistic imagery. Lesser describes how it erupts with crack- 
ing thunder and "pelting, piercing / slashing screaming / stream- 
ing / rain." Then just as quickly as it began, the storm subsides 
and lightning becomes "an elusive flicker, / Thunder a murmur." 
The animals return to drink from newly formed pools, and to 
feast on the fresh flowers and leaves that emerge. Ted Rand uses 
bright pastels, chalks, and watercolors to show the changing 
desert landscape. Double-page spreads and strong lines that slash 
across the pages give a feeling of the enormous power of the 
storm and fce vastness of the landscape. Some of the pages have 
no words, allowing the beauty of nature to speak for itself. 
Tucson-area readers took issue, however, with a couple of the 
illustrations that depicted landscapes much more like the Painted 
Desert regions of northern Arizona or the Red Rock country near 
Sedona, regions that differ vastly from the Sonoran Desert. This is 
an excellent book to use in a desert unit to provide a more aes- 
thetic perspective. Teachers can discuss how Lesser uses the 
rhythm of language to show the phases of the storm. Third grader 
Amanda wrote, "I liked this book because it had good pictures 
and it was realistic. . . . The words are tense when it gets to the 
storm part. The words in the beginning and end are soothing." 

10.43 Locker, Thomas (1997). Water Dance. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201284-2. Picture Book. 

Thomas Locker once again brings his talent as an oil painter to the 
picture-book format in Water Dance. The spare poetry describes 
various aspects of the water cycle, providing descriptions that 
culminate in a natural guessing game. After reading each page. 



360 



The Natural World 



335 



the reader can guess which form of water has been described: 
stream, waterfall, river, sea, mist, storm front, and so on. The clos- 
ing pages of the book show each illustration in miniature, with 
scientific descriptions identifying the different aspects of the 
water cycle. This book fills several needs in a classroom by com- 
bining the literary and scientific genres quite beautifully. We 
found that teachers are drawn to this book. We also were pleas- 
antly surprised that students could barely conceal their delight 
with the beautiful illustrations, although they may need help 
appreciating the poetic imagery. Several reviewers helped their 
children create a beautiful choral reading of the poem, complete 
with sound effects and costumes. 

10.44 Mora, Pat (1998). This Big Sky. Illustrated by Steve Jenkins. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-37120-7. Picture Book. 

Well-known Latina poet Pat Mora brings readers fourteen spare 
but lyrical poems about the desert Southwest. The combination of 
Mora's poems and Steve Jenkins's boldly colored, richly textured, 
cut-paper collages bring to life the landscapes, animals, and peo- 
ple of the desert. A sense of the desert's heat, vastness, and deli- 
cate balance of life inhabits the pages, conveyed by both the 
poetry and the illustrations, which bleed off the edges of the 
pages. A group of first and second graders chose "Suspense" as 
their favorite poem in the book. "That's just what it's like when it 
rains here in the summer," remarked Ricardo in response to both 
the text and the illustration. Because this class had been involved 
in nature sketching at the time, they were particularly apprecia- 
tive of the amount of detail Jenkins was able to capture with his 
collage techniques. In some of the poems, Mora includes Spanish 
words that drop into the poetry quite naturally. Although it's not 
difficult to gather a sense of the meaning of these words within 
the context of the poems, a brief glossary of the Spanish words is 
included at the end of the book. 

10.45 Rylant, Cynthia (1998). Bless Us All: A Child's Yearbook of 
Blessings. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
82370-3. Picture Book. (See 13.8) 

10.46 Yolen, Jane, editor (1997). Once upon Ice, and Other Frozen 
Poems. Photographs by Jason Stemple. Honesdale, PA: Boyds 
Mills. 40 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-408-8. Picture Book. 




361 



336 



Poetry 



Jane Yolen and sixteen other poets respond in verse to the frozen 
photographs taken by Jane Yolen's son, Jason Stemple. The sounds, 
feel, strange roughness, and “smooooth" of ice are but a few of the 
images captured by writers such as J. Patrick Lewis, Mary Ann 
Hoberman, X. J. Kermedy, Lee Bermett Hopkins, and Nancy 
Willard. These poets were prompted to describe ice in its natural 
forms along rivers, in ice pyranuds, or melting during the change of 
seasons. Artistically designed, this book joins Yolen's Water Music 
as a companion volume to be used alone in its own poetic spotlight, 
or as a complement to any science unit on water or changing sea- 
sons. One nuddle-school student included one of the poems in her 
science fair project, adding an aesthetic touch to the scientific inves- 
tigation. The beauty of ice brought out in the photographs provides 
tempting lead-ins for student poetry writing. 

Yolen, Jane (1995). Water Music. Photographs by Jason 

Stemple. Homesdale, PA: Boyds Mill s Press. 40 pp. 

ISBN: 1-56397-336-7. Picture Book. 

Secondary Reviews 

10.47 Asch, Frank (1998). Cactus Poems. Illustrated by Ted Levin. San 
Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200676-1. Picture 
Book. 

Ted Levin's marvelous full-color photos celebrate the beauty and 
life forms of four North American deserts, while Frank Asch's 
poetry gives each image soul. Together they "break down the 
walls we've placed between ourselves and nature" to bring facts 
and feelings together. Scientific information on the featured plants 
and animals is included in an appendix. We found this book 
appealed to our older elementary students. Fourth graders Marc 
and K. C. particularly liked how Asch used slow, languid phras- 
ing in "Slow and Steady," while their classmate Brad strongly 
identified with the wolf in "Howl." A student of one reviewer 
wrote the following poem in response to the book: 

Desert Rain 

The land is dry 
washed up, lifeless 
and deserted. 

Then rain pours down 
The dryness is gone so fast 
Beautiful flowers 
And animals come out 



362 



The Natural World 



337 



The desert is full of life 
It looks like a prairie. 

by Jordan Norris 

10.48 Johnston, Tony (1996). Once in the Country; Poems of the Farm. 
Illustrated by Thomas B. Allen. New York: Putnam. 32 pp. ISBN: 
0-399-22644-3. Picture Book. 

Each poem in this book is a quiet celebration of the beauty and 
uniqueness of individual moments experienced on a family farm. 
Johnston mines each memory to reach its essence, which she com- 
municates using a pleasant variety of poetic forms. The reader need 
not be a resident of a farming community to appreciate the simple 
pleasures revealed in Once in the Country. Even inner-city children 
will relate easily to "My Overalls," with its catalogue of positive 
attributes found in a well-worn pair of overalls. The poems call out 
to be read and reread silently and aloud, as the beauty of their figu- 
rative language is revealed in peaceful contemplation. 

10.49 Moore, Lilian (1997). Poems Have Roots. Illustrated by Tad Hills. 
New York: Atheneum. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80029-0. Chapter Book. 

In carefully selected words, Moore describes nature as viewed 
from both east-coast and west-coast sites. Using both rhyme and 
free verse, she focuses on scenes explained in notes at the back of 
the book. One reviewer's class chose "Pilgrim Flower" and 
"Waterfall" as favorite poems that were connected to class stud- 
ies. Best of all, they liked "The Automated Bird Watcher," which 
they read in choral fashion, in parts. Rooted in beauty, this book 
will feed children's love of poetry. 

10.50 Yolen, Jane (1996). Sea Watch; A Book of Poetry. Illustrated by 
Ted Lewin. New York: Philomel. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22734-2. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Both benign and malevolent creatures of the sea appear here in 
cameo roles. Each creature has a moment in the limelight as Yolen 
and Lewin expose its most basic qualities through razor-sharp fig- 
urative language and lively watercolor illustrations. The poetry 
informs as well as entertains. Readers will laugh at the incon- 
gruity of papa seahorse incubating his young, and draw their col- 
lective breaths at the menacing behavior of the orca. Children and 
teachers will return again and again to this collection for enjoy- 
ment and enlightenment. 




363 



338 



Poetry 



10.51 Yolen, Jane (1998). Snow, Snow: Winter Poems for Children. Illus- 
trated by Jason Stemple. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 
1-56397-721-4. Picture Book. 

Who hasn't grumbled about the inconveniences caused by wet, 
icy, cold snow? In this book, Yolen incorporates shinning photo- 
graphs by her son Jason Stemple with both free verse and rhymed 
poetry to present diverse images of this natural occurrence. From 
fall leaves covered with icy crystals described as "crisp leaf litter / 
under snowy glitter" to a tree branch pointing the way to spring 
with a "mittenless . . . long finger," there is much to think about in 
this collection. 

Transcending Cultural Boundaries 

See also the section entitled Cultural Practices and Celebrations in chap- 
ter 3, "Exploring Our Past," and the chapters in this volume devoted to 
the literature of specific cultural groups. 

Primary Reviews 

10.52 Carlson, Lori Marie (1998). Sol a sol: Bilingual Poems. Illustrated 
by Emily Lisker. Translated by Lyda Aponte de Zacklin. New 
York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4373-X. Picture Book. 

Sol a sol contains fifteen fun and nostalgic poems in English and 
Spanish about family members, foods, cultural activities, and 
play. Although each poem selected or written by Lori Marie Carl- 
son is a separate entity, together they tell the story of family life 
from sunup to sundown. Ivan (age seven) noticed how the struc- 
ture of the book contributed to its effect: "Es de Sol a sol porque va 
de la manana a la noche. Pero debe ir a la manana otra vez porque 
se va a ver el sol otra vez por la manana." ("It's Sol a sol because it 
goes from the morning to the night. But it should go to the morn- 
ing again because you see the sun again on the next morning.") 
Although the focus is on Hispanic /Latino families, all children 
will find some personal connection — if not to the mother who 
smells like "the freshness of the morning," then with the tribute to 
chocolate or the "leaves that blur into green air" as the bicyclist 
coasts by. Most pages privilege English in the positioning of text. 
However, both English and Spanish versions contain rich, lyrical 
language that maintains the music of the poetry so well that it's 
difficult to tell which version is the original without reading the 
notes about translations. The English- to-Spanish translations are 



^ u 



364 



Transcending Cultural Boundaries 



339 



beautifully crafted by Lyda Aponte de Zacklin, while Lori Carlson 
has provided her typically excellent Spanish-to-English transla- 
tions. Emily Lisker's vibrant acrylic-on-canvas illustrations bring 
each page to life, with extensive use of contrasting colors bleeding 
off the edges of many double-page spreads. The visibility of the 
canvas texture through the paint further contributes to the famil- 
iar, touchable quality of this book. 

10.53 Mora, Pat, editor (1996). Confetti: Poems for Children. Illustrated 
by Enrique Sanchez. New York: Lee & Low. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-880000- 
25-3. Picture Book. 

This lively anthology celebrates the experiences of daily life 
within a Mexican American context. Although the poems evoke a 
strong sense of this unique culture with references to fiestas, click- 
ing castanets, and woodcutters, they also touch on things all chil- 
dren can relate to: trying to catch the wind, sitting on Grandma's 
lap to talk, and finding dragons in the clouds. Bold, colorful paint- 
ings with scatterings of confetti complement the text. Spanish 
words interspersed throughout the text generally can be under- 
stood through context or illustration. If not, a glossary is provided 
in the back. This collection honors all children who wish to be 
"free as confetti." We found our children needed teacher support 
to appreciate these poems. Starting with those that are universal 
in theme, teachers can contrast the poems in this collection with 
poems on the same topic from other cultures. For example, Mora's 
"Leaf Soup" can be compared to Eve Merriam's "Fall Leaves." 
Then teachers can read and discuss the poems that capture the 
special aspects of Mexican American life. Teachers also can share 
other poetry collections from this culture, such as Gary Soto's 
Canto familiar or Tony Johnston's My Mexico/Mexico mio. 

Johnston, Tony (1996). My Mexico/Mexico mfo. Illus- 
trated by F. John Sierra. New York: Putnam. 36 pp. ISBN: 
0-399-22275-8. Picture Book. 

Soto, Gary (1997). Canto familiar. Illustrated by Annika 
Nelson. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-15- 
200067-4. Picture Book. 

10.54 Nye, Naomi Shihab, editor (1998). The Space between Our Foot- 
steps: Poems and Paintings from the Middle East. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 143 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81233-7. Chapter Book. 



365 



340 



Poetry 



Few children's books have the Middle East as their setting. Even 
less poetry about this region is available. Naomi Nye's anthology 
The Space between Our Footsteps helps to fill this void by featuring 
over one hundred poems by poets from nineteen Middle Eastern 
countries, resulting in an interesting medley of "voices and 
visions." Nye invites her readers to move beyond the stereotypes 
they may have about this region and discover universal human 
connections that transcend a particular culture, such as family 
love, passion for one's homeland, dreams of peace, and hopes for 
the future. As she states in the introduction, "I can't stop believing 
human beings everywhere hunger for deeper-than-headline news 
about one another. Poetry and art are some of the best ways this 
heartfelt 'news' may be exchanged." Since the poems are rather 
sophisticated, we think teachers would find it most useful to 
select a few to read aloud to fit a theme study or evoke thinking 
about an issue. Discussing some of the imagery and showing chil- 
dren how the poets are expressing feelings similar to their own 
will help deepen their appreciation. There is much that will shake 
complacency and alter thinking in this collection. 

10.55 Orozco, Jose-Luis, editor (1997). Diez deditos/Ten Little Fingers 
and Other Play Rhymes and Action Songs from Latin America. 
Illustrated by Elisa Kleven. New York: Dutton Children's Books. 
56 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45736-4. Picture Book. 

Jose-Luis Orozco, a popular performer and songwriter, has 
assembled a collection of his own original songs, Spanish adapta- 
tions of popular English songs, and traditional action songs and 
finger rhymes from Spanish-speaking countries. Each song or 
rhyme is accompanied by an English translation, and preceded by 
information about its origin and directions for the accompanying 
hand movements or dance. Orozco also includes musical notation 
and chords for the guitar and piano for all of the songs. Elisa 
Kleven's illustrations and borders use combined painting and col- 
lage techniques to bring each song and rhyme to life. Teachers will 
turn to this book frequently as a resource, and children will pore 
over the illustrations time and time again, singing their way from 
front cover to back cover. This book makes a fine addition to 
Orozco's previous collection of songs, De Colores and Other Latin- 
American Folk Songs for Children. 

Orozco, Jose-Luis, editor. (1994). De colores and Other 

Latin- American Folk Songs for Children. Illustrated by 



366 



Transcending Cultural Boundaries 



341 



Elisa Kleven. New York: Dutton Children's Books. 56 pp. 

ISBN: 0-525-45260-5. 

10.56 Philip, Neil, editor (1996). Earth Always Endures: Native Ameri- 
can Poems. Illustrated by Edward S. Curtis. New York: Viking. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-86873-6. Chapter Book. 

An anthology of selected Native American songs, chants, prayers, 
and lullabies translated to let readers gain an understanding of 
Native American cultures and worldviews. The reader also comes 
to understand the Native American belief that words hold the 
power to bring about changes in the world, and more specifically 
that the use of particular combinations of words can bring about 
desired changes for the benefit of all. Therefore there is purpose to 
the repetition and limited number of words within the Native 
American songs, chants, and prayers represented here. These 
translations illustrate that the language of songs, prayers, and 
chants is distinguishable from the language of poetry. The former 
are not purely forms of entertainment, but rather celebrations of 
and appeals for a good life. These words of power are set against 
poetic images created by the photographs of Edward S. Curtis. 

10.57 Reiser, Lynn W. (1998). Tortillas and Lullabies/Tortillas y can- 
cioncitas. Illustrated by Corazones Valientes. Translated by 
Rebecca Hart. New York: Greenwillow. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14628- 
7. Picture Book. (See 13.39) 

10.58 Swarm, Brian (1998). Touching the Distance: Native American 
Riddle-Poems. Illustrated by Maria Rendon. San Diego: Brown- 
deer. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200804-7. Picture Book. 

Puzzle and riddle poems are particularly effective in helping 
children see how poets use words to describe things in unusual 
ways. We've found that discussions about imagery and word- 
crafting emerge as children try to puzzle out the meaning of a 
riddle. This book can be a wonderful catalyst for this sort of 
response. The fifteen riddle poems, drawn from Native American 
sources, are graceful and subtle, and challenge middle-grade 
children to think divergently. Even we found solving the riddles 
no easy task. For example, try this one: "There is a place / I know 
and love well. / It is cut into gullies / where much water fell." 
(Answer: Grandmother's face.) Or "I can touch something / far 
off / in the distance." (Answer: eyesight.) Rendon's striking 



367 



342 



Poetry 



mixed-media illustrations employ wood carvings, stone, fabric, 
metal, eggshells, paint, and other unusual materials to create an 
almost three-dimensional effect. They simultaneously depict the 
riddle while providing hints to the answer. We foimd it most 
effective to first read the poem without showing the picture, then 
let children speculate about the answer, and finally show the pic- 
ture and discuss the art. 

Secondary Reviews 

10.59 Ada, Alma Flor (1997). Gathering the Sun: An Alphabet in Span- 
ish and English. Illustrated by Simon Silva. Translated by Rosa 
Zubizaretta. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-13903-5. Picture Book. (See 7.23) 

10.60 Alarcon, Francisco X. (1997). Laughing Tomatoes and Other 
Spring Poems/Jitomates risuenos y otros poemas de primavera. 
Illustrated by Maya Christina Gonzalez. San Francisco: Children's 
Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-139-1. Picture Book. 

In this dual-language book, Alarcon, the award-winning Chicano 
author of seven books of poetry, alternates humorous and serious 
poems about Mexican culture, family, nature, food, life, and tradi- 
tional celebrations. In an afterword, the poet explains that some 
poems were written first in Spanish, others in English, and some 
simultaneously. Therefore Spanish and English text alternate posi- 
tions on the pages, equally highlighting both languages. Both lan- 
guage versions rhythmically convey the lyrical imagery, making it 
impossible to identify which language is the translation. Maya 
Christina Gonzalez's vivid gouache illustrations and hand-lettered 
titles support the joy for living and belonging that the poems com- 
municate, as well as the magic of poetry and the playfulness of the 
words. 

10.61 Ho, Minfong, editor (1996). Maples in the Mist: Children's Poems 
from the Tang Dynasty. Illustrated by Jean Tseng and Mou-sien 
Tseng. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-12044-X. Picture Book. 

A collection of sixteen poems from various Chinese poets. The 
subject matter of the poems ranges from nature appreciation to 
special people. Although each poem is translated into English, the 
original poem written in Chinese is printed along the margins of 




368 



Transcending Cultural Boundaries 



343 



each page. The poet's red-stamped signature appears on each 
page, bringing authenticity and authorship to each poem. The 
watercolor designs lend a softness to the illustrations, and capture 
the beauty of nature and the details of human expression. Because 
poetry is an integral part of Chinese culture, the poems in this 
book often are memorized by Chinese children at a very young 
age. A biography of each poet at the end of the book provides for 
the older reader additional irvformation about the poets during 
the Tang Dynasty, from whence these poems originated. 

10.62 Hucko, Bruce (1996). A Rainbow at Night: The World in Words 
and Pictures by Navajo Children. San Francisco: Chronicle. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8118-1294-4. Picture Book. (See 11.41) 

10.63 Spivak, Dawnine (1997). Grass Sandals: The Travels of Basho. 
Illustrated by Demi. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-80776-7. Picture Book. 

The journeys across Japan of seventeenth-century haiku poet 
Basho are outlined in this unique biographical picture book. The 
text describes his travels — what he did, what he saw, friends he 
made along the way. Double-page spreads feature Demi's charac- 
teristic delicate illustrations of colored inks applied with brushes 
on textured paper. A haiku by Basho (and one by Issa) appropriate 
to an event in his travels also appears in each spread, along with a 
Japanese character, its transliteration, and the word in English. The 
spacious layout of words and illustrations contributes to the gentle 
reverence created by Basho's haiku. This lovely and thoughtful 
work will help students understand the significance of haiku 
rather than merely copy its structure. 




369 




A. My Name Is Georgia: A Portrait, Jeanette Winter (1 1 .50). B. William Shakespeare’s 
Macbeth, Bruce Coville/Gary Kelley (11.27). C. To Market, To Market, Anne Miranda/ 
Janet Stevens (1 1 .4). D. Special Effects in Film and Television, Jake Hamilton (1 1 .33). 




370 best copy available 




345 



11 Fine Arts 

Carol Gilles 

Contributing reviewers included Janet Alsup, Marilyn Andre, 

Linda Aulgur, Carolyn Dye, Carol Gilles, Janice Henson, Veronica 
Lee, Jenine Loesing, Virginia Pfannenstiel, Charles Robb, Stephanie 
Shafer, and Shelli Thelen. 

G reat books provide children with enjoyment and information while 
transporting them to higher levels of understanding. Children 
often connect with great literature in such a way that they are moti- 
vated to express their enjoyment and knowledge construction through 
culturally accepted, alternative sign systems. These alternative ways of 
knowing about the world help readers mediate or organize their thinking 
(Bodrova and Leong 1996; Dixon-Krauss 1996; Eisner 1997; Fosnot 1996; 
Vygotsky 1962; Vygotsky 1978). Using universal symbolic systems such as 
music, art, dance, or drama, readers can experience and then share with 
others their interpretation of a superb reading adventure. Some authors 
and illustrators present their stories in a musical or dance setting. Others 
might include beautiful or unique visual art to enhance the meaning of the 
written text. Sometimes the story in the text will inspire readers to perform 
music, drama, or dance, or to create other forms of expressive art. Books 
about the makers of art, music, and dance also are intriguing to children as 
they learn to appreciate the expressive arts. 

As educators, we know the importance of presenting learning 
experiences to our students using a multimodal array of different intelli- 
gences (Gardner 1993). Well-written books always have been the main- 
stay of teachers wanting to reach children's linguistic, interpersonal, and 
intrapersonal intelligences, but other modes of intelligence — such as 
musical-rhythmic, bodily-kinesthetic, logical-mathematical, and visual- 
spatial — also can be embraced in children's literature. 

Publishing companies, recognizing the trend to include fine arts 
in the general curriculum, have flooded the market in recent years with 
books about music or art. Some are wonderful, others merely mediocre. 
In this chapter, we present some of the outstanding literary offerings 
that can enhance children's reading and learning through alternative 
sign systems such as music, drama, art, and dance. By using or encour- 
aging the use of the expressive arts, these books can unlock meaning 
and enjoyment for many children who have not previously connected to 



ERIC 



371 



346 



Fine Arts 



written texts. Children can become avid readers as they sing their expe- 
riences, illustrate their poetry, and dance their stories. 

There are many categories that might be included under the 
umbrella of expressive arts, but the criteria for inclusion in this chapter 
is that books guide readers to be musicians, dramatists, artists, and 
dancers. Within each of the four categories that we have used to organ- 
ize the literature in this chapter, readers will find both books that inspire 
children to engage in the fine arts and books that help children to appre- 
ciate the fine arts. The categories include the following: 

■ Music Books. This section includes three subcategories of books: 
Rhymes, Chants, and Songs; Books That Inspire Music; and 
Music Appreciation. 

■ Drama Books. In this section, readers will find two subcate- 
gories: Books That Inspire Drama, and How-To Drama Books. 

■ Art Books. This section includes three subcategories of litera- 
ture: Books That Inspire Art, Books about Artists, and Art 
Appreciation. 

■ Dance Books. Here readers will find two subcategories of 
books: Books That Inspire Dance, and Dance Appreciation. 

Works Cited 

Bodrova, Elena, and Deborah J. Leong. 1996. Tools of the Mind: The Vygotskian 
Approach to Early Childhood Education. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 

Dixon-Krauss, Lisbeth. 1996. Vygotsky in the Classroom: Mediated Literacy Instruc- 
tion and Assessment. White Plains, NY: Longman. 

Eisner, Eliott. 1997. Cognition and Representation: A Way to Pursue the Ameri- 
can Dream? Phi Delta Kappan 78, no. 5: 348-353. 

Fosnot, Catherine Twomey. 1996. Constructivism: A Psychological Theory of 
Learning. In Constructivism: Theory, Perspectives, and Practice, ed. C. T. 
Fosnot. New York: Teachers College. 

Gardner, Howard. 1993. Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice, a Reader. 
New York: Basic. 

Vygotsky, Lev. 1962. Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT. 

Vygotsky, Lev. 1978. Mind in Society: The Development of Higher Psychological 
Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each sub- 
heading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books wor- 
thy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chapter; 




372 



Music Books 



347 



entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic informa- 
tion. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained elsewhere in 
this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the bibliographic information. 



Music Books 

See also the section entitled Riddles, Chants, and Poems in chapter 13, 

"The Craft of Language." 

Rhymes, Chants, and Songs 

Primary Reviews 

11.1 Gerber, Carole (1997). Hush! A Gaelic Lullaby. Illustrated by 
Marty Husted. Danvers, MA: Whispering Coyote. 32 pp. ISBN: 1- 
879085-57-7. Picture Book. (See 10.26) 

11.2 Hoberman, Mary Ann (1998). Miss Mary Mack: A Hand-Clapping 
Rhyme. Illustrated by Nadine Bernard Westcott. Boston: Little 
Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-93118-7. Picture Book. (See 13.36) 

11.3 Jackson, Alison (1997). I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a 
Pie. Illustrated by Judith Byron Schachner. New York: Dutton 
Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45645-7. Picture Book. 

Here is the much-loved and familiar song "I Know an Old Lady" 
with a modem twist. The whimsical watercolor illustrations por- 
tray the Old Lady as she swallows an entire Thanksgiving feast. She 
begins with a pie and proceeds to eat the rest of the dinner — "and 
her future looked murky after she swallowed that turkey." After 
hearing the first pages, kindergartners and first graders chimed in 
and helped with the predictable but hilarious lyrics. They were 
eager to illustrate their own versions of the story afterwards. 

11.4 Miranda, Anne (1997). To Market, to Market. Illustrated by Janet 
Stevens. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200035- 
6. Picture Book. 

This book is an adaptation of the nursery rhyme, "To market, to 
market, to buy a fat pig." The author's choice of mixed media, 
photographs, and drawings, in both black-and-white and color 
produces an interesting contrast in the book. The rhythmic lan- 
guage supports early readers, and makes this a natural chanting 
book for large groups, small groups, or with an individual student. 
The illustrations are a springboard for discussion and promote 




373 



348 



Fine Arts 



language development. One reviewer shared this book with Brock, 
a first grader, who said, "She kept going home again. The pig 
keeps aggravating her!" 

11.5 Orozco, Jose-Luis, editor (1997). Diez deditos/Ten Little Fingers 
and Other Play Rhymes and Action Songs from Latin-America. 
Illustrated by Elisa Kleven. New York: Dutton Children's Books. 
56 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45736-4. Picture Book. (See 10 . 55 ) 

11.6 Sloat, Teri (1998). There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a 
Trout! Illustrated by Reynold Ruffins. New York: Henry Holt. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4294-6. 

A rollicking remake of the classic song. There Was an Old Lady Who 
Swallowed a Trout! introduces readers to animals commonly found 
in Alaska, as the Old Lady swallows one after another to handle 
the trout that "splished and splashed and thrashed about. It 
wanted out!" When the old lady swallows a whale, young readers 
are certain they know what will happen to the old lady, but she 
surprises them by swallowing the ocean. Then "The old lady 
started to wriggle and jiggle; / The swirling inside made her hic- 
cup and giggle." Finally all the animals come washing out in 
reverse order. Re}mold Ruffins's bold illustrations with lots of 
reds and blues are reminiscent of the Russian artwork common in 
parts of Alaska, and capture subtle elements of the habitat for 
each animal included. 

Secondary Reviews 

11.7 Catalano, Dominic (1998). Frog Went A-Courting: A Musical 
Play in Six Acts. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
56397-637-4. Picture Book. (See 11 . 31 ) 

11.8 Halpern, Shari (1997). Hush, Little Baby. New York: North-South. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55858-807-8. Picture Book. 

Beautiful collage illustrations with borders made up of quilt 
pieces give this book a feeling of texture. The text is the exact lull- 
aby many people heard in their childhood. The pictures inspire 
children to sing along, and also to create their own illustrations 
with fabric, wrapping paper, string, etc., in collage fashion. These 
collages could be joined together in a class quilt wallhanging. The 
sheet music to the lullaby is provided at the end of the book. 



O 

ERIC 



374 



Music Books 



349 



11.9 Mahy, Margaret (1998). A Summery Saturday Morning. Illus- 
trated by Selina Young. New York: Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670- 
87943-6. Picture Book. 

Repetitive language, rhythm, and rhyme invite the audience to 
come along on an exciting Saturday morning adventure. Mahy 
finds the exact words to portray dogs chasing a cat, a boy, and 
finally some geese. Her simple verse, which can be sung to the 
tune of "This is the way we wash our clothes" is well matched to 
the winsome, descriptive illustrations. This book leaves children 
chanting, singing, laughing, and telling adventures of their own. 

11.10 Omerod, Jan (1996). Ms. McDonald Has a Class. New York: Clar- 
ion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-77611-2. Picture Book. (See 10.30) 

11.11 Scott, Steve (1998). Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear. New York: Harper 
Festival. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-694-01162-2. Picture Book. 

Steve Scott illustrates with bright, simple pictures this book based 
on the traditional rhyme. The book begins just like the rhyme — 
"Teddy bear, teddy bear turn around" — ^but adds new phrases 
like "jump up now" and "dance on your toes." The large, white 
printing contrasts with the bright background colors, and natu- 
rally draws the eye of the reader. After this book was introduced 
to first-grade children during a nursery rhyme read-aloud time, 
they often chanted it in pairs or independently. It was not uncom- 
mon to observe one child reading and another "following the 
directions" during shared reading times. 

Books That Inspire Music 

Primary Reviews 

11.12 Bartlett, T. C. (1997). Tuba Lessons. Illustrated by Monique Felix. 
San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201643-0. Pic- 
ture Book. 

This nearly wordless book explores the adventures of a young boy 
on his way to a tuba lesson. Chalk-on-gray illustrations are used 
imaginatively and whimsically. The illustrations depict a musical 
staff that becomes the boy's road, a tree he climbs, and finally ani- 
mals that seem to emerge from the staff. As the boy plays his tuba, 
huge notes float out and the animals kick, hold, or balance them. 
The boy meets a bear, who at first becomes tangled in the notes and 
the staff, but eventually is soothed. Finally aU the animals follow 




375 



350 



Fine Arts 



the boy to his lesson. Primary students selected notes to wear 
aroimd their necks, created a movement for the note, and then 
played it on an instrument. Then the children created patterns on 
various instruments to match the badger, the bear, the fox, and so 
on. Using the instruments, they reenacted the story. 

11.13 Birchman, David F. (1997). A Green Horn Blowing. Illustrated by 
Thomas B. Allen. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-688-12388-0. Picture Book. 

This story, set in the Depression, examines the richness and power 
of music and friendship. A wandering worker who plays the 
trumpet stirs in a young boy a yearning to play a horn. While 
walking home from town, the two discover a green gourd called a 
trombolia that the man says is for blowing, not eating. This 
becomes the boy's horn imtil it goes to seed the next fall. Allen's 
pastel and colored-pencil illustrations enable readers to step back 
into the 1930s. This book stimulated discussion among primary 
children about what they wanted but couldn't have. When asked 
to listen for a special part of the book, many of the children chose 
the phrase, "You're a horn player now and for life. And that's 
something you can hold on to." The children then made connec- 
tions to other things they could hold on to, including books, 
songs, learnings, friends, love, dreams, imagination, and God. 

11.14 Egan, Ted (1998). The Drover's Boy. Illustrated by Robert Ingpen. 
Melbourne, Australia: Lothian. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-887734-52-X. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.61) 

11.15 Shaik, Fatima (1998). The Jazz of Our Street. Illustrated by E. B. 
Lewis. New York: Penguin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1885-3. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Just as the children in this story are called by the beat of the jazz 
band, the reader is called by the vivid watercolor illustrations and 
the rhythmic, descriptive language. One feels the connection of 
the present to the past and the importance of "listening real hard 
when another has something to say, because all must play along — 
not just with the songs." Jazz begins to come alive as the beat and 
rhythm of the language begins to pulse and sway. Readers join a 
parade of music makers, and "We follow their paths as we dance 
and walk. We shimmy. We shake like a rumbling train, remember- 
ing the times before." Children love to move to the rhythm and 
the rhyme of this story. 



Music Books 



351 



11.16 Takao, Yuko (1997). Winter Concert. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7613-0301-4. Picture Book. 

This charming picture storybook explores the lasting effects of a 
concert. Black pen-and-ink mice fill a theater to listen to a piano 
concert. Once the concert begins, small dots of color emerge from 
the piano and begin to cover the black-and-white mice with color. 
As the mice emerge from the theater, the text reads, "The concert 
ended but the music did not. It paved their pathways home. It col- 
ored their world." Later one mouse records the experience in a 
journal and a dot of color remains on the page, reminding readers 
that a special musical performance does become part of ourselves. 
This book evokes pointillism art projects and profoimd discus- 
sions. One of the most troubled students in one reviewer's first 
grade class explained, "Like the story, music is always with you." 

Secondary Reviews 

11.17 Fleming, Candace (1997). Gabriella's Song. Illustrated by Giselle 
Potter. New York: Atheneum Books for Yoimg Readers. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-689-80973-5. Picture Book. 

On a walk through Venice, Gabriella hears the soimds of boats, 
the street traders, pigeons, and church bells; she composes a little 
city song and hums it to herself. Her song, a compilation of the 
soimds of Venice, delights the townsfolk, from the baker to the 
gondolier. Potter's illustrations capture the charm of Venice. First 
graders in one reviewer's class begged to go on a "music walk" 
after hearing the story, and they found ways to represent the 
"music" they had heard. Students even pointed out the song they 
heard in the soimds in the classroom. This book also sparked dis- 
cussion about how the same song brings out different feelings for 
different people because each of us has had different things hap- 
pen to us. 

11.18 Hopkins, Lee Bennett (1997). Song and Dance: Poems. Illustrated 
by Cheryl Munro Taylor. New York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80159-9. Picture Book. (See 10.11) 

11.19 Rogers, Sally (1998). Earthsong. Illustrated by Melissa Bay Mathis. 
New York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45873- 
5. Picture Book. 

We suggest that teachers practice singing the text of this book to 
the tune of "Over in the Meadow" before presenting it to children. 



er|c 



377 



352 



Fine Arts 



When the children in one reviewer's classroom heard about each 
endangered animal (panda, Bengal tiger, Indian lion, etc.) and its 
habitat in the musical setting, their attention was rapt, and they 
immediately wanted to "do something with endangered animals." 
The second and third graders in particular were enthusiastic about 
using the book as a resource for further research about endangered 
species. Dark, brilliant color illustrations bring each setting to life; 
readers can almost feel the heat of the desert or the arctic cold. 

Music Appreciation 

Primary Reviews 

11.20 Ganeri, Anita (1996). The Young Person's Guide to the Orches- 
tra. Compact disc narrated by Ben Kingsley. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201304-0. Picture Book. 

The book and compact disc complement each other as good 
resources to introduce the orchestra to elementary students. The 
book provides information about the history of orchestras, sec- 
tions of the orchestra, and what it is like to play in the great 
orchestras of the world. Full-color photographs enhance the infor- 
mation for students who do not have experience with real instru- 
ments, and are helpful to use when listening to the compact disc. 
There also is a brief introduction to famous composers from the 
1600s through the present. The book includes an index; the com- 
pact disc is tucked safely inside the front cover. The book can be 
used in its entirety, or used a section at a time. 

11.21 Pinkney, Andrea Davis (1998). Duke Ellington: The Piano Prince 
and His Orchestra. Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. New York: 
Hyperion. ISBN: 0-7868-0178-6. Picture Book. 

The musical words and textured illustrations in this biography of 
Duke Ellington jump off the page. This detailed picture book 
describes the life of Edward Kermedy "Duke" Ellington in a style 
that gives the reader the feel of the music that he created. The 
scratchboard illustrations create movement on each page, and the 
rhythmic words that accompany them are a great dedication to 
the creative artistry of Ellington. 

Secondary Reviews 

11.22 Colon-Vila, Lillian (1998). Salsa. Illustrated by Roberta Collier- 
Morales. Houston, TX: Pinata. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55885-220-4. Pic- 
ture Book. 



378 



Drama Books 



353 



This colorful dual-language edition describes one of the most 
enjoyable activities for many Latino and Caribbean families — 
dancing to salsa music — through the eyes of a young girl who pre- 
tends to be the various musicians and dancers she knows. Colon- 
Vila carefully places the music within the culture and traditions of 
el barrio families, while also connecting this dance music to its 
Afro-Caribbean roots. Although the text is rather simplistic, it 
serves to highlight the intergenerational link of salsa among aunts, 
uncles, grandparents, and grandchildren. Each boldly colored illus- 
tration is surrounded by a musically themed border, and the Eng- 
lish and Spanish texts are separated by a series of musical notes. 

11.23 Igus, Toyomi. i see the rhythm. Illustrated by Michele Wood. San 
Francisco: Children's Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-151-0. Picture 
Book. (See 3.90) 

Drama Books 

Books That Inspire Drama 

Primary Reviews 

11.24 Brown, Ruth (1997). Cry Baby. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45902-2. Picture Book. 

In this picture storybook, no one ever likes to walk with the little 
sister. She drags her old blanket, which is nearly in shreds; she is 
afraid of cows and high fences; and she is always crying out 
"Baba! Baba!" When the walk is nearly complete, the siblings find 
the little sister is holding one end of a completely unraveled blan- 
ket. Retracing her steps to wind up the thread, little sister finds 
she can willingly do all the things she has whined about earlier. 
Brown's bright watercolors depicting the English countryside, 
and the realistic features of the little girl, remind children of their 
little brothers and sisters or their own experiences. Primary chil- 
dren retold this simple story through movement, music, and art. 
Using the ball of yam to connect the episodes in the story, the chil- 
dren acted it out silently, with the dramatic music in the back- 
ground. They could retell the story in detail days afterwards, and 
made lasting connections to the action and characters. 

11.25 Christopher, Matt (1996). Great Moments in Baseball History. 
Boston: Little Brown. 104 pp. ISBN: 0-316-14130-5. Chapter Book. 
(See 12.12) 



ERIC 



379 



354 



Fine Arts 



11.26 Christopher, Matt (1997). Great Moments in Football History. 
Boston: Little Brown. 89 pp. ISBN: 0-316-14196-8. Chapter Book. 
(See 12.13) 

11.27 Coville, Bruce (1997). William Shakespeare's Macbeth. Illus- 
trated by Gary Kelley. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037- 
1899-3. Sophisticated Picture Book. 

In this retelling of Macbeth, Coville combines modern-day lan- 
guage with some of Shakespeare's most famous lines to create an 
unforgettable drama. Macbeth is portrayed as a man tormented 
by the witches' words, a man both heroic and evil. Kelley's illus- 
trations add to the dark and mysterious nature of the story. This 
book can be shared with intermediate youngsters as their first 
introduction to Shakespeare, or used with older students before 
they read the actual book to build up their prior knowledge. One 
reviewer reported that she read this story to her fourth-grade 
boys, and they immediately suggested dramatizing the book and 
looking for more books by Shakespeare. 

11.28 Fleming, Denise (1997). Time to Sleep. New York: Henry Holt. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-3762-4. Picture Book. 

This vivid picture storybook has illustrations that were created by 
pouring colored cotton pulp through handcut stencils. The result is 
handmade paper with large, bright, textured images of animals in 
their habitats. The story concerns a community of animals that 
warn one another to hibernate as winter approaches. When Bear 
smells winter in the air, he hurries off to tell Snail that it is time to 
sleep. Snail tells Skunk, who tells Turtle. Yet each animal tries to put 
off sleep for just a little longer. The predictable and repetitious 
structures make this story perfect for bedtime and dramatizing. 
The father of two small boys in one reviewer's class shared that one 
of his boys dramatized the story spontaneously as he read it aloud. 

11.29 Vail, Rachel (1998). Over the Moon. Illustrated by Scott Nash. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-33068-0. Picture Book. 
(See 13.26) 

Secondary Reviews 

11.30 Casey, Moe (1997). The Most Excellent Book of Dress Up. Brook- 
field, CT: Copper Beech. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0550-5. Picture Book. 
(See 12.50) 



3S0 



Drama Books 



355 



11.31 Catalano, Dominic (1998). Frog Went A-Courting: A Musical 
Play in Six Acts, Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
56397-637-4. Picture Book. 

This retelling of the old classic folk song "Frog Went A-Courting" 
is unique in its presentation as a play. The list of characters appears 
as a real playbill, and brilliant hill-page chalk-pastel illustrations 
are interspersed with charcoal stage sketches. The characters are 
whimsically portrayed with great detail, down to the orange-and- 
green plaid Scottish kilt the frog wears, and the dainty pearl ear- 
rings in Miss Mouse's ears. The familiar rhyme appears in large 
text with a single phrase on each page. The song and directions for 
simplifying the accompaniment also are included. This book 
inspired children to write and produce their own plays, including 
costumes and stage directions. 

11.32 Lavis, Steve (1997). Jump! It's Fun! New York: Dutton. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-525-67578-7. Picture Book. 

Lavis uses simple, lively illustrations to depict the personalities of 
the animal characters. Whether the frog is jumping, the teddy is 
soaring, or the elephant is marching, readers will be engaged by 
the book. One reviewer, a special education teacher, used drama 
to help children read independently and remember the story. She 
explained, "My students decided to perform a play from the 
book. We made individual animal puppets to depict the charac- 
ters (a tiger, a lion, a snake, a toucan, etc.). I read and reread the 
book to the children to help them determine the sequence of the 
characters' appearance. In the dramatization, as I read the book 
aloud again, each child held up the puppet portrayed in the 
action. Through this experience, many of the children could later 
pick up and read this book independently." 

How-to Drama Books 

Primary Reviews 

11.33 Hamilton, Jake (1998). Special Effects in Film and Television, 
New York: Dorling Kindersley. 63 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2813-X. Pic- 
ture Book. 

This is a complete, easy-to-understand, and fascinating look at 
special effects. The special effects are divided into categories, such 
as Camera Effects, Larger than Life, Natural Disasters, Digital 
Dragons, etc., with color photographs to make the explanations 




381 



356 



Fine Arts 



clear. There are many different types of movies discussed, ranging 
from classics like Clash of the Titans to the newest releases. Two stu- 
dents in one reviewer's class gravitated to the book immediately, 
and started an animated conversation about different movies and 
techniques used to achieve various effects. This would be an excel- 
lent resource book for almost any classroom. 

11.34 Wilkes, Angela (1996). Dazzling Disguises and Clever Cos- 
tumes: More than 50 Step-by-Step Projects to Make, Paint, Sew, 
Prepare, and Wear. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7894-1001-X. Picture Book. 

Dazzling Disguises and Clever Costumes shows children how to cre- 
ate fabulous costumes and props that are simple and do not 
require any sewing. Young children are able to make most of these 
costumes with little help from an adult. Each page has clear, step- 
by-step directions that are easy to understand. The vibrant colors 
attract the eye, and children can create many of these disguises by 
just looking at the pictures. This book is a must in any classroom 
that uses props, costumes, and disguises when role-playing. One 
reviewer's kindergartners made medieval hats and crowns to 
retell the rhyme "The Queen of Hearts." Children had to problem- 
solve, compare sizes, measure, and talk about shapes to success- 
fully create the hats. 

Art Books 

Books That Inspire Art 

Primary Reviews 

11.35 Ellwand, David (1996). Emma's Elephant and Other Favorite 
Animal Friends. New York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-525-45792-5. Picture Book. 

David Ellwand's Emma's Elephant features full-page, black-and- 
white photos of young children with their chosen animal. Each 
page introduces in alphabetical order a new animal, its name, and 
something about it. For example, on the page with the dalmatian, 
the text states, "David's dotted dog." The children on each page 
are captured with their animals at just the right moment to convey 
the child's joy and personality. The animal in each picture repre- 
sents the feelings of the child it is with. For example, Catherine is 
shown with her cat. The cat looks calm and gentle, just as Cather- 



382 



Art Books 



357 



ine appears to be very timid and delicate. The simple, alliterative 
text makes it easy for beginning readers to share in the fun of this 
book. 

11.36 Gilchrist, Jan Spivey (1997). Madelia. New York: Dial Books for 
Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2052-1. Picture Book. 

Madelia has just received her first set of watercolor paints. She 
can't wait to paint the Bible stories she has heard in her father's 
church. Because it is Sunday, Madelia has to leave the paints and 
go to church. She expects that she can daydream and ignore the 
sermon, but her father draws her into the sermon and into a place 
of swirling colors, fragrant smells, and wonderful sounds. This 
book not only inspires children to use their creativity to express 
their experiences and view of the world, but it also provides a 
glimpse into the life of Ms. Gilchrist, whose father was a preacher. 
Gilchrist's gouache paintings, highlighted with pastels, are warm, 
expressive, and inspiring. The book touches a chord with primary 
children who, like Madelia, are experimenting with art. 

11.37 Nicholson, Nicholas B. A. (1998). Little Girl in a Red Dress with 
Cat and Dog. Illustrated by Cynthia Von Buhler. New York: 
Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-87183-4. Picture Book. 

In the 1830s, traveling portrait painters like Ammi Phillips roamed 
the countryside searching for work. In this story, the littlest girl in 
the family is always ignored. She is too small to cut wood with the 
boys in the family, and the needlework her sisters do is too com- 
plex for her. When Mr. Phillips offers to paint a portrait of the fam- 
ily, the little girl is the only one who has the time and patience to be 
painted. However in the days she sits for the paintings, she begins 
to be accepted by her family. The finished portrait of her in her red 
dress is placed above the mantle. In the author's notes we find that 
Ammi Phillips did use the same composition frequently. The illus- 
trations in this book give us a real sense of the grainy oils that were 
used and the simple, stilted pictures of that time. Children could 
use this book as a springboard to study more American folk art, 
compose their own art in that style, or dramatize this story. 

11.38 Sola, Michele (1997). Angela Weaves a Dream: The Story of a 
Young Maya Artist. Photographs by Jeffrey Jay Foxx. New York: 
Hyperion Books for Children. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0073-9. Picture 
Book. 



er|c 



383 



358 



Fine Arts 



This look at the Maya culture gives readers ar\ opportunity to 
share in Angela's pursuit of her dream: winning the local weaving 
contest. In Chiapas, a town in southern Mexico, the women and 
girls of the village traditionally participate in a weaving contest. 
Sola follows Angela daily as she practices creating the "seven 
sacred designs of San Andres" in her weaving. Each design is rep- 
resented and interpreted with inset diagrams, opposite Jeffrey Jay 
Foxx's full-page, close-up color photographs of the weaving, 
making it possible for the yoimg reader to experience Angela's 
growth as a yoimg weaver and her eventual success. Jonathan 
(age 10) said, "I feel happy because I love to learn about indige- 
nous groups like the Maya. I thought the book was fantastic!" 
Captions, a glossary, a bibliography, maps, and notes from the 
photographer and author contribute to this informative piece of 
literature. The step-by-step instructions and patterns for weaving 
and other art projects found in Florence Temko's Traditional Crafts 
from Mexico and Central America gave our students their own first- 
hand experiences as part of a study of indigenous peoples. 

Temko, Florence (1996). Traditional Crafts from Mexico 
and Central America. Illustrated by Randall Gooch. Pho- 
tographs by Robert L. Wolfe and Diane Wolfe. Minneapo- 
lis: Lemer. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2935-1. Chapter Book. 

11.39 Wright-Frierson, Virginia (1996). A Desert Scrapbook: Dawn to 
Dusk in the Sonoran Desert. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80678-7. Picture Book. (See 2.26) 

11.40 Young, Ed (1997). Voices of the Heart. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-50199-2. Picture Book. 

In twenty-six collages composed from a variety of papers (includ- 
ing handmade). Young defines twenty-six feelings or emotions in 
terms of their relationship to the human heart. The concepts are 
abstract (e.g., virtue, realization, grace, constancy, wrath, and loy- 
alty), but each concept is taken apart with a Chinese character 
assigned to each part, accompanied by an explanation in English. 
The concepts are then reassembled into an ideogram in the seal 
style of ancient Chinese calligraphy. The collages depict the inter- 
action of the Chinese characters, and incorporate an image of a 
heart to complete the definition. The overall effect is a stunning 
work that is appropriate for art, language, and culture studies. It 
is a picture book for older students who have the sophistication to 
discuss Young's interpretation of the concepts. 



384 



Art Books 



359 



Secondary Reviews 

11.41 Hucko, Bruce (1996). A Rainbow at Night: The World in Words 
and Pictures by Navajo Children. San Francisco: Chronicle. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8118-1294-4. Picture Book. 

The impetus for this beautiful book of stories was a child's ques- 
tion: "Have you ever seen a rainbow at night?" For Navajo chil- 
dren, the answer is evident in the world around them. Bruce 
Hucko allows the children, whose art and youthful wisdom are 
embodied within the covers of this book, to tell and show the 
reader how very possible this is. Theirs is a world seen differently, 
a world that is inclusive of all that has life and spirit. As children, 
they are able to blend traditional Navajo life and beliefs with 
modern ideas. 

11.42 Lee, Huy Voun (1995). In the Park. New York: Henry Holt. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-8050-4128-1. Picture Book. 

Xiao Ming, a small Chinese boy, enjoys the pleasures of a spring 
day in the park with his mother. With cut-paper illustrations that 
create a colorful three-dimensional effect, this simplistic picture 
book incorporates the writing of Chinese characters within the 
story. Young readers will relate to the familiar setting of this con- 
temporary tale, while observing the natural relationship between 
images, words, and Chinese characters presented. 

11.43 Minor, Wendell (1998). Grand Canyon: Exploring a Natural Won- 
der. New York: Blue Sky. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-47968-7. Picture 
Book. (See 2.45) 

11.44 Rumford, James (1996). Cloudmakers. Illustrated by James Rum- 
ford. New York: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-76505- 
6. Picture Book. 

Captured by the Arabs, Young Wu and Grandfather Wu are given 
seven days to make a cloud. In the next seven days, grandfather is 
seen using hemp rope, collecting ashes, beating shoes, and bleach- 
ing fibers. By the seventh day, they produce special paper that 
looks like clouds, and the sultan frees them. A story to intrigue 
children about the art of papermaking. 

11.45 Say, Allen (1996). Emma's Rug. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-74294-3. Picture Book. 




385 



360 



Fine Arts 



Emma stared at her unwashed, ragged rug each day, creating pic- 
tures in her mind that she could draw. One day, her mother 
washed Emma's rug. Emma was devastated; she felt she could no 
longer create art. But once she sat quietly and explored the recesses 
of her mind, the images came back to her, and she was able to cre- 
ate again. Emma's Rug teaches children how to search within for 
inspiration and creativity. 

11.46 Wood, Nancy, editor (1997). The Serpent's Tongue. New York; 
Dutton. 214 pp. ISBN: 0525-45514-0. Chapter Book. 

A collection of stories and artwork presented by many well- 
known Native American writers, as well as non-native authors 
who have done extensive research about and work with Native 
Americans. Photographs of Native American people taken many 
years after the historical period they record serve to perpetuate 
stereotypical representations of Native peoples. In the same vol- 
ume is Paula Gunn Allen's work, which challenges such represen- 
tations. Most of the artwork by Native American artists displays 
scenes from everyday life or from tribal legends and myths. The 
prose and poetry cover all aspects of Pueblo culture and daily life, 
and the format of the text is very inviting. The contributor's notes 
and bibliography indicate the level of research done in prepara- 
tion for editing this text. 

Books about Artists 

Primary Reviews 

11.47 Dionetti, Michelle (1996). Painting the Wind: A Story of Vincent 
van Gogh. Illustrated by Kevin Hawkes. Boston: Little Brown. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-18602-3. Picture Book. 

The reader sees the light and dark side of Vincent van Gogh through 
the eyes of Claudine, a child who helps to clean his house. Claudine 
is mesmerized by van Gogh's paintings, which "do not look like 
other paintings, neat and perfect. They were thick and wild. Bright 
suns curled in spangled light. Sunflowers blared like little trum- 
pets." Kevin Hawkes' bright and bold illustrations are reminiscent 
of van Gogh's paintings. When van Gogh's rage and temper get him 
thrown out of his house, it is Claudine who tells him that she Ukes 
his paintings. One elementary art teacher darkened the room and 
spotlighted her print of The Starry Night before reading the book to 



Art Books 



361 



children. Another first-grade teacher exclaimed, "As we came into 
the darkened room, with the bright light on The Starry Night, I felt 
like I was entering the painting, and so did the children." Children 
immediately wanted to imitate van Gogh's unusual painting style. 

11.48 Goldstein, Ernest (1996). The Journey of Diego Rivera. Min- 
neapolis: Lerner. 104 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2066-4. Chapter Book. 

In the early 1900s, the brilliant young Mexican painter Diego 
Rivera traveled to Paris to join the ranks of artists such as Matisse 
and Picasso, and to participate in the revolutionary modern art 
movement. His wildly unpredictable behavior shocked the bour- 
geois and created almost as much notoriety as his sophisticated 
paintings. The text weaves together his early influences, including 
El Greco, Monet, the cubists, and later the Italian Renaissance 
painters and the pre-Columbian art of his beloved Mexico. This 
lavishly illustrated volume relates in great detail the many turbu- 
lent, poignant journeys in Rivera's personal and artistic life. We 
see the life and mastery of one of this century's most revered 
muralists. For more mature readers, this book offers a thorough 
historical context, an accessible discussion of features of his art, 
and glimpses into Rivera's daily life. Many details of his murals 
are richly examined, from the peasants of his homeland to his cel- 
ebration of the age of science and industry. A must for any student 
of Mexican art history. 

11.49 Greenberg, Jane, and Sandra Jordan (1998). Chuck Close Up 
Close. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2486-X. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Chuck Close Up Close is a striking biography of an artist who 
received recognition in the 1960s by painting enormous, photo- 
graphically realistic portraits. He uses a grid system and enlarged 
photographs to produce the meticulous details. He believes his 
system is a result of his struggle to overcome learning disorders as 
a boy. In 1988, he experienced what he calls "the event" — a spinal 
artery collapse that left him with only partial use of his arms and 
legs. During his rehabilitation, the faces of his visitors recon- 
nected him to his paintings. He continues to paint portraits that 
are really "himdreds of little abstract paintings — multicolored 
ovals and gaudy squares, amoebas swimming before your eyes." 
When one moves back from these enormous pieces, the portrait is 



O 

ERIC 



387 



362 



Fine Arts 



clear. This book will interest students of all ages. They will be fas- 
cinated by Close's grid systena, and many will be interested to see 
his paintings in museums. 

11.50 Winter, Jeanette (1998). My Name Is Georgia: A Portrait. San Diego: 
Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201649-X. Picture Book. 

This illustrated picture book biography of Georgia O'Keefe will 
appeal to all ages. As a young girl, O'Keefe did things other girls 
didn't: She went barefoot, let her hair fly in the wind instead of 
having it braided, and was always satisfied to be by herself. She 
also saw the world differently. She carefully examined flowers, 
sunsets, and deserts. As an artist, she gathered bones and rocks to 
paint so others would see them the way she did. Winter's illustra- 
tions have been "done in homage to [O'Keefe's] art and include 
many of the images she often used." When paired with Georgia 
O'Keefe prints, this book calls children to gather items around 
them and paint them clearly and with emphasis as they see them, 
just as O'Keefe did. 

Secondary Reviews 

11.51 Carle, Eric (1996). The Art of Eric Carle. Illustrated by Eric Carle. 
New York: Philomel. 125 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22937-X. Sophisticated 
Chapter Book. 

The Art of Eric Carle is a retrospective of Eric Carle's life and work, 
with personal photographs and illustrations from his books. It 
contains an autobiographical chapter; chapters by editors and 
authorities from America, Germany, and Japan; a photo-essay on 
Carle's collage technique; some of Carle's sketches; and a list of 
books Carle has created. The illustrations consist of a wide vari- 
ety of photographs, some of which span a two-page spread. Oth- 
ers are small, personal photographs of Carle as a small boy. The 
illustrations from his books include A Week with Willi Worm, 
which became The Very Hungry Caterpillar. This is a complete and 
fascinating resource book for intermediate students and teachers 
interested in knowing more about the life, times, and art of Eric 
Carle. 

Carle, Eric. The Very Hungry Caterpillar. (1987). New 
York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-20853-4. Picture 
Book. 



388 



Art Books 



363 



11.52 Littlesugar, Amy (1996). Marie in Fourth Position. Illustrated by 
Ian Schoenherr. New York: Philomel. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399- 
22794-6. Picture Book. 

This compelling tale examines what it may have been like to pose 
for the artist Edward Degas. In an author's note, Littlesugar 
reminds us that Marie van Goethem, a poor ballet girl, posed for 
Degas sometime between 1879 and 1880. Ian Schoenherr 's realistic 
illustrations help readers to understand the difficulty of holding a 
pose, and the frustration Degas might have experienced trying to 
get Marie to stretch and stretch "High. Higher. As though you 
wish to fly." After Degas made several drawings, he actually 
sculpted the model, and then went a step further by adding hair, 
slippers, and a real silk tutu. After reading this book, children 
would enjoy seeing Degas' The Little Dancer (located at the Metro- 
politan Museum of Art) or a replica, or perhaps creating their own 
pieces, first in two dimensions on paper and later in three dimen- 
sions in clay. Other children may wish to use music to imagine 
what movement would be made prior to a pose. 

11.53 Parillo, Tony (1998). Michelangelo's Surprise. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-34961-4. Picture Book. 

This story is based on an actual event that occurred in the life of 
one of Italy's most famous artists. It has snowed in Florence 
overnight and Sandro, the youngest page in the palazzo, is sum- 
moned by a Medici to find Michelangelo. He searches every- 
where, from the palazzo to the kitchen to the chapel, and still can't 
find him. He finally finds Michelangelo sculpting a gorgeous 
snow sculpture, a surprise for the Medici. The illustrations pres- 
ent a clear idea of how life may have looked during the late 1400s, 
and include many details about the people and the buildings of 
Italy. The book presents enough background information about 
Michelangelo and Italy that it could be used as an introduction to 
study Italy. 

Art Appreciation 

Primary Reviews 

11.54 King, Penny, and Clare Roundhill (1996). Artists' Workshop 
Landscapes. New York: Crabtree. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-86505-853-9. Pic- 
ture Book. 



389 



364 



Fine Arts 



Day after day, children pored over the pages of this landscape 
book, one in a series along with Artists' Workshop Portraits and 
Artists' Workshop Stories. They would then head to the art center to 
respond. This is a great resource book that presents six artists 
(Hokusai, Klimt, Monet, O'Keefe, Burchfield, and Himdertwasser) 
and their work, as well as information on the decisions they had to 
make as artists. The reader can see full paintings as well as detailed 
close-ups. Following the artist study, the authors provide instruc- 
tions to create landscapes in that artist's style. The reproductions 
of all the artists' professional and childhood works are vivid in 
style and color. 

Artists' Workshop Portraits. (1996). 32 pp. ISBN: 0-86505- 
850-4. Picture Book. 

Artists' Workshop Stories. (1996). 32 pp. ISBN: 0-86505- 
852-0. Picture Book. 

11.55 Micklethwait, Lucy (1996). A Child's Book of Play in Art: Great 
Pictures Great Fun. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 45 pp. ISBN: 
0-7894-1003-6. Picture Book. 

This large-format, colorful book offers children an introduction to 
great art by using many famous paintings as the basis for activities, 
from inventing a pattern in modem art to telling a story about 
paintings from the 1500s. The activities are fun and easy, and chil- 
dren of all ages can access this book. One reviewer's first graders 
wanted to take it with them on the next museum trip to see if they 
could find any of the artwork depicted, or to look at the artwork 
and figure out which section of the book it would fit in. The chil- 
dren recognized the picture Vincent's Bedroom in Arles as a Van Gogh 
from a previous study of his works in Painting the Wind (see 11.47). 

Secondary Reviews 

11.56 Presilla, Maricel E. (1996). Mola: Cuna Life Stories and Art. New 
York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-3801-9. Picture Book. 

The Cxma women of the San Bias Islands, located off the northern 
coast of Panama, create a unique form of art called mola. Molas are 
intricate fabric designs of different colors and textures sewn 
together in layers. Each mola tells a story, and Presilla presents and 
interprets the ancient and modem stories depicted in the molas 
she displays, revealing the culture of the artists' community. In Life 
around the Lake, Presilla and Soto introduce the reader to embroi- 



390 



Dance Books 



365 



deries by the Tarascan women of Lake Patzcuaro in Central Mex- 
ico. It is a simple yet thoughtful picture book that shows the lives 
of the Tarascan people through their creative art forms. Together 
these books provide a glimpse of some of Latin America's creative 
and resilient artists. 

Presilla, Maricel E. (1996). Life around the Lake. Illus- 
trated by Gloria Soto. New York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. 

ISBN: 0-8050-3800-0. Picture Book. 

Dance Books 

Books That Inspire Dance 

Primary Reviews 

11.57 Ancona, George (1998). Let's Dance! New York: Morrow Junior 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-16211-8. Picture Book. 

Ancona invites readers with the following observations: "If you 
can speak, you can sing. If you can walk, you can dance. All you 
have to do is kick, step, turn, hop, jump, leap, reach and wiggle." 
In this lively book, readers see full-color photographs of people 
all over the world dancing, either alone, with a partner, or in a 
large group. Each page features a dance from a different country, 
while the small caption gives a more detailed explanation. Tradi- 
tional dances of particular countries or cultures, such as flamenco 
dancing or the Jarana from the Yucatan, are featured here, as well 
as dances that are no longer associated with just one country, such 
as clog dancing and tap dancing. This joyous book offers an intro- 
duction to dance for all ages. 

11.58 Gray, Libba Moore (1995). My Mama Had a Dancing Heart. Illus- 
trated by Raul Colon. Unpaged. New York: Orchard. ISBN: 0-531- 
08770-0. Picture Book. (See 13.6) 

11.59 Rohmann, Eric (1997). The Cinder-Eyed Cats. New York: Crown. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-517-70896-5. Picture Book. (See 14.14) 

11.60 Thomassie, Tynia (1996). Mimi's Tutu. Illustrated by Jan Spivey 
Gilchrist. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-44020-9. 
Picture Book. 

Mimi loves to go with her momma to her dance classes, and dance 
with momma at the end. One day another little girl appears at the 




391 



366 



Fine Arts 



studio with black leotards and a tutu, and Mimi realizes that she 
wants one too. Her family helps her connect to her African her- 
itage by making her a lapa, a "belt of beige cowrie shells, and 
beads of black, orange and dark green." The blending of the pas- 
tel watercolors in the background add a feeling of warmth to the 
story and seem to represent the blending of cultures in Mimi's 
life. The strong colors used to depict Mimi's family add to the 
strength of family and tradition in the story. After hearing the 
book, one first grader at Lee School named Ajai said, "I think I 
need to be like the Lee School song says, unique. I shouldn't have 
to be exactly like everyone else. That's what Mimi's grandmoth- 
ers, aunts, and mother helped her find out when they gave her a 
different kind of tutu." 

Secondary Reviews 

11.61 Giff, Patricia Reilly (1998). Rosie's Big City Ballet. Illustrated by 
Julie Durrell. New York: Viking. 73 pp. ISBN: 0-670-87792-1. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Rosie's Big City Ballet touches all those who have a dream while 
taking ballet. This chapter book helps children who have to deal 
with the emotion of auditioning and not always being selected. 
Rosie wonders if her time spent making a special treehouse is a 
factor when she does not get a part in the ballet. Eventually Rosie 
learns that even famous dancers are not always selected, and also 
that other opportunities will come about. First grader Maddy 
wrote, "I liked it. It changed my mind about going to the ballet." 
This is one title in a series of six books on dance. 

11.62 Hampshire, Susan (1998). Rosie's Ballet Slippers. Illustrated by 
Maria Teresa Meloni. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged ISBN: 
0-06-443488-5. Picture Book. 

This picture storybook depicts a young girl in her first ballet les- 
son with her new pink slippers. Meloni's soft illustrations show 
the boys and girls learning plies, sautes, and pointing toes. We 
feel the joy and jumps as the story brings out the first-day excite- 
ment experienced by dancers. Readers simply must get up and 
dance throughout the story. We see the children in the story with 
their slippers and dance bags over their shoulders for all the 
world to see, saying goodbye to each other at the end of their les- 
son. As one dancer said, "I remember when I got my first ballet 
shoes and carried them just like that." 



392 



Dance Books 



367 



11.63 Hopkins, Lee Bennett (1997). Song and Dance: Poems. Illustrated 
by Cheryl Munro Taylor. New York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-80159-9. Picture Book. (See 10.11) 

Dance Appreciation 

Primary Reviews 

11.64 Isadora, Rachel (1997). Lili Backstage. New York: Putnam. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-399-23025-4. Picture Book. 

This book provides a view of the backstage world of ballet through 
the eyes of a child. Readers follow Lili into the orchestra rehearsal 
studio, the ballet studio, and the theater. Backstage we see the 
makeup, costumes, and props that are used for plays. When the 
performance begins, Lili can see how each part comes together in a 
grand transformation. This book gives readers an intimate glimpse 
of the world of ballet. The information gained from Isadora's book 
helped primary students understand all the jobs necessary for the 
third graders at the school to write, produce, and perform their 
own opera in the spring. 

11.65 Newman, Barbara (1997). The Illustrated Book of Ballet Stories. 
Illustrated by Gill Tomblin. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7894-2024-4. Picture Book. 

This book combines photographs of ballet stars with illustrations 
of dance scenes from five well-known ballets, including The Sleep- 
ing Beauty, Giselle, Coppelia, Swan Lake, and The Nutcracker. Young 
dancers will be fascinated to learn more about the stories and the 
music that have made these ballets such classics over time. As a 
resource, the book provides background information, depicts bal- 
let steps and dance positions, and explains terms most children 
would want to know. The text accurately conveys the story of the 
ballet and sparks the interest of children. An added benefit is the 
compact disc, which allows readers to hear musical excerpts from 
the ballets. This book is a valuable resource for children who are 
interested in the movement of dance, and also for children who 
want to learn more about the art of dance. 



393 




A. Jacks around the World, Mary D. Lankford/Karen Dugan (12.43). B. First in the 
Field: Baseball Hero Jackie Robinson, Derek T. Dingle (12.5). C. The Story of Chess, 
Horacio Cardo (12.41). D. The Good Housekeeping Illustrated Children’s Cookbook, 
Marianne Zanzarella/Tom Eckerle (12.55). 

Er|c 394 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




369 



12 Sports, Games, 
and Hobbies 

Lauren Freedman 

Contributing reviewers included Lauren Freedman, Penny 
O'Shaunessey, Sandra Schmidt, Jean Williams, and Allison Young. 



T he books we have chosen for inclusion in this chapter are often the 
kinds of books that students choose for voluntary reading, or use 
when they have free choice for a research project or book share. 
These are the books that can pique interest and engage students who oth- 
erwise may find reading objectionable or difficult, because they are about 
things that these students hear and see in the world around them outside 
of school. The subjects are real and offer immediate connections. Through 
these books, students may be drawn to learn more, and may find them- 
selves looking for books that go beyond their immediate experiences. 

The majority of the books in this chapter are nonfiction, and 
rarely appear within most schools' curricula. While there are a number 
of fiction books about sports, for the most part they are written by two 
authors. Matt Christopher and Bruce Brooks, and tend to be formula 
novels. As with all books, the ones in this chapter provide both mirrors 
and windows for students to explore the world and their place in it. 
One of the major benefits to the books in this section is the use of visu- 
als. The authors and illustrators make tremendous use not only of illus- 
tration, but also of photography, graphs, maps, charts, and diagrams. 
The authors also make ample use of supporting material such as 
indices, glossaries, and lists that increase the books' usefulness as texts 
for inquiry projects. 

The members of the review committee for this section unani- 
mously feel that more use could be made of these books within the 
framework of the core curriculum, especially as teachers move to a more 
integrated thematic and inquiry-based curriculum. Many of the books 
reviewed could fit into text-sets developed around various broad con- 
cepts or themes. They could be used as individual reference books or as 
read-aloud texts for classroom units on topics as wide-ranging as the 
human body, courage and perseverance, playing by the rules, developing 




395 



370 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



self-esteem and self-discipline, or imderstanding various math concepts. 
Many of the books we reviewed could be used by older children as mod- 
els for writing their own texts. 

The reviews in this chapter are organized into three major cate- 
gories: Sports, Games, and Hobbies. The section on Sports is further 
divided into five subsections: Autobiographies, Biographies, Informa- 
tion Books, How-to Books, and Fiction and Poetry. 

The criteria we used as we reviewed books for inclusion in this 
chapter were appeal to children, clarity of writing, clarity of illustrations, 
connection and integration between illustrations and the text, appropri- 
ateness for classroom use, representation of diverse groups, and level of 
complexity. Appeal to children refers not only to visual appeal, but also 
to such things as content and the amoimt of white space on a page. It was 
important that pages not be cluttered or present an overwhelming 
amoimt of information. So too, it was extremely important that the 
author's style be straightforward and simple without being simplistic. 
The illustrations needed to be clear and imcluttered, and the integration 
of illustration and text was essential, particularly in the books that 
described how to play a sport, play a game, or follow a recipe. We also 
felt that the books we included needed to be ones that could be used by 
both students and teachers within a classroom or library context. Thus 
activities described in the books on hobbies and games needed to use 
materials that could be foimd and used in schools. Finally, but perhaps 
most importantly, was the issue of diversity and the representation of as 
many groups of people as possible. We foimd, not surprisingly, that 
many of the sports books leaned toward boys, but that there also was 
more material about and representation of girls than we had imagined. 

As we reviewed the myriad books available for inclusion in our 
chapter, we also realized that there were some rather glaring omissions, 
and some areas in which books did not seem to be available. Hispanic/ 
Latino people are severely underrepresented, except in the area of base- 
ball. The representation of Native Americans is almost nonexistent, except 
for a biography of Jim Thorpe and a book on lacrosse. This is especially 
disturbing as Native American cultures have shared a number of games 
with the wider culture. In general we did not find enough books about 
games, and none that offered the history of many games. We found a few 
books that took an international approach, but again, not nearly enough. 
Furthermore, the sports books mostly were limited to mainstream and 
professional sports. We hope authors, illustrators, and publishers will 
provide more books on recreational sports such as watersports and win- 



396 



Sports 



371 



ter sports. We were surprised to find next to nothing on horseback riding 
or roller skating. Finally we feel authors, illustrators, and publishers need 
to provide more picture books for young children that focus on simple 
games that can be played in pairs or small groups. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 

Sports 

Autob iographies 

Primary Reviews 

12.1 Lipinski, Tara, and Emily Costello (1997). Tara Lipinski: Triumph 
on Ice: An Autobiography. New York: Bantam. 116 pp. ISBN: 
0-553-09775-X. Chapter Book. 

This is a wonderful book written by a teenager particularly for 
teens. The collection of color photographs from Lipinski's infancy 
to her winning a world championship gold medal is not only fasci- 
nating, but has the potential to connect with the reader in ways that 
the text alone cannot. The story traces Lipinski's figure-skating 
career through a number of personal anecdotes. It also includes an 
introduction by Todd Eldredge, a list of important dates, a list of 
Lipinski's favorite things, a guide to scoring in figure skating, and 
a glossary of skating terms. One sixth grader commented, "I liked 
it very much because it told everything in her life and how she was 
nervous at the competition." 

12.2 Positively for Kids series. Dallas, TX: Taylor. 

Titles in this series include: 

Pippen, Scottie, with Greg Brown (1996). Scottie Pippen: Reach 
Higher. Illustrated by Doug Keith. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-87833-981-7. 
Picture Book. 



397 



372 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



Rodriguez, Alex, with Greg Brown (1998). Alex Rodriguez: Hit a 
Grand Slam! Illustrated by Doug Keith. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-87833-997-3. 
Picture Book. 

These are two of the books in one of the best sports autobiography 
or biography series available. These books contain the life stories of 
Scottie Pippen and Alex Rodriguez as told from their perspectives, 
along with anecdotes about them from family members, teammates, 
and friends. The stories are enhanced by photographs and wonder- 
fully realistic paintings. Rodriguez's story is inspirational as well 
as informative. There are other athletes' life stories in this series, 
including Troy Aikman, Bonnie Blair, John Elway Dan Marino, Cal 
Ripken, Kerri Strug, Sheryl Swoopes, Mo Vaughn, Kristi Yama- 
guchi, and Steve Young. These books would be excellent for stu- 
dents to use as models for their own autobiographies. 

Biographies 

Primary Reviews 

12.3 Adler, David A. (1997). Lou Gehrig: The Luckiest Man. Illus- 
trated by Terry Widener. San Diego: Gulliver. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-15- 
200523-4. Picture Book. 

This is a stunningly told biography. The beautiful, golden acrylic 
paintings and the narrative are interwoven to present the essence 
of this real American hero. The book is an extraordinarily moving 
and inspiring biography that will have readers enthralled with 
Lou Gehrig and his spirit. This book could be used in many ways 
with students of all ages. For example, it would make an excellent 
read-aloud text as an introduction to a study of heroes. 

12.4 Christopher, Matt. Sports Biography series. Boston: Little Brown. 
Titles in this series include: 

On the Court with . . . Andre Agassi (1997). 120 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
14202-6. Chapter Book. 

On the Field with . . . Emmitt Smith (1997). 118 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
13722-7. Chapter Book. 

On the Court with . . . Grant Hill (1996). 110 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
13790-1. Chapter Book. 

On the Mound with . . . Greg Maddux (1997). 121 pp. ISBN: 0- 
316-14191-7. Chapter Book. 



398 



Sports 



373 



On the Court with . . . Hakeem Olajuwon (1997). Ill pp. ISBN: 0- 
316-13721-9. Chapter Book. 

At the Plate with . . . Ken Griffey, Jr. (1997). 121 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
14233-6. Chapter Book. 

At the Plate with ... Mo Vaughn (1997). 113 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
14192-5. Chapter Book. 

On the Mound with . . . Randy Johnson (1998). 116 pp. ISBN: 0- 
316-14221-2. Chapter Book. 

In the Huddle with . . . Steve Young (1996). 131 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
13793-6. Chapter Book. 

On the Course with . . . Tiger Woods (1998). 117 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
13445-7. Chapter Book. 

Christopher has a wealth of knowledge and experience when it 
comes to writing about sports. His most recent endeavor is a 
series of high-quality sports biographies in a market flooded with 
inferior-quality literature. These clearly written titles delve into 
the life of an athlete, starting with childhood. The short chapters 
center around a particular incident or issue in the athlete's life, 
reveal how they became interested in the sport, and show how 
hard work and perseverance made them stars. Descriptive high- 
lights of key games add to the interest of the books. A series of 
photographs in the center of each book offers visual information 
to enhance the text. 

12.5 Dingle, Derek T. (1998). First in the Field: Baseball Hero Jackie 
Robinson. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. 48 pp. ISBN: 
0-7868-0348-7. Picture Book. 

This book is written in chronological order and places Jackie Robin- 
son squarely within a historical context that includes both the disr 
crimination all African Americans faced during this time and the 
outbreak of World War II. Each chapter in the book describes a time 
in Jackie Robinson's life that coincides with a historical event. The 
story not only shares Robinson's life, but also describes those peo- 
ple he held as role models. The book contains a list of Milestones 
in Black Sports, and a selected bibliography of books, films and 
newsreels, and articles for further investigation. This is an excel- 
lent book for reluctant older readers as it has enough text to give 
interesting information and sufficient supporting material. 




399 



374 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



12.6 Engel, Trudie (1996). We'll Never Forget You, Roberto Clemente. 
New York: Scholastic. 108 pp. ISBN: 0-590-68881-2. Chapter Book. 

A chapter book for young readers, this tribute to Roberto Clemente 
will captivate and inform. It includes a number of photographs as it 
follows Clemente from his childhood in Puerto Kco to his rise to 
prominence in the world of baseball with the Pittsburgh Pirates. 
The importance of his success is underscored by details such as the 
fact that, due to the poverty in which he lived, his first bat was a 
broomstick. The book includes a section entitled Baseball Basics, 
which defines many of the terms used in the book; a glossary 
for the Spanish words incorporated into the text; and a chart of 
Clemente's lifetime statistics. 

12.7 Greenfield, Eloise (1997). For the Love of the Game: Michael Jor- 
dan and Me. Illustrated by Jan Spivey Gilchrist. New York: Harper- 
Collins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-027298-8. Picture Book. 

The boy and girl who narrate this story speak of Michael Jordan's 
desire to play basketball, as well as his seemingly innate abilities as 
an athlete. They then look to their own lives and consider what 
may lie ahead for them. Children are able to understand the 
poignant message that Greenfield and Gilchrist have communi- 
cated in this beautiful tribute to one of the most famous athletes of 
our time. Greenfield describes how Jordan would go up for a shot, 
and appear to be suspended in air. "He dreams he can fly, that he is 
an eagle," said GeneU (age eight). A clear message is conveyed 
through simple prose and vibrant watercolor illustrations. "This 
book is telling us you have to believe in yourself. Don't believe in 
anything else. That's what Michael Jordan does," explained Con- 
nor (age six). 

12.8 Krull, Kathleen (1996). Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph 
Became the World's Fastest Woman. Illustrated by David Diaz. 
San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201267-2. Picture 
Book. (See 5.17) 

12.9 Krull, Kathleen (1997). Lives of the Athletes: Thrills, Spills (and 
What the Neighbors Thought). Illustrated by Kathryn Hewitt. San 
Diego: Harcourt Brace. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200806-3. Chapter Book. 

This book profiles twenty great athletes representing a variety of 
sports. The biographies are presented in chronological order by 



400 



Sports 



375 



the birth of the fourteen men and six women who are included. 
These athletes are representative of a number of ethnic groups. 
Each story is told by detailing the pivotal events in the athlete's 
life. The biographies are each about three pages long, and may 
interest the reader enough to want to learn more about the athlete. 
The watercolor and colored-pencil illustrations are well-drawn 
caricatures that include details about aspects of the athlete's life. 
This would be a great book for upper-elementary students and 
beyond. It includes a selected bibliography of books for readers 
who want to find more information. 

12.10 Leder, Jane (1996). Grace and Glory: A Century of Women in the 
Olympics. Chicago: Triumph. 102 pp. ISBN: 1-572443-116-4. Chap- 
ter Book. 

A wonderful tribute to women who made great inroads and 
advancements in Olympic sports. This important book is arranged 
in chronological order, beginning with ancient times when women 
were excluded from sports and continuing to the present. It is fas- 
cinating to read about the myths and stereotypes about women 
who enjoyed participating in athletics and sports. These obscure 
heroines deserve much credit, for they confronted almost insur- 
mountable prejudices and odds with courage and logic. These 
brave women led the way for the female athletes of today. We can 
now look back and find at last that their "grace and glory under 
pressure are valued and respected." The book is effectively illus- 
trated with photographs, and is a book students may enjoy brows- 
ing through while picking and choosing from among the short, 
readable biographies. 

12.11 Long, Barbara (1997). Jim Thorpe: Legendary Athlete. Spring- 
field, NJ: Enslow. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-89490-865-0. Chapter Book. 

This book is one of six titles in the Native American Biographies 
series. Jim Thorpe was a member of the Sac and Fox nations. Filled 
with photographs, the book portrays the life of Jim Thorpe from 
his birth in 1888 in Prague, Oklahoma, to his Olympic success in 
1912. His life story is firmly located within a historical context, 
including a discussion of Thorpe's experiences at the Carlisle 
School, where in 1907 he was coached in football by "Pop" Warner. 
Many students will be able to identify with this name, as "Pop" 
Warner is the namesake of numerous local youth football leagues. 
This is a highly readable biography, and should raise a number of 




401 



376 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



questions for the reader to pursue. As one sixth-grade student put 
it, "I liked it because it is about a legendary athlete." 

Secondary Reviews 

12.12 Christopher, Matt (1996). Great Moments in Baseball History. 
Boston: Little Brown. 104 pp. ISBN: 0-316-14130-5. Chapter Book. 

This book is organized into nine chapters, each one focusing on 
the accomplishments of a particular player on a particular day 
during his career. Each chapter describes the event using a play- 
by-play style. For example. May 25, 1935, was the day that Babe 
Ruth hit a ball out of Forbes Field. No one had ever done that 
before. This book lends itself to dramatic renderings. 

12.13 Christopher, Matt (1997). Great Moments in Football History. 
Boston: Little Brown. 89 pp. ISBN: 0-316-14196-8. Chapter Book. 

This book consists of nine chapters, each focusing on a particular 
player at a particular moment in his career. Written in a play-by- 
play style, the book describes events in the careers of such players 
as Joe Namath, Walter Payton, Joe Montana, and Emmitt Smith. 
This book lends itself to dramatic renderings. 

12.14 DuPlacey, James. Hockey Superstars (NHL) series. New York: 
Morrow Junior Books. 

Titles in this series include: 

Amazing Forwards (1996). 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15024-1. Picture 
Book. 

Champion Defensemen (1997). 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15688-6. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Great Goalies (1996). 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15020-9. Picture Book. 

Top Rookies (1996). 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15022-5. Picture Book. 

Photographs aboimd in these books, and the text is biographical in 
nature and uses a basic and concise style. The biographies range in 
length from one paragraph to four or five, and highlight the his- 
tory of and innovations in the respective positions presented in 
each text. These books glamorize the roughness of professional 
hockey to some degree. Appropriate for upper-elementary readers 
and beyond. This series is not very substantive, but might be used 
to hook reluctant readers and generate beginrdng interest. 



402 



Sports 



377 



12.15 Egan, Terry, Stan Friedman, and Mike Levine (1997). The Good 
Guys of Baseball: Sixteen True Sports Stories. New York: Simon 
& Schuster Books for Young Readers. Ill pp. ISBN: 0-689-80212-9. 
Chapter Book. 

Although slim on illustrations and photographs, this book pres- 
ents substantive biographies of baseball players who exemplify 
virtuosity and a strong work ethic. Some of the players depicted 
are not among the most famous or those with the most name 
recognition, which is what makes this book imique. The players 
were chosen for their contributions as role models. A wide range 
of ethnic groups is represented in the biographies, which run 
approximately ten pages in length. At the end of the book, there 
are references for further reading. 

12.16 Gutman, Bill. Millbrook Sports World series. Brookfield, CT: 
Millbrook. 

Titles in this series include: 

Alonzo Mourning: Center of Attention (1997). 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7613-0061-9. Chapter Book. 

Anfernee Hardaway: Super Guard (1997). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613- 
0062-7. Chapter Book. 

Deion Sanders: Mr. Prime Time (1997). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0224- 
7. Chapter Book. 

Grant Hill: Basketball's High Flier (1996). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613- 
0038-4. Chapter Book. 

Scottie Pippen: The Do-Everything Superstar (1997). 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0223-9. Chapter Book. 

Steve Young: NFL Passing Wizard (1996). 48 pp. ISBN: 1-56294- 
184-4. Chapter Book. 

This series would be very attractive to younger readers interested 
in famous athletes. One drawback to the series is that only one 
female athlete, tennis star Jennifer Capriati, is included in the 
twenty-one athletes profiled. The series as a whole highlights the 
accomplishments of numerous professional basketball, football, 
baseball, and hockey players. Although this series glorifies profes- 
sional sports, the biographical nature of these books delves into 
the obstacles that the athletes had to overcome. The writing is 
engaging for readers with some prior knowledge of athletes and 



er|c 



403 



378 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



sports. The text is supported by captioned photographs. Each 
book ends with a list of career highlights, a Find out More section 
with a list of references and an address for writing to each athlete, 
and an index. 

12.17 Lemer Sports Biographies series. Minneapolis: Lerner. 

Titles in this series include: 

Fehr, Kristin Smith (1997). Monica Seles: Returning Champion. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2899-1. Chapter Book. 

Kramer, Barbara (1996). Ken Griffey, Junior: All-Around All-Star. 
64 pp. ISBN: 08225-2887-8. Chapter Book. 

Morgan, Terri (1997). Junior Seau: High Voltage Linebacker. 64 
pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2896-7. Chapter Book. 

Olney, Ross R. (1997). Lyn St. James: Driven to be First. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-2890-8. Chapter Book. 

Raber, Thomas R. (1997). Michael Jordan: Basketball Skywalker. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-3654-4. Chapter Book. 

Savage, Jeff (1997). Andre Agassi: Reaching the Top — Again. 64 
pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2894-0. Chapter Book. 

Savage, Jeff (1997). Barry Bonds: Mr. Excitement. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
225-2889-4. Chapter Book. 

Savage, Jeff (1997). Grant Hill: Humble Hotshot. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8225-2893-2. Chapter Book. 

Savage, Jeff (1997). Mike Piazza: Hard Hitting Catcher. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-2895-9. Chapter Book. 

Savage, Jeff (1998). Tiger Woods: King of the Course. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-3655-2. Chapter Book. 

Schnakenberg, Robert (1997). Scottie Pippen: Reluctant Super- 
star. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-3653-6. Chapter Book. 

Thornley, Stew (1997). Deion Sanders: Primetime Player. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-3658-7. Chapter Book. 

Thornley, Stew (1997). Emmitt Smith: Relentless Rusher. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-2897-5. Chapter Book. 

Thornley, Stew (1997). Frank Thomas: Baseball's Big Hurt. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-3651-X. Chapter Book. 



404 



Sports 



379 



Townsend, Brad (1997). Anfemee Hardaway: Basketball's Lucky 
Penny. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-3652-8. Chapter Book. 

This series highlights the lives and careers of notable male and 
female athletes in a variety of sports, from racing and tennis to 
football and basketball. The books provide interesting and inti- 
mate insights into the athletes profiled. For example, in Monica 
Seles: Returning Champion, we learn about the milestones in Seles' 
career as a young tennis star, as well as the views of her critics and 
supporters. The career decisions and professionalism of Junior 
Seau, one of the few great Samoan American football players, are 
highlighted in Junior Seau: High Voltage Linebacker, as are the prob- 
lems Seau experienced with the SAT, his decision to leave college 
early, and the personal importance he places on his wife and 
child. Lyn St. fames: Driven to be First investigates the life of this 
female pioneer in the sport of auto racing, and documents her 
struggles to overcome the traditional demands placed on her to be 
a lady. Andre Agassi: Reaching the Top — Again highlights the ups 
and downs of Agassi's career, from teen star to professional elite 
tennis player. It includes a discussion of his outcast image, and his 
banishment from Wimbledon for his wild hairstyle and colorful 
clothing. Tiger Woods: King of the Course describes the complexities 
of being an African American golf professional. Statements from 
his parents highlight his competitive spirit and drive at a young 
age. The books in the series include photographs, glossaries of 
sports-related terminology, career highlights, tables of contents, 
and indices, and some contain reference information for further 
research. 

Information Books 

Primary Reviews 

12.18 Anderson, Dave. The Story of . . . Sports series. New York: Mor- 
row Junior Books. 

Titles in this series include: 

The Story of Baseball (1997). 150 pp. ISBN: 0-688-143-164. Chap- 
ter Book. 

The Story of Basketball (1997). 144 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14317-2. 
Chapter Book. 

The Story of Football (1997). 160 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14315-6. Chap- 
ter Book. 



er|c 



405 



380 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



The Story of Golf (1998). 159 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15797-1. Chapter Book. 

Three sports of great interest and one of growing interest to most 
young Americans are well presented in these books. The informa- 
tion is divided into two parts. The first part covers the history of 
the sport; the second part covers specific skills and strategies of 
each sport. The text is lively, and one or two black-and-white pho- 
tos appear on almost every double-page spread. Most of the pho- 
tos are action shots. A glossary and index are included in each 
book. The revised editions of each of the first three titles listed 
provide up-to-date coverage of specific players and games. These 
books would be excellent resources for students who are working 
on an in-depth investigation of one of these sports. 

12.19 Horenstein, Henry (1997). Baseball in the Barrios. San Diego: 
Gulliver. 36 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200499-8. Picture Book. 

This book is a photo-essay narrated by a fifth-grade Venezuelan 
boy who loves to play baseball. He talks about his team, and how 
the game is played in the barrio. He also tells us what a barrio is, 
and talks about his daily life. The reader meets the members of his 
family as well. The text makes use of Spanish words and names. It 
should be of interest to and, at the same time broaden the scope of 
interest of, young baseball fans; it will be especially welcomed by 
Hispanic/Latino students. The color photographs are abundant 
and sharp. At the end of the book is a world map that shows the 
location of Venezuela. There is also a double-page spread of four 
categories of baseball terms in English and Spanish, with Spanish 
pronunciation in parentheses. 

12.20 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1998). Lacrosse: The National Game of 
the Iroquois. Photographs by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Hol- 
iday House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1360-8. Picture Book. 

The gorgeous color photographs, along with two reprints of George 
Gatlin pieces, support this narrative of a middle-school lacrosse 
player who plays for the Iroquois nation. The narrative includes the 
history of the game from its Native American origins to the present, 
the basic rules of the sport, and the skills involved in playing the 
game. This is a fantastic book for upper-elementary students and 
beyond, although the pictures and diagrams provide access for 
younger children as well. The book provides a strong multicultural 
emphasis. It is clearly written, and the information is easily accessi- 
ble. The book includes an index and a glossary for easy reference. 



406 



Sports 



381 



12.21 Macy, Sue (1996). Winning Ways: A Photohistory of American 
Women in Sports. New York: Scholastic. 217 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
76336-9. Chapter Book. 

This is a chronological summary of women's accomplishments in 
athletics from the nineteenth century through 1995. The book traces 
the opportunities and obstacles women faced in becoming involved 
in various sports, including bicycling, horseracing, bodybuilding, 
soccer, and baseball. Filled with captioned individual and team pho- 
tographs of the times, the book offers ready access to all students 
who are interested in this material. It includes reproductions of 
advertisements and postcards that demonstrate women's changing 
roles in sports. The author addresses society's views toward women 
in athletics, and highlights the individual accomplishments of 
standout female athletes. The book includes a chronology of firsts, 
records, and noteworthy events; resources for finding further infor- 
mation by topic; and an index. 

12.22 Rafkin, Louise (1997). The Tiger's Eye, the Bird's Fist: A Beginner's 
Guide to the Martial Arts. Illustrated by Leslie McGrath. Boston: Lit- 
tle Brown. 133 pp. ISBN: 0-316-73464-0. Chapter Book. 

Although there are a few photographs of people doing the martial 
arts, and there are drawings to support the historical narrative of the 
book, this is a text-based book. It describes the history, philosophy, 
legends, and stories of the martial arts, and shares the biographies of 
famous martial artists. With an emphasis on the philosophy (and in 
some instances, spirituality) of the martial arts, this book dispels 
popular misconceptions drawn from media and video games. The 
biographies help the reader to develop a contemporary context in 
which to explore the ancient histories of the marital arts. Probably 
appropriate for upper-elementary students and beyond, this book 
provides important background information for readers interested 
in the martial arts. This is an excellent guide and presents some 
interesting multicultural perspectives on Asian and Indonesian cul- 
tures. It includes a bibliography, references for further reading, a list 
of magazines for martial arts enthusiasts, a list of foundations and 
associations, and an index. 

Secondary Reviews 

12.23 Baddiel, Ivor (1998). Soccer: The Ultimate World Cup Compan- 
ion. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2795-8. 
Reference Book. 




407 



382 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



This book is an encyclopedia of soccer. With numerous photo- 
graphs supporting the text, the book covers such topics as the his- 
tory, rules, and techniques of the game; great stadiums; great 
teams; great players; and the history of the FIFA World Cup. The 
table of contents and the index offer easy reference for students 
who are looking for particular information. It is a very appealing 
and engaging text. 

12.24 Brooks, Bruce (1997). NBA by the Numbers. Photographs by 
National Basketball Association. New York: Scholastic. 31 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-97578-1. Picture Book. 

Organized around flashy photos of NBA stars based on the num- 
bers they wore, this book might be enjoyable for younger readers 
who have some knowledge of the game. The book discusses basic 
skills and plays in basketball, as well as highlighting major play- 
ers both past and present. Although light on text, the text is fairly 
technical with respect to the game, and it is clear that the author 
expects prior knowledge on the part of the reader. The book is 
probably more interesting for the pictures than the text. 

12.25 Cooper, Elisha (1998). Ballpark. New York: Greenwillow. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-688-15755-6. Picture Book. 

This picture book details the behind-the-scenes happenings of a 
major league baseball stadium, from the laundry room to the 
groundskeeping. The author uses sparse text and a series of car- 
toonlike watercolor-and-pencil illustrations to describe the activi- 
ties that occur in a baseball stadium in preparation for and during 
the game. The text is printed on the pages in ways that enhance, 
and almost become part of, the illustrations. 

12.26 Fundamental Sports series. Minneapolis: Lemer. 

Titles in this series include: 

Klinzing, James, and Michael Klinzing (1996). Fundamental Bas- 
ketball. Photographs by David Kyle and Andy King. 63 pp. ISBN: 
0-8225-3458-4. Chapter Book. 

Nitz, Kristin Wolden (1997). Fundamental Softball. Photographs 
by Andy King. 63 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-3460-6. Chapter book. 

The two titles listed above are representative of the books in this 
series. The books are divided into six chapters, followed by a glos- 



‘408 



Sports 



383 



sary, a bibliography for further reading, and an index. Pho- 
tographs of athletes who participate in each sport help to demon- 
strate what is being explained or described in the text. The texts are 
equitable in relation to gender, with photos of both boys and girls 
throughout. There are eleven titles in this series, including books 
on baseball, golf, gymnastics, hockey, mountain biking, snow- 
boarding, soccer, tennis, and volleyball. Julie Jensen has written a 
Beginning Sports series which she adapted from the books in the 
Fundamental Sports series. Both series use the same format. 

Jensen, Julie. Beginning Sports series. Minneapolis: 
Lerner. 

12.27 Lee, Barbara (1996). Working in Sports and Recreation. Min- 
neapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-1762-0. Chapter Book. 

This book profiles twelve people who are in careers related to 
sports and recreation, such as a college basketball coach, an ath- 
letic trainer, an activities director, and a sportswriter. A wide range 
of careers is portrayed, with supporting color photographs. This 
would make a great reference text for a survey of careers in sports 
and recreation. Anecdotal statements are the basis for the narrative 
about each career. The section on professional sports is particularly 
realistic in its focus. Boxed sections in each chapter describe the 
requirements that are needed to attain the career under discussion. 
Also included are a table of contents and an index. 

12.28 Osborn, Kevin (1997). Scholastic Encyclopedia of Sports in the 
United States. New York: Scholastic. 220 pp. ISBN: 0-590-69264-X. 
Reference Book. 

This book contains easy-to-read entries on a variety of athletes 
and athletic events in U.S. history from 1770 to 1996. It is organ- 
ized chronologically. The index provides a handy reference for 
locating topics of interest. This book could provide students with 
an excellent resource for looking at sports happenings in relation 
to other historical events. 

How-to Books 

Primary Reviews 

12.29 Blackstone, Margaret (1998). This Is Figure Skating. Illustrated 
by John O'Brien. New York: Henry Holt. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8050- 
3706-3. Picture Book. 



409 



384 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



The cartoonlike illustrations demonstrate the simple, straightfor- 
ward descriptions provided in the text. The book follows two girls 
as they walk to the ice-skating rink in the park, where they see 
experts doing the moves that are talked about in the text. For sev- 
eral of the moves, the reader also sees one or both of the girls try- 
ing the technique. Although the text is limited, it might be an 
excellent book for developing a beginning interest in ice-skating. 
As one sixth grader said, "1 liked this book because 1 want to learn 
how to figure skate." 

12.30 McFarlane, Brian (1996). Hockey for Kids: Heroes, Tips, and 
Facts. Illustrated by Bill Slavin. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-688-15026-8. Picture Book. 

Engaging photographs and illustrations support the descriptions of 
the basics of hockey — skills, rules, equipment, player biographies, 
and history. Packed with detailed facts about this game, which is 
enjoying a recent resurgence in popularity, this book is appropriate 
for upper-elementary students and beyond. This book even fea- 
tures a few pages on women's involvement in the sport, and sev- 
eral girls are depicted in the illustrations throughout the book. A 
great overview of the sport, this book would be a terrific place to 
start an inquiry into hockey. The book contains an index for easy 
reference. 

12.31 Young Enthusiast series. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 

Titles in this series include: 

Edwards, Chris (1996). The Young In-Line Skater. 37 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7894-1124-5. Picture Book. 

Iguchi, Bryan (1997). The Young Snowboarder. 37 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7894-2062-7. Picture Book. 

Mitchell, David (1997). The Young Martial Arts Enthusiast. 65 
pp. ISBN: 0-7894-1508-9. Picture Book. 

Morrissey, Peter (1998). The Young Ice Skater. 37 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7894-2825-3. Picture Book. 

Perez, Eduardo (1998). The Young Baseball Player. 37 pp. ISBN: 
0-7894-2825-3. Picture Book. 

The five books listed above are several of the titles in this excellent 
series aimed at the sports interests of elementary children. Each 
book in the series is written by a professional athlete in the sport 




Sports 



385 



being described. Each title combines high-quality, full-color photo- 
graphs and a supportive text that outlines the preparation for and 
execution of moves for each sport. The descriptions are clear and 
accurate, with step-by-step diagrams of children performing the 
skills. The children shown represent a variety of ethnic groups. An 
index, glossary, and useful addresses appear at the end of each 
book. One sixth grader who read The Young Snowboarder com- 
mented, "I liked the book because it was interesting and it teaches 
moves." Other subjects in the series include: basketball, dancing, 
gymnastics, horseback riding, soccer, swimming, tennis, and track 
and field. 

Fiction and Poetry 

Primary Reviews 

12.32 Bruchac, Joseph (1996). Children of the Longhouse. New York: 
Dial Books for Young Readers. 150 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1793-8. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 5.63) 

12.33 Bruchac, Joseph (1998). The Heart of a Chief. New York: Dial Books 
for Young Readers. 153 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2276-1. Chapter Book. 
(See 5.37) 

12.34 Curtis, Gavin (1998). The Bat Boy & His Violin. Illustrated by 
E. B. Lewis. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80099-1. Picture Book. (See 4.6) 

12.35 Hopkins, Lee Bennett, editor (1996). Opening Days: Sports Poems. 
Illustrated by Scott Medlock. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 35 pp. 
ISBN: 0-15-200270-7. Picture Book. (See 10.17) 

Secondary Reviews 

12.36 Brooks, Bruce. The Wolfbay Wings series. New York: Harper 
Trophy. 

Titles in this series include: 

#1 Woodsie (1997). 116 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027349-6. Chapter Book. 

#2 Zip (1997). 106 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027350-X. Chapter Book. 

#3 Cody (1997). 117 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027541-3. Chapter Book. 

#4 Boot (1998). 122 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027569-3. Chapter Book. 

#5 Prince (1998). 122 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027542-1. Chapter Book. 



411 



386 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



#6 Shark (1998). 118 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027570-7. Chapter Book. 

#7 Billy (1998). 94 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027899-4. Chapter Book. 

Each of these books centers around one player on the Wolfbay 
Wings hockey team. Using hockey as the focal point, each book in 
the series deals realistically with the problem of the title character 
and takes on a different issue and perspective. Play-by-play hockey 
action is included in each book, and the last few pages preview the 
next book in the series. This series is for upper-elementary and 
middle-school students. 

12.37 Christopher, Matt. Matt Christopher Sports Classics Series. 
Boston: Little Brown. 

Titles in this series include: 

Baseball Turnaround (1997). 122 pp. ISBN: 0-316-14275-1. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Penalty Shot (1997). 131 pp. ISBN: 0-316-13787-1. Chapter Book. 

These books are representative of the stories in a series of sports 
novels for upper-elementary children written by Matt Christopher. 
Throughout the series, the protagonists are white males in grades 
4 through 8. Usually the stories are set in a small town. The stories 
are well written for their genre, and while the focus is on the sport, 
there is always another issue involved, and the main character has 
learned a life lesson by book's end. Plenty of play-by-play sports 
action and emotion, along with sports talk and lingo, can be found 
in each story. These books have all the right ingredients to entice 
reluctant readers, including straightforward sentence structure, 
simple vocabulary, well-developed story, and a popular topic. 

12.38 Christopher, Matt (1998). The Dog That Called the Pitch. Illus- 
trated by Daniel Vasconcellos. New York: Little Brown. 38 pp. 
ISBN: 0-316-14207-7. Chapter Book. 

This is one of a series of books by Matt Christopher that have The 
Dog as a main character. In this title, Mike and his dog Harry can 
read each other's minds. Mike is going to pitch at the Little 
League game that day, and wants his dad to help him practice. As 
they start to warm up, along comes Mr. Grimley, who is going to 
be the home-plate umpire for the game. Mr. Grimley, it turns out, 
can also read Mike's and Harry's thoughts. In the bottom of the 
eighth inning, Mike accidentally bumps into Mr. Grimley, whose 



412 



Sports 



387 



glasses fall off and get stepped on. Harry saves the day by calling 
the pitches for Mr. Grimley. Much of the book reads like a play- 
by-play of the game, complemented by the pen-and-ink cartoon 
drawings. This early reader is another one of Matt Christopher's 
well-told sports stories, and will be of great interest to baseball 
fans. The team is made up of both boys and girls. 

Other titles in this series include: 

The Dog That Stole Home. (1996). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
14187-9. Chapter Book. 

The Dog That Pitched a No-Hitter. (1993). 48 pp. ISBN: 
0-316-14103-8. Chapter Book. 

The Dog That Stole Football Plays. (1997). 48 pp. ISBN: 
0-316-13423-6. Chapter Book. 

The Dog That Called the Signals. (1982). 48 pp. ISBN: 0- 
316-13980-7. Chapter Book. 

12.39 Costello, Emily (1998). On the Sidelines. New York: Skylark. 150 
pp. ISBN: 0-553-48645-4. Chapter Book. 

This book is the second title in Emily Costello's Soccer Stars 
series. It tells the story of eleven-year-old Fiona who loves soccer, 
but struggles with asthma and her parents' overprotectiveness. 
She is an excellent player who is important to her team. With the 
help of her coach and teammates, she works to figure out how to 
solve her health and family dilemmas. These books are endorsed 
by the American Youth Soccer Organization. At the end of each 
book, readers will find a list of AYSO soccer tips and a glossary of 
soccer terms. 

Other titles in this series include: 

#1 Foul Play. (1998). 144 pp. ISBN: 0-553-48644-6. Chap- 
ter Book. 

#3 Against the Rules. (1998). ISBN: 0-553-48647-0. Chap- 
ter Book. 

#4 Best Friend Face-off. (1998). 152 pp. ISBN: 0-553- 
48648-9. Chapter Book. 

#5 Tournament Trouble. (1998). ISBN: 0-553-48649-7. 
Chapter Book. 

#6 Lottery Blues. (1998). ISBN: 0-553-48648-9. Chapter 
Book. 



O 

ERIC 



413 



388 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



12.40 Mackel, Kathy (1997). A Season of Comebacks. New York: Put- 
nam. 116 pp. ISBN: 0-399-23026-2. Chapter Book. (See 5.104) 

Games 

Primary Reviews 

12.41 Cardo, Horacio (1998). The Story of Chess. New York: Abbeville. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-7892-0250-6. Picture Book. 

This illustrated book offers a mythical look at the derivation of the 
game of chess. In so doing, it explains the pieces, the board, and 
some of the moves. It is a compelling introduction to chess that 
clearly exemplifies the complex strategies involved in playing the 
game. The full-color paintings, although fanciful and consistent 
with the mythological nature of the text, are also representative 
of the information presented. Cardo achieves a br illian t balance 
between the myth and the reality of the game. Many students who 
might not otherwise have shown an interest in chess may well be 
intrigued by this book and want to experiment with the game. 

12.42 Erlbach, Arlene (1997). Sidewalk Games around the World. Illus- 
trated by Sharon Lane Holm. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0008-2. Picture Book. 

Using an attractive, inviting, and easy-to-use format, this book 
introduces popular children's games from twenty-six different 
countries. Each game is described on a double-page spread intro- 
duced with a brief paragraph about the country. A world map on 
each double-page spread also shows the location of the country. 
Occasionally there is a language box with a pronunciation key of 
the terms (usually numbers) used by the children as they play the 
game. Each set of directions begins with the number of players, 
what they will need, and how to play. Directions for play are clear 
and easy-to-understand, and include useful illustrations. There is 
a broad representation of countries. Games are indexed by conti- 
nent, age, indoors-outdoors, and number of players required. An 
extensive bibliography is included at the end. This would be an 
excellent book to use in a study of diversity. 

12.43 Lankford, Mary D. (1996). Jacks around the World. Illustrated by 
Karen Dugan. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0- 
688-13708-3. Picture Book. 




414 



Games 



389 



This book includes jacks games from fourteen countries. The book 
is organized into double-page spreads. The opening spread con- 
tains a map of the world with the continents in green and water in 
blue. The coimtries with jacks games that are represented in the 
text are numbered and shown in yellow. A corresponding list of 
the countries is given on the left-hand side of the double-page 
spread. The rest of the book has the text on the left-hand page, 
and a painting of children playing the game on the right. There 
are details in each illustration pertinent to the country being 
shown. The name of the game in the coimtry being shown is also 
presented. For example, in South Korea the game is called kong- 
keui, and in Israel it is called hamesh avanim. The text gives a bit of 
history and backgroimd for each game, and then a numbered list 
of rules for play. 

Secondary Reviews 

12.44 Cole, Joanna, and Stephanie Calmenson (1998). Marbles: 101 
Ways to Play. Illustrated by Alan Tiegreen. New York: Morrow 
Junior Books. 127 pp. ISBN: 0-688-12205-1. Chapter Book. 

This book gives the history of the game of marbles, as well as 
basic how-to information and a myriad of games kids can play 
with marbles. One sixth grader said, "I bet a lot of kids would 
take it out and have a fim time with the marbles book." At the end 
of the book, there is a page listing other things that can be done 
with marbles, suggestions for starting a marble collection, and a 
glossary of the different kinds of marbles. The cartoonlike pen- 
and-ink drawings offer visual support for the directions and 
descriptions of both the marbles and how to play the various 
games. 

12.45 Diagram Group (1998). The Little Giant Encyclopedia of Games 
for One or Two. New York: Sterling. 510 pp. ISBN: 0-8069-0981-1. 
Reference Book. 

This book offers directions and supportive illustrations for over 
130 games that can be played either alone or with one other per- 
son. It is divided into three sections. The first section contains 
games for one; the second section describes games for two; and 
the third section provides an index to aU of the games discussed, 
organized by type of game (e.g., board games, card games, etc.). 
There is also an alphabetical index to all of the games. 




415 



390 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



12.46 Drake, Jane, and Ann Love (1998). The Kids Campfire Book. 
Illustrated by Heather Collins. Buffalo, NY: Kids Can. 128 pp. 
ISBN: 1-55074-454-2. Chapter Book. 

This book offers information about a number of outdoor games and 
recreation activities. The writing is descriptive and detailed. Musi- 
cal text and information for campers on nature and conservation 
techniques also are included. There are also recipes and directions 
for meals, as well as other things to make and do. This text would 
be excellent for supporting kids' preparations for a camping trip. 
The illustrations are pencil drawings. An index is included. 

12.47 Drake, Jane, and Ann Love (1998). The Kids Summer Games 
Book. Illustrated by Heather Collins. Buffalo, NY: Kids Can. 176 
pp. ISBN: 1-55074-469-0. Chapter Book. 

A good reference book of card games and tricks, land and water 
outdoor activities, and games that simply require paper and pen- 
cil. This book would be a great resource for parents as well as 
teachers and students. The writing is descriptive and technical, 
but accessible to the interested reader. 

Hobbies 

Primary Reviews 

12.48 Cole, Joarma, and Stephanie Calmenson (1997). The Rain or 
Shine Activity Book: Fun Things to Make and Do. Illustrated by 
Alan Tiegreen. New York: Morrow Junior Books. 192 pp. ISBN: 0- 
688-12131-4. Chapter Book. 

This attractive and well-organized treasure trove of things to do 
will be useful to children, teachers, and parents. It has thirteen 
categories of activities, including card games, paper crafts, jump- 
rope rhymes, word games, magic tricks, and paper-and-pencil 
games, and lists ninety activities in all. The format is inviting, and 
the instructions are easy-to-follow. The illustrations include car- 
toonlike line drawings that add to the hm, and diagram drawings 
that support the directions. The book is entirely in black-and- 
white except for the titles, which are in red. This is a book that stu- 
dents easily could use independently. 

12.49 Micklethwait, Lucy (1996). A Child's Book of Play in Art: Great 
Pictures Great Fun. New York: Dorling Kindersley 45 pp. ISBN: 
0-7894-1003-6. Picture Book. (See 11.55) 




416 



Hobbies 



391 



12.50 The Most Excellent Book of . . . series. Brookfield, CT: Copper 
Beech. 

Casey, Moe (1997). The Most Excellent Book of Dress Up. 32 pp. 
ISBN; 0-7613-0550-5. Picture Book. 

Lincoln, Margaret (1997). The Most Excellent Book of Face Paint- 
ing. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0551-3. Picture Book. 

In each of the two books reviewed, clear step-by-step instructions 
are offered for creating the costumes and faces depicted in both 
drawings and photographs. These are books that upper-elementary 
children could use independently. Both books offer a table of con- 
tents and an index for easy reference. As one sixth grader explained, 
"I like the book because it has nice costumes and you can learn to 
make them." The first few pages of each book offer information 
about the origin of costumes and face painting, discussion of differ- 
ent materials to be used, safety tips, and general instructions. Each 
costume or face is then given in a double-page spread with instruc- 
tions and accompanying illustrations and photographs. 

12.51 Ross, Kathy (1997). The Jewish Holiday Craft Book. Illustrated 
by Melinda Levine. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 96 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7613-0055-4. Picture Book. 

This book is organized by holidays. In the table of contents, each 
holiday is given with two to eight items to make listed imdemeath. 
The first page of each section explains the holiday, and then the 
purpose of each activity in relation to the celebration is explained. 
The illustrations offer clear support for the directions given in the 
text, and each craft item is depicted as it will look when fully con- 
structed. The crafts range from very simple to fairly complex. This 
book invites an exploration of Judaism in a way that provides 
information and leads to many new questions as well. 

12.52 Sola, Michele (1997). Angela Weaves a Dream: The Story of a 
Young Maya Artist. Photographs by Jeffrey Jay Foxx. New York: 
Hyperion Books for Children. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0073-9. Picture 
Book. (See 11.38) 

12.53 Temko, Florence (1996). Traditional Crafts from Mexico and Cen- 
tral America. Illustrated by Randall Gooch. Photographs by 
Robert L. Wolfe and Diane Wolfe. Minneapolis: Lerner. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-2935-1. Chapter Book. (See 11.38) 




417 , 



392 



Sports, Games, and Hobbies 



12.54 Wilkes, Angela (1996). Dazzling Disguises and Clever Cos- 
tumes: More than 50 Step-by-Step Projects to Make, Paint, Sew, 
Prepare, and Wear. New York; Dorling Kindersley. 48 pp. ISBN; 0- 
7894-1001-X. Picture Book. (See 11.34) 

12.55 Zanzarella, Marianne (1997). The Good Housekeeping Illus- 
trated Children's Cookbook. Photographs by Tom Eckerle. New 
York; Morrow. 176 pp. ISBN; 0-688-13375-4. Reference Book. 

This is a traditional recipe book for children. Some of the recipes 
are creative, but most are standard fare with common names. The 
directions are clear and attractively arranged. Most of the recipes 
will need adult supervision. Preparation time, degree of difficulty, 
number of servings, utensils, and ingredients are given first. Most 
recipes have only one photograph of the finished product, but the 
directions are detailed, clear, and easy-to-follow. There are photo- 
graphs of children representing several ethnic groups throughout 
the book, but not in abundance. A chapter on the general aspects 
of cooking begins the book. The recipes are divided into standard 
but useful groupings; breakfasts, lunches, dinners, snacks, salads, 
side dishes, drinks, and desserts. At the end of the book, there is a 
glossary of cooking terms with thorough descriptions for each; an 
extensive picture-glossary of utensils; and an index. For easy ref- 
erence, each section is color-coded. For instance, cooking basics 
and general information are coded in light blue, and breakfast in 
orange. 

Secondary Reviews 

12.56 Mayer, Marianna (1998). The Mother Goose Cookbook: Rhymes 
and Recipes for the Very Young. Illustrated by Carol Schwartz. 
New York; Morrow Junior Books. 37 pp. ISBN; 0-688-15242-2. Pic- 
ture Book. 

The rhyme is on the left-hand page surrounded by a full-color 
illustration done in gouache and airbrush, and the recipe is on the 
right. The recipe directions are written in a way that includes 
rebus-like drawings between the sentences to reinforce the ingre- 
dients needed for each step. This is a book that would be fun for 
young children to use to choose recipes, but the actual prepara- 
tion would need adult assistance and supervision. 

12.57 Ross, Kathy. Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About . . . series. 
Illustrated by Sharon Lane Holm. Brookfield, CT; Millbrook. 




Hobbies 



393 



Titles in this series include: 

Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About Dinosaurs (1997). 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0053-8. Picture Book. 

Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About Outer Space (1997). 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0054-6. Picture Book. 

Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About Rainforests (1997). 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0117-8. Picture Book. 

These attractive books could be used as much by teachers as by 
students. The format is inviting and well organized, but the direc- 
tions for most of the projects are lengthy and detailed. Kids will 
enjoy making most of the items, but they will need adult or 
teacher guidance. The topics all have child appeal and could be 
incorporated easily into units on the topic. Twenty projects are 
included in . . . Dinosaurs and . . . Outer Space; thirteen projects are 
included in . . . Rainforests. 

12.58 Temko, Florence. Paper Magic series. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 
Titles in this series include: 

Animals and Birds (1996). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0070-6. Picture 
Book. 

Planes and Other Things (1996). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0041-4. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Paper Gifts and Jewelry (1997). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0209-3. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Paper Tags and Cards (1997). 48 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0210-7. Picture 
Book. 

In each book, the fuU-color illustrations show clearly how to follow 
the concise and straightforward directions. Each activity is labeled in 
the table of contents as to its level of difficulty. Three levels are 
included: easy, you-can-do-it, and expert. Also included are an intro- 
duction, a key to the symbols used in the illustrations, and an expla- 
nation of the paper and supplies needed to complete each project. 



■'419 





Ill® if po^if^s ®i(La.®(f^ 



c. 

A. Bless Us All: A Child’s Yearbook of Blessings, Cynth\aRy\an{{A3.8). B. Myth Maker: 
J. R. R. Tolkien, Anne E. Neimark (13.47). C. To Every Thing There Is a Season, Leo & 
Diane Dillon (13.28). 




420 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

r 



13 The Craft of Language: 
Passages, Profiles, 
and Puzzles 



Kathleen Marie Crawford 
M. Ruth Davenport 

Contributing reviewers included Kathleen Marie Crawford, 

M. Ruth Davenport, Mary L. Diener, Jill M. Hartke, Lynda S. 
Hootman, Angela Humphrey, Joyce Madsen, Elizabeth Mena, 

Pat Pearman, Laurie Reddy, and Jennifer L. Wilson. 

ie craft of language is important because it draws children into the 



shared cultural bond that unites us all as people. We support chil- 



dren by helping them become literate and helping them learn the 
stories that make us who we are. As readers, children can learn to appre- 
ciate an exciting beginning, an intriguing tale, a surprising twist of plot, 
and an unexpected ending. A poignant scene can be relived again and 
again, just as an unforgettable character stays in our hearts forever. A 
well-written caper can still make us chuckle, long after the book has 
been closed. As writers, children can develop a critical eye for the liter- 
ary craft. They can come to appreciate how a single word can change the 
reader's mental image, or a single phrase can make the difference 
between a ho-hum story and a memorable plot. Guided by strong writ- 
ing mentors, children can learn to fall in love with language, and gain 
the skill to use the right amount of detail, create dynamic tension, and 
develop memorable characters. 

This chapter reviews books in five major categories: Lovely Lan- 
guage; Language Play; Riddles, Chants, and Poems; Biographies and 
Autobiographies (of Authors, Books, and Characters); and Mysteries. 
The books we selected for the section entitled Lovely Language include 
those in which the author presented "beautiful writing, truly original 
language, images that make you sit up straight when you're reading" 
(Fletcher 1993, 139). Lovely Language includes books such as Daddy Calls 
Me Man (Johnson 1997), in which the words of the story playfully dance 
across the pages. We wanted to share books in which the language would 




421 



396 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



be so memorable that when children read them, the books would "sim- 
ply take their breath away" (Harwayne 1992, 13). Through a beautiful 
text such as My Mama Had a Dancing Heart (Gray 1995), we see that one 
way of connecting to books is to find ourselves in passages that present 
stunning, startling language that gives "the reader a dazzling jolt of 
recognition" (Fletcher 1993, 147). We wanted to share with children 
"books that highlight the richness of the English language and . . . cele- 
brate unusual words" (Harwayne 1992, 12). 

Books in the section entitled Language Play look at the light- 
hearted side of the literary craft, such as the use of alliteration and the 
mischievous joy of simply toying with words. Not only will children 
learn that language is something malleable and pliant, but also that it is 
something that can bring great joy. By manipulating and playing with 
words and phrases, children gain control over language in a way that 
empowers them to take risks and become inventive. Children enjoy 
reading these playful texts, and trying out new possibilities by combin- 
ing the different meanings and sounds of words. Like the girl in Double 
Trouble in Walla Walla (Clements 1997), they get carried away with lin- 
guistic pranks. Harwayne (1992) recognizes that "playfulness with 
words, ideas, and design will come in handy when these young writers 
begin to generate topics, shape texts, and revise drafts" (12). 

The third section is Riddles, Chants, and Poems. Each of these 
styles of writing uses the craft of language to illuminate an everyday 
occurrence in a unique manner. Here we review the beautiful words of 
Nikki Grimes telling us about the love of children's laughter, and Step- 
toe's artistic celebration of African American fathers through the eyes of 
several poets. In addition to the hand-clapping rhymes, tongue-twisters, 
and ridiculous riddles, we share the timeless To Every Thing There Is a 
Season (Dillon and Dillon 1998), accompanied by the Dillons' sumptu- 
ous illustrations in a variety of styles. We chose books in this area that 
would give children the enjoyment of solving brain-teasers, the amuse- 
ment of skipping to childhood chants, and the delight of reflecting on 
their lives through exquisite poetry. We agree with Huck et al. (1997), 
who state, "There is an elusiveness about poetry that makes it defy pre- 
cise definition. It is not so much what it is that is important, as how it 
makes us feel" (390). 

In the section entitled Biographies and Autobiographies, we explore 
a wide range of noted writers. Vignettes of George Ella Lyon's life as a 
child are compared to her life today to create a sense of autobiography in 
A Sign (Lyon 1998). By exploring the lives of authors such as Stevenson, 
London, and Tolkien, we examine the craft of language and learn how they 
came to love words themselves. One book in this section is the "biogra- 



422 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



397 



phy" of a much-loved children's book. Goodnight Moon (Brown 1947). 
while another presents the autobiography of a famed book character, 
Strega Nona. 

Authors of mysteries and detective stories deliberately use lan- 
guage to "play" with readers' predictions and their inclination to seek 
patterns and explanations. By leaving a part of the story untold until the 
end, these writers invite readers to draw on their own life experiences 
and the clues in the text to propose a story that can explain all the pieces. 

In the section entitled Mysteries, there is something for readers of 
every age. From an Arthur story to books for more mature students, 
there is a mystery here that will capture readers' imaginations. With 
young main characters who face issues as diverse as witnessing a kid- 
napping, losing a parent, living with a Native American tribe, and dis- 
covering a mute stranger in the barn, readers will be captivated by these 
intriguing mysteries. 

We want children to attend to the craft of language in order to 
appreciate and honor lovely language and the masterful wielding of the 
literary craft. We want them to value having fun with language and to 
"know that people play with language" (Harwayne 1992, 12). We share 
books filled with riddles, chants, and poems to communicate our enjoy- 
ment and enthusiasm for rhythm and the lilt of language. Through biog- 
raphies, children can appreciate a particular talent with language as 
writers tell the story of a life well lived. Mystery writers display a 
unique mastery of the skill of weaving together specific detail, charis- 
matic characters, and tension through unforgettable language (Fletcher 
1993). Join us now as we adventure with words and lovely language, 
explore interesting lives through biographies, and are spellbound by 
these irresistible mysteries! 

Works Cited 

Fletcher, Ralph. 1993. What a Writer Needs. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Harwayne, Shelley. 1992. Lasting Impressions: Weaving Literature into the Writing 

Workshop. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemarm. 

Huck, Charlotte, Susan Hepler, Janet Hickman, and Barbara Z. Kiefer. 1997. 

Children's Literature in the Elementary School. 6th ed. Madison, WI: Brown 

& Benchmark. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chapter; 



423 



398 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic informa- 
tion. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained elsewhere 
in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the bibliographic infor- 
mation. 

Lovely Language 

Primary Reviews 

13.1 Bauer, Marion Dane (1997). If You Were Born a Kitten. Illustrated 
by JoEllen McAllister Stammen. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80111-4. Picture 
Book. 

With a gently flowing text, Bauer celebrates the miracle of birth. By 
sharing in the experiences of twelve different animals nuzzling their 
caring mothers (or seahorse father!), we see how each is nurtured as 
a newborn. The lovely language delights the reader through allitera- 
tion and repeated words. Bauer captures the movements, sounds, 
and features of these varied creatures, showing a common bond of 
universal love between parent and offspring. There is a tenderness 
here children will be drawn to, from the furry sleeping mama bear 
to the baby elephant sucking his trunk. Stammen's illustrations in 
dry pastel evoke the warmth and cuddling of each family in exqui- 
site detail. This is a delightful text that ends with the welcome of a 
newborn child after he has been floating in a salty sea, "waiting for 
us who were waiting for you." Join Bauer and Stammen as they 
commemorate the fascination and wonder of bearing young. 

13.2 Brook, Donna (1998). The Journey of English. Illustrated by Jean 
Day Zallinger. New York: Clarion. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-71211-4. 
Chapter Book. 

This is a fascinating, informative history of English. The book 
begins with an explanation of the extent to which English is used 
throughout the world, and continues with a look at the language's 
origins. Beginning with the year 2000 B.C.E. and continuing to 
modern times, the evolutions and journeys of the English lan- 
guage are traced through wars, conquered empires, slavery, mar- 
riages between countries, and much more to show the trading of 
words and meanings. The discussions of changes and additions 
are followed by examples of words and phrases currently used in 
modern English. The book ends with an interesting look at dialect 
and the speculation that one day England's English and the 



424 - 



Lovely Language 



399 



United States' English may become two completely different lan- 
guages. Included at the end is a page about the origin of dictionar- 
ies, as well as a resource page on Clues to Word Origin. These 
pages offer references for additional independent word study. 

13.3 Desimini, Lisa, David Ricceri, Sara Schwartz, and Dan Yaccarino 
(1997). All Year Round: A Book to Benefit Children in Need. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-36097-3. Picture Book. 

In this rhyming picture book, four artists combine their creative tal- 
ents to illustrate and playfully sprinkle words to depict the passing 
of time through four seasons. Rainbow-colored snowmen welcome 
winter with a "frosty party" for their winter friends. Signalled by a 
patch of green grass peeking through the snow, spring is intro- 
duced with a gentle rain shower as birds sing and flowering mead- 
ows reappear along a muddy, puddled path. Cleverly chosen 
rhyming words transport the reader to summer, as the authors 
show readers a dazzling orange sun shining on beaches filled with 
children enjoying ice-cream treats, and high waves splashing 
against the sandy shores. Gray clouds, along with the call of a large 
black crow flying across the wind-swept sky, usher in fall. Huge 
piles of brightly colored leaves cover two boys so just their eyes 
peer above their leafy hiding place. A bright harvest moon reveals 
scarecrows on hills, waiting patiently "for the seasons to come 
around again." Through response writings, this story evoked in 
seven- and eight-year-old children memories about the fun times 
they spent with their f amili es through the passing seasons of their 
lives. The Robin Hood Foundation, which serves children in need, 
will receive a portion of the proceeds of this book to distribute to 
nonprofit organizations that help families all year round. 

13.4 Faulkner, Keith (1996). The Wide-Mouthed Frog. Illustrated by 
Jonathan Lambert. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1875- 
6. Picture Book. 

Young children will be amused by this playful tale of a curious 
frog who keeps asking other creatures he encounters what they 
like to eat — that is, until he stumbles upon an alligator who eats 
wide-mouthed frogs! In this silly repetitive story, the mouths of 
all the animals pop up at the reader and invite interaction with the 
text. Readers will delight in imitating the shapes of the different 
mouths as they follow the frog through his escapades in different 
animals' habitats. 



ERIC 




400 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



13.5 Fox, Mem (1997). Whoever You Are. Illustrated by Leslie Straub. 
San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200-787-3. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 8.9) 

13.6 Gray, Libba Moore (1995). My Mama Had a Dancing Heart. Illus- 
trated by Raul Colon. Unpaged. New York: Orchard. ISBN: 0-531- 
08770-0. Picture Book. 

In this tribute to the beauties of nature and to each other's com- 
pany, mother and daughter take delight in the sights, sounds, 
tastes, and ballets of each season. Celebrating a "tip-tapping, song- 
singing, finger-snapping kind of day," they dance a welcome to the 
spring rain, summer waves, autumn winds, and winter snows. 
With a masterful hand. Gray crafts a playful dance with words that 
portrays the magical encounter with each season these two charac- 
ters share. Colon's soft, distinctive style perfectly echoes the ethe- 
real, luscious, joyful text. The inspiration of these "hello" ballets 
stays with the daughter as she feather-floats down on stage as a 
professional ballerina. An unforgettable lovely language book. 

13.7 Johnson, Angela (1997). Daddy Calls Me Man. Illustrated by 
Rhonda Mitchell. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531- 
30042-0. Picture Book. (See 4.11) 

13.8 Rylant, Cynthia (1998). Bless Us All: A Child's Yearbook of 
Blessings. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
82370-3. Picture Book. 

Rylant has done it again! With each unique book, she surprises 
and delights us with her diversity of styles and talents as a 
weaver of words. In this book of monthly devotions, we also are 
treated to her folk art: illustrations that show the passing of time, 
surrounded by quilt squares. The rolling text gives us all gentle 
reminders of the simple wonders that surround us through the 
rhythm of the year. This lovely language book offers new insights 
into Rylant's love of animals, appreciation of family, and aware- 
ness of common beauty. Her craft as an author is unmistakable as 
each word, carefully selected and placed, allows her tribute to 
unfold across each month. 

13.9 Schnur, Steven (1997). Autumn: An Alphabet Acrostic. Illus- 
trated by Leslie Evans. New York: Clarion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
77043-2. Picture Book. 




Language Play 



401 



In this lovely language text, Schnur cleverly embraces the harvest 
season with delightful wordplay that presents the serenity and 
subtle wonders of fall. Each page dances the reader through the 
alphabet with familiar words that depict the memories of family 
gatherings, the coziness of fireplaces, the warmth of stacked-high 
quilts, the bounty of the harvest, the crisp cold air, and frost on 
window panes. The flawless craftship of Evans' linoleum-cut 
illustrations helps to extend and illuminate the fullness of 
autumn. "Oooh," exclaimed Brett (age seven), "I wish I could 
write a book like that. It makes me feel warm and cozy. Fall is my 
favorite season of the year." Readers of all ages will appreciate the 
warm words that build the traditional relationships that autumn 
brings to Earth. An added delight is the acrostic poem that results 
from the first letter of each line. 

13.10 Young, Ed (1997). Voices of the Heart. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-50199-2. Picture Book. (See 11.40) 

Language Play 

Primary Reviews 

13.11 Barrett, Judi (1998). Things That Are Most in the World. Illus- 
trated by John Nickle. New York: Antheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-689-81333-3. Picture Book. 

Children often ask, "What is a superlative?" The answer to this 
question can be found in this brilliantly colorful and imaginative 
book. Each page is dedicated to a superlative, taking the reader 
from what are the silliest to the smelliest to the wiggliest things in 
the world. Children of all ages will be inspired to create their own 
renditions of what is the most in the world. 

13.12 Clements, Andrew (1997). Double Trouble in Walla Walla. Illus- 
trated by Sal Murdocca. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0306-5. Picture Book. 

Everyone has had a day when they have been tongue-tied and the 
words just won't come out right. In Clements' delightful text, lit- 
tle Lulu finds herself in exactly this situation in her school class- 
room. Realizing her homework is a mess, she raises her hand in 
class and says, "Mrs. Bell, I feel like a nit-wit. My homework is all 
higgledy-piggledy. Last night it was in tip-top shape, but now it's 
a big mish-mash." From that point on. Lulu infects the whole 



402 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



school, including the principal, with her rhyming lingo. Just when 
Walla Walla school thinks it can no longer speak English, the 
school nurse comes to the rescue and puts everything straight 
again. Large, brilliant illustrations bring to life the hysterical situ- 
ations. Michael and Courtney shared that reading this funny book 
is like reading pages of tongue-twisters. Readers of all ages surely 
will read this story several times, as those tongue-twisters are 
truly tricky! 

13.13 Edwards, Pamela Duncan (1996). Some Smug Slug. Illustrated by 
Henry Cole. New York: HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024789- 
4. Picture Book. 

With a swagger, a slug slithers up a highly sinister slope. The spar- 
row, the spider, and the swallowtail are simply trying to save him by 
screaming at this slug. But the smug slug shambles on. It showed no 
suspicion "until something shifted, and shuddered and shook." 
This creative alliteration talk will have children snorting them- 
selves silly at the surprise ending for this very smug slug! The 
realistic paintings on each page give you a "slug's-eye view" of 
life at ground level. 

13.14 Heller, Ruth (1997). Mine, All Mine: A Book about Pronouns. 
New York: Grosset & Dunlap. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-448-41606-9. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Heller has colorfully added to her collection of acclaimed books 
about the English language. Mine, All Mine highlights pronouns 
and what our whimsical language would be like without them. 
Melanie (age eight) commented after her teacher shared the book 
during Writing Workshop, "I love the illustrations so much I want 
to take them home with me and keep them forever." As always, 
Heller provides the reader with gay and richly colored illustra- 
tions that capture the imagination and remind us how much fun 
language really can be. 

Secondary Reviews 

13.15 Cyrus, Kurt (1997). Tangle Town. New York: Earrar, Straus and 
Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-37384-1. Picture Book. 

This story plays on children's love of all things silly. After the first 
few pages Genell (age eight) said, "Teacher, this is a silly, flip-flop 
story." The story begins when the mayor gets locked in his office. 



428 , 



Language Play 



403 



He says "I'm getting blisters!" to a passing policeman, who tells a 
man "We need blasters!" and the pandemonium begins. "This 
whole town forgot to listen" said Angie (age six). A young girl 
named Roxy goes to town looking for her escaped cow, and sees 
the tangled-up mess. She takes charge and sets things right again. 
After hearing this story, Filemon (age seven) said, "This sure was 
a tangled tale." 

13.16 Falwell, Cathryn (1998). Word Wizard. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-85580-2. Picture Book. 

Anna is eating her cereal one morning when she notices the letters 
on her spoon speU "DAWN." These letters float around and become 
the word "WAND." Anna begins to find many words and 
rearranges their letters to make new words. She meets a sad boy 
named Zack, and with her magic wand helps him find his home, 
changing words along the way. Each time the two encounter a prob- 
lem on their journey, Anna waves her wand and changes the prob- 
lem into a solution. The illustrations are bright and inviting, made 
from a mixture of cut-paper collage, rubber-stamp prints, and 
watercolors. The final page of the book is an idea page that suggests 
ways readers can become word wizards. "This book makes me 
thiuk of words" said Angie (age six). "There were tons of words in 
this book" said Clint (age six). 

13.17 Grover, Max (1997). Max's Wacky Taxi Day. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-20098-9-2. Picture Book. 

This delightful book is a must for the teacher who is exploring the 
multiple meanings of words in our language. Grover, an artist 
since childhood, has used brilliant acrylic colors to create illustra- 
tions that stimulate the eyes as well as the mind. Children will be 
amused by the verbal and visual puns as Max, the taxi driver, 
takes them along in his wacky taxi. Lily (age seven) giggled when 
she noticed that in order to "train" Hector the dog to be a better 
passenger in the taxi. Max put him on a train! Another group of 
children observed that the train was already filled with a 
menagerie of other animals in need of obedience training. The 
reader encounters these and similar absurdities created by the lit- 
eral interpretations of language. Caleb (age eight) thought "the 
book was so funny that it reminded me of the silly times that I 
have with my best friend." The entertaining use of language is 
combined with wacky illustrations, such as the one depicting the 




404 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



harried Ms. Hastings. Fearing she will be late for a meeting, she 
laments that everyone else has a car phone (a car shaped like a 
phone). Students will enjoy composing their own visual and ver- 
bal puns as they explore language. 

13.18 Most, Bernard (1998). A Pair of Protoceratops. San Diego: Har- 
court Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201443-8. Picture Book. 

Author Bernard Most toys with alliteration and delights the imagi- 
nation of every child in this charming story about two mischie- 
vous protoceratop youngsters. Students will identify with the 
"pair of protoceratops" as they paste paper, practice their penship, 
ponder over puzzles, pack plastic pails, party in the park, plunge 
into pools, and play ping-pong. A group of second graders were 
reminded of their own experiences as they read about the proto- 
ceratop pair "pestering papa." Derek (age eight) stated that the 
protoceratops remind him of his twin cousins, who often get into 
trouble. Travis (age eight) remembered a time he was punished for 
"pestering" someone. Like the characters in the story, he had to do 
some extra chores to atone for his misbehavior. Most's enchanting 
illustrations and tantalizing text make this book a model of alliter- 
ation and a platform for a discussion about the consequences of 
misbehavior. 

13.19 Most, Bernard (1998). A Trio of Triceratops. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201448-9. Picture Book. 

In this companion book to A Pair of Protoceratops, an adorable trio 
of triceratops youngsters try on trousers, taste tangerines, tangle 
tails, take turns on the teeter-totter, and toot trumpets. Matthew 
(age eight) thought the book was funny and liked the playful trio. 
Second grader Brian (age eight) noticed that the trio were trouble- 
makers as they tickled turkeys, terrified turtles, and teased a 
tyrannosaurus. Andrew (age eight) liked the way Most illustrated 
the trio. Most's pictures are delightful, and Whitney (age eight) 
noticed that the numbers 1, 2, and 3 always are included. Her 
favorite illustration was the trio of triceratops tanning in the trop- 
ics. The intricacies of the illustrations and the alliteration in the 
text invite the reader to linger and appreciate this charming book. 

13.20 Nikola-Lisa, W. (1997). Tangle Talk. Illustrated by Jessica Clerk. 
New York: Dutton. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45399-7. Picture Book. 



Language Play 



405 



This humorous book tells of strange events in a topsy-turvy 
world, while having fun with language. Nikola-Lisa uses simple 
but tickling language to unfold a story based on an old children's 
verse from England. It is the story of a gentleman who goes for a 
stroll through the "wonderful city of May in the month of Boston" 
and soon realizes that things are "upside down." Most interesting 
is the way the story ends — ^just as it begins. Clerk depicts the 
whimsical rhyming text in a way that immediately draws the 
attention of the reader. Young readers will surely find this story to 
be a great way of inventing their own topsy-turvy language! 

13.21 Older, Jules (1997). Cow. Illustrated by Lyn Severance. Water- 
town, MA: Charlesbridge. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88106-957-4. Picture 
Book. 

If you are curious about cows, this is the book for you! Numerous 
cow facts are revealed throughout this book in a very humorous 
way. Where do various types of cows come from? What do cows 
provide for us? How do they survive? The author has a unique 
way of presenting this information, and in the end makes this non- 
fiction piece very entertaining. "I loved it because the book was 
sarcastic and factual at the same time," said Kristin (age eleven). 
This book also opens up many topics for discussion. "Nobody 
cares what color a cow is. Why do some care about people's col- 
ors?" questioned Tim (age eleven). Not only do students learn facts 
about cows, but they also are entertained by the pictures on every 
page. There are many inquiries within science, history, and lan- 
guage arts in this book, which makes it a wonderful teaching tool. 

13.22 Pandell, Karen (1996). Animal Action ABC. Photographs by Art 
Wolfe and Nancy Sheehan. New York: Dutton. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
525-45486-1. Picture Book. 

This gorgeous alphabet story will hold the interest of even the 
youngest children. Wolfe has taken close-up photographs of ani- 
mals in their natural habitat, and Sheehan has taken photographs 
of children acting like the animals in the photographs. Children 
feel compelled to identify and mimic the animals' actions. "They 
want us to act this story out. Let me show you how," said Genell 
(age eight). Pandell has written a poem to accompany each set of 
photographs. The alphabet is woven throughout, not by naming 
the animals, but by identifying the actions in the photographs. A 
great book to launch a discussion of the language of verbs! 




406 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



13.23 Root, Phyllis (1996). Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble. Illus- 
trated by David Parkins. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-56402-3478. Picture Book. 

Aunt Nancy doesn't like it when Old Man Trouble shows up 
because things just don't seem to go her way. Old Man Trouble 
loves to visit Aunt Nancy, and takes delight in the accidents he 
causes her. Finally, Aunt Nancy decides to give Old Man Trouble a 
taste of his own medicine by pretending she likes it when Old 
Man Trouble smirks at her wrongdoings. Aunt Nancy finally gets 
even with Old Man Trouble. Children enjoy the irony of the two 
different perspectives on the same event. The use of dialect makes 
the language interesting. "I like it when Aunt Nancy would stay 
happy and act like everything bad was good. She sure tricked 
him," said Adam (age eight). 

13.24 Rosenberg, Liz (1997). A Big and Little Alphabet. Illustrated by 
Vera Rosenberry. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531- 
30050-1. Picture Book. 

This elegantly illustrated alphabet book is tailor-made for lovers of 
picture books. The antics of the wild collection of creatures invite 
the reader to explore each page to discover their actions as they 
romp through the alphabet. The alliteration explosions will delight 
the reader. Krystal (age eight) noticed that the big and little alpha- 
bet letters were illustrated by "a zoo" of creatures that were doing 
things that began with the letter on the page. Rosenberg's fanciful 
illustrations encourage prediction and discussion as readers make 
their way from armadillos aiming arrows to zebras with zippers 
catching zzz's. This book is an excellent resource to help students 
become aware of the sounds of letters, as well as discover the use 
of verbs. Students will delight in choosing an alphabet letter and 
creating their own playful possibilities. 

13.25 Speed, Toby (1995). Two Cool Cows. Illustrated by Barry Root. 
New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22647-8. Picture Book. 

Readers will howl at the antics of these "two cool, too cool cows," 
as they steal boots from the Huckabuck kids, travel to the moun- 
taintop of Hillimadoon, and (in search of greener pastures) ven- 
ture to the far side of the moon. After a rollicking picnic in the 
craters with their cousins, the wayward cool cows return to eart^i, 
give back the boots, and head for the Huckabuck farm. Through 



O 

ERIC 



432 



Riddles, Chants, and Poems 



407 



rhyming, lilting text. Speed takes us on a roller coaster ride of fim 
language and cow capers. See what really happened when the 
cow jumped over the moon! 

13.26 Vail, Rachel (1998). Over the Moon. Illustrated by Scott Nash. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-33068-0. Picture Book. 

Get ready for a rollicking ride through repeated takes at a theater 
rehearsal as animals attempt to enact the familiar nursery rhyme. 
The set includes backdrops, prop assistants, stagehands, makeup 
artists and reviewers with notebooks. This whimsical rendition 
will split your seams as Broadway-style director Mr. Hi Diddle 
Diddle tries to direct the cow, little dog, and cat (playing a Stradi- 
varius, of course!) in the infamous jumping-over-the-moon scene. 
Kids will be tickled by VaiTs playful toying with prepositions as 
the cow just can't seem to get OVER the moon, but succeeds in 
going under, next to, and through the moon backdrop! Here is 
great fun through language play, as we get an alternative perspec- 
tive on these familiar characters, including a cameo appearance 
by the dish and spoon. Nash's illustrations give the book a car- 
toonlike feel that adds a comical touch to the hysterical rapid-fire 
dialogue. Enjoy! 

13.27 Wilbur, Richard (1998). The Disappearing Alphabet. Illustrated 
by David Diaz. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
201470-5. Picture Book. 

What would we do without a Q? Could we get by without a Y? 
Wilbur's poetic questions and humorous speculations are delight- 
fully portrayed in Diaz's stylized silhouettes. Students will have 
great fun thinking of their own potential linguistic dilemmas as 
they play with this fun look at the important role of each letter in 
the alphabet. Different fonts and words in capital letters help the 
reader find Wilbur's zany examples of life without each letter. A 
wonderful addition to any collection of ABC books that helps us 
appreciate the letters and wonder what we might do without 
them! 



Riddles, Chants, and Poems 

See also the section entitled Rhythm, Rhyme, and Repetition in chapter 
7, "Literacy"; chapter 10, "Poetry"; and the section entitled Music 
Books: Rhymes, Chants, and Songs in chapter 11, "Fine Arts." 



433 



408 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



Primary Reviews 

13.28 Dillon, Leo, and Diane Dillon (1998). To Every Thing There Is a 
Season. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-47887-7. Pic- 
ture Book. 

For thousands of years, the words of this picture book have served 
as inspiration, hope, and comfort to millions aroxmd the world. 
With the Biblical text adapted slightly for yoxmger readers, this 
timeless message is accessible to all. These famous verses encom- 
pass a range of emotion and purpose to celebrate the seasons of 
human experience. Truly doing justice to the xmiversality of these 
words, the Dillons have drawn on fourteen different styles in their 
artistic repertoire to lavishly bring to life these poignant lines. 
Using techniques as diverse as Egyptian murals, Greek vases, 
Japanese woodblocks, and Australian bark paintings, the Dillons 
demonstrate their xmdisputed mastery as artisans. A beautiful text 
through which to examine myriad art styles, the book offers an 
excellent explanation and description of each technique used. 

13.29 Grimes, Nikki (1997). It's Raining Laughter. Photographs by 
Myles C. Pinkney. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2003-3. 
Picture Book. 

The playful language and photographs burst with life in this col- 
lection of poems about growing up. Grimes touches on subjects 
from xmcontrollable giggles to being teased, from playing in the 
garden to playing the piano, from making up with friends to lis- 
tening to life. The laughing bug that rxms through this brilliant 
collection is a treasure. The photographs are portraits of children 
at play. 

13.30 Jackson, Alison (1997). I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a 
Pie. Illustrated by Judith Byron Schachner. New York: Dutton 
Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45645-7. Picture Book. 
(See 11.3) 

13.31 Steptoe, Javaka (1997). In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall. New York: Lee 
& Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-31-8. Picture Book. (See 4.26) 

13.32 Swann, Brian (1998). Touching the Distance: Native American 
Riddle-Poems. Illustrated by Maria Rendon. San Diego: Brown- 
deer. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200804-7. Picture Book. (See 10.58) 



Riddles, Chants, and Poems 



409 



Secondary Reviews 

13.33 Cole, Joanna, and Stephanie Cabnenson (1996). Give a Dog a 
Bone: Stories, Poems, Jokes, and Riddles about Dogs. Illustrated 
by John Speirs. New York: Scholastic. 90 pp. ISBN: 0-590-46374-8. 
Picture Book. 

Poems, jokes, and riddles are a great way to get young children 
involved in reading. This book has all of those and more! Light- 
hearted, funny, rhyming poems; easy-to-understand jokes and 
riddles; and a selection of short stories by well-known authors 
give youngsters a collection of readings all about dogs. Bright and 
bold illustrations give the book that something extra to enjoy. A 
rebus story and interesting facts help to lend even more variety 
for all dog lovers. 

13.34 Corwin, Judith Hoffman (1998). My First Riddles. New York: 
Harper Festival. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-694-01109-6. Picture Book. 

This brightly colored book is a great primary teaching tool. With 
every turn of the page, there is a surprise. A riddle is asked, and on 
the page next to it, clues to the answer are provided in the pictures. 
Then when the page is turned, the answer is obvious. This book 
provides illustrations through photographs of fabric applique. 
What a great way to get students making predictions based on pic- 
ture cues! 

13.35 Elya, Susan Middleton (1997). Say Hola to Spanish, Otra Vez 
(Again!). Illustrated by Loretta Lopez. New York: Lee & Low. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-59-8. Picture Book. 

Elya and Lopez have teamed up again to create a lively, colorful 
sequel to their first creation. Say Hola to Spanish. Both books aim to 
teach Spanish in an entertaining manner by using Spanish words 
within English phrases and sentences. Middleton uses spirited 
rhythm and rhyme to define over seventy common Spanish words 
in each book. The colorful illustrations rendered in gouache and 
colored pencil support the text in a whimsical fashion that is sure 
to tickle readers of all ages. "It teaches you Spanish in a fun way," 
said Alexis (age nine). The Spanish-speaking children in our pri- 
mary classrooms pointed out that these books could also teach 
them some English, and we observed students teaming up with 
each other and these books during independent reading time, tak- 
ing turns with the Spanish and English portions of the text. 



410 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



Elya, Susan Middleton (1996). Say Hola to Spanish. 

Illustrated by Loretta Lopez. New York: Lee & Low. 

Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-29-6. Picture Book. 

13.36 Hoberman, Mary Ann (1998). Miss Mary Mack: A Hand-Clapping 
Rhyme. Illustrated by Nadine Bernard Westcott. Boston: Little 
Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-93118-7. Picture Book. 

This is a delightful chant many elementary school children learn 
to love. Whether it is introduced in music class or the classroom, it 
must be shared. Students take delight in learning rhymes or 
chants at an early age. However, putting this story with the won- 
derful illustrations leaves a child in awe. There is a hand-clapping 
pattern that children can perform while singing Miss Mary Mack. 
Westcott does a fabulous job of matching the pictures with the 
words. Students will get a chance to actually see what they have 
always been visualizing. Elephants do jump the fence, can touch 
the sky, and do make really good friends. The illustrations allow 
the story to come true! 

13.37 Marsh, T. and Jermifer Ward (1998). Way out in the Desert. 
Illustrated by Kermeth Spengler. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-87358-687-5. Picture Book. (See 7.8) 

13.38 Martin, Bill, Jr. (1998). The Turning of the Year. Illustrated by 
Greg Shed. New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
201085-8. Picture Book. 

Through lilting, poetic text, Martin invites the reader to welcome 
winter's icy blow, splash through puddles recklessly, and run 
through fields that praise the sun. Come along on this glorious 
celebration of the passing of the months. Each page offers an 
action, a taste, a feel, or a rich experience that fills our senses and 
helps us recall the sights and sounds of the carefree days of child- 
hood. Taking delight in the simple pleasures of each season, the 
children in the book savor each moment captured in Shed's ethe- 
real paintings. The rhyming text is poetry in its finest, simplest 
form. 

13.39 Reiser, Lyrm (1998). Tortillas and Lullabies/Tortillas y cancionci- 
tas. Illustrated by Corazones Valientes. Translated by Rebecca 
Hart. New York: Greenwillow Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14628-7. 
Picture Book. 





Biographies and Autobiographies 



411 



This dual-language book reveals how a family from El Salvador 
passes traditions from the great-grandmother, to the grandmother, 
to the mother, and finally to the young daughter. "Every time it was 
the same but different," is the predictable text that concludes each of 
four sections — Tortillas, Flowers, Washing, and Lullabies. The story 
closes with a traditional lullaby, in Spanish and English versions, 
with musical notation. In a somewhat abstract style, the bold, acrylic 
illustrations depict the generations of a family making tortillas, 
growing gardens, washing, and singing. The art is a celebration of 
heritage and change, created by a group of Costa Rican women who 
call themselves the Corazones Valientes (Valiant Hearts). They began 
their artistic endeavors under the encouragement of translator 
Rebecca Hart, then a Peace Corp Volunteer in their village. Both 
Spanish- and English-speaking kindergartners enjoyed this book. It 
would be a good addition to a text-set about families or lullabies. 

Biographies and Autobiographies 
(of Authors, Books, and Characters) 

See also the section entitled Histories and Herstories in chapter 3, 
"Exploring Our Past"; the section entitled Bigger than Life Heroes, 
Heroines, and Events in chapter 5, "Struggle and Survival"; and the sec- 
tion entitled Art Books: Books about Artists in chapter 11, "Fine Arts." 

Primary Reviews 

13.40 Carpenter, Angelica Shirley, and Jean Shirley (1997). Robert Louis 
Stevenson: Finding Treasure Island. Minneapolis: Lerner. 144 
pp. ISBN: 0-8225-4955-7. Chapter Book. 

Robert Louis Stevenson's biography gives a vivid description of 
his life and the many experiences that can be found in his books 
Treasure Island, Kidnapped, The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. 
Hyde, and A Child's Garden of Verses. Although he was very ill 
throughout his childhood, at age six Stevenson won his first writ- 
ing contest with a dictated story. From this point on, he knew he 
was destined to become an author. He preferred writing biogra- 
phies to fiction because it was like fitting a puzzle together. 
Stevenson's diary is quoted frequently in the biography to pro- 
vide a realistic sense of his writing style and life history. Pictures 
from his personal life, as well as illustrations from his books, are 
woven throughout the story to provide yet another insight into 
the life of Robert Louis Stevenson. 



! } 



437 



412 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



13.41 de Paola, Tomie (1996). Strega Nona: Her Story. New York: Put- 
nam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22818-7. Picture Book. 

The much-beloved Strega Nona returns in this tale to tell us her 
story. We find that Strega Nona was bom into a family of women 
healers known for their remedies and advice. Nona is left the 
magic pasta pot, and the secrets that accompany it. This folktale 
heroine displays cleverness and intelligence along with her magic. 
Strong, capable women are shown as respected members of their 
community. Unfortunately this respect is often lacking in classic 
folktales. Children will enjoy hearing Strega Nona's story, and will 
be delighted by the colorful de Paola artwork featuring his famil- 
iar hearts, doves, and cats. 

13.42 Dyer, Daniel (1997). Jack London: A Biography. New York: 
Scholastic. 228 pp. ISBN: 0-590-22216-3. Chapter Book. 

Dyer retells John Griffith Chaney's ("Jack London's") life history 
through an intriguing recounting of many of the adventures in 
London's short life. From his experiences as an oyster pirate and a 
fish patrol officer to his time spent in Erie Cormty Penitentiary for 
vagrancy, and from the time he enrolled as a high school fresh- 
man at the age of nineteen to his Gold Rush fever, we get a 
glimpse of some of his adventures. We also witness his many 
rejections by publishers before finally receiving the recognition he 
has achieved today. He wrote his stories in order to honestly 
relate his experiences, and through this blrmt style readers know 
that what they read in London's books is a true description of var- 
ious times and places. It is this honesty that has attracted readers 
of all ages. This biography includes pictures and quotes from Jack 
London, and shows how one child can rise above a dysfrmctional 
childhood to become one of the most well-known authors of the 
twentieth century. 

13.43 Heller, Ruth (1996). Fine Lines. Photographs by Michael Emery. 
New York: Owen. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-878450-76-X. Picture Book. 

Fine Lines is one of many autobiographies published by Richard 
C. Owen that introduce children to the lives of authors and illus- 
trators. Through this collection, children can discover more about 
the authors and illustrators they know and love. Often it is diffi- 
cult for children to realize that these special people are just like 
someone they know — or even like themselves. The simple text 



438 



Biographies and Autobiographies 



413 



and photographs focus on different aspects of the authors' and 
illustrators' lives, and give the reader an enjoyable journey as they 
follow these people through their accomplishments. Wesley (age 
eight) says it all: "If they can do it, I can too!" Other authors and 
illustrators who have written in this series include Verna 
Aardema, Eve Bunting, Lois Ehlert, Paul Goble, George Ella Lyon, 
Patricia Polacco, Cynthia Rylant, and Jane Yolen. 

13.44 Lester, Helen (1997). Author: A True Story. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-82744-2. Picture Book. 

In this autobiography, Lester tells children how she came to be a 
writer, beginning with the story of how she wrote grocery lists 
for her mother when she was a little girl. She speaks candidly of 
her learning disability (mirror writing), as well as the process 
that all writers go through when they write stories. Her sense of 
humor is present throughout the story, and children feel as if they 
know her because they know the stories she has written. She also 
tells readers why she works with an illustrator, noting, "This tal- 
ented person draws what I would if I could." This book is a must 
when teaching children about writing, editing, and publishing 
their own work. 

13.45 Lyon, George Ella (1998). A Sign. Illustrated by Chris K. Soent- 
piet. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30073-0. Picture 
Book. 

Tracing her dreams of making neon signs, walking a tightrope, 
and blasting into space, Lyon uses lovely metaphors to bring us 
into her present life as an author. Abandoning these dreams to 
become one who can make "words glow," who puts "one word in 
front of the other, hoping the story won't fall," and who sends 
words to our hearts, Lyon brilliantly shares the lovely childhood 
aspirations that evolved into her mature literary endeavors. In his 
daring watercolors, Soentpeit captures the nuances of shadow 
and shade and of tension and poise as few others can. A book to 
give us pause to reflect on how dreams take flight and lead us to 
become who we are. 

13.46 Marcus, Leonard S. (1997). The Making of Goodnight Moon: 
A 50th Anniversary Retrospective. New York: Harper Trophy. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-446-192-0. Sophisticated Picture Book. 




439 



414 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



This is a remarkable tribute to one of the most notable children's 
books of the century. The book gives background information about 
the lives of Margaret Wise Brown and her collaborator and illustra- 
tor Clement Hurd. Brown's education in early childhood teaching 
allowed her to explore children's literature in a new and fresh way 
for the era. Hurd's time in France studying art gave him the ability 
to focus on a new style of painting. From these two contemporary 
minds came Goodnight Moon, a favorite among families with young 
children. This tribute includes pictures from the author's and illus- 
trator's lives, rough drafts of the original book, and examples from 
the popular press that show the extent to which Goodnight Moon 
affected the children's literature industry. 

Brown, Margaret Wise (1947). Goodnight Moon. Illus- 
trated by Clement Hurd. New York: Harper. 31 pp. Pic- 
ture Book. 

13.47 Neimark, Anne E. (1996). Myth Maker: J. R. R. Tolkien. San Diego: 
Harcourt Brace. 118 pp. ISBN: 0-15-298847-5. Chapter Book. 

Neimark does an excellent job recounting John Ronald Reuel 
(J. R. R.) Tolkien's life history. She begins with the young Tolkien's 
life in Africa. Although he was ill as a child, once Tolkien moved 
to England with his mother and younger brother, the cooler 
weather found him healthier. Tolkien's love was fairy tales. As 
soon as he learned to read, dragons and evil fairies played in his 
head. He loved the outdoors, and his mother encouraged this love 
with a strong education in botany before he began his studies at 
King Edward VI School in Birmingham. He married a woman 
three years his senior during leave from his military duty in 
World War I. It was creating tales for his children that developed 
Tolkien's storytelling ability. His stories always included good tri- 
umphing over dragons and other evil beings. Tolkien's love of 
words and word origins showed in his brilliant lectures as a pro- 
fessor of philology at Oxford University. Tolkien created his own 
language and, through myths and legends, an extensive heritage 
for this made-up language. 

13.48 Rylant, Cynthia (1996). Margaret, Frank, and Andy: Three Writ- 
ers' Stories. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201083- 
1. Chapter Book. 

This charming book insightfully portrays the personal lives of 
Margaret Wise Brown, L. Frank Baum, and E. B. White. Rylant 



410 



Mysteries 



415 



captures the private lives of these familiar authors m three short 
stories. Each story presents brief anecdotes about the author that 
show rather than tell the reader about the personality and life his- 
tory of the writer. Pictures from the authors' lives are added to 
create a sense of true understanding of their history. In addition to 
the wonderful primary sources, including pictures and quotes 
from books written by the authors, Rylant captures each author's 
successes and failures in relation to writing and his or her per- 
sonal life. 



Mysteries 

Primary Reviews 

13.49 Benton, Amanda (1997). Silent Stranger. New York: Avon. 160 pp. 
ISBN: 0-380-97486-X. Chapter Book. 

One night during the War of 1812, fourteen-year-old Jessica finds 
a very frightened young man in the family's barn in New York 
state. Although the young man, named Daniel by Jessica's family, 
is unwilling or unable to speak, he becomes part of the family and 
works on the farm for his keep. The sinister Stillwater family, 
influential local storekeepers, use the political intrigue of war to 
foster an atmosphere of suspicion in the community. Rumors gen- 
erated by the Stillwaters raise suspicions about Daniel's identity 
by suggesting he may be crazy and dangerous, and put the fam- 
ily's farm in jeopardy. Despite pressure from neighbors, Jessica 
remains drawn to Daniel and sets about discovering the truth 
about him. Benton's development of this engaging mystery is 
enhanced by accurate details of frontier life. The ending will sur- 
prise everybody. 

13.50 Bloor, Edward (1997). Tangerine. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 294 
pp. ISBN: 0-152-01246-X. Chapter Book. 

Legally blind or not, Paul Fisher clearly sees the world around him. 
Threatened and dwarfed in all aspects of his life by an egocentric, 
psychotic, football hero older brother, Paul wonders where he 
belongs. After his family moves to Tangerine, Florida, where thun- 
derstorms happen daily and a school disappears down a sinkhole, 
Paul's life begins to change. He gains self-esteem through friend- 
ships, success as a soccer goalie, and confidence by helping his 
teammates save their tangerine grove when it is threatened by a 
killer frost. He finds the courage to corifront the shadowy memories 



441 



416 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



of the event that caused his blindness, and with his newfound 
strength, Paul breaks free of the fear that has bound him for so long. 
In the city of Tangerine anything can happen. 

13.51 Crowe, Carole (1998). Sharp Homs on the Moon. Honesdale, PA: 
Boyds Mills. 112 pp. ISBN: 1-563-97671-4. Chapter Book. (See 14.51) 

13.52 Paterson, Katherine (1998). Parzival: The Quest for the Grail 
Knight. New York: Lodestar. 127 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67579-5. Chap- 
ter Book (See 14.53) 

13.53 Paulsen, Gary (1998). The Transall Saga. New York: Delacorte. 248 
pp. ISBN: 0-385-32196-1. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 14.45) 

13.54 Pullman, Philip (1998). Clockwork. Illustrated by Diana Bryan. 
Brooklyn, NY: Levine. 113 pp. ISBN: 0-590-12999-6. Chapter Book. 

In this mystery set in an inn in historic Germany, Fritz the story- 
teller begins to unravel a story he has not yet completed. With his 
telling of the tale, he sets the story into motion, and it cannot be 
stopped until it has run its course. Fritz becomes frightened 
when, after reading a description of the evil Dr. Kalmenius, the 
character bursts through the door. Like a good fairy tale, this 
deceivingly simple but multilayered story will engage both 
young and old readers and listeners as they become caught up in 
the story's pleasant mixture of love, intrigue, sorcery, clockwork, 
and the ultimate triumph of good over evil. Bryan's enchanting 
but scary illustrations curry the imagination. 

13.55 Sachar, Louis (1998). Holes. Austin, TX: Foster. 233 pp. ISBN: 0- 
374-33265-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Accused criminal Stanley Yelnats is sent to Camp Green Lake to 
serve out his sentence, all the while asserting his innocence. Dig- 
ging holes was not in his plan, but is part of the routine prescribed 
by the warden. Mystery builds as Stanley's and fellow inmate 
Zero's lives and family histories become entangled. Why are they 
digging these five-foot deep, five-foot across holes every day? 
What does the situation Stanley finds himself in now have to do 
with the curse his "no-good-dirty-rotten-pig-stealing-great-great- 
grandfather" caused to be put on the Yelnats family? A fanciful 
approach by Sachar lets us follow life in the camp, the building of 



442 



Mysteries 



417 



friendships, and the ever-entertaining endeavors of both the 
inmates and staff. This amazingly well-written mystery, with 
information dispensed slowly but with precise timing, will con- 
sume the reader until the very last page. 

13.56 Skurzynski, Gloria, and Alane Ferguson (1997). Wolf Stalker. 
Washington, DC: National Geographic. 147 pp. ISBN: 0-792- 
27034-7. Chapter Book. 

Set in Yellowstone National Park, this fast-paced mystery involves 
all the members of a family: father, mother, son Jack, daughter 
Ashley, and foster child Troy. Mother is bent on solving the riddle 
of a wolf attack and saving the wolf. Troy is keen to find his 
mother and return to his home. Troy's rebelliousness is exacer- 
bated by Jack's impatience. Outdoor enthusiasts and animal lovers 
will find this book hard to put down. The authors introduce con- 
siderable detail of life in Yellowstone National Park while tracking 
a poacher and solving both animal and human mysteries. The 
accuracy of the geographical information adds an authentic tone 
to this well-written mystery. 

13.57 Wallace, Barbara Brooks (1997). Sparrows in the Scullery. New 
York: Antheneum. 160 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81585-9. Chapter Book. 

Nineteenth-century England saw orphans sold to charitable 
homes, where they were clothed, fed, and then sent off to gloomy 
factories where they were worked to death. Wealthy eleven-year- 
old Colley Trevelyn finds himself at Broggin's Home for Boys after 
being kidnapped a few nights after the accidental death of his par- 
ents. Survival becomes the driving force for Colley, generating a 
need for friendship and collaboration with other inmates. The 
story of Life at Broggin's and the mystery of why he was kidnapped 
builds to a most happy ending. Andrew (age ten) remarked, "I felt 
like I was with Colley as he sat in the 'Hole,' ate his daily grey 
gruel and stale bread, and struggled with his five friends to sur- 
vive by making a secret home and family." Benton has written a 
believable story that captures the deprivations of the era. 

13.58 White, Ruth (1996). Belle Prater's Boy. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 196 pp. ISBN: 0-374-30668-0. Chapter Book. 

After the disappearance of his mother from their home in the hills 
of Appalachia, Woodrow moves in with his grandparents in the 




418 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



nearby town of Coal Station, Virginia. There a unique friendship 
blooms between cross-eyed, unattractive Woodrow and his beau- 
tiful cousin Gypsy Both sixth graders have hidden secrets that in 
the end bind them together despite their differences. White brings 
you into the life of this community and the lives of these two cap- 
tivating cousins through the painful mysteries they must face. 
Readers will find these two characters unforgettable. The story's 
exploration of the concept of beauty and its impact in the lives of 
this 1950s community will inspire parallel discussions in today's 
classrooms. 

13.59 Yep, Laurence (1998). The Case of the Lion Dance: Chinatown 
Mystery #2. New York: HarperCollins. 214 pp. ISBN: 0-06-024447- 
X. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 7.62) 

Secondary Reviews 

13.60 Brown, Marc (1998). Arthur's Mystery Envelope. Boston: Little 
Brown. 58 pp. ISBN: 0-316-11546-0. Picture Book. 

The first in the new Arthur mystery series proves to be a hit. Princi- 
pal Haney gives Arthur an envelope marked "Private and Confi- 
dential" to take home. Arthur and his friends try to guess what 
kind of trouble could be waiting for Arthur inside the envelope. 
Could it be information on summer school? After discussing what 
to do with his friends, Arthur takes the envelope home, only to 
have it accidentally fall into the trash. What should Arthur do? In 
this story. Brown addresses a big issue for young readers: how to 
face consequences. This book also raises for class discussion the 
issues of honesty and responsibility. After reading the story, a class- 
room of third graders all agreed that Arthur did the right thing. 

13.61 Cushman, Doug (1996). The Mystery of King Karfu. New York: 
HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-060-24796-7. Picture Book. 

Wombat detective Seymour Sleuth's engaging casebook takes the 
reader to Egypt to find ancient pharaoh King Karfu's missing 
stone chicken. The casebook, complete with coffee stains and fin- 
gerprints, leads to four suspects. Photographs, ticket stubs, foot- 
prints, letters, and other fascinating clues make this a good 
read-aloud text as well as a hit with newly independent readers. 
Solve the secret code to get to the tasty end of this unique picture 
book. Stephanie (age eight) said, "It is just like a real casebook." 




Mysteries 



419 



13.62 DeFelice, Cynthia (1998). The Ghost of Fossil Glen. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 167 pp. ISBN: 0-374-31787-9. Chapter 
Book. 

While hunting for fossils in the glen, imaginative and creative 
sixth grader Allie Nicholas is averted from a near-fatal fall with the 
guidance of a mysterious voice. This encounter connects her with 
the ghost of a girl her age named Lucy, who died four years earlier 
in the glen. The elements that draw readers into this intriguing 
mystery are a ghost seeking revenge, a sinister real-estate deal, and 
two red leather-bound journals whose entries bring the past and 
present together. With the help of her friend Dub, a sympathetic 
teacher, and clues from the ghost of the murdered Lucy, Allie 
strives to bring Lucy's killer to justice and save the glen from being 
made into a housing development. Elena (age ten) said, "1 couldn't 
put the book down. 1 especially loved following the two journals 
and the way AlUe stood up to her critical disbelieving friends." 

13.63 Glenn, Mel (1996). Who Killed Mr. Chippendale? A Mystery in 
Poems. New York: Dutton. 100 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67530-2. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. (See 10.27) 

13.64 Hobbs, Will (1997). Ghost Canoe. New York: Morrow. 195 pp. 
ISBN: 0-688-14193-5. Chapter Book. 

Cape Flattery in Washington State is the setting for this 1874 mur- 
der mystery. Fourteen-year-old Nathan MacAllister works as an 
assistant lighthouse keeper with his father Zackary, while taking 
care of his ill mother. In an attempt to improve her failing health, 
he moves with his mother to a Makah village on the mainland. 
Their quiet life in this Native American community is interrupted 
by the wreck of a small ship. The discovery of the captain's mur- 
dered body and the eerie footprints leading away from the bodies 
of the drowned crew sends Nathan off on a search to find the cul- 
prits. Filled with hidden treasure, many ghostly overtures, and 
considerable danger to Nathan, this is an engaging and intriguing 
story supported by accurate historical and cultural information. 

13.65 Marzollo, Jean (1996). I Spy Spooky Night. Photographs by Wal- 
ter Wick. New York: Scholastic. 34 pp. ISBN: 0-590-48137-1. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Wick's theme-oriented photographs are stimriing and will instantly 
grab the attention of youngsters as they read to find out what 



ERIC 



445 



420 



The Craft of Language: Passages, Profiles, and Puzzles 



mysterious real-life objects to look for. Young readers will spend a 
great amount of time searching for the objects suggested by the 
riddles on each page. At the end of the book, Marzollo provides 
extra riddles for the reader to solve. In case children don't get 
enough in this volume, Marzollo has several other books avail- 
able, including I Spy Gold Challenger and I Spy Super Challenger. 

Marzollo, Jean (1997). I Spy Super Challenger. Pho- 
tographs by Walter Wick. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. 

ISBN: 0-590-34128-6. Picture Book. 

Marzollo, Jean (1998). I Spy Gold Challenger. Pho- 
tographs by Walter Wick. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. 

ISBN: 0-590-04296-3. Picture Book. 

13.66 Miller, Dorothy Reynolds (1996). The Clearing. New York: Athen- 
eum. 119 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80997-2. Chapter Book. 

Eleven-year-old Amanda spends the summer with relatives in rural 
Pennsylvania while her parents check out a job possibility in Min- 
neapolis. Cousin Elinore, with her bossy ways, leaves Amanda no 
alternative but to seek other friends. Her relationships with her 
cousin Nelson and fourteen-year-old neighbor Cynthia draw her 
into a maze of events that mysteriously keep leading back to the 
unsolved disappearance of five-year-old Bucky Meade. Is the long- 
suspected Spook Wade responsible for Bucky's disappearance, or 
has someone else been withholding the truth for ten years? Miller's 
subtle disclosure of the details maintains suspense to the end. 

13.67 Roberts, Willo Davis (1998). The Kidnappers: A Mystery. New 
York: Atheneum. 137 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81394-5. Chapter Book. 

Eleven-year-old Joey has the misfortune of being the sole witness 
to the kidnapping of one of his classmates in Willey Groves. When 
he tries to tell others about what he saw, he is not believed 
because of his reputation for telling tall stories. Realizing that he 
is unable to convince adults that there is real trouble, Joey must 
set about solving the mystery himself. The appearance of the local 
police vindicates Joey, but leaves him vulnerable to several dan- 
gerous contacts with the kidnappers. Suspense builds throughout 
this thoroughly engaging mystery. Drew (age thirteen) said, "I 
could identify with Joey's frustration when no one would believe 
him. The fear he felt when he was kidnapped just jumped off the 
pages and grabbed me too." 



Mysteries 



421 



13.68 Roberts, Willo Davis (1998). Secrets at Hidden Valley. New York: 
Atheneum. 150 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81166-7. Chapter Book. 

When her actress-mother decides to go on a shoot alone, eleven- 
year-old Steffi, who has recently lost her dad in an accident, faces a 
surruner with a distant and disagreeable grandfather whom she has 
never met and who has been estranged from her family since 
before she was bom. Despite the cold welcome to her grandfather's 
remote Michigan trailer park, Steffi makes a place for herself by 
cooking; undertaking a project that will benefit the park; and estab- 
lishing relationships with the local residents, especially Casey. Mys- 
terious threads of this story include why her grandfather appears 
to dislike her deceased father, why some park residents are fearful 
of any new people who come to stay, and why an FBI agent is 
"vacationing" at Hidden Valley. Following an untimely accident, 
Steffi finds herself running the Hidden Valley Trailer Park, check- 
ing in new guests, managing the small store, and cleaning and 
repairing the grounds. As the mysteries are solved, she and Casey 
learn that most people have a secret — some are just bigger than 
others. 

13.69 Sharmat, Marjorie Weinman (1998). Nate the Great and Me: The 
Case of the Fleeing Fang. New York: Delacorte. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
385-32601-7. Chapter Book. 

This new twenty-fifth anniversary special-edition Nate the Great 
mystery will be loved by new and old fans alike. In this interac- 
tive book, the reader follows clues to help Nate the Great solve his 
newest mystery. When Nate's friends and their pets decide to give 
him a surprise Happy Detective Day party, he also gets a new 
case. He has to find Annie's dog Fang, who ran away on the way 
to the party. Read along to find out if Nate is able to solve the mys- 
tery before the strawberry ice cream melts! Detective tips, a detec- 
tive certificate, and recipes give a new twist to this series. Bryan 
(age nine) said, "The tips on how to be a detective are great." 




A. Paper Quake: A Puzzle, Kathryn Reiss (14.57). B. Gullible's Troubles, Margaret 
Shannon (14.16). C. The Seven Gods of Luck, David Kudler/Linda Finch (14.9). D. 
Child of Faerie, Child of Earth, Jane Yolen/Jane Dyer (14.21). 




best copy available 





423 



14 Fantasy Literature: 
Making the Impossible 
Possible 



Karen Smith 

Contributing reviewers included Cheryl Alley, Kathy Bennett, 
Laura Burch, Sally Burgett, Diane Elliott, Carol Jones, and Karen 
Smith 



R eading fantasy is demanding work. It requires readers to give them- 
selves over to worlds unlike any they have known. At first these 
worlds may appear ordinary, but with a slight twist of a character's 
action, a shift in some detail of the setting, or a curious turn of events, 
these everyday worlds become unfami l iar. Authors of fantasy literature 
succeed when readers help to render these unfamiLiar worlds believable 
by suspending disbelief and accepting the possibility of their existence. 
Consistency is the key to developing a successful fantasy story. In these 
stories, characters' motives, actions, and language are consistent within 
the framework developed by the author. Details of the setting also must be 
consistent within this framework, and developed so thoroughly that read- 
ers can see, hear, and feel them. Eleanor Cameron believes that authors of 
fantasy must establish a premise and an inner logic for their story, and 
draw boimdary lines outside which the fantasy may not wander. "With- 
out ever having to think about it, a reader must feel that the author is 
working consistently within a frame of reference" (Cameron 1983, 23-24). 

As our review committee selected the books for this chapter, we 
looked for those with well-developed characters, intriguing plots, and 
familiar themes. To sharpen our focus within the fantasy genre, we 
adapted the following evaluation criteria from Norton (1994, 335): 

1. Are characters' actions consistent with the story parameters 
developed by the author? 

2. How does the author's characterization allow children to sus- 
pend disbelief? Do characters begin in a world of fantasy? Do 
characters begin in a real world before they travel to the 
world of fantasy? Does a believable character accept a fanci- 
ful world, characters, or happenings? Does the author use an 
appropriate language consistent with the story? 




424 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



3. Does the author pay careful attention to the details in the set- 
ting? If the author develops several timeperiods, are the set- 
tings authentic and integral to the story? 

4. Are the themes worthwhile for children? 

5. Does the author encourage readers to suspend disbelief by 
developing a point of view that is consistent in every detail, 
including sights, feelings, and physical reactions? 

As we read, discussed, deliberated, and finally selected the books 
for this chapter, we were pleased by what we found. We were surprised to 
find so many books like Lucy Dove (Del Negro 1998) with strong female 
protagonists who counter the traditional fairy tale heroine by demonstrat- 
ing courage and strong wUl. We were amused by Bubba the Cowboy Prince 
(Ketteman 1997) who, like his predecessor Cinderella, is mistreated by his 
wicked stepfamily. Our final selection of books was guided mainly by 
how well we and our students liked the books. The books we selected 
caused us to imagine other possibilities. They evoked rich discussions and 
made us question, explore, and argue with others' ways of thinking and 
behaving. Through careful, critical reading, these books also caused us to 
envision new theories, make new discoveries, and conceive new worlds. 

Our group's greatest challenge was deciding which books fit 
within the genre of fantasy. We purposely chose not to include many tra- 
ditional folktales, fables, myths, and legends. These books are high- 
lighted in the Traditional Literature section of chapter 3, "Exploring Our 
Past." We did, however, include modem stories written in fairy-tale and 
tail-tale style. We elected not to include collections of short stories. At 
first, we also ruled out books that were part of a series, but then we 
reconsidered. We think the series books we chose are compelling 
enough to stand on their own, and hopefully they will incite readers to 
seek out other books in the series. 

We also tried to balance our selection. For example, we chose 
books that would be of interest to younger and older children alike. 
We selected lighthearted fantasy books with whimsical events — such 
as A Bad Case of the Stripes (Shannon 1998), in which a young girl finds 
herself covered in stripes — as well as more serious fantasies that probe 
unknown dimensions — such as The Transall Saga (Paulsen 1998). In 
addition, we picked books that require different reading abilities so 
that all readers, regardless of age or skill, can enjoy reading fantasy. 

Fantasy in the Schools 

Although fantasy is often the genre of choice for very young readers, 
older readers often voice their dislike of it. Therefore many students will 




450 



Organization of This Chapter 



425 



need support entering these complex worlds and finding relevance and 
enjoyment in them. The good news is that once students experience suc- 
cess with fantasy, they usually ask for more. With the availability of 
many wonderful fantasy books and with supportive classroom practices, 
it is easy for librarians and teachers to foster a love of fantasy in students, 
but we must be deliberate in our efforts. Reading aloud and discussing a 
range of fantasy books is a good place to begin. Students need experience 
with animal fantasies, quests, time-slip tales, and magic; they need to 
meet fantastic yet believable characters, and frightening spirits; and they 
need to be introduced to stories with themes that make them consider 
the emotional and psychological effects of futuristic ideas and conflicts. 
These experiences will give students footing in fanciful worlds and pre- 
pare them to read and respond on their own. 

Students need opportunities to read independently and to respond 
to the impact these experiences will have on them. One form of response — 
small group discussions — allows students to share personal responses, 
clarify questions, and explore alternate interpretations. This is especially 
important with fantasy literature that puts high demands on the imagina- 
tion. Drama also helps students recapture the impact of their experience 
by allowing them to assume roles in the story and explore their thoughts 
and wonderings. Art experiences such as murals and dioramas provide 
means for recreating settings so readers can better envision and experi- 
ence these worlds. 

Organization of This Chapter 

We organized the books in this chapter into two sections: Picture Books 
and Chapter Books. This organizational scheme is not meant to imply 
that picture books are for younger children and chapter books are for 
older children. As you will see, the suggested age ranges reveal that 
some picture books may not be appropriate for the very young, nor are 
all chapter books written exclusively for older students. How a particu- 
lar book and a particular child find each other is often beyond reason- 
able explanation. However, with caring, passionate adults to support 
them, we're convinced that many children will find pleasure in the fan- 
tasy books that follow. 

Within each of our two categories, we have suggested text-sets 
(Rhodes 1987) in order to help teachers extend their students' experi- 
ences with a particular book. We grouped the books according to themes 
or topics (see figure 1 and figure 2) so teachers can invite students to 
read all the books within a set and then discuss their similarities, differ- 
ences, and other connections. This process not only draws out elements 



451 



426 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



PICTURE BOOKS 

Detective Donut and the Wild Goose Chase 



The Dumb Bunnies Go to the Zoo 

\ 



The Cinder-Eyed Cats 



The Nature of the Beast 

N 



Gullible’s Troubles 



Bubba the Cowboy Prince 



My Dinosaur 



I Met a Dinosaur 
Farmer Eno and His Cow 



ANIMALS 

The Cinder-Eyed Cats 





I Met a Dinosaur 




La Cucaracha Martina 



Miss Spider’s New Car 



The Leaf Men 

Mr. Bumble 

\ 



\ 



The Seven Gods of Luck 

\ 

Lucy 



IMAGINATION 

Zorro and Quwi 
Lady Kaguya’s Secret 



Squash It! 



A Weave of Words 
N 



Bubba and Trixie 



Strega Nona 
Mouse Match 



La Cucaracha Martina 

_y 

The Paper Dragon 
/ 



INSECTS 



MODERN/RETOLD FOLKTALES 



A Bad Case of Stripes 

\ 



Mr. Bumble 
\ 



Faraway Drums 



Gullible’s Troubles 
/ 



Child of Faerie, Child of Earth 

\ 



Bubba and Trixie 
/ 



Lucy Dove 



Faraway Dmms 



. Fatima and the Dream Thief 

\ 



Mangaboom 



Strega Nona 



Raising Dragons 



A Weave of Words 
/ 



SELF ESTEEM 



STRONG FEMALE PROTAGONIST 



Figure 1 




45.2 



Organization of This Chapter 



427 



CHAPTER BOOKS 



The Young Merlin Trilogy 




ARTHURIAN LEGEND 



I Am Mordred 



The Young Merlin Trilogy 



In the Stone Circle 
\ 



Paper Quake 



Silverwing 
/ 



-The Transall Saga 



COMING OF AGE 



EEEK! Stories to Make You Shriek 




The Young Merlin Trilogy 

Harry Potter and the . 
Sorcerer’s Stone 

Parzival 

Ella E nchanted 

The Transall Saga 



The Boggart and the Monster 



Circle of Magic: 
Sandry’s Book 




JThe Iron Ring 



I Am Mordred 
/ 



HIGH FANTASY 



The Music of Dolphins Ella Enchanted 

V 



Paper Quake 



I Am Mordred 

Circle of Magic: 
Sandry’s Book 



The Iron Ring 




Sharp Homs on 
the Moon 



STRONG FEMALE PROTAGONIST 



The Great Interactive Dream Machine 




Figure 2 




453 



428 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



that make fantasy a unique genre, it also helps students connect to 
larger ideas that are revealed across texts such as how magic works or 
how heroes and heroines rise to impossible challenges. 

We hope this chapter will serve as a useful guide to literature that 
will capture the imaginations of even the most reluctant fantasy readers. 
As we noted above, reading fantasy is indeed demanding work. How- 
ever given a talented author and a supportive literary environment, 
reading fantasy is also a thrilling, and often magical, experience. 

Works Cited 

Cameron, Eleanor. 1983. The Inmost Secret. Hornbook Magazine 59, no. 1: 17-24. 

Norton, Donna E. 1994. Through the Eyes of a Child: An Introduction to Children's 
Literature. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Merrill. 

Rhodes, Lynn K. 1987. Text Sets. In Ideas and Insights: Language Arts in the 

Elementary School, ed. Dorothy J. Watson. Urbana, IL: National Council 
of Teachers of English. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this chap- 
ter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. 



Picture Books 

Primary Reviews 

14.1 Burrdngham, John (1996). Cloudland. New York: Crown. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-517-70928-7. Picture Book. 

Kate Greenaway Award wirmer John Burningham delivers a won- 
derfully illustrated childhood adventure about a small boy who 
falls off a cliff while hiking in the mountains. To his amazement, 
the children who live in the clouds rescue him. After enjoying his 
time dancing and jumping with his newfound friends, the small 
boy becomes homesick. Sympathetic to the young boy's feelings, 
the queen of the cloud children returns him to his parents. This 
magical tale is full of attractive cutouts of children displayed on 
top of vibrant, full-colored photos of sky scenes. This touching 



454 



Picture Books 



429 



story of friendship will mesmerize children and set their imagina- 
tions afloat. See also Burningham's Hey! Get off Our Train. 

Bnmingham, John (1994). Hey! Get off Our Train. New 

York: Crown. 48 pages. ISBN: 0-517-88204-3. Picture Book. 

14.2 Davol, Marguerite W. (1997). The Paper Dragon. Illustrated by 
Robert Sabuda. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-31992-4. Picture Book. 

Mi Fei, a humble scroll painter and historian for his Chinese village, 
is sent to confront Sui Jen, a vicious dragon intent upon wreaking 
havoc in the land. To save his life. Mi Fei must perform the dragon's 
three tasks: wrap fire in paper (he fashions a lantern), capture 
wind in paper (he makes a fan), and carry the strongest thing in 
the world in paper. Struggling with the last task. Mi Fei recalls the 
villagers' faces and paints a magnificent scroll depicting them. 
When Sui Jen sees the scroll, he realizes that nothing is stronger 
and disappears. Elaborately detailed cut-tissue papers, created 
and painted by the artist and affixed to Japanese paper, cover the 
pages in a series of gatefold illustrations that open to form triple- 
page spreads. This story will appeal to even the youngest readers. 
Its sumptuous art and timeless message are for everyone. 

14.3 Del Negro, Janice (1998). Lucy Dove. Illustrated by Leonid Gore. 
New York: Dorling Kindersley. 32 pp. ISBN: 0789-42514-9. Sophis- 
ticated Picture Book. 

In search of a strong female protagonist to counter the traditional 
fairy-tale heroine, librarian and storyteller Janice Del Negro cre- 
ated her own version of a classic Scottish tale. A rich but supersti- 
tious laird offers a sack of gold to the person who can sew him a 
pair of lucky trousers by moonlight in the confines of St. Andrew's 
cemetery. Out of all the villagers only Lucy Dove, the poor and 
elderly tailor recently sacked from the household of the laird in 
question, has the courage and the will to accept the challenge. 
With her sights set on "her own bit of shore," Lucy Dove sets off to 
brave the deadly claws and sickening stench of the vicious ceme- 
tery boggle. Del Negro uses her storytelling prowess to weave a 
text filled with suspense, horror, and humor among Leonid Gore's 
dark, haunting, but often comical paintings. 

14.4 Joyce, William (1996). The Leaf Men and the Brave Good Bugs. 
New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-027237-6. Picture 
Book. 



455 



430 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



The old, old lady knows her garden is a magical place, but she is 
unaware of how that magic happens. As both she and her garden 
begin to fail, readers experience the wonder of this magic when 
the wisdom of a mysterious toy, the valor of a troop of doodle- 
bugs, and the courage of Leaf Man come together on a stormy, 
moonlit night to bring life and hope back to the old lady and the 
garden. Although the story's conflict will keep the pages turning 
for its young readers, its themes of love, valor, and the power of 
memory will linger with them long after they turn the last page. 

14.5 Kennedy, Kim (1998). Mr. Bumble. Illustrated by Doug Kennedy. 
New York: Hyperion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7868-0263-4. Picture Book. 
(See 8.43) 

14.6 Ketteman, Helen (1997). Bubba the Cowboy Prince: A Fractured 
Texas Tale. Illustrated by James Warhola. New York: Scholastic. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-590-25506-1. Picture Book. 

Helen Ketteman transforms the classic Cinderella story into a 
classic Texan tall tale, with a hero worthy enough to ride with the 
likes of John Wayne . . . well, maybe Pecos Bill. Bubba, like his 
feminine predecessor, is mistreated by his wicked stepfamily (a 
stepdaddy and two stepbrothers). But with the help of his fairy 
godcow, he makes it to Miz Lurleen's ball in time to rope her heart 
and lose his high-heeled boot (cowboys don't two-step in glass 
slippers). Warhola's bright, magical oil paintings give a kick to the 
funny, although sometimes stilted, text. The facial expressions of 
his cartoonish characters, as well as the artist's attention to detail, 
humorously depict the emotion, action, and setting of the story. 
Younger readers also will enjoy locating the fairy godcow hidden 
on almost every page. And of course, the cleverly worded happy 
ending may prompt a hearty "Yeehaw!" from young and old 
readers alike. 

14.7 Kirk, David (1997). Miss Spider's New Car. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-439-04675-0. Picture Book. (See 8.44) 

14.8 Kroll, Virginia L. (1998). Faraway Drums. Illustrated by Floyd 
Cooper. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-50449-1. 
Picture Book. 

Inspired by her students, former teacher Virginia Kroll composed 
this story of two African American girls, Jamila and her younger 



4 56 - 



Picture Books 



431 



sister Zakiya, who await their mother's return from her night job. 
Aided by their active imaginations and the stories their great- 
gramma told them, they comfort themselves against the city 
sounds outside their small apartment with thoughts of faraway 
Africa. Through the eyes of these two girls, Kroll cleverly links 
images of the urban setting with that of the African one: people's 
angry voices in the street become hyenas "bickerin' over the scraps 
they found"; car horns are really "elephants come to the waterin' 
hole"; and the quick beating of their hearts is surely the echo 
of the "faraway drums" across the savanna. Moreover, Floyd 
Cooper's soft oil-wash paintings — reminiscent of Chris Sheban's 
artwork in Jan Wahl's I Met a Dinosaur — offer the reader a visual 
key to the girls' soothing fantasy world and gently blur the lines 
between reality and imagination. This book would serve as an 
excellent springboard for a discussion of the history and tradi- 
tions of cultures. 

Wahl, Jan (1997). I Met a Dinosaur. Illustrated by Chris 

Sheban. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-15- 

201644-9. Picture Book. 

14.9 Kudler, David (1997). The Seven Gods of Luck. Illustrated by 
Linda Finch. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
78830-7. Picture Book. 

Because mother is unable to afford a New Year's feast this year, 
she instructs Kenji and Sachiko to sell their homemade goods at 
the local market in hopes of making money. Instead they trade 
their goods for six bamboo hats, which they place on the snow- 
covered shrine of the seven gods. In return for their kindness and 
generosity in keeping the gods warm and happy, the gods give 
Kenji and Sachiko a very special New Year's feast. 

14.10 Nolen, Jerdine (1998). Raising Dragons. Illustrated by Elise Pri- 
mavera. New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201288- 
5. Picture Book. 

Jerdine Nolen has written a fantasy about an endearing young 
girl who finds an unusual egg, waits for it to hatch, and sets out to 
raise the resulting baby dragon. Ma and Pa don't have any time 
for dragons, what with their farm work and all, but the girl and 
the dragon find creative and bigger-than-life ways to help. They 
also have time for grand adventures. How great to find a female 
lead in a book about dragons. This bright and stunning picture 




432 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



book features acrylic paints and pastels on gessoed illustration 
board. The language will excite young people as Nolen describes 
the dragon food, "Eel pot pies, frog leg pudding, and fish-and- 
insect stew." This is a story about overcoming challenges, devel- 
oping trust, and most of all about love. "As I touched skin to scale, 
I knew I was his girl and he was my dragon." 

14.11 Pollock, Penny (1996). The Turkey Girl: A Zuni Cinderella Story. 
Illustrated by Ed Young. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-316-71314-7. Picture Book. 

Children will readily see the parallels to traditional European 
tales in this Zuni Cinderella story. The Turkey Girl, an outcast, is 
magically readied for the Dance of the Sacred Bird by the turkeys 
under her care. Eairy godmother-like, the turkeys require her to 
return by sundown or suffer consequences. Unfortunately by the 
time she remembers her promise to return before the sun sets, it is 
too late. She returns to find the turkeys have gone, leaving her 
empty-handed. The story illustrates that we pay a price when we 
break our trust with Mother Earth. In the Turkey GirTs case, and 
in contrast to Cinderella stories in which the heroine captures the 
prince's heart, she is left with nothing. The book is an excellent 
vehicle for teachers to use in concert with Western versions of the 
Cinderella story because the starkness of the ending contrasts 
strongly with that of the traditional Western tale. Soft oil, crayon, 
and pastel illustrations by Caldecott Award winner Ed Young 
offer tender, gentle images to accompany the text. Teachers may 
want to use this book in combination with other Cinderella story 
variations, such as Bubba the Cowboy Prince (see 14.6), The Golden 
Sandal: A Middle Eastern Cinderella Story (see 3.130), and Cendrillon: 
A Caribbean Cinderella. 

San Souci, Robert D. (1998). Cendrillon: A Caribbean Cin- 
derella. Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. New York: Simon & 

Schuster. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-689-8066-8-X. Picture Book. 

14.12 Pomerantz, Charlotte (1997). Mangaboom. Illustrated by Anita 
Lobel. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-12957-9. 
Picture Book. 

In this unusual adaptation of "Jack and the Beanstalk," Manga- 
boom is a gorgeous female Latina giant, effervescent and content in 
her gargantuan self. Rather unconventional in her ways. Manga- 





Picture Books 



433 



boom loves to climb trees, turn cartwheels, and in general chal- 
lenge not only the traditional view of giants, but also stereotypes of 
females. Daniel, a young boy who chmbs her beanstalk, has the 
opportunity to get involved in Mangaboom's search for the perfect 
companion, one who will accept her — high heels, flamboyant 
ways, and all. Mangaboom's matchmaking aunt tries to help too, 
but in the end, Mangaboom's own resourcefulness leads her to the 
perfect companion. Colorful gouache and watercolor paintings by 
Anita Lobel artfully give life to this story. Teachers can use this 
story in the classroom in conjunction with other books, such as Jon 
Scieszka's The True Story of the Three Little Pigs or Stephen Kellogg's 
The Three Little Pigs (see 14.29), to help students explore alternate 
versions of traditional fairy tales. 

Scieszka, Jon (1991). The True Story of the Three Little 

Pigs. Illustrated by Lane Smith. New York: Viking. 

Unpaged. ISBN: 0-670-84162-5. Picture Book. 

14.13 Ringgold, Faith (1999). The Invisible Princess. New York: Crown. 
ISBN: 0-517-80024-1. Picture Book. 

In the Village of Visible lived Mama and Papa Love. They loved 
children and wanted to have children of their own, but were 
afraid to because they were slaves and knew that the horrible 
plantation owner. Captain Pepper, would probably take their chil- 
dren away and sell them. Their love of children was so strong that 
once Mama Love gave birth to their first child, their prayers of 
having a child who only knew freedom is magically granted by 
the Lady of Peace, who takes the young child away. The little girl 
grows up in a beautiful world where the elements of nature raise 
her as a princess. This is one of the first originally created African 
American fairy tales. Faith Ringgold ironically creates a tale that 
has never been visible before, and uses the theme of an African 
American princess who is invisible. 

14.14 Rohmann, Eric (1997). The Cinder-Eyed Cats. New York: Crown. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-517-70896-5. Picture Book. 

On a beautiful sunlit day, a young boy climbs into his sailboat and 
sets sail — or more exact, sets flight — across the deep blue sea. 
After dropping anchor on a faraway shore, the young boy ambi- 
tiously sculpts a giant fish from the shore's sand as hints of cats 
and other creatures watch from nearby sites. All is peaceful until 



459 



434 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



twilight time when the sand fish awakens, cats emerge from the 
woods, and fishes rise from the deep. Together this unlikely cast 
of characters twirl, weave, wiggle, and dance their way through 
the night. As in most dream stories, the sun signals that it's time 
for the frolicking to stop. Although the fishes return to the sea and 
the boy and cats return to shore, it is clear from the look of con- 
tentment on the boy's and cats' faces that this is not a one-time 
event. Rather the boy will return and the dance will start again 
once twilight falls "and the moon comes round once more." 
Rohmarm's illustrations add unique perspectives and complexity 
to a deceptively simple story line. 

14.15 Shannon, David (1998). A Bad Case of the Stripes. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-92997-6. Picture Book. 

Camilla Cream loves to please everyone . . . except herself. For 
example, she loves lima beans, yet refuses to eat them because 
none of the other children will. Imagine our heroine's surprise 
when, after trying on forty-two outfits for the first day of school, 
she looks in the mirror to find herself covered in stripes from head 
to toe! Her parents are flabbergasted, and none of the doctors or 
specialists they summon can cure her sickness. In fact, all of their 
efforts to help her out of her dilemma make her symptoms worse! 
Not to mention the fact that all of the children at school make fun 
of her. In the end, Camilla learns an important lesson: just be your- 
self. This wonderful book is instructive to children, who must deal 
with pressures from peers, parents, and teachers everyday. The 
magnificent and colorful illustrations are especially attractive to 
the younger eye. 

14.16 Sharmon, Margaret (1998). Gullible's Troubles. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-83933-5. Picture Book. (See 8.57) 

14.17 Teague, Mark (1998). The Lost and Found. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-84619-1. Picture Book. 

Wendell and Floyd's school adventures, which began in The Secret 
Shortcut, continue in this book as the unlucky duo is sent to the 
principal's office because they were late for class. When Mona 
Tudburn, the new girl in school, walks into the office looking for 
her missing lucky hat, she mysteriously disappears into the lost- 
and-found box. The boys jump in after her and their adventure 
begins. They journey through various tunnels and rooms until 



4,Gft 



Picture Books 



435 



they reach the hat room, where Mona finds her hat. The boys each 
choose a lucky hat for themselves, and they all return to the prin- 
cipal's office before anyone notices their absence. Teague's charac- 
teristic cartoon illustrations are suggestive of animation, which 
suits the story well. 

Teague, Mark (1996). The Secret Shortcut. New York: 

Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590-67714-4. Picture Book. 

14.18 Weatherby, Mark Alan (1997). My Dinosaur. New York: Scholas- 
tic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-97203-0. Picture Book. 

Have you ever dreamed of having a dinosaur as a friend? It seems 
impossible, but when Sophie, a young girl with a vivid imagina- 
tion, finds a dinosaur hiding among trees in her backyard, she 
befriends the gentle giant. Together Sophie and her new friend 
take readers on a magical nighttime adventure where they explore 
the world around them while playing hide-and-seek, swimming 
in moonlit water, and soaring so far above the trees they almost 
touch the stars. When the sun comes up, Sophie sings goodbye to 
her new friend: "Good night, my Dinosaur. Sleep tight, my 
dinosaur. Soon I'll see you again, my very best friend. Good night, 
sleep tight, my dinosaur ..." Readers who think the story is only a 
dream will give pause at the story's end, when the illustrator 
shows Sophie waking to the morning sun with leaves clinging 
loosely to her hair. Weatherby's simple text and realistic illustra- 
tions (rendered, according to the artist, in acrylics, metallic paints, 
and fairy dust) create an understated magic that makes this jour- 
ney one that all readers, young and old alike, will want to take 
again and again. 

14.19 Whatley, Bruce, and Rosie Smith (1997). Detective Donut and the 
Wild Goose Chase. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
06-026604-X. Picture Book. (See 8.62) 

14.20 Wood, Audrey (1998). Sweet Dream Pie. Illustrated by Mark 
Teague. New York: Blue Sky. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-96204-3. Pic- 
ture Book. 

When Pa Brindle has a restless night, he begs Ma to make a sweet 
dream pie, as she did long ago. Ma agrees, but warns that if things 
get out of hand, she is not to blame. Ma tosses marshmallows, 
candy com, cinnamon hots, chocolate drops, sugar cubes, and the 



436 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



like into the giant pie. When the pie comes out of the oven, the 
entire neighborhood stops by for a piece. Despite Ma's warning — 
“Only one piece, or you'll be sorry" — they all help themselves to 
thirds and fourths. Feeling sleepy, everyone heads home to a 
night of wild dreams. Ma stays awake to sweep away the unruly 
dreams with her broom, and only then can all the dreamers settle 
in for a good night's sleep. The quirky perspectives of Mark 
Teague's vividly colored double-page spreads might be coupled 
with Wood's The Napping House for a discussion of artistic point of 
view. 

Wood, Audrey (1944). The Napping House. Illustrated 
by Don Wood. New York: Harcourt Brace. 32 pp. ISBN: 
0-1525-6708-9. Picture Book. 

14.21 Yolen, Jane (1997). Child of Faerie, Child of Earth. Illustrated by 
Jane Dyer. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-96897- 
8. Picture Book. 

One magical Hallow's Eve, a child of Faerie and a child of Earth 
meet in a woodland clearing by the light of the full moon. The 
Faerie child leads his newfoimd human friend on a grand tour of 
the enchanted faerie realm, complete with "brownies and boggles 
and sprites / And elven folk and all," and pleads with her to stay. 
Hesitant to leave her home, the Earth child then takes her gossamer- 
winged companion through her own world of "colors pure and 
bright / Of open sight" and "Of warm sunlight," and extends to 
him the same invitation. Jane Yolen's rhythmic poetry lilts and tum- 
bles through every page, while Jane Dyer's brilliant, highly detailed 
watercolors highlight at once the vivid contrasts and subtle har- 
monies between the magical realms of Faerie and Earth. 

Secondary Reviews 

14.22 Carr, Jan (1996). The Nature of the Beast. Illustrated by G. Brian 
Karas. New York: Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-I3596-X. Pic- 
ture Book. 

Isabelle finds a dollar bill and uses it to buy a beast. Isabelle's 
father thinks the beast will make an interesting scientific experi- 
ment, and encourages her to keep a journal documenting the 
beast's behavior. Her mother, however, says the beast will have to 
go, despite its imcanny ability to imitate her French lessons. The 
parental conflict continues until the beast falls ill, bringing com- 



Picture Books 



437 



passion and a new awareness to the mother's heart. Finally she 
concedes that as long as the beast is quiet, he may stay. Any child 
who has longed for a pet over parental objections will empathize 
with Isabelle and her struggles to meet the demands of caring for 
the beast while attempting to placate an unconvinced parent. 
Whimsical illustrations will aid in engaging young listeners in 
this comic tale. 

14.23 de Paola, Tomie (1996). Strega Nona: Her Story. New York: Put- 
nam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22818-7. Picture Book. (See 13.41) 

14.24 Denim, Sue (1997). The Dumb Bunnies Go to the Zoo. Illustrated 
by Dav Pilkey. New York: Blue Sky. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-84735- 
X. Picture Book. (See 8.27) 

14.25 EEK! Stories to Make You Shriek series. Grosset & Dunlap, New 
York. 

Frith, Margaret (1997). Mermaid Island. Illustrated by Julie Dur- 
rell. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-448-41618-2. 

McMullan, Kate (1996). The Mummy's Gold. Illustrated by Jeff 
Spackman. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-448-41310-8. 

Dussling, Jennifer (1996). A Very Strange Dollhouse. Illustrated 
by Sonja Lamut. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-448-41311-6. 

These books are excellent for beginning or struggling readers, and 
one reviewer noted that the high-interest nature of the EEK! Sto- 
ries to Make You Shriek series books made them compelling even 
to her fifth-grade students. 

Jane vacations with her mother and father every summer. This 
year they stay for a week at Mermaid Island, in the book by the 
same title. Jane soon befriends Molly, a young girl who has a won- 
derful shell necklace, can build fantastic sandcastles, won't eat 
fish, leaves funny silvery things behind in the bathtub, and has a 
bedroom painted like the underwater world of the sea. Jane is 
bewildered by all of Molly's eccentricities, but everything makes 
perfect sense when she finally learns Molly's secret: her mother is 
a mermaid! The many clues to Molly's secret will keep readers on 
their toes, and provide an excellent introduction to an author's 
use of foreshadowing to tell her story. 

Jake's brother Henry loves to play tricks on him in The 
Mummy's Gold. So Jake is suspicious when Henry and his friend 



er|c 



463 



438 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



Max invite him to a movie — their treat. The movie is about a 
mummy who searches for his lost treasure and scares people out 
of their skin by moaning, "I want my Gold!" Afterwards Henry 
and Max run off, leaving Jake to walk home alone. All of a sud- 
den, Jake finds himself being chased by a real mummy! This story 
with its many twists and turns will leave readers still wondering 
at the end. 

In A Very Strange Dollhouse, Lucy is new in school and every- 
one thinks she's a little weird. When one of her classmates visits 
Lucy's house, she thinks it even more odd that Lucy's parents are 
nowhere to be found. When she plays with Lucy's dollhouse, she 
notices something even stranger: the dolls seem to change places 
by themselves, they feel warm, and they even blink! Before long, 
it is evident that the dolls in Lucy's dollhouse are really her par- 
ents, and that Lucy intends to shrink her classmate, too. Her 
would-be victim just makes it to the door before being caught for- 
ever in Lucy's spell. The next day, Lucy's house is for sale, and she 
is not in school . . . 

14.26 Ernst, Lisa Campbell (1997). Bubba and Trixie. New York: Simon 
& Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-81357-0. Picture Book. (See 8.30) 

14.27 Hickox, Rebecca (1997). Zorro and Quwi: Tales of a Trickster 
Guinea Pig. Illustrated by Kim Howard. New York: Bantam Dou- 
bleday Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-440-41183-1. 
Picture Book. (See 3.202) 

14.28 Jemigan, E. Wesley (1997). Cloudcatcher. Auckland, New Zealand: 
Shortland. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-57257-668-5. Picture Book. 

Manytracks is a curious little boy who is easily distracted from his 
chores and who constantly gets into mischief. There is concern 
that his behavior will anger the Kachinas and cause problems for 
the people of his pueblo. Manytracks tries to behave, but when he 
discovers a small vaporous form stuck in a pinion pine tree, his 
curiosity overwhelms him. He frees the little cloud from the tree, 
but then captures it in a basket, takes it back to his cliff-dwelling 
home, and hides it from the rest of his family. Eventually Many- 
tracks realizes that the little cloud is growing weaker, and he 
seeks his father's counsel. His father charges him with nurturing 
the little cloud until it is strong enough to survive the wind, other- 
wise his actions may anger the Cloud People and bring drought to 



Picture Books 



439 



his pueblo. In the end, Manytracks accepts responsibility for his 
actions and nurtures the little cloud until it is strong enough to 
leave. A gentle story, Cloudcatcher emphasizes the importance of 
taking responsibility for one's actions. 

14.29 Kellogg, Steven (1997). The Three Little Pigs. New York: Morrow 
Junior Books. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-688-08731-0. Picture Book. 

Everyone knows the story of the Three Little Pigs, but Kellogg's 
retelling gives it a new twist. Perry, Pete, and Prudence are suc- 
cessful entrepreneurs. They are happy with their waffle franchises 
until Tempesto the wolf shows up and starts huffing and puffing. 
Sarafina Sow has to come out of retirement to save the day. Kel- 
logg's clever, full-color illustrations are irresistible. 

14.30 Kimmel, Eric A. (1997). Squash It! A True and Ridiculous Tale. 
Illustrated by Robert Rayevsky. New York: Holiday House. Un- 
paged. ISBN: 0-8234-1299-7. Picture Book. 

Author Eric A. Kimmel has adapted a well-known story from 
Spain and made it outrageous. In this exaggerated tale, made even 
more hilarious by Robert Rayevsky's bold and cartoonish illustra- 
tions, the King of Spain keeps a pet louse that grows to enormous 
size, and is then carved into a musical instrument after its death. 
The proud king promises the hand of one of his daughters to any- 
one who can guess the origin of the instrument. A poor, grubby 
peasant, wanting riches but (much to the relief of the haughty 
princess) not a bride, correctly answers the riddle with the help of 
three insects. Young readers and listeners agreed this folktale is 
among their favorites. Joey said Squash It! is "excellent!" 

14.31 Marton, Jirina (1997). Lady Kaguya's Secret: A Japanese Tale. 
New York: Annick. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55037-441-9. Picture Book. 

Kaguya-hima, the Moon King's daughter, falls in love with the 
Emperor. But because she is not mortal, they are unable to marry. 
When Kaguya-hima's father comes to take her home, Kaguya- 
hima gives ^e Emperor a bottle filled with the elixir of eternal 
life. Unable to live without her, the Emperor pours the contents 
atop the highest mountain, hoping the smoke will reach his 
beloved. Based on an ancient Japanese tale about the Moon 
Princess, this story offers another perspective on classic themes in 
fantasy and traditional literature, themes such as lovers giving up 
worldly goods or eternal life in order to be with their, chosen 



440 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



mates. Marton traveled to Japan to complete the research for the 
stunning oil-and-pastel illustrations that add a mystical quality to 
the story 

14.32 Matsumoto, Lisa (1996). Beyond 'Ohi'a Valley: Adventures in a 
Hawaiian Rainforest. Illustrated by Michael Furuya. Honolulu: 
Lehua. 55 pp. ISBN: 0-9647491-2-2. Picture Book. 

Lisa Matsumoto and artist Michael Furuya give the plight of 
Hawaii's rainforests a friendly, personable face in the form of 
Kahuli, an endangered tree snail whose wish for adventure is 
granted as he "surfs the wind" on a leaf blown free from his home 
in the Great 'Ohi'a Tree. Kahuli lands in the next valley and 
befriends Hau'oli, a happy-faced spider. Together they escape 
predators, fall into a moxmtain stream, and plunge over a water- 
fall. Finally a Hawaiian owl airlifts them back to 'Ohi'a Valley. 
Relieved and happy, Kahuli now knows where he belongs. Mat- 
sumoto authenticates the story with photos and facts about the 
animals. Yoxmg readers will enjoy this well-crafted and beauti- 
fully illustrated book, both for the story and for its historical and 
ecological significance. Nobody can read this book without a 
renewed reverence for the beauty and balance in nature. 

14.33 Rassmus, Jens (1998). Farmer Eno and His Cow. New York: 
Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30081-1. Picture Book. 

Farmer Eno is dreaming of ships, and the ships in his head are 
appearing on his farm each morning! What begins with one small 
vessel in the middle of his bedroom leads to quite a large shipyard 
in his once green fields. When Farmer Eno and his talking cow 
Africa head to the city for help, the dreams (and the ships) follow . . . 
xmtil Farmer Eno learns to follow his dreams instead. The bright, 
fantastic illustrations in this oversized picture book are a lovely 
complement to this delightful translation of Jens Rassmus' German 
tale about a dream in search of its farmer. 

14.34 San Souci, Robert D. (1998). A Weave of Words: An Armenian 
Tale. Illustrated by Raul Colon. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-531-30053-6. Picture Book. 

A master storyteller, Robert San Souci combines several Armenian 
folktales to create this intriguing story. We find Prince Vachagan 
out hxmting when he meets Anait. Vachagan finds delight in 
Anait's quick wit, easy laugh, and good sense. When he asks her 




Picture Books 



441 



to marry him, Anait explains that she carmot marry a man who 
"doesn't know how to read or write, and who can't earn a living 
by his own hands." Determined to marry the woman he loves, 
Vachagan teaches himself to read, write, and weave. He and Anait 
marry and govern together imtil Vachagan leaves to investigate 
reported trouble in the eastern part of the kingdom and is cap- 
tured by the dreaded three-headed devil. Ultimately it is Vacha- 
gan's ability to read, write, and weave that allows him to let Anait 
know of his predicament. Anait battles bravely, and together they 
overcome the evil devil. Colon's rich, detailed illustrations bring 
this tale to life. A gripping adventure with a confident, capable 
heroine. 

14.35 Schami, Rafik (1996). Fatima and the Dream Thief. Illustrated by 
Els Cools and Oliver Streich. New York: North-South. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-55858-653-9. Picture Book. 

Fatima is worried. Her mother is ill from exhaustion, and her 
brother Hassan has had his dreams stolen by the evil lord of the 
castle outside their city. With only enough food left to last them 
one week, Fatima knows it is up to her to save her family. Despite 
her mother's warning — "Oh daughter, you're only twelve, and so 
small and weak!" — Fatima sets off for the evil lord's castle armed 
only with her courage, confidence, and wit, but manages to win 
back more than just her brother's dreams. Although the transla- 
tion of this Swiss-German tale is often imprecise — one has the 
feeling that brevity was too often favored over clarity and 
artistry — the overall story flows well. Cools' and Streich's bright 
watercolor paintings add a comic element to the tale, and help the 
reader to bring to life the author's fantasy world. 

14.36 Stanley, Diane (1997). Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter. New York: 
Morrow Jimior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14328-8. Picture 
Book. (See 3.167) 

14.37 Soto, Gary (1997). Chato y su cena. Illustrated by Susan Guevara. 
Translated by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy. New York: 
Putnam and Grosset. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-698-11601-1. Picture 
Book. (See 8.58) 

14.38 Whal, Jan (1997). I Met a Dinosaur. Illustrated by Chris Sheban. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-152-01644-9. Picture 
Book. 




442 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



After a visit to a museum, a young girl spends the next week see- 
ing dinosaurs wherever she looks. Rhymed text on each page 
complements the story Misty, dreamlike illustrations, similar to 
Floyd Cooper's illustrations in Virginia Kroll's Faraway Drums 
(see 14.8), are either set within small frames, fill full-page frames, 
or spill gently off the page. Although a fantasy, this beautifully 
designed book could be used to supplement a dinosaur unit 
because the dinosaurs are labeled and a glossary of dinosaur 
names is included. See also Patrick's Dinosaurs. 

Carrick, Carol (1983). Patrick's Dinosaurs. New York: 
Houghton Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-599-19189-4. Picture 
Book. 

14.39 Young, Ed (1997). Mouse Match: A Chinese Folktale. San Diego: 
Silver Whistle. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201453-5. Picture Book. (See 
3.138) 

Chapter Books 

Primary Reviews 

14.40 Billingsley, Franny (1997). Well Wished. New York: Simon & Schus- 
ter. 170 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81210-8. Chapter Book. 

Eleven-year-old Nuria, an orphan, wants two things she's never 
had: someone to love her just the way she is, and a special friend. 
Her first wish is answered when she comes to live with her kind 
grandfather, the Aya, in the mysterious town of Bishop Mayne. 
However the children in her new town have disappeared because 
someone's wish went wrong at the town's temperamental wish- 
ing well. Nuria is pleased to find a friend when she meets up with 
eleven-year-old Catty, crippled and confined to a wheelchair. 
Then another wish goes wrong, and Nuria finds herself in Catty's 
body. Although it is possible to undo a wish, it must be carefully 
constructed because each person can make only one wish each 
lifetime. The need to wish carefully suggests a possible link to 
Half Magic and The Trouble with Wishes (see 14.55). 

Eager, Edward (1999). Half Magic. New York: Harcourt 
Brace. 208 pp. ISBN: 0-152-02068-3. Chapter Book. 

14.41 Coville, Bruce (1997). The Skull of Truth. Illustrated by Gary A. 
Lippincott. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 176 pp. ISBN: 0-15-275457- 
1. Chapter Book. 



Chapter Books 



443 



Charlie has a chronic lying problem. He lies when his mother asks 
him where he has been for the afternoon, he lies when his teachers 
ask simple questions. Even he doesn't know why he makes up 
these stories, and consequently he spends most of his time alone 
wandering through the swamp behind his house. Then while run- 
ning away from a bully one afternoon, Charlie takes a wrong turn 
in the swamp. He finds a shop deep in the cover of the swamp 
that he does not remember seeing before. It turns out to be Mr. 
Elives' magic shop. When he thinks he hears a skull named Yorick 
say, "Take me home," he accidentally steals it from the shop. Mr. 
Elives sends a message to warn him of the skull's curse, and 
admits that he is relieved that the skull is gone. Almost immedi- 
ately, Charlie discovers Yorick's curse: the truth. From then on, 
Charlie is forced to tell the truth about everything. To his surprise, 
he finds that people believe him even less when he tells the whole 
truth. This dilemma brings Charlie trouble, and things get worse 
until he capitalizes on the curse to save something that he loves 
dearly. 

14.42 Hesse, Karen (1996). The Music of Dolphins. New York: Scholas- 
tic. 181 pp. ISBN: 0-590-89797-7. Chapter Book. (See 4.10) 

14.43 Levine, Gail Carson (1997). Ella Enchanted. New York: Harper- 
Collins. 232 pp. ISBN: 0-06-440405-5. Chapter Book. 

This 1998 Newbery Honor book captures the Cinderella story in a 
new way that will delight and charm readers. Cursed at birth by a 
fairy's gift of obedience, Ella spends her Life trying to outwit, out- 
smart, and break the curse's hold over her, only to find the power to 
do so lies within herself. Living in a fairy wonderland peopled by a 
colorful cast of elves, ogres, giants, princes, and fairies, Ella sm- 
mounts many obstacles (including the traditional evil stepmother 
and self-centered stepsisters) and successfully meets numerous 
challenges in her quest. This strong, clever, and feisty heroine 
reminds us all of the central truth: the power to change our lives lies 
within. Ella Enchanted is an excellent vehicle for teachers of interme- 
diate-grade children to use in conjunction with other versions of 
the Cinderella story. Encouraging students to write alternate ver- 
sions of Cinderella or other fairy tales is one natural outcome of 
using this book in the classroom. 

14.44 Oppel, Kenneth (1997). Silverwing. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
217 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81529-8. Chapter Book. 



444 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



Shade, the runt of his bat colony, becomes separated during a storm 
as the group makes its winter migration to the warmer Hibemacu- 
lum. Alone he struggles through a series of adventures to rejoin his 
kind. The young bat grows and changes, learning to flee from owls, 
pigeons, and the evil vampire bats Goth and Throbb. In the 
process, he learns to trust Marina, a brightwing bat, and Zephyr, an 
albino. Readers will easily become engrossed in Oppel's fantasy 
world and enjoy the factual notes at the end of the book. 

14.45 Paulsen, Gary (1998). The Transall Saga. New York: Delacorte. 
248 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32196-1. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Thirteen-year-old Mark Harrison finds himself in a primitive 
world where the trees and grass are red, he can't see any stars at 
night, and the animal life is strange — and dangerous. Monkey- 
teddy bear mutants throw rocks at him from the trees above, buf- 
falo creatures with sharp tusks charge at him, and scorpion-like 
insects bite him all over his body. Gary Paulsen's heroic narrative 
follows Mark through Transall as he tries to find the mysterious 
blue light, which transported him there, to help him get back 
home. Sophisticated concepts such as bigotry, war, and slavery 
are presented in accessible vocabulary and short, action-packed 
chapters. Paulsen returns to a favorite theme of survival on one's 
own. Mark's coming-of-age in Transall can only be accomplished 
by overcoming the challenges of this eerie land, and the strange 
people who inhabit it. 

14.46 Rowling, J. K. (1998). Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone. Illus- 
trated by Mary GrandPre. New York: Scholastic. 320 pp. ISBN: 0- 
590-35340-3. Chapter Book. 

Following the death of his mother and father at the hands of the 
evil sorcerer Voldemort, the baby Harry Potter is sent to live with 
his cruel aunt and uncle and their rotten son Dudley (three of the 
biggest "muggles" you'll ever meet). There, for the first eleven 
years of his life, Harry is forced to live in a cupboard under the 
stairs and eat nothing but the family's leftovers. He is not even 
allowed to celebrate his own birthday. On his eleventh birthday, 
however, with the arrival of a mysterious letter from Hogwart's 
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, Harry's life takes a magical 
turn for the better. He has been accepted into the school without 
ever applying, and once he gets there, not only does he begin to 
study the secrets of Herbology, Transfiguration, and the like, he 



Chapter Books 



445 



also discovers that his past has already made him something of a 
celebrity. Moreover with the help of his newfound magical talent 
and some unlikely friends, Harry must face Voldemort and keep 
him from stealing the powerful Sorcerer's Stone. Rowling's writ- 
ing brings fresh style and wit to the traditional high-fantasy 
genre, and her superb storytelling abilities set this tale on its way 
to becoming a classic. Adults and children alike are sure to find 
this book as riveting, magical, and lovable as its hero. See also the 
sequels Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets and Harry Potter and 
the Prisoner ofAzkaban. 

Rowling, J. K. (1999). Harry Potter and the Chamber of 
Secrets. Illustrated by Mary GrandPre. New York: 
Scholastic. 320 pp. ISBN: 0-439-06486-4. Chapter Book. 

Rowling, J. K. (1999). Harry Potter and the Prisoner of 
Azkaban. Illustrated by Mary GrandPre. New York: 
Scholastic. 435 pp. ISBN: 0-439-13635-0. Chapter Book. 

14.47 Spinger, Nancy (1998). I Am Mordred: A Tale from Camelot. 
New York: Philomel. 184 pp. ISBN: 0-399-23143-9. Sophisticated 
Chapter Book. 

This compelling revision of Arthurian lore turns Mordred — the 
odious bastard son who Merlin prophesied would kill his own 
father. King Arthur — into a complex young man who has been 
mislabeled and misunderstood. Seeking to tell his own story and to 
live nobly. Springer's Mordred faces questions that loom over any 
coming-of-age: Is my life determined by fate, society, or myself? Is 
human nature good or bad, and how far can I trust those with 
experience and power? These considerations are interwoven 
deftly with a feminist thread as Mordred is aided by the sorceress 
Nyneve, who rejects Camelot's definition of woman as a lady in 
need of a knight and who urges Mordred to contend in like fash- 
ion with others' attempts to determine his life. Readers will find 
much to identify with and to ponder as Mordred tries to under- 
stand his situation, live with his choices, and find positive mean- 
ing in the midst of it all. Another Arthurian revision can be foimd 
in Jane Yolen's The Young Merlin series (see 14.48). 

14.48 Yolen, Jane. The Young Merlin series. 

Passager (1996). San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 76 pp. ISBN: 0-15- 
200391-6. Chapter Book. 



ERIC 




446 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



Hobby (1996). San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 90 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200815- 
2. Chapter Book. 

Merlin (1996). San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 91 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200814- 
4. Chapter Book. 

In Passager, Yolen introduces us to a wild eight-year-old boy who 
has been left in the woods to fend for himself. How he came to be 
there is a mystery, although the boy does recall bits and pieces of 
the home he once knew. Master Robin, an expert hawker, happens 
upon the boy one day while hxmting in the same tree in which the 
boy sits. Curious, the boy follows the hxmter home. Using patience 
and gentleness. Master Robin soon gains the boy's confidence, and 
he quietly becomes part of the household. The story ends as the 
boy's true name is discovered: Merlin. 

In Hobby, Merlin is now twelve and part of Master Robin's 
family. One night, he dreams of a bird with a fiery red breast, but 
does not know that his dream forebodes disaster. One night soon 
after, he wakes to find the house where he lives with Master 
Robin, Mag, and Nell on fire. Merlin himself has time to escape, 
but is xmable to save his family. Alone once more, he wanders into 
the forest he once called home with a cow and a horse that also 
managed to survive the blaze. Then he is captured by an evil man 
named Fowler, and his terrible dog Ranger, who steal his horse 
and cow and take him to town hoping to sell him. There Merlin is 
rescued by a magician and his mistress who use his prophetic 
dreams as a means to draw crowds and earn money. As they 
travel, a king requests their presence, but the magician becomes 
nervous about the nature of the boy's dreams and leaves town 
without him. Once again. Merlin finds himself alone. 

In Merlin, young Merlin meets a troupe of wodewose who 
allow the boy to accompany them. At first the wodewose take in 
Merlin and feed him, but when the wodewose women discover 
that the boy is a prophetic dreamer, they cage him and put hallu- 
cinogenic herbs in his food. Knowing that he does not need the 
herbs to dream, he refuses to eat. Then one night, he dreams of 
blood filling the clearing where they are camped. Without waiting 
for Merlin's interpretation of the dream, the wodewose decide 
they must break camp and leave. In the confusion. Merlin escapes 
with Cub, a small wodewose (and the future King Arthur) who 
insists on running away with him. Soon after their departure, sol- 
diers attack the camp and kill all of the inhabitants. Thus Merlin 
and the small boy are left to make a life for themselves. Readers 



472 



Chapter Books 



447 



who enjoy this trilogy may also want to discover the stories in 
Yolen's Camelot for more Arthurian legend interpretations. 

Yolen, Jane (1995). Camelot. New York; Philomel. 198 

pp. ISBN: 0-399-22540-4. Chapter Book. 

Secondary Reviews 

14.49 Alexander, Lloyd (1997). The Iron Ring. New York; Dutton Chil- 
dren's Books. 283 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45597-3. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book. 

Long ago in what is now India, an ill-fated game of dice causes 
Tamar, the young King of Sundari, to lose his freedom to the mys- 
terious Jaya, King of Mahapura. Since Tamar is not just a king, but 
also a member of the noble warrior caste called the kshatriyas, to 
which honor or darhma is everything, he must leave the comfort 
and safety of his palace and go in search of his destiny — a journey 
which may or may not end in his death. Tamar and his compan- 
ions (including his timid teacher, a mischievous monkey-king, a 
whiny eagle, and an intrepid milkmaid) must brave a world of 
sharply delineated social castes, belligerent kshatriyas, powerful 
kings, and evil rakshasas (spirits). Their experiences lead them 
through difficult journeys of the heart, mind, and soul, causing 
them each to question and challenge traditional ideas of caste, 
gender, honor, loyalty, and love. Alexander is able to weave multi- 
ple complex ideas into a single literary thread with unusual deft- 
ness and artistry. Moreover his skillfully developed characters 
live and breathe on every page, lending themselves well to in- 
depth comparative analysis. 

14.50 Cooper, Susan (1997). The Boggart and the Monster. New York: 
Margaret K. McElderry. 185 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81330-9. Chapter 
Book. 

In this sequel to The Boggart, Canadian brother and sister Jessup 
and Emily Volnik return to Scotland and Castle Keep, where they 
are reunited with their old friend the Boggart, a nearly invisible, 
mischievous, shape-changing sprite. On a camping trip to Loch 
Ness with some friends, the children and the Boggart discover 
that the legendary creature of the lake is really the Boggart's long- 
lost cousin, stuck in his monstrous form for centuries. When a 
high-tech scientific expedition tries to prove the monster's exis- 
tence, the children must help the two boggarts escape the ensuing 



473 



448 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



media circus. Cooper keeps the action moving by frequently shift- 
ing point of view, presenting the story from the perspectives of 
the children, the scientists, and the fun-loving boggarts them- 
selves, and she convincingly blends ancient magic and modern 
science. The boggarts provide both comic and poignant moments 
in a story that stresses the importance of loyalty, family ties, and 
the power of belief in oneself and one's friends. 

Cooper, Susan (1993). The Boggart. New York: Simon & 

Schuster Children's. 208 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80173-4. Chap- 
ter Book. 

14.51 Crowe, Carole (1998). Sharp Horns on the Moon. Honesdale, PA: 
Boyds Mills. 112 pp. ISBN: 1-563-97671-4. Chapter Book. 

Sharp Horns on the Moon tells of the timeless bounds of friendship, 
the pain of sacrifice, and the connections between past and pres- 
ent. Ivy Marie Bell has spent her whole life with her father and 
unmarried aunt in the house where her mother grew up. Her 
mother died soon after Ivy's birth. Since they live outside of town. 
Ivy is schooled at home by her aunt, but longs to attend the high 
school in town so she can make friends her own age. As usual, she 
spends her lonely summers swimming and fishing. One day as 
she is out swimming, she feels something holding her under the 
water as she fights to get back to the surface. Soon Ivy learns that 
the "something" is a ghost named Eleanor, who wants to be her 
friend. Eleanor turns out to be the same friend her mother had as 
a child — the ghost of a young girl from a shipwreck long ago. In 
this suspense-filled time overlap. Ivy risks her life and her friend- 
ship to protect Eleanor's family. 

14.52 Kimmel, Elizabeth Cody (1998). In the Stone Circle. New York: 
Scholastic. 225 pp. ISBN: 0-590-21308-3. Chapter Book. 

Fourteen-year-old Cristyn reacts with typical teenage dismay 
when her father informs her they will spend the summer in 
Wales. Once there, they stay with another family in a sixteenth- 
century house inhabited by a ghost interested in making contact 
with Cristyn. Eventually they find that the ghost is a young girl 
from the 1200s, trapped in the house. Cristyn and the other chil- 
dren in the story have repeated encounters with the ghost, until 
finally they are able to execute a plan that allows the ghost to rest 
in peace. Riveting text written in a lively, engaging style will cap- 



474 



Chapter Books 



449 



ture the reader's interest. Readers who enjoy this story might also 
try Sharp Horns on the Moon (see 14.51). 

14.53 Paterson, Katherine (1998). Parzival: The Quest for the Grail 
Knight. New York: Lodestar. 127 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67579-5. 

This story is a retelling of a thirteenth-century Arthurian legend. 
Raised in the wilderness, Parzival is imaware of his noble birth. 
One day, after a chance meeting with three men in armor, Parzival 
decides to go to King Arthur's court to become a knight. His 
many adventures teach him chivalry and honor, and he comes of 
age through his quest for the Holy Grail. Readers will appreciate 
the brief biographical information about the characters at the 
beginning of the book, as well as source notes about the original 
epic poem by Wolfram von Eschenbach. 

14.54 Peck, Richard (1996). The Great Interactive Dream Machine: 
Another Adventure in Cyberspace. New York: Dial. 149 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-1989-2. Chapter Book. 

When computer whiz Aaron Zimmer develops a program that 
grants wishes, his best friend Josh Lewis accompanies him on 
adventures through time and space. Each journey begins with cel- 
lular reorganization, then personal disintegration, and finally 
interactivity — but the program has a few bugs and the boys aren't 
sure exactly when and with whom the computer will interact 
next. The cast of characters includes the school bullies Stink 
Stu)rvesant and Hulk Hotchkiss; their neighbor's dog Ophelia; 
their history teacher Mr. Thaw; and the mysterious Watcher, who 
seems to know all their computer secrets. Aaron and Josh con- 
tinue the successful combination of humor and science fiction 
they established in Lost in Cyberspace. 

Peck, Richard (1997). Lost in Cyberspace. New York: 

Puffin. 160 pp. ISBN: 0-140-37856-1. Chapter Book. 

14.55 Pfeffer, Susan Beth (1996). The Trouble with Wishes. Illustrated 
by Jermifer Plecas. New York: Henry Holt. 71 pp. ISBN: 0-8050- 
3826-4. Chapter Book. 

The day Katie Logan finds a magic wish-granting lamp in the 
park, she thinks she's died and gone to heaven. She now has three 
whole wishes to spend however she pleases! She soon realizes, 
however, that wishing is not all it's cracked up to be. What if she 




450 



Fantasy Literature: Making the Impossible Possible 



wishes to be rich, only to find out she is the long-lost daughter of a 
wealthy family and not really the daughter of the parents she 
loves? Or if she wishes for world peace only to watch the world 
become overrun by an evil dictator capitalizing on the impossibil- 
ity of war? Finally Katie settles on what she thinks is a small-scale 
wish: to have the lead in the class play She soon discovers, how- 
ever, that even the smallest of wishes can have dire consequences. 
This light, easy-reader book could be used to inspire writing proj- 
ects about wishes, "what if" scenarios, and the like. 

14.56 Pierce, Tamora (1997). Circle of Magic: Sandry's Book. New York: 
Scholastic. 252 pg. ISBN: 0-590-55356-9. Chapter Book. 

The stories of four young characters are braided together in this 
tale of elemental magic. Sandry, a noble, is imprisoned in a dark, 
windowless storeroom. Daja, a trader, is adrift at sea, the lone sur- 
vivor of a shipwreck. Briar, a thief, stands before the judge, caught 
nicking others' goods for a third time. And Tris, whose budding, 
uncontrollable magic powers wreak havoc around her, has just 
been banished — again — from the children's dormitory in Mnver. 
Each is rescued by the mysterious Niklaren Goldeye (Niko), and 
together they are taken to the Winding Circle Temple in Emelan. 
Drawn together by fate, they come to Discipline Cottage, where 
they learn new crafts, develop powerful arts of meditation under 
Master Niko's instruction, and discover unexpected friendships 
blossoming out of their differences in race and gender. The stories 
of these four adventurers are continued in three other Circle of 
Magic books by fantasy author Tamora Pierce. 

Pierce, Tamora (1998). Circle of Magic: Tris's Book. New 
York: Scholastic. 256 pp. ISBN: 0-590-55357-7. Chapter 
Book. 

Pierce, Tamora (1998). Circle of Magic: Daja's Book. 

New York: Scholastic. 288 pp. ISBN: 0-590-55358-5. Chap- 
ter Book. 

Pierce, Tamora (1999). Circle of Magic: Briar's Book. 

New York: Scholastic. 288 pp. ISBN: 0-590-55359-3. Chap- 
ter Book. 

14.57 Reiss, Kathryn (1998). Paper Quake: A Puzzle. New York: Har- 
court Brace. 264 pp. ISBN: 0-15-201183-8. Chapter Book. 



476 



Chapter Books 



451 



Eighth-grader Violet Jackstone's world is a bit shaky. One of a set 
of triplets, her dark, frizzy hair, brown eyes, and small stature 
contrast sharply with her two sisters' blond, svelte appearances. 
Nicknamed "Baby" by her family, Violet struggles between fitting 
in and asserting her individuality. Recurring earthquake tremors 
and the accompanying visions Violet has only serve to complicate 
matters. When one of the tremors exposes a letter hidden in the 
wall almost a century ago, she marvels at the eerie connections 
between its contents and the events in her own life. An engaging 
and creative metaphor (noticeably free of cliched language or 
action) for the journey through adolescence, the ensuing adven- 
ture leads Violet on a tumultuous, often dangerous trip through 
time, history, and her own identity. 

14.58 Scieszka, Jon (1996). Tut, Tut. Illustrated by Lane Smith. New 
York: Viking. 74 pp. ISBN: 0-140-36360-2. Chapter Book. 

Joe and his friends Sam and Fred have promised never again to 
open The Book, because the volume causes the time travel that 
seems always to get the trio into trouble. But when Joe's sister 
Anna unwittingly opens the book, they land in ancient Egypt, 
where they are pursued by a mean little priest named the Great 
Hatsnat, who thwarts their every attempt to reach home. Eventu- 
ally they find an ally in the boy king Thutmose 111, who loves their 
basketball sneakers. They manage to outwit Hatsnat with a sim- 
ple physics trick: they ask one of his strongest guards to lean with 
his head against a wall, and pick up a small footstool. When the 
guard is unable to, but Anna is magically able to do so, they win a 
wager with Hatsnat and are able to escape. After some scary but 
comical adventures, the trio is able to find The Book, which allows 
them all to return home. Those children who enjoy Tut, Tut should 
be sure to check out the other titles in The Time Warp Trio series. 
These high-interest books make them an excellent choice for 
reluctant readers. 



ERIC 






A. S/// P/c/fett;f?odeo-f?/d/n’ Cowboy, Andrea D. Pinkney/Brian Pinkney (15.25). B. I Am 
Rosa Parks, Rosa Parks with Jim HaskinsA/Vil Clay (15.24). C. Amistad Rising: A Story 
of Freedom, Veronica Chambers/Paul Lee (15.44). 




478 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




453 



15 African and African 
American Voices 
and Experiences 

Patricia Tefft Cousin 
Dale Allender 
Nancy Tolson 

Contributing reviewers included Patricia Tefft Cousin, Claudette 
Mitchell, Grade Porter, and Nancy Tolson. 



A s teachers, we never really think about books without considering 
their instructional possibilities. This is true whether the instruc- 
tion is direct or indirect, aesthetic or didactic. That is why we have 
chosen to introduce this chapter on African and African American chil- 
dren's and young-adult literature by highlighting authorship and context 
as two of the most important selection and instruction considerations. 

Our first observation about authorship is best summarized by the 
title of Cornel West's collection of essays: race matters. Often readers and 
writers privilege the author's imagination over his or her race. They pre- 
sume that it is enough for a writer to imagine racial positioning in order 
to convey accurately the experiences of others, or that a writer can rise 
above his or her social institutions and write about race without being 
affected by race. This is a particularly troubling position when it is 
adopted by White European American writers who write about people 
of color — in this case African Americans. Given the unequal status in the 
United States between African Americans and White European Ameri- 
cans, African Americans have less power and often are either held under 
a microscope or completely ignored. It is more often the case that White 
writers choose to write about people of color than the reverse. Authen- 
ticity and exploitation suggest that race should be a far more significant 
factor than imagination when evaluating literature about African and 
African American voices and experiences. 

Although relaying an authentic experience through children's 
and young-adult literature is admittedly difficult for any writer, history 




479 



454 



African and African American Voices and Experiences 



demonstrates that it is especially difficult for mainstream writers writ- 
ing about African Americans. In the United States and throughout much 
of the world. Black cultural expression and contributions to society 
always have been devalued. Traditional African religion is demonized, 
even though it provides the basis for many contemporary forms of 
mainstream religious expression; Black dialect is considered inferior, 
even though linguists have demonstrated its syntactic integrity and 
widespread influence on American and European speech; hip hop 
music is criticized for being antisocial and misogynist, while at the same 
time it has grown into an international art form. This schizophrenic 
treatment of Black cultural expression by mainstream society demon- 
strates the importance of the Black author's authentic reflection from 
inside the Black experience. What should be highlighted? What should 
be celebrated? What should be stated matter-of-factly? When main- 
stream culture demonizes or idolizes Black cultural expression, an 
authentic and realistic rendering of Black voices and experiences by a 
mainstream writer is difficult at best. 

Authenticity is achieved by moving from inside African American 
culture and experience outward into the world — evolving internally and 
influencing externally, and occasionally being influenced from the out- 
side. Too often, writers outside of African American culture and experi- 
ence write an African American children's or young-adult book that 
contains subtle or overt inaccuracies and offenses. A writer such as 
Arnold Adoff occasionally disproves the rule, but such writers are rare. 
Nonetheless the Arnold Adoffs of the world compel us not to dismiss all 
writers who write about African Americans but are not themselves 
African American. Rather, we want to promote African America authors 
while carefully scrutinizing authors who seek to write about African 
Americans from outside of African American culture and experience. 
Such a posture promotes authenticity while combating exploitation. 

When sharing African American children's and young-adult liter- 
ature, teachers should always be attentive to context. In thinking about 
context, we offer some suggestions and a few cautions. It is crucial that 
teachers assist students in building a rich context for the reading mate- 
rial. The books reviewed below should not be read in isolation from 
each other or from other African American and young-adult literature. 
African American books for children and young adults should be seen 
as part of the rich and diverse African American literary tradition. Vir- 
ginia Hamilton or Julius Lester may write about slavery and the Civil 
War, or retell tales of High John and other tricksters from African and 
African American mythology, but they also write mysteries, science fic- 




480 



African and African American Voices and Experiences 



455 



tion, fantasy, and realistic fiction. Therefore a good reading list will 
include a wide range of genres and subject matter. Otherwise we restrict 
our students' view of the world and of themselves. 

African American children's and young-adult books should be 
paired or grouped in conversation with each other, in order to both offer 
complementary perspectives and reveal contradiction or divergence 
witlidn the tradition. For example, Andrea Davis Pinkney's Bill Pickett: 
Rodo-Ridin' Cowboy (1996) might be paired with Joyce Hansen's I Thought 
My Soul Would Rise and Fly (1997) in order to explore different but related 
experiences within African American history. Pinkney's book also can be 
paired with her book on Duke Ellington to explore African American 
biography. The depth of empathy, understanding, and critical insight 
that readers develop will be influenced by the degree to which teachers 
build and facilitate the creation of a literary context for their students. 

For theme study and literature circles, teachers also may be 
inclined to pair or group African American books for children and young 
adults with books about other cultural traditions or experiences. Theme 
study can widen the reader's experience, but it also can foster color 
blindness and naive notions of similarity, and decrease the reader's 
awareness of the critical subtleties of human culture. We suggest that 
teachers carefully plan out a theme-study unit and encourage students to 
think beyond simplistic notions of culture and ethnicity in order to 
explore tt\e ideas of similarity and difference as social, political, or geo- 
graphic phenomena, and not as universal truths that underlie all things. 

The books in this chapter are organized around six broad topics: 
Poetry and the Arts, Biographies and Heroes, Family Life and Relation- 
ships, Celebrations, Inner Triumphs and Finding One's Identity, and 
Exploring Our Heritage. Many of the books included in this chapter 
would fit easily into more than one broad topic. Teachers interested in 
grouping African American books for theme study or literature circles 
may find these topics useful starting points. Several of these broad top- 
ics overlap with other chapters in Adventuring with Books; combining 
books listed in this chapter with titles from related chapters invites read- 
ers to consider multiple perspectives on a particular genre, event, motif, 
or theme. 

In the section on Poetry and the Arts we have included a sampling 
of books about art, music, photography, dance, and poetry. These books 
may be starting points for in-depth inquiries into individual arts or the 
important contributions of African Americans to the arts in this country. 

For many individuals, finding one's identity is closely linked to 
reflection on the inner triumphs that are part of the personal growth 




481 



456 



African and African American Voices and Experiences 



process. Inner Triumphs and Finding One's Identity includes books that 
highlight individual growth and personal acceptance. In Biographies 
and Heroes we have included those books that present positive and 
realistic images of important individuals by showing how these individ- 
uals set goals and persevered even in the face of disappointment and 
discrimination. 

The section titled Family Life and Relationships includes books 
about families and books that highlight powerful relationships between 
individuals who may not necessarily be part of the same family. Cele- 
brations includes books about traditional cultural celebrations as well as 
some of the reasons people celebrate. The largest set of books in this col- 
lection relates broadly to Exploring Our Heritage. These fiction and 
nonfiction books highlight the people, events, places, and cultural prac- 
tices that shape African American heritage in this country. While we 
were pleased to find a significant number of books written by African 
Americans about African Americans in history, we continue to be con- 
cerned about the small number of books that address periods in history 
other than slavery and the Civil War. We hope the groupings that follow 
will help to create spaces in all children's lives for the study and celebra- 
tion of the diverse African and African American experiences and 
voices. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other books 
worthy of consideration. The titles listed below are not reviewed in this chapter; 
entries contain only bibliographic information. A cross reference to the anno- 
tated entry contained elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the 
end of the bibliographic information. 

Poetry and the Arts 

Primary Reviews 

15.1 Barnwell, Ysaye M. (1998). No Mirrors in My Nana's House. 
Illustrated by Synthia Saint James. San Diego; Harcourt Brace. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-15-201825-5. Picture Book. (See 10.15) 

15.2 Belafonte, Harry, and Lord Burgess (1999). Island in the Sun. 
Illustrated by Alex Ayliffe. New York: Dial Books for Young Read- 
ers. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2387-3. Picture Book. (See 10.25) 



462 



Inner Triumphs and Finding One's Identity 



457 



15.3 Igus, Toyomi (1998). i see the rhythm. Illustrated by Michele 
Wood. San Francisco: Children's Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-151- 
0. Picture Book. (See 3.90) 

15.4 Johnson, Dinah (1998). All Around Town: The Photographs of 
Richard Samuel Roberts. Photographs by Richard S. Roberts. 
New York: Henry Holt. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5456-1. Picture Book. 
(See 3.91) 

15.5 Kroll, Virginia L. (1996). Can You Dance, Dalila? Illustrated by 
Nancy Carpenter. New York: Simon & Schuster. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
689-80551-9. Picture Book. (See 4.12) 

15.6 Medearis, Angela Shelf (1997). Rum-A-Tum-Tum. Illustrated by 
James E. Ransome. New York: Holiday House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8234-1123-5. Picture Book. (See 10.29) 

15.7 Pinkney, Andrea Davis (1998). Duke Ellington: The Piano Prince 
and His Orchestra. Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. New York: 
Hyperion. ISBN: 0-7868-0178-6. Picture Book. (See 11.21) 

15.8 Steptoe, Javaka, editor (1997). In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall: 
African Americans Celebrating Fathers. Illustrated by Javaka 
Steptoe. New York: Lee & Low. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-880000-31-8. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.26) 

Inner Triumphs and Finding One’s Identity 

Primary Reviews 

15.9 Bunting, Eve (1998). Your Move. Illustrated by James Ransome. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200181-6. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 5.71, 20.33) 

5.10 Curtis, Gavin (1998). The Bat Boy & His Violin. Illustrated by 
E. B. Lewis. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80099-1. Picture Book. (See 4.6) 

15.11 Farmer, Nancy (1996). A Girl Named Disaster. New York: Orchard. 
309 pp. ISBN: 0-531-08889-8. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 5.73) 

15.12 Grimes, Nikki (1998). Jazmin's Notebook. New York: Dial. 102 
pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2224-9. Chapter Book. (See 5.84) 



483 



458 



African and African American Voices and Experiences 



15.13 Herron, Carolivia (1997). Nappy Hair. Illustrated by Joe Cepeda. 
New York; Random House Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. 
ISBN; 0-679-87937-4. Picture Book. (See 4.9) 

15.14 Myers, Walter Dean (1999). Monster. Illustrated by Christopher 
Myers. New York; HarperCollins Juvenile. 281 pp. ISBN; 0-06- 
028077-8. Chapter Book. (See 5.112) 

15.15 Shange, Ntozake (1997). Whitewash. Illustrated by Michael 
Sporn. New York; Walker. Unpaged. ISBN; 0-8027-8490-9. Sophis- 
ticated Picture Book. (See 5.117, 20.16) 

15.16 Tarpley, Natasha Anastasia (1998). I Love My Hair. Illustrated by 
E. B. Lewis. Boston; Little Brown. 32 pp. ISBN; 0-316-52275-9. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 8.61) 

Secondary Reviews 

15.17 Antle, Nancy (1997). Staying Cool. Illustrated by E. B. Lewis. 
New York; Dial Books for Young Readers. 32 pp. ISBN; 0-8037- 
1876-4. Picture Book. (See 4.30) 

15.18 Cosby, Bill (1998). Money Troubles. Illustrated by Varnette P. 
Honeywood. New York; Scholastic. 40 pp. ISBN; 0-590-16402-3. 
Chapter Book. (See 7.38) 

15.19 Machado, Ana Maria (1996). Nina Bonita. Illustrated by Rosanna 
Faria. Brooklyn, NY; Kane/Miller. 24 pp. ISBN; 0-916291-63-4. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 8.48) 

15.20 Pinkney, Brian (1997). The Adventures of Sparrowboy. New 
York; Simon & Schuster. 40 pp. ISBN; 0-689-81071-7. Picture Book. 
(See 8.53) 

Biographies and Heroes 

Primary Reviews 

15.21 Adler, David A. (1997). A Picture Book of Thurgood Marshall. 
Illustrated by Robert Casilla. New York; Dial Books for Young 
Readers. 48 pp. ISBN; 0-8234-1506-6. Picture Book. (See 3.76) 

15.22 Dingle, Derek T. (1998). First in the Field: Baseball Hero Jackie 
Robinson. New York; Hyperion Books for Children. 48 pp. ISBN; 
0-7868-0348-7. Picture Book. (See 12.5) 



484 ' 






Family Life and Relationships 



459 



15.23 Greenfield, Eloise (1997). For the Love of the Game: Michael Jor- 
dan and Me. Illustrated by Jan Spivey Gilchrist. New York: 
HarperCollins. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027298-8. Picture Book. (See 12.7) 

15.24 Parks, Rosa, and Jim Haskins (1997). I Am Rosa Parks. Illustrated 
by Wil Clay. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-1206-5. Chapter Book. (See 3.96) 

15.25 Pinkney, Andrea Davis (1996). Bill Pickett: Rodeo-Ridin' Cow- 
boy. Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
Unpaged. ISBM: 0-15-200100-X. Picture Book. (See 3.72) 

Secondary Reviews 

15.26 Cooper, Floyd (1996). Mandela: From the Life of the South 
African Statesman. New York: Philomel. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-399- 
22942-6. Picture Book. (See 5.3) 

15.27 Hudson, Wade, and Cheryl Willis Hudson, compilers (1997). In 
Praise of Our Fathers and Our Mothers. East Orange, New Jer- 
sey: Justus. 131 pp. ISBN: 0-940975-59-9. Picture Book. (See 4.35) 

15.28 Krull, Kathleen (1996). Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph 
Became the World's Fastest Woman. Illustrated by David Diaz. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201267- 2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 5.17) 

15.29 Pippen, Scottie, with Greg Brown (1996). Scottie Pippen: Reach 
Higher. Illustrated by Doug Keith. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-87833-981-7. 
Picture Book. (See 12.2) 

15.30 Rodriguez, Alex, with Greg Brown (1998). Alex Rodriguez: Hit a 
Grand Slam! Illustrated by Doug Keith. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-87833-997- 
3. Picture Book. (See 12.2) 

Family Life and Relationships 

Primary Reviews 

15.31 Johnson, Angela (1997). Daddy Calls Me Man. Illustrated by 
Rhonda Mitchell. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531- 
30042-0. Picture Book. (See 4.11) 

15.32 Johnson, Angela (1998). Heaven. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-689-82229-4. Chapter 
Book. (See 4.68) 



4S5 . 



460 



African and African American Voices and Experiences 



15.33 McKissack, Patricia C. (1997). Ma Dear's Apron. Illustrated by 
Floyd Cooper. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-81051-2. Picture Book. (See 4.16) 



Secondary Reviews 

15.34 Carter, Dorothy (1997). Bye, Mis' Lela. Illustrated by Harvey 
Stevenson. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
374-31013-0. Picture Book. (See 4.126) 

15.35 English, Karen (1998). Just Right Stew. Honesdale, PA: Boyds 
Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-487-8. Picture Book. (See 4.33) 

15.36 Hru, Dakari (1996). The Magic Moonberry Jump Ropes. Illus- 
trated by E. B. Lewis. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1754-7. Picture Book. (See 4.34) 

15.37 Igus, Toyomi (1996). The Two Mrs. Gibsons. Illustrated by Daryl 
Wells. San Francisco: Children's Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-135-9. 
Picture Book. (See 4.36) 

15.38 Johnson, Angela (1998). Songs of Faith. New York: Orchard. 103 
pp. ISBN: 0-531-30023-4. Chapter Book. (See 5.76) 

15.39 Mitchell, Claudette, Grade Porter, and Patricia Tefft Cousin 
(1996). Jump-rope. San Diego: Arborlake. 8 pp. ISBN: 1-57518- 
0641-2. Picture Book. (See 7.52) 

Celebrations 

Primary Reviews 

15.40 King, Jr., Martin Luther (1997). I Have a Dream. New York: 
Scholastic. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-590-20516-1. Picture Book. (See 3.93) 

15.41 Ringgold, Faith (1999). The Invisible Princess. New York: Crown. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-517-80024-1. Picture Book. (See 14.13) 

15.42 Rosales, Melodye (1996). 'Twas the Night B'fore Christmas: An 
African-American Version. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
590-73944-1. Picture Book. (See 3.216) 



48G 



Exploring Our Heritage 



461 



15.43 Woodtor, Dee Parmer (1996). Big Meeting. Illustrated by Dolores 
Johnson. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-31933-9. 
Picture Book. (See 4.53) 

Exploring Our Heritage 

Primary Reviews 

15.44 Chambers, Veronica (1998). Amistad Rising: A Story of Freedom. 
Edited by Shelly Bowen and All}m M. Johnston. Illustrated by 
Paul Lee. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
201803-4. Picture Book. (See 3.26) 

15.45 Fleming, Candace (1996). Women of the Lights. Illustrated by 
James Watling. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
9165-3. Chapter Book. (See 3.84) 

15.46 Johnston, Tony (1996). The Wagon. Illustrated by James E. Ran- 
some. New York: Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13457-2. Picture 
Book. (See 3.38) 

15.47 Lester, Julius (1998). From Slave Ship to Freedom Road. Illus- 
trated by Rod Brown. New York: Dial. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1893-4. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 5.18) 

15.48 Lester, Julius (1999). What a Truly Cool World. Illustrated by Joe 
Cepeda. New York: Scholastic. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-590-86468-8. Picture 
Book. (See 3.131) 

15.49 McKissack, Patricia C. (1997). Run Away Home. New York: 
Scholastic. 160 pp. ISBN: 0-590-46751-4. Chapter Book. (See 5.79) 

15.50 Mitchell, Rhonda (1997). The Talking Cloth. New York: Orchard. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30004-8. Picture Book. (See 4.39) 

15.51 Myers, Walter Dean (1997). Harlem. Illustrated by Christopher 
Myers. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590-54340-7. Picture 
Book. (See 10.19) 

15.52 Paulsen, Gary (1997). Sarny: A Life Remembered. New York: 
Delacorte. 97 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32195-3. Chapter Book. (See 3.111) 



ERIC 



487 



462 



African and African American Voices and Experiences 



15.53 Robb, Laura (1997). Music and Drum: Voices of War and Peace, 
Hope and Dreams. Illustrated by Debra Lill. New York: Philomel. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-399-22024-0. Picture Book. (See 10.20) 

Secondary Reviews 

15.54 Berry, James (1997). First Palm Trees: An Anancy Spiderman 
Story. Illustrated by Greg Couch. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81060-1. Picture 
Book. (See 3.143) 

15.55 Duncan, Dayton (1996). The West: An Illustrated History for 
Children. New York: Little Brown. 136 pp. ISBN: 0-316-92236-6. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.83) 

15.56 Hansen, Joyce (1997). I Thought My Soul Would Rise and Fly: 
The Diary of Patsy, a Freed Girl. New York: Scholastic. 202 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-84913-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.32) 

15.57 Haskins, James, and Kathleen Benson (1998). African Begin- 
nings. Illustrated by Floyd Cooper. New York: Lothrop, Lee & 
Shepard. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-688-10256-5. Picture Book. (See 3.88) 

15.58 Haskins, James, and Kathleen Benson (1999). Bound for America: 
The Forced Migration of Africans to the New World. Illustrated 
by Floyd Cooper. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-688-10258-1. Picture Book. (See 3.89) 

15.59 Johnson, Angela (1997). The Rolling Store. Illustrated by Peter 
Catalanotto. New York: Orchard. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-531-30076-5. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 8.41) 

15.60 Jurmain, Suzarme (1998). Freedom's Sons: The Story of the Amis- 
tad Mutiny. Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-688-11072- 
X. Chapter Book. (See 5.15) 

15.61 Katz, William Loren (1997). Black Indians: A Hidden Heritage. 
New York: Simon & Schuster. 198 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80901-8. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 5.16) 

15.62 Kroll, Virginia L. (1998). Faraway Drums. Illustrated by Floyd 
Cooper. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-316-50449-1. 
Picture Book. (See 14.8) 




4S8 



Exploring Our Heritage 



463 



15.63 Reeder, Carolyn (1997). Across the Lines. Illustrated by Robin 
Moore. New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 220 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-81133-0. Chapter Book. (See 3.123) 

15.64 Riggio, Anita (1997). Secret Signs: Along the Underground Rail- 
road. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-56397-555-6. 
Picture Book. (See 3.46) 




489 







A. Pedro and the Monkey, Robert D. San Souci/Michael Hays (16.1 1 ). B. Behind Vhi'a 
Valley: Adventures in a Hawaiian Rainforest, Lisa Matsumoto/Michael Furuya (16.9). 

C. Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the Nun's Kung Fu, Emily Arnold McCully (16.42). 

D. The Great Race, David Bouchard/Zhong-Yang Huang (16.46). 



ERIC 



4 90 best COPY AVAILABLE 



465 



16 Asian, Asian American, 
and Hawaii Pacific 
Voices and Experiences 



Jann Pataray-Ching 

Contributing reviewers included Trina Crawford, Alice Kimura, 
Patty Leahey, Miki Maeshiro, Jocelyn Mokulehua, Sally Omalza, 
Marcia Omura, Jann Pataray-Ching, Kathy Phillips, Anna Sumida, 
and Karla Hawkins Wendelin. 



sian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific children's literature are 



among a growing number of multicultural voices being pub- 



jlished today. As we make greater efforts to learn about and 
embrace diverse cultures, both domestic and international, the need for 
more fiction and nonfiction literature that represents these cultures and 
cultural perspectives becomes greater. 

This chapter on Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific chil- 
dren's literature represents three broad cultural traditions. Asians and 
Asian Americans often are viewed as one homogenous group of people; 
however their histories and cultures are quite diverse. For example, 
within the broad Asian cultural tradition, we find that Filipino culture 
differs greatly from Korean culture, which differs greatly from Indian 
culture. Even within one culture, there are differences stemming from 
place and time. Being Japanese in Japan, for example, is different from 
being Japanese American or from being Japanese in the United States. 
As Fischer (1986) noted, although each cultural group may find com- 
monality with others through connections to the past and intergenera- 
tional lineage, culture is dynamic and evolving. In other words, Asian 
Americans have no cultural template. Instead each generation must 
"reinvent and reinterpret" itself while still, in some sense, remaining 
connected to the past (195). 

Good quality children's literature that is both authentic and repre- 
sentative of the diversity among Asian and Asian American cultures 
and ethnic groups is difficult to find. We were successful at locating a 




ERIC 



491 



466 



Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific Voices and Experiences 



rich collection of literature about Japanese Americans and Chinese 
Americans (such as Bunting's So Far from the Sea, Turmell's The Children 
of Topaz, and Lee's Nim and the War Effort) and Japanese and Chinese cul- 
ture (for example, McCully's Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the Nun's 
Kung Fu, Melmed's Little Oh, and Bouchard's The Great Race). In addi- 
tion, authors such as Allen Say and Ed Young have been successful at 
bringing Japanese American and Chinese American voices into the 
mainstream with books such as Emma's Rug, Allison, Mouse Match, and 
The Lost Horse. However, our search has made us aware of the need for 
more writing that represents the lives of other Asian and Asian Ameri- 
can cultural and ethnic groups. 

Locating children's literature about these other cultural and eth- 
nic groups is difficult for two reasons. First most major publishing 
houses do not have an extensive list of cultural and ethnic literature that 
represents these various groups. Second the literature currently avail- 
able is often produced by small publishing houses, making the literature 
difficult to find and therefore less accessible to children, parents, and 
teachers. We hope that the books we have included here will both cele- 
brate the rich collection of Asian and Asian American voices currently in 
print, and signal the need to write and publish more literature repre- 
senting the voices that are absent. 

The third broad cultural tradition represented in this chapter is 
what we have called Hawaii Pacific children's literature. Although the 
Hawaiian monarchy was overthrown by the U.S. government in 1893, 
and despite the fact that the island chain became the fiftieth state in the 
union in 1959, Hawaii still has maintained a distinct identity — perhaps 
because of the rightful desire of native Hawaiians to reclaim their sover- 
eignty, and because of the influx of foreigners who have arrived and set- 
tled on Hawaii's shores. An ethnically diverse population from 
predominantly Polynesian, Asian, and White European backgrounds 
makes Hawaii unique. Naturally then, its stories capture the cultural 
interrelationships born out of harmony and conflict between ethnic 
groups, and the shared cultural experiences of people living together on 
a group of islands heavily influenced by a rich cultural history but gov- 
erned by a dominant western culture. 

Stephen Sumida (1986) noted that Hawaii has been traditionally 
stereotyped in literature either as an island paradise where people enjoy 
a carefree and indolent lifestyle, or as a place of fantastic adventure. 
Much of Hawaii Pacific children's literature — even those books written 
locally — bear traces of these stereotypes, whether they are conveyed 



O 

ERIC 



492 



Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific Voices and Experiences 



467 



through human characters or animal characters. In selecting Hawaii 
Pacific literature (and the literature of other ethnic groups) for this chap- 
ter, we looked for the authors' ability to distinguish between cultural 
myth and cultural reality. 

Cultural and gender stereotypes may be present not only in writ- 
ten text, but also in illustrations. Semiotics has taught us that both written 
and visual texts construct meaning (Peirce 1960). For example, illustra- 
tions in Hawaii Pacific children's literature often contribute to mispercep- 
tions of Hawaiians or local residents. Some books include illustrations of 
Hawaiian characters that are superficial and inaccurate, and that give 
readers the impression that little girls run around daily in mu'umu'u 
(flowered dresses) and haku lei (a string of flowers worn as a crown), or 
that menehune women (the legendary little people of old Hawaii) have 
Barbie-doll figures and are rescued by strong menehune men. Therefore 
it became our challenge to find a variety of fiction and nonfiction chil- 
dren's literature that demystified these stereotypes in both the text and 
illustrations, accurately educated readers about Hawaii's historical 
events, and portrayed Hawaii's people with affirmation and dignity. Not 
surprisingly, many stories selected for inclusion in this section pay tribute 
to the land, the early Polynesians, and the Hawaiian monarchy. 

The books in this chapter have been organized around seven 
broad themes: Conflict and Memory, Crossing Boundaries, Relation- 
ships, Celebrations, Creation and Preservation, Irmer Triumphs, and 
Voices of the Past. We have made our best effort to include a range of 
entertaining stories and culturally and politically empowering narra- 
tives about Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific racial and ethnic 
groups. James Clifford (1997) has reminded us that museums are more 
than storehouses of art; they are places of "contestation," where cultural 
memory is produced (188-219). In this chapter, we have tried to be sen- 
sitive to the political function of literature, and to select works that are 
both aesthetically exciting and culturally enabling. 

Drawing on the ideas of Gramsci, Victor Villanueva (1993) envi- 
sions national memory as a mosaic of folklores. We believe this diversity 
of folklores, joined through a sense of the common good and a recogni- 
tion of difference, embodies a democratic vision of society and the class- 
room; and that such a concept of national memory envisions a national 
consciousness woven out of voices rooted in local spaces. We have tried 
in this chapter to foreground those voices we find most invigorating and 
empowering, and that we hope will move students and teachers toward 
a greater appreciation for culture and diversity in the nation. 



493 



468 



Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific Voices and Experiences 



Works Cited 

Clifford, James. 1997. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. 

Fischer, Michael M. J. 1986. Ethnicity and the Post-modem Arts of Memory. In 
Writing Culture, eds. James Clifford and George E. Marcus. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California. 

Peirce, C. S. 1960. Division of Signs. In Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. 
Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. 

Sumida, Stephan H. 1986. Waiting for the Big Fish: Recent Research in the 

Asian American Literature of Hawaii. In The Best of Bamboo Ridge, eds. 
Eric E. Chock and Darrell H. Y. Lum. Honolulu: Bamboo Ridge. 

Villanueva, Victor, Jr. 1993. Bootstraps: From an American Academic of Color. 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other 
books worthy of consideration. The titles listed below are not reviewed in this 
chapter; entries contain only bibliographic information. A cross reference to the 
annotated entry contained elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type 
at the end of the bibliographic information. 

Conflict and Memory 

Primary Reviews 

16.1 Balgassi, Haemi (1996). Peacebound Trains. Illustrated by Chris 
K. Soentpiet. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-395- 
72093-1. Picture Book. (See 3.114) 

16.2 Bunting, Eve (1998). So Far from the Sea. Illustrated by Chris K. 
Soentpiet. New York: Clarion. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72095-8. Picture 
Book. (See 3.105, 20.9) 

16.3 Cha, Dia (1996). Dia's Story Cloth. Illustrated by Chue Cha and 
Nhia Thao Cha. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000- 
34-2. Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.78) 

16.4 Mochizuki, Ken (1997). Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story. 
Illustrated by Dom Lee. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880000-49-0. Picture Book. (See 20.28) 



ERIC 




Crossing Boundaries 



469 



16.5 Turinell, Michael O., and George W. Chilcoat (1997). The Children 
of Topaz: The Story of a Japanese-American Internment Camp, 
Based on a Classroom Diary. New York: Holiday House. 74 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8234-1239-3. Picture Book. (See 5.119) 

Secondary Reviews 

16.6 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-73570-X. Sophisticated 
Picture Book. (See 3.115, 20.22) 

16.7 Dolphin, Laurie (1997). Our Journey from Tibet: Based on a True 
Story. Photographs by Nancy Jo Johnson. New York: Dutton Chil- 
dren's Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45577-9. Sophisticated Picture 
Book. (See 3.198) 

Crossing Boundaries 

Primary Reviews 

16.8 Little, Mimi Otey (1996). Yoshiko and the Foreigner. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-32448-4. Picture 
Book. (See 4.84) 

16.9 Matsumoto, Lisa (1996). Beyond 'Ohi'a Valley: Adventures in a 
Hawaiian Rainforest. Illustrated by Michael Furuya. Honolulu: 
Lehua. 55 pp. ISBN: 0-9647491-2-2. Picture Book. (See 14.32) 

16.10 Rumford, James (1998). The Island-below-the-Star. Boston: Hough- 
ton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-85159-9. Picture Book. (See 3.47) 

16.11 San Souci, Robert D. (1996). Pedro and the Monkey. Illustrated by 
Michael Hays. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-13743-1. Picture Book. (See 3.135) 

Secondary Reviews 

16.12 Choi, Sook Nyul (1997). Yunmi and Halmoni's Trip. Illustrated 
by Karen Dugan. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
395-81180-5. Picture Book. (See 4.111) 

16.13 Marton, Firina (1997). Lady Kaguya's Secret: A Japanese Tale. 
New York: Annick. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55037-441-9. Picture Book. 
(See 14.31) 




'495 



470 



Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific Voices and Experiences 



16.14 Say, Allen (1997). Allison. Illustrated by AUen Say Boston: Hough- 
ton Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-85895-X. Picture Book. (See 4.75) 

16.15 Wong, Janet (1996). A Suitcase of Seaweed and Other Poems. 
New York: Simon & Schuster. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80788-0. Chapter 
Book. (See 4.76) 

16.16 Yee, Tammy (1997). Baby Honu's Incredible Journey. Aiea, HI: 
Island Heritage. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89610-285-8. Picture Book. (See 
5.137) 

Relationships 

Primary Reviews 

16.17 Bash, Barbara (1996). In the Heart of the Village. San Francisco: 
Sierra Club Books for Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87156-575-7. 
Picture Book. (See 4.130) 

16.18 Melmed, Laura Krauss (1997). Little Oh. Illustrated by Jim 
LaMarche. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
688-14208-7. Picture Book. (See 4.17) 

16.19 Pirotta, Saviour (1997). Turtle Bay. Illustrated by Nilesh Mistry. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
37888-6. Picture Book. (See 2.18) 

Secondary Reviews 

16.20 Brenner, Barbara, and Julie Takaya (1996). Chibi: A True Story 
from Japan. Illustrated by June Otani. New York: Clarion. 63 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-69623-2. Picture Book. (See 5.130) 

16.21 Garland, Sherry (1998). My Father's Boat. Illustrated by Ted 
Rand. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-47867-2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.127) 

16.22 Ho, Minfong (1996). Hush! A Thai Lullaby. Illustrated by Holly 
Meade. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-09500-2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.112) 

16.23 Johnston, Tony (1996). Fishing Sunday. Illustrated by Barrett V. 
Root. New York: Morrow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13458-0. Picture 
Book. (See 4.37) 



•496 



Creation and Preservation 



471 



16.24 Kudler, David (1997). The Seven Gods of Luck. Illustrated by 
Linda Finch. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395- 
78830-7. Picture Book. (See 14.9) 

16.25 Waite, Michael P. (1996). Jojofu. Illustrated by Yoriko Ito. New 
York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13660-5. 
Picture Book. (See 5.136) 

16.26 Yee, Paul (1996). Ghost Train. Illustrated by Harvey Chan. 
Emeryville, CA: Douglas & McIntyre. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88899- 
257-2. Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 4.61) 

16.27 Young, Ed (1997). Mouse Match: A Chinese Folktale. Orlando, 
FL: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201453-5. Picture Book. 
(See 3.138) 

Celebrations 

Secondary Reviews 

16.28 Chin-Lee, Cynthia (1997). A Is for Asia. Illustrated by Yumi Heo. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30011-0. Picture Book. 
(See 7.32) 

16.29 Demi (1997). Happy New Year! Kung-hsi fa-ts'ai! New York: 
Crown. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-517-70957-0. Picture Book. (See 3.197) 

16.30 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1998). Celebrating Chinese New Year. 
Illustrated by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1393-4. Picture Book. (See 3.205) 

16.31 Russell, Ching Yeung (1997). Moon Festival. Illustrated by 
Christopher Zhong-Yuan Zhang. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397-596-3. Picture Book. (See 3.217) 

16.32 Williams, Riarma M. (1997). Mahealani and the King of Hawai'i. 
Illustrated by Jackie Black. Honolulu: Ka mea Kakau. 103 pp. 
ISBN: 0-9658621-0-0. Chapter Book. (See 3.54) 

Creation and Preservation 

Primary Reviews 

16.33 Davol, Marguerite W. (1997). The Paper Dragon. Illustrated by 
Robert Sabuda. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
31992-4. Picture Book. (See 14.2) 



- '497 



472 



Asian, Asian American, and Hawaii Pacific Voices and Experiences 



16.34 Orr, Katherine (1997). Discover Hawaii's Freshwater Wildlife. 
Aiea, HI: Island Heritage. 44 pp. ISBN: 0-89610-243-2. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. (See 1.48) 

16.35 Orr, Katherine, and Mauliola Cook (1997). Discover Hawaii's 
Birth by Fire Volcanoes. Aiea, HI: Island Heritage. 44 pp. ISBN: 0- 
89610-245-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 1.49) 

16.36 Young, Ed (1997). Voices of the Heart. New York: Scholastic. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-50199-2. Picture Book. (See 11.40) 

Secondary Reviews 

16.37 Knight, Margy Bums (1996). Talking Walls: The Stories Con- 
tinue. Illustrated by Anne Sibley O'Brien. Gardiner, ME: Tilbury. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88448-165-4. Picture Book. (See 7.21) 

16.38 Lee, Huy Voun (1995). In the Park. New York: Henry Holt. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4128-1. Picture Book. (See 11.42) 

16.39 Rumford, James (1996). Cloudmakers. New York: Houghton Mif- 
flin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-76505-6. Picture Book. (See 11.44) 

Inner Triumphs 

Primary Reviews 

16.40 Demi (1997). One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical Folktale. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-93998-X. Picture Book. 
(See 9.13) 

16.41 Lee, Milly (1997). Nim and the War Effort. Illustrated by Yang- 
sook Choi. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-35523-1. Picture Book. (See 3.109) 

16.42 McCully, Emily Arnold (1998). Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of 
the Nun's Kung Fu. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590- 
37487-7. Picture Book. (See 5.43) 

Secondary Reviews 

16.43 Say, Allen (1996). Emma's Rug. New York: Houghton Mifflin. 32 
pp. ISBN: 0-395-74294-3. Picture Book. (See 11.45) 




Voices of the Past 



473 



16.44 Wells, Ruth (1996). The Farmer and the Poor God: A Folktale 
from Japan. Illustrated by Yoshi. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80214-5. Picture 
Book. (See 4.40) 

16.45 Young, Ed (1998). The Lost Horse: A Chinese Folktale. San 
Diego: Silver Whistle /Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15- 
201016-5. Picture Book. (See 3.171) 

Voices of the Past 

Primary Reviews 

16.46 Bouchard, David (1997). The Great Race. Illustrated by Zhong- 
Yang Huang. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7613- 
0305-7. Picture Book. (See 7.93) 

16.47 Ho, Mingfong (1996). Maples in the Mist: Children's Poems 
from the Tang Dynasty. Illustrated by Jean Tseng and Mou-sien 
Tseng. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
12044-X. Picture Book. (See 10.61) 

16.48 Spivak, Dawnine (1997). Grass Sandals: The Travels of Basho. 
Illustrated by Demi. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
689-80776-7. Picture Book. (See 10.63) 

Secondary Reviews 

16.49 Alameida, Roy (1997). Na Mo'olelo o ka Wa Kahiko: Stories of 
Old Hawaii. Honolulu: Best. 124 pp. ISBN: 1-57306-026-7. Sophis- 
ticated Chapter Book. (See 3.140) 

16.50 Demi (1997). Buddha Stories. New York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-8050-4886-3. Picture Book. (See 3.144) 




499 




A. 





A. Mamaanc/PapaHaveaS/ore, Amelia Lau Carling (17.7). B. Gathering the Sun: An 
Alphabet in English and Spanish, Alma Flor Ada/Simon Silva (17.44). C. Sol a Sol: 
Bilingual Poems, Lori Marie Carlson/Emily Lisker (17.2). D. Mola: Cuna Life Stories and 
Art, Maricel E. Presilla (17.9). 




BESTCOPYAVAILABIE 




475 



17 Hispanic/Latino, 
Hispanic American, 
and Latino American 
Voices and Experiences 



Caryl Gottlieb Crowell 

Contributing reviewers included Carol Cribett-Bell, Caryl Gottlieb 
Crowell, Kathy Lohse, Carmen M. Martmez-Rolddn, Sandra 
Montiel-Costell, Elizabeth M. Redondo, Betsy Shepard, Kathy G. 
Short, and Katrina Smits. 



I n deciding to include books about Hispanics/ Latinos throughout this 
edition of Adventuring with Books, rather than reviewing them all in a 
single chapter, the members of our review committee hope that teachers 
will include in their language arts curriculum the literature of communi- 
ties that may not be represented in their school populations. In this way, 
they can offer children a vision of a world where language and cultural 
differences are resources, not obstacles. At the same time, we want teach- 
ers whose classes may include Hispanic /Latino children to be able to eas- 
ily access books that may be of particular interest to their students. To this 
end, we have decided to group the books we reviewed in this chapter into 
text-sets that teachers may find useful in representing the diversity of His- 
panic/Latino culture and language use throughout the world. 

In choosing among the many books presented to us for review, 
we looked for books that provided authentic images of different 
Hispanic /Latino cultures and language users. Where the author or 
illustrator was a member of the community he or she was representing, 
we could be reasonably assured that the portrayal was accurate, and 
such was the case with almost two-thirds of the books we reviewed. For 
example, Luis Garay draws heavily upon his own Nicaraguan back- 
ground in his stories and illustrations. However, if the author was not 
Hispanic /Latino, we looked for strong ties to the community and cul- 
ture being depicted or some evidence of extensive research, such as the 
story of two quinceaneras presented by Elizabeth King. 



ERIC 




476 



Hispanic American and Latino American Voices and Experiences 



Although we have included books that deal with such surface- 
level elements of culture as food and holidays, we also looked for books 
that moved beyond stereotypes to show these activities embedded in 
the daily family and community life of Hispanics/ Latinos from differ- 
ent areas of the world. This was a particular challenge for our group's 
members because we are most familiar with the language and culture of 
our Arizona border community and nearby northern Mexico. We relied 
on Carmen Martinez, the Puerto Rican member of our group, and other 
colleagues from Central America, South America, and the Caribbean, to 
advise us in reviewing books about cultures in their countries. 

Language use was of particular interest to us in reviewing books. 
Hispanic /Latino culture is not monolithic, and neither is the use of 
Spanish across these distinct communities. In the case of dual-language 
texts and books simultaneously released in both English and Spanish, 
we carefully examined books for language that is accessible to all read- 
ers, and interpretations that honor the meaning and significance of the 
story and the richness and rhythm of words in both languages. Some of 
us have been teaching long enough to remember early translation 
efforts that were riddled with grammatical and lexical errors. We also 
considered which language was given privileged position on the page, 
and have commented on this feature in our reviews. 

Often the books we read were written in English with just a few 
words of Spanish embedded in the texts. In these situations, it is impor- 
tant to acknowledge the purpose of such language use. Where the intent 
is to teach Spanish as a second language, the insertion of Spanish words 
does not always sound natural. Many of these books contain glossaries 
to help readers pronounce the foreign words. In contrast are books that 
include very authentic code-switching — alternating the use of two lan- 
guages at the word, phrase, clause, or sentence level — which is a distinc- 
tive characteristic of bilingual communities. Code-switching occurs 
between friends and family members, and is used to help tell stories, 
identify speakers as members of the same language community, and 
define the social roles of the speakers. Gary Soto's books are excellent 
examples of code-switching done well, and readers of his books usually 
can figure out the meaning of the words from the context. 

In reviewing traditional stories from different Hispanic /Latino ori- 
gins, we paid attention to books that were carefully researched and that 
offered respectful portrayals of culhores and history. The children who lis- 
tened to these tales were enchanted with the stories, most of which are 
enriched by a smattering of indigenous words. In discussions that fol- 
lowed these readings, we reminded children that ways of living change 



502 



Hispanic American and Latino American Voices and Experiences 



477 



over time, even though a culture's long-standing stories may not. We 
wanted them to imderstand that the depictions of early Hispanic /Latino 
or Native American cultures in folktales is not what they would likely 
encoimter upon visiting these coimtries today 

Almost all of the books we reviewed were used in classrooms and 
school libraries with children, in the context of larger theme-based 
inquiries or literature studies. We want to share these classroom applica- 
tions with teachers, who may want to focus on the diversity of Hispanic 
culture by grouping books in the text-sets we've suggested in this chap- 
ter, rather than following the themes in the chapters in which the 
reviews can be found. In the same way that the intensity of colors varies 
when the background is changed, the focus of these books can shift 
when they are placed in different text-sets. We have organized the books 
in this chapter into the following sections: Poetry and Song, Comparing 
Diverse Cultures, Folktales and Legends, Cultural Foods, The Power of 
Language and Literacy, Concept Books, A Sense of Community, Heroes 
and History, and Life Passages. 

The books in some of these sections offer a look at past and pres- 
ent cultures in Mexico, the Caribbean, Colombia, Central America, and 
Hispanic/Latino commxmities in the United States. The section entitled 
Comparing Diverse Cultures includes mostly nonfiction works that 
present traditional ways of life in differing locales. The section A Sense 
of Commimity focuses on how families and communities support each 
other, and Life Passages celebrates the life cycle events that are impor- 
tant to all cultures — ^birth, birthdays, coming-of-age ceremonies, wed- 
dings, and death. The books listed imder Cultural Foods give readers 
an opportunity to discover that not all Hispanics/ Latinos eat tacos. The 
sections Poetry and Song, Concept Books, and Folktales and Legends 
are thematically similar to the Adventuring with Books chapter headings. 
In Heroes and History, we grouped together books about important 
historical figures and events from Hispanic /Latino communities, 
including both famous people and more personal voices from the past. 
Finally, The Power of Language and Literacy section includes books 
that consider how access to oral and written language, in both first and 
second languages, is essential to the personal and communal success of 
Hispanics /Latinos in the United States. 



The titles listed below are not reviewed in this chapter; entries contain only bib- 
liographic information. A cross reference to the annotated entry contained else- 
where in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the bibliographic 
information. 




478 



Hispanic American and Latino American Voices and Experiences 



Poetry and Song 

17.1 Alarcon, Francisco X. (1997). Laughing Tomatoes and Other 
Spring Poems/Jitomates risuenos y otros poemas de primavera. 
Illustrated by Maya Christina Gonzalez. San Francisco: Children's 
Book. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-139-1. Picture Book. (See 10.60) 

17.2 Carlson, Lori Marie (1998). Sol a sol: Bilingual Poems. Illustrated 
by Emily Lisker. Translated by Lyda Aponte de Zacklin. New 
York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-4373-X. Picture Book. 
(See 10.52) 

17.3 Orozco, Jose-Luis (1997). Diez deditos/Ten Little Fingers and 
Other Play Rhymes and Action Songs from Latin America. Illus- 
trated by Elisa EQeven. New York: Dutton Children's Books. 56 
pp. ISBN: 0-525-45736-4. Picture Book. (See 10.55) 

Comparing Diverse Cultures 

17.4 Ancona, George (1997). Mayeros: A Yucatec Maya Family. New 
York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13465-3. 
Picture Book. (See 3.56, 20.51) 

17.5 Ancona, George (1998). Fiesta Fireworks. New York: Lothrop, Lee 
& Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14817-4. Picture Book. (See 
3.172) 

17.6 Applebaum, Diana (1997). Cocoa Ice. Illustrated by Holly Meade. 
New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30040-4. Picture Book. 
(See 3.21) 

17.7 Carling, Amelia Lau (1998). Mama and Papa Have a Store. New 
York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2044-0. Picture Book. (See 4.97) 

17.8 Presilla, Maricel E. (1996). Life around the Lake. Illustrated by 
Gloria Soto. New York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-3800- 
0. Picture Book. (See 11.56) 

17.9 Presilla, Maricel E. (1996). Mola: Cuna Life Stories and Art. New 
York: Henry Holt. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8050-3801-9. Picture Book. 
(See 11.56) 

17.10 Sola, Michele (1997). Angela Weaves a Dream: The Story of a 
Young Maya Artist. Photographs by Jeffrey Jay Foxx. New York: 



504 



Foktales and Legends 



479 



Hyperion Books for Children. 47 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0073-9. Picture 
Book. (See 11.38) 

17.11 Staub, Frank J. (1996). Children of Yucatan. Minneapolis: Carol- 
rhoda. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-984-0. Picture Book. (See 3.56) 

17.12 Temko, Florence (1996). Traditional Crafts from Mexico and Cen- 
tral America. Illustrated by Randall Gooch. Photographs by 
Robert L. Wolfe and Diane Wolfe. Minneapolis: Lerner. 64 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8225-2935-1. Chapter Book. (See 12.38) 

17.13 Torres, Leyla (1998). Liliana's Grandmothers. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374-35105-8. Picture Book. 
(See 4.108) 

Folktales and Legends 

17.14 Ada, Alma Flor (1997). The Lizard and the Sun: La lagartija y el 
sol. New York: Doubleday. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-385-32121-X. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 3.139) 

17.15 Anaya, Rudolfo (1997). Maya's Children: The Story of La Llorona. 
Illustrated by Maria Baca. New York: H}rperion. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-7868-0152-2. Picture Book. (See 3.126) 

17.16 Gonzalez, Lucia M. (1997). Senor Cat's Romance and Other 
Favorite Stories from Latin America. Illustrated by Lulu Delacre. 
New York: Scholastic. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-590-48537-7. Chapter Book. 
(See 3.132) 

17.17 Harper, Jo (1998). The Legend of Mexicatl/La leyenda de Mexicatl. 
Illustrated by Robert Casilla. Spanish-language edition translated 
by Tatiana Lans. New York: Turtle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-890515-05-1 
(EngUsh)/l-890515-06-X (Spanish). Picture Book. (See 3.129) 

17.18 Hickox, Rebecca (1997). Zorro and Quwi. Illustrated by Kim 
Howard. New York: Delacorte. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-385-32122-8. 
Picture Book. (See 3.202) 

17.19 Kimmel, Eric A. (1997). Squash It! A True and Ridiculous Tale. 
Illustrated by Robert Rayevsky. New York: Holiday House. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8234-1299-7. Picture Book. (See 14.30) 




505 



480 



Hispanic American and Latino American Voices and Experiences 



17.20 Kurtz, Jane (1996). Miro in the Kingdom of the Sun. Illustrated 
by David Frampton. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-395-69181-8. Picture Book. (See 3.153) 

17.21 Moreton, Daniel (1997). La Cucaracha Martina: A Caribbean 
Folktale. New York: Turtle. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-890515-03-5. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 3.132) 

17.22 Ramirez, Michael Rose (1998). The Legend of the Hummingbird. 
Illustrated by Margaret Sanfilippo. New York: Mondo. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 1-57255-232-8. Picture Book. (See 3.164) 

Cultural Foods 

17.23 Bertrand, Diane Gonzales (1996). Sip, Slurp, Soup, Soup/Caldo, 
caldo, caldo. Illustrated by Alex Pardo DeLange. Houston, TX: 
Pinata. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55885-183-6. Picture Book. (See 7.92) 

17.24 Rosa-Casanova, Sylvia (1997). Mami Provi and the Pot of Rice. 
Illustrated by Robert Roth. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-689-31932-0. Picture Book. (See 4.19) 

17.25 Soto, Gary (1997). Chato y su cena. Illustrated by Susan Guevara. 
Translated by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy. New York: 
Putnam and Grosset. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-11601-1. Picture 
Book. (See 8.58) 

17.26 Wing, Natasha (1996). Jalapeno Bagels. Illustrated by Robert 
CasiUa. New York: Atheneum. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80530-6. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.72) 

17.27 Zamorano, Ana (1996). Let's Eat! Illustrated by Julie Vivas. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-13444-2. Picture Book. 
(See 4.109) 

The Power of Language and Literacy 

17.28 Lachtman, Ofelia Dumas (1997). Call Me Consuelo. Houston, TX: 
Arte Publico. 149 pp. ISBN: 1-55885-187-9. Chapter Book. (See 5.91) 

17.29 Mora, Pat (1997). Tomas and the Library Lady/Tomas y la senora 
de la biblioteca. Illustrated by Raul Colon. New York: Knopf 



5'06 



A Sense of Community 



481 



(English) /Dragonfly (Spanish). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-679-80401-3. 
Picture Book. (See 20.39) 

17.30 Rodriguez, Luis J. (1997). America Is Her Name. Illustrated by 
Carlos Vasquez. Willimantic, CT: Curbstone. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880684-40-3. Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 20.7) 

Concept Books 

17.31 Elya, Susan Middleton (1996). Say Hola to Spanish. Illustrated by 
Loretta Lopez. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000- 
29-6. Picture Book. (See 13.35) 

17.32 Elya, Susan Middleton (1997). Say Hola to Spanish, Otra Vez 
(Again!). Illustrated by Loretta Lopez. New York: Lee & Low. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-59-8. Picture Book. (See 13.35) 

A Sense of Community 

17.33 Ancona, George (1998). Barrio: Jose's Neighborhood. San Diego: 
Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201049-1. Picture Book. (See 
4.1) 

17.34 Bunting, Eve (1996). Going Home. Illustrated by David Diaz. 
New York: Cotier. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-026296-6. Picture Book. 
(See 4.4, 20.1) 

17.35 Colon-Vila, Lillian (1998). Salsa. Illustrated by Roberta Collier- 
Morales. Houston, TX: Pihata. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-55885-220-4. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 11.22) 

17.36 Garay, Luis (1997). The Long Road. Plattsburgh, NY: Tundra. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-88776-408-8. Picture Book. (See 5.126) 

17.37 Garay, Luis (1997). Pedrito's Day. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-531-09522-3. Picture Book. (See 8.34) 

17.38 Lomas Garza, Carmen (1996). In My Family/En mi familia. 
Translated by Francisco X. Alarcon. San Francisco: Children's 
Book. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-89239-138-3. Picture Book. (See 4.14) 

17.39 London, Jonathan (1998). Hurricane! Illustrated by Henri Soren- 
sen. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
12977-3. Picture Book. (See 5.111) 



482 



Hispanic American and Latino American Voices and Experiences 



17.40 Martinez, Victor (1996). Parrot in the Oven: Mi vida. New York: 
Cotier. 216 pp. ISBN: 0-06-026704-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 
(See 20.4) 

17.41 Soto, Gary (1996). The Old Man and His Door. Illustrated by Joe 
Cepeda. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22700-8. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.25) 

17.42 Steptoe, John (1997). Creativity. Illustrated by E. B. Lewis. New 
York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-68706-3. Picture Book. (See 20.6) 

17.43 Stevens, Jan Romero (1997). Carlos and the Skunk/Carlos y el 
zorrillo. Illustrated by Jeanne Arnold. Translated by Patricia Hin- 
ton Davison. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87358- 
591-7. Picture Book. (See 4.107) 

Heroes and History 

17.44 Ada, Alma Flor (1997). Gathering the Sun: An Alphabet in Span- 
ish and English. Illustrated by Simon Silva. Translated by Rosa 
Zubizaretta. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-13903-5. Picture Book. (See 7.23) 

17.45 Aldana, Patricia, editor (1996). Jade and Iron: Latin American 
Tales from Two Cultures. Illustrated by Luis Garay. Translated by 
Hugh Hazelton. Toronto, Canada: Groundwood. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
88899-256-4. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 3.125) 

17.46 Collins, David R. (1996). Farmworker's Friend: The Story of 
Cesar Chavez. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 80 pp. ISBN: 0-87614- 
982-4. Chapter Book. (See 5.38) 

17.47 Marrin, Albert (1997). Empires Lost and Won: The Spanish Her- 
itage in the Southwest. New York: Atheneum. 216 pp. ISBN: 0- 
689-80414-8. Chapter Book. (See 3.110) 

17.48 Morey, Janet Nomura, and Wendy Dunn (1996). Famous His- 
panic Americans. New York: Cobblehill. 190 pp. ISBN: 0-525- 
65190-X. Chapter Book. (See 5.44) 

17.49 Romero, Maritza (1997). Selena Perez: Queen of Tejano Music. 
New York: Power Kids. 24 pp. ISBN: 0-8239-5086-7. Picture Book. 
(See 7.69) 



Life Passages 



483 



17.50 Stanley, Diane (1996). Elena. New York: Hyperion Books for Chil- 
dren. 55 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0256-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.15) 

Life Passages 

17.51 Guy, Ginger Foglesong (1996). |Fiesta! Illustrated by Rene King 
Moreno. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14331-8. 
Picture Book. (See 9.8) 

17.52 Johnston, Tony (1998). Day of the Dead. Illustrated by Jeanette 
Winter. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-15-222863-2. 
Picture Book. (See 3.178) 

17.53 King, Elizabeth (1998). Quinceanera: Celebrating Fifteen. New 
York: Dutton Children's Books. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45638-4. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 3.179) 

17.54 Kleven, Elisa (1996). Hooray, a Pinatal/iViva! ;Una pinata! New 
York: Dutton Children's Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45606-8 
(English)/0-525-45606-6 (Spanish). Picture Book. (See 6.22) 

17.55 Lachtman, Ofelia Dumas (1997). Leticia's Secret. Houston, TX: 
Pinata. 126 pp. ISBN: 1-55885-209-3. Chapter Book. (See 5.141) 

17.56 Luenn, Nancy (1998). A Gift for Abuelita: Celebrating the Day 
of the Dead/Un regalo para Abuelita: En celebracion del dfa de 
los muertos. Illustrated by Robert Chapman. Translated by Mario 
Lamo-Jimenez. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising Moon. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
87358-688-3. Picture Book. (See 4.15) 

17.57 Reiser, Lyrm (1998). Tortillas and Lullabies/Tortillas y cancion- 
citas. Illustrated by Corazones Valientes. Translated by Rebecca 
Hart. New York: Greenwillow. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14628-7. Picture 
Book. (See 13.39) 

17.58 Saenz, Benjamin Alire (1998). A Gift from Papa Diego/Un regalo 
de Papa Diego. Illustrated by Geronimo Garcia. El Paso, TX: 
Cinco Pimtos. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-938317-33-4. Picture Book. (See 4.21) 

17.59 Soto, Gary (1997). Snapshots from the Wedding. Illustrated by 
Stephanie Garcia. New York: Putman. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399- 
22808-X. Picture Book. (See 3.188) 



509 




The Life and Death of 

CRAZY HORSE 




by Russell Freedman 

l)rvt\vinys hv Amos Bad Hear! infill 



c. 



A. Salmon Summer, Bruce McMillan (18.2). B. Spider Spins a Story: Fourteen Legends 
from Native America, Jill Max/various illustrators (18.37). C. The Life and Death of Crazy 
Horse, Russell Freedman/Amos Bad Heart Bull (18.73). 



51 (> 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







485 



18 Native American Voices 
and Experiences 

Stacie Cook Emert 

Contributing reviewers included Sandra Beecher, Caroline Carlson, 
Stacie Cook Emert, Barbara Greenberg, Janelle Mathis, Bea Nez, 
and Sheilah Nicholas. 



O ur committee reviewed the current literature related to Native 
American people and their experiences. As individuals, we brought 
diverse experiences and multiple perspectives to the group. These 
perspectives were important to our conversations as we selected the best 
Native American literature published between 1996 and 1998. In addition 
to our varied work experiences as librarians, teachers, curriculum 
resource staff, and university professors, we each have had varying expe- 
riences with children's literature. Native American literature, and Native 
American people. Some members shared with the committee their 
Navajo or Hopi heritage and culture. Some had taught imdergraduate or 
graduate children's literature courses, while others shared their experi- 
ences working in a school setting with children ages five to fourteen. All 
members of the committee had taken several graduate courses related to 
children's literature and had explored multicultural issues. Our com- 
bined experiences helped us determine whether the literature we 
reviewed would be appropriate for classroom use. We initially read and 
discussed several professional articles to help guide our decisions about 
selection criteria for the books that we would be reviewing (CaldweU- 
Wood and Mitten 1991; Kuipers 1991; Slapin and Seale 1992; Slapin, 
Seale, and Gonzales 1992). A primary concern about past literature 
related to Native Americans was that the books were not authentic from 
the Native American point of view (Bader 1997; Harris 1997; Reimer 
1992). Accounts of Native American people and their experiences often 
were written from a European perspective. We wanted to make sure that 
in the books we reviewed, cultural traditions were honored and Native 
Americans were recognized for their individual and societal contribu- 
tions (Ledford and Peel 1998). Using Slapin, Seale, and Gonzales' (1992) 
criteria as a guide, we noted whether the language in the book was 
demeaning or condescending. We looked to see whether terms such as 




511 



486 



Native American Voices and Experiences 



scfuaw, chief, redskin, or savage were used. We examined how Native 
American people were portrayed in the illustrations, and paid particu- 
lar attention to clothing and symbols reflected in traditions and stories 
to ensure that they were accurate representations of a particular group 
of people and did not fall prey to stereotypes. Finally we checked the 
historical accuracy of the literature. 

Our interest in authenticity also led us to note whether the 
authors or illustrators were native people. In addition, we recorded the 
type of research that the author had done to familiarize himself or her- 
self with the specific group being written about or the area of the coun- 
try in which the story took place. We recorded the same information 
about the illustrators. We thought that this additional information 
would help support how these books were used in the classroom. 

The content of the texts also was an important consideration. We 
wanted to provide a set of materials that could be used across the cur- 
riculum in a variety of ways. To help us determine how each book might 
best be utilized in the classroom, we asked ourselves these questions: 
Can it be used as a reference book? For what ages is the book appropri- 
ate? Is the lesson or moral of the book told from a Native American 
point of view? What issues are brought out in the book? Who would 
read this book? 

Although we did find some unfavorable materials, overall we 
found a substantial amount of high-quality literature related to Native 
Americans. Our experiences reminded us how important it is to take a crit- 
ical stance as we review and share books with others. Among our favorite 
selections were contemporary stories and essays about native people. The 
photo essays were rated highly because of their accurate information and 
the use of photography. These books showed images of how many Native 
Americans live today, while still practicing their cultural traditions from 
the past. Unfortunately much of the literature we reviewed tended to 
focus on legends and traditional stories. Although these are important, we 
feel that it is equally important to provide modem images of Native Amer- 
icans in order to help students relate to current issues. In addition, stu- 
dents need to see how our past influences our present. 

Another concern we had was a tendency in the literature to gener- 
alize across all Native American groups. Some books tended to attribute 
information from one tribe to all native people. Because of this, we were 
careful to select materials that observed the uniqueness of each group 
and that emphasized the diversity among the various tribes. 

Thinking about the diversity issue led us to speculate about the 
writers and illustrators of the literature we reviewed. We wondered 



Native American Voices and Experiences 



487 



why more Native American authors and illustrators did not participate 
in the publishing process, and asked ourselves, "What can be done to 
encourage native people to tell their stories and share their artwork?" 
Although we have no specific answer to this question, we hope that the 
issue continues to be discussed as more literature related to Native 
American voices and experiences is published. 

In order to help readers locate the particular type of book needed 
for a specific text-set, project, or curriculum-related inquiry, we have 
chosen to organize this chapter around the chapter headings used in this 
edition of Adventuring with Books. Accordingly, the books we reviewed 
are grouped into the following sections; Our Changing World; Explor- 
ing Our Past; Families; Struggle and Survival; School Life; Poetry; Fine 
Arts; Sports, Games, and Hobbies; Fantasy; and Critical Conversations. 

Works Cited 

Bader, Barbara. 1997. "They Shall Not Wither": John Bierhorst's Quiet Crusade 
for Native American Literature. The Horn Book Magazine 73, no. 3: 
268-281. 

Caldwell-Wood, Naomi, and Lisa A. Mitten. 1991. Selective Bibliography and 
Guide for "I" Is Not for Indian: The Portrayal of Native Americans in Books 
for Young People. Paper presented to the ALA/ OLOS Subcommittee for 
Library Services to American Indian People, American Indian Library 
Association. Annual meeting of the American Library Association, June, 
Atlanta, Georgia. 

Harris, Violet., ed. 1997. Using Multiethnic Literature in the K-8 Classroom. 
Norwood, MA: Christopher-Gordon. 

Kuipers, Barbara J. 1991. American Indian Reference Books for Children and Young 
Adults. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited. 

Ledford, Carolyn, and Betty B. Peel. 1998. Images of Native American Cultures: 
The Works of Paul Goble. Book Links 7, no. 6: 32-4. 

Reimer, Kathryn Meyer. 1992. Multiethnic Literature: Holding Fast to Dreams. 
Language Arts 69, no. 1: 14-21. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale, eds. 1992. Through Indian Eyes: The Native Expe- 
rience in Books for Children. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: New Society. 

Slapin, Beverly, Doris Seale, and Rosemary Gonzales. 1992. How to Tell the Dif- 
ference: A Guide for Evaluating Children's Books for Anti-Indian Bias. 
Philadelphia, PA: New Society. 



The titles listed below are not reviewed in this chapter; entries contain only bib- 
liographic information. A cross reference to the annotated entry contained else- 
where in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the bibliographic 
information. 



488 



Native American Voices and Experiences 



Our Changing World 

18.1 Hunter, Sally M. (1997). Four Seasons of Corn: A Winnebago Tra- 
dition. Illustrated by Joe Allen. Minneapolis: Lerner. 40 pp. ISBN: 
0-8225-2658-1 . Picture Book. (See 2.38) 

18.2 McMillan, Bruce (1998). Salmon Summer. Boston: Houghton Mif- 
flin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84544-0. Picture Book. (See 2.42) 

18.3 Mercredi, Morningstar (1997). Fort Chipewyan Homecoming: A 
Journey to Native Canada. Illustrated by Darren McNally. Min- 
neapolis: Lerner. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8225-2659-X. Picture Book. 
(See 2.43) 

18.4 Van Camp, Richard (1997). A Man Called Raven. Illustrated by 
George Littlechild. San Francisco: Children's Book. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-89239-144-8. Picture Book. (See 2.57) 

Exploring Our Past 

18.5 Armstrong, Nancy M. (1994). Navajo Long Walk. Illustrated by 
Paulette Livers Lambert. Niwot, CO: Roberts Rinehart. 128 pp. 
ISBN: 1-879373-56-4. Chapter Book. (See 3.22) 

18.6 Arnold, Caroline (1996). Stories in Stone: Rock Pictures by Early 
Americans. Photographs by Richard Hewitt. New York: Clarion. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72092-3. Picture Book. (See 3.77) 

18.7 Bateson-Hill, Margaret, and Philomine Lakota (1998). Shota and 
the Star Quilt. Illustrated by Christine Fowler. New York: Zero To 
Ten. 32 pp. ISBN: 1-84089-021-5. Picture Book. (See 3.193) 

18.8 Bruchac, Joseph (1998). The Arrow over the Door. Illustrated by 
James Watting. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 96 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8037-2078-5. Chapter Book. (See 3.24) 

18.9 Bunting, Eve (1997). Moonstick: The Seasons of the Sioux. Illus- 
trated by John Sandford. New York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-06-024804-1. Picture Book. (See 3.194) 

18.10 Burks, Brian (1998). Walks Alone. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 128 
pp. ISBN: 0-15-201612-0. Chapter Book. (See 3.25) 

18.11 Ciment, James, and Ronald LaFrance (1996). Encyclopedia of the 
North American Indian. New York: Scholastic. 224 pp. ISBN: 0- 
590-22790-4. Reference Book. (See 3.79) 



514 



Exploring Our Past 



489 



18.12 Comelissan, Cornelia (1998). Soft Rain: A Story of the Cherokee 
Trail of Tears. New York: Delacorte. 115 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32253-4. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 3.116) 

18.13 Crook, Connie Brummel (1998). Maple Moon. Illustrated by Scott 
Cameron. Don Mills, Ontario, Canada: Stoddart Kids. 32 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7737-3017-6. Picture Book. (See 3.27) 

18.14 Dewey, Jennifer O. (1996). Stories on Stone: Rock Art: Images 
from the Ancient Ones. Boston: Little Brown. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-316- 
18211-7. Picture Book. (See 3.82) 

18.15 Fox, Robert Barlow (1997). To Be a Warrior. Sante Fe, NM: Sunstone. 
128 pp. ISBN: 0-86534-253-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 3.106) 

18.16 Goble, Paul (1996). Remaking the Earth: A Creation Story from 
the Great Plains of North America. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-531-09524-X. Picture Book. (See 3.127) 

18.17 Goble, Paul (1996). The Return of the Buffaloes: A Plains Indian 
Story about Famine and Renewal of the Earth. Washington, DC: 
National Geographic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7922-2714-X. Picture 
Books. (See 3.146) 

18.18 Goble, Paul (1997). Love Flute. New York: Aladdin. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-689-81683-9. Picture Book. (See 3.200) 

18.19 Goble, Paul (1998). La nifia que amaba los caballos salvajes. New 
York: Aladdin Paperbacks (Libros Colibri). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
81455-0. Picture Book. (See 3.147) 

18.20 Goldin, Barbara Diamond (1996). Coyote and the Firestick: A 
Pacific Northwest Indian Tale. Illustrated by Will Hillenbrand. 
San Diego: Gulliver. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200438-6. Picture Book. 
(See 3.128) 

18.21 Goldin, Barbara Diamond (1997). The Girl Who Lived with the 
Bears. Illustrated by Andrew Plewes. San Diego: Harcourt Brace. 
40 pp. ISBN: 0-15-200684-2. Picture Book. (See 3.148) 

18.22 Goodman, Susan E. (1998). Stones, Bones, and Petroglyphs: Dig- 
ging into Southwest Archaeology. Illustrated by Michael J. 
Doolittle. New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 48 pp. 
ISBN: 0-689-81121-7. Picture Book. (See 1.12, 3.86) 



515 



490 



Native American Voices and Experiences 



18.23 Hamm, Diane Johnston (1997). Daughter of Sugua. Illustrated by 
Paul Micich. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 154 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
1477-2. Chapter Book. (See 3.31) 

18.24 Hausman, Gerald (1996). Eagle Boy: A Traditional Navajo Legend. 
Illustrated by Barry Moser and Cara Moser. New York: Harper- 
ColUns. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-021100-8. Picture Book. (See 3.201) 

18.25 Hausman, Gerald (1998). The Story of Blue Elk. Illustrated by 
Kristina Rodanas. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84512-2. 
Picture Book. (See 3.149) 

18.26 Hobbs, Will (1997). Beardream. Illustrated by Jill Kastner. New 
York: Atheneum Books for Children. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-31973- 
8. Picture Book. (See 3.203) 

18.27 Hobbs, Will (1997). Ghost Canoe. New York: Morrow Junior 
Books. 195 pp. ISBN: 0-688-14193-5. Chapter Book. (See 3.35, 13.64) 

18.28 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1997). Potlatch: A Tsimshian Celebra- 
tion. Illustrated by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 
32 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1290-3. Picture Book. (See 3.204) 

18.29 Johnson, Sylvia A. (1997). Tomatoes, Potatoes, Com, and Beans: 
How the Foods of the Americas Changed Eating Around the 
World. New York: Atheneum. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80141-6. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 3.92) 

18.30 Kalman, Bobbie (1997). Celebrating the Powwow. New York: 
Crabtree. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-86505-640-4. Picture Book. (See 3.207) 

18.31 Kearns, Geri (1998). Snail Girl Brings Water: A Navajo Story. 
Illustrated by Richard Ziehler-Martin. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising Moon. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87358-662-X. Picture Book. (See 3.150) 

18.32 Lavender, David (1998). Mother Earth, Father Sky. New York: Hol- 
iday House. 117 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1365-9. Chapter Book. (See 3.94) 

18.33 Lewis, Paul Owen (1997). Frog Girl. Hillsboro, OR: Beyond 
Words. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-582-46003-5. Picture Book. (See 3.155) 

18.34 Marrin, Albert (1996). Plains Warrior: Chief Quanah Parker and 
the Comanches. New York: Atheneum Books for Young Readers. 
200 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80081-9. Chapter Book. (See 3.40) 



O 

ERIC 



516 



Exploring Our Past 



491 



18.35 Martin, Rafe (1997). The Eagle's Gift. Illustrated by Tatsuro 
Kiuchi. New York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22923-X. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 3.157) 

18.36 Matcheck, Diane (1998). The Sacrifice. New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 224 pp. ISBN: 0-374-36378-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.41) 

18.37 Max, Jill, editor (1997). Spider Spins a Story. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising 
Moon. 63 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-611-5. Chapter Book. (See 3.158) 

18.38 McDonald, Megan (1997). Tundra Mouse: A Storyknifing Tale. 
Illustrated by S. D. Schindler. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-531-30047-1. Picture Book. (See 3.159) 

18.39 Morris, Juddi (1997). Tending the Fire: The Story of Maria Mar- 
tinez. Flagstaff, AZ: Rising Moon. 113 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-654-9. 
Chapter Book. (See 3.95) 

18.40 Nichols, Richard (1998). A Story to Tell: Traditions of a Tlingit 
Community. Illustrated by Bambi D. Kraus. Miimeapolis: Lemer. 
48 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2661-1. Picture Book. (See 3.212) 

18.41 Normandin, Christine, editor (1997). Echoes of the Elders: The 
Stories and Paintings of Chief Lelooska. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 38 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2455-X. Picture Book. (See 3.186) 

18.42 Purdy, Carol (1997). Nesuya's Basket. Illustrated by Paulette Liv- 
ers Lambert. Boulder, CO: Roberts Rinehart. 110 pp. ISBN:1- 
57098-087-X. Chapter Book. (See 3.215) 

18.43 Rendon, Marcie R. (1996). Powwow Summer: A Family Cele- 
brates the Circle of Life. Illustrated by Cheryl Walsh Bellville. 
Mirmeapolis: Carolrhoda. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-986-7 (paper- 
back)/l-57505-011-0 (hardcover). Picture Book. (See 3.214) 

18.44 Roop, Peter (1996). The Buffalo Jump. Illustrated by Bill 
Farnsworth. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-87358- 
616-6. Picture Book. (See 3.99) 

18.45 Rosen, Michael (1998). The Dog Who Walked with God. Illus- 
trated by Stan Fellows. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. 40 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7636-0470-4. Picture Book. (See 3.165) 

18.46 Sherrow, Victoria (1997). American Indian Children of the Past. 
Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-7613-0033-3. Chapter 
Book. (See 3.100) 



517 



492 



Native American Voices and Experiences 



18.47 Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk (1997). The Apaches: A First 
Americans Book. Illustrated by Ronald Himler. New York: Holi- 
day House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1287-3. Picture Book. (See 3.101) 

18.48 St. George, Judith (1997). Sacagawea. New York: Putman. 115 pp. 
ISBN: 0-399-23161-7. Chapter Book. (See 3.49) 

18.49 Swanson, Diane (1996). Buffalo Sunrise: The Story of a North 
American Giant. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books for Children. 
64 pp. ISBN: 0-87156-861-6. Chapter Book. (See 3.102) 

18.50 Taylor, Harriet Peck (1997). When Bear Stole the Chinook: A Sik- 
sika Tale. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-30589-7. Picture Book. (See 3.168) 

18.51 Van Laan, Nancy (1997). Shingebiss: An Ojibwe Legend. Illus- 
trated by Betsy Bowen. New York: Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-395-82745-0. Picture Book. (See 3.169) 

18.52 Vick, Helen Hughes (1998). Shadow. Boulder, CO: Roberts Rine- 
hart. 128 pp. ISBN: 1-57098-195-7. Chapter Book. (See 3.52) 

18.53 Viola, Herman J. (1996). North American Indians. Illustrated by 
Bryn Barnard. New York: Crown. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-517-59017-4. 
Chapter Book. (See 3.103) 

18.54 Viola, Herman J. (1998). It Is a Good Day to Die: Indian Eyewit- 
nesses Tell the Story of the Battle of the Little Bighorn. New York: 
Crown. 101 pp. ISBN: 0-517-70913-9. Chapter Book. (See 3.124) 

18.55 Walking Turtle, Eagle (1997). Full Moon Stories: Thirteen Native 
American Legends. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. 47 
pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0225-1. Picture Book. (See 3.170) 

18.56 Warren, Scott (1997). Desert Dwellers: Native People of the 
American Southwest. San Francisco: Chronicle. 55 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8118-0534-4. Chapter Book. (See 3.220) 

18.57 Waters, Kate (1996). Tapenum's Day: A Wampanoag Indian Boy 
in Pilgrim Times. Photographs by Russ Kendall. New York: 
Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-20237-5. Picture Book. (See 3.18) 

18.58 Whelan, Gloria (1996). The Indian School. Illustrated by Gabriela 
Dellosso. New York: HarperCollins. 86 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027077-2. 
Chapter Book. (See 3.19) 



O 

ERIC 



518 



Struggle and Survival 



493 



Families 

18.59 Dabcovich, Lydia (1997). The Polar Bear Son: An Inuit Tale. New 
York: Clarion. 37 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72766-9. Picture Book. (See 4.98) 

18.60 Dorris, Michael (1996). Guests. Illustrated by Ellen Thompson. 
New York: Hyperion. 119 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-1108-0. Chapter Book. 
(See 4.44) 

18.61 Eyvindson, Peter (1996). Red Parka Mary. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Can- 
ada: Pemmican. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-9218-2750-4. Picture Book. (See 4.131) 

18.62 George, Jean Craighead (1997). Arctic Son. Illustrated by Wendell 
Minor. New York: Hyperion. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-7868-0315-0. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 4.102) 

18.63 Ingold, Jeanette (1997). The Window. New York: Hyperion. 106 
pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0301-0. Chapter Book. (See 5.102) 

18.64 Krantz, Hazel (1997). Walks in Beauty. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. 
192 pp. ISBN: 0-87358-667-0. Chapter Book. (See 4.92) 

18.65 Luenn, Nancy (1997). Nessa's Fish. Illustrated by Neil Waldman. 
New York: Aladdin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-81465-8. Picture Book. 
(See 4.104) 

18.66 Mitchell, Barbara (1996). Red Bird. Illustrated by Todd Doney. 
New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 31 pp. ISBN: 0-688-10859-8. 
Picture Book. (See 4.38) 

18.67 Plain, Ferguson (1996). Roily's Bear. Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada: 
Pemmican. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-921827-52-0. Picture Book. (See 4.134) 

18.68 Savageau, Cheryl (1996). Muskrat Will Be Swimming. Illustrated 
by Robert Hynes. Flagstaff, AZ: Northland. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
87358-604-2. Picture Book. (See 4.123) 

Struggle and Survival 

18.69 Bruchac, Joseph (1996). Children of the Longhouse. New York: 
Dial Books for Young Readers. 150 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1793-8. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 5.63) 

18.70 Bruchac, Joseph (1997). Eagle Song. Illustrated by Dan Andreasen. 
New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 80 pp. ISBN: 0-8037- 
1919-1. Chapter Book. (See 5.50) 



ERIC 



519 



494 



Native American Voices and Experiences 



18.71 Bruchac, Joseph (1998).The Heart of a Chief. New York: Dial 
Books for Young Readers. 153 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-2276-1. Chapter 
Book. (See 5.37) 

18.72 Dorris, Michael (1996). Sees behind Trees. Illustrated by Linda 
Benson. New York: Hyperion. 104 pp. ISBN: 0-7868-0224-3. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 5.72) 

18.73 Freedman, Russell (1996). The Life and Death of Crazy Horse. 
Photographs by Amos Bad Heart Bull. New York: Holiday House. 
144 pp. ISBN: 0-8234-1219-9. Chapter Book. (See 5.8) 

18.74 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1997). Buffalo Days. Illustrated by 
Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday House. 32 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8234-1327-6. Picture Book. (See 5.13) 

18.75 Katz, William Loren (1997). Black Indians: A Hidden Heritage. 
New York: Aladdin. 198 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80901-8. Chapter Book. 
(See 5.16) 

18.76 Keegan, Marci (1997). Pueblo Boy. New York: Viking. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-14-36945-7. Picture Book. (See 5.55) 

18.77 Lowry, Linda (1996). Wilma Mankiller. Illustrated by Janice Lee 
Porter. Minneapolis: Carolrhoda. 56 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-880-1. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 5.22) 

18.78 Mott, Evelyn Clarke (1996). Dancing Rainbows: A Pueblo Boy's 
Story. New York: Cobblehill. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-65216-7. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 3.211) 

18.79 Philip, Neil, editor (1997). In a Sacred Manner I Live: Native 
American Wisdom. New York: Clarion. 93 pp. ISBN: 0-395-84981- 
0. Chapter Book. (See 5.46) 

18.80 Shaughnessy, Diane (1997). Pocahontas: Powhatan Princess. New 
York: PowerKids. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8239-5106-5. Picture Book. 
(See 5.32) 

18.81 Yamane, Linda (1997). Weaving a California Tradition: A Native 
American Basketmaker. Photographs by Dugan Aguilar. Minneap- 
oUs: Lemer. 48 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2660-3. Picture Book. (See 3.221) 



Critical Conversations 



495 



School Life 

18.82 Scott, Arm Herbert (1996). Brave as a Mountain Lion. Illustrated 
by Glo Coalson. New York; Houghton Mifflin. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395- 
66760-7. Picture Book. (See 6.61) 

Poetry 

18.83 Baylor, Byrd (1997). The Way to Make Perfect Mountain: Native 
American Legends of Sacred Mountains. Illustrated by Leonard 
Ghana. El Paso, TX: Cinco Puntos. 59 pp. ISBN: 0-938317-26-1. 
Chapter Book. (See 10.40) 

18.84 Philip, Neil (1996). Earth Always Endures: Native American Poems. 
Illustrated by Edward S. Curtis. New York; Viking. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-670-86873-6. Chapter Book. (See 10.56) 

18.85 Swann, Brian (1998). Touching the Distance: Native American 
Riddle Poems. Illustrated by Maria Rendon. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200804-7. Picture Book. (See 10.58) 

Fine Arts 

18.86 Hucko, Bruce (1996). A Rainbow at Night: The World in Words 
and Pictures by Navajo Children. San Francisco: Chronicle. 
Unpaged. ISBN; 0-8118-1294-4. Picture Book. (See 11.41) 

18.87 Wood, Nancy, editor (1997). The Serpent's Tongue. New York: 
Dutton. 256 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45514-0. Chapter Book. (See 11.46) 

Sports, Games, and Hobbies 

18.88 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane (1998). Lacrosse: The National Game of 
the Iroquois. Illustrated by Lawrence Migdale. New York: Holiday 
House. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8234-1360-8. Picture Book. (See 12.20) 

Fantasy 

18.89 Jernigan, E. Wesley (1997). Cloudcatcher. Auckland, New Zealand: 
Shortland. 48 pp. ISBN: 1-57257-668-5. Picture Book. (See 14.28) 

Critical Conversations 

18.90 Hirschi, Ron (1996). People of Salmon and Cedar. Illustrated by 
Deborah Cooper. New York: Cobblehill. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-525-65183- 
7. Picture Book. (See 20.13) 



O 

ERIC 



521 





A. Red Scarf Girl: A Memoir of the Cultural Revolution, J\L\J\anQ(\9.24). B. The Bat Boy 
& His Violin, Gavin Curtis/E. B. Lewis (19.2). C. Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph 
Became the World’s Fastest Woman, Kathleen Krull/David Diaz (19.41). 




522 •• 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




497 



19 Gender Issues: 

Spunky, Clever, Caring, 
and Endearing Girls 
and Boys in Children’s 
Literature 

Patricia Heine and David Heine 

Contributing reviewers included: Chris Inkster, Frank Kazemek, 
Sylvia Raschke, Della Stevens, and Sandra Williams. 



I n this chapter, readers will find some of the best role models available 
today for our elementary girls and boys: California Morning (Lucy) 
Whipple, who went to gold mining country with her mother and sib- 
lings; Wilma Rudolph, who, despite having polio, won three Olympic 
gold medals; and Palmer, who is tom between his own beliefs and pres- 
sure from peers and townspeople as he makes his decision whether or 
not to wring the pigeons' necks. 

What makes these main characters so special? That is the question 
our review committee wrestled with for several months. We know that 
positive role models are important for our children, and that television, 
advertisements, movies, and much of the literature for children rein- 
forces limiting and often negative stereotypes for both girls and boys. It 
was our desire, therefore, to find the best books available today that por- 
trayed positive images of boys and girls. 

We began this process with the definition of a high-quality gen- 
der book as one that provides a positive role model for children today. 
As we read and rejected hundreds of books and placed a few books in 
the keeper pile, we realized we were developing a more finely tuned 
set of criteria. We knew that first and foremost, our recommended 
books needed to be high-quality literature — literature with a believable 
and interesting plot, complex characters, worthwhile themes, powerful 




52'3 



498 



Gender Issues: Endearing Girls and Boys in Children's Literature 



language, and high-quality illustrations. Only then did we consider the 
strength of the gender representation. 

As we worked with and refined our criteria, we found helpful the 
material developed by the Council on Interracial Books for Children, 
"Ten Quick Ways to Analyze Books for Racism and Sexism" (1980) and 
"Evaluating Books for Bias" (1997). Eventually we developed and 
applied the criteria below to the books we were reviewing. No single 
book exemplifies all of the characteristics listed below, but each meets 
enough of these criteria to create characters who are rich in texture and, 
we believe, are worthy of being called role models for our children. We 
were delighted to find such a varied, positive group of male and female 
characters to share with our students. The following criteria guided our 
evaluation of the books included in this chapter: 

1. Personal traits of the character. Does the character display a 
variety of emotions, abilities, and concerns? Does the charac- 
ter change and grow throughout the book? Is the character 
persistent, courageous, feisty, intelligent, spirited, humane, 
resourceful, capable, or independent? Does the character 
wrestle with significant problems or issues? 

2. Issues important to the character. Is the character struggling 
with gender images, including what actions, attitudes, and 
roles are appropriate for females and males? Does the charac- 
ter approach body-image issues in a positive, accepting way? 

Is the character facing experiences that help in growing up 
and reaching maturity? Is the character concerned with issues 
that make a difference in the world? 

3. How the character solves problems. Does the character use per- 
sonal qualities such as humor, strength, intelligence, or clever- 
ness to solve problems as appropriate to the situation? Does the 
character initiate solving problems rather than waiting for 
someone else? Does the character find strength and answers 
from within? Does the character use a wide range of strategies, 
including seeking help from others, discussing problems with 
family or friends, or exploring solutions through writing and 
reading? 

4. The character's relationships with others. Does the character put 
forth effort and value establishing healthy relationships with 
others? Are the character's relationships with others based on 
or working toward admirable traits such as mutual respect, 
equality, loyalty, honesty, friendship, commitment, or trust? 

5. How the character departs from traditional stereotypes. Is the char- 
acter moving away from the following traits: typical female 
stereotypes such as being passive, frightened, weak, gentle, 
easily discouraged, unoriginal, siUy, confused, inept, depend- 




Gender Issues: Endearing Girls and Boys in Children's Literature 



499 



ent, a follower, a conformist, emotional, concerned about 
appearance, needful of marriage and motherhood, or passive 
in language and behavior; or typical male stereotypes such as 
being active, strong, brave, rough, competitive, logical, unemo- 
tional, messy, decisive, a leader, adventurous, or aggressive in 
language and behavior? 

6. Whether the character provides a voice for those who are often 
unheard in children's literature. Is the character in a role not 
usually found in literature, such as male nurses, female 
inventors, or females during the gold rush? Does the charac- 
ter represent a cultural, religious, ethnic, ability, or socioeco- 
nomic group found infrequently in children's literature? 

We found that by using these criteria, we had the tools to justify 
and articulate our reasons for choosing the books contained in this chap- 
ter. These criteria may prove useful as readers examine additional titles 
for inclusion in classrooms and libraries. 

Rather than reviewing them in a single chapter, the members of 
our committee chose to disperse books with positive role models for 
boys and girls throughout Adventuring with Books. Although we encour- 
age educators to use the titles listed in this chapter as part of a special 
unit on gender issues, we did not want to limit the books to that use. 
Instead we recommend that these books be woven into many units 
throughout the school curriculum. When we are studying the depres- 
sion era with our students, they need to encounter the character of Leah 
in Leah’s Pony (Friedrich 1996). When we look at the labor movement in 
the United States, students need to find Rebecca Putney in The Bobbin 
Girl (McCully 1996). When studying families, they need to celebrate 
fathers through the book In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall (Steptoe 1997). When 
we want an exciting read-aloud text for our young children featuring a 
spunky, confident girl, we can share Raising Dragons (Nolen 1998). By 
both creating a separate index chapter and integrating them throughout 
the chapters, we felt these books would find their widest use. 

We have organized this chapter into three sections: Positive Role 
Models in History, Positive Role Models in Contemporary Times, and 
Positive Role Models in Fantasy. The first two sections also are subdi- 
vided into Fiction and Nonfiction. 



The titles listed below are not reviewed in this chapter; entries contain only bib- 
liographic information. A cross reference to the annotated entry contained else- 
where in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the bibliographic 
information. 



525 



500 



Gender Issues: Endearing Girls and Boys in Children's Literature 



Positive Role Models in History 

Fiction 

19.1 Bartone, Elisa (1996). American Too. Illustrated by Ted Lewin. 
New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13279- 
0. Picture Book. (See 3.192) 

19.2 Curtis, Gavin (1998). The Bat Boy & His Violin. Illustrated by E. 
B. Lewis. New York: Simon & Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689- 
80099-1. Picture Book. (See 4.6) 

19.3 Cushman, Karen (1996). The Ballad of Lucy Whipple. New York: 
Clarion. 195 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72806-1. Chapter Book. (See 5.51) 

19.4 Friedrich, Elizabeth (1996). Leah's Pony. Illustrated by Michael 
Garland. Honesdale, PA: Boyds Mills. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-56397- 
189-S. Picture Book. (See 3.29) 

19.5 Giff, Patricia Reilly (1997). Lily's Crossing. New York: Delacorte. 
180 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32142-2. Chapter Book. (See 3.107) 

19.6 Hansen, Joyce (1997). I Thought My Soul Would Rise and Fly: 
The Diary of Patsy, a Freed Girl. New York: Scholastic. 202 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-84913-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.32) 

19.7 Hearne, Betsy G. (1997). Seven Brave Women. Illustrated by Beth- 
anne Andersen. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
14503-5. Picture Book. (See 4.47) 

19.8 Rest, Amy (1997). When Jessie Came across the Sea. Illustrated 
by P. J. Lynch. Cambridge, MA: Candlewick. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
7696-0094-6. Picture Book. (See 3.34) 

19.9 Lee, Milly (1997). Nim and the War Effort. Illustrated by Yang- 
sook Choi. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-374-35523-1. Picture Book. (See 3.109) 

19.10 McCully, Emily Arnold (1996). The Bobbin Girl. New York: Dial 
Books for Young Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1827-6. Picture 
Book. (See 3.42, 20.30) 

19.11 McCully, Emily Arnold (1997). Starring Mirette and Bellini. New 
York: Putnam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22636-2. Picture Book. (See 
5.128) 



Positive Role Models in History 



501 



19.12 McCully, Emily Arnold (1998). Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of 
the Nun's Kung Fu. New York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590- 
37487-7. Picture Book. (See 5.43) 

19.13 Paterson, Katherine (1996). Jip: His Story. New York: Lodestar. 
181 pp. ISBN: 0-525617-543-4. Chapter Book. (See 3.13) 

19.14 Paulsen, Gary (1997). Sarny: A Life Remembered. New York: 
Delacorte. 97 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32195-3. Chapter Book. (See 3.111) 

19.15 Pfitsch, Patricia Curtis (1997). Keeper of the Light. New York: 
Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers. 137 pp. ISBN: 0-689- 
81492-5. Chapter Book. (See 3.44) 

19.16 Pryor, Bonnie (1996). The Dream Jar. Illustrated by Mark Gra- 
ham. New York: Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688- 
13062-3. Picture Book. (See 3.45) 

19.17 Schroeder, Alan (1996). Minty: A Story of Young Harriet Tubman. 
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney New York: Dial Books for Young 
Readers. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1889-6. Picture Book. (See 3.14) 

19.18 Stanley, Diane (1996). Elena. New York: Hyperion. 55 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7868-0256-1. Chapter Book. (See 3.15) 

19.19 Stewart, Sarah (1997). The Gardener. Illustrated by David Small. 
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-374- 
32517-0. Picture Book. (See 3.16) 

Nonfiction 

19.20 Cooney, Barbara (1996). Eleanor. New York: Viking. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-670-86159-6. Picture Book. (See 5.39) 

19.21 Egan, Ted (1998). The Drover's Boy. Illustrated by Robert Ingpen. 
Melbourne, Australia: Lothian. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-887734-52-X. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.61) 

19.22 Fleming, Candace (1996). Women of the Lights. Illustrated by 
James Watling. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. 79 pp. ISBN: 0-8075- 
9165-3. Chapter Book. (See 3.84) 

19.23 Hansen, Joyce (1998). Women of Hope: African Americans Who 
Made a Difference. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
93973-4. Picture Book. (See 20.12) 



527 



502 



Gender Issues: Endearing Girls and Boys in Children's Literature 



19.24 Jiang, Ji-Li (1997). Red Scarf Girl: A Memoir of the Cultural Rev- 
olution. New York: HarperCollins. 240 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027585-5. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 20.47) 

19.25 Josephson, Judith Pinkerton (1997). Mother Jones: Fierce Fighter 
for Workers' Rights. Minneapolis: Lemer. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
8225-4924-7. Picture Book. (See 5.14) 

19.26 Leder, Jane (1996). Grace and Glory: A Century of Women in the 
Olympics. Chicago: Triumph. 102 pp. ISBN: 1-572443-116-4. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 12.10) 

19.27 Macy, Sue (1996). Winning Ways: A Photohistory of American 
Women in Sports. New York: Henry Holt. 217 pp. ISBN: 0-8050- 
4147-8. Chapter Book. (See 12.21) 

19.28 Meltzer, Milton (1998). Ten Queens: Portraits of Women of Power. 
Illustrated by Bethanne Andersen. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. 134 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45643-0. Chapter Book. (See 5.24) 

19.29 Ryan, Pam Munoz (1998). Riding Freedom. Illustrated by Brian 
Selznick. New York: Scholastic. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-590-95766-X. Chap- 
ter Book. (See 3.48) 

19.30 Swain, Gwenyth (1996). The Road to Seneca Falls: A Story about 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Illustrated by Mary O'Keefe. Minneapolis: 
Carolrhoda. 64 pp. ISBN: 0-87614-947-6. Chapter Book. (See 3.50) 

Positive Role Models in Contemporary Times 

Fiction 

19.31 Farmer, Nancy (1996). A Girl Named Disaster. New York: Orchard. 
309 pp. ISBN: 0-531-08889-8. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 5.73) 

19.32 Grambling, Lois G. (1998). Daddy Will Be There. Illustrated by 
Walter Gaffney-Kassell. New York: Greenwillow. Unpaged. ISBN: 
0-688-14983-9. Picture Book. (See 4.8) 

19.33 Holt, Kimberly Willis (1998). My Louisiana Sky. New York: Henry 
Holt. 132 pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5251-8. Chapter Book. (See 4.67) 

19.34 Numeroff, Laura J. (1998). What Daddies Do Best, What Mom- 
mies Do Best. Illustrated by Lynn Munsinger. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80577-2. Picture Book. (See 4.18) 



528 



Positive Role Models in Fantasy 



503 



19.35 Shaw, Eve (1997). Grandmother's Alphabet. Duluth, MN: Pfeifer- 
Hamilton. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-57025-127-4. Picture Book. (See 4.23) 

19.36 Sisalu, Elinor Batezat (1996). The Day Gogo Went to Vote. Illus- 
trated by Sharon Wilson. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-316-70267-6. Picture Book. (See 20.32) 

19.37 Spinelli, Jerry (1997). Wringer. New York: HarperCollins. 229 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-024913-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. (See 5.82, 20.41) 

19.38 Steptoe, Javaka, editor (1997). In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall: 
African Americans Celebrating Fathers. New York: Lee & Low. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-880000-31-8. Picture Book. (See 4.26) 

19.39 Watts, Jeri Hanel (1997). Keepers. Illustrated by Felicia Marshall. 
New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-58-X. Picture 
Book. (See 4.28) 

Nonfiction 

19.40 Johnson, Rebecca L. (1997). Braving the Frozen Frontier: Women 
Working in Antarctica. Minneapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0- 
8225-2855-X. Chapter Book. (See 1.17) 

19.41 Krull, Kathleen (1996). Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph 
Became the World's Fastest Woman. Illustrated by David Diaz. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201267-2. Pic- 
ture Book. (See 5.17) 

19.42 Wolf, Bernard (1997). HIV Positive. New York: Dutton Children's 
Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-525-45459-4. Sophisticated Picture Book. 
(See 5.121) 

19.43 Wright-Frierson, Virginia (1996). A Desert Scrapbook: Dawn to 
Dusk in the Sonoran Desert. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-689-80678-7. Picture Book. (See 2.26) 

Positive Roie Modeis in Fantasy 

19.44 Demi (1997). One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical Folktale. New 
York: Scholastic. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-590-93998-X. Picture Book. 
(See 9.13) 

19.45 de Paola, Tomie (1996). Strega Nona: Her Story. New York: Put- 
nam. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-399-22818-7. Picture Book. (See 13.41) 



329 



504 



Gender Issues: Endearing Girls and Boys in Children's Literature 



19.46 Hesse, Karen (1996). The Music of Dolphins. New York: Scholas- 
tic. 181 pp. ISBN: 0-590-98797-7. Chapter Book. (See 4.10) 

19.47 Levine, Gail Carson (1997). Ella Enchanted. New York: Harper- 
Collins. 232 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027511-1. Chapter Book. (See 14.43) 

19.48 Nolen, Jerdine (1998). Raising Dragons. Illustrated by Elise Pri- 
mavera. New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-201288- 
5. Picture Book. (See 14.10) 

19.49 Peterson, Julienne (1996). Caterina the Clever Farm Girl: A Tale 
from Italy. Illustrated by Enzo Giannini. New York: Dial. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-8037-1181-6. Picture Book. (See 3.163) 

19.50 San Souci, Robert D. (1998). A Weave of Words. Illustrated by 
Raul Colon. New York: Orchard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-531-30053-6. 
Picture Book. (See 14.34) 

19.51 Stanley, Diane (1997). Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter. New York: 
Morrow Junior Books. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-14328-8. Picture 
Book. (See 3.167) 



530 




A. Mayeros: A Yucatec Maya Family George Ancona (20.51). B. The Circuit: Stories 
from the Life of a Migrant Child, Francisco Jimenez (20.36). C. Going Home, Eve Bunting/ 
David Diaz (20.1). D. So Far from the Sea, Eve Bunting/ Chris K. Soentpiet (20.9). 



O 

ERIC 



531 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



507 



20 Supporting Critical 
Conversations 
in Classrooms 



Jerome C. Harste 

Contributing reviewers included Amy Breau, Jerome C. Harste, 
Christine Leland, Mitzi Lewison, Anne Ociepka, and Vivian Vasquez. 



C ritical conversations are important because they highlight diversity 
and difference while caUing attention to the nature and role of liter- 
acy in our society. We have found that some books are particularly 
useful for starting and sustaining critical conversations in classrooms. 
These books provide the framework for a new kind of critical-literacy cur- 
riculum that focuses on building students' awareness of how systems of 
meaning and power affect people and the lives they lead. We are inter- 
ested in studying the conversations that follow the reading of these 
books, and observing how children become new literate beings as a 
result of having participated in these conversations. 

According to the definition developed by our review committee, 
books that can help to build a critical-literacy curriculum are those that 
meet one or more of the following criteria: 

1. They don't make difference invisible, but rather explore what 
differences make a difference. 

2. They enrich our understanding of history and life by giving 
voice to those who traditionally have been silenced or mar- 
ginalized — those we call "the indignant ones." 

3. They show how people can begin to take action on important 
social issues. 

4. They explore dominant systems of meaning that operate in 
our society to position people and groups of people. 

5. They help us question why certain groups are positioned as 
"others." 

Some books in the critical-literacy category focus more on histori- 
cal issues such as slavery or the industrial revolution and show how 
large groups of people were marginalized and stripped of their human 




532 



508 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



rights. Others are more contemporary in nature and encourage readers to 
interrogate current practices that are generally accepted because they are 
traditional or conventional in nature. For example, if a present-day high 
school uses a "slave day" theme to raise money for student activities, is it 
acceptable simply because it's traditional, or do we need to consider that 
this practice might be seen as sustaining the degrading treatment of 
African Americans? Other critical-literacy books focus on the issue of 
"otherness," and how our perceptions of people of different ethnic, cul- 
tural, or social groups can change after we get to know them better. 
Engaging children in conversations about the pernicious effects of other- 
ness can help them begin to see and understand the world in new ways. 

In primary classrooms, we have introduced critical-literacy books 
by reading them aloud. We note the key conversations that are gener- 
ated by each book, and plan subsequent curricular activities that will 
help to extend these conversations over time. To foreground children's 
thinking in regard to critical literacy issues, we select related artifacts to 
post on the classroom wall. Artifacts might be something as simple as a 
copy of a page in the book and key conversational interchanges between 
class members written on three-by-five-inch cards with arrows mapping 
the flow of conversation over time. The result is what we call an "audit 
trail" (Harste and Vasquez 1998), or what the three- and four-year-olds 
in Vivian Vasquez' classroom called "the learning wall" (see Figure 1). 

In upper-elementary and middle-school classrooms, we have 
used multiple copies of four or five critical adolescent novels to create 
text-sets that students self-select to read and discuss in groups. Mem- 
bers of each group work together to identify themes, after which the 
whole class comes together to share findings, artifacts, and insights that 
are then posted on a classroom wall. 

Conceptually this approach is anchored in Luke and Freebody's 
(1997) model of reading as social practice. Arguing that literacy is never 
neutral, Luke and Freebody lay out a grid showing four different con- 
structions or views of literacy. They argue that historically, reading has 
been seen as decoding and the function of reading instruction was the 
development of children's ability to break the code. During the 1970s 
and 1980s, psycholinguistic and schema- theoretical notions of reading 
emphasized reader-text interactions and drew attention to "text-mean- 
ing practices," or more specifically, the development of a reader who 
understands how to use the textual and personal resources at hand to 
coproduce a meaningful reading. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, 
social-linguistic and social-semiotic theory focused our attention on lan- 
guage in use. During this period, reading was viewed in terms of what it 
did or could accomplish pragmatically in the real world. More recently. 



533 



509 





LU 

CO 




CO 

LU 

CO 



CO 

vO 



535 



31 cc'jA w'f.mrB 



510 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



Luke and Freebody have suggested that reading should be seen as a 
non-neutral form of cultural practice, one that positions readers and 
obliterates as much as it illuminates. Readers for the twenty-first cen- 
tury, they argue, need to be able to interrogate the assumptions that are 
embedded in a text, as well as the assumptions which they, as culturally 
indoctrinated beings, bring to the text. Questions such as "Whose story 
is this?" "Who benefits?" and "What voices are not being heard?" invite 
children to interrogate the systems of meaning that operate both con- 
sciously and rmconsciously in a text as well as in society. 

Although critical literacy involves critical thinking, it also entails 
more. Part of that "more" is social action built upon an rmderstanding 
that literacy positions individuals and, in so doing, serves some more 
than others. As literate beings, it behooves us not only to know how to 
decode and make meaning, but also to rmderstand how language works 
and to what ends, so that we can better see ourselves in light of the kind 
of world we wish to create and the kind of people we wish to become. 

From several perspectives, then, the books we review in this chap- 
ter are of critical importance to educators. Although they invite specific 
conversations around specific topics, they function as a whole to create a 
curriculum that honors diversity and invites students and teachers alike 
to explore a new kind of literacy curriculum — one built upon the prem- 
ise that a model of difference is a model of learning, for individuals as 
well as for society. One of the implicit arguments being tested by our use 
of these books in classrooms is that a diversity-and-difference model of 
education better serves a multilingual and multicultural society such as 
ours than does the conformity-and-consensus model of learning that 
currently permeates our educational system. 

Given such possibilities, the book reviews that follow are some- 
what different from the reviews that are included in other sections of this 
volume. Although we summarize the text, we also highlight potential 
conversations that the reading of these texts can make possible. In this 
way, teachers who wish to invite students to engage in particular conver- 
sations about events that have transpired in their commrmity can easily 
locate texts that fit the bill. Others who have started particular conversa- 
tions and wish to have them continue will find the thoroughness of our 
reviews useful as they identify themes and alternative perspectives on 
issues. Of necessity, therefore, the reviews in this chapter are longer than 
those formd throughout the rest of Adventuring with Books. 

To expedite organization and planning for teachers, the titles in 
this chapter were organized into the following five sections, which cor- 
respond to the five criteria for critical literacy books discussed above: 
Understanding Differences that Make a Difference; Giving Voice to the 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



511 



Indignant Ones; Taking Social Action; Understanding How Systems of 
Meaning in Society Position Us; and Examining Distance, Difference, 
and "Otherness." A sixth section entitled Other Ideas for Text-Sets 
includes three categories of books that teachers might find helpful for 
putting together additional text-sets. The first category focuses on Child 
Labor and Children's Rights, and includes books that address these 
issues from both historical and contemporary perspectives. This text-set 
provides a wide lens for seeing how working children in a variety of 
national and international settings have been, and continue to be, mar- 
ginalized and exploited. The second category. Literacy as Power, pulls 
together books that demonstrate the power of literacy to allow new 
voices to be heard. Characters in these books discover how their acquisi- 
tion or use of literacy allows them to write a new identity, or to interact 
with others in powerful new ways. The third category is called Multiple 
Perspectives. Books in this group rely on the use of several different 
characters to tell the story. Seen through the eyes of these different peo- 
ple, the same events look very different and far more complex than they 
did at first glance. By highlighting these discrepancies in perception, 
teachers might find this text-set useful for beginning philosophical con- 
versations about the nature of reality and how our backgrounds and 
beliefs influence what we see. 

Our committee designated as Primary books those that we 
thought had the most potential for generating the kinds of critical con- 
versations that we want our students to experience. Books designated as 
Secondary are worthy of consideration, but are not as outstanding as 
those in the Primary sections. For example, we found that some of these 
books were not as obviously critical in their approach. Although critical 
issues and possibilities were present, too much was left unsaid and too 
much had to be dug out before the critical implications of the book 
could be realized. In other cases, our committee felt the books were 
more valuable as references or resource materials for supporting critical 
conversations rather than as vehicles for beginning them. Finally some 
of these books we considered too sophisticated for most elementary and 
middle-school readers. 

Arthur Applebee (1997) found that the best teachers thought 
about curriculum in terms of what conversations they wanted their stu- 
dents to be engaged in, not in terms of what concepts they wanted to 
introduce through reading or through direct instruction. Concepts, he 
argues, will come as learners engage in conversations that keep them at 
the forefront of the discipline they are studying and the world in which 
they are living. Although many of the books we reviewed can be seen as 
controversial, they reflect life in a way that most school curricula do not. 



537 



512 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



It is this relevancy and the potential to explore new curricular possibili- 
ties that make this chapter, the books we reviewed, and the topic of criti- 
cal literacy itself conversations we simply can't afford not to have. 

Works Cited 

Applebee, Arthur N. 1997. Rethinking Curriculum in the English Language 
Arts. English Journal 86, no. 3: 25-31. 

Luke, Allan, and Peter Freebody. 1997. Shaping the Social Practices of Reading. 
In Construction of Critical Literacies, ed. Sandy Muspratt, Allan Luke, and 
Peter Freebody. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton. 

Harste, Jerome C., and Vivian Vasquez. 1998. The Work We Do: Journal as 
Audit Trail. Language Arts 75, no. 4: 266-276. 



The titles listed below each subheading are organized into Primary Reviews and 
Secondary Reviews. The Primary Reviews describe outstanding books in each 
subheading. The Secondary Reviews provide brief information about other 
books worthy of consideration. Some titles listed below are not reviewed in this 
chapter; entries for these titles are not annotated and contain only bibliographic 
information. In such cases, a cross reference to the annotated entry contained 
elsewhere in this volume is provided in boldface type at the end of the biblio- 
graphic information. In other instances, because of the specific nature of the 
reviews provided in this chapter, titles reviewed below also are reviewed in 
another chapter in this volume. In such cases, a cross-reference to the other 
annotated entry is provided in boldface type at the end of the annotation. 

Understanding Differences That Make a Difference 

Primary Reviews 

20.1 Bimting, Eve (1996). Going Home. Illustrated by David Diaz. New 
York: HarperCollins. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-06-026296-6. Picture Book. 

When Carlos' mother says the family is going home to Mexico for 
Christmas, Carlos isn't sure what to think. What about the house 
they've lived in for five years, and the crops they've worked for 
Mr. Culloden? And if Mexico is home, why did his parents ever 
leave? His father's answer is always the same: "There is no work 
in La Perla. We are here for the opportunities." But Carlos knows 
what it's like to work in the hot strawberry fields, and he sees his 
parents come home tired and sore every night. He wonders what 
those mysterious "opportimities" might be. When they arrive in 
La Perla, his parents are more excited and lively than he's ever 
seen them. It's as if they've forgotten about their sore shoulders 



ERIC 




Understanding Differences That Make a Difference 



513 



and bad knees. Welcoming relatives "don't feel like strangers/' 
and Carlos begins to see why, as his sister tells him, their parents 
are working to save money to come back to Mexico someday 
"after our opportunities." 

The brightly colored illustrations by David Diaz capture the 
warmth and festivity of homecoming and holiday celebration in a 
Mexican town. Although lovely, the colorful photographs of folk 
art that frame Diaz' work detract from the beautiful illustrations. 
At the same time that this story dazzles and welcomes, it raises cru- 
cial questions about economic disparity, the hard working condi- 
tions of farm laborers in the United States, differences in language 
and culture that can exist within families, and the painful choices 
and sacrifices facing families who live in poverty. (See also 4.4) 

20.2 Fox, Paula (1997). Radiance Descending. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 101 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2467-3. Chapter Book. 

Radiance Descending is a novel about an older brother named Paul 
who is learning to accept a yoimger sibling named Jacob, who 
was born with Down's Syndrome. The imfortimate thing is that 
readers learn very little about Jacob's condition, but much about 
Paul's egotism. For example, we learn that Paul doesn't want to 
take Jacob to the doctor's office. 

The real consequence of his taking Jacob to Dr. Brill for his 
appointments would be that he wouldn't be able to practice not 
thinking about him. Jacob would haunt him all day long. Paul was 
being drawn into the life of the family. It felt like the inside of the 
school bus when it was filled with kids — warm, crowded, humid. 

On the positive side. Radiance Descending is filled with food for 
thought. 

There's something good about having a brother hke Jacob, even 
though you won't understand it for a few years . . . when you're 
grown up. People don't like to think about trouble until it slams 
into them. You'll be more ready for it. It always comes — in one 
form or another. 

Jacob is an eerie child at times. He's irritating. You've explained 
him to yourself. It's the explanation you think you understand — 
not Jacob. That's true about other things as well. We're very famil- 
iar with our own explanations. 

Like Paul, we've all tried to avoid being drawn into the problems 
we face in life. Although there is no happy ending here, there is 
value in learning the importance of multiple perspectives. Paul 



539 



514 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



seems to see Jacob as an other. He'd be quite happy if Jacob didn't 
exist at all. Although Paul doesn't make much progress, near the 
end of the novel he begins to see the world through less egotisti- 
cal eyes. 

Creating opportunities to talk with children about issues of this 
sort is what makes this novel worthwhile. Radiance Descending is an 
easy read that invites children to reflect on their own attitudes and 
behaviors towards others. After reading this book, we foimd chil- 
dren exploring their feelings and reactions to handicapped chil- 
dren, old people, and members of nondominant minority groups in 
their community. 

20.3 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1998). Sister Anne's Hands. Illustrated by 
K. Wendy Popp. New York: Dial. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-2038-6. 
Picture Book. 

Set within the context of the racially tom 1960s, this is the story of 
Anna Zabrocky and her first encounter with an African American. 
Anna's new second-grade teacher Sister Anne believes in story, 
the power of example, and hands-on learning. Arma never loved 
school so much, nor were Sister Anne's lessons ever more mean- 
ingful, than the day when a paper airplane crashed into the black- 
board with a note that read: 

Roses are Red 
Violets are Blue 
Don't let Sister Anne 
Get any black on you! 

Like good teachers everywhere. Sister Anne transforms this inci- 
dent into an opportunity to learn about Black Americans and 
imderstand the systems of oppression and opposition in our soci- 
ety. Hands become the metaphor for what we can give and learn 
across the racial divide. 

Sister Anne's Hands is a gentle story, and a gentle way to invite 
conversations about difference. Teachers in both public and pri- 
vate school settings will find the story uplifting. K. Wendy Popp's 
illustrations successfully evoke the period in which the story is 
set as well as the mood of the story. Second grader Robert said of 
the story, "It's important. You learn to be fair and get along with 
people." 



20.4 Martinez, Victor (1996). Parrot in the Oven: Mi Vida. New York: 
HarperCollins. 216 pp. ISBN: 0-06-447186-1. Chapter Book. 




Understanding Differences That Make a Difference 



515 



Winner of the 1996 National Book Award for Young People's Lit- 
erature, Parrot in the Oven is a powerfully written account of a 
Mexican American boy's coming-of-age, and how hard it is for 
members of underrepresented groups to outgrow the circum- 
stances of their birth. In Mexico there is a saying about a parrot 
who complains how hot it is in the shade, while all along he is 
sitting in an oven. In this novel, the protagonist is known as 
Perico ("parrot" in Spanish), and the more one reads, the more 
one comes to appreciate the appropriateness of the book's title. 
Perico is growing up in an oven where his sister dates one of the 
roughest characters in the barrio, where gang membership is 
assumed, and where participation in what the gang does, even if 
it involves robbery, is considered common practice. Fourteen- 
year-old Manny Hernandez wants to make something of his life, 
but it's not easy when you have an abusive father; your brother is 
a member of a gang and can't hold a job; and your mother faces 
reality by scrubbing the house, physically and metaphorically 
trying to scrub her troubles away. "Start on the bottom and work 
your way up," his father tells him. Drop out of school and 
become a dishwasher. From dishwasher you can become bus boy 
and finally waiter. Perico thinks otherwise, observing that "most 
of the people he knew started on the bottom and worked their 
way sideways." 

Parrot in the Oven is an excellent book for literature study. No 
one can walk away from this book without having a better under- 
standing of home culture — ^both as a negative and positive tie that 
binds — as well as a better imderstanding of the systems of mean- 
ing that operate in the larger society to maintain the status quo 
and ensure that the poor stay poor and the vast inequities never 
get examined. The chapters entitled "Boxing Match," "Going 
Home," and "Dying of Love" are particularly excellent in demon- 
strating the yin and yang of cultures, cruelties, and clashes. 

20.5 Rapp, Adam (1997). The Buffalo Tree. Asheville, NC: Front 
Street. 188 pp. ISBN: 1-886910-19-7. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Each of us knows or has known a juvenile who is out of control. It 
seems like these yoimg people not only reject the dominant social 
values, but also are destructive and dangerous to themselves and 
to society. Told from the perspective of Sura, a juvenile who is 
doing six months in the Hartford Juvenile Home for "clipping" 
hood ornaments. The Buffalo Tree is a harmting tale of how the 



. 541 



516 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



juvenile and adult residents of this detention center seem to be 
doing all that they can to make their collective experience there a 
living hell. Author Adam Rapp uses "juve talk" to give readers a 
glimpse of how these troubled adolescents think, and the heavy 
burdens they carry 

Although this book may not be for everyone, both because of 
its focus and its language, it is eye-opening and does invite con- 
versations about young people who most adults dismiss as 
anchorless. Although there is no happy ending in this tale of insti- 
tutional child abuse, readers are encouraged to reflect on how 
society positions some of its young people, and who benefits from 
this positioning. Left unanswered is the question of what we 
should do. This is a much-needed conversation, for clearly there 
should be better alternatives than the one portrayed in the book. 
Although this story is disturbing, then, this also is its virtue. 

20.6 Steptoe, John (1997). Creativity. Illustrated by E. B. Lewis. New 
York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-68706-3. Picture Book. 

Charles is surprised to learn that Hector, the new kid, is Puerto 
Rican. After all, both boys have the same brown skin and the same 
black hair, although Hector's is straight and Charlie's is curly. What 
separates them is their language. In exploring these issues, CharUe 
begins to see difference as creative rather than problematic. 

Although the book focuses on surface issues such as having 
the right shoes and T-shirt to fit into the group, bigger issues 
await discussion: how different languages can camouflage a com- 
mon culture; how pop cultures are created to sell merchandise 
and define who is "in" and who is "out"; and how language and 
issues of multiculturalism are related to power in our society. 
Watercolor pictures by E. B. Lewis capture the kind of transparent 
role that color in our society should play, but in many ways seem 
prosaic given the importance that difference and culture make in 
a book entitled Creativity. 

Secondary Reviews 

20.7 Rodriguez, Luis (1997). America Is Her Name. Illustrated by Car- 
los Vasquez. Willimantic, CT: Curbstone. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880684-40-3. Picture Book. 

In school, nine-year-old America Soliz passes some teachers in the 
hallway and hears her teacher Miss Gable whisper: 



542 



Understanding Differences That Make a Difference 



517 



"She's an illegal." How can that be? How can anyone be illegal? 

She is Mixteco, from an ancient tribe that was here before the 
Spanish, before the blue-eyed, even before this government that 
now calls her "illegal." How can a girl called America not belong 
in America? 

Miss Gable finds America's Spanish-speaking class "difficult," 
but when a Puerto Rican poet named Mr. Aponte comes to visit, 
America rises to recite Spanish poetry and the whole class listens 
and applauds. Encouraged by this response, America begins to 
write poetry, remembering the strong and open voice she had in 
Oaxaca, the mountainous area in Mexico where she was born. Her 
father says writing is a waste of time because it won't pay the bills 
or clean the house. But America continues to write, despite the 
disheartening gray world of the Chicago ghetto, the violence she 
sees on the street, and her father's loss of his job. Her stories and 
poems evoke the mountains in Oaxaca, and even encourage her 
mother and siblings to write as well. America creates an imagina- 
tive and expressive space where she belongs, regaining her own 
strong and open voice. 

Although the ending is rather neat and America often seems 
more like a grown woman than a nine-year-old girl, this book 
raises complex and important issues for discussion: urban poverty 
and lack of opportunity; inequities in education; how schools posi- 
tion students whose primary language is not English; and how the 
U.S. economy relies on the labor of low-paid workers declared ille- 
gal by immigration policy. The illustrations are bright and beauti- 
ful, and vividly depict the characters' imaginations. 

20.8 Wyeth, Sharon Dermis (1998). Something Beautiful. Illustrated 
by Chris K. Soentpiet. New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell. 30 pp. 
ISBN: 0-385-32239-9. Picture Book. 

The young girl in this book pursues a quest for beauty in her 
inner-city neighborhood. She initially is discouraged by the 
blighted areas around her, including the letters "DIE" on her own 
front door and the trash that is strewn around the yard. But she 
soon discovers that beauty can be found in a beautiful tasting fish 
sandwich or the beautiful sound of a baby's laugh, or simply the 
beauty inside each individual. In the end, the girl takes her own 
positive action to enhance the beauty of her neighborhood. For 
her efforts, she receives the approval and appreciation of her 
mother, who reminds the girl of her own beauty and self-worth. 



543 



518 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



In the author's note to this book, the reader is informed that the 
idea for this story sprang from an event in Sharon Wyeth's own 
childhood as she searched for the beauty in her world. This book 
offers an opportunity to take a critical look at the places people 
inhabit, as well as initiate discussions around the multiple mean- 
ings of the word beautiful. The book itself is made beautiful by the 
illustrations, which reflect both the joy and despair of living in an 
inner-city neighborhood. The realistically painted pictures are 
drawn with serious attention to the details that distinguish the 
characters and the community. This detailed artwork, along with 
the well-crafted text, enables the reader to visualize clearly the 
people who inhabit this cityscape, and appreciate the beauty that 
does exist here. (See also 8.64) 

Giving Voice to the Indignant Ones 

Primary Reviews 

20.9 Bunting, Eve (1998). So Far from the Sea. Illustrated by Chris K. 
Soentpiet. New York: Clarion. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-395-72095-8. Picture 
Book. 

In 1942, the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor. Two months later. 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, 
which decreed that all people of Japanese ancestry living on the 
West Coast of the United States must be relocated to internment 
camps. Many of those interned were American citizens. Set in 
1972, So Far from the Sea is a story of the Iwasaki family and their 
visit to the internment camp in California where their father was 
interned for three and one-half years. 

The story raises important issues about the segregation of the 
Japanese during the war, and offers a demonstration of how easily 
people can be othered. Questions regarding citizenship, who 
decides what a good citizen is, and who qualifies to be a citizen 
can be raised. The story allows space for conversations regarding 
segregation that exists today, and the systems that maintain its 
existence. The illustrations by Soentpiet alternate between black- 
and-white and color, effectively supporting Bunting's description 
of the sensitive journey. (See also 3.105). 

20.10 Coleman, Evelyn (1996). White Socks Only. Illustrated by Tyrone 
Geter. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8075-8955- 
1. Picture Book. 



Giving Voice to the Indignant Ones 



519 



When the little girl in white socks started walking to town, she 
had no idea of the role she would play in rewriting history. This is 
a story of a young African American girl who goes to town to find 
out if it's possible to fry an egg on the sidewalk, and decides to 
take a drink from a water fovmtain in segregated Mississippi. 
Thinking that she vmderstands the "Whites Only" sign on the 
fovmtain, she sits down in the grass, takes off her patent-leather 
shoes, and climbs up on the stool to take a drink with only her 
clean white socks on her feet. When some of the town's White res- 
idents attempt to chastise and humiliate the child, fellow African 
Americans who witnessed the event decide to take action. The 
story ends with "And from then on, the 'Whites Only' sign was 
gone from that water fountain forever." 

Although the signs may be gone from water fountains, issues 
of inequity continue to be played out across the nation. Inspired 
by childhood memories of places she could not go and things she 
could not do because of her skin color, Evelyn Coleman presents a 
thought-provoking story that can provide much needed conver- 
sations about segregation, marginalization, the inequitable distri- 
bution of power and control, and finding ways to take social 
action in what can appear to be the least likely places. 

20.11 Forrester, Sandra (1997). My Home Is over Jordan. New York: 
Lodestar. 163 pp. ISBN: 0-525-67568-X. Chapter Book. 

Life was not easy for newly freed slaves at the end of the Civil 
War. Caught between the ruined economy and overt racism of the 
South, former slaves were often homeless and without means. 
Maddie Henry's family is better off than most because they have 
the money that her Papa earned working as a soldier for the 
Union Army. But he ended up giving his life to the war, and now 
the family is on the road, looking for a place to settle down. Along 
the way, Maddie befriends Tibby, the child of a master and slave 
who has neither home nor family. Tibby is a victim who has been 
so silenced that she literally cannot speak. 

This is a story about voice — ^how Tibby, Maddie, and other 
family members began to gain new voices that refuse to be 
drowned out by the waves of hatred around them. This book 
raises questions about the meaning of freedom, and how racist 
beliefs cause some groups to deny real freedom to others. It 
invites conversations about racist attitudes that still exist today 
and continue to silence people of color. 




545 



520 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



20.12 Hansen, Joyce (1998). Women of Hope: African Americans Who 
Made a Difference. New York: Scholastic. 32 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
93973-4. Picture Book. 

A teacher for twenty-two years in New York City, Hansen describes 
her combined message of self-empowerment and community serv- 
ice in this way: "By reaching their goals, these women helped 
someone else." Hansen's page-length, inspiring biographies depict 
the lives of thirteen African American women, arranged chronolog- 
ically. We meet celebrity authors Maya Angelou and Toni Morrison. 
We also meet lesser-known women like Ida Wells-Bamet, a teacher 
and journalist at the turn of the century who exposed inequities in 
education for Black students and the brutality of lynching in the 
South, and Dr. Mae C. Jemison, who was not only the first African 
American woman astronaut, but who also worked as a physician in 
West Africa. These artists, educators, health care providers, and 
activists provide role models and inspiration in the integrity, pas- 
sion, and struggle of their life work as well as in their own words. 

Critical questions could explore the obstacles each of these 
women faced, the resources they called upon to overcome them, 
and the ways they redefined cultural notions of courage, strength, 
and heroism. What is perhaps most important is how these stories 
invite exploration of the unique and individual journeys each of 
us makes toward finding meaning in our lives. For the upper- 
elementary school level, this book would work beautifully as a 
read-aloud text. The striking black-and-white photographs were 
drawn from the Bread and Roses Cultural Project poster series. 
Women of Hope. 

20.13 Hirschi, Ron. (1996). People of Salmon and Cedar. Illustrated by 
Deborah Cooper. New York: Cobblehill. 42 pp. ISBN: 0-525-65183- 
7. Picture Book. 

Although this is a nonfiction text about the Native American tribes 
that populate the Northwest region of the United States, it is told 
like a story that invites the reader into these cultures to learn about 
their history and traditions. The text traces the history of the tribes 
of the Northwest, such as the Suquamish, S'Klallam, and Lummi, 
and provides a realistic account of their struggles since Europeans 
invaded their land. According to this account, it was feared at the 
end of the 1800s that Native American cultures and traditions 
would not survive. Thankfully these dire predictions proved 
untrue, and the author goes on to describe how today "the People" 



546 



Giving Voice to the Indignant Ones 



521 



continue their traditional cultural practices and beliefs and "live in 
harmony with the earth." The author confronts the critical issue of 
conservation, and exposes the abuses of land and water in the 
Northwest region. He contends that more and more, modem soci- 
ety is coming to realize the ancient Native American wisdom of 
replenishing natural resources and taking care not to ovemse the 
land or the rivers. 

This text provides the reader with the opportunity to reflect on 
the local and global repercussions of being careless with consum- 
able resources. At the same time, the book offers ways that this 
wasteful attitude can be reversed by observing the traditions and 
practices of an earlier culture. In addition to its thought-provoking 
and informative text, this book is peppered with beautifully drawn 
pictures that coincide with the story. In contrast to the colored 
drawings that reflect an earlier culture, a number of black-and- 
white photos are included to show a modern view of this region. 
The combination of drawings and photos in the book presents the 
reader with visual images of the conflicts in this region that hope- 
fully will be resolved for the next generation. 

20.14 Kaplan, William (1998). One More Border: The True Story of One 
Family's Escape from War-Tom Europe. Illustrated by Stephen 
Taylor. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Groundwood. 61 pp. ISBN: 0- 
88899-332-3. Picture Book. 

In this powerful example of historical nonfiction, William Kaplan 
shares the story of the struggle experienced by his father's family 
as they escaped war-torn Europe during the late 1930s to avoid 
persecution for being Jewish. The story reveals the social reposi- 
tioning of the Kaplan family from living in comfort and luxury to 
being penniless. Through the story of the Kaplan family's escape, 
the reader learns about the oppression and marginalization of the 
Jews during the war. Inclusion of authentic artifacts such as pho- 
tographs, maps, and the visa that allowed Bernard, Igor, and 
Nomi Kaplan to leave Europe provide a sense of realism. 

This book raises thought-provoking questions about how sys- 
tems of meaning can oppress certain groups or individuals: Who 
stands to gain from the oppression of others? What do they gain? 
What are some ways of interrogating persecution in order to take 
social action and effect change? When paired with Passage to Free- 
dom: The Sugihara Story (see 20.28) this text-set offers a rich demon- 
stration of how people taking social action can make a difference 



er|c 



547 



522 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



in the lives of the oppressed. Through the support of others, the 
Kaplans were able to rewrite their lives into existence, and readers 
are offered a glimpse of their new home in Cornwall, Ontario, 
Canada. But not all Jewish families who experienced persecution 
were able to start anew as the Kaplans did. Thus the book can gen- 
erate further inquiries into what happened to those who were not 
able to escape. Further the book can offer space for conversations 
regarding the different ways that some groups and individuals 
continue to be persecuted and oppressed. 

20.15 Parker, David (1998). Stolen Dreams: Portraits of Working Chil- 
dren. Minneapolis: Lerner. 112 pp. ISBN: 0-8225-2960-2. Chapter 
Book. 

It is impossible to read this book on the exploitation of children 
throughout the world and not feel the need to act on their behalf. 
Although the subject matter is difficult to read about, it is impor- 
tant to be aware of the injustices of child exploitation and labor. 
The book immediately draws the reader into this timely topic by 
opening with the story of one exploited child who had the courage 
to raise his voice against the industry that was oppressing him and 
many others like him. Although his individual struggle is only one 
small piece of this pervasive problem, it serves to emphasize how 
much more needs to be done on behalf of all mistreated children. 

Subsequent chapters describe how some children end up in this 
situation, and what happens to them as a result. There is also a 
very important chapter with ideas for helping exploited children 
in the fight for establishing their human rights. The final pages of 
the book are devoted to poignant letters and genuine questions 
from children speaking out eloquently against the exploitation of 
their peers. Throughout the book, stunning and disturbing black- 
and-white photographs of exploited children reveal their suffering 
and despair. The pictures speak volumes about these children, and 
greatly add to the power of the text. 

20.16 Shange, Ntozake (1997). Whitewash. Illustrated by Michael Spom. 
New York: Walker. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8027-8490-9. Picture Book. 

An African American preschooler named Helene-Angel walks 
home from school with her brother, who doesn't particularly enjoy 
the task of walking his little sister home. One day, a gang of White 
kids surround them, blackening Mauricio's eye and painting 
Helene-AngeTs face white as they show her how to be a "true 



548 



Giving Voice to the Indignant Ones 



523 



American" and "how to be White." Helene-Angel is traumatized; 
she hides in her room until her grandmother forces her to come out. 
As she emerges from the house, her classmates greet her and prom- 
ise to stick together so that events like this won't happen again. 

Based on a series of true incidents. Whitewash is a powerful 
story written in narrative style by the poet Ntozake Shange, with 
illustrations from a Carnegie Medal-winning video. The book 
gives voice to a little-known racial incident that became a lesson 
in tolerance and a child's triumph. Children need to understand 
why stories such as this one should never be forgotten. They also 
should be encouraged to explore how they might transform the 
bad things in their own lives into triumphs. We found it easy to 
extend conversations to the topics of diversity and difference, and 
the role that each must play in a multilingual and multicultural 
society that seeks to be democratic. (See also 5.117) 

20.17 Springer, Jane (1997). Listen to Us: The World's Working Chil- 
dren. Toronto, Canada: Groundwood. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-88899-291-2. 
Chapter Book. 

As the book jacket advertises. Listen to Us explores, in a complex 
and multifaceted fashion, "the difficult questions that surround 
child labor, including globalization, consumerism, and attitudes 
toward girls and women." Springer takes seriously the working 
children who are her subjects, as well as those in her intended 
audience. She justly describes children as resistors and activists. 
Some, like Iqbal Masih, are even shapers of history. This Pakistani 
child worker was killed at the age of twelve as a result of his inter- 
national efforts to raise consciousness and free children from 
forced labor. Other child activists and workers speak for them- 
selves in this volume: ten-year-old Nirmala, a Nepalese carpet 
weaver; sixteen-year-old Christine, a Canadian sex worker; and 
eighteen-year-old Naftal, kidnapped to be a soldier in the Mozam- 
bique National Resistance when he was twelve years old. 

This book leaves readers to explore critical questions about the 
economic and social systems that support the exploitation of chil- 
dren, and what might be done to help them. Springer discusses the 
potential harm poorly planned boycotts can inflict on working 
children, who may lose their livelihood and end up working in 
even worse conditions or on the street. She also describes well- 
organized, sustained campaigns that are helping to reduce child 
labor and to provide schooling and basic necessities for former 



549 



524 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



child workers. These include the "Foul Ball" soccer ball campaign 
and "Free the Children/' started by twelve-year-old Craig Kiel- 
burger. The only drawbacks to the volume are the inclusion of too 
many charts and boxed sections that interrupt the text, and the fact 
that Springer glosses over the poverty and struggle for survival of 
children within industrialized countries. Overall, however, this is a 
truly outstanding book, with color and black-and-white photos 
that take a compassionate look into the difficult, varied lives of 
working children worldwide. 

20.18 Tillage, Leon Walter (1997). Leon's Story. Illustrated by Susan 
Roth. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 107 pp. ISBN: 0-374- 
34379-9. Chapter Book. 

Every year. Tillage tells the story of his life to the children in the 
Baltimore school where he works as custodian. We're lucky to 
have his amazing story in print. Remembering his childhood as 
the son of a sharecropper in North Carolina, Tillage describes his 
personal experiences of — and profound insights into — segrega- 
tion, racial violence, and the economic disenfranchisement of 
Black Americans in the South as he was growing up. He tells of 
joining marches for civil rights as a high school student: 

Our parents would say to us, "We don't understand. Don't you 
know you're going to get killed for listening to those people? 

You're going to get beat up. What's wrong with you?" Ihen we 
would say to them, "We're getting beat up now. We're getting 
killed now. So I'd rather get beat up for doing something or trying 
to change things. I mean, why get beat up for nothing?" 

When he was fifteen. Tillage witnessed the violent murder of his 
father by some White boys who were drunk, "just out to have 
some fun," and who never faced any consequences for their 
crime. And yet his voice, as he shares his story, is often spirited 
and gentle, rich with wisdom, humor, anger, and pain. 

The book covers so much personal, political, and historical 
ground that critical questions abound. This is truly a book for all 
ages. Readers can explore American slavery's legacy of racism, 
racial violence, and economic injustice, as it was when Tillage was 
growing up and as it persists today. The book also generates dis- 
cussion about the power of literacy and storytelling. Roth's col- 
lage art, although evocative, is an odd choice for the book. 
Tillage's story is so powerful that Roth's feeling "that even one 
picture would be too many for Leon Walter Tillage's words" 




550 



Giving Voice to the Indignant Ones 



525 



seems wholly unfounded. One returns again and again to the sin- 
gle photo of young Tillage on the cover, wishing for more. 

Secondary Reviews 

20.19 Egan, Ted (1998). The Drover's Boy. Illustrated by Robert Ingpen. 
Melbourne, Australia: Lothian. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-887734-52-X. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. (See 3.61) 

20.20 Hurmence, Belinda (1997). Slavery Time: When I Was Chillun. 
New York: Putnam. 96 pp. ISBN: 0-399-23048-3. Chapter Book. 

In these twelve stories selected from Slave Narratives, the 1930s 
Works Progress Administration interviewing project, we hear the 
voices and stories of African American men and women who 
lived under slavery. These are voices that have been largely 
erased or ignored by American history and culture. The stories 
range from nostalgic recollections of childhood games and planta- 
tion cuisine, to painful memories of deprivation and abuse. This 
book truly invites interdisciplinary conversation. 

Although the brief introduction makes passing reference to the 
historical and social context, one disappointing aspect of the book 
is that some of the stories and photos deserve or require immedi- 
ate comment, rather than simply leaving it to chance that these 
conversations will take place. Consequently Slavery Time may best 
be read by students in a group setting, where discussions can 
explore the crucial and often troubling questions that arise. How 
can we make sense of the way a former slave recalls the days of 
slavery as a better time? What did freedom mean in 1865? What 
does freedom mean today? Finally these narratives are a pro- 
found testament to the power of literacy and self-expression, 
which so threatened the structures of slavery that slave owners 
strove at all costs — and often by violent means — to keep slaves 
from reading, writing, and speaking for themselves, as these men 
and women do so eloquently. 

20.21 Stanley, Jerry (1997). Digger: The Tragic Fate of the California 
Indians from the Missions to the Gold Rush. New York: Crown. 
104 pp. ISBN: 0-517-70951-1. 

Stanley has created a well-researched, highly readable portrait of 
the destruction of many of the Native American tribes that inhab- 
ited what is now California at the time of the first Spanish, and 




526 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



then the European, occupation. Because the Native Americans 
gathered their food and used sticks to dig vegetables, the forty- 
niners called them "Diggers," and saw them as "uncivilized crea- 
tures that were to be shot on sight." Stanley organizes his account 
chronologically, first telling readers about what life was like for 
the Native Americans prior to the coming of the Spanish and 
Europeans, and then what life was life during the period of the 
missions and the Gold Rush. 

At times Digger reads like a social studies text, but few readers 
will walk away not having learned several interesting facts or hav- 
ing their romanticized notions of the missions and the Gold Rush 
shattered. Although many events are glossed, the text is full of his- 
torical facts and quotations, including the fact that "When Euro- 
peans arrived in North America, 10 million people were living 
there. By 1910, only 230,000 Native Americans were left." Stanley 
gives voice to a people who have been marginalized by current 
accounts of history and political policy. Sprinkled throughout the 
volume are maps, original photographs, drawings, and quotations 
from an interview with Ishi, a Yahi man believed to be the last 
Native Californian to live according to the customs of his people. 
The author provides an extensive index so that students studying 
this period can locate information. Anyone studying California 
history or Native American culture at the upper-elementary level 
and beyond should consider using this book as a read-aloud or as 
part of a text-set for literature discussion. Who gets to write his- 
tory, to what effect, and for whose benefit are only a few of the 
issues raised. When we briefly introduced this book in a multi-age 
classroom of fifth and sixth graders, one of the questions that arose 
focused on the responsibility we have today for correcting the sins 
of our forebearers. This is the kind of question that makes history 
come alive. 

Taking Social Action 

Primary Reviews 

20.22 Breckler, Rosemary (1996). Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood. Illustrated by Deborah Kogan Ray. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-395-73570-X. Picture Book. 

This story is told from the point of view of a yoimg Vietnamese girl 
whose life is changed by the encroaching war that surrounds her. 





Taking Social Action 



527 



What starts out as a distant threat gradually comes to encompass 
her family and her life. A major figure in the book is Ong Noi, the 
girl's grandfather, a "revered elder" who has been the herb doctor 
in his village for many years. When his son becomes a soldier, he 
comes to help look after his two grandchildren. With him Ong Noi 
brings baskets of medicinal herbs, and sweet dried apples to cover 
their bitter taste. When their grandfather leaves to tend wounded 
soldiers in a distant area, the children continue to gather herbs as 
he has taught them to do. In the end, Ong Noi uses his position as 
the herb doctor to sacrifice his own life so that others can have 
relief from pain and suffering. He gives all of his medicines to oth- 
ers and saves nothing to heal his own wounds. This book invites 
conversations about the different forms that social action can take 
and how this action affects people's lives. (See also 3.115) 

20.23 Dash, Joan (1996). We Shall Not Be Moved: The Women's Fac- 
tory Strike of 1909. New York: Scholastic. 165 pp. ISBN: 0-590- 
48409-5. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

This historical account of the events leading up to a massive 
women's factory strike almost a century ago shows how taking 
social action and working together can help to improve conditions 
for those who lack power. In this case, there was social action on 
the part of three groups. First, the shirtwaist factory workers 
themselves, mostly poor young women between the ages of six- 
teen and eighteen, had the courage to stand up to the powerful 
factory owners and demand better pay and better working condi- 
tions. Starving and without warm clothing, they picketed in the 
cold and continued their strike for months. When they were ter- 
rorized and brutally beaten by hired thugs and hauled off to jail by 
corrupt police, two other groups of women became involved. Both 
"the mink brigade" (wealthy women) and "the college girls" had 
power and were ready to use it to fight for their progressive 
beliefs. When the strike ended, conditions for the factory workers 
had improved only slightly, but other gains had been made, 
including raising public consciousness and establishing a labor 
union that would ultimately protect the workers who followed. 

This book would be appropriate in a historical text-set focusing 
on civil rights and suffrage issues, as weU as in one dealing with 
current and past labor practices that reward some workers while 
abusing others. It could provide a starting point for conversations 



553 



528 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



about domestic and foreign sweatshops that still exist to make 
cheap garments at the expense of the workers who make them. 

20.24 Fleischman, Paul (1998). Whirligig. New York: Henry Holt. 133 
pp. ISBN: 0-8050-5582-7. Chapter Book. 

The premise of this book is deceptively simple: The thoughtless 
act of an unhappy teenager has tragic results that set in motion a 
series of surprising events. Certainly this theme is a staple of 
young-adult chapter books. Here, however, Fleischman has clev- 
erly added concurrent storylines to this conventional format in 
order to make a point about the effect one individual can have on 
the larger society. As the story opens, the main character, Brent, is 
charged with the task of designing, constructing, and placing four 
memorial whirligigs at various locations throughout the United 
States. We then follow Brent on his journey to various regions of 
the country in search of appropriate locales for the colorful, wind- 
driven whirligigs, and witness his growth from a self-centered, 
careless teenager to a thoughtful young man. 

Although Brent's story is engaging in its own right, Fleischman 
subtly inserts into the story four completely independent narra- 
tives about other characters from varying backgrounds and social 
positions. The single connection between these stories and lives is 
the whirligigs Brent places throughout the country. In each of these 
parallel stories, a character has a unique encounter with one of the 
whirligigs, in some cases years after they were created. As a result 
of their encounter, each character has to rethink his or her own life. 
These concurrent narratives provide the reader with a broader per- 
spective of the impact that Brent and the whirligigs have on very 
different individuals. Just as the wind sets the whirligigs in motion, 
so Fleischman sets in motion a superb collection of stories with a 
single common thread. This ingenious literary device offers a 
wider vision of the effect one individual can have on the larger 
society, and demonstrates the consequences that a single thought- 
less action can have as it ripples over time. (See also 5.138) 

20.25 McGuffee, Michael (1996). The Day the Earth Was Silent. Illus- 
trated by Edward Sullivan. Bloomington, IN: Inquiring Voices. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-9634637-1-3. Picture Book. 

The class makes a beautiful new flag, which they want to share 
with all the earth. The principal asks, "Why try?" But one child 
insists, "Why not try?" So the principal tells them to ask the mayor. 




Taking Social Action 



529 



since she might know. This exchange continues through several 
permutations as the children keep asking, and keep hearing from 
weary adults all the reasons for giving up on their plan: it 
involves too much work, it's too expensive, and on and on, until 
finally, at a meeting of all the nations, they unveil their flag, and 
the people of earth finally see — Why not! 

In tius story, children continue to cooperate, ask insightful 
questions, and insist on a unity among all people, until the whole 
world is awed and healed by their vision. But this isn't simply a 
story of visionary optimism — it's also about the importance of 
persistence and cherishing small yet significant moments of social 
change. Edward Sullivan's illustrations radiate the bright energy 
of kids engaged in creative expression and social action. Possible 
topics for conversation aboimd, including the potential of imagin- 
ing, creating, questioning, and working together to change our 
world for the better (not to mention the importance of listening to 
children!). And what better way to initiate this conversation than 
this story about kids choosing and implementing their own 
dreams to share with their community and world. 

20.26 Miller, William (1998). The Bus Ride. Illustrated by John Ward. 
New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1-880000-60-1. Picture Book. 

"It's always been this way," Sara's mother replies when Sara asks 
why she and the other African Americans have to ride in the back 
of the bus. Curious as to what could possibly justify such a law, 
Sara heads off to the front of the bus. Once up front she takes a 
seat and realizes that the only difference is that White people sit 
there. Regardless, Sara decides to take a seat. 

Based on the Montgomery bus boycott, and framed through 
the experience of Rosa Parks, The Bus Ride can be used as a vehicle 
for conversations about how particular systems of meaning can 
result in the "othering" of certain groups of people. Other ques- 
tions that can be raised include: Who does the law support? Who 
benefits most from certain laws? What role can the media play in 
raising consciousness or maintaining inequities? Most impor- 
tantly, The Bus Ride demonstrates the possibility of effecting social 
change through individual or group action. 

20.27 Mitchell, Margaree King (1997). Granddaddy's Gift. Illustrated 
by Larry Johnson. Mahwah, NJ: BridgeWater. Unpaged. ISBN: 0- 
8167-4010-0. Picture Book. 



■ 555 



530 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



Little Joe lives with her grandparents on a farm in segregated Mis- 
sissippi. One day when she misses the school bus, Granddaddy 
drives her all the way to school, insisting that she go and learn as 
much as she can even though "they're not teaching you every- 
thing they should." Little Joe begins to understand this better 
when her grandfather tries to register to vote. Granddaddy 
bravely persists in defending his rights even after the town clerk 
tries to dissuade him, the owner of the town co-op refuses to do 
business with him anymore, and an arsonist sets fire to the church 
he attends. On her eighteenth birthday. Little Joe is able to register 
to vote herself, simply by filling out a voter registration card. She 
does this while remembering her granddaddy's gift — his example 
of standing up for things he believed in and being proud, even 
when he was afraid. 

This book celebrates the gift given to us by preceding genera- 
tions, who made a difference in the struggle for human dignity 
and civil rights for all. It both honors their achievements and 
reminds us of the importance of education, pride, and vigilance in 
the ongoing struggle for social justice. Granddaddy's Gift invites 
students to experience the complex social milieu of segregated 
Mississippi, and to witness the racism and violence that was 
encountered by Black citizens who had the courage to stand up 
for their rights. 

20.28 Mochizuki, Ken (1997). Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story. 
Illustrated by Dom Lee. New York: Lee & Low. Unpaged. ISBN: 1- 
880000-49-0. Picture Book. 

In July of 1940, young Hiroki Sugihara, son of the Japanese consul 
to Lithuania, sees hundreds of Jewish refugees from Poland gath- 
ered at the gate of his family's house. These people want the con- 
sul to give them travel visas so that they can escape from 
imminent persecution. After Consul Sugihara is denied his gov- 
ernment's permission to give out visas to the refugees, he asks his 
family whether he should help the refugees anyway — ^by writing 
visas allowing them to travel through the Soviet Union to Japan, 
and from there on to safety — and thereby risk punishment by the 
Nazi, Japanese, and Russian governments. The family's collective 
decision to help the refugees sets the wheels in motion for the next 
month, during which Consul Sugihara hand writes thousands of 
visas while Hiroki plays with the refugee children in the park. 




Taking Social Action 



531 



Finally when the Soviets take over Lithuania, they order Consul 
Sugihara to leave. But as the fascinating afterward notes, the 
actions of the Sugihara family saved thousands of people. 

Dom Lee's sepia-toned illustrations beautifully convey the 
intense emotion of the Sugihara and refugee families, and are also 
reminiscent of stark, black-and-white Holocaust photographs. The 
tone seems just right for this story, which raises important conver- 
sations about human rights; the relationships between compas- 
sion, courage, and sacrifice; nonviolent resistance; and the power 
of the pen as an instrument of social justice. 

20.29 Winslow, Vicki (1997). Follow the Leader. New York: Delacorte. 
215 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32285-2. Chapter Book. 

Set in 1971 in North Carolina, this is the story of a family that's 
trying to make a difference. Mrs. Adams remembers segregation 
laws from her childhood, and now votes only for "people who 
want to make things better for everybody." Mr. Adams hires sub- 
contractors according to their bids and not who they are, and 
refuses to join a segregated country club, even though it would 
help him with business contacts and is "the most beautiful golf 
course this side of Myrtle Beach." Both Mr. and Mrs. Adams sup- 
port desegregation of the local schools, even though this means 
that their daughter Amanda will be bused out of their neighbor- 
hood to a downtown school. Resistant at first, Amanda eventually 
comes to appreciate the teachers and students in her new school, 
and realizes that the friend she missed so much at first was not the 
kind of friend she wanted to keep. 

Follow the Leader invites conversations about racist attitudes 
that continue to lurk just below the surface in contemporary life. 
The book encourages adolescents to interrogate their often tacit 
acceptance of questionable peer-group ethics, and to rethink their 
own beliefs. Another important conversation that might come out 
of this book relates to how the burden of carrying out policy deci- 
sions often falls on people who did not make the decisions in the 
first place. In this case, adult citizens made the decision to deseg- 
regate the public schools, but the onus of working through the 
problems that came with implementation of this order fell on the 
children and teachers. Because one group elected to think globally 
in voting for integration, another group had to act locally in terms 
of figuring out how to make integration work. 



557 



532 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



Secondary Reviews 

20.30 McCully, Emily Arnold (1996). The Bobbin Girl. New York: Dial. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-8037-1827-6. Picture Book. 

Rebecca Putney is a ten-year-old bobbin girl in nineteenth century 
LoweU, Massachusetts, who works thirteen-hour days under un- 
healthy working conditions in order to help support her family. The 
story, however, is not as much about Rebecca as it is about the social 
and industrial milieu of the times. More specifically, the story pro- 
vides much needed space in which to encourage conversation 
about issues of child labor and child abuse, as well as issues of labor 
control, enslavement, and the marginalization of women. In the 
story, Rebecca befriends Judith, another mill worker who puts up 
with the conditions at the mill in order to finance her studies. It is 
Judith who rises to the occasion, standing up for the rights of the 
female factory workers when the mill owner decides to reduce 
already low wages. At first it appears as though the group of female 
workers may stand united against management. But in the end, 
many of them abandon the protest and return to work, driven by 
the illusion that working in the mill represents their independence. 

The Bobbin Girl does not explicitly present itself as a story of tri- 
umph for women. However it does raise a number of questions 
regarding the difficulties involved in any struggle for equity and 
social justice. It also points to the need for ongoing social action. 
With regard to gender issues, the book easily lends itself to discus- 
sions of what happens when women break the crust of conven- 
tion and move into positions that challenge the ingrained gender 
biases in our society. McCully's use of a dark palette and shadows 
conveys quite effectively the feeling of the poor working condi- 
tions in the mill. (See also 3.42) 

20.31 McCully, Emily Arnold (1998). The Ballot Box. New York: Knopf. 
Unpaged. ISBN: 0-679-87938-2. Picture Book. 

"All the summer of 1880, Cordelia's job was to go next door, feed 
Mrs. Stanton's horse and clean out the stall. Every afternoon, Mrs. 
Stanton put aside her work on The History of Woman Suffrage and 
gave Cornelia a riding lesson." The Ballot Box, set in the late 1800s, 
is a weaving of history and fiction that shares the parallel stories 
of two females and their attempts to challenge social norms and 
expectations. Cordelia is a young girl and neighbor to suffragist 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton. As ihe book unfolds, we learn of Cordelia's 




Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



533 



desire to jump a four-foot fence on horseback. This is a feat that her 
brother is sure she cannot accomplish. 

Paralleled with Stanton's story of going to the polls to attempt 
to vote and fight for women's suffrage, Cordelia's story takes a 
backseat when she accompanies Stanton to cast a ballot. However 
the Stanton story is one that is not currently told or made visible 
in picture-book form. As such, the book is an important demon- 
stration of what it means to take up the plight of women as a mar- 
ginalized group. The book also clearly reminds us of the position 
of men, especially White men, as dominant decisionmakers, thus 
opening up the possibility for a discussion of ways that women 
can redefine their position in society. 

20.32 Sisalu, Elinor Batezat (1996). The Day Gogo Went to Vote. Illus- 
trated by Sharon Wilson. New York: Little Brown. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-316-70267-6. Picture Book. 

This story of the historic 1994 election in South Africa is told 
through toe eyes of young Thembi. Thembi's grandmother Gogo 
is determined to cast a ballot in the first election in which native 
people are allowed to vote. Although she has not been out of the 
family's yard for years, the elderly Gogo makes the long journey 
to the balloting place, accompanied by her granddaughter and 
assisted by numerous community members. Thembi sees how 
much voting means to Gogo, the oldest voter in the township. 

Reading aloud Gogo and Thembi's story could provoke inter- 
esting discussion about the importance of democracy during polit- 
ical campaigns and election times. Although the issue of apartheid 
is not directly discussed in this book, its effects are demonstrated 
by Gogo's determination to create her own destiny by voting. 
Paired with Granddaddy's Gift by Margaree King Mitchell (see 
20.27), this book raises parallel issues about worldwide struggles 
for Black suffrage and social justice, and the important contribu- 
tion our elders have played and continue to play in this struggle. 

Understanding How Systems 
of Meaning in Society Position Us 

Primary Reviews 

20.33 Bunting, Eve (1998). Your Move. Illustrated by James Ransome. 
New York: Harcourt Brace. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-15-200181-6. Pic- 
ture Book. 



er|c 



559 



534 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



James is ten, and his six-year-old brother Isaac likes to do what- 
ever he does. One evening after their mother goes to work, James 
sneaks out to meet the K-Bones, bringing Isaac with him because 
he can't exactly leave his little brother home alone. The K-Bones, 
lead by KriS and Bones, claim that they aren't a gang or a crew, 
just guys who hang out together. James thinks he wants to join 
them, so they give him a task: Spray paint the K-Bones' name over 
the Snakes' name, way up on a sign over the highway. "You mean 
tagging?" James asks. But Bones replies, "Crews tag. We write." 
James is nervous and scared, wishing he could leave. But how can 
he? He's there just "to prove I'm tough enough to be in K-Bones." 
When he's back on the grotmd with his mission accomplished, 
James feels "suddenly so cool." But the feeling is short lived. As 
they flee the scene, James pulls Isaac by the hand and thinks: 

I'm not feeling too great about getting him mixed up in this. I 
should have known the kind of stuff the K-Bones do. I'm not that 
dumb. Maybe I did know. But I wanted to be in with them. 

And that's when they run into the Snakes, who have a gun. The 
K-Bones take off. James hears a shot, and little Isaac drops to his 
knees. 

In the end, Isaac ends up with just two skinned knees, but Your 
Move does much more than scratch the surface of the issues it 
raises. Bunting explores the reasons why James and six-year-old 
Isaac are attracted to the K-Bones — ^both seek not only to connect 
with peers, but also to find older males to look up to, especially 
since their dad left. The reasons why they both decide not to join 
the K-Bones when Kris offers them the chance are even more com- 
pelling. Critical discussion could begin with the choices James and 
Isaac make. What attracts them to the K-Bones? Why do they each 
decide to turn down the offer to join? Are there differences 
between the way ten-year-old James and six-year-old Isaac make 
their decisions? Exploring with kids what they think is at stake 
and how they have faced or would face similar decisions is crucial, 
especially because — as the book reminds us — even very young 
kids may need to make such difficult and important decisions. 
Your Move also encourages discussion of the challenges single 
mothers face, particularly in finding safe and affordable childcare, 
and the way families and communities try to deal with violence. 
Ransome's fine oil paintings dramatize the complex relationships 
between characters and the boys' excitement and fear on the street. 
(See also 5.71) 



ERIC 



560 



Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



535 



20.34 Fletcher, Ralph (1998). Flying Solo. New York: Clarion. 144 pp. 
ISBN: 0-395-87323-1. Chapter Book. 

Told from the perspective of different students in Mr. Fabiano's 
sixth-grade class, this is the story of what happens when a substi- 
tute teacher doesn't show up and the class decides they'll run 
things by themselves for the day. No one discovers their secret as 
they more or less maintain the usual routine, bringing the atten- 
dance sheet to the office, filing to music class in straight rows, and 
so on. But there's a lot else going on, even as they stick to most of 
Mr. Fab's lesson plan. Rachel, who hasn't spoken since the death 
of their classmate Tommy six months ago, confronts Bastian about 
his cruelty to Tommy while he was alive. The conflict and emo- 
tions that ensue make Karen, who masterminded a few lies to 
keep their day of self-governance secret, wish that Mr. Fab were 
there after all. But at the same time, the class talks and writes 
about things they probably wouldn't have with him there. It's 
only at the end of the day, at the school assembly, that the princi- 
pal discovers the deception. When Mr. Fab does appear at the 
end, it's easy to see why the class loves him and his structured 
routines. Like the other adults, he's concerned and dead serious 
when he brings up what the class did. But he also wants to know 
what each of them thinks, and asks each student to write to him 
with his or her version of what happened that day. The varying 
responses allow for great discussions on taking responsibility ver- 
sus being irresponsible, and on how school practices can both 
inhibit and empower kids. (See also 6.50) 

20.35 Hesse, Karen (1998). Just Juice. Illustrated by Robert Andrew 
Parker. New York: Scholastic. 138 pp. ISBN: 0-590-03382-4. Chap- 
ter Book. 

This multilayered story is told from the point of view of nine- 
year-old Juice Faulstich, a chronically truant child who is happier 
at home with her vmsuccessful father and pregnant mother than 
at school where she is constantly reminded of her inability to 
read. As the story imfolds. Juice comes to realize that her father is 
also a nonreader and that his lack of reading proficiency has 
brought the family to the brink of disaster in the form of eviction 
from their home. Juice begins to vmderstand that although both 
she and her father are skilled in many ways, their acceptance by 
society and even by other family members is greatly affected by 
their status as illiterate. The book ends on a hopeful note as the 



ERIC 



561 



536 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



family finds a way to avert the eviction and makes literacy a goal 
for all of them. 

The critical issues embedded in this story begin to surface as the 
reader considers how learning and literacy position individuals as 
successes or failures both personally and socially, in school and in 
everyday life. The story of the Faulstich family shows how other 
ways of knowing are seldom valued as highly as literacy skills. In 
addition, the story illustrates how the efforts of well-meaning social 
service professionals can impact negatively on the people they are 
attempting to help if the voices of those individuals are not being 
heard. When extended to these critical levels, the story of Juice and 
the Faulstich family invites readers to consider how some people 
are marginalized not only by their poverty, but also by their illiter- 
acy. (See also 7.76, and Patricia Polacco's Thank You, Mr. Talker 
(7.80), for another example of how literacy positions individuals.) 

20.36 Jimenez, Francisco (1998). The Circuit: Stories from the Life of a 
Migrant Child. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico. 
134 pp. ISBN: 0-8263-1797-9. Chapter Book. 

In this powerful collection of short stories that flow together like 
a novel, Franciso Jimenez presents a brilliant, up-close view into 
the lives of the Mexican immigrant farm workers who harvest 
produce in the fields of California. We see the humanity of this 
usually faceless group that brings food to our tables while con- 
tinually being the object of political and media degradation. The 
book begins with Jimenez' parents risking everything to come 
across la frontera to the promised land of California in order to 
escape the poverty of their lives in Mexico. What they find 
instead of good jobs and a better life is the back-breaking life of 
migrant workers. As they continually move from place to place 
on "the circuit" following the ripening of the crops, they live in 
tents and shacks with no electricity or running water, don't earn 
enough money to feed their eight children or provide them with 
medical care, and constantly worry about being deported to 
Mexico. The twelve stories in this book are told from the perspec- 
tive of young Panchito, whose authentic voice lets us feel both 
the joy and despair of migrant life. Jimenez's memoirs of school 
experiences and the frustration his father feels when he is unable 
to feed or protect his family are especially poignant. 

This book would be a marvelous way to begin class discussions 
on a variety of critical issues, including poverty in the United 



562 



Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



537 



States, the working conditions of farm laborers, labor-management 
issues, how schools position students whose primary language is 
not EngUsh, healthcare and who's entitled to it, and transient 
Lifestyles. The book is also an inspirational tale of personal courage 
and growth, despite the last scene of the book in which Panchito is 
taken out of school by an immigration officer and led into a border- 
patrol car. The book is the winner of the 1997 John and Patricia 
Beatty Award from the California Library Association, and the 1997 
Americas Award. 

20.37 Levy, Marilyn (1996). Run for Your Life. Boston: Houghton Mif- 
flin. 217 pp. ISBN: 0-395-74520-9. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Run for Your Life is based on a true story about the recreation direc- 
tor of a community center in a drug-infested housing project in 
Oakland, California, and how he impacts positively the lives of a 
group of teenage girls. Darren, the new center director, enlists the 
help of thirteen-year-old BCisha and her friend Natonia in convinc- 
ing other girls in the project to join a newly organized track club. 
This is not just the story of the rocky and often traumatic road to 
success for the track club, but also the story of the remarkable 
growth that takes place in the lives of some of the club's members. 
The girls spend hours a day working out in the Walt Whitman 
project, surrounded by crime, drugs, and domestic violence. There 
is so much unrest in the neighborhood that Kisha's younger 
brother is afraid to leave the house unless he's with his parents. 
This book provides an opportunity for students to see the harmful 
effects of poverty and unemployment, and how hopelessness can 
lead to domestic violence. Both teenage pregnancy and sexual 
abuse are briefly dealt with in the book in nongraphic ways. 

20.38 Lorbiecki, Marybeth (1996). Just One Flick of a Finger. Illustrated 
by David Diaz. New York: Dial. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-8037-1948-5. 
Sophisticated Picture Book. 

From the first stanza of this story-poem, the reader is drawn into 
the urban tale of two boys trying to cope with the violence that 
handguns bring into their lives. The boys know well enough the 
dangers of handgims, and can articulate the reasons to avoid 
using these weapons. Yet when one of the boys feels threatened 
by an older peer, he decides to ignore what good sense tells him 
and brings his father's gun to school. In the end, the handgun dis- 
charges accidentally, wounding the boy and his friend. Although 



538 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



it is a hard lesson, the boy comes to see the folly of carrying a 
loaded handgun for protection, and vows to rely on his friends 
and his own intellect to solve his problems in the future. 

Life in an urban setting is closely scrutinized in this story The 
issues of handguns, personal responsibility, handling conflicts, 
and making choices can all be interrogated using the context of 
this story The use of street language and rhyme gives the story 
the feel of a rap song. The author's choice to write this story in the 
form of a poem using urban dialect is both appropriate and 
intriguing. The illustrations are a combination of vivid, abstract 
background drawings and individually framed pictures of the 
characters. The abstract background drawings look somewhat 
like graffiti, while the framed pictures are like snapshots that 
record the action as the story progresses. The use of bold colors in 
the artwork adds to the intense feelings and drama inherent in 
this all-too-realistic narrative. (See also 8.47) 

20.39 Mora, Pat (1997). Tomas and the Library Lady/Tomas y la senora 
de la biblioteca. Illustrated by Raul Colon. New York: Knopf 
(English) /Dragonfly (Spanish). Unpaged. ISBN: 0-679-80401-3 
(English and Spanish). Picture Book. 

Based on the life of Tomas Rivera, a migrant farm worker who 
became a national education leader and University of California 
chancellor, this story shows how literacy and access to good books 
can work together to give a voice to people who historically have 
been marginalized. With the help of a caring librarian and lots of 
books, Tomas is able to forge a new identity as the next-generation 
storyteller in his family. This book shows how libraries and literacy 
have the power to help all of us escape the mundane and explore 
new worlds. The seemingly textured illustrations add an almost 
surrealistic quality to the story. On another level, Tomas and the 
Library Lady is a story that can help raise children's consciousness 
about migrant workers and what they and their families endure to 
survive. This book would be a good addition to a text-set dealing 
with inequities and harsh working conditions in the workplace. 

20.40 Nodelman, Perry (1998). Behaving Bradley. New York: Simon & 
Schuster Books for Young Readers. 232 pp. ISBN: 0-689-81466-6. 
Chapter Book. 

Brad Gold steps into a quagmire when he agrees to provide stu- 
dent input into the Code of Student Conduct at Roblin High 



564 



Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



539 



School. After being humiliated by adrninistrators and parents at a 
parent meeting, he becomes committed to reforming not only the 
language of the Code, but the way students, teachers, and admin- 
istrators interact at Roblin High. The fact that Brad is after nothing 
less than mutual respect is so threatening to the status quo that he 
is beaten up by school bullies Mandy and Candy, threatened by a 
midnight caller, and lambasted by teachers for his efforts. In the 
process. Brad discovers that power in the school resides in some 
surprising places, that his teachers are humans with heartbreaking 
problems, and that everything is more bewildering than he ever 
thought possible. Although the School Board adopts his rewritten 
version of the Code, perhaps nothing has changed more than Brad 
himself, who muses: 

If this were a TV show or a movie, I'd know exactly what hap- 
pened and why it happened and I'd do something about it . . . But 
it isn't a TV show. It's life. Stuff like that happens to you, or to 
other people, and you don't know why exactly, or even what did 
happen, exactly, and it may or may not have a happy ending and 
it may or may not even be over yet and your best friend won't 
even tell you about it. It's just plain bewildering. 

Nodehnan's satirical look at high school life raises some impor- 
tant issues for discussion. Brad's explorations prompt questions 
of how the social systems in schools position students, teachers, 
and administrators. A real strength of the book is how Brad's per- 
ceptions of people at Roblin change as a result of his growing 
understanding of the social and institutional dynamics that con- 
nect them. Although his depictions of classmates start out as 
rather cartoonlike, they become increasingly complex. The book 
also invites discussions on dissent and the process of working 
toward social change. (See also 6.52) 

20.41 Spinelli, Jerry (1997). Wringer. New York: HarperCollins. 229 pp. 
ISBN: 0-06-440578-8. Chapter Book. 

If you grow up as a boy in American society, you generally are 
expected to endure "the treatment" on your birthday, participate 
in hunting at a particular age, and be moderately ugly to girls 
even if they were your best friends a year earlier. Although these 
behaviors might delight your male peers, amuse your father, puz- 
zle your mother, annoy your female friends, and emotionally 
traumatize you, they are "what men do." Palmer LaRue is going 
to be ten, and he is going through his own rite of passage in a 



565 



540 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



town that annually holds a pigeon shoot. In this town, it is the ten- 
year-olds who get to wring the necks of all the pigeons who are 
wounded but do not die outright. Not only does Palmer question 
why he should be expected to do this, but as luck would have it, 
he also is befriended by a pigeon he calls Nipper, who becomes 
his pet. Palmer's resulting inner turmoil, the social pressure he 
endures, and the inevitability of an approaching birthday drive 
the story forward. 

Understanding that "common sense is always just cultural 
sense," Jerry Spinelli spins a tale that merits impacking. Boys may 
just be boys, but that is not accidental. The rituals of male initia- 
tion — smoking behind the barn, drinking beer to be part of the 
gang, learning to hunt — position young boys to be certain kinds 
of human beings. Wringer invites the kinds of conversations that 
we cannot afford to miss having with children. It invites them to 
explore the forces that operate in society to make them into cer- 
tain kinds of people. Perhaps even more important, the book 
might help them to become more consciously aware of their alter- 
natives. In the end, even Palmer learns to stop being afraid and to 
stand up for what he believes. His decision to be himself is 
redeemed in a particularly hopeful scene; as Palmer rushes out of 
the shooting arena with his woimded bird Nipper, a little boy in 
the audience asks his father if he too can have a pigeon for a pet. A 
brilliant, must-read, Newbery Honor Book from the author of the 
Newbery Award book Maniac Magee. (See also 5.82) 

Spinelli, Jerry (1990). Maniac Magee. Boston: Little Brown. 

184 pp. ISBN: 0-316-80722-2. Chapter Book. 

20.42 Thomas, Rob (1997). Slave Day. New York: Simon & Schuster 
Books for Yoimg Readers. 188 pp. ISBN: 0-689-80206-4. Sophisti- 
cated Chapter Book. 

This book explores how dominant systems of meaning position 
people and groups in certain ways. Through short, first-person 
narratives, the reader is able to follow the thoughts and actions of 
seven students and a teacher as they live through "Slave Day," an 
annual tradition at Robert E. Lee High School. Although the offi- 
cial purpose for the activity is to raise money for student activi- 
ties, an African American student named Keene challenges the 
activity as racist and demeaning. He writes in the school paper 
that this event is "not perceived as racist simply because it has 
always existed without comment from those it should chiefly 



566 



Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



541 



offend — African-American students." Keene calls for social action 
in the form of a boycott of school on Slave Day by all Black stu- 
dents. This suggestion is rejected by Shawn, a basketball star and 
the first African American President of the Student Coimcil. For 
Shawn, "the civil rights movement ended twenty years ago" and 
has nothing to do with him. When the boycott fails to materialize, 
Keene decides to "buy" Shawn and raise his — and others' — 
awareness of racial issues. Other characters in the book interro- 
gate systems of meaning relating to gender, social status, and 
institutional power. The book encourages readers to rethink the 
kinds of roles they choose for themselves and assign to others. 

20.43 Wolff, Virginia E. (1998). Bat 6. New York: Scholastic. 256 pp. 
ISBN: 0-590-89799-3. Chapter Book. 

World War II has recently ended, and everyone in the Oregon 
towns of Barlow and Bear Creek is gearing up for the yearly "Bat 
6," the armual softball game between sixth-grade girls from each 
town. Both teams have one great new player: Shazam, whose 
father was killed at Pearl Harbor and who has just come to live 
with her grandmother; and Aki, a Japanese American girl who 
has just returned home with her family after years in an intern- 
ment camp. From the perspectives of twenty-one different charac- 
ters, we hear first of the excitement and preparation leading up to 
the game, and then how the game is cut short by a terrible inci- 
dent of racial violence: Shazam knocks Aki in the head forcefully 
and intentionally, causing serious injury. What follows is the 
town's struggle to make sense of what happened that day — a 
search that brings many to question their acceptance of the war's 
racism and violence, and their own complicity and silence. 

Critical conversations might focus on how social systems of 
meaning position various characters, including Shazam, Aki, 
their families, the returning soldier, and the conscientious objec- 
tor. The technique of using twenty-one voices also provides fertile 
groimd for a discussion of diversity, difference, and dissent, espe- 
cially in the context of this war, which so often is portrayed as 
uniting all Americans in moral consensus. 

Secondary Reviews 

20.44 Haskins, Jim (1998). Separate but Not Equal: The Dream and the 
Struggle. New York: Scholastic. 184 pp. ISBN: 0-590-45910-4. 
Sophisticated Chapter Book. 





567 



542 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



Perhaps no event better dramatizes the institutional weight, vio- 
lence, and injustice of segregated and inequitable education than 
when young Elizabeth Eckhart tried to pass through the line of 
armed National Guardsmen called out by Governor Orval Faubus 
to prevent Black students from entering Central High in 1957. 
Haskins moves from this starting point to examine the history of 
Black schooling in America, from violence against slaves who 
learned to read to the issues behind landmark legal decisions such 
as Brown v. Board of Education. Haskins interrogates subsequent 
rulings that imdermined this stand, including the 1973 Supreme 
Court ruling that upheld the fimding of public schools through 
property taxes. We also hear about Black writers' and intellectu- 
als' great and often unsung contributions to the struggle, from 
Phillis Wheatley to W. E. B. DuBois. Simple statistics on the dis- 
parity in school expenditures for White and Black students speak 
volumes about the ongoing inequities in education. 

Critical questions include how issues of segregation and fund- 
ing are being played out in schools today. Students might explore 
funding in their own districts as compared to a nearby district 
serving another commimity. Can a public education system paid 
for by local property taxes be called "public" when it so plainly 
discriminates against poor communities? What does integration 
mean, and what relationship does it bear to social justice and 
equality? Haskins includes a helpful chronology of events impact- 
ing civil rights and education, from the Civil War and Emancipa- 
tion through a 1995 federal district court judge's ruling that 
released the Denver, Colorado, public schools from court-ordered 
busing. Black-and-white photographs give faces to the people 
who have dreamed of, and struggled for, equal education for 
African Americans. 

20.45 Hoffman, Mary (1997). An Angel Just Like Me. Illustrated by 
Cornelius Van Wright and Ying-Hwa Hu. New York: Dial Books 
for Yoimg Readers. Unpaged. ISBN; 0-8037-2265-6. Picture Book. 

As Tyler's family prepares for Christmas, he discovers that the 
angel that tops their tree has broken. Wondering why all the rep- 
resentations of angels he has seen are female, pale, and blond, 
Tyler sets out to find a male Black angel who looks more like him. 
Through his search, Tyler questions dominant cultural and Christ- 
ian representations of the angelic and the divine. How can Jesus 



568 



Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



543 



be blond if he was Jewish and bom in the Middle East? Tyler's 
mother informs him that it is possible to be both Jewish and 
blond, but Tyler still wonders why Jesus isn't depicted with dark 
skin and hair and eyes. 

The story ends with the appearance of an angel just like Tyler, 
but his questions remain salient for discussion. Why couldn't 
Tyler find an image of a male Black angel to identify with in his 
family's Christian tradition? Why couldn't he find one for sale in 
any store? With a light touch, this story makes room for us to 
question how racism and gender stereotypes have shaped not 
only consumer culture and institutionalized religion, but even 
individual family traditions and conceptions of spirituality. Tyler 
challenges the dominant social systems that not only exclude him 
and deny history, but also stereotype Black males as anything but 
angelic. Wright and Hu's luminous watercolor illustrations make 
Tyler and his family come to life. 

20.46 Jenkins, A. M. (1997). Breaking Boxes. New York: Delacorte. 182 
pp. ISBN: 0-385-32513-4. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Breaking Boxes is a well-crafted tale about sixteen-year-old Charlie, 
who has lived in a poor neighborhood with his very responsible 
older brother since their mother died of alcoholism six years ago. 
Charlie is a loner who is befriended by Brandon, one of the rich 
kids in town, after an incident in which Brandon ridicules Charlie 
for not wearing the "in" shoes. We see their friendship grow, and 
eventually Charlie feels comfortable enough to tell his friend 
Brandon that Charlie's older brother is gay. Brandon is shocked, 
feels betrayed, gets incredibly angry, and tells everyone at school 
about Charlie's brother. The book ends with the story of the even- 
tual reconciliation between Brandon and Charlie. 

The issues of homosexuality and homophobia are handled in 
realistic and appropriate ways for middle-school students. This 
book invites discussions about friendship, class differences, 
teenage problems, and homophobia. The publisher suggests that 
Breaking Boxes is written for children fourteen years of age and 
older. There is a liberal sprinkling of profanity throughout the 
book, which adds to the beUevability of dialogue, but which may 
not be appropriate in certain school settings. There are also scenes 
that depict teenage drinking and semi-expUcit sex. Despite these 
potential problems, A. M. Jenkins does a masterful job of depicting 



;569 



544 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



homophobia in a way that makes the issue accessible for class- 
room discussions. 

20.47 Jiang, Ji-Li (1997). Red Scarf Girl: A Memoir of the Cultural Rev- 
olution. New York: HarperCollins. 240 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027585-5. 
Chapter Book. 

"Chairman Mao, our beloved leader, smiled down at us from his 
place above the blackboard." Thus begins the true story of Ji-Li 
Jiang and her family from 1966 to 1969 during the cultural revolu- 
tion in China. Twelve-year-old Jiang was an excellent student 
with the potential to assume an important role in the communist 
party when Mao Ze-Dong armounced the cultural revolution. He 
commanded everyone to find and destroy "the four olds" — old 
ideas, old customs, old habits, and old culture. Because of Jiang's 
family's class status as former landlords, they lived with terror, 
powerlessness, and confusion as they were publicly humiliated 
and threatened. Told from Jiang's memories, this compelling 
story has an honesty, intensity, and integrity that brings to life this 
frightening period of history. 

Critical conversations can begin by examining how the cul- 
tural revolution positioned the Jiang family in China. Given some 
historical background on the McCarthy era, students also could 
talk about the social, political, and economic forces that posi- 
tioned American citizens at that time and today. An epilogue and 
glossary are included. 

20.48 Nunez, Sandra, and Trish Marx (1997). And Justice for All: The 
Legal Rights of Young People. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook. 174 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7613-0068-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

Nunez and Marx provide a valuable summary of the legal rights 
of minors in the United States today, explaining what specific 
rights children do or do not have. Begirming with a brief sketch of 
the history of children's rights in the United States, they describe 
the legal relationships between the state, parents, and children 
themselves. In recent years, and often for the first time, children's 
voices are being heard more frequently within the legal system. 
Each chapter focuses on a different issue, from children's rights 
and first amendment protections for minors to safety issues and 
child labor laws. Specific cases are used to illustrate the struggle 
between minors who demand their own rights, parents who insist 



ERIC 




Understanding How Systems of Meaning in Society Position Us 



545 



on their rights to decide what's best for their kids, and the state 
which attempts to insure the safety of children. 

The strength and spirit of some children, who have challenged 
not only their families but the entire legal system to provide them 
with safety and justice, is truly astounding. Issues are presented in 
a complex, challenging marmer, and provide much material for 
discussion on subjects as diverse as student privacy rights in 
schools and child protection laws. In the words of Martin Guggen- 
heim, professor of law at New York University, "the book chal- 
lenges the reader to question the law as it applies to young people, 
ultimately leaving it to the reader to decide whether the law has 
gone too far, or not far enough." 

20.49 Sapphire (1997). Push. New York: Vintage. 192 pp. ISBN: 0-679- 
76675-8. Sophisticated Chapter Book; adult mediation required. 

The adults in Precious Jones' life either brutalize or ignore her. 
Her mother beats her, her father rapes her, healthcare workers 
blame her for two resulting pregnancies, and teachers pass her 
through school even though she can't read. But after she seeks 
help at the alternative school where Ms. Rain is her teacher. Pre- 
cious struggles to rewrite the devastating story of her life in her 
own words. 

This is partly a story of what happens when the adults respon- 
sible for nurturing and supporting a child act in brutalizing and 
neglectful ways. Larger questions are raised concerning the sys- 
tems of meaning in society that neglect or do violence to Precious 
because she is young. Black, and female. This novel shouldn't be 
left on shelves for students to read on their own; it raises too many 
issues that would be overwhelming for kids to deal with alone. 
Rather this novel pushes us, along with Precious, to ask each other 
questions about racism, sex, abuse, poverty, and inequities in edu- 
cation. These are important questions that impact kids' lives and 
often aren't addressed in school settings. One of the most crucial 
questions raised is where kids can turn, and what social and per- 
sonal resources they can call upon, when adults hurt them. Pre- 
cious Jones' story, told partly in the language of a sixteen-year-old 
just learning to read and write, is also a moving testament to the 
power of literacy and of courageous teachers. This book passion- 
ately reminds us that a prerequisite for learning — for entering into 
multivalent, literate conversation — is for children to believe that 
their voices will be heard. 



- 571 



546 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



Examining Distance, Difference, and “Otherness” 

Primary Reviews 

20.50 Abelove, Joan (1998). Go and Come Back. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 177 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2476-2. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book. 

When two female anthropologists arrive at a village in the Peru- 
vian jungle to study agriculture and infant care, the local residents 
see their actions as both bewildering and foolish to the point of 
being entertaining. Although some are suspicious at first, most of 
the villagers end up agreeing that "They ask many stupid ques- 
tions. But they are not mean. . . . just incredibly ignorant." Told 
from the point of view of Alicia, an adolescent villager, this is a 
story of stark contrasts and vast cultural differences. In a society 
where it is beautiful to be fat and women are encouraged to have 
relations with several men in order to be assured of giving birth to 
a healthy baby, there are myriad communication problems that 
arise between the visitors and their hosts. 

Although they never come to understand each other com- 
pletely, the anthropologists and the villagers are able to connect 
on some deep issues that touch them all: life, death, and survival 
in the jungle. Critical conversations could explore how being 
smart or stupid, "with it" or clueless, is always contextual, and 
how our perceptions of success or failure depend on the context 
in which we find ourselves. The story raises questions about how 
different cultural groups are positioned and how judgments 
made about people we don't really understand can be seriously 
flawed. 

20.51 Ancona, George (1997). Mayeros: A Yucatec Maya Family. New 
York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. Unpaged. ISBN: 0-688-13465-3. 
Picture Book. 

That Ancona chose the title Mayeros — the name by which Yucatec 
Maya call themselves — sets the tone for his respectful and lively 
photodocumentary of the daily life of a Yucatec Maya family. We 
meet two young brothers, Armando and Caspar, as well as their 
parents, sisters, grandparents, and extended family as they pre- 
pare and eat meals, build a ring for a bullfight, and dance to cele- 
brate the feast of saints. Ancona, himself a descendent of the 
Yucatec Maya, masterfully juxtaposes ancient Mayan carvings and 
paintings with his photos. We see a carving of a stone house from 




572 



Examining Distance, Difference, and "Otherness" 



547 



the ruins at Uxmal that mirrors the family's house, and a painting 
of a woman grinding com just as Dona Satulina does today. 

Throughout the book, Ancona explores the ways in which the 
mix of Mayan and Spanish life has come to shape how the family 
lives today. Although there is room to ask questions about history 
and economic disparity — how Spanish colonization affected the 
Yucatec Maya or how the grandmother might benefit from mod- 
ern medical care after she hurts her wrist — this is not primarily a 
story of poverty or oppression. Rather, Ancona's lens portrays 
the life of the family as rich with tradition, laughter, connected- 
ness to people and land, and resilient adaptability to change. (See 
also 3.56) 

20.52 Browne, Anthony (1998). Voices in the Park. New York: Dorling 
Kindersley. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-7894-2522-X. Picture Book. 

An overprotective wealthy mother, her lonely son, an unem- 
ployed father, his outgoing daughter — these are the four character 
voices in Anthony Browne's extraordinary picture book Voices in 
the Park. When these four gorilla characters go to the park, we see 
their experiences from four very diverse perspectives. Browne 
uses a different font for each character to tell his or her story — a 
font that visually represents the personality of the voice. He does 
a masterful job of letting us see how the same incident is lived and 
understood in four completely different ways. For example, we 
see Albert the dog portrayed as an unruly, scmffy mongrel who is 
bothering a pedigreed Labrador; as the energetic pet of a dejected 
man who wishes he had half his dog's energy; as a friendly dog 
who is having a great time (the kind of experience the boy wishes 
he were having at the park); and as a loving pet who is always in a 
hurry to be let off of his leash and to have fun. 

On the surface this is the story of a simple trip to the park, but 
readers are soon confronted with issues of class, gender, unem- 
ployment, first impressions, prejudice, and cultural stereotypes. 
One of the ways that Browne is able to accomplish so much in 
such a short book is through his stunning illustrations, which help 
to convey the four perspectives. On one page we hear the rich 
mother describing how she sees her child Charles talking to "a 
very rough looking" girl. From the illustration, however, we see 
that there is no way the mother can actually see how the girl looks 
because the girl and Charles are standing too far away to be seen 
in detail. This type of interplay between text and illustrations 



573 



548 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



adds wonderful layers of meaning to the story. This unique pic- 
ture book is appropriate for all age groups. 

20.53 Dines, Carol (1997). Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. New York: 
Delacorte. 223 pp. ISBN: 0-385-32271-2. Sophisticated Chapter 
Book; adult mediation required. 

Truth is I came here with an agenda . . . 

Lose my virginity 
Become an intellectual 
Define my future. 

So begins Lez Boy's trip to Paris. Wes — known as "Lez Boy" 
because he lives with his mother and her partner — needs to find 
himself psychologically as well as sexually. Like his mother and 
her partner, Wes has to escape from Woodberry County and the 
Puritanical attitudes that prevail. In Paris he falls in love, learns to 
talk openly about his home situation, and begins to take an active 
role in defining what kind of life he wants to live and what kind of 
person he wants to be. This is just one of several powerful short 
stories in Talk to Me. In "Pillow Talk," Lise finds herself in love 
with Mathias, a boy just coming to grips with his own homosexu- 
ality. In "Listening to My Father's Silence," a teenage boy has to 
come to grips with his mother's cancer and his desire not to face 
the new realities of his family life. In "Boy Crazy," a teenage girl is 
just that. "You have the face of an angel, the hair of Bonnie Raitt, 
the body of Madonna, but you are the daughter from hell," her 
mother tells her, and their relationship goes downhill from there. 
In "At the Edge of the Pool," Leah finally gets a summer job teach- 
ing water aerobics at a senior center. When Dorey, one of the sen- 
ior citizens, befriends her, everyone gets concerned about this 
"unnatural" relationship. In "Payback Time," Jess has to decide 
who will be his permanent guardian. He loves his mother, his 
stepfather, and his biological father, and has a difficult time decid- 
ing between them. In "Locker-Room Talk" (the novella), Pete, 
Naylor, and other members of the football team start a campaign 
to get Mary Fortunato — the frequent subject of locker-room 
jokes — elected homecoming queen. When Principal Rickover 
charges the boys with having violated the school's sexual harass- 
ment policy and consequently rules them ineligible to play in the 
homecoming game, Pete is led to rethink the effects of his behav- 
ior on Mary, her family, and himself. 



574 



Examining Distance, Difference, and "Otherness" 



549 



This volume is extremely well written, and each story pushes us 
to confront our own beliefs, values, relationships, and stereotypes. 
The worlds in Carol Dines' short stories are socially constructed, 
and readers are invited to think beyond themselves to consider how 
what they do, say, and believe affects others. Although a coming-of- 
age theme runs through the volume, these stories are meant to start 
among teenagers much-needed conversations about many issues, 
and at the exact age when they should be taking place. Lest teachers 
reading this review conclude these issues are too sentitive for stu- 
dents and therefore become skittish about using this book, the ques- 
tion remains: If these issues can't be discussed in the safety of the 
classroom, where can they be discussed? 

20.54 Fleischman, Paul (1997). Seedfolks. Illustrated by Judy Pedersen. 
New York: HarperCollins. 69 pp. ISBN: 0-06-027471-9. Chapter 
Book. 

This amazingly complex but short novel is told from the perspec- 
tives of thirteen different residents of an ethnically polarized 
inner-city neighborhood in Cleveland. Fleischman does a master- 
ful job of intertwining the narratives and lives of each of the char- 
acters. Kim, a nine-year-old Vietnamese girl, plants dried lima 
beans in a trash-filled vacant lot in an attempt to spiritually con- 
nect with her father, a farmer who died soon after her birth. While 
Kim plants the seeds, she is watched by Ana, an elderly neighbor 
who lives across the street from the lot. Ana's suspicion that Kim 
is hiding drugs leads to a series of human interactions that trans- 
form an ugly trash heap into a community garden, a place where 
people who had previously been distrustful of each other come 
together with a common purpose. In the course of this book, we 
hear the believable voices of residents who are ethnically, linguis- 
tically, and culturally diverse. We hear the pain of their lives, and 
we hear their triumph as they slowly and tentatively make con- 
nections and become part of a community. Each chapter is titled 
with the name of the character who tells his or her story, and is 
accompanied by a simple but effective black-line portrait by illus- 
trator Judy Pedersen. 

Many important social issues arise from the individual and col- 
lective stories of the thirteen characters. Stimulating and provoca- 
tive classroom discussions can center around the topics of ageism, 
the social toll of economically depressed inner cities, the immi- 
grant experience, the difficulties with and ways of getting action 



550 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



from city hall, victims of violence, pregnant teenagers, racial preju- 
dice, vandalism, and how to get beyond cultural stereotypes. This 
inspirational book can serve as a compelling demonstration of 
what a community action project might look like in students' own 
communities. (See also 7.66) 

20.55 Walter, Virginia (1998). Making Up Megaboy. Illustrated by Kat- 
rina Roeckelein. New York: Dorling Kindersley. 64 pp. ISBN: 0- 
7894-2488-6. Sophisticated Chapter Book. 

In this remarkable book, Virginia Walter weaves together popular 
culture, ethnic tensions, youth violence, and strained interpersonal 
relationships to create an extremely disturbing, realistic, and well- 
crafted tale. On his thirteenth birthday, Robbie Jones walks into Mr. 
Koh's convenience store, pulls out his father's gun, then shoots 
and kills the elderly Korean proprietor. The story is presented 
through the voices of community members as they try to figure out 
why this horrible killing happened. We hear from Robbie's disbe- 
lieving mother, a glib television news reporter, Robbie's disapprov- 
ing father, a Vietnam veteran, the local barber, Robbie's classmates, 
the girl Robbie had a crush on, Robbie's teacher, Robbie's best 
friend, a correctional officer, and many others. This book reads like 
a television drama, and because of the disturbing content and 
treatment, it is probably best used as a read-aloud text followed by 
a class discussion. 

Walter brings us face-to-face with real-world issues that we 
read about regularly in newspaper headlines, but that have no 
easy answers, including teenage violence, the proliferation of 
guns, the plight of victims of violence, adult responsibilities, cal- 
lous classmates, small-town prejudice, and lonely children. We 
also are confronted head-on with how the perceptions of others 
position us, and how powerful this positioning can be. Some 
would say that it is a weakness of this novel that Robbie's charac- 
ter is not well developed and we don't learn about the motivation 
that led to the killing, but by presenting Robbie as a construction of 
others, Walter places readers in the realistic situation of commu- 
nity members who have been confronted with a "senseless" act of 
teenage violence, are struggling to understand its source, and 
don't have a lot of information. Although not a traditional novel, 
this book is a very convincing postmodern tale. Katrina Roeck- 
elein 's striking graphics are powerful, aptly reflect popular media 
images, and add to the cultural impact and tone of the book. 




576 



Examining Distance, Difference, and "Otherness" 



551 



20.56 Wilson, Nancy Hope (1997). Old People, Frogs, and Albert. Illus- 
trated by Marcy D. Ramsey. New York; Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
58 pp. ISBN; 0-374-35625-4. Chapter Book. 

Albert is a fourth grader with more than just a reading problem — 
he's also very uncomfortable about walking by Pine Manor, a 
nursing home that he passes on his way to and from school each 
day. The people who sit on the porch and call out to him are not 
only old and wrinkled, but not in the best of health either. When 
his reading tutor and friend Mr. Spear has a stroke and ends up at 
Pine Manor, it's almost too much for Albert to bear. But when he 
surprises himself by reading a whole book without help and with- 
out focusing on the terrifying fact that he is reading, Albert gets 
the courage to overcome his fear and share his success with the 
residents of Pine Manor. He learns that the people he has been 
avoiding are different, yet have much to offer as friends. 

This book makes the point very poignantly that being old or 
sick has nothing to do with being interesting and fxm, and that 
negative feelings about others often disappear when we get to 
know them. Many children and adolescents share Albert's initial 
distaste for dealing with incapacitated or elderly people; this 
book encourages them to rethink their beliefs. 

Secondary Reviews 

20.57 Birdseye, Debbie, and Tom Birdseye (1997). Under Our Skin: 
Kids Talk about Race. Photographs by Robert Crum. New York; 
Holiday House. 30 pp. ISBN; 0-8234-1325-X. Picture Book. 

In this book, six twelve- and thirteen-year-olds speak in their own 
words about their perceptions and experiences of race in the 
United States. They describe their own ethnic traditions, their 
experiences of racism and prejudice, and their ideas and hopes for 
race relations in America. One of the kids we meet is Janell, a 
Native American dancer from Oregon, who tells us that her school 
friends are curious about life on the reservation. Another is Jason, 
an African American who offers incisive perspectives on continu- 
ing social and economic inequities. The title of the book comes 
from Jason's observation that "It's not what color the skin is, but 
what's under our skin that counts." Crum's photographs of each 
kid in different settings — with friends, with family, at church, 
cooking traditional foods, at a school dance — complement the 
multifaceted individual portraits that emerge in the text. This 




577 



552 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



focus on kids' individual voices provides a great starting point for 
discussion of how students experience the impact of race and eth- 
nicity in their own lives, including the differences that make each 
of us distinct, the problems of racism and prejudice, and possibili- 
ties for social change. 

20.58 Lears, Laurie (1998). Ian's Walk: A Story about Autism. Illus- 
trated by Karen Ritz. Morton Grove, IL: Whitman. Unpaged. 
ISBN: 0-8075-3480-3. Picture Book. 

Julie and her big sister Tara are on their way to the park to feed the 
ducks, but now their brother Ian wants to come. Through simple 
language and Ritz' luminous watercolor illustrations, this book 
explores not only the range of emotions Julie feels being the sibling 
of an autistic child, but also the ways in which Ian himself experi- 
ences and senses the world differently. On the journey to the park, 
Ian wants to smell bricks, not flowers, and once there, he lies with 
his cheek on the concrete instead of feeding the ducks. The illustra- 
tions capture the immense range of Julie's feelings: understanding, 
armoyance, anger, embarrassment, protectiveness, guilt, love, and 
affection. After Ian becomes lost in the park, Julie tries hard to 
enter his world and figure out where Ian would go. In so doing, 
she not only finds her brother, but also finds a way to cormect with 
him and share experiences together. 

Lears manages to validate all of Julie's feelings and to convey 
both the responsibility and opportunity Julie has to reach outside 
of herself and into her brother's world. This book could spark 
great discussions with kids about the way we feel toward people 
we perceive as somehow different, and what changes when we 
open ourselves up to trying to understand our differences and 
cormect with each other. 

20.59 Senisi, Ellen (1998). Just Kids: Visiting a Class for Children with 
Special Needs. New York: Dutton. 40 pp. ISBN: 0-525-45646-5. 
Picture Book. 

This documentary-like book offers a look at "special kids" and 
"special classes" through the eyes of Cindy, who is a regular edu- 
cation student. Because she really does not know any special 
needs kids, Cindy makes a hurtful comment to a child in the spe- 
cial needs class. To help her better understand the special needs of 
some learners, Cindy is asked to join their class for one-half hour 
each day over the course of two weeks. Every day, the teacher 



O 

ERIC 



578 



Examining Distance, Difference, and "Otherness " 



553 



describes the needs of one of the special kids to Cindy. The teacher 
offers readily understandable information on learning disabilities 
ranging from autism and dyslexia to epilepsy. She explains the 
difference between physical therapy occupational therapy, and 
speech therapy. The teacher answers all of Cindy's questions 
about this class, and encourages her to interact with the students. 

Through Cindy, the reader comes to know and appreciate the 
nine learners in this special needs classroom. Each page of this 
book is highlighted with photographs taken in an actual special 
needs classroom, which the author acknowledges in her preface. 
These photographs give faces to the children as they are described 
by the teacher. The pictures enhance the text, and allow the reader 
to see the individuals behind the special needs labels. This book 
offers both clear and concise information regarding the special 
needs of some learners, as well as a sensitive account of the feel- 
ings of the children who carry the labels of special education. It 
offers an entry point into discussions surrounding these sensitive 
issues. 

20.60 Van Camp, Richard (1998). What's the Most Beautiful Thing You 
Know about Horses? Illustrated by George Littlechild. San Fran- 
cisco: Children's Book. 30 pp. ISBN: 0-89239-154-5. Picture Book. 

The most beautiful thing about this book is that it provides space 
for us to see the world and ourselves in entirely new ways. 
Richard Van Camp, the author, is the main character. In his home- 
town of Fort Smith in the Northwest Territories of Canada, on a 
day so cold that he says the ravens refuse to fly, he carmot go out- 
side. He decides to ask his friends and family a question he has 
been thinking about: "What's the most beautiful thing you know 
about horses?" On the surface, the book appears to be a clear 
demonstration of what it truly means to be an inquirer. However 
the perspectives offered to Van Camp in response to his question 
set up the possibility for a number of conversations to take place 
regarding stereotypes, ethnic differences, biracial issues, language 
and power, animal rights, and cultural perspectives. His search 
for responses to his questions appears to be a playful and gentle 
reminder that critical issues can arise or be teased out of conversa- 
tions that are not primarily centered on such issues. George Little- 
child offers bold and bright illustrations that encourage curiosity, 
and therefore invite other inquiries. 



579 



554 



Supporting Critical Conversations in Classrooms 



Other Ideas for Text-Sets 

Full bibliographic iivformation and reviews for the titles in the following 
groups are included elsewhere in this chapter; see the cross-reference in 
boldface type at the end of each entry. 

Child Labor and Children's Rights 

Dash, Joan. We Shall Not Be Moved: The Women's Factory Strike of 
1909. (See 20.23) 

Jimenez, Francisco. The Circuit: Stories from the Life of a Migrant 
Child. (See 20.36) 

Martinez, Victor. Parrot in the Oven: Mi Vida. (See 20.4) 

McCully, Emily Arnold. The Bobbin Girl. (See 20.30) 

Parker, David L. Stolen Dreams: Portraits of Working Children. (See 
20.15) 

Springer, Jane. Listen to Us: The World's Working Children. (See 20.17) 

Literacy as Power 

Hesse, Karen. Just Juice. (See 20.35) 

Mora, Pat. Tomas and the Library Lady. (See 20.39) 

Rodriguez, Luis. America is Her Name. (See 20.7) 

Sapphire. Push. (See 20.49) 

Thomas, Rob. Slave Day. (See 20.42) 

Multiple Perspectives 

Birdseye, Debbie, and Tom Birdseye. Under Our Skin: Kids Talk about 
Race. (See 20.57) 

Browne, Anthony. Voices in the Park. (See 20.52) 

Fleischman, Paul. Seedfolks. (See 20.54) 

Fletcher, Ralph. Flying Solo. (See 20.34) 

Thomas, Rob. Slave Day. (See 20.42) 

Walter, Virginia. Making Up Megaboy. (See 20.55) 

Wolff, Virginia E. Bat 6. (See 20.43) 



580 



555 



Author Index 



Abelove, Joan, 20.50 
Ada, Alma Flor, 3.139, 7.23 
Adler, David A., 3.76, 6.66, 9.16, 12.3 
Adoff, Arnold, 10.23 
Alameida, Roy, 3.140 
Alarcon, Francisco X., 10.60 
Alda, Arlene, 9.1 
Aldana, Patricia, 3.125 
Alexander, Lloyd, 14.49 
Aliki, 7.74 
Allen, Judy, 2.1 
Alphin, Elaine Marie, 1.32 
Anaya, Rudolfo, 3.126 
Ancona, George, 3.56, 3.172, 4.1, 11.57, 
20.51 

Anderson, Dave, 12.18 
Anderson, Leone Castell, 4.54 
Antle, Nancy, 4.30, 5.1 
Appelbaum, Diana, 3.21 
Appelt, Kathi, 9.7 
Applegate, K. A., 6.70 
Archbold, Rich, 2.2 
Archer, Jules, 5.2 
Armstrong, Nancy M., 3.22 
Arnold, Caroline, 1.1, 2.28, 3.77 
Amosky, Jim, 2.29 
Asch, Frank, 8.22, 10.47 
Atkinson, Mary, 2.13 
Axelrod, Amy, 9.10 
Aylesworth, Jim, 4.31, 10.24 



Baddiel, Ivor, 12.23 
Balgassi, Haemi, 3.114 
Banks, Kate, 8.1 
Barlowe, Sy, 1.57 
Barnwell, Ysaye M., 10.15 
Barrett, Judi, 13.11 
Bartlett, T.C., 11.12 
Bartone, Elisa, 3.192 
Bash, Barbara, 4.130 
Bateman, Robert, 2.2 
Bateson-Hill, Margaret, 3.193 
Bauer, Joan, 4.74, 9.11 
Bauer, Marion Dane, 7.43, 13.1 
Baylor, Byrd, 10.40 
Becklake, Sue, 1.16 
Behan, Brendan, 3.141 
Belafonte, Harry, 10.25 



Ben-Ezer, Ehud, 3.142 
Bennett, Cherie, 6.71 
Benson, Kathleen, 3.88, 3.89 
Benton, Amanda, 13.49 
Berenstain, Jan, 6.72 
Berenstain, Stan, 6.72 
Bernhard, Emery, 4.110 
Berry, James, 3.143 
Bertrand, Diane Gonzales, 7.92 
Best, Cari, 8.2 
Betancourt, Jeanne, 6.73 
Billingsley, Franny, 14.40 
Birchman, David E, 11.13 
Birdseye, Debbie, 20.57 
Birdseye, Tom, 20.57 
Blacks tone, Margaret, 12.29 
Blake, Robert J., 8.3 
Bledsoe, Lucy Jane, 5.123 
Bliss, Corinne Demas, 8.23 
Bloor, Edward, 13.50 
Blue, Rose, 3.174 
Bogacki, Tomek, 8.24 
Bortz, Alfred, 1.2 
Bos veld, Jane, 2.3 
Bouchard, David, 2.4, 7.93 
Bourgeois, Paulette, 2.66 
Boyd, Candy Dawson, 4.62 
Branley, Franklyn M., 1.3 
Breckler, Rosemary, 3.115, 20.22 
Brenner, Barbara, 5.130 
Brett, Jan, 8.25 
Brewster, Hugh, 1.4 
Brisson, Pat, 7.44 
Brook, Donna, 13.2 
Brooks, Bruce, 12.24, 12.36 
Brown, Laurie Krasny, 1.22, 6.28 
Brown, Marc, 1.22, 6.74, 7.84, 13.60 
Brown, Ruth, 11.24 
Browne, Anthony, 20.52 
Bruchac, Joseph, 3.24, 3.58, 5.37, 5.50, 5.63 
Bryant, Bormie, 6.75 
Buckley, Helen E., 8.5 
Bunting, Eve, 3.105, 3.194, 3.195, 4.4, 4.5, 
5.71, 20.1, 20.9, 20.33 
Burgess, Lord, 10.25 
Burks, Brian, 3.25 
Bumingham, John, 14.1 
Bums, Marilyn, 9.12 
Byars, Betsy, 7.37 




581 



556 



Author Index 



Cabrera, Jane, 7.20 

Calmenson, Stephanie, 6.38, 12.44, 12.48, 
13.33 

Calvert, Patricia, 4.42 
Campbell, Ann Jeanette, 5.64 
Campbell, Joanna, 6.76 
Carbone, EHsa, 6.29 
Cardo, Horacio, 12.41 
Carle, Eric, 11.51 
Carling, Amelia Lau, 4.97 
Carlson, Lori Marie, 10.52 
Carlstrom, Nancy White, 9.2 
Carpenter, Angelica Shirley, 13.40 
Carr, Jan, 14.22 
Carter, Dorothy, 4.126 
Casey, Moe, 12.50 
Catalano, Dominic, 11.31 
Catalanotto, Peter, 7.82 
Cha, Dia, 3.78 
Chall, Marsha Wilson, 8.26 
Chambers, Veronica, 3.26 
Chilcoat, George W., 5.119 
Chin-Lee, Cynthia, 7.32 
Choi, Sook Nyul, 4.111 
Christopher, Matt, 12.4, 12.12, 12.13, 12.37, 
12.38 

Ciment, James, 3.79 

Clements, Andrew, 13.12 

Cole, Joanna, 1.5, 1.41, 12.44, 12.48, 13.33 

Coleman, Evelyn, 20.10 

Collins, David R., 5.38 

Colon- Vila, Lillian, 11.22 

Conrad, Pam, 8.6 

Cook, Mauliola, 1.49 

Cooney, Barbara, 3.59, 5.39 

Cooper, Elisha, 12.25 

Cooper, Floyd, 5.3 

Cooper, Susan, 14.50 

Comelissan, Cornelia, 3.116 

Corwin, Judith Hoffman, 13.34 

Cosby, Bill, 7.38 

Costello, Emily, 12.1, 12.39 

Cousin, Patricia Tefft, 7.52 

Coville, Bruce, 11.27, 14.41 

Cox, Judy, 6.9 

Coy, John, 8.7 

Creech, Sharon, 5.99, 6.53 

Cristalsdi, Kathryn, 9.27 

Crook, Connie Brummel, 3.27 

Crowe, Carole, 14.51 

Curlee, Lynn, 5.125 

Currie, Stephen, 3.80 

Curtis, Gavin, 4.6 

Curtis, Patricia, 2.32 



Cushman, Doug, 13.61 
Cushman, Karen, 5.51 
Cyrus, Kurt, 13.15 
Czech, Kenneth, 3.81 



Dabcovich, Lydia, 4.98 

Dadey, Debbie, 6.77 

Dakos, Kalli, 10.8 

Danziger, Paula, 6.67 

Dash, Joan, 3.60, 20.23 

Davol, Marguerite W., 14.2 

de Paola, Tomie, 13.41 

DeFelice, Cynthia, 13.62 

Del Negro, Janice, 14.3 

Delano, Marfe, 2.61 

Demi, 3.144, 3.145, 3.197, 9.13 

Denim, Sue, 8.27 

Desirnini, Lisa, 13.3 

Dewey, Jennifer O wings, 1.6, 3.82 

Diagram Group, 12.45 

Dillon, Diane, 5.6, 13.28 

Dillon, Leo, 5.6, 13.28 

Dines, Carol, 20.53 

Dingle, Derek T., 12.5 

Dionetti, Michelle, 11.47 

Dolphin, Laurie, 3.198 

Dormelly, Jane, 2.47 

Dorris, Michael, 4.44, 5.72 

Dorros, Arthur, 2.33 

Dotlich, Rebecca Kai, 10.9, 10.31 

Drake, Jane, 12.46, 12.47 

Draper, Sharon, 4.90 

Dubowski, Mark, 6.78 

Duffey, Betsy, 6.16 

Duncan, Dayton, 3.83 

Dunn, Andrew, 1.33 

Dunn, Wendy, 5.44 

DuPlacey, James, 12.14 

Dussling, Jermifer, 14.25 

Dyer, Daniel, 13.42 



Edwards, Chris, 12.31 

Edwards, Pamela Duncan, 13.13 

Egan, Ted, 3.61 

Egan, Terry, 12.15 

Egan, Tim, 8.8 

Ellwand, David, 11.35 

Elya, Susan Middleton, 13.35 

Engel, Trudie, 12.6 

English, June, 1.7, 3.117 

English, Karen, 4.33 

Enzensberger, Hans Magnus, 9.14 



582 



Author Index 



557 



Erlbach, Arlene, 3.199, 12.42 
Ernst, Lisa Campbell, 8.29, 8.30 
Esbensen, Barbara Juster, 2.6, 10.41 
Eyvindson, Peter, 4.131 



Falwell, Cathryn, 13.16 

Farmer, Nancy, 5.73 

Farndon, John, 1.34 

Faulkner, Keith, 13.4 

Fehr, Kristin Smith, 12.17 

Ferguson, Alane, 13.56 

Fields, T. S., 5.74 

Finchler, Judy, 6.32 

Fisher, Leonard Everett, 3.62 

Fleischman, Paul, 5.138, 7.66, 20.24, 20.54 

Fleming, Candace, 3.84, 8.31, 11.17 

Fleming, Denise, 11.28 

Fletcher, Ralph, 6.50, 10.1, 10.10, 20.34 

Florian, Douglas, 10.32, 10.35 

Ford, Harry, 1.8 

Forrester, Sandra, 20.11 

Fox, Mem, 8.9 

Fox, Paula, 20.2 

Fox, Robert Barlow, 3.106 

Fradin, Dennis, 1.9 

Franklin, Kristine L., 8.33 

Frasier, Debra, 1.43 

Freedman, Russell, 5.8 

Friedman, Stan, 12.15 

Friedrich, Elizabeth, 3.29 

Frith, Margaret, 14.25 

Fuller, Sarah Betsy, 5.40 



Galan, Mark, 2.7 
Ganeri, Anita, 1.23, 11.20 
Gantos, Jack, 6.40 
Garay, Luis, 5.126, 8.34 
Garland, Sherry, 4.127 
Gamer, Alan, 5.109 
Gayle, Sharon Shavers, 5.9 
George, Jean Craighead, 4.102 
George, Kristine O'Connell, 10.2 
Gerber, Carole, 10.26 
Gerstein, Mordicai, 3.63 
Gibbons, Gail, 1.10, 2.8, 2.9, 2.34 
Gift, Patricia Reilly, 3.107, 11.61 
Gilchrist, Jan Spivey, 11.36 
Gillette, J. Lynett, 1.11 
Gilson, Jamie, 6.7 
Glenn, Mel, 10.27 
Gliori, Debi, 8.35 

Goble, Paul, 3.127, 3.146, 3.147, 3.200 



Godkin, Celia, 1.61 

Goldin, Barbara Diamond, 3.128, 3.148 

Goldstein, Ernest, 11.48 

Goodman, Susan E., 1.12, 3.86 

Grambling, Lois G., 4.8 

Gray, Libba Moore, 13.6 

Greenberg, Jan, 11.49 

Greene, FOionda Gowler, 7.7 

Greenfield, Eloise, 12.7 

Grimes, Nikki, 5.84, 13.29 

Grove, Vicki, 5.75 

Grover, Max, 13.17 

Gutman, Bill, 12.16 

Guy, Ginger Foglesong, 9.8 



Haddad, Charles, 6.68 

Haddix, Margaret Peterson, 4.80, 6.56 

Haddon, Mark, 2.67 

Hall, Donald, 3.30 

Halpern, Shari, 11.8 

Hamilton, Jake, 11.33 

Hamm, Diane Johnston, 3.31 

Hampshire, Susan, 11.62 

Hampton, Wilbom, 3.87 

Hanna, Jack, 2.35 

Hansen, Brooks, 5.131 

Hansen, Joyce, 3.32, 20.12 

Harper, Dan, 9.28 

Harper, Jo, 3.129 

Harrah, Madge, 3.118 

Harris, Marian, 8.37 

Harris, Pamela, 7.15 

Harter, Debbie, 7.5 

Haskins, James, 3.88, 3.89 

Haskins, Jim, 3.93, 3.96, 20.44 

Hausherr, Rosmarie, 4.64 

Hausman, Gerald, 3.149, 3.201 

Hawcock, David, 1.28 

Hazen, Barbara, 7.10 

Hearne, Betsy G., 4.47 

Heller, Ruth, 13.14, 13.43 

Henkes, Kevin, 6.13 

Hermes, Patricia, 4.81 

Herron, Carolivia, 4.9 

Hesse, Karen, 4.10, 4.48, 7.76, 20.35 

Hest, Amy, 3.34, 8.38 

Hetherington, Tim, 1.37 

Hickox, Rebecca, 3.130, 3.202 

High, Linda Oatman, 4.118 

Hines, Anna Grossnickle, 4.65, 5.67 

Hirschi, Ron, 20.13 

Ho, Minfong, 4.112, 10.61 

Hoban, Tana, 7.2 



583 



558 



Author Index 



Hobbs, Will, 3.35, 3.203, 5.110, 13.64 
Hoberman, Mary Ann, 8.39, 13.36 
Hodge, Deborah, 2.36 
Hoffman, Mary, 2.10, 20.45 
Holbrook, Sara, 10.16 
Holt, Kimberly Willis, 4.66 
Holtz, Lara Tankel, 7.33 
Hoopes, Lyn, 10.36 
Hopcraft, Carol, 2.37 
Hopcraft, Xan, 2.37 

Hopkins, Lee Bennett, 10.3, 10.11, 10.17 
Horenstein, Henry, 12.19 
Howard, Ellen, 3.36 
Howe, James, 4.82, 6.17, 7.54 
Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane, 3.204, 3.205, 5.13, 
12.20 

Hru, Dakari, 4.34 
Hucko, Bruce, 11.41 
Hudson, Wade, 4.35 
Hughes, Dean, 6.79 
Hunter, Sally M., 2.38 
Hurmence, Belinda, 20.20 
Hurwitz, Johanna, 6.10 
Huynh, Quang Nhuong, 7.67 



Iguchi, Bryan, 12.31 
Igus, Toyomi, 3.90, 4.36 
Ingold, Jeanette, 5.102 
Inkpen, Mick, 7.3, 8.40 
Isadora, Rachel, 11.64 



Jackson, Alison, 11.3 
Jackson, Shelley, 8.10 
Janeczko, Paul B., 10.28 
Jenkins, A. M., 20.46 
Jemigan, E. Wesley, 14.28 
Jessup, Harley, 7.11 
Jiang, Ji-Li, 20.47 
Jimenez, Francisco, 6.45, 20.36 
Johnson, Angela, 4.11, 4.68, 5.76, 8.41 
Johnson, Dinah, 3.91 
Johnson, Neil, 1.62 
Johnson, Paul Brett, 4.58, 5.132 
Johnson, Rebecca L., 1.17 
Johnson, Stephen T., 9.3 
Johnson, Sylvia A., 2.39, 3.92 
Johnston, Tony, 3.38, 3.178, 3.206, 4.37, 
10.48 

Jones, Marcia Thornton, 6.77 
Jones, Thomas, D. 1.7, 3.117 
Joosse, Barbara M., 8.42 
Jordan, Sandra, 11.49 



Josephson, Judith Pinkerton, 5.14 
Joyce, William, 14.4 
Jurmain, Suzanne, 5.15 



Kalman, Bobbie, 3.207 
Kaplan, William, 20.14 
Katz, Bobbi, 10.12 
Katz, William Loren, 5.16 
Kearns, Geri, 3.150 
Keegan, Marci, 5.55 
Kellogg, Steven, 14.29 
Kemp, Moira, 7.51 
Kennedy, Kim, 8.43 
Kent, Deborah, 5.95 
Ketteman, Helen, 14.6 
Kimmel, Elizabeth Cody, 14.52 
Kimmel, Eric A., 5.139, 14.30 
King, Elizabeth, 3.179 
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 3.93 
King, Penny, 11.54 
Kirk, David, 8.44 
Kirkwood, Jon, 1.38 
Klass, Sheila Solomon, 5.85 
Kleven, Elisa, 6.22 
Kline, Suzy, 6.30, 7.55 
Klinzing, James, 12.26 
Klinzing, Michael, 12.26 
Knight, Margy Bums, 7.21 
Konigsburg, E. L., 6.48 
Kooharian, David, 5.140 
Kramer, Barbara, 12.17 
Kramer, S. A., 7.68 
Kramer, Stephen, 2.62 
Krantz, Hazel, 4.92 
Krensky, Stephen, 6.39 
Kroll, Virginia L., 4.12, 4.120, 14.8 
Kmll, Kathleen, 5.17, 12.9 
Kudler, David, 14.9 
Kurtz, Jane, 3.153 
Kusugak, Michael, 9.4 



Labi, Esther, 1.37 

Lachtman, Ofelia Dumas, 5.91, 5.141 

LaFaye, A., 4.83 

Lankford, Mary D., 12.43 

Lansky, Bmce, 6.11 

Lasky, Kathryn, 3.154, 6.4 

Lauber, Patricia, 2.63 

Lauture, Denize, 6.46 

Lavender, David, 3.94 

Lavis, Steve, 11.32 

Lawlor, Laurie, 7.39 



Author Index 



559 



Lears, Laurie, 20.58 

Leder, Jane, 12.10 

Lee, Barbara, 1.24, 12.27 

Lee, Huy Voun, 3.209, 11.42 

Lee, MiUy, 3.109 

Lesser, Carolyn, 10.42 

Lester, Helen, 13.44 

Lester, Julius, 3.131, 5.18 

Levine, Gail Carson, 14.43 

Levine, Mike, 12.15 

Levy, Constance, 10.37 

Levy, Marilyn, 20.37 

Levy, Matthys, 1.44 

Lewis, Celeste, 5.132 

Lewis, Paul Owen, 3.155 

Liatsos, Sandra Olson, 10.13 

Lincoln, Abraham, 3.119 

Lincoln, Margaret, 12.50 

Ling, Mary, 2.13 

Lipinski, Tara, 12.1 

Little, Jean, 7.40 

Little, Mimi Otey, 4.84 

Littlesugar, Amy, 3.39, 11.52 

Livingston, Myra Cohn, 10.38 

Llewellyn, Claire, 7.16 

Locker, Thomas, 10.43 

Lodge, Bernard, 8.45 

Loewer, Peter, 7.17 

Lomas Garza, Carmen, 4.14 

London, Jonathan, 2.40, 5.68, 5.111 

Long, Barbara, 12.11 

Loomis, Christine, 8.46 

Lorbiecki, Marybeth, 5.20, 8.47, 20.3, 20.38 

Losi, Carol A., 9.17 

Love, Ann, 12.46, 12.47 

Lowell, Susan, 8.12, 8.13 

Lowry, Linda, 5.22 

Luenn, Nancy, 4.15, 4.104 

Lyon, George Ella, 13.45 



Maass, Robert, 1.64 
Machado, Ana Maria, 8.48 
Mackel, Kathy, 5.104 
Macquitty, Miranda, 2.41 
Macy, Sue, 12.21 
Maganzini, Christy, 9.22 
Mahy, Margaret, 7.12, 11.9 
Malam, John, 1.45 
Malotki, Ekkehart, 3.156 
Mamchur, Carolyn, 7.88 
Marcus, Leonard S., 13.46 
Marrin, Albert, 3.40, 3.110 
Marsh, T.J., 7.8 



Martin, Ann M., 6.80, 6.81, 6.82 
Martin, Bill, Jr., 13.38 
Martin, Rafe, 3.157 
Martinez, Victor, 20.4 
Marton, Jirina, 14.31 
Marx, Trish, 20.48 
Marzollo, Jean, 13.65 
Mason, Adrienne, 1.46 
Masurel, Claire, 9.5 
Matas, Carol, 5.42 
Matcheck, Diane, 3.41 
Matsumoto, Lisa, 14.32 
Mavor, Salley, 10.18 
Max, Jill, 3.158 
Mayer, Marianna, 12.56 
Ma)mard, Christopher, 1.65 
Mazer, Harry, 4.86 
Mazer, Norma Fox, 4.85 
McCully, Emily Arnold, 3.42, 5.43, 5.128, 
20.30, 20.31 

McCutcheon, John, 4.69 
McDonald, Megan, 3.159 
McFarlane, Brian, 12.30 
McGrath, Barbara Barbieri, 9.6, 9.29 
McGuffee, Michael, 20.25 
McKelvey, Douglas Kaine, 5.143 
McKissack, Patricia C., 4.16, 5.79 
McMillan, Bruce, 2.42, 9.23 
McMullan, Kate, 14.25 
McPhail, David, 8.49 
Medearis, Angela Shelf, 10.29, 15.6 
Melmed, Laura Krauss, 4.17 
Meltzer, Milton, 5.24 
Mercredi, Momingstar, 2.43 
Metzger, Steve, 6.83 
Micklethwait, Lucy, 11.55 
Miller, Brandon Marie, 1.25 
Miller, Debbie S., 2.44 
Miller, Dorothy Reynolds, 13.66 
Miller, William, 20.26 
Mills, Claudia, 6.51, 7.56 
Minor, Wendell, 2.45 
Miranda, Anne, 3.160, 11.4 
Mitchell, Barbara, 4.38 
Mitchell, Claudette, 7.52 
Mitchell, David, 12.31 
Mitchell, Margaree King, 20.27 
Mitchell, Rhonda, 4.39 
Mochizuki, Ken, 20.28 
Modarressi, Mitra, 8.51 
Moore, Lilian, 10.49 
Mora, Pat, 10.44, 10.53, 20.39 
Moreillon, Judi, 3.210 
Moreton, Daniel, 3.132 



5 - 8 ' 5 ' 



560 



Author Index 



Morey, Janet Nomura, 5.44 
Morgan, Rowland, 9.24 
Morgan, Terri, 12.17 
Morin, Paul, 7.90 
Morris, Juddi, 3.95 
Morrissey, Peter, 12.31 
Morton, Christine, 7.18 
Moss, Cynthia, 2.46 
Moss, Francis, 1.36 
Moss, Marissa, 6.69 
Most, Bernard, 13.18, 13.19 
Mott, Evelyn Clarke, 3.211 
Mugford, Simon, 1.35 
Munsch, Robert, 6.12 
Murphy, Jim, 3.121 

Murphy, Stuart J., 9.15, 9.18, 9.19, 9.30, 9.31 

Myers, Steve, 1.31 

Myers, Walter Dean, 5.112, 10.19 



Napoli, Donna Jo, 5.129 

Naylor, Phyllis Reynolds, 5.134, 6.59, 8.52 

Neimark, Anne E., 13.47 

Neuschwander, Cindy, 9.25 

Newman, Barbara, 11.65 

Nichelason, Margery G., 1.39 

Nichols, Richard, 3.212 

Nicholson, Nicholas B. A., 11.37 

Nicholson, Sue, 7.6 

Nicoll, David, 2.47 

Nikola-Lisa, W., 13.20 

Nitz, Kristin Wolden, 12.26 

Nivola, Claire A., 5.45 

Nodelman, Perry, 6.52, 20.40 

Nolan, Dennis, 3.161 

Nolen, Jerdine, 14.10 

Normandin, Christine, 3.186 

Numeroff, Laura J., 4.18 

Nunez, Sandra, 20.48 

Nye, Naomi Shihab, 10.54 



Parker, David, 20.15 
Parker, Steve, 1.50 
Parks, Rosa, 3.96, 3.97 
Pascal, Francine, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86 
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw, 1.66 
Paterson, Katherine, 3.13, 14.53 
Paulsen, Gary, 3.111, 14.45 
Peck, Richard, 4.59, 14.54 
Pedersen, Ted, 1.36 
Perez, Eduardo, 12.31 
Peterson, Julienne, 3.163 
Petty, Kate, 1.18 
Pfeffer, Susan Beth, 14.55 
Pfeffer, Wendy, 2.17 
Pfitsch, Patricia Curtis, 3.44 
Philip, Neil, 3.213, 5.46, 10.56 
Pierce, Tamora, 14.56 
Pilkey, Dav, 8.14 

Pinkney, Andrea Davis, 3.72, 11.21 

Pinkney, Brian, 8.53 

Pippen, Scottie, 12.2 

Pirotta, Saviour, 2.18 

Plain, Ferguson, 4.134 

Platt, Richard, 1.13 

Plourde, Lynn, 8.54 

Polacco, Patricia, 7.79, 7.80 

Pollock, Penny, 14.11 

Pomerantz, Charlotte, 14.12 

Poole, Josephine, 5.29 

Porter, Gracie, 7.52 

Prebeg, Rick A., 2.35 

Prelutsky, Jack, 10.4, 10.39 

Presilla, Maricel E., 11.56 

Pringle, Laurence, 1.26, 2.20, 6.3 

Pryor, Bonnie, 3.45 

Pullman, Philip, 13.54 

Purdy, Carol, 3.215 



Quigley, James, 7.45 



Older, Jules, 13.21 
Olney, Ross R., 12.17 
Omerod,Jan, 10.30 
Oppel, Kenneth, 14.44 
Orozco, Jose-Luis, 10.55 
Orr, Katherine, 1.48, 1.49 
Osborn, Kevin, 12.28 
Otto, Carolyn, 2.48 



Pandell, Karen, 13.22 
Parillo, Tony, 11.53 



Raber, Thomas R., 12.17 
Rael, Elsa Okon, 8.15 
Rafkin, Louise, 12.22 
Ramirez, Michael Rose, 3.164 
Rankin, Laura, 9.9 
Rapp, Adam, 20.5 
Raschka, Chris, 8.16 
Rassmus, Jens, 14.33 
Rathmann, Peggy, 8.17 
Reed, Gregory, 3.97 
Reeder, Carolyn, 3.123 
Rees, Elizabeth M., 6.88 



586 . 



Author Index 



561 



Reid, Struan, 1.14 

Reiser, Lynn, 13.39 

Reiss, Kathryn, 14.57 

Rendon, Marcie R., 3.214 

Ricceri, David, 13.3 

Ridlon, Mard, 10.5 

Riggio, Anita, 3.46 

Ringgold, Faith, 14.13 

Robb, Laura, 10.20 

Roberts, Willo Davis, 13.67, 13.68 

Rochelle, Belinda, 7.91 

Rockwell, Anne, 6.18 

Rodriguez, Alex, 12.2 

Rodriguez, Luis, 20.7 

Rogers, Fred, 4.70 

Rogers, Sally, 11.19 

Rohmann, Eric, 14.14 

Romero, Maritza, 7.69 

Roop, Peter, 3.99 

Root, Phyllis, 8.18, 13.23 

Rosa-Casanova, Sylvia, 4.19 

Rosales, Melodye, 3.216 

Rosen, Michael J., 3.165, 7.70 

Rosenberg, Liz, 13.24 

Rosenberg, Maxine, 1.30 

Ross, Kathy, 12.51, 12.57 

Ross, Michael E., 1.51, 1.52, 1.53 

Roundhill, Clare, 11.54 

Rowe, John A., 8.19 

Rowling,]. K., 14.46 

Rumford, James, 3.47, 11.44 

Russell, Ching Yeimg, 3.217 

Russo, Marisabina, 4.71 

Ryan, Pam Munoz, 3.48, 3.98, 10.14 

Ryder, Joanne, 2.51 

Rylant, Cynthia, 4.122, 7.48, 7.49, 8.55, 
10.33, 13.8, 13.48 



Sachar, Louis, 13.55 
Saenz, Benjamin Alire, 4.21 
Salvadori, Mario, 1.44 
San Souci, Robert D., 3.135, 3.136, 3.137, 
14.34 

Sanders, Pete, 1.31 
Sandoval, Dolores, 8.56 
Sandved, KjeU B., 7.28 
Sapphire, 20.49 
Sauvain, Philip, 1.54 
Savage, Jeff, 12.17 
Savageau, Cheryl, 4.123 
Say, Allen, 4.75, 11.45 
Schami, Rafik, 14.35 
Scheffler, Ursel, 7.41 



Schertle, Alice, 10.6 

Schlein, Miriam, 9.32 

Schnakenberg, Robert, 12.17 

Schneider, Antoni, 5.144 

Schnur, Steven, 13.9 

Schroeder, Alan, 3.14 

Schwartz, David M., 9.26 

Schwartz, Sara, 13.3 

Scieszka, Jon, 8.20, 14.58 

Scott, Ann Herbert, 6.61 

Scott, Elaine, 4.22 

Scott, Steve, 11.11 

Senisi, Ellen, 20.59 

Sgouros, Charissa, 4.124 

Shahan, Sherry, 5.116 

Shaik, Fatima, 11.15 

Shange, Ntozake, 5.117, 20.16 

Shannon, David, 8.21, 14.15 

Shannon, George, 7.30 

Shannon, Margaret, 8.57 

Sharmat, Marjorie Weinman, 13.69 

Shaughnessy, Diane, 5.32 

Shaw, Eve, 4.23 

Sherrow, Victoria, 3.100 

Shirley, Jean, 13.40 

Shreve, Susan, 6.25 

Sierra, Judy, 10.34 

Silverman, Erica, 3.218 

Silverstein, Alvin, 2.52 

Silverstein, Virginia, 2.52 

Simms, Laura, 6.14 

Simon, Seymour, 1.27, 2.22, 2.23 

Sis, Peter, 3.74 

Sisalu, Elinor Batezat, 20.32 

Skurzynski, Gloria, 13.56 

Slate, Joseph, 6.36, 9.33 

Sloan, Peter, 7.50 

Sloan, Sheryl, 7.50 

Sloat, Teri, 11.6 

Smith, Rosie, 8.62 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk, 3.101 

Snyder, Zilpha Keatley, 5.81 

Sola, Michele, 11.38 

Soto, Gary, 4.25, 8.58 

Speed, Toby, 7.19, 13.25 

Spinelli, Jerry, 5.82, 20.41 

Spinger, Nancy, 14.47 

Spivak, Dawnine, 10.63 

Springer, Jane, 20.17 

St. George, Judith, 3.49 

Stanley, Diane, 3.15, 3.167, 8.59 

Stanley, Jerry, 20.21 

Steig, William, 8.60 

Steiner, Barbara A., 2.53 



562 



Author Index 



Steptoe, Javaka, 4.26 
Steptoe, John, 20.6 
Stevens, Jan Romero, 4.107 
Stewart, Sarah, 3.16 
Stine, R. L., 6.90, 6.91 
Stone, Lynn, 2.54 
Stroud, Virginia, 7.35 
Swain, Gwenyth, 3.50 
Swann, Brian, 10.58 
Swanson, Diane, 3.102 
Swanson, Susan Marie, 7.82 
Swarthout, Glendon, 5.83 
Swarthout, Kathryn, 5.83 


Walton, Darwin M., 3.219 
Ward, Jennifer, 7.8 

Warner, Gertrude Chandler, 6.93, 6.94 

Warren, Scott, 3.220 

Waters, Kate, 3.18 

Watts, Jeri Hanel, 4.28 

Weate, Jeremy, 5.36 

Weatherby, Mark Alan, 14.18 

Wells, Rosemary, 3.53, 4.129, 6.49 

Wells, Ruth, 4.40 

Wetterer, Margaret, 1.19 

Whal, Jan, 14.38 

Whatley, Bruce, 8.62 

Whelan, Gloria, 3.19 

White, Ruth, 13.58 


Tafuri, Nancy, 7.4 
Takao, Yuko, 11.16 
Takaya, Julie, 5.130 
Tanaka, Shelley, 2.25 
Tarpley, Natasha Anastasia, 8.61 
Taylor, Barbara, 2.56 
Taylor, Harriet Peck, 3.168 
Teague, Mark, 14.17 
Temko, Florence, 12.58 
Thomas, Jane Resh, 5.93 
Thomas, Rob, 20.42 
Thomassie, Tynia, 11.60 
Thomley, Stew, 12.17 
Tillage, Leon Walter, 20.18 
Tobias, Tobi, 7.36 
Torres, Ley la, 4.108 
Townsend, Brad, 12.17 
Tudor, Tasha, 5.135 
Tunnell, Michael O., 3.51, 5.119 
Turner, Ann, 10.22 


Wick, Walter, 1.55 

Wilbur, Richard, 13.27 

Wilkes, Angela, 11.34 

Wilkinson, Philip, 1.15 

Williams, Rianna M., 3.54 

Williams, Suzanne, 7.87 

Wilson, Colin, 1.20 

Wilson, Nancy Hope, 20.56 

Wing, Natasha, 4.72 

Winner, Cherie, 1.56 

Winslow, Vicki, 20.29 

Winter, Jeanette, 11.50 

Winthrop, Elizabeth, 4.73 

Wolf, Bernard, 5.121 

Wolff, Virginia E., 20.43 

Wong, Janet, 4.76 

Wood, Audrey, 14.20 

Wood, Nancy, 11.46 

Woodtor, Dee Parmer, 4.53 

Wright-Frierson, Virginia, 2.26, 2.27 

Wyeth, Sharon Dennis, 8.64, 20.8 


Vail, Rachel, 13.26 
Van Camp, Richard, 2.57, 20.60 
Van Laan, Nancy, 3.169 
Van Leeuwen, Jean, 6.27, 7.95 
Vick, Helen Hughes, 3.52 
Viera, Linda, 2.58 
Viola, Herman J., 3.103, 3.124 
Voigt, Cynthia, 6.31 


Yaccarino, Dan, 7.22, 13.3 
Yamane, Linda, 3.221 
Yee, Paul, 4.61 
Yee, Tammy, 5.137 
Yep, Laurence, 7.62 

Yolen, Jane, 4.41, 4.125, 5.133, 10.46, 10.50, 
10.51, 14.21, 14.48 
Young, Ed, 3.138, 3.171, 11.40 


Waite, Michael R, 5.136 
Walker, Sally M., 5.35 
Walking Turtle, Eagle, 3.170 
Wallace, Barbara Brooks, 13.57 
Walsh, Ellen Stoll, 7.86 
Walter, Virginia, 20.55 


Zamorano, Ana, 4.109 
Zanzarella, Marianne, 12.55 
Zaunders, Bo, 5.48 
Ziefert, Harriet, 9.20 



588 



563 



Illustrator Index 



Adinolfi, JoAnn, 6.39, 7,45 
Aguilar, Dugan, 3.221 
Allen, Joe, 2,38 

Allen, Thomas B,, 10.48, 11,13 
Andersen, Bethanne, 4.47, 5.24 
Anderson, Peter, 2.47 
Andreasen, Dan, 5,50 
Arnold, Arthur, 1.1 
Arnold, Jeanne, 4,107 
Aruego, Jose, 10,34 
Ayliffe, Alex, 10.25 



Baca, Maria, 3.126 
Bad Heart Bull, Amos, 5.8 
Barnard, Alan, 2,25 
Barnard, Bryn, 3.103 
Barrett, Angela, 5,29 
Barringer, Sarah, 7,18 
Bash, Barbara, 2.40 
Beddows, Eric, 8.6 
BellviUe, Cheryl Walsh, 3,214 
Bender, Robert, 7,7 
Benson, Linda, 5.72 
Berner, Rotraut Susane, 9,14 
Bernhard, Durga, 4,110 
Birmingham, Christian, 2.67 
Black, Jackie, 3.54 
Blake, Robert J„ 10,22 
Bluthenthal, Diana Cain, 7.44 
Bolam, Emily, 9,20 
Bolster, Rob, 9,6 
Bonson, Richard, 1,13 
Boudreau, Ray, 1.46 
Bowen, Betsy, 3.169 
Brickman, Robin, 2,17 
Brightling, Geoff, 2,41, 2.47, 2,56 
Brown, Kathryn, 8.55 
Brown, Marc, 6.28 
Brown, Rod, 5,18 
Bryan, Diana, 13,54 



Call, Ken, 7,68 
Cameron, Scott, 3,27 
Canyon, Christopher, 2.58 
Caple, Laurie A,, 1.19, 1.51, 1.52, 1.53 
Carle, Eric, 11.51 



Carpenter, Nancy, 4.5, 4.12, 15,5 
Carpenter, Stephen, 6.11 
Casilla, Robert, 3.76, 3,129, 4,72 
Cassels, Jean, 2.6 
Catalanotto, Peter, 8,41 
Catrow, David, 6,14 
Cepeda, Joe, 3.131, 4.9 
Cha, Chue, 3.78 
Cha, Nhia Thao, 3,78 
Chan, Harvey, 4.61 
Chana, Leonard, 10,40 
Chapman, Robert, 4.15 
Chayka, Doug, 4.118 
Chiago, Michael, 3,210 
Choi, Yangsook, 3.109 
Clay, Wil, 3,96 
Clerk, Jessica, 13,20 
Coalson, Glo, 6.61 
Colbeck, Martyn, 2,46 
Cole, Henry, 13,13 
Collier-Morales, Roberta, 11.22 
Collins, Heather, 12.46, 12.47 
Colon, Raul, 3,136, 13.6, 14.34, 20.39 
Cools, Els, 14,35 
Cooper, Deborah, 20.13 
Cooper, Floyd, 3,88, 3.89, 4.16, 4.62, 4,125, 
14.8 

Corbella, Luciano, 1,16 
Couch, Greg, 3.143 
Crawford, Andy, 2.41 
Crews, Donald, 7.30, 9.32 
Crum, Robert, 20.57 
Curry, Tom, 8,13 
Curtis, Edward S., 3.213, 10,56 



Daniel, Alan, 6,12 
Daniel, Lea, 6.12 
Daugavietis, Ruta, 9,22 
Davalos, Felipe, 3.139 
Davie, Helen K., 10,41 
DeChristopher, Marlowe, 3,39 
Degen, Bruce, 1.5, 1,41, 9.2 
de Groat, Diane, 6.7 
de Kiefte, Kees, 10.38 
DeLange, Alex Pardo, 7,92 
Delf, Brian, 1.16 
Delosso, Gabriela, 3.19 




589 



564 



Illustrator Index 



Demi, 3.197, 3.144, 10.63 
Denise, Christopher, 5.133 
Desirnirii, Lisa, 10.23 
Dewey, Ariane, 10.34 
Diaz, David, 4.4, 5.17, 8.47, 13.27, 20.1, 
20.38 

Dodge, Katharine, 10.31 

Doney, Todd, 4.38 

Doolittle, Michael J., 1.12, 3.86 

Downing, Julie, 7.19 

Dugan, Karen, 4.111, 6.10, 10.13, 12.43 

Durrell, Julie, 11.61, 14.25 

Dusikova, Maja, 5.144 

Dyer, Jane, 14.21 



Eckerle, Tom, 12.55 
Eitan, Ora, 8.46 
Emery, Michael, 13.43 
Evans, Leslie, 13.9 



Faidley, Warren, 2.62 
Faria, Rosanna, 8.48 
Farnsworth, BiU, 3.99 
Feldman, Lynne, 3.174 
Felix, Monique, 11.12 
Fellows, Stan, 3.165 
Finch, Linda, 14.9 
Firth, Barbara, 5.68 
Fisher, Cynthia, 6.9, 7.39, 9.16 
Flower, Renee, 10.3 
Fowler, Christine, 3.193 
Frampton, David, 3.153 
Fricker, Steve, 1.23, 1.34 
Fuchs, Bemie, 10.28 
Furuya, Michael, 14.32 



Gaffney-Kassell, Walter, 4.8 
Garay, Luis, 3.125 
Garcia, Geronimo, 4.21 
Garcia, Stephanie, 4.25 
Garland, Michael, 3.29, 8.23 
Garrison, Barbara, 6.3 
Geter, Tyrone, 20.10 
Giannini, Enzo, 3.163 
Gilchrist, Jan Spivey, 11.60, 12.7 
Gonzalez, Maya Christina, 10.60 
Gore, Leonid, 14.3 
Graham, Jenny, 10.8 
Graham, Mark, 3.45 
GrandPre, Mary, 14.46 



Greenaway, Frank, 2.13, 2.47 
Guevara, Susan, 8.58 



Hafner, Marylin, 6.4 
Hallensleben, Georg, 8.1 
Harris, Jim, 8.12, 8.37 
Hamdon, Mike, 1.34 
Hawkes, Kevin, 11.47 
Hays, Michael, 3.135 
Hearn, Diane Dawson, 7.43 
Henderson, Douglas, 1.11 
Heo, Yoshi Yumi, 7.32 
Hewett, Richard, 2.28, 3.77 
Hewitt, Kathryn, 12.9 
Hillenbrand, Will, 3.128, 3.130, 6.66 
Hills, Tad, 10.49 

Himler, Ronald, 2.53, 3.36, 3.101 
Hincks, Gary, 1.45 
Holder, John, 1.23 

Holm, Sharon Lane, 3.199, 12.42, 12.57 

Honeywood, Vamette R, 7.38 

Howard, Arthur, 7.48 

Howard, Kim, 3.202 

Hu, Ying-Hwa, 7.91, 20.45 

Huang, Zhong-Yang, 7.93 

Hull, Richard, 10.24 

Himter, Anne, 4.41 

Husted, Marty, 10.26 

Hynes, Robert, 4.123 



Ingpen, Robert, 3.61 
Ito, Yoriko, 5.136 



Jenkins, Steve, 10.44 
Johnson, Dolores, 4.53 
Johnson, Larry, 20.27 
Johnson, Nancy Jo, 3.198 
Johnson, Paul Brett, 5.132 
Josey, Rod, 9.24 
Josey, Kira, 9.24 
Judkis, Jim, 4.70 



Kaminsky, Jef, 8.52 
Karas, G. Brian, 8.59, 14.22 
Kastner, Jill, 3.203 
Keith, Doug, 12.2 
Kelley, Gary, 11.27 
Kelley, True, 1.3 
Kellogg, Steven, 7.87 



'590 



Illustrator Index 



565 



Kendall, Russ, 3.18 
Kennedy, Doug, 8.43 
Kiesler, Kate, 10.1, 10.2 
King Moreno, Rene, 9.8 
King, Andy, 12.26 
King, Dave, 2.13, 2.47, 7.33 
Kiuchi, Tatsuro, 3.157 
Kleven, Elisa, 10.55 
Kraus, Bambi D., 3.212 
Krudop, Walter Lyon, 10.10 
Kyle, David, 12.26 



La Braca, Judy, 10.37 

Lacapa, Michael, 3.156 

LaMarche, Jim, 4.17 

Lambert, Jonathan, 13.4 

Lambert, Paulette Livers, 3.22, 3.215 

Lamut, Sonja, 14.25 

Lawman, Peter, 5.36 

Lee, Dom, 20.28 

Lee, Paul, 3.26 

Levin, Ted, 10.47 

Levine, Melinda, 12.51 

Lewin, Ted, 3.192, 10.50 

Lewis, E. B., 4.6, 4.30, 8.61, 11.15, 20.6 

Lill, Debra, 10.20 

Lippincott, Gary A., 14.41 

Lisker, Emily, 10.52 

Littlechild, George, 2.57, 20.60 

Litzinger, Rosanne, 8.26 

Lloyd, Megan, 2.48 

Lobel, Anita, 14.12 

Loewer, Jean, 7.17 

Lopez, Loretta, 13.35 

Lynch, P. J., 3.34, 3.141 



Maas, Robert, 3.130 
MacCarthy, Patricia, 7.12 
Malone, Peter, 7.36 
Manning, Jane, 7.10 
Marschall, Ken, 1.4 
Marshall, Felicia, 4.28 
Marstall, Bob, 2.20 
Mathis, Melissa Bay, 11.19 
Matthews, Derek, 2.47 
Masiello, Ralph, 3.98, 10.14 
Mazzola, Frank, Jr., 9.6 
McCarty, Peter, 8.7 
McCully, Emily Arnold, 3.30 
McCurdy, Michael, 3.119 
McGaw, Laurie, 7.88 



McGinley-Nally, Sharon, 9.10 
McGrath, Leslie, 12.22 
McNally, Darren, 2.43 
Meade, Holly, 3.21, 4.112 
Medlock, Scott, 10.17 
Merrell, Patrick, 9.17 
Micich, Paul, 3.31 

Migdale, Lawrence, 3.204, 3.205, 5.13, 
12.20 

Miller, Margaret, 4.22 
Minor, Wendell, 4.102 
Mistry, Nilesh, 2.18 
Mitchell, Rhonda, 4.11 
Moore, Robin, 3.123 
Morehouse, Henry B., 9.27 
Morin, Paul, 3.58 
Moser, Barry, 3.201, 9.28 
Moser, Cara, 3.201, 9.28 
Moss, Marissa, 9.26 
Munoz, William, 1.66 
Munro, Roxie, 5.48 
Munsinger, Lynn, 4.18 
Murdocca, Sal, 13.12 
Myers, Christopher, 5.112, 10.19 



Nadler, Ellis, 2.47 
Nash, Scott, 13.26 

National Basketball Association, 12.24 

Negrin, Fabian, 5.64 

Nickle,John, 13.11 

Noon, Steve, 3.69 

Nunn, Laura Silverstein, 2.52 



O'Brien, Anne Sibley, 7.21 
O'Brien, John, 12.29 
O'Keefe, Mary, 3.50 
O'Leary, David, 2.3 
Oiler, Erika, 8.2 
O'Malley, Kevin, 6.32, 8.18 
Otani, June, 5.130 



Pang, Alex, 1.35 
Paparone, Pamela, 9.5 
Parker, Robert Andrew, 7.76, 20.35 
Parker, Ron, 2.4 
Parkins, David, 13.23 
Paschkis, Julie, 4.69 
Patrick, Pamela, 4.31 
Pedersen, Judy, 7.66, 20.54 
Pica, Steve, 6.68 



591 



566 



Illustrator Index 



Pilkey, Dav, 8.27 
Pinkney, Brian, 3.72, 3.137, 11.21 
Pinkney, Jerry, 3.14 
Pinkney, Myles C., 13.29 
Plecas, Jennifer, 7.40, 14.55 
Plewes, Andrew, 3.148 
Popp, K. Wendy, 20.3 
Porter, Janice Lee, 5.22 
Potter, Giselle, 8.31,11.17 
Priceman, Marjorie, 8.15, 8.39 
Primavera, Elise, 8.5, 14.10 



Ramsey, Marcy D., 20.56 

Rand, Ted, 3.51, 4.127, 10.6, 10.42 

Ransome, James E., 3.38, 10.29, 15.6, 20.33 

Ray, Deborah Kogan, 3.115, 20.22 

Ray, Jane, 2.10 

Rayevsky, Robert, 14.30 

Remkiewicz, Frank, 6.30, 7.55, 9.30 

Rendon, Maria, 10.58 

Ritz, Karen, 20.58 

Roberts, Richard S., 3.91 

Roche, Denis, 6.38 

Rockwell, Lizzy, 6.18 

Rodanas, Kristina, 3.149 

Roeckelein, Katrina, 20.55 

Root, Barry, 4.37, 13.25 

Rosenberry, Vera, 13.24 

Ross, Christine, 4.124 

Ross, Tony, 6.67 

Roth, Robert, 4.19 

Roth, Susan, 20.18 

Rothman, Michael, 2.51 

Ruffins, Reynold, 6.46, 11.6 

Rumford, James, 11.44 



Sabuda, Robert, 14.2 
Saint James, Synthia, 10.15 
Sanchez, Enrique, 10.53 
Sandford, John, 3.194 
Sandin, Joan, 4.73 
Sanfilippo, Margaret, 3.164 
Schachner, Judith Byron, 11.3 
Schindler, S. D., 2.33, 3.159 
Schoenherr, Ian, 11.52 
Schoenherr, John, 8.54 
Schwartz, Amy, 8.38 
Schwartz, Carol, 12.56 
Schweninger, Ann, 6.27 
Selznick, Brian, 3.48 
Severance, Lyn, 13.21 
Shahan, Sherry, 1.56 



Sheban, Chris, 14.38 
Shed, Greg, 4.129, 13.38 
Sheehan, Nancy, 13.22 
Shield, Christopher, 7.16 
Shone, Rob, 1.50 
Shulevitz, Uri, 3.142 
Silva, Simon, 6.45, 7.23 
Simont, Marc, 7.37 
Slavin, Bill, 2.66, 12.30 
Small, David, 3.16 
Smith, Lane, 8.20, 14.58 
So, Meilo, 10.39 

Soentpiet, Chris K., 3.105, 3.114, 8.64, 
13.45, 20.8, 20.9 
Sorensen, Henri, 5.111 
Spackman, Jeff, 14.25 
Speirs, John, 9.19, 13.33 
Spengler, Kenneth, 7.8 
Spom, Michael, 5.117, 20.16 
Stammen, JoEllen McAllister, 13.1 
Staub, Leslie, 8.9 
Stemple, Jason, 10.46, 10.51 
Stephens, Pat, 2.36 
Steptoe, Javaka, 4.26 
Stevens, Janet, 3.160, 11.4 
Stevenson, Harvey, 4.126 
Stevenson, James, 10.4 
Stevenson, Sucie, 7.49 
Stock, Catherine, 7.56 
Stone, Peter C., 10.36 
Streich, Oliver, 14.35 
Sullivan, Edward, 20.25 
Suzan, Gerardo, 4.120 
Sweet, Melissa, 6.17, 7.54, 9.7 



Tauss, Herbert, 5.20 
Taylor, Cheryl Munro, 10.11 
Taylor, Mike, 7.16 
Taylor, Stephen, 20.14 
Teague, Mark, 14.20 
Teresa Meloni, Maria, 11.62 
Thompson, Ellen, 4.44, 6.16 
Tiegreen, Alan, 12.44, 12.48 
Tilley, Debbie, 9.12 
Tomblin, Gill, 11.65 
Trimble, Stephen, 1.6 
Truesdell, Sue, 8.42 
Tseng, Jean, 10.61 
Tseng, Mou-sien, 10.61 
Tusa, Tricia, 9.15 



592 



Ulrich, George, 9.18 



Illustrator Index 



567 



Valientes, Corazones, 13.39 
Valiguette, Matthew, 7.70 
van Mast, Ruth Scholte, 7.41 
Van Wright, Cornelius, 7.91, 20.45 
Van Zyle, Jon, 2.44 
Vasconcellos, Daniel, 12.38 
Vasquez, Carlos, 20.7 
Vivas, Julie, 4.109 
Von Buhler, Cynthia, 11.37 



Waldherr, Kris, 8.33 

Ward, John, 20.26 

Warhola, James, 14.6 

Wamick, Elsa, 2.22, 2.23 

Watling, James, 3.24, 3.84 

Watson, Maru, 5.67 

Wells, Daryl, 4.36 

Westcott, Nadine Bernard, 13.36 

Whyte, Mary, 7.95 

Wick, Walter, 13.65 



Widener, Terry, 12.3 
Wilhelm, Hans, 6.83 
Wilson, Sharon, 20.32 
Winter, Jeanette, 3.178 
Wolfe, Art, 13.22 
Wolff, Ashley, 6.36, 9.33 
Wood, Clare, 1.26 
Wood, Michele, 3.90 
Woodruff, Liza, 9.25 



Yoshi, 4.40 
Young, Ed, 14.11 
Young, Jerry, 2.47 
Young, Selina, 11.9 



Zallinger, Jean Day, 13.2 

Zhang, Christopher Zhong-Yuan, 3.217 

Ziehler-Martin, Richard, 3.150 




593 



569 



Subject Index 



Aardema, Verna, 13.43 
Aardvarks, 6.2 

Abandonment and neglect, 4.81, 4.83, 4.90, 
8.19, 8.55, 14.46, 14.48, 20.5, 20.49 
Aborigines, 3.61 

Acceptance and belonging, 4.6, 4.10, 4.37, 
4.66, 4.68, 4.70, 4.75, 4.80, 5.81, 5.133, 

8.9. 8.29. 8.38. 8.40. 8.42. 11.37. 13.49, 
14.57, 20.33 

Accidents, 8.52, 13.23 
Activism, 5.2, 5.38 
Adaptation — Animal, 2.29, 2.48 
Adolescents (see Teenagers) 

Adoption, 4.69, 4.75 
Adoptive and foster families, 4.64, 4.68, 
4.69, 5.102 
Adultery, 4.83 

Adventure, 2.40, 3.35, 3.41, 3.51, 3.52, 

3.128, 3.141, 3.153, 3.154, 3.155, 3.168, 
3.201, 4.41, 4.59, 4.112, 5.48, 5.73, 5.74, 
5.83, 5.109, 5.116, 5.129, 5.133, 5.134, 

5.136. 5.137. 6.77. 6.78. 6.94. 7.39. 7.49, 
7.54, 7.55, 7.62, 7.67, 8.7, 8.17, 8.46, 
8.52, 9.10, 10.24, 11.9, 11.12, 13.42, 
13.61, 13.62, 13.64, 14.1, 14.10, 14.12, 

14.17, 14.18, 14.21, 14.32, 14.34, 14.35, 
14.40, 14.43, 14.44, 14.45, 14.46, 14.53, 
14.54, 14.56, 14.57, 14.58 

Africa, 2.2, 2.35, 2.37, 3.26, 3.26, 3.89, 3.143, 
5.9, 5.73, 14.8 

African Americans, 1.51, 3.26, 3.72, 3.83, 
3.89, 3.90, 3.91, 3.93, 3.96, 3.131, 3.214, 
3.216, 3.219, 4.6, 4.9, 4.11, 4.12, 4.16, 
4.26, 4.33, 4.34, 4.35, 4.36, 4.39, 4.52, 
4.68, 4.126, 5.15, 5.16, 5.17, 5.18, 5.84, 
5.112, 5.117, 7.38, 7.52, 8.41, 8.48, 8.53, 
8.61, 10.15, 10.19, 10.25, 10.29, 11.60, 
12.5, 14.8, 14.13, 20.3, 20.10, 20.12, 
20.16, 20.18, 20.20, 20.26, 20.27, 20.42, 

20.44. 20.45. 20.49, 20.57 
African savannah, 2.2, 2.6, 2.35, 2.37 
After-school programs, 6.68 
Agassi, Andre, 12.4, 12.17 
Agriculture, 2.38, 3.29, 3.92, 3.94, 3.118, 

7.18 

Alaska, 2.42, 2.44, 3.212, 5.116, 11.6 
Alcohol, 1.31, 6.81 
Alcoholism, 4.74, 4.81, 5.93 



Alligators, 2.47 

Alliteration, 13.12, 13.13, 13.18, 13.19, 13.24 
Alphabet, 6.2, 7.23, 7.28, 7.30, 7.32, 7.33, 

7.35, 7.36, 9.26, 10.8, 13.9, 13.16, 13.22, 
13.24, 13.27 

Amusement parks, 6.30 
Anatomy — Animal, 1.50 
Anatomy — Human, 1.23, 1.25, 1.27, 1.28 
Anatomy — Insects, 2.41 
Angels, 8.14, 20.45 
Animal rights, 6.51, 20.60 
Animals, 1.45, 1.46, 1.48, 1.50, 1.53, 2.2, 2.4, 
2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.13, 2.20, 2.21, 2.23, 

2.28. 2.31. 2.32. 2.34. 2.35, 2.36, 2.39, 
2.40, 2.42, 2.44, 2.47, 2.48, 2.51, 2.52, 
2.54, 2.58, 3.102, 3.138, 3.148, 3.160, 
3.165, 3.168, 3.186, 3.202, 4.18, 4.104, 
4.107, 4.112, 5.13, 5.35, 5.68, 5.82, 

5.123. 5.131. 5.135. 5.136. 6.2. 6.51, 
6.70, 7.2, 7.3, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.12, 

7.18. 7.22. 7.51, 7.67, 7.90, 8.1, 8.20, 
8.22, 8.25, 8.27, 8.54, 9.4, 9.7, 9.30, 

10.4, 10.24, 10.30, 10.31, 10.37, 10.39, 
10.42, 10.44, 10.47, 11.6, 11.12, 11.19, 
11.28, 11.31, 11.32, 11.35, 12.58, 13.1, 
13.4, 13.8, 13.17, 13.21, 13.22, 13.24, 
13.26 (see also specific animals) 

Antarctica, 1.17, 10.34 
Anthropology, 3.62, 5.129, 20.50 
Ants, 9.17 
Apartheid, 20.32 
Appalachia, 3.53 

Aquatic life, 1.43, 1.48, 1.54, 1.57, 2.23, 

2.36, 2.42, 2.44, 2.47, 2.51, 5.133, 5.137, 
10.33, 10.35, 10.37, 10.39, 10.50, 11.6, 
14.14 

Archaeology, 1.1, 1.12, 1.14, 3.52, 3.82, 3.86 
Architecture, 1.35 
Arctic, 4.102, 5.125, 9.4 
Arizona, 3.52, 4.73 

Artists, 11.36, 11.37, 11.38, 11.41, 11.45, 

11.46. 11.47. 11.48. 11.49. 11.50. 11.51, 
11.52, 11.53, 11.54, 11.55 

Art — Nature in, 2.45 
Arts and crafts, 3.199, 3.207, 11.40, 12.48, 
12.51, 12.57, 12.58, 13.28 
Arts and crafts — Basket weaving, 3.221 
Arts and crafts — Beadwork, 6.61 




594 



570 



Subject Index 



Arts and crafts — Drawing, 11.45, 11.51, 

11.54. 11.55 

Arts and crafts — Embroidery, 11.56 
Arts and crafts — Murals, 4.1, 11.48 
Arts and crafts — Origami, 4.17 
Arts and crafts — Painting, 11.36, 11.37, 

11.47. 11.49. 11.50. 11.52. 11.54. 11.55 
Arts and crafts — Papermaking, 11.44 
Arts and crafts — Pottery, 3.95, 3.221 
Arts and crafts — Quilting, 3.193 

Arts and crafts — ^Sculpture, 11.53 
Arts and crafts — ^Sewing, 11.56 
Arts and crafts — Weaving, 3.221, 11.38 
Asia {see specific countries) 

Asian Americans, 3.78, 3.83, 3.105, 3.109, 
3.171, 3.197, 3.205, 3.217, 4.61, 4.76, 
5.119, 7.62, 20.9 
Assassination, 3.87 
Astronauts, 1.3, 1.15, 2.67 
Astronomy, 1.2, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10, 1.16, 1.18, 

I. 19, 1.33, 1.37, 2.10, 2.61, 3.47, 3.74 
Athletes, 4.30, 5.17, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3, 12.5, 

12.6, 12.7, 12.9, 12.10, 12.11, 12.12, 
12.13, 12.14, 12.15, 12.16, 12.17, 12.21, 
12.23, 12.24, 12.26, 12.28, 12.36 {see 
also specific athletes) 

Attention Deficit Disorder, 6.40 
Australia, 3.61, 5.129 
Authors, 4.35, 13.40, 13.42, 13.43, 13.44, 
13.45, 13.46, 13.47, 13.48 {see also 
specific authors) 

Autism, 20.58 

Autobiographies, 3.96, 3.97, 4.14, 4.66, 

II. 51, 12.1, 12.2, 13.43, 13.44, 20.18 
{see also Biographies) 

Aztecs, 3.129 



Babies, 1.26, 1.30, 4.110, 5.85, 7.12, 7.54, 
8.19, 13.1 
Baboons, 8.1 
Baez, Joan, 7.69 
Bald eagles, 2.9 

Ballet, 11.61, 11.62, 11.64, 11.65, 13.6 
Barrio, 8.58, 11.22, 12.19, 20.4 
Baseball, 4.6, 4.28, 5.104, 6.79, 10.17, 12.18, 
12.19, 12.25, 12.26, 12.31, 12.37, 12.38 
Baseball — Fields, 12.25 
Baseball — ^History, 12.5, 12.12, 12.18 
Baseball— Players, 12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 
12.6, 12.15, 12.16, 12.17 
Basketball, 12.18, 12.24, 12.26, 12.31 
Basketball — History, 12.18 



Basketball— Players, 7.68, 12.2, 12.4, 12.7, 
12.16, 12.17 

Bats, 2.28, 7.17, 9.7, 14.44 
Baum, L. Frank, 13.48 
Bears, 2.47, 3.148, 3.168, 3.203, 4.98, 6.72, 
7.43, 8.22,8.62, 9.2, 9.19 
Beauty, 10.15, 13.58 

Bedtime, 4.41, 4.112, 5.67, 6.12, 7.95, 8.17, 
8.61, 10.31, 11.28 
Bees, 1.41, 2.8, 4.118, 8.43 
Belonging {see Acceptance and belonging) 
Bicycles, 8.34, 10.24, 12.26 
Bilingual books {see Dual-language books) 
Billiards, 9.11 

Biographies, 3.14, 3.26, 3.39, 3.40, 3.48, 

3.49, 3.50, 3.53, 3.63, 3.72, 3.74, 3.76, 
3.84, 3.91, 3.93, 3.95, 3.96, 4.35, 5.2, 

5.3, 5.8, 5.14, 5.17, 5.22, 5.29, 5.35, 

5.38, 5.39, 5.44, 5.55, 7.68, 7.69, 10.63, 
11.21, 11.47, 11.48, 11.49, 11.50, 11.51, 
12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7, 12.9, 12.10, 
12.11, 12.12, 12.13, 12.14, 12.15, 12.16, 
12.17, 12.22, 13.40, 13.41, 13.42, 13.46, 
13.47,13.48, 20.12 {see also 
Autobiographies) 

Biology, 1.23, 1.28, 1.33, 1.40, 1.41, 1.46, 
1.50, 2.56, 6.51 

Birds, 2.4, 2.9, 2.21, 2.57, 3.156, 3.164, 4.129, 
5.131, 8.19, 8.45, 10.35, 10.36, 10.39, 
12.58 

Birthdays, 3.199, 4.21, 4.33, 6.22, 6.69, 20.41 
Blindness, 13.50 
Boarding school, 3.31 
Boats {see Ships and boats) 

Bonds, Barry, 12.17 
Bosnia, 5.20 

Botany, 1.52, 1.56, 1.62, 2.56 
Boxing, 4.30 
Brain, 1.27 

Breckenridge, Mary, 3.53 
Brothers {see Siblings) 

Brown, Margaret Wise, 13.46, 13.48 
Buddha, 3.144 

Buffalo, 3.99, 3.102, 3.146, 5.13 
Buildings, 1.35 

Bullies, 6.25, 6.29, 6.34, 7.54, 8.8, 20.40 
Bunting, Eve, 13.43 
Butterflies, 2.20, 4.120, 6.45, 7.28 



Calligraphy, 11.40, 11.42 
Campfires, 8.26 
Camping, 12.46 



595 



Subject Index 



571 



Canada, 5.110, 5.126 
Cancer, 5.95, 5.141,20.53 
Capriati, Jennifer, 12.16 
Careers (see Professions and careers) 
Caribbean, 3.21, 5.111, 6.46, 10.25, 11.22 
Caring and nurturing, 4.8, 4.11, 4.62, 4.71, 
4.104, 4.110, 4.124, 5.79, 5.130, 6.4, 6.9, 
6.40, 7.70, 8.2, 8.5, 8.14, 8.15, 8.19, 

8.33, 8.35, 14.22, 14.28 
Carle, Eric, 11.51 
Carnivals and fairs, 3.195, 9.18 
Catlin, George, 3.39 

Cats, 2.6, 2.37, 2.47, 2.54, 5.134, 6.15, 7.20, 
8.24, 8.39, 8.42, 8.58, 9.28, 14.14 
Celebration, 3.157, 3.172, 3.174, 3.178, 
3.179, 3.192, 3.197, 3.199, 3.204, 3.205, 
3.217, 3.219, 4.1, 4.15, 4.25, 4.33, 4.38, 
4.53, 4.69, 7.32, 9.12, 10.60, 13.69, 

20.51 

Cemeteries, 14.3 

Censorship, 5.40 

Central America, 4.97 

Ceremonies (see Rituals and ceremonies) 

Change (see Growth and change) 

Chavez, Cesar, 5.38 
Cheetahs, 2.6, 2.37, 2.47 
Chemistry, 1.46 
Chess, 12.41 
Chicago, 4.59 
Chickens, 8.6 

Child abuse, 4.44, 4.82, 4.85, 4.86, 4.90, 
5.93, 6.56, 14.46, 20.5, 20.15, 20.30, 
20.37, 20.49 

Child labor, 3.80, 20.15, 20.17, 20.30, 20.48 
Children's rights, 3.80, 20.48 
China, 3.145, 5.43, 10.61, 14.2, 20.47 
Chinese, 3.109, 3.171, 3.197, 3.205, 3.217, 
4.61, 4.76, 4.97, 7.93, 11.40, 11.42 
Cinderella variants, 3.34, 3.130, 14.6, 14.11, 
14.43 

Circus performers, 5.128 
Cities (see Urban life; specific cities) 
Cisneros, Henry, 7.69 
Citizenship, 20.9, 20.27 
CivU rights, 3.93, 3.96, 3.97, 20.18, 20.26, 
20.27 

Civil War— U.S., 3.38, 3.46 

Class, socioeconomic, 20.52 

Class clowns, 6.10 

Class prejudice, 20.46 

Classic literature, 6.95 

Classroom activities, 6.3, 6.12, 6.36, 6.50 

Clemente, Roberto, 7.69, 12.6 



Close, Chuck, 11.49 

Clothing, 1.17, 4.36, 6.7, 6.25, 6.28, 8.25, 
14.15 

Clouds, 11.44 
Cockroaches, 3.132 
Code-switching, 4.25, 8.58 
Colorado, 3.86 
Colors, 7.20, 9.23 
Colombia, 4.108 

Conung-of-age, 3.18, 3.24, 3.34, 3.100, 

3.155, 3.179, 3.194, 3.221, 4.42, 4.44, 
4.48, 4.66, 4.81, 5.37, 5.39, 5.43, 5.71, 
5.72, 5.73, 5.76, 5.82, 5.83, 5.84, 5.102, 
6.51, 6.53, 6.59, 8.38, 13.29, 14.45, 

14.47, 14.53, 14.57, 20.4, 20.24, 20.41 
Communism, 20.47 

Community, 3.29, 3.30, 3.206, 3.214, 4.1, 
4.10, 5.46, 7.66, 7.79, 8.15, 8.64, 20.54 
Competition, 6.17, 6.88, 12.1 (see also 
Contests and competitions) 
Computers, 1.36, 7.41, 14.54 
Concerts, 11.16 
Conformity, 3.19, 5.82 
Conquest, 20.21 

Conquistadors, 3.94, 3.110, 3.125 
Conservation, 3.169, 3.206, 3.206, 3.221, 
12.46, 20.13 
Consumerism, 20.17 

Contests and competitions, 6.48, 6.61, 6.71, 
6.79, 7.54, 8.3, 8.18, 9.11, 11.38, 11.61 
Cooking, 3.178, 3.199, 3.205, 4.19, 4.33, 

4.72, 7.56, 7.92, 8.58, 9.19, 12.46, 12.55, 
12.56, 13.39, 14.20 (see also Food) 
Cooperation, 3.143, 4.71, 5.74, 6.72, 9.15, 
9.19, 20.25 

Cortes, Heman, 3.110 
Costumes, 12.50 
Cougars, 2.54 

Counting, 3.218, 7.8, 9.2, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7, 9.8, 

9.9. 9.23. 9.25. 9.29, 9.31, 9.32 
Courage, 2.46, 3.15, 3.25, 3.26, 3.36, 3.52, 

3.84. 3.96. 3.123. 3.153. 4.47. 4.104. 5.29, 
5.82, 5.83, 5.128, 5.140, 8.33, 8.43, 13.50, 
14.3, 14.35, 20.28, 20.41 

Country (see Rural life) 

Cowhands, 3.72, 8.13, 8.46, 10.28 
Cows, 13.21, 13.25, 14.6, 14.33 
Crazy Horse, 5.8 
Creativity, 6.50, 11.44, 11.45 
Cultural assimilation, 5.32, 5.91, 5.126 
Cultural differences, 3.19, 3.21, 3.125, 

3.206, 4.1, 4.9, 4.36, 4.110, 5.50, 5.126, 
20.50, 20.54 




, 596 



572 



Subject Index 



Cultural identity, 3.19, 3.22, 3.109, 3.207, 
4.1, 4.9, 4.14, 4.28, 4.38, 4.72, 4.75, 

4.76, 4.92; 4.108, 4.123, 5.22, 5.37, 5.55, 

5.91. 5.110. 7.32, 7.67, 7.90, 10.52, 
11.60, 20.1, 20.6, 20.42, 20.57 

Cultural traditions, 4.131 
Cultural understanding (see Intercultural 
understanding) 

Culture, 5.6, 7.21, 11.57, 12.42 
Culture — African American, 3.90, 3.219, 
4.9, 4.12, 4.16, 4.26, 4.33, 4.34, 4.36, 
4.39, 4.126, 7.52, 10.19, 10.29 
Culture — African, 3.90, 5.9, 5.73, 11.60, 

14.8 

Culture — Asian American, 3.78, 3.105, 
3.109,3.217, 4.76, 7.62 
Culture — Asian Indian, 4.130 
Culture — Asian, 7.32, 12.22 
Culture — Australian aboriginal, 7.90 
Culture — Caribbean, 3.21, 11.22 
Culture — Central American, 4.97 
Culture— Chinese, 3.171, 3.197, 3.205, 4.61, 
4.97, 5.43, 7.93, 10.61, 11.40, 11.42, 14.2 
Culture— Creole, 10.29 
Culture — Filipino, 3.135 
Culture — Hawaiian, 3.54 
Culture — Hispanic /Latino, 3.178, 3.179, 
3.206, 4.1, 4.4, 4.14, 4.25, 4.107, 4.108, 
4.109, 5.44, 7.92, 10.55, 11.22, 12.19 
Culture — Italian, 3.192, 6.53, 11.53 
Culture — ^Jamaican, 10.25 
Culture — ^Japanese, 3.208, 4.36, 4.84, 6.49, 
10.63 

Culture— Jewish, 3.174, 4.72, 8.15, 12.51 
Culture — Korean, 3.114 
Culture — Latin American, 11.56 
Culture — Mayan, 11.38 
Culture — Mexican American, 4.15, 4.72, 
10.53, 20.4, 20.7 

Culture — Mexican, 3.172, 5.91, 10.60, 20.1 
Culture — Middle Eastern, 10.54 
Culture — Native American, 1.12, 2.38, 

2.42, 2.43, 2.57, 3.18, 3.19, 3.22, 3.24, 
3.25, 3.27, 3.31, 3.35, 3.39, 3.40, 3.41, 
3.49, 3.58, 3.62, 3.77, 3.79, 3.82, 3.86, 
3.92, 3.94, 3.95, 3.100, 3.101, 3.102, 
3.103, 3.106, 3.159, 3.193, 3.194, 3.200, 
3.201, 3.204, 3.207, 3.210, 3.211, 3.212, 
3.214, 3.215, 3.220, 3.221, 4.38, 4.92, 

4.102. 4.123. 4.134. 5.13. 5.22. 5.32, 
5.37, 5.46, 5.50, 5.55, 5.72, 6.61, 10.40, 
10.56, 10.58, 11.41, 11.46, 12.20, 13.64, 
20.13, 20.21 



Culture — Puerto Rican, 3.164, 4.19, 20.6 
Culture — Quaker, 3.24 
Culture — Salvadoran, 13.39 
Culture — Swiss, 6.53 
Culture — Thai, 4.112 
Culture — Tibetan, 3.198 
Culture — Vietnamese, 4.127, 7.67, 20.22 
Culture — Yucatec Mayan, 3.56, 20.51 
Customs (see Family traditions; Rituals 
and ceremonies) 



Dance, 3.157, 3.203, 3.207, 3.211, 3.214, 
3.215, 4.12, 4.38, 6.88, 8.18, 10.11, 
10.55, 11.15, 11.22, 11.57, 11.60, 11.61, 
11.62, 11.64, 11.65, 12.31,13.6 
Day and night, 8.6, 8.26, 10.1 
Days of the week, 4.16 
Deafness, 3.46 

Death, 1.22, 3.178, 4.15, 4.48, 4.61, 4.81, 
4.85, 4.122, 4.124, 4.126, 4.129, 5.42, 
5.84, 5.91, 5.99, 5.102, 5.138, 5.139, 
5.140, 5.141, 5.143, 5.144, 6.68, 8.16, 
14.46 (see also Mortality) 

Degas, Edward, 11.52 
Depression, The Great, 11.13 
Desegregation, 20.29 
Deserts, 2.26, 2.34, 2.53, 3.86, 3.110, 3.129, 
3.142, 3.210, 5.74, 5.83, 5.132, 7.5, 7.8, 
10.42, 10.44, 10.47 

Determination and inner strength, 3.14, 
3.15, 3.18, 3.26, 3.36, 3.96, 4.74, 5.29, 
5.95, 7.40, 7.80, 8.3, 8.43, 9.11, 11.38, 
11.61, 12.7, 14.10, 14.35, 14.43, 20.12, 
20.16, 20.27, 20.32 
Devils, 8.18,9.14 
Difference, 20.58 
Difference — Exploring, 20.6 
Difference — ^Respect for, 8.9, 9.27, 20.16 
(see also Intercultural understanding) 
Dinosaurs, 1.11, 1.18, 2.25, 6.28, 6.83, 12.57, 
13.18, 13.19, 14.18, 14.38 
Dirt, 1.32, 1.40, 7.45 

Disabilities — Learning, 7.76, 7.80, 11.49, 
13.44, 20.58, 20.59 

Disabilities — Mental, 4.66, 4.86, 20.2 
Disabilities — Physical, 3.46, 4.65, 5.17, 

5.72, 5.102, 6.48, 12.39, 13.50, 14.40, 
20.56 

Discipline, 6.10, 6.13, 6.52, 20.40 
Discoveries, 1.1, 1.9, 1.14, 1.19, 1.25, 1.33 
Discrimination, 12.5, 12.10, 12.21, 20.29, 
20.44 (see also Prejudice and racism) 



ERIC 



597 



Subject Index 



573 



Disease, 1.25, 1.40, 5.140, 7.45 
Disease, Lou Gehrig's, 12.3 
Dissent, 5.14, 20.23, 20.30, 20.40, 20.42, 
20.43 {see also Revolution and revolt) 
Diversity, 6.49, 8.9, 12.42, 20.16 
Divorce, 4.83, 4.92, 5.71 
Divorced families, 4.65, 4.66, 4.73, 5.76, 6.67 
Doctors, 1.24 

Dogs, 5.132, 6.15, 6.95, 7.11, 7.49, 8.3, 8.8, 
8.29, 8.33, 8.39, 8.42, 8.55, 8.58, 9.5, 
10.6, 11.9, 12.38, 13.33, 13.69 
Dogsledding, 8.3 
Dolls, 5.45 
Dolphins, 4.10 
Domestic violence, 20.37 
Dragons, 14.2, 14.10 
Drama, 11.27, 11.31, 11.32, 11.34, 13.26 
Drawing {see Arts and crafts) 

Dreams, 3.143, 4.61, 9.14, 9.25, 14.20, 14.33, 
14.48 

Dreams and aspirations, 3.38, 8.53, 13.45 
Drug abuse, 4.90 
Drugs, 5.84, 20.37 

Dual-language books, 3.126, 3.139, 3.193, 
4.14, 4.15, 4.21, 4.25, 4.107, 4.109, 7.23, 
7.32, 7.92, 8.12, 9.8, 10.52, 10.55, 10.60, 
10.61, 11.22, 12.19, 13.35, 13.39 
Ducks, 3.169,5.130, 20.58 
Dust Bowl, 3.29, 4.48 



Eagles, 2.9, 2.47 
Earth, 2.1 

Earthquakes, 1.13, 1.44 
Eastman, Charles, 1.53 
Eastwood, Alice, 1.52 
Eating disorders, 6.81 
Economic disparity {see Inequality — 
Economic) 

Economics, 9.15, 9.23 
Economy— Global, 20.17 
Ecosystem, 1.48, 1.61, 2.1, 2.17, 2.27, 2.34, 
2.39, 2.44, 3.86 

Education, 3.15, 3.19, 3.22, 3.32, 3.111, 4.92, 
6.46, 8.56, 20.34, 20.44 
Educational inequalities {see Inequality — 
Educational) 

Egypt, 13.61, 14.58 
Ehlert, Lois, 13.43 
El Salvador, 13.39 

Elderly people, 4.23, 4.125, 4.131, 4.134, 
20.53, 20.56 

Elders — ^Respect for, 4.23, 4.26, 4.37, 20.56 



Electricity, 1.5, 1.41 
Elephants, 2.46, 13.36 
Ellington, Duke, 11.21 
Elves and fairies, 8.13, 14.21, 14.43 
Emancipation, 3.32, 3.111, 5.15, 5.18, 20.11, 
20.20, 20.44 {see also Freedom) 
Embarrassment, 4.37, 6.7, 7.40, 8.25 
Emotions and feelings, 10.5, 10.16, 11.40, 
13.28, 20.34, 20.58 

Endangered species — Animals, 2.2, 2.7, 
2.9, 2.28, 2.32, 2.39, 2.52, 5.137, 10.36, 
11.19, 14.32 

Endangered species — Plants, 2.7 
England, 13.57 

English language — History, 13.2 
Environment, 1.7, 2.1, 9.24, 20.13 
Environmentalism, 5.2 
Equality, 4.80, 6.52, 20.40 
Escalante, Jaime, 7.69 
Ethnic differences, 4.108, 20.54, 20.60 
Ethnicity, 4.76, 20.57 
Ewing, Patrick, 7.68 
Explorers, 1.17, 5.48, 5.125 
Extinction, 2.25 {see also Endangered 
species) 

Extinction — Animals, 1.11 
Extrasensory perception (ESP), 12.38 
Eyeglasses, 1.39 



Fables, 8.6, 8.8, 8.16, 8.20, 8.43, 10.6 
Face painting, 9.31, 12.50 
Faidley, Warren, 2.62 
Fairies {see Elves and fairies) 

Fairs {see Carnivals and fairs) 

Fairy tales, 3.130, 5.109, 7.86, 8.51, 14.13, 
14.30 

Fairy-tale variants, 14.29 {see also 
Cinderella variants) 

Families, 3.13, 3.25, 3.29, 3.31, 3.36, 3.45, 
3.56, 3.107, 3.109, 3.114, 3.115, 3.145, 
3.174, 3.179, 3.193, 3.204, 3.205, 3.207, 
3.211, 3.212, 3.214, 3.215, 3.217, 4.4, 
4.8, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.15, 4.17, 4.21, 
4.26, 4.30, 4.31, 4.35, 4.40, 4.42, 4.44, 
4.47, 4.48, 4.53, 4.58, 4.64, 4.65, 4.68, 
4.84, 4.92, 4.109, 4.122, 5.1, 5.81, 5.85, 
5.93, 5.99, 5.102, 5.104, 5.110, 5.121, 
5.144, 7.76, 7.91, 8.15, 8.34, 10.16, 
10.52, 10.54, 10.60, 11.37, 11.60, 13.8, 
13.9, 13.49, 13.55, 13.56, 13.57, 20.1, 
20.7, 20.35, 20.48, 20.53 {see also 
Adoptive and foster families; 



o 

ERIC 



598 



574 



Subject Index 



Divorced families; Interracial 
families; Multicultural families; 
Single-parent families; Stepfamilies) 
Family life, 4.5, 4.22, 4.65, 4.70, 4.71, 6.61 
Family traditions, 4.1, 4.28, 4.39, 4.53, 
4.127, 7.95, 13.39, 20.45, 20.51 
Famine, 9.13 

Fantasy, 3.143, 4.10, 4.17, 4.122, 5.109, 6.70, 
6.78, 7.96, 8.8, 8.13, 8.53, 12.41, 13.16, 
13.54, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 14.6, 14.8, 
14.10, 14.11, 14.12, 14.13, 14.14, 14.15, 
14.17, 14.18, 14.20, 14.21, 14.22, 14.25, 
14.28, 14.29, 14.30, 14.31, 14.32, 14.33, 
14.34, 14.35, 14.38, 14.40, 14.41, 14.43, 

14.44. 14.45. 14.46. 14.47. 14.48. 14.49, 
14.50, 14.51, 14.53, 14.54, 14.55, 14.56, 
14.57, 14.58 

Farm labor, 5.38, 7.23, 20.1, 20.36, 20.39 
Farms, 1.1, 3.29, 4.40, 4.42, 4.48, 4.58, 5.35, 
5.68, 5.99, 7.6, 7.7, 7.12, 7.18, 8.18, 

8.35. 8.54. 10.30. 10.48. 13.25. 13.49, 
14.10, 14.33 

Fashion, 1.39, 8.13 

Fasts and feasts, 3.172, 3.192 

Fasts and feasts — Native American, 3.211 

Fate, 3.171, 14.47 

Fathers, 4.18, 4.26, 4.31, 4.62, 4.73, 4.74, 
4.81 

Fear, 4.81, 4.82, 5.117, 6.30, 6.61, 7.37, 7.40, 
7.45, 11.24 

Feelings {see Emotions and feelings) 

Feral children, 3.63, 4.10, 4.86 
Ferrets, 2.39, 2.40 

Festivals, 20.51 {see also Rituals and 
ceremonies; Carnivals and fairs) 
Field trips, 6.40, 10.30 
Fireworks, 3.172 
First Amendment, 5.40, 20.48 
Fish, 8.16, 11.6 

Fishing, 2.42, 2.43, 3.35, 4.37, 4.104, 4.127 
Flowers, 1.52, 1.56, 1.62, 1.64 
Folktales and folklore, 3.131, 3.147, 3.160, 
3.167,6.38, 13.41 

Folktales and folklore — Armenian, 14.34 
Folktales and folklore — Asian Indian, 9.13 
Folktales and folklore — Asian, 3.144 
Folktales and folklore — Caribbean, 3.132 
Folktales and folklore — Chinese, 3.138, 
3.145, 3.171, 4.61 

Folktales and Folklore — Filipino, 3.135 
Folktales and folklore — German, 14.33 
Folktales and folklore — Hawaiian, 3.140 
Folktales and folklore — Incan, 3.153 
Folktales and folklore — Irish, 3.141 



Folktales and folklore — ^Japanese, 4.40, 
5.136, 14.31 

Folktales and folklore — Mexican, 3.139 
Folktales and folklore — Middle Eastern, 
3.130,3.142 

Folktales and folklore — Native American, 
3.146, 3.148, 3.149, 3.156, 3.157, 3.158, 
3.159, 3.201, 4.98, 10.56, 14.11, 14.28 
Folktales and folklore — Peruvian, 3.202 
Folktales and folklore — Swiss/German, 
14.35 

Folktales and folklore — Tuscan, 3.163 
Food, 2.38, 2.43, 3.92, 3.178, 3.205, 4.19, 
4.33, 4.72, 4.109, 6.49, 7.18, 7.92, 9.6, 
9.12, 10.52, 10.60, 11.3, 13.4 {see also 
Cooking) 

Football, 12.18,12.38 
Football — History, 12.13, 12.18 
Football-Players, 12.2, 12.4, 12.11, 12.16, 
12.17 

Forgiveness, 8.23 

Freedom, 3.14, 3.15, 3.123, 5.15, 8.26, 14.13, 
20.11, 20.20 {see also Emancipation) 
Friends, 7.49, 7.52, 7.55, 8.47 
Friendship, 2.18, 3.13, 3.161, 3.193, 4.30, 
4.38, 4.58, 4.67, 4.102, 4.125, 4.126, 
4.131, 5.75, 5.76, 5.91, 5.110, 5.117, 
5.123, 5.133, 5.141, 6.17, 6.27, 6.28, 6.29, 
6.31, 6.66, 6.73, 6.74, 6.75, 6.76, 6.80, 
6.81, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 6.88, 6.89, 7.10, 
7.40, 7.44, 7.48, 7.54, 8.24, 8.30, 8.45, 
9.18, 10.16, 10.18, 11.13, 11.35, 13.50, 
13.55, 13.57, 13.58, 13.66, 14.1, 14.18, 
14.21, 14.40, 14.50, 14.51, 14.56, 20.46 
Frogs, 3.155, 7.43, 7.86, 8.24, 11.31, 13.4 



Galileo, 3.74 

Games, 3.199, 7.3, 7.52, 12.41, 12.42, 12.43, 
12.44, 12.45, 12.46, 12.47, 12.48 
Gangs, 5.71, 5.117, 20.4, 20.33 
Gardening, 1.61, 1.64, 3.16, 7.66, 13.39, 
14.4, 20.54 
Gargoyles, 8.14 
Gehrig, Lou, 12.3 

Gender roles, 3.15, 3.41, 3.44, 3.48, 3.52, 
3.53, 4.18, 20.42, 20.45, 20.52, 20.53 
Geography, 1.45, 1.54, 3.89, 10.24 
Geology, 1.44, 1.45, 1.49, 1.65, 2.58 
Ghosts, 13.62, 13.64, 14.51, 14.52 
Giants, 14.12 
Glasses {see Eyeglasses) 

Goble, Paul, 13.43 
Golf, 12.18, 12.26 



Subject Index 



575 



Golf— History, 12.18 
Golf— Players, 12.4, 12.17 
Gorillas, 20.52 

Grades — Repeating, 6.25, 7.76 
Grammar, 13.11, 13.14, 13.22, 13.24 
Grand Canyon, 2.45, 2.58 
Grandfathers, 4.21, 4.26, 4.30, 4.37, 4.118, 
4.120, 4.122, 4.129, 7.41, 7.56, 7.95, 
8.38, 11.44, 13.68, 14.40, 20.22 
Grandmothers, 3.16, 3.31, 3.114, 3.193, 
4.12, 4.15, 4.19, 4.23, 4.28, 4.59, 4.66, 
4.104, 4.108, 4.111, 5.91, 5.144, 10.15, 
14.8, 20.32 

Grandparents, 4.92, 7.91, 13.58 
Gravity, 1.3 

Great Plains — The North American, 2.39, 
3.99, 3.102, 4.48 
Greed, 3.141 
Greeks, 7.74 

Grief, 1.22, 4.15, 4.124, 4.126, 5.99, 5.144 
Griffey, Ken, Jr., 12.4,12.17 
Growing up {see Coming-of-age) 

Growth and change, 3.30, 3.31, 3.69, 3.193, 
4.44, 5.67, 6.45, 6.53, 6.70, 7.38, 7.44, 
7.66, 7.70, 7.76, 8.1, 8.6, 8.10, 8.16, 

8.30, 8.38, 10.16, 13.29, 13.45, 14.44, 
14.49, 20.2, 20.24, 20.29, 20.37 
Guatemala, 4.97 
GuUt,5.138, 8.23 
Guns {see Weapons) 

Gymnastics, 12.26, 12.31 
Gymnasts, 12.2 



Habitats, 7.5 
Haiku, 10.38, 10.63 
Hair, 4.9, 8.61 
Haiti, 6.46 
Hamsters, 8.17 

Hardaway, Anfemee "Penny", 7.68, 12.16, 
12.17 

Harlem, 10.19 

Hawaii, 1.48, 1.49, 3.47, 3.54, 3.140, 5.137, 
14.32 

Healing {see Medicine — Traditional) 
Health, 1.40 

Healthcare professionals, 1.24, 3.53 

Heart, 1.27 

Hedgehogs, 8.25 

Heller, Ruth, 13.43 

Hercules, 3.154 

Heroes and heroines, 3.41, 3.44, 3.84, 

3.129, 3.153, 3.154, 3.155, 3.163, 3.167 
5.3, 5.14, 5.17, 5.24, 5.29, 5.32, 5.38, 



5.39, 5.91, 6.78, 7.69, 8.59, 12.3, 12.5, 
12.10, 14.3, 14.29, 14.34, 14.35, 14.43, 
14.46, 20.28 

Hill, Grant, 7.68, 12.4, 12.16, 12.17 
Hispanic/Latino people, 3.83, 3.178, 3.179, 

4.1. 4.4. 4.14. 4.25. 4.107. 4.108. 4.109, 

5.44, 7.69, 10.52, 10.55, 11.22, 12.19, 
14.12 

Historical fiction, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 

3.18, 3.19, 3.21, 3.22, 3.24, 3.25, 3.27, 
3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.32, 3.34, 3.35, 3.36, 
3.38, 3.39, 3.40, 3.41, 3.42, 3.44, 3.45, 
3.46, 3.48, 3.49, 3.50, 3.51, 3.52, 3.53, 

3.54. 3.99. 3.105. 3.106. 3.107. 3.109, 

3.111. 3.115. 3.116. 3.118. 3.123. 4.6, 

4.31, 4.42, 4.44, 4.48, 4.54, 4.59, 4.67, 
4.83, 5.1, 5.20, 5.43, 5.45, 5.51, 5.79, 
5.128, 11.13, 12.41, 13.57, 13.58, 20.3, 
20.10, 20.11, 20.22, 20.26, 20.27, 20.29, 

20.30. 20.31, 20.43, 20.9 
Historical nonfiction, 2.3, 3.26, 3.56, 3.58, 

3.61, 3.62, 3.63, 3.69, 3.74, 3.77, 3.78, 
3.79, 3.80, 3.81, 3.82, 3.83, 3.84, 3.86, 
3.87, 3.89, 3.90, 3.92, 3.94, 3.95, 3.97, 
3.100, 3.101, 3.102, 3.103, 3.110, 3.117, 

3.119. 3.121. 3.124. 4.47. 5.2. 5.3. 5.6, 
5.8, 5.14, 5.15, 5.16, 5.18, 5.24, 5.32, 
5.36, 5.42, 5.46, 5.48, 5.125, 6.3, 12.5, 
12.10, 12.21, 12.22, 12.28, 20.12, 20.13, 
20.14, 20.18, 20.20, 20.21, 20.23, 20.28, 

20.44, 20.47 

History, 1.39, 3.72, 3.72, 3.76, 3.93, 3.96, 
3.214, 3.216 
HIV/AIDS, 5.121 
Hmong, 3.78 
Hobbies, 12.48 

Hockey, 12.26, 12.30, 12.36, 12.37 
Hockey — Players, 12.14, 12.16 
Holiday celebrations, 3.174 
Holidays — Chinese New Year, 3.197, 3.205 
Holidays — Christmas, 3.214, 3.216, 7.88, 
20.45 

Holidays — Dia de los Muertos (Day of the 
Dead), 3.178 
Holidays — Easter, 8.27 
Holidays — Halloween, 3.218, 9.10, 10.6 
Holidays — ^Jewish, 12.51 
Holidays — Kwanzaa, 3.219 
Holidays — Moon Festival, 3.217 
Holidays — New Year, 3.208 
Holidays — Thanksgiving, 6.67, 11.3 
Holocaust — ^Jewish, 5.42 
Home and household, 1.32, 1.34, 1.39, 

7.50, 8.57 



‘600 



576 



Subject Index 



Homecomings, 4.4 
Homelessness, 4.65 
Homework, 7.84, 8.20 
Homophobia, 20.46 
Homosexuality, 20.46, 20.53 
Honesty, 3.107, 4.68, 13.60, 13.67, 14.41 
Honey, 2.8 

Horror stories, 6.90, 6.91, 13.54, 14.25 
Horseback riding, 12.31 
Horses, 2.52, 3.147, 6.73, 6.75, 6.76, 20.60 
How-to books, 11.34, 12.22, 12.29, 12.30, 

12.31 

Human reproduction, 1.25, 1.30 
Human rights, 3.80, 3.198, 20.15, 20.28, 

20.32 

Humanitarian aid, 5.20 
Humor, 6.89 

Hunting, 3.102, 4.134, 5.68, 5.82, 13.56, 
14.34, 20.41 
Hurd, Clement, 13.46 
Hurricanes, 2.63, 5.111 
Hypnotism, 6.15 



Illiteracy, 20.35 

Illness, 4.19, 4.120, 4.124, 5.95, 5.121, 5.141, 
7.7, 20.53, 20.56 
Illustrators, 4.35, 13.43, 13.46 
Imagination, 8.49, 14.2 
Immigrant experiences, 3.34, 3.45, 3.83, 
3.178, 3.192, 4.1, 4.127, 5.126, 7.74, 
20.7, 20.36, 20.54 

Immigrants, 3.45, 3.78, 3.83, 3.192, 4.1 
Immigration, 3.34, 20.36 
Inca, 3.153 

Independence, 4.42, 4.81, 4.86, 5.9, 6.53, 
20.41 

India, 3.198, 4.130,9.13 
Indigenous cultures, 3.164, 11.38, 11.56, 
20.21, 20.50 

Individuality, 4.22, 6.35 
Inequality — Educational, 20.7, 20.44, 20.49 
Inequality — Social, 20.10, 20.57 
Inequality — Economic, 20.1, 20.18, 20.44, 
20.57 

Inner city (see Urban life) 

Inner strength (see Determination and 
inner strength) 

Insects, 1.41, 1.48, 1.51, 1.61, 2.8, 2.20, 2.21, 
2.41, 3.132, 4.112, 4.118, 4.120, 7.17, 
7.28, 8.8, 8.20, 8.30, 9.17, 10.6, 10.32, 
10.39, 13.13, 14.30, 14.45 (see also 
specific insects) 

Intelligence, 3.167, 13.41 



Interconnectedness — Human, 5.6, 20.24 
Interconnectedness — Nature (see 
Nature — Interdependence of) 
Intercultural understanding, 3.24, 4.36, 
4.84, 4.111, 5.6, 5.50, 5.55, 6.48, 6.49, 
7.21, 7.32, 20.50 
Internet, 1.36, 4.80 

Interracial families, 3.61, 4.64, 4.75 (see also 
Multicultural families) 

Inventions, 1.32, 1.33, 1.34, 1.39, 3.81, 
5.138, 20.24 
Iraq, 3.130 
Irony, 8.16, 13.23 
Israel, 5.42 
Italy, 11.17, 11.53 



Jamaica, 10.25 

Japan, 2.18, 5.130, 10.63, 14.31 
Japanese people, 4.36, 4.40, 4.84, 20.28 
Japanese American internment, 3.105, 

20.9, 20.43 

Japanese Americans, 3.105, 5.119, 20.9 
Jazz, 11.15 

Jealousy, 5.79, 5.104, 8.2, 8.42 
Jewelry, 12.58 

Jewish people, 3.174, 4.72, 5.42, 8.15, 12.51, 
20.14, 20.28 
Joan of Arc, 5.29 
Johnson, Randy, 12.4 
Jokes (see Riddles and jokes) 

Jones, "'Mother" Mary, 3.80, 5.14 
Jordan, Michael, 12.7, 12.17 
Journalism, 3.87 

Journals and diaries, 3.32, 4.82, 5.84, 6.56, 
6.69, 6.81, 10.22 

Journeys (see Travels and voyages) 

Jump rope, 4.34 

Juvenile homes and detention centers, 

20.5 



Kalakaua, King, 3.54 
Kennedy, John R, 3.87 
Kindness, 3.161, 3.208 
King, Jr., Martin Luther, 3.93 
Kites, 8.5 

Knowing — Multiple ways of, 20.58, 20.59, 
20.60 

Korea, 3.114, 4.76,4.111 



Labor protests, 3.42, 3.80, 5.14, 20.23, 20.30 
Labor unions, 5.38, 20.23 



601 



Subject Index 



577 



Labor — Conditions of, 3.42, 3.80, 8.37, 
20.15, 20.17, 20.23, 20.30, 20.36, 20.39 
Lacrosse, 12.20 

Language differences, 6.45, 7.74, 20.6, 
20.36, 20.54 

Language as power, 10.56, 20.6, 20.7, 

20.36, 20.60 

Language study, 13.14, 13.15, 13.16, 13.17, 
13.22 

Latin America, 3.125, 3.126, 11.56 
Law, 20.26, 20.44, 20.48 
Leadership, 3.41, 3.97, 3.129, 5.24, 5.37, 

5.39 

Legends (see Myths and legends) 

Lester, Helen, 13.44 
Letters, 10.23 
Lewis and Clark, 3.49 
Librarians, 7.87 

Life cycle, 2.17, 2.20, 2.21, 2.33, 8.30, 11.28 

Lighthouses, 3.44, 3.84 

Lightning, 1.65 

Lincoln, Abraham, 3.119 

Lions, 2.47, 3.161 

Lipinski, Tara, 12.1 

Listening, 13.15 

Literacy, 6.46, 7.68, 7.74, 7.80, 14.34, 20.56 
Literacy as power, 4.28, 7.76, 7.79, 20.7, 
20.18, 20.20, 20.35, 20.39, 20.49 
Literary concepts, 8.16, 8.19, 8.27, 13.11, 
13.13, 13.14, 13.17, 13.23, 14.25 
Little Bighorn, Battle of the, 3.124, 5.8 
London, Jack, 13.42 
Loneliness, 8.14 

Love, 3.63, 3.163, 3.195, 3.200, 3.206, 4.8, 
4.11, 4.17, 4.35, 4.65, 4.73, 4.75, 4.84, 
4.90, 4.98, 4.108, 4.122, 5.76, 5.81, 
5.109, 5.121, 5.131, 7.56, 7.76, 8.7, 8.21, 
8.22, 8.55, 10.23, 11.31, 14.6, 14.10, 
14.12,14.31 

Loyalty, 3.13, 5.9, 5.136, 8.3, 14.50 
Lullabies, 10.26, 11.8, 13.39 
Lying, 8.23, 8.57, 14.41 
Lyon, George Ella, 13.43, 13.45 



Maddux, Greg, 12.4 

Magic and sorcery, 4.34, 8.8, 13.16, 13.41, 
14.4, 14.18, 14.25, 14.40, 14.41, 14.46, 
14.48, 14.50, 14.55, 14.56 
Mandela, Nelson, 5.3 
Mankiller, Wilma, 5.22 
Marbles, 12.44 
Marbury, Stephon, 7.68 
Marginalization, 4.86, 20.10 



Marketplaces, 3.208, 4.58, 9.8, 9.10, 10.29, 
11.4 

Marriage, 3.135, 4.66, 11.31, 14.34 
Mars, 1.2 

Marshall, Thurgood, 3.76 

Martial arts, 5.43, 7.62, 10.17, 12.22, 12.31 

Martinez, Maria, 3.95 

Masai, 2.35 

Mathematical concepts, 9.6, 9.10, 9.11, 

9.12, 9.13, 9.14, 9.15, 9.16, 9.17, 9.18, 
9.19, 9.20, 9.22, 9.24, 9.25, 9.26, 9.27, 
9.29, 9.30, 9.32, 9.33 
Mathematics, 1.37, 8.54 
Maya, 11.38 

Medicine, 1.24, 1.33, 3.201 
Medicine — History, 1.25 
Medicine — Traditional, 1.25, 2.43, 3.52, 
5.95, 20.22 
Memoirs, 3.121 
Memories (see Remembrance) 

Mermaids, 4.122, 14.25 
Mexican Americans, 4.15, 4.72, 5.91, 10.53, 
20.4, 20.7 

Mexican people, 11.48 

Mexico, 3.15, 3.110, 3.129, 3.139, 3.172, 

3.178, 3.206, 4.4, 10.60, 11.38, 20.1, 20.7 
Mice, 3.138, 8.24, 8.58, 8.62, 11.16 
Michelangelo, 11.53 
Middle East, 10.54, 13.61 
Migrant workers, 4.4, 5.38, 7.23, 20.1, 

20.36, 20.39 

Migration — Flora and fauna, 2.20, 2.21, 
2.23, 3.92 

Migration — Human, 3.47, 3.78, 3.89 
Mirrors, 10.15 
Misbehavior, 13.18, 13.19 
Missions and missionaries, 3.19, 20.21 
Monsters, 3.218, 8.51, 14.3, 14.22, 14.34, 
14.50 

Montana, Joe, 12.13 

Moon, 1.10, 1.15, 2.10, 2.67, 3.217, 7.4, 

13.25 

Morning, 8.31 

Mortality, 1.22, 3.126, 4.15, 5.140, 8.55 (see 
also Death) 

Mothers, 3.126, 4.16, 4.18, 4.33, 4.71, 4.90, 
4.109, 4.124, 7.12,8.57 
Moths, 7.28 
Mott, Lucretia, 3.50 
Mountain biking, 12.26 
Mountains, 7.5, 10.40 
Mourning, Alonzo, 12.16 
Movies, 11.33 
Mud, 1.6, 8.54 



603 



578 



Subject Index 



Multicultural families, 4.72 
Multiculturalism, 4.19, 4.97, 6.18, 6.22, 
6.48, 6.80, 12.42, 12.43 
Mummies, 14.25 
Murals {see Arts and crafts) 

Museums, 14.38 

Music, 3.90, 5.139, 11.21 

Music — Bands and musicians, 11.15 

Music — Instruments, 3.145, 3.149, 3.200, 

4.6. 4.48, 7.12, 8.18, 11.12, 11.13, 11.16, 
11.20, 14.30 

Music— Songs, 3.61, 3.157, 4.69, 7.8, 8.31, 
10.11, 10.25, 10.55, 11.3, 11.8, 11.9, 

11.17.11.19. 11.31.12.46 
Mustangs, 2.52 

Mysteries and detective stories, 5.91, 

5.123, 5.129, 5.135, 6.77, 6.90, 6.91, 
6.93, 6.94, 7.11, 7.39, 7.49, 7.62, 8.62, 
10.27, 13.49, 13.50, 13.54, 13.55, 13.56, 
13.57, 13.58, 13.60, 13.61, 13.62, 13.64, 
13.65, 13.66, 13.67, 13.68, 13.69 
Myths and legends, 2.10, 2.66, 3.139, 3.143, 

3.154. 3.161. 5.139. 8.26. 14.47. 14.48, 
14.53 

Myths and legends — Aztec, 3.129 
Myths and legends — Hawaiian, 3.140 
Myths and legends — Latin American, 
3.125,3.126 

Myths and legends — Native American, 
2.9, 2.57, 3.127, 3.128, 3.150, 3.155, 
3.158, 3.165, 3.168, 3.169, 3.170, 3.186, 

10.40. 10.56. 11.46 

Myths and legends — Puerto Rican, 3.164 



Namath, Joe, 12.13 
Names, 6.27 

Narratives — Personal, 3.53, 3.58, 3.124, 
4.14,4.66 

National Basketball Assocation (NBA), 
12.24 

Native Americans, 1.53, 2.38, 2.43, 2.57, 
3.19, 3.27, 3.58, 3.77, 3.79, 3.92, 3.100, 
3.103, 3.128, 3.148, 3.158, 3.200, 3.207, 
3.220, 4.38, 4.44, 5.16, 5.37, 5.46, 7.35, 
10.40, 10.56, 10.58, 11.46, 14.28, 20.13, 
20.21, 20.57 

Native Americans — Abenaki, 3.24, 4.123 
Native Americans — Aleut, 2.42 
Native Americans — Algonquin, 3.127 
Native Americans — Anasazi, 3.62, 3.82 
Native Americans — Apache, 3.25, 3.101, 
5.79 



Native Americans — Arapaho, 3.127, 3.170 
Native Americans — Blackfeet, 3.99, 3.102, 
3.127 

Native Americans — Cherokee, 3.116, 5.22 
Native Americans — Cheyenne, 3.127 
Native Americans — Chipewyan, 2.43 
Native Americans — Cochiti, 5.13 
Native Americans — Comanche, 3.40 
Native Americans — Crow (Apsaalooka), 
3.41,5.13 

Native Americans — Dene, 5.110 
Native Americans — Dogrib, 2.57 
Native Americans — Hopi, 3.156 
Native Americans — Inuit, 3.157, 4.98, 9.4 
Native Americans — Inupiat, 4.102 
Native Americans — Iroquois, 12.20 
Native Americans — Kato, 3.165 
Native Americans — Kwakiutl, 3.186 
Native Americans — Lakota, 3.124, 3.146, 
3.193 

Native Americans — Maidu, 3.215 
Native Americans — Makah, 3.35, 13.64 
Native Americans — Metis, 2.57 
Native Americans — Modoc, 5.72 
Native Americans — Mohawk, 5.50 
Native Americans — Mono, 3.221 
Native Americans — ^Navajo, 3.22, 3.106, 
3.150, 3.201, 3.221, 4.92, 11.41 
Native Americans — Ojibwe, 3.169, 3.214, 
4.134 

Native Americans — Pawnee, 3.41 
Native Americans — Plains, 1.53, 3.147 
Native Americans — Powhatan, 5.32 
Native Americans — Pueblo, 1.12, 3.86, 
3.94, 3.110, 3.149, 3.221, 5.55 
Native Americans — Sac and Fox, 12.11 
Native Americans — Santee, 1.53 
Native Americans — Shoshone, 3.49, 6.61 
Native Americans — Siksika, 3.99, 3.168 
Native Americans — Sinagua, 3.52 
Native Americans — Sioux, 1.53, 3.124, 
3.194, 5.8 

Native Americans — Suquamish, 3.31 
Native Americans — Tewa, 3.211 
Native Americans — Tlingit, 3.212 
Native Americans — Tohono O'odam, 3.210 
Native Americans — Tsimshian, 3.204 
Native Americans — U.S. government pol- 
icy toward {see U.S. government — 
Policy toward Native Americans) 
Native Americans — Ute, 3.203 
Native Americans — Wampanoag, 3.18 
Native Americans — Winnebago, 2.38 



603 - 



Subject Index 



579 



Native Americans — Yaqui, 5.13 
Native Americans — Yup'ik Eskimo, 3.159 
Native Americans — Zuni, 3.156, 14.11 
Natural disasters, 1.13, 1.44, 2.63 
Natural formations, 1.45, 1.49 
Naturalists, 1.51, 1.52, 1.53, 2.26 
Nature, 1.6, 1.61, 2.27, 2.45, 3.143, 3.210, 

4.41, 7.2, 7.17, 9.1, 10.10, 10.13, 10.37, 

10.38. 10.41. 10.49. 10.60. 10.61. 11.41, 

12.46. 13.3. 13.8. 14.13 

Nature — Interdependence of, 2.1, 2.7, 2.17, 
2.56, 3.94, 3.165, 3.169, 3.170, 4.130, 
5.68, 7.35, 14.32, 20.13 
Nature — Respect for, 1.48, 2.1, 2.18, 2.42, 
2.57, 3.148, 3.165, 3.170, 4.104, 5.46, 

6.51. 20.13 

Neglect (see Abandonment and neglect) 
Neighborhoods, 3.193, 4.1, 20.54 
Neighbors, 4.19, 4.131, 6.68, 7.40, 7.54, 

7.66, 14.20 
New York City, 9.3 
Nicaragua, 5.126 

Night, 4.41, 7.17, 7.22, 14.14 (see also Day 
and night) 

Nonviolent resistance, 20.10, 20.17, 20.25, 
20.26, 20.27, 20.28, 20.29 
Numbers, 9.1, 9.3, 9.4, 10.8 (see also 
Counting) 

Nursery rhymes, 11.4, 11.11, 12.56, 13.20, 
13.26, 13.36 
Nurses, 1.24, 3.53 

Nurturing (see Caring and nurturing) 



O'Keefe, Georgia, 11.50 

Oceans, 1.43, 1.45, 1.54, 1.57, 7.5, 11.6 

Ochoa, Ellen, 7.69 

Oklahoma, 4.48 

Olajuwon, Hakeem, 12.4 

Olympics, 5.17, 12.10, 12.11 

Opposites, 7.15 

Oppression, 3.22, 3.25, 3.31, 3.58, 3.83, 
3.116, 5.18, 5.79, 5.128, 20.3, 20.14, 
20.18, 20.31,20.44, 20.47 
Orchestras, 11.20 
Orphans, 5.81, 8.59, 13.57, 14.40 
Outcasts, 5.75 
Overweight, 5.85 



Pacific Northwest — The American, 3.31, 
3.35, 3.148, 3.155 
Pain and suffering, 5.140 



Painting (see Arts and crafts) 

Paleontology, 1.11, 1.18, 2.25 
Parents, 20.53 
Parents' rights, 20.48 
Parker, Quanah, 3.40 
Parkhurst, Charlotte, 3.48 
Parks and playgrounds, 11.42, 13.56 
Parks, Rosa, 3.96, 3.97 
Parrots, 8.2 
Patience, 8.56, 9.11 
Patriotism, 10.14, 10.54 
Payton, Walter, 12.13 
Peace, 3.24, 10.20, 10.54, 14.55, 20.25 
Peer pressure, 1.31, 5.71, 5.82, 5.84, 5.85, 
6.31, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 14.15, 20.6, 20.33 
Penguins, 10.34 
Perez, Selena, 7.69 

Perserverance, 2.46, 3.169, 5.17, 5.22, 5.109, 
5.131,8.45,8.56, 20.25 
Perspectives — Multiple, 3.105, 3.123, 4.92, 
8.10, 8.21, 10.15, 13.23, 20.43, 20.50, 
20.52, 20.54, 20.57, 20.58, 20.60 (see 
also Knowing — Multiple ways of) 
Peru, 3.202, 20.50 
Petroglyphs, 3.77, 3.82, 7.90 
Pets and companion animals, 5.82, 5.123, 
5.132, 5.134, 5.136, 5.144, 6.9, 6.22, 

6.66, 6.68, 7.49, 8.2, 8.42, 8.55, 9.5, 9.28, 
11.35, 13.8, 13.33, 14.22, 14.30, 20.41 
Philippines, 3.135 
Philosophy, 5.36 

Photography, 2.62, 3.81, 3.91, 3.91, 11.35 
Piazza, Mike, 12.17 
Picnics, 7.18,9.17 

Picture books — Flap books, 7.3, 7.51 

Picture books — Unusual formats, 7.4, 7.17 

Pigeons, 4.129 

Pigs, 7.3,9.10, 11.4, 14.29 

Pilgrims, 3.18 

Pihatas, 6.22, 9.8 

Pioneer life, 3.36, 3.83, 4.42, 4.54, 5.51, 5.83, 

5.143. 10.22. 13.49 
Pippen, Scottie, 12.2, 12.16, 12.17 
Planes, 12.58 

Planets, 1.2, 1.9, 1.16, 1.19, 1.37, 2.61 
Plants, 1.46, 1.52, 1.56, 1.62, 1.64, 1.65, 1.66, 
2.7, 2.21, 2.34, 2.56, 2.58, 3.16, 3.92, 
3.206, 7.2, 7.17, 7.22, 7.41, 8.2, 10.37, 
10.41, 10.42, 10.44 

Play, 4.8, 4.18, 4.34, 7.52, 8.5, 8.21, 8.24, 
8.49, 8.60, 10.4, 10.5, 10.13, 10.47, 

10.52. 11.11.12.50 
Pocahontas, 5.32 



604 



580 



Subject Index 



Poetry, 2.4, 4.48, 4.76, 6.11, 7.23, 10.1, 10.8, 
10.10, 10.14, 10.19, 10.22, 10.24, 10.26, 

10.27. 10.29. 10.30. 10.31. 10.33. 10.36, 

10.41. 10.42. 10.43. 13.29. 13.33. 13.38, 
14.21, 20.38 

Poetry — African American, 4.26 
Poetry — Anthologies, 10.3, 10.11, 10.17, 

10.18. 10.20. 10.28. 10.34. 10.38. 10.39, 
10.40, 10.46, 10.52, 10.53, 10.54, 10.55, 
10.56, 10.58, 10.61 

Poetry — Collections by a single poet, 10.2, 
10.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10.9, 10.12, 10.13, 

10.16. 10.23. 10.27. 10.32. 10.35. 10.37, 
10.44, 10.47, 10.48, 10.49, 10.50, 10.51, 
10.60, 10.63 

Polacco, Patricia, 13.43 
Politics, 1.37, 3.117, 5.22, 5.24, 20.47 
Pool (see Billiards) 

Pottery (see Arts and crafts) 

Pourquoi tales, 3.128 
Poverty, 3.13, 7.76, 8.15, 8.34, 20.1, 20.4, 
20.7, 20.17, 20.35, 20.36, 20.37, 20.49 
Power and control, 20.10, 20.40, 20.42 
Powwow, 3.193, 3.214, 4.38 
Prairie, 4.54, 10.22 
Pregnancy, 1.25, 1.30, 6.66, 13.1 
Pregnancy — Teenage, 5.40, 20.37, 20.54 
Prehistoric times, 1.1, 2.3, 3.52, 3.62, 3.69, 
3.77, 3.82, 3.86, 3.94 
Prejudice and racism, 3.61, 3.105, 5.37, 
8.29, 12.5, 12.10, 12.21, 14.45, 20.3, 
20.11, 20.16, 20.18, 20.20, 20.26, 20.27, 
20.42, 20.43, 20.45, 20.46, 20.49, 20.52, 
20.54, 20.57 (see also Discrimination) 
Prejudice and racism — Responding to, 
5.50, 5.117, 20.10, 20.16, 20.29 (see also 
Stereotypes — Interrogating) 

Pride, 4.9, 8.6 
Prison, 5.112, 13.55 

Professions and careers, 1.24, 4.23, 5.44, 
12.27, 13.43, 13.44 
Public opinion, 3.117 
Puerto Ricans, 12.6, 20.6 
Puerto Rico, 3.164, 5.111 
Pumpkins, 3.195 
Punishment, 8.21 
Puns and wordplay, 13.17, 13.20 
Puzzles, 9.16, 9.22, 10.58 



Quakers (Friends), 3.24 
Quinceaneras, 3.179 
Quotations and sayings, 7.36 



Rabbits, 6.4, 8.27, 8.46, 8.48, 9.20 

Race-car drivers, 12.17 

Racial equity, 3.76 

Racism (see Prejudice and racism) 

Rainforests, 1.54, 12.57, 14.32 

Rats, 8.37 

Reading, 6.34, 7.40, 7.79, 7.87 (see also 
Literacy) 

Rebelliousness, 20.5 
Recipes, 12.55, 12.56 
Recreation, 12.27, 12.46, 12.47 (see also 
Play) 

Reference books, 1.14, 1.16, 1.33, 1.36, 1.37, 
2.31, 3.79, 3.83, 3.100, 3.102, 3.103, 
3.110, 3.117, 3.124, 5.24, 5.36, 5.46, 

7.16. 11.20. 12.10. 12.18. 12.21. 12.22, 
12.23, 12.27, 12.28, 12.42, 12.45, 13.2 

Refugees, 3.107, 20.28 (see also 
Immigrants) 

Reindeer, 5.131 

Relationships, 4.39, 6.89, 8.64, 10.23 
Relationships — Adult-child, 3.13, 4.125, 

4.126.4.131.20.53 

Relationships — Intergenerational, 3.31, 
3.114, 3.193, 4.12, 4.15, 4.19, 4.21, 4.23, 
4.26, 4.28, 4.30, 4.37, 4.59, 4.67, 4.108, 
4.111, 4.118, 4.120, 4.122, 4.129, 4.134, 

7.41, 7.56, 7.91, 7.95, 8.38, 10.15, 11.22, 
11.44, 13.39, 13.68, 20.51 

Relationships — Parent-child, 3.126, 4.5, 

4.6, 4.8, 4.11, 4.16, 4.18, 4.22, 4.26, 

4.41, 4.44, 4.54, 4.62, 4.67, 4.70, 4.73, 
4.74, 4.81, 4.82, 4.83, 4.90, 4.98, 4.124, 
5.76, 5.83, 5.93, 5.121, 6.16, 6.56, 6.59, 
6.67, 6.81, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 8.7, 8.21, 

8.22. 8.23. 8.38. 8.60. 12.39. 13.1. 13.6, 

20.48. 20.53 

Relationships — Sibling, 1.30, 4.5, 4.11, 

4.22, 4.71, 4.85, 5.76, 5.84, 5.109, 6.72, 
6.80, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 6.92, 6.93, 6.94, 
7.37, 11.24, 11.37, 13.50, 20.2, 20.46, 
20.58 

Religion, 1.22, 3.24, 3.74, 3.127, 3.144, 

3.179. 3.198. 3.208. 4.40. 4.53. 5.6, 
10.56, 11.36,12.51,20.45 

Remembrance, 1.22, 3.178, 4.15, 4.61, 

4.124, 4.129, 5.138, 5.140, 5.144, 8.40, 
14.4 

Reptiles, 2.13, 2.18,2.29 
Rescue, 1.35, 1.38, 20.28 
Respect, 6.49, 20.40 

Responsibility, 4.44, 5.9, 8.15, 8.20, 8.34, 
13.60, 14.28, 20.34, 20.38 



ERIC 



605 



Subject Index 



581 



Revenge, 6.29, 13.62 

Revolution and revolt, 5.15, 3.118 {see also 
Dissent) 

Revolution — American, 3.121, 5.35 
Revolution — Mexican, 3.15 
Riddles and jokes, 7.19, 10.8, 10.58, 13.33, 
13.34, 13.65, 14.30 

Rituals and ceremonies, 3.100, 3.139, 3.201, 
7.32 

Rituals and ceremonies — Native 

American, 3.41, 3.203, 3.204, 3.207, 

3.210. 3.211. 3.214. 3.215. 4.38 
Rituals and ceremonies — Powwows, 

3.193. 3.214. 3.221.4.38 
Rivera, Diego, 11.48 
Roberts, Ruchard Samuel, 3.91 
Robinson, Jackie, 12.5 
Rodriguez, Alex, 12.2 

Role models, 4.62, 12.15, 20.27 
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 5.39 
Rudolph, Wilma, 5.17 
Running, 4.48, 4.86, 5.45, 5.79, 8.59 
Rural life, 4.31, 4.42, 4.48, 4.58, 4.59, 4.130, 
7.23, 10.2, 10.48, 13.66 
Russia, 3.45, 5.128, 8.33 
Ruth, Babe, 12.12 
Rylant, Cynthia, 13.43 



Sacagawea, 3.49 
Sacrifice, 4.4, 20.22, 20.28 
Safari, 2.2, 2.35 
Salsa music 11.22 
Same-sex parents, 4.65 
Sanders, Deion, 12.16, 12.17 
School, 6.2, 6.3, 6.66, 7.40 
School life, 4.92, 5.40, 5.75, 6.7, 6.9, 6.10, 
6.11, 6.18, 6.28, 6.38, 6.59, 6.69, 6.77, 
6.82, 6.83, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 6.88, 7.55, 
7.74, 10.27, 10.30, 13.12, 13.60, 14.17, 
20.3, 20.29, 20.34, 20.40, 20.42 
School lunches, 6.4, 6.28 
School nights, 6.12 
School plays, 6.17, 14.55 
School projects, 6.15 
School supplies, 10.3 
School violence, 5.71, 20.38 
School year — End of, 6.30 
School— First day of, 6.4, 6.27, 6.36, 9.33, 
14.15 

Schools — New, 6.29, 7.55 
Science experiments, 1.8, 1.28, 1.44, 1.46, 
1.51,1.55,2.66 



Scientific theories, 1.1, 1.2, 1.11, 1.20, 1.37 
Scotland, 1.1, 14.50 
Sea turtles, 5.137 

Search-and-find books, 7.33, 7.51, 9.1, 9.3, 
13.65 

Seashore, 1.43, 1.57, 2.18, 2.27, 4.82 
Seasons, 2.33, 2.44, 3.27, 3.168, 3.169, 3.194, 
3.195, 3.203, 3.210, 4.34, 4.41, 4.120, 
7.48, 7.82, 10.1, 10.2, 10.5, 10.9, 10.10, 
10.13, 10.38, 10.46, 10.51, 11.28, 13.3, 

13.6, 13.8, 13.9, 13.38 
Seau, Junior, 12.17 

Segregarion, 20.9, 20.10, 20.18, 20.26, 20.27, 
20.29 

Seles, Monica, 12.17 
Self-awareness, 4.68, 5.43, 14.43 
Self-control, 4.30 

Self-empowerment, 20.12, 20.15, 20.16, 
20.17, 20.18, 20.23, 20.25, 20.26, 20.27, 
20.30, 20.32, 20.35 

Self-esteem, 5.50, 5.85, 8.6, 8.30, 13.50 
Self-identity, 4.10, 4.90, 4.123, 5.102, 6.25, 
6.31, 8.16, 8.40, 8.48, 8.61, 14.15, 14.57, 
20.41, 20.49, 20.53 
Self-reliance, 4.81, 5.76, 5.116, 5.123 
Selfishness, 7.38 
Sequoias, 2.3 
Sexual abuse, 20.37, 20.49 
Sexual harassment, 20.53 
Sexuality, 5.84, 6.59, 20.53 
Sexuality — Gender and, 20.53 
Shakespeare, 11.27 

Sharing, 4.19, 4.22, 7.10, 7.38, 7.43, 8.39, 
9.20 

Sharks, 2.47, 2.51 
Sheep, 8.35 

Ships and boats, 1.4, 2.43, 3.47, 4.127, 5.15, 
5.133, 5.139, 14.14, 14.33, 14.51 
Shoes, 1.39, 8.13 

Short stories, 7.44, 7.66, 7.67, 7.70, 20.53 
Show-and-tell, 6.14, 6.18, 6.28 
Sibling relationships {see Relationships — 
Sibling) 

Sibling rivalry, 4.5, 4.22, 5.104 
Siblings, 1.26, 11.24, 14.57, 20.2, 20.46, 

20.58 

Sign language, 9.9 
Simplicity, 3.30, 3.145, 8.39 
Single-parent families, 4.65, 4.71, 4.81, 
20.33 

Sisters, 4.5 {see also Siblings) 

Skaters, 12.2 

Skaring— Figure, 10.17, 12.1, 12.29, 12.31 



o 

ERIC 



606 



582 



Subject Index 



Skating — Inline, 12.31 
Skunks, 4.107 

Slavery, 3.13, 3.14, 3.26, 3.26, 3.32, 3.38, 
3.46, 3.50, 3.61, 3.89, 3.111, 3.123, 
3.161, 5.15, 5.16, 5.18, 5.79, 14.13, 
14.45, 20.11, 20.20, 20.42, 20.44 
Smith, Emmitt, 12.4, 12.13, 12.17 
Snails, 3.150 
Snakes, 2.13, 2.29 
Snow, 10.51 

Snowboarding, 12.26, 12.31 
Soccer, 6.29, 12.23, 12.26, 12.31, 12.39 
Soccer — History, 12.23 
Social action, 3.97, 20.10, 20.12, 20.14, 

20.15, 20.17, 20.22, 20.23, 20.26, 20.30, 
20.40 

Social change, 20.25 

Social inequality {see Inequality — Social) 
Social justice, 20.15, 20.17, 20.23, 20.27 
Softball, 12.26, 20.43 
Songs {see Music — Songs) 

Sorcery {see Magic and sorcery) 

South Africa, 5.3, 20.32 
Southwest — The American, 1.12, 2.26, 

2.45, 2.53, 2.58, 3.52, 3.62, 3.110, 3.220, 
4.73, 5.74, 5.83, 7.8, 8.12, 10.36, 10.40, 
10.42, 10.44, 10.47 

Space, 1.2, 1.3, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10, 1.16, 12.57 
Spacecraft, 1.15, 1.16 
Spaceflight, 1.3, 1.7, 1.15, 2.67 
Spanish-language books, 3.126, 3.129, 
3.139, 3.147, 4.14, 4.15, 4.21, 4.25, 
4.107, 6.22, 7.23, 7.92, 8.12, 8.58, 9.8, 
10.52, 10.55, 10.60, 11.22, 13.35, 13.39, 
20.39 {see also Dual-language books) 
Special education, 20.59 
Special effects, 11.33 
Spelling, 13.16 
Spiders, 3.158, 7.16, 8.44 
Sports, 4.30, 5.37, 6.79, 7.68, 10.17, 12.1, 
12.2, 12.3, 12.4, 12.5, 12.6, 12.7, 12.9, 

12.10. 12.11. 12.12. 12.13. 12.14. 12.15, 
12.16, 12.17, 12.18, 12.19, 12.20, 12.21, 
12.23, 12.26, 12.27, 12.28, 12.29, 12.30, 
12.31, 12.37, 20.37 {see also specific 
sports) 

Sports figures {see Athletes) 

St. James, Lyn, 12.17 

Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 3.50, 20.31 

Stars, 1.8,2.10,2.61 

Stepfamilies, 4.54, 4.65, 4.66, 4.70, 14.6 
Stereotypes, 20.45, 20.52, 20.53, 20.54, 
20.57, 20.60 



Stereotypes — Interrogating, 3.103, 5.37, 
5.50, 10.25, 10.54, 11.46, 20.41, 20.45, 
20.56, 20.59 {see also Prejudice and 
racism — Responding to) 

Stevenson, Robert Louis, 13.40 
Storms, 1.13, 1.65, 3.47, 5.111, 10.26, 10.42, 
10.43, 14.44 

Storytelling, 3.24, 3.157, 3.159, 3.165, 3.170, 
3.186, 4.28, 4.39, 4.47, 4.125, 4.134, 
5.50, 7.84, 7.86, 7.88, 7.90, 7.91, 7.95, 
20.39 

Struggle, 3.19, 3.36, 3.42, 4.42, 4.48, 20.14 
Substitute teachers, 6.32, 6.50 
Sun, 1.8, 1.18, 2.10, 2.61, 2.66, 3.139, 7.4, 
8.26 

Superlatives, 13.11 

Supernatural phenomena, 1.20, 11.27 
Supreme Court, U.S., 3.76, 5.40 
Survival, 3.22, 3.47, 3.52, 3.105, 3.115, 

3.116, 3.156, 4.47, 4.48, 4.82, 4.85, 4.90, 
4.123, 5.1, 5.18, 5.20, 5.74, 5.83, 5.110, 
5.111, 5.116, 5.123, 5.125, 5.131, 5.132, 
5.134, 13.57, 20.14 
Swimming 12.31, 14.51 
Switzerland, 6.53 



Talent shows, 6.16 

Talents and abilities, 6.16, 8.6, 8.45 

Tanka, 10.38 

Teachers, 3.63, 6.10, 6.13, 6.14, 6.27, 6.32, 
6.36, 6.38, 6.39, 6.40, 6.50, 6.52, 6.56, 
6.82, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 7.80, 7.84, 20.3, 
20.34, 20.40 
Teamwork, 4.118, 5.74 
Technology, 1.5, 1.7, 1.16, 1.33, 1.34, 1.35, 

I. 37, 7.50, 11.33 

Teenagers, 1.31, 3.179, 4.44, 4.92, 6.59, 6.71, 
6.81, 7.70 

Television, 7.79, 7.87, 11.33 
Tennis, 10.17, 12.26, 12.31 
Tennis — Players, 12.4, 12.16, 12.17 
Tests and exams, 6.35 
Texas, 3.110, 4.21 

Theater — Costumes and props, 11.34, 

II. 64, 13.26 
Thomas, Frank, 12.17 
Thorpe, Jim, 12.11 
Tibet, 3.198 

Tigers, 2.47 
Time concepts, 9.28 
Titanic, 1.4 
Toads, 7.10 




607 



Subject Index 



583 



Togetherness, 4.53, 5.117 
Tolkien, J. R. R., 13.47 
Tombaugh, Clyde, 1.19 
Tongue-twisters, 13.12 
Totalitarianism, 4.80, 20.47 
Toys, 8.40 

Track and field, 12.31, 20.37 
Tradition, 4.84, 4.92, 5.9, 20.42 
Trains, 3.51, 3.114, 5.129, 7.56 
Travels and voyages, 3.34, 3.47, 3.49, 3.52, 
3.78, 3.111, 3.116, 3.129, 3.142, 3.198, 

4.4. 4.31. 4.44. 4.59. 4.74. 4.111. 5.9, 
5.73, 5.129, 5.131, 5.132, 5.135, 6.48, 
6.53, 8.64, 8.7, 10.19, 10.63, 11.24, 

11.48 , 13.16, 13.25, 13.61, 14.1, 14.14, 
14.17, 14.18, 14.21, 14.32, 14.35, 14.44, 

14.45. 14.46. 14.49. 14.54. 14.58. 20.9, 
20.11, 20.14, 20.24, 20.32 

Treasure, 1.14, 1.43, 3.35 
Trees, 1.66, 2.3, 2.17, 2.33, 3.27, 3.143, 4.130, 
7.22, 10.41 

Trickster tales, 3.128, 3.158 
Trucks, 1.38, 10.12 
Trust, 14.11 
Tubman, Harriet, 3.14 
Turkeys, 14.11 
Turner, Charles Henry, 1.51 
Turtles, 2.18 

Twilight, 10.1, 14.14 {see also Day and 
night) 

Twins, 4.5, 4.22, 6.84, 6.85, 6.86, 6.92 



U.S. government, 3.76 
U.S. government — Policy toward Native 
Americans, 3.19, 3.22, 3.31, 3.40, 3.58, 
3.101, 3.116, 3.211, 5.79, 20.13, 20.21 
Umbrellas, 1.39 
Underground Railroad, 3.46 
Unemployment, 20.37, 20.52 
Unexplained phenomena, 1.20 
Unidentified Flying Objects (UFOs), 1.20 
Urban life, 3.132, 3.142, 4.31, 8.64, 9.3, 
11.17, 14.8, 20.7, 20.37, 20.38, 20.54 



Vacuum cleaners, 1.32 
Van Gogh, Vincent, 11.47 
Vaughn, Mo, 12.4 

Vehicles, 1.35, 1.38, 8.44, 10.12, 12.58 
Venezuela, 12.19 
Vietnam, 3.115, 7.67, 20.22 
Vietnamese, 4.127 



Violence, 20.18, 20.27, 20.33, 20.43, 20.54, 
20.55 

Vocational guidance {see Professions and 
careers) 

Volcanoes, 1.13, 1.44, 1.49, 1.65 
Volleyball, 12.26 
Voting, 20.27, 20.31, 20.32 
Voyages {see Travels and voyages) 



Wales, 14.52 
Walls, 7.21 

War, 5.126, 10.20, 14.45, 3.24, 3.121, 5.35 
War — Bosnian, 5.20 
War — History of, 3.117, 4.47 
War — Indian Wars, 3.124 
War — Korean War, 3.114 
War — Mexican, 3.110 
War— U.S. Civil War, 3.111, 3.119, 3.123, 
4.42 

War— Vietnam, 3.115, 5.1, 20.22 
War— War of 1812, 13.49 
War— World War 1, 4.129 
War— World War II, 3.105, 3.106, 3.107, 

3.109, 5.45, 6.3, 12.5, 20.9, 20.14, 20.28, 
20.43 

Water, 1.48, 1.55, 3.150, 7.19, 8.24, 8.49, 
10.41, 10.43, 10.46 
Water buffalo, 7.67 
Water cycle, 10.43 

Water— Bodies of, 1.43, 1.45, 1.54, 1.57, 
1.65, 2.23, 3.30, 3.69, 3.150, 3.153, 
4.127, 5.133, 5.139, 7.82, 8.10, 10.26, 
10.43, 10.50 

Wealth, 3.141, 3.145, 14.55 
Weapons, 5.71, 5.75, 8.47, 20.38 
Weather, 1.17, 2.61, 2.62, 2.63, 3.168, 3.169, 
3.210, 5.110, 7.48, 8.24, 8.35, 8.49, 10.5, 

10.26. 10.41. 10.42. 10.43. 10.46. 10.51, 
13.3, 13.9 

Weaving {see Arts and crafts) 

Weddings, 4.25, 11.31 

West — The American, 3.39, 3.48, 3.51, 3.77, 

3.83. 3.116. 5.16. 5.51. 8.13. 20.21 
Westward movement, 3.36, 3.83, 4.42, 5.51, 

10.22. 20.21 

Whales, 2.36, 10.33, 10.37 

White, E. B., 13.48 

Wild Child of Aveyron, 3.63 

Wilderness, 5.116, 5.125 

Wildlife, 2.4, 2.32, 2.34, 2.36, 2.47, 2.48, 

2.51, 2.54, 3.149, 4.102, 7.5, 7.8, 10.34, 
10.39, 10.42, 14.45 



6'08 



584 



Subject Index 



Wildlife— African, 2.2, 2.6, 2.35, 2.37 
Wildlife — North American, 2.7, 2.21, 2.26, 
2.31, 2.42, 2.44, 2.45, 2.52, 2.53, 2.58, 
3.49, 3.102, 5.13,9.4, 13.56 
Wisdom, 3.142, 8.7 

Wishes, 14.40, 14.55 (see also Dreams and 
aspirations) 

Wolves, 2.47, 13.56, 14.29 

Women, 2.26, 3.25, 5.44 

Women in nontraditional roles, 1.17, 3.15, 

3.44. 3.48. 3.61. 3.84. 3.153. 4.23. 4.47, 
5.22, 5.24, 5.29, 5.43, 5.48, 5.51, 12.10, 

14.12. 14.47, 20.23, 20.30 
Women role models, 3.96, 5.9, 5.14, 5.24, 

5.29, 5.39, 5.73, 13.41, 20.12, 20.31 
Women in sports, 12.1, 12.2, 12.9, 12.10, 
12.21, 12.30 

Women — Marginalization of, 20.17, 20.30, 
20.31 



Women's rights, 3.50, 20.23, 20.30, 20.31 
Women's suffrage, 20.31 
Woods, Tiger, 12.4, 12.17 
Workers' rights, 3.42, 3.80, 5.14, 5.38, 20.15, 
20.23, 20.30 

Writing — Finding voice through, 4.82, 

6.56, 6.69, 20.7, 20.49 



Yolen, Jane, 13.43 
Young, Steve, 12.4, 12.16 
Yucatan, 3.56 
Yucatec Maya, 3.56, 20.51 



Zodiac, 7.93 
Zoos, 8.27 




609 



585 



Title Index 



A Is for Asia, 7.32 
Across the Lines, 3.123 
Adventures of the Bailey School Kids 
series. The, 6.77 

Adventures of Benny and Watch, The: 

A Boxcar Children Early Reader 
series, 6.93 

Adventures of Sparrowboy, The, 8.53 
African Beginnings, 3.88 
Akiak: A Tale from the Iditarod, 8.3 
Alex Rodriguez: Hit a Grand Slam!, 12.2 
All about Rattlesnakes, 2.29 
All Around Town: The Photographs of 
Richard Samuel Roberts, 3.91 
All Year Round: A Book to Benefit 
Children in Need, 13.3 
Allison, 4.75 

Alonzo Mourning: Center of Attention, 
12.16 

Alphabet Book, 7.33 
Am I Naturally This Crazy?, 10.16 
Amanda Bean's Amazing Dream: A 
Mathematical Story, 9.25 
Amanda Pig, Schoolgirl, 6.27 
Amazing Bugs, 2.41 
Amazing Forwards, 12.14 
Amazing Pull-out Pop-up Body in a Book, 
The, 1.28 

Amber Brown Is Feeling Blue, 6.67 
Amelia Writes Again!, 6.69 
America Is Her Name, 20.7 
American Indian Children of the Past, 
3.100 

American Too, 3.192 

Amistad Rising: A Story of Freedom, 3.26 
Among the Hidden, 4.80 
Anasazi, 3.62 

And Justice for All: The Legal Rights of 
Young People, 20.48 

Andre Agassi: Reaching the Top — Again, 
12.17 

Androcles and the Lion, 3.161 
Anfemee Hardaway: Basketball's Lucky 
Permy, 12.17 

Anfemee Hardaway: Super Guard, 12.16 
Angel Just Like Me, An, 20.45 
Angel Knew Papa and the Dog, The, 5.143 
Angela Weaves a Dream: The Story of a 
Young Maya Artist, 11.38 



Animal Action ABC, 13.22 
Animal Dreaming: An Aboriginal Dream- 
time Story, 7.90 
Animals and Birds, 12.58 
Animals You Never Even Heard Of, 2.32 
Animorphs series, 6.70 
Ant Plays Bear, 7.37 
Antarctic Antics: A Book of Penguin 
Poems, 10.34 

Anthology for the Earth, 2.1 
Apaches, The: A First Americans Book, 
3.101 

Apple Trees, 1.66 
Arctic Son, 4.102 

Arlene Alda's 12 3: What Do You See?, 9.1 
Arlene Sardine, 8.16 
Arrow over the Door, The, 3.24 
Art of Eric Carle, The, 11.51 
Arthur Chapter Book series, 6.74 
Arthur Writes a Story, 7.84 
Arthur's Mystery Envelope, 13.60 
Artists' Workshop Landscapes, 11.54 
As the Crow Flies, 4.73 
At the Edge of the Forest, 5.68 
At the Plate with . . . Ken Griffey, Jr., 12.4 
At the Plate with . . . Mo Vaughn, 12.4 
Atlas of Animals: A Scholastic First 
Discovery Book (1996), 2.31 
Aunt Chip and the Great Triple Creek 
Dam Affair, 7.79 

Aunt Nancy and Old Man Trouble, 13.23 
Author: A Tme Story, 13.44 
Autumn: An Alphabet Acrostic, 13.9 



Baboon, 8.1 

Baby Honu's Incredible Journey, 5.137 
Baby-Sitters Club series. The, 6.80 
Baby-Sitters Little Sister series, 6.80 
Bad Case of the Stripes, A, 14.15 
Bad Girls, 6.31 

Ballad of Lucy Whipple, The, 5.51 
Ballot Box, The, 20.31 
Ballpark, 12.25 
Barnyard Song, 7.7 
Barrio: Jose's Neighborhood, 4.1 
Barry Bonds: Mr. Excitement, 12.17 
Baseball in the Barrios, 12.19 
Baseball Turnaround, 12.37 




610 



586 



Title Index 



Bat, 2.28 

Bat Boy & His Violin, The, 4,6 
Bat Jamboree, 9.7 
Bat 6, 20.43 

Be Patient, Abdul, 8,56 
Bear's Hiccups, 7.43 
Beardream, 3.203 

Beautiful Warrior: The Legend of the 
Nun's Kung Fu, 5,43 
Beauty of the Beast, The: Poems from the 
Animal Kingdom, 10.39 
Beekeepers, 4.118 

Beginner's Guide to Animal Autopsy, The: 
The Hands-on Approach to Zoology, 

1.50 

Behaving Bradley, 6,52, 20.40 
Belle Prater's Boy, 13,58 
Berenstain Bears series. The, 6,72 
Beyond 'Ohi'a Valley: Adventures in a 
Hawaiian Rainforest, 14.32 
Bicycle Riding and Other Poems, 10.13 
Big and Little Alphabet, A, 13.24 
Big Meeting, 4,53 

Bill Pickett: Rodeo-Ridin' Cowboy, 3,72 

Billy, 12.36 

Billy Lazloe, 5,139 

Black Indians: A Hidden Heritage, 5.16 
Bless Us All: A Child's Yearbook of 
Blessings, 13.8 
Bloomability, 6,53 
Bobbin Girl, The, 3,42, 20,30 
Boggart and the Monster, The, 14.50 
Boom, Baby, Boom, Boom!, 7,12 
Boot, 12.36 

Bootmaker and the Elves, The, 8,13 
Bound for America: The Forced Migration 
of Africans to the New World, 3,89 
Boxcar Children series. The, 6,94 
Brave as a Mountain Lion, 6,61 
Braving the Frozen Frontier: Women 
Working in Antarctica, 1.17 
Breaking Boxes, 20,46 
Bubba the Cowboy Prince: A Fractured 
Texas Tale, li.6 
Bubba and Trixie, 8.30 
Buddha Stories, 3,144 
Buffalo Days, 5.13 
Buffalo Jump, The, 3.99 
Buffalo Sunrise: The Story of a North 
American Giant, 3,102 
Buffalo Tree, The, 20.5 
Bug in a Rug, 6.7 

Bug Watching with Charles Henry Turner, 

1.51 



Burnt Toast on Davenport Street, 8.8 
Bus Ride, The, 20,26 
Butterfly Alphabet, The, 7,28 
Butterfly Boy, 4.120 
Bye, Mis' Lela, 4.126 



Cactus Poems, 10.47 
Caesar's Antlers, 5,131 
California Diaries series, 6.81 
Call Me Consuelo, 5.91 
Can You Dance, Dalila?, 4,12 
Carlos and the Skunk/Carlos y el zorrillo, 
4,107 

Case of the Lion Dance, The: Chinatown 
Mystery #2, 7,62 
Cat and Mouse in the Rain, 8.24 
Cat's Colors, 7.20 

Caterina, the Clever Farm Girl: A Tale 
from Italy, 3.163 

Celebrating Chinese New Year, 3.205 
Celebrating Families, 4.64 
Celebrating the Powwow, 3.207 
Champion Defensemen, 12.14 
Chasing Redbird, 5.99 
Chato y su cena, 8,58 
Cheat the Moon, 4.81 
Cheerios Counting Book, The, 9.6 
Chibi: ATrue Story from Japan, 5,130 
Child of Faerie, Child of Earth, 14,21 
Child's Book of Play in Art, A: Great 
Pictures Great Fun, 11.55 
Children of the Longhouse, 5.63 
Children of Topaz, The: The Story of a 
Japanese-American Internment 
Camp, Based on a Classroom Diary, 
5,119 

Children's Atlas of Lost Treasures, The, 
1,14 

Children's Atlas of Scientific Discoveries 
and Inventions, The, 1,33 
Chuck Close Up Close, 11,49 
Cinder-Eyed Cats, The, 14.14 
Circle of Magic: Sandry's Book, 14.56 
Circuit, The: Stories from the Life of a 
Migrant Child, 20,36 
City by Numbers, 9.3 
Clearing, The, 13.66 
Clockwork, 13.54 
Cloudcatcher, 14.28 
Cloudland, 14.1 
Cloudmakers, 11.44 
Clyde Tombaugh and the Search for 
Planet X, 1.19 



Title Index 



587 



Cocoa Ice, 3.21 

Cody, 12.36 

Condor Magic, 10.36 

Confetti: Poems for Children, 10.53 

Cool Math, 9.22 

Cougars, 2.54 

Cow, 13.21 

Cowboy Bunnies, 8.46 
Coyote and the Firestick: A Pacific North- 
west Indian Tale, 3.128 
Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About 
Dinosaurs, 12.57 

Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About 
Outer Space, 12.57 
Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About 
Rainforests, 12.57 

Crafts for Kids Who Are Wild About . . . 

series, 12.57 
Creativity, 20.6 

Cricket Never Does: A Collection of Haiku 
and Tanka, 10.38 

Crocodiles, Camels and Dugout Canoes: 
Eight Adventurous Episodes, 5.48 
Cry Baby, 11.24 
Cutaway Trucks, 1.38 



Daddy Calls Me Man, 4.11 
Daddy, Daddy, Be There, 4.62 
Daddy Doesn't Have to Be a Giant 
Anymore, 5.93 
Daddy Will Be There, 4.8 
Dancing Rainbows: A Pueblo Boy's Story, 
3.211 

Danger in the Desert, 5.74 
Daughter of Sugua, 3.31 
Day of the Dead, 3.178 
Day the Earth Was Silent, The, 20.25 
Day Gogo Went to Vote, The, 20.32 
Day at Greenhill Farm, A, 7.6 
Dazzling Disguises and Clever Costumes: 
More than 50 Step-by-Step Projects to 
Make, Paint, Sew, Prepare, and Wear, 
11.34 

Dear Mrs. Parks: A Dialogue with Today's 
Youth, 3.97 

Deion Sanders: Mr. Prime Time, 12.16 
Deion Sanders: Primetime Player, 12.17 
Desert Dwellers: Native People of the 
American Southwest, 3.220 
Desert Scrapbook, A: Dawn to Dusk in the 
Sonoran Desert, 2.26 
Desert Trip, 2.53 
Deserts, 2.34 



Detective Donut and the Wild Goose 
Chase, 8.62 
Dia's Story Cloth, 3.78 
Diez deditos/Ten Little Fingers and Other 
Play Rhymes and Action Songs from 
Latin America, 10.55 
Digger: The Tragic Fate of the California 
Indians from the Missions to the 
Gold Rush, 20.21 
Dinofours series, 6.83 
Dinosaur Ghosts: The Mystery of 
Coelophysis, 1.11 

Disappearing Alphabet, The, 13.27 
Disappearing Lake: Nature's Magic in 
Denali National Park, 2.44 
Disaster! Catastrophes that Shook the 
World, 1.13 

Discover Hawaii's Birth by Fire 
Volcanoes, 1.49 

Discover Hawaii's Freshwater Wildlife, 
1.48 

Divide and Ride, 9.18 
Dog That Called the Pitch, The, 12.38 
Dog Who Walked with God, The, 3.165 
Don't You Dare Read This, Mrs. Dunphrey, 
6.56 

Dora's Box, 5.64 

Double Trouble in Walla Walla, 13.12 
Dream Jar, The, 3.45 
Drinking Alcohol, 1.31 
Drop of Water, A, 1.55 
Drover's Boy, The, 3.61 
Duke the Dairy Delight Dog, 8.29 
Duke Ellington: The Piano Prince and His 
Orchestra, 11.21 

Dumb Bunnies Go to the Zoo, The, 8.27 



Eagle Boy: A Traditional Navajo Legend, 
3.201 

Eagle Song, 5.50 
Eagle's Gift, The, 3.157 
Earth Always Endures: Native American 
Poems, 10.56 
Earthquake Games, 1.44 
Earthsong, 11.19 
Easy Math Puzzles, 9.16 
Echoes of the Elders: The Stories and 
Paintings of Chief Lelooska, 3.186 
Echoes for the Eye: Poems to Celebrate 
Patterns in Nature, 10.41 
EEK! Stories to Make You Shriek series, 
14.25 

18 Penny Goose, The, 5.35 



612 



588 



Title Index 



Eleanor, 5.39 

Electra and the Charlotte Russe, 8.23 
Elena, 3.15 
Elisabeth, 5.45 
Ella Enchanted, 14.43 
Emma's Elephant and Other Favorite 
Animal Friends, 11.35 
Emma's Magic Winter, 7.40 
Emma's Rug, 11.45 

Emmitt Smith: Relentless Rusher, 12.17 
Empires Lost and Won: The Spanish 
Heritage in the Southwest, 3.110 
Encyclopedia of the North American 
Indian, 3.79 
Essential Facts, 1.37 
Even Steven and Odd Todd, 9.27 
Everybody Has a Bellybutton: Your Life 
before You Were Born, 1.26 
Everyone Hide from Wibbly Pig, 7.3 
Extraordinary Life, An: The Story of a 
Monarch Butterfly, 2.20 
Eye of the Storm: Chasing Storms with 
Warren Faidley, 2.62 



Fair Bear Share, A, 9.19 
Famous Hispanic Americans, 5.44 
Fantastic Cutaway Book of Rescue!, The, 
1.35 

Far North, 5.110 
Faraway Drums, 14.8 
Farmer Eno and His Cow, 14.33 
Farmer and the Poor God, The: A Folktale 
from Japan, 4.40 
Farmers' Market, 4.58 
Farmworker's Friend: The Story of Cesar 
Chavez, 5.38 

Fatima and the Dream Thief, 14.35 
Fear Street Sagas series, 6.90 
Fear Street series, 6.90 
Fearsome Hunters of the Wild, 2.47 
Ferrets, 2.39 

Field of Sunflowers, A, 1.62 
jFiesta!, 9.8 

Fiesta Fireworks, 3.172 
Fine Lines, 13.43 

First in the Field: Baseball Hero Jackie 
Robinson, 12.5 

First Palm Trees: An Anancy Spiderman 
Story, 3.143 
Fishing Sunday, 4.37 
512 Ants on Sullivan Street, The, 9.17 
Flag We Love, The, 10.14 
Floating in Space, 1.3 



Flower Watching with Alice Eastwood, 1.52 
Flying Solo, 6.50, 20.34 
Follow the Leader, 20.29 
For the Love of the Game: Michael Jordan 
and Me, 12.7 
Forged by Fire, 4.90 

Fort Chipewyan Homecoming: A Journey 
to Native Canada, 2.43 
Four Seasons of Corn: A Winnebago 
Tradition, 2.38 

Frank Thomas: Baseball's Big Hurt, 12.17 
Freedom's Sons: The True Story of the 
Amistad Mutiny, 5.15 
Frog Girl, 3.155 

Frog Went A-Courting: A Musical Play in 
Six Acts, 11.31 

From Slave Ship to Freedom Road, 5.18 
Frozen Stiff, 5.116 
Full Moon Stories: Thirteen Native 
American Legends, 3.170 
Fundamental Basketball, 12.26 
Fundamental Softball, 12.26 
Fundamental Sports series, 12.26 
Funny Bones and Other Body Parts, 1.23 



G Is for Googol: AMath Alphabet Book, 
9.26 

Gabby Growing Up, 8.38 
Gabriella's Song, 8.31, 11.17 
Garden, 1.64 
Garden, The, 5.42 
Gardener, The, 3.16 
Gathering the Sun: An Alphabet in 
Spanish and English, 7.23 
Get out of the Alphabet, Number 2! Wacky 
Wednesday Puzzle Poems, 10.8 
Get out of Bed!, 6.12 
Gettysburg Address, The, 3.119 
Ghost Canoe, 3.35, 13.64 
Ghost of Fossil Glen, The, 13.62 
Ghost Train, 4.61 
Ghosts of Fear Street series, 6.90 
Gib Rides Home, 5.81 
Gift for Abuelita, A: Celebrating the Day 
of the Dead/Un regalo para 
Abuelita: En celeb racion del Dia de 
los Muertos, 4.15 

Gift from Papa Diego, A/Un regalo de 
Papa Diego, 4.21 
Girl Named Disaster, A, 5.73 
Girl Who Lived with the Bears, The, 3.148 
Give a Dog a Bone: Stories, Poems, Jokes, 
and Riddles about Dogs, 13.33 



613 



Title Index 



589 



Go and Come Back, 20.50 
God Bless the Gargoyles, 8.14 
Going Home, 4.4, 20.1 
Golden Sandal, The: A Middle Eastern 
Cinderella Story, 3.130 
Good Guys of Baseball, The: Sixteen True 
Sports Stories, 12.15 
Good Housekeeping Illustrated 

Children's Cookbook, The, 12.55 
Good Night, Baby Bear, 8.22 
Good Night, Mr. Night, 7.22 
Good Yontif : A Picture Book of the Jewish 
Year, 3.174 

Good-bye, Vivi!, 5.144 
Goosebumps Find Yourself series, 6.91 
Goosebumps series, 6.91 
Goosebumps 2000 series, 6.91 
Grace and Glory: A Century of Women in 
the Olympics, 12.10 
Grand Canyon: Exploring a Natural 
Wonder, 2.45 

Grand Canyon: A Trail through Time, 2.58 
Granddaddy's Gift, 20.27 
Grandmother's Alphabet, 4.23 
Grandpa's Amazing Computer, 7.41 
Grant Hill: Basketball's High Flier, 12.16 
Grant Hill: Humble Hotshot, 12.17 
Grass Sandals: The Travels of Basho, 10.63 
Graveyards of the Dinosaurs: What It's 
Like to Discover Prehistoric 
Creatures, 2.25 

Great Corgiville Kidnapping, The, 5.135 
Great Frog Race and Other Poems, The, 
10.2 

Great Goalies, 12.14 
Great Interactive Dream Machine, The: 
Another Adventure in Cyberspace, 
14.54 

Great Moments in Baseball History, 12.12 
Great Moments in Football History, 12.13 
Great Race, The, 7.93 
Greatest Treasure, The, 3.145 
Green Horn Blowing, A, 11.13 
Guests, 4.44 

Gullible's Troubles, 8.57 

Gus and Grandpa Ride the Train, 7.56 



Halloween House, The, 3.218 
Handmade Counting Book, The, 9.9 
Happy Adoption Day!, 4.69 
Happy Birthday, Everywhere, 3.199 
Happy New Year! Kung-hsi Fa-ts'ai!, 3.197 
Harlem, 10.19 



Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone, 14.46 
Hat, The, 8.25 

Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier: Censorship in 
School Newspapers, 5.40 
Healing of Texas Jake, The, 5.134 
Heart, The, 1.27 
Heart of a Chief, The, 5.37 
Heart Is Big Enough, The: Five Stories, 7.70 
Heartbeats series, 6.88 
Heaven, 4.68 

Henry and Mudge and the Sneaky 
Crackers, 7.49 

Hercules: The Man, the Myth, the Hero, 
3.154 

High Voltage Linebacker: Junior Seau, 
12.17 

Highest Longest Deepest: A Fold-out 
Guide to the World's Record 
Breakers, 1.45 
HIV Positive, 5.121 
Hobby, 14.48 

Hockey for Kids: Heroes, Tips, and Facts, 

12.30 

Hockey Superstars (NHL) series, 12.14 
Holes, 13.55 

Home on the Range: Cowboy Poetry, 10.28 
Honey Makers, The, 2.8 
Hoop Heroes, 7.68 

Hooray, a Pihatal/iVivaljUna pinata!, 6.22 
Horrible Harry and the Drop of Doom, 

6.30 

Horrible Harry Moves up to Third Grade, 
7.55 

Hosni the Dreamer: An Arabian Tale, 3.142 
Hot, Cold, Shy, Bold: Looking at 
Opposites, 7.15 
Hot Fudge Hero, 7.44 
How It Was with Dooms, 2.37 
Hurricane!, 5.111 

Hurricanes: Earth's Mightiest Storms, 2.63 
Hush! A Gaelic Lullaby, 10.26 
Hush, Little Baby, 11.8 
Hush! A Thai Lullaby, 4.112 



I Am Mordred: A Tale from Camelot, 14.47 
I Am Rosa Parks, 3.96 
"I Can't Take You Anywhere", 8.52 
I Didn't Know That Dinosaurs Laid Eggs, 
and Other Amazing Facts about 
Prehistoric Reptiles, 1.18 
I Have a Dream, 3.93 
I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a 
Pie, 11.3 



614 



590 



Title Index 



I Love My Hair, 8.61 
I Met a Dinosaur, 14.38 
i see the rhythm, 3.90 
I Spy Spooky Night, 13.65 
I Thought My Soul Would Rise and Fly: 
The Diary of Patsy, a Freed Girl, 3.32 
Ian's Walk: A Story about Autism, 20.58 
If You Were Bom a Kitten, 13.1 
Illustrated Book of Ballet Stories, The, 11.65 
In Daddy's Arms I Am Tall: African 

Americans Celebrating Fathers, 4.26 
In the Heart of the Village: The World of 
the Indian Banyan Tree, 4.130 
In the Huddle with . . . Steve Young, 12.4 
In My Family /En mi familia, 4.14 
In the Next Three Seconds, 9.24 
In the Park, 11.42 

In Praise of Our Fathers and Our Mothers, 
4.35 

In a Sacred Manner I Live: Native 
American Wisdom, 5.46 
In the Stone Circle, 14.52 
In the Swim: Poems and Paintings, 10.35 
Incredible Plants, 2.56 
Indian School, The, 3.19 
Insectlopedia: Poems and Paintings, 10.32 
Inside the Titanic, 1.4 
Internet for Kids! A Beginner's Guide to 
Surfing the Net, 1.36 
Into the Ice, 5.125 
Invisible Princess, The, 14.13 
Iron Ring, The, 14.49 
Islander, The, 4.122 

Island Scrapbook, An: Dawn to Dusk on a 
Barrier Island, 2.27 
Island-below-the-Star, The, 3.47 
Island in the Sun, 10.25 
It Is a Good Day to Die: Indian 

Eyewitnesses Tell the Story of the 
Battle of the Little Bighorn, 3.124 
It's Raining Laughter, 13.29 



Jack London: A Biography, 13.42 
Jack's Tale, 7.86 
Jacks around the World, 12.43 
Jade and Iron: Latin American Tales from 
Two Cultures, 3.125 
Jalapeho Bagels, 4.72 
Jazmin's Notebook, 5.84 
Jazz of Our Street, The, 11.15 
Jelly Beans for Sale, 9.23 
Jewels, 7.91 

Jewish Holiday Craft Book, The, 12.51 



Jim Thorpe: Legendary Athlete, 12.11 
Jip: His Story, 3.13 
Joan of Arc, 5.29 

Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key, 6.40 
Johnny Germ Head, 7.45 
Jojofu, 5.136 

Joshua T. Bates in Trouble Again, 6.25 
Journey of Diego Rivera, The, 11.48 
Journey of English, The, 13.2 
Jump! It's Fun!, 11.32 
Jump-rope, 7.52 

Jungle Jack Hanna's Safari Adventure, 2.35 
Just Enough Carrots, 9.30 
just Juice, 7.76, 20.35 
Just Kids: Visiting a Class for Children 
with Special Needs, 20.59 
Just One Flick of a Finger, 8.47, 20.38 
Just Right Stew, 4.33 
Just What the Doctor Ordered: The 

History of American Medicine, 1.25 



Kai, A Big Decision, Africa, 1440, 5.9 
Keeper of the Light, 3.44 
Keepers (Alice Schertle), 10.6 
Keepers (Jeri Hanel Watts), 4.28 
Ken Griffey, Junior: All-Around All-Star, 
12.17 

Kennedy Assassinated! The World 
Mourns: A Reporter's Story, 3.87 
Kidnappers, The: A Mystery, 13.67 
Kids Campfire Book, The, 12.46 
Kids in Ms. Colman's Class series. The, 
6.82 

Kids Summer Games Book, The, 12.47 
King of Ireland's Son, The, 3.141 
Kwanzaa, 3.219 



La Cucaracha Martina: A Caribbean 
Folktale, 3.132 

La Mariposa, 6.45 

La nina que amaba los caballos salvajes, 
3.147 

Lacrosse: The National Game of the 
Iroquois, 12.20 

Lady Kaguya's Secret: A Japanese Tale, 
14.31 

Language of Doves, The, 4.129 

Lasting Echoes: An Oral History of Native 
American People, 3.58 

Laughing Tomatoes and Other Spring 
Poems /Jitomatoes risuenos y otros 
poemas de primavera, 10.60 



615 ' 



Title Index 



591 



Leaf Men and the Brave Good Bugs, The, 
14.4 

Leah's Pony, 3.29 

Legend of ^e Hummingbird, The, 3.164 
Legend of Mexicatl, The /La leyenda de 
Mexicatl, 3.129 
Lemonade for Sale, 9.15 
Lemonade Sun and Other Summer 
Poems, 10.9 
Leon's Story, 20.18 

Lerner Sports Biographies series, 12.17 

Let's Count It Out, Jesse Bear, 9.2 

Let's Dance!, 11.57 

Let's Eat!, 4.109 

Leticia's Secret, 5.141 

Letter to the Lake, 7.82 

Library Lil, 7.87 

Life and Death of Crazy Horse, The, 5.8 
Lift-the-Flap Chick, 7.51 
Lift-the-Flap Kitten, 7.51 
Lift-the-Flap Mouse, 7.51 
Lift-the-Flap Puppy, 7.51 
Lift-the-Flap series, 7.51 
Lili Backstage, 11.64 
Liliana's Grandmothers, 4.108 
Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse, 6.13 
Lily's Crossing, 3.107 
Listen to Us: The World's Working 
Children, 20.17 

Little Big Ears: The Story of Ely, 2.46 
Little Giant Encyclopedia of Games for 
One or Two, The, 12.45 
Little Girl in a Red Dress with Cat and 
Dog, 11.37 
Little Oh, 4.17 

Lives of the Athletes: Thrills, Spills (and 
What the Neighbors Thought), 12.9 
Living Things, 1.46 

Lizard and the Sun, The /La lagartija y el 
sol, 3.139 

Log Cabin Quilt, The, 3.36 
Log's Life, A, 2.17 
Long Road, The, 5.126 
Long Way from Chicago, A, 4.59 
Look Book, 7.2 

Los tres pequenos jabalies/The Three 
Little Javelinas, 8.12 
Lost and Found, The, 14.17 
Lost Horse, The: A Chinese Folktale, 3.171 
Lost in the War, 5.1 
Lost, 5.132 

Lou Gehrig: The Luckiest Man, 12.3 
Love Flute, 3.200 
Love Letters, 10.23 



Lucy Dove, 14.3 
Lunch Bunnies, 6.4 

Lyn St. James: Driven to be First, 12.17 



Ma Dear's Apron, 4.16 
Machines in the Home, 7.50 
Madelia, 11.36 

Magic Hurnmingbird, The, 3.156 
Magic Maguey, The, 3.206 
Magic Moonberry Jump Ropes, The, 4.34 
Magic School Bus inside a Beehive, The, 
1.41 

Magic School Bus and the Electric Field 
Trip, The, 1.5 

Mahealani and the King of Hawai'i, 3.54 
Mailing May, 3.51 

Making of Goodnight Moon, The: A 50th 
Anniversary Retrospective, 13.46 
Making Up Megaboy, 20.55 
Mama and Papa Have a Store, 4.97 
Mami Provi and the Pot of Rice, 4.19 
Man Called Raven, A, 2.57 
Mandela: From the Life of the South 
African Statesman, 5.3 
Mangaboom, 14.12 

Many Troubles of Andy Russell, The, 6.66 
Maple Moon, 3.27 

Maples in the Mist: Children's Poems 
from the Tang Dynasty, 10.61 
Marbles: 101 Ways to Play, 12.44 
Margaret, Frank, and Andy: Three 
Writers' Stories, 13.48 
Marianthe's Story: Painted Words; 
Marianthe's Story: Spoken 
Memories, 7.74 

Marie in Fourth Position, 11.52 
Martian Fossils on Earth? The Story of 
Meteorite ALH 84001, 1.2 
Mary on Horseback: Three Mountain 
Stories, 3.53 

Matt Christopher Sports Classics series, 
12.37 

Max's Wacky Taxi Day, 13.17 
Maya's Children: The Story of La Llorona, 
3.126 

Mayeros: A Yucatec Maya Family, 3.56, 20.51 
Meet Calliope Day, 6.68 
Merlin, 14.48 
Mermaid Island, 14.25 
Michael Jordan: Basketball Skywalker, 
12.17 

Michelangelo's Surprise, 11.53 

Mike Piazza: Hard Hitting Catcher, 12.17 



6 IB - 



592 



Title Index 



Millbrook Sports World series, 12.16 
Mirrd's Tutu, 11.60 

Mine, All Mine: A Book about Pronouns, 

13.14 

Minty: A Story of Young Harriet Tubman, 

3.14 

Miro in the Kingdom of the Sun, 3.153 
Miss Bindergarten Celebrates the 100th 
Day, 9.33 

Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for 
Kindergarten, 6.36 

Miss Malar key Won't Be in Today, 6.32 
Miss Mary Mack: A Hand-Clapping 
Rhyme, 13.36 

Miss Spider's New Car, 8.44 
Mission: Earth: Voyage to the Home 
Planet, 1.7 

Mississippi Mud: Three Prairie Journals, 

10.22 

Miz Berlin Walks, 4.125 
Mola: Cuna Life Stories and Art, 11.56 
Mommy's in the Hospital Having a Baby, 
1.30 

Money Troubles, 7.38 

Monica Seles: Returning Champion, 12.17 

Monster, 5.112 

Monster Stew, 8.51 

Moon Book, The, 1.10 

Moon Festival, 3.217 

Moonflower, The, 7.17 

Moonlight Kite, 8.5 

Moonstick: The Seasons of the Sioux, 3.194 
More M&M's Math, 9.29 
More than One, 9.32 

Most Excellent Book of Dress Up, The, 12.50 
Most Excellent Book of Face Painting, The, 
12.50 

Most Excellent Book of . . . series. The, 
12.50 

Mother Earth, Father Sky, 3.94 
Mother Goose Cookbook, The: Rhymes 
and Recipes for the Very Young, 

12.56 

Mother Jones: Fierce Fighter for Workers' 
Ri^ts, 5.14 

Mouse Match: A Chinese Folktale, 3.138 
Mr. Bumble, 8.43 

Mr. Putter and Tabby Row the Boat, 7.48 
Ms. McDonald Has a Class, 10.30 
Mud Matters, 1.6 
Mummy's Gold, The, 14.25 
Music and Drum: Voices of War and 
Peace, Hope and Dreams, 10.20 



Music of Dolphins, The, 4.10 

Muskrat Will Be Swimming, 4.123 

Mustang, The, 2.52 

My Arctic 1, 2, 3, 9.4 

My Brother, My Enemy, 3.118 

My Dinosaur, 14.18 

My Father's Boat, 4.127 

My First Riddles, 13.34 

My Home Is over Jordan, 20.11 

My Louisiana Sky, 4.66 

My Mama Had a Dancing Heart, 13.6 

My Name Is Georgia: A Portrait, 11.50 

My Own Big Bed, 5.67 

My Palace of Leaves in Sarajevo, 5.20 

My Sister's Rusty Bike, 10.24 

My Teacher's Secret Life, 6.39 

Mystery of King Karfu, The, 13.61 

Myth Maker: J. R. R. Tolkien, 13.47 



Na Mo'olelo o ka Wa Kahiko: Stories of 
Old Hawaii, 3.140 
Nappy Hair, 4.9 

Nate the Great and Me: The Case of the 
Fleeing Fang, 13.69 
Nature of the Beast, The, 14.22 
Navajo Long Walk, 3.22 
NBA by the Numbers, 12.24 
Nessa's Fish, 4.104 
Nesuya's Basket, 3.215 
Night Driving, 8.7 
Nim and the War Effort, 3.109 
Nina Bonita, 8.48 

No Mirrors in My Nana's House, 10.15 
No More Homework! No More Tests! Kids' 
Favorite Funny School Poems, 6.11 
No, David!, 8.21 
Nocturne, 4.41 

North American Indians, 3.103 
Nothing, 8.40 
Nugget and Darling, 8.42 
Number Devil, The, 9.14 



Oceans, 1.54 
Old Home Day, 3.30 
Old People, Frogs, and Albert, 20.56 
Old Woman and the Wave, The, 8.10 
Old Woman Who Named Things, The, 
8.55 

On the Course with . . . Tiger Woods, 12.4 
On the Court with . . . Andre Agassi, 12.4 
On the Court with . . . Grant Hill, 12.4 



617 



Title Index 



593 



On the Court with . . . Hakeem Olajuwon, 

12.4 

On the Field with . . . Emmitt Smith, 12.4 
On the Mound with . . . Greg Maddux, 

12.4 

On the Mound with . . . Randy Johnson, 

12.4 

On the Sidelines, 12.39 
Once in the Country: Poems of the Farm, 
10.48 

Once upon Ice, and Other Frozen Poems, 
10.46 

One of Each, 8.39 

One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical 
Folktale, 9.13 

101 Quesrions about the Seashore, 1.57 
One More Border: The True Story of One 
Family's Escape from War-Torn 
Europe, 20.14 
One Room School, 6.3 
Only Way Out, The, 5.95 
Opening Days: Sports Poems, 10.17 
Ordinary Things: Poems from a Walk in 
Early Spring, 10.10 

Our Journey from Ubet: Based on a True 
Story, 3.198 
Out of the Dust, 4.48 
Out of the Ocean, 1.43 
Outrageously Alice, 6.59 
Over the Moon, 13.26 



Pageant series, 6.71 

Painting the Wind: A Story of Vincent van 
Gogh, 11.47 

Pair of Protoceratops, A, 13.18 
Paper Dragon, The, 14.2 
Paper Gifts and Jewelry, 12.58 
Paper Magic series, 12.58 
Paper Quake: A Puzzle, 14.57 
Paper Tags and Cards, 12.58 
Parrot in the Oven: Mi Vida, 20.4 
Parzival: The Quest for the Grail Knight, 
14.53 

Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story, 
20.28 

Passager, 14.48 

Path of the Quiet Elk, The, 7.35 
Peacebound Trains, 3.114 
Pedrito's Day, 8.34 
Pedro and the Monkey, 3.135 
Penalty Shot, 12.37 
Penny Pot, The, 9.31 



People of Salmon and Cedar, 20.13 
Pete's a Pizza, 8.60 

Phantom of the Prairie: Year of the Black- 
footed Ferret, 2.40 
Picnic Farm, 7.18 

Picture Book of Thurgood Marshall, A, 
3.76 

Pigs Go to Market: Fun with Math and 
Shopping, 9.10 

Pigs in the Mud in the Middle of the Rud, 

8.54 

Pillow for My Mom, A, 4.124 

Pinky and Rex and the New Neighbors, 

7.54 

Pinky and Rex and the School Play: 
Ready-to-Read Level 3, 6.17 
Pizza the Size of the Sun, A, 10.4 
Plains Warrior: Chief Quanah Parker and 
the Comanches, 3.40 
Planes and Other Things, 12.58 
Planet Hunters: The Search for Other 
Worlds, The, 1.9 

Pocahontas: Powhatan Princess, 5.32 
Poems Have Roots, 10.49 
Polar Bear Son, The: An Inuit Tale, 4.98 
Pony Pals series, 6.73 
Popcorn Tree, The, 7.88 
Portrait of Spotted Deer's Grandfather, A, 
3.39 

Positively for Kids series, 12.2 
Potlatch: A Tsimshian Celebration, 3.204 
Powwow Summer: A Family Celebrates 
the Circle of Life, 3.214 
Prince, 12.36 
Puddle, The, 8.49 
Pueblo Boy, 5.55 
Pumpkin Fair, The, 3.195 
Push, 20.49 



Quinceahera: Celebrating Fifteen, 3.179 



Rabbit and Hare Divide an Apple, 9.20 
Radiance Descending, 20.2 
Rain or Shine Achvity Book, The: Fun 
Things to Make and Do, 12.48 
Rainbow at Night, A: The World in Words 
and Pictures by Navajo Children, 
11.41 

Raising Dragons, 14.10 
Reaching Dustin, 5.75 
Red Bird, 4.38 



618 



594 



Title Index 



Red Parka Mary, 4.131 
Red Scarf Girl: A Memoir of the Cultural 
Revolution, 20.47 

Remaking the Earth: A Creation Story 
from the Great Plains of North 
America, 3.127 

Return of the Buffaloes, The: A Plains 
Indian Story about Famine and 
Renewal of the Earth, 3.146 
Rex and Lilly Schooltime: A Dino Easy 
Reader, 6.28 

Ride on Mother's Back, A: A Day of Baby 
Carrying around the World, 4.110 
Ride the Wind: Airborne Journeys of 
Animals and Plants, 2.22 
Riding Freedom, 3.48 
Road to Seneca Falls, The: A Story about 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, 3.50 
Robert Louis Stevenson: Finding Treasure 
Island, 13.40 
Rolling Store, The, 8.41 
Roily's Bear, 4.134 
Rooster's Gift, The, 8.6 
Rosie's Ballet Slippers, 11.62 
Rosie's Big City Ballet, 11.61 
Rosie's Fiddle, 8.18 
Rotten Teeth, 6.14 
Rugrats series, 6.89 
Rules of the Road, 4.74 
Rum-A-Tum-Tum, 10.29 
Rumpelstiltskin's Daughter, 3.167 
Run Away Home, 5.79 
Run for Your Life, 20.37 
Running the Road to ABC, 6.46 
Rupa Raises the Sun, 8.26 



Sabrina the Teenage Witch series, 6.78 

Sacagawea, 3.49 

Sacrifice, The, 3.41 

Saddle Club series. The, 6.75 

Safari, 2.2 

Salmon Summer, 2.42 
Salsa, 11.22 
Sammy's Story, 5.140 
Sarny: A Life Remembered, 3.111 
Saving Sweetness, 8.59 
Say Hola to Spanish, Otra Vez (Again!), 
13.35 

Scholastic Encyclopedia of Sports in the 
United States, 12.28 
Scholastic Encyclopedia of the United 
States at War, 3.117 

School Supplies: A Book of Poems, 10.3 



Scottie Pippen: The Do-E very thing 
Superstar, 12.16 

Scottie Pippen: Reach Higher, 12.2 
Scottie Pippen: Reluctant Superstar, 12.17 
Scrappers series, 6.79 
Sea Man, The, 5.133 
Sea of Tranquility, The, 2.67 
Sea Watch: A Book of Poetry, 10.50 
Sean's War, 4.54 
Season of Comebacks, A, 5.104 
Secret Signs: Along the Underground Rail- 
road, 3.46 

Secrets at Hidden Valley, 13.68 
Seedfolks, 7.66, 20.54 
Sees Behind Trees, 5.72 
Selena Perez: Queen of Tejano Music, 7.69 
Separate but Not Equal: The Dream and 
the Struggle, 20.44 
Serpent's Tongue, The, 11.46 
Seven Brave Women, 4.47 
Seven Gods of Luck, The, 14.9 
Shadow, 3.52 
Shark, 12.36 
Shark in the Sea, 2.51 
Sharp Homs on the Moon, 14.51 
Shingebiss: An Ojibwe Legend, 3.169 
Shoes, 1.39 

Shota and the Star Quilt, 3.193 
Show and Tell Day, 6.18 
Sidewalk Games around the World, 12.42 
Sign, A, 13.45 
Silent Stranger, 13.49 
Silverwing, 14.44 
Singing down the Rain, 3.210 
Sip, Slurp, Soup, Soup/Caldo, caldo, 
caldo, 7.92 

Sister Anne's Hands, 20.3 
Skull of Tmth, The, 14.41 
Sky, 2.61 
Slave Day, 20.42 

Slavery Time: When I Was Chillun, 20.20 
Smudge, 8.19 

Snail Girl Brings Water: A Navajo Story, 
3.150 

Snake Book, The, 2.13 
Snapshot: America Discovers the Camera, 
3.81 

Snapshots from the Wedding, 4.25 
Snow Lambs, The, 8.35 
Snow, Snow: Winter Poems for Children, 
10.51 

So Far from the Sea, 3.105, 20.9 
Soaring with the Wind: The Bald Eagle, 

2.9 



Title Index 



595 



Soccer: The Ultimate World Cup 
Companion, 12.23 

Soft Rain: A Story of the Cherokee Trail of 
Tears, 3.116 

Sol a sol: Bilingual Poems, 10.52 
Some Smug Slug, 13.13 
Something Beautiful, 8.64, 20.8 
Song and Dance: Poems, 10.11 
Songs of Faith, 5.76 
Sooner, 4.42 

Space between Our Footsteps, The: Poems 
and Paintings from the Middle East, 
•10.54 

Space: Stars, Planets, and Spacecraft, 1.16 
Spacebusters: The Race to the Moon, 1.15 
Spaghetti and Meatballs for All, 9.12 
Sparrows in the Scullery, 13.57 
Special Effects in Film and Television, 

11.33 

Spider Spins a Story: Fourteen Legends 
from Native America, 3.158 
Spiders Have Fangs and Other Amazing 
Facts about Arachnids, 7.16 
Sports Biography series, 12.4 
Spotlight on Cody, 6.16 
Squash It! A True and Ridiculous Tale, 14.30 
Squids Will Be Squids: Fresh Morals, 
Beastly Fables, 8.20 
Standing Up to Mr. 0, 6.51 
Starring Mirette and Bellini, 5.128 
Starry Messenger, 3.74 
Starting School, 6.10 
Starting School with an Enemy, 6.29 
Staying Cool, 4.30 
Stepfamilies, 4.70 

Steve Young: NFL Passing Wizard, 12.16 
Sticks, 9.11 

Stolen Dreams: Portraits of Working 
Children, 20.15 

Stone Age Farmers beside the Sea: 
Scotland's Prehistoric Village of 
Skara Brae, 1.1 

Stones, Bones, and Petroglyphs: Digging 
into Southwest Archaeology, 1.12, 
3.86 

Stories on Stone: Rock Art: Images from 
the Ancient Ones, 3.82 
Stories in Stone: Rock Art Pictures by 
Early Americans, 3.77 
Storm on the Desert, 10.42 
Story of Baseball, The, 12.18 
Story of Basketball, The, 12.18 
Story of Blue Elk, The, 3.149 
Story of Chess, The, 12.41 



Story of Football, The, 12.18 
Story of Golf, The, 12.18 
Story of . . . Sports series. The, 12.18 
Story to Tell, A: Traditions of a Tlingit 
Community, 3.212 

Street through Time, A: A 12,000- Year 
Walk through History, 3.69 
Strega Nona: Her Story, 13.41 
Suitcase of Seaweed and Other Poems, A, 
4.76 

Summery Saturday Morning, A, 11.9 
Sun, The, 2.66 
Sun, Moon, and Stars, 2.10 
Sun through the Window: Poems for Chil- 
dren, 10.5 

Sunflower Family, The, 1.56 
Sweet Dream Pie, 14.20 
Sweet Dreams of the Wild: Poems for 
Bedtime, 10.31 

Sweet Dried Apples: A Vietnamese 
Wartime Childhood, 3.115, 20.22 
Sweet Valley High series, 6.84 
Sweet Valley Kids series, 6.85 
Sweet VaUey Twins and Friends series, 6.86 
Swift as the Wind: The Cheetah, 2.6 



Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella, 20.53 

Talking Cloth, The, 4.39 

Talking Walls: The Stories Continue, 7.21 

Tangerine, 13.50 

Tangle Talk, 13.20 

Tangle Town, 13.15 

Tanglebird, 8.45 

Tapenum's Day: A Wampanoag Indian 
Boy in Pilgrim Times, 3.18 
Tara Lipinski: Triumph on Ice: An Autobi- 
ography, 12.1 

Teddy Bear, Teddy Bear, 11.11 
Teeny Tiny Teacher, The: A Teeny Tiny 
Ghost Story, 6.38 

Telling Time with Big Mama Cat, 9.28 
Ten Dogs in the Window, 9.5 
10 Minutes till Bedtime, 8.17 
Ten Queens: Portraits of Women of Power, 
5.24 

Tending the Fire: The Story of Maria 
Martinez, 3.95 
Thank You, Mr. Falker, 6.34 
That Toad Is Mine!, 7.10 
There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a 
Trout!, 11.6 

There's Still Time: The Success of the 
Endangered Species Act, 2.7 



620 



596 



Title Index 



They Swim the Seas: The Mystery of 
Animal Migration, 2.23 
Things that Are Most in the World, 13.11 
Third Grade Pet, 6.9 
This Big Sky, 10.44 
This Is Figure Skating, 12.29 
Thoroughbred series, 6.76 
Three Little Pigs, The, 14.29 
Through the Night, 4.31 
Tickle Stories, The, 7.95 
Tiger Woods: King of the Course, 12.17 
Tiger's Eye, the Bird's Fist, The: A 

Beginner's Guide to the Martial Arts, 
12.22 

Time to Sleep, 11.28 
To Be a Warrior, 3.106 
To Every Thing There Is a Season, 5.6, 
13.28 

To Market, to Market, 3.160, 11.4 
To Save the Earth: The American 
Environmental Movement, 5.2 
Tomas and the Library Lady/Tomas y la 
senora de la biblioteca, 20.39 
Tomatoes, Potatoes, Com, and Beans: How 
the Foods of the Americas Changed 
Eating Around the World, 3.92 
Tomorrow's Alphabet, 7.30 
Top Banana, 8.2 
Top Rookies, 12.14 
Tortillas and Lullabies /Tortillas y 
cancioncitas, 13.39 

Touching the Distance: Native American 
Riddle-Poems, 10.58 
Tracks in the Snow, 5.123 
Transall Saga, The, 14.45 
Tree Is Growing, A, 2.33 
Trio of Triceratops, A, 13.19 
Trouble on the Tracks, 5.129 
Trouble with Wishes, The, 14.55 
Truck Talk: Rhymes on Wheels, 10.12 
Tuba Lessons, 11.12 
Tuesday in Arizona, 8.37 
Tundra Mouse: A Storyknifing Tale, 3.159 
Turkey Girl, The: A Zuni Cinderella Story, 
14.11 

Turning of the Year, The, 13.38 
Turtle Bay, 2.18 
Tut, Tut, 14.58 

'Twas the Night B'fore Christmas; An 
African-American Version, 3.216 
Twilight Comes Twice, 10.1 
Twinnies, 4.5 
Twins!, 4.22 



Two Cool Cows, 13.25 
Two of a Kind series, 6.92 
Two Mrs. Gibsons, The, 4.36 



Uncivil War, 5.85 

Under Our Skin: Kids Talk about Race, 20.57 
Unexplained, The: Mysteries of the 
Universe, 1.20 



Vacuum Cleaners, 1.32 
Very Strange Dollhouse, A, 14.25 
View from Saturday, The, 6.48 
Voices from the Wild: An Animal 
Sensagoria, 2.4 
Voices in the Park, 20.52 
Voices of the Heart, 11.40 



Wagon, The, 3.38 
Walking through the Jungle, 7.5 
Walks Alone, 3.25 
Walks in Beauty, 4.92 
Watcher, The, 4.82 
Water Buffalo Days: Growing Up in 
Vietnam, 7.67 
Water Dance, 10.43 
Water Voices, 7.19 
Way out in the Desert, 7.8 
Way to Make Perfect Mountains, The: 
Native American Legends of Sacred 
Mountains, 10.40 

We Have Marched Together: The Working 
Children's Cmsade, 3.80 
We Shall Not Be Moved: The Women's 
Factory Strike of 1909, 20.23 
Weave of Words, A: An Armenian Tale, 
14.34 

Weaving a California Tradition: A Native 
American Basketmaker, 3.221 
We'll Never Forget You, Roberto 
Clemente, 12.6 
Well of the Wind, The, 5.109 
Well Wished, 14.40 
West, The: An Illustrated History for 
Children, 3.83 
Whales, The, 10.33 

Whales: Killer Whales, Blue Whales and 
More, 2.36 

What a Truly Cool World, 3.131 
What about Ladybugs?, 1.61 
What Color Is Camouflage?, 2.48 



621 



Title Index 



597 



What Daddies Do Best, What Mommies 
Do Best, 4.18 

What Happens When . . . ? You Turn on 
the TV? Switch on a Light? Mail a 
Letter? And Much More!, 1.34 
What the Sun Sees, 7.4 
What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street, 8.15 
What's Alice up To?, 7.11 
What's the Most Beautiful Thing You 
Know about Horses?, 20.60 
When Bear Stole the Chinook: A Siksika 
Tale, 3.168 

When Dinosaurs Die: A Guide to Under- 
standing Death, 1.22 
When Jessie Came across the Sea, 3.34 
When Mama Gets Home, 4.71 
When She Was Good, 4.85 
When We Married Gary, 4.65 
When Whales Exhale and Other Poems, 
10.37 

Whichaway, 5.83 
While a Tree Was Growing, 2.3 
Whirligig, 5.138, 20.24 
White Socks Only, 20.10 
Whitewash, 5.117, 20.16 
Who Killed Mr. Chippendale? A Mystery 
in Poems, 10.27 
Whoever You Are, 8.9 
Why Do Volcanoes Erupt?, 1.65 
Wide-Mouthed Frog, The, 13.4 
Wild Boy, The, 3.63 
Wild Kid, The, 4.86 

Wildlife Watching with Charles Eastman, 
1.53 

William Shakespeare's Macbeth, 11.27 
Wilma Mankiller, 5.22 
Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph 
Became the World's Fastest Woman, 
5.17 

Window, The, 5.102 

Winning Ways: A Photohistory of Ameri- 
can Women in Sports, 12.21 
Winter Concert, 11.16 
Wishbone Classics series, 6.95 



Wolf Stalker, 13.56 
Wolfbay Wings series. The, 12.36 
Wolfhoimd, The, 8.33 
Women of Hope: African Americans Who 
Made a Difference, 20.12 
Women of the Lights, 3.84 
Woodsie, 12.36 
Word Wizard, 13.16 
Working in Health Care and Wellness, 
1.24 

Working in Sports and Recreation, 12.27 
World of Words, A: An ABC of 
Quotations, 7.36 

Worst Kid Who Ever Lived on Eighth 
Avenue, The, 7.39 
Wringer, 5.82, 20.41 



Year of the Sawdust Man, The, 4.83 
Yoko, 6.49 

Yoshiko and the Foreigner, 4.84 

You and Me: Poems of Friendship, 10.18 

Young Astronomer, The, 1.8 

Young Baseball Player, TTie, 12.31 

Young Enthusiast series, 12.31 

Young Ice Skater, The, 12.31 

Young In-Line Skater, The, 12.31 

Young Martial Arts Enthusiast, The, 12.31 

Young ^erHn series. The, 14.48 

Young Patriot, A: The American 

Revolution as Experienced by One 
Boy, 3.121 

Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra, 
The, 11.20 

Young Person's Guide to Philosophy, A, 
5.36 

Young Snowboarder, The, 12.31 
Your Move, 5.71, 20.33 
Yunmi and Halmoni's Trip, 4.111 



Zip, 12.36 

Zorro and Quwi: Tales of a Trickster 
Guinea Pig, 3.202 



o 

ERIC 



622 



Contributors 



Dale Allender, associate executive director, NCTE, Urbana, Illinois 

Cheryl Alley, parent and former elementary teacher, Champaign, Illinois 

Janet Alsup, doctoral student in English education. University of Missouri, 
Columbia 

Marilyn Andre, first-grade teacher, Lee Elementary School of Expressive Arts, 
Columbia, Missouri 

Linda Aulgur, elementary methods instructor, Westminster College, Fulton, 
Missouri 

Susie Bargiel, multiage intermediate teacher. Captain Elementary School, 
Clayton, Missouri 

Cathy Beck, eighth-grade English teacher, Wydown Middle School, Clayton, 
Missouri 

Sandra Beecher, graduate student in comparative cultural and literary studies. 
University of Arizona, Tucson 

Kathleen Bennett, librarian, Lincoln Trail Elementary School, Mahomet, 
Illinois 

Beth Berghoff, assistant professor of language education, Indiana University- 
Purdue University, Indianapolis 

Joan Bownas, third-grade teacher, Emerson Magnet School, Westerville, Ohio 

Amy Breau, graduate assistant in language education. School of Education, 
Indiana University, Bloomington 

Laura Burch, graduate student in French literature and women's studies. 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis-St. Paul 

Jenay Burck, media and research skills teacher, Indian Creek Elementary 
School, Indianapolis, Indiana 

Sally Burge tt, kindergarten teacher. South Side Elementary School, 
Champaign, Illinois 

Caroline Carlson, early childhood resource teacher. Native American Studies 
Department, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School District 

Julie Carlton, director. First Presbyterian Preschool, Las Vegas, Nevada 

Ruby Clayton, kindergarten teacher. Cold Spring Elementary School, 
Indianapolis (Indiana) Public Schools 




600 



Contributors 



Kathleen Marie Crawford, assistant professor in curriculum and instruction, 
Illinois State University, Bloomington 

Trina Crawford, elementary media specialist, Hawthorne Elementary School, 
Lincoln, Nebraska 

Sandra Montiel Costell, bilingual teacher, Carrillo Intermediate Magnet 
School, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School District 

Patricia Teff t Cousin, formerly associate professor of education, Indiana 
University-Purdue University, Indianapolis 

Carol Cribett-Bell, librarian, Carrillo Intermediate Magnet School, Tucson 
(Arizona) Unified School District 

Caryl Gottlieb Crowell, bilingual/ multiage primary classroom teacher, Borton 
Primary Magnet School, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School District 

Lisa Dapoz, first-grade teacher, Emerson Magnet School, Westerville, Ohio 

M. Ruth Davenport, assistant professor of education. Eastern Oregon 
University, La Grande 

Mary Diener, third-grade teacher, Lincoln Elementary School, Clinton, Illinois 

Maureen Dietzel, Title I teacher, LeClaire Elementary School, Edwardsville, 
Illinois 

Carolyn Dye, first-grade teacher, Lee Elementary School of Expressive Arts, 
Columbia, Missouri 

Pennie Dye, second-grade teacher, Edwards Elementary School, Las Vegas, 
Nevada 

Diane Elliott, fifth-grade teacher. South Side Elementary School, Champaign, 
Illinois 

Stacie Cook Emert, curriculum specialist. Maxwell Middle School, Tucson 
(Arizona) Unified School District 

Susan Flynn, recent graduate. Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville 

Lauren Freedman, assistant professor of education. Western Michigan 
University, Kalamazoo 

Carol Gilles, assistant professor in literacy and language education. University 
of Missouri-Columbia 

Cyndi Giorgis, assistant professor in literature education. University of 
Nevada-Las Vegas 

Barbara Greenberg, teacher librarian, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School District 

Denice Haines, sixth-grade teacher. Cold Spring Elementary School, 
Indianapolis (Indiana) Public Schools 



ERIC 




Contributors 



601 



Jerome C. Harste, distinguished professor of language education, Indiana 
University, Bloomington, Indiana 

Jill M. Hartke, sixth-grade teacher, Hopedale (Illinois) Elementary School 

Katherine Hawker, pastor. Evangelical United Church of Christ, St. Louis, 
Missouri 

David Heine, assistant professor of education, St. Cloud State University, 
Minnesota 

Patricia Heine, assistant professor of education, St. Cloud State University, 
Minnesota 

Janice Henson, special education teacher, Columbia Catholic School, 

Columbia, Missouri 

Karen Hildebrand, library media director, Willis Middle School, Delaware, 
Ohio 

Lynda S. Hootman, classroom teacher, Tremont (Illinois) Elementary School 

Angela Humphrey, fourth-grade teacher, Sheridan Grade School, 

Bloomington, Illinois 

Sang Huang, doctoral student, English as a second language. University of 
Missouri-Columbia 

Christine Inkster, reference librarian, St. Cloud State University, Minnesota 

Carol M. Jones, elementary schools librarian. Champaign (Illinois) School 
District 

Frank Kazemak, associate professor. Department of Teacher Development, 

St. Cloud State University, Minnesota 

Jan Keenoy, fifth-grade teacher, Glenridge Elementary School, Clayton, 
Missouri 

Alice Kiruma, first-grade teacher, Panahou Elementary School, Hawaii 

Dick Koblitz, multiage intermediate teacher. Captain Elementary School, 
Clayton, Missouri 

Dottie Kulesza, reading specialist. Paradise Professional Development School, 
Las Vegas, Nevada 

Patty Leahey, secondary language arts teacher, James Campbell High School, 
Ewa Beach, Hawaii 

Veronica Lee, multicategorical classes teacher, Fairview Elementary School, 
Columbia, Missouri 

Christine Leland, associate professor of education, Indiana University-Purdue 
University, Indianapolis 




625 



602 



Contributors 



Mitzi Lewison, assistant professor of language education, Indiana University, 
Bloomington 

Jenine Loesing, first-grade teacher, Fairview Elementary School, Columbia, 
Missouri 

MariBeth Loesing, sixth-grade student, Lange Elementary School, Columbia, 
Missouri 

Kathy Lohse, bilingual kindergarten teacher, Borton Primary Magnet School, 
Tucson (Arizona) Unified School District 

Miki Maeshiro, sixth-grade teacher, Kamehameha Elementary School, 
Honolulu, Hawaii 

Carmen M. Martmez-Roldan, graduate student in language, reading, and 
culture. University of Arizona, Tucson 

Janelle B. Mathis, assistant professor of education. University of North Texas, 
Denton 

Beth Mayberry, parent and graphic artist, St, Louis, Missouri 

Joyce Madsen, second-grade teacher, Tremont (Illinois) Elementary School 

Amy McClure, professor of reading and children's literature, Ohio Wesleyan 
University, Delaware, Ohio 

Elizabeth Mena, third-grade teacher. Four Seasons A+ (Fine Arts) Elementary 
School, St. Paul, Minnesota 

Claudette Mitchell, kindergarten teacher, Inglewood Elementary School, 
Nashville, Tennessee 

Jocelyn Mokulehua, first-grade teacher, Waiau Elementary School, Pearl City, 
Hawaii 

Norma Nelson, sixth-grade teacher, DuBray Middle School, Ft, Zumwalt, 
Missouri 

Shari Nelson-Faulkner, parent. The Family Center, School District of Clayton, 
Missouri 

Beatrice "Bea" Nez, fourth-grade teacher, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School 
District 

Sheilah Nicholas, graduate student, American Indian Studies Department, 
University of Arizona, Tucson 

Anne Ociepka, graduate student in language education, Indiana University, 
Bloomington 

Anne O'Connor, multiage primary teacher, Glenridge Elementary School, 
Clayton, Missouri 

Sally Omalza, sixth-grade teacher, Mililani (Hawaii) Middle School 




Contributors 



603 



Marcia Omura, graduate student in education, University of Hawaii-Manoa 

Penny O'Shaunessey, sixth-grade teacher, Lincoln Environmental Elementary 
School, Grand Rapids, Michigan 

Peggy Oxley, second-grade teacher, St. PauLs School, Westerville, Ohio 

Jann Pataray-Ching, assistant professor of language and literacy studies. 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Pat Pearman, fifth-grade teacher. Four Seasons A+ (Fine Arts) Elementary 
School, St. Paul, Minnesota 

Virginia Pfannenstiel, elementary methods instructor. Central Methodist 
College, Fayette, Missouri 

Kathy Phillips, assistant professor of language and literacy studies. University 
of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Grade Porter, principal, John Early Middle School, Nashville, Tennessee 

Sylvia Raschke, third-grade teacher. Oak Hill Elementary School, St. Cloud, 
Minnesota 

Laurie Reddy, first-grade teacher, Iroquois West Elementary School, Gilman, 
Illinois 

Elizabeth M. Redondo, interactive literacy teacher, Safford Engineering/ 

Technology Magnet Middle School, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School 
District 

Pam Riggs, seventh-grade communication arts teacher, Buehler Middle School, 
Marshall, Missouri 

Charles Robb, parent and former teacher, Moberly, Missouri 

Sandra Schmidt, high-school global studies teacher, Comstock Park 
(Michigan) High School 

Sharon Schneegerger, project construct leader, Columbia, Missouri 

Stephanie Shafer, early childhood education student. Central Methodist 
College, Fayette, Missouri 

Betsy Shepar, librarian, Wakefield Middle School, Tucson (Arizona) Unified 
School District 

Kathy G. Short, professor of language, reading and culture. University of 
Arizona, Tucson 

Karen Smith, associate professor of curriculum and instruction, Arizona State 
University, Tempe 

Katrina Smits, third-grade bilingual teacher, Carrillo Intermediate Magnet 
School, Tucson (Arizona) Unified School District 




604 



Contributors 



Jane Soelhke, intermediate teacher, Illini School, Fairview Heights, Illinois 

Marilyn Soucie, teacher mentor. Teaching Fellowship Program, Fairview 
Elementary School, Columbia, Missouri 

Sharon Stemmons, fourth-grade teacher. Mill Creek Elementary School, 
Columbia, Missouri 

Della Stevens, elementary media specialist. Rice Lake Elementary School, Lino 
Lakes, Minnesota 

Anna Sumida, second-grade teacher, Kamehameha Elementary School, 
Honolulu, Hawaii 

Pamela Swinford, remedial reading teacher. New Palestine (Indiana) School 
Corporation, 

Shelli Thelen, kindergarten teacher. Pilot Grove (Missouri) Elementary School 

Nancy Tolson, assistant professor in English, Illinois State University, 
Bloomington 

Beverly Johns Vick, third-grade teacher, Patrick Henry Elementary School, 
Fairfax, Virginia 

Vivian Vasquez, assistant professor of reading and language arts, American 
University, Washington, D.C. 

Joan Von Dras, fifth-grade teacher, Glenridge Elementary School, Clayton, 
Missouri 

Lillian Webb, elementary schools gifted education teacher, Worthington, Ohio 

Karla Hawkins Wendelin, elementary library media specialist, Norris School, 
Firth, Nebraska 

David Whitin, professor of elementary and early childhood education. Queens 
College, Flushing, New York 

Phyllis Whitin, assistant professor of elementary and early childhood 
education. Queens College, Flushing, New York 

Jean Williams, acquisitions and collection development librarian, Kalamazoo 
(Michigan) Public Schools 

Sandra Williams, associate professor. Center for Information Media, St. Cloud 
State University, Minnesota 

Jennifer L. Wilson, seventh-grade teacher, Reed-Custer Middle School, 
Braidwood, Illinois 

Susan Wolf, fifth-grade teacher, Glenridge Elementary School, Clayton, 
Missouri 

Allison Young, assistant professor of education. Western Michigan University, 
Kalamazoo 



. 628 



Editor 




Kathryn Mitchell Pierce is a multiage primary 
classroom teacher in the School District of 
Clayton, Missouri. She has served on the Chil- 
dren's Literature Assembly of the National 
Council of Teachers of English, and as a mem- 
ber of the committees to select the NCTE 
Notable Children's Books in the Language 
Arts and the Lee Bennett Hopkins Poetry 
Award. Pierce has served as co-editor (with 
Carol Gilles) of the "Talking about Books" 
department in Language Arts, and (with Kathy 
Short) of the "Children's Books" department 
in The Reading Teacher. Her publications 
include Talking about Books: Literature Discus- 
sion Groups K-8 (with Kathy Short), Cycles of 
Meaning: Exploring the Potential of Talk in Learn- 
ing Communities (with Carol Gilles), and a 
chapter in Teaching Language Arts: Learning 
through Dialogue (Judith Wells Lindfors and 
Jane S. Townsend, editors). 




629 



This book was typeset in Palatino and Helvetica by Precision Graphics. 
Typefaces used on the cover were University Roman and Palatino. 
The book was printed on 50 lb. White Lynx Opaque by Versa Press. 



o 

ERIC 



630 



Adventuring with Books introduces readers to powerful books— 
books that expand children's horizons and stimulate their 
imaginations. This project builds on the excellent work reflected in 
previous editions of the booklist by providing an annotated 
bibliography of books published from 1996 through 1998 for 
children in elementary grades. A rich variety of topics is covered, 
including Our Changing World, Families, Fine Arts, and The Craft 
of Language. Classroom teachers and curriculum specialists will 
appreciate the inclusion of comments and reactions by teachers 
and children who have used these books in classroom and library 
settings, as well as their suggestions for additional uses. 

This edition of Adventuring with Books is the result of a 
collaborative project involving study groups across the coimtry 
made up of teachers, librarians, university faculty, school-age and 
imiversity students, and parents; the collaboration has resulted in 
a book of imusual depth and breadth. In the introduction to each 
chapter, the groups share their process, the criteria they developed, 
the issues they grappled with as they selected and reviewed their 
books, and the decisions they made about organizing the books in 
the chapters. Extensive indexes — organized by author, title, 
illustrator, and subject — help make Adventuring with Books a 
valuable resource for parents, classroom teachers, librarians, and 
curriculum specialists, as well as university faculty in child 
development, children's literature, reading, language arts, and 
curriculum. 






U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODTJCTTON BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket) form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




EFF-089 (9/97) 





