
by Kimberley A. M. Boyer and Susan M.Tracz 


By 2040, Asian Americans are expected to account for 
10 percent of the country's total population (Lee, 1999). 
However, few studies focus on afterschool interventions for 
Asian-American young people or examine how afterschool 
programming affects them. One reason may be the myth 
of the model minority, the stereotype that Asian-American 
students are all high-achieving conformists (Olsen, 1999; 
Walker-Moffat, 1995). However, Asian Americans are 
far from being a monolithic group. For one thing, their 
backgrounds are highly diverse. 

The Asian population is made up of 31 different ethnic 
groups who speak close to 300 languages and dialects 
(Olsen, 1999). Among these groups, wide differences in 
experiences are common. Recent immigrants, particularly 
those from underprivileged areas where education levels 
are low, are less likely to have the resources to support 
their children’s learning than are immigrants from more 


affluent regions. Experience of trauma before and dur¬ 
ing immigration likewise takes its toll. For example, the 
families of the Hmong students who are the focus of this 
study came to the U.S. as refugees, often after long and 
debilitating stays in refugee camps. The children of such 
immigrant families must cope not only with language 
and cultural differences but also with recent trauma and 
with all the challenges of living in poverty. Contrary to 


KIMBERLEY A. M. BOYER, Ed.D., is executive director at Central 
Valley Afterschool Foundation, a technical assistance and capac¬ 
ity building organization that supports high-quality afterschool 
and summer programs through training and coaching, curricu¬ 
lum development, community partnership development, special 
events, and public policy initiatives. For the past 16 years, she 
has worked as an elementary school teacher, afterschool director, 
and consultant. Her research focuses on expanded learning and on 
Asian-American youth. 

SUSAN M. TRACZ, Ph.D., is a professor at California State Uni¬ 
versity, Fresno, where she teaches graduate research and statistics 
courses and guides doctoral students in their research methods. As 
graduate programs coordinator, she assists with the administration 
of the university's master's degree programs. She is on the editorial 
board of several journals and has served as program evaluator for 
National Science Foundation grants and others. 







the “model minority” stereotype, these young people face 
at least as many barriers to educational and social success 
as do members of other minority groups in this country. 

Afterschool programs can support Asian-American 
young people by providing academic support and cultur¬ 
ally specific programming designed to help them bridge 
their native and adopted cultures. However, little is known 
about the effect of afterschool participation on academic 
and social outcomes for Asian-American students. This 
causal-comparative study helps to fill this gap by studying 
the differences in achievement, behavior, and self-esteem 
between Hmong students who did and did not participate 
in afterschool programs in two high schools in the Central 
Valley of California. The focus on a specific ethnic group is 
a reminder that Asian Americans are not a single entity but 
a diverse set of groups. Our study helps to fill another gap in 
the literature by focusing on the high school level, where the 
effects of afterschool programming are much less well doc¬ 
umented than at the elementary and middle school levels. 

The Experience of Hmong Students 

Beginning in 1975, the Hmong from northern Laos be¬ 
gan to immigrate to the United States (Bliatout, Downing, 
Lewis, & Yang, 1988). Recruited by the CIA during the 
Vietnam War, many Hmong later fled from Laos to Thai¬ 
land, where large numbers lived in refugee camps for up to 
20 years (Goodkind, 2006). Between 1975 and 1999, about 
1.2 million Southeast Asian refugees resettled in the U.S. 
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of 
Refugee Resettlement, 1999). Some of these families expe¬ 
rienced catastrophic losses during the Vietnam War and in 
the refugee camps. These losses were further compounded 
by the losses involved in emigrating. 

The total Hmong population in the U.S. is esti¬ 
mated at more than 235,000 people (California State 
University, Fresno, 2011). California’s Hmong popula¬ 
tion is estimated to be nearly 85,000; in the Central 
Valley, the population is about 47,000. The adjustment 
issues these immigrants faced in the U.S. included poor 
health, post-traumatic stress disorder, poor English 
language skills, lack of formal education, conflicted in- 
tergenerational relations, unemployment, poverty, and 
identity confusion about family and other roles (Beiser, 
Turner, & Ganesan, 1989; Pernice & Brook, 1996). 

According to Lee (2001), the proportion of Hmong 
who are 17 years or younger is 44.1 percent; the U.S. aver¬ 
age is 24.3 percent. Initially, when Hmong students began 
to attend U.S. schools, their achievement rate was perceived 
to be low, and Hmong students had high dropout rates, in 
part because of the early marriages of girls. To compound 


the burden, newly educated English-speaking children of¬ 
ten did not respect their elders as their culture expected, 
perceiving their parents and grandparents as clinging to 
traditional ways. Later this pattern was broken as two dis¬ 
tinct types of Hmong students emerged. Some students 
were highly successful in school, reinforcing the stereo¬ 
type of the model minority. Girls were higher achievers 
than boys. However, for other students, low achievement, 
early marriages and pregnancies, dropping out, and gang 
membership continued to be problems. 

A Shortage of Research 

The positive effects of afterschool programs generally are 
well documented. Teens in afterschool tend to have higher 
achievement, higher test scores in high school, better at¬ 
tendance, better study habits, and better psychosocial 
indicators (American Youth Policy Forum, 2006; Espino, 
Fabiano, & Pearson, 2004; Fabiano, Pearson, Reisner, & 
Williams, 2006; Goerge, Cusick, Wasserman, & Gladden, 
2007; Vandell, Reisner, & Pierce, 2007; Welsh, Russell, 
Williams, Reisner, & White, 2002). These positive out¬ 
comes are especially important for young teens and high 
school students, who are increasingly likely to drop out 
of school or engage in risky behaviors as they grow older. 

Most of the research on the effect of afterschool pro¬ 
grams on high school students examines programs in 
middle school, where the foundation is laid for academic 
and social success in high school. For example, Vandell 
and colleagues (2007) found that middle school students 
in high-quality afterschool programs experienced signifi¬ 
cant gains in mathematics achievement. They also found a 
reduction in incidence of misconduct, with a correspond¬ 
ing increase in positive work habits. Similarly, researchers 
(Espino et al., 2004, Fabiano et al., 2006) examined the 
high school outcomes of eighth grade students who attend¬ 
ed Citizen School afterschool programs in Boston. Fabiano 
and colleagues (2006) found that participating students 
had better school attendance, better English and math 
grades, and fewer school suspensions than did students 
who did not attend afterschool programs. In a study of LA’s 
BEST programs for students in grades 6-9, Huang and col¬ 
leagues (2005) followed four cohorts of students through 
grade 12. LA’s BEST students were reported to have higher 
self-esteem and lower dropout rates than did matched 
nonparticipants (Huang, Kim, Marshall, & Perez, 2005). 

Studies of afterschool programs in high schools are 
less numerous because fewer students attend high school 
programs. Indeed, as students drop out, fewer even attend 
high school. The studies on the effects of afterschool pro¬ 
grams on high school youth that do exist generally show 


Boyer & Tracz 


HMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS IN AFTERSCHOOL 45 


positive results. For example, a study of the After School 
Matters program in Chicago (Goerge et al., 2007) found 
that participants had fewer absences, fewer course fail¬ 
ures, better high school graduation rates, and lower 
dropout rates than nonparticipants. A report by Flipps 
and Diaz (2007) on the After School Safety and Enrich¬ 
ment for Teens (ASSETs) program—also the setting of 
our research—revealed that ASSETs had some signifi¬ 
cant effects on students and schools. Participants passed 
California’s English language arts and mathematics exit 
exams at significantly higher rates than did similarly 
situated students not involved in afterschool programs. 
The program also increased students’ awareness of options 
after high school and facilitated positive relationships 
with adults and peers. 

Ethnicity is rarely mentioned 
in these studies of the effects of 
middle and high school afterschool 
programs. In those that do spec¬ 
ify the ethnicities of the student 
samples, the percentages of Asian- 
American students are predictably 
low, from 3 percent (Vandell et al., 

2007) to 9 percent (Welsh et al., 

2002). In the LA’s BEST study, Asian- 
American students were the third 
largest group after Hispanic and 
African-American students (Huang 
et al., 2005). Even in these studies, 
however, the effects of afterschool programs specifically 
on Asian-American students go essentially unexamined. 

We know of no research that examines afterschool 
programming for Hmong high school students. The only 
study we have found of afterschool programs serving 
low-income Hmong immigrant youth is that of Lee and 
Hawkins (2008), who conducted a qualitative study of 
community-based programs in Lakeside, Michigan, serving 
children ages 6-12. Through observations and interviews, 
Lee and Hawkins examined how these programs sup¬ 
ported students’ development of their cultural identity by 
drawing on Hmong culture, history, and family structure 
as well as mainstream American culture. Children were 
encouraged to learn English while continuing to speak the 
Hmong language. The director advised students to adopt 
aspects of the dominant American culture that were neces¬ 
sary for social mobility and success but not to give up their 
cultural identities. Lee and Hawkins concluded that par¬ 
ticipants felt safe and comfortable in trying out their new 
Hmong-American identities, so that they developed their 
self-esteem and could be successful in school. However, 


the study did not quantify academic and psychosocial out¬ 
comes among participating Hmong youth. 

Methods 

In order to begin to quantify the effect of afterschool 
programming on Hmong high school students, we 
conducted a causal-comparative study of the differ¬ 
ences in academic outcomes, academic behavior, and 
self-esteem between such students who attended and 
did not attend afterschool programs. 

Setting 

The setting for our study was the After-School Safety and En¬ 
richment for Teens (ASSETs) program in two high schools 
in the Central Valley of California. 
These two high schools average ap¬ 
proximately 2,600 students apiece in 
grades 9-12; both have high Hmong 
enrollments. These schools were 
chosen for this study because they 
were early ASSETs program grant¬ 
ees, beginning the ASSETs program 
during the 2007-2008 academic 
year. Our research covered the 
2008-2009 academic year. 

ASSETs is a 21st Century Com¬ 
munity Learning Centers program 
established by the California Legis¬ 
lature in 2002 as part of a statewide 
effort to address the underachievement of California youth 
(California Department of Education, 2008). Priority is giv¬ 
en to projects that serve students in schools that, like the 
two schools in this study, ranked in the lowest three deciles 
of the Academic Performance Index (Hipps & Diaz, 2007). 

The ASSETs programs we studied offered academic 
support activities every day. Academic programs included 
mentoring, tutoring, and workforce readiness training, 
as well as frequent and extensive training to prepare stu¬ 
dents for academic testing. Students could drop in and out 
depending on their schedules and participation in other 
ASSETs activities. Cultural enrichment and awareness ac¬ 
tivities like dance and cooking were offered in modules 
so students could pick and choose. These classes typically 
met three to five times a week. Program facilitators were 
school teachers or college students. 

At each of the two schools, about 200 students at¬ 
tended the ASSETs program each day. Roughly 15 percent 
of the attendees were Hmong. In both schools, all students 
were invited to attend, but program facilitators and men¬ 
tors purposefully recruited struggling students who were 


Ethnicity is rarely 
mentioned in these studies 
of the effects of middle 
and high school afterschool 
programs, in those that do 
specify the ethnicities of 
the student samples, the 
percentages of Asian- 
American students are 
predictably low. 


46 Afte rschool Matters 


Spring 2014 


referred by teachers and administrators to take advantage 
of the academic help the ASSETs programs offered. 

Participants 

We recruited from among all Hmong-American students 
in the two high schools chosen for this study. The final 
sample consists of 226 Hmong high school students. Ap¬ 
proximately one-third (77) participated in the afterschool 
program, and two-thirds (149) did not. 

Of the 176 students for whom gender information 
was available, 42 percent were male and 58 percent 
were female. Nearly equal numbers of students were in 
all four grades, 9-12. According to the student surveys, 
parental education levels were low, with 36 percent of 
students’ parents having only an elementary school 
education or less and another 41 percent having some 
high school education. We did not have demographic 
data for all students because some students did not 
answer those questions on the survey. 

Data Sources 

To measure academic performance, we used student 
scores from the California High School Exit Exam for Eng¬ 
lish language arts (ELA) and mathematics. Only 11th- and 
12th-grade students take these tests, so scores were not 
available for students in grades 9 and 10. We assessed aca¬ 
demic performance using cumulative grade point average 
(GPA) and academic behavior using individual attendance 
rates. The attendance rate was calculated as the number 
of days a student was present in school divided by the 
number of days that student was enrolled. All of these 
data came from school district records. 

To measure the affective outcome of interest, we used 
the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1989), the 
most widely used self-esteem measure in social science 
research. The Rosenberg scale contains 10 items that are 
rated on a four-point Likert scale ranging from “strongly 
agree” to “strongly disagree.” We administered this 
assessment to participating students along with a survey 
of pertinent demographic information. 

Procedures 

In order to examine differences between Hmong youth 
who did and did not participate in the ASSETs pro¬ 
gram, we took several steps. First, we secured approval 
from the institutional review board of California State 
University, Fresno. At one school the principal assisted 
with recruiting students from their homerooms. In the 
other school, students were recruited with announce¬ 
ments asking them to come to the library for further 


information. As an incentive, participating students 
were entered into a lottery for an iPod. Once students 
volunteered, we gave them informational packets that 
included an introductory letter; a consent form; and a 
DVD that educated the students and their parents about 
the purpose of the study, the surveys, and other relevant 
materials. After permission was secured, we brought 
students together to take our survey, which included 
self-esteem and demographic measures. 

We then divided the 224 Hmong students whose par¬ 
ents gave consent and who responded to our survey into 
two groups: students who had participated in the ASSETs 
program for at least 30 days since August 2008 and stu¬ 
dents who had not. We identified members of these groups 
based on their answers to our survey questions and then 
checked the afterschool site attendance databases. We 
chose 30 days as the cutoff point based on research by 
Hipps and Diaz (2007) indicating that significant increases 
in student achievement took place at 30 days or more of 
participation in the ASSETs program. Furthermore, stu¬ 
dents who dropped out of ASSETs tended to leave within 
the first 30 days, so that those who persisted past 30 days 
tended to continue in the program. 

Next, we collected archival 2008-2009 data for stu¬ 
dents in both groups, including exit exam scores in ELA 
and math, cumulative GPAs, and school attendance. 
Using student ID numbers as identifying information, 
we merged our survey data with the archival data for 
analysis. We ran a variety of statistical tests to deter¬ 
mine significance. For example, we ran chi-square tests 
of independence to determine whether gender, grade, or 
parent education level affected whether or not students 
participated in the afterschool program. We calculated 
average results for each of the dependent variables— 
ELA scores, math scores, GPA, attendance rate, and 
self-esteem—by afterschool participation and by grade 
and then ran tests to determine whether these results 
were significant at the 0.05 level. 

Effects of Afterschool Participation on Hmong 
High School Students 

We found no significant differences in afterschool par¬ 
ticipation by gender or parent education level. Students 
whose parents had only an elementary school educa¬ 
tion, for example, were no more or less likely to attend 
the afterschool program than students whose parents 
had college degrees. However, we did find a significant 
chi-square value between grade and afterschool partici¬ 
pation: a higher proportion of students in grade 12 than 
in other grades participated in ASSETs. 


Boyer &■ Tracz 


HMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS IN AFTERSCHOOL 47 


Tests comparing the effect of afterschool participation 
on academic outcomes showed some statistically signifi¬ 
cant differences. We found that the difference in GPA by 
ASSETs participation was in the negative direction: Stu¬ 
dents who participated had an average GPA of 2.05, lower 
than the average GPA of nonparticipants, 2.47. However, 
on the California High School Exit Exam, 11th- and 12th- 
graders who participated in the afterschool program had 
a higher average ELA score than did nonparticipants. The 
average ELA score was 371 for participants and 355 for 
nonparticipants, a statistically significant difference. (The 
passing score is 350.) Participants also had higher math 
scores than did nonparticipants, though the difference 
was not statistically significant. 

In our measure of academic behavior, ASSETs partici¬ 
pants had significantly better average attendance rates, at 
99 percent, than did nonparticipants, at 95 percent. 

The findings for self-esteem were mixed. Ninth-grade 
students who did not participate in ASSETs had higher 
scores for self-esteem than did participants. However, for 
all other grades, participants had higher self-esteem scores 
than did nonparticipants, with participating seniors hav¬ 
ing the highest self-esteem score of all. 

Understanding the Results 

In contrast to much of the pub¬ 
lished research on afterschool 
programming for middle and high 
school students (Fabiano et al., 

2006; Goerge et al, 2007), which 
reports higher achievement rates 
for afterschool students than for 
non-participating peers, our find¬ 
ings were mixed. Though students 
in the ASSETs program achieved 
higher scores on the ELA exit exam 
than did non-participating stu¬ 
dents, participating students had 
lower GPAs. It must be noted that GPAs for both groups of 
Hmong students were relatively low: just 2.05 for partici¬ 
pating students and 2.47 for non-participating students. 
In this respect, Hmong students in this study apparently 
experienced an achievement gap comparable to the often- 
cited gap experienced by Hispanic and African-American 
students. Clearly the Hmong students in our study did 
not fit the model minority stereotype of Asian Americans. 

The relatively low GPAs of all Hmong students may 
be at least partially explained by cultural and educational 
background. Formal schooling in all subjects relies on 
reading and writing. Hmong is an ancient culture, but, 


unlike many Asian cultures, its language has only recently 
acquired a system of writing (Bliatout et al., 1988). Mean¬ 
while, about 40 percent of the parents of the students in 
our study had, at best, only a grade school education— 
a finding consistent with their backgrounds as refugees. 
Parents with little education themselves, and particularly 
those raising children in marginal settings such as refu¬ 
gee camps, are not likely to engage in the child-rearing 
practices that prepare children to excel in school, such as 
reading aloud. As a group, then, the Hmong students in 
our sample may have started with an educational deficit 
that helps to explain their relatively low grades. 

The fact that afterschool participants had lower 
average GPAs than did nonparticipants may also be 
attributed to the students’ starting point before the 
afterschool intervention. Students with low GPAs 
were targeted for recruitment into the ASSETs pro¬ 
grams so that they could benefit from the specialized 
academic support the programs offered. Tutoring in 
core subject areas, credit recovery classes, and exit 
exam tutorials were designed to help ASSETs students 
get and stay on track to graduate. As a group, ASSETs 
students are likely to have started out with lower GPAs 
than their non-participating peers. 

Two areas in which the ASSETs 
program does seem to have helped 
participating students are prepara¬ 
tion for the high school exit exam 
and school attendance. Test prepa¬ 
ration was offered to all students in 
the high schools in our study, but 
it was offered only sporadically, 
and students often did not take 
advantage of the opportunity or 
use it regularly. Meanwhile, ASSETs 
students received targeted tutor¬ 
ing to help them with the exam. 
Evidence of the effectiveness of this 
exit exam training is that participants had significantly 
higher mean scores on the ELA exam than did nonpar¬ 
ticipants. ASSETs students also had better attendance 
rates than did non-participating students. These Endings 
echo the research described above that found higher re¬ 
sults on some measures of academic achievement and 
behaviors for afterschool participants. 

The ASSETs program also seems to have had pos¬ 
itive effects on self-esteem. In the ninth grade, students 
attending the afterschool program had lower average 
self-esteem scores than those who did not attend. Per¬ 
haps these students were experiencing more freedom 


Hmong students in this study 
apparently experienced an 
achievement gap comparable 
to the often-cited gap 
experienced by Hispanic and 
African-American students. 
Clearly the Hmong students 
in our study did not fit the 
model minority stereotype 
of Asian Americans. 


48 Afte rschool Matters 


Spring 2014 


as they started high school, while 
the ASSETs students felt confined 
by their participation in a school- 
related activity after school. 

However, students in grades 10- 
12 who participated in ASSETs 
had higher self-esteem scores than 
did those who did not participate. 

The highest self-esteem rating 
was for seniors who were assisted 
academically by ASSETs as they 
neared the achievement of a high 
school diploma. Program partici¬ 
pants may have benefitted from 
the positive adult relationships, 
academic support, and Hmong 
cultural enrichment provided by ASSETs, similar to the 
students in Lee and Hawkins’s (2008) qualitative study. 

Implications for Policy and Practice 

The ASSETs afterschool program produced positive 
outcomes for the Hmong high school students in our 
sample. The implication is that other Hmong high 
school students could also benefit from afterschool 
programs. If they receive intensive test preparation, 
students are likely to improve their test scores. They 
may be more likely to attend during the regular school 
day if they are motivated to attend the afterschool 
program. Furthermore, exposure to experiences 
related to their home culture with the support of car¬ 
ing afterschool staff may improve their self-esteem. 

Self-esteem is one possible indicator of mental 
health status. The process of acculturation—the cog¬ 
nitive and behavioral changes brought about by close 
contact with a different culture—can be stressful 
for acculturated individuals, often producing de¬ 
pression, anxiety, and low self-esteem (Rhee, Chang, 
& Rhee, 2003). As Rhee and colleagues (2003) found, 
professionals must recognize the importance of com¬ 
munication, within families and across cultural groups, 
in promoting self-esteem among adolescents. School 
and afterschool educators who work with Hmong stu¬ 
dents should pay particular attention to the students’ 
distinct cultural context. These professionals need to 
understand the ecological realities and ethno-cultural 
dynamics faced by Hmong students in order to help 
them more effectively. Many afterschool programs like 
ASSETs strive to address these realities. Afterschool 
programs’ ongoing efforts along these lines can pro¬ 
duce positive social-emotional outcomes not only 


among Hmong students but also 
among students from any disad¬ 
vantaged immigrant group. 

As with all studies, this one 
leads to future research possibili¬ 
ties. Future studies that address 
academic differences among 
Asian subgroups, including the 
Hmong, may be useful in dis¬ 
pelling the myth of Asians as the 
model minority. Studies comparing 
the academic and social outcomes 
of Hmong students and of mem¬ 
bers of other non-Asian minorities 
may find more similarities than 
differences. Other research could 
compare outcomes among Hmong students whose 
families have lived in the U.S. for longer and shorter 
periods of time. This avenue of research could provide 
useful insights into Hmong students’ educational 
and acculturation processes. 

References 

American Youth Policy Forum. (2006, January). 
Helping youth succeed through out-of-school time 
programs. Retrieved from http://www.aypf.org/ 
publications/HelpingYouthOST2006.pdf 

Beiser, M., Turner, R., & Ganesan, S. (1989). 
Catastrophic stress and factors affecting its consequences 
among Southeast Asian refugees. Social Science 
Medicine, 28, 195. 

Bliatout, B., Downing, B., Lewis, J., & Yang, D. (1988). 
Handbook for teaching Hmong-speaking students. 
Sacramento, CA: Folsom Cordova Unified School 
District, Southeast Asia Community Resource Center. 

California Department of Education. (2008). 21st 
Century Community Learning Centers. Retrieved from 
www. cde. ca. gov/ls/ba/cp 

California State University, Fresno. (2011). Hmong and 
Southeast Asian demographics. Retrieved from http:// 
www.csufresno.edu/hsari/demographics/index.html 

Espino, J., Fabiano, L., & Pearson, L. M. (2004). 

Citizen Schools: Evidence from two student cohorts on the 
use of community resources to promote youth development. 
Washington, DC: Policy Studies Associates. 

Fabiano, L., Pearson, L. M., Reisner, E. R., & Williams, 
I. J. (2006). Preparing students in the middle grades to 
succeed in high school. Washington, DC: Policy Studies 


School and afterschool 
educators who work with 
Hmong students should 
pay particular attention to 
the students' distinct 
cultural context. These 
professionals need to 
understand the ecological 
realities and ethno-cultural 
dynamics faced by Hmong 
students in order to help 
them more effectively. 


Boyer &■ Tracz 


HMONG HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS IN AFTERSCHOOL 49 


Associates. Retrieved from http://www.emcf.org/ 
fileadmin/user/PDF/Results/evalCitizenSchools 
Evaluation2006.pdf 

Goerge, R., Cusick, G. R., Wasserman, M., & Gladden, R. 
M. (2007). After-school programs and academic impact: A 
study of Chicago’s After School Matters. (Issue Brief 112). 
Retrieved from http://www.chapinhall.org/sites/default/ 
files/publications/ChapinHallDocument(2)_0.pdf 

Goodkind, J. R. (2006). Promoting Hmong refugees’ 
well-being through mutual learning: Valuing knowledge, 
culture, and experience. American Journal of 
Community Psychology, 37(1/2), 77-93. 

Hipps, J., & Diaz, M. (2007, January). California 21st 
Century high school After School Safety Enrichment for 
Teens (ASSETs) program: Independent evaluation. 
Retrieved from http://www.wested.org/online_pubs/ 
eval-07-02.pdf 

Huang, D., Kim, K. S., Marshall, A., & Perez, P. (2005, 
December). Keeping kids in school: An LA’s BEST example. 
A study examining the long-term impact of LA’s BEST on 
students’ dropout rates. Los Angeles: Center for Research 
on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing, 
University of California, Los Angeles. Retrieved from 
http://www.lasbest.org/download/keeping-kids-in-school 

Lee, S. J. (2001). More than “model minorities” or 
“delinquents”: A look at Hmong American high school 
students. Harvard Educational Review, 71(3), 505-528. 

Lee, S. J., & Hawkins, M. R. (2008). “Lamily is here”: 
Learning in community-based after-school programs. 
Theory into Practice, 47(1), 51-58. 

Lee, S. K. (1999, January). The relationship between 
cultural identity and academic achievement of Asian 
American students. Paper presented at the 28th Annual 
International Bilingual/Multicultural Education 
Conference, Denver, CO. 

Olsen, L. (1999). An invisible crisis: The educational 
needs of Asian Pacific American youth. New York, NY: 
Asian Americans/Pacific Islanders in Philanthropy. 

Pernice, R., & Brook, J. (1996). Refugees’ and immigrants’ 
mental health: Association of demographic and post¬ 
migration factors. Journal of Social Psychology, 136, 511— 
519. 

Rhee, S., Chang, J., & Rhee, J. (2003). Acculturation, 
communication patterns, and self-esteem among Asian and 
Caucasian American adolescents. Adolescence, 38, 749-768. 

Rosenberg, M. (1989). Society and the adolescent self-image 
(Rev. ed.). Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press. 


U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 

Office of Refugee Resettlement. (1999). Annual ORR 
Reports to Congress - 1999. Retrieved from http:// 
archive.acf.hhs.gov/programs/orr/data/99arc8.htm 

Vandell, D. L., Reisner, E. R., & Pierce, K. M. (2007, 
October). Outcomes linked to high-quality afterschool 
programs: Longitudinal findings from the study of promising 
afterschool programs. Report to the Charles Stewart Mott 
Loundation. Retrieved from http://www.gse.uci.edu/ 
childcare/pdf/afterschool/PP%20Longitudinal%20 
Lindings%20Linal%20Report.pdf 

Walker-Moffat, W (1995). The other side of the Asian 
American success story. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Welsh, M. E., Russell, C. A., Williams, I., Reisner, E. R., 
& White, R. N. (2002). Promoting learning and school 
attendance through after-school programs: Student-level 
changes in educational performance across TASC’s first three 
years. Washington, DC: Policy Studies Associates. 
Retrieved from http://www.tascorp.org/files/1436_file_ 
promoting_learning_attendance_TASC_3years_2002.pdf 


50 Afte rschool Matters 


Spring 2014 


