DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 468 311 



FL 027 391 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

JOURNAL CIT 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Gonzalez-Pino, Barbara 

An Infusion Curriculum for the Heritage Speaker of Spanish. 
2000 - 00-00 

19p.; In: Proceedings for the Texas Foreign Language 
[Education] Conference (Austin, Texas, March 31 -April 1, 
2000) ; see FL 027 384 . 

Journal Articles (080) -- Reports - Research (143) -- 

Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education; v5 nl p93-109 
spec iss Fall 2000 

EDRS Price MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

*Heritage Education; Higher Education; Hispanic American 
Students; ^Native Language Instruction; * Spanish; ^Student 
Attitudes; Teaching Methods; Urban Areas 



ABSTRACT 

This article presents an overview of the literature on 
program models for teaching Spanish to heritage speakers, noting definitions, 
intake and placement procedures, typical offerings, and effective approaches, 
and covering a proficiency orientation, infusion of subculture materials, 
study of sociolinguists, community involvement, and cooperative learning. It 
then focuses on three studies conducted in an urban commuter institution with 
a large number of heritage speakers to determine students’ views of mixed 
classes, motivations for rejecting heritage classes, and assessment of their 
own language background and abilities. Finally, the article reports on an 
experiment to infuse materials about southwest Spanish into second-, third-, 
and fourth-semester classes . The experiment was well-received by students . It 
suggests both a permanent infusion curriculum for the regular Spanish course 
sequence and using this approach to interest additional heritage learners in 
classes tailored to their needs. Appendices present questionnaires and a 
description of southwest Spanish. (Contains 35 references.) (Author/SM) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



An Infusion Curriculum For The Heritage Speaker Of Spanish* 



Barbara GonzAlez-Pino, University of Texas at San Antonio 



ro 

oo 

VO 

Q 

W 



u S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and improvement 
EC/JCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

[gjf This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

Pj \f K ft. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



VS - * 

cO 

ctS 




o 

c 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



An Infusion Curriculum For The Heritage Speaker Of Spanish* 

Barbara GonzAlez-Pino, University of Texas at San Antonio 

The author presents an overview of the literature on program models for teaching 
Spanish to heritage speakers, noting definitions, intake and placement procedures, 
typical offerings, and effective approaches, and covering a proficiency orientation, in- 
fusion of subculture materials, study of sociolinguistics, community involvement, 
cooperative learning, etc. She then focuses on three studies conducted in an urban 
commuter institution with a large number of heritage speakers to determine stu- 
dents' views of mixed classes, motivations for rejecting heritage classes, and assess- 
ment of their own language background and abilities. Finally she reports on an 
experiment to infuse materials about Southwest Spanish into second-, third-, and 
fourth-semester classes. The experiment was well received by students and suggests 
both a permanent infusion curriculum for the regular Spanish course sequence and 
this approach to interesting some additional heritage learners in classes tailored to 
their needs. 

Meeting The Needs Of The Heritage Speaker 

Heritage speakers constitute a significant percentage of enrollments in many 
Spanish language programs, and the language knowledge and skills they bring to 
their studies are increasingly recognized as valuable national resources (Campbell 
and Peyton, 1998), resources that we must build upon and develop further rather 
than deprecate and attempt to replace (Latoja, 1997). Nevertheless, only 26 percent 
of Spanish programs in the nation offered heritage classes in 1990 (Wherritt, 1990), 
and only an estimated 32 percent do so currently. While we do not have clear statis- 
tical information regarding the number of programs that have enough heritage 
speakers to warrant special courses for those students, given the ever-growing 
number of Hispanic students in our schools we can well be concerned whether the 
needs of many are being well met at the 32 percent level. Mixed classes are still the 
norm in many settings (L. LeBlanc and Lally, 1997), and we have little to no infor- 
mation about any special efforts being made to meet the needs of heritage students 
within those classes when heritage classes are not available. 




O "0 

ERLC- 

2 v 

I <"A 



Identifying The Heritage Speaker 

In practice, we refer to the target population as heritage speakers, Spanish 
speakers, native speakers, and a subset of false beginners, among other terms. We 
also may associate varying definitions with those terms, referring to those who 
speak Spanish in the home and community, those who hear Spanish in the home 
and community, those who are foreign-bom and perhaps at least partly educated in 
a Spanish-speaking country, and those who may have spoken or heard the language 
in the home or community and studied it in school at some level for some period. 
Indeed, the profile is complex, even more so when we examine a thorough treat 



* Presented at the Texas Foreign Language Education Conference 2000 (TexFLEC 
2000), University of Texas at Austin, March 31-April 1, 2000. J 



94 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



merit such as that of Valdes (1997), 
which highlights factors such as the 
country of origin, the length of resi- 
dence in this country, the particular dia- 
lect and all its sociocultural associa- 
tions, the proficiency level, prior lan- 
guage study, and range of prior aca- 
demic success. While the literature has 
focused more on programs offered to 
the more fully proficient heritage or na- 
tive-speaker student, with less attention 
given to programs for students with 
primarily listening skills only 
(D'Ambruoso, 1993), most of the types 
of students mentioned above are served 
within the framework of programs cur- 
rently in operation. 

What The Literature Tells Us 

Among the 32 percent of pro- 
grams that offer courses for heritage 
speakers, there is no single way to iden- 
tify the heritage student from among 
the rest and place him or her in the 
proper course. Schwartz (1985) indi- 
cates that some institutions use ques- 
tionnaires about language use, some 
use interviews of potential students by 
faculty, some use credit equivalencies 
stated in the catalog (Schwartz, 1985), 
and some use self-placement, perhaps 
guided by a rubric that students use to 
make their decisions (LeBlanc and 
Lally, 1997). A few institutions use a 
special test to sort heritage speakers 
from other types of false beginners, 
such as that used at the University of 
Texas at El Paso, a test with some ques- 
tions focused on language characteris- 
tics that only a heritage speaker would 
know and that are normally not taught 
in Spanish classes. Others use the same 
standardized tests that are used in gen- 



eral for placing nonheritage students, 
such as those from Brigham Young 
University, Ohio, Wisconsin, and Flor- 
ida (LeBlanc and Lally, 1997). Among 
these are the Wisconsin College Level 
Placement Examination, the SAT II, the 
OPI, and MAPS from ETS. Some 39 per- 
cent use local course-specific tests 
(Wherritt, 1990), which are thought by 
some researchers to be more effective 
placement tools (Blackie, 1997). Most of 
the tests measure listening and reading 
comprehension skills, however, and 
thus do not separate the students who 
speak and write the language from 
those who do not. Further, all the pos- 
sible measures, tests, questionnaires, 
and interviews are subject to manipula- 
tion by students, who can respond or 
perform as they wish in order to appear 
less proficient and often do so (R. 
LeBlanc and Paine haud, 1985, Wherritt, 
1990). In addition, in the case of self- 
placement with rubric or checklist, stu- 
dents at the lower end of proficiency 
may not have sufficient information 
about their capabilities to assess them- 
selves accurately and may overestimate 
their abilities (Jordan, 1985). 

Finally, while 79 percent of insti- 
tutions offer a placement test, according 
to Wherritt (1990), far fewer require 
students to take it (49 percent), and 
even fewer require students to act on 
the basis of the results (Wherritt, 1990). 
In many instances students register be- 
low the level of their placement even 
though general or Spanish advisers 
may try to influence them to register at 
the proper level and/or in a heritage 
class. Schwartz (1985) reported that 42 
percent of California students regis- 
tered below placement level or in first 




4 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers Vto 



semester, as did Klee and Rogers (1989), 
who also indicated that students often 
did so in order to improve grade-point 
averages. Kondo (1999) also supports 
the concept of grade-point motivation 
and adds that most students are more 
interested in speaking skills than in 
reading-writing skills and thus are of- 
ten not concerned about taking the 
higher levels. Wherritt (1990) notes that 
88 percent of false beginners enter first 
semester and only 32 percent of institu- 
tions offer credit for the lower levels 
with a higher placement as an incentive 
to go to the higher level. In some cases, 
of course, state policy does not allow 
public institutions to give away credit 
hours in this manner. Finally, only 28 
percent penalized students who chose 
the lower level by awarding no credit, 
even though there is a widespread con- 
cern about using limited higher educa- 
tion funds to reteach students skills 
they acquired elsewhere (LeBlanc and 
Lally, 1997). 

The literature also tells us that 
most heritage programs are limited in 
scope, comprising only one or two 
years of courses and mixing heritage 
and nonheritage students by third year 
(D'Ambruoso, 1993, and Villa, 1997). 
Since many heritage students, espe- 
cially in the border areas, enter a pro- 
gram with Intermediate High or Ad- 
vanced-level proficiency on the ACTFL 
scale, a level nonheritage students may 
not reach until the end of a major (Hiple 
and Manley, 1987), special offerings 
may be inadequate to addressing the 
need. Further, students in the upper- 
level classes may differ widely in their 
prior exposure to reading and writing 
the language. The nonheritage students 



will likely have had exposure to all four 
language skills, although their speaking 
may still be in the Intermediate range. 
The heritage students who enter upper 
division with CLEP credits and no prior 
coursework in Spanish of any kind (15- 
20 percent at the author's institution) 
may have no prior experience with 
reading and writing the language. 
These students often report that they 
"read the CLEP reading passages aloud 
to themselves in order to hear them" 
and thus, along with their listening 
skills, achieved a score necessary to 
place in third year even though they 
had in some cases never read Spanish 
before, never written it, and, in not a 
few cases, spoken it little. In such in- 
stances, the program that has only one 
or two years of heritage courses is not 
meeting the needs of this type of heri- 
tage learner when he or she moves di- 
rectly into upper-level literature 
courses, as is often the case. Further, 
many upper-level programs in the 
Southwest are heritage programs only 
by virtue of their populations, which 
may be primarily heritage speakers. To 
the extent that professors are unfamiliar 
with the characteristics of the students, 
the literature on the most effective pro- 
gram models for heritage students, and 
die need to consider language devel- 
opment in all courses (including cul- 
ture, linguistics and literature), the stu- 
dents' needs are not met. Finally, al- 
though faculty generally want the sub- 
set of heritage students who are non- 
prestige dialect speakers to shift to a 
prestige form of the language, these 
same faculty are often unaware that, 
even in the best circumstances, this shift 
will not occur in one course. Hidalgo 



96 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



(1993) indicates that in some programs 
in Mexico a student is expected to take 
600 contact hours to make this shift. 

The literature is clear on effective 
approaches for heritage students. Build- 
ing proficiency is primary, as evident in 
newer texts such as those by Blanco et 
al (1995) and Roca (1999), which em- 
phasize developing all the skills in task- 
related contexts of high interest levels 
to students. In addition, content-based 
instruction, sociolinguistics (Merino et 
al., 1993, Pino, 1997), classes to develop 
academic domains in Spanish (Sanchez, 
1997, Carrasquillo and Sagan, 1998), 
community-based projects (Trueba, 
1993, Pino, 1997> Varona, 1999), Chicano 
literature to infuse culture (Merino et 
al., 1993), cooperative learning (V aides, 
1997), and opportunities to tutor other 
students are all shown to facilitate stu- 
dent involvement and learning. All 
these approaches fit Valdes-Fallis (1978) 
recommendation of the comprehensive 
approach to instructing heritage stu- 
dents, as opposed to the "normative 
approach." Some students have already 
internalized society's negative views of 
their dialect (Roca, 1997), and some fac- 
ulty continue in this negative vein with 
their own negative views of dialect and 
assumptions of the superiority of one 
variety of native speech over another 
(Koike and Liskin-Gasparro, 1999). If 
only the confident student will use the 
language extensively outside of class 
(Kondo, 1999), these faculty may be in- 
hibiting their students' further learning 
in more than one way. In general, pro- 
fessors rate Chicanos below other heri- 
tage speakers and even below anglo- 
phones (Valdez, 1998), possibly because 
few faculty are from Mexico and are 



thus less familiar with educated Mexi- 
can Spanish (as compared to their own 
variety) and even less familiar with the 
subset of Chicano speech. Given this 
situation, the confident heritage student 
in the Southwest should be rare. 

A Mixed-Method Approach To 
Working With The Heritage 
Student 

At the author's urban, largely 
commuter institution, there were once 
lower-division heritage Spanish courses 
to serve a varied community of Span- 
ish-speakers of many different national 
origins and from one to eight genera- 
tions in the area. Many are of Mexican 
descent, however; and the number of 
minority students in the institution is 
approaching fifty per cent of the more 
than 18,000 students attending, accord- 
ing to recent enrollment figures . At one 
point, heritage students objected 
strenuously to being segregated into 
classes for Spanish-speakers and drew 
analogies to bilingual programs in the 
public schools, which they said also 
segregated students. Thus the courses 
were dropped from the curriculum. Re- 
cently, the heritage courses were of- 
fered again, with extensive publicity 
emphasizing the positive nature and 
potential benefits of the classes; but the 
courses did not make. Thus, heritage 
students continue to enroll in the stan- 
dard communicative sequence, gener- 
ally enrolled below their placement 
level. A few begin with an intermediate 
conversation and composition course, 
an intermediate culture course, or a 
special-purposes course, all of which 
can be more appropriate to their needs; 
but most choose the regular sequence. 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers 97 



Many first-year classes are more than 
fifty percent Hispanic; many second- 
year classes may be eighty percent 
Hispanic. Since there is no language re- 
quirement for students in most pro- 
grams, it is often heritage students who 
are more interested in taking the 
classes. Cross-cultural communication 
modules and Chicano literature selec- 
tions in Spanish have been used in 
some classes as an enrichment, al- 
though some students have reacted un- 
expectedly (since the literature recom- 
mends these selections as a way to in- 
fuse relevant culture) by saying they 
objected to reading about poor people 
(Gonzalez Pino and Pino, 1997). The 
University does not place heritage stu- 
dents effectively, since the required 
scantron placement test covers only lis- 
tening and reading comprehension and 
tends to place heritage students higher 
than they feel comfortable. However, 
they can choose to ignore the place- 
ment; and many do so. 

At the upper-level and Master's 
level, the program includes many ele- 
ments recommended in the literature. 
Proficiency-building is facilitated 
through a series of three oral communi- 
cation courses and three composition 
courses. Expansion into the academic 
domain is especially facilitated through 
an advanced reading course in which 
students work with materials from a 
variety of disciplines. Task-oriented ac- 
tivities and community-based activities 
are meshed and provided in a number 
of courses, depending on the instructor, 
and are particularly emphasized in in- 
ternships in the community. There are 
courses at both levels on Southwest 
Spanish and Chicano literature, and 



several instructors (though not all) use 
cooperative-learning techniques. Thus 
much of what has been recommended 
in the literature has been incorporated 
and used successfully at these levels, 
where most of the students are heritage 
speakers. Given that circumstance, the 
need has seemed particularly to infuse 
even more of these elements into the 
regular lower-division program since 
the students were not interested in en- 
rolling in special courses. 

Studying The Context 

A first step was to determine 
what students' perspectives were re- 
garding the classes they were in, the 
type of classes they wanted and why, 
and their own language variety, abili- 
ties and needs. During 1998, 1999, and 
2000 students responded to question- 
naires on these topics so that faculty 
could consider the findings and their 
implications for an even more effective 
program design. The first questionnaire 
in 1998 (See appendix.) addressed how 
students viewed mixed classes, the kind 
of classes in which they were currently 
enrolled. Two hundred students in first 
through fourth semester participated; 
and of these, 45 percent classified them- 
selves as heritage speakers. Twenty-five 
percent were true beginners, and thirty 
percent were other types of false be- 
ginners. A majority of the students (70 
- percent) thought that students should 
be allowed to register for any courses 
for which they did not have prior 
credit, even if overqualified (the current 
policy). One hundred percent of them 
thought that overqualified students 
wished to improve their grade-point 
average. A majority of the students 




1 



98 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



found the mixed class helpful, since 76 
percent could learn from more profi- 
cient students and 63 percent found the 
more proficient students willing to 
help. Unlike the literature (Loughrin- 
Sacco, 1992), more of the heritage 
speakers apparently enjoy helping the 
non-heritage students, and the anglo- 
phones are less intimidated . Seventy- 
five percent thought the course was 
taught at its appropriate level, undis- 
torted by the mixture; and only 12 per- 
cent thought a true beginner could not 
earn an A. 

Serious curricular implications 
were found, however, in the fact that 
only 36 percent thought there should be 
accelerated courses and only 42 percent 
thought heritage courses should even 
be offered (not required). Indeed, 72 
percent thought that, if offered, heritage 
courses should be optional to those 
who qualify to be in them. An over- 
whelming 94 percent thought one se- 
quence was sufficient for everyone. 

Another important question con- 
cerned how many students actually 
identified themselves as heritage 
speakers, as it seemed that many stu- 
dents who had significant exposure to 
the language did not so envision them- 
selves. A second questionnaire was 
used in 1999 (See appendix.) with an- 
other 200 students in first and second- 
year Spanish. This time, seventy per- 
cent were Hispanic. Indeed, seventy 
percent of the Hispanics indicated that 
they were true beginners in the lan- 
guage, even though more than half of 
these individuals indicated prior expo- 
sure to Spanish, either hearing or 
speaking the language in the home, 
with family, and/or in the community. 



Eighty percent indicated that they 
would not register for heritage classes 
and that they wanted to be in the regu- 
lar sequence to use what they know to 
advantage and to make good grades. 
Thirty percent thought heritage 
courses would be too demanding. 
Clearly there was a discrepancy in fac- 
ulty views of students and students' 
views of their own language back- 
grounds. Again, there was little interest 
in heritage courses. 

A Special Infusion 

Since the program was already 
communicative and proficiency- 
oriented, cooperative-learning and pair 
activities were already used, cross- 
culture communication and Chicano 
literature were infused to some extent, 
some instructors included community- 
based activities, and expansion into the 
academic domains was available to 
some extent in the special-purposes 
courses, the primary element from the 
literature which could appear to be 
lacking was the sociolinguistic study. 
Thus the third questionnaire in 1999 
and 2000 (See appendix.) focused on 
this area. Initially a limited amount of 
material about Southwest Spanish (See 
appendix.) was infused into second- 
year classes and selected second- 
semester classes in order to benefit heri- 
tage speakers by providing information 
they might normally have accessed in 
heritage classes or advanced classes 
(which they might never take) and to 
benefit non-heritage speakers who are 
very aware also that the language of the 
classroom and the language of the 
community are often not identical. The 
infusion was also intended to determine 




8 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers 99 



whether this information would be of 
interest to the heritage student. Mate- 
rial on Southwest Spanish was pre- 
sented as a handout to students and 
was discussed in classes on several oc- 
casions, as well as addressed via the 
third questionnaire to collect students' 
reactions to the material. Another 200 
students participated, with nearly 70 
percent Hispanics. One hundred per- 
cent of the students found the material 
helpful and interesting. Fifty percent 
wanted more information, 25 percent 
recommended creating a study guide, 
and 35 percent recommended creating a 
lower-division course on this topic. 
Fifty percent recommended offering 
heritage classes, slightly up from the 42 
percent on the previous questionnaire; 
but 70 percent said to offer this material 
in the regular classes, that it was 
needed there. 

Clearly the infusion of material 
about Southwest Spanish was well- 
received and should be continued. 
While it did not seem to create an in- 
stant and large increase in the number 
of students interested in heritage 
classes, there might be a trend there. A 
small amount of such instruction in- 
fused into the regular program might 
help over time to interest more students 
in heritage classes, and thus further ma- 
terial is being developed by the author. 

Conclusions 

The road to meeting the needs of 
heritage students may be a bumpy one. 
Obviously not all students are inter- 
ested in special courses, although this 
research suggests that students may be 
strongly interested in many of the com- 
ponents of successful instruction in 



model programs for heritage students. 
Since the population is a very diverse 
one, perhaps the responses to meeting 
their needs can be equally diverse. As 
the students reported in the literature, 
many students in this context seem to 
prefer lower placements and higher 
grades at the same time that they are 
interested in a communicative class, 
task-based instruction, cooperative and 
pair learning, acquisition of varied aca- 
demic vocabulary, ties to their culture 
and community, and a greater under- 
standing of their Southwest language 
variety. For programs such as this one, 
with a similar cadre of students, per- 
haps an infusion curriculum is an ap- 
propriate option. Certainly it will meet 
the needs and interests expressed by 
the heritage students at this time, and it 
may later lead to an expansion of op- 
tions for these students if a somewhat 
greater number of them eventually be- 
come interested in special courses. 

For the time being, infusion will 
meet the students where they are and 
will overcome the special problem of 
many of the heritage learners seeing 
themselves as true beginners. Following 
Cubillo's (2000) advice about mixed 
classes and the incorporation of lan- 
guage variants, culture, and community 
along with communication, we may 
make our programs more successful. 
Infusing material about Southwest 
Spanish may add the final piece needed 
to address more of the students' needs 
and heighten their interest in the entire 
topic of developing as heritage learners. 

References 

Blackie, John A. (1997). Dual Enroll- 
ment in Spanish: building a Sue- 




0 



100 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



cessful Program. Hispania, 80, 
136-139. 

Blanco, George M., Victoria Contreras, 
and Judith M. M&rquez (1995). 
Ahora si. Boston: Heinle and 
Heinle. 

Campbell, Russell and Joy Kreeft Pey- 
ton (1998). Heritage Students: A 
Valuable Language Resource. 
Eric Review, 6, 31-35. 

Carrasquillo, Angela and Philip Segan 
(1998). The Teaching of Reading to 
the Bilingual Student. New Jersey: 
Erlbaum. 

Cubillo, Jorge (2000). Temas.. Boston: 

Heinle and Heinle. 

D'Ambruoso, Lorraine. Spanish for 
Spanish Speakers: A Curricu- 
lum. Language and Culture in 
Learning: Teaching Spanish to Na- 
tive Speakers of Spanish. Washing- 
ton, D. C.: Palmer Press. 

Gonzalez Pino, Barbara and Frank Pino 
(1997). Chicano Literature in the 
Lower Division Spanish Class- 
room. A paper presented at the 
South Central Modem Language 
Association in New Orleans. 

Hidalgo, Margarita (1993). The Teach- 
ing of Spanish to Bilingual Span- 
ish Speakers: A Problem of Ine- 
quality. Language and Culture in 
Learning: Teaching Spanish to Na- 
tive Speakers of Spanish. Washing- 
ton, D. C.: Palmer Press. 

Hiple, David V. and Joan H. Manley 
(1987). Testing How Well For- 
eign Language Teachers Speak: 
A State Mandate. Foreign Lan- 
guage Annals, 20, 147-154. 

Jordan, J. (1985) in Evaluation: A Way 
of Involving the Learner, by Jo- 
sephine A. Lewkowitz and Jayne 



Moon. Lancaster Practical Papers 
in English Language Education, 
Volume 6, Evaluation. Oxford: 
Pergamon Press. 

Klee, Carol A. and Elizabeth S. Rogers 
(1989). Status of Articulation, 
Placement, Advanced Placement 
Credit and Course Options. His- 
pania, 72, 157-165. 

Koike, Dale L. and Judith Liskin- 
Gasparro (1999). Perspectives of 
Job Seekers and Search Commit- 
tees in Spanish. ADFL Bulletin, 
30, pp. 54-62. 

Kondo, Kimi (1999). Motivating Bilin- 
gual and Semibilingual Univer- 
sity Students of Japanese. Foreign 
Language Annals, 32, 77-88. 

Latoja, Luis E. (1996). Unprograma de 
espanol para colegio universi- 
tario: esfuerzos por lograr una 
mejor articulacidn. Hispania, 79, 
523-530. 

LeBlanc, Leona B. and Carolyn G. Lally 
(1997). Foreign Language 
Placement in Postsecondary In- 
stitutions: Addressing the Prob- 
lem. Dimensions 1997. Myrtle 
Beach: Southern Conference on 
Language Teaching. 

LeBlanc, Leona B. and Carolyn G. Lally 
(1997). Making the Transition 
from Secondary to Postsecond- 
ary Spanish Study: Achieving 
Consistency in College Place- 
ment for Florida's Students. His- 
pania, 80, 124-135. 

LeBlanc, Raymond and Gisele Pain- 
chaud(1985). Self-assessment as 
a Second Language Placement 
Instrument. Tesol Quarterly, 19, 
673-687. 

Loughrin-Sacco, Steven J. (1992). More 





Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers iUi 



Than Meets the Eye: An Ethnog- 
raphy of an Elementary French 
Class. The Canadian Modem Lan- 
guage Review, 80-101. 

Merino, Barbara J. and Fabian A. 
Samaniego (1997). Language 
Acquisition theory and Class- 
room Practices in the Teaching 
of Spanish to the Native 
Speaker. Language and Culture in 
Learning: Teaching Spanish to Na- 
tive Speakers of Spanish. Washing- 
ton, D.C.: Palmer Press. 

Merino, Barbara J., Henry T. Trueba, 
and Fabian A. Samaniego (1993). 
Towards a Framework for the 
Study of the Maintenance of the 
Home Language in Language 
Minority Students. Language and 
Culture in Learning: Teaching 
Spanish to Native Speakers of Span- 
ish. Washington, D. C.: Palmer 
Press. 

Perez-Leroux, Ana T. and William R. 
Glass (2000). Linguistic Diversity 
and Inclusion in the Foreign 
Language Classroom. Foreign 
Language Annals, 33, 58-62. 

Pino, Cecilia Rodriguez (1997). La 
reconceptualizaci6n del pro- 
grama de espahol para hispano- 
hablantes: estrategias que refle- 
jan la realidad sociolingulstica 
de la clase. La ensehanza del 
espahol a hispanohablantes.. Bos- 
ton: Houghton Mifflin. 

.Riley, Richard (March 16, 2000). Riley 
Favors Immersion Programs. 
San Antonio Express News. San 
Antonio: Express News Publish- 
ing Corporation. 

Roca, Ana (1997). La realidad en el 
aula: logros y expectativos en la 



ensehanza del espahol para 
estudiantes bilingues. La en- 
sehanza del espahol a hispanohab- 
lantes. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Roca, Ana (1999). Nuevos Mundos. New 

York: John Wiley and Sons. 

Sanchez, Rosaura (1993). Language 
Variation in the Spanish of the 
Southwest. Language and Culture 
Learning: Teaching Spanish to Na- 
tive Speakers of Spanish. Washing- 
ton, D.C.: Palmer Press. 

Sandrock, Paul (1995). Competency- 
based Admission: A Project of 
the University of Wisconsin Sys- 
tem. ADFL Bulletin, 26, 55-57. 

Schwartz, Leon (1985). The California 
Study on Foreign Language Ar- 
ticulation ADFL Bulletin 17, 22- 
28. 

Trueba, Henry (1993). Culture and 
Language: The Ethnographic 
Approach to the Study of Learn- 
ing Environments. Language and 
Culture: Teaching Spanish to Na- 
tive Speakers of Spanish. Washing- 
ton, D. C.: Palmer Press. 

Valdes, Guadalupe (1997). The Teach- 
ing of Spanish to Bilingual Span- 
ish Speaking Students: Out- 
standing Issues and Unanswered 
Questions. La ensehanza del 
espahol a hispanohablantes. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Valdes, Guadalupe (1998). Chicano 
Spanish: The Problem of the Un- 
derdeveloped Code in Bilingual 
Repertoires. Modem Language 
Journal, 82, 473-501. 

Valdes-Fallis, Guadalupe (1978). A 
Comprehensive Approach to the 
Teaching of Bilingual Spanish 
Speaking Students. Modem Lan- 



O 

ERJC 



11 



102 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



guage Journal, 3, 102-10. 

Varona, Lucia T. (1999). La comunidad 
en el aula y el aula en la comu- 
nidad. Hispania, 82, 806-816. 

Villa, Daniel (1997). Theory, Design and 
Content for a "Grammar" Class 
for Native Speakers of Spanish. 
La ensenanza del espanol a hispano- 
hablantes. Boston: Houghton Mif- 
flin. 



Wherritt, Irene and T. Anne Cleary 
(1990). A National Survey of 
Spanish Language Testing for 
Placement or Outcome Assess- 
ment at B.A.-granting Institu- 
tions in the United States. For- 
eign Language Annals, 23, 157- 
165. 



o 

ERiC 



12 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers 1U3 



APPENDIX A 

Spanish Class Profile Questionnaire 

1. In my Spanish class there are students who are : (Circle all letters that apply) : 

a 'True beginners in the language. Students that have had little or no former experience 

with Spanish. 

b. False beginners in the language. Students that have studied Spanish before entering the 
University. 

c. Native speakers from the U.S. who have been exposed to Spanish but who do not speak it 
fluently. 

d. Native speakers from the U.S. who are fluent in Spanish 

e. Native speakers from Latin American countries who are very fluent. 

2. My classification: (Circle one letter from .a through f that best applies to you) : 

a. True beginner - 1 had little or no experience with Spanish before entering the University. 

b. False beginner - I had studied Spanish before entering the University. 

c. Native speaker from the U.S. but I do not consider myself fluent m Spanish. 

d. Native speaker from the U.S.-I am fluent in Spanish. 

e. Native speaker from another Latin America country - 1 am fluent in Spanish. 

f. Other (Please describe): ' 

3. Have you been given a language placement exam at UTSA? (Circle one): 

a. Yes b. No 

4. Is this your first university level Spanish language course? (Circle one): 

a. Yes b. No 

5. How were you placed in your first Spanish course (which may be this course) at UTSA? (Cir- 
cle the answer that best applies.) 

a. I was placed in my first Spanish course based on the results of the placement exam. 

b. I was placed in my first Spanish course based on the Advanced Placement credits I 
earned m high school. 

c. I was placed in my first Spanish course based on the CLEF credits I earned. 

d. I placed myself in my first Spanish course based on my own assessment of my Spanish 
language skills/ needs. 

6. If you placed yourself below your Spanish language level in your first Spanish course, which 
of the following bestexplains your reason for doing so. (Please circle the answer that best ap- 
plies or fill in your own response.) 

a. Because I didn't learn enough Spanish in my prior Spanish courses. 

b. Because I wanted to be sure I had a firm foundation in the language before going on. 

c. Because I felt I didn't remember much from my prior Spanish courses. 

d. Because I wanted to improve or protect my GPA. 

e. This question does not apply to me. 

f. Other: 

7. In this course, do you think you are learning at, above, or below your current Spanish language 
ability? 

(Circle one): a.. At my level b. Above my level. c. Below my level 

8. Age: (Circle one): a. 18 to 30 years b. 31 to 50 years c. over 50 years 

9. Sex: (Circle one): a. female b. male 



[Turn page over] 



104 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



SPANISH CLASS PROFILE QUESTIONNAIRE (Continued) 



[On the original form, for each item below the student designates strong agreement, 
agreement, no opinion, disagreement, or strong disagreement.] 

10. Please mark the column that most closely describes your opinions or reactions to fol- 
lowing statements. 

a. Students should have the right to register for any course for which they do not already have 
credit even if thev are overqualified for the course. 

b. Students should not be allowed to register below their placement level and should be re- 

quired to register at their true proficiency-placement level. 

c. Students should have the opportunity to test out of any lower level course for credit. 

d. Over-proficient students often register for lower-level courses to improve their grade point 

average since successful testing results only in academic credit, not in grade point credit. 

e. I feel I can learn from students who are more proficient than I am and I welcome their pres- 

ence. 

f. I feel intimidated by students who are more proficient that I am. 

g. The more proficient students are usually helpful to others. 

h. The more proficient students don't really want to help others. 

i. The instructor calls on the more proficient students much more often. 

j. The instructor calls on the on-level students more often. 

k. The teacher involves all students more or less equally. 

l. The level of the course is harder than it should be because of the more proficient students. 

The mstructoi moves through the material too fast because the more proficient students al- 
ready know it or learn it faster. 

n. The false beginners/ native speakers get all the good grades. A true beginner can hardly earn 

an A. 

o. Anyone who does all the work and studies hard can earn an A or B m this class. 

p. This course is targeted at a particular level in the language development sequence and the 

instructor generally stays at that level. 

q. There should be accelerated courses for false beginners. 

r. There should be special courses for speakers of U.S. Spanish focusing more on read- 

ing/writing and less on listening/ speaking. 

s. Accelerated or special-speaker courses should be optional, not required, for those who qual- 

ify for them. 

t. Each course should target a proficiency level. Then with appropriate placement, special or 

accelerated courses are not needed and all students will move from where they are to 
higher levels of proficiency. 




14 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers 1UD 



Appendix B 

Language Profile Questionnaire Spring 1999 



In order to serve our students of Spanish better, we would like to make adaptations to OUT pro- 
gram based on the language profiles of our students. In order to do this, we need more informa- 
tion about your language background and hope that you will assist us by answering the follow- 
ing questions, anonymously, of course. We appreciate your help. When we refer to heri- 
tage/Spanish-speaker, these are courses which assume the student has been around Spanish a 
little (lower level) to a lot (higher level) and which target reading, writing, vocabula- expansion 
and culture and emphasize listening and speaking skills less than in courses for true beginners. 



AGE RANGE (Check one.): Under 25 _26-39 _ Over 40 GENDER: _M _F 

FAMILY LANGUAGE BACKGROUND (Check the one that best fits your background.): 

_1 . i did not speak Spanish at home nor with relatives. 

_2. 1 did not speak Spanish at home but did with relatives or friends.. 

_3. 1 heard Spanish at home but did not speak it. 

_4. 1 did not h ea r Spanish at home but did with relatives. 

_5. 1 spoke Spanish at home and with relatives. 

_6. 1 spoke Spanish at home, with relatives, and with friends. 

_7. 1 spoke Spanish at home, with relatives and friends, and at school and/or work. 

FAMILY RESIDENCE BACKGROUND (Check the one that best fits your situation.) 

_8 I was bom in the U.S., and so were my parents and grandparents. 

_9 i W as bom in the U.S., as were my parents; but my grandparents were not. 

_10. 1 was bom in the U.S., but my parents and grandparents were not. 

_11. 1 was bom outside the U.S. 

YOUR VIEW OF YOUR SPANISH LANGUAGE SKILLS (Check the one that best fits you.) 

12. 1 am a true beginner in the language because I've never spoken or studied it before now. 

13. 1 consider myself a learner in progress because I’ve been around the language at home. 

14 I'm a learner in progress who’s been around the language at home and studied it before. 

Iis'. I’m a learner in progress-I studied the language before but not been around it otherwise. 

YOUR VIEW OF HERITAGE SPEAKER/ SPANISH SPEAKER COURSES (Check one.) 

_16. 1 would sign up for such a course at my level if the day, time, instructor, etc. were right. 

17. 1 would not sign up for such a course because I am a true beginner. 

_18. 1 would not sign up for such a course even though I've been around Spanish some or a 

l0t (If you checked Item 16 or 18, please continue. If Item 17, you are finished, 
and we thank you.) 



CHECK ALL THAT APPLY: 

_19 i want the regular sequence as I don’t know the language well & don t want to nuss 



things. 

20. 1 want to 



benefit from what I already know and be able to make an A in a regular class. 



21. Special sections are discriminatory. 

_22 Special sections are likely to be too demanding. 

JS. Even though I’ve been around Spanish, I don't consider myself a Spanish-speaker. 
24. In order to attract me a special course would need a better title, such as 




15 



1 06 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



25 . 1 need a course with ..listening, ..speaking, _reading, _writing, _graxnmar, .vocabulary. 

26. I'd like a course that included study of Hispanic cultural heritage in the Southwest. 

27. I’d like to study cross-cultural comparisons and intercultural communication. 

.28. In a special course I'd like • 

.29. Overall my opinion of such special courses is 



16 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers 107 



Appendix C 
Southwest Spanish: 

Understanding It And Making The Most Of It 



The Spanish language and Spanish speakers are spread all across the United States today; 
and Spanish is a second language here rather than a foreign language, making it an integral part 
of our society. Spanish has also risen dramatically in importance for us because of our vastly in- 
creased contact with people, agencies, and companies in the enormous entity known as Latin 
America (which some say even includes an overlay of the United States because of our history 
and the Hispanic cultures among our citizenry). Therefore, more and more students are studying 
Spanish at all levels of their education, for these reasons and many others. 

The varieties of Spanish taught in our educational institutions are not always exactly like 
the varieties spoken in our communities, however. Just as we recognize that there are many varie- 
ties of English in the world today, we recognize that there are also many varieties of Spanish, de- 
riving from many different national origins, social classes, regions, and other societal variants. We 
also recognize that there are different registers of Spanish, or levels of formality m our speech, 
just as there are in English and other languages. Because Spanish-speakers and heritage speakers 
of Spanish (those who are from the United States but who have lived and learned with Spanish as 
part of their families and/or communities), are ever more numerous in the United States, it is im- 
portant that we recognize the vital natural resource that Spanish constitutes m our citizenry and 

our communities. „ . „ . , „ 

By understanding the variety of Spanish known in this country as Southwest Spanish, all 

those of us who are learning and/or using Spanish can do so even more effectively. Those who 
are learning Spanish for the first time can also learn at least in part to understand this important 
dialect of the language with which they will undoubtedly be in contact if they use the language m 
this environment. Those students who are heritage speakers of the language can learn more pre- 
cisely how this variety of Spanish fits into the larger constellation of the entire Spanish-speaking 
world; and if they themselves and their families are speakers of Southwest Spanish, they can 
compare its characteristics with those of the more universal variety, of the language taught in their 
classes This comparison will empower them to add the additional form of the language to their 
repertoire more easily, building on the strengths they already possess from their lifelong expo- 
sure to the language, maintaining their Southwest Spanish for use in its appropriate settings, and 
adding the more universal forms to enable themselves to communicate more effectively m a 

broader context. . „ 

Southwest Spanish has many roots. First and foremost, it is Spanish and is especially re- 
lated to the Spanish of rural Northern Mexico. It is also affected by English and contains angli- 
cisms. It is a repository for some archaic forms of Spanish, which dropped from use long ago in 
more populated parts of the Spanish-speaking world, areas that have had more interaction with 
one another, especially through the media in more recent times, and where formal education has 
occurred through the medium of that language. Here the language evolved for a long time in 
more isolated communities, certain sound shifts and changes in usage have occurred and been 
reinforced without contact with those other areas and without significant widespread contact 

with print media in many instances. . 

Most beginning and intermediate Spanish texts treat transnational differences in the lan- 
guage but none to date provide any extensive information about Southwest Spanish. While there 
are textbooks written especially for the heritage speaker population, many students who speak 
Southwest Spanish do not have access to or do not avail themselves of these courses and thus do 
not have the opportunity to compare their dialect with the more universal forms. In addition, 
some heritage speakers suffer from being told by relatives, community members, teachers or 
other contacts that their form of the language is inferior and best forgotten, when m fact they 
have an enormous advantage in the form of a variety of skills and knowledge that can easily 



108 Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education 



expanded into a more fully utilizable and extremely valuable resource. The Southwest speaker 
wiU at least have comprehension skills and a start on natural-sounding pronunciation. They likely 
have some subconscious knowledge of syntax, and they possess a certain vocabulary. If this indi- 
vidual also speaks the language, he/ she has an even greater advantage over the person who is 
just beginning the language. 

If one is interested in being familiar with or in expanding Southwest Spanish for profes- 
sional use, it is helpful to understand the characteristics of Southwest Spanish and how these 
compare to the more universal national forms of the language. In the material drat follows, you 
will engage in a brief perusal of some of the areas of comparison. Should you find this material 
helpful, you can interact with your Spanish instructor regarding further readings and/or classes 
that would help you continue this vein of study. 



I While Southwest Spanish uses much universal vocabulary, there are also ANGLICISMS. 
Words such as troca, biles, espelear, huachar, and tichar are common adaptations of English 
words. Expansion will help us add the universal words for these concepts to our reper- 
toire. 

2. There are also archaic forms. When we use maneas for brakes, truje for brought or estofata 
for post office, we are using forms that were part of the language when it was brought here, 
but these are concepts for which speakers in other locales have since developed other 
terms. Other examples comprise haiga, ansina, nadien. A good course or resource helps us 
learn these new forms. 

3. There are many cognates (words similar in two languages) for English and Spanish. 
Mathematics and matemdticas are a good example of the many pairs that help us to expand 
our vocabularies in both directions. 

There are some false cognates, however, words which appear to be the same but are not. 
Embarosado and constipado are common and humorous examples of these; but there are 
other more subtle examples. Educado is a good example. In English it refers to formal educa- 
tion; in Spanish it refers to good manners, knowing how to treat others appropriately. Letra, 
libreria, atender, suc(c)eso, parientes, papel and nuevas are additional examples. 

4. In the Southwest we use many mexicanismos, words which work quite weil in a Mexican 
national environment but which are sometimes different in other settings. Ouajolote, tecolote 
and zoquete are good examples. Again our classes and resources can help us become famil- 
iar with additional forms. 

5 In the Southwest we tend, as do speakers in other parts of the Spanish-speaking world, to 
overwork some of our vocabulary and function with a rather limited repertoire in some 
cases. A good example is the verb agarrar, which we may use for getting the bus, getting a 
cold, getting the idea, etc., much as we might overwork "get" in English. 

6. We also codeswitch, meaning that we mix English and Spanish into the same sentence, 
switch languages from one topic to another and switch languages from one listener to an- 
other. 

GRAMMAR 

1. In the Southwest we have sometimes changed the gender of vocabulary items. It is not un- 
common to hear la problema, la sistema, la mapa, el canci6n, la papa. It is also common for us to 
translate the two-word verbs from English (to come back, to call back, to give back, for ex- 
ample) into Spanish as llamarpa' iras, day pa! tras. 



Infusion Curriculum for Heritage Speakers 109 



2. We change past participles, sometimes to regularize them, and not using the irregular 
forms common elsewhere. We say murido, escribido. abrido, cubrido instead of muerto, escrito, 
abierto, cubierto. 

3. We may use prepositions in different ways. We may say debo que ir or necesito que ir. We may say las 
cosas que ellos necesitan ayuda instead of las cosas con que (or con las cuales) ellos necesitan ayuda. 

4. We may mix tu and usted liberally and are generally less familiar with the use of this dis- 
tinction. 

5. We may use an archaic ending in the past, e.g., by saying tu hablastes or tu hablates instead 
of tu hablaste. 

PRONUNCIATION 

1. We may add sounds, as in the following examples: (a)tocar, (a)bajar, o(y)ir, cre(y)o, mu(n)cho. 

2. We may subtract sounds, as in (a)hogarse, (ha)ber, (es)taba, telefon(o), pa(ra), clas(e). e(ll)a, 
torti(ll)a, ne(ce)sita, or tam(b)ien. 

3. We may switch sounds, as in luenga, siudad, pader, porblema, estogamo, 

4. We may otherwise change sounds, as in estoria, defied, ofecinafoventud, dicir, dishonesto, 
nojotros, pos, gradar, experencia, cencia. 

POSTSCRIPT 

The foregoing are a few examples of the areas that are helpful for us to understand as w e 
learn to communicate both in the Southwest environment and in a much broader one. Certainly the 
person who knows all the above forms already has much valuable vocabulary (though most heritage 
speakers don't exhibit all these forms) and, with the opportunity for study in class or with appropri- 
ate materials, can build on what is already known to broaden Southwest Spanish as a valuable re- 
source and foundation for a universal Spanish. 

TO LOWER DIVISION SPANISH STUDENTS 

We are interested in knowing how you react to the reading on Southwest Spanish, as we 
are including material of this type in our classes. Please read the selection and answer the follow- 
ing questions, as your input would be very helpful to us. Thank you for assisting. 

CHECK ALL THAT APPLY. 

1. The material is helpful. 

2. The length is appropriate. 

3. The material is too brief. 

4, The points are clear. 

5. More examples are needed. 

6. Additional information is needed. 

7. Delete some of it. 

8. Create a self-study guide with tape/ CD and exercises. 

9. Create a lower division course to cover this in depth. 

10. Offer courses for heritage speakers. 

11. Include this material in the regular 1014, 1024, 2013, 2023. 

12. This material is needed. 

13. The tone of the material is positive and constructive. 

14. Other comments: 




19 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 




This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 



EFF-089 (1/2003) 



