International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 37 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Exploring the Influence of 21st Century Skills in a Dual Language Program: A Case Study 

Christine R. Heinrichs 

Baldwin Park Unified School District, USA 

Preparing students as 21st century learners is a key reform in education. The 
Partnership for 21st Century Skills developed a framework that identifies 
outcomes needed for successful implementation of rigorous standards. The Dual 
Language (DL) program was identified as a structure for reform with systems and 
practices which can be used to prepare students for the 21st century. The purpose 
of this study was to explore the systems and practices within a DL program that 
support development of 21st century skills in a southern California school district 
at an elementary school, middle school, and high school. Data were collected 
through interviews, focus groups, and document review and were coded to reveal 
six themes. Themes pertaining to Research Question One were: systems that 
advanced 21st century skills, and structures for collaboration. Leadership, 
development of community, and shared beliefs were themes that were germane to 
Research Question Two. 


Introduction 

The advent of the information age has encouraged an atmosphere conducive to 
educational reform (Fullan, Lang worthy, & Barber, 2014). The positive educational reforms are 
those that developed innovative systems that will equip all students with the necessary skills to 
be successful in the 21 st century. The Common Core State Standards (CCSS) were developed to 
prepare students for college and career upon graduation and have been adopted in 43 states 
(Common Core State Standards Initiative, 2014). The non-profit agency, Partnership for 21 st 
Century Skills (P21), has put forth a framework to support the implementation of the CCSS 
(Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2006a). The P21 framework categorizes student outcomes 
into four themes: (1) “Life and Career Skills”; (2) “Learning and Innovation Skills—4Cs”; (3) 
“Information, Media, and Technology Skills”; and (4) “Core Subjects and 21 st Century Themes” 
(Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2011a, p. 2). Among the various desired competencies listed 
in the four themes, multilingual communication, problem solving in authentic learning 
environments, and finding value in varied cultures are included. These listed competencies are 
identified as needed 21 st century skills by various researchers such as Fullan et al. (2014), 
Suarez-Orozco and Suarez-Orozco (2009), and Darling-Hammond (2014). This study shows 
ways the aforementioned competencies connect with the goals of the Dual Language (DL) 
program. 

The DL program is an educational program model that comprises distinct systems and 
structures which support literacy in two languages for English Learners (ELs) as well as for 
English dominant students. These structures include specific language instructional models and 
progressions (Cloud, Genesee, & Hamayan, 2000; Collier & Thomas, 2004; Freeman, Freeman, 
& Mercuri, 2005; Skutnabb-Kangas & McCarty, 2010). The underlying principles of the DL 
program are clear goals for language acquisition and a consistent message that the students’ 
native language and culture are resources instead of an obstacle (Gandara & Contreras, 2009; 
Gandara & Gomez, 2008; Garcia & Baetens Beardsmore, 2009; Garcia, 2011; Lindholm-Leary, 
2001; Ray, 2008; Thomas & Collier, 1997a). 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 38 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Practices are distinguished from systems or structures in two distinct ways. First, 
practices are the actions of participants of an organization to implement a system or program. 
Secondly, there is a personal quality of practices. A practice is the manner in which an individual 
chooses to implement or participate in a system or structure. Unlike systems, practices include an 
individual’s beliefs, feelings of connection, and professional capacity (Hargreaves & Fullan, 
2013). 

The purpose of this case study was to identify the systems and key practices of a DL 
program that enhanced the acquisition of 21 st century skills. The purpose was explored through 
two research questions: 

1. What are the key systems of a K-12 Dual Language program that were pivotal in the 
development of 21 st century skills? 

2. What are the significant ways systems are being practiced by educational leaders and 
teachers at various levels to promote 21 st century learning in a Dual Language program? 

The research questions guided the exploration of the systems and practices of a DL program 
across school levels in a single district. 

Theoretical Framework 

Systems theory provided a framework with which to examine DL program structures as 
well as to assess methods of implementation, or practices, that support a program’s effectiveness 
(Banathy, 1991; Duffy, 2010). Implementation at the macro, meso, and micro levels were studied 
to further develop an organizational analysis of the schools (Wagner & Hollenbeck, 2009). 
Within systems theory, studies of organizational behavior identify three levels to develop the 
analysis of an organization; macro, meso, and micro. Wagner and Hollenbeck (2009) discussed 
the importance of examining each level of an organization in order to provide suitable solutions 
or make an organizational structure more efficient. At the macro level, the overall power 
structures, symbolic culture, and values of the members are found in the organization’s guiding 
systems. In an educational setting, the macro level includes Federal and State agencies and the 
local school district. These boundaries are defined by laws, board policies, district history, 
culture, and practices that influence the meso level of organizations. 

The bridge between the macro and micro levels is the meso level. The meso level is 
comprised of subgroups within the groups found at the macro level (Wagner & Hollenbeck, 
2009). At the meso level, the organization focuses on developing means to collaborate efficiently 
in order to realize a shared vision. There are systems for creating opportunities for interactions, 
managing teams to work well together, and practicing a distributed leadership model. These 
interactions emphasize human relationships and the examination of practices through 
collaboration (Brooks & Kensler, 2011; Spillane, Halverson, & Diamond, 2001). Lambert (2002, 
2005) discussed the implementation of a distributed or shared leadership model that supports 
sustainability of a school program. Spillane et al. (2001) wrote that, “From a distributed 
[leadership] perspective, it is the collective interaction among leaders, followers, and the 
situation that are paramount” (p. 4). Distributed leadership promotes the authority to make 
decisions as well as the accountability for the results of the decisions “close to the classroom” to 
impact the instructional environment (Darling-Hammond, 2002, p. 52). 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 39 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


The subgroups at the meso level, in turn, are comprised of individuals at the micro level 
of the organization. At the micro level, attaining the shared vision is effected by developing 
professional capacity, motivating individuals, and applying individual skills to the group effort. 
The addition of the three levels of macro, meso, and micro in the study of organizational systems 
contributes to a more robust understanding of the complexities involved in school reform. This 
case study explored the key practices of a DL program at the macro, meso, and micro levels, as 
evidenced in one town’s district and school-wide policies. The researcher analyzed the schools’ 
systems for implementing and communicating the vision among the DL groups, and the 
individual participant’s involvement in the DL program. 

Review of the Literature 

A review of the literature reveals two components of an effective DL program: (1) clear 
goals for language acquisition and (2) non-English native languages as resources. Each of the 
components are presented with various studies from DL programs. An analysis of the 
intersection of the components of an effective DL program and 21 st century skills as outlined in 
the P21Framework, three common areas were identified to provide direction to the study. First, 
both DL programs and the P21 Framework value multilingual communication, which is defined 
by P21 as a basic skill, intended to promote innovation. A second area of overlap is the 
application of technology in a diverse, multicultural environment. The final area of overlap is the 
mutual goal of integrating the 21 st century concepts of multilingualism, global awareness, and 
civic literacy during instruction in order to prepare students with viable competencies in the ever- 
changing international economy. The commonalities between the DL program and 21 st century 
skills are significant in demonstrating that the DL program is a beneficial system for educational 
reform. 

Clear Goals for Language Acquisition 

In a study that investigated the impact of DL programs on student achievement and 
closing the achievement gap, Collier and Thomas (2004) identified DL programs as enrichment 
programs in which the goal was to support students’ proficiency in both their native and second 
languages. This perspective is different from one which considered older bilingual program 
models generated after the original ESEA authorization as a remediation program where the goal 
was to bridge the language gap for ELs with proficiency in their native language. 

The researchers followed students over a period of 18 years, collecting qualitative data 
regarding their experiences with DL programs that were a part of school reform policy. They 
also combined the quantitative and qualitative data from two previous articles published in 1997 
and 2002 (Thomas & Collier, 1997a, 2002). Additional data from these previous studies were 
included to obtain a large sample size to “better assess the true program effect sizes” (Collier & 
Thomas, 2004, p. 4). 

Based on longitudinal data from Texas and Maine, Collier and Thomas (2004) found that 
DL programs were the only programs that narrowed the achievement gap for ELs between fifth 
and seventh grade. In addition to the quantitative data, the qualitative data demonstrated that 
implementation of DL programs as part of school reform led to a greater respect for 
multiculturalism, and built capacity in staff members through goal planning and the 
implementation process. Sustaining DL programs required strong, consistent leadership as well 
as parents who were welcomed partners in the school community. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 40 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


The research by Collier and Thomas (2004) also identified characteristics of effective DL 
programs. The characteristics included clear goals and reliable implementation of the program, 
respect for student heritages, a strong culture of achievement, and stakeholder involvement. 
Skutnabb-Kangas and McCarty (2010) emphasized, “The most successful bilingual programs are 
those that aim to develop bilingualism and biliteracy” (p. xv). The acquisition of a second 
language has a broader impact on learning beyond the ability to speak, read, and write two 
languages. In addition to language transfer, researchers have found an increased cognitive 
executive function in bilingual students (Bialystok, 1991, 2001; Foy & Mann, 2013; Stocco, 
Yamasaki, Natalenko, & Prat, 2012). The term executive function refers to using seemingly 
unrelated skills to strategize and complete a new task. Executive function tasks include “shifting 
between mental sets or tasks...,updating and monitoring of working memory contents,” and 
“inhibiting” impulsive or superfluous responses (Miyake et al., 2000, p. 86). 

Stocco et al. (2012) found that “bilingualism translates into a domain-general advantage 
in cognitive function” (p. 2). Studies have revealed that bilingual students have an advantage in 
non-verbal tasks where instructions are given through visual or auditory methods (Foy & Mann, 
2013; Stocco et al., 2012). Stocco et al. (2012), concluded that speaking more than one language 
“trains the brain” to switch between tasks and to simultaneously manage different sets of 
information (p. 3). The impact of DL programs, therefore, transcends language learning to 
include extending modes of cognition. 

In DL programs, the goals for language acquisition focus on enrichment rather than 
remediation (Alanis & Rodriguez, 2008; Collier & Thomas, 2004). The concept of clear goals is 
a time-tested concept which applies to the effectiveness of any organizational structure (Bolman 
& Deal, 2008; Darling-Hammond, LaPointe, & Meyerson, 2009; Fullan, 2001; Fullan et al., 
2014). Building DL programs around clear goals for bilingual language acquisition creates a 
culture where language is both the ends, and the means, for learning (Fullan, 2001). Paramount 
to the success of DL programs are the clear vision for implementation and the importance of 
participants’ implementation and interaction at the macro, meso, and micro levels demonstrate 
that strong structures examined through the cycle of inquiry. 

Native language as a resource. Several scholars, such as Freeman (1994), Lindholm- 
Leary (2001), and Alanis and Rodriguez (2008), have examined the effect of treating native 
languages other than English as resources for student achievement. Alanis and Rodriguez (2008) 
conducted case study research of a single school to “explore the factors that may have 
contributed to the success and sustainability of one dual language program in an inner city, 
urban-diverse campus” (Alanis & Rodriguez, 2008, p. 307). They asked whether the teacher 
outlook regarding objectives and instructional standpoint had an impact on student achievement, 
and which, if any, practices contributed to sustainability of the DL program. Specifically, the 
researchers examined the manner in which the teachers viewed “challenges as opportunities” (p. 
306) in order to offer a DL program as an additive bilingual language program for both EL and 
English dominant students. 

Alanis and Rodriguez (2008) identified four factors necessary for the sustainability of the 
DL program: “pedagogical equity, effective bilingual teachers, active parent participation, and 
knowledgeable leadership and continuity” (p. 312). Pedagogical equity referred to giving equal 
value to English and Spanish as well as applying rigorous standards in Spanish as the first 
language of instruction. Pedagogy, however, would not have an impact without effective 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 41 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


bilingual teachers who implement a “culturally relevant” curriculum through active collaboration 
and with many opportunities for student communication (p. 313). 

Using students’ native languages as a resource does not mean devaluing the language; 
rather a key tenet of DL programs is to convey the value of each of the languages (Freeman, 

1994; Lindholm-Leary, 2001). One of the goals is to maintain two languages through structured 
communication and collaboration (Alanis & Rodriguez, 2008; Estrada, Gomez, & Ruiz- 
Escalante, 2009; Ray, 2008; Thomas & Collier, 1997b, 2003). DL programs have been described 
as an additive program, which means increasing students’ bilingual abilities. This is in 
opposition to a traditional single language classroom experience for ELs where the process is 
subtractive—the sole focus is on English proficiency for students which results in the loss of 
native language (Thomas & Collier, 1997b). Alanis and Rodriguez (2008) described the additive 
approach as pedagogy equity wherein the two languages become a natural and a celebrated part 
of students’ daily school routine. 

Olsen (2010) also advocated for developing the home language of an EL student “to 
teach students issues of contrastive analysis and transfer across the two languages” as a response 
to the growing number of students designated as Long-term English Learners (p. 32). Thomas 
and Collier (2002) also advocated for student placement in a program that maintains the 
student’s native language while the student learns English as an effective instructional strategy 
that supports the acquisition of English (Thomas & Collier, 2002). DL programs therefore serve 
as enrichment programs that support achievement in two languages rather than treating the native 
language as a gap which requires remediation (Collier & Thomas, 2004). 

Pedagogical equity is also advanced by the balance of enrollment in each classroom 
wherein half of students are English dominant and the other half are dominant in the partner 
language (Thomas & Collier, 1997b). This balance engages both sets of students beyond learning 
from the teacher. The English dominant students and the Spanish dominant students serve as 
language models for each other during group work or on the playground (Estrada et al., 2009; 
Garcia & Baetens Beardsmore, 2009). The students develop interdependence as they learn 
language and interact socially (Banathy, 1991). As Gandara and Contreras (2009) stated, 
“Importantly, researchers also find that there are no achievement disadvantages for English 
speakers who are educated in two-way programs” (Gandara & Contreras, 2009, p. 324). 

Valdes (1997), however, questioned who actually benefitted from using language as a 
resource. She pointed that the placement of students, 50% of whom were native speakers of 
English and 50% native speakers of the partner language created new problems of language 
hierarchy and the potential for exploitation of Spanish dominant students. Valdes (1997) noted 
that the provisioning of native language role models for all students was one foundational piece 
of the DL program model. Speakers of the partner language were expected to receive benefits 
from DL programs equal to the benefits derived by the English dominant students. However, in 
practice, this was not always the case. She identified two educational leadership perspectives on 
DL programs that were held by educators: bilingual educators and foreign language educators. 
The bilingual educator wants to provide high-quality education for both ELs and English 
dominant students. The foreign language educator, however, sees the DL program as a means for 
English dominant students to acquire a second language; consequently, the students serving as 
role models for the partner language are seen as a means to an end. The power dynamics of DL 
programs are not neutral—ELs may be exploited for their native language resources for the 
benefit of the English dominant students (Freeman Field, 2010; Gandara & Contreras, 2009; 
Nieto, 2009; Schwinge, 2010). Hence, Valdes (1997) argued that educators who were unaware of 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 42 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


broader sociopolitical implications of the classroom composition risked causing harm to ELs or 
Spanish dominant students. 


Methodology 

This research used the structure and protocols of a case study. This case study method 
enabled the researcher to explore organizational practices with a focus on the current reality of 
the participants (Yin, 2009). Merriam (2009) wrote that the case study method was appropriate in 
the field of education as it “has proven particularly useful for studying educational innovations, 
evaluating programs, and informing policy” (p. 51). Because the DL program was examined 
across the school levels in a single district, the systems and practices of an effective DL program 
and how they connect with 21 st century skills were examined at the macro, meso, and micro 
levels. Through qualitative inquiry in the mode of a case study, exploration of the three schools 
was intended to reveal “themes, patterns, understandings, and insights” (Patton, 2001, p. 5) of the 
DL program practices to inform future researchers, policy makers, and educators. 

To answer the two research questions, the systems and practices of a DL program were 
studied across school levels in a single district. Pseudonyms were assigned to the district and the 
schools to assure confidentiality. The Adelante Unified School District (AUSD) in southern 
California was chosen along with three schools within the District—Comienzo Elementary 
School, Proximo Middle School (MS), and Adelante High School (HS). The schools satisfied the 
study’s selection criteria which included the following: (a) the DL program was offered 
kindergarten through twelfth grade, (b) the elementary school employed a 90:10 instructional 
model, (c) the secondary schools used a departmental model, (d) Spanish and English were the 
languages offered, and (e) school or district recognition of increasing student opportunities for 
ELs and low-income students by the California Department of Education. 

This study employed various qualitative research methods, namely, document review, 
focus groups, and interviews to collect data. The reviewed documents included school-wide 
enrollment data, state assessment data, DL staff lists, DL program parent brochures, the Chicano 
studies syllabus, and the Chicano literature syllabus, and related program materials provided by 
the teachers. Three focus groups were conducted. One focus group included five Comienzo 
Elementary School teachers. A second focus group was held with five parents of students 
enrolled in the DL program at Comienzo Elementary. The third focus group included five 
parents of students enrolled in the DL program at either Proximo MS or Adelante HS. The 
principal at each school was interviewed in addition to two DL program graduates, two DL 
middle school teachers, and two DL high school teachers. Transcriptions of the interviews and 
focus groups were coded and organized into themes under each research question. Each coded 
quote was entered into an Excel spreadsheet and with identifying information and the location of 
the quote. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 43 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Limitations 

Two areas were identified as limitations of the study: generalizability and factors during 
data collection. The nature of case study research limits the generalizability and factors during 
data collection as well as the generalizability of the findings (Yin, 2009). Additionally, the 
specificity of the composition of the district had a low income predominantly Hispanic 
population, with a large population of ELs that could limit application to other settings. Areas in 
the country that do not have enough ELs or a large group of students who speak the partner 
language may not have the option of implementing a DL program. 

Apart from generalizability, other limitations include unknown factors during data 
collection. When conducting focus groups, there may have been limitations with unknown 
affects upon each participant based on the responses from others or being in a group setting 
(Merriam, 2009; Patton, 2001). 


Findings 

In relation to the research questions, six themes were identified: belief, established goals, 
development of community, leadership, structures for collaboration, and systems that advanced 
21 st century skills. Once the themes emerged, they were categorized as either a DL program 
systems or a practice of DL teachers and leaders. Three themes were relevant to Research 
Question One: systems that advance 21 st century skills, established goals, and structures for 
collaboration. Leadership, development of community, and belief were three themes identified 
germane to Research Question Two. Table 1 shows the organization of the themes under 
Research Questions One or Two, the number of quotes attributed to each theme, and the percent 
of quotes compared to the overall number of quotes. 


Table 1 

Data Themes with Quote Statistics 



Theme 

Number of 
Quotes 

Percent of 
Overall Quotes 

Research 

Systems that Advance 21 st Century Skills 

316 

36% 

Question 

Established Goals 

105 

12% 

One 

Structures for Collaboration 

92 

11% 

Research 

Leadership 

202 

23% 

Question 

Two 

Development of Community 

110 

13% 


Belief 

51 

6% 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 44 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Research Question One: What are the key systems of a K-12 Dual Language program that 
were pivotal in the development of 21 st century skills? 

Three themes germane to Research Question One were classified as: systems that 
advanced 21 st century skills, established goals, and structures for collaboration. Since this case 
study explored how the skills developed in the DL program aligned with the 21 st century skills 
identified in the P21 Framework , the data were organized to show the connection between the 
DL program systems to the four P21 Framework student outcomes sections. Additionally, 
support of the 21 st century skills through the practices of the teachers and leaders was discussed. 

Systems that advanced 21 st century learning. The DL program developed 21 st century 
skills and was distinguished from other school reform systems in several ways. First, the DL 
program taught academic skills while students learned two languages. The focus of DL 
instruction is on bilingual communication through collaboration which are skills vitally 
important for success in the 21 st century workplace. Secondly, students gained cultural 
understanding which increased their understanding of how to think globally. Thinking globally 
increased DL students’ cultural capital and increased the likelihood for success in a globally 
connected world. In a DL classroom, 21 st century skills were developed in a culturally relevant 
and linguistically relevant environment. 

Life and career skills. Life and career skills listed in the P21 framework involve more 
than content knowledge. Working in an environment of diversity with open-mindedness was a 
targeted skill. Working effectively in diverse teams was identified as an ongoing practice of the 
DL program. The diversity of the classroom was part of the DL structure at the elementary level 
in that half of the class included ELs, and half of the students were English dominant (Lindholm- 
Leary, 2001). The students served as language role models for each other, and teachers accessed 
their knowledge of different words from various Spanish speaking countries to enrich the 
conversation. One of the graduates who was interviewed for this study discussed that DL 
students were comfortable with others having differing ideas. Parents mentioned that their 
children exhibited flexibility in thought and were able to adapt to different situations easily. The 
abilities to practice flexible and adaptable thinking are skills needed in the 21 st century 
workplace. 

Student leadership, mutual accountability, and self-directed learning were additional 
abilities in the life and skills category. This finding aligns with what Darling-Hammond (2002) 
discussed as interactive teaching and classroom environments promoting a “sense of community 
and teamwork” (p. 33). That students’ managed their time well was mentioned by a parent as a 
result of being in the DL program. The parents attributed time management skills to the child 
having to organize his or her thinking and his or her work in two languages. Producing leaders 
was something the parents said resulted from being in the DL program. At the high school level, 
development of leadership skills was explicit as a response to the content in the Chicano studies 
and Chicano literature classes. Several parents mentioned that their children, who were normally 
shy, felt comfortable running for a student government office because of the encouragement and 
relationship with their teachers and peers. Teachers and the graduates commented that students 
felt a responsibility towards one another. This responsibility took the form of healthy 
competition and pushing each other to achieve. This sense of connection was also found among 
parents, teachers, and administration. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 45 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Learning and innovation skills. The learning and innovation skills included the Four Cs: 
communication, collaboration, creativity, and critical thinking. Communication in two languages 
was one of the established goals discussed as part of the DL program. Verbal communication in 
two languages was identified as being a long-standing examined skill in the DL program. 
Additionally, proficiency in communicating verbally in Spanish and English was part of the 
exam for continuing at the secondary level. The parents, teachers, and the elementary school 
principal discussed the established practice of student presentations in the DL classrooms. 
Frequent student presentations developed confidence as observed by parents as well as the 
school staff participants. High levels of academic language to enhance the communication skills 
were also discussed as a DL program expectation which reinforced communication skills. 
Darling-Hammond (2014) discussed the development of metacognition and questioning through 
application of rigorous content. Teachers expected students to use academic vocabulary during 
their presentations which provided an opportunity for the authentic application of the vocabulary. 

Collaboration was understood as a powerful structure used in the DL classroom to 
provide opportunities for students to interact using two languages and apply learned content. 
Teachers and principals acknowledged collaborative structures took different forms; however, 
collaboration has been an important taught 21 st century skill. Suarez-Orozco and Suarez-Orozco 
(2009) discussed speaking multiple languages and cultural understanding as a needed skill in the 
21 st century. 

Critical thinking and creativity were both mentioned in the data collection. The 
elementary school teachers said that the students exhibited creativity and flexibility in their 
thinking because they frequently tried reaching a solution in different ways. Several parents 
remarked directly that their children think differently because using a different language allowed 
more avenues for self-expression. Parents commented that the use of two languages was an 
advantage because students were able to see the information from another point of view. The 
rigor of thinking in two languages also improved problem-solving skills. Parents and teachers 
also noted the DL students’ increased executive function (Miyake et al., 2000). 

Overall, the DL program structures and practices were shown to develop 21 st century 
skills as outlined by the P21 Framework. The only exception was the use of media. This analysis 
demonstrated that the DL program is a viable program for schools seeking an innovative way to 
implement the CCSS and support the development of 21 st century skills. 

Established goals. Frequent examination of long-term goals entails three components: 
establishing long-term goals; identifying benchmarks for reaching the identified goals; and 
implementing systems for dissemination and evaluation of the goals (Banathy, 1991; Goldsmith, 
2003; Kluger & Van Dijk, 2010). The continuity of the goals and program quality was a common 
focus across schools. Additionally, long-term goals created a vision for a larger, shared aim 
beyond the classroom door. 

The coding of the data led to identification of four goals which were (a) student 
proficiency in Spanish and English, (b) passing the Advanced Placement (AP) Spanish language 
test in tenth grade, (c) integrating cultural elements during instruction, and (d) preparing students 
with skills for the future. There were, however, different emphases depending on the grade level. 
The AP Spanish Language examination was not a focus for the elementary staff participants 
unlike the participants in the secondary level. At the elementary level, use of Spanish and 
English academic language and students’ interest in language were discussed as goals for student 
proficiency in Spanish and English, but not in relation to the AP Spanish Language examination. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 46 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


The elementary school staff did not mention that the final program benchmark was receiving the 
DL Program Seal on students’ diplomas. 

The graduates discussed the Seal of Biliteracy as a prestigious result of the AP Spanish 
Language examination, but they did not discuss the DL Program Seal. Passing the AP Spanish 
Language examination was seen as a way of supporting college readiness. The graduates 
discussed that passing the AP Spanish Language examination was a significant advantage when 
they entered college. Inclusion of taking an AP Spanish Language examination communicated to 
students that they already had a foot in the door for college. Biliteracy was a goal expressed by 
each teacher for their grade level as well as a long-term DL program goal. In addition, all 
participants were well aware of biliteracy as a goal and valued efforts to achieve that goal. The 
secondary teachers, secondary principals, and some parents focused on passing the AP Spanish 
Language examination in tenth grade as a measure for bilingualism. 

The district Seal of Biliteracy was a valued benchmark for the graduates. The Seal was 
awarded to DL students when they maintained a 3.0 grade point average in English language 
arts, passed the AP Spanish Language examination with a three or higher, and passed the State 
standardized assessment in eleventh grade. The middle school and high school teachers 
collaborated to ensure that their instruction supported student preparedness for the AP Spanish 
Language examination as part of receiving the Seal of Biliteracy. 

Global awareness was listed as a skill under 21 st century themes. Respect for other 
cultures in instruction was an expectation in the DL classroom. The idea of including cultural 
understanding in the classroom was central in the discussion regarding why parents chose the 
program, why teachers had a passion for teaching in two languages, and why principals and the 
district administrators continued to set up structures to support the DL program. In practice, the 
teachers and principals discussed teaching culture more in broad terms. The parents discussed the 
cross-cultural skills as understanding of their own culture or the culture of their ancestors. It was 
clear that sustaining culture was a key element of the DL program. 

Structures for collaboration. Structures for collaboration were implemented at the 
macro, meso, and micro levels. At the macro level, the district office leaders coordinated 
frequent collaboration meetings in which student data, instructional materials, and DL program 
goals were examined. Frequent communication and interaction between the district leaders and 
the school staff conveyed the importance ensuring that the actions of teachers and principals 
connected with district-wide DL program goals for student achievement. The district leaders 
harnessed the DL program’s professional community to build relationships between teachers, 
schools, and the district. Various teams were facilitated by the district leaders to “support 
learning across the schools as well as within schools” (DuFour & Fullan, 2013, p. 67). Regular 
meetings were scheduled for DF principals and teachers across grade levels. This time for 
collaboration was similar to DuFour and Fullan’s (2013) discussion of how principals working 
in purposeful teams “to help one another identify and solve problems and promote the success of 
all the schools in the district” (p. 67) led to positive results. 

Teachers and principals reported that when there were concerns about student 
performance in the DF program, time would be allocated for teachers to examine the situation 
using student data and to work together with the guidance of district leaders to improve the 
program. One example of a significant system that was developed through this process was the 
application process for continuing in the DF program at the secondary level. The teachers were 
concerned that the students who were continuing with the DF program were not prepared for the 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 47 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


rigor at the secondary level. The application process was developed to ensure DL students were 
on the right track for college. In the district, the application process was first implemented for 
students continuing from elementary schools to the middle schools. The following year, the 
application process was implemented for students to continue in the DL program from middle 
school to high school. Teachers continued to meet and discuss the evolution of the exams 
included in the application process to reflect current teaching and expectations that align with 
CCSS. 

One of the DL program structures that had the potential to inhibit student access and 
motivation was scheduling. The middle school principal established a “zero period” schedule 
structure so DL students did not lose access to electives if they remained in the DL program. 
Another accommodation in scheduling was the provision of summer classes. A parent of a 
secondary DL student discussed how the counselor suggested that her child take a class at the 
high school during the summer session so there would be time to take both the DL class and an 
AP class during the regular school term. These examples of evaluation of the situation in context 
of supporting the goals for student achievement, allowed the administrators to make changes to 
the schedules to increase student access. The graduates of the DL program, however, expressed 
disappointment over the restrictions on their class schedules at the high school level. At the time 
the graduates were in high school, summer classes were offered only as remediation due to fiscal 
restrictions, and so, the graduates were unable to open their schedule by taking summer classes. 
Frequent collaboration in order to evaluate the curriculum and goals was supported formally by 
the district and school administration as well as informally by the teachers. District leaders 
coordinated study sessions for the DL staff members from all grade levels to meet. The multi¬ 
grade level meetings supported continuity of the goals as well as problem solving discussions. 
The district leaders also coordinated meetings among the principals to coordinate individual 
school and district-wide activities. 

The district leaders also coordinated evaluation of curriculum by teachers at the meso 
level. Brooks and Kensler (2011) wrote about the meso level as opportunities created within the 
school for collaboration on issues promoting equity and access. The curricular meetings included 
a smaller group of teachers who came together to discuss and plan the time-sequence for 
instruction. Through employing teacher leadership to make the curricular choices, the decisions 
were kept close to the classroom (Darling-Hammond, 2002). 

Ongoing formal school level meetings included meetings with the general teaching staff 
and with DL teachers. These school site meetings were also based on the established goals for 
student achievement and the instructional practices. Meeting with teachers from their grade level 
or department supported the commonality of instructional strategies and understanding of the 
standards between DL instruction and English only instruction at the secondary level. The 
middle school principal discussed the importance of all teachers feeling connected to the DL 
program’s goals. A high school teacher noted that planning instruction as part of the DL program 
was different because of the long-term goals. The goals focused beyond the grade level to 
graduating students who are bilingual, biliterate, and culturally diverse. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 48 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Furthermore, DL teachers understood they were accountable for the State-mandated 
requirements in addition to the DL program goals. At the high school, both departmental and DL 
teacher meetings were essential in creating a shared vision. It was noted that the high school 
structure of teaching a single subject at the high school can make narrow the vision for 
instruction. Darling-Hammond (2002) noted that time for collaboration “to revisit the school’s 
vision and goals, developfs] a collective perspective of teaching practice, and create[s] a stronger 
school culture” (p. 43). 

Research Question Two: What are the significant ways systems are being practiced by 
educational leaders and teachers at various levels to promote 21 st century learning in a 
Dual Language program? 

Three themes were also identified pertaining to Research Question Two: distributed 
leadership, development of community, and shared beliefs. 

Importance of distributed leadership. In the current climate of educational reform, 
distributed leadership is a useful practice for effectively implementing and sustaining change. 
Scholars, such as Fullan (2001), Lambert (2002, 2005), and Spillane et al. (2001), have written 
about distributed leadership as a useful structure for implementing tenable school reform. 
Distributed leadership became apparent as a theme when the coding analysis revealed that it was 
a topic about which all the participants spoke. The participants discussed the importance of 
leadership by teachers and administrators influencing instruction and in building effective DL 
structures. 

Teachers had a personal interest in the success of the program and principals noted that 
teachers held each other accountable. All the participants acknowledged that a specialized 
program was accompanied by additional responsibilities. At the micro, or individual level, 
instructional leadership was demonstrated when teachers assumed the responsibility to meet with 
parents, to decide on culturally-relevant activities, and to make choices about instruction. 
Valenzuela (1999) wrote, 

While relationships with teachers exert a tremendous impact on the kinds of schooling 
orientations that develop in school, the social capital embedded in youths’ networks also 
plays a clear, productive role. Positive relations with teachers and among students make 
schooling worthwhile and manageable. In so doing, the potential for higher academic 
achievement increases, (p. 30) 

The increase in the students’ social capital and academic achievement discussed by Valenzuela 
(1999) was evident in the AUSD DL programs because of the reciprocal relationship among 
teachers, parents, and students. 

When the teachers at Comienzo Elementary School were faced with the fact that their DL 
program would close because of declining enrollment, they assumed the role of community 
leaders. Teachers informed parents of the requirements to preserve the program at Comienzo 
School. Teachers also harnessed the power of community voice to increase enrollment. Their 
actions had long-term-results in that the parents and teachers continue to connect to ensure a 
stable program that remains an option for the Comienzo School community. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 49 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Distributed leadership practiced within the DL program empowered the practitioners to 
evaluate and improve the program within the system established by the district and school 
leaders. The work of implementing the DL program goals was viewed as everybody’s shared 
responsibility as well as a shared passion among the DL community members. Shared 
responsibility resulted in dedication to the quality of the program and the students’ academic 
success. 

Development of community. At the micro level, teachers, parents, students, and 
administrators created community through the individual actions that were apart from the 
standard or typical interactions at a school. The actions at the micro level were evident in the 
connections discussed by all the participants. Graduates, parents, and teachers said the DL 
program felt like a family. The graduates discussed how they challenged each other to excel the 
way siblings might challenge each other. Parents spoke of joining the DL program because of the 
recommendation of other parents. Parents also valued feeling comfortable to call other parents or 
the teachers for support. 

Meeting with the parents to annually review the goals was discussed as a practice at 
AUSD at all levels of schools. The parents were initially informed of the program through formal 
meetings or from school community members. It was noted by the teachers and secondary 
principals that the parents knew the program goals and expectations early in their involvement of 
the program. The questions at the DL secondary parent meetings focused more on the types of 
classes and access to electives. 

The service-learning project at the high school was a specialized activity which 
connected the DL program seniors to the community as part of their Chicano literature class. The 
topics chosen by the students for their service-learning projects helped advance civic and health 
literacies. Some of the service-learning projects were multicultural fairs at the middle schools 
and at the elementary schools, health fairs at elementary schools, the production of Spanish 
plays, and activities for students to support their understanding of their contribution to the 
community. 

The projects began with students identifying a problem in the community. The DL 
students then researched the issue and created a plan to address the issue in the community. They 
implemented their plan and then presented the results in class. A reflection was included at the 
end of their service-learning presentation. The service-learning project was discussed by the 
Chicano literature teacher as a culmination of all the instruction the students had received in the 
DL program. A graduate commented that the experience of the service-learning project 
supported her understanding of how to make professional connections in her current job. The 
teacher of this class stated that the goals of this project were to build student agency, improve 
networking skills, and hone other soft skills needed to be successful in college. This aligns with 
the call from Suarez-Orozco and Suarez-Orozco (2009) for a 21 st century citizenry who 
understand the culture of the community and increase the student’s cultural capital. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 50 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Shared beliefs. Parents in the DL program connected with each other because they 
shared beliefs in the importance of common goals for their children, and they had similar 
experiences as participants in the DL program. Because of the cultural component, parent 
collaboration with the teacher and student was a natural element. Language and culture is 
personal and value laden. The teachers and leaders in AUSD strived to communicate the value of 
culture and language to parents and students through the manner in which the DL program was 
implemented. The parents expressed that they chose the program because they wanted their child 
to have a connection to culture and language. The DL program’s cultural instruction went 
beyond basic knowledge to the more personal skills of cultivating talent, promoting individual 
passion, and valuing culture. Building upon the interests and talents to enhance the educational 
experience were elements discussed by the participants. 

Parents spoke of the cultural experiences included in the DL program as a significant 
reason for choosing the DL program. The cultural aspect of the DL program was incorporated by 
the teachers individually in their classes and district outlined activities. At the elementary level, 
the forms of cultural activities were not as clearly defined as the secondary level. The parents 
commented that the inclusion of cultural elements in instruction depended on the decisions of the 
teachers and principals. 

The long-term goals in place at AUSD were the guideposts for developing instruction in 
the classrooms, implementing programs at the school sites, and evaluating district-wide systems. 
The goals were shared and believed to be important by the school staff members and parents 
which was the foundation for creating a culture supportive of student achievement. 

The DL program provided students the opportunity to learn two languages as an option 
for students at an early age. Learning a second language connected with the core subject area of 
world languages. At the studied schools, the DL program option was publicized to parents by 
principals, teachers, and other parents. The parents discussed that the structure of teaching two 
languages through content made language an important theme for students. Parents and teachers 
also noted that language was something students thought about; the subject had become 
important to them. The graduates discussed how being bilingual helped them connect with others 
who spoke Spanish as well as to their family members. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 51 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Conclusion 

This study identified the systems and key practices of a DL program that support student 
preparation as 21 st century learners and how they were implemented by teachers and school 
leaders. The data supported that the DL program is an important educational system to be 
considered by school districts that have the appropriate student population. The DL program is 
an additive program which provides a cultural and linguistically relevant context for teaching 
and learning the 21 st century skills. Garcia and Baetens Beardsmore (2009) stressed, 

Bilingualism must be accepted as an all-terrain vehicle, adapting to the ridges and the 
craters of communication that encompass technology enriched interactions in the global 
sphere and in very local exchanges. Bilingual education could be a mechanism to develop 
this communicative capacity for the twenty-first century. ( p. 387) 

Studying the DL program across the school levels provided an important perspective on 
the extent of the collaboration and distributed leadership that are needed to effectively implement 
such a large program. The DL graduates gave insights on how the structures affected their 
connection with their school community as well as the DL community. The dedication of the 
parents, teachers, and principals resulted in a community built upon the shared goal of student 
success. It became apparent that the long-term goal of achieving the Seal of Biliteracy had 
several impacts. First it was a well-defined goal for students, teachers, and parents. Additionally, 
passing the AP Spanish Language examination built a mindset for college attendance because the 
students had already earned college credit. 

This case study explored the systems that supported the DL program and found these 
systems to be dynamic and continuously evaluated and modified by the school staff in order to 
meet the needs of the students. The staff members’ practices were frequently examined and 
aligned to the DL goals among school staff members as well as across school levels. Frequent 
collaboration resulted in informal expectations of increased rigor and teacher leadership. Ideas 
now identified as 21 st century skills were identified as skills already embedded as part of the DL 
program. Finally, the work of education is a dynamic process built upon the passion of the 
people who are part of the school community with the goal of student success. DL programs that 
are implemented with sustained, distributed leadership and collaboration can serve as a primary 
influence in students’ development of 21 st century skills. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 52 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


References 

Alanis, I., & Rodriguez, M. A. (2008). Sustaining a dual language immersion program: Features 
of success. Journal of Latinos & Education, 7(4), 305-319. 

Banathy, B. H. (1991). Systems design of education: A journey to create the future. Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J: Educational Technology Publications. 

Bialystok, E. (1991). Language processing in bilingual children. Cambridge University Press. 

Bialystok, E. (2001). Bilingualism in development: Language, literacy and cognition. Port 
Chester, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from 
http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/docDetail.action?docID=5006349 

Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2008). Refraining organizations: Artistry, choice and leadership. 
Jossey-Bass. 

Brooks, J. S., & Kensler, L. A. W. (2011). Distributed leadership and democratic community. In 
F. W. English (Ed.), The SAGE Handbook of Educational Leadership: Advances in 
Theory, Research, and Practice (pp. 55-66). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 
Inc. 

Cloud, N., Genesee, F., & Hamayan, E. V. (2000). Dual language instruction: A handbook for 
enriched education. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 

Collier, V. P., & Thomas, W. P. (2004). The astounding effectiveness of dual language education 
for all. NABE Journal of Research and Practice, 2(1), 1-20. 

Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2014). Development Process I Common Core State 
Standards Initiative. Retrieved from http://www.corestandards.org/about-the- 
standards/development-proces s / 

Darling-Hammond, L. (2002). 10 features of good small schools-redesigning high schools: What 
matters, what works. School Redesign Network, Stanford University. Retrieved from 
https://edpolicy.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/10-features-good-small-schools- 
redesigning-high-schools-what-matters-and-what-works_0.pdf 

Darling-Hammond, L. (2014). What can PISA tell us about U.S. education policy? New England 
Journal of Public Policy, 26(1), 1-14. 

Darling-Hammond, L., LaPointe, M., & Meyerson, D. (2009). Preparing principals for a 

changing world: Lessons from effective school leadership programs. Hoboken, NJ, USA: 
Jossey-Bass. Retrieved from 

http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/docDetail.action?docID=10350132 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 53 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Duffy, F. M. (2010). Dream! create! sustain!: Mastering the art and science of transforming 
school systems. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. 

DuFour, R., & Fullan, M. (2013). Cultures built to last: Systemic PLCs at work. Bloomington, 

IN, USA: Solution Tree Press. Retrieved from 
http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/docDetail.action?docID=10743964 

Estrada, V. L., Gomez, L., & Ruiz-Escalante, J. A. (2009). Let’s make dual language the norm. 
Educational Leadership, 66(1), 54-58. 

Foy, J. G., & Mann, V. A. (2013). Bilingual children show advantages in nonverbal auditory 
executive function task. International Journal of Bilingualism. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1367006912472263 

Freeman Field, R. (2010). Identity, community and power in bilingual education. In J. Cummins 
& N. Hornberger (Eds.), Bilingual Education. Springer Verlag. 

Freeman, R. (1994). Language planning and identity planning: An emergent understanding. 
Working Papers in Educational Linguistics, 10(1), 1-20. 

Freeman, Y. S., Freeman, D. E., & Mercuri, S. (2005). Dual language essentials for teachers and 
administrators. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Fullan, M. (2001). Leading in a culture of change. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Fullan, M., Langworthy, M., & Barber, M. (2014). A rich seam. Retrieved from 

http://www.newpedagogies.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/A_Rich_Seam.pdf 

Gandara, P. C., & Contreras, F. (2009). The Latino education crisis: The consequences of failed 
social policies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Gandara, P. C., & Gomez, M. C. (2008). Language policy in education. In G. Sykes, B. 

Schneider, & D. N. Plank (Eds.), Handbook of Education Policy Research (pp. 581-595). 
Routledge. Retrieved from http://www.routledge.com/books/details/9780415989916/ 

Garcia, O., & Baetens Beardsmore, H. (2009). Bilingual education in the 21st century: A global 
perspective. Malden, MA; Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Pub. 

Garcia, P. A. (2011). A delicate balance: Continuing immersion in U.S. middle and high schools. 
Regents of the University of Minnesota. Retrieved from 

http://www.researchgate.net/publication/234586023_Integrating_Language_and_Content 

_in_Immersion_Classrooms_Research_Perspectives 

Goldsmith, M. (2003, Fall). Try Feedforward instead of feedback. Journal for Quality & 
Participation, pp. 38-40. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 54 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Hargreaves, A. & Fullan, M. (2013). The power of professional capital. Learning forward, Vol. 
34. No. 3. Retrieved from http://www.michaelfullan.ca/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/JSD- 
Power-of-Professional-Capital.pdf 

Heinrichs, C.R. (2015) Exploring the influence of 21 st century skills in a dual language program: 
a case study (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from California State Polytechnic 
University Library (http://hdl.handle.net/1021L3/157290). 

Kluger, A. N., & Van Dijk, D. (2010). Feedback, the various tasks of the doctor, and the 
feedforward alternative. Medical Education, 44(12), 1166-1174. 
http://doi.org/10T 111/j. 1365-2923.2010.03849.X 

Lambert, L. (2002). A framework for shared leadership. Educational Leadership, 59(8), 37-40. 

Lambert, L. (2005). Leadership for lasting reform. Educational Leadership, 62(5), 62-65. 
Retrieved from 

http://proxy.library.cpp.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true 
&AuthType=ip,uid&db=aph&AN=15969326&site=ehost-live&scope=site 

Lindholm-Leary, K. J. (2001). Dual language education. Multilingual Matters. 

Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., Howerter, A., & Wager, T. D. 

(2000). The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex 
“frontal lobe” tasks: a latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 49-100. 
http://doi.org/10.1006/cogp.1999.0734 

Nieto, S. (2009). The light in their eyes: Creating multicultural learning communities. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 

Olsen, L. (2010). Reparable harm; Fulfilling the unkept promise of educational opportunity for 
California’s long term English learners. Long Beach, CA: Californians Together. 

Patton, M. Q. (2001). Qualitative research & evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE 
Publications, Inc. 

Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2006a). Our history - the partnership for 21st century skills. 
Retrieved from http://www.p21.org/about-us/our-history 

Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2011a). P21 common core toolkit: A guide to aligning the 
common core state standards with the framework for 21st century skills. The Partnership 
for 21st Century Skills. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 55 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Ray, J. M. (2008). Building the bridge as you walk on it: Didactic behaviors of elementary 
teachers in a dual language program. Teaching and Teacher Education , 24(6), 1658— 
1671. http ://doi.org/10.1016/j.tate.2008.01.007 

Schwinge, D. (2010). Conceptualizing biliteracy within bilingual programs. In J. Cummins & N. 
Homberger (Eds.), Bilingual Education, (pp. 51-64). Springer Verlag. 

Skutnabb-Kangas, T., & McCarty, T. L. (2010). Key concepts in bilingual education: 

Ideological, historical, epistemological, and empirical foundations. In J. Cummins & N. 
Homberger (Eds.), Bilingucd Education, (pp. 3-17). Springer Verlag. 

Spillane, J. P., Halverson, R., & Diamond, J. B. (2001). Investigating school leadership practice: 
A distributed perspective. Educational Researcher, 30(3), 23-28. 
http://doi.org/10-3102/0013189X030003023 

Stocco, A., Yamasaki, B., Natalenko, R., & Prat, C. S. (2012). Bilingual brain training: A 

neurobiological framework of how bilingual experience improves executive function. 
International Journal of Bilingualism, http://doi.org/10.1177/1367006912456617 

Suarez-Orozco, C., & Suarez-Orozco, M. M. (2009). Educating Latino immigrant students in the 
twenty-first century: Principles for the Obama administration. Harvard Educational 
Review , 79(2), 327-340. 

Thomas, W. P., & Collier, V. (1997a). School effectiveness for language minority students. 
NCBE Resource Collection Series, No. 9. Retrieved from 
http ://eric. ed. go v/?id=ED436087 

Thomas, W. P., & Collier, V. P. (1997b). Two languages are better than one. Educational 
Leadership, 55(4), 23. 

Thomas, W. P., & Collier, V. P. (2002). A national study of school effectiveness for language 
minority students’ long-term academic achievement. Retrieved from 
http ://eric. ed. go v/?id=ED475048 

Thomas, W. P., & Collier, V. P. (2003). The multiple benefits of dual language. Educational 
Leadership, 61(2), 61-64. 

Valdes, G. (1997). Dual-language immersion programs: A cautionary note concerning the 

education of language-minority students. Harvard Educational Review, 67(3), 391-430. 
http://doi.Org/10.17763/haer.67.3.n5ql75qp86120948 

Valenzuela, A. (1999). Subtractive schooling: U.S. -Mexican youth and the politics of caring. 
Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Wagner, J. A., & Hollenbeck, J. R. (2009). Organizational behavior: Securing competitive 
advantage. Routledge. 




International Journal of Teacher Leadership 
Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2016 


Heinrichs • Exploring the Influence 56 
ISSN: 1934-9726 


Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: design and methods. Los Angeles, CA: Sage 
Publications, Inc. 




