DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 403 938 



JC 970 101 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Hagerstovm Junior College, Exploring America’s 
Communities* Progress Report* 

Hagerstovm Junior Coll*, Md* 

American Association of Community Colleges, 
Washington, DC*; National Endovnnent for the 
Humanities (NFAH) , Washington, D*C* 

Jan 97 

7p*; In: National Conference on American Pluralism 
and Identity Program Book (Nev^ Orleans, LA, January 
18-19, 1997); see JC 970 087* 

Reports ~ Descriptive (141) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage* 

’^Community Colleges ; ’'^Cul tural Pluralism; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; ’^Learning Activities ; 
Literature; Multicultural Education; ’'^Music 
Activities ; Program Descriptions; Tv^o Year 
Colleges 

Hagerstovm Junior College MD 



ABSTRACT 

In 1996, Hagerstov?n Junior College (Maryland) 
participated in the American Association of Community Colleges* 
Exploring America's Communities project, v/hich v?orks to strengthen 
the teaching and learning of American history, literature, and 
culture at U*S* community colleges* The primary goals of the action 
plan v?ere to create a series of faculty development activities to 
provide the background and foundation for infusing the curriculum 
v?ith common threads that bind diverse communities v^ithin the American 
experience* Tv?o colloquia, one discussing the Mennonite, Pennsylvania 
Dutch, and African American communities, and one discussing the 
Indian, Iranian, and Greek communities, v?ere held* Three "lunch and 
learn" activities exploring different facets of culture vzere 
conducted* The first panel featured a Native American student, a 
Ukrainian student, and an immigrant from the Dominican Republic* The 
second featured an Episcopal priest, a Jevrish rabbi, and a Hindu 
articulating the commonalties and divisions that religion can bring 
to cultures* The third v?as a musical presentation by an Irish 
American and an Iranian American v/hich shovzed that music is not 
simply a form of entertainment, but reflects and molds society's 
values* The basic obstacle for the program v^as a lack of financial 
support due to diminishing resources and increased demands on staff* 
Ideas for infusing unity, diversity, justice, family values, social 
priorities, and discrimination into the curriculum vyill advance in 
January* (HAA) 



* * Vc Vc * sV Vc Vc sV Vc * * sV Vc * * :V :'c :'c V? * i: "if Vc Vc * Vc Vc it it it it it 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document * * 

it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



ED 403 938 



Hagerstown Junior College 
Exploring America’s Communities 
Progress Report 



In; National Conference on American Pluralism and Identity Program Book 
(New Orleans, LA, January 18-19, 1997) 



O 




^ ® OCPARTiICNT OF COUCA^ 

Offic# ot Educational Research and^i 

educational ne^ynces infoi 

CENTER (ERIC) 

jflrms dt^umeni has been repr<x 
received from the person or ore 
originating ||. ° ® 

O Minor Changes have been made tc 
reproduction Quality. 



Points of view 
ment do not 
OERl position 



or opinions stated m this docu 
necessarily represent official 
Or policy 



‘‘PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J* Gollattscheck 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).” 



2 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



HAGERSTOWN 

JUNIOR 

COLLEGE 

11400 Robinwood Drive • Hagerstown, Maryland 21742-6590 • (301) 790-2800 * Voice-TDD 



Introduction 

Hagerstown Junior College is located two and one half miles from downtown Hagerstown, Maryland 
in Washington County. The campus is located on a semi-rural 187 acre site which is easily 
accessible from interstates 81 and 70. The college is located 70 miles to the west of Baltimore, 
Maryland and Washington, D.C and is included in the Baltimore- Washington Metropolitan Area. 

The college attracts students from nearby Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Virginia. Each semester 
there are approximately 3,000 credit students. Approximately 1100 are full time and 1900 are 
part time. The average age is 28. In addition to the credit program the college serves 7000 non- 
credit students through its continuing education programs. 

Primary goal of project 

The primary goals of the action plan were to provide a series of faculty development activities to 
provide the background and foundation for infusing the curriculum with common threads that bind 
diverse communities within the American experience. 

Accomplishments 

In May the team organized a colloquium entitled “Who are We in the Western Maryland region”? 
The panel represented the Mermonite, Pennsylvania Dutch, and African American communities. 

This event was well attended by the faculty and served to highlight not only some of the major 
cultural attributes of these communities, but also reminded the audience of the many common 
threads running through the cultural experience of the local region. In August we continued with a 
second faculty colloquium which focused on HJC faculty who spoke about their heritages from 
India, Iran, and Greece. Each of the speakers responded to a provided series of questions which 



focused on how their cultures compare and contrast to American society. Each speaker gave a brief 
demographic description of their native land and then proceeded to comment on farnily structure and 
values, ways of dress, educational expectations, economic conditions, national and religious 
holidays, and stereotypes by and about Americans. Each presenter brought a collection of cultural 
artifacts which added a visual dimension of cultural enrichment. Even though most faculty see each 
other frequently during the year there is seldom the opportunity for an exchange of in-depth formal 
discussion of personal and cultural experiences. The faculty was especially interested in the various 
educational systems and the place of women in other countries. The colloquium was an excellent 
format to illustrate the diversities in our midst while sharing our common experiences. Immigrants 
to this country have learned that while there are vast differences between their two cultures, there are 
great similarities. 

During the fall semester we sponsored three “lunch and learn” activities from 1 1 :30 to 1 :00 
during our Thursday meeting time. Each of the three programs explored different facets of culture. 
The first “lunch and learn” panel featured three students— A Native American, a Ukranian, and an 
immigrant from the Dominican Republic. Each spoke about native customs, activities, and routines 
and commented on how their lives have changed through the American acculturation process. The 
Navajo student was especially articulate about her two societies and marveled at the insight she 
gained about one through her experiences with the other. After she lived in her “Other Society” 
(American society), she said that she was especially impressed with the sophistication of her native 
language and the wisdom of her elders. 

The second “lunch and learn” activity featured speakers from three different religions. This panel 
did an exceptionally good Job in articulating the commonalities and divisions that religion can bring 
to culture. An Episcopal priest, a Jewish rabbi, and a follower of a Hindu guru spoke about the basic 
tenets of their faiths, the uniqueness of their convictions, and their qualified statements about “the 



many trails to the top of the same mountain”. The success of this particular program was enhanced 
by the particular combination of personalities on the panel. Each of them had a deep respect for the 
others. The panel shared two basic assumptions: (1) that we look to tradition to find truths that are 
not scientifically provable, and (2) there are transcendent truths, i.e., good and bad do exist in the 
world. In different ways the presenters expressed the thought that religion is meant to be a positive 
force. Several of the attendees commented that the presentation had caused them to think 
differently about themselves and others in a way that is more inclusionary. 

The third “lunch and learn” activity was a presentation of ethnic expressions in music by an Irish 
American and an Iranian American. The listeners found the Irish harp to be very relaxing and the 
commentary between selections to be quite informative. Music is not simply a form of 
entertainment; it reflects and molds society’s values. The harp, for instance, was used as a political 
instrument. In their songs harpers criticized the British crown and as a result the Celtic harp was 
virtually destroyed. Only four survive from the early period. Early Celtic harp music has been lost, 
so harp music today has its roots in Europe, especially Italy. Many familiar musical selections 
today can be traced through a long history created by harpers several centuries ago. Harp music has 
strong ties to our Appalachian roots which are mainly Scotch-Irish. Harp music also has 
associations with New Age music. 

The santur (Persian dulcimer) provided an interesting contrast to the harp. The music selected 
was classical Persian music. Eastern music often sounds out of tune to Westerners because Western 
music is based on 12 different pitches, each one one-half-step apart. Eastern music, the artist 
explained, is based on more than 12 different pitches, with combinations of quarter steps and three- 
quarter steps. The dulcimer varies in shape and size and is found in many different cultures. The 
Persian dulcimer differs from the American (mountain dulcimer), Greek dulcimer and others in its 
construction. While the Persian dulcimer has movable bridges, the others have stationary ones. 



Obstacles 



The basic problems surrounding the implementation of new courses and programs or major 
curricular changes in existing programs are related to financial resources. On a small campus such 
as HJC there are diminishing resources with increased demands on staff who have limited time to 
develop new courses. 

Remaining task. 

At this writing five of the six programs have taken place. The sixth is scheduled for January 
9,1997. Ideas for curriculum infusion will be advanced at that time. Through the facility of variable 
credit seminar faculty quickly can arrange 1-3 credit courses in subject areas not presently addressed 
in the curriculum. For example unity and diversity could be addressed under such topics “women in 
society”, “ethnicity in the region”, or “non Christian religious values”. A second approach might be 
to design a new interdisciplinary course focusing on major issues such as justice, family values, or 
social priorities. The third proposal would explore the process of infusing cultural awareness 
projects into service learning options which are being developed at the college. Included in the 
project would be reports on their experiences and understanding of justice, discrimination, and “civil 
society”, etc. 

Responses of colleagues and students 

Conversations in classrooms, faculty offices, and hallways cannot be summarized in a unilateral 
convergence. Our programs which focused on family values, religious commonalities, and cultural 
traditions have shown us that there are many answers to life’s challenges, predicaments, and 
questions as they are played out in different parts of the world and in different segments of American 
society. We are brought together by the tenacious belief that in America, despite our history of 
examples of extraordinary injustice, discrimination, and individualism that eventually there will be 
equal opportunity. In our class discussions we realize that the universals of culture derive from the 
fact that all societies must perform the same essential functions if they are to survive. In meeting 
these prerequisites for group life, people inevitably design similar, though not identical, patterns for 



living. As Clyde Kluckhohn wrote, “All cultures constitute somewhat distinct answers to essentially 
the same questions posed by human biology and by the generalities of the human situation.” It is our 
challenge to find ways for these distinct answers to be acceptable to all. Meanwhile we know that 
still there is division, and there is ethnocentrism. Our discussions also concluded that racial division 
in American society may be getting wider. One of our faculty wrote an article for the local 
newspaper “Is It Class or Race That Most Shapes Our Values”. He concludes his article by saying: 
Ideally speaking, it is hoped that a liberal arts education in conjunction 
with any occupational skills will make it possible for each citizen to 
remove the binders of race and class origin and work for the long term 
well being of the whole community. 

Our conversations are resting for now on the thought that basic repairs are required in our society. 
We are concerned that “the civil society” (discussed in From Me To We) is collapsing. The 
fulfillment of a democratic system is dependent on the government, private sector, and the “civil 
society”. The challenge to reinvigorate our civil society is also the challenge to reinvigorate a 
family structure which will institute and reinforce humanitarian and egalitarian values which mature 
through a liberal arts education. 








as. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 




Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 


ERIC 


1 * 









101 



NOTICE 

REPRODt;CTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



