DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 456 542 



EA 031 241 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



SPONS AGENCY 



IDENTIFIERS 



INSTITUTION 



Biemesderfer , Susan 

Building on What We Have Learned: A National Dialogue on 
Standards-Based Education. 

North Central Regional Educational Lab., Oak Brook, IL. ; 
Berkana Inst., Provo, UT.; Mid-Continent Research for 
Education and Learning, Aurora, CO. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2001-03-00 

2 8p . ; Version 1. The most recent version located online at 
the National Dialogue Web site. 

ED- 01- CO- 0011; ED- 01 -CO- 0006 

For full text: http://www.nationaldialogue.org. 

Opinion Papers (120) -- Reports - Descriptive (141) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

* Academic Standards; *Educational Change; Elementary 
Secondary Education; *Standardized Tests 

Berkana Institute; Mid Continent Research for Education and 
Learning; North Central Regional Educational Laboratory 



ABSTRACT 



Three nonprofit organizations support a dialogue on 



standards-based educational reform. North Central Regional Education 
Laboratory, Mid-Continent Research for Education and Learning, and the 
Berkana Institute offer Web sites and a toll-free number to those who want to 
comment on this type of reform. In surveys, a clear majority of parents feel 
that testing to identify students who need help and to publish school's 
scores for comparison are appropriate uses of standards tests. However, even 
more parents are against using the score on one test as the criterion for 
promotion to the next grade or for graduation. In high-stakes assessment, 
teacher's jobs and students' promotion are at risk. Teachers have to be 
apprised of the contents of the tests given in order to even attempt to teach 
to the test. Another major concern is equity. African American, Hispanic, and 
Native American students tend to perform at lower academic levels than whites 
and Asian/Pacific Islanders on most standardized measures of achievement. 
High- stakes testing policies may increase education inequity between whites 
and minorities or between affluent and impoverished students, perhaps 
increasing dropout rates. Possibly standards scores will prod schools to 
target resources where they are needed most. Potential topics to address, 
suggested questions, and recommendations from research literature are 
offered, along with a glossary and suggested reading. An appendix traces the 
history of this type of reform from 1983. (RJK) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 45 



Building on What We 
Have Learned 

A National Dialogue on Standards-Based Education 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

0 This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



L 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



by Susan Biemesderfer 



In our judgment, this docunnent 
is also of interest to the 
Clearinghouses noted to the right. 
Indexing should reflect their^ 
special points of view. 



NCR6L HBREL 




North Central Regional 
O ’ >nal Laboratory 

ERIC 



Mid-continent Research 
for Education and Learning 

2 



b47 

The Berkana Institute 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Building on What We Have Learned: 

A National Dialogue on 



by Susan Biemesderfer 



Version 1* 
March 2001 



*This document also exists in an electronic format. The most recent version is located online at the 
National Dialogue Web site (www.nationaldialogue.org) and contains links to the articles and research 
studies referenced. 



ERIC 



3 



For more information about the National Dialogue on Standards-Based Education, 
visit the National Dialogue Web site at www.nationaldialogue.org. 



North Central Regional Educational Laboratory 
1120 East Diehl Road, Suite 200 
Naperville, Illinois 60563 
(800) 356-2735 (630) 649-6500 
www.ncrel.org 



Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning 

2550 South Parker Road, Suite 500 

Aurora, Colorado 80014-1678 

(303) 337-0990 

www.mcrel.org 



The Berkana Institute 
P.O. Box 1407 
Provo, Utah 84603 
(801) 377-2996 
www.berkana.org 



Copyright © 2001 by the North Central Regional Educational Laboratory, the Mid-continent Research for 
Education and Learning, and The Berkana Institute. All rights reserved. 

This work was produced in whole or in part with funds from the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement (OERI), U.S. Department of Education, under contract numbers ED-01-CO-0011 and 
ED-01-CO-0006. The content does not necessarily reflect the position or policy of OERI or the Department 
of Education, nor does mention or visual representation of trade names, commercial products, or organiza- 
tions imply endorsement by the federal government. 



NCR€L 




B 




ERIC 



4 




on 







Here’s what we believe: A tremendous 
amount of energy in this country is being 
focused on whether or not standards-based 
educational reform has made an impact in 
the manner in which it was intended— 
namely, helping all students achieve to high 
levels. 

This issue has deep roots and often polar- 
izes communities, but it also has spurred 
some unique and promising partnerships. 
One such partnership has grown among 
NCREL, McREL, and the Berkana 
Institute— three not-for-profit organizations 
dedicated to quality public education for all 
of our children. 

Our organizations have committed to start- 
ing and supporting real dialogue about 
standards-based educational reform among 
people with diverse and often dissenting 
voices. Our hope is that together we will 
recognize common ground and begin to gen- 
erate action steps and measurable outcomes 
that significantly improve opportunities to 
learn for all children. We hope that these 
dialogues— planned at national, state, and 
local levels— will create and sustain 
momentum for change. 

As one product of our growing relationship 
around this reform effort, this monograph 
is intended to provide information to help 
you explore both sides of the standards 
issue. It is by no means a comprehensive 
report; rather it’s a very traditional means 
to tweak your interest, encourage you to 
raise important questions, and inspire you 
to let your voice be heard. 



The National Dialogue sessions, while 
thoughtfully and deliberately planned, will 
be structured in a way that many partici- 
pants may not find familiar, traditional, or 
even comfortable. Purposefully, these con- 
versations will compel you to reflect on your 
beliefs about public education and the role 
that standards play within this system. You 
will be challenged to look deeply at the con- 
sequences of this reform effort— both the 
intentional and unintentional impacts on 
children, classrooms, and schools. 

We are certain that this conversation will 
grow from community to community, 
because at its heart is the welfare of our 
children’s future. We also believe that 
these conversations have the potential to 
shift our thinking and reactions away from 
blame and apathy toward positive action 
that will make a real difference for children. 

We look forward to meeting each of you. 

Gina Burkhardt, Executive Director 
North Central Regional Educational 
Laboratory (NCREL) 

Tim Waters, Executive Director 
Mid-continent Research for Education 
and Learning (McREL) 

Myron Kellner-Rogers, Cofounder 
The Berkana Institute 



O 

ERIC 



5 



Contents 

Why This Dialogue? Our Purpose, Plan, and Partners 1 
Overview 1 
The Plan 2 
Digital Strategy 2 
How to Participate 2 
Our Partners 3 

Moving the Dialogue Forward 3 

Framework for Progress: More on Dialogue 3 
Ground Rules for Dialogue 4 

More Context for the Dialogue on Standards, High-Stakes Testing, 
and Acountability 5 

The Big Picture 5 

What This Means for Teaching and Learning 6 
Accountability and High-Stakes Testing 7 
The Opportunity to Learn: Equity Issues 8 

Questions and Recommendations 10 

Questions to Address Regarding Standards, High-Stakes Testing, 
and Accountability 10 

Recommendations from the Literature 11 
Breaking It Down: Definitions for Dialogue 12 
References 13 
Additional Reading 15 
Appendices 16 

Appendix A. The Road to Standards: A Brief History of Standards-Based 
Educational Reform 16 

Appendix B. National Dialogue Planning and Advisory Team Members 22 




6 



Why This Dialogue? Our Purpose, Plan, and Partners 



Overview 

During the past two decades, the quality of 
public education in America has been the 
focus of unprecedented study, debate, and 
legislative activity nationwide. The impetus 
for much of this activity was the “rising tide 
of mediocrity” cited in A Nation at Risk: 

The Imperative for Educational Reform 
(National Commission on Excellence in 
Education, 1983, p. 5). As a result, educa- 
torsj parents, and policymakers have devot- 
ed much time, discussion, and hard work to 
improving educational opportunities for 
children. 

Today, in the wake of concerns about educa- 
tion that echoed throughout the 1980s— and 
reforms proposed and implemented 
throughout the 1990s— most of us involved 
with public schools are navigating our way 
through a variety of changes in policies, 
expectations, and everyday practices. In 
particular, the use of standards has been 
advocated to ensure that all students reach 
high levels of learning. 

Subject-matter experts nationwide have 
identified achievement standards in subject 
areas ranging from English, mathematics, 
and science, to dance, theater, and art. 

Those standards, in turn, have served as a 
foundation for new classroom curricula— as . 
well as assessment and accountability 
systems— in districts and states across the 
country. (For a complete timeline and history, 
see Appendix A, The Road to Standards : A 
Brief History of Standards -Based 
Educational Reform.) Educators who are 
implementing standards in the classroom 
have experienced both the joys and the 
frustrations of standards-based education 
(see Mid-continent Research on Education 
and Learning, 2000). 



Standards-based reform initiatives have 
met with both success and controversy. On 
one hand, significant increases in student 
achievement have been linked to standards- 
based efforts. For example, a recent RAND 
report (Grissmer, Flanagan, Kawata, & 
Williamson, 2000) concluded that consider- 
able increases in math test scores in certain 
states could best be explained by an “inte- 
grated set of policies involving standards, 
assessment and accountability.” A 
University of Texas study (Johnson & 

Asera, 1999) also tracked similar progress 
in nine high-performing, high-poverty 
urban elementary schools. ’ 

On the other hand, standards-based educa- 
tional reform initiatives have been the 
subject of ongoing debate. Criticisms about 
reform efforts have ranged from practical 
considerations (for example, teachers have 
been overwhelmed by the sheer number of 
standards) to concerns about socioeconomic 
factors and how they play into growing 
achievement gaps. Indeed, the parents, 
educators, researchers, and policymakers 
involved with reform initiatives often have 
found themselves at odds with peers, neigh- 
bors, public leaders, and other community 
members. 

The term education reform has evolved from 
a well-intentioned concept to a politically 
charged catchphrase. Many standards-based 
assessment and accountability systems have 
come under fire, particularly when the 
stakes are high— for example, when stu- 
dents may be held back a year or denied a 
diploma based on test results. In February 
2000, nearly 200 students in Chicago organ- 
ized a “flunk-in” to protest the state’s stan- 
dards-based test. In March 2000, a group of 
high school students in Massachusetts boy- 
cotted a statewide assessment. And in 



0 



*EL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 



7 



March 2001 



December 2000, the California State Board 
of Education, fearing legal challenges to the 
state’s new high school exit exam, voted to 
request urgent legislation delaying the date 
that the test becomes mandatory for stu- 
dents (see Shafer, 2000). 

Given this backdrop— where a movement 
that arose from concern for children often 
has been mired in division, polarization, 
and politicization— the challenge is clear: to 
raise the quality and productivity of public 
discourse on education reform. To facilitate 
this discourse, the National Dialogue on 
Standards-Based Education has been created. 

The Plan 

The first meeting to launch the National 
Dialogue is scheduled for April 19-21, 2001, 
at the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation 
in Kansas City, Missouri. The project and 
the April session have been planned and 
designed by an Advisory Team that includes 
representatives from parent organizations, 
student groups, educational organizations, 
state departments of education, business 
communities, policy organizations, the U.S. 
Department of Education, and research and 
development organizations. (Appendix B 
provides a complete list of Advisory Team 
members and their affiliations.) 

We expect that the April meeting will be 
the first of a series of regional and national 
opportunities for dialogue. These events 
will be unique. Unlike most conferences, 
where experts typically present information 
to attendees, the focus of these gatherings 
will be on the participants. The meetings 
will provide a setting for a variety of stake- 
holders— including educators, parents, stu- 
dents, researchers, and policymakers— to 
share common experiences, success stories, 
and frustrations. Using a few simple and 
clear “ground rules for dialogue,” partici- 



ICREL/McREL/Berkana 



pants will determine the direction and focus 
of their conversations. 

In addition, we anticipate that some partici- 
pants might decide to sponsor similar dia- 
logue events within their own states, con- 
stituencies, and local communities. For 
example, a local group might decide to host 
its own “town meeting” to share some of the 
insights and information gleaned from a 
National Dialogue event. 



Digital Strategy 

Our dialogues will be supported and 
advanced by a comprehensive digital strategy. 
Our Web site, www.nationaldialogue.org, 
will provide easy, ongoing access to infor- 
mation about upcoming events, as well as 
an electronic library of research and media 
reports about standards-based educational 
reform efforts. The information will present 
a balanced perspective, without bias toward 
one school of thought or another. In addi- 
tion, the site will enable visitors to share 
information with other participants and to 
take part in live, online dialogues. 

Through this digital strategy, the National 
Dialogue will have a presence that reaches 
far beyond the launch event. It will be an 
ongoing, evolving electronic venue for 
exchanging ideas, concerns, success stories, 
information, and resources. Online dialogue 
participants also will have the opportunity 
to receive e-mail alerts about upcoming 
online events, including panel discussions 
and discussions with guest experts. 

How to Participate 

If you would like to participate in the 
National Dialogue on Standards-Based 
Education, please contact us online through 
our Web site at www.nationaldialogue.org or 
through e-mail at dialogueinfo@mcrel.org. 




March 2001 



Version 1 



You also may call our toll-free number, 
1-877-846-2332. We will provide regular 
updates on National Dialogue events and 
activities. 

Our Partners 

Initial partners include the North Central 
Regional Educational Laboratory (NCREL), 
Mid-continent Research for Education and 
Learning (McREL), and the Berkana 
Institute. In addition, the Boston-based 
public television station WGBH will be doc- 
umenting certain aspects of the dialogue 
process. As the dialogue progresses, we 
anticipate that our group of partners and 
sponsors will grow. 

0 NCREL is a nonprofit organization 
that provides research-based expertise, 
technology resources, technical assis- 
tance, and professional development 
opportunities for teachers, administra- 
tors, and policymakers throughout the 
Midwest. Based in Naperville, Illinois, 
and supported by the U.S. Department 
of Education, NCREL serves a seven- 
state region, including Illinois, 

Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, 
Ohio, and Wisconsin. The NCREL Web 
site is located at www.ncrel.org. 

0 McREL is a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to improving education 
through applied research and develop- 
ment. Based in Aurora, Colorado, and 
supported by the U.S. Department of 
Education, McREL’s regional educa- 
tional laboratory provides technical 
assistance, professional development, 
and other research-based services to 
state and local education agencies in 
Colorado, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, 
North Dakota, South Dakota, and 
Wyoming. The McREL Web site is 
located at www.mcrel.org. 




lEL/McREL/Berkana Version 1 



° The Berkana Institute is a 501-C3 
charitable educational and research 
foundation based in Provo, Utah. The 
Institute’s staff, led by founders 
Margaret Wheatley and Myron 
Kellner-Rogers, seeks to create com- 
munities of support and inquiry to 
explore new thinking and practice 
about the organizing of human 
endeavor. The Berkana Institute Web 
site is located at www.berkana.org. 

Moving the 
Dialogue Forward 

Framework for Progress: 

More on Dialogue 

We are building a partnership to do the 
work we believe most needs to be done in 
this arena: creating the right conditions for 
stakeholders to discuss standards-based 
educational reform, high-stakes testing, 
and accountability. Our approach is rooted 
in the value of bringing together people 
with diverse points of view for thoughtful 
conversation about a critical topic. 

In this context, we use the word dialogue 
quite deliberately. Dialogue is, by defini- 
tion, an activity that requires a suspension 
of judgment and, more important, a shared 
pursuit of understanding and insights. In 
fact, the Latin roots of the word emphasize 
a focus on process and meaning: dia trans- 
lates as “through”; logos translates as 
“word” or “meaning.” 

We are setting the stage for this dialogue 
so that the information and solutions that 
already exist within our participants’ expe- 
riences and expertise will be shared. As 
Margaret Wheatley (1999, p. 9) points out 
in Bringing Schools Back to Life: Schools as 
Living Systems: 



9 March 2001 



Living systems contain their own solu- 
tions. When they are suffering in any 
way— from divisive relationships, from 
lack of information, from declining 
performance— the solution is always 
to bring the system together so that it 
can learn more about itself from itself. 
Somewhere in the system there are 
people who have already figured out 
how to resolve this problem. They are 
already practicing what others think 
is impossible. Or they possess infor- 
mation which, if known more widely, 
would help many others. 

From a foundation of shared understanding 
and insights, we can move forward to make 
real progress. We hope this process may 
lead to the kind of thoughtful focus 
described by Jonathan Kozol (2000, p. vii) 
in his foreword to the book Will Standards 
Save Public Education? (Meier, 2000): 

In speaking of “the aims of education” 
for a city or a nation, even for a 
neighborhood, we draw to some 
degree on who we are, and what we 
like (or don’t) in ourselves, and what 
we wish we might have been. 

So when I listen to debates on educa- 
tion— whether about standards, peda- 
gogic styles, or objectives, or “assess- 
ments,” or whatever else— I listen 
first to voices. Before I pay attention 
to ideas, I want to gain some sense of 
character and value— lived experi- 
ence— within the person who is telling 
us what he or she believes is best for 
children. 

.... So the question, for me, isn’t if we 
ought to have some “standards” in our 
children’s education. It is, rather, how 
and where they are determined, and 
by whom, and how they’re introduced, 
and how we treat or penalize (or 



JCREL/McREL/Berkana 



threaten, or abuse) the child or 
teacher who won’t swallow them. 

.... So the question, again, is not if we 
“need” standards in our schools but 
with what sensibilities we navigate 
between the two extremes of regi- 
mented learning with destructive 
overtones, on one side, and pedagogic 
aimlessness and fatuous romanticism 
on the other .... There is a place of 
sanity where education is intense and 
substantive, and realistically competi- 
tive in a competitive society, but still 
respectful of the infinite variety of 
valued learnings and the limitless 
varieties of wisdom in the hearts of 
those who come to us as students. 

Ground Rules for Dialogue 

Experts in the field of dialogue— among 
them, authors Peter Senge (1990) and 
David Bohm (1996)— provide us with a 
simple set of ground rules for our dialogue. 
These rules are: 

0 All participants suspend their 
assumptions. 

0 All participants regard each other 
as colleagues. 

0 The facilitator holds the context. 

In addition, Seng (1990) and Bohm (1996) 
provide several general characteristics of 
dialogue that may be helpful to understand 
before participating in the dialogue process. 
They include the following distinctions 
between dialogue and discussion: 




Version 1 March 2001 



In dialogue... 


In discussion... 


There is an emphasis on listening. 


There is an emphasis on talking. 


Opinions are shared without intention. 


Opinions are shared with the intent 
to influence or persuade. 


There is freedom for each person to talk. 


There is competition for airtime. 


Conversation is group-facilitated. 


Conversation is leader-dependent. 


There is a free flow of ideas. 


Ideas are shared according to agendas 
and goals. 


. Participants suspend their assumptions. 


Participants defend their assumptions. 


Consensus tends to emerge from broad- 
based understanding. 


Consensus tends to be limited to 
myopic opinion. 


Our expectation is that through true dia- 
logue, participants will be able reach beyond 
any differences and disagreements toward a 
better understanding of how to improve 
education for all of our children. In this con- 
text, our participants' diversity of opinions, 
experiences, and backgrounds will serve 
only to strengthen our collective effort. 


districts across the nation, rigorous assess- 
ment and accountability systems have been 
or are being put into place. 

In addition, by some accounts, a certain 
backlash has developed in reaction to 
standards-based reforms. An article by 
Chmelski (1999) in the National School 
Boards Association School Board News 
summarizes the phenomenon this way: 


More Context for the 
Dialogue on Standards, 
High-Stakes Testing, 
and Accountability 


In some schools, teachers have com- 
plained about having to push aside 
real learning to concentrate on 
drilling for the tests. Some parents 
fear their students will be penalized 


The Big Picture 

To date, 49 states have adopted state educa- 
tion standards. As a report by the nonprofit, 
nonpartisan organization Public Agenda 
(2000b) explains: “Although strategies vary 
from state to state, they often include clari- 
fying teaching and curriculum guidelines, 
tying promotion or graduation to specific 
skills, eliminating promotion based on age, 
and testing students periodically to ensure 
progress.” Overall, classroom practices in 
many schools have changed and, in school 


if they don’t pass. Academics have 
claimed that critical thinking skills 
are being neglected. Some urban 
school leaders argue their schools 
are not treated equitably and that 
the tougher tests are causing more 
students to drop out. And many have 
become frustrated by the high failure 
rates and by how long it takes to see 
real progress. 

Despite such concerns, public opinion 
surveys continue to reflect support for the 
key principles underlying standards-based 



o 



REL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



11 



March 2001 



reforms. Results of a national parent survey 
by Public Agenda (2000a) show that 71 per- 
cent of parents questioned support testing 
during elementary years as a way to identify 
struggling students; 75 percent agree that 
“students pay more attention and study 
harder if they know they must pass a test 
to get promoted or to graduate”; and 76 per- 
cent agree that “requiring schools to publi- 
cize their standardized test scores is a 
wake-up call and a good way to hold schools 
accountable.” However, almost eight in ten 
parents interviewed (78 percent) also agree 
that “it's wrong to use the results of just 
one test to decide whether a student gets 
promoted or graduates.” 

In light of the challenging mix of responses 
to standards-based reform, former U.S. 
Secretary of Education Richard W. Riley 
(2000) described the education reform 
movement as being at “a critical juncture” 
in his annual State of American Education 
address: 

We have worked very hard in the last 
decade to help states and school dis- 
tricts set new expectations and put 
new high standards into place for all 
of our children. This has involved 
committed and dedicated educators 
from all of our nation's public, private, 
and parochial schools. But setting 
new expectations and reaching for 
high standards have to be done the 
right way.... 

We are at a critical juncture in raising 
standards. As standards move from, 
the statehouse to the schoolhouse, the 
debate is growing louder. While some 
of the debate reflects opposition to 
higher standards and stronger 
accountability, much of it is occurring 
because there is a gap between what 
we know we should be doing and 
what we are doing. 



What This Means for 
Teaching and Learning 

Most concerned observers, regardless of 
their opinions about standards-based edu- 
cation, agree that the crux of a meaningful 
dialogue on the topic should focus primarily 
on what happens in classrooms. In a U.S. 
Department of Education brochure for par- 
ents, Stolp (n.d.) gives this explanation of 
possible reform-based changes: 

How reforms will affect your child 
will depend on the type of changes 
that are made. If reform is related to 
the subject areas, your child may be 
introduced to new content, materials, 
and ways of learning. These changes 
may be made as a result of a particu- 
lar education goal or objective. If the 
reform is related to the administra- 
tive process, your child may not notice 
any change at all. Such changes may 
affect only administrative decision- 
making or the school-community 
relationship. 

When it comes to teaching and learning, 
the basic components of standards-based 
educational reform present a certain para- 
dox of conventional and innovative 
approaches. This paradox is described in 
the following passage by Hill and Crevola 
(1999) in the Association for Supervision 
and Curriculum Development (ASCD) 
Yearbook: 

Standards-based education is both very 
familiar and very new. It is familiar in 
the sense that countless initiatives 
throughout the history of public 
schooling have focused on standards 
as a means of improving student 
learning outcomes. It is also familiar 
in the sense that most of the elements 
that make up standards-based educa- 
tion are well known to teachers and 




12 



CREL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



March 2001 



uilding on What We Have Learned 



school administrators. They can be 
found to varying degrees in almost all 
schools and school systems. 

What is new about standards-based 
education is (1) the degree of focus 
and commitment to the goal of ensur- 
ing that all students achieve defined 
and challenging standards of perform- 
ance, (2) the coherence and depth of 
the beliefs and understandings that 
underpin the response, and (3) the 
rigor and sophistication with which 
every aspect of schools and school sys- 
tems is examined, redesigned, and 
managed to ensure that high stan- 
dards are achieved. 

Accountability and 
High-Stakes Testing 

As is sometimes the case with new educa- 
tional approaches, the vision and theory 
behind standards-based efforts have not 
always been well reflected in what actually 
happens in schools. Although most states 
have adopted statewide content standards 
and have begun to develop assessments 
based on those standards, the systems of 
accountability that states have put into 
place have not always been closely aligned 
with their standards. Yet students, teach- 
ers, and administrators face potential 
rewards and sanctions based on these 
accountability systems. 

A recent report by Stapleman (2000) for 
Mid-continent Research for Education and 
Learning explains the disparity that exists 
in some instances: 

As accountability measures are put in 
place, schools, districts, and states 
play varying roles and have different 
responsibilities, depending on the way 
each system has been structured. 



'REL/AAcREL/Berkana 



Each of the 50 states has taken a 
different approach to holding schools 
accountable. 

States rarely set out to create a new 
accountability system from whole 
cloth. A report from the Education 
Commission of the States (1999) 
noted that components often fall into 
place in fits and starts, rather than in 
the logical sequence of developing 
standards and aligned assessments 
first. States may implement some 
components by law and others by reg- 
ulation. Often components of state 
systems are not aligned because they 
were implemented years apart and for 
different purposes. 

Much of the public protest about standards- 
based educational reform has focused on 
the high stakes for students, teachers, and 
schools. More than half the nation’s states 
use standards-based tests to rate all schools 
or to identify low-performing schools. Test 
results often are used to determine if a stu- 
dent may be promoted to the next grade or 
graduate from high school. And an increas- 
ing number of states are using assessments 
to hold teachers accountable for the test 
results of their students (Lewis, 2000). 

An article by Domenech (2000) in The 
School Administrator describes the issues 
raised by testing based on the state of 
Virginia’s Standards of Learning (SOL): 

Today, the state’s SOLs face serious 
challenges from educators and 
parents concerned with the eventual 
impact the tests might have on 
children and education. The problem 
is with the high-stakes assessment 
program that is supposed to measure 
whether or not the standards are 
being met. 




Version 1 March 2001 



13 



It was not enough to simply raise the 
bar and expect our children to per- 
form at higher levels. Along with the 
higher standards came accountability. 
Our policymakers were determined to 
hold students and educators account- 
able for their performance or lack 
thereof. Enter high-stakes testing. 

... It is the question of validity, or how 
these high-stakes tests are being used 
and interpreted, that threatens to 
undermine the whole standards 
movement. 

In addition, although a common criticism 
of standards-based reforms is that teachers 
under accountability pressures resort to 
“teaching to the test,” just the opposite is 
sometimes the case. Classroom practices 
do not consistently reflect state-mandated 
assessments. For example, a recent report 
by the Wisconsin Center for Education 
Research (cited in Boser, 2000) shows a 
limited relationship between what teachers 
are teaching and what state assessments 
are testing. In the ten states studied, the 
extent of overlap (between items taught 
and items tested) ranged from 46 percent 
(in fourth-grade science in one state) to 
just 5 percent (in eighth-grade math in 
another state). These findings, say experts, 
touch on another issue that is key to better 
aligning standards-based systems: adequate 
training and professional development for 
teachers to help ensure they are aware of 
the standards addressed by state tests. 

There also is disagreement about how 
heavily test sores should weigh on students, 
teachers, and schools. Even in states where 
test results are generally high, experts and 
education officials are cautious about 
attaching too much significance to assess- 
ments. For instance, Archer (2000) notes 
that in Connecticut— where students post 



top scores nationwide on the National 
Assessment of Educational Progress 
(NAEP) in fourth-grade reading and mathe- 
matics— the state board of education 
recently approved the following statement: 

There is a danger that overemphasiz- 
ing state test scores to evaluate a 
student’s, a school’s, or a district’s 
performance can result in an inappro- 
priate narrowing of the curriculum 
and inappropriate classroom instruc- 
tional practices. 

The Opportunity to Learn: 
Equity Issues 

In this context of high stakes, issues of 
fairness and equity arise. Although there 
are well-documented examples of notable 
student improvement linked to standards- 
based reforms, assessments, and accounta- 
bility systems— in high-poverty, urban 
schools (see Johnson & Asera, 1999) as well 
as suburban and more affluent schools— 
there also are well-documented, continuing 
disparities in achievement that correlate 
along race and class lines. 

As a recent report by Taylor (2000) for the 
North Central Regional Educational 
Laboratory points out, “Research consis- 
tently confirms that beginning in early 
elementary school and persisting across 
the academic career, African-American, 
Hispanic, and Native American students 
tend to perform at lower academic levels 
than whites and Asian/Pacific Islanders 
on most standardized measures of achieve- 
ment (e.g., NAEP and SAT test scores)” ' 

(p. 5). The report continues: 

The literature suggests several 
contributors to this gap. Some 
[researchers] argue that deep, structural 
barriers within society (such as racial 



:REL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 




March 2001 



prejudice and discrimination) prevent 
certain racial/ethnic groups from 
achieving at high levels. Others con- 
tend that cultural attributes within 
groups either match (or mismatch) 
with the norms and expectations of ' 
schooling and, therefore, support or 
thwart student achievement. Still oth- 
ers suggest that school characteristics, 
including the curriculum, instruction, 
resources, and teacher expectations, 
contribute to the gap. (p. 6) 

Critics of standards-based testing argue 
that decisions that will have a major impact 
on a student should not be made on the 
basis of a single test score. (See Berkowitz, 
Wolkowitz, Fitch, & Kopriva [2000] for 
guidelines for educators and policymakers 
with regard to high-stakes tests and compli- 
ance with nondiscrimination laws.) 
Moreover, some say, when districts and 
states place great emphasis on standardized 
tests, pre-existing gaps in achievement- 
linked by many studies to race and socio- 
economic status— are likely to grow only 
deeper. As Jencks and Phillips (1998) note, 
“Reducing the test score gap is probably 
both necessary and sufficient for substan- 
tially reducing racial inequality in educa- 
tional attainment and earnings” (p. 4). In 
the January 2000 issue of the Harvard 
University Gazette , an article titled 
“Studies: ‘High Stakes Tests Are 
Counterproductive” reviewed the results 
of two studies commissioned by the Civil 
Rights Project at Harvard. The article stated, 
“So-called ‘high-stakes’ testing policies that 
require students to pass standardized tests 
deepen educational inequity between 
whites and minorities and widen the educa- 
tional gap between affluent and impover- 
ished students ....” 

Similarly, a recent Education Week article 
by Johnston and Viadero (2000) reinforces 



this notion that gaps in achievement and 
opportunity are likely to be compounded by 
schools’ heavy reliance on testing: 

By 2019, when they are 24 years old, 
current trends indicate that the white 
children who are now nearing the end 
of their first year in school will be 
twice as likely as their African- 
American classmates, and three 
times as likely as Hispanics, to have 
a college degree. 

The disparity in school performance 
tied to race and ethnicity, known as 
the achievement gap, shows up in 
grades, test scores, course selection, 
and college completion. It happens in 
cities and suburbs and in rural school 
districts. The gaps are so pronounced 
that in 1996, several national tests 
found African-American and Hispanic 
12th graders scoring at roughly the 
same levels in reading and math as 
white 8th graders. 

After decades of school desegregation 
efforts, during which the gap between 
blacks and whites closed substantially, 
progress has stalled. At the same 
time, the greater diversity of the 
school population and the rapid 
growth of the Hispanic population 
and other ethnic groups have 
reshaped the problem with a more 
complex set of issues. 

Those factors, combined with a much 
stronger focus on test scores in K-12 
education ... have raised the 
achievement-gap issue to the forefront 
of the national debate about schools, 
and created a new sense that some- 
thing needs to be done. 

In an effort to close race- and poverty-related 
gaps in test scores, coalitions of educators, 
community leaders, parents, and researchers 




O 



*EL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



15 



March 2001 



are working to address potential underlying 
issues. For example, the Minority Student 
Achievement Network is a national part- 
nership of 15 multiracial, urban or subur- 
ban school districts from across the country 
working to improve the academic achieve- 
ment of students of color, specifically 
African-American and Latino students. In a 
recent report, the National Task Force on 
Minority High Achievement (1999) noted 
the “chronic shortage of African-American, 
Latino, and Native American students who 
achieve at very high levels academically.” 
This report describes several research- 
based strategies for raising student achieve- 
ment, including: providing all students with 
high-level and engaging curricula; deliver- 
ing exemplary instructional support to 
teachers; providing support to students to 
increase their opportunities to learn at 
high levels; engaging parents in meaningful 
classroom participation and in school 
decision-making; recruiting and retaining 
exemplary teachers (especially in poor 
schools); and promoting fair and responsi- 
ble accountability. 

In addition, some observers argue that, 
ultimately, standards-based reforms will 
help to safeguard equal access to high- 
quality education. A recent commentary by 
William L. Taylor (2000), vice chairman of 
the Leadership Conference of Civil Rights, 
offers the following perspective: 

Today, new forms of accountability 
and assessment are the best tools we 
have to ensure quality education for 
all children. When schools and dis- 
tricts are held accountable for the 
achievement of all students, the 
means are at hand to force them to 
improve the quality of schooling pro- 
vided for previously neglected stu- 
dents. Standards and accountability 
expose the sham that passes for edu- 



cation in many heavily minority 
schools and provide measurements 
and pressure to prod schools to target 
resources where they are needed most. 

Questions and 
Recommendations 

Questions to Address 
Regarding Standards, 
High-Stakes Testing, 
and Accountability 

The potential topics to address in this 
dialogue are numerous and varied. The 
following list of questions, compiled by 
the National Dialogue’s Advisory Team, 
is offered as a starting point for further 
dialogue. 

° What are some of the education reform 
success stories that ought to be publi- 
cized and shared? What can we learn 
from those successes? What do these 
students, teachers, and/or schools have 
in common? 

° How can we make standards a better 
“fit” for our kids and schools? How 
can we better align classroom, school, 
and district practices with the intent 
of standards? 

° How can we do a better job of using 
standards to help kids learn at high 
levels? In other words, how can 
instructional practices be used to 
engage students in the kind of learn- 
ing addressed by standards? 

° How do we truly support the learning 
of all children? What are some practi- 
cal approaches to improving levels of 
equity and fairness when it comes to 
all children’s opportunity to learn? 



t 

JCREL/McREL/Berkana Version 1 1 6 



March 2001 




on 





° What else can we do to address 
achievement and opportunity gaps? 



as well as motivation to teach a broad 
range of information and context. 



° How should accountability be delineated? 
Who ought to be accountable for what? 

° When it comes to assessments, how 
high-stakes should tests be? How 
effective are sanctions? How do 
sanctions affect children? How do 
sanctions impact teachers? 

° What is the most constructive role 
for incentives? 

Recommendations 
from the Literature 

Experts often have disagreed about how to 
address concerns about teaching and learn- 
ing in the context of standards-based 
assessments and accountability. With so 
many different issues potentially coming 
into play, proposed solutions may pose diffi- 
culty in building consensus and even be 
more challenging to put into place. In that 
context, the following recommendations are 
among those that frequently have been 
offered by researchers and practitioners to 
states and districts attempting to improve 
their standards-based systems (see 
Goodwin, 2000; Olson, 1999; Riley, 2000; 
Thomas, 2000; Tripp & Platt, 2000): 

° Align standards and assessments. 
Work with teachers and administra- 
tors to better align state and local 
content standards with student assess- 
ments. This kind of consistency and. 
coherency is essential to fair and 
accurate testing of students 5 progress. 

° Clearly identify the range of 
subject matter that a test will 
measure. If the range is comprehen- 
sive, make that clear: Teachers then 
have a better sense of the assessment, 



° Report on performance regularly. 

Establish a consistent, accessible 
method of reporting school perform- 
ance (such as school report cards) to 
parents, educators, policymakers, and 
the public. 

° Establish clear consequences. 
Clearly define and communicate the 
potential remedies and sanctions for 
low-performing students, teachers, and 
schools, and the potential recognition 
and rewards for high-performing 
students, teachers, and schools. 

° Help teachers improve curricula. 
Ensure that the curricula are rigorous. 
Studies of achievement gaps have 
found that minority students tend to 
be concentrated in low-performing 
schools where less rigorous curricula 
are used. 

° Help teachers improve instruction. 
Build the capacity of teachers to teach 
in ways that are compatible with the 
state standards. Provide ongoing tech- 
nical assistance and professional 
development, which are vital to 
improving instruction and maintaining 
high-quality instruction standards. 

° Provide leadership. Encourage the 
implementation of fair and workable 
standards-based reforms. Properly 
fund initiatives and maintain systems 
of accountability. Such leadership is a 
critical factor in producing sustain- 
able, improved student achievement. 
This recommendation is essential 
across classrooms, schools, districts, 
and states— from teachers and princi- 
pals to superintendents, school boards, 
and state houses. 



a 

*EL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 



17 



March 2001 



0 Provide assistance. Provide ongoing 
technical assistance, financial backing, 
and other resources to struggling 
schools. Ensure that state and district 
levels have not only the capacity but 
also the willingness to provide such 
assistance. 

In addition, researchers such as Honey, 
Culp, and Spielvogel (1999) are beginning 
to address the many ways that technology 
can be used to improve student achieve- 
ment— both directly (as a tutor, a means to 
explore, a creative tool, and/or a communi- 
cations tool) and indirectly (by providing 
resources to support teachers in improving 
instruction, developing high-quality stan- 
dards, and accessing tools for professional 
development). 

Breaking It Down: 
Definitions for Dialogue 

The following definitions are offered as 
points of reference for National Dialogue 
participants. 

Academic or Content Standards: 
Statements that provide a clear description 
of the knowledge and skills that students 
should be developing through instruction in 
specific content (or academic) areas. 

Assessment: A method used to determine 
what a student knows, has learned, and/or 
is able to do. 

Benchmark: Level of performance that 
is expected in a given subject, in a given 
grade. A benchmark is usually a set meas- 
urement point used to assess whether stu- 
dents are progressing toward a specific 
goal. 



High-Stakes Testing: Achievement tests 
(or assessments) that may carry serious 
consequences for students (e.g., being held 
back a grade or denied a diploma based on 
low scores) or for educators (e.g., sanctions 
for low scores or financial rewards for high 
scores). 

Performance-Based Assessment: An 
evaluation in which students demonstrate 
they know something by using knowledge 
and facts. Practical applications and real- 
life tasks are used. (Sometimes referred to 
as Authentic Assessment.) 

Performance Standards: Statements 
that describe what it will take for a student 
to demonstrate mastery of a standard. 
(Sometimes called benchmarks.) 

Rubric: A scoring guide that gives specific 
criteria on which a piece of student work 
will be evaluated based on standards for 
student performance. 

Standard: Generally speaking, a descrip- 
tion of what students should know and be 
able to do. 

Standards-Based Accountability: 
Policies, procedures, and systems designed 
to hold students, teachers, and schools 
responsible for their performance with 
regard to academic standards. Standards- 
based accountability systems use various 
measures and are implemented at various 
levels (school-level, districtwide, statewide). 



O 




ICREL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



March 2001 



References 

Archer, J. (2000, October 4). High-scoring 
Connecticut says scores aren’t everything. 
Education Week [Online]. Available: http:// 
www. ed week. org/ew/ewstory.cfm?slug= 
05conn.h20 

Berkowitz, D., Wolkowitz, B., Fitch, R., & 
Kopriva, R. (2000). The use of tests as part 
of high-stakes decision-making for stu- 
dents: A resource guide for educators and 
policymakers [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ed.gov/offices/OCR/testing/ 

Bohm, D. (1996). On dialogue. New York: 
Routledge. 

Boser, U. (2000, June 7). Teaching to the test? 
Education Week [Online]. Available: 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/ewstory.cfm7slug 
=39align.hl9 

Chmelynski, C. (1999, November 23). 

Backlash surfaces against high-stakes test- 
ing. NSBA School Board News [Online]. 
Available: http://www.nsba.org/sbn/ 
1999/112399- l.htm 

Domenech, D. A. (2000, December). My stakes 
well done. The School Administrator 
[Online]. Available: http://www.aasa.org/ 
pubhcations/sa/2Q00_12/domenech.htm 

Education Commission of the States. (1999). 
Education accountability systems in 50 
states. Denver, CO: Author. 

Goodwin, B. (2000, May). Raising the achieve- 
ment of low-performing students. McREL 
Policy Brief [ Online]. Available: http://www. 
mcrel.org/products/policy-briefs/raising.asp 

Grissmer, D. W., Flanagan, A., Kawata, J., & 
Williamson, S. (2000). Improving student 
achievement: What NAEP state test scores 
tell us [Online]. Available: http://www. 
rand.org/publications/MR/MR924/ 



Hill, P. W., & Crevola, C. A. (1999). The role 
of standards in educational reform for 
the 21st century. In D. D. Marsh (Ed.), 
Preparing our schools for the 21st century 
(ASCD Yearbook, Chapter 6) [Online]. 
Available: http://www.ascd.org/ 
readingroom/books/marsh99book.html 

Honey, M., Culp, K. M., & Spielvogel, R. 
(1999). Using technology to improve 
student achievement. Pathways to 
School Improvement [Online]. Available: 
http ://www.ncrel . org/sdr s/ areas/i ssues/ 
methods/technlgy/te800.htm 

Jencks, C., & Phillips, M. (Eds.) (1998). 

The black-white test score gap. Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution Press. 

Johnson, J. F., & Asera, R. (Eds). Hope for 
urban education: A study of nine high- 
performing, high-poverty, urban elementary 
schools [Online]. Available: http://www. 
ed.gov/pubs/urbanhope/ 

Johnston, R. C., & Viadero, D. (2000, March 
15). Unmet promise: Raising minority 
achievement. Education Week [Online]. . 
Available: http://www.edweek.org/ew/ew 
story.cfm?slug=27gapintro.hl9 

Kendall, J. S., & Marzano, R. J. (2000). 
Purpose of this work. In Content knowl- 
edge: A compendium of standards and 
benchmarks for K-12 education (3rd ed.). 
Aurora, CO: Mid-continent Research for 
Education and Learning. Available online: 
http://www.mcrel.org/standards- 
benchmarks/docs/process.asp 

Kozol, J. (2000). Foreword. In D. Meier, Will 
standards save public education ? Boston: 
Beacon Press. 

Lewis, A. (2000, April). High-stakes testing: 
Trends and issues. McREL Policy Brief 
[Online]. Available: http://www.mcrel.org/ 
products/policy-briefs/highstakes.asp 



REL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 



March 2001 



Meier, D. (2000). Will standards save public 
education ? Boston: Beacon Press. 

Mid-continent Research for Education and 
Learning. (2000). Noteworthy perspectives 
on implementing standards -based educa- 
tion. Aurora, CO: Author. Available online: 
http://www.mcrel.org/products/noteworthy/ 
implement.asp 

National Commission on Excellence in 
Education. (1983). A nation at risk: The 
imperative for educational reform (No. 
065-000-00177-2). Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office. Available 
online: http://www.ed.gov/pubs/NatAtRisk/ 

National Task Force on Minority High 
Achievement. (1999). Reaching the top: A 
report of the National Task Force on 
Minority High Achievement. Executive 
summary available online: http://www. 
collegeboard.org/index_this/research/html/ 
991017r.html 

Olson, L. (1999). In search of better assess- 
ments. Education Week [Online]. Available: 
http://www.edweek.org/sreports/qc99/ac/ 
mc/mc l-s2.htm 

Public Agenda. (2000a). Is there a backlash 
against education standards ? (National 
poll of parents of public school students) 
[Online]. Available: http://www.publicagenda. 
com/aboutpa/standardsbacklash.htm 

Public Agenda. (2000b, February 16). Reality 
check 2000. Education Week [Online]. 
Available: http://www.edweek.org/ew/ 
ewstory. cfm? slug=23par c3 . h 1 9 

Riley, R. R. (2000, February 22). Setting new 
expectations (Seventh Annual State of 
American Education Address) [Online]. 
Available: http://www.ed.gov/ 
Speeches/02-2000/000222.html 

Senge, P. M. (1990). The fifth discipline: The 
art and practice of the learning organiza- 
tion. New York: Doubleday. 



Shafer, L. (2000, December 8). State panel 
asks delay for passing exit exams. Contra 
Costa Times. 

Stapleman, J. (2000, April). Standards-based 
accountability systems. McREL Policy 
Brief [Online]. Available: http://www.mcrel. 
org/products/policy-briefs/account.asp 

Stolp, S. W. (n.d.). What does school reform 
mean to my neighborhood school ? [Online]. 
Available: http ://www. accesseric . org/ 
resources/parent/schrefor.html 

Studies: 'High stakes’ tests are counterproduc- 
tive for economically disadvantaged stu- 
dents. (2000, January 20). Harvard 
University Gazette [Online]. Available: 
http://www.news.harvard.edu/gazette/2000/ 
01.20/tests.html 

Taylor, J. (2000, Fall). Closing the achieve- 
ment gap. NCREL Policy LINCletter. 

Taylor, W. L. (2000, November 15). Standards, 
tests, and civil rights. Education Week 
[Online]. Available: http://www.edweek. 
org/ew/ewstory.cfm?slug=lltaylor.h20 

Thomas, G. W. (2000, May/June). Six steps 
to surviving standards. Thrust for 
Educational Leadership , 29(5). Available 
online: http://www.acsa.org/ 
publications/Leadership/Leadership_ 
May_2000/thomas.html 

Tripp, C., & Platt, A. (2000, October). 3 C’s for 
building a culture of high standards. The 
School Administrator [Online]. Available: 
http://www.aasa.org/publications/sa/2000_ 
10/Tripp_side_3c.htm 

Wheatley, M. J. (1998.) Bringing schools back 
to life: Schools as living systems [Online]. 
Available: http://www.berkana.org/ 
articles/lifetoschools.html 



CREL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



20 



March 2001 



Additional Reading 

Eisner, E. W. (1993, February). Why standards 
may not improve schools. Educational 
Leadership, 50( 5), 22-23. 

Kessler, R. (2000). The soul of education: 
Helping students find connection, compas- 
sion, and character at school [Online]. 
Available: http://www.ascd.org/ 
readingroom/books/kesslerOObook.html 

Marzano, R. J., & Kendall, J. S. (1996, 
February). The fall and rise of standards- 
based education. NASBE Issues in Brief 
[Online]. Available: http://www.mcrel.org/ 
products/standards/fallrise.asp 

Massell, D., Kirst, M., & Hoppe, M. (1997, 
March). Persistence and change: 
Standards-based systemic reform in nine 
states. CPRE Policy Brief [Online]. 
Available: http://www.negp.gov/Reports/ 
cprebrie.htm 

Minority Student Achievement Network. 
(2000, Fall). Multi-district network tackles 
the minority student achievement gap. 
Newsletter of the Minority Student 
Achievement Network. 



Seligman, D. (2000, November 13). 
Accountability: The backlash. Forbes 
[Online]. Available: http://www.forbes.com/ 
forbes/2000/1113/6613238a_print.html 

Viadero, D. (2000, March 22). Lags in minority 
achievement defy traditional explanations. 
Education Week [Online]. Available: 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/ewstory.cfm7slug 
=28causes.hl9 

Viadero, D v (2000, March 29). Minority gaps 
smaller in some Pentagon schools. 
Education Week [Online]. Available: 
http://www.edweek.org/ew/ewstory.cfm7slug 
=29dodd.hl9 

Viadero, D., & Johnston, R. C. (2000, April 5). 
Lifting minority achievement: Complex 
answers. Education Week [Online]. 
Available: http://www.edweek.org/ew/ 
ewstory.cftn?slug=30gap.hl9 



j JEL/McREL/Berkana 




. Version 1 



March 2001 



Appendix A 

The Road to Standards: 

A Brief History of Standards- 
Based Educational Reform 

The following section is an excerpt from 
Content Knowledge: A Compendium of 
Standards and Benchmarks for K-12 
Education, by John S. Kendall and Robert 
J. Marzano. This document is a product of 
the Standards Project at Mid-continent 
Research for Education and Learning 
(McREL). For access to the entire document 
and a complete list of references, go to 
http://www.mcrel.org/standards- 
benchmarks/docs/purpose.asp. 

Many educators see the publication of the 
now-famous report A Nation at Risk 
(National Commission on Excellence in 
Education, 1983) as the initiating event of 
the modern standards movement. Few calls 
to action have been so often quoted as the 
dire pronouncements from that report: “The 
educational foundations of our society are 
presently being eroded by a rising tide of 
mediocrity that threatens our very future 
as a nation and a people. ... We have, in 
effect, been committing an act of unthink- 
ing, unilateral educational disarmament” 
(National Commission on Excellence in 
Education, 1983, p. 5). 

Amid growing concerns about the educa- 
tional preparation of the nation’s youth, 
President Bush and the nation’s governors 
called an Education Summit in 
Charlottesville, Virginia, in September 
1989. That summit concluded with the 
establishment of six broad goals for educa- 
tion that were to be reached by the year 
2000. The goals and their rationale are pub- 
lished under the title The National 



Education Goals Report: Building a Nation 
of Learners (National Education Goals 
Panel [NEGP], 1991). Two of the goals (3 
and 4) related specifically to academic 
achievement: 

Goal 3: By the year 2000, American 
students will leave grades 4, 8, and 12 
having demonstrated competency in 
challenging subject matter including 
English, mathematics, science, history, 
and geography; and every school in 
America will ensure that all students 
learn to use their minds well, so they 
may be prepared for responsible citizen- 
ship, further learning, and productive 
employment in our modem economy. 

Goal 4: By the year 2000, U.S. students 
will be first in the world in science 
and mathematics achievement. 

The goals were outlined in the State of the 
Union of 1990, a year which also saw 
Congress establish the National Education 
Goals Panel (NEGP); the following year, 
Congress established the National Council on 
Education Standards and Testing (NCEST). 
Collectively, these two groups were charged 
with addressing unprecedented questions 
regarding American education such as, What 
is the subject matter to be addressed? What 
types of assessments should be used? What 
standards of performance should be set? 

These efforts had an impact on national 
subject-matter organizations, who sought 
to establish standards in their respective 
areas. Many of these groups looked for 
guidance from the National Council of 
Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM), which 
preempted the public mandate for stan- 
dards by publishing the Curriculum and 
Evaluation Standards for School 
Mathematics in 1989. The National 
Academy of Sciences used the apparent 
success of the NCTM standards as. the 



f 



JCREL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



22 



March 2001 



impetus for urging Secretary of Education 
Lamar Alexander to underwrite national 
standards-setting efforts in other content 
areas. According to Diane Ravitch, then an 
assistant secretary of education, “Alexander 
bankrolled the projects out of his office’s 
discretionary budget” (in Diegmueller, 1995, 
p. 5). The National Science Teachers 
Association (NSTA) and the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS) quickly launched independent 
attempts to identify standards in science. 



Efforts soon followed in the fields of civics, 
dance, theater, music, art, English language 
arts, history, and social studies, to name a 
few. (An overview of the movement to estab- 
lish standards in the core subject areas is 
reported in Table 1.1.) Since 1990 the move- 
ment has acquired considerable momentum 
at the state level as well. As of 1999, the 
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and every 
state except Iowa have set or are setting 
common academic standards for students 
(American Federation of Teachers, 1999). 



Table 1.1 

1983 A Nation at Risk is published, calling for reform of the U.S. education system. 

1983 Bill Honig, elected state superintendent of California public schools, begins a 

decade-long revision of the state public school system, developing content 
standards and curriculum frameworks. 

1987 The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) writing teams 

begin to review curriculum documents and draft standards for curriculum 
and evaluation. 

1989 Charlottesville, VA: The nation’s 50 governors and President Bush adopt 

National Education Goals for the year 2000. One goal names five school 
subjects— English, mathematics, science, history, and geography— for which 
challenging national achievement standards should be established. 

1989 The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics publishes Curriculum and 

Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics. 

1989 Project 2061 of the American Association for the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS) publishes Science for All Americans, describing what “understand- 
ings and habits of mind are essential for all citizens in a scientifically liter- 
ate society.” 

1990 In his State of the Union address, President Bush announces the National 
Education Goals for the year 2000; shortly thereafter, he and Congress 
establish a National Education Goals Panel (NEGP). 

1990 The Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS) is 

appointed by the Secretary of Labor to determine the skills young people 
need to succeed in the world of work. 

1990 The New Standards Project, a joint project of the National Center on 

Education and the Economy and the Learning Research and Development 
Center, is formed to create a system of standards for student performance in 
a number of areas. 



£ ^EL/AAcREL/Berkana 




Version 1 




March 2001 



1990, Fall 
1991 

1991, June 

1992, Jan. 

1992, Jan. 
1992, Spring 
1992, Spring 

1992, June 

1992, July 

1992, July 
1992, Oct. 

1992, Nov. 

1993, Jan. 
1993, April 

1993 



Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL) begins the 
systematic collection, review, and analysis of noteworthy national and state 
curriculum documents in all subject areas. 

SCANS produces What Work Requires of Schools , which describes the knowl- 
edge and skills necessary for success in the workplace. 

Secretary of Education Lamar Alexander asks Congress to establish the 
National Council on Education Standards and Testing (NCEST). The pur- 
pose of NCEST is to provide a vehicle for reaching bipartisan consensus on 
national standards and testing. 

NCEST releases its report, Raising Standards for American Education , to 
Congress, proposing an oversight board, the National Education Standards 
and Assessment Council (NESAC), to certify content and performance 
standards as well as “criteria” for assessments. 

The National Council for the Social Studies names a task force to develop 
curriculum standards. 

The National History Standards Project receives funding from the National 
Endowment for the Humanities and the U.S. Department of Education. 

The National Association for Sport and Physical Education begins work on 
Outcomes for Quality Physical Education Programs, which will form the 
basis of standards in Physical Education. 

The Consortium of National Arts Education receives funding from the U.S. 
Department of Education, the National Endowment for the Arts, and the 
National Endowment for the Humanities to write standards in the arts. 

The Center for Civic Education receives funds from the U.S. Department of 
Education and the Pew Charitable Trusts for standards development in 
civics and government. 

The Geography Standards Education Project creates the first draft of geogra- 
phy standards. 

The Committee for National Health Education Standards is funded by the 
American Cancer Society. 

The Bush administration awards funds to create English standards to a con- 
sortium of three organizations: the National Council of Teachers of English, 
the International Reading Association, and the Center for the Study of 
Reading at the University of Illinois. 

The National Standards in Foreign Language Project becomes the seventh 
and final group to receive federal funds for standards development. 

McREL publishes its first technical report on standards, The Systematic 
Identification and Articulation of Content Standards and Benchmarks: An 
Illustration Using Mathematics. 

AAAS’s Project 2061 publishes Benchmarks for Science Literacy. 



slCREL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 




March 2001 



1993, Nov. 



uilding on What We Have Learned 



1993, Nov. 



1994, Jan. 



1994, Feb. 



1994, March 



1994, March 



1994, March 



1994, Fall 



1994, Oct. 



1994, Oct. 



1994, Oct. 



NEGFs Technical Planning Group issues Promises to Keep: Creating High 
Standards for American Students , referred to as the “Malcolm Report.” The 
report calls for the development of a National Education Standards and 
Improvement Council (NESIC), which would give voluntary national stan- 
dards a stamp of approval. 

The National Research Council, with major funding from the U.S. Department 
of Education and the National Science Foundation, establishes the National 
Committee on Science Education Standards and Assessment (NCSESA) to 
oversee standards development in content, teaching, and assessment. 

McREL publishes The Systematic Identification and Articulation of Content 
Standards and Benchmarks: Update , January 1994, which provides a syn- 
thesis of standards for science, mathematics, history, geography, communica- 
tion and information processing, and life skills. 

The Standards Project for English Language Arts, a collaborative effort of 
the Center for the Study of Reading, the International Reading Association, 
and the National Council of Teachers of English, publishes the draft 
Incomplete Work of the Task Forces of the Standards Project for English 
Language Arts. 

President Clinton signs into law Goals 2000: Educate America Act. This leg- 
islation creates the National Education Standards and Improvement Council 
(NESIC) to certify national and state content and performance standards, 
opportunity-to-learn standards, and state assessments; adds two new goals 
to the national education goals; and brings to nine the number of areas for 
which students should demonstrate “competency over challenging subject 
matter.” The subject areas now covered include foreign languages, the arts, 
economics, and civics and government. 

The U.S. Department of Education notifies the Standards Project for the 
English Language Arts that it will not continue funding for the project, 
citing a lack of progress. 

The Consortium of National Arts Education Associations, funded by the U.S. 
Department of Education, the National Endowment for the Arts, and the 
National Endowment for the Humanities, publishes the arts standards 
(dance, music, theatre, and the visual arts). 

The National Council on Social Studies publishes Curriculum Standards for 
the Social Studies: Expectations for Excellence. 

Lynne Cheney, past chair of the National Endowment for the Humanities 
(NEH), criticizes the U.S. history standards in the Wall Street Journal two 
weeks before their release. (NEH, with the U.S. Department of Education, 
funded development of the U.S. history standards.) 

U.S. history standards are released; world history and K-4 history are 
released shortly thereafter. 

The Geography Education Standards Project publishes Geography for Life: 
National Geography Standards. 



m 



£ ‘EL/McREL/Berkana 



Version 1 



25 



March 2001 



1994, Nov. 

1995, Jan. 
1995, April 

1995, May 

1995, 

Summer 

1995, Oct. 
1995, Nov. 

1995, Dec. 
1995 

1996, Jan. 
1996, Jan. 
1996, March 

1996, March 
1996, April 



The Center for Civic Education, funded by the U.S. Department of Education 
and the Pew Charitable Trusts, publishes standards for civics and govern- 
ment education. 

Gary Nash, National History Standards Project co-director, agrees to revise 
the history standards; the U.S. Senate denounces the history standards in a 
99-1 vote. 

The U.S. Department of Education withdraws assurance of a $500,000 grant 
to the National Council on Economic Education for the development of stan- 
dards in economics. 

The Joint Committee on National Health Education Standards releases 
National Health Education Standards: Achieving Health Literacy. 

The National Association for Sport and Physical Education publishes Moving 
Into the Future: National Standards for Physical Education. 

The National Council on Economic Education, using funds from private 
sources, convenes a drafting committee to develop standards; projected publi- 
cation is winter 1996. 

The New Standards Project releases a three-volume “consultation draft” 
entitled Performance Standards for English language arts, mathematics, sci- 
ence, and “applied learning.” 

McREL publishes Content Knowledge: A Compendium of Standards and 
Benchmarks for K-12 Education , a synthesis of standards in all subject 
areas, including behavioral studies and life skills. 

The National Business Education Association publishes National Standards 
for Business Education: What Americas Students Should Know and Be Able 
to Do in Business. 

The National Standards in Foreign Language Education Project publishes 
Foreign Language Learning: Preparing for the 21st Century. 

The National Research Council publishes National Science Education 
Standards. 

The National Education Summit is held. Forty state governors and more 
than 45 business leaders convene. They support efforts to set clear academic 
standards in the core subject areas at the state and local levels. Business 
leaders pledge to consider the existence of state standards when locating 
facilities. 

The National Council of Teachers of English and the International Reading 
Association publish Standards for the English Language Arts. 

Revised history standards are published. A review in the Wall Street Journal by 
Diane Ravitch and Arthur Schlesinger, professor emeritus at City University of 
New York, endorses the standards. Lynne Cheney renews her criticism of the 
history standards, determining that the revision does not go far enough. 



4CREL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 




March 2001 



1996 The International Technology Education Association, supported by a grant 

from the National Science Foundation and the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration, releases a guiding document for the development of 
standards in technology. 

1997, Feb. President Clinton, in his State of the Union address, calls for every state to 
adopt high national standards, and declares that “by 1999, every state 
should test every 4th grader in reading and every 8th grader in math to 
make sure these standards are met.” 

EconomicsAmerica releases Voluntary National Content Standards in 
Economics in paper copy and on CD-ROM. 

Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages publishes ESL 
Standards for Pre-K-12 Students. 

The National Center on Education and the Economy publishes the New 
Standards’ Performance Standards: English Language Arts, Mathematics, 
Science, Applied Learning— one volume each for elementary, middle, and 
high school. 

The National Communication Association publishes Competent 
Communicators: K-12 Speaking, Listening, and Media Literacy Standards 
and Competency Statements. 

The Council for Basic Education publishes Standards for Excellence in 
Education, which includes standards in science, history, geography, English 
language arts, mathematics, civics, foreign language, and the arts 

The American Library Association publishes Information Power: Building 
Partnerships for Learning, which includes nine broadly described informa- 
tion literacy standards. 

1999, Fall The National Education Summit is held. Governors, educators, and business 
leaders identify three key challenges facing U.S. schools— improving educa- 
tor quality, helping all students reach high standards, and strengthening 
accountability— and agree to specify how each of their states would address 
these challenges. 

1999 The National Standards in Foreign Language Education Project republishes 
their standards as Standards for Foreign Language Learning in the 21st 
Century , complemented by nine language-specific standards for Chinese, 
classical languages, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, 

Russian, and Spanish. 

2000 The International Technology Association publishes Standards for 
Technological Literacy: Content for the Study of Technology. 

2000 The International Society for Technology in Education publishes National 

Educational Technology Standards for Students: Connecting Curriculum and 
Technology. 



1997 

1997 

1997 

1998 
1998 
1998 



I f^[C iEL/McREL/Berkana 



f 

Version 1 March 2001 



uilding on What We Have Learned 



Appendix B 

National Dialogue Planning and Advisory Team Members 




Initiators: 

Gina Burkhardt , NCREL 

Myron Kellner -Rogers, The Berkana Institute 

Tim Waters, McREL 

Project Director: 

Bryan Goodwin, McREL 

Advisory Team: 

Bob Bartman, Consultant 

Al Bennett, Roosevelt University 

Ron Brandt, National Study of School Evaluation 

Reed Caldwell, student, University of Colorado at Boulder 

Doug Christensen, Nebraska Department of Education 

Lesley Dahlkemper, KSA-Plus Communications 

Charlotte Danielson, Educational Testing Service 

Ruth Ann Gaines, East High School, Des Moines, IA 

Mel King, Boston Rainbow Coalition Party 

Anne Miller, National Association of Secondary School Principals 

Robert Rice, Council for Basic Education 

Guadalupe Shields, Chicago Public Schools 

Mickey Vanderwerker, Parents Across Virginia United to Reform 
Standards of Learning 



vICREL/McREL/Berkana 




Version 1 



March 2001 



tn 03 M h- I 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 

M 




This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)" form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a "Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either "Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




EFF-089 (3/2000) 




