DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 403 



SO 035 100 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Old Elk, Arlene; Stoklas, Jackie 
After the Rain : Clouds . 

Heard Museum, Phoenix, AZ . 

2001 - 00-00 

81p.; For related units, see SO 035 097-102. 

Heard Museum, 2301 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004- 
1323. Tel: 602-252-8344; e-mail: education0heard.org. For 
full text : http: // www.heard.org/rain/clouds/clouds . pdf . 
Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

Art Activities; Community Resources; ^Cultural Context; 
Educational Facilities; ^Integrated Curriculum; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Arts; Mathematics; 
^Museums; Primary Education; Primary Sources; Sciences; Skill 
Development ; Student Educational Objectives ; ^Thematic 
Approach 

Clouds; Native Americans; *Rain; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT 

The Heard Museum (Phoenix, Arizona) has developed and updated 
an integrated curriculum for use in grades K-3. The goals for this curriculum 
are to: (1) share museum resources with schools; (2) promote cross-cultural 

understanding, through a focus on rain, a universal requirement for life; (3) 
help students understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modern world; (4) develop an awareness 
of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature, and customs of the 
native people of the greater southwest; and (5) use culturally specific 
materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially as they 
relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. The curriculum may be used 
in any order. This unit contains: (1) art prints of artifacts in the Heard 

Museum collection related to rain; (2) specific cultural information and 
materials relating to a particular Native American tribe or nation featured 
through the art prints this cultural information is the basis for some of the 
lessons in mathematics, science, and language skills; (3) mathematics lessons 
with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing; (4) science lessons, 
usually hands-on or observational units; (5) language skills, including 
reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary, and poetry skills; and 
(6) art projects. (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 478 403 









After the Rain: 



Heard Museum 
2301 North Central Avenue 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004-1323 



http;//www.heard.orq/rain/rain pdf main.html 



Updated 2001 



o': 

o 

r-H ! 

m 

o 

O 2 

00'; BEST COFY MMUMm 



r ' ' ’ 

i PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 

' DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 

I BEEN GRANTED BY 

I 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
I INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



V. 



Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATIO 

/ CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

Q Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 






Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Introduction 



The Heard Museum has developed this integrated curriculum for use in schools in grades K 
through 3. The overriding goals for this program are to: 

• 1 . Share museum resources with schools; 

• 2. Promote cross-cultural understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement 
for life on earth; 

• 3. Help students to understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modem world; 

• 4. Develop an awareness of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature and 
customs of the native peoples of the Greater Southwest; 

• 5. Use culturally specific materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially 
as they relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. 

This curriculum is divided into six units that can be used in any order. 

Each unit contains: 

• 1 . Art Prints of artifacts in the Heard Museum collection related to rain. While these 
prints are used for art history and aesthetics lessons, these artifacts are also used to begin 
lessons in math, science and language skills. 

• 2. Specific cultural information and materials relating to a particular Native American 
tribe or nation featured through the art prints. This information includes a map, text fi"om 
the RAIN exhibit applicable to the people, and other information of special interest to 
children. This cultural information is the basis for some of the lessons in math, science 
and language skills. 

• 3. Math lessons with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing. 

• 4. Science lessons, usually hands-on or observational units. 

• 5. Language skills, including reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary and 
poetry skills. 

• 6. Art projects 



This K-3 curriculum was developed teachers by Arlene Old Elk (Dine') and Jackie Stoklas 
during a year-long residency at the Heard Museum, made possible by the Lila Wallace-Readers 
Digest Museum Accessibility Fund. Additional information was developed by the Heard 
Museum Education Department staff 




3 



Rain 

The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rain shadow cast by mountain 
ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy seasons: summer and 
winter. Often, summer rains are brief and hi^ly localized, as clouds suddenly boil up fi'om the 
south in the afternoon and early evening. Winter storms come fi'om the Pacific Ocean and may 
arrive in waves, soaking the ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between 
these two seasons are dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until 
the next rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, praying for the 
blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative expressions. Many expressions of 
rain and water focus on rain's connection to making life and growth possible. Expressions may 
be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. Some are intended to be 
temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or the pigments of a sand painting. 
Other expressions take the form of music, song, oratory, poetry, and prayer. 

For all of the cultures in this exhibit, rain has deep meanings that reflect a culture's unique 
experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far fi'om the stereotype of the 
"Indian Rain Dance", or feeble jokes suggesting a superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a whole and 
have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. Some of the forms 
change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come fi'om rain into their lives and the 
world remains unchanged. 




4 



H3[J> 




It Looks Like Spilt Milk 




Activity: Students create a class big book or 
bulletin board. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print Hemis 
Kachina Doll by Tino Youvella (Hopi). Look at 
the kopetsokiQasadjpv&co). This terraced shape is 
a cloud: but what else could this shape be? 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will learn to look at clouds with 
a creative eye. 

2) Students will experience the sight words: 

Sometimes it looked like... 

3) Students will experience tom paper lines. 

Vocabulary: 

• soft, fuzzy, curve 
Materials: 

• "It Looked Like Spilt Milk", oversized blue paper, glue, several small pieces of 
white paper to experiment with tearing and shape techniques, copy of the 
worksheet for each child. No pencils or scissors. 

Procedure: 

1) Read "It Looked Like Spilt Milk" to the class. 

2) Demonstrate tearing paper into a shape by holding the paper tight with one hand 
and tearing with the other. Point out the soft feel of the line. 

3) Assure children that they will have plenty of paper to experiment with. (Note: 
Having pictures, objects or picture dictionaries available will ensure better cloud 
shapes.) 

4) After all students have created cloud forms and chosen their favorite, they need 
to write the text. Use the worksheet for this purpose. Students might, for example, 
write: "It looks like a giant golden arches sign over Ronald McDonald's house, but 
it isn't a giant golden arches sign over Ronald McDonald's house." 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




5) Assembling the book may be something you or a volunteer can do after class, or 
it can be a group project. Each student may show his/her picture, read his/her 
sentence and then glue the work in place while the next child is sharing his/hers 
with the class. 

Assessment: 

1) Are the students pointing out interesting formations to each other? 

2) Are the students saying the correct words as they "read" their line? 

3) Are the students pointing to the words they are saying? 

4) Does the illustration match the writing? 

5) Has every student tom at least one shape that satisfies him/her? 

Extension: 

• Once the children feel free to work with the tom paper collage, they can use 
this technique to illustrate stories or poems, or as a form of free expression. 
Colored paper, wallpaper, magazine pictures and wrapping paper scraps are all 
good materials for tom paper collages. A wet paper towel to wipe fingers 
sticky with glue is also a help. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



6 



er|c 



CQ 

o 

o 



VI 

0> 



0 ^ 

s 

o 

c/} 



7 



but it wasn't a 



Mosaic Cloud 



Activity: Students create a cloud design 
by using "mosaic" pieces. 

Focus Activity: Look at the clouds in 
Hopi artist Milland Lomakema's 
"Summer Results." Notice that he has 
used several shapes of different colors, 
which fit within each other to portray a 
cloud. 




Outcomes: 

• Students will have an understanding of the technique of mosaic work. 
Vocabulary: mosaic 

Materials: 

• glue, scissors, copy of the cloud design for each student, copy of the mosaic 
pieces for each student 

Procedure: 

1) If you wish, copy the mosaic design pieces onto colored paper (turquoise and 
red coral are good choices). If the copies are in color, have students cut out the 
shapes. If you copy the design pieces on white paper, have the children color the 
pieces before cutting out the shapes. 

2) Have the children select the "mosaic pieces" they wish to use. Remind the 
children that each space and piece is unique. They must find which pieces fit 
correctly into each area of the design. 

3) After the children have selected their mosaic pieces and placed the pieces on the 
design to make sure they fit, have children glue the pieces in place. 

4) Have a display of the work, make note of the variations in the colors. Remind 
the students that there is no "right" way to do this exercise. They are creating their 
work the same way the artist did: by selecting colors that are pleasing to them. 

Assessment: 

1) Can the children also see the cloud design in the finished work? 



s 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 





9 





10 




Cotton Clouds 



Activity: Students make a scene with 
dimensional clouds. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"Summer Results" by Milland 
Lomakema (Hopi). Discuss how the 
artist has shown the cloud and the rain. 

Outcomes: 

1) The students will create a scene 
with clouds. 

2) The students will review the 
different kinds of clouds. 

Vocabulary: 




• stratus, nimbostratus, cumulus, stratocumulus, cumulonimbus, altostratus, 
altocumulus, cirrocumulus, cirrostratus, cirrus 

Materials: 



• Cloud Chart (available from Frank Schaffer Publications, Inc.), cotton balls, 
glue, crayons, paper 

Procedure: 

1) Use the pictures from the Cloud Chart to discuss different types of clouds. 

2) Children decide to make a scene with one particular type of cloud. Either you 
can assign cloud types, or allow the children to select. Try to make sure that all 
types are represented by at least two students. 

3) Children draw a scene appropriate for the type of cloud they are representing. 

4) Children use the cotton balls to make the clouds in the sky. Work with the 
students to create the appropriate cloud shape and density. 

5) Have a display in your classroom of the students' work. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Assessment: 



1) Are the students able to recognize and describe different clouds? 

2) Are the students able to create an appropriate scene to go with their clouds? 



12 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Rain in Life 



Zuni Pueblo is located along the Zuni River in western New Mexico. Although the 
river is a permanent stream, its flow is very limited in dry seasons. Rainfall at the 
Pueblo, which can be fairly erratic from year to year, increases as the elevation of the 
land increases. Most people live at the 6,000 to 7,000 foot level which receives 1 1 to 
1 6 inches of rainfall aimually. Fierce summer storms accoimt for up to half of the 
precipitation at Zimi Pueblo. Water from these sudden storms runs off quickly, 
causing occasional flash floods. By contrast, the slow drizzle of winter storms and 
gradual melting of the snow pack allows rain to soak into the groimd. 



Average Annual Inches of Rainfall 




H Zuni Reservation Average Annual Rainfall Statistics 



Rain in Ceremony 

In Zuni religion, for each of the six directions there are six U'wanami (rain priests or 
water spirits) who live along the shores of oceans and in springs. When they leave 
their houses of cumulus clouds, they may take the form of clouds, rainstorms, fog or 
dew. They have six "spokesmen", who are water-bringing birds. Thimder and 
lightning are made by their Bow Priests. Frogs are their children. 

Zimi people offer song-prayers for rain, the growth of crops and good health to spirit 
beings who live at the junction of the Zuni and the Little Colorado Rivers, near St. 
John's, Arizona. When a Zuni person dies, the soul travels to this place to join with the 
ancestors. These ancestor spirits return to Zimi Pueblo by traveling up the Zuni River 
in the form of ducks, rain or snow to bring life and guidance to the living. Six 
important ceremonies occur after the summer solstice and are associated with the need 
for the summer rainy season to begin and continue. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



13 




Expressions of Rain 



Expressions of rain are most frequently seen on ceramics and jewelry. Zuni potter 
Eileen Yatsattie comments: 

"These crafts that we make are part of prayers for moisture. So these images represent 
life in Zuni. Without the water, we wouldn't be alive." 

Ceramics used in ceremonies have terraced edges that represent clouds and are painted 
in a distinct style that features animals associated with water. On water jars made for 
sale or use, abstract designs of rain take meaning from connections to adjoining 
designs that represent vegetation, thus linking rain to growth, nourishment and a good 
life. 

Zuni lapidary work is a commercial art form that has frequently depicted water 
animals and, occasionally, symbols associated with the Zuni Gods of War, including 
rainbow bows and lightning arrows. 

The People of the Pueblo of Zuni 

Many, many years ago, the A. shiwi (Ahhhh-she-we, the name the Zuni people call 
themselves) came up to this earth from the underworld at a place that is identified as 
either the Grand Canyon or the Mojave Desert. For many generations, the A.shiwi 
wandered throughout the area. Finally, they settled in the place they are now. They 
call this area the center or middle place. 




14 



BEST COPY AVAILABl P 





There is physical evidence of permanent farming villages in the Zuni area from A.D. 
700. The Spanish first met the Zuni in A.D. 1540, when they encountered ihQA:shiwi 
living in six villages. Village homes were in use during the winter, but in the summer 
the A:shiwi lived closer to their fields in one of the many communities scattered over a 
20 mile radius from the villages. In recent times, the A:shiwi have abandoned all but 
one village, Halona:wa, on the Zuni River near the center of the reservation. 

A.'shiwi lives revolve around the annual cycle of religious ceremonies and the network 
of obligations to families and religious observances. Community life and well-being is 
of primary importance. 

The A.shiwi have always enjoyed peaceful relations with their Puebloan neighbors, 
including the Hopi, Acoma and other peoples of the Rio Grande area. All of these 
indigenous peoples were labeled "Pueblo Indians" by the Spanish, who discovered 
them living in towns or villages. Although the villages and life ways may appear 
similar, each pueblo is distinctly different from every other pueblo. In addition, the 
A.shiwi speak a language that is unique and not related to any other language. The 
name "Zuni" comes from a word used by their neighbors in Acoma Pueblo to refer to 
the A.shiwi. 

Zuni Beliefs 



Zuni Beliefs link the Ashiwi to the Earth 

The three most powerful supernatural beings are Earth Mother, Sun Father and 
Moonlight-Giving Mother. Sunlight is recognized as vital for life, and the word for 
"daylight" and "life" are the same word in the Zuni language. Sunrise is a special and 
very sacred time. 

For the Ashiwi, there are six directions: North, South, East, West, Above and Below. 
Because of the extra two directions, there is also the "middle", which is the connecting 
point. 

In addition to ceremonies honoring and thanking supernatural beings and natural 
forces for health and well-being, there are rituals to mark important times in each 
person's life including birth, coming of age, marriage and death. 

A woman's mother assists with the birth of a child, but the father's mother is the first to 
visit and to pray for the child's well-being. For eight days, the mother and child rest 
and are taken care of by the father's mother. On the morning of the eighth day, as the 
sun rises, the child is bathed, given commeal and taken out to meet the rising sun by 
the paternal grandmother. It is the father's mother who names the baby. Children are 
sometimes named after a relative who has had a long and happy life. 



1 cr 
1 xJ 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



m 



When a girl is ready to become a woman, she goes to the home of her father's mother 
to grind com all day long. Because com is a sacred food, given to the A:shhvi by the 
six com maidens, the preparation and use of com is very important. A girl therefore 
shows that she is ready to take part in the important ceremonies of her pueblo by 
preparing commeal. 

When boys are ready to become men, the parents select a spiritual "father" who 
instmcts and guides the young boy through the ceremony. Boys are initiated into one 
of many societies and learn to assume the religious and secular or political duties 
associated with that society. 

Marriage ceremonies are not a single event but rather a series of steps that end with 
the joining of two people and their families. Exchanges of gifts and food are 
important, and the final act is for the groom to arrive at the home of his bride to share 
the evening meal with her family. 

When a person dies, it is the responsibility of the father's sister to prepare the body for 
burial. New clothes are put on the deceased, but the clothes are tom or slashed so that 
they, too, are no longer of this world. Often, items are placed with the body to assist 
the person in the next life. What the deceased does not take is fi'equently destroyed. 
The brothers of the person who died are responsible for burying the body. All relatives 
moimi for four days, since it is believed that the soul must journey four days to reach 
the afterlife. 

A:shiwi recognize many relatives. Closest to an individual is the immediate family and 
all those related by blood. The associations are then extended to all clan relatives, who 
are families related thorough traditional histories. Finally, each person is related to 
many people through religious ties. Each A:shiwi person is supported and helped by a 
large network of these relatives and must, in turn, assist and support many people. 

Arshiwi Food 



In the past, A:shiwi men were farmers. They prepared the fields, planted the seed and 
harvested the crops. Com was, and still is, the most important crop. 

Rainfall is the major concern for farmers at the Pueblo of Zuni. The only sources of 
running water are the Zuni River, which is small, and some natural springs. The 
people built dams to collect and divert this water and the mn-off from storms to water 
the fields. They were so successful that, in the past, it was not unusual for the A:shiwi 
to produce enough surplus com to last for two years. 

In addition to farming, the men also hunted for deer, rabbit, birds and other animals. 
Women did some farming too, closer to home. A.'shiwi women planted "waffle 
gardens" to grow chilies, herbs, spices and vegetables. The name comes from the way 
the gardens look: low mounds of dirt are piled up in a grid pattern to retain water, 
making the garden look like a waffle. 



best copy available 



16 




In addition to gardening, A. shiwi women are responsible for all the preparations of 
food, especially the com dishes that are so essential to ceremonies. 



Aishiwi Pottery 

The .•j/j/w/ have been making pottery for a long, long time. Many of the old ways 
and new ways are the same. 

Potters use local clay to make pottery, and they prepare the clay by grinding, sifting 
and mixing with water. Pots are made by building up coils of clay and smoothing the 
surface with a scraper. 

A slip, or thin layer of clay, is applied to the smooth surface of the pot. Then the pot is 
polished with a stone. The design is painted with a commercial brush, although some 
potters may still use the old-style yucca brush. 

Sheep dung is used to fire the pottery. The kilns or ovens used by the Zuni people has 
remained the same for thousands of years. 

In the past, primarily women were potters. Today, some women still learn to make 
pottery from their mothers and grandmothers, while others leam by taking pottery- 
making classes at the school. Today, men are an important force in pottery-making 
too. There are currently more A.shiwi men maing pottery than women. 

The A. shiwi use several designs on pottery that are characteristic of the Pueblo. One is 
a deer. Deer are often associated with water containers. A:shiwi women say that they 
paint deer so their husbands will have success in hunting. The deer has an arrow 
drawn from the mouth into the body, which is called a "heart line". Potters know that 
it is important to leave a white space between the red heart line and the rest of the 
deer. The white space is the entrance for the breath of life. 

The deer is often placed under an arch. This design is called "deer in his house". 

A:shiwi potters often draw birds on water jars. Since birds live near water, A. shiwi 
potters say, the jar will never be empty. Birds are sometimes placed "in a house" as 
well. 

Arshiwi Jewelry 

The A.shiwi are recognized as fine jewelers. They have been making jewelry for 
thousands of years using the old ways and materials. Today, artists have introduced 
many new ideas, new materials and new ways into this art. 



1 

-i / 



BEST COPY AVAIU\BLE 






ERIC 



In the past, jewelry was primarily made from turquoise, coral, shell and jet. Today, 
silver, as well as precious and semi-precious stones, are also used. 

A pump-drill was used to make holes. Beads were smoothed and roimded using sand 
and stones. Now, jewelers use power tools for shaping, drilling and polishing. 

Most of the jewelry-making in the past was probably done by men. But today, both 
A:shiwi men and women make jewelry, and it is a family business. 



1 8 best copy available 




Terraced Cloud Poem 



Activity: Students will write a poem. 

Focus Activity: 

Look at the art print of the Hemis Kachina Doll by 
Tino Youvella (Hopi). Look closely at the 
kopetsoki or headdress. This is a terraced cloud. 
When large clouds pile up like this in the sky, 
people can look forward to rain. Notice that the 
terraced cloud can also be seen on the kilt. 

Materials: 

scrap paper, pencils, copy of the terraced cloud 
worksheet in English for each student 

Vocabulary: 




adverb 



Procedure: 

1. Select a subject for the poem. The subject in the example given here is "boy". 

2. Create a list of verbs or actions that the subject does. 

3. Create a list of adverbs describing the actions of the subject. 

4. Create a list of locations where these actions might take place. 

5. Together as a class, select one verb, two adverbs and one location. Write the 
words on the "Terraced Cloud" form as shown below. 



Iitippily 



splaslics 



and 



The boy 



iiiisclilevlouslv 



hi tlie muddy puddle. 



19 



BEST COPY AVAILABL F 




6. Now ask the students to create a poem of their own. Using scrap paper, have 
each student create the subject, verb, adverb and location lists. 

7. Ask students to select one verb, two adverbs and one location. Tell them to 
write the words on the "Terraced Cloud" worksheet in the correct places. 

Assessment: 



• Do the children generate nouns, verbs, adverbs and phrases? 

• Do the poems fit a feeling, mood or pictme? 

Extension: 



• Students could cut out their poems and post them on a bulletin board to create 
a pattern. 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLF 



20 



21 




Comparison Poem 

Activity: Students will write a poem 
connecting attributes of a cloud with a 
dissimilar object having some of the same 
attributes. 



Focus Activity: Look at the art print of the 
Contemporary Water Jar by Zuni artists 
Josephine Nahohai, Randy Nahohai and 
Milford Nahohai. Remind the children that 
the cloud on the pot is filled with rain: the 
thin, parallel lines represent rain. Discuss 
with the children how the artists have made 
us think about how much rain is in the cloud 
and how it would fall to the earth in a storm. 

Materials: 

• pencils, paper 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will focus on the attributes of a specific cloud. 

2. Students will use divergent thinking skills. 




Vocabulary: 

• attribute 
Procedure: 

1. Begin by discussing clouds. Use images from this presentation, illustrations in 
books or images from magazines. 

2. As a class, begin by deciding on a color for your cloud. Write the color of the 
cloud on the board. 

3. Ask students to name things that are the same color as your cloud. Ask them to 
be specific: do they mean new paper white or old baseball shoe white? 



99 



best COPY AVAIUBLE 




4. Ask the class: "If a cloud had a taste, what would it taste like? How would it 
smell? Or sound?" Repeat the procedure used above. 

5. When all of the lists are completed, choose the favorite from each column and 
write the poem in the following way: 

o Clouds 

■ look toothpaste white, 

■ feel baby bunny soft, 

■ sound butterfly quiet, 

6. End with a last line that is a statement or a question. For example, end this poem 
with: 



But they're too far away! 

7. Have students write their own poem. Encourage them to choose items with the 
same attributes that are most unlike clouds. 

Assessment: 

• Are the students creating pictures with words? 

• Do the poems share feelings and moods? 

• Did students select items with the same attributes as clouds? 



9 O 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



"Thank you" Hero Twins 



Activity: Students write a "thank 
you" letter to the Hero twins fro 
slaying the monster. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art 
prints showing the pottery from the 
Pueblo of Zuni: the Terraced Bowl 
by Myra Eraicho; the 
Contemporary Water Jar by 
Josephine Nahohai, Randy 
Nahohai and Milland Nahohai; and 
the older Water Jar by an unknown 
Hopi artist. Review the designs 
that refer to rain and clouds. 
Discuss how important rain is for 
the Zuni people. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will practice 
listening and memory skills. 

2. Students will practice 
writing a letter. 

Materials: 

• "The Cloud Swallower", 
pencils, paper 




Terraced Bowl 




Contemporary Water Jar 




older Water Jar 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



24 







Procedure: 



1 . Read the story "The Cloud Swallower" to the class and ask the students to just 
listen to the story. 

2. Read the story a second time. 

3. Ask the students to write down some of the events they recall from the story that 
deserve a "thank you". Either review the list of events as a group, or have the 
children work in pairs to review it. 

4. Have the children write a letter to the Hero Twins, saying "thank you" and 
telling the Twins why people are so grateful to them. 

Assessment: 

• Were the children able to order the events of the story? 

• Did the children help each other remember the events and the order? 

Extension: 

• As an art project, students might illustrate this story. 



best COPY AVAIUB( P 



The Cloud Swallower 



A Zuni Legend* 

Once upon a time there was a terrible giant who lived on top of a 
cliff near Canyon de Chelly. He liked to eat people, and when he 
was thirsty he took the clouds from the sky and put them in his 
mouth. Since he was swallowing the clouds, the snow stopped 
falling, the rain stopped falling, the mist above the mountains 
disappeared and the springs started drying up. After a while the 
crops were dying, and some of the very old and very young people 
were dying of hunger and thirst. Many brave men from the village 
tried to kill the giant, but they were thrown off the cliff or were 
eaten up by the giant. The people in the village were very sad. They 
did not know what to do. 

The Hero twins who lived in the village wanted to help, so one day 
they set out to find the giant. On the way they met Grandmother 
Spider. 

"Hello, Grandmother Spider", said the Hero Twins. 

"Hello grandchildren", replied Grandmother Spider. "Where are you 
going?" 

The Hero Twins said: "We are going to find the giant and kill him, 
because he is swallowing all the clouds and now there is no more 
rain. Some of our village people are dying." 

Grandmother Spider was happy to hear that the Hero Twins wanted 
to help. She said: "I will tell you a secret. The giant pretends to be 
asleep and when you go near him, he will grab you and toss you off 
the canyon or eat you up." 

Grandmother Spider thought for awhile, then she said: "I have a 
plan! Wait here and then follow me." Grandmother Spider left on 
the trail to the home of the giant. When she got there, the giant was 
pretending to be asleep. Grandmother Spider was so small that the 
giant did not see her. She quietly climbed on a rock and let herself 
down on a strand of her web. She landed on his forehead and 
quickly wove her web across his eyes so that he could not open 
them. 



2e 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



The Hero Twins carried their clubs and sang war songs on the way 
to the home of the giant. When they arrived, they decided to split 
up. One of the Hero Twins struck the giant in the head with a club. 
The other Twin struck the giant in the stomach. The giant tried to 
get up and see who was hitting him but he could not see anything 
at all. The Hero Twins kept hitting him until they killed him. Then 
they threw him off the cliff into the canyon. 

The people in the village were very happy that the Hero twins had 
killed the giant. Now the clouds are able to pass through the 
mountains, the snow returned, the rains came and the springs 
flowed once more. The crops gave everyone plenty of food at 
harvest time and the people in the village had plenty to eat. They 
always give thanks for the rain. 

*retold by Jacklyn Stoklas 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

27 



Parts Make the Whole 



Activity: 

Students will practice dividing words into 
syllables. 



Focus Activity: 

Look at the images of the pots from Zuni 
Pueblo. One is an old Contemporary Water 
Jar by Josephine Nahohai, Randy Nahohai 
and Milford Nahohai (Zuni). Have the 
students look closely at the way the artists 
have divided the surface of the water jar to 
create the design. The neck area, for example, 
is set off by a line. Then the body of the pot 
has been sectioned off as well. When 
finished, however, all the sections work 
together to make the pot. 

Materials: 

• copy of the worksheet for each student, pencils, dictionary (optional) 
Outcomes: 

1 . Students will review the rules and practice dividing words into syllables. 
Vocabulary: 

• syllable 

• vowel 

• consonant 

• prefix 

• suffix 

Procedure: 

1. Review with students the rules and practice of dividing words into syllables. 

Rule #1 : When a word has a prefix or a suffix, the word is divided between the 
prefix or the suffix and the root word. 




28 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




Rule #2; When two vowels are together in a word and have separate sounds, the 
word is divided between the vowels. 

Rule #3: When a vowel is sounded alone in a word, it is a syllable by itself. 

Rule #4; When two consonants come between two vowels in a word, it is usually 
divided between the two consonants. 

2. Give each student a copy of the worksheet. 

3. Have students complete the work on their own. 

4. Have children check their work, using a dictionary (optional). 

Assessment: 

Were the students able to divide the words into syllables correctly? 



29 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Name 



Date 



A single sound that forms a word or a part of a word is called a 
syllable. Use a hyphen to divide the following words into syllables. 

Unhappy ' 

Prepay 

Science 

Arguing 

Goodness 

Decimals 

Population ^ 

Automobile 

Director 

Paragraph 

Illustration ^ 



Bean Around? 

Activity: Students will estimate the number of 
dried beans needed to make a rain symbol, and 
find the difference between their estimate and the 
actual number of rocks needed. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art prints featuring 
the Hemis Kachina Doll by Tino Youvella, 

"Summer Results" by Milland Lomakema and all 
three of the Zimi Jars. Review with the students 
the designs referring to clouds. As students 
isolate each element, draw that design on the 
board to emphasize the shapes. 

Outcomes: 

1. Students will gain experience in number 
skills. 

2. Students will imderstand the concept 
perimeter. 

Vocabulary: perimeter, estimate, actual, difference, shape 

Materials: Copy of one of the cloud shapes (Terraced cloud, Pueblo cloud, Zimi 
cloud, Hopi cloud) for each student, copy of the worksheet for each student, dried 
beans, cloud shapes in color for display 

Procedure: 

1 . Explain the concept of perimeter to students by showing them the perimeter of 
familiar objects (a desk, the door, their classroom). 

2. Tell students that they are going to make the perimeter of the symbols using 
beans. Give each student a page with a cloud symbol and a small pile of dried 
beans. Then: 

a. Students estimate how many beans they will need to go aroimd the 
perimeter of their design. 

b. Students count out the number of beans they have estimated that they 
will need. 

c. Students put beans aroimd the perimeter of their cloud design. 




3 1 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




d. Using the worksheet, students compare their estimate to the actual 
number. Did they need to get more? How many? Did they have too many? 
How many? 

3. Students can write the number sentence and a strategy for future estimating. 

4. Students then exchange their design for another design and repeat the exercise. 

Assessment: 

1 . Did students' estimates improve from the first attempt to future attempts? 

2. Were students able to develop a strategy for future estimating activities? 

3. Did students use appropriate vocabulary when discussing their work? 



Extension: 

1 . Students could participate in cooperative learning groups to work with larger 
figures. 



32 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Terraced Cloud 






33 




D 

© 




© 

D 

Plm 




This cloud looks much like cumulus clouds. 
The arch below represents rain in the distance. 



d 




£ 

Ui 



"O 

_o 

o 

(/I 

S 

H 




The band through the middle is the Milky Way. 





The billowing clouds are on top and 
the lines below represent rain falling. 





37 



Predicting Spinning Clouds 



Activity: Using the spinner, students determine 
the probability of landing on one of three cloud 
symbols. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art prints Hemis 
Kachina Doll by Tino Youvella and Terraced 
Bowl by Myra Eriacho. Emphasize that both the 
Hopi and Zuni artists have used a stepped cloud 
design to refer to clouds and rain. Then, look 
carefully at the old Water Jar from Zuni, made in 
the 1800s. Look at the top cross design that 
shows a cloud. These designs are two of the three 
images that students will be working with in this 
section. 




Outcomes: 

1 . Students will experience probability with an even probability for each outcome, 
but with three possible outcomes. 

Vocabulary: sometimes, never, always, probability, outcome 

Materials: spinner for each pair of children, copy of "Predicting Clouds" worksheet 
for each pair of students, pencils 

Procedure: 

1 . First, each team predicts how many times the spinner will land on each of three 
different cloud designs. Remind the students that the total must add up to ten. 

2. Taking turns, each student in the team spins the spinner. The other student 
marks the box where the spinner lands. In each vertical row, only one box is 
marked. 

3. At the end of ten spins, students add up the number of times each cloud design 
was selected. The total will again be ten. 

4. Students complete the worksheet. 



3 g BEST COPY AVAILABLF 











Assessment: 

1 . Did student predictions demonstrate an even probability among the three 
possible outcomes? 

2. Were students able to use their data to form a probability statement? 



ERIC 



39 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




40 





Name Date 

Predicting Clouds 

If you take 10 turns, how many times will you gel each cloud? 










































































How many times did you get each cloud? 




Write a number sentence to show^ the difference. 



What happened sometimes? 



What always happened? 



What never happened? 



Write what you learned on the back of this paper. 




41 






Graphing Perimeters 



Activity: Students find coordinates on graph 
paper to draw clouds and rain designs. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print of the 
Contemporary Water Jar by Josephine 
Nahohai, Randy Nahohai and Milford 
Nahohai. Look closely at the stepped or 
terraced cloud shapes in the center area of the 
jar. Discuss how the viewer can see the shape 
as the white shape -- or as the filled-in shape. 
Think about drawing the black line that 
defines the shape: look at how straight the 
lines are; how even the segments are; and 
how the points match. 




Outcomes: 

1. Students will gain the skills of locating points on a grid. 

2. Students will work with the concept of perimeter. 

Vocabulary: grid, perimeter 

Materials: Copy of grid worksheet for each student, a copy of one of the design 
directions (Clouds, Terraced Clouds, Lightning, Dine' Storm Pattern) for each student, 
pencils 

Procedure: 

1. Discuss with students how to find points on a grid. 

2. Explain to students that by following the directions, they will reveal a design on 
their grid. Have students all work on one design you have selected. 

3. Have students assist each other, so that each person has a finished design. 

4. On each of the following three days, have students work with a different design. 
You will need additional designs for each day. 

Assessment: 

1. Did the exercise become easier each time the students worked with a new 
design? 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



42 




Extension: 



1 . Have students draw a picture on grid paper. Then, have them write the 
directions to create the design. Have each student give the design to another 
student and have that student draw the design. 



4 3 BEST COPY AVAIU^Bl 



Name 




,S) 

[3 

I, 

os 

> 

:s 



3 

O 

>> 

J3 

'c 

> 



o 

>> 

e 

M 



G 

•JG 

0 
M 

1 

T3 

C 

3 



e 

'3 

a 



.c 

T3 

e 

c 



o 

iM 

u 



a 

3 

a 



.iS 

15 



'iA 






44 

o 

ERIC 













Clouds 



Use the grid paper to make a cloud design. Draw the lines to connect these points: 

Draw a line from IF to IL. 

Draw a line from IL to 41. 

Draw a line from 41 to IF. 

And 

Draw a line from 4F to 4L. 

Draw a line from 4L to 71. 

Draw a line from 71 to 4F. 

Then 

Draw a line from 7F to 7L. 

Draw a line from 7L to 101. 

Draw a line from 101 to 7F. 

Finally... 

Draw a line from lOF to lOL. 

Draw a line from lOL to 131. 

Draw a line from 131 to lOF. 

Congratulations! You did it! How many clouds are there? 






ERIC 



45 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Terraced Clouds 



Use the grid paper to make a terraced cloud design. Draw the lines to connect these 
points: 

Draw a line from IB to 3B. 

Draw a line from 3B to 3D. 

Draw a line from 3D to 5D. 

Draw a line from 5D to 5F. 

And 

Draw a line from 5F to 7F. 

Draw a line from 7F to 7H. 

Draw a line from 7H to 9H. 

Draw a line from 9H to 9J. 

And 

Draw a line from 9J to 7J. 

Draw a line from 7J to 7L. 

Draw a line from 7L to 5L. 

Draw a line from 5L to 5N. 

And 

Draw a line from 5N to 3N. 

Draw a line from 3N to 3P. 

Draw a line from 3P to IP. 

Draw a line from IP to IB. 

Good for you! You did it! 

Can you find at least one terraced cloud on each of the six art prints? 



4G 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



Lightning 

Use the grid paper to make a lightning design. Draw the lines to connect these points: 

Draw a line from 13A to 13D. 

Draw a line from 13D to 1 ID. 

Draw a line from 1 ID to 1 IF. 

Draw a line from 1 IF to 9F. 

And 

Draw a line from 9F to 9H. 

Draw a line from 9H to 7H. 

Draw a line from 7H to 7J. 

Draw a line from 7J to 5J. 

And 

Draw a line from 5J to 5L. 

Draw a line from 5L to 3L. 

Draw a line from 3L to 3N. 

Draw a line from 3N to IN. 

And 

Draw a line from IN to IP. 

Draw a line from IP to OP. (This point is zero-P). 

Draw a line from OP to OM. (This point is zero-M). 

WOW! Now... 

Draw a line from 13 A to 12 A. 

Draw a line from 12A to 12C. 

Draw a line from 12C to IOC. 

Draw a line from IOC to lOE. 

And 

Draw a line from lOE to 8E. 

Draw a line from 8E to 8G. 

Draw a line from 8G to 6G. 

Draw a line from 6G to 61. 

And 



47 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Draw a line from 61 to 41. 

Draw a line from 41 to 4K. 

Draw a line from 4K to 2K. 

Draw a line from 2K to 2M. 

AND!! 

Draw a line from 2M to OM. (This point is zero-M). 

Good for you! You did it! 

Can you see the iightning? 



48 



BEST COPY AVAILABI F 



Dine' Storm Pattern 



Use the grid paper to make a storm pattern design. Draw the lines to coimect these 
points: 

Draw a line from 8G to 8L. 

Draw a line from 8L to 5L. 

Draw a line from 5L to 5G. 

Draw a line from 5G to 8G. 

Then 

Draw a line from 13B to 12B. 

Draw a line from 12B to 12D. 

Draw a line from 12D to lOD. 

Draw a line from lOD to lOF. 

And 

Draw a line from lOF to 8F. 

Draw a line from 8F to 8G. 

Then 

Draw a line from OB (Zero-B) to IB. 

Draw a line from IB to ID. 

Draw a line from ID to 3D. 

Draw a line from 3D to 3F. 

And 

Draw a line from 3F to 5F. 

Draw a line from 5F to 5G. 

OK! Now... 

Draw a line from 13Q to 12Q. 

Draw a line from 12Q to 120. 

Draw a line from 120 to lOO. (This is ten-letter O). 

Draw a line from lOO to lOM. 

And 



49 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Draw a line from lOM to 8M. 
Draw a line from 8M to 8L. 




Finally... 

Draw a line from OQ (zero-Q) to IQ. 

Draw a line from IQ to lO. (This is one-letter O). 
Draw a line from lO to 30. 

Draw a line from 30 to 3M. 

And 

Draw a line from 3M to 5M. 

Draw a line from 5M to 5L. 

Good for you! You did it! 



50 



BEST COPY AVAILABI F 



Match and Count 



Activity: Students play a game of 
concentration with cloud designs, and then 
add up the results. 

Focus Activity: Look at the Dine 
Ceremonial Basket. Focus on the terraced 
cloud shapes. Ask the children to count the 
number of black clouds in the basket. Then 
count the number of tan (natural fiber 
colored) terraced shapes. Have the students 
examine "Siunmer Results" by Milland 
Lomakema (Hopi). How many cloud shapes 
can they identify? 




Outcomes: 

1. Students will be gain experience in visual memory skills. 

2. Students will gain experience in addition. 

Materials: Set of cards (These can be output on an 11" X 14" color printer). 
Procedure: 

1 . Have the students place one deck of cards face down on a surface. The cards 
should be placed individually in neat rows of eight cards each. 

2. The first student turns over two cards: if the design and color match, the player 
keeps the pair and tries again. If the cards do not match in design and color, the 
player turns them back face down, and it is the next player's turn. 

3. This game, also known as "Concentration", can be played by three or four 
children at one time 

4. After all of the cards have been picked up in pairs, the children can: 

A. Count their cards; or 

B. Count their points (2 points for a green pair, 3 points for a blue pair, 4 
points for a red pair.) 



51 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Assessment: 



1 . Did the students observe and remember where the cards were 
overturned? 

2. Can the students write the number sentence unaided? 



Extension: 



1. Find the difference for numbers other than 10. 

2. Could the students coimt their scores accurately? 



52 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




53 



Flint tu'o copies (his sheet to play the Match and Count ^tic. 
Cut out the cards using a paper cutter at the trim lines. 



In Line (for older students) 



Activity: Students will practice addition and 
subtraction of decimals. Students practice 
lining up decimal places. 

Focus Activity: Look at the Dine (Navajo) 
Ceremonial Basket. Point out to the students 
how the maker made all the stitches neatly in 
a line, one on top of the other. Emphasize 
how this is the reason that the red and black 
lines look so even and crisp. Discuss how the 
weaver carefully kept all this in mind and 
how that helps us, the viewer, see and 
appreciate the design. 




Outcomes: 

1 . Students will review decimal places and number skills. 

Materials: pencils, copy of the worksheet for each student. 

Procedure: 

1. Review with the students the concept of decimal places: 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, etc. 

2. Compare the lining up of decimals to the basket: to make a design "work," the 
stitches must be in line! To make a decimal problem "work," the decimal points 
must be in line. 

3. Hand out the worksheet and have the students rewrite the problems, lining up 
the decimal points. 

4. Check the work at this stage. 

5. Have the students do the math problems. 

Assessment: 

1 . Did the students rewrite the problems using the decimal places correctly? 

2. Did the students complete the math correctly? 



54 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Name 

A, 37,04 + 319,2 = 

B, 15 - 12,21 = 

C, 183,2 + 31,007 = 

D, 81,42-2,798 = 

E, 224,5 + 193,81 = 

F, 65,5 + 317,8 = 

G, 56,3 + 938,40 = 

H, 804,7 - 63,222 = 

I, 123,004-47,005 = 

J, 19,689 + 14,07 = 



o 

ERIC 





Match and Count 

Activity: Students play a game of 
concentration witih cloud designs, and 
then add up the results 

Focus Activity: Look at the "Summer 
Results" by Milland Lomakema (Hopi). 
How many cloud shapes can they identify? 




Outcomes: 

1. Students will gain experience in visual memory skills. 

2. Students will gain experience in addition. 

Materials: Set of cards 

Procedure: 

1 . Have the students place one deck of cards face down on a surface. The cards 
should be placed individually in neat rows of eight cards each. 

2. The first student turns over two cards: if the design and color match, the player 
keeps the pair and tries again. If the cards do not match in design and color, the 
player turns them face down in the same position and it is the next player's turn. 

3. This game, also known as "Concentration," can be played by three of four 
children at one time. 

4. After all the cards have been picked up in pairs, the children can: 

A. Count their cards; or 

B. Count their points (2 points for a green pair; 3 points for a blue pair; 4 
points for a red pair.) 

Assessment: 

1 . Did the students observe and remember where the cards were overturned? 

2. Could the students count their scores accurately? 



ERIC 

hfiiitiiiiaiiffiiaaa * 



SB 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 






















J 
















ja 

















57 



Piinl two copies of ihis sheet to play the Match and Count |ainc. 
Cut out the caids using a paper cutter at the trim lines. 




Nothing Missing/br older students) 



Activity: Students will practice multiplying 
large numbers. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print Dine 
(Navajo) Ceremonial Basket by an unknown 
Dine (Navajo) artist. Discuss with the 
students how each stitch is necessary for the 
basket to be complete. Note that each row of 
stitches depends upon the previous row. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will practice multiplication of 
large numbers. 




Materials: pencils, copy of the worksheet for each student. 

Procedure: 

1 . Hand out a copy of the worksheet to each student. 

2. Explain that there is one number missing in each row of the multiplication 
problems. It is their challenge to enter that number in each row. 

3. Each student should work on the math independently. 

4. After the students have finished, the teacher should review the answers with the 
class. 



Assessment: 

1 . Did the students complete the assignment? 

2. How long did it take for the students to complete the work? 

3. Were there any multipliers that were difficult for most students, indicating 
additional review or practice would be helpful? 



58 



BEST COPY AVAlUABtE 



Name 



Date 



576 

x 38 _ 

1,152 

46.0 _8 
1 _ 2,800 
22_,032 

2_5 
x 2 73 
73 _ 
1_,150 

49.000 
6_,885 



368 

x 489 

3,_12 

2_,440 

1 _ 7,200 

179,_52 

345 

xl _4 

1,-80 

10,350 

34,500 

46 , 2_0 



1,3 7 _ 
x 683 
4,_13 
109,680 
82^,600 
93_,393 



-22 
x 371 
622 
43,_40 
18_,600 
230 , 7_2 



2,877 
x 46 _ 
5, 754 
12_,620 
1,1 _ 0, 800 
1 , 3 _ 9,174 



3,872 
x 2_6 
23 , 2_2 
116,160 
7 _ 4,400 
913, _92 




59 








Terraced Bowl 




Artist: Myra Eriacho 

Culture: Pueblo of Zuni, New Mexico 

Size: Height 6 15/16"; Depth 1 1 3/8" 

Media:Clay, paint 
Date: 1975 

Catalogue Number:NA-SW-ZU-A7-30 
Description: 

Snake - Plumed water serpent, called Kolowisi in Zuni, is a traditional water symbol. It 
is responsible for rain and lightning. If not treated with respect, Kolowisi can cause 
floods. 

Dragonflies - Dragonflies are foimd near water and carry messages to the Kachinas. 

Steps - This shape is a cloud symbol at the rim. There are four for the cardinal 
directions. 



,^Q best COPY AVAIUBLE 




Animal - This is a bear with a heart line. The heart line is an arrow from the mouth of 
the animal to the heart area. This shows the life spirit of the animal. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - thin, continuous 

Shape - terraced, three-dimensional, half circles, moon-shapes, triangles 
Color - neutral, polychrome 
Space - regular, deep 

Texture - surface, touch, smooth, hard, matte 
Art Principles: 

Concept: Balance 

Cultural Context: 

The bowl shows how old traditions can be changed to reflect new styles. Many older 
bowls are more shallow and have some handles. The Kolowisi painted on the side is 
from Zimi tradition, but his expression is reflective of contemporary art. 

Images for Comparison: 

• Zimi Water Jar (late 1 800s) 

• Contemporary Water Jar by Josephine, Randy and Milford Nahohai 



Questions for Comparison: 

• What do you see that is the same about all three pieces of pottery? 

• What do you see that is different? 

• When a potter designs a container, he or she thinks about the three parts of the 
container — the rim, the body and the base. Look at these containers. Did all 
three potters decorate the three parts? Is there a different decoration for each 
part of all the containers? 



BEST CX)PY AVAILABLE 





Ceremonial Basket 




Artist: Unknown 
Culture: Dine (Navajo) 

Size: Diameter 13 7/8", Height 2 7/8" 

Media: Sumac, willow, mountain mahogany root, charcoal, jimiper sap 
Date: Late 1800s 
Catalog Number: 269BA 
Description: 

Outside rim - This is daylight. 

Outermost row of black triangles - This is darkness. 

Red band - This is the rainbow. 

Inner row of black triangles - These are moimtains. 

Center - This is the beginning of consciousness or birth. 

Break in the line - This is the path of consciousness. Note that the basket is finished at 
this point on the rim. When the basket is used, this path is held to the East. 

62 

best copy AVAILABL F 



A 



Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - straight, curved, radiating, spiral 

Shape - man-made, even, precise, round, curving, pointed 

Color - Neutral, natural 

Space - outer, interior 

Texture - woven 

Art Principles: 

Concept - Repetition 
Cultural Context: 

This type of basket is used for various ceremonial purposes. It is used to serve 
traditional food at weddings and healing ceremonies. It is used to mix yucca roots into 
shampoo during a girl's coming-of-age ceremony {Kinadlda). It is used to store a 
special mixture of salt during a celebration for a baby's first laugh feast. It holds a 
family's jewelry during prayers and ceremonies. Baskets can be given to a bride and 
groom at a wedding ceremony. 

Cultural Response: 

This basket has been handed down to many generations. Arlene Old Elk (Dine) said, 
"This Dine basket reminds me of a happy home where a family is proud to own a 
ceremonial basket. It means that the family is proud of their culture and maintains 
traditional ways. It makes me think of all the things the basket has witnessed." 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




"Summer Results" 




Artist: Milland Lomakema 
CulturerHopi 

Size: Height 19 13/16", Width 23 3/4" 

Media: Tempera, watercolor, mat cardboard 
Date: 1970 

Catalogue Number: IAC-939 
Description: 

Face - The face is a Hopi sun symbol. It is traditionally divided into three parts. All 
human, animal, and plant life is supported by the powers of the sun. 

Kachina - This Kachina is Chakwaina. Chakwaina wears a star on one cheek and a 
moon on the other. 

Ponds - Ponds are somces of water. 

Frogs - Frogs are symbols of water and growth. 



EKLC 



£4 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Cora - Cora is a very important source of food for the Hopi. It is planted in flood 
plains and is very dependent on the right amount of rain at the right time. 

Rainbow - The rainbow represents the begimiing of life. 

Cloud - Above the rain are terraced and rounded clouds. 

Rain - Modem technology has helped the Hopi manage water, but without rain there is 
no water to manage. Remebering this, most sacred prayers of the Hopi continue to be 
for rain. 

Lightning - There are bird tracks on the lightning. 

Pot - The pot is decorated with terraced clouds and tadpoles. 

Tadpoles - The tadpole is a reminder of the stages of life, from infancy to old age. 

Cultural Context: 

Milland Lomakema was bom in Shungopavi at Hopi in 1941. He never went to school 
to leam to be an artist, but taught himself. 

Early in the 1960s, Lomakema began to go to art shows around the United States to 
sell his work. He worked for a detective agency in Phoenix, Arizona, to earn money 
until he could make enough money as an artist. 

In 1968, Lomakema returned to Hopi and went to work for the Hopi Police Force. 
While there, he met other artists. They talked together and found they had similar 
beliefs. They formed a group and called themselves Artist Hopid. They all worked 
using their art to share Hopi values and history. 

Questions for discussion: 

Many of the images you see in "Summer Results" came from ideas Mr. Lomakema got 
while looking at pieces of walls decorated by his ancestors hundreds of years ago. 
What could you look at from your ancestors that might give you ideas about them? 

What symbols do you see in this painting that are connected to rain? 



B5 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



Contemporary Water Jar 




Artist: Josephine Nahohai, Randy Nahohai and Milford Nahohai 
Culture: Pueblo of Zuni, New Mexico 
Size: Height 8 1/16"; Diameter 8 15/16" 

Media: Clay, paint 
Date: 1983 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-ZU-A7-44 
Description: 

Bird - This is a traditional Zuni theme. 

Parallel Lines - Slanted parallel lines represent rain. 

Steps - These are referred to as terraced and represent rain clouds. 
Circles - rectangles, triangles - Zuni pottery design is often geometric. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






Vocabulaty for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - parallel, curved, precise, regular, vertical, horizontal 

Shape - three-dimensional, curved 

Color - polychrome, neutral, glaze 

Space - Positive, negative, neck, body, base 

Texture - Woven 



Art Principle: 

Concept - Repetition 

Discuss the repetition of line and shape, especially the parallel lines that represent rain. 

Cultural Context: 

Often when rain clouds come into the Zuni valley they are so heavy with water they 
skim over the top of the mountains and roll into the valley like a tumbling, soft, giant 
water-filled bird. Milford Nahohai, the Zuni artist who painted this water jar, believes 
that a Zuni artist many generations ago saw the same rolling cloud formations he sees 
today and created the first rainbird. The rainbird, the terraced (stepped) clouds and the 
slanted parallel lines that represent rain are designs that Randy and Milford Nahohai, 
along with other contemporary Zuni artists, learned from their ancestors and today use 
to create their own designs. 

Zuni artists have learned designs and craftsmanship from their ancestors. In the 1880s, 
when this water jar was made, 85% of Zuni workers used this knowledge to make 
jewelry, ceramics and other artwork to support their families. This water jar was made 
by the Nahohai family working together. Josephine Nahohai made the water jar. Her 
son Randy Nahohai drew the design on it. Then her son Milford Nahohai painted the 
design. 

Milford Nahohai is proud that Zuni is a progressive community, working together to 
market their work. 



Artist's Response: 

Milford Nahohai explained that you need to be in the right frame of mind and think 
only good thoughts when you're doing your pottery. If you don't, the ceramic will turn 
out bad or break in the firing. 



07 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





Images for Comparison: 

Zuni Water Jar (late 1 800s) 

Terraced Bowl 
Questions for Comparison: 

What do you see that is the same about all three pieces of pottery? 

What is different? 

When a potter designs a container, he or she thinks about the three parts of the 
container: the rim, the body and the base. Look at these containers. Did all three 
potters decorate the three parts? Is there a different decoration for each part of all the 
containers? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

68 





Artist: Unknown 

Culture: Pueblo of Zuni 

Size: Height 10 13/16"; Diameter 7 7/16" 

Media: Clay, paint 
Date: Late 1800s 
Catalog Number: 41 IP 
Description: 

Parallel lines - Parallel lines represent rain. 

Circle - Notice the slight coil line. This is a ceremonial drumstick. 

Terraced Cross - This shape is a cloud all alone after a storm. In this pot, three have 
been joined. 

The area where the design has worn away suggests that this is where a dipper was 
kept. The dipper handle could have rubbed against the surface of the jar. 



G9 

BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 






Art Elements: 



Line - Thick, thin, straight, curved, parallel 
Shape - enclosed, positive, negative, round, curved 
Color - polychrome, contrast 

Space - rim, bottom , body, inside, three-dimensional 
Texture - actual, smooth, hard, simulated, rough 

Art Principles: 

Concept -Repetition 

Ask: "What do you see repeated?" 

Cultural Context: 

During the first half of the 20th century, people at Zuni made fewer ceramics than they 
had in the past because there were other things they could buy in the store for 
everyday use. 

Today, Zuni families enjoy the beauty of traditional ceramics on display in their 
homes. They may appreciate a ceramic piece because of their cultural tradition or 
family memories. 

This jar, made in the late 1 800s, was used for storing water. The worn spot at the neck 
was probably produced by the handle of the dipper kept in the jar. 

Today, more potters at Zuni are active making special ceramics for people to enjoy. 
These potters are interested in the designs their ancestors made. With the help of older 
Zuni potters, books showing old pottery, the support of museums and the ability to see 
ceramics like this one made in the late 1800s, Zuni potters are learning the old styles. 

Today's potters do not just copy traditional designs. A Zuni potter, Randy Nahohai, 
states, "Every time I mix around the designs so they are all original, my own 
interpretations of what the old designs mean." 

Images for Comparison: 

Terraced Bowl 

Contemporary Water Jar 



BEST COPY AVAII.^*^* " 

7D 



Questions for Comparison: 

What do you see that is the same about all three pieces of pottery? 
What is different? 



71 



best COPY AVAIl-AP' " 




Artist: Tino Youvella 
Culture: Hopi 
Size: Height 19" 

Media: Cottonwood root, paint, feathers, cotton, leather 
Date: 1983 

Catalog Number: RK-9 
Description: 

Headdress - The headdress is called a kopetsoki in Hopi. The kopetsoki has both 
terraced and rounded clouds with a blue, yellow and red rainbow. 




best COPY AVAiU' 






Rainbow - A blue, yellow and red rainbow is on the kopetsoki directly over the head of 
the Hemis Kachina. 



Feathers - The feathers located on top of the kopetsoki represent clouds. 

Sash - The cotton sash the Hemis Kachina wears aroxmd his waist has red and white 
strips representing rain. On the sash is a black terraced (stepped) cloud outlined in 
white. 

Kilt - A kilt is worn in ceremonial dances. Cloud designs are seen on this embroidered 
kilt. 

White circles - The white circles on the Kachina doll's chest are the Hopi sign of 
friendship. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Principles: 

Line - straight, vertical, horizontal, curved, broken, dashed 

Shape - rounded, arched, rectangular 

Color - primary 

Space - positive, negative 

Texture - smooth, fluffy, shiny, hard, soft 

Description of Art Principles: 

Concept -Repetition 
Ask: 

"What symbols are repeated?" 

"Are the repeated shapes exactly the same in each case?" 

Cultural Context: 

The tihu (pronoxmced tee hoo) is an important part of the Hopi religion. It is a 
reminder of religious beliefs and practices. This tihu is a reminder of the Hemis 
Kachina. Each year, the Hemis Kachinas are seen for the first time at sunrise on the 
morning that begins the celebration of the year's first harvest. It is an exciting time at 
Hopi. Early in the morning prayers are said, and everyone listens eagerly to hear the 
Kachinas music coming closer. 

The last ceremony of the year is the Niman or "Going Home" ceremony. At this 
ceremony, the Hemis Kachina brings gifts to the children of the village. They bring 
cattails and cornstalks as symbols of rain. They bring bull roarers (a musical 
instrument) and bows and arrows for the boys, and tihus and baskets for the girls. 



73 



BEST COPY A'/aIU8. 



Special Note: 

The Hopi Kachina religion is deserving of the respect that is given to any religion. 
When discussing artwork that has a connection to religious beliefs, practices or 
ceremonies, guidelines are always followed; it is never appropriate to discuss or mime 
any aspect of a religion that would be offensive to the believers. 

The Hopi Kachina religion is based on a cannon of sacred beliefs, and those beliefs 
center on the concept of spirit, called "Kachinas", who visit the people bringing 
blessings, rain and other good things. Thus the use of the terms "mask", "represent", 
"impersonate" or "impersonator" is completely inappropriate in a discussion of Hopi 
beliefs. 

Tihu has no translation into English, so the closest term used is kachina doll. A tihu is 
not a toy. In the past, young Hopi girls played with tihu or kept them nearby while 
doing chores. Tihu are not sacred objects but are treated with respect. It is not 
appropriate to make a tihu as an art project. 

The headpieces worn by some Kachinas are called kopetsoki meaning "sits on top". 
This is a religious item and should not be made or used in an art project. 

Kachina dolls, items that the Kachinas themselves wear, and even drawings of the 
Kachinas may be made only by Hopi men who have been initiated. Even Hopi 
children are told not to draw the Kachinas or color a picture of a Kachina until they 
have the religious right to do so. 



";7,4 BEST COPY AVAiLAa. 





Over the Mountain 



Activity: Students try to blow a dry 
cotton ball and a wet cotton ball over a 
stack of books. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print of 
the Water Jar made in Zuni in the late 
1800s. Review with the students the 
design of the clouds: look for the three 
terraced crosses in the center of the 
body of the jar. Remind the students 
that the thin, parallel lines represent 
rain in the clouds. Then look at 
"Summer Results" by Hopi artist 
Milland Lomakema. See the clouds in 
the upper right-hand area, and notice 
that the rain is falling from the clouds. 




Outcomes: 



1) Students will recognize that clouds are made up of moisture/water. 

2) Students will understand that water has weight. 

3) Students will understand that in order for clouds to go over a mountain, the 
clouds must release water. 

Vocabulary: weight, release 

Materials: Eyedroppers, cotton balls, water, stack of books 
Procedure: 

1) On a cleared surface, place a small stack of books. Put a dry cotton ball on the 
table and blow the cotton ball on top of ~ or over — the books. 

2) Have students predict how many drops of water it will take to make the cotton 
ball too heavy to blow up onto, or over, the books. 

3) Try putting four drops of water on the cotton ball. 

4) If the student is successful, try another four drops. Repeat this process until the 
cotton ball is too heavy to move. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







• Assessment: 

o Did the students realize that the water was the element giving weight to 
the cotton ball. 

o Do the students realize the connection between the weight of the water 
in the cotton ball and the weight of rain in clouds? 

o Do the students now understand why clouds drop their moisture (rain) 
on one side of a mountain and not on the other side? 

Extension: 

o Help students to understand that clouds drop their moisture on the 
California side of the Rocky Mountains, not on the Arizona side. This 
is why California is greener and Arizona is mostly desert. 



7B 



BEST COPY AVAILABLt 



Cloud Match 



Activity: Students play a matching game to learn about different clouds. 

Focus Activity: Look at all the art prints (see prints section), and focus on the clouds. 
Look at the Cloud Chart. Discuss with the children why the cumulonimbus cloud is 
the most similar to the clouds seen in all the art prints. 

Outcomes: 

• 1) Children will gain a familiarity with the kinds of clouds, the characteristics 

of the various types and the altitudes where the clouds are formed. 



Materials: photocopy of the cloud card pieces (group 1, group 2, group 3), for each 
child, scissors, glue (optional) 

Procedure: 

1) Have children review the types of clouds, altitudes and descriptions. A 
summary is found on the back of the Cloud Chart. 

2) Have children cut out all the cloud card shapes. 

3) Explain that all the pieces fit together in pairs: one part has the name of the 
cloud, the other has the description. Each pair is unique. 

4) Have the students fit the pieces together. They may then glue the pairs to 
another piece of paper, or you may have them repeat the exercise several times 
before gluing the pieces permanently in place. 

Assessment: 

Were the children able to match the shapes? Did the students use the information to 
help them match the pairs? 

Extension: 

Students could add a drawing of the cloud type to the card pieces or to the paper they 
use for gluing. 



77 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Medium Clouds — 8,000 to 15,000 feel 



Grayish-white sheet of clouds that 
often makes the sky look water}'; 
usually no rain or snow falls. 




Low Clouds — Up to 8,000 feet 

Large piles of white clouds that 
can billow high in the sky; they 
appear during clear weather. 



High Clouds — Above 15,000 feet 

"See-through" white clouds that may 
cover the whole sky; they can be a sign 
that a storm is approaching. 





78 




Cumulonimbus 




Cirrocumulus 




Cirrostratus 



Altocumulus 




Stratocumulus 





79 





so 



Clouds Inside and Out 



Activity: Students realize that clouds are 
moisture by creating clouds of their own. 

Focus Activity: Look at the print showing the 
Contemporary Water Jar by Zuni artists 
Josephine Nahohai, Randy Nahohai and 
Milford Nahohai. Notice that the thin, parallel 
lines inside the terraced cloud shape refers to 
rain. The artists are reaffirming what 
scientists say: clouds are made up of particles 
of water that, under the right conditions, fall 
to the earth as rain or snow. 




Outcomes: 

1) Students will understand the link between moisture and cloud formation. 

2) Students will make clouds. 

Materials: mirror, sprayer, electric kettle, water 
Procedure: 

1) Tell the students that the first cloud they will "create" in the classroom will be 
the steam from water boiling in the kettle. The cloud/steam will be visible. It can 
also be captured on a mirror. Discuss how the same thing happens to the mirror in 
the bathroom if they take a shower! 

2) By using the finest particle setting on the sprayer, students can create a cloud 
that is just barely visible. Shoot the fine spray into the air, and see if they can see it 
fall. Remind students that water has weight (as they discover in the "Over the 
Mountain" activity in this section). This cloud can also be captured on a mirror. 

3) Finally, have students release the cloud inside them by breathing on a mirror. 
Remind them that water is essential to all life, and that our bodies are made up 
mostly of water. Remind them that they may have seen pictures of people and 
animals in cold weather when breath is visible. 

Assessment: 

• Do students imderstand that clouds are made up of very small particles of 
water? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) . 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 







EttocstliinQl Restiurces lolofnHilli)ii Ceater 






I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: SP 



Title: 

After the Rain: Clouds 




Author(s): , 




Arlene Old Elk and Jackie Stoklas 
Corporate Source; 


Publication Date: 
2001 


II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 





In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and 
electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction 
release is grant^, one of the following notices is affbced to the document. 



If permission Is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identifted document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 



of the page. 



The samp*® «ticker shown below win be 
clfixed to an Level 1 doctanents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



3 '^ 









TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



1 



Level 1 




Check here for Level 1 releasa, pormWino reproductioo 
and dissemlnetion in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
me^ (a.g.. el oct ron ic ) end paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
afToced to all Level 2A documents 


The sample sticker shown below will be 
afToced to all Level 2B documents 


PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 






DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 




DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 


FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 




MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 
























TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


2A 




2B 



Level 2A Level 2B 

t t 



Check here ter Level 2Ateloaso.p#nnillinorepro<luctk3n 0»ek here ter Level 2B teleaeo. ponnittino reproduction 

ertedissornlnaUontetnlcrofiehoandlnelocJronlctnodiater end rSeeeinlnaUon In tnicroficho only 

ERIC archival collection aubscribera only 



Oooumenta wU be prooesaed aa incficated provided reproduction (^iaGty permita. 

If pemniaaion to reproduce is grartfed, but ro box to checked, dooumenta wffl bo prooesaed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here, ^ 
please 




/ hereby grant to the Educationat Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this 
document as indicated above. Reproduction fh>m the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and 
its system contractors requires pennission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to sati^ information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, If you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 




However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolidted contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document beinq 
contnbuted) to: ^ 



O 

ERLC 

h n ij in i mrtM 3 (Rgy 2/2001) 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
4483-A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland -20706 

Telephone: 301-552-4200 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-552-4700 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfecility.org 



