DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 416 546 



CS 509 743 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Schrader, Elizabeth L.; Schrader, David C. 

Community Health Resource Training for Native Americans. 
1997-11-00 

22p . ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National 
Communication Association (83rd, Chicago, IL, November 
19-23, 1997) . 

Reports - Descriptive (141) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Adult Learning; American Indians; * Audience Awareness; 
♦Cultural Context; *Health Education; Health Needs; 
Intercultural Communication; * Learning Experience; *Theory 
Practice Relationship 

Health Communication; *Health Resources Information; *Native 
Americans; Oral Presentations; Theoretical Orientation; 
Traditional Healing; Uncertainty Reduction 



ABSTRACT 

This paper applies concepts from intercultural communication 
theory, adult learning theory, and traditional Native American medicine to a 
specific learning experience for Native Americans. The background is an 
educational opportunity offered by the Indian Health Services Bureau to tribe 
members to become employed on their reservations as Health Resource Persons 
(HRP) , with attendance at an annual conference for training and development 
on a variety of health issues. Noting the lack of information available 
related specifically to the interpretation of health conditions in a cultural 
context, a conference presenter focused on an understanding of the culture's 
attitudes and beliefs toward health issues and an explication of adult 
learning principles relevant to these issues in her presentation. A 
literature review focused on the following objectives: developing an 
understanding of uncertainty reduction theory as it pertains to the 
intercultural experience; developing an understanding of traditional Native 
American medicinal practices; and selecting the most appropriate adult 
education theory to integrate these issues. After the conference experience, 
the presenter examined her performance and noted that a facilitator with more 
modest and humble manner would probably have developed audience rapport more 
quickly and the progressive education theory is more consistent with the 
philosophies of the culture. The Native American culture has a noncompetitive 
attitude, and the audience responded to group activities much better than to 
individual activities. Also noted was that the conference organizer needed 
more expertise in adult education. (Contains 10 references.) (NKA) 



******************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

******************************************************************************** 



erJc 



£ S> Co f 7 4-3 ED 416 546 



Native Americans 



1 



Running Head : 



NATIVE AMERICANS 



Community Health Resource Training 
For Native Americans 



Elizabeth L. Schrader, Adult Nurse Practitioner 
David C. Schrader, Associate Professor 
Oklahoma State University 



Correspondence should be addressed to Elizabeth L. Schrader, 
Adult Nurse Practitioner, Student Health Center, Oklahoma State 
University, Stillwater, OK 74078. Phone: (405) 744-7047. 

Email : EBSDS@OSUUNX . UCC . OKSTATE . EDU . 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
j CENTER (ERIC) 

h This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

}>■ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 



ERIC 



4 , 



®ES?F COW AVAILABLE 



Native Americans 



2 



* 



Introduction 

The purpose of this paper is to apply concepts 
from intercul tural communication theory , adult learning theory 
and traditional Native American medicine to a specific learning 
experience for Native Americans. 

The Indian Health Services Bureau offers an educational 
opportunity to tribe members to become employed on their 
reservation as Health Resource Persons (HRP ) . The selected 
individuals are sent annually to a three-week conference for 
training and development on a variety of health issues. This 
conference provides most of of the educational preparation they 

will receive for this task. 

I was invited to be a presenter for the 1996 Summer 
Conference held in Tuscon, Arizona. My educational background as 
an Adult Nurse Practitioner and as a Community Health Educator 
qualified me for the invitation. The content of my presentation 
included health education areas on prenatal care, childbirth, 
fetal alcohol syndrome, diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, 
nutrition, and sexually transmitted diseases. The time frame for 
presenting this material was three days, which made this task a 
challenging opportunity. 

The conference organizer gave me the content of the material 
that was to be presented to the participants. However, there was 
a lack of information available related specifically to the 
interpretation of these health conditions in a cultural context. 
To affect a change on health beliefs and behaviors, an 



0 

ERIC 



3 



Native Americans 



3 



V 



t 



understanding of the cultural beliefs in the population is 
essential. My own cultural background (Caucasian female of 
European descent, raised in the Midwest) inhibited my ability to 
achieve this understanding. Consequently, my preparation for 
this presentation focused on obtaining a better understanding of 
the student's culture in general, an understanding of this 
cultures attitudes and beliefs towards health issues, and an 
explication of adult learning principles relevant to these 
issues . 

Specifically, preparation for this conference included a 
thorough review of literature in three main areas, with a focus 
on the following objectives: 

1. Developing an understanding of Uncertainty Reduction 
Theory as it pertains to the intercultural experience. 

2 . Developing an understanding of the traditional Native 
American medicinal practices. 

3. Selecting the most appropriate adult education theory 
to integrate these issues. 

Uncertainty Reduction Theory 

This theory seeks to explain interpersonal communication 
during the beginning of an interaction. The core assumption of 
this theory is that when strangers meet, they seek to reduce 
uncertainty about each other (Infante, Rancer, Womack, 1993) . 
Uncertainty reduction theory consists of three stages of initial 
interactions: the entry phase, personal phase, and exit phase. 




Native Americans 



4 



The entry phase is generally controlled by communication 
norms. It would be inappropriate in this phase to ask a 
strangers about intimate details of their behavior. The personal 
phase consists of less constrained rules and norms in sharing 
more personal information and details. The last phase is the 
exit phase, during which communicators decide on future 
interaction plans. They discuss ways in which the relationship 
may grow and continue. 

Uncertainty Reduction Theory advances the following seven 
axioms (Berger & Calabrese, 1975) : 

1. When uncertainty levels are high verbal communication 
between strangers decrease, and when uncertainty 
decreases verbal information increases. 

2 . When the interaction is for information seeking the 
perceived similarities between individuals will 
reduce uncertainty with an increased probability of 
a greater exchange of information. 

3. Perceived similarities include similar background, 
attitudes, and appearance. 

4. Nonverbal expressions of interest and attention 
increase as uncertainty decreases . 

5. As a reduction in uncertainty continues, intimate 
messages may be exchanged. 

6. Self disclosing statements reveal more intimate 
information and may rapidly move the relationship 
from the entry phase. 



Native Americans 



5 



7. As uncertainty between communicators decreases the 
result us that they will like each other more and 
understand each other in a more meaningful way. 

The understanding and awareness of these axioms are useful 
as they pertain to interactions between strangers and between 
people of various cultures. This information would be valuable 
for presenting ice-breakers at the beginning of this seminar, 
since there were vast cultural differences between the presenter 
and the learners . 

Native American Health Beliefs 

The Navajo Indian tribes' health belief system appear to be 
consistent with beliefs of other Native American tribes. 

According to Locust (1985) no two tribes have identical beliefs, 
but the majority of tribes have the following beliefs in common: 

1. Native Americans believe in a Supreme Creator. In 
this belief system there are also "lesser" beings. 

2. Man is a three-fold being made up of a body, mind, and 
spirit . 

3. Plants and animals, like humans, are part of the spirit 
world . 

4 . The spirit world exists side by side and intermingles 
with the physical world. 

5. Illness affects the mind and spirit as well as the 
body . 

6. Wellness is harmony of body, mind, and spirit. 

7. Unwellness is disharmony in body, mind and spirit. 




6 



Native Americans 



6 



8. Natural unwellness is caused by witchcraft. 

9. Each of us is responsible for our own wellness. 

In the Native American belief system, health is "not only a 
physical state, but also a spiritual one" (Hammerschlag, 1985) . 
Therefore, healing in this culture involves a high degree of 
integration between religious beliefs and beliefs about health. 
Healing cannot be separated from culture, sacred narratives, or 
religion, nor can the social behavior of the Indian be separated 
from these things (Levy, 1963), and investigators of Native 
American ceremonies were unable to distinguish between healing 
ceremonies and worship (Kahn et al . 1975). 

The belief system of the Navajo tribe is very representative 
of the basic Native American belief system. For the Navajo, as 
well as other tribes, there seems to be little or no difference 
between religion and medicine. There is a connection between 
these two belief systems that makes it almost impossible to 
understand one system without understanding the other. For 
instance, taboos have both a religious and physical significance. 
The result of breaking a taboo may result in an individual 
becoming ill or developing some form of disability. Some of the 
prevalent tribal taboos concern death, incest, menstrual cycle, 
witchcraft, certain animals, natural phenomenon such as lightning 
or an eclipse an particular foods (Locust , 1985 ) . 

According to Claus (1961) , the most important supernatural 
causes of disease are the spirits of the animals, who thus gain 
revenge for slights and abuses. Disrespect toward fire, such as 




i 



Native Americans 



7 



urinating or spitting on ashes will bring disaster. Insults of a 
similar nature to rivers have their penalty. Human ghosts who 
are lonesome for their relatives cause a disease, so as to 
provide congenial company, while an animal ghost will cause 
trouble if respect has not been shown to its body after it has 
been killed. A powerful disease-bringer is the magic used by 
witches to cause sickness. Other causes' include dreams, omens, 
neglected taboos, and the evil influence attributed to a women 
during her catamenial period. For instance, the individual who 
has broken a taboo, or has been placed under some form of 
witchcraft by another, or is simply in "disharmony", is usually 
afflicted with some form of illness. A family member of the ill 
person will call -the tribe's medicine man or women to assess the 
"patient " . 

A medicine man or woman has very distinct powers for 
assessing the "cause" of the illness (which taboo has been 
broken, etc.) The medicine man or woman has been trained through 
a lengthy apprentenceship by the previous medicine man or woman. 
They are instructed about which types of illness are related to 
which type of affront that has occurred. The also are given 
training about medicinal treatments. The Navajo tribe, among 
others, holds "healing ceremonies". These ceremonies are secret 
and only those invited to attend are aware of the specifics of 
the ceremony. Newcomb (1964) describes one of these healing 
ceremonies : 




8 



Native Americans 



8 



Four men carrying blankets filled with clean 
adobe-colored sand from the bank of the arroyo entered 
the lodge, and emptied part of the contents on the 
floor at the center of the hogan, reserving part of it 
for future use. To the north of the door, a blanket had 
been spread on which a large grinding stone had been 
placed, along with rocks and sands of different colors. 
There was white, red, and yellow sandstone; there was 
black charcoal to be ground with sand to make it heavy 
enough to fall through the fingers; and there was the 
charred root of the rock oak which would be ground with 
the white sand to produce a beautiful pastel blue. A 
sand painting was begun of the floor of the hogan by 
the sandpainters under the direction of the medicine 
man. The medicine man began chanting and waving a 
rattle; he then picked up bag of pollen and sprinkled 
it around each figure in the sandpainting. Twelve 
prayer sticks had been erected around the outside of 
the painting, and these were blessed. The patient was 
prepared and waiting and now entered the lodge followed 
by ten or twelve women of her family. She was dressed 
in new clothing . In the bend of her arm she carried a 
ceremonial basket filled with yellow corn meal. At a 
motion of the medicine man, she walked near the 
painting and tossed a spray of corn meal on each figure 
as her gift to the immortal it depicted. She then sat 




s 



Native Americans 



9 



down in the middle of the painting. The medicine man 
pressed prayer bundles to her head and body, had her 
drink herb infusions and created a face painting. He 
then moistened his hands and pressed them to the heads 
of all the sand figures and then pressed this sand to 
the head of the patient. This continued as the power 
of the figures in the sandpainting were transferred to 
the patient. Since these figures had been perfect, she 
would now gain perfect health. 

The relationship between traditional Indian medicine and 
healing practices and western medicine involves primarily the 
component of "herbal infusions", or medicine. Certainly some of 
the most valuable drugs in official use even today are of Indian 
origin. Vogel (1970) has written a book about Native American 
medicine. He cites the various herbal remedies that were used, 
and later adapted by frontiersman for their own use. Some people 
mistakenly believe that synthetic drugs have eliminated Indian 
natural remedies. The first U. S . Pharmacopeia (1890) listed 296 
substances, of which 130 were drugs used by Indians. The USP 
Dictionary of Drug Names through June, 1981, lists thirty-two 
substances or derivatives from substances used medicinally by 
Native Americans. 

An important concept of health education to the Native 
American is the overlapping of religion and medical treatment. 
This concept was key to choosing the most appropriate type of 
adult learning atmosphere. 




1-0 



Native Americans 



10 



Adult Learning Theory 

Recent course work in theories of adult learning proved to 
be helpful in assessing and using the most appropriate 
philosophical approach. The humanistic philosophy of education 
appeared to be the best fit. Patterson (1973) describes 
humanistic theory as a belief that man is naturally and 
inherently good. Given a loving environment and freedom to 
develop, humans will grow in a manner beneficial to themselves 
and society. 

A fundamental concept of humanistic learning theory is a 
strong sense of responsibility to self and to others with the 
ability to develop towards one's fullest potential. The goal of 
humanistic education is the development of the person by striving 
for self-actualization, and to be able to live together as fully- 
functioning individuals. As such, the whole focus of humanistic 
education is on the individual learner rather than the body of 
knowledge. The student is the center of the process; the teacher 
is the facilitator, and learning is by discovery. The 
facilitator sets the initial mood or climate for the class 
experience. This philosophy was maintained throughout this three 
day portion of the three week seminar. 

Application of Combined Theories In the Classroom 

Day One 

This was the beginning of the last week of a three-week HRP 
course. The students seemed fatigued. Incorporating the 
humanistic approach, the class was asked, "How are you doing?". 



Native Americans 



11 



Many stated they were tired because they had been up late the 
night before visiting with their friends. Some said the chairs 
were to hard to sit in all day and this made them uncomfortable. 
Several stated they were extremely "homesick" . Many of the 
tribal members had never been away from their reservations, out 
of their state, or away from their families. Some said they were 
exhausted from their traveling, and that they had never been on 
an airplane or on a college campus. All of these experiences in 
such a short period of time were starting to feel overwhelming. 
Several were developing some anxiety about their subsequent 
flight back to their home. 

The class had about 40 participants. Approximately forty 
percent were male and sixty percent were female. The majority of 
the students were middle-aged. At least there was some 
subcultural similarity between the female students and me. Some 
similarity occurred across genders, in that we were all about the 
same age . 

Incorporating Uncertainty Reduction Theory in this 
experience was initiated by discussing the fact that we were all 
away from our homes, and that we had traveled a long distance, 
most by plane, to attend this conference. We also discussed the 
educational goals we had in common. I expressed the desire to 
share my knowledge with them and hoped that they would share with 
me how this knowledge could be best utilized on their 
reservations . 

After attempting to soften intercultural disparity, I needed 




12 



Native Americans 



12 



to focus on the task of promoting health education. I realized 
at this frightful moment that the first segment of the program 
was to be sexually transmitted diseases. The Native American 
population had been presented in the literature as being bashful, 
and shyness was considered a desirable attribute. The best I 
could do at this time was to try to present the information in a 
factual, relatively nonintimate, way. 

Video tapes and overheads were available for use during the 
presentation and this seemed to be a way to start with being 
perceived as to bold or offensive. The students observed the 
videos and were attentive considering the fact that they had 
earlier expressed being fatigued. The students were relatively 
unresponsive when asked if they had any questions about these 
various sexually transmitted diseases. 

Many of the students were from the same tribe, but from 
different parts of the country. Some were from the same part of 
the country but from different tribes. This seemed to be a 
logical way to break into groups for discussion. The HRPs were 
responsive to this suggestion and broke into groups of like 
tribes; if there were not many like tribes from a given region 
then they were broken into groups of regional similarity. The 
groups seemed to be slow in getting their discussions about these 
topics going, but after awhile they readily conversed with one 
another. So as not to be to far removed from the activity each 
group was asked to identify a spokesperson and share with the 
other groups the issues that evolved from this topic. Many of 




1 



O 

o 



Native Americans 



13 



the participants expressed a reluctance among their tribal 
members to use any form of birth control even though the family 
couldn't really afford another member. They also had many 
questions about the chemical components in birth control pills. 

The lack of readily available transportation to take women 
to family planning appointments was discussed. Depoprovera, (an 
injectable form of birth control that lasts for three months) , 
and norplant (an implant that is effective for five years) were 
discussed as possibilities since the transportation issue would 
occur less frequently. 

The HRPs did briefly mention a ceremonial ritual for women 
which is held when they first start menstruation. The younger 
Native Americans seemed interested in telling me more about this 
ritual, but the older participants cut them off quickly from the 
conversation. The reason they gave for ending the discussion was 
that the Holy People would not want this to be discussed with 
someone outside of their culture, as this could have a 
detrimental effect on the outsider. 

Day Two 

The course content of day two was of a less intimate nature. 
The course content included diabetes and heart disease. The 
incidence of these two disease processes are remarkably high in 
the Native American population. Many theories have been 
suggested for this high rate. 

In keeping with the uncertainty reduction theory, I tried to 
identify with these students. The class presentation was opened 




24 



Native Americans 



14 



by reflecting on my own experiences in caring for patients with 
these disease processes. I revealed that some of my immediate 
family had suffered with these illnesses, some in a particularly 
extreme form. An aunt had developed diabetes while carrying her 
third child. She was on a strict diabetic diet and instructed on 
injecting herself with insulin. Her condition continued to 
decline, and she volunteered to try an insulin pump, which was 
experimental at that time. Even this did not offer sufficient 
control of her diabetic condition and she had various 
hospitalizations related to comas and near death. Her twin 
sister volunteered to donate a kidney for her, as she was also 
developing kidney failure . She eventually succumbed to this 
disease at a relatively young age. This revelation was well 
received and the group seemed to empathize with the distress I 
felt related to that event. The group was much more open, and 
shared their own family stories around the affects of diabetes 
and heart disease. They had many questions about monitoring 
blood sugar levels and about signs and symptoms that are related 
to life threatening conditions. 

Since the group activities had been a success on day one I 
decided to continue them. This time I simply divided the groups 
up by number . This was not as well received as the previous 
division my tribes or regions. I felt that it would be a good 
opportunity for them to understand something about other Native 
American tribes. 

Understanding the importance of the animals to the Indian 




-r- 

29 



Native Americans 



15 



4 ^ 



religion and medicine, I asked the group to describe their 
positive traits by using an animal to represent the group. 

The groups seemed to enjoy this activity, but it was hard for 
them to come up with positive characteristics because, as one 
group testified, modesty, humility, and shyness were considered 
positive traits and they felt too boastful in describing their 
self worth. However, the groups did finish this task. Many of 
the groups had picked an eagle as their group mascot, 
characterizing the group as strong, committed, and beautiful. 
Another favorite selection was the wolf, considered to have 
similar traits as the eagle. The purpose of this assignment was 
to promote self-worth and to examine positive personal attributes 
consistent with the humanistic learning philosophy. 

A presentation was given on heart disease and the groups 
discussed the affects of this disease process on their tribes. 
Prevention was emphasized. 

Day Three 

This was the final day of my class presentation. I had not 
had much success it identifying ways to connect traditional 
Indian medicine (healing ceremonies and herbal infusions) with 
contemporary or Western medicine. The main topics for discussion 
this day were hypertension and nutrition. We started the 
presentation on nutrition with a video and overheads. The 
concept of limiting fat grams to reduce calories and fat in the 
diet was described. An interactive activity was planned and the 
students were each given a piece of candy. Three types of 




16 



Native Americans 



16 



candies were used in the demonstration. One type had 0 fat 
grams, one type had 3 fat grams and another had 15 grams of fat. 
Each participant selected a piece of candy from a bag unaware of 
the planned assignment. After selection of the candy, the 
participant was asked to figure the percent of total calories 
represented by the grams of fat . 

This was a humanistic learning activity designed to promote 
individual learning. Even though the group had practiced 
figuring the same data from other examples, they were having 
difficulty doing this individually. Sensing mounting levels of 
anxiety and frustration, I recommended that the break into groups 
based on the type of candy they selected. I suggested that they 
try to calculate the same information in the group. This went 
much more smoothly, although some groups were still having 
difficulty. The groups that had completed the assignment were 
asked to assist the groups still having some difficulty. 

The nutrition pyramid was another difficult concept for the 
group to grasp. The Native American has many myths and beliefs 
revolving around cycles, which are circular in nature. The food 
pyramid has little meaning in its representation other than 
larger percentages of foods needed for balance are on the bottom 
and smaller percentages on top. I drew this same concept on a 
flip chart using smaller circles inside larger ones to represent 
the percentages of types of foods needed for a balanced diet. In 
this new format, which referenced Native American symbolism, the 
class readily understood how foods for a balanced diet should be 



‘I < 



Native Americans 17 

selected. 

There seemed to be a greater sense of accomplishment by the 
students following these activities. They said they couldn't 
wait to explain the concept of fat gram counting to their tribal 
members, and asked about the relationships between diet, 
exercise, heart disease, diabetes and hypertension. They 
expressed an understanding of these relationships, and realized 
the importance of their ability to provide information that may 
help prevent or control these illnesses. It was inspiring to 
observe these excited and motivated learners. 

I made a final attempt to acquire a better appreciation for 
the way in which sand paintings and medicine men or women could 
be incorporated with the new information they had learned. I 
asked the group if they could describe a way that this 
information could be worked into the healing ceremonies. 

At the same time I was asking this question, a loud noise 
above us made it difficult for the students to even hear me. In 
fact in sounded like the building was going to crumble. I 
repeated the question and one the students that had a rapport 
with me answered, "We cannot discuss this, the ceremonies are 
secret and the Holy People will be very displeased if we continue 
to talk about this. . In fact, something very bad could happen to 
you if we do not hold a blessing ceremony for you, even for this 
discussion . " 




13 



Native Americans 



18 



Conclusion 

There are several changes that could be made in applying 
Uncertainty Reduction Theory and adult learning theory to a 
similar teaching experience. Common traits between the audience 
and the presenter can be the key to reducing Uncertainty when 
addressing a culture different from your own. This experience 
made me consider my own personal characteristics and attributes. 
Being gregarious by nature and relatively outgoing were not 
necessarily the best characteristics for a facilitator of this 
group. A facilitator that was modest and humble would probably 
have developed a rapport with this audience more quickly. 

When asked to present information to a similar audience in 
the future I would change the style of my presentation to 
accommodate the climate that would produce the best learning 
experience for the students. This could only be accomplished by 
deliberately altering my usual style. It would be interesting to 
explore affect of the style change on the group. Changing your 
teaching style to accommodate the culture of the learners could 
decrease the appreciation for acknowledging the differences 
between cultures . 

The organizer for this conference has previously organized 
the last five conferences. He had about twenty years of 
experience with the Indian Health Services. His previous 
background was in pharmacy. He had no course work in adult 
education, or human resource development. The absence of 
expertise in these areas was easily identified. The information 





Native Americans 



19 



to be covered in the amount of time allowed was too detailed. He 
allowed too much time for breaks, leaving me further behind in 
presenting the course content. 

The humanistic approach to adult learning could also be 
altered. The audience responded to group activities much better 
than individual activities. This culture admires traits of 
bashfulness and have a noncompetitive attitude. The Progressive 
Education Theory is more consistent with the philosophies of this 
culture. The progressives broadened the concept of education to 
include socialization and inculturat ion . Education is not 
restricted to schooling, but includes all those incidental and 
intentional activities that society uses to pass on values, 
attitudes, knowledge, and skills (Elias and Merriam, 1984) . The 
progressives incorporate the quality and the volume of personal 
experiences of adults to provide a rich learning resource that 
can contribute to a more mature approach to education (Knowles, 
1970) . The progressive education philosophy describes learning 
as a social movement, involving the whole society. This 
philosophy notes the value of group process.’ 

There are challenging opportunities available for the 
non-Native American educator to promote a valuable learning 
experience in the Native American culture. However, close 
consideration and attention to cultural similarities and 
differences prior to the learning event is necessary. 




20 



Native Americans 



20 



«*• 



References 

Berger, C.J., & Calabrese, R.J. (1975). Some explorations 

in initial interaction and beyond: Toward a developmental theory 

of interpersonal communication. Human Communication Research, 1, 
99-112 . 

Claus, E.P. (1961) . Pharmacognosy (4th ed.) . Philadelphia: 
Lea & Febiger. 

Elias, J., & Merriam, S. (1984). Philosophical foundations 
of adult education. Malamar, Florida: Kreiger. 

Hammerschlag, C. (1985). The spirit of healing in groups . 
Monograph from a modified text of the Presidential address 
delivered to the Arizona Group of Psychotherapy Society, Oracle, 
AZ, April, 1985. Printed by the Phoenix Indian Medical Center. 

Infante, D.A., Rancer, A.S., & Womack, D.F. (1993). 

Building communication theory (2nd ed.) . Prospect Hieghts, IL: 
Waveland Press . 

Kahn, M., Williams, C. , Calvez, E., Lejero, L., Conrad, R., 

& Goldstein, G. (1975) . The Papago psychological service: A 

community mental health program on an American Indian 
reservation. American Journal of Community Psychology, 3, 81-96. 

Knowles, M.S. (1970). The modern practice of adult 
education: Andragogy versus pedagogy . New York: Association 

Press . 




21 



Native Americans 



21 



Levy, J. (1963) . Navajo health concepts and behaviors: The 

role of the Anglo medicine man in the Navajo healing process . A 
report to the United States Public Health Service. Betheseda, 

MD: Indian Health Systems. 

Locust, C.S. (1985). An Indian belief concerning health and 
wellness . Grant from National Institutes of Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research. U.S. Department of Education, Grant # 
G0083094 . 

Newcomb, F.J. (1964). Hosteen Klah: Navajo medicine man 

and sandoainter . Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. 




ds (off 7 t 3 

Vi?uld you like to put 



your paper or papers in ERIC? Please send us a clean, dark copy! 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 

jjllg. Paper presented at the National Communication Assn. Meetings (Chicago) 

C.D m rr> u n 1 4y fesooree ~Trat n i -fir Nah'SC r , co n S 

Author(S):^ - £//2.ofce-f A L. < Tc A <- A and. I C- .fcAra.o/<<- 

Corporate Source: | Publication Date: 

jNov. 19-23, 1997 

II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: cllcHLA . 1 T ^ > 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources In Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 



12 

t 

Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6* film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


A® 










Jr 


J 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



□ 

t 

Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here-* 

please 




’thereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries . * 


Signature: 

Cj^<yCA-^eP C . ] 


j Printed Name/Position/Tide: 

1 PaVIP C- Sct-tFAbeyt. AsSeCtATH 


Org^IzatlorVAddress: 

OF SpC£CH Co Ai iCATi oa) 

O/CLAHt^A rr/v 7T eKtiry 

SncAvvArretz 0< 7 HOTS’ 


\ Telephone: 


FAX: 


|£-KfeilAddress:" 

ISFCHJd&H'/t-Occ. 

■ p kit Are . giv 


bate: 



(over) 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it Is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 






ERIC/REC 
2805 E. Tenth Street 
Smith Research Center, 150 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47408 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 



rn i^v. 6/96) 



CRIO - P r o ce ss i ng and R e f eren c e raci Ht y 

11 00 W e s t St ree t, 2d f~l o or 
Lau rel , Mary l and 20707-05 9 0 

. ; , To l ophone: 301-4 9 7 J 40Q0 . , 

ToH - Froo: 8 00 - 700 - 37 4 2 ‘ ' 

FAX : 001 - 053 - 0203 >t 

e-ma i l: eri c fa e@in et . ed . go v 
WWW: http ,// e r icfac.pici.a rd .csc.c om 



