DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 371 391 



CS 214 395 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Eastman, Kristen Paletti, Ed.; Omura, Grace Inokuchi, 
Ed* 

Folklore around the World: An Annotated Bibliography 
of Folk Literature. 

Hawaii Univ., Manoa. School of Library and 

Information Studies. 

94 

222p»; For earlier related bibliographies, see ED 354 
532, ED 309 779, and ED 286 531* 
Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) — 
Collected Works - General (020) 

MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; Annotated Bibliographies; 
Cultural Enrichment; Elementary Secondary Education; 
*Folk Culture; Foreign Countries; Global Approach; 
Oral Tradition 

^Folktales; Japanese Culture; Jewish Culture; 
Multicultural Materials; Native Americans; Pacific 
Islands Literature; ^Traditional Oral Literature 



ABSTRACT 

Fourth in a series, the annotated bibliographies in 
this collection were compiled by students in the Traditional 
Literature and Oral Narration class at the School of Library and 
Information Studies, University of Hawaii at Manoa. These 
bibliographies are designed to make information about specific topics 
in traditional literature easily accessible to teachers and 
librarians. Each of the 11 annotated bibliographies in the collection 
contains an introduction to the particular topic and an annotated 
bibliography of both scholarly works «?nd tales retold for young 
people. Annotated bibliographies in the collection are: (1) 
"Christmas Gift Givers 11 (Kristen Paletti Eastman); (2) "Iktomi, the 
Sioux Trickster" (Grace Omura); (3) "The Roles of Coyote in Selected 
Native American Cultures" (Catherine Thomas); (4) "Hi'iaka the Hero" 
(Noenoe Moan); (5) "Kahalaopuna, the Rainbow Maiden of Manoa Valley" 
(Lei Tan); (6) "Urban Legends of Hawaii" (Sandy Pak) ; (7) "Elijah the 
Prophet in Jewish Folk Literature" (Karen Zinn Heau) ; (8) "The Kappa" 
(Judi R. Kobayashi); (9) "The Badger in Folktales of Japan" (Lois 
Tagami) ; (10) "Rame: Japanese Sea Turtles and Tortoises" (Nancy 
Yomogida) ; and (11) "The Rice Cake Motif in Japanese Folktales" (Pam 
Yuen) . (Author/RS) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 



FOLKLORE AROUND THE WORLD 

An Annotated Bibliography of Folk Literature 



EDITORS 
Kristen Paletti Eastman 
Grace Inokuchi Omura 



SERIES EDITOR 
Therese Bissen Bard 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Offico of Educational Research arid Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

y CENTER (ERIC) 

Or This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 
□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 

• Points ol view or opinions stated in this 
document do not nocessarity ropresont 
olliciat OERI position or policy. 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



School of Library and Information Studies 
University of Hawaii at Manoa 
Honolulu, Hawaii 
1994 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Copyright 



The contents of this sourcebook are protected by copyright. No part may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval system 
without permission in writing from the original publisher of the copyrighted 
publications. 

The bibliography and other text contributed by the writers of the sourcebook 
may be reproduced for instructional purposes according to the fair use guidelines of 
copyright legislation. 

University of Hawaii 
School of Library and Information Studies 
1994 



ABSTRACT 

Folklore Around the World 
An Annotated Bibliography of Folk Literature 
Number 4 



This is the fourth in a series of annotated bibliographies with introductory 
essays that were compiled by students in the Traditional Literature and Oral 
Narration class at the School of Library and Information Studies, University 
of Hawaii at Manoa. The purpose of these bibliographies has been to make 
information about specific topics in traditional literature easily accessible to 
teachers and librarians through the ERIC system. 

Seven of the eleven topics in this bibliography focus on Hawaii and Japan. 
One of the three bibliographies on Hawaiian traditional literature tells about 
Hi'iaka, the young goddess whose inspiring myth embodies the traditional 
values of ancient Hawaii. Another provides sources for the tragic story of 
Kahalaopuna, the Rainbow Maiden of Manoa. The third presents urban 
legends currently circulating orally in Hawai'i. Two of the bibliographies of 
Japanese folklore are on well known folk characters, Kappa and Badger. One 
is of the lesser known Kame, the sea turtle, and one examines the rice cake 
motif and tales based upon it. Four of the bibliographies are on topics other 
than Hawai'i and Japan. One is on the history and characteristics of Christmas 
gift-givers. Two are on tricksters in Native American mythology, Iktome and 
Coyote. One is on Elijah the Prophet, the ubiquitous and appealing character 
from Jewish folklore. For each of the four compilations of bibliographies in 
this series, the students have chosen topics according to their individual 
interests in traditional literature and folklore. 



FOLKLORE AROUND THE WORLD 

An Annotated Bibliography of Folk Literature 



This is the fourth in a series of annotated bibliographies with introductory 
essays that were complied by students in the Traditional Literature and Oral 
Narration class at the School of Library and Information Studies, University of 
Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii, 

All of the compilations of bibliographies have a global focus. Students have 
chosen their topics according to their special areas of interest in traditional literature. 

One of the bibliographies is on a popular topic with stories found worldwide. 
Two are on a special character in N**:ve American folk tales and three deal with 
Hawaiian culture. Five of the bibliographies grew from students' desire to write about 
their ancestral lore. 

Christmas has always been a favorite time of year for Kristen Paletti 
Eastman. She enjoys the giving and the happiness the season brings and collected 
stories of Christmas gift-givers in a variety of cultures. 

Trickster tales are found in most Native American tribal folklore and were 
used to help children learn the tribe's values. Grace Omura searched for children's 
stories about Iktomi, the Sioux trickster, and Catherine Thomas chose Coyote of the 
Navaho tribe. 

Hawaii's rich culture, both ancient and modern, interested three students. 
Noenoe Moan, a native Hawaiian, chose to translate a portion of the HViaka legend 
that has never been published before. Lei Tan recently arrived from China and is 
intensely interested in Hawaiian folklore and culture. She writes about Kahalaopuna, 
the rainbow goddess of Hawaii. Urban legends of Hawaii have always intrigued Sandy 
Pak, who re aembers hearing some of the legends as a child growing up in Hilo. 



ERIC 



5 



Karen Zinn Heau selected the topic of Elijah to explore Jewish folklore in order 
to pass down the traditions of her ethnic background to her son. Judi R. Kobayashi, 
Lois Tagami, Nancy Yomogida and Pam Yuen are all third generation Japanese- 
Americans and they selected characters from traditional Japanese folklore. 

Each selection contains an introduction to the topic and an annotated 
bibliography of both scholarly works and tales retold for young people. The 
contributors hope this sourcebook will be helpful to teachers and librarians seeking 
stores and folklore on cultures and topics not easily accessible to them. 



ERIC 



6 



CONTENTS 



Christmas Gift Givers 



Kristen Paletti Eastman 



Iktomi, the Sioux Trickster 



Grace Omura 



The Roles of Coyote in Selected 
Native American Cultures 



Hilaka the Hero 



Catherine Thomas 
Noenoe Moan 



Kahalaopuna, the Rainbow Maiden 

of Manoa Valley Lei Tan 



Urban Legends of Hawaii 



Sandy Pak 



Elijah the Prophet in Jewish 
Folk Literature 



Karen Zinn Heau 



The Kappa 



Judi R. Kobayashi 



The Badger in Folktales of Japan Lois Tagami 



Kame: Japanese Sea Turtles 
and Tortoises 



Nancy Yomogida 



The Rice Cake Motif in Japanese 
Folktales 



Pam Yuen 



9 

ERIC 



7 





Christmas Gift Givers 

KRISTKN PALETTI EASTMAN 







er|c 



8 



Eastman 



Introduction 

Santa Claus is known the world over. Not only does he deliver gifts in the 
United States, but in many other countries as well. Yet, Santa Claus is not the only 
Christmas gift giver. Several other gift givers are found throughout the world and 
most of these gift givers were around hundreds of years before Santa Claus. 

Gift-giving rituals can be traced back to pagan beliefs. The gift givers of old 
were sometimes gods and goddesses and sometimes elves or gnomes. With the 
advent of Christianity, many of these gift givers evolved into the individuals we 
know today. Some of these individuals, such as St. Nicholas, the Christ Child, and 
the Three Wise Men still retain their religious significance, while others, such as 
Father Christmas and Santa Claus, do not. Some children in Italy and parts of 
Russia believe the gift givers are old women, and Syrian children believe their gifts 
are brought by a camel. No matter what form, the gift giver is always looked upon 
as a beloved figure. 

This paper will introduce you to some of the gift givers from around the 
world. The focus is on the evolution of gift givers of European descent. 

Santa Claus 

Santa Claus came to the United States in 1624, with the settlers of New 
Amsterdam (now New York) as Sinter Klaas. The name Sinter Klaas (Sint 
meaning "Saint", and Klaas, a diminutive form of fr Nicholas") is from the Dutch 
legend of St. Nicholas (Stevens 1979, 82). Santa Claus as we know him today is 
largely due to four men: John Pintard, Washington Irving, Clement C. Moore, and 
Thomas Nast. 

John Pintard founded the New- York Historical Society [sic] in an attempt to 
retain the Dutch heritage. On December 6, 1810, Pintard persuaded this society to 

1 

ERiC 3 



Eastman 

annually commemorate the anniversary of St. Nicholas (Giblin 1985, 43). 
Washington Irving was a member of this society and enjoyed the celebration. In 
1809, when Irving wrote the successful book, Diedrich Knickerbockers History of New 
York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty, St. Nicholas 
was mentioned several times (Stevens 1979, 83). This book was widely read 
throughout the United States and "probably did more to spread the word about St. 
Nicholas than any book up to that time" (Giblin 1985, 46). 

The next advancement of St. Nicholas into the American culture was due to 
the famous poem by Clement C. Moore, "The Night Before Christmas" (then known 
as "An Account of a Visit from St. Nicholas") (Coffin 1973, 87). This poem 
established St. Nicholas' tradition of coming down the chimney and his sleigh being 
driven by eight tiny reindeer. Although the poem was published in 1823, Santa's 
physical appearance was still undefined until Thomas Nast drew Santa for a 
children's book in 1863 and then for the cover of Harper's Weekly (Stevens 1979, 87). 
These illustrations were based upon the descriptions in Moore's poem and have 
remained with the legend ever since. 

Eventually, the Santa Claus of the United States emigrated back to Europe 
and into many countries that never before celebrated Christmas. Today, although he 
is not the only gift giver, he is the most popular. 

St. Nicholas 

As previously mentioned, Santa Claus evolved from the legend of St. Nicholas. 
St. Nicholas day is celebrated on December 6 in many European countries. Tradition 
dictates that St. Nicholas spend St. Nicholas Eve traveling to people's homes 
delivering gifts. This gift-giving lore began over a thousand years ago in Lycia, Asia 
Minor, in what is now southwestern Turkey (Coffin 1973, 76). 



ERIC 



2 

10 



Eastman 



It is widely believed that the Roman Catholic Church desperately wanted to 
replace the pagan winter celebrations with more holy observances. However, many 
people who already enjoyed these gift giving rituals were reluctant to change. 
Therefore, in an effort to make the winter celebrations more pious, the Roman 
Catholic Church inducted St. Nicholas into the gift giving ceremony (Cooke 1980, 
45). 

The real St. Nicholas was actually Nicholas, the Bishop of Myra. The 
Bishop lived in the early part of the fourth century and was thought to be a kind, 
giving man. Although there is not much factual information about Nicholas, 
legend tells us that Nicholas' parents died when he was young, and, as a result, he 
inherited a great amount of wealth. Instead of living off this fortune, he gave all of 
the money to the needy and continued his religious studies. At the age of nineteen, 
Nicholas was ordained the Bishop of Myra and became known as the "Boy 
Bishop" (Giblinl985, 6). 

The Bishop was well liked by his parishioners. In the course of his lifetime, 
he converted many people to Christianity and was said to have performed many 
life and soul saving deeds. During the reign of the Roman emperor Diocletian, 
Nicholas spent five years in jail for urging Christians to be true to their faith and, 
by the time he was released by the new emperor, Constantine, Nicholas had 
gathered a great following. People began telling stories about his legendary feats 
before his death around December 6, in the year A.D- 343 (Giblin 1985, 9). It was 
believed that he continued these good deeds long after his death and, in the year 
A.D. 800, Nicholas was officially named a saint (Giblin 1985, 10). 

Nicholas is an extremely popular saint and has over 500 churches dedicated 
to him in Europe alone (Stevens 1979, 78). He is thought to be the patron saint of 
many groups such as children, school boys, maidens, and sailors. Each group 

3 

ER?C II 



Eastman 

credits the saint with legendary acts of goodness. One such act was the saving of 
three maidens from slavery. The girls' father lost all of his money and had nothing 
to give for their dowries. He was left with no choice but to sell his daughters. 
Upon hearing this, Nicholas knew he must do something to save the young girls. 
So, on three different nights, he threw a bag of gold into the window of the man's 
house. These bags became his daughters' dowries, and the girls were rescued from 
slavery (Coffin 1973,77). 

St. Nicholas' attachment to children is strengthened by the legend of the 
school boys. The students were on their way to religious school when they stopped 
at a roadside inn. The innkeeper drugged and killed the boys and proceeded to cut 
up their bodies, putting the pieces in a pickle barrel in his store room. When St. 
Nicholas heard about this, he went to the inn and restored the students to life. In 
return, the innkeeper and his wife were converted to Christianity (Giblin 1985, 26). 

St, Nicholas' legends of benevolent giving, as well as his devotion to 
children, has captivated the hearts of many people. This endearment makes St. 
Nicholas a perfect choice for a Christian gift giver. 

Father Christmas and Pere Noel 

In many countries, St. Nicholas was eventually replaced by a more secular 
gift-giving figure. For example, Father Christmas in England and Pere Noel in 
France. During the Protestant Reformation, begun by Martin Luther in the early 
1500s, many rituals and traditions deemed Catholic were dismissed (Stevens 1979, 
117). One such belief was the worship of any but the one God. The Protestants 
did not allow the worship of saints, therefore, celebrations relating to St. Nicholas 
were forbidden. In an effort to appease the people's desire for the midwinter gift 
giving festivities, Father Christmas, was enlisted. 

4 

12 



Eastman 

Father Christmas is "a personification of the Christmas feast" which evolved 
from the early Greek festival, Kronia (Stevens 1979, 81 ). Kronia is a celebration 
of harvest when food is plentiful. Sometime about 1000 B.C., the Romans entered 
the Italian peninsula and adopted this festival, renaming it Saturnalia after the 
Roman god, Saturn (Stevens 1979, 30). 

Saturnalia, December 17, was celebrated by reversing the roles < the slaves 
and their masters: the slaves had the day off while the master waited on them. The 
slaves were allowed to drink, gamble, and even insult the master. Not long after, 
the celebrations spread to the rest of the population and, though originally only one 
day, it ultimately became a celebration lasting a week or longer. In the year 153 
B.C., the festival was officially combined with the Roman New Year, January 1, 
and gifts were exchanged (Stevens 1979, 32). The Father Christmas figure 
incorporates the feasting and gift giving of the pagan rituals, but does not have the 
religious significance of St. Nicholas. Therefore, when a new figure was needed by 
the Protestant Church, Father Christmas fit in. 

Christkindl 

Another attempt to dethrone St. Nicholas occurred when the Protestants of 
Germany adopted the use of the Christ Child or Christkindl as their gift giver. 
Whereas Father Christmas is a nonreligious character, the Christkindl is an 
incarnation of the Infant Jesus (Giblin 1985, 33). This way, people who idolized 
the gift giver would be worshipping God. 

The figure is often portrayed as a tall, thin, genderless angel with blonde 
hair. The Christkindl delivers gifts to all deserving children on Christmas Eve. 

5 

ERIC 13 



Eastman 

Grandfather Frost 

In some places, religious gift giving figures were replaced by state 
governments rather than by churches. For example, in Russia, gift giving was once 
done by Father Christmas, or Kolyada, on Christmas Eve and by Babushka on 
Epiphany. However, during the communist regime, a completely nonreligious 
figure, Grandfather Frost, was instated. This kindly old man delivers gifts on the 
secular holiday of New Year's Eve. Although he somewhat resembles St. Nicholas, 
he is not allowed any ieligious function (Del Re and Del Re 1979, 76). 

Befana and Babushka 

The people of Italy do not celebrate St. Nicholas day; instead they give gifts 
on January 6. This date is known as Epiphany or the Twelfth Night, the day the 
Wise Men reached the Christ Child in Bethlehem. The legendary Italian gift giver 
is Befana, whose name is based on the word Epiphany (Cooke 1980, 168). 
Although Befana was never a real person, some sources suggest that she, like St. 
Nicholas, replaced the pagan winter fanfare. Moreover, Befana is also closely 
linked to the pagan goddess Berchta (Stevens 1979, 75). 

Berchta, the goddess of the hearth, was an old, misshapen woman who was 
believed to fly around on her broomstick. She was one of the celebrated goddesses 
of the pagan winter festivals who gave gifts to, and watched over, children. In an 
effort to Christianize this pagan belief Befana was made very similar tc Berchta. 
Like Berchta, Befana is an older woman who, in some versions, also flies around 
on a broomstick. In other versions, however, she is stripped of her flying abilities 
and uses her broom to sweep incessantly. 

The Christian legend of Befana says she was so busy cleaning and sweeping 
that, when the Wise Men asked her to accompany them to Bethlehem, she refused. 

6 

ERiC 14 



1 



Eastman 

A while later, she reconsidered but, because it was daylight, she had no star to 
follow. She could not find the wise men and continues to search the world for the 
Christ Child. She delivers gifts to all children in hopes that they are the One. 

In many parts of Russia, the gift giver, Babushka, is very similar to Befana. 
Babushka, too, probably evolved from old pagan lore. Like Befana, Babushka was 
too busy cleaning her home to go with the wise men to Bethlehem. Some versions 
of the legend say she even misled the wise men. As a result, she continues to 
search the world for the Christ Child (Stevens 1979, 76). 

Three Wise Men or Tres Reyes Magos 

In Spain, the gift giving is done on January 6 by the Three Wise Men 
traveling on their camels. This is a logical evolution since Epiphany is the date that 
the Magi brought gifts to the Christ Child. Tradition dictates that the children of 
Spain leave straw or hay in their shoes for the tired camels and in return, the Wise 
Men reward the children with gifts (Cooke 1980, 49). 

Julnisse, Jultomten and Julesvenn 

In the Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Sweden, Finland and Norway, 
small gnomes or elves begin to appear around the Christmas holidays (Patterson 
1970, 5). In Denmark and Norway, the elves are known as Julnisse (pL -nisser) 
and in Sweden, as Jultomten. In pagan lore, these elves were evil winter spirits 
who could not live in cleanliness or near evergreens. In trying to protect 
themselves from the spirits, the people would clean and decorate their homes with 
evergreens. They would then sing and hold ceremonies to ward off the evil spirits. 
These ceremonies came to be called Jul or Yule. Eventually, the pagan Jul evolved 

7 

ERIC 



Eastman 



into a Christian feast in honor of Jesus' birth (Patterson 1970, 6). However, unlike 
other pagan icons, the elves were not ousted with the onset of Christianity. 

In time, the Jul celebration had to contend with the gift givers, St. Nicholas 
and Father Christmas. In an effort to rival these enormously popular individuals, 
the Scandinavian countries introduced gift-giving into their celebrations. In 
Sweden, the Jultomten brings the gifts, while Julenisser bring gifts in Norway and 
Denmark (Patterson 1970, 9). Finland enlisted the services of Joulupukki or Old 
Man Christmas, who is similar to Father Christmas and Santa Claus (Patterson 
1970, 35). 

Smallest Camel 

One of the most original gift-giving legends comes from Syria. Although 
there is very little written about the origins of this gift giver, its legend is one of the 
most heartwarming. Here the gift-giving is not done by a person, but rather by an 
animal. Legend has it that the Three Wise Men rode to Bethlehem on camels. One 
of these camels was very small and weak. He had to struggle through the entire 
journey carrying one of the Kings. Finally arriving in Bethlehem, he collapsed and 
was near death. When the Christ Child heard of this small animal's determination, 
he rewarded the camel with immortality and everlasting strength. From that day 
on, the camel has delivered gifts to all young children throughout Syria (Cooke 
1980, 167). 

Conclusion 

Many different gift givers exist throughout the world. Some, like Santa 
Claus, are very well known, others, like the Syrian camel, are not. Unfortunately, 



ERIC 



8 

16 



Eastman 

due to the strong global commercialization by the United States, many people have 
no idea that there are gift givers other than Santa Claus. 

Although the gift givers have many unique traditions and legends, their 
commitment to giving and making children happy makes each one equally 
important. The legends of the gift givers have lasted through the years because of 
the hr ppiness they bring to children and families. Around the world, children and 
adults still believe in the love and happiness the gift-giving rituals represent. 

Reference List 

Coffin, Tristram P. 1973. The Book of Christmas Folklore. New York: Seabury 
Press. 

Cooke, Gillian, ed. 1980. A Celebration of Christmas. New York: Putnam. 

Del Re, Gerard and Patricia Del Re. 1979. The Christmas Almanack. New York: 
Doubleday and Company. 

Giblin, James Cross. 1985. The Truth About Santa Claus. New York: Thomas 
Y. Cromwell. 

Patterson, Lillie. 1970. Christmas in Britain and Scandinavia. Champaign, 
Illinois: Garrard. 

Stevens, Patricia Bunning. 1979. Merry Christmas!: A History of the Holiday. 
New York: Macmillan. 



ER?C 



17 



Eastman 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 
General Background Information 

Coffin, Tristram Potter. "Sanct Herr 'Cholas." In The Book of Christmas Folklore, 
New York: Seabury Press, 1973. pp. 74-96. 

This book describes of the roots of Christmas and some of its 
customs. The chapter "Sanct Herr 'Cholas" explains the origins of St. 
Nicholas with much detail, and includes many of the happenings which 
caused him to evolve into the Santa Claus that we know today. Although the 
chapter is informative the author focuses on his belief in the commercial ruin 
of gift giving rituals. He cites many sources that refute the goodness of the 
modern gift givers and attempts to discredit Clement C. Moore as the author 
of "Twas the Night Before Christmas." The factual information of the book 
might be helpful. The overall tone, however, is somewhat depressing for this 
festive time of year. 

Cooke, Gillian, ed. "Epiphany." \w A Celebration of Christmas. New York: G.P. 
Putnam's Sons, 1980. pp. 167-67. 

This chapter describes the evolution of the day of Epiphany, January 
sixth. The author offers different theories of the day's origins which range 
from it being the day the Christ Child was born or baptized to being the day 
the Magi arrived in Bethlehem. The author includes information of the 
individuals who deliver gifts on Epiphany such as the Three Magi, Befana, 
Babushka, and the smallest camel of the wise men. The chapter contains a 
few illustrations of Epiphany celebrations, but these will not be interesting to 
younger children. Although the type set is very small and difficult to read, 
this is the best source of information specifically on Epiphany. 

. "St. Nicholas and Santa Claus." In A Celebration of Christmas. New 

York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1980. pp. 45-49. 

This chapter details the evolution of the pagan gods of northern 
Europe to St. Nicholas and the modem day Santa Claus. The author offers 
theories for the changes in the appearance of these gift givers through the 
years. Several different traditional gift givers are included in this chapter as 
the author regrets their demise due to the commercial strong-arm of Santa 

10 



ERIC 



18 



Eastman 



Claus. There are colorful illustrations of different gift givers that will be of 
interest to children. However, the small print is difficult to read. This is a 
very good source of general gift giver information for teachers and librarians. 

Del Re, Gerard, and Del Re, Patricia. The Christmas Almanack. New York: 
Doubleday and Company, 1979. 

This easy-to-use compendium of Christmas trivia includes traditions, 
carols, prose, and films from the first Christmas to modern times. The 
chapter "Christmas Around the World in Custom and Tradition" is a 
dictionary of Christmas beliefs and practices from many different places. It 
is especially useful for locating information about a particular country's gift 
giver. The Christmas Almanack is an excellent reference source that can be 
used by older children, teachers, or librarians. 

Giblin, James Cross. The Truth About Santa Claus. New York: Thomas Y. 
Crowell, 1985. 

This book traces the origin and evolution of the modern day Santa 
Claus. It includes a detailed biography of the real and the legendary St. 
Nicholas. Chapter four, "St. Nicholas, the Gift-Bringer," and chapter five, 
"Father Christmas, the Christkindl, and Sinter Claes," detail the traditions of 
many different gift givers of Europe. This comprehensive book is an 
excellent source for Christmas gift giver lore for upper elementary aged 
students, teachers, and librarians. 

Johnson, Lois S., ed. Christmas Stories 'Round the World. Chicago: Rand 
McNally, 1960. 

This book contains Christmas legends from fourteen different 
countries. Although the stories are not about the origins of the gift givers, 
several are about the roles the gift givers play. At the beginning of each 
chapter there is a summary of how the holiday is enjoyed in that country. 
Most of the summaries include some information about the gift giver. This 
book will be helpful for the teacher or librarian who is collecting general 
information about Christmas legends. 



11 

19 



Eastman 



McNight, George S. St. Nicholas: His Legend and His Role in the Christmas 
Celebration and Other Popular Customs. Massachusetts: Corner House 
Publishers, 1974. 

This biography of St. Nicholas recounts how the saint became 
associated with children and Christmas, The author attempts to show the 
relationship of St. Nicholas to the Christ Child, Kris Kringle, and Santa 
Claus. Although this book provides a good background of St. Nicholas, 
because it was originally published in 1917, it relies mainly upon historical 
folklore and does not include any evolution of St. Nicholas or Santa Claus 
into recent times. 

Muir, Frank. Christmas Customs and Traditions. New York: Taplinger, 1977. 

This collection of Christmas customs from around the world includes 
the origins of the Christmas tree, Yule log and some Christmas gift givers. 
Chapter IV, "The Feast of St. Nicholas," renders a background of the saint 
and the tales that associate him with Christmas. There is also a description 
of pre-Christian Christmas-like celebrations. This book will be useful to 
teachers for gathering general information about the origin of Christmas 
traditions. 

Patterson, Lillie. "Christmas Gift-Bringers." In Christmas Feasts and Festivals. 
Champaign, Illinois: Garrard, 1968. pp. 47-53. 

This chapter provides a brief description of Christmas gift givers from 
many different countries and how they have changed over time. There is 
some information on the relationships between the gift givers and their 
religious significance, if any. The countries included are: England, France, 
Germany, Spain, Italy, Russia, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Holland. 
The large print and easy reading level make this book suitable for middle 
and upper elementary grades. 

. Christmas in Britain and Scandinavia. Champaign, Illinois: Garrard, 

1970. 

This is a compilation of the roots of Christmas traditions and gift 
givers from eight European countries. The author tracks the evolution of the 
Jul and Yule celebrations from their pagan beginnings and Christian 

12 

20 



Eastman 

influences to their modern traditions. In doing so, the author recounts some 
of the Northern European conquests that led the way to the mixing of 
different Christmas traditions. This book is an excellent source for 
elementary school students to see the relationships between many different 
countries' gift givers and Christmas rituals. 

Rinkoff; Barbara. The Family Christmas Book. New York: Doubleday, 1969. 

This book provides a general description of Christmas traditions from 
around the world. Chapter four, "Santa in other Countries," provides a brief 
summary of modern day gift giving in most of the European countries, but 
there are no descriptions of the gift givers' beginnings. Some of the author's 
details do not agree with the other sources listed here. Teachers may want to 
use this as a supplement to their background knowledge of Christmas gift 
givers. 

Sansom, William. Christmas. London: Weidenfeld andNicolson, 1968. 

This is an historical account of the origins of Christmas rites, rituals 
and traditions. It includes several illustrations and color photographs of 
Christmas events. The chapter, "Gi£f-Gaf£" is particularly helpful in 
discerning the origin of modern gift givers. While the author provides 
descriptions of modern day Christmas traditions, an aura of cynicism 
detracts from the festivity of the modern rituals. Nevertheless, teachers will 
find this source useful for gathering background information about 
Christmas gift givers. 

Stevens, Patricia Bunning. "The Gift Bringers." In Merry Christmas!: A History 
of the Holiday. New York: Macmillan, 1979. pp. 73-89. 

This chapter is an historical look at the transformation of European 
gift givers. The author attempts to link all gift givers, traditional and 
modern, to Berchta, the pagan god of the hearth or fire. In doing so, Stevens 
traces the 'rise and fall' of the popularity of the gift givers and the creatures 
who accompany them. There is much detail on Santa Claus in the twentieth 
century and his widespread and growing popularity. Teachers and librarians 
will find this a good overview of the relationship between the different gift 
givers. 



13 

21 



Eastman 



Walsh, William S. The Story of Santa Klaus. Detroit: Gale Research, 1970. 

The Story of Santa Klaus is a collection of folklore pertaining to St. 
Nicholas and how he evolved into the modern day Santa Claus. Walsh 
presents many different perspectives of the saint which begin with his birth 
and continue long after the saint's death. Additionally, the author includes 
several theories of how the Christ Child evolved into Kris Kringle. The book 
is easy-to-read and includes many different artists' portrayals of St. Nicholas. 

Wernecke, Herbert H. Celebrating Christmas Around the World. Philadelphia: 
Westminster Press, n.d. 

Forty two different countries are included in this collection of stories 
describing how Christmas is celebrated throughout the world. Some of the 
stories provide background information on a country's particular gift giver, 
but most are general stories about what actually happens on or around the 
Christmas season. Teachers will find it useful for background information 
on Christmas gift givers and as a read-aloud for their classes. 

Traditional Tales 

Bailey, Carolyn Sherwin. "Baboushka." In A Book of Christmas Stories for 

Children. Maude Owens Walters, ed. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1962. pp. 
50-52. 

Baboushka is an old woman who declines to go with the wise men to 
Bethlehem. Later, after contemplating their offer, Baboushka changes her 
mind. The next morning, when she starts out, she realizes that she had 
forgotten to ask the wise men what road to take. She follows many different 
roads and asks many different people where the Christ Child was born, but 
it is no use. Baboushka never finds the Baby Jesus and continues her search 
forever. This shortened version of the legend of Babushka is not as pleasant 
as some of the others. However, if the teacher or librarian cannot find 
another version, this one is acceptable. 



14 

22 



Eastman 



De Leeuw, Adele. "The Legend of Saint Nicholas." In Legends & Folk Tales of 
Holland. New York: Thomas Nelson & Sons, 1963. 

This legend has Saint Nicholas and his sidekick, Black Peit, traveling 
to Amsterdam by ship. En route, St, Nicholas saves the ship by calming the 
seas. He arrives in Holland on the fifth of December. While in Amsterdam, 
he gives candy and toys to the children and saves three maidens from 
slavery. This begins his reign as Holland's "Sinterklaas." This story is one 
of many versions of St. Nicholas. Although the story is suitable for young 
children, there are no illustrations to draw their attention. 

De Paola, Tomie. The Legend of Old Befana: an Italian Christmas Story. New 
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1980. 

Old Befana is a curmudgeon who enjoys keeping her house clean 
more than visiting with people. One night a star shines brightly and she is 
visited by a large procession that includes three kings. These kings ask if 
Old Befana would like to accompany them to bring gifts to the Child King. 
She declines saying she still has too much work to do. The procession 
moves on and soon Old Befana rethinks her decision. She decides to go find 
the Chiid King on her own. Never finding him, she gives gifts to all 
children, hoping that they are the Child King. De Paola's easy-to-read 
version of this Italian legend is brightly illustrated and will hold younger 
children's attention. 

Durand, Ruth Sawyer. "The Three Kings." In A Book of Christmas Stories for 
Children. Maude Owens Walters, ed. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1962. pp. 
114-22. 

This story begins with a description of the legend of why the Three 
Wise Men are the gift givers in Spain. The story continues with a poor 
neighborhood in Spain that is never visited by the Tres Reyes Magos or 
Three Wise Men. The children are curious as to why this is so. Most of the 
children decide it is because they have no shoes to leave food for the camels 
in and so they borrow some from the cobbler. One boy believes the Three 
Wise Men cannot fit their camels through their narrow neighborhood street. 
He goes outside the city gates to wait for the Kings and, when they arrive, he 
offers to hold the reigns of the animals. The Kings agree and deliver gold 
coins to the poor children. This story is one of the few that includes the 

15 



Eastman 



Three Wise Men as the gift givers. Although it is brief; and there are no 
illustrations, it is a pleasant story and should be included in lessons of 
multicultural views of Christmas. 

Ferguson, Lucille and Malvina Ellis. "The Camel of Bethlehem." In A Book of 
Christmas Stories for Children. Maude Owens Walters, ed. New York: 
Dodd, Mead, 1962. p. 69. 

This story is about the smallest camel of the Three Wise Men. The 
camel becomes very tired and weak along the way to Bethlehem but 
continues because he has a great desire to see the Baby Jesus. When the 
caravan of Kings arrives, the Christ Child rewards the camel's determination 
with renewed strength and immortality. This legend of the Camel that 
delivers gifts, although brief; is the only source located for this tale. This 
story is best used as a read-aloud because it is not illustrated, and the print is 
small. 

Kismarc, Carole. A Gift From Saint Nicholas. New York: Holiday House, 1988. 

This Belgian version of Saint Nicholas is about a little girl who wants 
a special chocolate boat for her Saint Nicholas Eve gift. Saint Nicholas and 
his companion, Ruprecht, try to convince the candy maker to give it to them. 
He refuses but in the end gives it directly to the little girl. Although there is 
a short summary of how the legend began, this is not a story of Saint 
Nicholas's origins but rather a story of the role he plays in different 
countries. The story may be too difficult for beginning readers, but, it is a 
very good book to read aloud. The book is beautifully illustrated in pen and 
ink drawings by Charles Mikolaycak. 

Mikolaycak, Charles. Babushka: an old Russian Folktale. New York: Holiday 
House, 1984. 

This Russian folktale is about Babushka, a young woman who takes 
pride in keeping her house clean. One evening, in the cold winter, she is 
visited by three men. They ask her to join them as they follow the star that 
will lead them to the King. Babushka declines, saying she still has cleaning 
to do. The next morning she remembers the visitors and hastens after them. 
She searches for many years and, never finding the King, begins giving gifts 
lo all children in hopes that they iright be Him. She continues her search 

16 



24 



Eastman 

every year. This version of the story of Babushka contains many bright pen 
and ink illustrations, and, although it may be too difficult for beginning 
readers, it is an excellent read-aloud. 

Robbins, Ruth. Baboushka and the Three Kings. Berkeley, California: Parnassus 
Press, 1960. 

This 1960 Caldecott Medal winner, is another version of the 
Baboushka tale. Baboushka is visited one night by three kings who ask her 
to accompany them to a place where a Babe has been born. She declines, 
but asks them to stay with her through the night and leave in the morning. 
They do not stay and Baboushka goes back to her scrubbing and cleaning. 
In the morning, she reconsiders, but cannot find the path of the three kings. 
She searches from village to village for the Babe, but never finds him. 
During the same season every year, she renews her search, bringing gifts to 
children in hopes that they are the Babe. The story is easy-to-read and 
includes a song of Baboushka. 

Rockwell, Anne. Befana: A Christmas Story. New York: Athenaeum, 1976. 

In this version, Befana becomes a hermit after the loss of her husband 
and child to illness. One night, as she is cleaning her home, she receives two 
visits: the first, three wise men, and then, a ragged shepherd. Before 
moving on, they each invite her accompany them to Bethlehem to greet a 
newborn, but she refuses. After thinking about the requests for some time, 
she decides that she wants to go. Although angels help her, she never 
catches up to the strangers. From then on, she gives gifts to every sleeping 
baby and child, just in case that child is the one she is seeking. Rockwell's 
version of the story of Befana contains much more detail than De Paola's. 
The print is smaller and works better as a read aloud. The black and white 
pictures are too plain to hold children's attention for very long. 



ERIC 



17 

2b 



Iktomi, the Sioux Trickster 



GRACE OMURA 



Omura 

Among American Indians the teller of stories is 
a weaver. His designs are the threads of his 
personal saga as well as the history of his people. 
Though the designs are always traditional, the 
hands that weave them are always new. These 
stories, like ancient Indian designs, have been 
passed from one generation to the next and 
sometimes have been borrowed by one tribe 
from another. (Musser and Freeman 1989, 5) 

Introduction 

Native Americans are stuvii^J in many contexts throughout the 
curricula of most elementary schools. In the primary grades, children 
learn about Native Americans in units about Christopher Columbus 
and Thanksgiving. In the middle grades, Native Americans are studied 
in American history and in the history of individual states. In addition, 
social studies units may focus specifically on various Native American 
tribes. As children learn about Native Americans in textbooks, 
stereotypes are often perpetuated. Although such stereotyping is often 
unintentional, it exists, nonetheless, in American books and media 
(Musser and Freeman 1989, 5). 

Legends and folk tales are very important in Native American 
culture. Stories are told in the oral tradition, and they present a rich 
and vibrant source for learning about Native Americans. The folklore of 
a culture gives students an awareness of that culture's beliefs, values 
and history (Musser and Freeman 1989, 6). Including culturally 
accurate folklore in elementary school curricula helps to acquaint 

1 



ERIC 



27 



Omura 

students with an expanded world view and helps to dispel stereotypes. 
This, in turn, helps them understand the reasons behind differing 
attitudes and behaviors (Vugrenes 1981, 454). 

Native American Trickster Tales 

Legends about Native American Tricksters are amusing tales 
which are not meant to be believed, but which often have moral lessons 
incorporated in them. Native American children learn what is 
acceptable behavior through the telling of Trickster tales. The stories 
are told mostly at night when children are ready for sleep. Adult 
listeners prompt the storyteller to interject comments about the stupidity 
* of believing anything the Trickster says or does. Everyone enjoys 

hearing about the Trickster's disreputable ways, for without meaning 
to, he gives the gift of laughter (Goble 1989, n.p.). 

In most myths, Trickster is represented as an incipient being of 
undetermined proportions, a figure foreshadowing the shape of man 
(Chapman 1975, 254). Additionally, Trickster is not easily characterized 
because his persona is comprised of at least three distinct roles: an 
aggressive Culture Hero such as the Monster-Slayer, the cunning 
Culture Hero, and the overreaching Trickster. The changes in his 
character can even be seen in the same story. In one legend he starts 
out as a benevolent physician. Later in the story he is humiliated by his 

2 

ERIC 2S 



Omura 

friend's superior power in thwarting an attempted theft and when the 
story ends, he is again the Trickster duped by his companion's luck. 
(Wiget 1985, 15). 

Role of the Trickster in Native American Culture 

All Native American tribes have a Trickster but he is known by 
many different names: Iktomi, Coyote, Sinti, Old Man Napi, Nanabozo, 
Sinkalip, Wihio, Veho and others (Goble 1990, n.p.). Among Native 
Americans, Trickster is at one and the same time "creator and destroyer, 
giver and negator, he who dupes others and who is always duped 
himself. He knows neither good nor evil, yet he is responsible for both. 
He possesses no values, and is at the mercy of his passions and 
appetites, yet through his actions all values come into being" (Chapman 
1975, 254). 

The form of Trickster is personified according to regions: in the 
Far West he is known as Coyote, in the Northwest and Arctic as Raven, 
in the East as Hare, in the North Woods as Canada Jay or Wolverine, 
on the Plains as Spider or Old Man (Wiget 1985, 16). But these 
characters are not necessarily equated with the actual animal for the 
Trickster possesses no well-defined or fixed form. Despite his many 
appearances in animal forms, Trickster is a man, with a full range of 
human possibilities. He can exchange animal and human form at will, 

3 

ERIC 2S 



Omura 

and will do so to evade or deceive others, but his motivation is 
recognizably human (Wiget 1985, 16). 

Laughter, humor and song permeate everything Trickster does. 
However, it is difficult to say whether the audience is laughing at him, 
at the tricks he plays on others, or at the implications his behavior and 
activities have for them (Chapman, 1975, 24). His behavior is always 
scandalous. His actions are openly acknowledged as madness by the 
elders who perform his stories with obvious delight on many winter 
nights. Yet these same respected voices assert the sacredness of these 
tales that always involve the most irreverent treatment of such topics as 
sexuality or religion. Many Westerners reading these stories for the first 
time don't know how to interpret them. Some find them at best a 
puzzling inconsistency, at worst a barbaric mystery that this idiot and 
miscreant was in some unaccountable way also the culture hero (Wiget 
1985, 16). 

Types of Trickster Tales 

There are three general types of Trickster tales. Some Trickster 
stories focus on men's bodily functions, undermining men's belief in 
their own ability to govern themselves. A second type of tales uses 
bawdy elements to heighten a satire on social or religious customs. In a 
third type, Trickster appears in human form and is "an undisguised 

4 



9 

ERIC 



30 



Omura 

attack on the dangers of institutional power in a social setting" (Wiget 
1985, 17). 

Most of the tales dealing with bodily functions "are in the best 
burlesque tradition and provide a telling commentary on the great 
lengths to which men will go to satisfy an enormous desire to which 
they surrender themselves and yet over which they pretend to maintain 
absolute control" (Wiget 1985,17). Typical of these are the stories of the 
Winnebago Trickster's rope-like penis. He keeps it in a box and carries it 
with him as if he had it under complete control. But he removes it only 
too readily and commands it to slither across the lake and have 
intercourse with the chiefs daughter. 

The tale known as Iktomi and the Ducks illustrates the satire on 
religious customs. This legend tells of the hazards of blind faith, the 
inordinate mystery of sacred things and the vanity apparent when 
power is desired for its own sake (Wiget 1985, 17). In one version of this 
tale, Trickster encounters a group of ducks. Seeing them as the source 
of his next meal, he deceives them with the offer of sacred songs. In 
order for the ducks to hear the sacred songs, they must dance with their 
eyes shut. They comply and he slays almost all of them. He commands 
his face to watch over the meal as it cooks while he sleeps. He awakes 
to find that his face has failed to guard the meal as he directed and all 



5 



ERIC 



32 



Omura 

has been lost to a hungry coyote. Poetic justice is served for the Trickster 
becomes the Tricked. 

In the third type of tale, Trickster undermines the tribe's social 
order (Wiget 1985, 17). In one well-known tale, Trickster Marries the 
Chiefs Son, the danger of confusing the power of an office with the 
power of man is illustrated. In this story, the chief behaves in an 
unthinkably dangerous, foolish and autocratic way. He pledges his 
son's hand and the tribe's future, to a woman who is an absolute 
stranger because she is an attractive woman who was recommended by 
an old woman not of high standing. This story reveals that it is more 
important to the chief to have his son marry an attractive woman than 
to arrange a sound marriage for the sake of the tribe (Wiget 1985, 17). 

Iktomi, the Sioux Trickster 

Iktomi is like the other Tricksters in that he is very clever with 
unusual magical powers. But he can also be very stupid, a liar and a 
mischief-maker. He is always trying to get the better of others but 
usually ends up getting fooled himself. The mention of Iktomi's name 
makes people smile, for he is always up to no good and gets himself into 
all sorts of trouble. He lacks all sincerity and has no moral values. Tales 
about Iktomi remind us that unsociable and chaotic behavior is never 
far below the surface; we can see ourselves in him (Goble 1990, n.p.). 

6 



32 



Omura 

Iktomi's actions are deliberately humorous to catch people's attention. 
Once that happens, it is easier to communicate on another level 
through the use of humor (Dooling 1976, 55). 

In addition to his image of a mischief maker, the Sioux also view 
Iktomi as a culture hero who brings important and sacred things to the 
people. The Sioux have a belief that they never need to make their own 
arrowheads out of flint. They find them on the prairie already made by 
Iktomi and this is his offering to the people. The association of flint with 
fire and lightning makes the flint arrow-point very valuable and sacred 
(Dooling 1976, 62). 

Iktomi means spider in the Sioux language called Lakota. 
According to Joseph Epes Brown, selecting the spider as a trickster was 
an appropriate choice for several reasons: spiders are also tricky, there 
are many different types of spiders and they are able to do many 
different things that are seen as powerful by the Sioux people (Dooling 
1976, 62). The Sioux have observed what spiders do and have drawn 
parallels to their own lives. 

One of the traits the Sioux admire is that spiders ingeniously trap 
their prey. The Sioux have watched and learned from spiders and have 
taken that knowledge and applied it, non-literally, to their lives. For 
example, spiders that build their webs in concentric circles are able to 
produce two different kinds of thread, one smooth and one sticky. When 

7 



ERIC 



33 



Omura 

making webs, the threads that go in the center are smooth but the 
threads that are in concentric circbs are sticky and catch the prey. 
There is a message in this: as long as you travel to the center you don't 
get stuck, trapped, or eaten up. But if you go to the right or left, if you 
diverge from the straight way to the center, you get caught. (Dooling 
1976, 62). 

Another trait is that when hatched out of their eggs, certain types 
of spiders send little filaments into the air and they are carried by the 
winds for great distances. Sioux people see this as a particular control 
that spiders have over the forces of the winds and this is a power that 
they would like to have themselves (Dooling 1976, 62). A third trait is 
that the spider is thought of as very industrious because he is always 
working, weaving or building. Thus, he is held up as an example to 
young girls for his hard working behavior. 

Conclusion 

When contemporary Sioux tell a story, it is often about Iktomi. 
Iktomi is still alive and stories which never existed in the "Buffalo Days" 
have been created. However, he is in danger of being viewed as merely 
a whimsical character because his adventures are always entertaining. 
Stories are told about Iktomi so that Sioux children will learn the 
values of the tribe in a non-moralizing way. In former times, he lived 

8 



34 



Omura 

in people's minds and characteristics; their insincerities, ambitions and 
vulgarities were humorously likened to those of Iktomi (Goble n.p., 
1990). In order for Iktomi stories to continue to have true meaning and 
power, they must embody the values of the Sioux in addition to making 
us laugh. Otherwise the purpose, for which they are told, will be lost. 



Reference List 

Chapman, Abraham, ed. 1975. Literature of the American Indians: 

Views and Interpretations. New York: New American Library Inc. 

Dooling, D.M. 1976. The Wisdom of the Contrary: A Conversation with 
Joseph Epes Brown. Parabola 4:54-65. 

Goble, Paid. 1989. Iktomi and the Berries: A Plains Indians Story. New 
York: Orchard Books. 

Goble, Paul. 1990. Iktomi and the Ducks: A Plains Indians Story. New 
York: Orchard Books. 

Musser, Louise S. and Freeman, Evelyn B. 1989. Teach Young Students 
about Native Americans: Use Myths, Legends and Folktales. The 
Social Studies 80: 5-9. 

Vugrenes, David E. 1981. North American Indian Myths and Legends 
for Classroom Use. Journal of Reading 24: 494-6. 

Wiget, Andres. 1985. Native American Literature. Boston: Twayne 
Publishers. 



ERIC 



35 



Omura 

Selected Annotated Bibliography 

General Background Information 

Using Nat ive Ameri can Tales in Elementary Classrooms 

Bosma, Bette. Fairy Tales, Fables, Legends and Myths: Using Folk 
Literature in Your Classroom. New York: Teachers College 
Press, 1992. 

This wonderful resource for teachers and librarians offers 
both background information and relevant teaching ideas for 
using folk literature to teach reading, writing and content 
subjects. There is an annotated guide to recommended folk 
literature for children which includes a brief summary of 
the plot, origin of the tale, and suggestions for using the 
selection in the classroom. Appendix B offers geographic 
information about Native American tribes and the most 
common trickster hero of the tribe is named whenever possible. 

Musser, Louise S. and Freeman, Evelyn B. Teach Young Students 
about Native Americans: Use Myths, Legends, and Folk Tales." 
The Social Studies 80 (January-February 1989) 5-9. 

This article discusses the value of using the traditional 
literature of Native Americans to help elementary-aged 
children learn the values, history and culture of Native 
Americans, Included in this article is a bibliography of 
picture books, collections of tales and songs, poetry 
and chants. There is also a section on factors to consider 
when selecting traditional literature and the authors 
recommend that teachers carefully consider the 
authenticity of tales. 



ERIC 



38 



Omura 

Vugrenes, David E. "North American Indian Myths and Legends for 
Classroom Use." Journal of Reading 24 (March 1981) 494-496. 

This article describes how including culturally 
accurate myths and legends in elementary level curricula 
The author stresses that an essential function of education 
is to help young people understand that people from 
different backgrounds may see things in different 
ways and that there are different ways of viewing 
and solving problems. The most valuable feature of 
this article is that it lists authentic sources from which 
stories can be obtained. 



General Information about the Sioux Tribe for Teachers and Librarians 

Gray, Louis Herbert, ed. The Mythology of All Races. 13 vols. 
New York: Cooper Square Publishers, 1964. Vol. 10: North 
American, by Hartley Burr Alexander. 

This book gives excellent background information 
about the various North American Native American tribes. 
The relationships of tribes to each other are described and 
the author attempts to define similarities and differences. 
The book is broken into chapters by regions, and the 
Sioux are described in the chapter on the Great Plains. 

Kopper, Philip. The Smithsonian Book of North American Indians: 
Before the Coming of the Europeans. Washington, DC: 
Smithsonian Books, 1986. 

This book contains large photographs and text 
describing aspects of North American Indian culture. 
Tribes are divided by location and there are chapters 
that describe general differences and similarities 
between tribes. The Sioux are mentioned in the 
chapter on the Plains Indians. The value in this 
book lies in its colorful photographs, which will keep 
students' attention while the short passages, containing 
information on a wide range of topics, are read aloud. 

11 



ERIC 



37 



Marken, Jack W. and Hoover, Herbert T. Bibliography of the Sioux. 
Native American Bibliography Series, no. 1. Metuchen, N.J.: 
Scarecrow Press, 1980. 

The authors have attempted to list all the important 
books and articles published through 1978 relating to 
the Sioux. The entries in this bibliography are organized 
in alphabetical order under subject headings. Several 
bibliographies are relevant to Iktomi tales: Fiction 
and other Works, History, Literature-Collections 
and Stories, Types of Literature and Criticism. 

Ortiz, Roxanne Dunbar. The Great Sioux Nation: Sitting in 
Judgment on America. New York: The American Indian 
Treaty Council Information Center, 1977. 

This book is based on testimony given at the Sioux 
Treaty Hearing held December 1974. In this compilation 
is . . probably the most complete history and analysis 
of Sioux culture. . . The article on Oral History by 
Beatrice Medicine, a Sioux anthropologist, explains 
why oral history and folklore were very important to 
tribes like the Sioux who did not have a written language. 
It is easy to read and informative. 

General I nformation about Iktomi the Trickster Tales 

Chapman, Abraham, ed. Literature of the American Indians: Views 
and Interpretations. New York: New American Library Inc.. 
1975. 

The chapter by Paul Radin entitled The Trickster" 
gives a short and concise analysis of the characteristics 
of Trickster tales. The author explains how Trickster is 
at the same time creator and destroyer, giver and negator, 
he who dupes others and is always duped himself. The 
author believes that Trickster stories can be interpreted 
as meaning man's struggle with himself and the world 
into which he is thrust. Iktomi is not mentioned by name 
in this article, but it is still a valuable resource. 

12 



Omura 

Dooling, D.M. "The Wisdom of the Contrary: A Conversation with 
Joseph Epes Brown." Parabola 4 (Winter 1976) : 54-65. 

Joseph Epes Brown is a well-known authority on 
Plains Indians. Brown spent eight months with Black Elk, 
a Sioux medicine man, learning about the rites and 
ceremonies of the Sioux people. This article focuses on 
the Trickster, and Iktomi is among those mentioned. 
Brown specifically gives examples of how Iktomi, 
the mischief maker and Trickster, also appears as 
a hero in a positive form. This is an informative article 
that is easy to read due to its interview format. 



Erdoes, Richard, ed. and Ortiz, Alfonso, ed. American Indian Myths 
and Legends. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. 

This book contains 166 legends categorized by 
different tales including Trickster tales. Some of the 
Plains Indians tales were jotted down at powwows, 
around campfires, even inside a moving car. Others 
are classic tales which appear here in their original form. 
A third group comes from 19th century stories, which, while 
containing the nuggets of original tales, were also embellished. 
This book defines Iktome (Iktomi) as the Sioux Spider 
Man. The five Iktome stories are not appropriate for 
children to read as they have sexual connotations. 
A storytelling approach would be best for these stories. 

Wiget, Andres. Native American Literature. Twayne's United States 
Authors Series, no. 467. Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1985. 

This book provides a good general overview of 
Native American literature. The first chapter focuses 
on oral narrative, and a portion of it is devoted to the 
Trickster. The names that the Trickster is known by 
in different tribes are explained as well as a discussion 
of the meaning of Trickster tales. Even though there 
is no specific information about Iktomi, this is a valuable 

13 



ERIC 



33 



Omura 

resource. In a few pages the reader is given a great deal 
of information about the origin and general characteristics 
of Trickster stories across several Native American tribes. 

Information about the Sioux Tribe for Children 

McGovern, Ann. If You Lived with the Sioux Indians. Illustrations by 
Bob Levering. New York: Four Winds Press, 1974. 

This interesting book focuses on the way the Sioux 
lived for fifty years, from 1800-1850. The ending of the 
books tells about the way Sioux Indians live today. The 
format of this book is in question-and-answer style. It 
describes the daily life of the Sioux-their clothing, 
food, games and customs. Children will find the sections 
dealing with Sioux boys and girls especially interesting 
when they compare the Sioux lifestyle to their own lives. 
The illustrator's detailed line drawings give an authentic 
picture of what it was like to live with the Sioux during 
that time. 



Wolfson, Evelyn. The Teton Sioux: People of the Plains. Bookfield, 
Conn.: Millbrook Press, 1992. 

This informative book traces the history of the 
Teton Sioux from the mid-1600s to the present. The 
text is written at about a fourth grade readability. 
Different chapters describe life on the Plains before 
and after the arrival of white soldiers and other 
stranger There is a time line of important dates in 
the history of the Sioux plus a glossary and a 
bibliography which includes books for children as 
well as adults. There are many colorful drawings and 
photographs. It is an excellent resource for children to use. 



ERIC 



40 



Orrura 

Traditional Tales 

Eastman, Charles A. and Eastman, Elaine Goodale. "Unktomee 
and His Bundle of Songs." In Wigwam Evenings: Sioux Folk 
Tales Retold. Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press, 
1990. pp.79-87. 

Iktomi is known as Unktomee, the Spider, in these 
stories first published in 1909. There are two stories about 
Unktomee in this collection. Both are appropriate for 
children in the upper elementary grades to read due 
to their choice of language and short length. Several 
stories are supplemented with line drawings. 

Unktomee and His Bundle of Songs is a version 
of the story of Iktomi and the Ducks. Uiiktomee meets 
up with a flock of ducks. He carries a load of dry grass 
on his back which he tells the ducks is his bundle of 
songs. He tricks the ducks into entering a teepee and 
sings them a song. The ducks shut their eyes and 
dance around and Unktomee seizes one at a time and 
wrings its neck. But one small duck opens his eyes and 
warns the others and they fly away. Unktomee prepares 
the ducks for eating but falls asleep while they are 
cooking in a pot. Fox, who Unktomee was rude to 
earlier, returns and eats a ll the ducks while Unktomee 
sleeps. This legend teaches that he who deceives another 
may himself be deceived one day. 

. "Unktomee and the Elk." In Wigwam Evenings: Sioux Folk 

Tales Retold. Lincoln, Neb.: University of Nebraska Press, 1990. 
pp. 89-98. 

Iktomi envies the Elks for he believes that they have 
an easy life and begs to become one of them. Unktomee 
passes a test and is admitted into their company. In fact, 
he is made the chief because he so wants to be. Twice he 
falsely arouses them to flee. The third time they lay down 
to rest, the Elks steal away from Unktomee while he sleeps 
and he is severely wounded by a hunter. This legend teaches 



15 



Omura 

us to be well content with our own for there is no life that 
is free from hardship and danger. 

Goble, Paul. Iktomi and the Boulder: A Plains Indians Story. New 
York: The Trumpet Club, 1988. 

Ail of Paul Goble's Iktomi picture books are written 
at about a third grade readability and are beautifully 
illustrated. Each has an introduction page giving 
background information about the tale and a note for 
the reader explaining how to read the text in Sioux 
storytelling style. 

In this story, Iktomi takes back a gift that he has 
given to a boulder. The boulder is angry and rolls over 
Iktomi. Iktomi pleads for help from different animals 
on the prairie but they are unable to free him. Finally, 
bats appear and Iktomi tricks them into helping him. 
Angered over what Iktomi tells them, they hit the 
boulder, breaking off pieces of it until nothing is left 
but little chips. This story explains why bats have flattened 
faces and why there are rocks scattered all over the Great 
Plains. 

. Iktomi and the Berries: A Plains Indians Story. New York: 

Orchard Books, 1989. 

Iktomi goes hunting one morning boasting about 
what a great hunter he is. He doesn't watch where he is 
going and falls into a river. When he pulls himself out, 
he spots some beautiful red berries in the water. Silly 
Iktomi doesn't realize that what he sees is a reflection 
and goes diving for the berries. He ties a rock around 
his neck and almost drowns. When he frees himself 
and floats to the surface of the river he finally sees 
the branches loaded with berries above him. In anger, 
he beats the tree until all the berries fall off into the river. 

In this book the author explains how the Sioux 
pick buffalo berries after the first frosts of fall by spreading 
cloths under the bushes and beating the branches just 
like Iktomi did. 

16 



ERIC 



42 



Omura 

. Iktomi and the Ducks: A Plains Indians Story. New York: 

Orchard Books, 1990. 

This is a version of the story in the Eastman 
collection, Unktomee and His Bundle of Songs. There 
are a few differences, but the stories are generally similar. 
Once again Iktomi lures innocent ducks off a pond with 
his promise of singing them his latest songs. He tricks them 
into dancing with their eyes closed and manages to 
kill a few. While Iktomi waits for the ducks to cook, 
the sound of two trees scraping together bothers him. 
He climbs up to pull the trees apart and gets trapped 
between them. While he is stuck, coyote comes by and 
eats all his ducks. Coyote fills the one remaining duck 
with red-hot coals and when Iktomi is finally freed, 
he takes a great bite and gets a mouthful of red hot coals! 



. Iktotni and the Buffalo Skull: A Plains Indians Story. 

New York: Orchard Books, 1991. 

Iktomi, the trickster, gets dressed up and goes off 
in search of some girlfriends even though he is married. 
He interrupts a powwow of the Mouse People and gets 
his head stuck in a buffalo skull because he is so curious. 
He crashes around blindly until he begs his wife to break 
the skull off his head. She does so gladly because she 
knows where he was headed that day. The story reminds 
us not to put our noses into other people's business and 
to remember that buffalo skulls are sacred and must 
be respected. 



ERIC 



4.3 



Omura 

Rosebud, Yellow Rose. "Iktomi and the Red-Eyed Ducks." In Tonweya 
and the Eagles and other Lakota Indian Tales. New York: Dial 
Press, 1979, pp. 86-93. 

This version of the story is very similar to Goble's 
because Iktomi gets trapped between two trees. In this 
story, it is fox who comes along and eats Iktomi's roast 
ducks while he is stuck in the trees. There are nine 
other stories in this collection ofLakota, or Sioux, tales. 
Each legend is written at about a fourth grade readability 
and each is illustrated with a detailed line drawing. 
The stories in this book were told to the author by her 
father, Canowicakte, of the Sioux tribe. 



9 

ERJC 



18 



The Roles of Coyote in 
Selected Native American 

Cultures 



CATHERINE THOMAS 



45 



Introduction 

Today's communication technologies bring different societies closer than 
ever before. Although this may be scary for some people, the beauty of this 
phenomenon is that societies that have lived in isolation are now beginning to 
share their knowledge and culture* In this shrinking world, the differences as 
well as commonalities of many cultures are becoming apparent* In spite of these 
differences there is a parallelism amongst cultures: we are all striving to seek the 
truth in varying ways. We have been shown, through lessons learned, the 
differences between acceptable and unacceptable behavior* Some have learned 
them in church or at the synagogue, at school, or at home. Some have learned 
life's lessons at a young age, or when older, while others may never learn them at 
all. All cultures have their own methods of teaching, showing and learning. 
Various methods include books, lectures, instruction, setting examples, and 
stories. 

Folktales are stories that are orally passed down from generation to 
generation. They are one method of showing appropriate forms of behavior. 
Native American tribes, such as the Navajo, use storytelling for many reasons. 
One, as mentioned earlier, is to teach acceptable behavior. Another reason is to 
explain the cosmogony of the culture as in the Emergence Myth. A third reason is 
to explain the origin of natural phenomena such as when Coyote places the stars 
in the sky. 

Purpose of Trickster Tales 

There is a purpose behind most folktales or else they would not be 
consistently passed on through the generations. What is the purpose behind these 
trickster tales? As was mentioned earlier, some of these tales are a means of 
teaching. In the majority of Coyote tales, Coyote, through his gullibleness and 



ERIC 



46 



Thomas 

self-seeking, shows inappropriate behavior. They are lessons for old and young 
alike of how not to be. As with most questions, however, the purpose of Coyote 
stories is not simply answered. 

The second purpose of these stories is to explain how certain things came to 
be. The story, Who Will Be the Sun? a Kutenai Coyote trickster tale retold by 
Joanna Troughton, explains how some animals have paler stomachs and darker 
backs. The tale also explains that when there is a fire people can always find a 
trail on which to lie to save themselves. In a Hopi tale, the placement of the stars 
is explained through Coyote's rashness and impatience when he throws the stars 
haphazardly into the sky. 

Since many Native American stories are told as explanations for natural 
occurrences there is not always an easy, "happily ever after" type ending. Many 
times Coyote may die in one story only to reappear in another. The motive 
behind these stories is not necessarily to entertain, but to teach and to explain. 

A third reason for these stories is that they explain the beginnings of their 
culture. As Genesis, in the Bible, is an explanation of the birth of humans and the 
universe, so is the Emergence Myth an explanation of beginnings. In some Native 
American cultures, Coyote was present during the time of the New People's 
Emergence into the New World. In Navajo, Coyote was present with First Man 
and First Woman as they ventured out from the underworld. So, too, was he 
present in the Emergence Myth stories of the Okanagon tribe. One Okanagon 
story of the Emergence of man explains why Coyote must be the trickster, as well 
as the impersonator (Lopez 1977, 1). 

In one such Okanagon story, Coyote desires a new name after the Great 
Spirit announces that the creatures may turn in their names for new ones. Coyote, 
tired of being seen without respect and laughed at all the time, decides he wants a 
more majestic name such as Grizzly Bear, Salmon, or Eagle. Wanting to be first 



ERLC 



2 

47 



Thomas 

in line the next day, Coyote fights with sleep but is unable to stay awake. The next 
day, when he wakes, it is very late in the morning. When he arrives to the place 
of the Great Spirit, he learns that all the names he desires are taken. He is stuck 
being Coyote, the trickster and the impersonator. At this time, the Great Spirit 
confides in Coyote that it is the way it should be, for Coyote is needed to be the 
trickster and impersonator in order to help the New People as they enter the New 
World, The Great Spirit tells Coyote that it will be his purpose to teach the New 
People how to survive in the New World for they will know nothing. Coyote 
must teach them how to hunt buffalo and how to catch salmon, he must also teach 
them how to dress and how to sing. Coyote is shown that, although he does silly 
things, it is okay because it is his way and the people will be grateful to him 
(Lopez 1977, 1-3), 

Coyote in Navajo Myth 

Coyote, in the Navajo culture is a mythic character that has been around 
long before the New People came to be. The New People are the humans present 
today. Coyote was of a generation known as First People, First People were 
neither human in appearance, nor did they take the physical form that their names 
reflect. Coyote was not in the form of the coyote as Raven was not in the form of 
the bird. What is intriguing about Coyote is that although his most popular and 
well-known guise is the trickster, he is actually a much more complex and 
powerful character in many Native American cultures. In his book, Navajo 
Coyote Tales, Berard Haile shows in a graph the variety of levels Coyote operates 
on, or masks that Coyote wears, in various stories (Haile 1984, 11). Even in the 
individual stories, Coyote's character is not stagnant. In the story, Coyote and 
Deer, Haile illustrates that Coyote's status crosses eight different levels, showing 
that Coyote is not merely a trickster. In one story alone he begins as god, then 



3 

43 



Thomas 

crosses over to savior then to trickster or gambler and ends up as fool at the end 
of the story. No single label can be placed on Coyote, he moves too much to be 
confined and tucked into the niche labeled "trickster/' Haile goes as far as to call 
Coyote, "Excrement-corpse-fool-gambler-imitator-trickster-witch-hero-savior- 
god" (Haile 1984, 7). 

Coyote in Other Native American Tribes 

Coyote is seen in other Native American tribes as well as Navajo, Some of 
these tribes include various Apache tribes, Crow, Kutenai, Pawnee, Shoshone and 
Taos (Carroll 1984, 108) as well as the Hopi tribe- Another name Coyote goes by 
in these tribes is Old Man Coyote, Not all tribes see Coyote in the same light. The 
common character trait of Coyote that threads its way through these tribes is 
trickster. But many cultures see Coyote only as some variation of trickster or 
buffoon. For example, in many of the Navajo stories which feature Coyote, he 
can be seen as hero or as god, at some point in the story, but in the Hopi culture, 
Coyote is not given that much respect. Berard Haile shows another graph that 
illustrates Coyote's various traits in Hopi tales. In Hopi, according to Haile, 
Coyote's range stays predominantly within the excrement-fool-gambler-trickster 
range (Haile 1984, 18). Very rarely does he model behavior that is reminiscent of 
hero, savior or god. Ekkehart Malotki in Gullible Coyote states that, "The overall 
esteem that the Hopi have for coyote the 'range creature* is quite low. The 
predominant view holds that the animal is a rather ordinary critter with no 
positive attributes whatsoever" (Malotki 1984, 3-4). In Hopi tales, Coyote is 
distinguished from other characters by "his extreme gullibility, his bent for 
mimicry, and his carnal wantonness" (Malotki 1984, 10). Even though the Hopis 
have such a low view of Coyote, they still tell the story of how he tries to come to 
the aid of humans by attempting to steal fire for them. In the end it is the vulture 



4 

49 



Thomas 

who succeeds in obtaining the fire, but "this is one of the few instances where 
Coyote comes close to fulfilling the role of a culture hero in Hopi mythology" 
(Malotki 1984, 17). 

Variations of Coyote Stories 

One important aspect of these stories is that since the Native American 
tribes did not have a written language for many hundreds of years, these stories 
were passed along orally. During the winter season the family would gather 
around the light of the fire and were told Coyote stories, usually by the person 
who is well versed in these stories. [In keeping with this tradition, this author 
suggests that Coyote stories be told only during the winter season in respect of the 
Native American tradition.] Since these stories were passed along orally there can 
be a number of variations to one story. Although the basic plot is relatively 
similar, within one tribe there can be differences in the story. For example, in the 
story of Coyote and his cousin Homed Toad the main theme in all the versions is 
that of Coyote trying to trick Homed Toad out of his cornfield. The variations 
are seen in the particular details. For example, there are different ways that 
Coyote eats Homed Toad, and in one version of the story Coyote dies of fright 
while in another he merely passes out. 

Translations of Coyote Stories 

Along with variations of Coyote stories there is also more than one way of 
translating these stories. One type of translation is a word for word, literal, 
translation of the Native American language which could be used to show 
differences in cultural storytelling. Since the semantics of the Native American 
tribe are different from other languages, these literal translations will not make 
sense. Another method involves translating a story into European prose. The 



5 

50 



Thomas 

purpose of this method is to rearrange the words so they will make more sense in 
the translation. A more recent type of translation called "ethnopoetic verse" is 
one in which the story is represented as lines which are treated as a unit* When 
written down these lines look similar to European poetry (Bright 1993, xiii-xiv). 
Bright has criticized ethnopoetic translations and mentions that many scholars 
have questioned this particular technique of translation. But Bright also believes 
that the translation of Native American stories into lines has two values: 

First, it represents an effort to present the elements of phonological, 
grammatical, and semantic parallelism that exist in the originals and that are 
basic to their effectiveness. Second, it represents a typographic attempt to 
focus the attention of readers: to encourage the type of close reading that we 
might not accord to a page of run-on, wall-to-wall prose. In these terms, the 
best translation of a text is someone who knows the structure of the native 
language and who strives for a translation that reflects both the substance and 
the form of the original (Bright 1993, xiv). 

When choosing a translation of a story the teacher or librarian must attempt to 
choose translations which are true to the spirit of the culture. A storyteller will 
get closer to the essence of the story if the translation has been done either by a 
person who was bom and raised in that culture or by a person who has lived in 
the culture and studied it to such an extent that the translator can retell the story 
without losing its flavor. Within these stories the reader is shown glimpses into a 
way of believing, thinking and living that must be honored and respected. 

Ceremony 

Coyote not only plays a role in many of the stories in Native American 
folklore, he also plays a role in the religious aspects of the Native American 
cultures, including Navajo. Leland Wyman states that although there is not a 
Navajo term for "religion," it is the closest term that can be used to label the 
Navajo belief system of the supernatural forces that control their world (Wyman 



ERLC 



6 * 

51 



Thomas 

1983, 536). Many ceremonies are still being performed today. Unfortunately, 
some of these ceremonies are extinct, or are close to becoming extinct. 
Ceremonies are methods of maintaining the spiritual balance. 

Ceremonialism is the system the Navajos have developed to cope with the 
uncertainties and dangers of their universe. . . . Evil and danger come 
from disturbance of the normal order, harmony, or balance among the 
elements of the universe and absence of control. . . . There are numerous 
things or powers in the universe that are indifferent or good when under 
control and in harmony with man but that may be potentially evil when 
uncontrolled (Wyman 1983, 536). 

The Navajo achieves and maintains this control through ceremonies. The majority 
of these are performed to cure any sickness or potential sickness that comes about 
when the powers of the universe are offended, or when taboos are broken. 
Another reason to perform a ceremony is when a person becomes excessive in 
activities as "gambling, sexual activity, or even harmless pursuits as weaving" 
(Wyman 1983, 536). 

Coyoteway 

The umbrella term for these ceremonies in the Navajo culture is 
Holyway Chantways. There are seven subgroups of the Holyway Chantway: 
Shooting Chant, Mountain Chant, God-Impersonators, Wind Chant, Hand- 
Trembling Chant, Eagle Trapping, and chants that have no particular affiliation. 
One ceremony that is becoming extinct is Coyoteway. This ceremony belongs in 
the subgroup, God-Impersonators. This name is given because the ceremony is 
performed by impersonators who dress up as Yeis (Holy People) during a nine- 
night period. Yeis appear on the final night in a public dance and are 
representative of the supernatural forces that need to be present for the healing 
process (Wyman 1983, 546). 



ERLC 



7 

52 



Thomas 

A variety of taboos surround the Holy Person, Coyote, most of which 
involve the treatment of the animal, coyote. If these taboos are broken, it is 
believed that Coyote causes illness which can only be healed through the 
ceremony, Coyoteway, These taboos include: 

Coyotes must not be hurt or killed. Coyote flesh may never be eaten. In 
hunting, the viscera of game animals must be left for coyotes to scavenge, 
as the share of game owed to the Holy Person, Coyote, who is man's 
companion in the hunt. Coyotes may not be watched as they die, lest their 
twitches enter the onlooker and produce disease. °ead coyote carcasses 
may not be touched. Symptoms diagnosed as Coyote illness appear to 
include nervous malfunctions, mania, sex frenzy, and rabies (Merker 1981, 
245). 

The ceremony, Coyoteway, is performed because illness is brought on 
when the patient becomes excessive in some area of his/her life. Even though the 
character of trickster conjures up images of laughter and fun through his selfish 
antics, Coyote is also a Holy Person. Coyote is not to be taken lightly even though 
he plays the fool at times. The lessons he teaches are important. Through 
Coyote's insatiability for sex and food he teaches the lessons of greed and what 
the repercussions can be when the self is placed above others. 

Summary 

As we have seen, stories play a powerful role in Native American cultures. 
The stories which feature Coyote are just one example of teaching. Coyote, 
having a variety of roles in the Navajo culture demonstrates acceptable behavior, 
teaches about the culture's cosmogony, and explains how certain things came to 
be. There is a wealth of information and knowledge within these stories. 



ERIC 



8 

53 



Thomas 

Conclusion 

In what we hope will become a multi-cultural society it is becoming 
imperative to realize that there are other ways of viewing the world. It is 
important to teach children that one culture is not better than others. The time is 
now to widen our own horizons and look at other ways of living. We must show 
^e differences, not to demean or to negate, but to celebrate the diversity of 
cultures and beliefs. Then we will begin to see that, underneath the exterior 
differences, we are all truly similar. 



Reference List 

Bright, William. 1993. A Coyote Reader. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 

Carroll, Michael P. 1984. The Trickster as Selfish-Buffoon and Culture Hero. 
Ethos 12:105-30. 

Haile, Father Berard. 1984. Navajo Coyote Tales-The Curly to Aheedliihii 
Version. American Tribal Religions Series. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 

Lopez, Barry Holstun. 1977. Giving Birth to Thunder, Sleeping with his 

Daughter: Coyote Builds North America. Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and 
McMeel. 

Molotki, Ekkehart and Michael Lomatuway'ma. 1984. Hopi Coyote Tales- 
Istutuwutsi. American Tribal Series. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press. 

Merker, Daniel. 1981. The Psychodynamics of the Navajo Coyoteway 
Ceremonial. The Journal of Mind and Behavior 2: 243-57. 

Wyman, Leland C. 1983. Navajo Ceremonial System. Handbook of North 
American Indians vol. 10: 536-57. 



ER?C 



9 

54 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



Thomas 



General Background Information 



Bright, William. A Coyote Reader. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1993. 

The majority of stories included are translations of Coyote with a 
few sections on traditional Coyote from me viewpoint of other Native 
American tribes as well as Navajo. The chapter on Coyote mythic 
background is a good place to go for a brief look at how Coyote traverses 
many tribes across a wide geographical area. If the reader wishes to look at 
a variety of tribes rather than just Navajo this book would be helpful. 



Haile, Berard. Navajo Coyote Tales-The Curly to Aheedliihii Version. American 
Tribal Religions Series. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

The author concentrates mainly on the Navajo, but in the 
introductory essay the Navajo Coyote tales are compared to the Hopi 
Coyote tales. The three parts of this book concentrate on different elements 
of Coyote. The tales are given here in both English and Navajo The 
introduction is an excellent tool in which to see how Coyote is not always 
presented as merely a trickster in the Navajo myth. A good introduction 
into the similarities and contrasts of how the Hopi and the Navajo view the 
Coyote in their myths. The publisher suggests that this publication she 
be used in conjunction with "Hopi Coyote Tales-Istutuwutsi," volume 9 in 
the same series. 



ERIC 



10 

55 



Thomas 



Kroeber, Karl. Traditional Literatures of the American Indian. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1 98 1 . 

Divided into five sections this book introduces Native American 
traditional literature to the non-specialist. Each chapter introduces a 
different tribe or a topic as presented by a specialist in that field. There is a 
Navajo translation of "Coyote and Prairie Dogs" as told by Yellowman and 
includes a line by line analysis of the narrator telling the story as well as 
the responses of the audience. It is a good source for teachers to be 
introduced to other tribes as well as being introduced to Coyote because of 
its broad spectrum of themes. The book shows insight and explains some 
different viewpoints between European and Native American thinking 
when looking at oral narratives. 



Lopez, Barry Holstun. Giving Birth to Thunder, Sleeping with his Daughter: 
Coyote Builds North America. Kansas City: Sheed Andrews and McMeel, 



This book focuses on the character Coyote in many different Native 
American tribes including Navajo, Nez Perce, Karok, Cherokee, Cheyenne 
and Pawnee. In this collection, Coyote is not only seen as trickster. Some of 
the folktales show his more stately qualities as warrior and helper of the 
First People. Coyote and Horned Toad appear in yet another version of the 
tale. This book is best used by the teacher or librarian who wijhes to learn 
more about Coyote in various tribes or to use during storytelling hour. 



1977. 



9 

ERIC 



n 



56 



Thomas 



Malotki, Ekkehart, and Michael Lomatuway'ma. Hopi Coyote Tales-Istutuwutsi. 
American Tribal Religions Series. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 
1984. 



This book reprints tales of Coyote in English and in Hopi. 
Background information relayed in the introduction as well as a glossary 
help to explain some terms and ideas. The bulk of the literature is devoted 
to translations of the tales. Some tales are suitable to be told in a class of 
4th-6th graders, but be aware that some tales are unsuitable for children in 
today's society. This book would be excellent for the teacher to use to 
illustrate the rich variety of cultures that are found in the United States. 
The publisher suggests that this book be used along with "Navajo Coyote 
Tales," which is volume 8 of the same series. 



Merkur, Daniel. "The Psychodynamics of the Navajo Coyoteway Ceremonial." 
The Journal of Mind and Behavior 2 (Autumn 1981): pp. 243-57. 

The author delves into the psychosomatic symptoms leading up to the 
need for the Coyoteway Ceremony. He describes in great depth the 
illnesses associated with Coyote. Additionally, he looks at the nine-night 
ceremony which cures the afflicted patient. This is an excellent article for 
the teacher or librarian who wishes to learn more of the spiritual beliefs of 
the Navajo culture as well as to learn more of the psychological aspects of 
the ritual's effectiveness. 



9 

ERIC 



12 

57 



Thomas 



Radin, Paul. The Trickster: A Study in American Indian Mythology. New York: 
Schocken Books, 1973. 



This is a good source for the instructor who wishes to learn about 
the mythological figure, the trickster, as it pertains to the Native American 
Winnebago tribe. The book is divided into five sections, the majority of 
which delve into the nature and meaning of the trickster myth, revealing 
some of the Winnebago culture, as well as comparing the trickster to Greek 
Mythology and a psychological look at the trickster. C.G. Jung contributes 
the psychological look at the trickster. An excellent, well rounded look into 
the trickster myth as seen by the Winnebago for teachers who wish to 
compare the Winnebago to another tribe. 



Roessel, Jr., Robert, and Dillon Platero. Coyote Stories of the Navaho People. 
Rough Rock. /\riz.: Dine, 1968. 

The Navaho Curriculum Center of Rough Rock Demonstration 
School in Chinle, Arizona created this book, which is part of a series 
intended for the Navaho cl ildren who attend Rough Rock School. The 
authors believe it would also be helpful to "nori-Navaho students" as well. 
Fourteen chapters are devoted to different Coyote stories. In most of the 
stories he appears as trickster. A version of Coyote and Homed Toad is 
included and differs from Begay's. The book is simply illustrated and will 
not hold the attention of young children. These tales are best suited for a 
storytelling hour. Copies of this book may be obtained by contacting the 
Navaho Curriculum Center, Rough Rock Demonstration School, Chinle, 
Arizona 86503. 



ERIC 



13 

58 



Thomas 



Welsch, Roger L. Omaha Tribal Myths and Trickster Tales. Athens, Ohio: Ohio 
University Press, 1981. 



Written to "provide easier . . . access to the background and 
historical materials that can help us understand modern tales and help non- 
Indians appreciate the fact that the Omaha had a rich culture . . ." (p. 13). 
Welsch does precisely that. He collected many myths and tales from the 
book "The Cegiha Language" by James Owen Dorsey, who was a 
missionary-ethnologist. The author groups these trickster tales by character 
(Rabbit, Ictinike, and Coyote) as well as relaying tales related to myths and 
culture heroes; the Animal World; Animal and Man; Creation and Origin; 
and other tales. Following each story is an explanatory note that gives 
insight into the meaning of the myth or tale. This book would be an 
excellent tool to the instructor who wishes to delve into the culture of 
Omaha. The myths are clearly labeled and easily read. 



Wyman, Leland C. "Navajo Ceremonial System." In Handbook of North 

American Indians vol. 10, Washington: Smithsonian Institution, 1983. pp. 
536-57. 



An excellent handbook that divides the United States into regions and 
concentrates on various attributes of different Native American cultures. 
The author explains in detail the significance that the ceremonies, as 
Coyoteway, have in the Navajo culture. In this way it is an excellent tool 
for the teacher or librarian who wishes to learn more about the religious 
aspects of the Navajo culture. Wyman delves into various aspects of the 
ceremonial systems and the role the Holy People play in these ceremonies. 
The author also looks at the ceremonial procedures as well as the 
equipment necessary to perform such ceremonies. 



14 

59 



Thomas 



Traditional Tales 



Begay, Shonto. Ma'ii and Cousin Horned Toad: A Traditional Navajo Story. 
New York: Scholastic, 1992. 



A delightful retelling of the Navajo story of how Coyote tries to 
trick his cousin, Horned Toad, out of his corn field. To obtain Horned 
Toad's corn field, Coyote eats him. But Horned Toad survives and roams 
around inside Coyote pulling at his organs. The author, Begay, is one of 
sixteen children born to a Navajo medicine man, which gives him an 
insight into the Navajo culture. This book is wonderful to use as a clear 
example of Coyote acting like a trickster. The large beautiful illustrations 
make this book appropriate for storytelling in the 3rd and 4th grades. 
Contains a glossary. 



Courlander, Harold. "Coyote and the Crying Song." In People of the Short Blue 
Corn: Tales and Legends of the Hopi Indians. New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1970. pp. 82-85. 



A wonderful Hopi tale that shows Coyote not as trickster but as fool. 
Coyote encounters a dove who is crying because she has hurt her hands. 
Mistaking her crying as a beautiful song, Coyote tries to memorize the 
"song." On his way home Coyote forgets the song and returns to the dove 
to ask her to sing it again. He continues to forget the song and returns to 
the dove a number of times asking her to sing it again. Getting tired of 
singing this song to Coyote, the bird paints a rock and leaves it in the field. 
Coyote returns for the third time to where the bird was and mistakes the 
rock for the dove. In his anger at forgetting the song, Coyote tries to eat 
the rock but hurts his jaw. Coyote cries in pain and a passing crow tells 
him that the song he is singing is beautiful. Since this story has no 
illustrations, teachers can adapt the story to tell to students in the 3rd~4th 
grades. Contains a glossary and pronunciation guide. 



15 

60 



Thomas 



, "Coyote Helps Decorate the Night," In People of the Short Blue Corn: 

Tales and Legends of the Hopi Indians. New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1970. pp. 25-26. 

This story is an excellent example of an explanatory tale. Taking 
place at the beginning of time, before people, it tells how all the animals, 
except lazy Coyote, decorate the world by creating trees, mountains, 
deserts and mesas. The animals decide to put shiny objects in the sky but 
being tired from their day's work they decide to sleep for a while. As they 
sleep, Coyote becomes curious about the shiny objects and picks them up to 
look at them. Finding them useless, he throws them away over his 
shoulder. Finally, after tossing all of the objects, he looks in the sky. There 
he sees the shiny objects twinkling in the darkness. Since this story has no 
illustrations teachers can adapt the story to tell to students in the 3rd-4th 
grades. Contains a glossary and pronunciation guide. 



. "Coyote's Needle." In People of the Short Blue Corn: Tales and 

Legends of the Hopi Indians. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970. 
pp. 143-44. 

This is a short, whimsical tale of how Coyote mistakes the bill of the 
hummingbird, who is buried in the sand, for a needle. When Coyote tugs at 
his bill, the hummingbird is shocked at Coyote's behavior and Coyote, in 
turn, is embarrassed. To appease the hummingbird, Coyote invites him 
over for dinner. As the time draws near for the hummingbird to arrive, 
Coyote buries himself in the dirt, leaving only his nose above ground. The 
hummingbird pulls at Coyote's nose mistaking it for a jug. This time it is 
the hummingbird's turn to be embarrassed. Since this story has no 
illustrations teachers can adapt the story to tell to students in the 2nd-4th 
grades. Contains a glossary and pronunciation guide. 



16 

61 



Thomas 



. "Two Friends, Coyote and Bull Snake, Exchange Visits." In People of 

the Short Blue Corn: Tales and Legends of the Hopi Indians. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970. pp. 97-100. 

This story is a good example to show what can happen \yhen 
someone shows inhospitality as well as to explain how things came to be. 
When the bull snake comes to visit Coyote his body is so long that in order 
to fit in Coyote's kiva, Coyote has to sit outside in the cold. This angers 
Coyote so he goes to visit the bull snake a few days later after attaching a 
long tail made of bark to himself. This time the bull snake has to leave his 
kiva to make room for Coyote. The long tail of Coyote makes the bull 
snake suspicious, especially since a piece of the tail remains after Coyote 
has left. Curious to see what will happen, the bull snake places the piece in 
the fire. The bark begins to smoke and it bursts into flames causing it to fly 
out of the kiva, landing on the rest of Coyote's bark tail which then catches 
on fire. Trying to outrun the fire, Coyote leaves a charred trail behind him 
which is said can still be seen today. Since this story has no illustrations 
teachers can adapt the story to tell to students in the 2nd-4th grades. 
Contains a glossary and pronunciation guide. 



Troughton, Joanna. Who Will be the Sun? A North American Indian Folk Tale. 
New York: Bedrick/Blackie, 1985. 

This beautifully illustrated children's book tells how the Chief of 
Indians chooses the right animal to be the sun. After a number of animals 
attempt and fail, Coyote decides he wants to try to be the sun. As the 
trickster, he gossips too much about the animals he spies on and is too hot- 
headed to be the sun. Failing miserably, jealous Coyote tries to keep Lynx 
from being the sun. Joanna Troughton retells this Kutenai myth very 
simply yet powerfully with brightly colored illustrations that match the text 
beautifully. Children will love reading this book as well as hearing it told. 



ERIC 



17 

62 



Hi'iaka the Hero 



by Noenoe Moan 



for 
LIS 685 
Professor Therese Bissen Bard 
Fall 1993 



Moan 

Introduction 

The legend of Hi'iakaikapoliopele is one of the great epics in the literature 
of Hawai'i. This essay will detail the versions of the myth that have so far been 
available and examine some of the reasons why this particular cycle is important. 
The introductory essay is followed by a translation of one of the stories in the 
cycle that demonstrates the heroic qualities of the young woman, Hi'iaka. It is 
best, perhaps, to begin with an outline of the myth. 

The Story of Hi'iaka 

Hi'iaka is the youngest sister of the volcano goddess, Pele. Pele is not born 
in Hawai'i, but in a faraway land, "Kahiki." After an argument with her older 
sister Namakaokaha'i, Pele leaves her birth land with her younger sisters, all of 
whom are named Hi'iaka, and some of her brothers. Pele carries her youngesst 
sister, who is in the form of an egg, close to her during this journey. After they 
arrive in Hawai'i, her sister is bom in human form from the egg, and named 
"Hi'iaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele," Hi'iaka-in-the-heart-of-Pele. 

Few stories exist about Hi'iaka's childhood. One tells that when Hi'iaka is 
an infant, Pele, wanting to go fishing, leaves the baby on the hot sands beneath the 
blazing sun. Perceiving the danger Hi'iaka is in, a shoreline plant spreads itself 
over the child, protecting her from the life -threatening rays of the sun. The plant 
is now called pa'uohi'iaka, or "Hi'iaka's skirt" (Pukui and Elbert 1986, 321). 

When next we hear of Hi'iaka, she is already a young woman. In this epic 
tale she has a dear friend, Nanahuki, with whom she surfs and dances hula at 
Ha'ena, on the eastern side of Hawai'i, the easternmost island. Nanahuki is a 
lovely young woman who lives at the shore, and who frequently gathers lehua 
blossoms — red brush flowers that mark the first cycle of regeneration following 
volcanic activity and destruction — from the grove called Hopoe. Hi'iaka loves 



ERIC 



l 

S3 



Moan 



both the fullness of the young girl and the round red blossoms of the lehua grove 
so much that she renames her friend "Hopoe." 

While they are at Ha'ena dancing, the volcano lies dormant. Pele, having 
decided to go to sleep for a long time, sends for her younger sister and, upon her 
arrival, instructs Hi'iaka not to wake her up until necessary. In her sleep Pele 
hears the enticing beat of hula drums; she follows the rhythmic pulse all the way 
from the island of Hawai'i to the island of Kaua'i, to an area also called Ha'ena, 
on the northwest side of the westernmost of the large islands. 

There Pele assumes the form of a beautiful young woman, and meets 
Lohi'au, the handsome young king of Kaua'i. It is Lohi'au who dances the hula 
and plays the drum that lures her to Kaua'i. They fall in love and for three days 
and nights they lie together in his house. At last, Pele must return home to the 
volcano. She leaves Lohi'au with a promise that she will send someone to bring 
him to her, and places a taboo upon his body. Before she leaves, she battles two 
mo 'o women (demons who appear as beautiful young women) who also desire 
Lohi'au. 

Pele returns to the caldera, awakens, and asks which of her sisters will go 
to Kaua'i to fetch her lover. All the elder Hi'iaka sisters know of Pele's 
impatience and fear her wrath, and so they all decline to go, all save 
Hi'iakaikapoliopele, who is surfing and dancing at Ha'ena with her beloved friend 
Hopoe. 

When she returns to the crater at Kilauea, Hi'iaka agrees to bring Lohi'au 
to Pele, but only under certain conditions: first, that she be granted supernatural 
powers to aid her on the long and dangerous journey, and second, that Pele 
promise not to harm her friend Hopoe or destroy the lehua grove. Pele agrees to 
these conditions, and gives Hi'iaka a magical skirt which affords her many great 
powers. 

2 6(> 



Moan 



Pele also offers Hi'iaka the supernatural young woman Pa'uopala'a (Skirt- 
of-fern) as a companion. The two of them set out for Kaua'i. On their first day of 
travel, they meet up with another young woman named Wahine'oma'o (Green 
Woman), who joins them on their errand for Pele. 

Along the way, the young women encounter evil spirits, or mo'o, who are 
sometimes described as giant lizards, other times as women, or as part of the 
natural landscape, and once even as a whirlwind. Hi'iaka outwits and outfights the 
mo'o whenever she comes across them. She also kills evil sharks, outsmarts and 
humiliates a would-be rapist, and heals many afflicted people throughout the 
islands. 

Upon her arrival in Kaua'i, Hi'iaka discovers that Lohi'au has died, and the 
mo 'o women have taken both his body and his spirit and hidden them on the tall 
cliff that is their home. Hi'iaka battles the two mo'o with her magic skirt, and 
retrieves Lohi'au's physical body and his spirit body. Hi'iaka then performs 
healing rituals to reunite the two, restoring the life of the young king. She then 
sets herself to the task of nursing him back to health in order that he might 
survive the rugged journey back to Pele on the Big Island of Hawai'i. The healing 
and recuperation take much longer than expected. In the meantime, Pele, not 
realizing what has happened, suspects that Hi'iaka has taken Lohi'au for herself. 
Consumed by jealousy, the caldera rages; Pele erupts, sending a river of fire to 
destroy the lehua forest, and envelop the girl Hopoe, who is turned to stone. 

Lohi'au finally recovers and they set out for Hawai'i. When they arrive on 
the island of O'ahu, Hi'iaka stands on a hilltop and, seeing smoke and fire rising 
from Ha'ena, on Hawai'i, she knows that her beloved Hopoe and the cherished 
ieAua-blossomed grove have been destroyed by her impatient ana jealous sister, 
Pele. After an overnight stay in Honolulu that includes a game of kilu, a form of 
competition that awards the victor the romantic partner of his or her choice, 



Moan 



Hi'iaka leads Lohi'au back to the volcano. There, at the edge of the caldera, 
Hi'iaka, overcome with anger at the loss of Hopoe, defiantly embraces Pele's 
lover. Her suspicions confirmed, Pele pulls Lohi'au out of her sister's arms and 
into her own where he suffers a second death in the depths of her molten crater. 
The tragic circumstances force Hi'iaka out of her own despair and she confides in 
her sister, telling Pele about Lohi'au 's previous death. Pele listens and relents 
when she discovers that their delay allowed him to recover and make the long 
journey back to her. Hi'iaka is able to again restore Lohi'au's life. Hopoe, 
however, is never restored. At the end of the cycle, Hi'iaka, unable to bear the 
loss of her friend or the sight of the lava-covered ruins of the lehua grove, 
returns to live with Lohi'au on the distant island of Kaua'i. 

The Importance of the Myth 

The story of Hi'iaka is important to us because she is an excellent role 
model for young women in that she embodies traditional Hawaiian values of 
cooperation and community, as well as strength and intelligence. Unlike the lone 
hero of Western lore, she is a young woman who goes on a hero's odyssey 
accompanied by other young women. She is never the helpless damsel in distress; 
no handsome prince or male hero of any stature ever appears to rescue either 
Hi'iaka or her companions. On the contrary, the women themselves fight off ill- 
intentioned men and rescue the able-bodied king from demons and natural 
disasters, sometimes calling to various gods for assistance, but mainly using the 
supernatural female powers of the lightning skirt and the skirt-of-fern. Hi'iaka is 
portrayed as courageous, powerful, smart, and loving to her sister and to her 
friends. 

Mililani Trask has pointed out that Hi'iaka's handling of difficult situations 
with courage and intelligence taught her an alternative view of womanhood: a 



Moan 



view from which it is possible to "[kiss] Sleeping Beauty goodbye," i.e., to 
effectively reject the idea of femininity as mere passivity (Trask 1986). In other 
words, the legend of Hi'iaka provides a much-needed counterpoint to the 
European fairy tales in which pretty young princesses invariably wait to be 
rescued, their fates entirely dependent upon male nobility and honor. Perhaps not 
coincidentally, Ms. Trask has grown up to be an attorney and a leader of the 
Hawaiian sovereignty movement. 

The Legend in Hawaiian 

We know of this epic because in the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
century, the Hawaiians had an extremely high literacy rate. Nearly everyone 
could read and write in Hawaiian. According to linguist and professor William 
Wilson, "It is often claimed that Hawai'i had the distinction of having the most 
literate citizenry of any nation in the world in the 1800s" (Wilson 1991). At the 
same time, epidemics, one after another, were decimating the native population. 
The Hawaiians had no immunities to the newly-introduced infectious diseases. It 
was apparent to the Hawaiian people of the day that if they did not write down 
their legends, histories, songs, chants, and genealogies, they would soon be lost 
forever. And so they began to record their traditions, using the newly- acquired 
tools of writing and the printing press to ensure that their experience and wisdom 
would be preserved. In the hundred years between 1840 and 1940, Hawaiian 
literature flourished in daily and weekly newspapers, a medium accessible to all. 

Five traditional Hawaiian language versions of the Hi'iaka cycle appeared 
in five different newspapers: Ka Hoku o ka Pakipika, December 26, 1861 to July 

17, 1862, by Moses Manu; Ka Leo oka Lahui, January 5 to July 12, 1893, by 
John E. Bush and S. Pa'aluhi; Ka Na'i Aupuni, December 1, 1905 to November 

30, 1906, by Ho'oulumahiehie (which might be a pseudonym for 



ERIC 



5 

69 



Moan 

Hawilo); Ku 'oko 'a Home Rula, January 1 0, 1 908 to January 20, 1 9 1 1 , by Joseph 
M. Poepoe; and Ka Hoku o Hawai'i, September 18, 1924 to July 17, 1928. The 
complete versions range from approximately 100 to 400 pages long. 

Translations and Commentaries 

In addition to the Hawaiian language versions, a few English versions exist. 
The first was written by Nathaniel Emerson, the son of early missionaries. It is 
titled Pele and Hi'iaka . Emerson drew heavily upon the Hawaiian newspapers and 
interviewed Hawaiians who, having grown up in a predominantly oral culture, 
had committed the cycle to memory. His Pele and Hi'iaka is therefore a synthesis 
of the newspaper serials and the oral tradition. The complexity of the epic is 
sacrificed in Emerson's attempt to condense the cycle to make it accessible to the 
European mind. 

Later, in 1940, Martha Beckwith published Hawaiian Mythology in which 
she details the work of Emerson and other prominent scholars and compilers of 
Hawaiian literature including Abraham Fornander, W. D. Westervelt, and David 
Male. The volume which she produced does not attempt an actual retelling of the 
cycle, but is a reference work that points to the sources where it can be found. 
Moreover, her work emphasizes an analysis of Hawaiian myth that encourages the 
reader to engage in a comparative study of the many versions. 

Subsequently, Mary Kawena Pukui, a native speaker of Hawaiian, was 
employed for many years by the Bishop Museum in Honolulu as a translator and 
scholar of Hawaiian traditions. She was raised on the Big Island, Hawai'i (volcano 
country), among a Hawaiian population that still includes people who worship the 
goddess Pele. Pukui translated many stories from the Hawaiian newspapers, 
including quite a bit of the Hi'iaka cycle. Some of her work went into the chapter 
of the book Pikoi called "How Hawai'i Was Made Safe." Other stories are 

ERIC 70 



Moan 



included in Sites ofO'ahu . Most of her translations, however, remain 
unpublished in the Bishop Museum's Hawaiian Ethnological Notes. 

After Pukui, the only major work to be published on Hi'iaka has been Pua 
Kanahele's Ka Honua Ola. Kanahele, also of volcano country, is a kumu hula 
(hula master) in a halau (hula school) dedicated to Pele. Her work is informed in 
a unique way by her active practice of the hula, a religious practice in which 
Hi'iaka is the major deity. Kanahele, fluent in Hawaiian, and the recipient of 
knowledge passed on to her through the oral tradition, through chant and song, is 
now the most authoritative source in print. 
Conclusion 

Through time and the filters of the American world view, the legend has 
changed: in the original Hawaiian it was "Ka Mo'olelo o Hi'iakaikapoliopele," 
i.e., "The Legend of Hi'iakaikapoliopele." Then, for Emerson, it became the 
story of Pele and Hi'iaka, with Pele's name taking prominence. The newest 
published version is called simply Pele (Varez 1991). This shift away from 
Hi'iaka and towards the volcano goddess herself signals an emphasis on an 
unreasonable, jealous, unpredictable, destructive female force. If the heroic 
force, the healing force, the force which brings new life and growth, i.e., Hi'iaka, 
should once again take a more prominent role, we would have a more Hawaiian, 
and a more balanced, view of women in myth and in the world today. 

The story which follows tells of one of Hi'iaka's heroic deeds.. It includes a 
healing episode as well as a battle against an evil being. I hope it will inspire 
further reading of this Hawaiian myth and encourage others to retell some of the 
old legends of Hawaii and elsewhere. 



ERIC 



7 

71 



Moan 



Pohakuloa 
an adventure from 
The Legend of Hi'iakaikapoliopele 

Based on a story in "The Legend of Hi'iakaikapoliopele" published in 
Ku 'oko'a Home Rula, October, 1910. Translation by the author of the essay. 

Hi 'iaka and her companions, Wahine 'oma 'o and Lohi 'au, are on then way 
back from Kaua 'i to Hawai 'i. She has instructed her companions to remain on the 
canoe while she visits the people of Kilavea, on the northern coast of O 'ahu. 

Hi'iaka walked along the shore until she saw a group of women, men and 
children gathered together, adorned with 'ilima leis. Usually, people gathered at 
that spot to dive into an oceanwater swimming pool there. But no one was diving 
or swimming because a huge rock had mysteriously appeared in the pool, and 
they didn't know whether or not it was safe to swim or dive. Fearful of entering 
the pool, they were just relaxing at the edge of it. 

The people saw Hi'iaka, a most beautiful young woman, approaching. It 
was hot and humid that day on the cape and so Hi'iaka's cheeks were red as if a 
lehva lei were draped on either side of her lovely face. 

"Oh, look. The most beautiful young woman is coming. The red of her 
cheeks is like the red glow of the sunset!" 

Hi'iaka said to them, "Greetings to you, the native people of Keawa'ula." 



9 

ERJC 



8 

72 



Moan 



The people replied, "Aloha. We thought we saw the canoe of a stranger. 
We saw a rainbow that appeared right above the canoe, and so we thought, 'it 
must be the canoe of an ali'i. ' Who is the ali'i on the canoe?" 1 

"He is Lohi'au, the king of all of Kaua'i. What are all of you doing 
gathered here?" 

"Oh! " they said, "We come here to go swimming. But today, we saw that 
huge rock standing in our swimming pool." 

Just then, a girl approached from the other direction, also draped in an 
'ilima lei, and dove straight into the swimming pool. She hadn't noticed the rock 
that had mysteriously appeared there. She had come right from the village, and 
dove into the pool without looking down. 

When she dove in, she hit the rock, causing her breath to leave her body 
and disappear into the sea. When Hi'iaka saw what had happened, she dove 
immediately after the girl and found her body. She swam out from the pool and 
then went ashore with her bundle at the nearby bay at Makua. 

The people shouted and ran to where Hi'iaka came ashore with the girl's 
body. When Hi'iaka reached the shore, she laid the body down and sang this 
chant: 

Oh flower of the 'ilima 

Who brings forth life 

Oh Makua in the swells of the sea 

Who gives us life 

Live, child, by the spray of the sea, 
Live, by the life-giving water of Kane. 



1 Ali'i means royalty or nobility; in this case, perhaps, "king." 

9 

73 



Moan 



When Hi'iaka finished chanting, she stood and gathered up her magical 
skirt. 2 She struck it down on the right side and then on the left side of Jie girl's 
body. The girl began to breathe again. 

Hi'iaka then spoke to the people, "Her breath has been restored. She is 
alive. She has wounds, however, and you must treat them with the herbs of the 
mountains. She will be well soon as long as you do this. 

"I have one more task to do. I must remove that evil rock standing in your 
swimming pool." 

"How are you going to get that immense rock out of there?" the people 
wondered. 

"Why shouldn't I be able to remove it? When it has been moved away from 
the girl, she will not be weak any longer. One of you should take her to the house 
now, and I will go and get rid of the 'mote in your eye.' 3 

"I want to tell you: this is the most insolent being, this rock who climbed 
up here. It is a troublemaker. And it is very strong. Its foundation rests upon the 
sea floor, but when I sap its strength, it will fly through the air and land in 
Waialua, where it will remain forever. 

"I tell you," Hi'iaka continued, "the name of this rock is Pohakuloa (Tall 
Rock). It is a native of these seas. It is a supernatural fish, as well as a rock. It is a 
canoe-smashing being, and a human-killing being, as well. It is alive, and because 
of its contempt for the family of this girl, we know that if it is not removed from 
the swimming pool it will be an evil, destructive force there." 

Hi'iaka rose and strode toward the swimming pool, and the people followed 
behind her. She stood by the edge of the swimming pool and spoke to the people. 



ERIC 



2At the beginning of the cycle the magical skirt is described as having the power of 
lightning, i.e., electricity. 

^"Pulakaumaka" is literally a mote in one's eye, but figuratively, an obsession, either 
good or bad. In this case, it's the problem the people cannot stop thinking about. 



10 



74 



Moan 

"This is the swimming pool called Kilauea; it is the companion of Kilauea on 
Kaua'i. The third Kilauea is on the island of Hawai'i — in the bosom of Kane. 4 

"Watch, and you'll see the sea rise in the middle like a waterspout, and then 
the foam will fly up over Kulaokala. You might see a shape that looks like a fish, 
and then you'll see the rock fly over to Waialua, just as I said."* 

She then jumped into the pool and disappeared. The water began to rise. 
The ocean became choppy, the waves on the dark sea crested and broke, white 
coral appeared on shore, and the thunderous crashing of waves roared upon the 
cape. 

The people thought the beautiful stranger was dead. They stood, puzzled, in 
deep regret, believing that Hi'iaka could not have survived. 

But then they saw, out in the middle of the sea, the water rising and 
standing straight up. It rose right up into the air, and entered a dark cloud. The 
sea foam itself seemed to fly over Kulaokala. 

Then the people knew that the amazing woman must still be alive, since 
everything was happening just as she had said. 

A rumbling like an earthquake shook the ground, there was a roaring 
sound, and a rising of the water in the pool of Kilauea. Not long afterward, a 
huge shape appeared from inside, and flew, tumbling, upward into the air. 

Indeed, a terrible battle had been waged between Hi'iaka and the rock. 
When they had fought out in the middle of the sea, the supernatural fish had died. 
Hi'iaka returned to the swimming pool, and when she got there, she thrust her 
hand beneath the rock body of the fish and flung it into air above. As the rock 
flew, Hi'iaka got up and went on shore where the people were crowded. 



4 Kilauea is the name of the crater where the volcano goddess Pele lives. 
5 Kulaokala is now called Kuaokala. 




1 1 



75 



Moan 



The people stared at it: never had they seen anything so big. It was so 
enormous that it blocked out the sun. They began to shout wildly, "Do you see 
that big thing — it's flying in the air! It's the rock, and it's flying to Ka'ena!" 

The rock flew and landed at the section of Waialua near Ka'ena. This is the 
same rock that was always seen by travelers on the train to that area. The people 
of Waialua and Wai'anae still call it Pohakuloa. 



ERIC 



12 76 



Moan 



Reference List 

Beckwith, Martha. 1989. Hawaiian mythology. Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press. 

Emerson, Nathaniel B. 1993. Pele and Hiiaka: a myth from Hawaii. Honolulu: Ai 
Pohaku Press. 

Kanahele, Pualani Kanaka'ole, and Duke Kalani Wise. 1 989. Ka honua ola (The 
living earth): an introduction to Pele and Hi'iaka with annotated 
bibhography. Honolulu: University of Hawaii at Manoa Center for 
Hawaiian Studies. 

Pukui, Mary Kawena. 1949. Pikoi and other legends of the island of Hawaii. 
Retold by Caroline Curtis. Honolulu: Kamehameha Schools Press. 

Pukui, Mary Kawena, and Samuel H. Elbert. 1986. Hawaiian dictionary. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Trask, Mililani. 1988. The role of women in Hawai'i's legends and stories. In 

Literature and Hawai'i's children: imagination, a bridge to magic realms in 
the humanities, 1986 proceedings, ed. Steven Curry and Christina 
Bacchilega. Honolulu: Literature and Hawai'i's Children, pp. 63-69. 

Varez, Dietrich, and Pua Kanaka'ole Kanahele. 1991. Pele, the fire goddess. 
Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press. 

Wilson, William. 1991. Hawaiian language making a comeback. Ka Wai Ola o 
OH A, February. 



Moan 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Beckwith, Martha. Hawaiian Mythology. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 
1989. 

Beckwith's book is an encyclopedic survey of Hawaiian myth that 
summarizes Emerson's Pele and Hi'iaka and works by Fornander, Malo, 
Westervelt, Rice and others. Aside from the Emerson summary, there is 
very little on Hi'iaka. Beckwith does, however, provide a comparison of 
the various names of the Hi'iaka sisters. It includes a bibliography and an 
index. This is an excellent work for background information as well as for 
reference. 

Diab, Elizabeth. "Hawaii." In The Feminist Companion to Mythology, ed. 
Carolyne Larrington. London: Pandora Press, 1992. pp. 305-329. 

Diab gives a rather terse summary of Emerson, along with a modern 
interpretation of the value of female mythological characters such as 
Hi'iaka and Pele. She identifies Hi'iaka as "firmly in the realms of 
recognizable fairy-tale," despite recognizing the length of the epic and the 
qualities of Hi'iaka's character. This is in contrast to my own view of 
Hi'iaka as hero rather than fairy princess; after all, fairy tale princesses 
hardly go out to slay dragons or other evil beings themselves, as does 
Hi'iaka. Nevertheless, teachers and librarians will find her unique 
viewpoint thought-provoking. 

Emerson, Nathaniel B. Pele and Hiiaka: A Myth from Hawaii. Honolulu: Ai 
Pohaku Press, 1993. 

This is the only comprehensive rendering of the myth. Emerson 
synthesized several versions from the Hawaiian newspapers, and along with 
interviews of knowledgeable Hawaiians, created the mostly widely -used 
source of information. Emerson's version is not, however, a full 
translation of any of the several accounts published in the Hawaiian 
newspapers. Hi'iaka's character is well developed; Emerson successfully 
conveys her various emotional trials along with her heroic adventures. 
Only songs and chants are included in his index, which makes it difficult to 



14 

78 



■V 



Moan 



locate particular events or people. Originally published in 1915, it is once 
again in print. 

Frierson, Pamela. The Burning Island: A Journey Through Myth and History in 
Volcano Country, Hawai'L San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1991. 

This idiosyncratic volume examines the history, literature, mythology, 
and current politics associated with the volcanoes on the Big Island of 
Hawai'i. Frierson summarizes Emerson, choosing to focus on Hi'iaka as a 
healer and patron goddess of the hula. This book is useful and enjoyable, 
particularly in its placement of the myth at the contemporary active 
volcano. 

Kanahele, Pualani Kanaka' ole, and Duke Kalani Wise. Ka Honua Ola (The 
Living Earth): an Introduction to Pele and Hi'iaka with Annotated 
Bibliography. Honolulu: University of Hawaii at Manoa Center for 
Hawaiian Studies, 1989. 

Although it is far from exhaustive, this is the most important book to 
be published concerning Pele and Hi'iaka since Emerson. Kanahele 
describes Hi'iaka's character (one of many deities discussed) as seen 
through song, chant, and hula. In addition to Emerson, Kanahele uses 
original Hawaiian language newspaper sources and the manuscript 
collections at Bishop Museum in Honolulu. She also draws from the 
traditional knowledge passed on to her as kumu hula (hula master) of a 
halau (hula school) dedicated to Pele. Kalani Wise contributes a large 
bibliography of sources in both Hawaiian and English. Unfortunately, 
neither the text nor the bibliography is indexed. 

Kanahele, Pualani Kanaka'ole. "Kllauea: Creation and Procreation." Pleiades 
(1990): 61-64. 

This article is a meditation upon Pele and Hi'iaka as the volcano and 
the life that grows upon it, respectively. Kanahele links Hi'iaka to the 
renewal of life upon fresh lava flows (which are Pele) and points out that 
Hi'iaka is a physician for people, as well. She explains the relationship 
between the sisters Pele and Hi'iaka as the dual procreative forces of 
nature: destruction and growth. Unlike others who view Pele and Hi'iaka m 
opposition to one another, Kanahele stresses that together the sisters are the 
cooperative force which brings new land and life. Highly recommended as 
the only work to articulate the relationship between the myth and the land. 



9 

:RIC 



1 5 



73 



Moan 

Luomala, Katharine. Voices on the Wind: Polynesian Myths and Chants, rev. ed. 
Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press, 1986. 

Luomala provides a summary of Emerson's version, along with her 
own exceptional translations of several important Hi'iaka chants. She also 
gives an insightful interpretation of Hi'iaka's character—- who is loyal to 
Pele, though finally disobedient out of grief and rage— which is useful for 
background material. 

Nimmo, H. Arlo. The Pele Literature: An Annotated Bibliography of the 

English-Language Literature on Pele, Volcano Goddess of Hawai'i. Bishop 
Museum Bulletin in Anthropology 4. Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press, 
1992. 

As the title indicates, this bibliography concentrates on Pele lore, 
rather than on the Hi'iaka cycle. Nevertheless, it is inclusive of Hi'iaka, and 
among its over 800 entries are many citations that will be helpful to the 
librarian or teacher seeking more than the usual sources of the legend. 

Sterling, Elspeth P. and Catherine C. Summers, comp. Sites ofOahu. Honolulu: 
Bishop Museum Press, 1978. 

Sites ofOahu contains several stories of Hi'iaka's journey taken from 
the Hawaiian newspapers that Emerson did not include in his book. Most of 
them are translated by Mary Kawena Pukui. The index includes place 
names only, so the reader will not find the Hi'iaka stories listed there. 
Some, but not all, can be found in Kalani Wise's bibliography in Ka Honua 
Ola. This is a good source of short tales that can be told to children or used 
to inspire skits. 

Trask, Mililani. "The Role of Women in Hawai'i's Legends and Stories." 

Literature and Hawai'i's Children: Imagination, a Bridge to Magic Realms 
in the Humanities, 1986 Proceedings, ed. Steven Curry and Christina 
Bacchilega. Honolulu: Literature and Hawai'i's Children, 1988. pp. 63-69. 

This is a transcript of a presentation given at a conference on 
children's literature in Hawai'i. Trask relates how she was taught the Pele 
and Hi'iaka legends by her grandmother. She describes how legends were 
used to teach valuable lessons such as caution in unfamiliar situations and 
self-assertion in dealing with abusive relationships. She examines the varied 
aspects of the female principle in nature that are shown in the legend 
through Hi'iaka's and Pele's characters. 



ERIC 



16 b0 



> 



Moan 

Westervelt, W. D. Hawaiian Legends of Volcanoes. Rutland, Vermont: Tuttle, 
1963. 

Westervelt translates and abridges the legend. His more literal 
translation is quite different from Emerson's, both in language and content. 
He includes several of Hi'iaka's heroic deeds along with the usual synopsis 
of the beginning and end. This is suitable as background information, and 
can be read to children as well. 



Resources for Children 

Colum, Padraic. Legends of Hawaii. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1987. 

In the early part of this century, Colum, a noted Irish author, was 
invited by the Commission on Myth and Folklore of Hawai'i to retell 
Hawaii's folklore specifically for children. This book includes a short, 
romantic version of the Pele and Hi'iaka legend. The language is more 
typical of the 19th than the 20th century, and so today's children may find 
it difficult to understand. The story concentrates on Pele rather than 
Hi'iaka, but does dwell upon one of Hi'iaka's greatest feats: the restoring of 
life to Lohi'au. Children will find this version exciting only if it is read to 
them by a skilled teacher or librarian. 

Kelly, Marion. Pele and Hi'iaka Visit the Sites atKe'e, Ha 'ena, Island ofKaua 'i. 
Honolulu, Bishop Museum Press, 1984. 

This little book is a synopsis of Emerson's version of the Hi'iaka 
legend, along with brief descriptions of the places on Kaua'i where Lohi'au 
lived and performed hula. The narrative includes a tracing of Hi'iaka's 
character development from obedient younger sister to assertive and 
defiant young woman. This is appropriate both for background 
information and as a version which can be read to (or by) children or 
teenagers. It includes questions at the end that can be used to prompt 
discussion. 



ERIC 



17 81 



Moan 

Pukui, Mary Kawena. "How Hawaii Was Made Safe/ In Pikoi and Other Legends 
of the Island of Hawaii. Retold by Caroline Curtis. Honolulu: 
Kamehameha Schools Press, 1949. 

"How Hawai'i Was Made Safe" is a chapter of Hi'iaka's heroic 
exploits in an outstanding collection of Hawaiian tales for children. In it, 
Hi'iaka's story is retold, devoid of all references to Pele's romance with 
Lohi'au. Instead, it concentrates on Hi'iaka's determination to destroy the 
evil spirits and monsters (mo'o) on the island of Hawai'i. It is a real loss to 
children that it is now out of print. Pukui's tale would be an ideal 
companion story to Varez and Kanahele's Pele. 

Varez, Dietrich, and Pua Kanaka' ole Kanahele. Pele, the Fire Goddess. 
Honolulu: Bishop Museum Press, 1991. 

Pele, the Fire Goddess is a condensed version of the legend designed 
especially for children. It is well-written and beautifully illustrated with 
woodcuts by the author, Dietrich Varez. Although it contains only two of 
Hi'iaka's heroic feats, it is by far the most appealing book now available to 
children. 



18 82 



Kahalaopuna, the Rainbow 
Maiden of Manoa Valley 



LEI TAN 



83 



Tan 



Introduction 



Manoa Valley is located in the Koolau mountain range of Oahu 
where it is always cool and fresh. The wind passes through the 
mountains, and the rain falls there frequently. Almost every day of the 
year, the Valley is canopied with rainbows. Manoa Valley is also called 
the Valley of Rainbows. 

Why is it that there is frequent rainfall and an abundance of 
rainbows in Manoa? Aside from the natural causes, Hawaiian lore 
offers a more poetic explanation of the exceptionally kind dealings of 
the elements with Manoa. Hawaiian people believe that their good 
fortune in weather is due to Kahalaopuna, the rainbow maiden, or the 
princess of Manoa. 



The Birth of Kahalaopuna 

There is some disagreement about the birth of Kahalaopuna in 
the tales, but most of the story-tellers agree that Kahalaopuna was 
the daughter of Kahaukani, who signified the Manoa wind, and 
Kauahuahine, who was believed to be the Manoa rain. Kahaukani and 
Kauahuahine were the twin children of the mountain-god Akaaka and 



ERIC 



84 



Tan 

the mountain-goddess Nalehuaakaaka of Manoa Valley. At their birth, 
they were adopted by a chief named Kolowahi and a chieftess named 
Pohakukala, who were cousins of Akaaka. Under the direction of their 
foster-parents, they married at the proper age. 

The marriage of the Wind and Rain of Manoa was said to bring 
to the valley an inheritance of rainbows and showers for which it has 
since been distinguished. The fruit of this union, Kahalaopuna, was of 
such beauty that the radiance emanating from her cast a roseate glow 
in the air around her. With all her beauty, she showed such a spirit of 
humility and obedience to her parents and guardians, and a love for 
all living things, that the staid old gods Kane and Kanaloa themselves 
fell in love with her, and sent the rainbow to play continuously around 
her home as a sign to all people that there dwelt one who was 
especially favored by the gods (Nakuina 1904, 41). 

The natives of the valley usually give her the name of the 
fragrant jandanus flower, the hala, which grows so luxuriantly in 
Puna, Hawaii. Therefore her name, "Ka-hala-o-puna", or "the hala of 
Puna". Sometimes, however, the people call Kahalaopuna 
Kaikawahine Anuenue, or The Rainbow Maiden. The rainbow marks 

2 



ERIC 



65 



Tan 

the continuation of the legendary life of Kahalaopuna. 

The Death and Resurrections of Kahalaopuna 

The tales record that from infancy Kahalaopuna was betrothed 
to Kauhi, the chief of Waikiki, who was distantly related to the shark- 
god. Kauhi, or his parents, knowing that Kahalaopuna's parents had 
given their consent to the engagement, always sent her all manner of 
good things. The acceptance of these favors kept her in continual 
remembrance of her betrothal. Moreover, because both of Kahalaopuna 
and Kauhi were of something more than human descent, she felt 
herself already bound to him by ties too sacred to be broken. 

Sometimes the princess of Manoa was also thought to be tabooed 
by the high priest, as she was a baby brought up in the strictest 
seclusion and seeing the face of no man but her own immediate 
relatives and attendants. For example, in Albert Taylor's "Legend of 
Kahalaopuna" in Under Hawaiian Skies, Kahalaopuna's daily life was 
limited to the hut where she lived and to the woods nearby, and no 
eyes but those of her parents, the priests, and the servants gazed upon 
her (Taylor 1922, 163). 

3 



ERIC 



66 



Tan 

Kauhi, in the tales, was described as having a suspicious and 
jealous nature and as someone who also shared the shark's cruel 
nature. He believed the accusation of the infidelity of Kahalaopuna 
who was disparaged by two ugly men, Keawaawakiihelei and 
Kumauna. He was so enraged that he determined nothing but her 
death would wipe out the disgrace. A popular belief held that Kauhi 
killed Kahalaopuna by beating her several times with a bundle of 
Hala branches. Each time the maiden was restored to life by the owl- 
god Pueo, until the last time when she was rescued by a young chief, 
Mahana. After each restoration, the girl followed Kauhi and chanted a 
song of lament, and begged him to be merciful to the one who had 
never wronged him, even in thought. 

Scholars believe that Kahalaopuna was killed at a different place 
each time. In Hawaiian folklore, every place has a legend associated 
with it. Abraham Fornander's "Legend of Kahalaopuna" in the 
Fornander Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore and David 
Kalakaua's "Kahalaopuna, the Princess of Manoa" in The Legends and 
Myths of Hawaii deserve special mention. They both note the places 
where Kahalaopuna was killed. Both Fornander and Kalakaua 

4 



ERIC 



87 



Tan 

believed that Kahalaopuna was eventually buried by Kauhi under a 
tree at Pohakea 1 (Fornander 1918, 188; Kalakaua 1972, 515) where 
Mahana found her body and carried it to his home. In the home, with 
the help of Mahana's elder brother and two spirit-sisters, the spirit of 
Kahalaopuna returned to the body; thus the girl once more was 
restored to her beautiful form. 

The Test of Kahalaopuna's Spirit 

It is said that Mahana adroitly provoked Kauhi into a wager 
dealing with Kahalaopuna's death. If she was found alive, Kauhi 
would be baked alive. The trial took place in the presence of the king 
and a number of distinguished chiefs. 

The test was also used by the priests and sorcerers of Kauhi's 
family , who believed that Kahalaopuna's spirit had inhabited in the 
body of a living girl. They hope to discover and capture the ghost of 
the murdered maiden with the aid of "spirit catchers" sent by Milu, 
the Hawaiian King of the Underworld. The Hawaiian witch doctors or 

between Ewa and Waianae; one of the resting places of 
Lohiau and Hiiaka on their journey from Kauai to meet Pele. 

5 



ERIC 



68 



Tan 

priests many years ago believed that, in this way, the venturesome 
ghosts could be seized and carried away to the spirit-land, where 
special punishments would be meted out to them (Westervelt 1915, 
89). 

In King Kalakaua version of the story, large and tender leaves of 
the 'ape (a Hawaiian word which means large taro-like plants (Pukui 
and Elbert 1971, 28)) plant were spread upon the ground where 
Kahalaopuna and her attendants were to be seated before the 
tribunal. In the trial, the most powerful method of making a test used 
by the ancient Hawaiians was put into practice. When Kahalaopuna 
entered, she quietly bent and rumpled the leaves under and around 
her. Therefore, she was accepted as a human being because a ghost, 
without the weight of flesh walking upon them, could not make any 
impression. Kauhi and the two slanderers were, therefore, punished to 
death by being baked alive in an oven. 

The Destiny of Kaiialaopuna 

Although in some legends Kahalaopuna was said to become 
Mahana's wife and to live happily everafter, a more popular belief held 

6 



ERIC 



69 



Tan 

that after a few years of happy life with Mahana, Kahalaopuna was 
killed by Kauhi, who turned into a shark after death. The father of the 
maiden heard of her tragic end and became enraged, howling and 
mourning in the valley. The mother wept without ceasing for her 
departed child, causing an almost constant downpour even to this day. 
The two slanderers were transformed into two mountain peaks behind 
Manoa Valley. Whenever a rainbow appears high above the summits 
and peaks of the wind and rain swept mountains, the princess' spirit 
is said to be hovering about the hills. The waterfalls of the valley are 
believed to be her tears. 

The story of Kahalaopuna has been told and enriched through 
each generation of native residents of the valley. Their inspiration 
came from nature: flowers and trees, clouds, the sea, mountains, 
rainbows, waterfall, and other elements of nature. Albert Taylor states 
in his work Under Hawaiian Skies: 

The superstitious dread of the elements in the native 
Hawaiian mind has from olden times to now, created a myriad of 
legendary lore-talk, and to them, the rain, the wind, the 
beautiful rainbow . . . have strange and mystic meanings and 
warnings. 

Thus their imaginative minds associated the wind, the rain 
and the rainbow, which are always to be seen upon the summits 



ER?C 



SO 



Tan 



of the mountains overhanging Manoa valley, with strange 
peoples, princes and princesses, and tales of tragedy and love. 

The legend of the beautiful Princess Kahalaopuna, the 
"tabued" maiden ... is symbolic of the elements which never 
cease clinging and swirling about the summits of the rich 
verdure-clothed mountains. (Taylor 1922, 163). 



Reference List 

Fornander, Abraham. 1918. Legend of Kahalaopuna. In Fornander 
Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore, 2nd v., ed. 
Thomas G. Thrum. Honolulu: Bishop Museum. 

Kalakaua, David. 1972. Kahalaopuna, the Princess of Manoa. In 
The Legends and Myths of Hawaii, ed. R. M. Daggett. 
Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle. 

Nakuina, Emma. 1904. The Valley of Rainbows. In Hawaii, It's 
People, Their Legends. Honolulu: Hawaii Promotion 
Committee. 

Pukui, Mary Kawena, and Samuel H. Elbert. 1971. Hawaiian 
Dictionary. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 

Taylor, Albert. 1922. Under Hawaiian Skies. Honolulu: Advertiser 
Publishing. 

Westervelt, W. 1915. Hawaiian Ghost Testing. In Legends of Gods and 
Ghosts. Boston: Press of Geo. H. Ellis. 



8 



ERIC 



91 



Tan 

Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Beckwith, Martha Warren. Hawaiian Romance of Laieikawai. In US 
Bureau of American Ethnology. Thirty-third Annual Report, 
1911-1912, 285-666. Washington: Government Printing Office, 
1919. 

This is a translation work with an introduction by the 
author. Hawaiian Romance of Laieikawai was originally written 
by a native Hawaiian named Haleole in Hawaiian. Although the 
main part of this work is the story of Laieikawai, the rainbow 
goddess of Paliuli, abstracts from the tales collected by 
Fornander are included. The story of Kahalaopuna, the rainbow 
maiden of Manoa is among these stories, which can be read 
quickly and understood easily. The introduction by the author 
enhances the reader's understanding of the stories from the point 
of view of Polynesian culture. 

Day, Frank R.. The Princess of Manoa and Other Fairy Tales of Old 
Hawaii. Hilo: Petroglyph Press, 1972. 

A collection of Hawaiian folk tales with beautiful 
illustrations enrich the readers' imagination of the stories. Most 
stories are concerned with a certain places in Hawaii, which each 
reflects a characteristic of Hawaiian folklore. Hawaiian legends 
are closely connected to places. The stories are interesting and 
were written in simple and vivid language. 



Tan 

Fornander, Abraham, comp. Fornander Collection of Hawaiian 

Antiquities and Folk-lore, 2nd vol. Honolulu, HI: Bishop Museum 
Press, 1918. 

Fornander's collection of Hawaiian mythology, traditions, 
meles and genealogies is a masterpiece which is composed of 
various Hawaiian folk-tales. Although the Fornander Collection 
is described as folklore, the great part of the traditions that have 
been collected are literature rather than folklore for the stories 
in the collection are deliberate compositions intended for 
cultivated audiences. The work is a valuable source for those who 
want to trace the origin of Hawaiians and who have a special 
interest in Hawaiian literature. The index included in each 
volume is very helpful. 

Kalakaua, David, comp. The Legends and Myths of Hawaii. Tokyo: 
Charles E. Tuttle, 1972. 

By King David Kalakaua of Hawaii, this book of Hawaiian 
myths and legends holds a special place in Pacific literature. The 
work is not only about mythology but also rich in historical 
narrative. It is believed by scholars to have played an important 
ro)l in reviving and preserving Hawaiian culture. The stories are 
lengthy yet absorbing. Illustrations and glossary are included. 

Nakuina, Emma Metcalf. Hawaii, It's People, Their Legends. Honolulu: 
Hawaii Promotion Committee, 1904. 

The work includes two parts: the introduction of the 
Hawaiian people — their origin, customs, culture and social 
structure— and a collection of well-known Hawaiian legends. 
Maps and illustrations from photographs of the real places where 
the legends happened are included. The work has detailed 
information on Hawaiian culture and tradition and is written in 
a readable style. 



10 



9 

ERIC 



93 



Tan 



Skinner, Charles M.. Myths & Legends of our New Possessions and 
Protectorate. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1899. 

A collection of Caribbean and Pacific legends. The stories 
will impress the readers with the striking similarities between 
them due to a paucity of plots. The stories are interesting and 
rich in historical and traditional narrative. Illustrations are 
included. 

Taylor, Albert P. Under Hawaiian Skies. Honolulu: Advertiser 
Publishing, 1922. 

This is a poetic book about the Hawaiian islands. It 
includes Hawaii's history, from it's origin to the early 20th 
century, biography, politics, romance, and adventure. The list of 
rulers of Hawaii and chronological data are very helpful. Pictures 
of Hawaii and some of the important people such as kings and 
queens as well as western pioneers to Hawaii are included. 

Thrum, Thomas. G. Hawaiian Folk Tales. Chicago: McClurg, 1907. 

Intending to gather and preserve Hawaiian folklore, the 
author collected in his work twenty-four Hawaiian legends and 
tales. Some of these are told by native Hawaiians in English 
while others have been translated from Hawaiian into English. 
These legendary folk-tales will also acquaint the readers with 
the history and traditions of the Hawaiian people. The 
illustrations and glossary are helpful. 

Westervelt, W. D., comp. Legends of Cods and Ghosts. Boston: Press of 
Geo. H. Ellis, 1915. 

This book is a collection of legends of the Hawaiian Islands. 
Unlike other collections of stories, each chapter in this book also 
includes the author's introduction to Hawaiian customs. This 
enriches the work with details of local life. The stories are 
interesting, and the language is vivid. Appendix and illustrations 



Tan 

are included. 

. Legends of Old Honolulu. Boston: Press of Geo. H. Ellis, 

1915. 

Stories gathered from the Hawaiian tradition are of special 
interest to those who are curious about Hawaii's original 
inhabitants. This collection of the legends of old Honolulu is an 
interesting and fascinating volume about the folklore of the 
Hawaiian people. Some of the old stories were influenced by 
foreign literature. The sepia illustrations, taken from original 
photographs, add greatly to the charm of the book. 



Traditional Tales 

Buffet, Guy. Kahala, Where the Rainbow Ends. Norfolk Island: Island 
Heritage, 1973. 

A colorful picture book telling the tragic love story of Kahala, 
who was the rainbow maiden of Manoa valley. She was killed seven 
times by Kauhi, to whom she had been promised from the time of 
her birth, and she was saved six times by the owl-god Pueo, who 
was her guardian. The last time she was saved by Mahana and 
married him. After years of a happy married life with Mahana, 
Kahala was killed by Kauhi and could never be restored to life. 
Mahana won and then lost Kahala but found the true meaning of 
trust and love. The story is very touching, and the language is 
simple. 

Day, Frank R., comp. "The Princess of Manoa." In The Princess of Manoa 
and other Fairy Tales of Old Hawaii. Hilo: Petroglyph Press, 
1972. pp. 1-13. 

A sad though beautiful story of Kaha, the daughter of the 
spirit of the rain-clouds and the god of the winds. Kaha was 

12 



ERIC 



95 



Tan 

betrothed to Kauhi, the prince of the sea, but she fell in love with 
a young chief of Manoa named Mahana and married him.. After a 
few years of happy life, she was killed by Kauhi. The language is 
simple but vivid. 

Fornander, Abraham, comp. "Legend of Kahalaopuna." In Fornander 
Collection of Hawaiian Antiquities and Folk-lore. Honolulu, HI: 
Bishop Museum Press, 1918. pp. 188-93. 

A story about Kahalaopuna, who was killed by her affianced 
and restored to life by her parents. Jealousy and contemptuousness 
are set against loyalty and love. The ending is unlike other versions 
of the same story, which end with the sad death of Kahalaopuna. 
The ending of this story is more encouraging: Kahalaopuna refused 
to forgive the killer Kauhi. 

Kalakaua, David, comp. "Kahalaopuna, the Princess of Manoa." In The 
Legends and Myths of Hawaii, ed. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle, 1972. 
pp. 509-22. 

A sad and absorbing story about Kahalaopuna, the daughter 
of wind and rain. She was killed several times by Kauhi, her 
betrothed, and was rescued by an owl-god and a young man who 
later became her husband. Kauhi was punished by being baked 
alive in an oven and turned into a shark. He finally caught up to 
Kahalaopuna and ate her so that she could never be restored to her 
life. The story is lengthy and complicated. 

Nakuina, Emma Metcalf. "The Valley of Rainbows." In Hawaii, It's 
People, Their Legends. Honolulu: Hawaii Promotion Committee, 
1904. pp. 41-45. 

The tragic story of Kahalaopuna, who was so loved by the 
gods that they sent the rainbow to play continuously around her 
home. But Kahalaopuna was killed by her affianced for he had 
believed the evil story about her coined by two mountaineers who 
fell in love with her because of her great beauty but who had no 

13 



Tan 



hope to marry her. The story is absorbing and the language is 
vivid. 

Skinner, Charles M.. "The Resurrections of Kaha." In Myths and Legends 
of Our New Possessions and Protectorate. Philadelphia: J. B. 
Lippincott, 1899. pp. 220-23. 

The granddaughter of the wind and the rain, Kaha was living 
in the valley of Manoa. She was killed five times by Kauhi to whom 
she had been betrothed from infancy, but was saved by an owl-god 
and Mahana, a chief of Manoa who loved her. She married 
Mahana, and the cruel Kauhi was punished to death. This story is 
interesting and unusual in terms of its happy ending which is 
different from most other stories of Kaha, the -rainbow princess of 
x Manoa. 

Westervelt, W. D. "The Owls of Honolulu." In Legends of Old 
Honolulu. Boston: Press of Geo. H. Ellis, 1915. pp. 127-37. 

Legends of the owl-gods of Honolulu, including the story of 
how the owl-god Pueo three times saved the rainbow maiden 
Kahalaopuna when she had been thrice killed and buried by her 
cruel suitor, a chief of Waikiki. In this story, Pueo and 
Kahalaopuna belong to the same family of Manoa Valley. The 
story is short but absorbing. Recommended for young adults. 

. "Hawaiian Ghost Testing." In Legends of Gods and Ghosts. 

Boston: Press of Geo. H. Ellis, 1915. pp. 84-93. 

An absorbing story of the Rainbow Maiden Kahalaopuna. She 
was killed by Kauhi, her fiance. Her spirit, wandered for a while, 
was returned to her body. In a trial to test whether she was a 
ghost, Kahalaopuna proved to be a human being; thus, Kauhi and 
two slanderers were punished by being baked alive in an oven. The 
Hawaiians' belief in ghosts and the way of testing ghosts are 
introduced by the author. These are helpful for understanding the 
story. 

14 



ERIC S7 



Urban Legends of Hawaii 



SANDY PAK 



Pak 



URBAN LEGENDS OF HAWAII 



Sandra F. Pak 
LIS 685 

Dr. Therese Bard 
Fall 1993 



ERiC S'9 



Pak 

Introduction 

Stories of spooks, gruesome or revolting happenings, and the supernatural are 
favorite topics of conversation. These are contemporary stories that most people 
have heard of as "true accounts of real-life experiences." No one knows where these 
stories came from or why they are enjoyed so much, but the most common source is 
usually from "a friend of a friend" and are from a branch of folklore called urban 
legends (Brunvand 1981, 4). 

According to Jan Harold Brunvand, urban tales are "realistic stories 
concerning recent events (or alleged events) with an ironic or supernatural twist." 
Some are reflections of much older motifs set in modern-day settings, but "the 
legends' physical settings are often close by, real, and sometimes renowned for 
other such happenings." Many who tell these stories believe them to be true although 
most of the stories are not substantiated by facts. This, however, does not keep them 
from being circulated (Cohen 1983, 71). 

Hawaii has its own share of urban folklore, and although most of the stories 
are not documented and published, many have become part of our local culture. 
These stories are transmitted by word of mouth by ordinary people in the course of 
everyday conversation which local people refer to as "talking story." Stories of Pele 
as the vanishing hitchhiker, the night marchers, and strange happenings associated 
with local sites such as Morgan's Comer and the Waialae Drive-in Theater make up 
the urban legends which are unique to Hawaii. 

Pele As the Vanishing Hitchhiker and Other Manifestations 

More than any other deity, Pele continues to endure not only in the physical 
manifestation of volcanic activity but in contemporary folklore as well. In Hawaii, 
the vanishing hitchhiker motif is associated with Pele, the goddess of the volcano. 



ERIC 



iuo 



Pak 



Since the 1930's, there have been many accounts and reports of Pele sightings. She 
is sometimes portrayed as a beautiful young maiden with long, black, blonde, or, 
less often, red hair, or as an old woman or hag who is sometimes accompanied by a 
little dog. Oftentimes Pele sightings occur before and during an eruption (Nimmo 
1986, 170). 

Katherine Luomala collected over forty-eight variants of Pele as the vanishing 
hitchhiker in a period of ten years. In a typical account, Pele is seen standing or 
walking on an isolated road. When offered a ride, she accepts and then mysteriously 
disappears. Other variants depict Pele as a vengeful spirit who often destroys the 
homes or stalls the cars of those careless drivers who refused to give her a ride 
(Luomala 1972, 30). That is why people who live on the Big Island say, "Never 
refuse an old lady-she might be Madame Pele" (McBride 1968, 31). More recent 
accounts include Pele asking for a cigarette and lighting it with her hand before 
vanishing (Luomala 1972, 33). 

Another of Pele's manifestations is evident in the lava rocks which carry her 
mana. Those foolish enough to take the shiny lava pieces inadvertently end up 
sending them back to Hawaii (Rohter 1980, 66). Many tales of woe are repeated in 
letters sent with the rocks describing family breakups, unsuccessful business 
ventures, car accidents, and broken hearts (Kane 1987, 51-52). 

Other modem tales associated with Pele include one of a small white dog, 
assumed to be Pele's pet, seen high on the slopes of Mauna Loa where no dog 
could hope to survive. His appearance, some believe, heralds a volcanic eruption 
(Scott 1977, 7). Pele is also depicted as a camera-shy laufiala (weaving material) 
lady who refuses to be photographed. There are stories of stolen film which have 
been nysteriously replaced by iauliala baskets (Knaefler 1991, 49, 77). 



2 

101 



Pak 



The Night Marchers 

Like the legends of Pele, the stories about Hawaii's night marchers are rooted 
in Hawaiian belief and culture. The night marchers or Huaka'ipo are the phantom 
spirits of the dead who walk over long-known paths to welcome a dying relative and 
conduct him/her to the underworld. Meeting up with the night marchers meant 
certain death unless one had a god ancestor or aumakua among the spirit procession 
(Hoyt 1976, 78). 

There are many accounts of night marcher sightings. Helen Hoyt tells of a 
story related to her by an old man from Waianae of a red-haired soldier, a non- 
Hawaiian, included in the deathly procession. Another account of the night 
marchers is the childhood experience of the late Napua Stevens Poire related by Glen 
Grant in his walking storytelling tour: 

"She [Poire] was playing with her friends one evening. She heard 
drums, chanting. She turned to look but some force caught her by the back of 
the neck. It pushed her to the earth and held her face in the dirt. Right by her 
head she heard the sound of marching feet. And she heard drums and chanting 
and one word spoken in Hawaiian. Then she was released" (Wittig-Harby 
1990, 63). 

She got up, ran home, and told her mother who informed her that the one 
word spoken was in her genealogical chant and had saved her life. It was a spirit 
ancestor of 400 or 500 years ago who had protected her. 

John Dominis Holt IV tells of witnessing a rare night marcher event while 
vacationing in the Ka'u district of the Big Island. A procession of about fifty giant 
women instead of the usual male ali'i (ruling chiefs) were seen holding spears and 
clubs, perhaps holding a sacred fertility rite at a nearby heiau (burial ground or 
religious site) (Knaefler 1991, 49) 



3 

102 



Pak 



Waialae Drive-In Theater 

An urban tale unique to Hawaii is an obake (Japanese ghost) tale about the 
faceless ghost of Waialae Drive-in Theater that circulated in 1959 and surfaced again 
in 1982 (Grant 1983, 8). The following is a retelling based on Glen Grant's 
account in the Hawaii Herald: : 

A young girl goes to the bathroom to freshen up her makeup. She sees 
another young woman standing at the mirror combing her long, black hair. 
As the girl approaches the mirror, she catches a reflection of the young 
woman's face-only to discover that she doesn't have a face. The faceless 
woman also has no feet or limbs. 

Sightings of the faceless ghost were followed by a newspaper article wh'ch 
offered some explanation about the haunting. Some claimed the drive-in was haunted 
by the spirits of a nearby cemetery. Although no one could produce an eye witness, 
the rumors persisted. Some suggested that it was a clever hoax while others repeated 
tales told by "a friend of a friend" that the ghost was real (Grant 1983, 9). 

- In 1982, the story of the faceless ghost resurfaced during a radio talk show 
when several callers claimed to have seen the faceless lady. What is unusual about 
this ghost is that faceless ghosts are rare in Western, American, and Polynesian 
folklore, the only close parallel being the Mujina (faceless ghost) from Japanese 
folklore, demonstrating that the Japanese obake have the power to become "multi- 
cultural Island phantoms" (Grant 1983, 9). 

Waialae Drive-in Theater no longer exists. It is now a housing development. 
The faceless ghost that frequented the women's restroom has been seen hanging 
around the Kahala Mall, a nearby shopping complex, and the Kahala Hilton Hotel in 
the area, sometimes as a blonde or a redhead (Knaefler 1991, 48). 



9 

ERIC 



4 

103 



Pak 

Another undocumented local urban tale which circulated over twenty years 
ago is very much like Daniel Cohen's "Southern Fried Rat" and also took place at 
the same theater: 

A teenage couple go to the movies. At the Waialae Drive-In, the girl 
orders fried chicken. As she starts to eat it in the dark, she notices something 
funny about the chicken. "It doesn't taste right," she says but continues 
eating. Then to her horror, she discovers that the chicken is actually a fried 
rat! 



Morgan's Corner and the Pali 

Another site known for its strange happenings is Morgan's Comer situated in 
the Nuuanu Pali area on the island of Oahu. It is a spot with a history of a famous 
murder and hauntings (Wittig-Harby 1990, 54). It is reputed to be the area of 
Kamehameha's victory, where menehunes or mischievous spirits abound, and is 
also the site of a nearby heiau. (ancient Hawaiian temple). This area has great allure 
for teenagers because of the legends associated with it (Rappolt 1983, 25). The 
following is Hawaii's version of the urban legend, "The Boyfriend's Death": 

A teenage couple is parked under a tree in Morgan's Comer. The boy is 
ready for a night of romance, but the girl is scared and wants to leave. No 
amount of coaxing can put her in a romantic mood. When they decide to 
leave, the car won't start, so the young man suggests that the girlfriend stay in 
the car while he goes to get some gas. While he is gone, she is frightened by 
the noises she hears: thumping, scratching, and dripping, but believes the tree 
branches and the rain are causing these sounds. She is so scared that she 
crouches on the floor and stays there till morning comes. The police come to 
get her but warn her not to turn around. She does, however, and sees her 
boyfriend hanging with his feet scraping the roof of the car. 

Another story associated with the Nuuanu Pali area concerns driving over the 
Pali after midnight with pork in your car. However, the consequences for carrying 



ERIC 



5 

104 



Pak 



pork are not gruesome* If one does, the car will stall until the pork is thrown out as 
an offering. Some people believe that the reason for not carrying pork while 
traveling across the Pali is to show Pele that you side with her against her former 
lover, the pig god Kamapua'a (Rohter 1980, 65). This warning extends beyond the 
Pali area to the Saddle Road on the Big Island and to certain parts of Maui where 
similar incidents have been known to occur. 

Conclusion 

The urban legends of Hawaii are genuine folklore, unique stories shaped by 
the process of oral tradition and influenced by the various island cultures present in 
Hawaii, They reflect the unconscious effect of Hawaiian beliefs and the subcultures 
present in the islands. Many of the urban legends of Hawaii have not been 
documented and very few have been published. 

Teachers have an excellent opportunity to hear and collect urban legends from 
their students. Urban legends can be used in the study of folklore. As class projects, 
students can collect and compare local examples of urban legends and compile 
anthologies of typical versions found in their community as well as analyze the ways 
in which they have been localized (Brunvand 1981, 201). When a community 
circulates a story, everyone who participates in the creation, adaptation, and 
dissemination of each retelling becomes a contributor, a storyteller. This allows 
students to see folklore as a "living tradition as it develops and changes"--the way 
urban legends are recycled and made unique (Wolkomir 1992, 174), 



6 

105 



Pak 

Reference List 

Brunvand, Jan Harold. 1981. The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American Urban Legends 
and Their Meanings. New York: W. W. Norton. 

Cohen, Daniel. 1980. The Headless Roommate & Other Tales of Terror. New York: 
M. Evans. 

Grant, Glen. 1983. "In Search of Kappa and Mujina: Japanese Obake in Hawaii". 
Hawaii Herald. 4: 1,8-9. 

Hoyt, Helen P. 1976. The Night Marchers. Hawaii: Island Heritage, 

Kane, Herb Kawanui. 1987. Pele: Goddess of Hawaii's Volcanoes. Captain Cook, 
Hawaii: Kawanui Press. 

Knaefler, Tomi K. 1991. "Haunted Hawaii." Honolulu. 1: 47-49, 77-79. 

Luomala, Katherine. 1972. Disintegration and Regeneration: The Phantom 
Hitchhiker Legend. New York: W. de Gruyter. 

McBride, L. R. 1968. Pele, Volcano Goddess of Hawaii. Hilo: Petroglyph Press. 

Nimmo, H. Arlo. 1986. "Pele, Ancient Goddess of Contemporary Hawaii." Pacific 
Studies.. 9: 121-179. 

Rohter, Sharlene. 1980. "Strange Encounters of Da Kine." Aloha. 12: 63-69. 

Stone, Scott. 1977. Volcano! Norfolk Island, Australia: Island Heritage. 

Wittig-Harby, Bill. 1990. "A Stroll With the Ghosts of Honolulu." The Spirit of 
Aloha. 15:52-56, 63. 

Wolkomir, Richard. 1992. "Modern Myths for Modern Minds." Smithsonian 166- 
176. 



9 

ERIC 



7 106 



Pak 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Apple, Russ, and Peg Apple. "Hawaii's Night Marchers." Honolulu Advertiser, 4 
August 1973, All. 

Discusses some Hawaiian customs, historical views, and the 
procession of the phantom night marchers. Includes the consequences of 
witnessing the ghostly procession and the do's and don't's for surviving the 
event. 

Brunvand, Jan Harold. The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American Urban Legends and 
Their Meanings. New York: W.W.Norton, 1981. 

Presents stories that most people have heard and accepted as true 
accounts of real life experiences. Urban legends, such as the vanishing 
hitchhiker, batter-fried rats, and hanging boyfriends, collected and studied by 
Brunvand are discussed with reference to conference papers and unpublished 
works. Articles and books, as well as student work, are identified in the text. 
A valuable reference source for a broad understanding of various motifs found 
on an international scale. 

Bryan, Jack. '"Phantom Dog' Returns to Mauna Loa Summit." Honolulu Star 
Bulletin, 1 April 1964, Al. 

Reports sightings of a little white dog near the summit of Mauna Loa. 
Reputed to be Pele's phantom dog, Kaupe, the little animal is believed to be 
the herald of impending volcanic eruptions. Article includes photograph of the 
"phantom dog." 

Cohen, Daniel. The Headless Roommate and Other Tales of Terror. New York: M. 
Evans, 1980. 

A collection of terrifying tales that have been passed on by word of 
mouth for generations. Some are updated versions of older tales while others 
are contemporary scary stories. Includes the popular and widespread "The 
Phantom Hitchhiker," sometimes referred to as the vanishing or ghostly 
hitchhiker, and "The Boyfriend's Death," a bonechilling tale of a teenage 
couple on a date. Full of macabre tales, this book is highly appealing to 
teenagers and appropriate for storytelling, especially late at night. 



ERIC 



8 

107 



Pak 



, . Southern Fried Rat & Other Gruesome Tales. New York: Avon Books, 

1983. 

Gruesome stories to be told around the campfire, at slumber parties, or 
in the course of everyday conversation. Includes tales about a poisoned 
second-hand prom gown, a missing bride, a dinosaur that kills on command, 
and a horrible discovery tale entitled "Southern Fried Rat." Stories and 
illustrations are especially appealing to teenagers. Higli-interest urban tales 
provide an excellent source for storytelling. 

Crook, Kathy. The Compilation of a Bibliography on Ghostly Legends of the 

Hawaiian Islands (Along With a Few Contemporary Accounts). [Photocopy]. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii, 1986. 

This bibliography attempts to compile a comprehensive amount of 
material on ghostly Hawaiian legends. Materials are grouped by type of 
references, collections, and individual tales followed by a section of 
contemporary accounts. Has many reference sources which contain Pele as 
the vanishing hitchhiker. Useful for researchers. 

Gotanda, Masae, ed. Hawaii Legends Index. Hawaii State Public Library. 
Department of Education, 1984. 

Three-volumes make up this revised edition. The first volume contains 
a list of books indexed in this set. Each entry is a distinct computer record 
which gives the author, story titles, sources, and call numbers, making it easy 
to locate relevant sources. Excellent for researching Hawaiian legends. 

Grant, Glen. "In Search of Kappa and Mujina: Japanese Obake in Hawaii." Hawaii 
Herald. 4:1,8-9. 

Examines urban and rural ghostlore in contemporary Hawaii and the 
abundance of Japanese obake tales commingling with Hawaiian spirits. The 
faceless ghost of Waialae Drive-In Theater parallels the Mujina spirit in 
Japanese folktales as do the various accounts of forced drownings linked with 
the foul Kappa (supernatural water creature) of Japanese legends. Stories 
provide highly entertaining reading for secondary level students and adults. 



ERIC 



9 

108 



Pak 



"The Ghost Army of Kauai." Paradise of the Pacific. 49 July 1937, 23-24. 

Includes stories of strange happenings in Hawaii. Recaps the story of 
the ghost army of Kauai and describes them as favorable omens of protection. 
Provides a brief but interesting look at the night marchers. 

Kane, Herb Kawanui. Pele: Goddess of Hawaii's Volcanoes. Captain Cook, 

Hawaii: Kawanui Press, 1987. / 

Pele, legendary goddess of Hawaii, is the focus of this Havily 
illustrated source. Mixes fact with the folklore of Pele and tre .es her from 
earliest beginning to contemporary times. Covers myths, legends, traditions, 
romances, and folktales of this fascinating fire goddess. Despite its brevity, it 
contains a wealth of information on Pele in an easy-to-read format. 

Keating, Barbara. Hawaiian Eruptions: The Eruptions ofKilauea andMauna Loa 
Volcanoes. Honolulu: University of Hawaii, 1987. 

Beautiful color photographs of the dual volcanic eruptions of Kilauea 
crater and Mauna Loa during 1984 to 1986 abound in the text of this reference 
source. Also contains useful information about Madame Pele and the legends 
and superstitions that surround her. 

Kittelson, David J. The Hawaiians: An Annotated Bibliography. Honolulu: Social 
Science Research Institute, University of Hawaii, 1985. 

A comprehensive compilation of ancient and modem writings on 
Hawaii, its people, and natural surroundings spanning the time of Western 
discovery in 1778 to 1983. Descriptive annotations refer to books, 
government documents, periodical articles, theses, and type-scripts found in 
the Hamilton Library (Pacific Collection) at the University of Hawaii at Manoa 
and are based on the author's personal examination of each text. Newspapers, 
children's books, and legends found in other bibliographies are excluded. 
Includes a glossary of Hawaiian words. The index is useful for locating 
numbered entries. An excellent reference for accessing relevant materials for 
anyone interested in Hawaii, and of particular benefit for those in Hawaiian 
studies. 



9 

ERIC 



10 

109 



Pak 



Knaefler, Tomi K. "Haunted Hawaii." Honolulu. 1 October 1991, 47-49, 77-79. 

A wide array of spooky stories and ghostlore of contemporary Hawaii 
is presented. Compiled from personal accounts, second-hand reports, and 
some published reports, many of the stories are "hybrids" of various island 
cultures. The faceless, legless obake woman of the Waialae Drive-In Theater, 
Morgan's Comer in Nuuanu Valley, Pele as the vanishing hitchhiker, and the 
night marchers stories provide a fascinating overview of the richness and 
diversity of present-day folklore. Ideal reading material for secondary level 
students and adults. 

Laubach, David C. Introduction to Folklore. Rochelle Park, N. J.: Hayden Book 
Company, 1980. 

Presents folklore and oral history as a multifaceted discipline. Designed 
for teaching folklore to high school students, the reading level is apppropriate, 
and the text is easy to understand. Each chapter ends with a list of student 
projects. Chapter % "Collecting Folklore," discusses various motifs found in 
urban legends, including the ghostly hitchhiker. A worthwhile source for 
teachers of folklore or anyone contemplating teaching a unit on urban legends 
and other types of folklore. 

Luomala, Katherine. Disintegration and Regeneration: The Hawaiian Phantom 
Hitchhiker Legend. New York: W. de Gruyter, 1972. 

Discusses the motif of the phantom hitchhiker, also expressed as the 
vanishing or ghostly hitchhiker, as it applies to Pele in the Hawaiian Islands. 
Includes a section about previous analyses of this legend as told in various 
parts of the world, which provides a basis for comparison. A major section is 
devoted to forty-eight variants of this motif with two major island divisions 
and various subgroupings based on actual narratives of Pele as a vanishing 
hitchhiker. Ends with three new variations of Pele as a vanishing hotel guest 
or visitor. Provides comprehensive, in-depth study of Pele in contemporary 
Hawaii. Excellent reference source. 

McBride, L.R. Pele, Volcano Goddess of Hawaii. Hilo: Petroglyph Press, 1968. 

Traces Pele from her earliest beginnings and tells of the legends that 
surround this living deity. Stories about her sister Hi'iaka, the ohia and lehua 
and Kalapana are presented. References of incidents involving Pele as an 
unseen passenger, a cigarette-lighting hitchhiker, and as a destructive, 
vindictive force of nature are briefly mentioned. Simple colored illustrations 
and glossary enhance the text. Good source for reading and storytelling. 



9 

ERIC 



1 1 

110 



Pak 



Mellen, Kathleen Dickenson. "Pele Alii." Paradise of the Pacific, 1 November 1962, 
91-92. 

Presents a brief overview of Pele as well as the myths and legends 
connected to the goddess of fire. Discusses superstitious beliefs and customs. 
References arc made to the various forms Pele takes and depicts several 
accounts of incidents involving her. Includes a poem. 

Mullins, Joseph G. The Goddess Pele. Honolulu: Aloha Graphics and Sales, 1976. 

A mixture of fact and fiction, this source describes Pele as a powerful 
and very real presence in nature, legends, and contemporary society. 
Recounts Pele's supernatural forms as a young, beautiful maiden, an old hag, 
a ball of fire, and a vanishing hitchhiker. Describes superstitions and beliefs 
about taking a piece of lava as a souvenir. Provides interesting reading for 
both adolescents and adults. 

Nicolini, Mary B. "'Is There a FOAF in Your Future?' Urban Folk Legends in 
Room 1 12." English Journal 78 (December 1989): 81-84. 

Meant for a teacher audience, a unit on Beowulf and other British epics 
and ballads is preceded with the study of modem urban legends. Using a local 
and nationally known legend and other urban folklore, high school students 
are led to examine various versions of the same legend. Practical ideas shared 
from a FOAF (friend of a friend) can be applied to studying other types of 
urban legends. 

Nimmo, H. Arlo. The Pele Literature: An Annotated Bibliography of the English- 
Language Literature on Pele, Volcano Goddess of Hawaii. Honolulu: Bishop 
Museum Press, 1992. 

Intended for anyone with an interest in Pele. An extensive bibliography 
containing over 800 annotated citations of chants, etiological tales, legends, 
children's stories, and contemporary references. Items are indexed by entry 
numbers. Exception is made to unindexed microforms, magazines and 
newspapers published by the tourist industry. Includes a detailed index for 
ease in searching relevant sources. An excellent reference source for both 
teachers and librarians. 



9 

ERJC 



Pak 



. "Pele, Ancient Goddess of Contemporary Hawaii." Pacific Studies 9 

(March 1986): 121-179. 

Presents a comprehensive look at the fire goddess, Pele. Her 
manifestations as a beautiful young woman or old hag, the rituals and 
ceremonies surrounding this ever-changing entity, and her nontraditional roles 
are discussed in detail. Contains excellent information about Pele as the 
vanishing hitchhiker. Includes a useful bibliography for the researcher. 

Nowaki, Junko, Helen Rogers, and Kenneth R. Herrick. The Hawaii Island 

Newspaper Index. Hilo, Hawaii: Edwin H. Mookini Library. University of 
Hawaii at Hilo, 1984. 

Indexes news of the island of Hawaii printed in the Hawaii Tribune 
Herald, Honolulu Advertiser, Honolulu Star Bulletin, and some entries from 
West Hawaii Today. Entries are modeled after the Library of Congress 
Subject Headings. A good source for more contemporary accounts of the fire 
goddess, Pele. 

Office of Library Services. Department of Education. Index to the Honolulu 
Advertiser and Honolulu Star Bulletin. Honolulu: State of Hawaii, 1929. 

Indexes articles printed in the Honolulu Advertiser and Honolulu Star 
Bulletin alphabetically according to bold-faced subject headings. Entries are 
listed by dates under each subject heading in small but readable print. 
Provides more contemporary accounts of Pele for researchers interested in 
modern tales about Pele. 

Okimoto, Elaine A., Toyo Nakamura, and Joan Hori. The Hawaii Herald Index. 
Honolulu: The Hawaii Herald, 1988. 

Indexes articles printed in The Hawaii Herald. Contains a usage guide, 
word-by-word indexing, and five appendices. Useful for those interested in 
more contemporary accounts of Hawaiian legends. Includes stories by Glen 
Grant, local historian and storyteller. Useful subject headings include ghost, 
supernatural powers, and superstitions. 



ERIC 



13 

112 



Pak 



Otaguro, Janice. "Islander of the Year: Pele." Honolulu, January 1991, 42-47, 52- 



Discusses many aspects surrounding Pele. Includes the superstitions 
attributed to her and several accounts of Pele sightings as the old hag or 
beautiful young woman with a white dog. Also covers volcanic activity, Pele 
worshippers, geothermal issues, and various islander views of the volcano 
goddess. Provides an indepth, multidimensional look of the fire goddess for 
secondary level students. 

Renter, Sharlene. "Strange Encounters of Da Kine." Aloha, May/June 1980, 63-69. 

Superstitious customs and beliefs and supernatural stories of modern 
Hawaii are discussed. Includes healing stones, carrying pork over the Pali 
(an area on the windward side of the island of Oahu), the shark god, night 
marchers, menehunes, and several stories about Pele. Provides a fascinating 
overview of contemporary folkore. Interesting reading material for secondary 
students and adults. 

Steinfirst, Susan. Folklore and Folklife. New York: Garland Publishing, 1992. 

Presents a short explanation of urban legends under "Legends-Urban 
Narratives." Lists relevant annotated sources for a look at contemporary urban 
legends for general information. Provides a good starting point for anyone 
researching urban legends. 

Stone, Margaret. Supernatural Hawaii. Honolulu: Aloha Graphics & Sales, 1992. 

Hawaiian customs, beliefs, and practices are the focus of this 
informative source. Includes religion, rituals, and superstitions and a section 
of stories referred to as "personal heresay." A section entitled "Gods of 
Hawaii" contains an article on Pele with a brief description and background of 
her as the vanishing hitchhiker. This source provides worthwhile information 
for a good overview of the religious and supernatural aspects of the Hawaiian 
culture. 

Stone, Scott C. S. Volcano!! Norfolk Island, Australia: Island Heritage, 1977. 

Heavily illustrated throughout with beautiful color and black and white 
photographs of the volcanoes of Hawaii. Allusions to Pele are interspersed in 
the text of this informative source. The first and last chapters give coverage to 
the goddess Pele and tell of a strange encounter with the goddess at the 
Volcano House located on the island of Hawaii. 



ERIC 



14 

113 



Pak 



Taylor, Lois. "Hawaiian Spook Stories." Honolulu Star Bulletin, 31 October 1972, 
Fl. 

Discusses Hawaii's spook stories from Ruby Johnson and the 
Honolulu Police Department. Includes stories of the night marchers, a Big 
Island ghost dog pack, a ghostly strangler, and the ghost dog of Poipu. 
Mentions the faceless long-haired lady who haunted the women's restroom of 
the Waialae Drive-in Theater and the kimono-clad ghost waitress of the Wako 
Restaurant. 

Wittig-Harby, Bill. "A Stroll With the Ghosts of Honolulu." The Spirit of Aloha, 1 
October 1990, 52-56, 63. 

Discusses Glen Grant's storytelling tours and presents a variety of 
contemporary ghost stories collected by Grant. Included are supernatural sites 
of Honolulu such as Iolani Palace, Hawaii State Public Library, and Kawai 
Ha'o Cemetery. Interesting reading material for a taste of contemporary 
Hawaiian ghostlore. Intended for secondary level students and adults. 

Wolkomir, Richard. "Modem Myths for Modem Minds." Smithsonian (November 
1992): 166-176. 

Provides a highly entertaining and easy-to-read overview of 
contemporary urban lore or urban legends. Discusses the various motifs and 
stories collected and circulated by Jan Harold Brunvand, "Mr. Urban 
Legend". Pele is mentioned in reference to "The Vanishing Hitchhiker" tale, a 
recurring motif. Charmingly illustrated, this informative article will appeal to 
adolescents as well as adults. 



15 

114 



Pak 

Urban Legends 

Gay, Roland L. "The Ghosts of Kalamaula." In Hawaii Tales of Yesteryear. 
Honokaa, Hawaii: Roland L. Gay, 1977. pp. 17-18 

One of twenty-three family stories based on the author's personal 
experiences tells of the night marchers passing through a two-story house in 
Molokai. Hearing noises about two o'clock in the morning, he goes 
downstairs to find the doors unlocked. The doors are locked again, but the 
same thing happens over and over. Then, one midnight, music and chanting 
are heard. In the morning, the doors are again unlocked, evidence that the 
night marchers have passed through. Provides good storytelling material for 
young and old. 

. "The Strange Doings of Pele." In Hawaii Tales of Yesteryear. 

Honokaa, Hawaii: Roland L. Gay, 1977. pp. 19-23 

Short episodes of the strange happenings associated with the goddess 
Pele are related in one story. A man from Kona (an area on the island of 
Hawaii) driving to the beach stops and picks up an old woman. When he asks 
her for her destination, he discovers she has vanished. A few days later, an 
old woman asks a Kona lady for some water. However, when she returns 
with the water, there is no trace of the old woman leading her to believe that 
the stranger was Pele and wondering if her appearance signaled an impending 
eruption. Other accounts included examine her various roles as a protector and 
a revengeful spirit. Simple illustrations enhance the stories of Pele as a 
multidimensional character. 

Gere, Jeff. Oahu Spookies: Unbelievably True Tales. Retold by Jeff Gere. 
Cassette 3054. Talking Island Productions, 1992. 

Stories from around Oahu are retold by master storyteller Jeff Gere. 
Includes two stories of the goddess Pele told in island pidgin. One account 
tells about a ten-year old's experience meeting Pele in the form of an old 
woman. He notices that her eyes glow red like fire when she smiles, and her 
touch bums like fire. As they speed away, they see the old woman floating, 
leaving the spot behind her smoking. The other Pele encounter is based on a 
teacher's experience with the camera-shy Pele while on a hike in the Kilauea 
crater area. When the pictures are developed, there is only a rock and no sign 
of the old woman. Dramatization conveyed through the storyteller's voice is a 
non-book medium ideal for secondary level and adult audiences. 



ERIC 



16 

115 



Pak 



Grant, Glen. "In Search of Kappa and Mujina: Japanese Obake In Hawaii." Hawaii 
Herald, 21 October 1983. p. 1,8 

Recounts a spine-tingling urban legend unique to Hawaii, the tale of the 
faceless ghost of the old Waialae Drive-In Theater. Around midnight, a young 
woman goes to the restroom to freshen her makeup. She sees another young 
woman combing her long black hair in the mirror. She catches a glimpse of 
the woman's face only to find that she has no face. The spirit at the mirror 
also has no legs and feet. A macabre tale that will appeal to teenagers and 
adults. Excellent urban legend for storytelling. 

Ghost Stories and Legends . Produced and directed by Gaye Glaser, Doug 

Hamasaki, and Jim Hewitt . 30 min. Oceanic Cable Community Programming 
Center, 1988. Videocassette. 

Stories from Hawaii, Ireland, and Australia are told by different 
storytellers. A "chicken-skin" version of the faceless ghost of Waialae Drive- 
in Theater, an older urban legend, is told by storyteller Russell Omori. A 
young girl goes to the restroom. After tending to her business, she is 
surprised to see a woman at the sink combing her long, black hair. It appears 
that the woman has no legs or feet. As she approaches the sink, she discovers 
that the woman has no face. Interesting viewing material for secondary and 
adult audiences. 

Hoyt, Helen P. The Night Marchers. Norfolk Island, Australia: Island Heritage, 
1976. pp. 1-40 

An old man from Waianae (a district on the leeward side of the island of 
Oahu) tells of his experience with the night marchers-once when they had 
come to welcome his grandson and later his wife. Left to raise his great 
granddaughter, Loke, life changes when Pearl Harbor is bombed. Loke falls 
in love with Daniel, a red-haired G.I. After Daniel is shipped out, a grieving 
Loke gives birth to his son. A month after the child's birth, the night marchers 
come again. Among the deathly procession is an American G.I. with red hair 
who has come to take Loke with the ghost marchers. Beautiful illustrations 
accompany this haunting tale. Provides excellent reading for young and old. 



7 lie 



Pak 



Island Ghost Stories. Produced and directed by Melanie Kosaka, Dave Beggin, 
Denise Cameron, and Terrance Dillon Morin. 10 min. KHET, 1989. 
Videocassette. 

Local storyteller Glen Grant relates a story of Pele as the vanishing 
hitchhiker. Two men are returning from a luau (Hawaiian feast) in Makapu 
on Oahu when they encounter an old woman who needs a ride to Waialua. 
Seated between the driver and the passenger, she asks for a cigarette. The men 
sober immediately when they notice that she lights it with a fire from her 
hand. Excellent example of storytelling using an urban legend from Hawaii 
for secondary students and adult audiences. 

Rappolt, Miriam E. "Lauhala Lady." In One Paddle, Two Paddle. . . Kailua, 
Hawaii: Press Pacifica, 1983. pp. 3-6 

Depicts Pele in one of her many forms as a lauhala lady. Eddie and his 
uncle take a picture of a camera-shy lady absorbed in weaving. The roll of 
film is mysteriously replaced the next day by a freshly-woven, green lauhala 
basket. The meaning of kapu (taboo) is then understood by Eddie. An 
interesting tale of Pele and Hawaiian superstition for upper elementary 
students and teenager. 

. "Morgan's Comer." In One Paddle, Two Paddle. . . Kailua, Hawaii: 

Press Pacifica, 1983. pp. 25-33 

Simply illustrated tale which depicts strange and unexplained events 
associated with Morgan's Comer in a lighthearted way. A bunch of teenage 
boys decide to test the theory about traveling across the Pali Highway at night 
with pork in the car and end up getting spooked. The boys use pork cutlet 
ordered from the Zippy's Restaurant and venture up to Morgan's Corner. 
Instead of the car stalling, the engine keeps on running until one of the boys 
starts to eat the pork. Then the car engine dies until the last of the pork is 
consumed. Mildly humorous tale intended for a teenage audience. 



ERIC 



18 

117 



'1 



Elijah the Prophet in 
Jewish Folk Literature 



KAREN ZINN HEAU 



ERIC 



118 



Elijah the Prophet in Jewish Folk Literature 



by 

Karen Zinn Heau 



us 



Heau 



Introduction 

Elijah the Prophe; is easily the most ubiquitous character in Jewish 
folklore. He appears in legends that span the centuries of Jewish history -- 
from the Biblical era to the Diaspora; and reflect the geographical distribution 
of Jewish settlements - from Tunisia to Persia, from Spain to Eastern Europe. 
And his presence is felt at key moments in the rituals of Jewish life: for 
example, during the Passover seder and the circumcision ceremony. 
Apparently, then, an understanding of the significance of Elijah will open the 
door to the soul of the Jewish people. Though quintessentially Jewish, Elijah 
stories - not only the fairy tale type, but even those with a "religious" 
message -- paradoxically can be appreciated and enjoyed by the non-Jew. 

No figure in Jewish history has captured the storyteller's 
imagination as much as Elijah the Prophet. Although he is 
portrayed as a stern agent of divine justice and retribution in the 
Tanakh, he metamorphoses into quite a different character in the 
tales of an exiled people. He becomes the redeemer of orphans 
and widows, the champion of the poor and the oppressed, and 
most significantly, the herald of the Messiah. Always he travels 
in disguise, to test us, to teach us that we should treat each 
stranger as though he were a messenger from heaven (Frankel 
1989, 575). 

Who is this remarkable figure, Elijah the Prophet? We will pursue the 
answer to this question in true Jewish fashion by asking some other questions: 
(1) What do we know about Elijah from Biblical and rabbinic sources? (2) 
What roles does Elijah play in the folk tales, and how does this later 
characterization depart from his earlier portrayal? (3) How does Elijah the 
Prophet respond to the needs and circumstances of the Jewish community? 
(4) How do the tales combine special "Jewish" features with elements found 
universally in traditional literature? 



1 KU 



Heau 

The Early Tradition 

Elijah (Hebrew Eliyyahu, "Yahweh is God") was a prophet who 
appeared in Israel during the reign of King Ahab, in the ninth century B.C. 
The origin of the traditions surrounding Elijah can be traced to the Biblical 
legend found in 1 Kings 17-19. Other stories about him can be found in 1 
Kings 21 and 2 Kings 1-2. Elijah's family name is not known; his appelation 
"the Tishbite of the inhabitants of Gilead" lead some scholars to assume that 
he belonged to one of the sects (either the Kenites or the Rechabites) which 
led a nomadic existence (Roth 1971, 632). Or, in Wiesel's words: "He 
belongs to all the tribes, to all of us. He responds to man's eternal need for 
poetry and his eternal quest for justice" (Wiesel 1981, 42). 

Elijah was a conservative extremist who felt that it was Israel's mission 
to maintain a pure monotheistic cult centered on the worship of Yahweh. His 
zeal for the Lord led him to singlehandedly wage war against the worshippers 
of Baal, including Jezebel, Ahab's Phoenician wife. Thus he proclaimed a 
drought to punish the idolators, which forced him into exile. Clad in a 
garment of haircloth with a leather girdle, Elijah began a reclusive life of 
wandering and privation. 

During this time, God took pity on the victims of the famine and tried 
to convince Elijah to release Him from His promise to let no rain fall if Israel 
worshipped idols. Elijah held fast until God caused the death of the son of the 
widow with whom Elijah was staying. Distressed, Elijah begged God to 
revive the child, but since he could only be resuscitated by means of dew, the 
drought had to end (Ginzberg 1913, 196-7). 

But first Elijah engaged 450 prophets of Baal in a contest on Mount 
Carmel. While their sacrifices and pleas were ignored by Baal, Elijah's 
offering was accepted by Yahweh, who sent down fire from heaven to 

ERLC 121 



Heau 



consume it. The priests of Baal were slain by the people of Israel, and the 
drought ended. Elijah's victory on Mount Carmel was his crown achievement. 
But he waj still forced to flee in order to escape Jezebel's wrath. In despair, 
he traveled to Mount Horeb (the scene of God's appearance to Moses) where 
God's revelation renewed his strength. According to 2 Kings 2:1-1 1, Elijah 
did not die but ascended to heaven in a chariot and horses of fire (Roth 1971, 
635). 

The idea that Elijah never truly died is reflected in Malachi's final 
prophecy (Malachi 3:23-24) that Elijah will return to Israel to bring the 
people to repentance before the day of judgment (Eliade 1987, 92). From then 
on, Elijah was associated with the Messianic age, as the forerunner of the 
Messiah. In fact, Jesus was first assumed to be Elijah, but when he revealed 
his own messianic mission, the Elijah role was relegated to John the Baptist 
(Roth 1971, 635). 

In the mystical tradition of the Kabbalah, Elijah did not die because he 
was not mortal to begin with. Instead, he was an angel named Sandalphon 
who was sent to live among men to convert them to the belief that "the Lord 
is God." Once his purpose was accomplished, "God took him again into 
heaven, and said to him: 'Be thou the guardian spirit of My children forever, 
and spread the belief in Me abroad in the whole world'" (Ginzberg 1913, 201- 
2). 



122 



Heau 



The Folkloric Tradition 

This mystical view of Elijah as a heavenly emissary allows him to 
continue his work into the present age, thus forming a bridge between the 
earlier legend and the popular folk tales, indeed, we can trace the roots of the 
various roles Elijah plays in the tales back to elements in the legend. But 
though Elijah is still the righter of wrongs, the emphasis of his mission is 
shifted from the future redemption of Israel to issues of social injustice. His 
character is also tempered: the severe, zealous, unyielding preacher becomes 
the benign giver of blessings and consoler of those in distress. We may well 
ask, as does Wiesel: "How did the prophet of anger become the bearer of 
promise?" Wiesel himself sees no contradiction between the two Elijahs, and 
finds features of kindness and tenderness in the Biblical portrayal (Wiesel 
1981,64-5). 

Dov Noy, on the other hand, perceives more of a break between the 
Biblical legend and the later narratives. He feels that the roles played by 
Elijah, as well as the Jewish customs connected with him, cannot be 
explained by Biblical parallels. He supports this view by the fact that none of 
the Elijah stories take the Biblical legend as its theme. He joins other scholars 
who speculate that the present mainstream of Elijah traditions was an attempt 
to replace the Biblical Enoch, a holy figure who also had a miraculous 
"death," because of the veneration of Enoch among non-Jewish sects, 
including the early Christians (Schram 1991, xii-xiv). 

The truth of whether or not Elijah the Prophet is the same person as his 
Biblical counterpart is probably somewhere between the two views. As Noy 
himself notes, while the miracles performed by Elijah have their parallels in 
non-Jewish folklore, they are also based on the Biblical account. For instance, 
the recurrent theme of Elijah's ability to ward off the Angel of Death is rooted 



4 

123 



Heau 

in the Biblical story of the revival of the widow's son. And the motif of Elijah 
as provider hearkens back to his Biblical power to cause rain to fall (Roth 
1971,639). 

Whatever his Biblical origins, we are concerned here with Elijah the 
Prophet as a folklore hero, the mediator between heaven and earth who is "all 
things to all men" (Eliade 1987, 92). As Schram points out, Elijah is referred 
to by his name alone in the earlier (Biblical and Talmudic-midrashic) 
literature. But in folklore he is commonly known as "Elijah the Prophet," with 
the additional words "may he be remembered for good," "whom it is always 
good to mention," or "of blessed memory" attached to his name (Schram 
1991, xxvi). 

The Elijah of folklore is rarely the main character of the story, but 
rather the protagonist's helper. He is "bound by neither time nor space" 
(Nahmad 1970, 24). He roams the earth as a "protector of the innocent, a 
guardian angel bringing help to people in distress" (Rappoport 1966, 211), 
appearing and disappearing at will. He assumes various disguises as an 
expedient device — an Arab, a horseback rider, a Roman dignitary, a dwarf, a 
doctor, a beggar, and so on. Sometimes he appears as himself to those whose 
faith is strong enough to bear his vision; other times he appears in a dream. 

What are the main purposes of Elijah's activity in the world? The most 
common is helping people in need, especially the deserving poor. Elijah's 
criteria of who is deserving include humility, hospitality, generosity, and 
piousness. He is particularly solicitous towards the poor scholar who loves to 
study the Torah. In fact, one of his roles is teacher of the true meaning of the 
Torah. 

Of course, rewarding the righteous has its flip side, namely, punishing 
the greedy, the arrogant, and the hypocrites. Many stories juxtapose an honest 



ERIC 



5 

124 



Heau 



poor person with a devious rich one, and both reap the consequences of their 
behavior. Elijah's recognition of kindliness cuts across economic and ethnic 
boundaries; he tends to favor the down-and-out or those shunned by society, 
as if to challenge the status quo. The prevailing motive is to restore the proper 
balance by correcting injustice wherever it appears. This includes bestowing 
wealth on the needy, correcting wrong attitudes, and creating family harmony. 
As Wiener notes, Elijah's aim was not merely "concerned with 'reward and 
punishment,' but also it was almost always to show a Jew the way to the 
divine and with it also to the truly humane" (Wiener 1978, 139). 

Elijah the Prophet in Jewish Life 

This brings up the question: What does Elijah the Prophet mean to the 
Jewish community? Do these tales have their counterpart in the real life and 
customs of the Jews? 

The abundance of Elijah stories alone attests to his popularity among 
the Jewish people. One example of the veneration felt towards Elijah is that 
many synogogues carry his name. In the Near East, these synogogues often 
contain Elijah rooms, or identify nearby caves as Elijah's. These places, many 
of which are associated with a previous revelation of Elijah, are the 
destination of pilgrims seeking advice, comfort, or healing (Wiener 1978, 
139-40). Elijah's name is also inscribed on amulets, especially in areas 
located within the Islamic sphere of influence (Roth 1971, 639). 

The reverence accorded Elijah is doubtlessly a result of the Jewish 
perception of him as the focus of hope for the fiiture as well as the resolver of 
present difficulties. Schram identifies three main roles that Elijah plays in 
Jewish life: the forerunner of the Messiah, the arbiter of Jewish law, and the 
mediator between parents and children (Schram 1991, xxiii). A popular 



ERIC 



6 

125 



Heau 

saying, "until Elijah arrives," is used to shelve an unsolved matter (Roth 1971, 
640). 

The significance of Elijah is reflected in numerous customs and rituals 
which pervade Jewish life. Dov Noy points out the close affinity of literature 
and custom in Jewish folklore, as many of the customs are explained by 
etiological tales (Roth 1971, 640). Elijah is mentioned daily in the grace after 
meals: "May God in his mercy send us the prophet Elijah, may his memory be 
blessed, and may he bring us good tidings, help, and comfort" (Wiener 1978, 
132); in prayers said on festivals for dew or rain; and in Elijah songs at the 
termination of the Sabbath. One refrain goes: "The prophet Elijah, the 
Tishbite from Gilead, may he come to us soon with the son of David, the 
Messiah" (Wiener 1978, 134). 

Two important rituals deserve mention. One is the Chair of Elijah used 
at the rite of circumcision, or brit. This special chair set aside for him 
originates with Elijah's accusation in 1 Kings 19:10: "for the children of Israel 
have forsaken your covenant." Later, rabbis interpreted this to mean the 
circumcision-covenant (Nahmad 1970, 25). His role was broadened to 
become the guardian and protector of the newborn child. 

The Cup of Elijah denotes the extra cup of wine placed on the table 
during the Passover ceremony, or seder. There are two reasons for this. The 
first is based on a Talmudic dispute over whether four or five cups of wine 
should be drunk in the seder. The solution was to fill a fifth cup that is not 
drunk, and to let the matter be resolved "when Elijah comes." The second 
explanation is that the Passover festival of redemption is naturally associated 
with Elijah in his role as the herald of the Messiah, and the cup is waiting to 
welcome the prophet's arrival (Enc. Judaica 1971, 645). 



ERIC 



7 

126 



Heau 

A fwal mention can be made of Elijah as the prototype of the 
Wandering Jew. This image reflects his peripatetic lifestyle in the Bible, as 
well as his legendary ability to appear at any place or time. In Harold Fisch's 
article. Elijah represents the wanderer archetype, or the ubiquity and 
immortality of the Jewish people as a whole (Fisch 1980). However, this 
interpretation is not universally accepted. Anderson, for instance, believes 
that the Wandering Jew motif was not connected to Elijah, but originated as a 
Christian disparagement of the Jews. According to the tale, when Christ was 
carrying his cross to Calvary, he paused to rest on a man's doorstep. When 
the man drove him away, Christ replied, "I go, but you will walk until I come 
again" (Anderson 1965, 11). 

Conclusion: The Universal Appeal of Elijah Stories 

We conclude by asking affinal question: Can these folk tales, which are 
quintessentially Jewish, be appreciated by the non-Jew? We can approach 
this question from two angles. One way is to analyze the tales to discover 
what characteristics they share in common with folklore of other cultures, and 
what elements are uniquely Jewish. 

In his foreward to Miriam's Tambourine,, Dov Noy acknowledges the 
commonality between Jewish and non-Jewish versions of the same tale. But 
he emphasizes the special Jewish aspects as worthy of attention. Using a 
structural model of the Jewish folk tale, he identifies four main elements as 
uniquely Jewish: (1) The Jewish Time — correlated to the Jewish year cycle or 
life cycle; (2) The Jewish Place — the locale is identifiably Jewish, e.g. a 
synagogue, the Land of Israel, or the home, which is considered a holy place; 
(3) The Jewish Acting Characters — often a historical figure, sometimes of 
Biblical origin, Elijah being the favorite; and (4) The Jewish Message - the 



ERIC 



8 

127 



Heau 



purpose of the Jewish folk tale is to teach a lesson rather than provide 
entertainment or escape from life's troubles, as do most non- Jewish folk tales 
(Noy 1986, xi-xix). 

Weinreich's approach is to analyze Elijah stories in terms of genre and 
content type. Her view is that the "Jewishness of the tale type . . . does not 
exclude the occurrence of international motifs within the tale" (Weinreich 
1965, 226). She finds many examples of the disguised-saint tale type among 
the East European neighbors of the Jews. And aside from the typological 
similarity, there were also specific borrowings and exchanging of stories 
throughout history. Elijah stories may also have contributed to the Christian 
saint legends (Weinreich 1965, 226-231). 

The other way to approach our question is to decide whether Elijah the 
Prophet is accessible to a general audience and whether the messages of the 
stories have any universal value. The key to this lies in the fact that Elijah the 
folklore hero is a somewhat different figure than the Elijah of the earlier 
legend. Whereas his mission in Biblical times was inflexibly linked to the 
people of Israel, his activities in the folk tales can be universally applied. 
Elijah's ability to manifest himself in any form to any person in any place 
means that he can adapt to an infinite variety of circumstances. He is a sort of 
all-purpose hero who responds to needs that are common not only to Jews, 
but to all people who are suffering from poverty or persecution, or who need 
emotional solace in times of crisis. 

Although the stories are invested with a "religious" message, or moral, 
these messages go beyond teaching one how to be a good Jew. They can help 
one become a better human being by improving one's relationship to God and 
neighbor. The values of humility, charity, kindness, and family harmony are 
common to all societies. And Elijah's role as ushering in the Messianic age 



ERIC 



9 

128 



Heau 



speaks to our universal longing for redemption. Who in their darkest hour 
would not wish to be rescued by a compassionate angel? 

Note 

The topic of folkloristic classification of the tales according to type and 
source is beyond the scope or needs of this project. The interested reader is 
referred to the Selected Annotated Bibliography for more detailed 
information. Elijah's influence on Christian and Islamic traditions will not be 
covered. Since they have more storytelling value, folk tales are given 
prominence over the "historical" legends. Most of the tales are suitable for the 
post-elementary school level. A few may be appropriate for the younger 
reader, with discretionary judgment. 

Reference List 

Anderson, George K. 1965. The legend of the wandering Jew. Providence: 
Brown University Press. 

Eliade, Mircea, ed. 1987. The encyclopedia of religion. New York: 
Macmillan. S.v. "Elijah," by John Van Seters. 

Encyclopaedia Judaica. 1971. S.v. "Elijah, cup of." 

Fisch, Harold. 1980. Elijah and the wandering Jew. In Rabbi Joseph H. 
Lookstein memorial volume, ed. Leo Landman, 125-35. New York: 
Ktav Publishing House. 

Frankel, Ellen. 1989. The classic tales: 4,000 years of Jewish lore. 
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson. 

Ginzberg, Louis. \9\3.The legends of the Jews. Vol 4, Bible times and 
characters from Joshua to Esther. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication 
Society. 



10 

129 



Heau 



Nahmad, H.M., trans. 1970. A portion in paradise: And other Jewish 
folktales. New York: Norton. 

Noy, Dov. 1986. Forward to Miriam's tambourine: Jewish folktales from 
around the world, by Howard Schwartz; illustrated by Lloyd Bloom. 
[Ardmore, PA]: Seth Press; New York: distributed by The Free Press, 
a division of Macmillan. 

Rappoport, Angelo S. 1966. Myth and legend of ancient Israel, vol. 3. With 
an introduction and additional notes by Raphael Patai. New York: Ktav 
Publishing House. 

Roth, Cecil, ed. 1971. Encyclopaedia Judaica. Jerusalem: Keter Publishing 
House. S.v. "Elijah," by Joshua Guttman et al. 

Schram, Peninnah. 1991. Tales of Elijah the prophet. Northvale, NJ: Jason 
Aronson. 

Singer, Isidore, ed. 1925. The Jewish encyclopedia. New York: Funk and 
Wagnalls. S.v. "Elijah," by Eduard Konig, et al. 

Weinreich, Beatrice Silverman. 1965. Genres and types of Yiddish folk tales 
about the prophet Elijah. In The field of Yiddish: Studies in language, 
folklore, and literature, ed. Uriel Weinreich, 202-31. Second 
collection. London: Mouton. 

Wiener, Aharon. 1978. The prophet Elijah in the development of Judaism: A 
depth-psychological study. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

Wiesel, Elie. 1981 . Five biblical portraits. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press. 



ERIC 



n 

130 



Heau 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 
General Background Information 

Eliade, Mircea, ed. The Encyclopedia of Religion. New York: Macmillan, 
1987. S.v. "Elijah," by John Van Seters. 

For a brief treatment of the Elijah figure, unencumbered by 
densely-packed information, Van Seters's article is unexcelled in its 
clarity and intelligence. The bulk of the essay is concerned with the 
question of Elijah's historicity and the basis of the stories in the Old 
and New Testaments. The final section deals with Elijah in post- 
biblical Judaism, when he became "all things to all men." It includes a 
paragraph on present-day customs associated with the Elijah. The short 
annotated bibliography is helpful. 

Encyclopaedia Judaica, 1971 ed. S.v. "Elijah." 

This thorough, well-documented article is divided into six 
sections, each authored by a different specialist. In the biblical section, 
Elijah is assumed to be an historical figure whose prime function was 
to estabish the exclusive worship of Yahweh among his people. The 
social, political, and religious impact of this prophetic mission is 
elucidated based on passages in 1 and 2 Kings. The legend of Elijah is 
then followed through the Aggadic literature of the Talmudic and post- 
Talmudic ages. Following a paragraph on mysticism, the folklore 
section discusses the themes in the Elijah legends found in written and 
oral folk literature: "the redemptive motif associated with Elijah in 
rabbinic literature as the herald of the future redemption of Israel and 
of the messianic era is not stressed in folklore: he is rather portrayed 
as the heavenly emissary sent on earth to combat social injustice." The 
final two sections cover Elijah in Islam and in the arts. Includes 
bibliography. 



ERIC 



12 

131 



Heau 



Ginzberg, Louis. The Legends of the Jews. Vol. 4, Bible Times and 

Characters from Joshua to Esther. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication 
Society, 1913. 

An older, but oft-cited survey of biblical figures and events. The 
chapter on Elijah contains a descriptive summary of Elijah's various 
activities, as related in the Bible and later sources (see notes in volume 
6), from his earthly career to his role as an angel of God ~ helper of 
the needy, censor and avenger, disciple and teacher of the wise, 
administrator of God's justice, rescuer of the doomed, teacher of the 
Kabbalah, and forerunner of the Messiah. Useful to quickly familiarize 
oneself with the themes and legends connected to Elijah the Prophet. 

The Jewish Encyclopedia, 1925 ed. S.v. "Elijah." 

This lengthy article tries to be all-inclusive, but one tends to lose 
the forest for the trees. The style is somewhat antiquated and the 
sections are not clearly demarcated. Yet a patient reader can reap a 
wealth of information on the numerous stories about Elijah. In the 
paragraph entitled "In Medieval Folk-Lore," there is an interesting 
passage which discusses Elijah as the prototype of the Wandering Jew. 
Additionally, he is compared to other wandering deities such as 
Buddha, Zeus, and Thor. The biblographies contain dated and mostly 
foreign language sources. 

Nahmad, H.M., trans. A Portion in Paradise: And Other Jewish Folktales. 
New York: Norton, 1970. 

The author divides the tales in this collection according to 
theme. The first section, devoted to the Prophet Elijah, contains four 
stories and a pithy introduction which discusses Elijah's attributes: 
significantly, the disctinction between the Elijah of biblical narrative 
and the popular figure of Jewish tradition. The preface is also 
instructive as a background to the characteristics and sources of the 
Jewish folktale. However, the reader will be disappointed to discover 
no source notes on the individual tales. 



13 

132 



Heau 



Schram, Peninnah. Tales of Elijah the Prophet. Northvale, NJ: Jason 
Aronson, 1991. 

If one wishes to become acquainted with the issues and legends 
surrounding Elijah the Prophet by reading one book only, this volume 
should be sufficient. In addition to thirty-six tales, the introduction 
gives a lucid and thorough summary of the various roles Elijah plays in 
the Bible and Jewish folklore. Dov Noy's forward offers provocative 
conjectures regarding the cross-cultural origins of the Elijah figure. 
Ample analyses of the tales according to source(s), tale type, and 
motifs are contained in the endnotes. Other useful features are the 
glossary, bibliography, and index. 

Special Topics in Elijah Studies 

Hyman, Frieda Clark. "Elijah: Accuser and Defender." Judaism: A Quarterly 
Journal of Jewish Life and Thought. 39 (1990): 282-95. 

A question is posed: How did Elijah become loved in Jewish 
folklore as a savior of the needy and oppressed, and the friend of 
scholars and mystics, when Scripture portrays him as a stern, 
unbending figure with no endearing features? Throughout the essay, the 
author continues this questioning mode, which resembles a religious 
search. By delving into a theological analysis of the biblical passages in 
which Elijah appears, she tries to resolve the paradox and dispel her 
doubts. The effect can be judged either overly emotional or moving, 
depending on one's spiritual orientation. 

Weinreich, Beatrice Silverman. "Genres and Types of Yiddish Folk Tales 
About the Prophet Elijah." In The Field of Yiddish: Studies in 
Language, Folklore, and Literature, ed. Uriel Weinreich. Second 
collection. London: Mouton, 1965. 

Based on the author's unpublished M.A. thesis, "The Prophet 
Elijah in Modern Yiddish Folktales" (1957), this folkloristic analysis of 
59 tales recorded from oral sources develops criteria for classifying the 
tales according to genre and content type. Regarding genre, Weinreich 
attempts to create criteria "intrinsic to the tale itself," namely actors, 
settings, narrative purpose, and episodic structure. (In this sense, her 



ERIC 



14 

133 



Heau 



methodology departs from the earlier systems of von Sydow and 
Thompson.) Having sifted out genre features, she then proceeds to 
classify the tales depending on their subject matter. Surprisingly, very 
few of the Yiddish Elijah tales exemplify the "Religious" or 
"Anecdotal" types, but fall into categories that occur in non-Jewish 
traditions, such as "Tales of Magic" and "Romantic Tales." The author 
concludes that more investigation is needed into the parallels between 
Jewish and non-Jewish materials, specifically comparing the cycle of 
Elijah tales with stories of disguised saints and wandering holy men 
told among non- Jewish groups worldwide. An important, but technical, 
research study of marginal interest to the non-scholar. 

Wiener, Aharon. The Prophet Elijah in the Development of Judaism: A 

Depth-Psychological Study. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978. 

A scholarly study of the Elijah figure from the perspective of the 
psychology of religion. The author starts with the appearance of Elijah 
in the biblical record and seeks to "throw light on his outstanding 
personality by depth-psychological interpretation." He then proceeds 
to investigate how this biblical portrayal has been modified in the 
Jewish literature over the course of 2500 years, and briefly describes 
the Christian and Islamic conceptions. In a final chapter, he points out 
the universality of the Elijah figure in terms of the hero-archetype. 
Aside from the short chapter on Jewish folklore, the book is not 
directly related to our topic. Its value lies in deepening our 
understanding of the function of Elijah in mythological consciousness. 

Bibliographical Source 

Yassif, Eli. Jewish Folklore: An Annotated Bibliography . New York: 
Garland, 1986. 

The aim of this ambitious compilation is to include scholarly 
works representing the diversity of Jewish folklore. However, the East 
European and the Sephardic Jewish traditions are not given full 
treatment, as the literature is too vast. Professor Yassif, of the 
Department of Hebrew Literature at Ben-Gurion University in Israel, 
emphasizes that this is "a bibliography of folkloristics and not of 
folklore. " Thus, studies alone are discussed and collections of tales, 



ERIC 



15 

134 



Heau 



for example, are not covered. The index gives 22 references to Elijah » 
some in English, but the majority in foreign languages (German, 
French, or Hebrew). Since this is a fairly recent publication, it should 
be helpful to those who wish to investigate a particular aspect of the 
legend of Elijah in further detail or pick up other interesting leads in the 
field of Jewish folklore. 



Traditional Tales 



Frankel, Ellen. "Two Brothers and Their Wish." In The Classic Tales: 4,000 
Years of Jewish Lore. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1989. 
pp.602-04. 

Elijah, disguised as a beggar, visits the homes of two brothers, 
one rich and one poor. He is turned away from the rich home and is 
welcomed in the poor one. As a reward, Elijah grants the poor brother 
one wish that will continue until he cries: "Enough!" He wishes for a 
gold coin, which multiplies until he cries: "Enough!" Seeing this, the 
rich brother apologizes to the beggar and is granted the same wish. But 
he and his wife do not know when to stop and are buried under a 
mountain of gold. A variation of this tale ("A Beggar's Blessing" in 
Schram, pp. 195-99) has the rich couple drink a toast before wishing for 
gold, whereupon the blessing takes effect and they drink themselves to 
death. The message here is that the greedy cannot enjoy their riches. 

Handler, Andrew, trans. "Moshiach ben David and the Prophet Elijah in 
Kallo." In Rabbi Eizik: Hasidic Stories about the Zaddik ofKallo. 
Rutherford, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1978. pp.37-40. 

Two Hasids overhear their rebbe (title of respect for a Hasidic 
teacher) longing to attend a Passover seder at Kallo and are filled with 
curiosity. They are sent in his stead but are completely unimpressed 
with the proceedings. They even ignore their host's request to confer a 
blessing on two guests who wish to marry. When the hasids return 
home and express their sarcasm to the rebbe, they discover that the 
bethrothed were none other than Elijah and the Messiah, and their 
blessing would have ushered in the time of salvation. The tale shows 
that arrogance blinds one to the way of salvation. 



ERIC 



16 

135 



Heau 



Ish-Kishor, Judith. "Traveling with Elijah." In Tales from the Wise Men of 
Israel, with an introduction by Harry Golden and drawings by W.T. 
Mars. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Co., 1962. pp.62-67. 

A pious rabbi fervently desires to accompany Elijah on one of 
his earthly journeys. His wish is granted on the condition that he not 
question Elijah's actions, no matter how strange they may seem. In the 
course of their wanderings, the rabbi is disturbed by what appears to be 
unjust behavior on the part of Elijah. When the rabbi presses him, 
Elijah reveals the correct interpretation of the events. The story 
illustrates that God works in mysterious ways; one should not pass 
judgment unless all the facts are known. 

Sadeh, Pinhas. "The Two Washerwomen on Passover Eve." In Jewish 
Folktales, trans. Hillel Halkin. New York: Doubleday, 1989. 
pp.13 1-32. 

A poor woman with no money to celebrate the upcoming holiday 
washes her children's clothes by the river. She is approached by a 
kindly old man who asks her if everything is prepared for Passover. 
"Praise God" is her answer; upon returning home, the woman discovers 
that the house is well-stocked, just as she had depicted. A rich 
neighbor, jealous of the poor woman's new supplies, hurries down to 
the river and begins washing rags. The old man appears and asks the 
same questions, but she replies only with complaints. When she gets 
home, she sees that indeed her previous wealth has disappeared. The 
story portrays the truth that whatever one chooses to evoke becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. The simplicity and clarity of this version is 
preferred, although it does not mention that the old man is Elijah (as 
does Sohram's rendering: "The Neighbors" in Tales of Elijah the 
Prophet, pp.1 19-23). 

Schram, Peninnah. "Beroka and Elijah the Prophet." In Tales of Elijah the 
Prophet, forward by Dov Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991 . 
pp.21-24. 

Elijah the Prophet joins Rabbi Beroka as he walks in a crowded 
marketplace. Pointing out a jailer dressed as a heathen, he remarks that 
he will inherit a place in Paradise. Astounded, Beroka questions the 



O 17 

ERIC 



136 



Heau 



man and is filled with admiration. This is repeated in the case of tvo 
jesters. A useful story to illustrate that one should not judge a person's 
heart by appearances. 

. "The Bride's Wisdom." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, forward by 

Dov Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991. pp.20 1-28. 

Wise and compassionate Deborah reluctantly marries a poor 
cousin after losing three bridegrooms in succession. When the Angel of 
Death appears at their wedding, Elijah points him out to the worried 
couple and Deborah is able to defeat him using laws from the Torah. 
This tale is an example of Elijah rescuing those doomed by a heavenly 
decree to die a premature death. 

. "Her Wisdom Is Her Beauty." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, 

forward by Dov Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991. pp.67-73. 

A girl born with the face of a beast is hidden by her parents and 
becomes an expert in Talmud. A scholar who is amazed by her "pearls 
of wisdom" insists on marrying her sight unseen. But in the wedding 
bed he is shocked by her appearance and flees to a distant town. Later, 
their son seeks him out and persuades him to return home; in the 
meantime, her face has been made beautiful by miraculous water, a gift 
of Elijah. This version is recommended because, unlike other tellings, 
the husband agrees to return before he knows of her transformation. 

. "The Inheritance." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, forward by Dov 

Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991 . pp. 169-75. 

Hyrkanos, a rich landowner, extols the virtues of farming to his 
sons. But Eliezer, the youngest, would rather devote himself to the 
study of Torah and is ridiculed by his father. Elijah appears in a dream 
and instructs Eliezer to study with a certain Rabbi Yochanan ben 
Zakkai in Jerusalem. After Eliezer's disappearance, his brothers 
persuade their father to disinherit him. In order to do this legally, 
Hyrkanos must travel to Jerusalem, where he is awed by the sermon of 
a great scholar, his lost son. Torah study is highly valued in traditional 
Jewish folklore, which is reflected in the emphasis placed on education 
among Jewish families even today. 



9 

ERIC 



18 137 



Heau 



. "Looking for His Luck." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, forward 

by Dov Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991 . pp.89-95. 

A beggar leaves home in search of his mazel (luck). Along the 
way, he meets up with a wolf, a king, and the owner of an orchard, 
who' each ask him to find the answer to their particular problem. 
Eventually, the wanderer meets an old man, Elijah the Prophet. Elijah 
answers all the questions and sends the beggar home, where his mazel 
will be waiting. The foolish man, fixated on returning home, passes up 
the treasure of the orchard owner and the kingdom of the city, only to 
be gobbled up by the wolf. This Elijah story is unusual in that it does 
not contain a religious message, but rather the universal theme of the 
fool who takes things literally. Another interesting feature is the 
presence of an animal character. 

. "The Repentant Rabbi." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, forward 

by Dov Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991. pp.209-14. 

A proud and learned rabbi insults a poor dwarf he meets on his 
journey home. His hero's welcome is thus marred by guilt and the 
embarrassing jeers of the dwarf. After a public repentance, the dwarf 
(none other than Elijah the Prophet) pardons him and the rabbi's heart 
is set to rest. Exemplifies the teaching that everyone is worthy of 
kindness and respect. A variation of this story has the rabbi insult a 
black man instead of a dwarf ("Soft Like a Reed, Not Hard Like a 
Cedar." In Frankel, pp.575-78). 

. "Things Could Be Far Worse." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, 

forward by Dov Noy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991. pp.55-59. 

A properous merchant always complains that things are not good 
enough. He becomes less successful and eventually has barely enough 
to scrape by. Elijah approaches him and tells him not to worry: things 
could be far worse. Sure enough, the merchant's situation successively 
deteriorates until he is reduced to begging for alms. At each stage, 
Elijah appears and repeats the dictum: Things could be far worse. 
Finally, the merchant reaches rock bottom and realizes the wisdom of 
Elijah's words. Illustrates the teaching: Be satisfied with your lot in life. 



ERIC 



19 

13S 



Heau 



. "Welcome to Clothes." In Tales of Elijah the Prophet, forward by 

Dov Nov. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1991. pp. 17-20. 

Elijah arrives at a wedding feast dressed as a beggar and is 
quickly ushered out. Later, he arrives at the same wedding richly 
dressed and is welcomed as an honored guest, treated to the choicest 
foods and fine wine. Pouring the food and drink into his pockets, Elijah 
exposes the hypocrisy of his hosts by "feeding" his clothes instead of 
himself. 

Schwartz, Howard. "Elijah's Violin." In Elijah's Violin & Other Jewish Fairy 
Tales. New York: Harper & Row, 1983. pp.19-24 

A victorious king embarks on a long and perilous quest to fulfill 
his youngest daughter's desire for Elijah's violin. The enchanted music 
of the violin enables the princess to win the love of a handsome prince, 
while the bow strings give her the power to thwart the evil intentions of 
her sisters. According to Schwartz, the violin symbolizes the positive 
attributes of Elijah, and the release of its imprisoned melodies echo the 
Jewish spirit. One of the few Elijah stories that also fits the mold of a 
traditional fairy tale. 

. "The Three Tasks of Elijah." In Miriam's Tambourine: Jewish 

Folktales from Around the World. [Ardmore, PA]: Seth Press; New 
York: distributed by The Free Press, 1986. pp.56-63. 

Elijah offers to help a starving family by insisting that they sell 
him into slavery. His new master, the king, gives Elijah three 
impossible tasks to perform in order to win his freedom. Upon 
completing the final task, the humbled king is convinced of Elijah's 
great wisdom. The story shows Elijah's readiness to sacrifice himself to 
ease the suffering of the needy. A simplified version of this tale, 
suitable for young children, is published in picture-book form (Singer, 
Isaac Bashevis. Elijah the Slave, trans. Isaac Bashevis Singer and 
Elizabeth Shub. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1970). 



9 

ERIC 



20 

139 



Heau 

Weinreich, Beatrice Silverman, ed. "The Leper Boy and Elijah the Prophet." 
In Yiddish Folktales, trans. Leonard Wolf. New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1988. pp. 182-84. 

Elijah offers to help a poor leper boy begging in a box. Claiming 
to be his uncle, Elijah heals the boy's skin and apprentices him to a 
baker. Later, the boy complains about the baking job, so Elijah grants 
his wish to be a tailor. The boy keeps changing his mind and goes 
through a multitude of professions until he finally decides to be a czar. 
But even this does not please him and he aspires to be God Himself. 
God sends the boy back to his leper box and rebukes Elijah: "Perhaps 
now you'll understand that sometimes I actually know what I'm doing." 
This tale is the reverse of "Things Could Be Far Worse" but with the 
same message. In addition, it contains the theme of Elijah as healer, 
and an interesting portrayal of Elijah as someone who makes mistakes. 

Additional Elijah stories, as well as other versions of the tales listed 
here, can be found in the following sources: 

Ausubel, Nathan, ed. A Treasury of Jewish Folklore: Stories, Traditions, 

Legends, Humor, Wisdom and Folk Songs of the Jewish People. New 
York: Crown, 1948. 

Bin Gorion, Micha Joseph. Mimekor Yisrael: Classical Jewish Folktales. Ed. 
Emanuel bin Gorion, trans. I.M. Lask, 3 vols. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press, 1976. 

Frankel, Ellen. The Classic Tales: 4,000 Years of Jewish Lore. Northvale, 
NJ: Jason Aronson, 1989. 

Klapholz, Israel. Stories of Elijah the Prophet. Jerusalem; New York: 
Feldheim Publishers, 1970. 

Nahmad, H.M., trans. A Portion in Paradise: And Other Jewish Foktales. 
New York: W.W. Norton, 1970. 

Neugroschel, Joachim, ed. and trans. The Shtetl: A Creative Anthology of 
Jewish Life in Eastern Europe. New York: Richard Marek Publishers, 
1979. 

ERIC * u 



Heau 



Noy, Dov, ed. Folktales of Israel. With the assistance of Dan ben-Amos, 
trans. Gene Baharav. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963. 

Patai, Raphael. Gates to the Old City: A Book of Jewish Legends. Detroit: 
Wayne State University Press, 1981 . 

Rappoport, Angelo S. Myth and Legend of Ancient Israel. Vol. 3. New York: 
Ktav Publishing House, 1966. 

Sadeh, Pinhas. Jewish Folktales. Trans. Hillel Halkin. New York: Doubleday, 
1989. 

Schram, Peninnah. Tales of Elijah the Prophet. Northvale, NJ: Jason 
Aronson, 1991. 

Schwartz, Howard. Miriam's Tambourine: Jewish Folktales from around the 
World. [Ardmore, PA]: Seth Press; New York: distributed by The Free 
Press, 1986. 

Weinreich, Beatrice Silverman, ed. Yiddish Folktales. Trans. Leonard Wolf. 
New York: Pantheon, 1988. 



ERIC 



22 , . , 

^ 141 




The Kappa 



JUDI R. KOBAYASHI 



142 



Kobayashi 

Introduction 

Buddhism and Shinto, the way of the gods, were two important 
influences on Japanese mythology. Authentic Japanese mythology came from 
the indigenous Shinto cult that taught that everything had a karnU a soul, 
spirit, or deity. The natural and supernatural world coexisted as one and the 
spirits and deities inhabited all natural phenomena, trees, mountains, rivers, 
birds, and beasts. With the introduction of Buddhism from India via China 
and Korea in the sixth century, the old legends and stories from these areas 
combined with the indigenous tales of Japan to produce an abundance and 
overlapping of supernatural beings and deities. Under these influences, Japan 
evolved a folklore abounding with the supernatural. 

In ancient days, ghosts, demons, spirits, goblins, and other supernatural 
creatures were a reality for the common people and were reflected through the 
art and literature of their culture. This was especially true during the Edo 
Period (1615-1867) of Japanese history. This assortment of spirits and demons 
was highly diverse in physical appearance, character, and purpose, and ranged 
from the merely odd and humorous to the truly horrible and grotesque. One 
fascinating example of this rich assortment of supernatural creatures is the 
Kappa (Kiej'e 1973, 7-10). 



Description and Features 

Because of the Kappa's long existence in Japanese legends and folklore, 
it is difficult to formulate a definitive description of the creature. However, the 
following provides a common frame of reference regarding the Kappa: 

Child of the river: Mythical amphibious goblin living in the rivers 
of the Island of Kiushiu. It has the body of a tortoise, the limbs of 

1 

ERiC 143 



Kobayashi 



a frog, and the head of a monkey, with a hollow at the top of the 
skull, in which is contained a fluid which gives the animal its 
strength. This goblin attacks and devours human beings, but there 
is an easy way to thwart its attack: be very polite and bow to him; 
the creature is very civil though ferocious, and will bow to you in 
return as deeply and as often; in so doing it spills its life fluid and 
loses its strength (Joly 1967, 258). 

Other references add to and sometimes contradict this common descrip- 
tion. For instance, one source refers to the Kappa as an animal preferring 
muddy lakes and rivers rather than clear flowing water. Its face is pointed and 
is a dark bluish color, and it has claw-like fingers. It is especially fond of 
killing children, although in shape it looks like a young child of four years 
(Joya 1985, 412). Another source provides further detail about the Kappa's 
description. The Kappa is said to average between three to four feet in height 
and to weigh approximately twenty to forty pounds. Other features include a 
face resembling a tiger, webbed hands and feet, and the ability to change the 
color of its skin like a chameleon (Murakami and Richie 1980, 188), Finally, 
the Kappa is believed to be older than four, about the size and shape of a 
twelve or thirteen year old child. Its body is slippery, has a fishy odor, and is 
covered with blue-green scales. It is also able to rotate its arms and legs freely 
and is partial to sumo wrestling (Ashby 1983, 156), These are a few descriptions 
to introduce the variations found throughout Japan, 

Origin of the Kappa 

The earliest reference to what may have been the first Kappa was found 
in the NihongU written in A,D, 720, It reports that in the year 619, a man-like 
creature was found in a river in central Japan, A few months later, a fisherman 
of the Osaka province discovered something in his net that was shaped like a 
child, but was neither fish nor man. No names or other details were supplied 




144 



Kobayashi 



with these records. Since references were just as vague in other ancient books, 
it was assumed that the "true" Kappa did not emerge during the early history of 
Japan. However, the Kappa must have been in Japan long enough to have 
multiplied and invaded rivers and streams throughout the entire country 
(Casal 1961, 160-161). 

Legends of divine, boy water-gods are widely distributed from Korea to 
China and suggest that the Kappa originated from these countries. In China, 
water monsters in the form of little boys remind us of the Kappa. The Shui-hu 
("water-tiger") looks like a child three to five years old. Its body is covered with 
carp-like scales which are impervious to arrows. In the autumn, it suns itself 
on the sand. Its knees are like the claws of tigers and it frequently hides in the 
water showing only its knees. When children play with the knees, it bites them. 
Another Chinese creature, the Shui-yun ("water-spirit"), is described as three to 
six ch'ih tall with a bowl on its head which holds about a pint of water. It is 
very daring when there is water in the bowl, but loses its courage when the 
water is spilled. Doubts about this "bowl" feature, however, have been 
expressed and it may be a later recording based on the Japanese Kappa (Ishida 
1950, 120-121). 

Other theories have been proposed, but the common description of the 
Kappa, as stated earlier in this paper, did not occur prior to 1695. That year, a 
book was published referring to the Kappa by the name Kawaro ("river boy") 
and by the name Kawauso, meaning otters. The book also suggested that the 
Kappa was a monster that crawled on all fours and resembled a supon or 
snapping turtle. Since then, Kappa encounters and recordings occurred more 
often. The cause of this sudden "popularity" is unknown, but the belief in the 

3 

145 



Kobayashi 



supernatural Kappa continues today. To some, however, the Kappa is just a 
degenerate form of the child gods of the water world (Casal 1961, 164-165). 

Dual Character of the Kappa 

As briefly revealed in the general description, the Kappa possesses a 
twofold nature. In traditional Japanese folklore, the Kappa is depicted as both 
benevolent and malevolent. Numerous folktales center on the evil qualities of 
the Kappa; of its preying on humans and animals. The Kappa is a vampire that 
attacks humans, horses, and cattle when they enter the water. It then pulls 
out the livers through the anus or sucks the blood of its victims. A drowned 
body with distended anus was often thought to be a victim of the Kappa. 
Kappa also rape women (Piggott 1982, 67). A local storyteller from the town of 
Tono, north of Tokyo, tells of a particular household where the women have 
become pregnant with Kappa children for two generations. The newborn are 
grotesque and are immediately hacked to pieces, placed in wine casks, and 
buried in the ground (Yanagita 1975, 41). 

The Kappa as a benevolent creature in Japanese folklore is rare. Some 
tales across Japan tell of the Kappa showing its gratitude by giving gifts of fish 
and by showing how to prepare a secret ointment or how to set bones. An 
example of the Kappa's courtesy is displayed in the story of the Kappa and the 
loan of bowls. A Kappa tried to drag a horse to the pond, but the horse bolted, 
spilling the water from the Kappa's head and dragging it to the stables. The 
owner of the horse released the Kappa on the condition that it would lend him 
bowls whenever he wished. These bowls were always ready when needed until a 
neighbor stole a set. Thereafter, the Kappa never offered the bowls for loan 

4 

14G 



Kobayashi 

again. Also, as already noted, Kappa are remarkably polite and return the 
courtesy of bowing, often to their own detriment. One last trait is its capacity 
for keeping a promise. Whenever a bargain is made between man and Kappa, 
the Kappa remembers its pledge and honors it (Piggott 1982, 68, 116). 

Conclusion 

The Kappa is just one of the many captivating and imaginary creatures 
in Japanese folklore. There is much more to be learned about this supernatural 
being, and it is hoped that this paper will serve as a preliminary step to further 
study. It must be remembered, however, that the Kappa is a living memory of 
the ancient beliefs of a race for whom water played an important part in 
everyday life. The Kappa is not only a recognition of the water or river god, but 
evidence that the Japanese people still respect the forces that shaped their 
beliefs, tradition and culture. The Kappa may be imaginary, but to the 
Japanese, it is very ancient, very familiar, and very personal. 

Reference List 

Ashby, Janet and others, eds. 1983. Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. New 
York, NY: Kodansha International/ USA. S.v. "Kappa," by Inokuchi 
Shoji. 

Casal, U. A. 1961. The Kappa. The Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan 
3d ser., 8 (December): 157-99. 

Ishida, Eiichiro. 1950. The Kappa Legend: A Comparative Ethnological Study 
on the Japanese Water-Spirit Kappa and Its Habit of Trying to Lure 
Horses into the Water. Folklore Studies 9: 1-152. 

Joly, Henri L. 1967. Legend in Japanese Art: A Description of Historical Episodes, 
Legendary Characters, Folklore, Myths, Religious Symbolism Illustrated in 
the Arts of Old Japan Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle. 



ERIC 



5 

147 



Kobayashi 



Joya, Mock. 1985. Mock Joya's Things Japanese. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Times. 

Kiej'e, Nikolas, comp. 1973. Japanese Grotesqueries. With an Introductory 
Essay by Terence Barrow. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle. 

Murakami, Hyoe and Donald Richie, eds. 1980. A Hundred More Things 
Japanese. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Culture Institute. S.v. "Kappa," by 
Anthony Liman. 

Piggott, Juliet. 1982. Japanese Mythology. New rev. ed. New York: Peter 
Bedrick Books. 

Yanagita, Kunio. 1975. The Legends of Tono. Translated, with an Intro- 
duction by Ronald A. Morse. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Foundation. 



ERIC 



6 

148 



Kobayashi 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Algarin, Joanne P. Japanese Folk Literature: A Core Collection and Reference 
Guide. New York: R.R. Bowker, 1982. 

Excellent reference guide for a number of important sources on the 
Kappa as well as many other titles on folklore and Japanese folktales in 
general. Included are sources such as U. A. CasaTs "The Kappa" in Trans- 
actions of the Asiatic Society of Japan and Eiichiro Ishida's 'The Kappa 
Legends: A Comparative Ethnological Study on the Japanese Water- 
Spirit Kappa and Its Habit of Trying to Lure Horses into the Water" in 
Folklore Studies. Most sources are accompanied by detailed abstracts 
that are useful and informative. The guide is well organized, easy- to-read 
and includes many helpful aids. There is a preface, introduction, two 
appendices on Japanese language sources and Japanese terms, and 
three indices, subject, article, and folktale. 

Ashby, Janet and others, eds. Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. New York, 
NY: Kodansha International/USA, 1983. S.v. "Kappa," by Inokuchi 
Shoji. 

Comprehesive compilation of knowledge about Japan to the 
English-speaking world. Tlie Encyclopedia represents a ten-year joint 
effort by Japanese and Western scholars and editors. The text consists 
of a diversity of subjects including broad introductory articles on most 
major aspects of Japanese culture, and covers both historical and 
modern Japan. There are approximately 1,000 illustrations to enhance 
the text; one of these illustrates Kappa with fish. The Kappa's physical 
features, age, and size are mentioned in one short paragraph. Its helpful 
and destructive characteristics and some of its predilections are also 
discussed. The information is of interest and varies somewhat from 
other sources. The Encyclopedia is highly recommended as the first 
source of reference to Japan and the Japanese. 

. Kodansha Enclyclopedia of Japan. New York, NY: Kodansha 

International/USA, 1983. S.v. "Suijin," by Oto Tokihiko. 

Short narrative of water gods and the tradition surrounding 
them. Implies that the Kappa may be a degenerate form of the water god, 
but this notion is not further developed. Useful as a brief introduction 
of the Kappa's relationship to the water deity. 



ERIC 



7 

149 



Kobayashi 



Jobes, Gertrude. Dictionary of Mythology, Folklore, and Symbols. New York: 
Scarecrow Press, 1961. (3 vols.) 

Three part, comprehensive dictionary of symbols, names, and 
motifs related to mythology and folklore. The first and second volumes 
contain the terms in alphabetical arrangement, ending with an author 
bibliography in the second volume. The third volume contains an index, 
a list of abbreviations and symbols, a table of deities, heroes, and perso- 
nalities, and a table of supernatural forms, realms, and things. The 
work is somewhat dated and makes only minor reference to the Kappa, 
relating it to a dwarf or a bogey. 

Joly, Henri L. Legend in Japanese Art: A Description of Historical Episodes, 
Legendary Characters, Folklore, Myths, Religious Symbolism Illustrated 
in the Arts of Old Japan. Rutland, VT: Charted E, Tuttle, 1967, 

Alphabetical arrangement of people, places, things, and concepts, 
including historical episodes, legendary characters, folklore, myths, and 
religious symbolism depicted in objects dart of Japan, There are 700 
black and white illustrations and sixteen full-color reproductions of art 
work. The Kappa is depicted in three illustrations and the text includes 
a brief explanation of its physical features and habits and provides other 
names for it. There are also references to a man who captured a Kappa 
and to a poem by Michizane as protection against the Kappa. This large 
volume has some value in research. 

Leach, Maria, ed. Funk & Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of Folklore, 
Mythology, and Legend. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1972, 

One-volume edition of countries, regions, cultures, culture areas, 
peoples, tribes and ethnic groups as they relate to folklore, legends, and 
mythology. There are a variety of help aids, such as a key to Si items 
discussed, a list of abbreviations, and an index. The print is small but 
readable and main entries are in boldface. Contains twenty-one 
references to the term "folklore" and extensive discussions of folklore and 
mythology and of Japanese folklore. There is a short description of the 
Kappa, but this information is insignificant compared to that found in 
Japanese reference sources. This volume is more valuable as a source of 
background information on Japanese folklore. 

People, Places and Things in Henri Joly's Legend in Japanese Art: An Analy- 
tical Index. Prepared by John Barr Tompkins and Dorothy Campbell 
Tompkins, Alexandria, VA: Kirin Books and Art, 1978, 

General index to Henri Joly's Legend in Japanese Art and a 
necessary aid to researchers. Should be used in tandem with Joly's 
volume. Lists ten references and cross references to the Kappa including 
illustrations. 



ERLC 



8 

150 



Kobayashi 



Steinfirst, Susan. Folklore and Folklife: A Guide to English-Language 

Reference Sources. New York: Garland Publishing, 1992. (2 vols.) 

Fairly comprehensive guide of all aspects of folklore and folklife. 
The sources are international in range, but predominately lists those of 
Europe, the U. S., and other English-speaking nations. The folk narra- 
tive section of the first volume lists several bibliographies and scholarly 
reference sources on Japanese folk literature containing knowledge about 
the Kappa. Arranged by country or by continental area, they are easily 
located. More importantly, all of the sources are annotated and provides 
valuable assistance in making suitable research choices. The guide also 
provides indexing by author, title, and subject. 



Additional References 

Akutagawa, Ryunosuke. Kappa. Translated from the Japanese by Seiichi 
Shiojiri. New ed. rev. [Tokyo, Japan]: Hokuseido Press, 1949. 

Largely, a fictionalized satire of Japanese society in the 1920's. 
Reveals some of the attributes of the Kappa of traditional folklore, but 
in a modern setting. This edition also includes introductory notes on 
the author and on the Kappa in Japanese folklore. The twelve pages of 
Kappa references are mostly comprised of direct quotations from early 
seventeeth to nineteeth century sources. These important references 
furnish additional insights into the nature and character of the Kappa. 



ERLC 



• Exotic Japanese Stories: The Beautiful and the Grotesque. Trans- 
lated by Takashi Kojima and John McVittie. New York: Liveright 
Publishing, 1964. 

Collection of sixteen unusual stories each preceded with an 
introductory note. Each story is accompanied by one or two collage 
illustrations in color or in black and white. The Kappa story offer in 
this collection is identical to the one described above. The one-page 
introductory note, however, is an interesting summary of the Kappa with 
mention of several areas of habitat. According to the note, this might be 
of interest to Kappa seekers. 

Blyth, R.H. Oriental Humour. Tokyo, [Japan]: Hokuseido Press, 1959. 

Comprehensive orientation into the humor of China, Korea, and 
Japan. Arranged in three parts, each beginning with a general dis- 
cussion on the humor of each particular country. The section on Japan 
is noticeably larger due to the author's familiarity with and knowledge of 
the area. There are two brief references to the Kappa in this section. 
One describes the Kappa as an old man three feet high who asks for a 
basin of water. When it is brought, the old man's neck elongates and he 

9 

151 



Kobayashi 



disappears into the water. The other reference tells of the wife of a 
samurai who is physically harassed by a beautiful boy. She cuts off his 
arm and then discovers that he is a Kappa. The text also contains 
twenty-six plates, some illustrations, a chart of Japanese humor, and an 
index. Interesting essentially as a comparative work on oriental humor. 

Casal, U. A. 'The Kappa." The Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, 
3d ser., 8 (December 1961): 157-99. 

In-depth account of the Kappa in this expanded version of a 
paper presented to the Society in 1960. This lengthy paper is well- 
researched and documented angi offers a comprehensive narrative on the 
Kappa's features, behavior, habits, origin, etc. The narrative is enhanced 
by recordings of an extensive selection of local stories and legends. 
Attention is also directed to several noteworthy references such as the 
birth of baby Kappas and to female Kappas. Includes an index and, 
although dated, remains an indispensable and essential resource on the 
Kappa. 

Davis, F. Hadland. Myths and Legends of Japan. Boston: David D. Nickerson, 
n.d. 



Limited edition study of the myths and legends of Japan contain- 
ing a representative selection of traditional stories. In the chapter on 
supernatural beings, the Kappa is described as a river goblin with scaly 
limbs. It possesses vampire-like tendencies and sucks the blood of its 
victims, and in some areas claims two victims each year. A colored 
plate of a Kappa with its victim illustrates a short story relating the 
Kappa's attempt to steal a horse. The study also contains many other 
colored plates, a list of gods and goddesses, a genealogy of the ages of 
the gods, and a bibliography, glossary, and index. Useful for an overview 
of Japanese mythology. 

De Garis, Frederic and Atsuharu Sakai. We Japanese: Being Descriptions of 
Many of the Customs, Manners, Ceremonies, Festivals, Arts and Crafts 
of the Japanese Besides Numerous Other Subjects. Yokohama, Japan: 
Yamagata Press, n.d. 

Set of three books bound together in one edition originally inten- 
ded to meet the informational needs and requests of guests at the 
Fujiya Hotel in Hakone, Japan. Book I relates the Kappa's physical 
description and provides a measurement of its exact height. Three short 
stories are also introduced, each from a different area of Japan. Book III 
refers to an area where the Kappa had been prevalent and tells a story 
about "Kappa medicine" and where it might still be purchased. The 
books are generously sprinkled with black and white illustrations and 
two are of the Kappa. The edition may be dated in certain areas, 
but basically it contains a wealth of information on many aspects of 
mid-twentieth century Japanese life, customs, and beliefs. All three 
books were last printed in October, 1950, in Japan and may be difficult 
to locate. 




Kobayashi 



Dorson, Richard. Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. 

Selection of Japanese folk legends in eight parts. Part two lists 
twenty-two short stories of various monsters, seven of which are Kappa 
stories. Each story begins with brief background notes and comments. 
Delightful black and white illustrations are randomly scattered through- 
out the text to embellish the work. Also includes an informative intro- 
duction by the author, a list of sources of the legends, a bibliography, 
and an index. Wonderful source of Kappa stories as well as stories of 
other categories of folk tales. 

Grant, Glen. "In Search of Kappa and Mujina: Japanese Obake in Hawaii," 
Hawaii Herald, 21 October 1983, 1, 8-9. 

Investigates two supernatural Japanese phantoms, the Mujina 
and the Kappa, and considers the question of their integration into 
contemporary Hawaiian urban tales. In Hawaii, the legend of the Kappa 
persists in stories of drowned children and in sightings of a "green lady" 
with greenish scaly skin, seaweed hair, duck-like feet, and claws on her 
hands. Also includes a concise introduction to the Kappa and a large, 
somewhat bizarre sketch of the creature. Intriguing perspective of the 
Kappa legend in today's society. Teachers, folklore students, and 
interested readers will find the article appealing, 

Ishida, Eiichiro. 'The Kappa Legend: A Comparative Ethnological Study on 
the Japanese Water-Spirit Kappa and Its Habit of Trying to Lure Horses 
into the Water." Folklore Studies 9 (1950): 1-152. 

Primarily discusses the legends surrounding horses and oxen and 
their relationship to water-gods. Worldwide associations with similar 
legends are also examined as well as associations between horses and 
dragons and horses and oxen. The latter part of the study focuses on the 
Kappa and its relationship to monkeys and horses. Thoroughly re- 
searched and includes an extensive bibliography and twenty interesting 
illustrations, three depicting a variety of Kappa. Particulary valuable for 
scholars, folklorists, and students researching this area of ethnology and 
folklore. 



Joya, Mock. Quaint Customs and Manners of Japan. Tokyo, Japan: Tokyo 
Newsservice, 1951. 



Arranged by chapters with a list of topics and page numbers. The 
Kappa is listed under the chapter for animals and is easily located. The 
reference here is an abbreviated version of the author's discussion in 
another book entitled Mock Joya's Things Japanese. Since more infor- 
mation is provided in this later book, it is the preferred source, 

_ . Mock Joya's Things Japanese. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Times, 1985, 



Discusses two references to the Kappa. One reference provides 
detail about the Kappa's features and its environment and alludes to its 

EWC 153 



Kobayashi 



possible origin as that of the suppon or mud-turtle. The second 
reference tells of another possible origin of the Kappa in a traditional 
tale about a living island. The god of the island planned to move the 
island closer to the mainland of Kyushu by making 3,000 straw dolls 
and transforming them into workmen. His attempt failed and he threw 
the dolls into the sea whereby they turned into Kappa. The book is use- 
ful in developing an overall impression of the Kappa and as a source of 
reference leading to further study. 

Kiej'e, Nikolas, comp. Japanese Grotesqueries. With an Introductory Essay by 
Terence Barrow. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1973. 

Consists almost entirely of illustrations, each accompanied by 
brief descriptive paragraphs. The illustrations are black and white copies 
of traditional Japanese art, most from the Edo period (1615-1867) of 
Japanese history. There are only two illustrations of the Kappa, both 
depicted in its water environment. One accompanying article refers to a 
demon as an enemy of the Kappa. The description, habits, nature, and 
characteristics of the Kappa are expanded in the introduction, but 
details are similar to other reference sources. Valuable primarily as a 
general reference on Japanese grotesqueries rather than as a source 
about the Kappa. 

Murakami, Hyoe and Donald Richie, eds. A Hundred More Things Japanese. 
Tokyo, Japan: Japan Culture Institute, 1980. S.v. "Kappa," by Anthony 
Liman. 

Alphabetical a rangement of one hundred things Japanese. 
"Things" refer to objects as well as to concepts. Heavily illustrated with 
colored and black and white photographs, copies of art work, and line 
drawings. The discussion on the Kappa is concise and makes reference 
to some contemporary phrases that allude to the Kappa. Includes an 
illustration of the Kappa and is interesting despite its brevity. 

Ouwehand, C. Namazu-e and Their Themes: An Interpretative Approach to 
Some Aspects of Japanese Folk Religion. Leiden, Netherlands: E.J. 
Brill, 1964. 

Highly involved, interpretive study of the namazu-e or "catfish 
pictures," its associated legends and stories, its place in folk culture and 
folklore, and its thematic relationship with the Kappa figure. The Kappa 
is discussed as an intermediary figure to help interpret the sub-theme of 
monkey and hyotan namazu. The reading is difficult, complicated, and 
often confusing even with the liberal use of footnotes by the author. 
There are twenty-live illustrations at the back of the book; two are of the 
Kappa. A bibliography, character index, corrigenda, and two maps are 
also included. Recommended for those knowledgeable and experienced 
in the field of comparative anthropology and ethnology. 



ERjfc 



12 

154 



Kobayashi 



Piggott, Juliet. Japanese Mythology. New rev. ed. New York: Peter Bedrick 
Books, 1982. 

This work is part of The Library of the World's Myths and Legends, 
an authoritative series on the major mythologies of the world. The book 
is well illustrated with many beautiful color and black and white 
photographs of art objects from international museums. In the section 
on creatures and spirits, it discusses some of the older creatures and 
spirits including the Kappa. Also relates interesting information about 
the description, origin, characteristics, and habits of the Kappa. A 
particularly large black and white illustration of the Kappa is displayed 
which clearly reveals its physical features. Several stories are related 
with references to a few more stories in other parts of the book. The 
stories are abbreviated, but still engaging. Overall, an informative and 
useful folklore and artistic resource, concluding with a short bibliogra- 
phy and an index. 

Rhoads, Sharon, 'Tales from Tohoku, Japan's Exotic Northeast." The East 
6, no. 6 November-December 1970, 28-35. 

Antiquated travel-log description of Tohoku, the northeast area 
of Japan's main island of Honshu. In the town of Tono, reference is 
made to Kappa Pool and to the Kappa in general. The reference is a 
reiteration of other more authoritative sources, but the article is accom- 
panied by two Kappa illustrations. One of these is peculiar and depicts 
the Kappa in the unusual pose of the maneki-neko cat with raised paw. 
No explanation is given for this pose. 

Yanagita, Kunio. The Legends of Tono. Translated, with an introduction by 
Ronald A. Morse. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Foundation, 1975. 

Collection of 1 19 tales and stories recorded verbatim by the 
author from Kyoseki Sasaki of the Tono district near the Pacific coast in 
northeastern Japan. The tales are significant because value is placed 
upon the Japanese oral tradition of storytelling which reflects daily 
village life through local legends. Five short stories concern the Kappa. 
Two of these refer to children of the Kappa, one is similar to the well- 
known legend about the Kappa and a horse, and the last two tell of the 
Kappa's footprint and face color. Each story is numbered and can be 
located using the index at the end of the book. Maps and a few color 
photographs of Tono add to the worth of these simple legends and tales. 
The reading is interesting and useful for local references regarding the 
Kappa. 



13 

155 



Kobayashi 



Traditional Tales 



Baruch, Dorothy W. Kappa's Tug-ofWar With Big Brown Horse: The Story of 
a Japanese Water Imp. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. 

Charming version of the old legend about the Kappa's encounter 
with a horse* After an introduction to the Kappa, the story centers on 
the Kappa's attempt to steal the big brown horse of Farmer Shiba. While 
the horse tries to withstand the tugging on its rope, the farmer helps by 
bringing his pet monkey to scare the Kappa. This succeeds and the horse 
drags the Kappa to the stable. The neighbors want to kill it, but the 
farmer intervenes and is rewarded each day thereafter with fish caught by 
a grateful Kappa. The story is enhanced by traditional Japanese-style 
watercolor illustrations and would be enjoyed by lower elementary 
students. 

Brenner, Barbara. Little One Inch. New York: Coward, McCann & Geoghe- 
gan, 1977. 

Personal rendition of an ancient folktale about the adventures 
of Issun Boshi, a man no bigger than a finger. While seeking his for- 
tune, Issun Boshi encounters three types of demons: the Kappa, Tengu, 
and OnL The Kappa lives in the water, has poor eyesight, and has the 
face of a monkey and the feet of a frog. It tries to trick Issun Boshi into 
the water by challenging him to a game oi pull-finger. Issun Boshi, how- 
ever, wisely hands the Kappa a cucumber in place of his finger, makes 
his escape and continues on his way. The tale is well written and illus- 
trated, with colors all in muted shades. Suitable for read-alouds to 
elementary students and for the promotion of multicultural awareness. 

Cox, Miriam. "The River Kappa and the Ocean Ningyo." In The Three 

Treasures: My ths of Old Japan. Evanston, IL: Harper & Row, 1964. 
pp. 103-106 

Collection of short stories and tales of old Japan, retold and 
illustrated with traditional ink and brush drawings of various sizes. The 
selection is actually two short separate stories combined under one title. 
The story is the popular version of the Kappa and the horse, but is told 
through the eyes of an onlooker named Yoshi. When the Kappa of the 
Kawachi River is captured, it is forced to sign a document promising 
never to trouble the animals or villagers. Unable to write, the Kappa 
makes an imprint with its fist and the document is taken to the temple 
where it still remains. Offers an understanding of Japanese culture 
and mythology. Appropriate for personal reading by intermediate to high 
school students. 



Dorson, Richard. "A Grateful Kappa. M In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: 
Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp. 65-66 



In the Northern District of Miyazaki Prefecture, the Kappa is some- 
times called "hyosubo" One day, Kimmaru, a Shinto priest who excels 




14 

156 



Kobayashi 



in fencing, is approached by a Kappa as he crosses a bridge. The Kappa 
requests the help of Kimmaru. A large snake has swallowed the Kappa's 
children one by one until he has but one child left. Kimmaru assures 
the Kappa that he will help and that very night skillfully cuts the snake 
in two. In repayment for his kindness, the Kappa promises never to pull 
any children of the priest into the river. To this day, children of this 
town will say these words before taking a swim: "Mr. Hyosubo, we belong 
to the family of Kimmaru. Don't play pranks on us." All of the stories 
in Folk Legends of Japan will be of interest to folklorists, students and 
researchers of folklore studies, and other readers of folktales and legends. 

. "The Kappa Bonesetter." In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: 

Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp. 63-65 

Story of a famous bonesetter in Hakata named Unsho-an. A 
Kappa pesters the wife of Unsho-an until she finally cuts off his hand. 
Unsho-an keeps the webbed hand, but is awakened for three nights by 
the Kappa begging for its return. Unsho-an finally agrees on the con- 
dition that the Kappa teach him the art of bonesetting. From this day 
on, Unsho-an becomes renowned for his skill, and the method of bone- 
setting learned from the Kappa is passed on from generation to genera- 
tion. 

. "The Kappa of Fukiura." In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: 

Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp. 59-61 

Kappa attempts to kill a cow tied to a tree, but his plot fails and 
he loses his arm. A farmer carries the arm home with him and is visited 
for three nights by the pleading Kappa. On the third night, the farmer 
feels sorry for the Kappa and returns the arm. In return, the Kappa 
must promise never to harm any of the villagers until the buttocks of the 
stone Jizo rot away. Includes a small illustration of the Kappa examin- 
ing the stone god. 

. "The Kappa of Koda Pond." In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: 

Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp. 61-62 

The Kappa of Koda Pond tries to pull Saito Bunji's horse into the 
pond, but the horse panics and drags the Kappa back to the stable. The 
miserable Kappa apologizes to Bunji and offers to lend him wooden 
bowls whenever needed. From then on, any time Bunji had a feast at his 
home, the bowls were placed in the yard the night before and returned 
the next day. One night, a neighbor keeps a set of bowls, but the Kappa 
regains them. Thereafter, the bowls were never lent to Bunji again. 

. "The Kappa Who Played Pull-Finger." In Folk Legends of Japan. 

Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp. 62-63 

Relates the legend behind a big stone called Pull-Finger stone in a 
pond at the foot of Mt. Tateshina. A child (in reality, a Kappa), standing 
on the stone, used to stop passers-by to play pull-finger with them. He 

15 



Kobayashi 



would then pull them into the pond and eat them up. Finally, a man 
named Tachiki locks fingers with the Kappa and drags it away on his 
horse. In exchange for his life, the Kappa teaches Tachiki the secret of 
bonesetting and moves away to another pond. This Tachiki then be- 
comes the founder of the line of the famous surgeon, Tachiki. 

• "Memories of Kappa." In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: 

Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp.67-68 

Retelling of a childhood experience in Shikoku by Mrs. Hitoshi 
Kawashima. She tells of swimming in a river as a young girl and of a 
forbidden area of the river where the water formed into a deep, green 
pool. One day, a childhood friend is found dead in the pool. The 
villagers believed that a Kappa had killed her because her anus was re- 
moved, a habit of the Kappa when they pull people into the river. She 
remembers that the Kappa existed for her in those innocent years. 

• "Wrestling a Kappa." In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: 

Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. pp. 66-67 

Brief tale from the farm village of Nao about a wrestling match be- 
tween a Kappa and a strong man named Goro. The Kappa's strength is 
apparent even at the beginning of the match and Goro is nearly defeated. 
He asks the Kappa for a short rest while he finds some rice to eat. The 
Kappa obliges and waits by the stream while Goro eats some rice. When 
the wrestling resumes, Goro proves to be much stronger than the Kappa 
and becomes the victor. 

Pratt, Davis and Elsa Kula. "The Kappa's Arm." In Magic Animals of Japan. 
Berkeley, CA: Parnassus Press, 1967. [pp. 23-24] 

Presentation of twelve short stories about some of the magical 
animals in Japanese legends. The Kappa story takes place in the 
southern island of Kyushu. One day, the Kappa decides to display his 
strength and challenges a warrior to a duel. Unfortunately for the 
Kappa, the warrior is an expert swordsman and swiftly ends the duel by 
cutting off the Kappa's right arm. The Kappa begs to have his arm re- 
turned. The warrior agrees, but only if the Kappa shows him how to 
make a healing medicine. A full-page, brightly colored woodblock print of 
the Kappa illustrates this story. This beautifully illustrated book will 
appeal to all ages and offers a wonderful orientation to the magical 
animals of Japan. 



16 

J5S 



The Badger in Folktales of 

Japan 



LOIS TAGAMI 



ERIC 



159 



Tagami 



Introduction 

The badger has played a prominent role in the folklore of 
Japan. Apnearing as a character endowed with transcendental powers 
in tales from early periods of Japan's history, it has been referred to 
as tanuki, mujina, or mami (Dorson 1962, 134). In this bibliography 
the term "badger" will be used to refer to both the tanuki and 
raccoon. 

The first reference to the badger in Japanese literature is 
recorded in an eighth century document, "Laws Concerning 
Robbers" ("Zokuto Ritsu ") where possible transgressors are warned 
against "smoking foxes and badgers out of graves" because of their 
special bewitching powers. In this same period, first accounts of the 
badger's ability to transform itself into other shapes appear in a 
passage from a chronicle entitled "Shoku Nihongi" (Harada 1976, 1). 

By the eighteenth century, the badger had established itself a 
special place in Japanese folklore. Joining the fox and serpent as a 
magical animal that could enchant and deceive, he could assume the 
guise of both ordinary animals and human beings, marry humans, 
and haunt families. He also assumed the form of a mirage 
(Akutagawa 1964, 353). Then, if the need arose, he could bring 
treasures to those who befriended him and cause humiliation or death 
to his enemies (Dorson 1962, 24). 

The badger is often compared to the fox but is a less 
complicated figure. Both are crafty animals possessing supernatural 
powers, but unlike the sly, cold-hearted fox, the badger is more 



ERIC 



1 160 



Tagami 



amusing than fearsome (Ashby 1983, 345). He is deceitful, but not 
clever or persistent enough to execute his schemes. 

Both foxes and badgers disguise themselves as people, but 
foxes generally impersonate beautiful women, while badgers 
impersonate men. Hence, fox stories are mysterious and erotic, but 
badger ones are full of charm and usually have a humorous climax. 
This different image stems from the fact that foxes are messengers of 
the gods, but badgers have absolutely no relation to deities ("Tokubei 
and the FLaccoon" 1976, 62). 

Possessing extraordinary powers, the badger could predict 
deaths and see into the future as well as know of a man's former 
existence (Harada 1976, 2). The badger also had the ability to inflate 
his belly and drum on it with his front paws to amuse himself and 
lure men under the spell of the music into ditches and swamps 
(Harada 1976, 2). Some badgers even beat their bellies so hard that 
they punctured themselves and died (Joya 1985, 146). 

Another interesting peculiarity was the phallic significance 
attached to the badger. There are several tales that describe the 
badger inflating its scrotum so that it could cover "eight mats," a 
measure referring to the size of a room (Harada 1976, 2). The 
badger has also been known to delight in wonderful, crazy, and 
dangerous pranks with his huge scrotum ~ e.g. dragging it behind 
him like a train, draping himself with it like a kimono, or using it as 
an umbrella (Addiss 1985, 130). 



ERIC 



2 161 



Tagami 



Badger Roles 

The badger plays three basic roles in Japanese folklore: a 
vengeful transformer, grateful friend, and roguish prankster (Harada 
1976, 2). 

As a vengeful transformer, the badger seeks revenge for some 
wrong committed against it, such as someone destroying its den, or 
killing its relative or threatening the badger itself. In retaliation, the 
badger is sometimes extremely tenacious and ferocious (Harada 
1976, 2). 

The best known tale in this category is "The Crackling 
Mountain" ("Kachi Kachi Yama" ). Although there are at least 
eighty-eight recorded versions of this tale, the main storyline 
remains the same in all of them. The mischievous badger is captured 
by a farmer for stealing from the farmer's garden. He convinces the 
farmer's wife to free him and when she does, he kills her. He then 
makes a soup out of her, assumes her shape, and tricks the farmer 
into enjoying the tasty soup. 

Sometimes the vengeful badger is not so vicious as seen in the 
tale "Tokubei and the Raccoon." When Tokubei Yamamoto startles a 
raccoon, tne raccoon retaliates by allowing some disciples to view 
him transforming into Tokubei's shape. Because of this, Tokubei is 
mistaken for the raccoon and ends up being punished instead. 

The badger as a grateful and benevolent animal appears in a 
few stories. In "The Badger's Money," a priest allows a badger to 
warm itself by his fire. To repay him for his kindness, the badger 

ERIC 3 162 



Taganri 



works hard on Sado Island and is able to present the priest with gold 
coins. The favorite children's story,"The Lucky Tea-Kettle," is 
found in many different versions and under numerous titles. It 
portrays the badger as a grateful creature who decides to take the 
shape of a magic tea-kettle to help the man who treated him kindly. 

Most of the badger tales, however, depict the animal as a 
rogue and trickster whose practical jokes range from harmless to 
tragic. As a practical joker in "The Badger Who Was a Shamisen 
Player," an inquisitive man is tricked into thinking he is spying on a 
badger who has transformed itself into a "shamisen" (a three- 
stringed musical instrument) player. However, when he is about to 
reveal the identity of the musician to onlookers, he suddenly 
discovers that he is staring at the buttocks of a horse. "Seventy-five 
Badgers" shows the badger as a cmel and wicked creature who lures 
an old woman away from her home and kills her. When her grieving 
husband goes to a shrine seeking aid, he is told to get "Todarabo, 
Dog of Tsukidani." With the help of the dog, he disposes of the 
tricksters. 

Sometimes, the badger is not as wise as it believes it is and 
winds up pathetically, or fatally outwitted. In "The Badger and the 
Magic Fan," the greedy badger steals a magic fan that can make 
noses grow and shrink. However, in his foolishness, he ends up with 
his nose reaching up into the heavens. Haunting houses and other 
sites is a favorite pastime of the badger. "The Hairy Arm" shows the 
badger as a foolish dupe when he haunts an old chapel where a 



9 

ERIC 



4 163 



Tagami 



hunter is spending the night. He is easily captured and then roasted 
and eaten. 

Summary 

The badger in Japanese folklore is a fascinating creature that 
possesses special transformation powers and a fondness for tricking 
the unwary. In most folktales, he is not a wicked trickster, but a 
foolish and amiable one who may sometimes become the victim of 
his own trickery. The badger has played an important role in the 
magic and richness of Japan's oral traditions. 
Reference Notes 

Akutagawa, Ryunosuke'. 1964. Exotic Japanese Stories: The 

Beautiful and the Grotesque. New York: Liveright Publishing 
Corporation. 

Ashby, Janet and others, eds. 1983. Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. 
New York, NY: Kodansha International/USA. S.v. "Tanuki" 
by Tatsuo Saneyoshi. 

Addiss, Stephen, ed. 1985. Japanese Ghosts and Demons: Art of the 
Supernatural New York: George Braziller. 

Dorson, Richard. 1962. Folk Legends of Japan. Japan: Charles E. 
Turtle. 

Harada, Violet H. 1976. The Badger in Japanese Folklore. Asian 
Folk Studies 35 no. 1:1-6. 

Joya, Moku. 1985. MockJoya's Things Japanese. Tokyo, Japan: 
Japan Times. 

Tokubei and the Raccoon. 1976. The East 12 no. 3: 62-65. 



5 164 



Tagami 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Addiss, Stephen, ed. Japanese Ghosts and Demons: Art of the 
Supernatural. New York: George Braziller, 1985. 

Collection of Japanese supernatural art along with 
informative accompanying texts. Included are ninety-nine 
black and white or color photos and prints of ghosts, demons, 
goblins, and other supernatural beings. The chapter entitled 
"The Trickster in Japan: Tanuki and Kitsune" describes the 
mythological role of trickster that tanuki plays in Japanese 
folktales. Also contains the complete tale of Kachikachiyama. 
A comprehensive selected bibliography would benefit further 
study needs. An impressive resource with much to offer for 
the eyes and mind. 

Akutagawa, Ryunosuke'. Exotic Japanese Stories: The Beautiful and 
the Grotesque. New York: Liveright Publishing Corporation, 
1964. 

Collection of Japanese tales that includes one entitled 
"The Badger." Introductory notes to this particular tale 
present the physical description of the badger as well as the 
history of its transformation role in Japanese folklore. An 
ideal source for use in the classroom as the informative 
introduction would be an excellent preface to the sharing of 
the story. 

Ashby, Janet and others, eds. Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. New 
York, NY: Kodansha International/USA,1983. S.v. "Tanuki" 
by Tatsuo Saneyoshi. 

Presents background information on the tanuki including 
its physical description as well as its unique habits. Also 
includes the tanuki's role in Japanese society as the subject of 
folktales, songs, sayings, and as a source of food or fur. A 



6 165 



Tagami 



black and white illustration depicts the tanuki in its natural 
setting. This article is a useful resource for basic information 
about the tanuki in Japanese folklore. 

Dorson, Richard. Folk Legends of Japan. Japan: Charles E. Tuttle 
Company, Mc, 1962. 

This collection of over one hundred Japanese folk 
legends includes a chapter of transformation stories. Three of 
these stories are about the badger. An informative annotation 
prefaces the stories and describes the three roles the badger 
plays in Japanese folklore as well as the titles of stories that 
depict the badger in each of those roles. An index and 
bibliography at the end of the book will assist further study on 
similar topics. 

Harada, Violet H. "The Badger in Japanese Folklore." Asian Folk 
Studies 35 no. 1 (1976): 1-6. 

Beginning with a historical look at the badger in 
Japanese folklore, this paper goes on to describe the badger as 
a complex creature who plays three different kinds of roles in 
folklore tradition. The roles are pointed out in abbreviated 
renderings of numerous tales. Also included are facts about its 
special transformation powers and its fondness for trickery. 
Footnotes provide useful references for further study. An 
important source for an in-depth study of the badger in 
Japanese oral tradition. 

Joya, Moku. Mock Joy a' s Things Japanese. Tokyo, Japan: Japan 
Times, 1985. 

Arranged alphabetically, this list of Japanese things and 
concepts includes three references to the badger. Under 
"Bunbuku Chagama," two versions of the famous badger-kettle 
story are summarized. "Shojoji" introduces the belief and 
story about the badger producing drum-like music by beating 
its fat belly with its front paws. "Tanuki" contains in-depth 
information about the tanuki including its physical description, 
traditional past, and its role in Japanese society. Includes a 



7 166 



Tagami 



table of contents by subject and an index. The wealth of 
information in an easy-to-read style makes this a very useful 
reference source for information about the badger as well as 
many other Japanese topics. 

Murakami, Hyoe and Donald Richie, eds. A Hundred More Things 
Japanese. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Culture Institute, 1980. 

One hundred Japanese things and concepts arranged 
alphabetically includes one reference to the tanuki. This article 
describes the tanuki as no mere beast, but one of the more 
magical figures of Japanese folklore, although in possession of 
basic flaws. Also questions its apotheosis in ceramic form in 
many Japanese gardens. An index and many black and white or 
color illustrations are included. This quick reference source 
provides interesting information about many Japanese things in 
short, concise form right at your fingertips. 

Piggott, Juliet. Japanese Mythology. New York: Paul Hamlyn, 1969. 

Heavily illustrated reference source with many black 
and white photographs and prints among an easily-read text. In 
the chapter entitled "Men and Animals," the badger is depicted 
as a malicious character in Japanese folklore through 
summaries of the tales of "Dankuro" and "Kachi Kachi 
Mountain." The different abbreviated renderings of the 
badger-kettle tale are also described and compared. Includes 
an index at the end of the book. A valuable source for an in- 
depth study of Japanese mythology. 

Pratt, Davis and Elsa Kula. Magical Animals of Japan. Berkeley, 
California: Parnassus Press, 1967. 

Collection of tales about animals with magical powers in 
Japan, including one story entitled "The Badger and the 
Boatmen." A double-spread page at the end of the book 
describes each of the magical animals. The badger's trickiness 
and transformation ability are highlighted. The combination of 
collected tales and relevant background information makes this 
juvenile book very useful for the classroom. 



8 167 




Tagami 



"Tanuki in Fact and Fancy." The East 12, no. 9, 10 (August 1976): 
78-83. 

Informative article on the tanuki's long-standing 
relationship with the Japanese. Contains many facts about its 
physical description, habitats, diet, and habits. Also includes an 
in-depth focus on the tanuki in Japan's folk literature as a 
transformer and prankster. Several folktales are scattered 
throughout the easy-to-read text. Black and white illustrations 
depict tanuki characters as well as real live tanuki in their 
natural setting. Because of the vast amount of information it 
provides, this is an excellent reference source for the study of 
the tanuki in general and in the folk literature of Japan. 

"Tokubei and the Raccoon," The East 12, no.3 (April 1976): 62-65. 

Preface to the Japanese folktale entitled "Tokubei and 
the Raccoon" contains a history of the raccoon in Japanese 
folklore as well as comparisons to another animal known to 
disguise himself, the fox. Also presents several examples of 
expressions that raccoons often appear in. The combination of 
folktale and informative introduction makes this source 
worthwhile searching for use in the classroom. 



Traditional Tales 

Akutagawa, Ryunosuke'. "Hie Badger." In Exotic Japanese Stories: 
The Beautiful and the Grotesque. New York: Liveright 
Publishing, 1964. pp. 353-357. 

Interesting tale of how the badger became a symbol of 
bewitchment. Beginning with the love affair between a young 
girl and boy; to the young boy singing in the shadows while he 
waits for his lover; to the rumor that those were badgers' 
voices heard singing at night. A Buddhist priest explains the 
badgers' singing as the transmigration of souls between man 
and badger. Eventually more and more people claim that they 
have seen or heard the badger. One black and white 



9 

ERJC 



9 168 



Tagami 



illustration is included within this tale about badger people. 
Written in a complex, highly intellectual style, this tale would 
be more suitable for high school through academic study. 

Bang, Garrett, trans. "The Crusty Old Badger." In Men From the 
Village Deep in the Mountains and Other Japanese Folk Tales. 
New York: MacMillan Publishing, 1973. pp. 38-45. 

Folktale about the crafty badger from the outskirts of 
Shirajima who enjoys transforming himself and tricking 
people. His latest victim, Sohei, is made a fool and ventures 
out to get revenge. However, Sohei is tricked once again when 
he discovers himself bald, his beautiful thick hair shaved off 
by the badger. The easy-to-read double-spaced text of this tale 
is proceeded by one full page black and white illustration. 
Appropriate for storytelling or folklore study in elementary 
or academic classrooms. 

Dorson, Richard M. "The Badger That Was a Shamisen Player." In 
Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. 
pp. 134-135. 

One day as a man observes from across the Arima 
River, a badger transforms logs and weeds into a shamisen (a 
three-stringed musical instrument) and then a little girl. He 
then puts weeds on his own head and transforms himself into a 
blind woman. As the man continues to watch, the three figures 
move into a temple at Tanigawa and the woman proceeds to 
entertain the people gathered there with her shamisen.. As the 
man peeks through a hole in the paper door, someone taps his 
shoulder and he discovers that he is peeping into the buttocks 
of a horse. One black and white illustration accompanies the 
easily-written, small printed text. This tale would be suitable 
for folklore study by secondary through academic students and 
sharing in the classroom. 



ERIC 



10 169 



Tagami 



. "Dankuro Badger." In Folk Legends of Japan. Rutland, 

VT: Charles E. Turtle, 1962. p. 136. 

When the nearby castle falls, Dankuro Badger steals into 
the castle and takes valuable utensils and treasures. He stores 
them in his cave and when the people of neighboring villages 
need utensils for special occasions like weddings or funerals, 
they go to Dankuro to borrow such things. However, if they 
do not return what they borrow, it was said Dankuro would 
not lend them any more. When one villager does not return all 
that he borrows, Dankuro not only stops lending, he also 
damages the village's fields as well. Then he piles firewood in 
his cave, sets it alight, and disappears from view forever. This 
short, small-printed tale would be most appropriate as a 
folklore study source. 

. "Seventy-Five Badgers." hi Folk Legends of Japan. 

Rutland, VT: Charles E. Turtle, 1962. pp. 137-138. 

One day when an old man goes up to the mountains, his 
wife is left at home. The old woman chases their runaway cow 
and ends up in Otaki-ga-naru in Miyahara where she is killed 
by a badger. Seventy-five badgers live there and they bring 
much trouble. The god of Ashio Shrine tells the man that 
Todarabo Dog of Tsukidani is the only creature that can 
destroy the badgers. So one morning, the man makes seventy- 
five rice balls and goes to Otaki-ga-naru with Todarabo Dog. 
Each time Todarabo Dog brings out a badger from its den, the 
old man gives him one rice ball. Filled with hunger, the man 
eats the last rice ball and the dog is defeated by the last badger. 
Because the seventy-fifth badger was not killed, there are still 
badgers around. The story-line of this tale would make for a 
good storytelling presentation or read-aloud. It is also an 
invaluable source for the study of Japanese folklore and 
multicultural awareness. 



11 170 



Tagami 



Johnston, Tony. The Badger and the Magic Fan. New York: G.P. 
Putnam's Sons, 1990. 

Amusing version of the well-known folktale about a 
magic fan that makes noses grow and shrink. When the badger 
sees just how special the tengu children's magic fan is, he uses 
his transforming powers to get it and trick people with it. He 
turns a beautiful rich girl's nose long. Her father tries to help 
her, but no doctor, witch, or thinker can shrink her nose. 
Finally, in desperation, he offers his daughter and half of his 
riches to anyone who can make his daughter's nose short 
again. The badger, upon hearing this, waves the magic fan by 
the girl's nose and shrinks it. He eats so much at the wedding 
feast, he falls asleep. The tengu children discover him and fan 
his nose with the magic fan. The badger's nose grows longer 
and reaches into the clouds. Some heavenly workers use the 
badger's nose as a pole for their bridge across the sky and the 
badger is never seen again. The beautiful color illustrations by 
Tomie dePaola and simple text make this children's book an 
excellent choice for read-aloud, personal enjoyment, and 
multicultural awareness by readers of all ages. 

Mayer, Fanny Hagin, trans. "Animal Races." In Ancient Tales in 
Modern Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University 
Press, 1984. p. 285. 

A badger and a mudsnail decide to race to the Grand 
Shrine in Ise. Mudsnail secretly fastens himself to badger's tail 
and is brushed off at their destination when badgers flicks his 
tail. He then exclaims that badger is late since he has alreadly 
been there a while. A shoit tale sans illustrations, this story 
will make a good choice for storytelling or folklore study by 
elementary through academic students. Another version of this 
tale is found in Kunio Yanagita's Asian Folklore and Social 
Life Monographs. 



er|c 



u 171 



Tagami 



♦ "The Badger's Divination." In Ancient Tales in Modern 

Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1984. 
p. 288. 

One night, a hunter's daughter begs him not to go 
hunting the next day because of a dream she has had. However, 
since he is a hunter, he sets out as usual the next morning. 
While hunting, one of his dogs leads him to a shrine. There he 
sees his daughter who tells her father that she is there to 
become the bride of the monkey leader. The hunter waits with 
his guns for the monkeys to return. Upon their arrival, the 
monkey leader senses something wrong and asks Uncle Badger 
to come and make a divination. Badger makes a divination, but 
it is too late. The hunter shoots the monkeys. Without 
illustrations or effective story line, this tale would be more 
appropriate for use in folklore study than for sharing in the 
classroom. 

. "Bumbuku Teakettle." In Ancient Tales in Modem 

Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1984. 
pp. 139-140. 

One version of the famous badger teakettle tale. In this 
version, a poor junk dealer asks a badger to transform into a 
teakettle. The junk dealer takes the beautiful teakettle to the 
priest at a temple who offers to buy it for three ryo. After 
being scrubbed and placed on the fire, however, the badger 
teakettle sticks his face, feet, then tail out and runs off into the 
mountains. And so the priest lost his three ryo. This easy-to- 
read tale without illustrations would be ideal for storytelling 
or reading aloud by elementary through academic students 
either for personal enjoyment or folklore study. 

• "Comparing Disguises." In Ancient Tales in Modern 

Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1984. 
p. 169. 

A bad fox named Osan and a bad badger decide to have 
a transforming contest. The badger turns himself into a 



tj& 13 172 



Tagami 



beautiful bride and then into a footman. When it is Osan's 
turn, he tells badger about a feudal lord's procession that 
would come through the pine grove on the highway in a few 
days. When the day arrives, the badger goes up to see the 
splendid procession and tells the feudal lord that he has done 
fine. He is cut down by the accompanying samurai for the 
procession was a real one. Osan made a fool of the badger. 
Short and without illustrations, this tale would be more 
appropriate for folklore study than classroom sharing. 

. "A Dialogue with a Ghost." In Ancient Tales in Modern 

Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1984. 
pp. 159-160. 

One night, a doctor living in a vacant temple is haunted 
by a voice and loud knocking on the doors. In the morning he 
finds big footprints of an animal and hears rumors that it must 
have been a badger. Several men decide to wait for the badger 
that night. Just about the same time as the night before, 
something pounds on the doors and yells loudly. The men yell 
back louder and use the temple drams to accompany their 
shouts. The shouting contest continues for some time and just 
at midnight it stops. At dawn, they find a big badger that had 
torn its belly open from humiliation. They make badger soup 
and eat it. Simply-written text without illustrations, this 
spooky tale would certainly be appropriate for storytelling at 
Halloween as well as a source for folklore study by students of 
various ages. 

. "Dividing Things That Were Picked Up." In Ancient 

Tales in Modern Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana 
University Press, 1984. pp. 288-289. 

The badger, monkey, and otter find a piece of straw 
matting, some salt, and some beans. Since they cannot decide 
how to divide the things, clever badger stands up and says that 
monkey can take the mat, otter can take the salt, and he will 
take the beans. The monkey and otter go their separate ways 
but return to badger's house unsatisfied. Badger eats the beans 
and fastens their husks on to his fur. He cries out that he and 



14 .173 



Tagami 



his wife have broken out with boils. The monkey and otter 
walk away saying that they are all in the same tlx. Although 
this tale is not illustrated, it would be worth sharing as a read- 
aloud or storytelling as well as a source for the study of 
Japanese folklore. 

. "Kachi-Kachi Yama." In Ancient Tales in Modern Japan. 

Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1984. pp. 
301-302. 

When a badger mocks an old man and woman as they 
work in their garden, they capture the badger and hang him 
from the beams of their house with thoughts of badger soup. 
While the old man continues his work, the badger frees 
himself. He kills the old woman and makes soup out of her. 
Disguised as his wife, the badger serves the old man the soup. 
When he discovers the truth, a rabbit decides to help the 
farmer seek revenge. Rabbit takes badger into the mountains 
and on to the ocean and completes his revenge with tragic 
results. The story-line of this tale makes this an excellent 
storytelling or read-aloud choice. 

. "The Notions Peddler and the Badger." In Ancient 

Tales in Modern Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana 
University Press, 1984. pp. 208-209. 

On his way home, a notions peddler stops at a house and 
asks to spend the night. After dinner, the woman who lives 
there asks if he has any needles. He shows her fine and coarse 
needles, but each one is not quite right and the peddler sticks it 
into the straw mat. At that, the woman expresses much pain. 
Finally he shows her the biggest needle and when she says it is 
too big, he jabs it with all his might into the matting. There is 
a loud shout and the woman and her house disappear. The 
peddler finds himself alone, sitting on a pitch black mountain. 
A badger lived on that mountain and the peddler had pricked 
the scrotum of the disguised badger and killed it. The simple 
story-line makes this tale appealing for sharing through 
storytelling, read-aloud, or just reading for enjoyment by 
readers of all ages. 



ERIC 



is 174 



Tagami 



. "The Straw Mat and the Soy Beans." In Ancient Tales in 

Modern Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University 
Press, 1984. pp. 289-290. 

One day the fox from Obana-mura and the badger from 
Babata discuss how to divide a piece of straw matting and 
some beans that they picked up on the road to Kosatori. The 
crafty badger tells fox to take the mat and sit on the cliff and 
he would save the beans until he returned. But fox is not 
comfortable sitting on the straw mat and returns to the 
badger's cave. Badger, now groaning, has eaten all the beans 
up and fastened the husks onto his fur. Badger sends fox to a 
rice paddy at Hebita-mura on a cold night and tells him to put 
his tail in the paddy so that fish will fasten onto it and he will 
not starve. Greedy fox follows badger's advice and loses her 
tail because it gets frozen into the ice. Although this tale is not 
illustrated, its easy-to-read yet descriptive format helps young 
and old readers visualize the story-line for the study of 
Japanese folklore. 

. "Two Mouths, an Upper and a Lower." In Ancient Tales 

in Modern Japan. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University 
Press, 1984. pp. 213-214. 

Coming home from Kesen with a load of fish on his 
horse, a man from Yonezato meets a sad young woman 
carrying a bundle on her back. He comforts her, but is then 
the subject of amorous glances and indecent behavior. He 
notices that her private parts are strangely formed and move 
as a mouth would open and shut. The man grows suspicious 
and strikes the woman with a burning stick. The part with the 
bundle begins to run away and the part below is knocked over. 
The girl was actually two badgers disguised. Although easily- 
written, this tale would be more appropriate for folklore study 
by secondary through academic students. 



ERIC 



16 1 75 



Tagami 



. "Zuitonbo." In Ancient Tales in Modern Japan. 

Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1984. p. 163. 

Nearly every night a badger comes to annoy a priest 
named Zuiton at a temple in the mountains. Just when it is time 
to go to sleep, the badger shouts outside the wooden doors. 
One night the priest gathers food and wine and waits to 
challenge the badger. The badger eventually arrives and begins 
to shout and Zuiton shouts back. A shouting contest begins. 
Zuiton keeps his spirits up by eating his food and drinking his 
wine and his shouts get louder and stronger each time while 
the badger's shouts only get weaker and weaker. Finally, the 
badger's voice cannot be heard at all and the priest goes to 
bed. In the morning he sees a big badger with its belly split 
open from shouting. This simply written tale has the makings 
of a good storytelling presentation. 

McAlpine, William and Helen. "The Lucky Tea-Kettle." In Japanese 
Tales and Legends. New York: Henry Z. Walck, 1958. pp. 
202-211. 

Retelling of the famous badger tea-kettle folktale. Freed 
from a trap by a tinker, the grateful badger repays him by 
transforming into a beautiful tea-kettle. The tinker presents the 
fine kettle to a priest who places him on hot coals. The badger 
tea-kettle expresses his displeasure by tricking the priest, who 
then returns the kettle to the tinker. At the badger tea-kettle's 
suggestion, the tinker opens up a show booth where the tea- 
kettle dances and walks a tightrope. The tinker and his wife 
prosper and abiding the wishes of the tea-kettle, return it to 
the priest's temple. And there, the folktale goes on to say, it 
sits in a place of honour. A few black and white illustrations 
and unique characterizations make this an entertaining tale to 
share with a wide audience through a read-aloud or 
storytelling presentation. Also included at the end of the tale is 
a glossary of Japanese words used in the story. 



17 176 



Taganri 



Ozaki, Yei Theodora. "The Farmer and the Badger." In The 

Japanese Fairy Book. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Turtle, 1970. 
pp.43-53. 

A popular tale about a wicked badger, a kind farmer, 
and a helpful rabbit. When the badger kills the farmer's wife 
and turns her into soup, a rabbit agrees to seek revenge for the 
farmer. This tale contains a few black and white illustrations 
accompanied by a single-spaced, wordy text. Because of its 
presentation, it is more appropriate for reading by students in 
a secondary or academic classroom. Elementary students will 
benefit from it being presented in a storytelling form. Another 
version of this tale is "Kachi-Kachi Yama" found in Yuri 
Yasuda's Old Tales of Japan. 

Pratt, Davis and Elsa Kula. "The Badger and the Boatmen." In 
Magical Animals of Japan. Berkeley, California: Parnassus 
Press, 1967. 

A mischievous badger disguises himself as a mooring 
pile in the boat harbor to tease the boatmen. The boatmen even 
the score by tying up the badger pile with rope and beating it. 
One large black and white illustration accompanies the 
readable, large print text. A good juvenile source for personal 
reading or study by elementary up to academic students. 
Another version of this tale is "The Pile in the Harbor" from 
Kunio Yanagita's Asian Folklore and Social Life Monographs. 

Redesdale, Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford. "The Badger's 

Money." In Tales of Old Japan. London, MacMillan, 1871. pp. 
110-116. 



When a priest grants an old badger's wishes to warm 
itself by his fire, the grateful badger insists on repaying his 
kindness in some way. Having no needs or wants, the priest 
refuses any requite. However, he finally agrees and asks for 
three ryo in gold that he can offer at the holy shrine. The 
badger leaves and after three years, returns with the gold he 
received by laboring on the island of Sado. The grateful priest 
opens his hut to the badger on cold winter nights for as long as 



ERIC 



18 

177 



Tagami 



he lived. Since this tale is presented without illustrations and in 
a highly intellectual style, it is suitable for storytelling to 
younger children and further study by secondary and academic 
students. 

"The Prince and the Badger." In Tales of Old Japan. 



London: MacMillan, 1871. pp. 117-122. 

Prince Yamanouchi Kadzutoyo loves to fish and one day 
after he has a great haul, a violent shower suddenly comes on. 
As he and his retainer hurry homeward, they come upon a 
young girl weeping on the side of the road. As she tells them 
her sad story, Kadzutoyo draws his sword and cuts off her 
head. When questioned by his father, he explains that he knew 
she was a goblin because her clothes were not wet. Upon their 
return to the roadside, they see a huge badger with its head cut 
off lying on the ground.This tale, lacking illustrations and 
written in a highly intellectual style would be more 
appropriate for secondary through academic folklore study. 

Sakade, Florence, ed. "The Badger and the Magic Fan." In Japanese 
Children's Favorite Stories. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 
1958. pp.73-77. 

Tale about the tricky badger who steals the tengu 
children's magic fan that can make noses grow and shrink. 
When he fans the nose of a beautiful, rich girl and her nose 
grows a yard long, her father frantically calls all the doctors 
in the country. But there is nothing they can do to help her. In 
desperation, the father offers his daughter and half of his 
fortune to anyone who can make her nose short again. Hearing 
this, the badger fans the girl's nose and instantly her nose is 
short again. At the wedding feast the badger eats and drinks so 
much that he becomes very hot and sleepy. Without thinking, 
he fans himself with the magic fan and his nose grows longer 
and longer. It goes up into the clouds where some heavenly 
workers use it as a pole for their bridge across the milky way. 
Simply-written text accompanied by black and white 
illustrations on each page makes this tale a good read-aloud, 
storytelling selection or reading for pleasure choice. 



19 



m " 178 



Tagami 



. "The Magic Teakettle." In Japanese Children's Favorite 

Stories. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1958. pp. 17-24. 

When a priest puts a kettle he has just bought from a 
secondhand shop over a charcoal fire, it spouts a badger head, 
feet, and tail and runs away. Upon being caught, it changes 
back to an ordinary kettle and the priest sells it to a junkman. 
The kettle, named Bumbuku, makes a bargain with the 
junkman. If he takes good care of the kettle and feeds him 
well, the kettle would help the junkman make a fortune. So the 
badger dances and walks a tightrope for a theater full of 
people and after each show the junkman gives Bumbuku 
delicious rice cakes to eat. Eventually the junkman becomes 
very rich. In agreement with the badger, he takes the kettle 
back to the temple to sit on a special stand in the treasure 
house. This tale includes an illustration on every page with one 
of them being a full-page color drawing. The simple text 
makes this an excellent source for read-alouds and storytelling 
presentations or personal reading. Other versions of this tale 
include "Bumbuku Teakettle" {Ancient Tales in Modern Japan) 
and "The Lucky Tea-Kettle" {Japanese Tales and Legends). 

Seki, Keigo. "The Hare, Badger, Monkey, and Otter." In Folktales of 
Japan. Translated by Robert Adams. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1963. pp. 4-6. 

A version of the tale about how the badger, monkey, 
and otter are fooled by their friend, the hare. When the 
friends steal some salt, beans, a water wheel, and a straw mat 
from a salt peddler, they have to make a decision about who is 
to get what. Shrewd hare takes over and gives the others each 
a part of the bounty, but saves the beans for himself. The 
badger, monkey, and otter go home, but quickly return 
unsatisfied to hare's place. The hare, who was eating the beans 
and sticking the skins in his navel, complains loudly that he is 
in pain. The three friends have been tricked, not once, but 
twice by their friend, hare. Easy-to-read, this tale is 
appropriate for storytelling as well as personal reading. A 




ERIC 



20 



179 



Tagami 



short introduction to the tale contains valuable information 
helpful to folklore study. 

. "Kachi Kachi Mountain and the Rabbit and the Bear." In 



Folktales of Japan. Translated by Robert Adams. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1963. pp. 6-14. 

Known in some eighty-eight versions, this particular tale 
is in two parts. Sometimes told as independent tales but more 
often combined, the badger is featured in the first half. In the 
second half where revenge is taken, his part is played by the 
bear. When an evil badger continues to pester an old man, the 
old man catches him and takes him home to make badger soup. 
Instead, the badger makes soup out of the man's wife. A 
helpful rabbit agrees to help the old man get revenge. The 
rabbit tricks the bear many times and finally kills him in a 
deep pool. He takes the bear to a house and makes bear soup. 
The tale then goes on to describe how it came to be that rabbits 
have no tails. Easy-to-read text with a predictable story-line in 
the second part makes it a good storytelling source for young 
children as well as an excellent piece for folklore study. 

. "The Quail and the Badger." In Folktales of Japan. 



Translated by Robert Adams. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1963. pp.14-15. 

From among eleven known versions, this tale describes 
the day when a quail and a badger happen to meet on the road. 
The quail asks the badger to transform himself into a roadside 
stake and he agrees. The quail sits on his head and a palanquin 
bearer carrying a six-foot pole comes by and strikes the quail. 
But the quail hops away at that moment and the badger gets hit 
instead. The angry badger pounces and the quail is caught fast 
in his mouth. When the quail asks the badger to call his mother 
for him, he ilies out. This time the badger grabs his tail. Quail 
pulls with all his might and loses his tail. Easy-to-read text 
with no illustrations, this tale would be most appropriate for 
folklorists young and old. 



ERIC 21 



ISO 



Tagami 



Stamm, Claus. The Very Special Badgers. New York: Viking Press, 
1960. 

Retelling of the folktale about two rival tribes of tanuki 
living on the neighboring islands of Awa and Awaji. To settle 
their dispute, the famous Bald Badger of Awa suggests that 
they have a cheat and change contest and the losing side must 
move to a faraway place. Hie experienced Bald Badger and 
the young but promising Shiba from Awaji try to outwit each 
other with their magical powers. Action-filled story-line 
combined with many black and white illustrations make this 
book a good choice for read-aloud or storytelling for students 
of all ages. 

"Tokubei and the Raccoon." The East. 12, no.3 (April 1976): 62-65. 

On his way home from playing "go" with his abbott 
friend in Awa Province, Yamamoto Tokubei startles a 
raccoon. Days later, some disciples observe a raccoon 
plastering algae from a pond all over his body, which 
magically transforms him into a samurai the spitting image of 
Yamamoto Tokubei. When Yamamoto Tokubei arrives at the 
temple to play "go" with the abbott, the disciples believe that 
he is the disguised raccoon. They tie him up and try to 
suffocate him with smoke. The raccoon, unhappy that 
Yamamoto Tokubei had frightened him earlier, showed the 
disciples his disguise on purpose to get back at Tokubei. Long 
and detailed text accompanied by only a few black and white 
illustrations make this tale more appropriate for storytelling 
or more mature readers and folklorists. 

Tyler, Royall, ed. and trans. "The Grinning Face of an Old Woman." 
In Japanese Tales. New York: Pantheon Books, 1987. pp. 
297-298. 

Despite being told that a pond is dangerous, Natatoshi 
sets off to hunt there. He finds the pond and waits on the bank. 
Deep in the night, a luminous mass rises out of the pond. 
Natatoshi draws his bow and the mass flies back into the pond. 
The next time it comes out, Natatoshi sees the grinning face of 



ERIC 22 181 



Tagami 



an old woman in the light. It tries to pull him into the pond, 
but he stabs it. The lights go out and a badger lays at his feet. 
The highly descriptive text with no illustrations makes this tale 
more appropriate for high school to academic readers for 
personal reading as well as folklore study. 

. "The Hairy Arm." In Japanese Tales. New York: 

Pantheon Books, 1987. p. 122. 

After a day of hunting, Sukeyasu seeks shelter in an old 
chapel that is said to be haunted. Hearing eerie voices, he peers 
out through a hole and sees the shape of a monk as tall as the 
roof. A skinny, hairy arm snakes through the hole and feels 
his face. The next time the arm comes through, Sukeyasu 
grabs it and overpowers its owner. He discovers that he has 
caught an old badger. Sukeyasu asks his men to watch it till he 
can show it off to the villagers in the morning, but the men 
roast it and eat it. Nothing haunted the chapel after that. 
Lacking illustrations, this tale would be best used as a source 
for folklore study or as a spooky storytelling presentation or 
read-aloud for students of all ages. 

• "No Fool the Hunter." In Japanese Tales. New York: 

Pantheon Books, 1987. pp. 174-175. 

When a hermit claims that the Bodhisattva Fugen has 
been appearing every night on his white elephant, a doubtful 
hunter agrees to stay one evening to view him. The hunter 
does indeed see the vision surrounded by light but is puzzled as 
to why he might deserve such a blessing. He draws his bow 
and shoots an arrow into the Bodhisattva's chest. The lights go 
out and something crashes downhill through the brush. At 
dawn, the hunter and hermit follow a trail of blood and find a 
huge badger with an arrow through its chest. This tale, lacking 
illustrations, would be best used as a storytelling presentation 
or source for folklore study. 



23 162 



t 



Tagami 



Yanagita, Kunio. "The Badger and the Snail." In Asian Folklore and 
Social Life Monographs. Translated by Fanny Hagin Mayer. 
China: The Orient Cultural Service, 1972. p. 28. 

While on a pilgrimage to Ise, the badger and the mud 
snail decide to race to the Great Shrine. The clever mud snail 
fastens himself to the badger's tail without him knowing. 
When they finally reach the shrine, the badger flicks his tail 
with happiness and the snail falls off. Without hesitation, the 
mud snail declares he was there first. Readable text without 
illustrations makes this tale appropriate for storytelling and 
folklore study by students of all ages. Another version of this 
tale is "Animal Races" found in Fanny Hagin Mayer's Ancient 
Tales in Modern Japan. 

. "The Badger, the Monkey, and the Otter." In Asian 

Folklore and Social Life Monographs. Translated by Fanny 
Hagin Mayer. China: The Orient Cultural Service, 1972. p. 28. 

On their way to the Yahiko Shrine, the badger, monkey, 
and otter pick up things dropped on the road. They find a 
piece of matting, a bag of salt, and some beans. Since they 
cannot agree on how to divide the things up, the shrewd 
badger sends the monkey to the top of a tree with the matting, 
the otter to the pool with the salt, and he keeps the beans. 
Monkey falls from the tree and otter bums his eyes. In the 
meantime, badger eats every one of the beans and fastens their 
husks onto his fur to feign boils. The monkey and the otter 
were fooled not once, but twice by the badger. Easy-to-read 
text without illustrations makes this a good choice for 
storytelling or further study by elementary through academic 
students. A variation of this tale is "The Hare, Badger, 
Monkey, and Otter" in Keigo Seki's Folktales of Japan. 



9 

ERIC 



24 183 



* 



Tagami 



. "Comparing Disguises." In Asian Folklore and Social 

Life Monographs. Translated by Fanny Hagin Mayer. China: 
The Orient Cultural Service, 1972. pp. 66-67. 

One day Gombe Badger and Ohana Fox decide to have a 
disguise contest. The next night they meet on the grounds of 
Miyojin Shrine. Ohaha Fox disguises herself as a beautiful 
bride. As she walks under a torii, she sees a freshly steamed 
dumpling. Forgetting that she should act like a bride, she picks 
it up and puts it into her mouth. Gombe Badger exclaims that 
he has won. He had transformed himself into the dumpling and 
fooled the ever greedy Ohana Fox. Simply-written text would 
satisfy a storytelling selection criteria as well as a source for 
further study of Japanese folklore. 

. "The Pile in the Harbor." In Asian Folklore and Social 

Life Monographs. Translated by Fanny Hagin Mayer. China: 
The Orient Cultural Service, 1972. pp. 69-70. 

In the harbor of Heisaka in Mikawa a bad badger enjoys 
tricking boatmen. His favorite trick is to disguise himself as a 
pile at which boatmen moor their boats. The boatmen decide 
one day to even the score by going out one full moon night 
with ropes and sticks. When they spot a fat pile they quickly 
tie their rope around it and beat it with their sticks. Crying 
out, the badger reveals his true identity. Simply written, this 
folktale has the makings of a good storytelling selection and 
resource for further folklore study. Another version of this 
tale is "The Badger and the Boatmen" in Magical Animals of 
Japan by Davis Pratt and Elsa Kula. 

Yasuda, Yuri. "Kachi Kachi Yama." In Old Tales of Japan. Rutland, 
VT: Charles E. Turtle, 1971. pp. 191-215. 

Simple retelling of the well-known tale "Kachi Kachi 
Mountain" describes the mean and wicked side of the badger. 
When he is caught by the angry fanner for eating his chickens 
and vegetables, the sly badger convinces his wife to untie him. 
The badger kills her and makes a soup out of her. Then he 



ERIC 



25 184 



Tagami 



changes himself into the wife and feeds the farmer the soup. 
The farmer finds out what has happened and accepts a rabbit's 
offer to seek revenge. The rabbit torments the badger and he 
truly gets punished for his wickedness. The rabbit ends up 
living comfortably with the lonely farmer. The double-spaced 
easy-to-read text and colored illustrations on every other page 
make this an excellent piece of literature to share with any 
classroom in a read-aloud or for personal enjoyment. 



» 185 



Kame: Japanese Sea 
Turtles and Tortoises 



NANCY M. YOMOGIDA 



ERIC 



186 



KAME (JAPANESE SEA TURTLES AND TORTOISES) 

Nancy Yomogida 



187 



Yomogida 

Table of Contents 



Introduction 1 

Kame (Sea Turtles and Tortoises) 1 

History of Sea Turtle Myths in Japan 2 

Sea Turtles as Deities 3 

Sea Turtles as Messengers of Deities 3 

Sea Turtles as Guides to Transport Deities Over the Sea 4 

Sea Turtles as Guides to Transport Mortals Over the Sea 4 

Sea Turtles as Guides to Transport Animals Over the Sea 5 

Sea Turtles as Symbols of Longevity and Happiness 5 

Sea Turtles Rewarding Mortals for Acts of Kindness 6 

Sea Turtle as the Turtle Princess 7 

Conclusion 7 

Reference List 8 

General Background Information 9 

Additional References 12 

Traditional Tales 15 



ERIC 



188 



Yomogida 



Introduction 

Kame (sea turtles and tortoises) often appear in Japanese mythology 
and legends. They are frequently worshipped as deities and as messengers for 
deities. Sea turtles and tortoises also act as transporters carrying other deities, 
mortals, and animals on their backs over the sea. Symbolically, they represent 
longevity and happiness and reward acts of kindness. For centuries, they have 
been held in respect by the Japanese and have played a significant role in 
Japanese mythology, culture, and religion. 

Ironically, however, in spite of their esteemed role in Japanese 
mythology, they are on the endangered species list. Their numbers have been 
drastically reduced because of worldwide demand of their exceptional meat 
and beautiful tortoise-shells. 

Kame (Sea Turtles aiid Tortoises) 

Kame is the generic name in Japanese for all reptiles of the order 
Chelonia, which includes sea turtles and tortoises. "Sea turtles" and 
"tortoises" are frequently used interchangeably when translated from Japanese 
to English works. In this paper, the word "sea turtle(s)" will represent both 
sea turtles and tortoises. 

Only two marine families of kame are found in Japan: Cheloniidae (Sea 
Turtles) and Dermochelyidae (Leatherback Turtles). They are frequently 
found along the seacoast from the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido 
downward to the southern islands. Of these, the akaumigame (Caretta 
caretta) lays its eggs on the Pacific coast of southwestern Japan while the 
aoumigame (Chelonia mydas or Green Turtle) lays its eggs on the Ogasawara 
Islands located near Tokyo (Kodansha 1983, 120). 



189 



Yomogida 



Ranging in length from three to five feet, sea turtles can weigh up to a 
few hundred pounds and live more than 1 50 years. Their long life span has 
inspired many myths in Japan and other Asian countries. 

History of Sea Turtle Myths in Japan 

Myths of sea turtles originated long ago in India and in the Indonesian 
and Melanesian islands. These myths migrated through China and Korea and 
were later imported into Japan. Turtles in ancient Japan were considered 
sacred and their pictures were drawn on walls as protection. 

The earliest records of these myths appear in the Kojiki (Record of 
Ancient Matters) written in 712 A.D. and in the Nihon-Shoki (Chronicles of 
Japan) compiled in 720 A.D. Both records were prepared under imperial 
decree and provide a history of the imperial family (Kodansha 1983, 303). A 
few of these myths are in the sections that describe the role of sea turtles as 
guides to transport deities and mortals over the sea. These myths are 
considered to be very sacred. 

The ancient Japanese worshipped the Ssu-shen (Deities of Cardinal 
Points) with the Turtle deity representing the Northern point. The Deities of 
Cardinal Points were "drawn on the inner walls of the burial chamber in the 
belief that it was an effective charm for safeguarding the body of the deceased 
against the evil spirit" (Nishimura 1929, 88). 

Likewise, in the ancient city of Kokuri (Koguryo), a Korean tribute- 
paying city to Japan, pictures of turtles were discovered on the walls of burial 
chambers. Again, their purpose was to ward off evil spirits and to protect the 
body of the deceased (Nishimura 1929, 88). 



ERIC 



2 130 



Yomogida 



Sea Turtles as Deities 

In the provinces of Kii and Awaji (at the entrance of the Inland Sea), 
sea turtles are found in abundant numbers and venerated as karni (gods). 
Joya states: 



At a certain town of Awaji, a turtle used to come every year to lay eggs 
until a few years ago. This turtle was considered as kami, and the 
people of the town held an elaborate ceremony in worship of it. The 
turtle was about three feet in length, and it always came to the same 
spot during the summer and laid 144 eggs in twelve rows, and twelve 
eggs in each row. When the turtle was seen coming up on the shore, 
the people came out to watch respectfully, and even Shinto priests 
were called to witness the laying of the e^gs. The place where the eggs 
were laid was marked off by shimenawa (straw rope to mark holy 
places), and no children were allowed to come near the spot. The 
Shinto priest came and prayed for the safe hatching of the eggs. It was 
believed that unless such precautions were taken, waves would 
suddenly rise in anger and destroy all those on the shore. For three 
months the eggs were thus carefully guarded, and when they hatched 
and the little turtles left with their mother, the people gathered and in 
very polite language offered their respects to them. Before leaving, the 
turtles were given plenty of sake (Japanese rice wine) (Joya 1985, 153- 
54). 

In addition to being revered and worshipped as a kami, they also serve 
as messengers of kami. 



Sea Turtles as Messengers of Deities 

Sea turtles are often portrayed as obedient and determined messengers 
of the kami in folktales. The Monkey's Liver and The Farmer and the Sea 
Princess (annotations are listed below in the Bibliography) are two examples 
of the sea turtle, being the strongest and fastest swimmer, serving as 
messengers for the undersea kami. 



er|c 



'191 



Yomogida 



Fishermen today still believe sea turtles are messengers of the kami. 
Fishermen rejoice when turtles are caught in their nets for these animals are 
believed to bring good fortune and a bounteous fishing season. The turtles are 
then taken to shore and offered drinks of sake to celebrate their legendary age 
(Joya 1985, 153). 

Sea Turtles as Guides to Transport Deities Over the Sea 

In addition to serving as messengers of the kami, sea turtles also serve 
as guides and carriers to transport deities, mortals, and animals on their backs 
over the sea. 

The Kojiki describes how in 667 B.C., the Emperor, leading the 
Imperial naval force on an expedition against the East, encounters an earthly 
deity named Udzu-biko riding a turtle shell. This deity becomes the pilot of 
the Imperial vessel and is given the name Sawo-ne-tsu-hiko who later become 
the first ancestor of the rulers of Japan (Kojiki 1932, 158-59). 

The Nihon-Shoki relates the myth of the daughter of the Sea God 
Toyotama-hime riding on a great tortoise. She arrives at the seaside home of 
her husband Hikohoho-demi no Mikoto to give birth to 
Hiko-nagi-satake-ugaya-fuki-ahezu no Mikoto (Nishimura 1929, 65). 

The myths cited above in the Kojiki and the Nihon-Shoki are the 
earliest records appearing in Japanese literature of sea turtles serving in a 
water carriage motif. 

Sea Turtles as Guides to Transport Mortals Over the Sea 

Sea turtles also ferry mortals over the sea in folktales. Perhaps the most 
well known is the story of Urashima Taro, the young fisherman who rescues 



ERJC 



192 



Yomogida 



(or catches in some versions) and releases a turtle being tormented by 
children. The turtle later returns to thank Urashima Taro for his kindness and 
then ferries him to the Undersea Kingdom where he is entertained for what he 
perceives as three years. Longing for his village, he is transported back to his 
village on the back of the turtle. 

The Nihon Shoki and the Man'yoshu (ca 759) refer to the man as 
Urashima no Ko (Kodansha 1983, 175). The oldest recorded version of this 
tale dates back to 710 - 794 during the Nara period (Kodansha 1983, 303). 
More recent versions, Urashima Taw, Taw and the Sea Turtles: A Tale of 
Japan, and The Farmer and the Sea Princess may be found in the Selected 
Annotated Bibliography at the end of this paper. 

In the Bonin Islands and throughout Japan, children still ride the backs 
of turtles as recreation (Nishimura 1929, 89). Turtle-shaped boats carrying 
couples are a familiar sight in recreational river activities throughout Japan. 

Sea Turtles as Guides to Transport Animals Over the Sea 

In addition to ferrying deities and mortals, sea turtles also ferry animals 
to the Undersea Kingdom. Although the turtle does not succeed in his 
mission to return with a monkey's liver to the undersea deity, he is portrayed 
as a loyal, obedient, and determined servant. Annotations for the tales The 
Monkey's Liver and The Turtle and the Monkey, appear at the end of this 
paper. 

Sea Turtles as Symbols of Longevity and Happiness 

Sea turtles have traditionally been regarded as symbols of longevity 
(Kodansha 1983, 120). A well-known Japanese proverb is "A crane lives a 



5 193 



Yomogida 



thousand and a turtle ten thousand years." Although sea turtles and tortoises 
generally live only a few hundred years, they are the longest living vertebrate 
on earth and in the sea. 

Sea turtles have also traditionally served as symbols of happiness 
because the Japanese believe that happiness comes from long life (Joya, 
1974, 504). They are usually portrayed as swimming though the water with 
their long, seaweed tails trailing behind them. As the Kodansha states: 

Marine turtles with algae growing on their shells were regarded as 
most auspicious, since the algae waving in the water reminded viewers 
of an old bearded man and, thus, longevity (Kodansha 1983, 120). 

An example of longevity and happiness is the tortoise that appears as a 

companion to Fukurokuju (or Fukurokujin), one of the Seven Lucky Gods of 

Good Fortune. The tortoise has "added to its tail, a long hairy fringe that 

serves to show that the animal has lived for ten thousand years" (Chiba 1966, 

32). For more than a thousand years, Fukurokuju and his companion tortoise 

have been worshipped as the patron god among athletes, chess players, 

gardeners, jewelers, magicians, and watchmakers (Chiba 1966, 40). 

Sea Turtles Rewarding Mortals for Acts of Kindness 

Another function of sea turtles is to reward mortals for acts of 
kindness. After Buddhism was introduced to Japan in the 6th century, sea 
turtles evolved from kami to messengers of kami to ferries and finally to 
symbolize the theme of repayment and gratitude. Folktales such as Urashima 
Taro and The Grateful Turtle show strong Shinto, Buddhist, and Taoist 
influence on the themes of gratitude and the repayment of kindness. 



6 194 



Yomogida 



Today, seacoast villagers believe that sea turtles rescued from nets and 
given sake will "dive through the waves... raise their heads above the water 
and bow to the people on the shore in thanks for the drink" (Joya 1971, 153). 

Sea Turtle as the Turtle Princess 

The sea turtle plays a central role in the Urashima Taro story. Through 
the centuries, however, the sea turtle's roles and functions have changed as 
the social and political climates change. In earlier variations of the Urashima 
Taro story, the sea turtle and the princess are one character (Kodansha 1983, 
303). In later versions, the character separates into a turtle and a princess 
(Kawail988, 99). 

The sea turtle/princess' evolution can be compared by reading versions 
from different eras. During the Nara period, the sea turtle/princess portrays 
divine marriage. During the Heian and Kamakura periods, the sea turtle and 
the princess have separated and have become distinct characters with the sea 
turtle symbolizing longevity and immortahty. During the Muromachi and Edo 
periods, the sea turtle represents the theme of repayment for kindness and 
gratitude. As the sea turtle and the princess become separate characters, their 
roles and functions become more distinct. 

Conclusion 

Sea turtles in Japanese mythology and legends have evolved from their 
original role and function. They are still frequently worshipped as deities and 
as messengers for deities and still symbolize longevity and happiness. By 
understanding their roles and functions in ancient and contemporary Japan, 
we can gain more insight into their value. 



'195 



Yomogida 



Reference List 

Chiba, Reiko. 1966. The Seven Lucky Gods of Japan. Rutland, Vt.: Charles 
E. Turtle. 

Joya, Moku. 1985. Mod: Joya's Things Japanese. Tokyo: Tokyo News 
Service. 

Kawai, Hayao. 1988. The Japanese Psyche: Major Motifs in the Fairy Tales 
of Japan. Translated by Hayao Kawai and Sachiko Reece. Dallas, 
Tex.: Spring Publications. 

Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. 1983. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha. S.v. 
"Folktales," by Ikeda Hiroko. 

.1983. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha. S.v. "Turtles," (genus 

paragraph) by Imaizumi Yoshiharu; "Turtles," (literature/folktale 
paragraph) by Saneyoshi Tatsuo. 

.1983. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha, 1983. S.v. "Urashima Taro," 

by Suchi Tokuhei. 

Nishimura, Shinji. 1929. A Study of Ancient Ships of Japan. Vol. 6, pt. 4, 

Skin-Boats, sec. 2. The Kame-No-Se or Turtle Shell: Tokyo: Society of 
Naval Architects. 

Translation of Kojiki or Records of Ancient Matters. 1932. Translated by 
Basil Hall Chamberlain. Kobe: J. L. Thompson. 



ERIC 



196 



Yomogida 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Embree, Ainslie T., ed. The Encyclopedia of Asian History. New York: 
Scribner, 1988. S.v. "Koguryo," by Kenneth H. J. Gardiner. 

Legends, history, religion, and impact of Chinese and Japanese 
on the ancient Korean kingdom of Koguryo are discussed. The most 
striking examples of tomb art (including pictures of turtles) are of 
frescoes on the inner walls of earth-mound tombs of nobles. These 
show scenes of ancient customs, traditions and daily life. Entries on 
Asian history are in volumes 1 to 3 with the Index in volume 4, Clearly 
written in large print with an understandable and helpful map. Students, 
teachers, and librarians who wish to know more about Koguryo's 
history and highly-developed culture may find this article interesting. 

Jobes, Gertrude. Dictionary of Mythology Folklore and Symbols. New York: 
Scarecrow Press, 1961. S.v. "Tortoise." 

This dictionary contains an abbreviated explanation of the 
symbolisms, functions, and roles of the tortoise in different cultures. 
Although the explanation of the tortoise in Japan contains only two 
lines, this explanation may be used to compare functions from other 
cultures. Folklore heroes, heroines, animals, and symbols are in 
volumes 1 and 2 with the index in volume 3. Recommended for readers 
who desire a brief introduction and an abridged description. For in- 
depth research, other sources are more appropriate. 



'l97 



Yomogida 



. Dictionary of Mythology Folklore and Symbols. New York: 

Scarecrow Press, 1961. S.v. "Turtle." 

A short but succinct explanation of the symbolism, function, and 
roles of turtles in folklore. This brief explanation has only one line 
pertaining to Japan but, like the "Tortoise" explanation above, allows 
readers to quickly compare the various turtle motifs with other cultures. 
This is an adequate source for terse and compact information; however, 
readers desiring to expand their knowledge of turtle motifs and 
symbols may wish to consult other sources. Recommended for a quick 
survey of turtle motifs and symbols. 

Knappert, Jan. Pacific Mythology: An Encyclopedia of Myth and Legend. 
London: Aquarian/Thorsons, 1992. S.v. "Sea-King's Palace." 

The entry in the "Sea-King's Palace" contains a version of 
Urashima, the young fisherman from Tango, who catches and releases 
a tortoise who is the Sea-King's daughter in disguise. The Sea-King's 
Palace and the Hall of Seasons are described well. Readers will find 
this encyclopedia of Pacific mythology and legends valuable for its 
excellent cross-references and comprehensive variations in names. 
However, for narrower and more focused entries, users may wish to 
refer to other sources on this list. Recommended for mscriminating 
readers interested in mythology from the Pacific area. 

Kodansha Encyclopedia of Japan. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha, 1983. S.v. 
"Animals," by Saito Shoji. 

This exceptional, highly-respected English-language 
encyclopedia contains comprehensive and authoritative entries of 
historical and current interest. The references to turtles under 
"Animals" are brief but describe the native traditions, importation 
historically from Chinese literature and religiously from Buddhist 
philosophy, and the development of traditional animal symbols during 
the 13th to 16th centuries. Teachers and librarians will find the 
references of animals in Japanese culture beneficial. 



• ERIC '° 198 



Yomogida 



. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha, 1983. S.v. "Folktales," by Ikeda 

Hiroko. 

This section on "Folktales" discusses the history of folktale 
studies, types and motifs, and diffusion routes to Japan. The oldest 
versions of authentic folktales are included, and types and motifs are 
compared with similar versions from different countries. This 
outstanding overview will help teachers and librarians acquire a good 
historical foundation and an appreciation for Japanese folktales. 
Recommended for students, teachers, and librarians. 

. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha, 1983. S.v. "Turtles," (genus 

paragraph) by Imaizumi Yoshiharu ; "Turtles," (literature/folktale 
paragraph) by Saneyoshi Tatsuo. 

This two-paragraph entry gives an overview of the genus and 
proverb/folktale information. The first describes the scientific names of 
families and egg-laying habits, and the second describes the proverb, 
symbol, and custom relating to marine turtles. While this entry is 
compressed, it may be used as a link to other encyclopedia entries. 
Users may find this entry sufficient to answer simple genus and general 
questions. Recommended for students, teachers, and librarians 
interested in a condensed version of marine turtles in folklore. 

. Tokyo; New York: Kodansha, 1983. S.v. "Urashima Taro," by 

Suchi Tokuhei. 

The standard folktale version of Urashima Taro who rescues an 
ill-treated turtle that then turns into a young woman and invites him to 
the Sea-God's palace is summarized. This entry may be useful for the 
historical sources, dates, and variations of the hero's name listed. 
Earliest original tales identified in these sources may be more 
appropriate for research and storytelling. Recommended for users 
desiring a quick overview of the Urashima Taro tale. 



"199 



Yomogida 



Translation ofKojiki or Records of Ancient Matters. 1932. Translated by 
Basil Hall Chamberlain. Kobe: J. L. Thompson. 

The Kojiki or Record of Ancient Matters, completed in 712 
A.D., contains the history of the imperial family. This credible and 
authentic Record includes the mythology, manner, language and history 
of ancient Japan. The Record has three volumes with the preface and 
creation of Japan in Volume I and the reigns of the emperors in 
Volumes II and III. The reader will find the three appendices most 
useful as they list the text of songs in the Kojiki, chronology of the 
earJy emperors, and a list of books on the Kojiki published from 1883 
to 1932. This is a "Japanese" classic containing no influence from other 
countries. Highly recommended for students of Japanese history. 

/ 

Additional References 

Chiba, Reiko. The Seven Lucky Gods of Japan. Rutland, Vt: Charles E. 
Turtle Co., 1966. 

This book gives the origin, descriptions, functions, and animal 
companions of the Seven Lucky Gods who are the benevolent patron 
gods of professions. The god Fukurokuju, usually accompanied by a 
tortoise that symbolizes longevity, is discussed. This easily read yet 
concise summary of the Seven Lucky Gods makes for interesting 
reading and contains numerous watercolors to help readers identify 
each god. Useful for students, teachers, and librarians in understanding 
Japanese culture and religion. 



300 



Yomogida 



Joya, Mock. MockJoya's Things Japanese. Tokyo: Japan Times, 1985. S.v. 
Tsuru-Kame." 

The entry on "Tsuru-Kame" (Crane and Turtle) is brief but gives 
a good description of its origin, symbol (representing happiness and 
long life), and drama (Noh play performed on happy occasions). 
Written in an appealing and easy-to-read style, this book will introduce 
foreigners to Japanese history, traditions, customs, religious beliefs, 
and folktales, and legends. Readers will enjoy this enlightening book 
and gain a better understanding of the background and meanings of 
Japanese culture. Recommended for students of literature, 
businessmen, and travelers. 

. MockJoya's Things Japanese. Tokyo: Japan Times, 1985. S.v. 

"Turtles." 

This detailed entry describes the historical and religious beliefs 
of the ancient and contemporary Japanese toward turtles. The role of 
the turtle as a kami (god), customs in different provinces, and sayings 
are explained. A version of the story of the young fisherboy, Urashima, 
and the rescued turtle is summarized. The reader may find this entry 
useful to get a better grasp of the relationship between the Japanese 
and turtles. Valuable to students, teachers, and travelers wishing to 
have information about customs relating to turtles. 



» 201 



Yomogida 



Kawai, Hayao. The Japanese Psyche: Major Motifs in the Fairy Tales of 
Japan. Translated by Hayao Kawai and Sachiko Reece. Dallas: Spring 
Publications, 1988. 

Japanese motifs and symbolism are interpreted and compared 
with those of the West. Variations of the Urashima legend and the role 
and evolution of his mother and the Turtle Princess during the Nartf, 
Heian, Kamakura, Muromachi, and Edo periods (710 - 1867 AD.) are 
discussed. Chapter Five elaborates on Urashima's relationship with the 
Turtle and Turtle Princess and to the Japanese psyche. Hie Appendix 
contains selected folktales, and a bibliography is attached. This 
impressive and fascinating book unveils the mystery of the Japanese 
psyche and soul. General knowledge of Jungian psychology may be 
helpful. Recommended for students of folktale literature and 
psychology. 

Nishimura, Shinji. A Study of Ancient Ships of Japan. Vol. 6, pt. 4, 

Skin-Boats, sec. 2. The Kame-No-Se or Turtle Shell: Tokyo: Society of 
Naval Architects, 1929. 

Although this book was written to explain how the turtle shell 
was used as a prototype for Japanese ships, the reader will find this 
book to be an outstanding resource for turtle myths from Japan and 
neighboring countries and islands. Superb, detailed translations give 
historical explanations and interpretations of the backgrounds and 
locations of many myths. Many folktales of turtles carrying deities on 
their backs and pictures of stone turtles with tombstones on their backs 
are discussed. Only 115 pages but tightly written with detailed 
footnotes, black and white photographs, plans, and colored pictures. 
Highly recommended for an in-depth view of turtle myths. 



9 

ERIC 



u202 



Yomogida 



Yanagita, Kunio. The Yanagita Kunio Guide to the Japanese Folk Tale. 
Translated by Fanny Hagin Mayer, ed. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana 
University Press, 1986. 

Kunio Yanagita originated and firmly established folklore 
studies in Japan. This English-language translation of his respected 
Nihon Mukashibanashi Meii (A List of Japanese Folktales), 
representing ihirty years of research, is arranged by tale types and 
contains variations of 347 tale types from the Ashikaga (1338 - 1573 
AD.) era to the present. Some folktales are complete while others are 
highly condensed. An excellent listing and map showing distribution by 
prefectures, sources, and variations in title and story. Tortoise tales are 
listed in tales 84, 294, and 306. A comprehensive glossary and maps of 
old and modern provinces are included. This is a highly recommended, 
must-have, well researched, and intensely-studied scholarly work of 
Japanese folktales. 



Traditional Tales 

Dobrin, Arnold. Taro and the Sea Turtles: A Tale of Japan. New York: 
Coward-McCann, 1966. 

Taro decides to regild the worn statue of Amida Buddha by 
using driftwood to make dolls that will be sold to buy thin sheets of 
gold. The village children help and, months later, Taro sails for the 
marketplace in Kobe where the dolls are quickly sold. Using the 
money, he buys the box of thin sheets of gold and ties it securely in his 
kimono. He sees turtles to be killed for soup and, compassionately, 
purchases and releases them. Sailing home, the boat is boarded by 
pirates and Taro falls overboard. Near drowning, he discovers he is 
riding on the back of a turtle that takes him home. This story 
emphasizes the Buddhist philosophy of kindness and love toward all 
creatures. Subdued watercolors convey a "Japanese" feeling. 
Unfortunately, the author does not give his source for this tale. 
Recommended for all children, adults, and students of Buddhism. 



ERIC 



„ 203 



Yomogjda 



Goodman, Robert B., Robert A. Spicer, and George Suyeoka. Urashima 
Taro. Norfolk Island, Australia: Island Heritage Limited, 1973. 

Urashima Taro saves a sea turtle being tormented by children. 
After a year, the turtle returns to carry Urashima Taro to the Palace of 
the Sea Princess where he falls under her spell. Worrying about his 
family, he feels he must return but, before leaving, he is shown the 
doors leading to the four seasons. The Princess then gives him a 
precious box and warns him against opening it. The turtle carries him 
home where he discovers he has lost 300 years. In anguish, he forgets 
the warning and opens the box. He sees, feels, and tastes the four 
seasons, ages rapidly, and dies. Traditional folk score included. 
Transience and fragility of man and the Zen philosophy of the seasons 
representing the rhythm of life are emphasized. Intensely vivid and rich 
illustrations make this book highly recommended for storytime to 
children and students of Zen literature. 

Japan Times, Ltd. "A Fisherman and the Sea Princess (Urashima Taro)". In 
Folk Tales of Old Japan. Tokyo, Japan: Japan Times, 1975. pp. 25-31 . 

Urashima Taro catches and releases a sea turtle. In gratitude, it 
reappears the next day with an invitation to visit the Dragon Palace. 
Riding on its back, Urashima Taro arrives where he is spellbound and 
charmed by the Princess. After three years, he desires to leave. He is 
given a three-tiered box that he is urged to open only when he is at a 
loss. The turtle carries him home and Urashima Taro discovers he has 
been gone for three generations. At a loss, he opens the box and finds a 
crane's feather in the first layer; a puff of smoke which envelopes and 
ages him in the second; and a mirror that reflects his astonishment in 
the third. The crane's feather is swept into the air, lands on his back, 
and transforms him into a crane. Urashima Taro-Crane flies into the 
sky while the Princess appears as a giant turtle and watches. 
Background Notes discuss the three themes of gratitude, paradise, and 
longevity and happiness. Recommended for children, adults, and 
students of Japanese literature. 




Yomogida 



Okawa, Essei. The Fisherman and the Grateful Turtle: Urashima Taro. 
Translated by D. T. Ooka. Union City, Calif.: Heian International, 
1985. 

Urashima Taro rescues a turtle being mistreated by children, 
then releases it. While fishing the next day, the daughter of the Sea 
King, accompanied by a huge sea turtle, appears before Urashima Taro 
and invites him to her father's palace for saving the life of their servant. 
The turtle ferries them there and Urashima Taro is rewarded and 
entertained. After three years, Urashima Taro wishes to rc urn to his 
village. Before he leaves, the Sea Princess gives him a treasure box that 
can return him to the Sea Palace but he is forbidden to open it. Riding 
on the back of the sea turtle, he returns home and discovers that he has 
been away for 300 years. Confused and disoriented, he opens the box 
and ages. "Afterword" elaborates on the history and themes. Full-page 
color illustrations on every page make this book desirable for 
storytime. Recommended for children and adults. 

Pratt, Davis, and Elsa Kula. "The Monkey's Liver." In Magic Animals of 
Japan. Berkeley, Calif.: Parnassus Press, 1967. pp. 8-9. 

The Dragon Queen of the undersea palace has a craving for the 
taste of a monkey's liver and sends the sea turtle to fetch a monkey. 
Using flattery, the sea turtle returns with a monkey but, once at the 
palace, a jellyfish reveals to the monkey the real reason for the 
invitation. The monkey then persuades the sea turtle to return him to 
the island in order to retrieve his liver that has been hung out to dry on 
a tree. The turtle rushes the monkey back and, once on shore, the 
monkey leaps to a tree and escapes. The turtle realizes he has been 
tricked and returns empty-handed. Full paged, color Japanese 
woodblock print. This action-oriented and appealing story is 
recommended for older children and adults. 



ERLC 



205 



Yomogida 



Sesoko, Chizue. "The Farmer and the Sea Princess." In Legends of Okinawa. 
Vol. 1. Urasoe, Okinawa, Japan: By the author, 157, Nakanishi, 1973. 
pp. 71-74. 

While fishing, Taruu from Minna Island meets a sea turtle from 
the Kingdom of the Sea who tells Taruu of his inability to fulfill his 
mission to secure the liver of a live monkey to cure the ailing Sea 
Princess. Taruu suggests trying "habu sake." After rowing home to 
Okinawa, Taruu obtains a bottle of habu sake. The turtle tries it and 
feels refreshed so they return to the undersea kingdom with the habu 
sake. The doctor administers the habu sake and the Princess slowly 
recovers. Taruu happily spends the rest of his life in the Sea Kingdom 
with the Princess. Map marking Minna Island and Okinawa and a 
photograph of a play with actors in ancient costumes provided. This 
fast-moving story is recommended for older children and adults 
desiring to know more about the culture of Okinawa. 

. "The Turtle and the Monkey." In Legends of Okinawa. Vol. 1 . 



Urasoe, Okinawa, Japan: By the author, 157, Nakanishi, 1973. pp. 65- 
68. 

This story is a variation of The Monkey's Liver. After visiting the 
surface, the Sea Princess becomes ill and lapses into a coma. The 
doctor prescribes a monkey's liver. A huge turtle volunteers and goes to 
Iheya Island where he entices a monkey with promises of all the 
wonders of the undersea world. Riding on the back of the turtle, the 
monkey learns that his liver will be donated to the Sea Princess. 
Thinking quickly, he entreats the turtle to return to the island to retrieve 
the monkey's liver that has been hung to dry on a tree. Near Iheya 
Island, the monkey climbs up a tree and tells the other monkeys about 
the trick. The monkeys pelt the turtle with raw, hard fruit and the turtle 
returns empty-handed to the Kingdom under the Sea. Easily memorized 
story is recommended for adults for storytelling. 



ER?C 



206 



Yomogida 



Tyler, Royal, ed. "The Catch." In Japanese Tales. New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1987. pp. 151-152. 

A poor man hopes to trade a bolt of home-made cloth for fish to 
be traded later for rice seeds so he can cultivate a parcel of land. 
Instead offish, he accepts a sea turtle and, compassionately, releases it. 
Shortly after, the man falls ill and dies but his act of kindness is not 
forgotten. That act and his later offer to sacrifice himself for a young 
woman causes the gods to reward him by giving him life. Provides 
insight into the Buddhist moral philosophy and medieval Japanese 
culture. Recommended for older children, adults, and students of 
Buddhism. 

. "The Grateful Turtle." In Japanese Tales. New York: Pantheon 

Books, 1987. pp. 152-153. 

While on a pilgrimage, the viceroy of Kyushu buys a sea turtle 
from a cormorant fisherman. He releases it and then sails with his 
family to his new post. In gratitude, the turtle follows the convoy and 
sees the viceroy's young son being dropped into the sea by his jealous 
stepmother. The boy is discovered the next morning riding merrily on 
the back of the sea turtle. Through a dream, the turtle tells the viceroy 
what has happened. Expounds the subtle but powerful Buddhist 
philosophy of gratitude and obligation. Recommended for older 
children, adults, and students of Buddhism. 



207 

19 



Yomogida 

. "Urashima The Fisherman." In Japanese Tales. New York: 

Pantheon Books, 1987. pp. 154-156. 

This version of Urashima is from the Tango province. Urashima 
catches a five-colored turtle that turns into an Immortal. Promising to 
be her husband, he rows them to her divine Eternal Mountain where he 
meets her family. After three years of living with the Immortals, he 
becomes homesick and longs for his parents and village. Before he 
leaves, his wife gives him a jeweled box. He is told to grip the box if 
he wants to return but is forbidden to open it. He sits in his boat and 
instantly returns home. Talking to the villagers, he realizes he has been 
away for 300 years. Bewildered and forgetting his promise, he opens 
the box and her form vanishes into the sky. Realizing he will never see 
her again, he sings a song expressing his grief and loss. Recommended 
for adults and students of Buddhism. 

UNESCO, Asian Cultural Centre. "The Story of Urashima Taro." In Folk 
Tales from Asia for Children Everywhere. Translated by Kyoko 
Matsuoka. Book Three. New York: Weatherhill, 1976. pp. 29-34. 

Urashima Taro rescues a little turtle being tormented by 
children, then sets it free. While fishing the next day, the daughter of 
the Sea King (the real form of the rescued turtle) appears before him 
with an invitation to visit her father's palace to be properly thanked. A 
turtle carries Urashima Taro to the undersea palace where he is 
captivated by its beauty and magnificence. After three years, he 
becomes homesick and desires to leave. The Sea Princess gives him a 
magic box that will allow him to see her again but he is told never to 
open it. Riding on the back of the sea turtle, he returns to his village 
and discovers that 300 years have passed. Shocked, he forgets the 
warning and opens the box. Smoke wafts up and he ages into an old 
man. This translation retains its Japanese flavor. Four water-color 
prints. Recommended for children and adults. 



ERIC 



208 

20 



The Rice Cake Motif in 
Japanese Folktales 



PAM YUEN 



20.9 



V 



Yuen 



Introduction 

This paper will examine how rice in the form of a "dumpling" is 
depicted in Japanese folktales, specifically the mochi or rice cake. It will 
also discuss the distinction between various types of Japanese 
"dumplings" not often distinguished when translated or retold from 
Japanese into English. 

In Japan, next to the emperor, rice is the most sacred of all things 
on earth. It is also said that money can be squandered, but there is no 
forgiveness for wasting rice. It is believed that such sinful behavior will 
result in blindness or punishment in the afterlife where the sinner is 
ground up into powder. So sacred is rice that even the straw used for mat 
making is honored (Funk and Wagnalls 1972, 938). 

Rice is an essential part of Japanese culture and is represented at 
all festivities. It is often prepared and presented in various ways 
depending on the celebration or holiday and its significance is often 
reflected in its traditional folklore. 

Types of Japanese "Dumplings" 

Many of the translated Japanese tales use the generic English term 
"dumpling" when referring to rice that is in a slightly flattened, circular 
shape. However, there are clear distinctions in the Japanese presentation 
of these rice forms, its purpose, and symbolism that are not 
defined in the term "dumpling" and often misunderstood or misinterpreted. 
These distinctions are addressed to give readers a better understanding of 
what these differences are. 

The musubi or rice ball is made from steamed glutinous rice that is 
often prepared plain or slightly salted, then formed into a triangular or 



1 

210 



Yuen 



round shape. Often the center is filled with a small portion of preserved 
plum or vegetable, or sometimes fish. The outside is usually decorated in 
various ways, most commonly with seaweed (nori) or toasted sesame 
seeds. In Japanese folktales, the rice ball usually leads individuals into 
adventure by rolling into an unsuspected area (MacDonald 1982, 689). It is 
also a common source of food and strength for those taking a long journey 
(Dalby and others 1984, 106). 

The mochi or rice cake is made of an especially glutinous rice 
(sweet rice) that is thoroughly steamed then pounded with a heavy wooden 
mallet until it is a thick, heavy paste (DeMente 1989, 194). Sometimes 
using sweet rice flour instead of the steamed rice grains allows mochi to 
be baked or prepared in a slightly different way. Mochi is often formed 
into slightly flattened balls or sliced into various shapes. The dango or 
manju is a steamed rice cake with sweet bean filling. 

Traditionally, the rice cake is a symbol of happiness, representing a 
good luck omen or serving as an all-purpose offering to the kami (deity of 
different things) or Jizo (a stone idol god) (Mikiharu 1966, 41). Folktales 
that incorporate this type of symbolism also use a similar theme when 
referring to manju or dango. 

The Rice Cake Motif 

The "dumpling" in most Japanese tales is usually represented as a 
form of food, for mere consumption. However, the tales that are collected 
for this bibliography required a dumpling theme that met one or more of 
the following requirements: 

1) The dumpling described in each tale could not be 
represented only as a source of food. 



ERIC 



2 

211 



Yuen 



2) The dumpling needed to have some form of characterization. 

3) The dumpling served as the focal point for creating the 
tale. 

Based upon descriptions or illustrations in many Japanese folktales, 
it was observed that most of them referred to the dumpling as a rice cake. 
The focus, therefore, will center on the mochi {manju) motif within these 
tales. 

Mochi is among the oldest ceremonial foods that take us back beyond 
the medieval days to Japan's immemorial Shinto spirit food. 
Traditionally, mochi is a New Year's item that serves as an all purpose 
offering. It is usually placed on the family altar or offered to the kami 
to indicate that one has achieved another year of age. "To be unable to buy 
a few mochi. . .is regarded as the greatest trial of poverty at the year end" 
(Joya 1952, 25). The mochi is also a symbol of happiness. 

This theme is especially portrayed in the tale, The Salt Grinding 
Millstones, which takes place during the New Year. It describes a couple 
too poor to offer food to the gods or to prepare a last meal for the end of 
the old year. However, after having met an old man who gives the husband 
a manju to offer to the kobito (little people) their lives dramatically 
change for the better. Most of the tales that incorporated the rice cake or 
mochi end happily. 

The mochi's virtue is such that it has long been eaten as a 
restorative after travel. !t is also noted for having a magical tradition 
(Dalby and others 1984, 106). Its magical essence is eminent in the tales 
of The Woman Who Lost Her Dumpling (or The Funny Little Woman), Rolling 
Rice Cakes (or Roly-Poly Rice Cakes) and The Dumpling and the Demon (or 
Dumpling Paradise). Each of these folktales describes a rice cake that has 



212 



Yuen 



some form of magic. Some of them talk, but always roll away leading the 
characters into a new dimension such as the underworld or a mystical 
cave. These magical rice cakes also lead to a happy and prosperous ending 
for those who remain obedient. 

As previously explained, rnochi is traditionally offered to kami, Jizo 
and at shrines because it is regarded as a good luck omen. This popular 
practice in Japan is woven into many of its folktales and is clearly 
depicted in The Funny Little Woman, Monkey's Jizo-sama and The Dumpling 
and the Demon. Each of these tales has mochi in some form being offered 
to a Jizo resulting in a greatly changed lifestyle. 

Conclusion 

Rituals of rice in Japan extend far beyond the rice cake. Rice 
represents a main staple in Japan and can be traced far back into Japanese 
history. Rice is such an essential part of Japanese culture that much of its 
symbolism can be found in Japanese folklore. 



4 213 



Yuen 



Reference List 

Dalby, Liza and others, eds. 1984. All-Japan: The Catalog of Everything 
Japanese. New York: William Morrow. 

DeMente, Boye. 1989. Everything Japanese. Lincolnwood, Illinois: 
Passport Books. 

Funk and Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of Folklore, Mythology and Legend, 
1972 ed. S.v. "Rice." 

Joya, Mock. 1952. Japan: The Life and Legend. Tokyo, Japan: Japan 
LP.F. Club. 

MacDonald, Margaret Reed. 1982. The Storyteller's Sourcebook: A 

Subject, Title and Motif Index to Folklore Collections for Children. 
Detroit, Michigan: Neal-Schuman Publishers. 

Mikiharu, Ito. 1966. Rice Rites in Japan Proper and the Ryukyus: A 
Comprehensive Study. In Folk Cultures of Japan and East Asia. 
Tokyo, Japan: Sophia University Press. 



« ERJC 



5 214 



Yuen 



Selected Annotated Bibliography 



General Background Information 

Dalby, Liza and others, eds. All Japan: The Catalog of Everything Japanese. 
New York: William Morrow, 1984. 

A useful catalog for librarians and others who wish to enjoy 
the culture and fascination of Japan. Offers the expertise of several 
writers in a very readable manner. Heavily illustrated with color 
photographs. Arranged by interest topics followed by page number. 
Mochi (rice cake) is addressed within the article which explains 
ceremonial foods of Japan.' This subheading is located under the 
main heading of Food and Drink. 

DeMente, Boye. Everything Japanese. Lincolnwood, Illinois: Passport Books, 
1989. 

Designed to serve as a comprehensive introduction to Japan, 
and encourages further study of its people and culture. Subject 
headings of every topic are listed alphabetically followed by the 
page number. Articles vary in length, but remain concise and 
informative. The discussion of mochi is relatively short in length, 
yet offers valuable information. Useful to librarians, educators and 
secondary education students as a source of general information. 

Dorson, Richard M. Studies in Japanese Folklore. Bloomington, Indiana: 
Indiana University Press, 1963. 

' Comprehensive studies of Japan's cultural history and 
seasonal rituals as they relate to folklore. Covers aspects of 
Japanese folklore in greater depth than more recent research. Its 
purpose is to stimulate the intellect as much as to inform. Dorson 
offers information that demonstrates extremely detailed research. 
This would be an excellent source for the serious researcher or 
more scholarly user. Arranged by motif topics and page number. The 
description of rice culture is listed under Rice Farmer. 



215 



Yuen 



Funk and Wagnals Standard Dictionary of Folklore, Mythology and Legend, 
1972 ed. S.v. "Rice." 

A practical, one-volume reference for librarians, educators 
and students. Includes several hundred revisions, many complete 
and uncut. Topics encompass many aspects of countries, regions, 
cultures, people tribes, and ethnic groups. Alphabetical arrangement 
allows for ease when searching. Articles vary in length. No Illustra- 
tions. Full column explanation list Rice, elaborates its cultural, 
historical, ceremonial and influencial role in Japan. 

Joya, Mock. Japan: The Life and Legend. Tokyo, Japan: Japan L.P.F. Ciub, 
1952. 

A text that examines the folklore, old customs, habits and 
tradition that the Japanese have experienced through many 
centuries. Information on mochi is woven into the text. Specific 
discussion is addressed within the Happy New Year article under 
the subheading Winter, located beneath the main topic heading of 
Customs and Festivals. Helpful to librarians, teachers and students 
interested in this area. 

. Quaint Customs and Manners of Japan (Volume II). Tokyo, 

Japan: Tokyo News Service, 1960. 

This supplement to the earlier publication is a collection of 
brief articles, explaining the customary habits and practices of 
Japan. Articles vary in length and are arranged by chapers, followed 
by a list of related topics and page number. Mochi is easily located. 
Articles are quite readable and may be found intriguing to secondary 
students, professionals and casual browsers. 

. Quaint Customs and Manners of Japan (Volume III). Tokyo, 

Japan: Tokyo News Service, 1960. 

Similar format as the preceeding books. Reference to rice is 
under the heading of Holy Rice. Explains the significance of rice in the 
Japanese culture and its purpose or meaning within various rituals, 
religious or customary practices. Useful as a general source for overall 
information. Articles are not specific to mochi or rice ball (musubi). 



ERIC 



216 



Yuen 



MacDonald, Margaret Reed.Tfte Storyteller's Sourcebook: A Subject, Title 
and Motif Index to Folklore Collections for Children. Detroit, 
Michigan: Neal-Schuman Publishers, 1982. 

A practical guide for librarians, teachers and students. Gives 
quick reference tale titles that fall within a main motif. Listings 
are arranged by classification, in alphabetical order for easy 
searching. Information can be retrieved through various strategies 
that include: the motif index, author of tale, key word of title, 
page number, area and ethnic group of tale's origin, or title index. 
Items are not cross referenced. Gives complete bibliographic 
citations for works indexed throughout the book. 

Mikiharu, Ito. "Rice Rites in Japan Proper and the Ryukyus: A Comprehen- 
sive Study." In Folk Cultures of Japan and East Asia. Tokyo, Japan: 
Sophia University Press, 1966. 

A collection of articles on folk cultures in Japan, Okinawa, 
Taiwan and South China. These articles are the translations of 
works written by Japanese scholars. Reference is made to rice rites 
in Japan and Ryukyu. Explains its purpose, meaning, and practice in 
the Japanese culture. Offers information that demonstrates 
extremely detailed research. No illustrations. Useful to librarians, 
educators and researchers. 



Traditional Tales 

Dorson, Richard M. "The Tengu Who Made Rice Cakes." In Folk Legends of 
Japan. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1962. p. 77 

A short tale that describes the relationship between the 
ankoro mochi (a special kind of rice cake) and the Tengu (a birdlike 
creature). Provides a brief but interesting account of how rice 
cakes became associated with the Tengu, what rice cakes are made 
of, and how they were presented as a gift of offering. There are no 
illustrations. An interesting selection for teachers, librarians and 
elementary students to read. Many of the tales in this text are 
appropriate for researchers or collectors of Japanese tales. 



ERIC 



8 

217 



Yuen 



Hearns, Lafcadio. "The Woman Who Lost Her Dumplings." In The Boy Who 
Drew Cats. New York: Macmillan Co, 1963. pp. 27-32 

A humorous tale of a little woman in Old Japan who liked to 
make rice cakes as well as laugh. One day a rice cake rolls through 
a hole in the earth and when the woman tries to catch it, she falls 
in and finds herself in a strange piace under the earth. Determined 
to find her rice cake, she is soon discovered by an Oni (demon) who 
takes her home and gives her a magic rice paddle. Before long the 
woman escapes the underworld, taking the rice paddle with her and 
prospering greatly from it. Beautiful color illustrations enhance 
this tale. Appropriate as reading material or as a read-aloud story 
for elementary students in grades 2-6. 

. "The Woman Who Lost Her Dumplings." In Japanese Fairy 

Tales. Great Neck, N. Y.: Core Collection Books, 1979. pp. 21-28 

Same version as the one in The Boy Who Drew Cats. There are 
no illustrations in this text. Provides interesting reading for 
students in the 4th - 6th grades and adult audiences. 

Lifton, Betty Jean. The Rice Cake Rabbit. New York: W.W. Nolon and Co., 
1966. 

An entertaining folktale about an unusual rabbit known only 
for his delicious rice cakes. Despite his fame, he deeply yearns to 
become a Samurai (warrior). Rabbit attempts to learn fencing, but 
is taunted and teased. One day he is given an opportunity to become 
a Samurai, and with the help of the Tengu, is able to attain his 
dream. Although the outcome is not what rabbit had expected, he 
finds it most satisfying. Simple Japanese-style ink illustrations 
enhance this story. Appropriate for reading aloud in grades 2 
through 6. 



9 

218 



Yuen 



Mosel, Arlene. The Funny Little Woman. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1972. 

This Caldecott winner is a retelling of Heams, The Woman 
Who Lost Her Dumplings. This entertaining variation is richly 
illustrated and appeals to students in the elementary grades. 
An ideal selection for read aloud, this picture storybook is also a 
good source for pure reading enjoyment. 

Sakade, Florence. "The Rolling Rice Cakes." In Japanese Children's Stories. 
Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle, 1959. pp. 69-73 

A charming folktale about an old man and his rice cakes. While 
chopping firewood, his nw cake rolls into a hole. As he attempts 
to retrieve i*, he finds himself rolling down the hole as well. At the 
bottom of the hole, he sees many field mice who have eaten his 
rice cakes. Gratefully, they give him a tiny, magical bag of rice 
which brings the old man and his wife wealth and good fortune. 
Very entertaining and ideal for reading aloud to elementary 
students. 

Schofield, Elizabeth. "The Roly-Poly Dumpling." in Hold Tight, Stick Tight. 
Tokyo, Japan: Kodansha International, 1966. pp. 40-46 

A variation of The Rolling Rice Cakes story. A delightful tale 
about an elderly couple who are rewarded for feeding the field mice 
their rice cakes. In appreciation, the mice give the couple a magical 
golden hammer, which when shaken fills a room with every kind of 
food imaginable. A greedy neighbor attempts to gain the same good 
fortune but meets with a painful and disappointing fate. Simple 
illustrations. Appealing to children to all ages. Appropriate 
for lessons on greed. 



ERIC 



10 219 



Yuen 



Seki, Keigo. "The Monkey and the Pheasant." In Folktales of Japan, 
translated by Robert J. Adams. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1963. pp.1 6-20 

An Asian variation of The Little Red Hen story. A pheasant is 
a hard working companion who ends up doing all of the work in the 
rice fields while lazy monkey only finds excuses to get out of 
working. After the harvest, pheasant and monkey decide to pound 
some mochi (rice cakes). Greedy monkey plays a trick on pheasant 
and runs away with the mochi, only to find that he has iost it along 
the way. Retracting his path, he sees pheasant pecking at the mochi 
that had fallen. Angered by this, monkey threatens the pheasant who 
outwits him in the end. No illustrations. Good source of reading 
material for upper elementary students, educators and collectors of 
folktales. 

. "The Monkeys' Jizo-sama." In Folktales of Japan, translated 

by Robert J. Adams. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963. 
pp. 128-130 

An old man goes to the fields to cut grass, bringing with him 
some roasted buckwheat mochi (rice cakes). While working in the 
fields, some monkeys steal his mochi. As they are eating the mochi, 
they notice the old man in the middle of the field and mistake him 
for a Jizo-sama (god). They decide to carry him across the river 
to a temple where he is honored and coins are thrown at his feet. 
After the monkeys leave, the old man gathers the coins and returns 
a rich man. An envious neighbor learns of this good fortune and 
attempts to prosper in the same manner. However, his identity is 
soon revealed leaving him empty handed. No illustrations. 
Entertaining reading material for upper elementary grades, adults 
and collectors of folktales. 



ERIC 11 220 



Yuen 



• "The Salt Grinding Millstones." In Folktales of Japan, 

translated by Robert J. Adams. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1963. pp.1 34-1 38 

This folktale tells of a couple too poor to offer food to the 
gods or to prepare a last meal for the end of the old year, a practice 
that holds particular significance in the Japanese tradition. In 
despair the husband wanders through the mountains and meets an old 
man who gives him a tiny manju (steamed dumpling). He is then 
instructed to go to the kobito (little people) and trade the manju for 
their magical millstones. The husband does as he is told and 
prospers greatly by his obedience. This causes envy in his older 
brother who steals the millstones and meets with an untimely 
misfortune. No illustrations. Ideal for lessons on greed and envy. 
Entertaining reading source for upper elementary students, adults, 
and collectors of folktales. 

Stamm, Clause. The Dumpling and the Demon. New York: Viking Press, 
1964. 

A delightful tale about a couple who are surprised when one 
of their dumplings (rice cakes) announces that it is going to the 
cave of the Jizo (god of children). After following the dumpling to a 
cave, the husband is welcomed by Jizo and instructed to play a trick 
on the demons that gamble there each night. For his dutiful 
obedience, he is richly rewarded. A greedy neighbor hears of his 
good fortune, and also attempts to trick the demons, only to be 
outwitted by them. Charming illustrations and entertaining for 
children in the 2nd through 6th grades. 

Yanagita, Kunio. "Dumpling Paradise." In Japanese Folk Tales, translated 
by Fanny Hagin Mayer. Taiwan, China: Orient Cultural Service, 1972 
pp. 117-119 

A variation of The Dumpling and the Demon tale. There are no 
illustrations, but the story is very entertaining. An excellent choice 
for reading material among students in the upper elementary grades 
and adult audiences. 



9 

ERJC 



Yuen 

. "The Jizo Made of White Rice Cakes." In Japanese Folk Tales, 

trans, by Fanny Hagin Mayer. Taiwan, China: Orient Cultural Service, 
1972. pp.127-128 

A version of "The Monkeys' Jizo-sama." This tale tells of an 
old couple who devise a scheme in order to save their wheat and 
millet fields from many invading, hungry monkeys who eat their 
crop before they can be harvested. Using soft white rice cake, the 
old man covers his body completely and poses as a Jizo. He is able 
to trick the monkeys and prospers by the money boxes left by them. 
An envious neighbor hears of this good fortune and attempts to 
prosper in the same manner. However, his disguise is revealed when 
he laughs at the monkeys. They in turn take revenge. No 
illustrations. Provides entertaining reading for students in the 
upper elementary grades and adults. 



. "The Rice Cake Tree." In Japanese Folk Tales, trans, by Fanny 

Hagin Mayer. Taiwan, China: Orient Cultural Service, 1972. p.151 

A delightful tale of how a younger brother tricks his older 
brother into paying for a rice cake tree that he has cleverly made. 
Believing it to be authentic, the elder brother heartily eats all 
the rice cakes from its boughs and is greatly disappointed when new 
rice cakes do not appear. Realizing that he had been fooled, he 
confronts the younger brother who then asks him which rice cake 
were consumed first. He replies that the large ones were eaten 
first. The younger brother explains that the biggest piece was the 
parent, the one that grew the crop. A witty and entertaining tale 
that is a good source for reading among upper elementary students 
and adults. 



13 222 



