DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 352 760 EC 301 690 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Hutchinson, Robert J, 

An Annotated Bibliography of Journal Articles on the 
Subject of Native American Students with Special 
Needs, 1985-1992. 
27 Oct 92 
129p* 

Reference Materials ~ Bibliographies (131) 
MF01/PC06 Plus Postage* 

^American Indians; Annctated Bibliographies; 
Cognitive Style; '''Cultural Influences; '''Disabilities; 
'^Educational Methods; Elementary Secondary Education; 
*Gifted; Handicap Identification: ^Health; Learning 
Disabil ities; Periodicals ; Program Development; 
Social Problems; Staff Development; Student 
Evaluation; Student Placement; Substance Abuse; 
Talent 

'^Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This project attempts to provide a comprehensive list 
of recently written, high quality journal articles relating to the 
subject of Native Americans and special education, handicapping 
conditions, social and medical issues that may contribute to 
handicapping conditions, and alternative teaching methods that can be 
used to help Native Americans in special education settings. The 
journal articles listed were published from 1985 to 1992. All 
articles were selected based on: (1) relevance to the subject of 
Native American students and special education, and (2) the article's 
possible value ai; a resource to school personnel and teachers of 
exceptional Native American students. Articles describing research 
done in Canada are included. The bibliography is divided into seven 
sections, covering the following topics: (1) assessment (referral, 
identification, and special education placement); (2) health issues 
(medical problems, psychological problems, and substance abuse); (3) 
learning handicaps; (4) gifted and talented Native Americans and the 
need for alternative methods of referral and assessment; (5) program 
development and personnel training; (6) culture/language issues; and 
(7) cognitive style. Conclusions are drawn about the state of the 
literature in each of the seven bibliography areas, and suggestions 
for future research are offered. An appendix lists descriptors used 
in an Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) search on this 
subject. (JDD) 



Vc * * Vc ic i< * Vc ^VVt Vc ic Vc i: ^'r ic ic * * i: Vr ic * ^fc ^VVr * * Vr :>V Vc * ^VVc Vt Vt 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. * 

Vc Vc * y? * Vc * i: Vc * )V Vc Vc Vc Vc i( Vc ^\ -A V? Vc V c k it ic Vc ic k ic ic Vc i< it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it ic it >V it it it * 



to 



An AnnotAtttd Bibliography of Jour^ Articlwm 
on thm Subject of Native American Students 
With Special Needs 

1985-1992 



U $. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
0«>ce ot Educttonti Research «nd lmpfov«ment 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 



•'^This docomeni has b«en reproduced as 
feccived from the person or organization 
oriQirtating a 

O Minor changes have been made Jo improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points o^ view or opinions stated m this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



Robert J. Hutchinson 



Descriptor® for project 
1. 



2. 
3. 



UNM examining committee 

Drr Barrera 

Dr. Nielsen 

Dr, Valles 

dates October 27, 1992 



ERIC 



• PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN^ANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 



INFORMATION CEN1E.R l£S'C> 



ACKNOMLEDGMENTS 



I wish to express my sincere appreciation and gratitude to the 
following people for their assistance and cooperation in 
the development of this projects 



Dr. Jozi De Leon, for sewing the seeds of knowledge in the area 
of multicultural education, 



Dr. James Everett, for his timm spent and encouragement given me to 
enter the field of spec^xal education- 



Dr. Isaura Barrera^ for timely advisement in both personal and 
academic matters. 



Dr. Elizabeth Nielsen, for her kind encouragement and assistance in 
helping me to complete this project. 



Dr. Gene Valles for his wisdom and his participation in my academic 
success. 



Jo Sanchez for her endless help in cutting red tape. 



Ambrosia, my little girl, for thousands of pages of photocopying, 
and for inspiration that I could never explain. 



Marie, for her love, assistance and first-hand stories of life at 
the boarding school. 



Don and Jean Hutchinson, my parents, to whom this project truly 
belongs. 



Table of Contents 



Introduction 




Page 


i 


Method 






Page 


2 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Assesement 


Page 


4 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Health Issuem 


Page 


13 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Learni ng Handi caps 


Page 


21 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Gifted 


Page 


25 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Program/Personnel Trai ni ng 


Page 


28 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Culture/Language Issues 


Page 


33 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Cognitive Style 


Page 


42 


Concl usi ons/ 1 mpressi one 




Page 


51 


Appendix: 


Demcriptors Used -for ERIC Search 


Page 


56 



ERIC 



INTRODUCTION 

There are many obstacles that one must overcome in order to 
e-F-Fectively research a subject in the area of education. Among these 
obstacles is -Finding an adequate number o-F accurate sources of 
information pertaining to a chosen subject. Given the time 
constraints that most students must live with, there is nothing more 
disheartening than to build enthusiasm for gaining knowledge in a 
certain area of study, Gnly to find a very limited amount of pertinent 
literature available from which to choose. As a result, the student 
will most likely (a) change his or her topic to fit the amount of 
literature that is easily accessible or (b) submit an inferior product 
based on the small amount of literature that he or she was able to 
find in the allotted time. 

The purpose of this project is to provide a comprehensive list of 
recently written, high quality journal articles that relate the 
subject of Native Americans with pertinent subjects such as special 
education, handicapping conditions, social and medical issues that may 
contribute to handicapping conditions, and alternative teaching 
methods that can be used to help Native Americans in special education 
settings. From his participation in many classroom discussions at the 
University of New Mexico, the researcher has concluded that there 
exists significant interest in the aforementioned topics among 
educators. An annotated bibliography is therefore offered to 
encourage educators to more easily avail themselves of information 
that would be of assistance in special education classrooms that 
contain Native American students. It is believed that if educators of 
Native American children with special needs had convenient access to 
this annotated bibliography, the quality of the children's educatiofi 
would be positively affected. 



~ PAGE 2 ~ 



Method 

An extensivo ERIC computsr «^e«rch of journal articles was 
conducted at the Zimmerman Library on the campus of the University of 
New Mexico in June, July and August of 1992. A complete list of 
descriptors used in this search is listed in the Appendix. Care was 
taken to search only journal articles published after December 31, 
1984. The Education Index was manually searched and compared to the 
results obtained from the ERIC search. The reference sections of all 
articles were checked for journal articles thc.t may not have been 
included in the ERIC and Education Index searches. In addition to the 
above searches, the following Journals were manually checked for 
relevant articles that may have been published subsequent to the 
latest ERIC file update: Journal of American Indian Education, 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, American Indian ami Alaska 
Native Mental Health Research, Psychology in the Schools, American 
Journal of Public Health, Atterican Indian Quarterly, School Psychology 
Review, Exceptional Children and Bilingual Review. 

All articles to be included in the annotated bibliography were 
selected based on (a) relevance to the subject of Native American 
students and special education and (b) their possible value as a 
resource to school personnel and teachers of exceptional Native 
American students. Articles describing quality research done in Canada 
were included. 

The bibliography is divided into seven sections as followsi 
Assessment, Health Issues, Learning Handicaps, Gifted, 
Program/Personnel Training, Culture/Language Issues and Cognitive 
Style. The Assessment section contains articles that pertain to 
^ . referral, identification and special education placement decisions. 



— PASE 3 — 



The Health Issu«*s section o-f-fer« information that can help 
educators to identify and understand medical, substance abuse and 
psychological problems frequently encountered by Native American 
stuc .nts. The Learning Handicaps section contains articles and 
studies specifically related to f^xceptionalities as defined by federal 
law. The articles found in the Gifted section pertain to issues 
that involve gifted and talented Native Americans and the need for 
alternative methods of referral and assessment. The 
Program/ Per sonnml Training section contains articles that describe 
innovative ideas as well as training programs for educators of Native 
American! students with special needs. The articles in the 
Culture/ Language Issues section deal with the effects that Native 
cultures and languages have on academic success in an Anglo-dominated 
education system. The Cognitive Style section can be a helpful 
resource for educators who seek alternative methods of presenting 
lessons. The articles in the latter two sections (Cognitive Style and 
Culture/Language) may pertain to regular education students as well as 
to special education students. The researcher has included these 
sections in the annotated bibliography because of the important role 
the topics play in the bilingual special education curriculum. 



ERLC 



7 



— PAGE 4 — 



ANNOTATED BIBLIOBRAPHY 
Assessment 

Carney, L. J. and Chermak, 6. D- (1991). Performance of American 
Indian children with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome on the Test of 
Language Development. Journal of Communication Disorders, 
24,(2), 123-134. 

Ten Native American children with diagnosed Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome (FAS) and seventeen normally developing Native American 
children were administered the Test of Language Development (TOLD) in 
order to compare their expressive and receptive language abilities and 
find out more about the effects of FAS on the language abilities of 
afflicted children. The performance of the FAS group was 
significantly poorer than the control (normal) group on most subsets 
of the TOLD. However, the older FAS children presented mainly 
syntactic deficits, whereas the younger FAS children presented more 
global language deficits. 

Chinn, P. C. and Hughes, S. (1987) Representation of Minority 
studants in special education classes. Remedial and 
Special Education, 8,(4), 41-46. 

A study of Office of Civil Rights, Elemmntmry and Smcondmry 
Schools Civil Rights surveys was performed to determine whether any 
changes in the nature of the representation of minorities in special 
education classes was taking place. The data collected showed that 
Native Americans continued to be overrepresented in classes for 
trainable mentally retarded and learning disabled, and 
underrepresented in the classes for gifted and talented. These 
disproportionate representations, according to the authors, reflect a 
breakdown in the referral process, in the assessment process, or both. 



ERLC 



— PABE 5 — 

Common, R. W. and Frost, L. 6. (1988). Thm implicationg of thg 

mismpasurgfflgnt o-f Nativ »tudgnt«' int«llig«nc« through the 
umc of gtundardizgd intelligencg t»«tm. Canadian Journal of 
Native Education, 15,(1\ 18-30. 

The article examines the history of the majority culture's 
attempts to measure the intelligence of Native Americans, starting 
Hith the use of phrenology, followed by measurements of skull capacity 
and the modern day futile attempts such as the WISC-R. The authors 
point out that all Anglo attempts have yielded the same inaccurate 
results. The inclusion of Sternberg's Contextualist Perspective on 
the assessment of Native Americans' intelligence is discussed as a 
possible breakthrough in the area of appropriately measuring the 
intelligence of Native Americans and other culturally different 
people. 

Connely, J. B. (1985). Receptive and expressive vocabularies of 
young Indian children. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 24,(1), 33-37. 

The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R> and the 
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) vocabulary 
subtest were administered to Native American and non-Native American 
children to investigate the differences in scores on each test that 
was attained by the respective ethnic groups. Since the PPVT-R 
requires less verbal expression than the WISC-R vocabulary subtest, 
it was hypothesized that the Native American group would score higher 
on the PPVT-R than on the WISC-R. The results showed that the 
non-Native American group scored higher on the two measures, but the 
gap between the Native American and the non-Native American scores on 
the PPVT-R was significantly less than the gap between the scores on 
the WISC-R vocabulary subtest. The author concluded that the PPVT-R 
may present a format which is more compatible with Native American 



— PAGE 6 — 

patterns of interpersonal communication and visual strengths. 

Deyhle, D. (19S6). A micro-ethnographic comparison of Navajo 
and Anglo students' perceptions of testing. Curriculum 
Inquiry. 16^(4), 365-389. 

lest results, teacher interviews, student interviews and 
extensive classroom observations were conducted in an all-Navajo BIA 
day school and at a predominantly Anglo schocl for the purpos^i* of 
examining the structure and presentation of tests such as the 
California Test of Basic Skills (CTBS) and to compare its effects on 
the two groups of children. The results indicated that the individual 
assessments, as well as the public displaying of the results, were 
culturally incongruent and against the experience and expectations of 
the Navajo children, whereas the Anglo students accepted and 
understood the importance of the testing procedure and the public 
display of the results. The Navajo culture does not value individual 
accomplishment in the same way as does the Anglo culture. The author 
urges any person who interprets the results of such tests to bear in 
mind the cultural discontinuities between the home and school 
environments of Native American children. 

Fifield, M. B. and Fifield, M. S. (1985). The effectiveness 

of psychoeducational testing reports as perceived by 
teachers in an intertribal secondary boarding school. 
Journal of American Indian Education. 24,(2), 16-24. 

A combination of questionnaires and interviews were administered 

to teachers to determine how well certain psychoeducational testing 

reports communicate test results and programming recommendations to 

teachers in a Bureau of Indian Affairs secondary boarding school, and 

to offer suggestions that will improve communication between these 

reports and the school personnel who use them. The majority of 

Q teachers viewed the testing reports favorably and found them to be a 

ERJC •. jQ 



— PAGE 7 — 



helpful tool in understanding the needs of the student* who were being 
tested. The authors recommended that teachers receive training in 
understanding what information can be derived from such reports, and 
that the diagnosticians be careful not to use jargon that can impede 
communication of vital information. 

Fisher, G. L. and Harrison, T. C. (1992). Assessment of alcohol 

and other drug abuse with referred adolescents. Psychology 
in the Schools, 29,(2), 172-178, 

The authors believe that many Native American adolescent 
substance abusers who are referred for special education services may 
be misidentified because the symptoms for handicapping conditions are 
often similar to the symptoms of drug and alcohol abuse. Such factors 
as antisocial behavior, hyperactivity, academic failure, 
rebelliousness, lack of social bonding, cognitive impairment, 
alienation and behavioral changes are symptomatic of handicapping 
conditions as well as substance abuse. Procedures that can assist in 
assessing the likelihood that substance abuse contributes to academic 
and behavioral problems are discussed. 

Larrick, W. Rp (1991). A descriptive approach to language 

assessment. Journal of Navajo Education, 8,(3), 20-22. 

The author, a speech/language pathologist, argues that the 

current language assessment process for special education placement is 

biased against Navajo children. Instead of the current approach, the 

author recommends the Descriptive Approach to assessing language of 

culturally and linguistically different children. The Descriptive 

Approach is made up of components that include the following: a 

naturalistic setting for the assessment rather than an artificial 

setting to meet the requirements of standardization, viewing the child 

ER?C - 



— PAGE B — 

as a communicator rathsr than as a language user, two levels of 
analysis (descriptive and explanatory) and the use of 

criterion-referencing that focuses on general communicative behaviors. 

MacAvoy, J- and Sidles, C- <1991)- The effects of language 

preference and multitrial presentation upon the free 
recall of Navajo children. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 30,(3), 33-43. 

The Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, a neuropsychological 
memory measure, was administered to eighty primarily Navajo-speaking 
children ranging in age from eight to ten years. One group was given 
the test in Navajo and the other group was given the test in English. 
The authors stated two purposess to compare test results in the two 
languages, and to examine results of using a multitrial, free recall 
testing format to gain an assessment of auditory memory functions. 
The results showed that the children's recall in their native language 
was significantly better in the first two trials, with no significant 
difference in the final three trials. The suggestions were made thats 
(1) a more accurate measure of recall is attainable when the 
assessment is performed in the child's native language, and (D more 
accurate skill estimates are attainable <rom memory tests in either 
language when a multitrial presentation format is used. 

Manuel, Lr L. (1991). Observations of a bilingual Navajo 

diagnostician. Journal of Navajo Education, 8,(3), 12-14. 

The author, a Navajo psych"-educational evaluator of children 

referred for special education serviciss, retells one of her 

experiences that convinced her to leave the teaching profession in 

favor of her current chosen field. "Joe" was referred for his problem 

behaviors and poor academic record. The author knew that Joe's 

problems with school were culturally based but the professional 



— PABE 9 — 

diagnosticiiani who was inssnsitivv to Navajo studsnts' n^cds, 
convinod thm waluation t«am oth»rwis«. Th» rsmult was an 
inappropriate placement in a C*-'level class. Several faulty 
assumptions about Navajo students are also listed and discussed. 

McCullough, C. S., Walker, J. L. and Diessner, R. (1985). The 
use O'f Wechsler Scales in the assessment of Native 
Americans of the Columbia River Basin. Psychology in the 
Schools, 22,(1), 23--28. 

The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and the Wechsler 
Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) were used in a study 
of Native American junior and senior high school students from the 
Columbia River Basin. The study was undertaken in part to contribute 
towards accepting or rejecting certain generalizations regarding the 
intellectual behavior Native Americans. The Verbal Scale scores 
were significantly below the normative mean and the Performance Scale 
scores were at or above the normative mean. These results were 
consistent across many studies previously performed with other Native 
American Tribes. Because these measures may not be accurately 
assessing the subjects' verbal abilities, the authors advise caution 
in the use of the WISC-R and the WAIS with Native Americans. 

Mishara, S. P., Lord, J* and Sabers, D. L. (1989). Cognitive 

processes underlying WISC-R performance of gifted and 
learning disabled Navajos. Psychology in the Schools, 
26,(1), 31-36. 

This study attempted to relate the Luria-Das Model of successive 
and simultaneous processes of coding information to the processing 
styles of learning disabled and gifted Navajo elementary school-age 
children. Using subtests from the WISC-R, it was hypothesized that 
the two groups would attack the same tasks by using different 
processing modes. The results indicated that the gifted group seemed 



— PABE 10 — 

to prefer the successive processing mode on certain subtests, whereas 
the learning disabled group preferred the simultaneous processing mode 
for attacking the same tasks- The authors conclude that the two 
groups may require differential remedial and intervention procedures 

depending on their preferred modes of pre massing information. 

Myles, D. W. and Ratzlaff, H- C- (1988)- Teachers^ bias towards 
visible ethnic minority groups in special education 
referrals. B- C. Journal of Special Education, 12,<1), 
19-27. 

Completed questionnaires were returned from 347 public elementary 
school teachers in Vancouver and used to investigate the possible 
presence of bias toward visible ethnic minority groups in special 
education. The questionnaire described a child who was experiencing 
academic and behavioral problems. The only difference between the 
questionnaires was that child was randomly described as being either 
Caucasian, Native Canadian, Oriental or East Indian. The analysis of 
the responses provided evidence of negative bias against the Native 
Canadian. The children described as Oriental and Caucasian 
experienced a positive bias. The authors suggest that this study 
provides evidence that visible ethnic minority groups, especially 
Native Canadians, are discriminated against in most educational 
settings. 

Persi, J. and Brunatti, S. (1987). Cognitive measures and 

cultural faiasi a comparison of the performances of Native 
a nd non-Native low achievers. Canadian Journal of Native 
Education, 14,(1), 15-18. 

This study was conducted to evaluate whether low achieving 
Ojibway children who had been referred for psychological assessment 
because of scholastic difficulty would perform better on the Category 
Test (Reitan, 1956) than low achieving non-Native children. The 



— PASE 11 ~ 

Category Test assesses matching an underlying principle to di-f-ferent 
visual patterns and is hypothesized to be a less culturally biased 
measure of Native Americans' cognitive skills. The results support 
the hypothesis in that the Ojibway children performed as well as 
non-Native children on the tasks found in the Category Test. However, 
the traditional IQ tests are more appropriate as predictors of 
academic difficulty in non-Native children. 

Plank, S. A. (1991). Features of Navajo children's Draw-A-Person 
samples and possible self-concept interpretations. Journal 
of Navajo Education, 8,(3), 15-19. 

Over 400 Draw-A-Person samples from Navajo children were analyzed 
in an effort to study their development of self-esteem. The results 
(abnormally small pictures) indicate that Navajo boys attending 
elementary school may be experiencing a problem with self-concept that 
begins before kindergarten. Navajo girls created larger drawings than 
the boys in every grade. The author asks whether the apparent low 
self-concept of Navajo boys could be a factor in the prevalence of 
problem drinking among Navajo males versus Navajo females. 

Stone, B. J. and Bridley, B. E. (1991). The bias of a 

kindergarten screening battery; predicting achievement for 
White and Native American elementary students. School 
Psychology Review. 20,(1), 132-139. 

A kindergarten screening battery (KSB), composed of results from 
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R), the Kindergarten 
Language Screening Test (KLST), the Beery Developmental Test of 
Visual-Motor Integration (VMI), and the McCarthy Draw-A-Child Test 
(DAC) was administered to 591 Mhite and 183 Native American elementary 
school children, and then compared to the subjects' Stanford 
Achievement Test total battery scores to see how well the KSB 
predicted achievement for the two ethnic groups. As expected, the 



— PAGE 12 ~ 



Whit« group scored higher on the language-based teste and the Native 
American group scored higher on the visual-motor tests. Based on the 
results of the KSB, achievement scores of the Native American group 
were overestimated, whereas the White group's scores were 
underestimated. 



ERLC 



16 



— PABE 13 — 



Health IssLEgg 

Asetoyer, C. (1987)- Fgtal alcohol syndromet an international 
concern. Winds of Change, 2,(4), 29-30. 

A description of the Native American Community Board's program 
entitled "Women and Children in Alcohol" is offered in this article. 
The NACB provides statistics on the extent of fetal alcohol syndrome 
(FAS) and fetal alcohol effects (FAE) in the Native American 
population, and their effect on the community. The devastating impact 
on the already overburdened special education system is discussed. 
Of particular interest is the impact that the customary late diagnosis 
of FAE has on both the student and the school. 

Beauvais, F., Oetting, E. R. and Edwards, R. W. (1985). Trends 

in the use of inhalants among American Indian adolescents. 
White Cloud Journal, 3,(4), 3-11. 

More than 10,000 rural Native American adolescents from over 30 
different tribes who were attending school were surveyed to ascertain 
the prevalence of inhalant use for mood-altering purposes. The 
results indicate that around 40% of Native American youth have tried 
inhalants by the time they reach 18 years of age. The authors 
concluded that Native American adolescent inhalant use far exceeds 
that of non-Native American inhalant use in the categories of 
intensity, recency and lifetime prevalence. 

Beauvais, F., Getting, E. R., Wolf, W. and Edwards, R. W. (1989). 
American Indian youth and drugs, 1976-B7i a continuing 
problem. American Journal of Public Health, 79,(5), 
634-636. 

Anonymous questionnaires were used to update data from previous 
articles on trends in drug use of Native American youth who live on 
reservations. After enjoying a decline in over-all drug use in 
O „ previous years, the 1988 data suggests a rise in the use of most 

^ 17 



— PAGE 14 — 



substanos. AIcc3fhoI ixmrn among Native American youth also appears to 
b» increasing slightly. 

Carpenter, R. A., Lyofis, C. A. and Miller, W. R. (1985). 

Peer-managed melf control program for prevention of alcohol 
abuse in American Indian high echool studentss a pilot 
evaluation study. The International Journal of the 
Addictions, 20,(2), 299-310. 

30 adolescent Native American high school students Nho were 
perceived as having drinking problems participated in a peer — managed 
self-control program to teach responsible drinking. This study 
differed from most studies involving alcohol abuse among Native 
American adolescents in that the primary goal was to teach "controlled 
drinking" and not alcohol prevention, and therefore was a test of the 
sociml Im^Lrteing mtiology of alcohol abuse rather than the 
traditional diseasm modwl of alcoholism. The majority of subjects 
in the study showed marked improvement in drinking habits in both the 
short term and after one year. 

Fingerhut, L. A. and Makuc, D. M» (1992). Mortality among 

minority populations in the United States. American Journal 
of Public Health, 62,(8), 1168-1170. 

This article discusses the death rates, ages and causes of death 
among Americans of Hispanic, Asian, Native American, Black and White 
origins. Native Americans have the second highest death rate between 
the ages of one and fourteen and the highest death rate between the 
ages of fifteen and twenty-four. The main causes of death of Native 
American youth are unintentional injuries and suicide. Many of the 
unintentional injuries are from alcohol-related traffic accidents. It 
is the authors' hope that showing the disparities in mortality as well 
as the causes of death will lead to the development of specific 
interventions to reducp the disparities. 

IS 



— PAGE 15 — 



Grossman, D- C, Milligan, B. Co and D«yo, R. A. (1991). Risk 

factors for suicidn attempts among Navajo adolcscgnts, 
American Journal of Public Health, 81,(7), 870-874. 

The results of self-reported suicide attempts of Navajo 
adolescents were analyzed in an attempt to identify risk factors. The 
highest risk factors were found to be extreme alienation from family 
and community, history of mental problems, knowing someone who has 
attempted suicide, frequent use of hard liquor, physical and sexual 
abuse, gender (female) and a poor self-perception of health status- 
Hall, R. L., Wilder, D., Bodenroeder, P. and Hess, M. (1990). 

Assessment of AIDS knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and 

risk level of Northwestern American Indians. American 

Journal of Public Health, 80,(7), 875-877. 

A questionnaire, made to assess knowledge, attitudes, behaviors 
and risk of infection from the HIV virus, was completed by 710 Native 
Americans from ages 12 to 78 years. The results indicate that twice 
as many members as in the general population are in the high risk 
group for contracting the virus. However, the group who completed the 
survey demonstrated a knowledge level similar to that of the general 
population. 

Neligh, G. (1990). Mental health programs for American Indiansi 
their logic, structure and function. American Indian and 
Alaska Native Mental Health Research, 3,(3), 11-259. 

The author's purpose is to provide information about mental 

health problems and programs to professionals who work with Native 

Americans. Qf particular interest to educators are the sections 

entitled Disorders Specific to Childhood and Problmms of 

Adolmscmncmn Detailed descriptions of mental health, learning and 

behavioral problems are analyzed from a Native American point of 

^ view. 

ERIC • 19 



— PAGE 16 — 



I 



□•tting, E. R., Be&uvais, F. and Edwards, R. (1988). Alcohol 
and Indian Youthi Social and pcycholoqical correlates 
and prevention. The Journal of Drug Issues, 18,(1), 
87-111. 

The authors discuss the psychosocial factors that can have a 
positive affect on a young Native Americans' decision not to drink. 
The results of a questionnaire completed by over 1700 Native Americans 
under the age of 17 show some surprising results as well as some 
predictable results. The surprising results include the following! 
there is no difference in family economic status for alcohol-involved 
and non-involved Native youth, there are no significant differences in 
self-confidence or social acceptance fcr alcohol-involved and 
non-involved youth, and alcohol abusing youth feel less alienated than 
their non-drinking peers. The predictable results include the 
following: young Native American alcohol users drink to lessen the 
pain of negative emotional states, adolescent drug use is usually 
related to disrupted family structure, and young Native American 
alcohol users have higher levels of such deviant behaviors as lying 
and cheating. Special attention is paid to peer cluster thmory 
and the need to break up deviant peer clusters who isolate themselves 
from influence by either adults or youth who espouse traditional 
societal values. 

Schafer, J. R. and Mcllwaine, B. D. (1992). Investigating child 

sexual abuse in the American Indian community. American 
Indian Quarterly, 16,(2), 157-167. 

The authors, special agents for the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation in Flagstaff, AZ, are experienced in the field of 
investigating crimes on several reservations throughout the United 
States. This article was written to share some of the problems that 

ERIC 



~ PAQE 17 ~ 

pcopla who are not familiar with tribal cultures have when they 
suspect, report and investigate child sexual abuse. Although all 
Native American cultures have strong sanctions against sexual abuse of 
children, one must remember that all tribes are culturally distinct 
and the handling of such a problem by non-tribal members should be 
done with extreme caution. The reporting and investigating procedures 
that are appropriate for one culture may be inappropriate for another 
culture. 

Schinke, S. P., Bebel, M. Y., Orlandi, M. A. and Botvin, G. J. (1988). 
Prevention strategies for vulnerable pupils. Urban 
Education, 22, (4>,510-519. 

The second part of this article dealt with drug abuse preventive 
intervention based on a bicultural competence model. Leader modeling 
and student practice methods were used to teach Native American 
students communication, coping and discrimination skills. The results 
indicated that the group who received the modeling and practice 
interventions were more highly skilled in turning down drug and 
alcohol offers from their peers than the control group who received no 
intervention. 

Schinke, S. P. et al., (1985). Strategies for preventing 

substance abuse with American Indian youth. White Cloud 
Journal, 1985, 3,(4), 12-18. 

This paper emphasizes culturally sensitive, scientific strategies 
for preventing substance abuse that are based on strengths that have 
served Native American people for thousands of years. Deciding what 
strategies to use starts with brainstorming sessions that include the 
ideas of local leaders. Native traditions, ceremonies and values are 
a central part of the design of the programs. The implementation of 
the program includes group homework assignments, field trips, 

ERJC ■■ 21 



— PAGE IB — 

audio-visual aids, gu»st speaksrs and eKp«riantial ttKwrciscs. 

Schinke, S. P. et al., <19BB>- Preventing substance abus> 

among American Indian adolescents! a bicultural competence 
skills approach. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 35,(1), 
87-90. 

The bicultural competence skills approach, consisting of three 
subgoals, (1) communication skills, (2) coping skills and (3) 
discrimination skills, was taught to Native American adolescents for 
the purpose of helping to prevent substance abuse. The group who 
received the skills-based intervention showed greater posttest and 
follow-up improvements on measures of knowledge, attitudes and 
interactive abilities than the control group who did not receive the 
intervention. 

Schinke, S. P. et al., <19B5>. Preventing substance abuse with 
American Indian youth. Social Casework, 66,(4), 213-217. 

The article begins with several startling statistics that relate 

Native American substance abuse with a high incidence of social 

m^ladaptation, poor health and death. The authors then discuss many 

of the accepted explanations for the high incidence of substance abuse 

among Native Americans, point out the merits of several prevention 

methods and conclude by declaring that substance abuse prevention 

programs are cheaper and more effective than substance abuse treatment 

programs. 

Takie, Y., Lynch, P. and Charleston, 6. M. (1986). To drink or 
not to drinki the Indian adolescents* choice between 
friends and family. Journal of American Indian Education, 
27,(2), 1-9, 

Interviews were conducted with 275 Native American children, 
adolescents and adults on the topic of social and family pressures 
that influence the adolescent's decision whether or not to drink. The 

ERJC - 22 



~ PAQE 19 — 

influences that promote drinking include peer pressure, lack of 
affectionate parent-child ties, lack of parent praise, parent modeling 
and older sibling modeling. 

Thurman, P. J,, Nartin, D. and Martin, M. (1985). An assessment 
°* •ttempt ed suicides among adolescent Cherokee Indians. 
Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, 13,(4), 
176-182. » » » 

A questionnaire was developed and given to nurses and counselors 
at a BIA hospital in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, the capital of the Cherokee 
Nation. The questionnaire was designed to examine both the rate and 
reasons for suicidal attempts among adolescent Cherokee Indians. The 
rate was not accurately reported because many suicide attempts are not 
documented. The reasons given for suicide attempts are generally the 
same as those given by the non-Native population. It was mentioned, 
however, that the suicide rate among Native American adolescents is 
higher than the suicide rate of the general population, and that 
increasing the Native American's adaptability to the non-Native 
environment would be a determining factor in lowering the incidence of 
suicide for Native American adolescents. 

Wescott, S. M. (1990). Time to address a preventable tragedy. 
Winds of Change, 5,(3), 30-34. 

This article discusses the topic of pregnant women who drink, the 
cultural pressures felt by them to drink in order to be a part of 
their society, the magnified effects that most European diseases have 
had on Native Americans throughout history and the economic impact of 
a single FAS baby on the government budget. The article also 
discusses strategies for prevention of FAS, including the possibility 
of forced treatment for pregnant women who drink. 



ERIC 



23 



~ PAGE 20 — 

Zitzow, D. <1990)« Djibwy adolggcent timtg »pgnt with 

pT»nt»/gld«rg related to delinquency and court 
adjudication enperienceg, American Indian and Alaska Native 
Mental Health Research, 4,(1), 53-63. 

This study examined the issue of adolescent quality and quantity 
o-f time spent with parents or elders, and its relationship to skipping 
school, running away and violating the law. A survey was used along 
with public court records to conclude that adolescent Ojibways who 
spent less time with their parents and elder family members tended to 
be more involved in court adjudication and delinquency behaviors than 
adolescents who spend considerable time with parents and elders. The 
author offered six skill developing suggestions for professionals who 
work with troubled Native American youth, and a list of five 
suggestions for reservation leaders whose goal is to minimize 
adolescent problem behaviors. 



ERLC 24 



— - PASE 21 — 

Learning Handicaps 

Beartt, P. L« (1986). Programming for birhaviorally diaordcrgd 
Native Americana. Journal of American Indian Education, 
25,(2), 24-31. 

Fourteen Native American high school students with academic and 
behavior problems were selected to participate in a treatment program 
designed to improve their academic performance, attendance and 
tardiness. The treatment program, known as Goal Attainment Scaling 
(GAS), stresses the setting of realistic expectations, monitoring of 
progress and recognition for student improvement. Thirteen of the 
fourteen students showed a significant decrease in the number of 
failing grades and eleven of the fourteen showed decreases in the 
number of tardies. The group attendance record improved slightly. 

Cummins, J. (1991). Preventing pedaqogically-induced learning 

difficulties among Indigenous students. Journal of Navajo 
Education, 8,(3), 3-9. 

The author explains the ways that Native American children's 
academic potential can be undermined by the school experiences that 
have the affect of robbing them of their identities. It is stressed 
that one must often examine the interaction between school and the 
child when looking for the reason for learning problems, rather than 
searching within the child for the cause. Abusive boarding school 
experiences, lack of promotion of native language literacy, poverty 
and a faulty attribution process are specifically cited as being major 
causal factors for academic failure. Cummins' Framework for 
Intervention for the Empowerment of Minority Students is offered as an 
aid in solving this problem. 



ERLC 



25 



— PAGE 22 — 

Dodd, J. M. and Nslson, J. R. (1989). Learning di»abl»d adultmi 
implicationg for tribal colleqgg. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 28,(3), 31-38. 

Learning disabled Native American high school graduates who 
aspire to attend institutions of higher education have a twofold 
problems (1) overcoming their disability and (2) adjustment to the 
different cultural environment of the predominantly White traditional 
higher education settings. Tribal colleges such as the Navajo 
Community College provide the opportunity for LD students to begin 
their higher education program without having to adjust to an 
unfamiliar cultural environment. The article also suggests twelve 
accommodations that teachers should consider for learning disabled 
students. These accommodations are also suitable for LD students of 
all ages. 

Harris, G. A. (1985). Considerations in assessing English 
language performance of Native American children. 
Topics in Language Disorders, 5,(4>, 42-52. 

This article explains, in detail, the reasons for the low verbal 
IQ test scores of Native American children on measures such as the 
WISC-R, and the problems that can result from the improper 
interpretations of the results. Some of the reasons for the typical 
performance characteristics include test bias, culturally determined 
child-rearing practices, bilingualism and the use of non-standard 
English dialects, possible hearing loss due to otitis media. Native 
American cultural emphasis on performance rather than verbal skills, 
unfamiliar assessment environment and inadequate test interpretation 
with respect to local customs. The article concludes with a numbe. of 
suggestions that professionals can take into account when assessing 
Native Americans and interpreting results of the assessments. 

ERIC 26 



— PAGE 23 — 

Horan, K. Tc (1966). Effects of head injury on thm aduc#/cional 

and vocational potential of American Indians. Rural Special 
Education Quarterly, B (1), 19-22. 

This article describes the nature of the increased risk of head 
injury that Native Americans who live on the reservation face. These 
hidden dangers include riding in the back of a pick-up trucks, 
livestock accidents, rodeo accidents, alcohol-related traffic 
accidents and the distance one must drive to obtain emergency medical 
care. A description of learning handicaps commonly experienced by 
head injury patients is offered, and alternative teaching methods are 
also discussed. 

Lankford, R. and Riley, J. D. (1986). Native American reading 
disability. Journal of American Indian Education, 25,(3), 
1-11. 

The author discusses the Language Experience Approach, a strategy 
for teaching reading to Native American children that will satisfy 
both the need to learn to read and the need for culture to be an 
integral part of the learning process. Currently there exists a gap 
between the beliefs of the cultural specialists and the education 
specialists on teaching strategies. The Language Experience Approach 
could bridge that gap. 

Scaldwell, W. A. (1989). Effect of otitis media upon reading 

scores of Indian children in Ontario. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 28,(2), 32-39. 

Otitis media has long been expected as a cause of speech and 
language problems in children. This study attempted to find a link 
between otitis media and reading skills of Native American children in 
Ontario. The results indicated that the children who were presently 
suffering with otitis media present lower on the Gates-MacGinite 
Reading Tests than children with normal hearing, and the children with 



— PAGE 24 ~ 

pa»t signs of infsction scored lowsst of ths thrse groups. Ths rssults 
also suggest that the younger the mge of onset, the lower the reading 
score of the inflicted child. 

Scaldwell^ W. A. and Frame, J. E. (1985). Prevalence of otitis 

media in Cree and Ojibway school-children in six Ontario 
communitigs. Journal of American Indian Education^ 25,(1). 
1-5. 

Otitis media (middle ear infection) is prevalent i;i Native 
American children and presents a major threat to normal language 
development. Over 700 Native American children in Ontario were 
screened by a registered audiologist for presence of active otitis 
media or for evidencr. of past infection, and 40.7% showed signs of 
having had the infection. The high rate of infection may offer an 
explanation as to why many Native American children do not respond 
well to the phonetic method of teaching reading. 

Thielke, H. M. and Shriberg, L. D. (1990). Effects of recurrent 
otit is media on language, speech, and educational 
achievement in Menominee Indian Children^. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 29,(2), 25-35. 

Several measures were administered to Menominee children to 
assess the effects of otitis media on language, speech and educational 
success. The results showed significantly higher scores on most 
measures for subjects who had no signs of the infection at any time in 
their lives, and trends toward higher scores on the remaining 
measures. A follow-up study of grade placements and support services 
indicated that the subjects who had showed signs of otitis media 
experienced more grade retention and much higher use of support 
services. 



ERLC 



28 



PAGE 25 — 

Gi-fted 

Christensen, R. A. (1991). A pcraonal perspgctiva on tribal 

Alaska Native gifted and talent»d aducation. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 31,(1), 10-14. 

The author argued that the term "giftedne««" for purposea of 
educational placement has always been defined within the world view of 
the White person. For this reason the Native American is usually 
underrepresented in programs for the gifted and talented. When 
speaking of Native Americans, the definition of gifted and talented 
must take a cultural stance and agree with tribal definitions. 
Because of such cultural dissimilarities as a different sense of time, 
space and world view, the traditional White definition does not apply 
to the gifted Native American student. 

Hartley, E. A. (1991). T hrough Navajo evesi enam inino 

differences in qiftedness. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 31,(1), 53-64. 

Surveys and interviews were conducted with Navajo and Anglo 
parents, and school personnel on the question of what is giftedness. 
The traditional Navajo description of giftedness was quite different 
from that of the Anglo description. For example, a gifted child in 
the traditional Navajo sense shows the following characteristics 
(Mhich are the opposite of the Anglo description)! (a) humble and 
not boastful, (b) oral memory rather than a visual memory, (c) quiet, 
(d) non-competitive with peers, (e) traditional rather than modern 
ways of dealing with personal issues, (f) not assertive or 
opinionated, (g) may not openly express feelings, (h) may submit to 
peer pressure, (i) little eye contact, (j) may not challenge something 
that is incorrect, (k) may not be comfortable working independently, 
(1) not inquisitive. 



— PAGE 26 — 



LaBatte, J. (1991). Nurturing crgativ/Tti«tic qi-ftgdn»sg in 
ftmerican Indian «tudgnt«. Journal o-f American I.idian 
Education, 31,(1), 2B-32. 

This article «ummariz«s thm opinions of ssvsral prominent 
educators on the subject of identifying and developing 
creative/artistic giftedness in Native American students. All six 
educators believe that the approach currently used by the United 
States Government in identifying Native American gifted students is 
seriously flawed. In addition, the educators offer several 
interesting and innovative ideas for program development. 

Bobbins, R. (1991). American Indian gifted and talented 

studentsi their problems and proposed solutions. Journal 
of American Indian Education, 31,(1), 15-24. 

This article contains the author's observations of 125 gifted and 
talented Native American secondary students who were participating in 
a gifted education program in Oklahoma. The author identifies many 
problems routinely confronted by gifted Native American students in 
the American education system, and offers a number of solutions to 
these problems. 

Shutiva, C. L. (1991). Creativity differences between 

reservation and urban American Indians. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 31,(1), 33-52. 

The Torrance Test of Creative Thinking, Figural Form B (TTCT-F,B) 
was administered to 2B urban and 122 reservation Native American 
eleventh grade students to compare creativity scores and academic 
achievement. The results indicated that the urban students scored 
higher in the areas of originality, abstractness of title, resistance 
to closure and creativity index scores. There was no significant 
difference between the reservation students and the urban students in 
^ academic achievement as measured by their grade point averages. 

EKIC 30 



— PAGE 27 — 



Tonmah, S- (1987). Ama^sming American Indian gifted and 

talcntgd studgnts' abilitic». Journal for th» Education 
of th» Gifted, 10,(3), 181-194. 

The American Indian Remearch and Development, Inc. (AIRD), in an 
effort to find and train capable future tribal leaders, ha« begun to 
develop a tribally-oriented program to assess and educate its gifted 
and talented youth in a way that would maximize their abilities and 
meet the future needs of tribal people. In order to reach their 
goals, the AIRD has developed a tribal-cultural checklist to help in 
assessing the students' understanding of tribal culture, abilities and 
giftedness from the point of view of adult tribal members. The 
contents of the checklist differs significantly from the contents of 
the Anglo definition of giftedness. The long range goal of the AIRD 
is the making of an American Indian Gifted and Talented Academy. 

Tonemah, S. A. (1991). Philosophical perspectives of gifted and 
talented American Indian Education. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 31,(1), 3-9. 

The article historically reviewed the philosophy of Native 
American education before the event of the European discovery, and the 
devastating impact the European arrival had on the education of tribal 
members following their discovery. The American Indian Research and 
Development, Inc. (AIRD), is designing a program to educate gifted and 
talented Native American students in a way that will benefit the 
tribes and break from recent history. Included in the program are the 
development of an individual education plan that takes into account 
student interests and preferred learning style (Renzulli's Enrichment 
Triad Model), non-competitive learning activities, use of Native 
American instructors and a wholistic approach to teaching. 



— PAGE 28 — 



Proqrain/P>r»onn«I Training 

BacAi L. and Mir«monte», 0. (1985). Bilingual special education 

teacher training for American Indians. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 24,(2), 38-47. 

^ Thim paper dimcusses (1) bilingual mp^cial education teacher 

training in general and (2) field-baaed Native American teacher 

training program*. The Navajo Special Education Teacher Development 

Program (NSETDP) is described in detail. The NSETDP Master's degree 

program offers classes in Window Rock during the school year and 

classes on campus at Northern Arizona University during the summer. 

The NSETDP is designed to reach teachers niho live in rural areas and 

therefore cannot commute to major metropolitan areas during the school 

year. 

Bissmeyer, R. D. (1991). Renewed vision for special education! 

Kayenta's model of inclusion. Journal of Navajo Education, 
8,(3), 28-32. 

The special education staff of Kayenta Unified School District, 
located on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona, expressed concern that 
the stigma of the trciitional pull-out resource room experience was 
devastating to special education students. In addition, the students' 
educational needs were not being met and many students would progress 
at unsatisfactory rates. Kayenta's inclusion program, designed to 
remedy the aforementioned problems, is described in detail. Regular 
education and special education are taught in the same classroom, 
using a cadre-team approach. Eleven key elements of the inclusion 
model are listed end discussed. 

Bluhm, H. P., Finley, R. E., Lodge, N and White, K. (1991). 

Training Native Americans as school counselors to work with 
handicapped children of their own race. Journal of Navajo 
Education, 8,(3), 41-47. 

EBs£C ft detailed description of a counselor training program at the 



— PAGE 29 — 



University of Utah is offarad to Nativ. American counselors who wish 
to handle consulting, psychological and behavioral problems of Native 
American special education students. It is the belief of the authors 
that Native American counselors could be more effective than the 
non-Native counselors who lack the knowledge necessary to fully 
understand the point of view of Native American special education 
students. Procedures for applying for graduate personnel preparation 
programs that provide on-site training are described in detail. 

Foster, C. G. (1986). Project SERTi special education training 

for regular educator s of Native Americans. Rural Special 
Education Quarterly, 8,(1), 23-25. 

A special education office on the Navajo Reservation surveyed 
regular education teachers on the topic of teaching special education 
students, and found that the teachers felt inadequately prepared for 
the task. Acting on the results of the survey, the University of 
Arizona designed and implemented project SERT, a training program 
located on the Navajo Reservation. The project was considered to be a 
success, as measured by a post-training questionnaire completed by the 
participating teachers. 

Foster, C. G. (1988). Special education program for Native 

Ameri can exceptional students and regular program staff. 
Rural Special Education Quarterly, 8,(3), 40-43. 

The regular education teachers on the Navajo Reservation in Tuba 
City expressed concern for their inability to adequately meet the 
needs of mainstreamed special education students. As a result, the 
Tuba City Boarding School initiated the Summer Special Education 
Program. This program had two purposesi (1) to provide special 
education training for regular education teachers and (2) to provide 
supplemental special education instruction for special education 



— PABE 30 — 

«tud»nt»- By the end of the summer, teachers and aids reported that 
they were comfortable with special education procedures as well as 
with the presence of mainstreamed exceptional students in their 
regular education classrooms. 

Gajary A. (1985). American Indian personnel preparation in 

special educationi needs, program components, programs. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 24,(2), 7-15. 

This article describes the need for an increase in trained 

special education personnel to work with handicapped Native American 

students. The American Indian Special Education Teacher Training 

Program at the Pennsylvania State University is described in detail. 

The objectives of the program are (i) to provide program participants 

with the necessary training to meet the special needs of handicapped 

Native American students, (2) to prepare Native American educators at 

the Master of Education level and (3) to identify successful and 

relevant strategies in preparing Native American special education 

leaders and personnel. 



Kiefer-O'Donnell, R. (1991). Redefining the role of special 

educations achieving participation and success in one's 
community and culture. Journal of Navajo Education, 8,(3), 
23-27. 

A description of the unique role that a rural Native American 
community plays in the delivery of special education services to 
students with moderate to severe disabilities is offered. With the 
common goal to emphasize participation and success within one's own 
community and culture, the I.E.P. committee includes tasks such as 
helping to pass out Sunday bulletins at the church, learning beadwork 
and skin-sewing from a peer tutor, participating in native dances 
outside of the school, janitorial skills in the school and working 
^Y^C P**"* ^^^^ post office. The participating students have 



~ PAGE 31 -~ 



improved th«ir social standing in thm community, incraassd thsir pmmr 
interactions and learned valuable skills that will help them to 
survive in their culture. Five features that are common ta most 
successful home-community-school partnerships are also presented. 

Latham, 6. I. (1989). Thirteen most common needs of American 
education in BIA schools. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 29,(1), 1-11. 

This study was conducted in order to ascertain the most common 
instructional and management-type needs of BIA schools. From 
interviews and direct observations, needs related to special education 
were determined to be as follows: the need to more precisely define 
learning disabilities, to improve cooperation and coordination between 
regular /and special education, to establish functional relationships 
between student Individual Education Plans (lEP) and classroom 
instruction, and to improve parental involvement in the schools. 

Latham, G., West, R. and Collins, S. C. (1985). Prescriptive 

behavioral intervention at the dorm level. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 24,(2), 25-37. 

A behavioral intervention study was undertaken at a high school 
dorm for girls in an attempt to improve their conduct during 
non-school hours while they were living at the dorm. The two 
paraprofessionals, specially trained in behavior techniques, 
identified problem behaviors of their six subjects, set goals and gave 
rewards for meeting the goals. The problem behaviors included 
consumption of alcohol and drugs, curfew violations, keeping a dirty 
room and cutting classes. The project demonstrated that the 
application of behavioral strategies can have positive effects on 
adolescents living in a dormitory, even if the intervention is managed 
Q by paraprofessionals. 

ERJC 35 



— PASE 32 — 



Sebastian, J. (1991). How do w ke»p them out in the -field? 
Preparing s pecial educators in rural gchool districts. 
Journal of Navajo Education, 8(2), 24-26. 

An e-f-fective model distance education program -for training rural 
special education teachers is described. The University of Utah 
recruits local members of rural communities who wish to become special 
education teachers, and provides them with trained master teachers as 
well as with televised courses that are video taped at the university. 
These courses are then presented locally, thereby facilitating the 
training of rural community members who live hundreds of miles from 
the nearest university. The program has continued to grow since its 
inception in the early 1980's, and has successfully prepared over BO 
special education teachers. Over eighty percent of the teachers who 
have completed the distance education program remain in their local 
communities teaching students with handicaps. The high success rate 
provides considerable help for school superintendents who find it a 
difficult if not impossible task to recruit special education teachers 
in isolated rural communities. 

Stuecher, U., Grossman, E., Hakala, N. and Kozlowski, G. (1985). 
Training p roject for Indian school liaison and support 
personne l in special education. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 24,(1), 9-19. 

A training program for Native American paraprofessional liaison 
and support personnel was administered to 55 people, mostly women, to 
work with Native children and parents in public schools and 
residential programs. The liaisons' primary function was to act as a 
bridge between the school and the home in order to improve 
communication. Data from formal advocacy contact reports indicated 
that the trained paraprofessionals performed their duties very well, 
especially in the area of professional communication abilities. 



— PAQE 33 ~ 

Culturg/Lanquaqg 

Bowker, A. (1992). Thm American Indian fcmaltt dropout. 

Journal of Amsrican Indian Education, 31,(3), 3-20. 

The purpose of this study was (1) to find the contributing 

factors to the success of Native American females who stay in school 

and graduate, and (2) to determine the contributing factors to the 

lack of success of Native American females who drop out of school. It 

was also the intention of the author to develop a research project 

that could augment or replace the current practices in Native American 

education. Approximately 51X of the Native American females who 

participated in the study dropped out because of pregnancy. Apart 

from this statistic, no one characteristic could describe the women 

who dropped out. Many women from so-called high risk groups achieved 

considerable academic success, and many women who were from the 

so-called low risk group dropped out. Of the girls who succeeded in 

school, the main factor was the support of their families, especially 

their mothers and grandmothers. Those who achieved success pointed to 

home environments with rules and restrictions as well as good parental 

role models. The article also contains excerpts from the book. 

Sisters in the Bloody which was scheduled for release in May, 

1992. 

Brandt, E. A. (1992). The Navajo area student dropout studyi 
findings and implications. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 31,(2), 48-63. 

Data collected from a school characteristic survey questionnaire 
and an analysis of enrollment data from schools on and near the Navajo 
Reservation were used to study the nature of and major reasons for the 
Navajo student dropout problem. Major contributing factors to the 
dropout problem include a history of high dropout rate in BIA schools. 



~ PABE 34 ~ 



boredom mth school, transport«tion problems, pervasivs 
institutionalized racism and lack of encouragement in the home. 
Academic problems do not seem to be a primary reason for dropping out. 

Cantrall, B., Peete, L. and Fields, M. (1990). Navajo culture as 
a bridge to the rest of the worldi a case study in 
empowerment. Journal of Navajo Education, 8,(1), 6—13. 

A description of a successful attempt to weave the Native 

American culture into the regular school curriculum in a school on the 

Navajo Reservation is offered in this article. Thanks to site-based 

management, a caring school staff and a cooperative community, the 

Greasewood School was able to do away with such inappropriate 

practices as required CTBS testing and supplementary Native American 

curriculum, and replace it with bilingual/bicultural education, the 

whole language approach to language development, Navajo culture^ as 

well as traditional Navajo folk tales and ceremonies. The authors, 

who are members of the school staff, have multiple goals for their 

schools the teaching of facts, the teaching of processes and the 

teaching of self-worth. 

Cunningham, K., Cunningham, K. and O'Connell, J. C. (1986). 
Impact of differing cultural perceptions on special 
education service delivery. Rural Special Education 
Quarterly, 8,(1), 2-8. 

Recognizing that education delivery systems have failed because 
of a lack of sensitivity to traditional cultural values and beliefs, 
the author has promoted the family systems approach for delivering 
special education services to handicapped Native American students. A 
distinction is drawn between Anglo and Native American views of 
family, school, success and the cultural perceptions that influence 
special education. Strategies for studying the different cultural 



— PAGE 35 — 
percsptions ar« discussed. 

Eb»rh«rd, D- R. (1989). Am»ricTi Indian ^ducationi a »tudy o-f 

dropoutg. 19B0-1987, Journal of Amarican Indian Educ^tiion, 
29,(1), 32-40- 

Urban secondary Native American dropout characteristics was th» 

focus of this study. Parsnt and pupil group intsrvisws, along with an 
urban district's dropout statistics w«re used to examine sin possible 
contributing factors to the dropout rate. Contributing to the dropout 
rate were a poor academic record, single parent families, high rate of 
family mobility, attendance in schools with poor graduation rates and 
affiliation with specific tribes. 

Erasmus, C. C. (1989). Mays with stories^ listening to the 
stories Aboriginal people tell. Language Arts, 66,(3), 
267-275. 

The author studied styles of discourse of a number of Native 
American peoples and discussed the mismatch between these styles and 
what is expected in the typical North American classroom. For 
example, at times it is improper for a Native American public speaker 
to arrive at a conclusion about a topic, whereas an Anglo public 
speaker is expected to lead the listeners toward a decision. It was 
suggested that many Native American students have difficulties in 
school because their teachers do not understand the difference in 
discourse styles. 

Leap, W. L. (1991). American Indian English. Journal of Navajo 
Education, 8,(3), 50-55. 

The author states that the development of English language 
instructional methods and materials designed for Native Americans 
should takff^ into account the type and level of English that the 
student brings into the classroom. In addition, the use of 



ERIC 



— PAGE 36 — 

non-mtandard English must bs respsctsd, as it is a nscsssary form of 
communication in Native American hom»s and communitiss. Many Nativs 
Amsrican students speak non-standard English, and classroom English is 
often difficult for them. Speech patterns from the various languages 
should be understood, or at least taken into account by teachers who 
develop curriculum. These efforts must be coordinated accross grade 
levels, mainstreaming and special education, and district boundaries. 

Ledlow, S. (1992). Is cultural discontinuity an adequate 

explanation for dropping out? Journal of American Indian 
Education, 51,(3), 21-36. 

This article reviews recent literature on the reasons for the 
high incidence of dropping out among Native American students. The 
majority of the research focuses on the area of cultural discontinuity 
between the school and home cultures. The author then suggests that 
such factors as economics, long distance commutes to school, 
pregnancy, and social structure may be more significant in the Native 
American student's decision to drop out than language and cultural 
differences. The author urges that further research into the problem 
of Native American dropouts devote equal attention to variables 
outside of the school. 

Little Soldier, L. (1989). Sociocultural context and language 

learning of Native American pupils. Journal of Rural and 
Small Schools, 3,(2), 2-6. 

The author believes that there are many cultural and linguistic 
barriers between the home and school environments that contribute to 
the poor academic record of Native Americans. In an effort to bring 
down some of those barriers, this study was conducted to determine the 
optimum classroom language learning environment for Native American 
students. Classrooms were observed and rated based on the students' 

'■ ' 40 



— PAGE 37 ~ 

oppnf-tuniti«» to u»e oral and written language in a variety of 
settings. The optimum classroom learning environment was found to be 
informally organized, where students as well as teachers shared the 
locus of control, where there was evidence of cooperative learning and 
informal dialog patterns, and where students were given the 
opportunity to speak and write about culturally relevant topics. 

Marti , Jr., W. E. <1991>. Career development and American 

Indians living on reservations! cross-cultural factors 
to consider. The Career Development Quarterly, 39,(3), 

273-283, ' 

The authv. Jiscussed factors that may affect the career 
dlevelopm^^ process of Native American students and adults, both 
disabled and non-disabled. The factors that must be considered when 
advising on vocational issues include the foilowingn Native American 
custom of passing a vocation from generation to generation within a 
family, geographical isolation of the reservation, lack of 
culture-fair assessment, lack of familiarity with the nature of 
various occupations (world of work knowledge) and many pressures that 
are hard for non-Natives to understand. Special attention must be 
paid to the added pressures on, and restricted labor market of Native 
Americ. uns with disabilities. 

McCarty, T. L. (1989). School as community! the Rough Rock 

demonstration. Harvard Educational Review, 59,(4), 484-503. 

The author discusses the historical significance of the Rough 

Rock Demonstration School, the sociopolitical events that lead to its 

creation, the impact of the school on the community and the potential 

impact on Native American schools throughout the country. The Rough 

Rock Demonstration School is the first school on the reservation to bi 

overseen by a locally elected, all-Native American governing board, 

ERIC 41 



— PAGE 38 — 

and th» first to includ* «yBtem«tic instruction in th» nativ* language 
and culture. 



ERIC 



McCarty, T. L., Wallace, S- and Lynchj R. H. (1989>- 

Inquiry-ba»gd curriculum developmgnt in a Navajo mchool. 
Educational Leadership, 46,<5), 66-71. 

This article reported on the development of a bilingual, 
bicultural, inquiry-based curriculum at the innovative Rough Rock 
Demonstration School on the Navajo Reservation- The Rough Rock 
Demonstration School is unique in that the local community has taken 
control of the curriculum and integrated Navajo language and social 
studies with conventional courses of study. The Rough Rock 
Demonstration School can serve as a model for other schools on 
reservations throughout the country because of its local control of 
school policy and the multicultural orientation of its curriculum. 

McLaughlin, D. (1989). Power and politics of knowledge! 

transformative leadership and curriculum development for 
minority language learners. Peabody Journal of 
Education, 66,(3), 41-60. 

The author examines how the community leaders' understanding of 
power plays a central role in the development of program and 
curriculum, and cites a community-controlled school on the Navajo 
Reservation as an example of effective understanding and use of power 
and politics. Effective use of political power can "build a bridge" 
between Native American students' home culture and the school 
environment. 

O'Neill, G. P. (19B7). The North American Indian in 

contemporary history and social studies textbooks. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 26,(3), 22-28. 

An examination of ongoing status of the Native American in 

contemporary American and Canadian textbooks was attempted to 



— PAQE 39 — 

••certain whether or not there have been improvement* in the nature o-f 
their depiction. Past depiction* include the stereotypes o-f 
alcoholic, blood-thirsty, hostile savages. Findings showed some 
improvement in the use of degrading, biased language, but little 
change has been -Found in the actual content o-F the textbooks. These 
inaccurate depictions contribute to the isolation and poor 
sel-f-concept -felt by Native American students. 

Oppelt, N. T. (1989). Cultural values and behaviors common 

among Tribal American Indiansi a r esource -For student 
service administrators. NASPA Journal, 26,(3), 167-174. 

In an effort to improve the school experiences of Native 
Americans, the author listed and described many common cultural 
differences between Native Americans and Anglos, hoping that school 
personnel would take these differences into consideration when 
designing and presenting curriculum. Some of these differences 
include time perspective, sharing of wealth, cooperation and group 
membership, concern for family, spiritual needs, attribution and group 
dynamics. 

Sawyer, D. (1988). The writing process and Native students. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 15,(2), 15-21. 

The author reviewed literature on the subjects of (1) 
identification of factors that impede Native American students- 
writing process, and (2) examples and models that have been used to 
facilitate the success of Native American students' attempts at 
writing. Among the main impediments to writing are a feeling that one 
cannot shape his or her social reality, and a lack of trust and 
understanding of English. Many useful suggestions for stimulating the 
writing process are offered. 



— PABE 40 — 

Scott, W. J. (1986). AttAchmcnt to Indian culture and the 

"difficult situation". Youth and Society, 17,(4) 381-395. 

Data on 101 Native American students in Oklahoma was compiled and 

analyzed to look for predictors of academic success in high school and 

college- The findings indicate that students who hold close cultural 

ties to their Native American heritage are more likely to fail because 

of lack of ability to integrate into the school community. The Native 

students who are less attached to Native culture have a higher chance 

of success in school. In order to improve their chances of academic 

success, the author stresses the need for Native American students to 

master White ways on their own terms and still be able to maintain 

commitment to Native values and traditions. 

Shonerd, H. 6. (1990). Domesticating the barbarous tonguei 

language policy for the Navajo in historical perspective. 
Language Problems and Language Planning, 14,(3), 193-208. 

The author traces the history of the Spanish and Anglo attempts 

to suppress and replace the Navajo language with European languages 

for reasons of religious ideology. The result of these efforts is 

evident in the widespread smmilingualism^ the lack of proficiency 

in both English and Navajo. Lack of understanding of semilingualism 

on the part of educators is responsible for high rates of Navajo 

placement in classes for the communication disordered. It is 

recommended that schools demonstrate respect for Navajo students' 

spoken language so that students will develop the ability to affirm 

their cultural identities, and that Navajo community members actively 

participate in educational policy making regarding language 

development in their classrooms. 

Er|c ' ^4 



— PAQE 41 — 



S/ogel, V. J. (1987). Jhm blackout of Nativa ftmcrican cultural 
achiev»fnent», American Indian Quarterly, llyd), 11-35. 

European historians have overlooked and denied many Native 

American cultural achievements for centuries, even in the -face of 

overwhelming evidence of their existence. This paper examined these 

denials in only three areass medicine, the manufacture of maple sugar 

and the use of fertilizer, and found abundant early literature to 

support these Native American achievements. Recognition of these and 

other historical accomplishments, and therefore the respect for Native 

cultures and Native people, is long overdue. 



ERIC 




- PAGE 42 — 



Coqnitiv Style 

Brown, D. B. (1990). Learning atylg» and N^ativ AmTicang, 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 17,(1), 23-35. 

The author eelected a few researchers' descriptions of learning 

styles and cognitive styles that seemed to be particularly useful to 

teachers, and elaborated on the model she called hemisphericity. The 

author pointed out that left hemisphere learners were better achievers 

in school, and that most Native Americans were right hemisphere 

learners. Many suggestions for curriculum modifications were offered, 

as were her ten criteria for a reading program that would allow right 

hemisphere learners a chance to succeed at learning to read. 

Chrisjohn, R. D. and Peters, M. (1986). The right-brained 
Indians fact or fiction? Journal of American Indian 
Education, 25,(2), 81-87. 

The authors expressed concern over the possible effects of the 

growing amount of research concluding that Native Americans are right 
hemisphere learners. Much evidence of an "anatomical" nature is often 
manipuldited in order to prove the superiority of the Anglo over ethnic 
minorities. In addition, the authors point out that damage in the 
area of education of Native Americans could result when educational 
strategies are linked with left- or right-brain learning. Such 
attitudes as, "why bother to teach Native American children things 
they are not capable of learning?" may result from right-brain 
curriculum design. 

Diessner, R. and Walker, J. L. (1986). A cognitive pattern of 
the Yakima Indian students. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 25,(2), 39-43. 

Using Bannatyne's recategorized WISC-R and WAI8 scores, the 
authors attempted to examine whether Yakima students, whose primary 



— PAGE 43 — 

language is English, •xhibitsd the same cognitive learning styles as 
other Native American students. The same pattern was -Found (spatial 
ability higher than sequential ability, sequential ability high^^r than 
verbal ability). The authors speculated that a possible cause for 
this pattern could be that spatial processing (right brain) may 
interfere with left brain hemisphere processing, resulting in 
decreased linguistic processing. Another possible cause that was 
mentioned was the high incidence of otitis media which contributes to 
deficits in linguistic processing. 

Foreman, K. (1991). Native teaching and learning/dramatic 
teaching and learning. Youth Theatre Journal, 5,(3), 
16^20. 

The teaching methods used in educational drama classes were 
analyzed for their compatibility with the learning styles that 
researchers have identified as being favored by Native American 
students. The dramatic teaching methods that are commonly used and 
thought to be compatible with Native learning styles are as followsi 
watch-then-do, think-then-do, using a holistic approach to get the 
"big picture" in order to provide context for a particular scene, 
small group (collective creation) interaction, visual-spatial methods 
to create imaginary situations as well as other forms of non-verbal 
communication strengths, the u«e of stories to convey meaning, and 
tactile stimulation. 

Haukoos, G. D. ana Satterfield, R. <19B6). Learning styles of 

minority students (Native Americans) and their application 
in developing a culturally sensitive science classroom. 
Community/Junior College Quarterly, 10,(3), 193-201. 

This study of Native American entry level college biology 

students was conducted in order to learn more about their learning 

styles and to recommend changes in teaching strategies based on the 



— PAGE 44 — 



ERIC 



results of thm study. Ths L»«rning Styles Inventory, Form C (LSI) was 
administered on the first d«y of biology class to m group of Native 
American biology students as well as to a group of non-Native 
students. The results indicated that there are four significant 
differences in learning style characteristics. From the results, the 
teacher implemented several changes into the course to accommodate the 
Native Americans' exhibited skills. A very high course success rate 
and completion rate was noted by the authors. 

Henry, S. L. and Pepper, F. C. (1990). Cognitive, social and 
cultural effects on Indian learning stylet classroom 
implications. The Journal of Educational Issues of Language 
Minority Students, 7, 85-97. 

Learning style is examined using three dimensionsi (1) thinking 
and reasoning, (2) social effects and (3) the biological elements 
involving physiology, nutrition, health and sex-related differences. 
The effects of home culture, child rearing practices and cultural 
incongruities on learning style are also discussed. Various teaching 
strategies designed to support the Native American student are 
offered. 

Macias, C. J. (1989). American Indian academic success! the 
role of indigenous learning strate gies. Journal of 
American Indian Education, special issue, 29, 43-52. 

Interviews were conducted with eleven successful Native American 

female graduate school students in order to discover what strategies 

they had developed on their way to experiencing such academic success. 

The women identified many common difficulties as well as coping 

strategies to overcome these difficulties. Some of these strategies 

werei keeping with a systematic study schedule, use of multimodal 

learning styles such as combining reading with writing, reading aloud, 

• 48 



~ PAGE 45 — 

includinQ physical movement in their studying, and visualization 
techniques. 

Moore, A. J. (1987>> Native Indian students and their learning 

stylesi research results and classroom applications. B. C- 
Journal of Special Education, 11,(1), 23-37. 

The author examines literature on learning styles under the four 
headings of (1) internal processes (global/analytic, imagery/verbal, 
impulsive/reflective, t r ial-and-er r or / watch- then-do, field 
dependence-independence, concrete/abstract), (2) external conditions, 
(3) teaching and communication styles, and (4) traditional learning 
styles. Problems in research, caused by a lack of uniformity for the 
term "learning style", are also discussed. The paper discusses a 
number of possible classroom suggestions for the implementation of 
Native learning styles- 
More, A. J. (1987). Native Indian learning stylesi a review 

for researchers and teachers. Journal of American 

Indian Education, 27,(1), 17-29. 

Research on learning styles was summarized and presented under 
the headings of internal cognitive process, external conditions, 
teaching and communication styles and traditional learning styles. 
Some strengths that are frequently mentioned in literature include 
global processing, simultaneous processing, visual/spatial processing, 
using imagery for coding rather than verbal coding, and reflective 
learning (learn by watching) rather than impulsive learning 
(trial-and-error). 

Osborne, B. (19S5). Research into Native North Americans' 

cognitiont 1973-1982. Journal of American Indian Education, 
24,(3), 9-25. 

This paper reviewed ten years of journal articles on the topic of 
O Native Americans' cognition and grouped them under five headings^ (1) 

ERIC 



~ PAGE 46 — 



visual perception and cognitive style, (2) perception o-f self, time, 
information needs and the world, (3) Piagetian tasks, (4) reading and 
bilingual education and (5) cognitive strengths. The groupings were 
then evaluated against J. S. Kleinfeld's findings in her studies on 
cognitive styles o-f Inuits. Given the many weaknesses of the studies 
reviewed, the author declared that it is very difficult to draw 
conclusions on Native Americans' cognitive styles. 

Pepper, F. C. and Henry, S. L. (1986). Social and cultural 

effects on Indian learning stylei classroom applications. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 13,(1), 54-61. 

The author examined the child's outer environment and its effects 

on learning style. The outer environment, as described, consisted of 

family atmosphere, family constellation (the relationship of family 

members to one another) and child-rearing/discipline practices. The 

author believes that learning styles evolve naturally from the outer 

environment. The paper concludes with a list of classroom 

implications that take into account learning style, and a reminder 

that stereotyping a child's learning style may contribute to an 

inferior education. One damaging example of an inferior strategy 

would be not teaching verbal skills to a Native child because his/her 

learning style is non-verbal. 

Rhodes, R. W. (1988). Holistic teaching/learning for Native 

American students. Journal of American Indian Education, 
27,(2), 21-29. 

In the search for reasons for the lack of success of Native 
Americans in Anglo-style school situations, the author has attempted 
to show that there is probably a difference in observational and 
thinking processes for Native Americans raised on a reservation than 
for Native Americans and non-Native Americans who are not raised on a 



— PASE 47 — 



ERIC 



reservation. Teacher* can therefore develop appropriate claasrooa 
activities by utilizing haptic, holistic and right brained learning 
styles that are favored by Native Americans. 

Rhodes, R. W. (1990). Measurements of Navajo and Hopi brain 

dominance and le arning styles. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 29,(3), 29-40. 

Using Navajo and Hopi students, teachers, and non-teaching adults 
as subjects, a brain hemispheric dominance and learning style 
preference study was performed. The Hnisphtric Hod* Indicator 
and the Learning Stylm Inyeniory were administered. The results 
indicated significant differences from national norms for all Navajo 
and Hopi subgroups, and imply a mismatch between the teaching style 
found in most schools and the learning styles of most Navajo and Hopi 
students. 

Sawyer, D. (1991). Native learning stvlesi shorthand for 
instruct ional adaptations? Canadian Journal of 
Native Education, 18,(1), 99-105. 

The author reviewed literature on the topic of Native learning 
styles and presented the view that many studies on the topic go beyond 
the definition of learning styles and are therefore vague and 
ambiguous. Many orientations to learning can be attributable to such 
causes as child rearing practices and the culturally-based 
"interference theory" (classrooms are not structured to allow Native 
students to display competence). Conclusions from many studies are 
based on small samples, and some patterns are preferred by just over 
half of the sample. However, such studies have value in that they 
might suggest alternative ideas that can be used to increase teacher 
sensitivity in specific situations. 



51 



— PASE 48 — 

Shade, B. J. <1989)- The influBnce of perceptual devglopment 
on cognitive styles croam ethnic cotnparisonm. Early 
Child Development and Care, 51, 137-155- 

This paper examined the perceptual patterns of Native Americans 
and Afro-Americans to determine how their perceptual development 
influences the way they process information- Such topics as person 
vs- object orientation, modality preferences, field 
dependence-independence and visual cues are discussed- The paper 
concluded by including cognitive style profiles for the two groups- 

S teller n, J-, Collins, J,, Gutierrez, B« and Patterson, E. (1966)- 
Hemispheric dominance of Native American Indian students- 
Journal of American Indian Education, 25,(2), 8-17- 

Dual-task experiments (finger tapping concurrently with a number 

of reading and spatial problem solving tasks) were used to examine the 

language and spatial lateralization of 49 Native American students in 

the fourth, fifth and sixth grades. The results indicated that the 

subjects in this study have language lateralization to the left 

hemisphere, and some also have the spatial function to the left 

hemisphere- The author summarized that the Native American students 

in this study are not right hemisphere dominant and therefore do not 

need right-minded teaching techniques- 

Swisher, K- (1990)- Cooperative learning and the education of 

American Indian/Alaskan Native studentsx a rwiew of the 
literature and suggestions for implementation- Journal 
of American Indian Education, 29,(2), 36-43- 

The author reviewed and summarized the findings of several 

researchers on the subject of Native American students and competition 

or cooperation in the classroom- In general, competition in the 

"team" sense has been used successfully in Native American classrooms- 

However, the type of competition in which recognition of the "winner" 

implies a negative attitude toward the "loser" is not acceptable, as 



" PAGE 49 — 



Native American children are not willing to be singled out or 
"spotlighted" in this way. Several team learning techniques that have 
been extensively researched and found to significantly increase 
learning are described in this article. 

Swisher, K. and Deyhle, D. <1987). Styles of learning and 

learning of stylesx educational conflicts for American 
Indian/Alaskan Native youth. Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development, 8(4), 345-360. 

This article reviews literature on Native Americans and cognitive 
style in three different categoriess learning style, interactional 
style and teaching style. The learning style category includes topics 
such as spatial/visual ability, observation and field 
dependence/independence. The interactional style category includes 
topics such as cooperative vs. competitive situations, classroom 
organization and the demonstration of knowledge. The teaching style 
category includes such topics as teacher understanding of culturally 
specific behaviors, group vSb individual orientation and multisensory 
instruction. 

Swisher, K. and Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are 

different, but the teaching is just the same» suggestions 
for teachers of American Indian youth. Journal of American 
Indian Education, special issue, 29, 1-14. 

This paper illustrated several learning styles with specific 
examples, and followed with a summary of supporting literature for 
each learning style. The styles that were featured were: visual 
learning, field-dependence/field-independence, public and private 
talk, and cooperating vs. competing. The paper concluded with a 
discussion of ways to apply learning preferences into practice in the 
classroom. 



~ PABE 50 ~ 

Walker, B. J., Dodd, J. and Bigelow, R. (19B9). Learning 

preferences of capable American Indians of two tribes. 
Journal of American Indian Education, special issue, 29, 63-71. 

The Walker Learning Preference Scale was completed by 28 

adolescent Native American students to determine if there was a 

preference in learning styles for the group. Nine of the fifteen 

males, and six of the thirteen females in the group selected the 

Patterned Symbols learning preference. The typical patterned symbols 

learner prefers a group oriented, non-competitive learning environment 

where he/she can draw personal symbolic relationships between the 

previously acquired knowledge and the new information. The author 

offered suggestions on adapting curriculum to the demonstrated 

learning preference. 



— PABE 51 — 



CONCLUSIONS/IMPRESSIONS 
The journal articles featured in this bibliography cover many 
aspects of the state of Native American special education in the 
1990's. Some aspects have been adequately researched, some aspects 
have been over-researched and other topics suffer from lack of 
reported scientific data. This researcher offers his opinion 
of the state of the literature found in professional journals in the 
past eight years. This opinion has been separated into the seven 
sections found in the bibliography* In addition, suggestions of 
topics that future researchers m^y consider have been offered in the 
final section of this conclusion. 

Assessment 

Bias in the assessment of Native American students with special 
needs has been discussed extensively. A number of articles discuss 
the need for alternative methods of assessment measures as well as 
using more naturalistic testing procedures. Test results that 
indicate poor performance of Native American students on verbal 
subtests of many popular measures are also extensively discussed. 
The literature is lac Lng, however, in specifically suggesting 
or developing verbal measures that will identify true learning 
handicaps and distinguish them from cultural/linguistic differences. 

Health Issues 

Many informative articles on alcohol, drugs, and substance abuse 
have been included for the following reasonsB (1) substance abuse can 
cause brain damage in the abuser and lead to the formation of a 
handicapping condition, (2) substance abuse is a symptom of emotional 
disturbance, (3) substance abuse can be the cause of many handicapping 



~ PAGE 52 — 



conditions to unborn babies, ar<d <4) the effects of substance abuse 
can be mistaken for handicapping conditions, and therefore lead to 
an erroneous identification, if the educational diagnostician is 
unaware of the student's use of substances. Several innovative 
articles on education and management of alcohol and drug use have 
also been included. In addition, this section contains articles 
designed to educate students and teachers on such important topics 
as suicide, high mortality rates, AIDS awareness, mental health, 
sexual abuse and the etiology of student delinquency. 

L earning Handicaps 
There is a distinct lack of recent research on the subject of 
Native American students and handicapping conditions. Many studies 
can be done on the efficacy of applying various teaching strategies, 
methods, materials, and procedures on Native students who are 
currently enrolled in special education programs. Some of the 
reasons for the lack of research on such important topics may 
include the following: (1> the Native American's historical mistrust 
of Anglo American intentions, (2) geographical barriers, such as long 
distances, between universities and reservation schools, (3) lack of 
perceived relevance of such studies on the part of Native American 
communities, and (4) many children who are identified as handicapped 
by the schools are not seen as handicapped by the Native American 
community. However, the handicapping characteristics of Native 
American students who have had otitis media, or middle ear infection, 
are well described in the recent literature offered in this 
bibliography. 

ErJc ^ 56 



~ PABE S3 — 

Bift»d 

Th« definition of gift«dn»«« is discussad in detail throughout 
this ssction. Special attention is paid to comparing the traditional 
Anglo definition of giftedness to the somewhat different Native 
American definition, and to the problems that are caused when the 
Anglo definition is used in the identification process of Native 
American gifted children. The literature does not, however, offer 
many solutions to the problem of identification of the gifted that are 
acceptable to both the Native American and the Anglo cultures. 

Program/Personnel Training 
Various excellent descriptions of personnel training programs 
for both regular and special education teachers, educational 
assistants, counselors, liaisons, and support personnel are discussed 
in this section. Df particular interest are the articles that 
describe field-based programs that are designed to train residents of 
the local communities to work in their school in special education 
capacities. The field-based programs usually offer university credit 
for attending classes close to their homes on the reservation, which 
in most cases are located hundreds of miles from the university. 

Culture/Language 
The articles in this section address the bilingual/bicultural 
component of the bilingual special education program, and are 
also suitable for those who wish to apply the content to regular 
education settings. Some of the issues discussed in this section 
include cultural incongruencies that can be responsible for school 
failure, historical issues such as the Anglo attempts to eradicate 
Native American languages and hide Native American accomplishments, 
and descriptions of successful bilingual/bicultural school programs. 



~ PAGE S4 ~ 



Cognitive Style 
This section contains twenty articles on the subjects of 
learning style, cognitive style and laterality. Although there are 
undoubtedly many useful ideas in these articles, it is the opinion of 
this researcher that there is not as much useful content in this 
section as the volume of articles would lead one to believe. The 
conclusions reached by the authors are repeated several times 
throughout this section. Nevertheless, it would behoove the teachers 
of Native American students with special needs to become familiar with 
the cognitive styles that are prevalent in their classrooms. 

Suggestions for Future Researchers 
The following list of suggestions have been compiled to help 
students and teachers choose topics that have not been thoroughly 
researched, and to introduce possibly valuable sources that are not 
currently found when conducting ERIC searches: 

* alternative verbal measures need to be developed to aid in the 
assessment and identification of Native Americans with learning 
handicaps, 

« alternative approaches for controlling and preventing substance 
abuse among Native American adolescents, 

♦ more scientific studies need to be conducted to test the efficacy of 
new approaches to teaching Native American students with learning 
handicaps, 

# gifted student identification procedures and educational programs 
that are agreeable to both cultures have yet to be de 'eloped, 

« field-based teacher training programs should be initiated at the 

high school level in order to capture the interest of younger Native 



— ' PAGE 55 — 

American studentm, 

* more »ci»ntific studies can be performed and published, thereby 
replacing the over-used survey method of gathering data, 

* Native Americans should be looked upon as a heterogeneous group and 
classified by tribal affiliation, rather than treated as a 
homogeneous group without regard to individual tribal 
characteristics, 

* Journml of Nmvmjo Educmixon articles will not be found in an 

ERIC search, but should be consulted when conducting research on 
issues pertaining to education of Native Americans of the Southwest. 



ERLC 



AppsndiK 

DMcriptorm Used For ERIC Search 



~ PABE 56 ~ 



1. American Indians and learning disabilities 

2. American Indians and communication disorders 

3. American Indians and behavior disorders 

4. American Indians and mental retardation 

5. American Indians and physical disabilities 

6. American Indians and dyslexia 

7. American Indians and mental disorders 

8. American Indians and behavior modification 

9. American Indians and behavior problems 

10. American Indians and reading difficulties 

11. American Indians and reading improvement 

12. American Indians and reading strategies 

13. American Indians and reading failure 

14. American Indians and evaluation 

15. American Indians and assessment 

16. American Indians and attention deficit disorder 

17. American Indians and hyperactivity 

IB. American Indians and developmental disabilities 

19. American Indians and language handicaps 

20. American Indians and learning problems 

21. American Indians and minimal brain dysfunction 

22. American Indians and writing difficulties 

23. American Indians and aphasia 

24. American Indians and holistic reading 

25. American Indians and cognitive styles 

26. American Indians and learning theories 

27. American Indians and annotated bibliography and special education 

ERJC • tJl 



— PAGE 57 — 

28. Amsrican Indians and apscial sducation 

29. American Indians and cultural pluralism 

30. American Indians and biculturalism 

31. American Indians and acculturation 

32. American Indians and cultural differences 

33. American Indians and culture 

34. American Indians and culture conflict 

35. American Indians and multicultural education 

36. American Indians and culture-shock 

37. American Indians and ethnocentrism 

36. American Indians and religious conflict 

39. American Indians and social differences 

40. American Indians and hearing impairments 

41. American Indians and visual impairments 

42. American Indians and bilingual special education 

43. American Indians and speech handicaps 

44. American Indians and hearing therapy 

45. American Indians and speech and hearing clinics 

46. American Indians and child health 

47. American Indians and mental health 
4B. American Indians and chronic illness 

49. American Indians and health conditions 

50. American Indians and health needs 

51. American Indians and prenatal influences 

52. American Indians and radiation effects 

53. American Indians and special health problems 

54. American Indians anJ alcohol education 

55. American Indians and drug education 



~ PAGE SB — 

56. American Indians and hsart disorders 

57. American Indians and diabetes 

58. American Indians and braille 

59. American Indians and neurological impairments 

60. American Indians and adaptive physical education 

61. American Indians and normalization 

62. American Indians and Special Olympics 

63. American Indians and bilingual education 

64. American Indians and second language learning 

65. American Indians and visual learning 

66. American Indians and verbal learning 

67. American Indians and multisensory learning 
6B« American Indians and cooperative learning 

69. American Indians and exceptional persons 

70. American Indians and language research 

71. American Indians and reading research 

72. American Indians and writing research 

73. American Indian Reservations and schools 

74. American Indian Reservations and special education 

75. Navajo and special education 

76. Navajo and cognitive styles 

77. Navajo and learning theories 

78. Navajo and learning disabilities 

79. Navajo and communication disorders 

60. Navajo and behavior disorders 

61. Navajo and mental retardation 
82. Navajo and physical disabilities 
63. Navajo and mental disabilities 

Er|c ' f3 



— PAGE 59 — 

84. Navajo and language handicaps 
65. Navajo and writing differences 

86. Navajo and speech handicaps 

87. Navajo and multicultural education 

88. Hopi and special education 

89. Hopi and learning theories 

90. Hopi and multicultural education 

91. Hopi and learning disabilities 

92. Hopi and communication disorders 

93. Cherokee and special education 

94. Cherokee and multicultural education 

95. Cherokee and learning theories 

96. Sioux and special education 

97. Sioux and learning disabilities 

98. Sioux and learning theories 

99. Sioux and communication disorders 

100. Sioux and multicultural education 

101. Canada Natives and bilingual education 

102. Canada Natives and multicultural education 

103. Canada Natives and learning disabilities 

104. Canada Natives and communication disorders 

105. Canada Natives and behavior disorders 

106. Canada Natives and language handicaps 

107. Canada Natives and learning theories 

108. Canada Natives and special education 

109. Canada Natives and physical disabilities 

110. Canada Natives and mental retardation 

111. Canada Natives and alcohol education 



~ PAGE 60 — 

112. Canada Native* and drug education 

113. Canada Natives and writing difficulties 

114. Canada Natives and reading difficulties 

115. Canada Natives and mental disorders 

116. Canada Natives and reading improvement 

117. Canada Natives and reading failure 

IIB. Canada Natives and minimal brain dysfunction 

119. Canada Natives and mental health 

120. Canada Natives and health needs 

121. Canada Natives and diabetes 



An Annotated Bibliography of Journal Articl«« 
on th» Subject of Native American Student* 
With Special Needs 

1985-1992 

Robert J. Hutchinson 



Descriptors for project 

1. 

2. 

3. 



UNM examining committee 

Dr. Barrera 

Dr. Nielsen 

Dr. Valles 

date: October 27, 1992 



ERIC 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



I wi»h to express my sincere appreci^ition and gratitude to the 
following people for their assistance and cooperation in 
the development of this projectt 



Dr. Jozi De Leon, for sewing the seeds of knowledge in the area 
of multicultural education, 



Dr. James Everett, for his time spent and encouragement given me to 
enter the field of special education, 



Dr. Isaura Barrera, for timely advisement in both personal and 
academic matters. 



Dr. Elizabeth Nielsen, for her kind encouragement and assistance in 
helping me to complete this project. 



Dr. 6ene Valles for his wisdom and his participation in my academic 
success. 



Jo Sanchez for her endless help in cutting red tape. 

Ambrosia, my little girl, for thousands of pages of photocopying, 
and for inspiration that I could never explain. 



Marie, for her love, assistance and first-hand stories of life at 
the boarding school. 



Don and Jean Hutchinson, my parents, to whom this project truly 
belongs. 



Tabic of Contents 



Introduction 




Page 


1 


Method 






Page 


2 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 




Page 


4 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Health Issues 


Page 


13 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Learni ng Handi caps 


Page 


21 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Gifted 


Page 


25 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Program/Personnel Trax ni ng 


Page 


28 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Culture/Language Issues 


Page 


33 


Annotated 


Bibliography on 


Cognitive Style 


Page 


42 


Concl usi ons/ 1 mpr essi ons 




Page 


51 


Appendix: 


Descriptor* Used -for ERIC Search 


Page 


56 



ERIC 



^■5 



INTRODUCTION 

There are many obstacles that one must overcome in order to 
effectively research a subject in the area of education. Among these 
obstacles is finding an adequate number of accurate sources of 
information pertaining to a chosen subject. Given the time 
constraints that most students must live with, there is nothing more 
disheartening than to build enthusiasm for gaining knowledge in a 
certain area of study, only to find a very limited amount of pertinent 
literature available from which to choose. As a result, the student 
will most likely (a) change his or her topic to fit the amount of 
literature that is easily accessible or (b) submit an inferior product 
based on the small amount of literature that he or she was able to 
find in the allotted time. 

The purpose of this project is to provide a comprehensive list of 
recently written, high quality journal articles that relate the 
subject of Native Americans with pertinent subjects such as special 
education, handicapping conditions, social and medical issues that may 
contribute to handicapping conditions, and alternative teaching 
methods that can be used to help Native Americans in special education 
settings. From his participation in many classroom discussions at the 
University of New Mexico, the researcher has concluded that there 
exists significant interest in the aforementioned topics among 
educators. An annotated bibliography is therefore offered to 
encourage educators to more easily avail themselves of information 
that would be of assistance in special education classrooms that 
contain Native American students. It is believed that if educators of 
Native American children with special needs had convenient access to 
this annotated bibliography, the quality of the children's education 
would be positively affected. 



~ PASE 2 ~ 



Method 

An extensive ERIC computer search of journal articles was 
conducted at the Zimmerman Library on the campus of the University of 
New Mexico in June, July and August of 1992- A complete list of 
descriptors used in this search is listed in the Appendix. Care was 
taken to search only journal articles published after December 31, 
1984- The Education Index was manually searched and compared to the 
results obtained from the ERIC search. The reference sections of all 
articles were checked for journal articles that may not have been 
included in the ERIC and Education Index searches. In addition to the 
above searches, the following Journals were manually checked for 
relevant articles that may have been published subsequent to the 
latest ERIC file updatei Journal of American Indian Education, 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, American Indian and Alaska 
Native Mental Health Research, Psychology in the Schools, American 
Journal of Public Health, American Indian Quarterly, School Psychology 
Review, Exceptional Children and Bilingual Review. 

All articles to be included in tha annotated bibliography were 
selected based on (a) relevance to the subject of Native American 
students and special education and (b) their possible value as a 
resource to school personnel and teachers of exceptional Native 
American students. Articles describing quality research done in Canada 
were included. 

The bibliography is divided into seven sections as follows: 
Assessment, Health Issues, Learning Handicaps, Gifted, 
Program/Personnel Training^ Culture/Language Issues and Cognitive 
Style- The Assmssmmnt section contains articles that pertain to 
^ referral, identification and special education placement decisions. 



— PAGE 3 — 



The Hmalih Issues section offers information that can help 
educators to identify and understand medical, substance abuse and 
psychological problems frequently encountered by Native American 
students. The Lemming HmTidicmps section contains articles and 
studies specifically related to exceptionalities as defined by federal 
law. The articles found in the Gifted section pertain to issues 
that involve gifted and talented Native Americans and the need for 
alternative methods of referral and assessment. The 
Program/Personnel Training section contains articles that describe 
innovative ideas as well as training programs for educators of Native 
American students with special needs. The articles in the 
Culture/ Language Issues section deal with the effects that Native 
cultures and languages have on academic success in an Anglo-dominated 
education system. The Cogniti\^e Style section can be a helpful 
resource for educators who seek alternative methods of presenting 
lessons. The articles in the latter two sections (Cognitive Style and 
Culture/Language) may pertain to regular education students as well as 
to special education students. The researcher has included these 
sections in the annotated bibliography because of the important role 
the topics play in the bilingual special education curriculum. 



ERLC 



^ ' 71 



— PA8E 4 — 



ANNOTATED BIBLIQBRAPKY 
Amacasmgnt 

Carney, L- J. and Chermak, 6- D- (1991). Performance of American 
Indian children with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome on the Temt of 
Language Development. Journal of Communication Dimorderm, 
24,(2), 123-134. 

Ten Native American children with diagnosed Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome (FAS) and seventeen normally developing Native American 
children were administered the Test of Language Development (TOLD) in 
order to compare their expressive and receptive language abilities and 
find out more about the effects of FAS on the language abilities of 
afflicted children. The performance of the FAS group was 
significantly poorer than the control (normal) group on most subsets 
of the TOLD. However, the older FAS children presented mainly 
syntactic deficits, whereas the younger FAS children presented more 
global language deficits. 

Chinn, P. C. and Hughes, S. (1987) Representation of Minority 
students in special education classes. Remedial and 
Special Education, 6,(4), 41-46. 

A study of Office of Civil Rights, Elmmitntury and Secondary 
Schools Civil Rights surveys was performed to determine whether any 
changes in the nature of the representation of minorities in special 
education classes was taking place. The data collected showed that 
Native Americans continued to be overrepresented in classes for 
trainable mentally retarded and learning disabled, and 
underrepresented in the classes for gifted and talented. These 
disproportionate representations, according to the authors, reflect a 
breakdown in the referral process, in the assessment process, or both. 



ERLC 



~ PAOE 5 ~ 

Common, R- W. and Frost, L- G. (1988). Th« implications of thm 

migm»asurgmgnt of Native «tad«nt«' intglliqeno through the 
a»c of standardized intelligence tests. Canadian Journal of 
Native Education, 15,(1), 18-30. 

The article examines the history of the majority culture's 
attempts to measure the intelligence of Native Americans, starting 
with the use of phrenology, followed by measurements of skull capacity 
and the modern day futile attempts such as the WISC-R. The authors 
point out that all Anglo attempts have yielded the same inaccurate 
results. The inclusion of Sternberg's Contextualist Perspective on 
the assessment of Native Americans' intelligence is discussed as a 
possible breakthrough in the area of appropriately measuring the 
intelligence of Native Americans and other culturally different 
people. 

Connely, J. B. (19B5). Receptive and expressive vocabularies of 
young Indian children. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 24,(1), 33-37. 

The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R) and the 
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) vocabulary 
subtest were administered to Native American and non-Native American 
children to investigate the differences in scores on each test that 
was attained by the respective ethnic groups. Since the PPVT-R 
requires less verbal expression than the WISC-R vocabulary subtest, 
it was hypothesized that the Native American group would score higher 
on the PPVT-R than on the WISC-R. The results showed that the 
non-Native American group scored higher on the two measures, but the 
gap between the Native American and the non-Native American scores on 
the PPVT-R was significantly less than the gap between the scores on 
the WISC-R vocabulary subtest. The author concluded that the PPVT-R 
may present a format which is more compatible with Native American 



— • PAQE 6 — 

patterns of interpersonal communication and visual strengths. 

Deyhle, D. (1?B6). A micro-ethnographic comparison of Navajo 
and Anglo students' perceptions of testing. Curriculum 
Inquiry. 16,(4), 365-389. 

Test results, teacher interviews, student interviews and 
extensive classroom observations were conducted in an all-Navajo BIA 
day school and at a predominantly Anglo school for the purpose of 
examining the structure and presentation of tests such as the 
California Test of Basic Skills (CTBS) and to compare its effects on 
the two groups of children. The results indicated that the individual 
assessments, as well as the public displaying of the results, were 
culturally incongruent and against the experience and expectations of 
the Navajo children, whereas the Anglo students accepted and 
understood the importance of the testing procedure and the public 
display of the results. The Navajo culture does not value individual 
accomplishment in the same way as does the Anglo culture. The author 
urges any person who interprets the results of such tests to bear in 
mind the cultural discontinuities between the home and school 
environments of Native American children. 

Fifield, M. B. and Fifield, M. G. (19B5). The effectiveness 

of psychoeducational testing reports as perceived by 
teachers in an intertribal secondary boarding school. 
Journal of American Indian Education. 24,(2), 16-24. 

A combination of questionnaires and interviews were administered 

to teachers to determine how well certain psychoeducational testing 

reports communicate test results and programming recommendations to 

teachers in a Bureau of Indian Affairs secondary boarding school, and 

to offer suggestions that will improve communication betwren these 

reports and the school personnel who use them. The majority of 

teachers viewed the testing reports favorably and found them to be a 



~ PAGE 7 ~ 



helpful tool in understanding the needs of the students who were being 
tested. The authors recommended that teachers receive training in 
understanding what information can be derived from such reports, and 
that the diagnosticians be careful not to use Jargon that can impede 
communication of vital information. 

Fisher, 6. L. and Harrison, T. C. (1992). Assessment of alcohol 

and other drug abuse with referred adolescents. Psychology 
in the Schools, 29,(2), 172-178. 

The authors believe that many Native American adolescent 
substance abusers who are referred for special education services may 
be misidentified because the symptoms for handicapping conditions are 
often simil^.r to the symptoms of drug and alcohol abuse. Such factors 
as antisocial behavior, hyperactivity, academic failure, 
rebelliousness, lack of social bonding, cognitive impairment, 
alienation and behavioral changes are symptomatic of handicapping 
conditions as well as substance abuse. Procedures that can assist in 
assessing the likelihood that substance abuse contributes to academic 
and behavioral problems are discussed^ 

Larrick, W. R. (1991). A descriptive approach to language 

assessmen t. Journal of Navajo Education, 8,(3), 20-22. 

The author, a speech/language pathologist, argues that the 

current language assessment process for special education placement is 

biased against Navajo children. Instead of the current approach, the 

author recommends the Descriptive Approach to assessing language of 

culturally and linguistically different children. The Descriptive 

Approach is made up of components that include the following: a 

naturalistic setting for the assessment rather than an artificial 

setting to meet the requirements of standardization, viewing the child 



— PABE B — 

as a comoiunicator rather than as a language user, two levels of 
analysis (descriptive and explanatory) and the use of 

criterion-referencing that focuses on general communicative behaviors. 

MacAvoy, J. and Sidles, C- (1991). The effects of language 

preference and multitrial presen t ation upon the free 
recall of Navajo children. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 30,(3), 33-43. 

The Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test, a neuropsychological 
memory measure, was administered to eighty primarily Nava jo-speaking 
children ranging in age from eight to ten years. QtiSt group was given 
the test in Navajo and the other group was given the test in English. 
The authors stated two purposes: to compare test results in the two 
languages, and to examine results of using a multitrial, free recall 
testing format to gain an assessment of auditory memory functions. 
The results^ showed that the children's recall in their native language 
was significantly better in the first two trials, with no significant 
difference in the final three trials. The suggestions were made thati 
(1) a more accurate measure of recall is attainable when th^ 
assessment is performed in the child's native language, and (2) more 
accurate skill estimates are attainable from memory tests in either 
language when ^ multitrial presentation format is used. 

Manuel, L. L. (1991). Observations of a bilingual Navajo 

diagnostician. Journal of Navajo Education, B,(3), 12-14. 

The author, a Navajo psych-educational evaluator of children 

referred for special education services, retells one of her 

experiences that convinced her to leave the teaching profession in 

favor of her current chosen field. "Joe" was referred for his problem 

behaviors and poor academic record. The author knew that Joe's 

problems with school were culturally based but the professional 




— PAGE 9 — 

diagnosticiany who was inssnsitivc to Navajo students' needs, 
convinced the evaluation team otherwise. The result was an 
inappropriate placement in a C-level class. Several faulty 
assumptions about Navajo students are also listed and discussed. 

McCullough, C. S., Walker, J. L. and Diessner, R. (1965). The 
ugg of Wechaler Scales in the assessment of Native 
Americans of the Columbia River Basin. Psychology in the 
Schools, 22,(1), 23-28. 

The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and the Wechsler 
Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) were used in a study 
of Native American junior and senior high school students from the 
Columbia River Basin. The study was undertaken in part to contribute 
towards accepting or rejecting certain generalizations regarding the 
intellectual behavior of Native Americans. The Verbal Scale scares 
were significantly below the normative mean and the Performance Scale 
scores were at or above the normative mean. These results were 
consistent across many studies previously performed with other Native 
American Tribes. Because these measures may not be accurately 
assessing the subjects' verbal abilities, the authors advise caution 
in the use of the WISC-R and the WAIS with Native Americans. 

Mishara, S. P., Lord, J. and Sabers, D. L. (1989). Cognitive 

processes underlying WISC-R performance of gifted and 
learning disabled Navajos. Psychology in the Schools, 
26,(1), 31-36. 

This study attempted to relate the Luria-Das Model of successive 
and simultaneous processes of coding information to the processing 
styles of learning disabled and gifted Navajo elementary school-age 
children. Using subtests from the WISC-R, it was hypothesized that 
the two groups would attack the same tasks by using different 
processing modes. The results indicated that the gifted group seemed 

I 4 



— PABE 10 ~ 

to prefer the successive processing mode on certain subtests, whereas 
the learning disabled group preferred the simultaneous processing mode 
for attacking the same tasks. The authors conclude that the two 
groups may require differential remedial and intervention procedures 
depending on their preferred modes of processing information. 

Myles, D. W. and Ratzlaff, H. C. (1988). Teachers^ bias towards 
visible ethnic minority groups in special education 
referrals. B. C. Journal of Special Education, 12,(1), 
19-27. 

Completed questionnaires were returned from 347 public elementary 
school teachers in Vancouver and used to investigate the possible 
presence of bias toward visible ethnic minority groups in special 
education. The questionnaire described a child who was experiencing 
academic and behavioral problems. The only difference between the 
questionnaires was that child was randomly described as being either 
Caucasian, Native Canadian, Oriental or East Indian. The analysis of 
the responses provided evidence of negative bias against the Native 
Canadian. The children described as Oriental and Caucasian 
experienced a positive bias. The authors suggest that this study 
provides evidenced that visible ethnic minority groups, especially 
Native Canadians, are discriminated against in most educational 
settings. 

Persi, J. and Brunatti, G. (1987). Cognitive measures and 

cultural biast a comparison of the performances of Native 
and non-Native low achievers. Canadian Journal of Native 
Education, 14,(1), 15-18. 

This study was conducted to evaluate whether low achieving 
Ojibway children who had been referred for psychological assessment 
because of scholastic difficulty would perform better on the Category 
Test (Reitan, 1956) than low achieving non-Native children. The 



— PAGE 11 — - 

Category Test assesses matching an underlying principle to different 
visual patterns and is hypothesized to be a less culturally biased 
measure of Native Americans' cognitive skills. The results support 
the hypothesis in that the Ojibway children performed as well as 
non-Native children on the tasks found in the Category Test. However, 
the traditional IQ tests are more appropriate as predictors of 
academic difficulty in non-Native children. 

Plank, S. A. (1991). Features of Navajo children's Draw-A-Person 
samples and possible self-concept interpretations. Journal 
of Navajo Education, 8,(3), 15-19. 

Over 400 Draw-A-Person samples from Navajo children were analyzed 
in an effort to study their development of self-esteem. The results 
(abnormally small pictures) indicate that Navajo boys attending 
elementary school may be experiencing a problem with self-concept that 
begins before kindergarten. Navajo girls created larger drawings than 
the boys in every grade. The author asks whether the apparent low 
self--concept of Navajo boys could be a factor in the prevalence of 
problem drinking among Navajo males versus Navajo females. 

Stone, J. and Gridley, B. E. (1991). The bias of a 

kindergarten screening batterya predicting achievement for 
White and Native American elementary students. School 
Psychology Review. 20,(1), 132-139. 

A kindergarten screening battery (KSB), composed of results from 
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT-R), the Kindergarten 
Language Screening Test (KLST), the Beery Developmental Test of 
Visual-Motor Integration (VMI), and the McCarthy Draw-A-Child Test 
(DAC) was administered to 591 White and 183 Native American elementary 
school children, and then compared to the subjects' Stanford 
Achievement Test total battery scores to see how well the KSB 
predicted achievement for the two ethnic groups. As expected, the 



— PAGE 12 ~ 



Whit* group «cor«d higher on thfc l«ngu«ge-b«««d t»mt« and the Native 
American group scored higher on the visual-motor tests. Based on the 
results of the KSB, achievement scores of the Native American group 
were overestimated, whereas the White group's scores were 
underestimated. 



ERIC 



— PAGE 13 — 



Health I»»uga 

Asetoyer, C. (1987). Pmtul •Icohol ayndromci an intcrrrtiorrl 
concorn. Winds of Change, 2y<4), 29-30. 

A demcription o-f the Native American Community Board's program 
entitled "Women and Children in Alcohol" im offered in this article. 
The NACB provides statistics on the extent of fetal alcohol syndrome 
(FAS) and fetal alcohol effects (FAE) in the Native American 
population, and their effect on the community. The devastating impact 
on the already overburdened special education system is discussed. 
Of particular interest is the impact that the customary late diagnosis 
of FAE has on both the student and the school. 

Beauvais, F., Getting, E. R. and Edwards, R. W. (1985). Trends 

in the use of inhalants among American Indian adolescents. 
White Cloud Journal, 3,(4), 3-11* 

More than 10,000 rural Nativnr American adolescents from over 30 
different tribes who were attending school were surveyed to ascertain 
the prevalence of inhalant use for mood-altering purposes. The 
results indicate that around 40% of Native American youth have tried 
inhalants by the time they reach 18 y&ars of age. The authors 
concluded that Native American adolescent inhalant use far exceeds 
that of non-Native American inhalant use in the categories of 
intensity, recency and lifetime prevalence. 

Beauvais, F., Getting, E. R., Wolf, W. and Edwards, R. W. (1989). 
American Indian youth and drugs, 1976-B7i a continuing 
problem. American Journal of Public Health, 79,(5), 
634-636. 

Anonymous questionnaires were used to update data from previous 
articles on trends in drug use of Native American youth who live on 
reservations. After enjoying a decline in over-all drug use in 
O previous years, the 1988 data suggests a rise in the use of most 

• 81 



— PAGE 14 — 



substances. Alcohol us« among Nativs American youth also appears to 
be increasing slightly. 

Carpenter, Ra A., Lyons, C. A. and Miller, W. R. (1985). 

Peer-managed self control program for prevention o-f alcohol 
abuse in American Indian high school students: a pilot 
evaluation study. The International Journal of the 
Addictions, 20,(2), 299-310. 

30 adolescent Native American high school students who were 
perceived as having drinking problems participated in a peer-managed 
self-control program to teach responsible drinking. This study 
differed from most studies involving alcohol abuse among Native 
American adolescents in that the primary goal was to teach "controlled 
drinking" and not alcohol prevention, and therefore was a test of the 
social lemming etiology of alcohol abuse rather than the 
traditional disease model of alcoholism. The majority of subjects 
in the study showed marked improvement in drinking habits in both the 
short term and after one year. 

Fingerhut, L. A. and Makuc, D. M. (1992). Mortality among 

m inority populations in the United States. American Journal 
of Public Health, 82,(B), 116B-1170. 

This article discusses the death rates, ages and causes of death 

among Americans of Hispanic, Asian, Native American, Black and White 
origins. Native Americans have the second highest death rate between 
the ages of one and fourteen and the highest death rate between the 
ages of fifteen and twenty-four. The main causes of death of Native 
American youth are unintentional injuries and suicide. Many of the 
unintentional injuries are from alcohol-related traffic accidents. It 
is the authors' hope that showing the disparities in mortality as well 
as the causes of death will lead to the development of i^pecific 
interventions to reduce the disparities. 



— PAGE 15 ~ 



Bro»«;;Tian, D. C, Milligan, B. C. and D©yo, R. A. <1991>. Ri«k 

factor* for guicid» attempt* among Navajo adolgacgnta. 
American Journal of Public Health, Bl,(7), 870-874. 

The result* of «elf-reported suicide attempts of Navajo 

adolescents were analyzed in an attempt to identify risk factors. The 

highest risk factors were found to be extreme alienation from family 

and community, history of mental problems, knowing someone who has 

attempted suicide, frequent use of hard liqaor, physical and sexual 

abuse, gender (female) and a poor self-perception of health status. 

Hall, R. Wilder, D., Bodenroeder, P. and Hess, M. (1990). 

Assessment of AIDS knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and 
risk level of Northwestern American Indians. American 
Journal of Public Health, 80,(7), 875-877. 

A questionnaire, made to assess knowledge, attitudes, behaviors 

and risk of infection from the HIV virus, was completed by 710 Native 

Americans from ages 12 to 78 years. The results indicate that twice 

as many members as in the general population are in the high risk 

group for contracting the virus. However, the group who completed the 

survey demonstrated a knowledge level similar to that of the general 

population. 

Neligh, G. (1990). Mental health programs for American Indiansi 
their logic, structure and function. American Indian and 
Alask\ Native Mental Health Research, 3,(3), 11-259. 

The author's purpose is to provide information about mental 

health problems and programs to professionals who work with Native 

Americans. Of particular interest to educators are the sections 

entitled Disorders Specific to Childhood and Problems of 

Adolescence. Detailed descriptions of mental health, learning and 

behavioral problems are analyzed from a Native American point of 

view. 



— PAGE 16 — 

Oetting, E. R«, Beauvais, F. and Edwards, R. (1986). Alcohol 
and Indian Youtht Social and psychological correlates 
and prcviention. The Journal of Drug Issues, 18,(1), 
87-111- 

The authors discuss the psychosocial -factors that can have a 
positive a-ffect on a young Native Americans' decision not to drink. 
The results of a questionnaire completed by over 1700 Native Americans 
under the age of 17 show some surprising results as well as some 
predictable results. The surprising results include the following! 
there is no difference in family economic status for alcohol-involved 
and non-involved Native youth, there are no significant differences in 
self-confidence or social acceptance for alcohol-involved and 
non~involved youth, and alcohol abusing youth feel less alienated than 
their non-drinking peers. The predictable results include the 
following: young Native American alcohol users drink to lessen the 
pain of negative emotional states, adolescent drug use is usually 
related to disrupted family structure, and young Native American 
alcohol users have higher levels of such deviant behaviors as lying 
and cheating. Special attention is paid to pmer cluster thmory 
and the need to break up deviant peer clusters who isolate themselves 
from influence by either adults or youth who espouse traditional 
societal values. 

Schafer, J. R. and Kcllwaine, B. D. (1992). Investigating child 

sexual abuse in the American Indian community. American 
Indian Quarterly, 16^(2), 137-167. 

The authors, special agents for the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation in Flagstaff, AZ, are experienced in the field of 
investigating crimes on several reservations throughout the United 
States. This article was written to share some of the problems that 

ERIC • 



~ PAGE 17 — 

p«opl« who mrm not famiXiAr with tribal cultures have when they 
suspect, report and investigate child sexual abuse. Although all 
Native American cultures have strong sanctions against sexual abuse of 
children, one must remember that all tribes are culturally distinct 
and the handling of such a problem by non-tribal members should be 
done with extreme caution. The reporting and investigating procedures 
that are appropriate for one culture may be inappropriate for another 
culture. 

Schinke, S. P., Bebel, M. Y., Qrlandi, M. A. and Botvin, G. J. (1988). 
Prevention strategies for vulnerable pupils. Urban 
Education, 22, (4),510-519. 

The second part of this article dealt with drug abuse preventive 
intervention based on a bicultural competence model. Leader modeling 
and student practice methods were used to teach Native American 
students communication, coping and discrimination skills. The results 
indicated that the group who received the modeling and practice 
interventions were more highly skilled in turning down drug and 
alcohol offers from their peers than the control group who received no 
intervention. 

Schinke, S. P. et al., (1985). Strategies for preventing 

substance abuse with American Indian youth. White Cloud 
Journal, 1985, 3,(4), 12-18. 

This paper emphasizes culturally sensitive, scientific strategies 
for preventing substance abuse that are based on strftngths that have 
served Native American people for thousands of years. Deciding what 
strategies to use starts with brainstorming sessions that include the 
ideas of local leaders. Native traditions, ceremonies and values are 
a central part of the design of the programs. The implementation of 
the program includes group homework assignments, field trips. 



— PAGE IB — 

Audio-vimual aids, Qu«st spsaksrs and •xpsrittntial eKercives. 



Schinke, S. P. et al., (1988>. Preventing mubstanco abum» 

among American Indian adolemcentai a bicultural competence 
skills approach. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 35,(1>, 
87-90. 

The bicultural competence skills approach, consisting of three 
subgoals, (1) communication skills, <2) coping skills and (3) 
discrimination skills, was taught to Native American adolescents for 
the purpose of helping to prevent substance abuse. The group Hho 
received the skills-based intervention showed greater posttest and 
follow-up improvements on measures of knowledge, attitudes and 
interactive abilities than the control group who did not receive the 
intervention. 

Schinke, S. P. et al., (19B5). Preventing substance abuse with 
American Indian youth. Social Casework, 66,(4), 213-217. 

The article begins with several startling statistics that relate 

Native American substance abuse with a high incidence of social 

maladaptation, poor health and death. The authors then discuss many 

of the accepted explanations for the high incidence of substance abuse 

among Native Americans, point out the merits of several prevention 

methods and conclude by declaring that substance abuse prevention 

programs are cheaper and more effective than substance abuse treatment 

programs. 

i 

Takie, Y., Lynch, P. and Charleston, G. M. (1988). To drink or 
not to drinki the Indian adolescents* choice between 
friends and family. Journal of American Indian Education, 
27,(2), 1-9. 

Interviews were conducted with 275 Native American children, 
adolescents and adults on the topic of social and family pressures 
that influence the adolescent's decision whether or not to drink. The 

ERJC ■■ v5 



— PAGE 19 — 

influences that promote drinking include peer pressure, lack of 
affectionate parent-child ties, lack of parent praise, parent modeling 
and older sibling modeling. 

Thurman, P. Martin, D- and Martin, M- <1985)- An assessment 
of attempted suicides among adolescent Cherokee Indians. 
Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, 13,(4), 

A questionnaire was developed and given to nurses and counselors 
at a BIA hospital in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, the capital of the Cherokee 
Nation. The questionnaire was designed to examine both the rate and 
reasons for suicidal attempts among adolescent Cherokee Indians. The 
rate was not accurately reported because many suicide attempts are not 
documented. The reasons given for suicide attempts are generally the 
same as those given by the non-Native population. It was mentioned, 
however, that the suicide rate among Native American adolescents is 
higher than the suicide rate of the general population, and that 
increasing the Native American's adaptability to the non-Native 
environment would be a determining factor in lowering the incidence of 
suicide for Native American adolescents. 

Wescott, S. M. (1990). Time to address a preventable tragedy. 
Winds of Change, 5,(3), 30-34. 

This article discusses the topic of pregnant women who drink, the 
cultural pressures felt by them to drink in order to be a part of 
their society, the magnified effects that most European diseases have 
had on Native Americans throughout history and the economic impact of 
a single FAS baby on the government budget. The article also 
discusses strategies for prevention of FAS, including the possibility 
of forced treatment for pregnant women who drink. 



— • PAGE 20 — 

Zitzow, <1990>- Djibway adolgsccnt timm mpgnt with 

PT»nt»/«ld»rs a« related to d»linqu«ncy and court 
adjudication expgriwncgm, Amairican Indian and Alaska Native 
Mental Httalth Rsssarch, 4,(1), 53-63. 

This study sxaminsd ths issus of adol«sc«nt quality and quantity 
o-f tim» spent with parents or elders, and its relationship to skipping 
school, running away and violating the law. A survey was used along 
with public court records to conclude that adolescent Ojibways who 
spent less timt* with their parents and elder family members tended to 
be more involved in court adjudication and delinquency behaviors than 
adolescents who spend considerable time with parents and elders. The 
author offered six skill developing suggestions for professionals who 
work with troubled Native Americtn youth, and a list of five 
suggestions for reservation leaders whose goal is to minimize 
adolescent problem behaviors. 



— PAQE 21 ~ 

L»Tninq Handicapg 

Bear*, L. <1986>. Progr^tmrning for bahaviorally disordered 
Native Americana. Journal of American Indian Education, 
25,(2), 24-31. 

Fourteen Native American high school students with academic and 
behavior problems were selected to participate in a treatment program 
designed to improve their academic performance, attendance and 
tardiness. The treatment program, known as Goal Attainment Scaling 
(GAS), stresses the setting of realistic expectations, monitoring of 
progress and recognition for student improvement. Thirteen of the 
fourteen students showed a significant decrease in the number of 
failing grades and eleven of the fourteen showed decreases in the 
number of tardies. The group attendance record improved slightly. 

Cummins, J. (1991). Preventing pedaqogically-induced learning 

difficulties among Indigenous students. Journal of Navajo 
Education, 8,(3), 3-9. 

The author explains the ways that Native American children's 
academic potential can be undermined by the school experiences that 
have the affect of robbing them of their identities. It is stressed 
that one must often examine the interaction between school and the 
child when looking for the reason for learning problems, rather than 
searching within the child for the cause. Abusive boarding school 
experiences, lack of promotion of native language literacy, poverty 
and a faulty attribution process are specifically cited as being major 
causal factors for academic failure. Cummins' Framework for 
Intervention for the Empowerment of Minority Students is offered as a 
aid in solving this problem. 



— PABE 22 — 

Dodd, J. M. and N«l«on, J. R. (1989). Learning di«abl»d ftault«t 
implicationK -for tribal collgqg». Journal of American 
Indian Education, 28,(3), 31-38- 

Learning dimabled Native American high school graduates who 
aspire to attend institutions of higher education have a twofold 
problem! (1) overcoming their disability and (2) adjustment to the 
different cultural environment of the predominantly White traditional 
higher education settings- Tribal colleges such as the Navajo 
Community College provide the opportunity for LD students to begin 
their higher education program without having to adjust to an 
unfamiliar cultural environment- The article also suggests twelve 
accommodations that teachers should consider for learning disabled 
students- These accommodations are also suitable for LD students of 
all ages- 
Harris, G- A- (1985). Considerations in assessing English 

language p erformance of Native American children- 

Topics in Language Disorders, 5,(4), 42-52- 

This article explains, in detail, the reasons for the low verbal 
IQ test scores of Native American children on measures such as the 
WISC-R, and the problems that can result from the improper 
interpretations of the results- Some of the reasons for the typical 
performance characteristics include test bias, culturally determined 
child-rearing practices, bilingualism and the use of non-standard 
English dialects, possible hearing loss due to otitis media. Native 
American cultural emphasis on performance rather than verbal skills, 
unfamiliar assessment environment and inadequate test interpretation 
with respect to local customs- The article concludes with a number of 
suggestions that professionals can take into account when assessing 
Native Americans and interpreting results of the assessments- 



— PAGE 23 — 

Horan, K. T. (1986). Effactg of head injury on thm cducmtional 

and vocational potential of AmTican Indians. Rural Special 
Education Quarterly, 8 (l>,19-22. 

Thie article describes the nature of the increased risk of head 
injury that Native Americans who live on the reservation face. These 
hidden dangers include riding in the back of a pick-up trucks, 
livestock accidents, rodeo accidents, alcohol-related traffic 
accidents and the distance one must drive to obtain emergency medical 
care. A description of learning handicaps commonly experienced by 
head injury patients is offered, and alternative teaching k.;ethods are 
also discussed. 

Lankford, R. and Riley, J, D. (1986). Native American reading 
disability. Journal of American Indian Education, 25,(3), 
l-ll. 

The author discusses the Language Experience Approach, a stratei 
for teaching reading to Native American children that will satisfy 
both the need to learn to read and the need for culture to be an 
integral part of the learning process. Currently there exists a gap 
between the beliefs of the cultural specialists and the education 
specialists on teaching strategies. The Language Experience Approach 
could bridge that gap. 

Scaldwell, W. A. (1989). Effect of otitis media upon reading 

scores of Indian children in Ontario. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 28,(2), 32-39. 

Otitis media has long been expected as a cause of speech and 
language problems in children. This study attempted to find a link 
between otitis media and reading skills of Native American children in 
Ontario. The results indicated that the children who were presently 
suffering with otitis media present lower on the Gates-HacGinite 
Reading Tests than children with normal hearing, and the children with 



— - PAGE 24 — 

past signs o-f infsction scorad lowest of ths thrss groups. Ths rssults 
also suggest that the younger the age of onset, the lower the reading 
score of the inflicted child. 

Scaldwell, W. A. and Frame, J. E. (1985). Prevalence of otitis 

media in Cree and Ojibway school-children in six Ontario 
communities. Journal of American Indian Education, 25,(1), 
1-5. 

t 

Otiti* m«di« (middls ©ar infection) is prevalent in Native 
American children and presents a major threat to normal language 
development. Dver 700 Native American children in Ontario were 
screened by a registered audiologist for presence of active otitis 
media or for evidence of past infection, and 40.7% showed signs of 
having had the infection. The high rate of infection may offer an 
explanation as to why many Native American children do not respond 
well to the phonetic method of teaching reading. 

Thielke, H. M. and Shriberg, L. D. (1990). Effects of recurrent 
otitis media on language, speech, and educational 
achievement in Menominee Indian Children. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 29,(2), 25-35. 

Several measures were administered to Menominee children to 
assess the effects of otitis media on language, speech and educational 
success. The results showed significantly higher scores on most 
measures for subjects who had no signs of the infection at any time in 
their lives, and trends toward higher scores on the remaining 
measures. A follow-up study of grade placements and support servicec^ 
indicated that the subjects who had showed signs of otitis media 
experienced more grade retention and much higher use of support 
services. 



ERLC 



c 9 



— PAGF ?5 — 



Bi-ftgd 

Christensen, R. A. (1991). A personal per»p»ctiv on tribal 

Alaska Native qift»d and talgnted gducation. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 31,(1), 10-14. 

The author argued that the term "giftedness" for purposes of 
educational placement has always been defined within the world view of 
the White person. For this reason the Native American is usually 
underrepresented in programs for the gifted and talented. When 
speaking of Native Americans, the definition of gifted and talentod 
must take a cultural stance and agree with tribal definitions. 
Because of such cultural dissimilarities as a different sense of time, 
space and world view, the traditional White definition does not apply 
to the gifted Native American student. 

Hartley, E. A. (1991). Through Navajo eyest examining 

differences in giftedness> Journal of American Indian 
Education, 31,(1), 53-64. 

Surveys and interviews were conducted with Navajo and Anglo 
parents, and school personnel on the question cf what is giftedness. 
The traditional Navajo description of giftedness was quite different 
from that of the Anglo description. For example, a gifted child in 
the traditional Navajo sense shows the following characteristics 
(which are the opposite of the Anglo description)! (a) humble and 
not boastful, (b> oral memory rather than a visual memory, (c) quiet, 
(d) non-competitive with peers, (e> traditional rather than modern 
ways of dealing with personal issues, (f) not assertive or 
opinionated, (g) may not openly express feelings, (h) may submit to 
peer pressure, (i> little eye contact, (j) may not challenge something 
that is incorrect, (k) may not be comfortable working independently, 
(1) not inquisitive. 

ERLC 



— PABE 26 — 



LaBatte, J. <1991>. Nurturing crcativ/artiatic qift»dn«»g in 
American Indian atud^ntg. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 31,(1), 28-32. 

This articls summarizvm thm opinions of several prominent 
educators on the subject of identifying and developing 
creative/artistic giftedness in Native American students. All six 
educators believe that the approach currently used by the United 
States Government in identifying Native American gifted students is 
seriously flawed. In addition, the educators offer several 
interesting and innovative ideas for program development. 

Robbins, R. (1991). American Indian gifted and talented 

students! their problems and proposed solutions. Journal 
American Indian Education, 31,(1), 15-24. 

This article contains the author's observations of 125 gifted and 

talented Native American secondary students who were participating in 

a gifted education program in Oklahoma. The author identifies many 

problems routinely confronted by gifted Native American students in 

the American education system, and offers a number of solutions to 

these problems. 

Shutiva, C. L. (1991). Creativity differences between 

reservation and urban American Indians. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 31,(1), 33-52. 

The Torrance Test of Creative Thinking, Figural Form B (TTCT-F,B) 
was administered to 2B urban and 122 reservation Native American 
eleventh grade students to compare creativity scores and academic 
achievements The results indicated that the urban »tudents scored 
higher in the areas of originality, abstractness of title, resistance 
to closure and creativity index scores. There was no significant 
difference between the reservation students and the urban students in 
academic achievement as measured by their grade point averages. 



— PAGE 27 — 



Tonttmah, S- (1987). A»mi?sminq Amgrican Indian gifted and 

talented student*^ abilitig». Journal for the Education 
of the Gifted, 10,(3>, 181-194. 

The American Indian Research and Development, Inc. (AIRD), in an 
effort to find and train capable future tribal leaders, has begun to 
develop a tribally-oriented program to assess and educate its gifted 
and talented youth in a way that would maximize their abilities and 
meet the future needs of tribal people. In order to reach their 
goals, the AIRD has developed a tribal-cultural checklist to help in 
assessing the students' understanding of tribal culture, abilities and 
giftedness from the point of view of adult tribal members. The 
contents of the checklist differs significantly from the contents of 
the Anglo definition of giftedness. The long range goal of the AIRD 
is the making of an American Indian Gifted and Talented Academy. 

Tonemah, S. A. (1991). Philosophical perspectives of gifted and 
talented American Indian Education. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 31,(1>, 3-9. 

The article historically reviewed the philosophy of Native 
American education before the event of the European discovery, and the 
devastating impact the European arrival had on the education of tribal 
members following their discovery. The American Indian Research and 
Development, Inc. (AIRD), is designing a program to educate gifted and 
talented Native American students in a way that will benefit the 
tribes and break from recent history. Included in the program are the 
development of an individual education plan that takes into account 
student interests and preferred learning style (Reniulli's Enrichment 
Triad Model), non-competitive learning activities, use of Native 
American instructors and a wholistic approach to teaching. 



— PABE 28 — 



Program/PTKonnel Training 

B«c«, L. and Mir«monte«, 0. (1985). Bilingual apecial education 

teacher training -for American indiang. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 24,(2), 38-47. 

Thi» paper discusses <1) bilingual special education teacher 
training in general and <2) field-based Native American teacher 
training programs. The Navajo Special Education Teacher Development 
Program (NSETDP) is described in detail. The NSETDP Master's degree 
program offers classes in Window Rock during the school year and 
classes on campus at Northern Arizona University during the summer. 
The NSETDP is designed to reach teachers who live in rural areas and 
therefore cannot commute to major metropolitan areas during the school 
year. 

Bissmeyer, R. D. (1991). Renewed vision for special education! 

Kayenta' s model of inclusion. Journal of Navajo Education. 
8,(3), 28-32. 

The special education staff of Kayenta Unified School District, 
located on the Navajo Reservation in Arizona, expressed concern that 
the stigma of the traditional pull-out resource room experience was 
devastating to special education students. In addition, the students* 
educational needs were not being met and many students would progress 
at unsatisfactory rates. Kayenta's inclusion program, designed to 
remedy the aforementioned problems, is described in detail. Regular 
education and special education are taught in the same classroom, 
using a cadre-team approach. Eleven key elements of the inclusion 
model are listed and discussed. 

Bluhm, H. P., Finley, R. E., Lodge, N and White, K. (1991). 

Training Na tive Americans as school counselors to work with 
handicap ped children of their own race. Journal of Navajo 
Education, 8,(3), 41-47. 

ERJC detailed description of a counselor training program at the 



~ PAGE 29 ~ 



Univ»rmity of Utah i» offmrmd to Nativa American counsslorm who wimh 
to handla consulting, pmychological and behavioral problems of Native 
American special education students. It is the belief of the authors 
that Native American counselors could be more effective than th« 
non-Native counselors who lack the knowledge necessary to fully 
understand the point of view of Native American special education 
students. Procedures for applying for graduate personnel preparation 
programs that provide on-site training are described in detail. 

Foster, C. B. (1986). Project SERTi special education training 

for regular educators of Native Americans. Rural Special 
Education Quarterly, 8,(1), 23-25. 

A special education office on the Navajo Reservation surveyed 
regular education teachers on the topic of teaching special education 
students, and found that the teachers felt inadequately prepared for 
the task. Acting on the results of the survey, che University of 
Arizona designed and implemented project SERT, a training program 
located on the Navajo Reservation. The project was considered to be a 
success, as measured by a post-training questionnaire completed by the 
participating teachers. 

Foster, C. G» (1968). Special education program for Native 

American exceptional students and regular program staff. 
Rural Special Education Quarterly, 8,(3), 40-43. 

The regular education teachers on the Navajo Reservation in Tuba 
City expressed concern for their inability to adequately meet the 
needs of mainstreamed special education students. As a result, the 
Tuba City Boarding School initiated the Summer Special Education 
Program. This program had two purposes! (1) to provide special 
education training for regular education teachers and (2) to provide 
supplemental special education instruction for special education 



— PABE 30 — 

mtudentft. By the end of the summer, teachers and aids reported that 
they were comfortable with special education procedures as well as 
with the prossnce of mainstreamed exceptional students in their 
regular education classrooms. 

Gajar, A. (1985). American Indian personnel preparation in 

special educationi needs, program components, programs. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 24,<2)v 7-15. 

This article describes the need for an increase in trained 

special education personnel to work with handicapped Native American 

students. The American Indian Special Education Teacher Training 

Program at the Pennsylvania State University is described in detail. 

The objectives of the program are (1) to provide program participants 

with the necessary training to meet the special needs of handicapped 

Native American students, (2) to prepare Native American educators at 

the Master of Education level and (3) to identify successful and 

relevant strategies in preparing Native American special education 

leaders and personr el. 

Kiefer-O'Donnell, R. (1991). Redefining the role of special 

educations achieving participation and success in one's 
community and culture. Journal of Navajo Education, S,(3), 



A description of the unique role that a rural Native American 
community plays in the delivery of special education services to 
students with moderate to severe disabilities is offered. Mith the 
common goal to emphasize participation and success within one's own 
community and culture, the I.E.P. committee includes tasks such as 
helping to pass out Sunday bulletins at the church, learning beadwork 
and skin-sewing from a peer tutor, participating in native dances 
outside of the school, janitorial skills in thv school and working 
part time in the post office. The pj^Ucipating students have 



23-27. 




— PAGE 31 — 



improved their mocial mtanding in the community, increased their peer 
interactions and learned valuable skills that will help them to 
survive in their culture- Five features that are common to most 
successful home-community-school partnerships are also presented. 

Latham, 6. I. (1989). Thirteen most common needs of American 
education in BIA schools. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 29,(1), 1-11. 

This study was conducted in order to ascertain the most common 
instructional and manigement-type needs of BIA schools. From 
interviews and direct observation ^ needs related to special education 
were determined to be as follows: the need to more precisely define 
learning disabilities, to improve cooperation and coordination between 
regular and special education, to establish functional relationships 
between student Individual Education Plans (lEP) and classroom 
instruction, and to improve parental involvement in the schools. 

Latham, G., West, R. and Collins, S. C. (1985). Prescriptive 

behavioral intervention at the dorm level. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 24,(2), 25-37. 

A behavioral intervention study was undertaken at a high school 
dorm for girls in an attempt to improve their conduct during 
non-school hours while they were living at the dorm. The two 
paraprofessionals, speci&lly trained in behavior techniques, 
identified problem behaviors of their six subjects, set goals and gave 
rewards for meeting the goals. The problem behaviors included 
consumption of alcohol and drugs, curfew violations, keeping a dirty 
room and cutting classes. The project demonstrated that the 
application of behavioral strategies can have positive effects on 
adolescents living in a dormitory, even if the intervention is managed 
by p4\raprofessionals. 



— PAGE 32 — 



Sebastian, J. (1991)« Ho w do w» keep them out in the field? 
Preparing cpecfial educators in rural achool districts. 
Journal o-f Navajo Education, 8iI2>, 24-26. 

An effective model distance education program for training rural 
special education teachers is described. The University of Utah 
recruits local members of rural communities who wish to become special 
education teachers, and provides them with trained master teachers as 
well as with televised courses that are video taped at the university. 
These courses are then presented locally, thereby facilitating the 
training of rural community members who live hundreds of miles from 
the nearest university. The program has continued to grow since its 
inception in the early 1980's, and has successfully prepared over 80 
special education teachers. Over eighty percent of the teachers who 
have completed the distance education program remain in their local 
communities teaching students with handicaps. The high success rate 
provides considerable help for school superintendents who find it a 
difficult if not impossible task to recruit special education teachers 
in isolated rural communities. 

Stuecher, U., Grossman, E., Hakala, N. and KozlowBki, G. (1985). 
Training project for Indian school liaison and support 
personnel in special education. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 24,(1), 9-19. 

A training program for Native American paraprofessional liaison 
and support personnel was administered to 55 people, mostly women, to 
work with Native children and parents in public schools and 
residential programs. The liaisons' primary function was to act as a 
bridge between the school and the home in order to improve 
communication. Data from formal advocacy contact reports indicated 
that the trained paraprofessionals performed their duties very well, 
O especially in the area of professional communication abilities. 

^ IOC 



ERLC 



~ PAQE 33 ~ 

Cultur»/Lanquaqg 

Bowkar, A. (1992). Thm American Indian f«mal» dropout. 

Journal of Amarican Indian Education, 31,(3), 3-20. 

The purpose oi this study was (1) to find the contributing 

factors to the success of Native American females who stay in school 

and graduate, and (2) to determine the contributing factors to the 

lack of success of Native American females who drop out of school. It 

was also the intention of the author to develop a research project 

that could augment or replace the current practices in Native American 

education. Approximately 51% of the Native American females who 

participated in the study dropped out because of pregnancy. Apart 

from this statistic, no one characteristic could describe the women 

who dropped out. Many women from so-called high risk groups achieved 

considerable academic success, and many women who were from the 

so-called low risk group dropped out. Of the girls who succeeded in 

school, the main factor was the support cf their families, especially 

their mothers and grandmothers. Those who achieved success pointed to 

home environments with rules and restrictions as well as good parental 

role models. The article also contains excerpts from the book, 

Sisters in the Bloody which was scheduled for release in May, 

1992. 

Brandt, E. A. (1992). The Navajo area student dropout studyi 
findings and implications. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 31,(2), 48-63. 

Data collected from a school characteristic survey questionnaire 
and an analysis of enrollment data from schools on and near the Navajo 
Reservation were used to study the nature of and major reasons for thi 
Navajo student dropout problem. Major contributing factors to the 
dropout problem ir elude a history of high dropout rate in BIA schools, 

loi 



— PAGE 34 — 



ERIC 



boredoAi mth school, transportation problsms, psrvasivs 
institutionalized racisft^ and lack o-F sncouragsmsnt in ths hoins. 
Academic problems do not seem to be a primary reason for dropping out. 

Cantrall, Peete, L. and Fields, M. (1990). Navajo culture as 
a bridge to the rest of the worldt a case study in 
empowerment. Journal of Navajo Education, 8,(1), 6-13. 

A description of a successful attempt to weave the Native 

American culture into the regular school curriculum in a school on the 

Navajo Reservation is offered in this article. Thanks to site-based 

management, a caring school staff and ck cooperative community, the 

Greasewood School was able to do away with such inappropriate 

practices as required CTBS testing and supplementary Native American 

curriculum, and replace it with bilingual/bicultural education, the 

whole language approach to language development, Navajo culture, as 

well as traditional Navajo folk tales and ceremonies. The authors, 

who are members of the school staff, have multiple goals for their 

school! the teaching of facts, the teaching of processes and the 

teaching of self-worth. 

Cunningham, K., Cunningham, K. and O'Connell, J. C. (1986). 
Impact of differing cultural perceptions on special 
education service delivery. Rural Special Education 
Quarterly, B,(l), 2-8. 

Recognizing that education delivery systems have failed because 
of a lack of sensitivity to traditional cultural values and beliefs, 
the author has promoted the family systems approach for delivering 
special education services to handicapped Native American students. A 
distinction is drawn between Anglo and Native American views of 
family, school, success and the cultural perceptions that influence 
special education. Strategies for studying the different cultural 



10 



ERLC 



— PAGE 35 — 
perceptions mrm discumsed. 

Eberhard, D- R. (1989). American Indian educationa • atudy of 

dropouts, 1980-1987. Journal of American Indian Education, 
29,(1), 32-40- 

Urban secondary Native American dropout characteristics was the 

focus of this study. Parent and pupil group interviews, along with an 
urban district's dropout statistics were used to examine six possible 
contributing factors to the dropout rate. Contributing to the dropout 
rate were a poor academic record, single parent families, high rate of 
family mobility, attendance in schools with poor graduation rates and 
affiliation with specific tribes. 

Erasmus, C. C. (1989). Ways with storiesg listening to the 
g ^.ories Aboriginal people tell. Language Arts, 66,(3), 
267-275. 

The author studied styles of discourse of a number of Native 
American peoples and discussed the mismatch between these styles and 
what is expected in the typical North American classroom. For 
example, at times it is improper for a Native American public speaker 
to arrive at a conclusion about a topic, whereas an Anglo public 
speaker is expected to lead the listeners toward a decision. It was 
suggested that many Native American students have difficulties in 
school because their teachers do not understand the difference in 
discourse styles. 

Leap, W. L. (1991). American Indian English. Journal of Navajo 
Education, 8,(3), 50-55. 

The author states that the development of English language 
instructional methods and materials designed for Native Americans 
should take into account the type and level of English that the 
student brings into the classroom. In addition, the use of 



10 



— PAGE 36 — 

non-«tand«rd English mu«t bm r»«p»ct*d, as it is a nscessary form o-f 
communication in Nativ© American hom»s and communities. Many Native 
American students speak non-standard English, and classroom English is 
often difficult for them. Speech patterns from the various languages 
should be understood, or at least taken into account by teachers who 
develop curriculum. These efforts must be coordinated accross grade 
levels, mainstreaming and special education, and district boundaries. 

Ledlow, S. (1992). Is cultural discontinuity an adequate 

explanation for dropping out? Journal of American Indian 
Education, 31,(3), 21-36. 

This article reviews recent literature on the reasons for the 
high incidence of dropping out among Native American students. The 
majority of the research focuses on the area of cultural discontinuity 
between the school and home cultures. The author then suggests that 
such factors as economics, long distance commutes to school, 
pregnancy, and social structure may be more significant in the Native 
American student's decision to drop out than language and cultural 
differences. The author urges that further research into the problem 
of Native American dropouts devote equal attention to variables 
outside of the school. 

Little Soldier, L. (1989). Sociocultural context and language 

learning of Native American pupils. Journal of Rural and 
Small Schools, 3,(2), 2-6. 

The author believes that there are many cultural and linguistic 
barriers between the home and school environments that contribute to 
the poor academic record of Native Americans. In an effort to bring 
down some of those barriers, this study was conducted to determine the 
optimum classroom language learning environment for Native American 
students. Classrooms were observed and rated based on the students' 

EbIc 10.; 



~ PAGE 37 — 

opportunities to us« oral and written language in a variety of 
settings. The optimum classroom learning environment was -Found to be 
informally organized, where students as well as teachers shared the 
locus o-f control, where there was evidence of cooperative learning and 
informal dialog patterns, and where students were given the 
opportunity to speak and write about culturally relevant topics. 

Martin, Jr., W. E. (1991). Career development and American 

Indians living on reservations! cross-cultural factors 
to consider. The Career Development Quarterly, 39,(3), 
273-283. 

The author discussed factors that may affect the career 
development process of Native American students and adults, both 
disabled and non-disabled. The factors that must be considered when 
advising on vocational issues include the fcUowingt Native American 
custom of passing a vocation from generation to generation within a 
family, geographical isolation of the reservation, lack of 
culture-fair assessment, lack of familiarity with the nature of 
various occupations (world of work knowledge) and many pressures that 
are hard for non-Natives to understand. Special attention must be 
paid to the added pressures on, and restricted labor market of Native 
Americans with disabilities. 

McCarty, T. L. (1989). School as community! the Rough Rock 

demonstration. Harvard Educational Review, 59,(4), 464-503. 

The author discusses the historical significance of the Rough 

Rock Demonstration School, the sociopolitical events that lead to its 

creation, the impact of the school on the community and the potential 

impact on Native American schools throughout the country. The Rough 

Rock Demonstration School is the first school on the reservation to be 

overseen by a locally elected, all-Native American governing board, 



— PAGE 38 — 

and th« fir«t to include mystsmAtic instruction in th» nativ* language 
and culture. 

McCarty, T. L., Wallace, S. and Lynch, R. H. (1989). 

Inquiry-baaed curriculum development in a Navajo school. 
Educational Leadership, 46,(5), 66-71. 

This article reported on the development of a bilingual, 
bicultural, inquiry-bAsed curriculum at the innovative Rough Rock 
Demonstration School on the Navajo Reservation. The Rough Rock 
Demonstration School is unique in that the local community has taken 
control of the curriculum and integrated Navajo language and social 
studies with conventional courses of study. The Rough Rock 
Demonstration School can serve as a model for other schools on 
reservations throughout the country because of its local control of 
school policy and the multicultural orientation of its curriculum. 

McLaughlin, D. (1989). Power and politics of knowledqei 

transformative leadership and curriculum development for 
minority language learners. Peabody Journal of 
Education, 66,(3), 41-60. 

The author examines how the community leaders' understanding of 
power plays a central role in the development of program and 
curriculum, and cites a community-controlled school on the Navajo 
Reservation as an example of effective understanding and use of power 
and politics. Effective use of political power can "build a bridge" 
between Native American students' home culture and the school 
environment. 

D'Neill, G. P. (1987). The North American Indian in 

contemporary history and social studies textbooks. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 26,(3), 22-28. 

An examination of ongoing status of the Native American in 

contemporary American and Canadian textbooks was attempted to 



~ PAQE 39 ~ 

ascertain whether or not there have been improvemente in the nature of 
their depiction. Past depictions include the stereotypes of 
alcoholic, blood-thirsty, hostile savages. Findings showed some 
improvement in the use of degrading, biased language, but little 
change has been found in the actual content of the textbooks. These 
inaccurate depictions contribute to the isolation and poor 
self-concept felt by Native American students. 

Oppelt, N. T. (19B9). Cultural values and behaviors common 

among Tribal American Indians! a resource for student 
service administrators. NASPA Journal, 26,(3), 167-174. 

In an effort to improve the school experiences of Native 

Americans, the author listed and described many common cultural 

differences between Native Americans and Anglos, hoping that school 

personnel would take these differences into consideration when 

designing and presenting curriculum. Some of these differences 

include time perspective, sharing of wealth, cooperation and group 

membership, concern for family, spiritual needs, attribution and group 

dynamics. 

Sawyer .7 D. (198B). The writing process and Native students. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 15,(2), 15-21. 

The author reviewed literature on the subjects of (i) 

identification of factors that impede Native American students' 

writing process, and (2) examples and models that have been used to 

facilitate the success of Native American students' attempts at 

writing. Among the main impediments to writing are a feeling that one 

cannot shape his or her social reality, and a lack of trust and 

understanding of English. Many useful suggestions for stimulating the 

writing process are offered. 

ERIC 107 



— PABE 40 ~ 

Scott, W. J. (1986). Attachment to Indian culture and the 

"difficult situation". Youth and Society, 17,(4) 381-395. 

Data on 101 Native American students in Oklahoma was compiled and 

analyzed to look for predictors of academic success in high school and 

college. The findings indicate that students who hold close cultural 

ties to their Native American heritage are more likely to fail because 

of lack of ability to integrate into the school community. The Native 

students who are less attached to Native culture have a higher chance 

of success in school. In order to improve their chances of academic 

success, the author stresses the need for Native American students to 

master White ways on their own terms and still be able to maintain 

commitment to Native values and traditions. 

Shonerd, H. G. (1990). Domesticating the barbarous tons lei 

language policy for the Navajo in historical perspective. 
Language Problems and Language Planning, 14,(3), 193-208. 

The author traces the history of the Spanish and Anglo attempts 

to suppress and replace the Navajo language v^ith European languages 

for reasons of religious ideology. The result of these efforts is 

evident in the widespread smmxlingu^lism^ the lack of proficiency 

in both English and Navajo. Lack of understanding of semilingualism 

on the part of educators is responsible for high rates of Navajo 

placement in classes for the communication disordered. It is 

recommended that schools demonstrate respect for Navajo students' 

spoken language so that students will develop the ability to affirm 

their cultural identities, and that Navajo community members actively 

participate in educational policy making regarding language 

development in their classrooms. 

ERIC 1"^ 



— PAGE 41 — 



Vogel, V. J. (1987>- The blackout of Native Am»rican cultural 
achievttmenta. Amarican Indian Quarterly, llid), 11-35. 

European historians have overlooked and denied many Native 

American cultural achievement® for centuries, even in the face of 

overwhelming evidence of their existence. This paper examined these 

denials in only three areasi medicine, the manufacture of maple sugar 

and the use cf fertilizer, and found abundant early literature to 

support these Native American achievements. Recognition of these and 

other historical accomplifihments, and therefore the respect for Native 

cultures and Native people, is long overdue. 



~ PABE 42 

Coqnitivg Style 

Brown, D. B. (1990). Learning mtylcs and Nativ Amgricang. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 17,(1), 23--35- 

The author selected a few researchers' descriptions of learning 

styles and cognitive styles that seemed to be particularly useful to 

teachers, and elaborated on the model she called hemisphericity. The 

author pointed out that left hemisphere learners were better achievers 

in school, and that most Native Americans were right hemisphere 

learners. Many suggestions for curriculum modifications were offered, 

as were her ten criteria for a reading program that would allow right 

hemisphere learners a chance to succeed at learning to read. 

Chrisjohn, R. D. and Peters, M. (19B6>. The right-brained 
Indians fact or fiction? Journal of American Indian 
Education, 25,(2), 81-87. 

The authors expressed concern over the possible effects of the 

growing amount of research concluding that Native Americans are right 
hemisphere learners. Much evidence of an "anatomical" nature is often 
manipulated in order to prove the superiority of the Anglo over ethnic 
minorities. In addition, the authors point out that damage in the 
area of education of Native Americans could result when educational 
st'^^tegies are linked with left- or right-brain learning. Such 
attitudes as, "why bother to teach Native American children things 
they are not capable of learning?" may result from right-brain 
curriculum design. 

Diessner, R. and Walker, J. L. (1986). A cognitive pattern of 
the Yakima Indian students. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 25,(2), 39-43. 

Using Bannatyne's recategorized WISC-R and WAI8 scores, the 
authors attempted to examine whether Yakima students, whose primary 



— PAGE 43 — 

language is English, exhibited the same cognitive learning styles as 
other Native American students. The same pattern was found (spatial 
ability higher than sequential ability, sequential ability higher than 
verbal ability). The authors speculated that a possible cause for 
this pattern could be that spatial processing (right brain) may 
interfere with left brain hemisphere processing, resulting in 
decreased linguistic processing. Another possible cause that was 
mentioned was the high incidence of otitis media which contributes to 
deficits in linguistic, processing. 

Foreman, K. (1991). Native teaching and learning/dramatic 
teaching and learning. Youth Theatre Journal, 5,(3), 
16-20. 

The teaching methods used in educational drama classes were 
analyzed for their compatibility with the learning styles that 
researchers have identified as being favored by Native American 
students. The dramatic teaching methods that are commonly used and 
thought to be compatible with Native learning styles are as followsx 
watch-then~do, think-then-do, using a holistic approach to get the 
"big picture" in order to provide context for a particular scene, 
small group (collective creation) interaction, visual-spatial methods 
to create imaginary situations as well as other forms of non-ve^-bal 
communication strengths, the use of stories to convey meaning, and 
tactile stimulation. 

Haukoos, G. D. and Satterfi^isld, R. (19B6). Learning styles of 

minority students (Native Americans) and their application 
in developing a culturally sensitive science classroom. 
Community/Junior College Quarterly, 10,(3), 193-201. 

This study of Native American entry level college biology 

students was conducted in order to learn more about their learning 

O styles and to recommend changes in teaching strategies based on the 

Emc 111 



~ PAGE 44 — 



results of the mtudy. Th« Learning Styles Inventory, Form C (LSI) was 
administered on the first day of biology class to a group of Native 
American biology students as well as to a group of non-Native 
students. The results indicated that there are four significant 
differences in learning style characteristics. From the results, the 
teacher implemented several changes into the course to accommodate the 
Native Americans' exhibited skills. A very high course success rate 
and completion rate was noted by the authors. 

Henry, S. L« and Pepper, F. C. (1990). Cognitive, social and 
cultural effects on Indian learning stylei classroom 
implications. The Journal of Educational Issues of Language 
Minority Students, 7, 85-97. 

Learning style is examined using three dimensions! (1) thinking 
and reasoning, (2) social effects and (3) the biological elements 
involving physiology, nutrition, health and sex-related differences. 
The effects of home culture, child rearing practices and cultural 
incongruities on learning style are also discussed. Various teaching 
strategies designed to support the Native American student are 
offered. 

Hacias, C. J. (1989)» American Indian academic success! the 
role of indigenous learning strategies. Journal of 
American Indian Education, special issue, 29, 43-52. 

Interviews were conducted with eleven successful Native American 

female graduate school students in order to discover what strategies 

they had developed on their way to experiencing such academic success. 

The women identified many common difficulties as well as coping 

strategies to overcome these difficulties. Some of these strategies 

werei keeping with a systematic study schedule, use of multimodal 

learning styles such as combining reading with writing, reading aloud, 



~ PABE 45 — 

including physical movement in their studying, and visualization 
techniques. 



Moore, A- J- (1987). Native Indian students and their learning 

styles: research results and classroom applications, B. C- 
Journal o-f Special Education, 11,(1), 23-37. 

The author examines literature on learning styles under the four 
headings of (1) internal processes (global/ analytic, imagery/verbal, 
impulsive/reflective, trial-and-error/watch-then-do, field 
dependence-independence, concrete/abstract), (2) external conditions, 
(3) teaching and communication styles, and (4) traditional learning 
styles. Problems in research, caused by a lack of uniformity for the 
term 'learning style", are also discussed. The paper discusses a 
number of possible classroom suggestions for the implementation of 
Native learning styles. 

More, A. J. (19S7>. Native Indian learning stylesi a review 
for researchers and teachers. Journal of American 
Indian Education, 27,(1), 17-29. 

Research on learning styles was summarized and presented under 
the headings of internal cognitive process, external conditions, 
teaching and communication styles and traditional learning styles. 
Some strengths that are frequently mentioned in literature include 
global processing, simultaneous processing, visual/spatial processing, 
using imagery for coding rather than verbal coding, and reflective 
learning (learn by watching) rather than impulsive learning 
(trial-and-error). 

Osborne, B. (1985). Research into Native North Americans' 

cognitiom 1973-1982 . Journal of American Indian Education, 
24,(3), 9-25. 

This paper reviewed ten years of journal articles on the topic of 
O Native Americans' cognition and grouped them under five headings: (1) 

113 



— PAGE 46 ~ 



visual pttrcsption and cognitivs stylo, (2) perception of self, time, 
information needs and the world, (3> Piagetian tasks, (4) reading and 
bilingual education and (5) cognitive strengths. The groupings were 
then evaluated against J. S. Kleinfeld's findings in her studies on 
cognitive styles of Inuits. Given the many weaknesses of the studies 
reviewed, the author declared that it is very difficult to draw 
conclusions on Native Americans' cognitive styles. 

Pepper, F. C. and Henry, S- L. (1986). Social and cultural 

effects on Indian learning style; classroom applications. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 13,(1), 54-61. 

The author examined the child's outer environment and its effects 

on learning style. The outer environment, as described, consisted of 

family atmosphere, family constellation (the relationship of family 

members to one another) and child-rearing/discipline practices. The 

author believes that learning styles evolve naturally from the outer 

environment. The paper concludes with a list of classroom 

implications that take into account learning style, and a reminder 

that stereotyping a child's learning style may contribute to an 

inferior education. One damaging example of an inferior strategy 

would be not teaching verbal skills to a Native child because his/her 

learning style is non-verbal. 

Rhodes, R. W. (1988). Holistic teaching/learning for Native 

American students. Journal of American Indian Education, 
27,(2), 21-29. 

In the search for reasons for the lack of success of Native 
Americans in Anglo-style school situations, the author has attempted 
to show that there is probably a difference in observational and 
thinking processes for Native Americans raised on a reservation than 
^ for Native Amer*icans and non-Native Americans who are not raised on a 

^ 11.4 



— PAGE 47 — 



rsMrvation. Tsachsrs can therefore develop appropriate classroom 
activities by utilizing haptic, holistic and right brained learning 
styl&s that are favored by Native American's. 

Rhodes, R. W. <1990). Measurements of Navajo and Hopi brain 

dominance and learning styles. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 29,(3), 29-40. 

Using Navajo and Hopi students, teachers, and non-teaching adults 
as subjects, a brain hemispheric dominance and learning style 
preference study was performed. The Hemispheric Mode Indicmtor 
and the Lemming Style Iw^ntory were administered. The results 
indicated significant differences from national norms for all Navajo 
and Hopi subgroups, and imply a mismatch between the teaching style 
found in most schools and the learning styles of most Navajo and Hopi 
students. 

Sawyer, D. (1991). Native learning stylesi shorthand for 
instructional adaptations? Canadian Journal of 
Native Education, 1B,(1), 99-105. 

The author reviewed literature on the topic of Native learning 
styles and presented the view that many studies on the topic go beyond 
the definition of learning styles and are therefore vague and 
ambiguous. Many orientations to learning can be attributable to such 
causes as child rearing practices and the culturally-based 
"interference theory" (classrooms are not structured to allow Native 
students to display competence). Conclusions from many studies are 
based on small samples, and some patterns are preferred by Just over 
half of the sample. However, such studies have value in that they 
might suggest alternative ideas that can be used to increase teacher 
sensitivity in specific situations. 

O 

115 



— PAGE 4B — - 

Shade, B- J. (1989). The influence of perceptual dgyglopment 
on cognitive mtylet crosm ethnic comparisong. Early 
Child Development and Care, 51, 137-155. 

This paper examined the perceptual patterns of Native Americans 
and Afro-Americans to determine how their perceptual development 
influences the way they process information. Such topics as person 
vs. object orientation, modality preferences^ field 

dependence-independence and visual cues are discussed. The paper 

concluded by including cognitive style profiles for the two groups. 

Stellern, J., Collins, J., Gutierrez, B. and Patterson, E. (1986). 
Hemispheric dominance of Native American Indian students. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 25,(2), B-17. 

Dual-task experiments (finger tapping concurrently with a number 

of reading and spatial problem solving tasks) were used to examine the 

language and spatial lateralization of 49 Native American students in 

the fourth, fifth and sixth grades. The results indicated that the 

subjects in this study have language lateralization to the left 

hemisphere, and some also have the spatial function to the left 

hemisphere. The author summarized that the Native American students 

in this study are not right hemisphere dominant and therefore do not 

need right-minded teaching techniques. 

Swisher, K. (1990). Cooperative learning and the education of 

American Indian/Alaskan Native studentsi a review of the 
literature and suggestions for implementation. Journal 
of American Indian Education, 29,(2), 36-43. 

The author reviewed and summarized the findings of several 

researchers on the subject of Native American students and competition 

or cooperation in the classroom. In general, competition in the 

"team" sense has been used successfully in Native American classrooms. 

However, the type of competition in which recognition of the "winner" 

O implies a negative attitude toward the "loser" is not acceptable, as 



- PAGE 49 — 



Nativtt American children «rs not willing to bm singled out or 
"spotlighted" in this way. Several team learning techniques that have 
been extensively researched and -found to significantly increase 
learning are described in this article. 

Swisher, K. and Deyhle, D. <1987>. Styles of learning and 

learning of stylesa educational conflicts for American 
Indian/Alaskan Native youth. Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development, 8(4), 345-360. 

This article reviews literature on Native Americans and cognitive 
style in three different categories: learning style, interactional 
style and teaching style. The learning style category includes topics 
such as spatial/visual ability, observation and field 
dependence/independence. The interactional style category includes 
topics such as cooperative vs. competitive situations, classroom 
organization and the demonstration of knowledge. The teaching style 
category includes such topics as teacher understanding of culturally 
specific behaviors, group vs. individual orientation and multisensory 
instruction. 

Swisher, K. and Deyhle, D. <1989>. The styles of learning are 

different, but the teaching is just the samea suggestions 
for teachers of American Indian youth. Journal of American 
Indian Education, special issue, 29, 1-14. 

This paper illustrated several learning styles with specific 
examples^ and followed with a summary of supporting literature for 
each learning style. The styles that were featured were: visual 
learning, field-dependence/field-independence, public and private 
talk, and cooperating vs. competing. The paper concluded with a 
discussion of ways to apply learning preferences into practice in the 
classroom. 



1V7 



— PAGE 50 — 



Walker, B. J., Dodd, J. and Bigeiow, R. (1989). Learning 

prgfgrencgs of capable American Indiana of two tribes. 
Journal of American Indian Education, special issue, 29, 63-71. 

The Walker Learning Preference Scale was completed by 28 

adolescent Native American students to determine if there was a 

preference in learning styles for the group. Nine of the fifteen 

males, and six of the thirteen females in the group selected the 

Patterned Symbols learning preference. The typical patterned symbols 

learner prefers a group oriented, non-competitive learning environment 

where he/she can draw personal symbolic relationships between the 

previously acquired knowledge and the new information. The author 

offered suggestions on adapting curriculum to the demonstrated 

learning preference. 



o It?; 
ERLC ^ ^ 



— PAGE 51 — 



CONCLUSIONS/IMPRESSIONS 



The Journal articlss featured in this bibliography cover many 
aspects of the state of Native American special education in the 
1990's. Some aspects have been adequately researched, some aspects 
have been over-researched and other topics suffer from lack of 
reported scientific data. This researcher offers his opinion 
of the state cf the literature found in professional journals in the 
past eight years. This opinion has been separated into the seven 
sections found in the bibliography. In addition, suggestions of 
topics that future researchers may consider have been offered in the 
final section of this conclusion. 



Bias in the assessment of Native American students with special 
needs has been discussed extensively. A number of articles discuss 
the need for alternative methods of assessment measures as well as 
using more naturalistic testing procedures. Test results that 
indicate poor performance of Native American students on verbal 
subtests of many popular measures are also extensively discussed. 
The literature is lacking, however, in specifically suggesting 
or developing verbal measures that will identify true learning 
handicaps and distinguish them from cultural/linguistic differences. 



Many informative articles on alcohol, drugs, and substance abuse 
have been included for the following reasonsi (1> substance abuse can 
cause brain damage in the abuser and lead to the formation of a 
handicapping condition, (2) substance abuse is a symptom of emotional 
disturbance, (3) substance abuse can be the cause of many handicapping 



Assessment 



Health Issues 



ERIC 




~ PAGE 52 ~ 



conditions to unborn babies, and (4) the effects of substance abuse 
can be mistaken for handicapping conditions, and therefore lead to 
an erroneous identification, if the educational diagnostician is 
unaware of the student's use of substances. Several innovative 
articles on education and management of alcohol and drug use have 
also been included. In addition, this section contains articles 
designed tc educate students and teachers on such important topics 
as suicide, high mortality rates, AIDS awareness, mental health, 
sexual abuse and the etiology of student delinquency. 

Learning Handicaps 
There is a distinct lack of recent research on the subject of 
Native American students and handicapping conditions. Many studies 
can be done on the efficacy of applying various teaching strategies, 
methods, materials, and procedures on Native students who are 
currently enrolled in special education programs. Some of the 
reasons for the lack of research on such important topics may 
include the following: (1) the Native American's historical mistrust 
of Anglo American intentions, (2) geographical barriers, such as long 
distances, between universities and reservation schools, (3) lack of 
perceived relevance of such studies on the part of Native American 
communities, and (4) many children who are identified as handicapped 
by the schools are not seen as handicapped by the Native American 
community. However, the handicapping characteristics of Native 
American students wl'io have had otitis media, or middle ear infection, 
are well described in the recent literature offered in this 
bibliography. 



ERIC 



120 



— PAGE 53 — 

Biftad 

Th» de-finition o-f gi-Ftadnsss is dimcumssd in d»t«il throughout 
thi« aection. Special attention is paid to comparing ths traditional 
Anglo definition o-f gi-ftedness to the somewhat different Native 
American definition, and to the problems that are caused when the 
Anglo definition is used in the identification process of Native 
American gifted children. The literature does not, however, offer 
many solutions to the problem of identification of the gifted that are 
acceptable to both the Native American and the Anglo cultures. 

Program/Personnel Training 
Various excellent descriptions of personnel training programs 
for both regular and special education teachers, educational 
assistants, counselors, liaisons, and support personnel are discussed 
in this section. Of particular interest are the articles that 
describe field-based programs that are designed to train residents of 
the local communities to work in their school in special education 
capacities. The field-based programs usually offer university credit 
for attending classes close to their homes on the reservation, which 
in most cases are located hundreds of miles from the university. 

Culture/Lanquaqg 
The articles in this section address the bilinguai/bicultural 
component of the bilingual special education program, and are 
also suitable for those who wish to apply the content to regular 
education settings. Some of the issues discussed in this section 
include cultural incongruencies that can be responsible for school 
failure, historical issues such as the Anglo attempts to eradicate 
Native American languages and hide Native American accomplishments, 
ERJC descriptions of successful bilinguai/bicultural school programs. 



— PAGE 54 ~ 



Cognitivg Stylg 
This section contains twenty articles on the subjects oi 
learning style, cognitive style and laterality. Although there are 
undoubtedly many useful ideas in these articles, it is the opinion of 
this researcher that there is not as much useful content in this 
section as the volume of articles would lead one to believe. The 
conclusions reached by the authors are repeated several times 
throughout this section. Nevertheless, it would behoove the teachers 
of Native American students with special needs to become familiar with 
the cognitive styles that are prevalent in their classrooms. 

Suggestions for Future Researchers 
The following list of suggestions have been compiled to help 
students and teachers choose topics that have not been thoroughly 
researched, and to introduce possibly valuable sources that are not 
currently found when conducting ERIC searchesi 

* alternative verbal measures need to be developed to aid in the 
assessment and identification of Native Americans with learning 
handicaps, 

* alternative approaches for controlling and preventing substance 
abuse among Native American adolescents, 

« more scientific studies need to be conducted to test the efficacy of 
new approaches to teaching Native American students with learning 
handicaps, 

* gifted student identification procedures and educational programs 
that are agreeable to both cultures have yet to be develcped, 

« field-based teacher training programs should be initiated at the 
Q high school level in order to capture the interest of younger Native 

ERIC 

12£ 



— PA6E 35 — 

American student*, 
« more scientific studies can be performed and published, thereby 

replacing the over-used survey method of gathering data, 
« Native Americans should be looked upon as a heterogeneous group and 

classified by tribal affiliation, rather than treated as a 

homogeneous group without regard to individual tribal 

characteristics, 

♦ Jouruml of Hmvmjo Educmtion articles will not be found in an 

ERIC search, but should be consulted when conducting research on 
issues pertaining to education of Native Americans of the Southwest. 



ERLC 



12Z 



Appttndix 

D^Bcriptor* Used For ERIC Search 



124 



ERIC 



— PASE 56 — 



1. American Indians and learning disabilities 

2. American Indians and communication disorders 

3. American Indians and behavior disorders 

4. American Indians and mental retardation 

5. American Indians and physical disabilities 

6. American Indians and dyslexia 

7. American Indians and mental disorders 

8. American Indians and behavior modification 

9. American Indians and behavior problems 

10. American Indians and reading difficulties 

11. American Indians and reading improvement 

12. American Indians and reading strategies 

13. American Indians and reading failure 

14. American Indians and evaluation 

15. American Indians and assessment 

16. American Indians and attention deficit disorder 

17. American Indians and hyperactivity 

18. American Indians and developmental disabilities 

19. American Indians and language handicaps 

20. American Indians and learning problems 

21. American Indians and minimal brain dysfunction 

22. American Indians and writing difficulties 

23. American Indians and aphasia 

24. American Indians and holistic reading 

25. American Indians and cognitive styles 

26. American Indians and learning theories 

27. American Indians and annotated bibliography and special education 

ale 125 



— PABE 57 — 

2B. American Indian* and special education 

29. American Indian* and cultural pluralism 

30. American Indians and biculturalism 

31. American Indian* and acculturation 

32. American Indian* and cultural di++erence» 

33. Amc^rican Indian* and culture 

34. American Indian* and culture con-flict 

35. American Indian* and multicultural education 

36. American Indians and culture-*hock 
37.. American Indians and ethnocentrism 

3B. American Indians and religious conflict 

39. American Indians and social differences 

40. American Indians and hearing impairments 

41. American Indians and visual impairments 

42. American Indians and bilingual special education 

43. American Indians and speech handicaps 

44. American Indians and hearing therapy 

45* American Indians and speech and hearing clinics 

46. American Indians and child health 

47. American Indians and mental health 

48. American Indians and chronic illness 

49. American Indians and health conditions 

50. American Indians and health needs 

51. American Indians and prenatal influences 

52. American Indians and radiation effects 

53. American Indians and special health problems 

54. American Indians and alcohol education 

55. American Indians and drug education 

1?B 



~ PAGE SB — 

56. American Indians and heart disorders 

57. American Indians and diabetes 

58. American Indians and braille 

59. American Indians and neurological impairments 

60. American Indians and adaptive physical education 

61. American Indians and normalization 

62. American Indians and Special Olympics 

63. American Indians and bilingual education 

64. American Indians and second language learning 

65. American Indians and visual learning 

66. American Indians and verbal learning 

67. American Indians and multisensory learning 

68. American Indians and cooperative learning 

69. American Indians and exceptional persons 

70. American Indians and language research 

71. American Indians and reading research 

72. American Indians and writing research 

73. American Indian Reservations and schools 

74. American Indian Reservations and special education 

75. Navajo and special education 

76. Navajo and cognitive styles 

77. Navajo and learning theories 

78. Navajo and learning disabilities 

79. Navajo and communication disorders 

80. Navajo and behavior disorders 

81. Navajo and mental retardation 

82. Navajo and physical disabilities 

83. Navajo and mental disabilities 

ErJc l?T 



— PABE 59 — 

84. Navajo and language handicaps 
65. Navajo and writing diffcrencM 

86. Navajo and speisch handicaps 

87. Navajo and multicultural education 

88. Hopi and special education 

89. Hopi and learning theories 

90. Hopi and multicultural education 

91. Hopi and learning disabilities 

92. Hopi and communication disorders 

93. Cherokee and special education 

94. Cherokee and multicultural education 

95. Cherokee and learning theories 

96. Sioux and special education 

97. Sioux and learning disabilities 

98. Sioux and learning theories 

99. Sioux and communication disorders 

100. Sioux and multicultural education 

101. Canada Nat .^ es and bilingual education 

102. Canada Natives and multicultural education 

103. Canada Natives and learning disabilities 

104. Canada Natives and communication disorders 

105. Canada Natives and behavior disorders 

106. Canada Natives and language handicaps 

107. Canada Natives and learning theories 

108. Canada Natives and special education 

109. Canada Natives and physical disabilities 

110. Canada Natives and mental retardation 

111. Canada Natives and alcohol education 

Er|c 1?: 



— PAGE 60 ~ 

112. Canada Natives and drug education 

113. Canada Natives and writing difficulties 

114. Canada Natives and reading difficulties 
lis. Canada Natives and mental disorders 

116. Canada Natives and reading improvement 

117. Canada Natives and reading failure 

118. Canada Natives and minimal brain dysfunction 

119. Canada Natives and mental health 

120. Canada Natives and health needs 

121. Canada Natives and diabetes 



