SdeUl^NT RESUME 



ED 281 680 



RC 015 963 



TITLE 

IRSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Eastern Indians: An Annotated Bibliography with 
Emphasis on Indigenous Tribes of Connecticut. 
Connecticut State Dept. of Education, Hartford. 
86 

72p. 

Connecticut Department of Education, State Office 
Building, Capitol Ave., Hartford, CT 06106 (free). 
Reference Materials - Bibliogrsphies (l3l) 

MF01/Pe03 Plus Postage . 

^American Indian Culture; ^American ^ndian History? 
Americatn indians| *Audiovisuai Aids ; Chi Idrens 
Literature; *eontent Analysis; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Ethnic Bias^*Ethnic Stereotypes; 
Evaluation Criteria: instructional Material 
Evaluation; Library Materials; Racial Bias; *Reading 
Materials; Resource Materials; Tribes 
*C6nnecticut ; New England; United States 
(Northeast) 



ABSTRACT 

The 137 books, audiovisual materials/sources, 
resource people and places, teacher resources, and bibliographies in 
this annotated bibliography for elementary and secondary school use 
were selected by members of the Connecticut Indian Education Council, 
the magority of whom are Native Americans. The Council attempted to 
include items describing American Indians of Connecticut and the 
Eastern Woodlands which avoided stereotypes,^ were factually correct 
and balanced^ had no distortion or bias^ and were generally 
accessible. The Council considered all listed materials , published 
between 1643 and 1985 (magdrity after 1970), to be useful and above 
average resources with the exception of those in a_ section entitled 
"Caveat Lector" which lists popularly used materials containing 
serious distortion, error, or bias. Bibliographical entries are 
arranged alphabetically by author in 10 sections : Cbhnecticut , New 
England, Eastern Woodlands, North America, Audiovisual Materials and 
Sources, Resource People andPlaces, 17th and 18th Century Primary 
Sources, Teacher Resources, Bibliographies^ and Caveat Lector (Reader 
Beware). Each entry contains an annotation^ evaluative comments, and 
reading/interest level designation. An author index is included. 
(LFL) 



******** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

********** ****************4:*W*********** 



EKLC 



Stale of CGiuieeticut 



William A. O'Neill, Governor 



Board of Education 

Abraham Glassmam Chairman 

James cl. SzerejRo, Vice Chairman 

A. Walter Esdaile 

Waiteh J, Foley 

bdrdthy C. Goodwin 

RitaLHehdel 

John F. Mahhix 

Julia S. RanJdh 

Hufiibeito Solatho 

Norma Foreman GlasgowXex officio) 
Commissioner of Higher Education 

Gerald N. Tlrozzi _ 
Cbmihissibher of Education 

FraiikA. Altieri 
Deputy Cbniinisslbher 
Finance and Operations 

torraihe M. Arpiisdh 
Deputy Commissioner. 
Program and Support Sendees 



EKLC 



3 



EASTERN INDIANS 



An Annotated Bibliography 
With Emphasis oil Indigenous 
tribes of GonneeHetit 



Compiled and edited by 

Connecticut Indian Education Council, Inc. 

Indian Advisory Committee 

Under the auspices of 

Connecticut State Department of Education 



CONTENTS 



THE CONNEGTieUT INDIAN EDUCATION COUNCIL v 

ACKNOWLEDGRENTS vii 

INTRODUCTION 1 

GUIDELINES 3 

KEY 7 

CONNECTICUT 9 

NEH ENGLAND 13 

EASTERN WOODLANDS 17 

NORTH AMERICA 25 

AUDIOVISUAL HATERIAtS AND SOURCES 37 

RESOURCE PEOPLE AND PLACES 39 

17TH AND 18TH CENTURY PRIMARY SOURCES 41 

TEACHER RESOURCE 45 

BIBLiOGRAPHlES 47 

CAVEAT LECTOR (READER BEWARE) 53 

AUTHOR INDEX 57 



eGNNEeneuT Indian EDueATiBN eguNeit 

INDIAN ADVISQRY GGMMITTEE 



The edhriectleut Indian Education eburiell Is ah brgahlzatlbh that has 
evolved from an advisory committee that was formed at the request of 
the eonhectlcut State Board of Education- The majority of the 
membership Is of Native American descent though i)oh-Ind1ahs are 
members as well - 

There are twelve executive members and ah open number of resource 
people who contribute khdwledge, resources, time, and support to the 
Connecticut Indian Education eouncll. Me presently have oh the 
ebuncll ah ahthrbpbloglst , ah archeolbglst , ah historian, library 
personnel, experienced Native American elders, the Gohhectlcut Indian 
Affairs Coordinator, and a teacher, as well as others who share 
various talents with us (membership 11st available on request). 



v 



EKLC 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



Many persons have contributed to the ripx/eldprnent of Eas4;wi Indiana - 
An Annotated Blbllbqrabhv WUfr -ErBpha44^ — ofl— in digenous Tribes of 
Connecticut . Without their constructive criticism and Invaluable 
assistance, the. d5veloj)ment core committee charged with the 
responsibility of fbrmulating the document would have been less 
effective. Sincere appreciation Is therefore extended to all who 
assisted In this manner. 

Members of the development core committee are: 

Mikkl Aganstata, Department bf Public Utilities 

Robert Bee, University of Connecticut 

Richard Carlson, Yale University 

Patti Kaliss, New Haven Public Library 

Buan Sanchez, ManchesterBoard of Education 

Ed Sarabia, Department of Environmental Protection 

Special appreciation Is extended to the following persons for 
their invaluable technical assistance: 

Julia Bradley, Connecticut Legal Services 

Karen Coody Cooper, American Indian Archaeological Institute 

Don Forbes, Micmac Tribe 

Adele 6arby, Schaghticbke Tribe 

William eloade, Micmac Tribe 

.lean Sraustein, Peabody Museum 

Anne Holcomb, New Haven Public Library 

Trudle bamb-Richmbnd, Native American Program - Save the 

Children _ _ _ 

byent Russell, Prbfessbr Emeritus, Yale University 

Arthur Soderlind, Connecticut State Department of Education 

(retired) _ 
Jahis Us, Hbhawk Tribe 
Flora Van Dyke, New Haven Public Library 
Paul Sleeping Wolf (Nbrbeck), New Haven Board of Education 

Finally, we wish to express our appreciation to the New Haven 
Public Library for Its support and the use d_f_ its facilities, services 
and collection; the office of the Indians Af fai rs Cdordinator for Its 
support and use of his services, and the Connecticut Legal Services 
for the use of their facilities. 



Bikk1 Aganstata, Chairperson 
Cbhnecticut Indian Education 
Advisory Committee 



Albert A. Alexander 
Education Consultant 



^9 The prcvjotis nmhmn page m 

Q fhe mgw^l document was blank 



ERIC 



INTRODUeTlON 



As part of_ Itis respdnslbl Ijty to evaiuate, expand, and Improve 
Instructional resources, the Connecticut State Department of Education 
Is working With Connecticut Indians and other experts In Native 
American studies to Identify appropriate source materials and to 
revise the public school curricula regarding American Indians. At the 
request <of the Department^ an advisory committee was formed that has 
how evolved Into the Conniectlcut Indian Education Councj'h its 
mission Is to encourage accurate teaching about Amerl^^^^^^^ Indian 
cultures and people and to enhance the educational experience of all 
students. With special emphasis on Native American students. 
Accordingly, the Connecticut Indian Education Council has sifted 
through existing resources and compiled this select, annotated 
bibliography for educational use at all grade levels. 

As the Council reviewed materials, we realized that all too often 
many of the most popular and accessible books tended to perpetuate 
"Indian" stereotypes rather than explore the realities of distinct 
tribal cultures and histories. Material on many important topics, 
such as the urban experiences of Indians, is generally inaccessible. 
We are convinced that this has helped to create a critical situation 
for the education of both Indians and non-Indians. 

Presently, students learn about "Indian" stereotypes; much of the 
reality of Indian cultures is not conveyed. For non-Indian students , 
this merely adds to the ignorance and bias that modern curricula and 
dedicated teachers are trying to eliminate. For Indian students the 
res*.'lts can be even_mdre harmful to the development of a healthy sense 
of s^nf-identity. They might play social charades^ either by adopting 
as their "bWn" behavior that of the Indian steseotypes they have been 
taught or by "passing" as BUck or White. They might remain faithful 
to th^ reality of their Indian heritage and thus be ostracized by 
non-Indian reers as -'odd." Or^ they may simply withdraw from J:he 
painful situation arid risk receiving a low grade for non-participation. 

ignorance is not bliss! It is imperative that high-quality 
material about our indigenous people be available and easily 
accessible. Righ-qualitv curricula about Indians must become the norm 
in Connecticut education. 

To that end the Cdr:necticut Indian, Education Council offers tMs 
annotated bibliography of some of the best existing sources ef 
informatibn about American Indians in Connecticut and in the wider 
area knoWn as the Eastern Woodlands. Some other good material s^^ 
deelina with American Indians outside of Connecticut, are not listed 



EKLC 



-1- 



io 



here because of the eouriell ' s limited resources. They are llslted for 
reference jjurposes 1ri the various bibliographies that we do Include. 

We Include materials about the present as well as the past. Some 
of the material Is rather sophisticated and we omitted some 
primary-level titles that simplify and generalize to the point of 
stereotyping. We believe educators can more aaslly and accurately 
adapt the former to their specific needs than they can Improvise on 
their own using the Insufficient Information of the latter. 

The Connecticut Indian Education eduncll Is glad to have this 

opportunity to work With the Connecticut State Department of 
Education. We shall continue to Improve and develop resources for use 
by the state's educators and students. 



ERIC 



COMMITTEE'S GUIDELINES 



No one topic dominated the eouneH'^ discussions more than that of the 
guidelines or criteria the Council members should use In deciding 
which materials ought to be IriclucLed. Two general guidelines were 
readily agreed upon: the Iterr^ should be accuNrter^r^ tl^y^ttwl^-be^ 
qeneral^ly accessible to librarians, educators^ and student^ . 

It became clear, however, as we talked and planned, that the term 
"accuracy" had so many facets and was so broad that It was, by Itself* 
Inadequate without qualifications. We came to the following 
conclusions : 

1. Accuracy means truthfulness; factujall^ correct; that the dates, 
names, places, and events be faithfully recorded. 

2. Accuracy Implies a balanced, whole view. 

3. Accuracy suggests an absence of distortion and bias. 

We chose books that are riot only factually correct* but that 
either in themselves or in combination present the most balanced, 
whole story. 

Truth is distorted in mariy ways, even when, the facts that are 
presented are correct. One way 1s by use of coloring adjectives and 
other value-laden words, such as "hideous," "backward, " "advanced," 
"spoiled," "drudgery," etc. Some words that were originally 
descriptive such as "savage, " which meant people of the woods or 
ijilderness, became pejorative because of ethnocentrism the opinion 
that anyone or anything different from "us" or "ours" must be 
inferior. Other examples of this are "uncivilized," "heathen," and 
"primitive. " 

The author "^s style brings us to a more subtle domain. While one 
may not find any biased words, nonetheless an attHude 1s conveyed 
which may be one of paternalism, condescerislori^ sarcasm, incredulityf 
or some other distorting impression. For exa/nple, many technocratic 
Judaed-Chnstian autltors assume that the majority of the audience 
share their own world view and go on to^mply through their style that 
this world view Is the only credible one ~- without explicitly putting 
down other world views. 

Anyone who__attempts to project or attribute motives or thought 
processes to other individuals or groups risks the dangers of bias, 
distortion or invalidity. It is particularly, dangerous wheri the 
individuals or groups not onl^y are (or were) real, but have different 
values^, means, goals, or relationships. 



^ _ Accuracy also reqajres enough detail to be sufficiently 
informative arid to enhance the development of balariced perspectives 
Huch^ stereotyping Is due to overgenerallzatldri and oversimplification' 
whicn forestalls development of greater knowledge arid broader 
perspective. Any statement beginning with, "The Indian was.. « Is 
susppct. A few of the older books by Indian authors use this phrase 
When re^f erring to their own tribes, (e.g., Charles Eastman's 
biographies of the Sioux, or George Copway's account of the Ojlbway); 
ln^5uch cases. In context, the phrase Is not worrisome. However, many 
authors purporting to deal with "the Indian," meariing all North 
Amerlca^n Indians, and In only =i few pages, can do more educational 
harm^ than good. The eonneclcut Indian Education eouncll Is 
particularly concerned with the tendencies for treating Northeastern 
Indians as though Identical to the tipl-dwelling, bison-dependent 
plains^ cultures; or for regarding one Individual's actions, attitudes, 
or opinions as typical of "the Indian" rather thari specific to that 
Iridlvldual . 

The omission of Important elements of Irifbrmatlon In a description 
or account of anything— events, situations, people, artifacts, etc. 
-- can bias the material. For example, Iri discussions of scalping. It 
Is usually not mentioned that Europeans, jBven here Iri New England, 
offered bounties for Indian heads and animal parts as an Incentive for 
^^clearlng" and"settl1ng" the larid. Again, King Philip's 
provocations" are abundantly described, while the atrocious treatment 
of the ^ehrlstlan Indians during that same period Is often not 
described^ at all (see the work of Daniel Gbokin for some Information 
on the latter). 

, If* °^ broad scope of this bibliography and the 

relatively t?w available sources dealing with Indlaris of this area we 
were ^forced to make compromises In applying these standards In 'our 
selection process In order to have sufficient material. The most 
Important compromises to be aware of as one looks at our final 
selectloris are these: 

1. Even the scanty material that was found jon indlaris of our area, 
especially for beginning readers. Is largely overgenerallzed 
and^ oversimplified, so we had to Include some less than 
satisfactory materials with notes that express our constraints. 

^' I!?^ fJ"ed1b111ty of works In thi genre of historical fiction, 
the definition of which is simply that the settlrig Is placed In 
ariother time. Is suspect because there are rio professional 
staridards of accuracy that an author Is obliged to meet. An 
exceptionally well done piece can provide added understanding 
Iri the same way a legend may demonstrate or convey a concept 
otherwise unwieldy In direct explanation. A poorly done. 
Inaccurate piece can be very interesting but extremely 
misleading and counterproductive to learning. 



o 

ERIC 



3. Some of our most useful sources on Indian life 1n the Northeast 

were written In the 18th and 19th centuries, when 

ethnoc^ntrl sm, chauvlnl sm and sexl sm were considered 

acceptable. Me have 1 n c 1 u d e d some of these sou r c e s f o r t h e 
Info r ma 1 1 0 n t hey cental n . Ou t s i d e o f the 1 r being o b s t a c 1 e s t o 
our objecti y1 ty , the di s torti ng attitudes mani fes ted In these 
sources , were themselves Influential factors In the formation 
of our history. Moreover, each Individual Is limited in 
perspective and chooses only aspects of a topic that that 
individual can relate to and considered to be significant or 
noteworthy , omitting aspects another individual may consider 
more salient or momentous. We entrust the reader to read 
critically to distinguish the valid Information from the biases. 

4. As everyone views the world through the lens of his or her own 
particular culture, we have included some materials by Indians 
that are_ biased because they are important In their 
manifestation of some of the various Indian world views, and to 
balance the already well--known Euro-American perspectives. 



Ue encourage readers to use our guidelines and commentary, as well 
as the materials listed herein in the evaluation of new materials not 
Included In this edition. 



14 



KEY 



We have divided the reading and Interest levels Into: 



E elementary level, or primary grades 

3 Intermediate, Independent reading level, averaging from 
fourth to sixth grade, but including a broad range of 
interest and capability 

Y young adult levels from sixth to riirith grade, but also 
including a broad range of interest arid capability 

A adult level, high school and up 



The appropriate letter(s) appears 1ri parenthesis fdlldwing the 
description of each Item in the bibliography. Haiiy of the items are 
currently In print arid may be obtained either through your local book 
dealer, or through the address given within the item. Some of them 
are no longer on the market, but can be obtained for use through 
agencies that rent such Items or libraries that lend them. 

When using a library for research, keep in mind while looking for 
particular Items that not all are kept on the same shelf* but may be 
shelved according to type ^f material , such as dcjcumentSi reference, 
or vertical file. Some materials may not be listed in the card 
catalog at all, such as clippings from newispapers, brochures from 
various places of Interest, and other miscellaneous items. If you 
have difficulty either finding a particular item or finding suitable 
material for a particular topic, it Is often rewarding to ask for the 
assistance of the librarian. Ifiith the computer _ networking now 
available to most libraries, it 1s much easier to locate even rare 
materials through, the interlibrary loan system. Many materials can 
easily be borrowed via tjiis system, arid for the rare items that can*t 
be lent out, the item can be located for on-site inspection. 
Photocopies of some of these may be made available. 

A M materials i n this bibliography are considere d by the 

C dnn e cticut Indian -Education eouricil to be useful. above averaag. 

resources that are relevant to the study of the Native A meric^m— People 
in our area, with ^the-except ion of the "Caveat Lector" sectldrn — Tfee 
ite ms listed in th e— "Caveat Lector" are popularly use d materials that 
dd^ cdntal fi ser4ws— distortions, errors and/or biases that are 



-^5 

ERIC 



cbunterproductlve. The annot ations t e nd to be longer because of the 
cbhtrbve r slal and^ conf using aspects^ of th e m aterial . 

Although there Is little material on some topics for some ages or 
levels, we believe that a creative educator can use combinations of; 
and excerpts from, these materials to cover basic topics about the 
Native American People in this area, at least at an Introductory level 



ERIC 



CdNNECTieUT 



1. Balgllesh, AlJce. The Coura^ of Sar ati^ New York: 

Serlbner's, 1954. 

A popular tale based oh a true stdr^ of a family that 
moved f rbm.Hassachusetts to New Hllford, Connecticut, 
In the 170Q's. Small Sarah Is left In New Hllford 
while the_ father sdes back to get the rest of the 
farnlly. Sarah deals with her fear of the unknown, new 
neighbor Si rumors > realities, and new 

responsibilities. Although this book does not teach 
anything about Indian culture, and the Indian 
characters are riot well developed> It could be useful 
In Introducing the subject of Indians, feelings about 
the unfamiliar^ and popular knowledge compared to 
first-hand knowledge. (J*Y) 



2. DeForest, 3ohn. History of the Indian s of ^onflecM cut From the 
Earliest Known Rerlod to 1850 . Hichlgan: Scholarly Press, 1970 
(brig. 1852). 509 p. Index, map. Illus. appendices, blbllo. In 
footnotes. 

Full of Anglo and Christian chauvinism of DeForest^s 
tlme^ with many pejorative, value-laden words DeForest 
describes his knowledge of traditional Connecticut 
Indian culture. Based on manuscripts available tq him 
(Cbrinectlcut and Hassachusetts records, and accounts of 
Roger Williams^ Daniel Gookin and John Winthrop (see 
Primary Sources)^ as well as personal visits and 
Interviews. DeForest declared a tendency (see p.vlll) 
to Ignore the oral history given by Indians themselves, 
arid also shows some .skepticism of the accuracy of 
riori-Indlan writers. The bulk of the work gives the 
eolbrilsts* — riot the Iridlaris' points of view of 
ebridltloris and events. It has major errors on the 
Importariee of cultivated fbbds In traditional life, and 
bri the social relatlbris betweeri males and females. For 
example, on page 4: "The_ women were too apt to be 
short and clumsy^ their features seldom delicate or 
haridsbme; and what femlrilrie graces they had were soon 
bbllterated by hard bodily labdr^ combined with mental 
arid moral degradatlbri. " On page 5: "The corn and 
bearis were cultivated by Wbmen and children; the 
tobacco alone was thought wbrthy of the attention of 
men." On page 19: "They often stole* however; and, by 



17 

EKLC 



their dally practice*, shbweii that they had little idea 
of the beauty and value of troth;" what's good about 
It? He managed to glean much accurate factual 
Information amidst the rest; (A) 



. Salllete, Mary Soulsby. American Indians In Connecticut^ Pas t 
and Present. Hartford* CT: CT Indian Affairs Council, 1979. 

Called a "report^" this Item Is sometimes kept In the 
document section of the library and not Included In the 
card catalog, so It must be requested from the 
reference librarian. This consists of histories of the 
five Indigenous tribes of Connectlcat that are still 
functioning today: the Schaghtlcoke, Paugussett* 
Hashantucket Pequot, Paueatuck Pequot, and Hohegan. 
(A) (Teacher resource) 



. Hughes. Arthur H. and^ Allen Horse; Connecticut PTace^ Waae^ 
Connecticut Historical Society, 1976; ' 

Listed alphabetically by town and then by place name, 
the entries give a description and the history of the 
places named, and lists their source of Information. 
It has a section of Indian names; (Y, A) (Reference) 



5. Keleher, Brendan and Trudy Ray Lamb. American Tfldlans In 
Connect1c4it^ j^^^tep ort on a Statewide Census I Hartford CT^ 
Connecticut Indian Affairs Council, 1977. 24 p. footnotes, maps! 



This Is an analysis of a census taken of the Indians In 
Connecticut. The maps show the population 
concentrations by town, and the locations of the 
reservations that existed at that time (there Is one 
more now In Colchester for the Paugussett). 
Employment, education. Income, age, birthplace, tribal 
affiliation, and family composition data Is reported 
(A) 



Lavin, Luclanne. PreMs4KJrv of Connecticut's Natlve^ABWfi^ans . 
New Haven, CT; Peabody Museum, Vale University, 1985. 54 p 
Index, bibllo. maps, graphs, nius. 

This is an Interesting^ yet simplywrltten, account of 
prehistoric Indian life In what Is now called 
Connecticut. It summarizes the successive cultural 



-10- 

18 

o 

ERIC 



periods of local prehistory. It includes clear 
discussion and 111u^>trat1on of plants utilized, 
subsistence pattern s> settlement patterns and shelter 
types i together with what evidence suggests about 
social and cerempnial patterns. Because of the type of 
evidence available through excavation, the work 
emphasizes the people's technology. (Y, A) 



7. Hdeller^ Roger W. SLF2^^ — — Pa^eo-Inc^lan Site In Hgstgrn 
C dnn e ctlcut . Washington, CT: American Indian Archeologlcal 
Institute, 1980. 

Hoeller describes the excavation end Interpretation of 
an archaeological project that recovered materials of 
Indian cultures of 10,000 years ago. (A) 



8. Orcutt, Samuel.. India ns of the -HQ4i^ aton1c and Naugatuck Valleys . 
Hartford, CT: Case, Lockwood & Bralnard, 1882. 220 p. Index. 

Drawing from LdskleTs History o f- Moravian Missions in 
Nartti — Afflef4^ , as wel 1 as various town records , 
DeFdrest and other sources, Orcutt portrays the Indians 
of Derby, Farmlngton, Mil ford . New Haven, Norwalk, 
Stratford, New Mil ford, Materbury, Woodbury, Sharon, 
and others In the 19th century. Orcutt describes the 
Ideation of many 'YemnantsV of Indigenous peoples, some 
particular tribes, and some specific Indian families. 



Towrishend, Charles. Harvey.. Th e Qu1nn1p1ac Indians a nd their 
Reservation . (See Primary Sources.) 



CT: Archdn (Imprint ot the Shoestring Press), facsimile c. 1974 
(orlg. 1881). 93 p. 

A nine page Introduction treats the jirocess by which 
original names change through time and retranslatlon. 
The body of the material explains some linguistics, 
naming patterns, and differences in dialect. An 
unfinished work, this book gives some highlights of 
historical Interest. (Y, A) (Reference) 



Vdlght, Virginia. Hohegan Chief: ^toi^y of Chief Harold 
TantaQUldg e on . Funk & Wagnall, 1965. Available through the 
Tantaquldgeon Museum, 1819 Norwich-New London Turnpike, 
Uncasvllle, CT 06382. Hohegan Press, 1983. 192 p. 



(A) 



Trumbul 1 , James Hantflond . 




Hamden, 



EKLC 



19 



This 1s a biography of Chief Harold Tahtaquldgeon, who 
1s jtlll living In Uncasvllle, Cdnriectleut, with his 
sister, eiadys. The author traces Chief 
Tahtaquldgeon 's life from school-age, through his 
service In World War II, to 1963. His museum 1s still 
open to visitors (see Resource People and Places). A 
very readable story that Introduces many major facts 
and people to young readers, (y^ A) 



11. Vblght, Virginia. Uncas : Sach e m of^the Wolf Peosle i New York- 
Funk & Wagnall, 1953. 209 p. map. bibllo. 

Uhcas, a Mohegan chleft was the rnain Iridlari character 
in Cooper's The Last^^4lie^oh4<:ans . Indeed, he was 
not the last, as Cooper posited In his fictional 
story. Vblght, In a romantic style specifically aimed 
at a youthful audience, re-tells the story of the move 
of Hohegans from near the Hudson River to eastern 
Connecticut, the Mohegan conquest of the Poduriks, and 
the Nehantlcs; their domination of the Hawnonasset, and 
QUInnlplae, and the resulting change bf their common 
name to the "Pequqts," or "Destroyers. " Volght writes 
about Uncas' longstanding rivalry with his cbaslh, 
Sassacus. The dialogue tends to be stereotypical at 
times: "Mohawks gone... but they return with plenty 
more warriors." (p. 67) It presents a view of Uncas' 
alliance with the English and continued wars with other 
Indian tribes and clans. Including the Pequot War upon 
which he gains final victory over Sassacus. (Y) 



ERIC 



NEW ENGLAND 



12 Cronon, Edward. Changes In the band: liidlans. Coloni sts aw^ the 
fegl^qy^^ tteff^ England . New York: Hill 4 Wang, 1983. 241 p. 
index, bibllo. 

This book offers an "Ecological history Showing Native 
and European attitudes toward land." Crdndn brings 
Interdisciplinary Insights into different systems of 
land use of New England Indians and the first English 
colonists; to differing uses of forests; arid to the 
changes brought to both the landscape and Indian life 
by tha Imposition of European agriculture and 
stockralsing systems. He highlights the adaptations 
each group made and the underlying sources of friction 
between Europeans and Native Americans. (A) 



13. Henry, Edna tNlpmuck-Cherokee) . Native Am erican Cookbodkr. New 
York: Oullan Messner, 1983. 9l p. index. 

This serves up both recipes arid stories, evoking the 
feeling that one Is sitting In Edna Henry's kitchen 
while she cooks. There's something Nipmuck^ a recipe 
from Princess White Flower of the Hassanamlsco 
Reservation in Massachusetts, something Shlnnecock and 
Narragansett, a recipe for cattail biscuits, and for 
good measure somethi rig Seminole. Klondike with a 
smattering of some others to round 1t out. (3» Y) 



14. HUden, Oohn C, compiler. Indian Pl a ce Mames of New EngT^nd . 
^contributions from the Museum of the American Indian Heye 
Foundation, Vol. 18) New York: Museum of the American Indian, 
1962. 

Here Is a gazeteer to place-names iri the six New 
England states that derive from the lariguages of the 
region's indigenous peoples. Each eritry includes 
geographical location, tribal lariguage derivation^ and 
translation. Entries of obscure origin are so 
designated. A pronunciation key Is given. (Yj A) 
Reference) 

15. Leach, Douglas E. Fllritlbck and Tomahawk; New ^ E4nMand^4n King 
Pfej^ip's War . Index, bibllo. 



-13- 



ERIC 



This book has an excellent blbHograjJhy that lists 
manyi many primary resources, it Is well researched; 
and^ comprehensive, although It Is a book In which an 
Indian win is a "massacre" and an English win, a 
^victory"; Joor, peaceful Englishmen are killed 
horribly while savages are killed necessarily. Re says 
this about secondary sources: 

"The serious student of king Philip's war 
must Use secondary sources with the greatest 
of caution. The war has been a favorite 
subject for the antiquarians and arfiateur 
historians of two centuries. Many of them 
did ercel lent work, but others produced Only 
superficial accounts of the war, often 
teeming with errors. Host of the writers 
have based their accounts on Hather, 
Hubbard, and ehuch, without attempting^ to 
check the accuracy of those sources. They 
have given free rein to all kinds of 
unsupported folklore and tradition. Usually 
they reVeal a decided bias either for or 
against the Indians^ Nevertheless, the 
secondary aeeourits should not be Ignored 
completely. tf selected with care, and 
wisely used, they serve to check our own 
concluslcns arid roun^ out the facts which 
have been derived from primary sources." 

think maybe he neglected to apply his own advice. 

(A) 

Love, W. DeLdss. Samson Occ om and the Christian Inrilari^ of New 
£naiM^. Boston: PI igrin Press. 1899. 379 p. Index, maps, 
photos, appendix. ^ 

Samsj)n Occom, 1723-1796, was a Mohegan who was ordained 
^ a. u^.^lF*^''*^" minister. He was instrumental i„ 
establishing the eormiunltles of Stockbridge and 
Brotherton. Love tells of Orcutt's partnership with 
Mheelock. and of their plans for a Christian school for 
Indians to be in Connecticut, which later became 
Dartmouth College. (A) 

Jus sell, ^Howard S. Indian New En^^and^^ef o re the Havflnwpr 
yanover, NH: Univ. Press of New England, 1980. 284 p. Index, 
bibllo. maps, photos, illus. appendix. 



-14- 

22 



Russell Is primarily an agrdnornlst and has been _a 
member of the Massachusetts Farm Bureau, Thus he 
emphasizes Indian agricultural techniques and plant 
uses. His descriptions of pre-contact and early 
contact Indian life are generally sound but not 
profound^ making It useful for Introductory and general 
UsCi but Inadequate for advanced research about New 
England Indian JMi^, A useful appendix gives names and 
general uses of a variety of plants. The pen-and-ink 
drawings are Illuminating. 



18. Siege! , Beatrice. Fur Trapper s and Trad^ers: The IficHans. Ttie 
Pilgrims. and the Beaver . New York: Walker & Co.,_1981. Illus. 
William Sauts Bock (Lenape) 64 p. Index, notes, bibllo. map. 

The author explains the fur trade In early NeW England, 
the Pilgrims' role In It, and about the strong 
sometimes literally cut-throat ~ competition. (J, Y) 



19. Wilbur, _ C. Keith. The NeW England Indians . Chester, CT: Globe 
Pequbt Press, 1978. 108 p- Index, bibllo. map. Illus. 



A very comprehensive book from an archaeological point 
of view of the archaic period and early historic time. 
The authormlstakenly declares that afterKIng Philip's 
Bar, the Algonklans "fragmented and dissolved," thereby 
lllDltlng the book's Use for the later periods . It 
offers a general overview rather than description of 
specific tribes. It 1s Jlustrated with line 
drawings. (Y, A) (Reference resource) 



-15- 

^ 23 

EKLC 



EASTERN H08DbAND 



20- Axtell , James, edUor. The Indian Peoples ef Eas t ern Amer ica: A 

Doc ' imentarv History of the Sexes . New York: Oxford Univ. Press,. 
1981 . 233 p. bibllo. map. 

The author organizes Information about "The life cycle 
of the Indians of Eastern North America," using primary 
sources , with excerpts from writings done at time of 
first contact on topics such as "Birth," "Gomlhg of 
Age," "Heaven and Earth," 'ind "Deatli". Sources are 
listed In the table of contents , suggested reading In 
the back. (A) (Reference) 



21. Axtel 1 , James. Native American Peoples of the East . (American 
People Series) Pendulum Press, 1973. 126 p. 

This Is part of th^^ American People series, similar to 
"Indian Peoples of Eastern America, " but this one Is 
for high school level . Ah excerpt from the 
Intrbductlbri reads: Founded on the belief that the 
study of history In the school s and junior levels of 
college generally begins at the wrong end... the 
conclusions of other historians as filtered through the 
pen of the textbook writer and hot with the primary 
sources of the past. . . . 'The American People* Is ah 
attempt to provide representative selections from 
primary sources. . .annotations and Introductory 
material . . .to Identify sources , their authors , and the 
circumstances In which they were written.... The 
historical accounts by ho means agree, and our task, as 
historians^ Is to put away our stereotypes of both 
Indians and Whites and to find out why. (Y, A) 



22. Bales, Carol. Kevin Cloud. Chippewa Boy In the City . Rellly & 
Lee, 1972. color photos, glossary 

This Is a picture book about ah urban i^ndlan boy and 
his family. Good photos of both hi s home In Chicago, 
and a reservation, of everyday clothing and regalia. 
The narrative Is purported to be In Kevin *s own words, 
although It seems artificial . As most of the Native 
Americans In our area are urban Indians, this Is a good 
Introduction to contemporary urban Indians for young 
people. (E, J, Y) 



EKLC 



-17- 

24 



the jmfcHis^n^^^ !» 
the original dooiment was t 



23. Barboar, Ph1i*p L, gggghorita s and Her hi5r1d; A CiM^ ^Vr-li^ of 
^tperlca's F1rs^.S(Attliffltfit In Which is Related the-SiHg^5f~T h;? 
r.m n." - y>^-^^^ffl^fflen - Par ^ca1ar1y Captain^ Ooferi .Smith. 
.Captain Samue]^U>^aU^,^d _MsterL^oM_RoIf^ Boston: Houghton 

^^r..^^^^- ^"^^'^^ ^^^1^°- ^^P- note., 

appendices; 

Quoting many primary sources, giving nls own 
interpretations labeled clearly as such, consulting 
other exper-:s on the subject— both in America and 
England ^- this Is an excellent primer for aduUs 
.nteras..ed in Jarnestown, Powhatan, Pocahontas, r>t al 
T..9 Powhatan Peoi)le are Algonquian, Eastern Woodland 
People, and the myths surrounding this time and place 
are^ equivalent to "Pilgrim and Indian" myths of New 
England. (A) 

^* ' «^ \ i^'"® ^ ■ . tKahgtofl^t^ COrnorow er. Ind lans of the ^ ;'^t^n 
Wpodlands . Canada; Royal Ontario Museum, 1983. ITT 



illus. photos 



map. 



This book portrays Indian life in the woodlands of 
pre-contact, and European contact periods, up to and 
including the present, (j, Y) 

25. Densmore, Frances, tiogz^ idi^ns Use Wild Plants for Food^ed icine 

New York: Dover, repr. igf—p. ^79^3?r^ 

Although this book focuses on plant life within the 
Great takes region, much of the information, including 
plant life and uses, is similar to that of the New 
England area. 

IrrJ«r'."VW'" ^"c barker on the i,^4^^^itinqs of 
Arthur e. Parlter,. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse Univ. Press, 1968. 

Here we have a description of iroquoian lifeways 
customs and laws organized by Fenton from one of the 
foremost experts of his time, Arthur Parker, who was an 
anthropologist, a museum curator, and a Seneca Indian. 
(A) (Reference) 

JJ^^ol^' Shirley. Ar^^^ Woodland Indian. : Macmillan, 1976. 
48 p. photos. ' 

Black and white photos of beadwork and quillwork of 



ERIC 



-18- 

25 



bags and clothing, carving piF_ Faise-face niasks and 
pipes , basketry, weaving. Included are explanations of 
traditional purposes , origins and symbolisms of many of 
the j tems d1 scussed ; among them the Iroquol s Fal se-f ace 
masks, and the Potawato:n1e underwater panther. (J, Y, 
A) 



28. Grinde, Donald A. (Yamasee); the IroGuols arid the F&undlhg of the 
Am^lcan Nation . San Francisco, CA: Indian Historian Press, 1977. 



This explores the priglns of our form of jovernment. 
The author d1 scourses on many possible Influences on 
our nation' s founders. Including knowledge of ancient 
governments and Ideals , prominent European and Colonial 
philosophers and authors of the period. Grinde states 
that probably the most profound Influence on the 
colonists 1n the frontiers of this land was the very 
concrete and Imfnedlate Influence of the Iroquois. 
Includes copy of Ben Franklin 's Albany Plan of the 
Unlon^ and the Constitution of the Five Nations. (A) 
(Teacher reference) 



29. Harrington, M.R. The- 4wJ1ans -gf — New Jersey^ — 44^fc&n Amon^ tlte^ 
tegage. New Jersey: Rutgers Univ. Press, 1963 (orlg. 1938). 

Historical fiction. A lost colonial youth lives with 
the Lenape and learns their culture. This Is well 
researched^ although some of the characters are 
caricatured, especially the antagonists of the story. 
(Y) 



30. Harrington, Hark. Th e Iroquois Trail: A St o ry of Am e r ica Indian 
I^Vfe- tfi— ^o^T&n4al ^ 1mes ^P1 ckon ^^ffloi ia t he-0na ndag a^a4id Senei^a^V , 
New Jersey: Rutgers U. Press, 1965. 

A continuation of_ Dickon' s adventures (see above), 
transferring Dickon to Iroquois country to find his 
kidnapped friend. This Is a good example of historical 
fiction that Is well researched and dj)ne so that the 
story supports the facts and becomes an aid to 
education. (Y) 



31. Johnston i Basi 1_ (Ojibway) . O.Hbway 44eMta<ie . New York: Columbus 
Univ. Press, 1976. 




ERIC 



Explanation of basic Ojibway world view, social 
structure, spirituality, symbol Ism^ arid legerids. The 
author points out that, because they are Algonklans, 
many stories are similar to those of the Micmac, 
Abenalcl, Blackfoot, and the Algonklari speaking peoples 
In the Connecticut area. "OJIbway stories are as broad 
and deep In meaning and mystery as are the tales of the 
Greeks... and Just as difficult to uriderstarid as the 
parables In the Bible." Readers are expected to draw 
their own Inferences and meanlrigs according to their 
level of understanding, (y. A) 

32. Johnston, Basil. Ta^es the Elders Told . Toronto: Royal Ontario 
Museum, 1981. Illus. Shirley Cheechoo. 

A retelling of some Ojibway legends for young people. 
(0, Y) 

33. Kupperman, Karen 0. Set^:11nq with the Indians; The Meeting of 
English and Ind4aB^ ^lt4ipes^n America. 158B-164G . Totowa, NJ- 
Rowman and Littlefleld, 1980. 224 p. Index, bibllo. 

This is an account of the relations between early 
English colonists arid Indlaris albrig the eastern 
seaboard. It places the relatlorishlps within a context 
that Includes colonists' past experlerice and concerns 
about their mother country as well as the contradiction 
between their feelings of et^noeeritrlsm and the fact of 
their dependence on Indians for survival. (A) 

34. Logan, Adelphena (Onondaga). Memories of Sweet qpass^ . 
Washington, CT; American Indian Archaeological Institute, 1979. 

This Is a book Of craft work, arid some reminiscences of 
an Onondaga woman. (V, A) 

35. Lyons, Oren (Onondaga). Bog Story . Holiday House, 1973. 

This Is an autobiographical story of the author's 

boyhood with his dog ori the reservation. It 

Illustrates some of the experlerices of a contemporary 
1n our region. (J^ Y) 

36. Moeller, Roger W. Guide to Indian Artifacts of the Northeast . 
Blaine, WA; Hancock House Pub., 1984. 31 p. Index^ photos. 



-26- 

27 



ERIC 



ThU is a cdriclse book _ about some cdmrnpn artifacts 
found In the Eastern Wdodlahd, their classifications by 
age and type, arid their uises. It contains Introductory 
Information Without profeisslonal jargon. (Y, A) 



37. Holloy, Ann. Wampum . Hastings, 1977. 128 p. Index, bibllo. 
Illus. 

"The makers of shell beads along the northeastern 
shores Were all AVgdnk1an^speak1ng_ people. . ^ One group 
Was made up of tribes In southern Connecticut and Rhode 
Island, principally the _ Pequot and the 
Narragansett. . "From their (Iroquois) raids to the 
south arid east^ their warriors brought back to the 
Ldhghouses the shirilrig discs of shell strung on plant 

fibres They gave the beads the narne oata 1n their 

own tongue. . . ". _ Also gives story of Hiawatha and 
wampum, and of the Wampum bird. It also has 
information about the Campbell factory, which was a 
ridn-Iridiari company that made wampum for a time. Very 
comprehensive. (Y, A) 

38. Parker, Arthur _C. (Seneca). Th e Indian How Bo^ . New York: 
Dover Publ . , 1927. 

Iriformatidn dri crafts, custdms^ food, clothing, 
religidri and recreations. Author speaks to the people 
of his day and their cdricerris^ mariy of which would be 
cdrisidered invalid today, but mdst informatidn about 
traditional culture is just as relevant now as it was 
then. (Y, A) 



39. Parker, Arthur C> (Seneca)^ Skuririy Wundy: — Sefle ca Indl afr Tales . 
Chicago: Albert Whitman, 1970 (1926). illus. 

Parker retells the tales of Idng agd that he heard from 
native storytellers When he was a boy. (3, Y) 



40. Pratson, Frederick Jdhn. Ufri-df-tfte-Fwr- Direction :^^^ l^ 

of Indian Life TodaV) . Riverside, CT: Chatham Press (distributed 
by Viking), 1970. 131 p. phdtds. 

This portrait includes the Passamaqudddies of iridian 
Township arid Pleasant Point, Hairiej the Haliseet of 
Tobique Reserve; and the Hicmac of_ Big Cove and Indian 
island. New Bruriswiek, Canada. The descriptions are 



-21- 

28 



EKLC 



sometimes poignant _ as :_ p, 53 "In the dimness the 
everpresent television set beams a strange world where 
affluence, comfort, purpose and beauty are the norm arid 
poverty Is a documentary special." (Y^ A) 



41 . Schoolcraft , Henry Rowe. I^eg^eft^^ — of the American 
Iridlaris . New York : Crescent Books 1 980 , 203 d 
lllus. 

An Illustrated storybook of some of Schoolcraft's 
collection with a 14 page Introduction by Schoolcraft 
glvlrig his observations and opinions, the former 
valuable and the latter sometimes questionable, 
includes tales of lagoo^ Weendlgd, Puck Wudj Inlnee, 
and Manabozho (or Nanabush). (Y, A) (Teacher resource) 



42. Siege! , Beatrice. Indians of th^-Hoed^and^^ — Before and After th e 
Pilgrims . New York: Walker & Co., 1972. lllus. 

The author gives us the definition of a "tribe". Then 
she tells of some Southern New England tribes — the 
Narrangansett, Wampanoag, Pequot, and Hohegarij of some 
of the majcr sachems, Massasolt and Hetacomet, 
Canonlcus arid Mlantanomo and Cononchet^ Sassacus, arid 
Uricas. She explains something about Indian warfare (as 
opposed to European warfare), and the. Pequot War. 
Contemporary situations and Issues are also discussed. 
This Is perhaps the best spurce on bur ar^a for 
children. It needs some supplement to be complete Iri 
detail about Connecticut's other tribes. (J, Y) 



43. Sriake, Sam (Ojlbway)^ Coatsworth, Emerson and David (compilers) 

The Adventures of Nanabusfe ftll^v^^iidlan Stories . New York- 

Atheneum, 1980. 85 p. lllus. 

Sixteen folktales of Nanabush (sometimes called 
Hariabozho) who is kind of like a superhero. Some of 
the stories are about Nanabush is schemes to catch 
diriner — which sometimes backfire, from which he 
learris a lesson. Some of them are about his creatloris, 
many of which we still see today, Including this earth, 
and turtles' shells. Still others are about Nanabush 's 
adveritures and travels. The colorful , stylistic 
Illustrations of Frances Kaglge (O^lbway) provide 
excellent settings for the expertly told traditional 
folktales. (E, J, Y) 



-22- 

29 



44. Tamarin, Alfred. We Have Not Vanished ; ehlcago: Follett Publ . , 
1974. 16(3 p. photos. 

About Eastern Woodland tribes Inclading Micmac, arid 
Penobscot this book focuses on Indians of ribrtheast arid 
southeast. It makes one aware of the mariy easterri 
tribal groups which have survived, although 1t does 
have a number of factual Inaccuracies. (3, Y) 



45. Tantaquld^geon, Gladys (Mohegan). Folk Medicirie of the Delaware 
a^nd Related Alqonklan Indians , Harrlsburg, PA: Penn. Historical 
and Museum Commission, 1977 (1972). 145 p. 

The author compares the folk medicine of the Hbbegans 
with the beliefs arid practices of the Delaware 
peoples. She tells of the beliefs regarding dreams, 
witchcraft, and other aspects of folk medicine as well 
as discussing the herbal medlclries. (A) 



46. Trigger, Bruce G., editor. Handbook of North American Iridlans: 
Vol. 15.: The Northeast . Washlngtori, DG: Smithsonian 
Institution, 1978. 924 p. 

includes a prehistoric overview plus discussion of 
history and cultures of tribes In three 
geographical-cultural reglorisr Coastal; Salrit Lawrence 
Lowlands; and Great Lakes-R1ver1ne. Extensive coverage 
of Iroquois In Saint Lawrerice Lowlands re^lbn. New 
England groups Included jri Coastal region. Chapters on 
languages of New Englarid groups and coastal 
prehistory. Separate chapters ori Bebthuk, Hlcmac^ 
Maliseet-Passamaquoddy, Eastern Aberiaki , Western 
Abenaki, Narragansett , and Mahlcan. Coririectlcut groups 
Included In two chapters on Iridlaris of Southern New 
England (both early and late perlbds) . Written by 
anthropologists and historians without professional 
jargon, suitable for a gerieral adult audience. (A) 
(Reference) 



47. Viereck, __Phillip. The New band: Discovery. Exploration, an4 
Ea^-Settlement of Northeastern Hrilted States, From the E^am^fe 
yo»aq#s^o^^621 . Told In the Words of the Explorers Themselves . 
New York ^ John bay Co., 1967. 244 p. Index, maps, bibllo. 
marginal notes, illus. photocopies. 

Viereck compi les, organizes, ribtates arid provides 
"running commentary" on quite a comprehensive 



-23- 

30 

EKLC 



cdllectibh of previously pabllshed journals, logbookSi 
letters arid aeeourits written by explorers, as well as 
maps drafted by navigators and cartographers of the 
time. Some "editorial bridging," and marginal notes 
that demonstrate what these early contact eyewitnesses 
saw^ how they felt about what they saw, and what they 
themselves did broaden the perspectives of the primary 
sources authors and explain some of the obscure terms 
used. Expert sources drawn on for this book were Peter 
Martyr, Richard Bakluyt, and Samuel Purchas. Primary 
sources are the basis for the book and some «>f those 
used and quoted from are: ehamplajn, Hudson, Argall, 
3ohn Smith, Dermer, Verrazario, and Weymouth. (J, Y, A) 



-24- 



31 



ERIC 



NORTH AMERICA 



48. Aliki. eorri Ha_1_2^: The Gift of the Indians . New York: 
Thomas Y. Crowell, 1976. 33 p. 1llus. 

Here 1s a picture-book history of corji from the first 
archaeological finds and the theory of how cultlvatlpn 
evolved from wild graisses to today's uses. Allkl 
1 llustrates some varieties of corn,, methods of 
preparation, and some regional dishes. (E, J) 



49. America's Fascinating Indian Heritage: - Ttie^l^ ^t Am e r t^^tfvs — 
Their Customs. Art, HIstbrV. and How— They- 14ve4 . New York: 
Reader's Digest Assoc., 1978. 415 p. Index, photos, maps. In the 
Introduction it says: "Although we tend to think of Indians as a 
single people, they were. In fact, as diverse as the nationals of 
Europe. " 

A chapter on the northeast arid on contemporary Indians 
Is Included plus an article on the Walum Olum; and 
sections on the Delaware,, and the Iroquois. There are 
discourses ori wampum. False Faces and _Husk Faces arid 
Woodland use of the Sacred Pipe. The chapter ori 
cbritemporary Iridlaris Iricludes Information bri the 
National Congress of American IndlansL^ the National 
Indian Youth Couricll, Indians of All Tribes; and the 
Amerlcari Iridlan Movement. 



59. Armstrorig, Virginia. I Have Spbken: Amerlcari H1st^ry^T"^H^o^gft^ttte 
Voices of the Indians . Swallow Press, c. 1971. 206 p. Index, 
bibllo. source notes. 

Aritholbgy of Iridlari oratory Iri^ chroriologVcal. order^ 
from 17th to 20th century. Includes experts from the 
orations arid/or writlrigs of Powhatan^ Hiaritariripmbh 
(Narragarisett) , Dpecariough, Corinbrichet CNarragarisett) , 
Tammany (Delaware) , Big Mouth (Sriandaga), Bekaoawlda, 
Cariassatego (Six Natloris) , Haridsome Lake, Ely Parker^ 
1961 Declaratlbri of Iridlari Purpose, and Vine Del ori a, 
Jr. (Y, A) (Reference) 



51. Axtell, James. The European & the Indians — Essays In trie 
Ethriohlstory of Colonial North America . New York: Oxford Univ. 
Press, 1981. 



-25- 
32 



EKLC 



A scho^^^^^ approach, carefully researched^ brings an 
Important consciousness and perspective to 
Indian-European relations. There 1s an interesting 
chapter oh who invented scalping. (A) 

52. Baylor, Byrd and Peter Parnall. The Other Way to Listen . New 
York: Charles Scrlbner's Sons, 1978. Illus. 

"Sometimes EVERYTHING BEING RIGHT makes a kind of 
sound." Written in poetic style, this picture book for 
all ages is about communing with nature. An old man 
and a youth spend time together enjoying the harmonies 
of creation. Though not about Indians or by Indians, 
this book is about a concept that Indians can Identify 
with. (J, Y) 

53. Bee, Robert. The^T4t4^ s of Am er^lcan Indian Policy . Cambridge, 
MA: Schenkman, 1982. bibllo. 

Dr. Bee describes how modern federal Indian piollcy Is 
made jnd the Impact of tribes' actions on the 
policymaking process. He focuses on the legislative 
and budgetary processes affecting Indian affairs and 
Includes a case study of one tribe's relations with 
Washington, D^C., and the efforts of tribal leaders to 
"get something for the people." There Is some 
discussion of New England Indian land claims and 
efforts to gain federal recognition of tribes. This Is 
a good source book for teachers wishing to understand 
how both tribal and federal government operate. (A) 
(Reference) 

54. Berkhofer, Robert F., dr. m White Man's Indian: Images of the 
American Iaiian^r^m^oTiifflb<is to the Present . New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf, 1978. 261 p. notes. Index. 

A survey of the Images non-indlans have created of 
Native Americans from the time of the 15th century 
European explorers to the 1970s. An Impiortant aspect 
is the use of the generic term and depiction of 
"Indians" rather than Individuals from tribes as 
distinct as, for example, the European French from the 
German cultures, and the effects thi is depiction has had 
Pn -^governmental policies toward Indians. The author 
further writes of the portrayal of "Indians" In 
anthropology, art, literature, and pojjular culture, arid 
"religious" groups. (A) (Teacher resource) 



-2b- 



33 



ERIC 



Blllard, 3ules B^, editor 

(see '* Worlj-a^4h€^meFican Indian ") 



55. Brown, Joseph Epes. Spiritual Legacy of the American Indian . New 
York: Crossroad, 1984 (1964). 135 p, notes, map. 

Brown Is here concerned with how Native American 
spiritual traditions fit In with the beliefs of other 
major world religions, through some anthropological and 
historical perspectives^ He explains Indian views of 
time as cycl leal and rhythml c , as contrasted to the 
European linear "progressive" view; also Indian 
concepts of Interrelationships of all things. 
pages specifically on the Eastern Woodlands sketch the 
Ojibway Midewewin, Pan-Indian Intertribal exchange, 
I roguol s "brenda " ( whi ch concept Brown states Is 
widespread acj^oss Indian cultures) , the False Face 
Society, and mentions the Iroquois Life Bringer. In a 
section cal led "The Primal Foun^tlons" Brown presents 

some basics he feels are common to most American 

Indians as well ar: other primal religions. (A) 



56. Culin, Stewart. Games of the North American Indians . New York: 
Dover, 1975. 

Comp r ehen s 1 ve . C u j 1 n c 1 as s i f i es games of 1 nd i gen ou s 

people throughout North America, touching upon 
religious and ceremonial significances, and why certain 
games are played and when. (A) 



57. Curtis, Natalie. The Indian's Book . New York: Dover Publl., 
c.l95b (1907). 584 p. Index, appendix, photos. 

An anthology of songs and their backgrqunds In English 
and tribal languages. The first chapter Is of the 
Mabanaki ; i nc 1 ud i ng Penobsc ot , Pas samaquoddy , and 
Hal i seet songs . Each song has an i ntroducti on by the 
Indian contributor. Songs are classified as Dance 
Songs, War Songs, Love Songs, Lullabies, Greeting 
Songs, Medicine Songs, and songs of various societies. 
(A) (Teachei resource) 



58. Deldria, Vine ,lr. (SlouxJ. Custer Died For Yo ui^imr^n Indian 
Manifest o . Hacmlllan; 1969. 279 p. 

Deloria discusses with sharp wit contemiJorary Native 
American life. He interprets some recent federal 



-27- 

34 



EKLC 



Indian policy andalsb notes that the Institutions, 
policies, and people who try tQ_"help' by Interfering 
have mostly failed. DeJbrIa calls for unity of effort 
between reservation and non-reservatlbn Indians. He 
confronts and cha llenges many popular non-Indian 
"liberal" stances, while demonstrating some political 
positions of his own. This Is the prototype for some 
of his more recent books, and offers a good overview of 
general contemporary Issues. (A) 



59. Delorla^ Vine Jr. (Sioux). The Indian Affair . New York: 
Friendship Pr., 1974. " 



A history of U,S. and chijreh. policies toward Indians 
and their effect on tribal policies. An overview that 
helps to gain perspective and understanding of current 
ppsltlohs. He offers a chapter of suggestions on, 
"What can we do to help?" (A) 



60. Dockstader, F»^eder1ck J. (Grielda). Great North Amer1can^^4an^4^ 

Prem^ — Life and Leadership . New York: Van Nprstrand 

Re^nhold, 1977. 385 p. Index, bibllo. photos. Illus. indexes by 
tri e and chronolooy. 

This Is an excel len± ebmpllatloa of 306 short 
biographies of notable Indian people from 1606 on. The 
author Included only those who were ho longer living, 
to avoid difficulties of trying to choose between 
contemporaries, Dbckstader gives native names and 
meanings, family data arid a comprehensive range of 
backgrounds, origins, time periods, arid persorialltles. 
(Y, A) (Reference) 



61. Dorian, Edith. Hokahevi American Tndiahs Then and Now . New 
York: HcGraw-HIll , 1957. 112 p. Index, bibllo. Illus. 

"When we Ibok back, we know why ari outspoken frontier 
army of fleer said that 'clylllzatlon approached the 
Indian with the Bible Iri brie hand, a paper treaty In 
the other, a bludgeon up her sleeve, and a barrel of 
whiskey In her wagon.*" Pa^es 14-27 about the Eastern 
Mpodlands. The last chapter praises 3ohn Collier and 
the Indian ReorgariUatlori Act and asks for support to 
discourage the Termlriatlon Bill (see copyright date) 
and reminds us that, ". . .happlriess, success, and 
contentment In a strange new life will depend on you 
and me, their fellow dtlzeris and new neighbors. This 



-28- 



35 



time we will not be able to s1t comfortably back and 
blame mistakes on our ancestors. Any mistakes will bb 
our mistakes." (J, V) 



Eastman, Charles (Sioux). Indian Boyhood . 

This Is an autobiography of a famous Sioux man, born 1h 
the mid leoOs. This book is of his youth till age 15, 
living the traditional way. (Y) 



Eastman, Charles (Sioux). From the Beep Woods to Glvlllzatlon - 
tittle. Brown & Co., I9l6. Index, photos. 

A continuation, this aupbiography picks up at age 15 
when ho was r^e^united w^^ his father and taken Into a 
Christian boarding school^ He looked at life from both 
sides; tried to help bridge the gap between Indians and 
Europeans, was i^n the middle, and ended choosing the 
Indian way alone In the mountains. His experiences, 
his view of his father's capture, the boarding school, 
the Massacre Wounded Knee (where he attended as a 
doctor), his attempts, through education to help 
Indians and non-Indians to live In harmony, his 
involvement with the Boy Scouts, and his writing about 
his life and people provide Important insights Into 
Indian and Euro-American cultures arid relationships. 



Eastman, Charles (Sioux). Soul of the Iridlari: An 
Interpretation . New York: Houghton Mifflin, l9ll. 171 p. 

Eastman explains Indian spirituality J:o riori-Iridians. 
He also discusses how values and Ideas are passed ori to 
a new generation. It has been reprinted a few times, 
most later editions leaving out the very Important last 
passage^ quoted herei^ "Such are the beliefs Iri which I 
was reared " the secret ideals which have riourlshed Iri 
the American Indian a unique character among the 
peoples of the earth. Its simplicity, its revererice. 
Its bravery and uprightness must be left to make their 

own appeal to the American of today, who Is the 

inheritor of our homes, our names, arid our tradltloris. 
Since there is nothing left us but remembrarice, at 
least let that remembrance be justl" (Y, A) 



Hodge, Frederick W. , ed. Handbook of American Iridiaris North of 
Mexic o . St. Clair Shores, MI: Scholarly Pr., 1971 (1910). 2 
vol. cross references. 



-29- 



38 

i 



Set up like ah encyelbpedlai this book gives brief 
descriptions bf.a cblripreherislve ncimber of groups, their 
origins* linguistic Information, and references to 
authoritative sources. "First published by Gov't, 
Pi-lntlng Office, reissued by Smithsonian in 1912, and 
rj?pr1r!ted In 1971, 1971 reprint covers all tribes, 
origins and derivations of tribal names; cross 
references to synonyms; all settlements and tribal 
subdivisions mentioned In historical sources - and from 
oral tradition." (taken from review by B.S. Wynar) 
(Reference) 



66. Hofslnde, Robert, TJia Indian's Secret hlor44 . New York- Mm 
Morrow, 1955. 96 p. Illus. 

Hofslnde here wrote a series of short stories that 
demonstrate some aspects of life In varloi s regions of 
North America. It Includes a chapter about a boy who 
enters the False Face Society of the Seneca, 
demonstrating the procedures, purposes, and symbolisms 
for jroung jjeople. Woven Into the book Is Information 
about quill decoration, a Cheyenne naming ceremony, the 
Medicine Pipe, and picture writing. (J, y) 



67. Hpfsinde, Robert. Indians at Hom e. New York: Wm. Morrow. 1964 
96 p. Index, illus. map. 

Chapters on "The^lqonqulan Wigwam" and I'The Iroquiari 
Longhouse" as Well as discourse on how modern Indian 
housing has cha^iged in different areas. (note 
copyright date) (J, Y) 



68. Jennings, Francis. The Invasion of — AnieM<:^: Indians. 
Co1o^^^a^U^5^l^. ^d^ th e Cant of Conquest . New York: W.W. Norton & 
Co. Inc., 1975. 359 p. illus. maps, colonial prints, biblio. 
index. 

An account of European colonial encounter with Indians, 
written from a perspective mostly sympat tic to the 
Indians and critical of the European expansibnist 
^lentality. Chronological account Begins with European 
ideology of colonial expansion, moves to the effects bf 
European disease on Indian pooulatlons and the 
escalating disasters of attempts to colonize Indian 
lands. FbcUs on the Indian-European relations in 
Connecticut begins in Chapter 12, with extensive 
discussion of the massacre of the Pequots in following 



-3d- 

37 



chapters. Account ends with the end of King Philip's 
(Metacom's) War In the late 167ds. (A) 



69, Jdsephy, Alvin H. Jr. Wow tha^^e-^uj^alou's Gone: A Study of 
Today ' s American — lna4^s . New York: Knopf, c. 1982. 300 p. 
blblio. Index. 

A sampling of tr1bes__ Is presented w_1_t_h_ a concise 
history and an In-depth look at contemporary problems 
and effects of recent actions. Analysis of several 
contemporary Issues, Including water rights, spiritual 
Integrity, and tribal soverelg^^^^ a chapter 

on the Puritan's conquest of the Pequots and a photo of 
Chief Piper of the Paugussets. (Y, A) 



70. kimbal i_ Yeffe ( Osage) and Jean Anderson. the Art of American 
IMI an Cookl w . New York: Doubleday, 1965. 

the last section 1s on foods of "Thewoodsman of the 
East." the Introduction mentions the Narragahsett 
and Penobscot; most about the Iroquol^s. Dishes of 
eel* oyster, clam, sunflower, tomato, squash, 
hazelnut, fish, Boston b<iked beans , corn, potatoes , 
cranberry, maple, and plum are Included. (A) 



71, Lagerqulsti Sybil. Ph144p- ^ohflstw ^nd the fjava.io Code talkers . 
Billings, HT: Council for Indian Education, 1975. 3l p. photos. 

Philip Johnston Is the son of missionaries to the 
Navajos, who spent many early years on a reservation 
where he learned to speak fluent Navajo. During 
World iJar II he started and headed up the Navajo 
Code Talkers.. Lagerqulst explains how the code 
works, gGrierally^ and mentions the 1969 reunion 
where a bronze medallion was presented by President 
Nixdn. This unique and Important service was a 
benefit to us all. (J, Y) 



72. Leitch, Barbara. fr^orv^4£^-^tct44:wary gf 4nd1an tr i bes of North 
AffieEj^a. Algouac, HI: Reference Publ., 1979. 646 p. maps. 
Illus. subject Index. 

Introduction by Vine Deloria, Jr. says It's concise, 
accurate, and a good overview. It lists 281 North 
American Indian tribes alphabetically, gives location, 



::31-. 

EKLC 



structures, religions, 1970 census Information, etc. 
(Y, A) (ReFererice) 



73. Linton, Ralph. We Gather Toqetrwr . circa 1940. 

Linton was a Sterjlng Fellow at Yale and this work Is a 
product of research on the origins and variations of 
Thanksgiving celebrations throughout the world and 
time. He doubted that the idea for our Thanksgiving 
came from the Puritans because their culture generally 
didn't allow levity or party-like celebrations, being 
Instead rather Calvlnlstlc 1n their outlook (we are 
here to toil and suffer). It Includes a very 
thoroughly done chapter on Squanto with many little 
Rriown facts, such as his baptism In Spain Into 
eatholicism, and his second kidnapping from New England 
to England. This book Is out of print at time of this 
writing, but Is available at Some libraries. (A) 
(Teacher resource) (Reference) 

74. HcLuhan, T.e. Touch ih^^^rth: A Self-Portrait of Indian 
Existence. New York: Touchstone (Simon & Schuster). l97l. 185 
p. photos by Edw. Curtis, bibllo. 

This is an anthology of Indian oratory similar to "I 
have spoken" (see Armstrong, Virginia). It has many 
Edward eurtis photographs among the quotations, which 
make It appear to be somewhat easier reading than 
Armstrong's. (Y, A) 

75. Harriott, Alice and Carol Rachlln. American Epic: The Story of 
the American Indian. New York: Putnam's Sons, 1969. 254 d 
Index, bibllo. 

A history of the North American Indian from origins to 
igeOs, this book gives us a general overview <-hat 
touches on various features of Indian culture in the 
Coririecticut area; discusses Connecticut Mohegari (3ladys 
Tantaquidgeon' s work with Frank Speck. (Y, A) 

76. Minor, Marz and Nono Minor, The American Indian Craft ^s ak. 
nebraska: University of Nebraska Press, 1972. 416 p. Index. 

A cbmpreherisive treatment of craftwork within the 
context of various cultural uses and varieties, from 



-32- 

39 

o 

ERIC 



beadWdrk to hairstyles. It provides much cultural 
Hifprmatlon about various tribes as well as 
Instructions on how to do many crafts. (Y, A) 



77. Momaday, N. Scott (Kiowa). House Hade of Dawn , c. 1969. 

A novel about a young Indian man^s search for self In 
the modern Indian and non-Indlan erivlrorments . A 
Pulitzer Prize winner. 



78. Nelhardt, John. Black Elk Speaks. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1972 (1932). Illus. by Standing Bear. 

A c 1 a s s 1c n a r r a 1 1 ye of a n bg 1 a 1 a Sioux s h ama n o r h o 1 y 
man. Nelhardt combines an historical , chronological 
view of events on the high plains from th_e_186ps to the 
turn of the century with a philosophy that gave order 
to the Indian's experiences and universe. Black Elk^s 
powerful vision Is described, as well as and other 
Indians' accounts of battles with the U.S. Cavalry, 
Including Little Blg Horn and Wounded Knee, Although 
the book is about the culture of the Plains, it gives 
us Insights Into a general world view shared by many 
Native Americans today. (A) 



79. Plne^ T11_l_ie_ S._ Tfte-^iid4^n5 Xn^ . New York: Scholastic Book 
Service^ 1957. 32 p. Illus. 

This Is part of a series about the _ technologies of 
various cultures. Each section has three parts: 1) 
The_ Indians knew... 2) Today we. .. 31 You can.... 
Each Item of technology Illustrates a simple scientific 
principle, e.g., the use of a feather shaft to 
stabilize the flight of an arrow and the "tall fins" 
that stabi lize the flight of airplanes . The drying of 
food Is Illustrated as well as sound conduction through 
the ground or through wood or other conductors. (E, J, 
Y) 



80. Poatgleter , Hermlna. li^4a^ft - Legacy: N ative AmerVcan ^nf Tuances 
o n Horld Ll fe^ffd^- Culture . New York: Julian Messner, 1981. Ntw 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1982. 191 p. Index, bibllo. maps. 

Topics covered Include government, ecology, trails, 
foods ^ medicines , tobacco, cotton. Inventions, 
recreation, words, and more. The author concludes^ 



^33-^ 



An 

EKLC 



"But . the recognmbn of mankind *s debt to 
the Indian Is stm Far from complete. Few 
people realize that; In the United States 
especially^ an enormous part of our life 1s 
Indian. We eat Indian foods every day, wear 
clothes made of Indian cotton, ride on tires 
made of Indian rubber along highways that 
follow Indian trails, smoke Indian tobacco, 
use Indian inyerittoris, enjoy Indian arts and 
recreations,^ benefit from Indian medicines, 
follow Indian democratic traditions, live In 
cities located dh Indian village sites, in 
states with Indian names. Indians are not 
figures of the past, who stood In the way of 
the white man's progress. They played a 
great part in making that progress 
possible. American IiKliahs are an 
indestructible part of the past and a living 
part of the present. Their part In the 
future can be ni less." (Y, A) 

Ready^J^M<}es^t Gui de to America's Fasc1nat4flq^rid^1jm 
Heritage (see America's Fascinating Indian Heritage Ite/ri 
no. 49) 



81. Sanders, Thomas E. (N'ippawanock - Cherokee) and Walter W. Peek. 
(Metacomet) (Narrangansett/Wampanoag) . LiteraittPe^^ %fte^mer1ran 
IndUn . Glencde Press (Collier/Macmillan) , 1973. 534 p. Index 



Written by Princess Red wing's son, Walter Peek, and 
his blood brother, this book talks about spirituality, 
religion, world view In the introduction and foreword, 
and then contains various passages of Oratory, and 
songs as well as the written word. Includes excerpts 
from Dhiyesa's " Soul o^ the 4r.d4an ". as well as 
selections from Momaday, Simon Ortiz, Clyde Warrior 
Princess Red Wing, with classics from past generations 
such as Crazy Horse, Pontlac, etc. An intrdductibh 
precedes each section. 114 selections Including^ the 
epic of Dekanar i arid the test of the Law of the Great 
Peace of the Longhouse, both iroquoian. (A) (Teacher 
resource) 



82. Tpmkins, William. Indiari Sign Lariquaae . New York: Dover. 1969 
108 p. 11 lus 

How to do some basic sign language and pictography. 

Dictionary format with sketches. Sign language Is 



-34- 

41 

o 

ERIC 



considered to be from__the Plains area though also 
thought of as rather universally used Intertribal 
communications. Pictography Is con:>1dered to be from 
the bjibway and was used by the Hidewewln. This book 
was written with the Boy Scouts In mind and glves^^l^ 
about using the knowledge of signs and pictographs In 
Boy Scout activities. (J, Y, A) 



83. Wor^Td^^ the Am erican Indian . NatM. Geographic Soc, 1974. 399 
p. Illus. map. supplement. 

this bdd_k__attempts to cover the period from_ 25^000 B.C. 
to the lS70s. It has many excellent photographs . It 
has some of the same contributors and materials that 
the Reader's Digest book has. The format makes it easy 
to find material on specific topics. To coyer a broad 
span requires that only a very general overview be 
given In one volume, so that there Is not much relevant 
to the 1mm'»d1ate concerns of our area. There is much 
that Is Interesting that makes It worth looking at. 
iY, A) (Reference) 



-35" 

42 

o 

ERIC 



AUbldVISUAL NAtERiALS 



84. How Beaver Stole F1r_e .__ 1972, 12 _m1n._ D1st.: University of 
Illinois Film Center, 1325 South Oak St., Champaign, IL 61820 

This -1s a version of a North American legend of how 
Animal People worked together to capture fire from the 
Sky People. (E, 3) 



85. Hohawk_ Basket Hak1n#^ A Cult u ral Profil e , 1979, 28 min. Dist.: 




Image Film 

A tribute to and exploration of the survival of the 
traditional art of basketmaking, this film provides an 
excellent contrast between the past and the present 
while allowlhs the audience a personal view of the life 
of Mohawk basketmaker, Mary Adams. (Y, A) 



86. More Than Bows and Arrows . 1977, 58 min. 2-reel film. Teacher's 
guide. Bist: Cinema Associates, 3000 First Ave., Seattle, WA 
98121 

Produced by a Native American company, narrated by N. 
Scott Homaday this film exhibits some archaeqloglcal, 
finds and demonstrates the hIstorlcaT development of 
Native American culture from prehistoric to present^ 
It shows us some of the Impact of Natl ve American 
culture on, and Its contributions to the rest of the 
world. (Y, A) 



87. Mv Father Calls He Son . 1975, 29 min. Dist.: PBS Video, 475 
L'Enfant Plaza, S.W. Washington, DC 20024 

A documentary that examines the problems of 

discrimination and asslmllatldn of Indian people. 

Up-to-date an^alysls of treatment of Indian people In 
the white world. 



88. People of the First Light . Video tape- 1979; series of 7 tapes, 
each 28 mlji. Teacher's guide. Dist. : Native American 
Broadcasting Consortium; P.O. Box 83111; Lincoln, NE 68501 

About Native Americans of Southern New England; this 




-37- 



43 



ERIC 



video focuses on conternpdrary life and the survival of 
tribal traditions. Appearing In the videos are Indians 
from the Mas^^^^^ Wampanoag^ Ga^ Head Wamparioag, 
Narragansett tribes^ and from the Boiston, Gonneetlcut, 
arid Southern New England areas. (Y, A) 



AUDieVISUAb SdURCES 



89. American Indian Archaeological Institute 
P. 6. Box 260 
Washington, CT 06793 



90. Audiovisual Museum and Library 
Telcawenriake 
P.O. Box 1506 
184 Mohawk St. 
Brantford, Ontario, Canada 



91. Indian Arts and Crafts Board films 
Modern Talking Pictures 
2323 New Hyde Park 
NY 11040 



92. National Seographlc Society 
Washlrigton, DC 20036 



93. Native American Indian Films, Inc. 
177 Nepeari St. Suite 201 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K2P 0B4 



-38~ 



RESOURCE PEOPLE AND PLACES 



eoNNEeTieoT tribes 

94. Hohegan Nation 
Tribal Historian 
166 Benton St., Apt. 301 
Hartford, CT 05114 



95. Golden Hill Paugussett Nation 
Tribal Historian 

Soldeh Hill Paugussett Reservation 
427 Sheltoh Rd. 
Trumbull, CT 66611 



96. Hasharitucket Pequot Nation 
Tribal Historian 
Tribal 6ff1ce 
P. 6. Box 160 
tedyard, CT 66339 



97. Paucatuck Pequot Nation 
Tribal Historian 
Paucatuck Pequot Reservation 
939 Lantern Hill Rd. 
tedyard, CT 06339 



98. Schaghtlcoke Nation 
Tribal Historian 
Schaghtlcoke Reservation 
P.O. Box 67 
Kent, CT 06757 



eONNEeTiCUT MUSEUMS 



99. American iridlari Archaeological Institute 
P. 6. Box 260 
Curtis Road 
Washlngtbr, CT 66793 
Telephone: 203-868-0518 



-39- 



ERIC 



160. Sbrriers Mountain Indian Museum 
Turnpike Road 
Somers, CT 06071 
Telephone: 203-749-4129 



191. Tahtaquidgeoh Indian Museum 

1819 Norwich-New London Turnpike (Rte, 32) 
Uncasvllle, CT 06382 
Tel eohone : 203-848-91 45 



CONNEGTieuT STATE 



102. eonnectlcut Indian Affalrii Council 

c/o Department of Environmental Protection 
165 Capitol Ave.^ Room 249 
Hartford, CT 06106 



103. Connecticut Environmental Protection Indian 
Affairs Coordinator 
Ed Sarabia 

c/o Department of Environmental Protection 
165 Capitol Ave., Room 249 
Hartford, CT 06106 
Telephone: 203^565-5191 



-40- 

46 



17TH AND 18TH CENTURY PRIMARY SOURCES 



104. Apes, Wnilam CPeqUo±). A Sdri n^f th e For e^t^ ^-^e^ £j( per1en ce^ of 
William Apes, A Native of the ^0f^est > New York: William Apes, 
1831 . 241 p. 



This 1s the autobiography of William Apes, who was a 
Peqiibt minister,, a soldier In the War of 1812, and a 
reformer who helped the Hashpees In the 1830s. Apes 
presents his Ideas of the origins and history of 
Native Amer1eahs._ Hueh bfthe book Is "theologically 
oriented" and follows the literary style of the early 
19th eentury. (Y, A) 



Axtell, James. 

1 . The Indian Peoples ^f^Sast^WnAmerUa^^^ 

History of ^fette Sexes^ . ^See Eastern Woodlands section.) 

2. Native American Peoples nof^ tt^e-last. (See Eastern 



105. Cbpway, George (Ojibway) . T^»e ^a4441oiwj — 4i4^iary and 

Characteristic Sketches of the D.1H)wav^Wa^w . c 1851. 266 p. 

(see Indian Life and History ) (Y, A) 



106. Cbpway, George CQilbway). Indian Life arid— H4^ory^ . AMS Press, 
1978 (repr. of 1860 edition of repr. of 1851 edition). 



These two books by George Copway are Identical except 
for title. Copway relates the tradltlpnal knowledge 
of the elders of the history of the Ojibway nation; 
Its origins migrations, bands and allies^ separations; 
and history of Its relations with surrounding peoples. 
Including the Sioux, Irjaquols^ and HUroh. He relates 
some key legends, tells of some of the sports, 
describes the language, arid Illustrates some 
pictbgraphs. He discusses government^ rel Iglon^, arid 
the missions. He puts forth his views on the Jridlans* 
situatlori and proposes his Idea of solutions to 
Improve prospects for the future. (Y, A) 




Woodlands section.) 



-41- 



47 



EKLC 



107. 6ook1n, Daniel, tils^m^a^^ Coirectlons of the Indians of Heu 
England. New York; Arno Pf. (N.Y. Times), 1972 (repr. 1792); 
89 p. (Part of a cpllection called the Research Library of 
Colonial Americana; which includes Benjamin Trumbull's Complete 
History of Connecticut [to 1818]). 

Daniel Gookin worked with John Eliot In ministering to the New 
England Indians. This writing gives account of his knowledge and 
experiences as a Christian friend among the Indians "propagating 
the Gospel" In the mid to late 1600s. It provides to readers of 
our day a fuller perspective on the people and events of his time 
than Is popularly jsresented In our simplified history texts. 
(See also the next entry.) (A) 



108. Gookin, Daniel. An H1sto i'4€a4 Account of the Doings and 
Sufferings of the XfrF4544afl 4ff4 4a fts ^n NeW England. In the Years 
1675. 1676. 167X. New York; Arno Pr. (N.Y. Times), 1972. 534 p. 
notes . 

This book and the previous brie together give ari 
Important account of some elements of New Eriglarid 
society and the history Of the period surrduridlrig 
King Phillip's War. It's a perspective that Is 
usually Ignored by popular htstorlaris In 
oversimplified explariatlOris of people arid their 
actions. As he describes situations arid everits 
concerning people that he kneW, one becomes aware 
of the stereotyping that began here and the 
purposes It served; hOW^ lo this time, all English 
became "good guys" and all "Indians" became "bad 
guys," Of "In J Uri lovers" and their uripopularjty, 
and of the total alienation of the Christian 
"Praying Indians." Gookin concludes; 

"...Waban^ you know alJ Indians are not 
good;... so't Is With Engllshmeri; all are 
not good, but sdtfie are bad,... arid this we 
must expect, while We are In this world; 
therefore let us be patient and quiet, and 
leave this case to God..." (to judge). (A) 



109. Heckewelder, John. M44^v^ Manners, arid Ctistoltis of the Indian 
Nations^ Wt& ^nee^^ffftafel^ed Pennsylvania and the Neighboring 
States . Ayer Co., 1971 Repr. Of 1819. 

Rev. Heckewelder, 1743-1823, was a Moravian missionary 
who worked among the Delaware. It Is said that 



-42- 

48 

o 

ERIC 



Heekwelder 's works 1ri print are the most complete 
Information We have about the Lenni Lenape of this 
time. (A) (Teacher resource) 



llO- Heckewelder, aohn. _ J^arratlve of the HI ss l^n^ -(>^^feft6--lJnH^ct 
Brethren Among the Delaware and Hdhegan 4n^4afts . (First American 
Frontier Series) Ayer Go., repr. of 1820 ed. 

The English ware not the first European, group to 
establish settlements In the new land. There were 
also other European groups settling the east coast 
concurrently. The United Brethren, also known as 
Moravians, were a Christian missionary group 
originating from Moravia, at brie time part of 
Austria- They later headquartered In Pennsylvania 
among the Pennsylvania Deutch speaking communities, 
where they are yet. Heckewelder shares a wealth of 
Information gained from his experiences In the early 
frontiers. (A) 



111. Towrishend, eharles Hervey. The Quinnlplac Imll^afr s and Their 
Reservation , j^ew Haven, CT: Tuttle, Morehouse & Taylor, 1900. 
79 p. map. photocopies. 

Written by a deseerident of the English family that 
moved onto the reservation, this book tells where the 
tribal burying ground, the main village, the look out 
point were located with the trails that the Pequots 
and Mohawks used. It shows a photocopy of the 
document that establishes the Quinnlplac Reservation 
as the first Indian reservation In the country ^ begun 
after the Pequot War and the founding of the English 
settlement of New Haven In 1538. The treaty was with 
Theophllus Eaton and John Davenport, et al. (A) 

Viereck, Phillip. The New band : Blscoverv> Exbl orat 1 on ^ and 
Early Settlement of Northeastern United States, From the Earliest 
Voyages jo 16S1. Told in the Words of the Explorers Themselves . 
(See Eastern Woodland section.) 



1l2. Williams, Roger. A Key Into the bariguage of America . Grig. 1543. 

Not unlike a Berlitz foreign language book; It 
contains basic language and "observations" of the 
Native Americans in the area. knoWn by him at that 
time, which was principally the Narragansett. 



ERIC 



Williams noticed that the groups siirrdtiridlrig them 
spoke dialects of the same language. He'd only heard 
of a different group of Native: Americans living about 
300-400 miles west [the Iroquois]. With much 
discourse on relationships With Sod as regards to 
Christianity; Williams observed that the behavior of 
many Xndians was closer to Christian Ideals than the 
behavior of many English who had been baptised. He 
hoped the Native Americans would be converted, but 
felt that God would work in His own way la His own 
time with a very dear people, which wojld allow them 
to retain their individuality and own world view. (Y, 
A) ((Reference) 



ERIC 



-44- 

50 



TEACHER RESOURCE 



113. Boston Indian Council. A^-Tea^h^ Training Manual on Native 

Afflei^tc<m^4 The ^ton^tds . 150 S- Huntington Ave., 3ama1ea 

Plains^ HA, 1982. 67 p. map- illus. biblio. 

Written with kindergarten through grade 5 as a target 
group^ this booklet contains a variety of introductory 
material about the rndlans indigenous to the Maine 
areai many of which are now living in our area. The 
booklet includes some good, basic introdactory 
information and ideas for teacher use about the 
subject of Indians. 



114. Council on Interracial Books for Children^ Unlearning Indian 
Stereotypes: A Teach4Tm Unit for Elementary Teachers and 
Cfr i 1 d r e n ' ^ ^1 bra afls^ . Write to the CIBC at: 1841 Broadway; New 
York, NY 100L3 

This is a packet of materials and sources to use in 
the classroom for examining, discussing and 
re-eyaluatihg attitudes to and associations with 
American Indians. 

115. Davids, Dorothy (Stockbridge-Hunsee/Mohegan) ; Gudinas, Ruth. 
Student Activities and Te acher Mat erial s^for^sg During the 
Thanksgiving Season . Madison, Wise: Madison Metropolitan 
Schools, c. 1979. 

This is a packet of Information about Thanksgiving to 
be used by teachers as a u?iit or to use in developing 
one's own activities. Helps to broaden one^s 
knowledge and awareness from the mythical "Pilgrims 
and Indians at their 'First Thanksgiving*" to a more 
realistic and universally traditional thanks-giving. 
(A) (Teacher resource) 

116. E.R.I.C. /CRESS 

ElaiheRoanhbrse Benally, resource person 
Box 3AP 

New Mexico Univ. 

Las Cruces, New Mexico 

A clearing house for information on education, this 
one covers Indian education. It has many papers and 




ERIC 



listings for many other materials available on the 
subject. Southern Connecticut State University has a 
collection on microfiche, as does UConn at Stbrrs, and 
there Is a collection In Bridgeport. Copies can be 
obtained by photocopying at the libraries, or writing 
to the publisher listed. These are for educators and 
can be used In many ways, sortie as guides, seme as 
mode is, and some as background Information. 



-46- 

o 

ERIC 



BIBLIOGRAPHIES 



117. Boston Indian Council. A Seml-Annotated Bibliography; The 
Wabahakls . 150 S. Huntington Ave., Jamaica Plains, HA, 1982. 51 
P- 

This bibliography *s focus Is on the Wabariaki 
Confederacy, Indigenous to the area In arid around 
Maine. Its choice of material roughly parallels 
ours. It has a g^ood sectlori of periodicals arid places 
to visit which broadens the ones we glve^ Some Items 
are listed here which are also gjrmalrie to a study of 
Connecticut Indians 1) because many Iridlans preseritly 
living In Connecticut are Wabariak , arid 2) the 
Wabanaki are of Algonquin stock as are the Indians 
Indigenous to this area. This Is appropriate to a 
study of "New Eriglarid" history. 



lis. Brumble, H. David, ill. Ari Aririotated B1 1 b1 ographv of Amer1 cari 
indlari and Eskimo Autobiographies . Urieolri: U. of Nebraska 
Press, 1981. 

A listing of 577^ autobiographical writlrigs by iridlans 
and Eskimos from the l7th ceritury to the late 2eth 
century., Brumble Includes full-length narratives, 

short art 1c 1 es , and s tatemen ts 1 oca ted 1 n 

anthropological reports. The author provides a 
description and analysis of each entry and Indicates 
paperback availability and suitability for high school 
readers. A tribal Index (including those of 
Connecticut) is particularly useful. 



119. Syler. Mary Sloyne (Eastern Cherokee). Amerlcari Iridlari Authors 
For Young Readers: A Selected Bibliography . New York: 
Association of American Indlari Affairs, 1973. 

A select bibliography narrowed from over 600 

candidates to a short list by Indian authors. Ms. 
Byler's foreword and Introduction are concise arid 
comprehensive, explaining her findings and conclusions. 

Thi s 1 s yal uabl e 1 n hel pi ng us to Become aware arid 
more sensi ti ve to ths di storti qns about Indians that 
appear in the media created by uninformed non-Indians. 



EKLC 



Me share the point of view about Ineltidlrig materials 
not ordinarily considered "for children" and concur 
when she says: 

"But In the oral tradition, those who have 
Information share It with those who do not; 
In this spirit then, It Is up to those who 
can read to embrace the oral tradition and 
share what they read with those who cannot. 
At this point _1n time It Is the only way 
very young children will be able to learn 
what American Indians are saying and writing 
about themselves." 



20. Haasi Marilyn. L. Indians of North America^ Methods and Sgt^c^s 
for AAWa ^sh Research . Hamden, GT: Shoestring Press, c. 1983. 
160 p. 

The first part of this book covers library usage: 
subject headings _ and classification systems^ The 
second part deals with search tools: Indexes, 
mlcrofdrms^ on-line data bases, abstracts, government 
documents, archives and manuscripts^ book catalogs, 
dictionaries, ^laridbdoRs, and dissertations. The third 
part Is an annotated bibliography of books on specific 
topics, most of them published since 1970^ subject 
bibliographies and standard works that provide a first 
slap Into a topic, from agriculture to legal problems, 
religion, treaties, and urban Indians. The titles are 
limited to those which cover many North American 
groups, but there Is ah additional bibliography of 
Individual tribes. 



. Hlrschfelder, Arlene^ American Indian Stereotypes^ 4Tt the^ -World 
of G;^44^refr: A Reader and Bibl lography . Meruchen, NJ: 
Scarecrow Press, 1982. 

Herein are reviews of great variety of books that 
Include materials oh Native Americans and essays about 
mahy aspects of literature and Information about 
origins of 5bme popular stereotypes. The book gives a 
good overview, some perspectives, and offers some 
specific discussloh of materials, from the Golden Book 
Dictionary to Counting Rhymes. 



"48- 



122- Hirschfelder, Arlene. Annotatgd Bibllbgrabhv of the Literature 

on A merican 4flilans Published In State Histori cal Society 

Pub14^art4ons: Wew^^w^l^nd and Middle Atlantic States . HI 1 Iwood 
NyT Kraus Internal 1; 1982. 356 p. subject, name, nation, place 
Indexes. 

Hirschfelder maps out articles on Indians In Journals 
and newsletters published by state historical 
societies 1n 11 New England and M1d-Atlant1c states. 
Bulk of material concerns Northeast, but some on wider 
area. Includes Connecticut references up to 1979, 
using the Bu^eHn of the Connecticut Historical 
Society and Collections of the Connecticut Historical 
So^ety . 1 ,182 entries, each having descriptive 
annotation of approximately 130 words. Cross Indexed 
under subject, person, place, title and Indian 
nation. The annotations are, in many Instances, 
Informative In themselves. Many of the Items listed 
are primary sources and others are good secondary 
sources. 



123. Hirschfelder, Arlene B., Mary Gloyne Byler, Michael A^ Dorrls- 
GtfWa- to Research North American Indians . Chicago: IL, 1983. 
330 p. map. cross Indexes. 

this blbllography^ has 1,100 entries of books, 
articles, government documents and miscellaneous 
sources with 250-400 word descriptions. It Includes 
subjects of archaeologyr land tenure, federal arid 
state relations, economics, urban life, religion, 
science, literature, philosophy, etc. 



124. Jennings, Francis, gen. ed. Bibliographical Series for the 
Newberry Library Center for the History of the American Indian, 
60 West Walton St., Chicago, IL, 60610. (See listings under 
individual author's names.) 



125. Prucha, Francis Paul. A^ibliographical Guide tr th e History of 
Ind^an^h lte Relations - In the tJnIted States . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1977. 454 p. Index. 

Available In paperback, this is a guide to literature 
ori American Indians that lists 9,705 entries on such 
topics as: Indian policy; military relations; land; 
trade; missionaries; Indian education and health; 
tribal histories; Indians and Blacks; Indian slavery; 
and economic developments. 



-49- 

55 



EKLC 



126. Prucha, Francis Paul. Ind1 ah -Wh 1 1 e Re 1 at i oh s^fl^ t^te-^l ted 
States^ A BW4^qr aphv of WorRs Pdbllshed 1975-l^aQ . Lincoln. 
NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1982. 179 p. Index. 

An update of Prucha '5 previous bibliography, this 
volume contains 3,400 additional titles. Both 
bibliographies list jaerlodlcal material concerning 
current Issues. 

127. Robinson, Barbara. Native Amerlrgn Source Book . Concord 
Antiquarian Museum^ 200 Lexington Rd., P.O. Box 146, Concord, HA 
01742. c. 1984. 

This Is a bibllograjjhy primarily for the Massachusetts 
area that lists resource people, films, books, etc. 
for that area. Hany of the llstjhgs are common to 
this area also. The majority of the books listed do 
not have annotations^ however It has a section of 
listings of curriculum materials of Interest to 
teachers . 

128. Salisbury, Neal, The Indians of New England^ A Critical 
BlbUsaEMM- Bloomlngton, IN: Indiana Univ. Press, 1982. 109 
p. 

This Is part of the Newberry Library Center for the 
History of the American Indian. It lists 257 titles 
and a bibliographical essay. A select list of works 
recommended by Salisbury for a basic library Is 
Included. 

129. Senungetuck, Vivian. P repared Native American Bibliographical 
HaterlaT^ ^m^tew Englan d Tribes For New England^J^^lafl^ask 
Force. Boston, HA: Boston U. Law School (material not available 
at time of entry). 

130. Stensland, Anna Lee. Lite rature by and Abou^^he^meflcan 
Inolaft^ ^n^^nnota ted Blblloaraphy . Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English, 1979. 382 p. Indexes. 

This book Is a really ambitious attempt to cover 
literature from all angles, for all of North America. 
Stensland and Anne H. Faddam have a biography section 
of Indian authors; a teacher's al^ds section for 
collecting and organizing curriculum materials and 



-50- 

58 



ERIC 



resources ; a bib1 1 ographic essay whi ch notes its 
references; a directory j)f publishers; an author and 
title Index; and the main bibliography, which is 
divided by type of material (fiction, myth. Biography, 
history, traditional life, modern life, and the arts), 
which is then divided by reading level. The selection 
of books is very broad, and as the author herself 
states, "Some books seem to present a one-sided or 
degrading picture of the Indian^ and we felt a bit 
uncomfortable about including them,,.1n an effort to 
determine which books offer accurate portrayals of 
Indian life, we have depended on reviews (by Indian 
scholars and Indian organizations) • " The result of 
this dependence, necessary for a work of this 
magnitude^ is a compromise of consistent evaluations, 
i.e., some material slipped by which lowered their 
selection standards considerably without it being 
noted. e.a.. One of the main sources is " About 
In dians ", which was a bibliography done by "Canadian 
University students, among them Indians" who didn't 
annotate all the books. The book has much usefulness 
in acquainting one with the field. One would be wise 
to check the appropriateness and value of specific 
items with other experts. 



131 . looker, Elizabeths Tfr^- Indi an^^f -the Itertfreas — A— 

Bibliography . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1978. 



Part of the Newberry Library Center for the History of 
the American Indian series. Lists 270 titles. 



132. Meatherford, Elizabeth. Na^t4v^ Affl^4 cans on Film and Vid e o . New 
York; Museum of the American Indian^ 1981. 151 p. index, biblio. 

This is an annotated list of about 400 films and 
videotapes about, American Indians. Host of the items 
discussed are of adult intereist, though some are for 
general audiences. 



EKLC 



-51- 

57 



CAVEAT LECTOR 
(READER BEWARE) 



133. Baker, Betty. Little Runner of the Longhouse . New York: 
Harper-Row, c. 1962. 

A beginning reader abojtJt some Indians In an activity 
that, to those unfamiliar with It, resembles 
Halloween. It Is not mentioned that these are the 
Iroquois, and that the activity looks like It's 
supposed to be the midwinter ceremony^ or _that the 
masks depicted have very special purposes. This Is a 
popular book that Is usually used by non-Indians at 
Halloween, which Is totally Inappropriate, Any person 
using the book should first learn aLout the midwinter 
ceremony; Its purposes ^ ritual > and symbol Isms. 
(GlUbbk gives some Information In The- Art of - th e 
Woodland Indians , see review.) (E, J) 



134. Bbnfariti, Leo. Biographies and Legends, of the New England 
Indians . Pride Publ., Inc.; Box 13, Wakefield, HA, 01880, 1968. 
Illus. 

yol. 1. 52 p. "Bibgraphlciil sketches of 17th century 
Indian leaders, plus_ brief chapters on the probable 
origins of the New England Indians (He expounds the 
theory of separate racial origins)... 

Vol. 2. 78 p. "Review of the causes that led to the 
start of the King Philip War, plus ah account of the 
first weeks of hostilities" (and "Depredations") 

Vol. 3. "Histories of the so-called Praying Indians 
arid the Nipmticks, arid ari account of the war in_ the 
Eoririectlcut Valley through the late fall of the first 
year. 

Vol. 4. The Colonies vs the Narragansetts . The Great 
Swamp Massacre. Death of King Philip 

Vol. 5. The "Eastern War" from September 1675 to 
August 1577. 

While Borifariti pririts a lot of details not commonly 
fourid, his controversial interpretations make the 
value of the work questionable. (A) 



-53- 

!i^J^f!^imbem page 



EKLC 



135. D'Aulalfe^ Ingr1 arid Edgar. Pocahontas , boubleday, 1946. 



One of the authors books about legendary figures, this 
book emphasizes the legend at the expense of 
historical accuracy. It carlcaturlzes and 
rbmahtlelzes the people Involved to heighten the 
Interest of the story. This Is very likely to give 
Children a Icitlng Impression of Powhatan and 
Pocahontas which may be difficult to correct later. 



136. Halliburton, Warren 3. The People of^wme&tifejri: . Norwalk GT- 
Connecticut Yankee Publ . , 1984. 192 p. Index, glossary. 

Hahy people think that it is the old books with the 
old ethnbeeritrisms that are the most destructive arid 
that the new books are better because Society knows 
better riow. No such generalization can be made. Some 
bid books done by clear thinking, honest Witnesses or 
done by evenhanded thorough researchers through 
primary soiirces are valuable today; while some new 
books carelessly researched and callously handled are 
better left on the shelf. This book, judging by the 
cover ,^ aj3pears to be just what the teacher ordered — 
a small book that covers everything. Tn the four-page 
Chapter devoted to Indians, the topics are (1) "They 
distrusted brie another and often fought for land on 
which to hunt...." p. 8 (2) "The Native Americans did 
little farmirig. The men thought that only the raising 

of tobacco was worthy of them " p. 8 (3) 

"Sometimes men lost ajl their property by bettlrig." 
p. 9 (4) "Sometimes the chlldreri grew spoiled because 
few were ever disciplined." p. 10 The author's choice 
of topic is questionable. Why did he choose to 
preserit these at al and riOt some other topics? His 
preseritation of the topics Is quite unbalanced and but 
of proper context because: 1. All countries have 
cbrifllcts with ojher countries; 2. The Native 
Americaris did farm^ It was Squarito who taught the 
Erigllshmeri, remember? 3. The Native American sense 
of property Is quite different than that of the 
European, so to Jose one's property to another Iridlan 
was riot the same as losing one's property to a 
Europeari. 4. Discipline actually means tralnlrig, 
from the word discjple. The way this Is accomplished 
is differerit Iri the Indian and European cultures; 
Indian is more internally Imposed and European more 
externally imposed. Indeed Europeans have come to 




equate discipline with vyxternal .Impositions of 
punishment and deprlysit Juns, whVie Indians are 
motivated to learn less^: r s from explorations arid 
observations. The author-j Information was appareritly 
gained mainly from Deforest. (Y) 



137. Speare, Elizabeth. Calico Ca^ tiv^ . c. 1957. 

This historical fiction story Is based on a true 
experience of Susanna 3ohnson and her family, who were 
captured by Indians In August of 1754 from 
Charlestown, New Hampshire. They were brought to 
Montreal^ where they were held by the French, as It 
was during time of the Frenchand Indian War, and were 
finally released after_ lengthy negqtlatlqris. The 
primary account, written by Susanna herself, and an 
excellent account by her daughter differ 1ri mariy 
respects with the story by Mrs. Speare- Hariy 
Incidents showing kindness and corislderatlori by the 
Indians are omitted by Mrs. Speare, and many of the 
difficult aspects of the journey are distorted to show 
the Indians to be mean. The^ stay 1ri Montreal and the 
treatment afforded the family by the French Is 
minimized by Mrs. Speare, though this part of their 
captivity was actually lenghtlest and most difficult. 
The accounts can be found at the Yale Uriiversity 
Library, and probably at the State Library^ Jri an 
Interview with Mrs. Speare, she stated that her 
primary goal in writing this story was to have ari 
exciting adventure story about a girl , rather than ari 
accurate account, and so the changes were made to 
heighten the sensational ism, making it more dangerous, 
the Indians more hostile and thus our heroine more 
heroic than was true. To have this book used on its 
own as educational literaturt is an Injustice to the 
Indians involved as well as to historical truth. If 
the primary sources are used first arid then this 
account is compared and analysed, we may learn about a 
whole genre of literature, which may Indeed be a very 
educational experience for students in critical 
reading. (Y) 




ERIC 



AUTHOR INDEX 



This Index Includes wr1t^^^ It <1oes not Include 

audiovisual material nor the resource people and places. The Item 
number after the title In foil ow^^^ list refers to the corresponding 
number In the detailed bibliography. 

Aliki 

Corn Is Haize: The Gift of the Indians (48) 

Apes, Hllllarr. (Pequot) 

A 5jn of the Forest: The Experience of William Apes, A Native of 
the Forest (104) 

Armstrong, Virginia 

I Have Spoken: American History Through the Voices of the 
Indians (50) 

Axtell, 3ames, editor 

1 . The Indian Peoples of Eastern America: A Bocumentary History 
of the Sexes (20) 

2. The European & the Indians - Essays In Ethhohl story of 
Colonial North America (51 ) 

3. Native American Peoples of the East (21) 

Baker, Betty 

LtttTe-fiunimr the Lori^house (Caveat) (133) 

Bales, Carol 

Ke^1n^-C4oud> Cheppewa Boy in^the City (22) 



-57- 

61 

Jh« fm'mt numbered pai 

O 

ERIC 



Barbour, Philip L. 

Pocah ontas an d^ Her Worl d (23) 

Baylor, Byrd 

Parnall, Peter 

The ether Way to Listen (52) 
Bee, Robert 

The Politics of Amer ican Indian Poli cy (53) 

Berkhbfer, Robert F., Or. 

The White H a n ' r -Ind4afi^ Images o f the American Indian From 

Columbus to the Present (54) 

Borifariti , teo 

Biographi e s and Legends o^ ^e Mew Englan d Indians (Caveat) (134) 

Brown, Joseph Epes 

Spiritual Lega cy of the Am e rl ^^-Indlan (55) 

Brumble, H. David, III 

M A nnotated Blbliogi^agfty^ of Am erican Indian and Eskimo 

Autobiographies (118) 

Byler, Mary Sidyne (Eastern Cherokee) 

American Indian Author^f w^ Young R e ad e rs (119) 

Cass, James 

Ekahoton the Cofflai^ ^r. Ind ians of the Eastern Woodlands (24) 

Copway, George (Ojlbway) 

1. Indian Life & History (106) 



^58- 

62 

EKLC 



2; The Trad1t16ria1 History & Churaeter1st1c Sketches of the 



ailbway Nation (105) 



Council on interracial Books for Ghlldren 

Unlgarnjng Indian Stereotypes; A Teaching Unit for Elementary 
Teachers and Ghlldren's Librarians (114) 

Cronon, Edward 

Changes 1n the Land: Indians. Colonists arid the Ecology of New 
England (12) 

Callri, Stewart 

Games of the North American Iridlans (56) 

Curtis, Natalie 

The Indians' Book (57) 

balgllesh, Alice 

The Courage of Sarah Noble (1 ) 

D'AulaIre, Irigri arid Edgar 

Pocahoritas (Caveat) (135) 

Davids, Dorothy (Stockbrldge-Hdrisee/Mohegari) 
Gudlnas, Ruth 

St4id^nt Activities arid Teacher Materials for Use Durlrig the 
Thanksgiving Season (115) 

DeForest, John 

History of the Iridlaris of Coririectlcut From the Earliest Knowri 
Period to 1856 (2) 



-59- 

63 



Oeloria, Vine Jr. (Sioux) 

1. Ciister Died for Yodr Sins: An Indian Manifesto (58) 

2. The Indian Affairs (59) 

Oensmbre, Frances 

How Indians Use Wild Plants for Food, Hed4c4^e-&-&r^#te (25) 

dockstader, Frederick J. (Oneida) 

^reat— Worth American Indians: Profiles in Life and L©ad^sfrt& 
(60) ' 

Dorian, Edith 

Hokahev! American Indians Then and Now (61) 

Eastman, Charles (Sioux) 

1. Indian Boyhood (6?) 

2. ft^^ the Deep Woods to Civil ^ nation (63) 

3. ThB Soul of the Indian: Ah h ^'^roLejatjon (64) 

E.R. I.e. /CRESS 

Benally, Elaine Roanhorse (116) 

Fenton, William N., editor 

Parker on the Iroquois; Writings of Art hur Park^ ( 26) 

Glubok, Shirley 

Ar^^ the Woodland Indians ( 27 ) 

Gookin, Daniel 

1. H44t^r1cal Collections of the Indians of New England (107) 



-60- 

64 



2. Ail Historical AccHpyfi^ -df^ ^ h e Ddliigs and Sufferings o f— tti^ 
CtHMs^t4 ^n Indians 4iH^tew -En^T^nd In the Years 167 3^1^14>. 
1677 (108) 

Grlnde^ Donald A- (Yamasee) 

The Irbdiiols and the Founding of ^he AmeM^an-Pta%4w (28) 

Gulliete, Mary Sbulsby 

American Indians 1n Connecticut; Past and Present (3) 

Haas, Harllyn L. 

Indians of _North America: Methods and Soiir^es- #e^^^t^4^ra4^ 
Research (120) 

Harrington, H.R. 

1. The Indians of New Jersey: Dickon Among the Lenape (29) 

2. The Iroquois Trail: A Story of American Ihdlail Life If) 
Colonial Times fDlckon Among the Onandagas afld^Seneoas4 (30) 

Heckewelder, 3ohh 

1 . History. Manners,, an d Customs of the Indian ^aat4 dns Khd O ftce 
Inhabited Pennsylva n ia and-the-He^^Wd rlng Stat es (109) 

2. Narrative of the r>1^s s^1^r^ -%h^--lJn4^ t e d Br ^thren ^ffl^ng-tfre^ 
Delaware and Ho iiega^ -Tiitf^^tf^ (110) 

Henry, Edna ( N1pmuck-C;-^rbki^ J 

Native American Cooi ^ ook f /i) 

Hirschfelder, Arlerie 

1 . American Iridl^ ^ S^-^r/o:^^;^:; in :? World of C ft Hdren: A 

Reader and BibT i 'isr^iX H « ^ ' 

2. An notated Bibllu^r aphv ,,J_^:: ' lU-r ature on America r. Indians 

Published in STii ^^/^^^i^tor ^ "^o ciotV Publicatidfiri: New 

England and Middle A ^Tc^^^n St^' 1 ) 22) 



-61- 

EKLC 



Hirschfelder, Arlene B., Mary Gloyhe Byler, and Michael A. Dorrls, 
Guide to^ Research on Wort hh American Indians (123) 

Hodge, Frederick M. , ed. 

Handbook s American Ifidlans North of Hexicb (65) 

Hofslnde, Robert 

1. The Indians^ Secret W orld (66) 

2. Indians^ ai4ioin& (67) 

Hudeh, John c, compiler 

India n Place Na mes^^New England (14) 

Hughes, Arthur H. and Allen Horse 
Conne cticut Place Na mes (4) 

Jennings, Francis 

The InyasVon of Ameri ca; Indians. Colonialism, and the C ant o f 
Conquest (68) 

Jennings, Francis, gen. ed. 

BWIographlcal Series . The Newberry Lib.ary Center for the 
History of the American Indian (124) 

Johnston, Basil (Ojlbway) 

1. d.liB wav Heritage (31) 

2. tales th^ Elders Told (32) 

Josephy, Alvin M. Jr. 

Now that ^fcbe ^ Buf^aT»Ls Gone; A Study of Today's Ame rican 
Indians (69) 




Keieher. Brendan S. arid Trudy Ray Lamb (Schaghtlcdke) 

Amerlcari Indians 1n Eonnectlcut: A Report A Statew1 4^-Cwsus 
(5) 

Kimball, Yeffe (Qsage) 
Aridersori, Jean 

The Art of American Indian CooMng ( 70) 



Lagerqulst, Sybil 

Philip Johnston arid the Navalo Code Talkers (71) 

Lavlne, Luclarme 

Prehistory of Coririectlcut ' s Native Americans (5) 

Leach. Douglas E. 

Flintlock and Tomahaw '- New England Ink ing P hilip's Iffer (15) 

Leitch, Barbara 

A Concise Dictionary of Iridlan Tribes of North Americ a (72) 

Linton. Ralph 

We Gather Together (73) 

Logari, Adelpheria (Qriandaga) 

Memories of Sweet Grass (34) 

Love. W. DeLoss 

Sams^n-bccom arid the Chrlstlari Iridlaris of New England (16) 

Lyons. Oren (Onandaga) 
Ooa Story (35) 



-63- 

67 

EKLC 



HcLdhan, T*C* 

Touch ttie ^arth: A S elf -■Portrait of Indian Existence (74) 

Marriott, Alice and Carol Rachllh 

American Epic: T he Sto r y of the American Indian (7) 

Minor, Marz and Nohd Minor, 

The Ameri can Indian Craft Book (76) 

Moeller, Roger W. 

1- Guide to imA^x) Artifacts of the Northeast (36) 

2. — ^ -Pa4^o-Ind1an Site In Western Connecticut (7) 

Molloy, Ann 

Waiiiwm (37) 

National Geographic Society 
m^U of the American Indian (83) 

Nelhardt, John 

Black El k-Sb fi -ks (78) 

Orcutt, Samuel 

I ndians of the Housatorilc and Naugatuck Va44evs^ (8) 




Parker, Arthur C. (Seneca) 

1. The Indian How Book (38) 

2. Skunnv Hun dV: Seneca Indian Tales (39) 

Pine, Time S. 

The Indla ft^ r>neW (79) 




•64- 



68 



EKLC 



Poatgleter, Hermina 

Indian begacy: Native American Influences on World Life and 
eulture (80) 

Prtieha, Francis Paul 

1. A Bibliographical 6u1de to the History of the Indian-White 
Relations In the United States (125) 

2. Indian-White Relations In the United States: A Bibliography 
of Works Published 197:>-1989 (126) 

Reader ' s Digest 

Guide to America's Fascinating Indian Heritage (49) 

Russel 1 , Howard S. 

Indian New England Before the Mayflower (17) 

Salisbury, Neal 

The Indians of New England: A Cr it ical Bibllog.aphy (128) 

Sanders, Thomas E. (eherok;-e) and Walter W. Peek 
(Narragansett/Wampanoag) 

biterature of the American Indian (81 ) 

Schoolcraft lienry Rowe 

Legends of the American Indians (41) 

3enungetuc!\. Vivian 

Prepar e_d Native American BlbllogracMyfCal MaterU js or; He\^ England 
T ribes for New England Indian Task _f_o_rce (129) 

Slegel , Beatr ice 

1 . Fur Trappers and T /aders: The I nd1an:i the Pil grims and the 
Beav-^r (18) 

2. Indians of the Woodlands (42) 



Snake, Sam (Ojibway). Coatswerth, Emerson and David (compilers) 
T^ie^ventures of Nanbush: Bjibway Indian stories (43) 

Speare, Elizabeth 

Calico C aptive (Caveat) (137) 

Stensland, Anna Lee 

Literature -by^ and About the American Indian: An Anftot at^ 

BitT4wj-^why^ (130) 

Tamarin, Alfred 

We^ Jave W q% - Vanish e d (44) 

Tantaquidgeon, Gladys (Mdhegan) 

foti<-Hed^cine of t he Delaware and Related Algonkian-^ff^iaf^^ (45) 

Tomkins, William 

I ndian Sign Lan guage (82) 

Towns hend, Charles 

The Quinn ipiack-Xfld4^n^^aftd^ Their Reservation (111) 

Tooker, Elizabeth 

The^4n44^ ns^H3f the Northeast: A Critical Bibliography (131) 

Trigger, Bruce G., editor 

Ha^boo*^^o^#Qrth American Indians, Vol. 15 ( 46 ) 

Trumbull, James Hammond 

Indi^j^Na mes in C onnecticut (9) 



-66- 

70 



Vlereck, Pfimip 

The New Land: Discovery. Exploration, and Early Settlement of 
Northeastern United States. From the Earliest Voyages to 1621. 
Told In the Words of the Explorers Themselves. (47) 

Volght, Virginia 

1. Hoheqan Chief: Story of ehlef Harold Tahtaquldgeoh (19) 

2. Uncas: Sachem of the ifJolf People (11) 

Weatherfbrd, Elizabeth, ed. 

Native Americans on Fll^n g-^ : (132) 

Wilbur, e. Keith 

th e New England Indians (19) 

William:^, Roger 

A key Into the Language of America (112) 



ERIC 



-67- 7^ 



State ef Cehheeticut 
Department of Education 



Divisibii of Educaiibii Siippert Services 
Robert I. Maryolin, Director 

Bureau of School and Program Bevelbpiheht 

Williarn J. Gauthier, Jr, Chief 

Albert A. Alexander, Consultant 

Staff 

Santa Colon 



Velhia A. Adams, Editor 



ERIC 



