DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 312 019 JC 890 529 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTOR? 



IDENTIFIERS 



Anderson, Gwendolyn; Ewing, Dessa 

A Multicultural Sequence of Humanities Electives. 

9 Nov 89 

18p.; Paper presented at the National Conference of 
the Community College Humanities Association 
(Washington, DC, November 9-11, 1989). 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Reportr - 
Descriptive (141) — Reference Materials - 
Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Community Colleges; ^Cultural Awareness; Cultural 

Exchange; ^Curriculum Enrichment; Elective Courses; 

*Ethnic Studies; ^Humanities Instruction; 

* Literature; ^Minority Groups; * Multicultural 

Education; Two Year Colleges 

*Delaware County Community College PA 



ABSTRACT 

In order to promote multi-cultural literacy among its 
students, Delaware County Community College (DCCC) developed a 
multi-cultural sequence of humanities electives. The sequence emerged 
as a response to the predominantly White student body's lack of 
knowledge or curiosity about other cultures. The first of the four 
courses in the sequence is entitled "Women in Literature," a 
team-taught course focusing on the works of women authors from four 
American ethnic groups: African Americans, Native Americans, 
Chicanas, and Asian Americans. The second course, entitled 
"Literature: The Minority View," focuses on the literature of a 
different cultural group during each of three semesters, beginning 
with Black authors in America, followed by Asian American and and 
Central/South American literature. The remaining two courses were 
deliberately designed to broaden students 1 cultural perspective. 
"Myths of Our Western Culture" uses literature, film, music, dance, 
and visual art to explore cultural myths and their changing relevance 
to society. The final course in the sequence, currently under 
development, will explore the social, cultural, economic, and 
political contributions of Hispanic peoples. DCCC intends to 
supplement this four-course sequence with interdisciplinary courses 
and a variety of extracurricular cultural activities, such as clubs 
and ethnic food festivals. Bibliographies for each of the four 
courses are attached. (JMC) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



A MULTICULTURAL SEQUENCE OF HUMANITIES ELECTIVES 



by Dr. Gwendolyn Anderson & Dr. Dessa Ewing 

Professors 
Delaware County Communi ty Col lege 



Paper presented at the National Conference of the 
Community College Humanities Association 
November 9-3 1 , 1989 



Washington/ D. C. 



"PFRMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



US DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OMtct« of Educational Research and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC! 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



G. 



Anderson & 



i This document has betn reproduced as 



received from the person or organisation 



D. Ewing 




Minor changes have been made to improve 
'teproductton quality 



• Points of view or optmons staled tnthisdocu 
ment do not ..ccessa'ily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



2 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Multicultural Literacy 
Session 7 



Gwendolyn Anderson and Dessa Ewing 
Delaware County Community College, PA 



A Multicultural Sequence of Humanities Electives 



If there is a commitment on the part of the college to promote 
the development of multi-cultural literacy among its students, what 
are some ways that this might be done? For four of us at Delaware 
County Community College, this meant a first step of getting togeth- 
er informally, talking, taking a look at what we were teaching or 
would be offering, and doing it. So, our group, consisting of Pro- 
fessors Dessa Ewing, George Spillane, Gerry Fisher, and Gwen Ander- 
son, did just that. First we looked at our population. Delaware 
County Community College is a suburban community college located 
approximately 20 miles outside of Philadelphia. The student popula- 
tion, as of September, 1989, is roughly as follows: 

89.7% Caucasian 
5.0% African Americans 

4.0% Other: Greek, French, Afghan, Egyptian, Liberian, Ethio- 
pian, Native of sierra Leone 

•8% Asian: Japanese, Filipino, Chinese, Natives of Hong Kong, 
Taiwanese, Malaysian, Vietnamese, Kampuchean 

.3% Hispanic: Mexican, Puerto Rican, Venezuelan, Brazilian 
.1% Native American 

Those of us who have direct contact with and responsibility for 
-thenon-native population observed that these students were eager to 
become familiar with the U.S. and its people and anxious to become 
part of the fabric. Our "home grown" population shows an appalling 
lack of knowledge about other cultures, exhibits very little curios- 
ity about others, and seems totally unaware that their level of 
ignorance is so deep. Yet, our number of non-native students rises, 



ERIC 



-2- 

albeit incrementally, steadily. We felt that there was much to 
learn for all students in the area of multi-cultural understanding; 
everyone could benefit, but our American students needed to see the 
value of ot'.ier cultures and to be sensitized to the validity of 
others . 

In practice, there was no consistent offering of multi-cultural 
courses available to students, although "Women in Literature" and 
"Myths of Our Western Culture" had been offered in the past. 

When I decided to offer "Women in Literature," this time I 
wanted it to be appealing and non-threatening. When it was first 
offered in 1984, it was feminist in theme. It was a team effort, 
taught by three professors. In its current incarnation, it is 
minority in theme. The base text is "The Third Woman: Minority Women 
Writers of the United States," edited by Dexter Fisher. Women 
writers from four groups are treated: African American, Native 
American, chicana, and Asian American. It was considered important 
to focus on American writers because students were almost 
universally unaware of the literature of these minority groups who 
share the continent with them. Additionally, we share anecdotal 
experiences; we read articles, novels, short stories, and poems 
put on reserve in the Library; we attend off -campus programs having 
to do with women and their place in our society, and we view the 
perceptions of women through these writers' works as well as 
perceptions of women held by the cultures under study. We try to 
see the commonalty of experiences shared by the target group of 
writers. And, students look to their own ethnic groups and relate 
treatment/position of women to what they are shown through the "win- 
dows" created by the writers. 



0 

ERJC 



-3- 



Our colleague, Professor George Spillane, developed a 
literature course "Literature: The Minority View." It is intended 
to revolve around three groups for the first three semesters. It is 
to be offered for African American, Asian American, and 
Central/South American literature. George began with "Black 
American Literature." This is a survey course which "traces the 
development of Black authors in America. . .and is a discussion of 
literary figures and thematic patterns which have distinguished the 
development of this unique literature." 

In addition to Black Literature and Women in Literature, we 
have two other courses deliberately designed to broaden our 
students' cultural perspective. Those two courses are "Myths of our 
Western Culture," recently developed and now being taught for the 
second time, and "Hispanic Culture," now under development. 

The Mythology course, listed as a humanities elective, uses 
literature, film, music, dance, and visual art to explore myths and 
their changing relevance to society. The primary readings of the 
course include Greek mythology and drama, Native American and 
African folk takes, "Romeo and Juliet," "Beowulf," and Mary 
Shelley's novel Frankenstein. The films used with the course 
include the uncut version of the 1931 "Frankenstein," the Zefferelli 
"Romeo and Juliet," a videotape of the Nuryev/Fonteyn/Fracci 
performance of Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet," Chaplin's "Modern 
Times," and selections from the TV series "The Power of Myth" with 
Joseph Campbell and Bill Moyers. Videotapes are also available 
which present Greek and Roman Myths and the Greek epic in an 
accessible but not condescending format. 



ERIC 



[3 



To introduce the students to music, we use a variety of 
selections ranging from the rock group Marillon's "Grendel" to the 
Tchaikovsky "Romeo and Juliet" overture, the Navajo Hoop Dance, 
Offenbach's "Orpheus in the Underworld" overture, Milhaud's jazz 
"Creation of the World," and excerpts from the Prokofiev ballet seen 
in class. Identification of these works is part of the final 
examination, so I provide tapes of them for the students to copy 
(using Learning Center facilities which copy foreign language tapes) 
and the students are able to copy and listen repeatedly to the 
music. 

The literature is read and discussed in class, using much the 
same approach as in a literature class, but supplemented with the 
music and with slides appropriate to the subject. Discussion of 
Eros and Psyche necessarily precedes "Romeo and Juliet," and various 
artists' rendering of these famous lovers proves enlightening in a 
variety of ways. A guided tour of mythological subjects in the 
Philadelphia Museum of Art is also a required part of the course; 
students are given a packet containing a map of the museum with 
mythological items keyed to a list, commentary, and questions. 

The Frankenstein novel and its variations in film are studied 
as a response to the question of what we will do about technology. 
Dedalus is seen as a progenitor of science and technology, and the 
students evaluate why Shelley subtitled her novel "The Modern 
Prometheus." Chaplin's "Modern Times" concludes the semester by 
showing man at the mercy of technology, overcoming only with love 
and sense of humor. 

Our fourth course to be presented is the Hispanic Culture 
Course being developed by our colleague professor Gerry Fisher. Her 



-5- 



starting point is that most community college students will not go 
on to study foreign literature in depth, but many will have an 
opportunity or need to communicate with Spanish speakers because of 
travel or business. she emphasizes in the foreign language courses 
the students' ability to use the language rather than to know about 
it. Since our student's own cultural reference point is often 
limited, an increasing awareness and appreciation of the target 
culture is stressed within the foreign language classroom. 

In response to those limitations, Professor Fisher is currently 
developing a three-credit course that will explore the social, 
cultural, economic and political contributions of the Hispanic 
peoples. offered in English, this humanities elective will support 
our efforts to expose our students to the intellectual and cultural 
differences beyond their immediate frame of reference and provide a 
global perspective. This course has obvious applicability both to 
those community college students leaving after two years to join the 
work force and to those who transfer to a four-year institution. 
Its value can be practical — to the business person who has 
international contacts— as well as cultural— to the community member 
who seeks enrichment. 

With these four humanities electives, then— African American, 
Women in Literature, Mythology, and Hispanic culture—we are 
attempting to address the cultural limitations of our students. We 
are not entirely satisfied, however, that the offering of electives, 
and requiring certain courses of our graduates, sufficiently 
broadens our students. 

Therefore, in addition to these courses, we are proposing the 
development of a series of truly interdisciplinary, one-credit 



t 



-6- 



courses which address the needs and limitation of our particular 
student body. Further, we wish to coordinate the cultural 
enrichment of our students by a variety of activities such as a 
Conversation club (particularly helpful for ESL students) ; an 
International Students' Club; an Ethnic Foods Festival; a variety of 
concerts on campus (ranging from Gospel to Native American to Irish 
harp) ; shows in the Art Gallery featuring Asian, Puerto Rican, and 
Native American artists. 

In these ways, we hope to address the challenge set down by 
Lynne Cheney in 50 Hours and to broaden our own awareness,, that of 
our colleagues, and that of our students. We hope the attached 
bibliography of these four courses will give other participants 
ideas for incorporation of diverse ethnic and cultural materials 
into courses. Even more, we hope to hear from you any good ideas we 
might incorporate into our program. We should all be educating the 
World Citizen. How can we plan and work together to that end? 



ERIC 



Professor Gwendolyn Anderson 
Liberal Arts 

Delaware County Community College 
Media, PA 19063 



ENGLISH 292: "Women in Literature" 
Bibliography 



All, Amina Susan. "Memories of Her." Cuentos; stories bv Latinas , 
Cherrie Moraga and Mariana Romo-Carmona, Eds., NY: Kitchen Table 
Women of Color Press, 1983. 

Bell, Roseann R. Visions of Black Women in Literature . New York: 
Anchor Press, 1979. 

Cahill, Susan, ed. New Women and New Fiction: short Stories Since 
the Sixties. New York: The New American Library, 1986. 

Cahill, Susan, Ed. Women and Fiction . Volume II. New York: The New 
American Library, 1986. 

Cahill, Susan, ed. Women and Fiction: Short stories bv and About 
Women. New York: The New American Library, 1986. 

Ferguson, Mary Anne, ed. Images of Women in Literature . Boston: 
Houghton-Mifflin, 1981. 

Green, Rayna. "Native American Women." signs . Vol. 6, No. 2, Winter 
1980 (Review Essay) . 

Iverson, Lucille and Kathryn Ruby. We become New— Poems bv Contem- 
porary American Women. New York: Bantam, 1975. 

Jordon, June. "From Sea to Shining Sea." Home Girls: A Black Femi- 
nist Anthology, ed., Barbara Smith. NY: Kitchen Table Press, 1983. 

Kolodny, Annette. The Land Before Her: Fantasy and Experience of 
Amer ican Frontiers, 1630-1860 . chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 1984. 

Krieger, Susan. "Lesbian Identity and Community: Recent Social 
Science Literature." Signs , Vol. 8, No. 1, Autumn 1982. 

Leacock, Eleanor. "Society and Gender." Mvths of Male Domination . 
NY: Monthly Review Press, 1981. 

Marshall, Paule. :i You Don't Even Act Colored." Brown Girl, Brown- 
Stones , selection reprinted from Immigrant Women r ed., Maxine S. 
Seller. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981. 

Maruyama, Magorah. "I Am Proud of Being Japanese." Immigrant Women , 
ed., Maxine S. Seller. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981. 

McCarthy, Mary. The Company She Keeps . New York, 1952. 

Mirande, Alfredo and Evangelina Enriquez. "Work, Education, and the 
Chicana. La Chicana. Chicago: University of Chicago, 1979. 



Moraga, Cherrie. "Pesadilla . " Cuentos; Stories by Latinas . eds., 
Alma Gomez, Cherrie Moraga and Mariana Romo-Carmona . NY: Kitchen 
Table Women of Color Press, 1983. 

Pescatello, Ann M. "Latina Liberation: Tradition, Ideology, and 
Social Change in Iberian and Latin american Cultures." Liberating 
Women's History, ed. , Berenice Carroll. Urbana: University of 
Illinois, 1972. 

Randall, Margaret. Cuban Women Now , The Women's Press, 1974. 

Rich, B. Ruby. "Feminism and Sexuality in the 1980 's." Feminist 
Studies. 12, NO. 3 (Fall 1986), pp. 525-561. 

Rosaldo, M.Z. "The Use of Abuse of Anthropology: Reflections on 
Feminism and Cross-cultural Understanding." signs . Vol. 5, No. 3, 
Spring 1980, pp. 389-417. 

Sherif, Carolyn Wood. "Bias in Psychology." The Prism of Sex . Eds., 
Julia A. Sherman and Evelyn Torton Beck. Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press, 1977. 

Viezzer, Moema, Let Me S peak! Testimony of Domitila. A Woman of the 
Bolivia n Mines . Monthly Review Press, February 1979. 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



Much of this first bibliography is owed to Dr. Judith L. Johnston's 

Integrating Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Class" Anthology compiled 
during the New Jersey Project Summer Institute, 1987. 



Additional Bibliography: "Women in Literature" 



Atwood, Margaret, "That certain Thing Called the Girlfriend," The 
New Yor k Tiroes Book Review . May 11, '86, p. l. 

Beckett, Wendy, Contemporary Women Writers . 

Beer, Patricia, Reader. I Married Him . PR 115.84. 

Cahill, Susan, Ed., Women a nd Fiction: short Stories bv and About 
Women t — New American Library, New York, and Scarborouqh, 
Ontario, 1975. 

2ahill, Susan, ed. , Women and Fiction 2; More of the Finest Short 
Stories by Women Writers From Around the G1 obe , New American 
Library, New York and Scarborough, Ontario, 1978. 

Chafe, William H., The Amer ican Woman; Her Changing Social. Econom- 
ic, and political Roles. 1920-I970 r Oxford University Press, 
London, Oxford, New York, 197 6. 

Cornelisen, Ann, Women of the Shadows, Random House, New York, 1976. 

Evans, Mari, ed. , Black Women Writers - iqsn-igan, Anchor Press/ 
Doubleday, Garden City, New York, 1984. 

Figes, Eva, Sex and Subterfuge: Women Writers to 1 850. pr m F54 
1988). ' 

Folsora and Kirschner, By Women: An Anthology of Literature . Boston: 
Houghton-Mifflin Co. , 1976. 

Gilbert and Gubar, No Man's Lard. PR 116.65 (1987). 

Hoy, Schor, DiYanni, Women's Voices: Visions and Perspectives . New 
York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 1990. 

Johnson, R.B. , The Women Novelists. PR 115. J6 (1967). 

Kanble, Frances Ann, Journal of a Residence on a Georgi an Plantation 
in 1838-1839, edited by J. A. Scott, Brown Thrasher Books, 
University of Georgia Press, 1984. 

Kblbert, Elizabeth, "Literary Feminism Comes of Age," The New Yo rk 
Times Magazine . Dec. 6 '87, p. 110 

Lasefiel, Muriel, Women Novelists from Fannv Burnev to George Eliot 
PR 111.M25 (1967) . 

Iawrenoe, Margaret, The School of Femininity , pr 115. L35 (1966). 

Tfifkowitz, Mary R, "The Heroic Woman of Greek Epic, " Ameri can 
Scholar . Autumn, '87, p. 503. 

Montgomery, Margaret, "The Value of Their Lives," English Journal 
March '85, p. 63. ' 



1.. 



Nornhold, Susan E. , Portrait of a Woman; a Predictable Drama. 

O'Brien, Edna, "Why Irish Heroines Don't Have to be Good Anymore," 
The New York Times Book Review . May 11, '86, p. 13. 

Price, Reynolds, "Men Creating Women," The New York Times Rook 
Review . Nov. 9, '86, p. 1. 

Prose, Francine, "Men Who Read Women's Minds," Savvy, Aug. '88, 
p» 18 • 

Scable, Fran Norris, "In Search of the Female Hero: Juliet Revisit- 
ed," English Journal , Feb. '86, p. 85. 

Schulz, Clair, "Recanmended: Shirley Ann Grair," English Journa l. 
Feb. '86, p. 95 

Showalter, Elaine, A Literature of Their Own . PR 115.15. 

Spachs, P.M. editor. Contemporary Women Novelists , PR 116. C8. 

Springer, Marlene, editor. What Manner of Woman? New York 
University Press, 1977. 

White, Deborah Gray, Ar'n't I A Woman? w.W. Norton & Company, 
New York London, 1987. 



eric 



la 



Professor Dessa Ewing 
Liberal Arts 

Delaware County Community College 
Media, PA 19063 



MX'THS OF OUR WESTERN CULTURE 
Bibliography 

Required Reading: 

Beowulf . Trans. Burton Raff el. NAL/NACS, 19. ISBN 0-451-62627-3. 
(John Gardner's Grendel is recommended, and most students read 
it. ) 

Campbell, Joseph and Bill Moyers. The Power of Mvth . Doubleday, 
1988. ISBN 0-385-24774-5. (Selections of the videotapes are 
viewed in conjunction with the text.) 

Hamilton, Edith. Mythology . NAL/NACS, 1971. ISBN 0-451-61697-9. 

Shakespeare, William. Romeo and Juliet . Washington Square Press/ 
NACS, 19. ISBN 0-671-41311-2. (Coupled with Pyramus and 
Thisbe, Eros and Psyche, ate. from the Hamilton). 

Shelley, Mary. Frankens tein: Or. The Modern Promet heus. NAL/NACS, 
19 . ISBN 0-451-51132-8. (Linked with Dedalus as well as 
Prometheus; also the question of technology is investigated with 
Jacob, Rachel, and Leah — surrogate motherhood — and Margaret 
Atwood's Handmaid's Tale as suggested reading.) 

Welty, Endora. The Wci-n Path . (short story) . 

Excerpts from the following: 

Abrahams, Roger. African Folktales . New York: Pantheon, 1983. 

Allen, Paula Gunn, ed. Spider Woman's Granddaughters: Traditional 
Tales and Contemporary Writ i ng bv Native American Wo men . 
Beacon Press, 1989. " 

Bible. Genesis: Creation; Jacob, Rachel, and Leah. 

Lopez, Barry Hoi stun. Giving Birth to Thunder. Sleeping with his 
Daughter: — Coyote Builds No rth America . New York: Avon, 1977. 

Videotapes (kept on reserve in the library) : 

The Power of Mvth r Joseph Campbell and Bill Moyers. 
Prokofiev. Romeo and Juliet , ballet with Nureyrv, 

Fonteyn, and Fracci. 
Greek and Roman Myths r Films for Humanities. 
The Greek Epic r Films for Humanities. 
Frankenstein, dir. James Whale, uncut 1931 edition. 
Romeo and Jul jet, dir. Franco Zeffirelli, 1968. 
Modern Times , dir. Charles Chaplin, 1936. 

Music: Milhaud, "Creation du Monde" 

Offenbach, "Orpheus in the Underworld" overture 
Tchaikovsky, "Romeo and Juliet" overture 
Prokofiev, "Romeo and Juliet" ballet 



Myths of our Western Culture: Supplemental Reading (for papers and 
oral seminar presentation) 



Creation and the Pantheon - 

Jean Bolen, Goddesses in Everywoman: A New Psychology of Women - 
for sci-fi buffs, James Varley's trilogy on Gaea, Titan, Wizard , 

and Demon 
Milton's "Paradise Lost 11 
Gore Vidal, Creation 

The Hero - 

Homer, The Aeneid 

Alice Walker, The Color Purple 

The Lucas trilogy "Star Wars," "Empire Strikes Back," and "Return of 

the Jedi," wit i references in Campbell's The Power of Myth 
John Gardner's Grendel 
All the Coyote Tales 
Anthony Powell, The Fisher King 

One of the Sherlock Holmes novels, or a complete collection of the 

short stories; for female detectives, Glaspell's "Trifles" 
Joseph Conrad's "The Secret Sharer" and Eric Higgs Doppelaanaer 
Legends of King Arthur: Malory's Morte d' Arthur (available in 
modern translation) 

John Steinbeck, The acts of King Arthur and his Noble 

Knights 
Thomas Berge Arthur Rex 

Marion Zik _r Bradley, The Mists of Avalon 
Sigurd Undset, Kristen Lavransdat.i-.er (any of the trilogy) 
Toni Morrison's Beloved 
Roger Abrahams, ed. African Folktales 

Lovers and Parents - 

Dashiell Hammett, The Thin Man and Lillian Hellman's "Turtle" from 

her book Pentimento 
Margaret Atwood, The Handmaid's Tale 
The Orestia — — — — 
"Oedipus" and "Antigone" 
C. S. Lewis, Till we have Faces 

H umanity - 

Daniel Keyes, Flowers for Algernon and its film version "Charley" 

Data on "Star Trek: New Generation" and Isaac Asimov's The Naked 
Sun and/or The Caves of steel 



Professor George Spillane 
Liberal Arts 

Delaware County Community College 
Modia, PA 19063 

ENGLISH 293 "Literature: A Minority view" 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
African American Literature 

A Ma rtin Luther King Treasury , by Martin Luther King (sermon collec- 
tion) 

America n Writers Series (Check indices). 

A Soldie r's Plav . by Charles Fuller (play) 

Autobiography of Malcolm X . by Malcolm X (autobiography) 

Black Plots and Black Characters Ed. by R.L. Southgate. 

Black Women Writers: 1950-1980 r Ed. By Mari Evans. 

Black Women Write rs at Work . Ed. Claudia Tate. Contains articles 
(in conversation form) about Toni Morrison, Nikki Giovanni, Moya 
Angelou, Alice Walker, and others. 

Black Plots and Black Charac tPR Ed. by R.L. Southgate. 

Blues for Mister Charlie r by James Baldwin (play) 

Cane, by Jean Toomer (novel) 

CLC Series (Contemporary Literary Criticism) . 

Cotton Candy on a Rainv Day r by Nikki Giovanni (poetry) 

Critical Survey of short Fiction . Ed. by F. Magill. 

Dark Symphony; Negro Lite rature in America . Edited by James A. 
Emmanuel and Theodore L. Gross. 

DLB (Dictionary of Litera ry Biography^ (Check indices) See Vol. 48. 
For example, Vol. 2 contains material re: Baldwin and Ellison. 
Vol. 5: Baraka, Giovanni, Brooks and others. Vols. 7-33-38-41- 
48-50 and 51 are filled with pertinent information. 

Dutchman . . . , by Imamu Amisi Baraka (LeRoi Jones) . 

Fences, by August Wilson. 

Go Tell It on the Mountain, by James Baldwin (play) 
Going to the Mee t the Man (collection of short stories) . 



Ir visible Man , by Ralph Ellison 

Just Give Ma a Cool Drink of Water 'fore I Die , by Maya Angelou 
(poetry) 

Ma Raine v's Black Botto m, by August Wilson (play) 

Native Son, by Richard Wright. We are using Perennial Library Edi- 
tion published by Harper and Row. 

Native Sons: A C ritical Study of Twentieth-Centurv Nearo American 
Authors, Ed. by E. Margolies (Contains essays about Black 
authors up to 1968). 

Raisin in the Sun f by Lorraine Hansberry (play) 

Soul on Ice, by Eldridge Cleaver (collection of revolutionary 
essays) 

Stride Toward Freedom, by Martin Luther King (non-fiction) 

Tar Baby, by Toni Morrison, (novel) 

TCLC Series (Twentieth Century Literary Criticism) . 

The Bluest Eye r by Toni Morrison. 

The Col or Purple , by Alice Walker. 

The Harlem Renaissance Remember^ f Ed. Arna Bontemps. Especially 
interesting is the essay, "The Awakening" by Arna Bontemps, in 
addition to essays about Jean Toomer, Countee Cullen, Claude 
McCay, Zora Neale Hurston, and Langston Hughes. 

Their Eves Were W atching Go d, by Zora Neale Hurston. 

The Negro Novel in America, by Robert Bone. A very thorough his- 
torical perspective. Excellent sections about Richard Wright's 
Native Son, Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man , and Jawes Baldwin's 
literary contributions. 

Twentieth Century American Literature Series. 



ERIC 



HISPANIC CULTURE COURSE 



Professor Gerry Fisher 
Liberal Arts 

Delaware County Community College 
Media, PA 19063 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Arens. Genocide in Parag uay. Temple U press, 1976. 

Arciniegas. Latin Am erica. A C_altur_al History . Knopf, 1966. 

Bradford, Colin I Jr. Forces for Change in Latin America: 
US Policy Implications. (monograph #5) , Overseas 
Dev. Council. 

Bronstein. LA LUCHA TRIPLE . 

Brown, Janet W. Bordering on Trouble: Resources & Politics in 
Latin America. Maguire, Andrew eds. 

Busey, James L. Latin American Political Guide . Schalkenbach, 
1985, pap $5.00. 



Chil cote, Ronald H. & Edelstein, Joel. Latin America Capitalist 
& Socialist Perspec tives of Development & Underdevelopment . 
(Latin American Perspective Series) Westview, pap. $14.95. 

Cockcroft, James D. Neighbors in Turmoil: Latin America . 
Harper Row, 1988. pap. $21.95. 

Contemporary Latin American Culture (Publication Set No. 25) 
(ISNN 0-939 238-27-6) Tulane MARI , 1968. 

Contrera3, Gloria ed. Latin American Culture Studies . 
U of Texas Lat. Am. studies, 1984. pap. $19.95. 

Economic Survey of Latin A m erica & The Caribbean . UN, 1985. $65. 

Gallagher. Modern Latin American Literature . Oxford U Press, 
1973 . 

Garcia, Jorge & Camurati, Mireya, eds. Philosophy & Literature 

in Lati n America , state U NY Pr, 1989. 

Gerassi, The Grea t Fear in Latin America . Macmillan, 1965. 

Harris. The Gro wth of Latin American cities . Ohio U Press, 



ERIC 



Hazen, Dan C, ed., Latin American Masses & Minorities: Their 
Images & Realities , 1987. 

Hinds, Harold & Tatum, Charles. Studies in Latin American 
Polular Culture . Vol. 6 

Kahl • Modernization. E xportation & Dependency in Latin Americ a . 
Transaction Books, 1976. 



Keen, Benjamin ed. Latin American civilization: History & 
Society . Westview. pap. $12.00. 

Landsberger. The Church and Social Change in Latin America . 
U of Notre Dame Press, 1970. 

Leander, Birgita ed. Cultural Identity in Latin American 

Cultures: Dialog Betwee n the Peoples of the World . Unesco, 
1987. pap. $12.00. 

Lernoux. Cry of t he People . Penguin Books, 1982. 

Lindauist. The Shad ow: Latin America Faces the Seventies . 
Penguin Books, 1972. 

Lipset & Solari. Elites in Latin America . Oxford U Press, 1967. 

Nash, June & Safia, Helen. Women and Change in Latin America: 
New Directions i n Sex and Class . Bergin & Garvey, 1985. 

Nash & Safia. Women a nd Change in Latin America . Bergin & 
Garvey, 1986. 

Pearse. The Lat in American Peasant . Frank Cass, 1975. 

Pescatello. Fe male & Male in Latin America . U of Pittsburg 
Press, 1972. 

Poverty in Latin America; The Impact of Depression . World Bank, 
1986. 



Sable, Martin. Guide to Nonprofit Materials for Latin America 
Studies . Ethridge, 1979. ~~ 

Sanchez, Luis. Literature & Popular Cul ture in the Hispanic 
World. Edins Hispanoamerica, 1982. 

Saultnier, Suzanne & Rakowski, Cathy. Women in the Development 
Process. U of Texas Pr, 1978. 

Shannon, Elaine. Desperados: Latin Drug Lords, US Lawmen & the 
War America Can't Win. Penguin, USA, 1988. 



S t avenhag en . Agrarian Problems & Peasant Movements in Latin 
America . Doubleday, 1970. 

Wiards, Howard. The Crisis in T.atin America Strategic, Economic 
& Polit ical Dimensions . Am Enterprise, 1984. 

Wolf & Hansen, The Huma n Condition in Latin America . Oxford 
Press, 1972. 

Wymia, Gary. The Poli tics of Latin American Developmen t. 
Cambridge U pr, 1989. 

WW************************* 
ERIC Clearinghouse for 
Junior Colleges 



