DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 415 073 



RC 021 343 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Bennett, Ruth, Ed. 

It Really Works: Cultural Communication Proficiency. 
Humboldt State Univ. , Areata, CA. Center for Indian 
Community Development. 

1997-00-00 

53p . ; In: Teaching Indigenous Languages; see RC 021 328. 
Photocopied photographs may not reproduce clearly. 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) -- Speeches/Meeting 

Papers (150) 

MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

*American Indian Education; American Indian Languages; 
American Indian Literature; Class Activities; Cooperative 
Learning; Culturally Relevant Education; *Educational 
Principles; Elementary Secondary Education; *Experiential 
Learning; Lesson Plans; *Second Language Instruction 
*Hupa; Total Physical Response 



ABSTRACT 



This paper describes the cultural communication proficiency 
method of indigenous language instruction, developed at Humboldt State 
University's Center for Indian Community Development (California), and 
demonstrates the method with five Hupa lesson plans. The method is based on 
three principles: that Native American students learn by doing, learn in ways 
compatible with their culture, and learn in stages. Cooperative learning, 
communication-based instruction, and total physical response approaches are 
integrated to present language lessons based in experience. Two lesson plans 
present Hupa words for relatives and for cultural activities. The lesson 
plans describe materials; list objectives in cultural, communication, and 
proficiency areas; and detail activities. The activities pass through the 
stages of comprehensible input (teacher's yes/no questions), guided practice 
(either/or questions) , independent practice (student supplies vocabulary 
term) , challenge (student responds to new elicitation) , and expansion. A 
third lesson plan teaches a traditional northern California story, 

He- Who-Was -Dug-Up, by having the children create puppets and stage puppet 
plays of the story. Objectives and activities are described for preschool and 
grades K-2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9-12. The fourth and fifth lesson plans accompany a 
Hupa "bingo" game based on the Hupa names for 20 local animals and a game 
based on Hupa words for the parts of the body. A description of the work of 
the Center for Indian Community Development is included. (SV) 



***************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document . 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



It Really Works: 

Cultural Communication Proficiency 

Ruth Bennett, Editor 



CO 

r- 

o 

a 



I 1 »o> • 
v "3 

•P i 5>0 

'll 



O 

ERIC 




m\ 



Dixwe:di ’Unt 4 e:n? 

Lesson Plan 
Activity Sheet 

Xa^owihva:tP 

Lesson Plan 
Activity Sheet 

Hupa Animal Bingo Game Set 

Bingo Card (sample) 
Flash Card (sample) 
Caller’s Card 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points of vie* or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



Jon Reyhner 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



CREDITS 




Editor: 

Illustrations: 

Graphics : 

Student Assistants: 

Hupa Phonetic Writing System : 
Hupa Verb Forms: 



Photos: 
Printing: 
Published by, 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

Dr. Ruth Bennett 
Lyn Risling 

Linda McRae, Yuka Kawamuia, Kelly Getz 
Christina West, Elaine Quiiaquit, Jennifer TimnMns, Jessica Fawn Whfle 
Adopted by Hoopa Valley Tribe 
From Victor Golla, The Hupa Dictionary, Center for Indian 
Community Development, 1996 
Ruth Bennett, Pam Martz 
HSU Graphics Department 

Center for Indian Community Development, Lois Risling, Director, 
Humboldt State University, Areata, C A 95521 







BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





V 



Teaching Indigenous languages 







I 



ERJC 



The Center for Indian Community Development 

HUMBOLDT STATE UNIVERSITY 

Since it was established in 1966, the Center for Indian Community Development, has de- 
signed and implemented innovative projects to meet fundamental community needs. Supported by a 
line item in the California State University budget, the Center’s primary mission is to channel the 
resources of Humboldt State University to the diverse communities of Northern California, particu- 
larly the Native American Communities. The Center has been instrumental in increasing interest in 
Indian culture, history and language, especially as they relate to elementary and secondary educa- 
tion. In addition, the Center has assisted the development of several local non-profit agencies by 
contributing small subsidies, providing in-kind support services and preparing funding proposals. 

For 20 years, the Center’s major project has been the American Indian Language and Litera- 
ture Program, which coordinates the work of linguists, curriculum specialists, teachers, students and 
community members in an effort to document and reinforce traditional Indian cultures of the area. 
The program provides linguistic documentation, curriculum development, teacher supervision and 
other technical support (including linguistic documentation and archiving) services required to pre- 
serve the languages of Northern California tribes. It presently sponsors classes in the Hupa, Yurok, 
Tolowa and Karuk languages at various sites in Humboldt, Del Norte and Siskiyou Counties. 

As part of the campus community, the Center for Indian Community Development works 
with professors in the Ethnic Studies, Anthropology and Native American Studies departments in 
development and implementation of the Center’s American Indian Language and Literature Pro- 
gram. This joint effort has significantly enhanced linguistic documentation, archiving and curricu- 
lum development activities. 

The production of lessons, dictionaries, word-lists, collections of stories, cassette tapes, 
videos, and other materials useful to the language education is an important function of the Lan- 
guage Program. Several projects have been undertaken over the years; a series of lessons in Hupa 
have been developed around cassette tapes and will be suitable for high school and adult classes. 
Similar materials will be produced for Karuk, Yurok as courses on these languages are introduced. 
Practical dictionaries have been created for Karuk, Hupa, and Tolowa. Language “Pocketbooks” 
have been created for Karuk, Hupa and, Tolowa. 

Collection of new information on Northwest California Indian Languages is also a high 
priority of the Language Program. These languages are rapidly losing fluent traditional speakers, 
and unless data is collected now it will be impossible to prepare fully accurate and comprehensive 
teaching materials. Furthermore, future efforts in language recovery as well as the general humanis- 
tic study of traditional Northwest California culture will need to rely on documentation gathered in 
this generation. Obtaining accurate and extensive data on an Indian language requires a number of 
highly specialized skills, primarily those of linguists and lexicographers. CICD plans to contract the 
services of trained professionals in these fields, both to gather and process materials directly and — 
more importantly — to train assistants from the Indian community to supplement and continue the 
work. 

In addition to meeting needs for cultural and educational programs, the Center is increas- 
ingly involved in business, economic, environmental, and social development activities. To develop 
greater participation in the free enterprise system, and consequently, we have identifies three world; 
to acquire the capital needed to start, buy out, expand, or “ save” business through purchases of 
tangible business assets (land, buildings, equipment, inventory, etc.) and the provision of essential 
working capital; and to identify market opportunities and procure sales contacts that will ensure 
successful participation and long-term survival in the free enterprise system. 

Ideally, assistance is provided to Indian tribes and community based organizations, both of 
which represent constituent communities, if the business employs members of tribes or other Indian 
groups; the business generates income to a tribe or other Indian group; or the business generates 
business for / purchases goods or services from other Indian-owned business. The Center for Indian 
Community Development is here to support the needs of Tribal Development, and continues to grow 
with their constituent communities. Q 









wmmm 















2 




Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 1 




Language can make people do things. Have you ever noticed how a warning, “Don’t do that,” will typi- 
cally produce a response, “Why not?” in the one who was warned, perhaps prompting them to go ahead and try 
exactly what they were told not to do? 

If so, you have witnessed the power of language. Language is communication* Someone saying, “Don’t 
do that,” can produce the intended response or move someone to another action. In both cases, there is a relation- 
ship between language and action. 



I. First Principle: Native American Students Learn by Doing 

Native American Cultural Communication Proficiency involves communication and action. It is built on 
the principle that students have to get out and do things. Students learn language through experience, through 
expressing feelings and ideas. They learn if what they say has consequences and what the consequences are, 
when they are actually communicating. They act out their words, they use actions to reinforce their words, and 
they communicate with body language. This emphasis on doing is at the heart of the Total Physical Response 
method, developed by James Asher for second languages. 

The Hupa Language Program also combines techniques from various other methods, such as Total Physi- 
cal Response. It also takes from Cooperative Learning, its emphasis on learning within peer groups. 

To practice this method, a group of students can get together and put on a scene from a traditional Hupa 
story. I will demonstrate: 

In this story, Xa:xowilwa:tl’ , a mother tells her young daughter, “Don’t dig the Indian potatoes when two 
of the stalks grow together.” 

Haya:l mine:jixomil And then, after a while, 

’A:ch’ondehsne’ She thought 

“Dixwe:diman, ‘a:whikh’ide:ne’ “Why, did she tell me, 

“Do:’a:t’ingT ” ‘Don’t do it!’ ” 

The girl proceeds to dig up a baby , who follows her back to the house, and for years after, and who has the 
name of Xa:xowilwa:tl’ , He-Was-Dug-Up ” 

4 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



2 IT REALLY WORKS ! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



When a group of students gets together, learns lines, and puts on a puppet play, they begin with key lines 
from the first scene, as in the above example, and they proceed from there. As they shape the scenes and practice 
their dialogue, they are cooperating with each other and learning by doing. Moreover, they succeed or fail as a 
group, so that the outcomes effect everyone on the team, not just one person. 



II. Second Principle: Native American Students Learn in Ways 
Compatible with Their Culture 

The second principle, is that learning inside the classroom be compatible with what the students experience 
in their communities. The puppet play Xa:xowilwa:tl’ is derived from a traditional Hupa story. Although pup- 
petry is a modem adaptation of the story , the story is an ancient Hupa practice. Since the Hupa people developed 
their language, storytelling has been the traditional way of passing knowledge, i.e., language and culture, to 
younger generations. 

Students learn the story, and they learn some Hupa words. Learning Hupa words is necessary so that they 
can tell part of the story in the Hupa language. Depending upon their level of proficiency, they learn character s 
names in Hupa, expressions in Hupa, or sequences of dialogue in Hupa. 

Using a Native American language 
is a big step for Cooperative Learning 
groups. They work together to produce a 
play , helping each other accomplish a group 
goal, and learning in the process of doing 
the project. 

Cooperative learning, teamwork in 
action, is compatible with patterns of Na- 
tive American (and other) children’s play 
in their out-of-school environments, and 
when moved into the classroom, can in- 
crease achievement .Research on Native 
American children has shown that peer team 
learning can increase test scores on reading 
comprehension. 




ffl. Third Principle: Native American Students Learn in Stages 

That students are at different levels of proficiency leads into the principle that students need to be intro- 
duced to lessons in stages. This idea has been developed in a method called, Communication-Based Instmction. 
In learning increasingly more difficult material, through this method, students advance step-by-step from one 
level to another. Students may begin with listening before they actually produce language themselves. 

A student moves step by step through a process, gradually taking on a greater role in responding. A senes 
of lessons typically begin with a teacher presenting something that requires a yes or no response. A senes will end 
with the student producing words, phrases, and longer units of language themselves. 



5 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 3 



In sum. Cultural Communication Profiency draws on three different methods: Total Physical Response 
Cooperative Learning, and Communication-Based Instruction. An integrative approach such as this has been 
urged in a recent national conference on indigenous languages and is at the heart of research and cirriculum 
developed at the Center for Indian Comunity Development. 



Philosophy 

Creating a relationship between language and experience reflects John Dewey’s educational philosophy, 
and the idea that language is communication, language develops under conditions of living, generally those of 
resistance and conflict. The relationship between language and experience can be played out in the classroom in 
a variety of ways, with students observing, thinking, and then getting what they need, using language. Lessons 
are task-centered, with achievement being individual or based upon group rewards. 

Experience, as defined in the classroom, can refer to: 

1) the teacher’s experience— how the lesson is shaped to express the objectives the teacher wants to ac- 
complish 

2) the student’s experience— how achievement can be expressed through elicited responses and self-ex- 
pression 

3) the tribe’s experience— how language relates to the values of the tribal community whose language is 
being passed on 

We aim for Cultural Communication Proficiency, and as we practice, we increase our skills. Lessons on 
the story of Xa:xowilwa:tl’ (He Was Dug Up), the story of Cha’ahi Milk’idildin (Frog’s Love Medicine) Dundi 
Ne:sing*? (Who Is it?), Hayah ‘Inda’ (Stand There), Hayde Me’ist, Native Language Bingo, and other lessons 
have been developed, tried out, revised, and are currently being used. Native Language instruction for Califor- 
nia and other Native American tribes are developed through a model whereby lessons are developed in one 
Native American language, and then adapted to others. 



References: 

Asher, James, Learning Language Through Action, Sky Oaks Production, Los Gatos, Ca., 1977. 
Cantoni, ed.. Stabilizing Indigenous Languages, Center for Excellence in Education /Flagstaff, AZ, 1 996. 
John Dewey, Art As Experience, Minton, Balch, and Co., New York, 1934. 

Klamath-Trinity Indian Education Program, Goals and Objectives: Klamath-Trinity Indian Education 
Program, Klamath-Trinity Joint Unified School District, Humboldt County, California, 1996. 

Krashen, Steven and Tracy D. Terrell, The Natural Approach, Language Acquisition in the Classroom, 
Pergamon Press, Elmsford, New York, 1983. 

Rivers, Wilga, Communicating Naturally in a Second Language, Cambridge University Press , New York, 1 983 . 
Slavin, Robert E. Student learning team techniques: Narrowing the achievement gap between the races. 
(Report No. 228) Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University, Center for Social Organization of the Schools. 1977. 



6 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY I 




Materials: 



Teacher shows pictures for six Hupa words for relatives. Within Hupa culture, relative names have 
cultural significance because the family is the most important social unit: 



xwunchwing 

xwhiwhxiy 

xwiyarchV 

xota’ 

xwitse’ 

xwiwhxiy 



Objectives: 



his/her mother 
his/her son 
(woman speaking) 
his/her daughter 
(woman speaking) 
his/her father 
his/her daughter 
(man speaking) 
his/her son 
(man speaking) 




From row Tosha Norton, Minnie McWilliams, JUi Sherman, Ula fabric, Anna fabric, (Melody's 
daughter, hidden), giri, Calvin Carpenter. Back row: Gina Campbell, Wendy Ferris, Jackie Martins. 
Cordon BusseU. Melody Carpenter, Joseph Rafael Marcellene Norton, Andre Kebric . 

Photo by Utah Btmett 



Cultural: 

Learn Hupa words for six Hupa relative names. 



Communication: 

Act out Questions and Answers relating to five Hupa relative names. 



Proficiency: 

Students increase Hupa language production. 



Oral: Students pronounce names and correctly identify six relative names. 

Written: Students recognize written forms for names and write names correctly. 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



2 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



Activity: 

Teacher engages in Question and Answer Sequence with students. 

At each stage, there is a teacher question that relates to each of the Hupa vocabulary words. 
Stages are: 




I. Comprehensible Input (yes-no questions) 

T: Hayde xwunchwing. (pointing to photo of mother) 

T: Hayde xwunchwing *ung? (pointing to photo of mother) 

S: Diye. 

T: Hayde xwiwhxiy*. (pointing to photo of mother's son, father’s son) 

T: Hayde xwiwhxiy ’ ’ung? (pointing to photo of mother’s son, father’s son) 

S: Diye. 

T: Hayde xwiyaxh’e’ (pointing to photo of mother's daughter) 

T: Hayde xwiya:chV ’ung? (pointing to photo of mother's daughter) 

S Diye. 

T: Hayde xota’ (pointing to photo of father) 

T: Hayde xota’ ’ung? (pointing to photo of father) 

S: Diye. 

T: Hayde xwitse:’ (pointing to photo of father's 
daughter) 

T: Hayde xwitse: * *ung? (pointing to photo of 
father's daughter. ? ) 

S: Diye. 

ft BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 3 



II. Guided Practice (either-or questions) 



T; Hayde xwunchwing? Hayde xwichwo? (pointing to picture of mother) 

S: WhunchwLng. 

T: Hayde xwunchwing? Hayde xota’? (pointing to picture of father) 

S: Xota’ 

T: Hayde xota’? Hayde xwitse:’ (pointing to picture of father's daughter) 

S: Xwitse:’ 

T: Hayde xwiwhxiy’? Hayde xota’? (pointing to picture of mother's son and father's son) 
S: Xwiwhxiy’. 



m. Independent Practice (student supplies vocabulary term) 






T: Diydi 4 ena:n hayde? (points to photo of mother) 



S: Xwunchwing. 



T: Diydi *ena:n hayde? (points to photo of father) 




T: Diydi ‘ena:n hayde? (points to photo of mother’s son and father’s son) 



,r i 

,!i' ! 



S: Xwiwhxiy’. 



T: Diydi *ena:n hayde? (points to photo of mother’s daughter) 




•l! 



II 



S: Xwiyarch’e’. 




9 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



4 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



T: Diydi ‘ena:n hayde? ( points to photo of father’s daughter) 
S: Xotse:’. 



IV. Challenge (student responds to new elicitation) 

Teacher introduces family tree for Hupa relative names and students find answers to fill in appropri- 
ate relative names. 

Expansion 

Students tell relative names from Dundi Ne:sing’? book and select one relative to write a sentence or 

story about. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 5 










Dundi Ne:sing’? 



Dundi Nersing’? 





her daughter 



her mother 



111 



his father 



his son 
















Teaching Indigenous Languages 






Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 1 




®|gi 









Sft-w 



'XS!t#S§£« 






Materials: 

Teacher brings objects and/or pictures for four Hupa vocabulary words that describe activities of cultural 
significance: 



Ch’itehsVn 
’A:k’iwilaw ch’o:ya:we’ 
Xwe:da’ay yehch’iwinyay 
Me’ilwul 



(S)he is looking 
They are reading 

They are listening (it went into my head) 
They are drumming 



Objectives: 



Cultural: 

Learn Hupa words for four Hupa cultural activities. 

Communication: 

Act out Questions and Answers relating to four Hupa cultural activities 

Proficiency: 

Students increase Hupa language production. 

Oral: Students say an appropriate verb form for four Hupa cultural activities when shown a 

photograph of the activity , 

Written : Students write an appropriate verb form for four Hupa cultural activities through identifica- 

tion on an activity sheet. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



2 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 







Activity: 

Teacher engages in a Four Stage Question and Answer Sequence with students 

At each stage, there is a teacher question that related to each of the Hupa vocabulary words. 
Stages are: 

I. Comprehensible Input (yes-no questions) 

T: Hayde Herman Sherman. Me'ilwul (he is drumming) 

(shows photo of Herman Sherman dumming) 

T: Hayde Herman Sherman. Me’ilwul ‘ung? (Is he drumming?) 

S: Diye. 

T: Hayde James Jackson, Calvin Carpenter. ’A: Vi wilaw ch’o:ya:we. 

(shows photo of James Jackson and Calvin Carpenter reading) 

T: Hayde James Jackson, Calvin Carpenter. ’A: Viwilaw ch’o:ya:we ‘ung? 

S: Diye. 

T: Hayde Wendy Ferris. Xwe:da’ay yehch’iwinyay. 

(shows photo of Wendy Ferris listening) 

T: Hayde Wendy Ferris. Xwe:da’ay yehch’iwinyay ‘ung? 




rl 



8llit 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 3 

II. Guided Practice (either-or questions) 

T: Hayde Herman Sherman. Me’ilwul ’ung? (Is he drumming?) 

Ch’itehs’e’n ‘ung? (Is he looking) 

(shows photo of Herman Sherman drumming) 

S: Me’ilwul. 

T: Hayde James Jackson, Calvin Carpenter. Me’ilwul ‘ung? ’A:’k’iwilaw ch’o:ya:we ‘ung? 

(shows photo of James Jackson, Calvin Carpenter reading) 

S: ’A:’k’iwilaw ch’o:ya:we. 

T: Hayde Wendy Fenis. Xwe:da’ay yehch’iwinyay ’ung? ’A:’k’iwilaw ch’o:ya:we ’ung? 

(shows photo of Wendy Ferris listening) 

S: Xwerda’ay yehch’iwinyay. 

T: Hayde Elsie Ricklefs. Xwe:da’ay yehch’iwinyay ‘ung? Ch’itehs’e’n ’ung? 

(shows photo of Elsie Ricklefs looking) 

S: Ch’itehs’e’n. 

HI. Independent Practice (student supplies vocabulary term) 

T: Diydi ’ena;n hayde k’iwinya’nyatn ’aya:t’e:n? 

(shows picture of James Jackson, Calvin Carpenter reading ) 

S: ’Ar’k’iwilaw ch’o:ya:we. 



T: Diydi ‘ena:n hayde k’iwinya’nyain ‘a’t’ern? 

(shows picture of Elsie Ricklefs looking) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



n' 

t; - 

ii- ( 



4 IT REAL LY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 

T: Diydi ‘ena:n hayde k’iwinya’nyam ’a’t’e.n? 

(shows picture of Wendy Ferris listening) 

S: Xwe:da’ay yehch’iwinyay. 




4 

i 

/ 

i 







{ 



T; Diydi ‘ena:n hayde k’iwinya’nya:n ’a’t’e:n? 



(shows picture of Herman Sherman drumming) 
S: Me’ilwul. 




Challenge (student responds to new elicitation) 

T: Ninyahwh 

S: (comes closer to teacher) 

T: ’Olchwit me’ilwul 

S: (points to photo of Herman Sherman drumming) 




WWWW FFF 



FFT 









^ ^ w " ""^^1 I w " 



si 

•i 

I 

i 

j 



i 




j . 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 5 



T: Yung’awh me’ilwul. 

S: (picks up photo of Herman Sherman drumming) 

T: Whiwung’awh ch’itehs’e’n. 

S: (hands photo of Elsie Ricklefs looking) 

T: No:nung’awh 

S' (student puts down photo of Elsie Ricklefs looking) 

T: Ma’a:nch’itehsVn k’itiitsil (throw it out the window) 

S: (student laughs) 




Expansion: . 

Students read Dixwe:di ’Unt’e:n? section in book, creating their own 

other forms, as given in Hupa Terms in this book section. 



Guided Practice examples, utilizing 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



6 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 




Dixwe:di ’A:yaYe:n? 



Dixwe:di ’AYe:n? 




Herman Sherman and Matthew Douglas Chavez Wendy Ferris 




They are reading 



She is looking 

19 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 1 




At the Center for Indian Community Development, we have implemented a cultural communication profi- 
ciency language that utilizes ethnographic research.This type of research seeks a cultural context. Introducing a 
context increases the meaning of words and phrases in the Hupa language so that students can comunicate mes- 
sages. Communicating messages builds confidence. Self-confidence is an important goal of a methodology that 
focuses on communication because students are more likely to attempt to use language if they believe they have the 
ability. This applies to all modes of language-learning, to speaking, listening, reading, and writing. 



Lessons that Work 



Self-confidence is related to the way that students are asked to leant new language. In a a book. Methods 
that Work , Jon Oiler has stressed two areas of importance in teaching language to Native American students, the 
use of stories and activities.' With puppet plays, traditional stories can be turned into a group activity . Not only do 
lessons require students to take action, they can work together cooperatively. This encourages an environment 
where all can leant: 



c 



Cooperative learning aims to reestablish the values 
of cooperation... an accepting, cooperative atmo- 
sphere, free of cross-comparisons . In cooperative learning, 
all can succeed because each has something unique to con- 
tribute to the enterprise... Cooperative learning implies full 
participation of both teacher and student and the interaction 
of student and student , 2 






‘(Jon Oiler. Methods that Work: Ideas for LHeracy and Language Teachers (7* *d) Heinle and Heinle. Boston. MS. 1993) 
1 (Wllga Rivers. Comm unicaring Naturally in a Second Language. Cambridge University Press. NY. 1983. p. 78) 



'ml |:| 



.lit 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

I !'l! ! 



ERIC 





















4LQ 






:|.i!i it 




Teaching Indigenous Languages 



\ 



2 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



Cultural Communication for Native American Students 

Cooperative learning has been found to be more successful with Native American children than lecture- 
based approaches because their learning styles have been found to favor teamwork, and student-controlled coop- 
erative projects over an environment where individuals compete for the attention of the teacher . 3 These methods 
are successful for the reason that they adapt classroom modes of instruction to modes of communication that 
prevail in Native American communities . 4 



Developing Language Proficiency that Prepares Students for Standarized Testing 

Finally, puppet plays of traditional stories introduce a literature -based curriculum. There is reason to 
introduce literature into the curriculum, as there is recent research that students who are taught with a literature- 
based approach perform better on reading comprehension tests .- 5 The rationale is that since literature is composed 
of longer units of discourse than words, and represents various levels of organization, reading stories require a 
greater attention to the material, resulting in better performance when comprehension is being tested. 



Applications at Grade Levels 

This lesson has a variety of applications at various grade levels, aiming to build language skills, communi- 
cation skills, and increase self-confidence. In the earliest years, students get practice in pre-reading skills, such as 
developing attention span. Storytelling with puppets allows for practice with hand-eye coordination, as students 
manipulate the puppets themselves. As students progress through the grades, what is expected becomes more 
complex. In Kindergarten through grade 2, they may be able to learn the names of characters, and some of the 
actions. At this age, when they retell the story, they are likely to fill in with actions from their own experience 
when they can’t remember the plot. In grade 3 through grade 5, however, they have the language skills to retell the 
traditional story. By junior high school, students can be introduced to storyteller’s strategies to understand how 
stories communicate meaning. High school students can compare stories and discover how language communi- 
cates culture. 

This lesson is an example of the cultural communication proficiency method. The lesson uses the native 
languages and stories that have been collected from elders. It incorporates linguistic documentation and archiving 
activities within a teachable form so that tribal communities can have a lesson ready to use. Objectives for the story 
adapted from the stated objectives for curriculum by the Klamath-Trinity School District on the Hupa Indian 
Reservation and the state of California. 



' Susan U. Philips. Participant Structures and Communicative Competen ce: Warm Springs Children in Community and Classroom, in Caxden. C„ et al„ eds. Functions of Language in the 
Classroom. Teachers College. Co lum b ia University, New York, 1972. p. 382. 

' Ibid^p. 393. 

1 Krashen. Steven. Every Person a Reader An Alternative to the Californian Task Force Report on Reading. Language Education Associates. Culver City. Ca„ 1996. p. 12. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 3 



Cultural Background 

Hupa is spoken on the Hoopa Indian Reservation. Hupa is an 
Athabaskan language of Northwestern California. The Hupa language is 
closely allied with Chilula and Whilkut, and to a lesser extent with other 
California Athabaskan languages. The Hupa shared a lifestyle of fam- 
ily-centered subsistence utilizing the natural resources of their envi- 
ronment, and world-renewal ceremonial dances. 

The Hoopa Indian Reservation spans approximately 144 
square miles in northeast Humboldt County along the Trinity River. San Francisco lies 300 miles southwest. 
Eureka, 64 miles west. The boundaries of the reservation were established by Executive order on June 23, 1876, 
pursuant to the Congressional Act of April 3, 1864. Nature in this area offers acorn, salmon, and deer for food, a 
variety of plants for medicinal purposes, houses made of cedar planks, ceremonial regalia of hides, feathers, seeds, 
and shells, and basketry. 

The Hupa historically lived along the shores of the Trinity River. 
The reservation, which covers about half of their traditional territory, con- 
tains several ancient village sites, three reconstructed sites. The ancient 
village sites are where ceremonial dances are held. The villages were the 
center of a culture that included literature, art, and music. 

Takimilding, the village at the “center of the world” for the Hupa, is 
y the location of the Jump Dance, held every two years in late summer. This 
dance coincides with the White Deerskin Dance, also a world renewal dance. 
Takimilding, on the downriver side of the valley, and Me’dilding on the upriver 
side were the two most prominant villages. Brush dances are still held at both sites. 





Xa’xowilwa:tl’ is a story from Diyshta:ng’a:ding, now a reconstructed Hupa village, located at the upper- 
most point on the Trinity River as it enters the Hoopa Valley. The storyteller from Diyshta:ng’a:ding who told this 
story said that his mother’s family had told it as long the Hupa lived there. 



Cultural Context 

The cultural context is the traditional story of the Hupa, that includes characters from an earlier epoch in 
pre-history. These characters are the k’ixinay, spirits who inhabited the world before human beings. Althqiigh 
k’ixinay possess superhuman qualities, in many ways, their lives reflected a Hupa lifestyle. 

Hupa stories combine the ordinary with the extra-ordinary. The story of Xa:xowilwa:tT features domestic 
life in a family that consists of a grandmother, mother, and a son bom from an Indian potato. Nurtured by his 
grandmother, Xa:xowilwa:tl’ grows unusually fast, and leams to hunt. He follows his mother when she goes to 
pick acorns. At the acorn grove he meets two young women. When he goes to their home, then- father directs him 
to shoot a condor covered with dentalia, catch salmon-covered with dentalia, and to play a stick game where 
thunder, moon, panther, and other players are competing. After winning at these events, he marries the two young 
women. They are the morning and the evening star, and all three are here today, having been transformed from 
k’ixinay to their present state. 



22 













BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Teaching Indigenous Languages 



Materials: 



Puppets can be made from papier 
mache , socks, paper bags, or felt. They can 
first be designed on paper using grocery bags 
or wrapping paper, and then transformed to the 
other media. The most simple puppets are two- 
dimensional, with two pieces of material sewn 
together. More advanced students can create 
three-dimensional puppets, starting with shap- 
ing the heads and then building on the other 
parts of the body. 



Language Arts Objectives: 



Pre-School 

(1) That students listen to at least one action in a story 

(2) That students have puppet characters do an action 

Grades K-2 

(1) That students identify the characters of Xa:xowilwa:tP 

(2) That students know their Hupa names 

Grades 3-5 
(1), (2) above, and 

(3) That students retell the plot of Xa:xowilwa:tP 

(4) That students describe actions in the Hupa language 

Grades 6-8 
(1),(2),(3),(4) and 

(5) That students can apply the motifeme sequence in Xa:xowilwa:tf to identify episodes in the plot 

Grades 9-12 
(1)» (2), (3), (4), (5) and 

(6) That students identify metaphors in Xa:xowilwa:tT 

(7) That students can describe the content of metaphors 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





Photo by Jill Fletcher 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 3 



Framework Areas and Concepts: 

Language Arts: 

Pre-School: 

Developing attention span 
Practicing hand-eye coordination 

Grades K-2: 

Using word identification strategies 
Showing an awareness of a character in a story 

Grades 3-5: 

Reading stories 
Knowing a plot of a story 



Grades 6-8: 

Developing further understanding of a story 
Reading familiar and unfamiliar text with skill 

Grades 9-12: 

Reading and applying narrative strategies to a 
Interpreting literary concepts 



Activities: 

Pre-School 

Teacher tells one episode in the story, 

(1) Teacher gathers children in a circle, and introduces story: “Let’s all sit on the rug because I am going 
to tell you an old story.” 

(2) Teacher tells the names of the characters: 

This is k’ehltsa:n (two girls) 

This is Xa:xowilwa:tl’ (He Was Dug Up) 

This is k’ist’aychwing (bluejay) ‘ ** 

(3) Teacher tells about when Xa:xowilwa:t V goes to the acorn grove, meets the nahxe k’ehltsam, and 
k’ist’aywing offers to help them pick acorns. 

(4) Teacher gives puppets to students so that they can retell the episode. Students take turns with the 
puppets. 

Grades K-2 

Teacher reads story to students 

(1) Teacher gathers children into a circle and introduces story: “This story is a very old story from our 
ancestors at Diyshta:ng’a:ding” 




James Jackson, Calvin Carpenter 




Cordon and Isaac Bussell 



IF 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



6 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



(2) Teacher reads story or parts of story .depending upon scheduling needs and attention span of students. 
After story is read, teacher asks students to identify the village where the story came from: “Who can 
tell us where the village of Diyshta:ng’a:ding is?” Teacher shows students map of Hoopa Valley and 
points to Diyshta:ng’a:ding. 

(3) Teacher asks students. “Who are some of the people in the story?” Teacher has students identify the 
following characters: 

Xa:xowiIwa:tT 

k’ilexich 

q’unch’wilchwil 

xo’isday 

kehltsa:n 

xwunchwing 

xwichwo 

tsamehst’Io:n nahxe 
yaxwota’ 

Stick Game Players: minimite:diliw. xontehftaw. xoljeh. xoltsaytaw. ke:niwh. de’ch’iqa:l. and 
mikyo:w 



Grades 3-5 

Students take turns reading story 

(1) Teacher asks students to get out their books: “Now we are going to read Xa:xowilwa:tl\ This story 
is a very old story from our ancestors at Diyshtamg* aiding. 

We are going to share this story by reading it in turns” 

(2) Students take turns reading paragraphs. 

(3) After story is read, teacher asks students to identify the village where the story came from: “Who can 
tell us where the village of Diyshtamg* aiding is?” 

Teacher shows students map of Hoopa Valley and points to Diyshtaing’ aiding. 

(4) Teacher then asks. “Who is the story about?” When a student names a character, the teacher asks “What 
did (s)he do in the story T The teacher can select a student if there are no volunteers. 



Grades 6-8 

Students create mini-dramas from sections of story 

(1) Teacher asks students to get out their books: “Now we are going to read Xa:xowilwa:tl\ This story 
is a very old story from our ancestors at 

Diyshta:ng’a;ding. Who wants to read first?” If there 
are no volunteers then the teacher calls on a student. 

(2) Students take turns reading episodes. 

(3) After story is read, teacher asks students to identify the 
village where the story came from: “Who can tell us 
where the village of Diyshta:ng’a:ding is?” 

Teacher shows students map of Hoopa Valley and points 
to Diyshta:ng’a:ding. 




25 



o 

M £ 



























Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 7 



(4) Teacher then asks, “Who is the story about and what happened?” The teacher asks for volunteers or 
calls on students. 

(5) Teacher then tells students: 

“Now we will turn to the page where motifemes are described/ 1 After that page is read, the teacher 
says “Now we will break out into six groups, and each group will discuss what motifemes describe 
one of the following episodes: 



Grades 9-12 
Objectives: 

Cultural: Retell a traditional Hupa story 

Communication: Dramatize a story of Hupa words , creating scenes from the various episodes 



Xa:xowilwa:tF has six episodes; 

I He Is Dug Up 

II He Grows Up 

ID He Talks to His Mother 

IV He Shoots the Condor covered with Dentalia and Catches the Dentalia Covered Salmon 

V He Plays a Stick Game 

VI He Marries 



For the purpose of giving groups more or less an equal part of the episode IV can be divided into two parts 



Teacher divides the class into groups to each work on one of the episodes. Depending upon the proficiency 
of the students, students can incorporate Hupa words, expression, and dialogue into their stories. 



Episode 

I He Is Dug Up 

II He Grows Up 

III He Talks to His Mother 



Motif erne 

Interdiction-Violation-Consequence 
Attempted Escape/Pursuit 
Task/ Task Accomplished 



IV He Shoots the Condor covered 
with Dentalia and Catches the 
Dentalia Covered Salmon 



Task/ Task Accomplished 
Task / Task Accomplished 
Task / Task Accomplished/Creation Motif 



V He Plays a Stick Game 

VI He Marries 



Proficiency: 



Oral: 

Written: 



Students increase Hupa language production at four stages or levels 
Saying vocabulary, expressions, dialogue, story performance 
Recognizing and producing written symbols for vocabulary, exp 
dialogue, story performance 




Stages: Dramatize Story 



and episode V combined with episode VI. 



*ERLC 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 








Teaching Indigenous Languages 



8 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



Performance: Act Out Story 

Groups put on the plays for each other, working in the Hupa language according to their level of profi- 
ciency. They incorporate the Hupa language in a series of stages, building on one level to the next level of 
increasing difficulty. 

Stage 1: Each group has a Hupa word or two to remember 

Group 1 : Hay kehltsa:n , the girl Hay xwanchwing, the mother 
Group 2: Hay xwichwo, the grandmother Hay mije’erdin, the child 

Group 3: Hay kehltsa:n nahxe, the two young woman, hay q’anch’iwilwhwii, the young man 
Group 4: Hay k’iwangxoyarn, the old man, hay k’iya:wh minahxole:n, the condor 
Group 5: Hay k’iwangxoya:n, the old man, hay k>:q\ the salmon 
Group 6: Hay xontehltaw the coyote Xa:xowiiwa:tr He Was Dug Up 



Stage 2 : Each group uses a Hupa sentence or two from the story 
Group 1: Hay xwunchwing, the mother 

Do:’unt’e:n, don’t do it! Hay kehltsa.n ,the girl, 

dixwe:diman,axokh’ide:ne’,do:’unt’e:n? why did she tell me, don’t do it 
Group 2: Hay xwichwo sa’xa:wh mito\ the grandmother (made) acom soup 

Hay mije’e:din ch’itehkhwern, the child was growing. 

Group 3: Hay kehltsa:n nahxe, hay q’unch’wilchwil, yaxohehl’e’n, the two young woman looked 

at the young man 

Group 4: Hay k’iwangxoya:n, ,hay k’iya:wh minahxole:n, yisxunde’ ‘a:xokh’ide:ne\ the old man 

said to shoot the condor the next morning 

Group 5: Hay k’iwangxoyain ‘a:xokh’ide:ne’, hay k:q’ me’diwhchwin,” the old man said, “I am 

hungry for salmon.” 

Group 6: Hay xontehltaw, hay xoljeh, ch’e:ya’winde:tl\ The coyote and the skunk, a lot of them 

came. 

Xa:xowilwa:tl’ ‘ist’ik. He-Was-Dug-Up was pretty slim. 

Stage 3 : Students work out a sequence of sentences in the Hupa language to recite when displaying 
puppets.The story then proceeds in English. 



Group 1 : Hay xwunchwing, the mother, Do:’a:ting\ don’t do it! Hay kehltsarn, the girl, 

dixweidiman, axokh’iderne’, do:’unt’e:n? why did she tell me, don’t do it? 
Hayarl ch’e:’indiqot’, and then, a baby tumbled from under the earth. 

Group 2 : Hay xwichwo sa’xa:wh mito’ ach’ischwe’n, the grandmother made acom 

soup 

Hay mije’eidin ch’itehkhwern, the child was growing. 

Hay xoji ts’ilting ‘ach’ischwe’n, she made him a bow and arrow. 
De:noholyidaq ch’itehsyay, he climbed up the ridges of the 
hills to the northeast of the Hoopa Valley. 

Group 3: Hay kehltsarn nahxe, hay q’unch’wilchwil, yaxonehl’e’n, 

the two young woman looked at the young man. 

Ch’ixenerwh hay xwichwo. He talked to his grandmother. 





BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 9 



Group 4: Hay k’iwangxoya:n, hay k’iya:wh minahxole:n, yisxunde ‘a:xdch ide:ne , the old man 

said to shoot the condor the next morning. 

Haya:l ch’idiwinchwit, and then he shot it. 

Group 5: Hay k’iwangxoya:n ‘a:xolch’ide:ne\hay lo:q’ me’diwhchwin,” the old man said.'i am 

hungry for salmon.” 

Hay q’unch’wilchwil ch’ixene:wh,“Se:sehiwinte.” The young man said, ‘ I will kill the 
salmon.” 

Nahdiyaw ch’ischwein, he was making money. 

Group 6: Hay xontehltaw, hay xoljeh, ch’e:ya’winde:tl\ The coyote and the skunk, a lot of 

them came. 

Xa:xowilwa:tr 4 ist’ik. He-Was-Dug-Up was pretty slim. 

K’exoltsais. He flopped him 
Ch’ilchwe’n, He made it. 

Hay ah no:nt’ik. That’s the end of it. 

Stage 4 - Students select an episode to perform in the Hupa language 

Activity: Puppet Drama 

1) Introduce characters: players hold up each puppet character and say its Hupa name twice, 

2) Players recite dialogue in Hupa, translating and switching to English as needed. 



I. He Is Dug Up 

Xotch’ixolik: KehHsa:n k’iwinya’nyam ch’iqal. (An Indian girl was out walking.) 
Xoji yinehtaw xak’iwhe’. (She was digging for Indian potatoes.) 



Xwunchwing: Do:’unt’e:n. (Don’t do it.) 
K’eMtsa:n : Dixwe:diman? (Why?) 



Xwunchwing : Do:’unt’e:n, nahx ‘ikh’ing’ (Don’t do it, two bulbs laying together.) 




K'eMtsam: Hayde: nahx ‘ikh’ing’. (These are two bulbs laying together.) ’Angya Xa:xowilwa:tl. 
(Lo and behold, it’s Xa:xowilwa:tl’ .) 



K’eMtsa:n: Xontahch’ing’ yehna:dahdiwhla:t. (I am going to run into the house.) 



K’ehksa:n: No:nuntse. (Shut the door!) 



BEST 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



10 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



II. He Grows Up 




Xwichwo: Hayde sa’xaiwh mito\ (This is acorn soup juice.) 

K'ile.xich (Xwitsoy) : Which wo whiwhchwil (Grandmother, I am growing) 

Xwichwo: Hayde xoji ts’ihing’ch. (This is a little bow and arrow.) 

K'ilexich (Xwitsoy): Xoji ts’iking’ch ts’isgyas. (The little bow and arrow broke.) 

Xwichwo: Hayde xoji ts’ihing’ tse: wilchwe’n. (This is a bigger bow and arrow, made of stone. 
Do:ts’isgyahste (It won’t break.) 

K'ilexich (Xwitsoy): Tse:q’iya:ng’ay se:sehlwe:n. (I killed a squirrel.) 

K'ilexich (Xwitsoy): Dandide’ hay xwunchwing xoneye:whte? (When is my mother going to talk to me? 



Xwunchwing : Te:se:yate haya:ch’ing’. (I am going up there.) 

Xokh'ixolik: Hay xwunchwing me’ist ch’iwil’a’ (The mother had a pestle.) Widwa:t sehkhwinte. (She 
is going to make acorn flour.) 

K'ilexich (Xwitsoy): De:nohotyidaq te:se:yate. (I’ll go to the ridges of the hills to the northeast of the 
Hoopa Valley.) 

Hayde k’iwinya’n xoji nikyaw. (These are really big acorns.) 

K'ilexich (Xwiwhxiy'): Hay mixaich’e’ te:se:yate. (I’ll go off on that stump.) 

Ne:se:date (I will sit down) Hay mixarch’e’ whimil whilchwil (That stump is growing with me.) Dotah 
whunchwing xoneye:whte. (Maybe my mother will talk to me.) 

K'ist'aychwing: Heyung (k’ehltsain xoch’ing’) (Hello [to girls]) 

K'eMtsamia' : K’yadawhmete. (I’m going to gather acorns) 

K'ist'aychwing: Nich’owhne. (I’ll help you). (Throws acorns down on ground) 

K'ehhsa:nia': Ijibeh! (I’m scared.) 

K'eMtsamnahx: Hay-yo:wq’unch’wilchwil. (There is a young man.) Hay xoxwek’inendern. K’inende:n 
sile’n. (Something is shining on him. He shines so bright.) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

29 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 1 1 



K’ehltsa:n la \ k’ehltsa.n nahx: Ye’inyawh nintsah. (Come in, sit down.) 
Q'unch’wilchwil: Xa\ (All right.) 

Xolch'ixolik: Xa:xowilwa:tF ch’islinte. (He will become Xa:xowilwa:tF.) 

IQ. He Talks To His Mother 

K’ist'aychwing: Nohch’ing’ nanamil hay k’iwinya:n. (Throw down some acorns for us.) 
Q'unch'wilchwil : K’ist’aychwing dixwe.di ‘unt’e:n? (Bluejay, what are you doing?) 
K’ist'aychwing: Na’akal. (They Ye dancing.) 

Q’unch’wilwil : Xontahch’ing’ te:se:yate. (I’m going home.) 

K*ehltsa:n la’ t k*ehltsa:n nahx : Nate:se:ddte. (We’re going back home.) 

K’ist’aychwing : Sa’ohding. (Go off together then.) 



Q’unch’wilchwil: Whunchwing, ky*a:da:yne\ (Mother, I’ve been picking acorns.) 

Whichwo, ky*a:da:yne’ (Grandmother, I’ve been picking acorns.) 

Yehch’i winy ate, hay whunchwing, yehch’iwinyate, hay whichwo. (Come up with me, mother, come up 
with me grandmother, to their house.) De:je:nis hay mixach’e te:se:yate. (Today, I will go on that stump.) 

Xwichwo : Xa! (All right.) 

Q’unch’wilchwil: Q’aytimil wh’ilchwe. (Pack up a basket for me.) 

IV. He Shoots the Condor Covered with Dentalia and Catches the Dentalia- 
Covered Salmon 

K’iwangxoya:n: Ye’ohdii. Hay q’unch’wilchwil, nahxe whitse:’. (Come in,young man, my two daughters.) 
Q’unch’wilchwil: Heyung, dixwe:di whung ’ant’e? (Hello, how are you?) 



K’iwangxoyam: Niwho:n. Yisxunde’ k’iya:whminahxole:n xo:ning’its. (Tomorrow, you will try to shoot 
the condor.) ’Aht’indin miq’it xwek’iwilxat nehwan nahdiyaw-mil. (Everywhere on it, it is covered with 
money. 





Teaching Indigenous Languages 



12 rr REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



Xontehltaw : Ky’owh’itste. (I'll shoot it.) 

K’iwangxoya.n : Doidinchwit. (You didn’t shoot it.) 

Xoljeh: Hayde xontehltaw. (That’s coyote) 

Q'unch'wilchwil: K’iya:whminahxole:n se:sehlwinte. (I will kill the condor.) 

K’iwangxoya.n: Xa’. Lo:q’ ch’isehlwinte. (All right. I will kill the salmon.) Ch’isehlwe:n. (He killed 
it.) Xontahding ye’inyawh-me’. (Go on in the house .) Milkyo:xet ‘ikhwe. (You’re making money.) 

Q'unch'wilchwil: Hayde ningxa ch’inehwan nahdiyaw. (This is the best dentalia.) 

K’iwangxoya.n : fco:q’ me’diwhchwin. (I am hungry for salmon.) 

Qunch’wilchwil: fco:q’ seisehlwinte. (I will kill the salmon.) 

K’iwangxoya:n: Nahdiyaw Tlchwinte. (You will make Indian money.) 

Qunch’wilchwil: Ne:se:date. (I’ll sit down and wait.) 

K’iwangxoyam: fco:q’ me’diwhchwin. (I am hungry for salmon.) 

Qunch’wilchwil: Tse*me:n, ‘Aht’ingq’a’ante to:q’. (All kinds of salmon are swimming into the net!) 
Hay k’ixaq’ te’iwme:n. (The net is filled up.) 

K’iwangxoya:n: Nahdiyaw ’ichwe. (You’re making Indian money.) 

V. He Plays the Stick Game 

K’iwangxoya:n: K’itesingqachte. (You’re going to play stick game.) Ch’e’anohderti’. (Go out to play.) 
Tenkichtel. (The Stick Game will begin.) 

Michwa:n’tulta:n: Dundi hay yadimil? (Who’s going to hold the tossel?) 

Xontehltaw: Xa’! Nisah me:yltunte. (All right! I’ll hold on to your mouth.) 

Michwa:n’tulta:n: Hay Xontehltaw. (It’s that Coyote.) 

Xokh’ixolik: Xobce’ilwaitl*. (Fox threw Coyote down.) 

Mikyo.-w: K*e:ts’ah-xowhsin. (I’m difficult to defeat.) 




31 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



' IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 13 

Mindich: Xa\ Nich’ing’ se.loyte. (All right. I’ll play stick game against you.) 

Xoich 'ixolik: Mindich Mikyo.w k’exoltsa:s. (Lynx flopped Grizzly Bear.) 

K’e.niwh: Whiwung tiwhte. (1 am strong.) 

Mina ’ xwe : Nich’ing’ se.loyte. (All right. I’ll play stick game against you.) 

Xoich 'ixolik: Mina’ xwe K’e:niwh xolxe’ilwaitl’. (Raccoon threw Thunder down.) 

K’e.niwh: K’emiwh. (makes sound of thunder) K’e:we:niwh. (Roar of Thunder.) 

Xoich' ixolik: K’emiwh de:je:nis. (It thunders yet today.) 



Xoitsaytaw: Whiwung tiwhte. (I am strong.) 

Ninis’a:nme’a:diruichwit-hii.: Nich’ing’ se:loyte. (All right. I’ll play stick game against you.) 
Xoich’ixolik: Xoitsaytaw ninis’amme’adinilchwit-hil k’exoltsais. (Lion flopped Earthquake.) 

De’ch'iqad: Xolisch xa’ na:whay. (I’m a fast runner.) 

Mining 'miie.diliw: Me:yk’unte. (I’ll stick on to you.) 

De’ch’iqa.l: WhiHc’Bkit xok’ets. (He is catching me with his claws.) 

Mining 'mHe.diliw: Xoning’ Hqay. (His face is white.) 

Xoich’ixolik: Xoning’ Hqay de:je:nis, De’ch’iqa.l. (Moon’s face is white today.) 

XsLxowilwa.ti’: Dundi nich’ing siloyte? (Who are you going to play against?) 

Mining 'miie :diliw: Xolisch dahch’idiwhla:t. (I am a fast runner.) 

Xa:xowilwa:d': Ning’em’ te:se:yo:te. G'U chase after you.) namiwhilkit-ming. (L’U catch you.) 

Xaxowilwa.ti’: Xoning mintiwh’its. (I’m pulling at his face.) Me:xwe:yltsa:s. a flopped him.) 

Xoich’ixolik: Mining’miledillw, ’aholye Mining’ mile:diUw de:je:nis. (Panther, he is called He-fights- 
with-his-face today.) 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



14 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



K'iwangxoyan : Xa:xowilwa:tF ch’indimile. (Xa:xowilwa:tF scored a goal.) Xa:xowilwa:tF ch’ilchwe’n. 
(Xa:xowilwa:tU made it!.) 



VI. He Marries 

Xoich'ixolik: Ch’ening’qachte de:je:nis. (They will be play stick game today.) 



Xa.-xoxvilwaiii' : Hay-yo:w nawhdiyate. (I am going back there.) Nahxe tsa:mehstl’o:n, q’ina. (The two 
women, too.) 

Xa:xowilwa:ri > : Nohwung na:tesohdeke. (You go back with us.) 



Xoich'ixolik: YadeiKtse, (They are living there yet). Wilwikiung Xa:singa:wh,Xatredang’ Xa:singa:wh, 
(The Evening Star and the Morning Star, those two women.) 



Hayah noint’ik. (That’s the end of it.) 



For the purpose of giving groups more or less an equal part of the episode IV can be divided into two parts 
and episode V combined with episode VI. 

Teacher divides the class into groups to each work on one of the episodes. Each group creates their own 
version of the episode, adding or changing actions if they wish to accomplish their message. 



Expansion: Comparing Two Tribe’s Versions of He Was Dug Up 

Students have copies of Xa:xowilwa:tF and other tribe’s versions of He Was Dug Up, such as 
Wana’tchuFaiyuwek from the Wiyot tribe. 

( 1 ) Teacher asks students to get out their books and students volunteer to read Xaixowilwaiti’ . ‘This story 
is a very old story from our ancestors at Diyshtaing’ aiding. " 

Teacher asks students to form a group with two or three other students 

(1) They read the Wana'tchul’aiyuwek story to each other. Students read the story out loud, or silently 
within their group. 






- - 

Tf 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY IS 



(2) Teacher brings the groups together for a discussion of similarities and differences between the two 
stories. For example, both include the episode where there are two girls in an acorn grove, but the two 
episodes are handled differently. In Xa:xowilwa:tL the two girls can’t look at him because he is so 
bright. In Wana’tchul’aiyuwek, his uncle Linnet precedes him to the acorn grove, and describes his 
good looks to the two girls. In the first example, the storyteller is making a metaphor in his description 
that connects Xa:xowilwa:tF with the sun and looks ahead to the Creation Motifeme at the end of the 
story; in the second, he is describing one character through the behavior of another, and Linnet’s 
description of his nephew is also a reflection on his own reticence to become involved with the two 
girls himself. 

(3) Teacher discusses the concepts of the characterization of He-Was-Dug-Up, and of the metaphors with 
the students: 

In Xa:xowilwa:tF , the description of him is metaphorical, he is being described like the sun. In addi- 
tion, his name is a metaphor: He-Was-Dug-Up is a metaphorical description of a birth. Also, in the 
Hupa language, it is common for names to be descriptive: the names of chracters describe actions that 
are typical of their behavior. Eg. Xa:xowilwa:tF, minimite:diliw, xontehhaw, xoljeh, xohsaytaw, 
ke:niwh, de’ch’iqad 

(4) The teacher discusses how the incidents in the acorn grove in the two story are different, and how these 
differences reflect differences between storytellers, and to the extent that these storytellers reflect their 
tribes, the differences in tribal cultures. Wana’tchuLaiyuwek shows more restraint, Xa:xowilwa:tl 
more visual imagery. 

(5) The teacher discusses how this practice of naming shows how meaning is communicated in Hupa 
culture. She presents this as an example of cultural, or communal meaning, and asks them to think 
about names in American culture, and the different ways that they communicate something about 
American culture. 

(6) Students have the opportunity to discuss their own cultures as reflected in their home backgrounds. 
Teacher asks if any languages other than English are spoken in the home, and if so, how that changes 
the communication in the home. Students can talk about subjects discussed in the other language, and 
not in English, such as wanting to go and visit, or things that happened in this country long ago when 
the people lived there. Students can compare these stories with the traditional Native American story, 
for cultural differences and similarities. 

(7) Students study map of the Hoopa Valley Village Sites where the story took place, and learn Hoopa 
Valley village names. 




Hoopa Valley 



u. 



- - - - - a * ^ - h - 






ERIC 





Teaching Indigenous languages 



I 



Trinity River , 



Beaver Creek 



4*T 









TToh wungq’it 

Bald Hill ^ahsitaineq’it 

Niltuquluy yt* 

“Black Oak Summit" 



Mill Creek 






ii" 1 






eh 









Xonsahdipg (9-11) 
Dahk’isxa'.nq’it -L Tsilundiiig 
^S^>“playing ph 

^K’incJrWiwhq’it 

Ch’e’indiqot’ding (12) 






Misq’it 

H%^vTse:nut’ah “ rock pocket 



Ts«- 






u'o' 1 , 



linfl 



eh 



| Hooter Creek | 



... V >: */ ' ! - 

.t ■ r Misq it-mima:nch mg%*p;^«-;. : - • 

O'/ “on the opposite side from Misq 'it T m^— 

<,;/ Ta ’k ’ imilding (14-20) 



(Sock Oil) Creek 



Tse:wina:lding (6-10)^ 

Tdq’a’ts’ding;^ 

m 



Hoopa Valley 

Village Sites 

as or 1850 



[Supply Creek | 



1 iti 

I s 






tali’ 



it* 




"VMe’dilding (22-28) 
Xo W ungq’i|p|& 



Diyshta:ng’a:ding (9-13) 



] Campbell Crock 



Diyshta:ng'a:ding yirpdm 
nilinq’ch i 

Miy-me/ 



"in where the ra(n rock ir"~; ; / 

RalnRock^V / 



Takes Crain: 

1. Map -Unknown aourae. 

2. HwmHr tC - no»«m^orT a t Califanka AdikbatcapOnarpa, UCAR l6.No.3dWl. 

J. UauomatyUh8cWt«lw-OoJ^E«teiJfertOat«GttaH>^UCPAAEl.No.l(lW).l**«J«>««“ 
tniudUm 1 




Xaslinding 

(6-9) 

(ooc mile ramh) 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

35 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



|6 it really works: native American cultural communication proficiency 



Resources 

Hupa elders. For groups of students, elders can be invited into classrooms to tell stones. For indi- 
vidual students, a student can arrange to visit an elder at home. 

Book: Dr. Ruth Bennett, He Was Dug Up: A Guide to Understanding a Northern California Slot y. 
Center for Indian Community Development, in preparation. 

Hoopa Valley Tribe, Johnson O’Malley K-12 Program 

Klamath-Trimty Unified School District, Indian Education Program. 




David Peter, Xa:xowilwa:d' Storyteller 



kkkk 

rrrr 






>kkk 

TFr 






*FFF 









TFF 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS'. NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 1 



aX; • . • . ' * : ' - v v 

'Si" 

. #> .. <■:• v “ -r • ... • '-' '•/ 




■■ 



# ..xJ * * % ^ *** ^ . * 

..” .;:L^»K^d\ 5 * .i-WaL A.LlV-V ~ :: 







Materials: 

Teacher brings Bingo game set, cover sheet, instructions, consisting of fifty Bingo cards. 
Bingo tokens (each with the picture and name of an animal), twenty flashcards (one for 
each animal), and caller’s recording card, and prizes. 




Objectives: 

1) Cultural: Identify twenty animals known in Hupa culture 

2) Communication: Play Hupa Bingo game relating to twenty Hupa animals 



3) Proficiency: 
Oral: 
Written: 



Students increase Hupa language production to say the words for twenty animals 
Students recognize twenty Hupa animal names from their written forms 





W 



2 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



Activity: 

The teacher introduces the activity at the stage appropriate to the students, 
beginning at Stage 1 for beginning learners. 

Stage 1 

■ Teacher explains to students how bingo game 
is played. The first person to fill up a row, 
vertically or horizontally, wins. 

■ Teacher calls for bingo game. 

■ Teacher holds up flashcards with animal names and pro- 
nounces each animal twice in the Hupa language 

■ Teacher distributes Bingo cards 

■ Teacher draws token from bag and calls animal name, pro- 
nouncing each name twice. 

■ Student who is first to get a row, vertical or horizontal, wins. A student who thinks they have won 
calls, “Na:ne:la.” (Iwon). 



game at this stage if one or more students can recognize and pronounce 
with Bingo calling, holding up flashcards and saying name of animal. 



Stage 2 

Bingo game: 

■ Teacher begins Bingo 
animal names . 

■ Student assists teacher 








wwww ^ 



rrr 






Trr 



■M 









WWW ^ 






BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 3 




Stage 3 

Bingo game: 

m Teacher begins Bingo game at this stage if two or more students can recognize, pronounce, and 
record animal names in the game. 

■ Student assists teacher with Bingo calling, holding up flashcards and saying the name of each 
animal. A second student records those squares that have been selected. 




Stage 4 

Bingo game: A 

m Teacher begins Bingo game at this stage if three or more students can recognize, pronounce, and 

record animal names in the game. 

■ Students take turns taking the place of the teacher and giving the Bingo calling themselves. 



Expansion: 

Variations to winning can be introduced in other games, for example, other ways to win are getting 
four comers or any square of four. Wild squares can be created, (squares already covered when 
game begins.) A further variation is a different Bingo game, based upon Hupa color terms for the 
vocabulary selected for the game. 




39 



/ Client tiff 



d 

h 



i 



I 






kyoh 












-s' 



trohme:we 




xoljeh 







triwhmixung’ 




lorq’yiditile 





fK 

/iVA\ 



4 f 






miq’it-dahch’idiltse 



sa:ts’ 



. f i " \\ 

tl’ohmerwe 





nork’ineryoit’ 



h/.\> 

michwatn’tultarn 




lo:q'yiditite 







miq’it-dahch’idiltse 



xontehltaw 







trohme:we 



minim’mitetdiliw 





k’ilixun 



mik’iqots’e’ 



chwa’ 



chwa* 




If you win, say “na:ne:lay!” (I won!) rrrrr rr rrrrr rr r rr 




Teaching Indigenous languages 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 






IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY S 




minim’ mile: diliw 



o 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION 



PROFICIENC Y , 




Materials: 

Teacher brings three body pan charts: head, boy, and girl, and flash cards for pans of body to be named in 
the game (one for each body pan), and balloons (one for each student). 



Objectives: 

Cultural: 
Communication : 
Proficiency: 
Oral: 

Written: 



Activity: 



Leam Hupa words for six Hupa relative names. 

Act out Questions and Answers relating to five Hupa relative names. 

Students increase Hupa language production. 

Students increase Hupa language comprehension by responding to five commands. 
Students increase Hupa language production by saying names for five body parts. 

Students recognize parts of the head and boy when seeing them written in the 
Hupa Writing System. 



The teacher introduces the activity at the stage appropriate to the students, beginning at Stage 1 for beginning 
learners. 



Teacher gives commands to conduct the game in the Hupa language, using body language to make the 
commands clear. 






------ ^ 



kkk 

l www 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Teaching Indigenous Languages 



2 n- REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



Stage 1: 

To Begin the Game: 



Heyung, (teacher’s name) ’a:wholye. Natinixwe Me’dilding na’whay. 
Hello, I am (teacher’s name.) I am a Hoopa Valley Indian from Me diling. 



’Ohying. 

Na:sma:s yeh’ohdil 
’Aht’ine ’ilyol. 
’Aht’ine ’a:dohne’ 
Whitsita’ 
Whinchwiwh 
Which ’ich 
WhUa’ 
Whiqot’ 



Everybody stand up 
Gather in a circle. 

Everybody blow up your balloons. 
Everybody say 

Top of my head 
My nose 
My elbow 
My hand 
My knee 



To conduct the game: De:diq f eh 

’Aht’ine ’adohne’ 



This way here (follow along) 
Everybody say 



Teacher bounces balloon on each of the body parts in turn and everybody says the body part when she 
bounces the balloon on that body part: 



Whits’ idah 

Whinchwiwh 

Which’ich 

Whila’ 

Whiqot’ 



Top of my head 
My nose 
My elbow 
My hand 
My knee 



Students stay in the game as long as they continue to bounce the balloon on the appropriate body part. 

Teachergives commands for beginning the game. When saying the names for body teacher asks 

for student volunteers to name the appropriate body part when she is holding up the flash cards. 

Teachergives commands for beginning the game, and chooses a student volunteer*) hold up t be ^ash 
and say the Hupa names. This student, or another student, says the appropriate body part when balloons are 

bouncing. 

Students^ake turns taking the place of the teacher and conducting the Balloon Body Part Game themselves. 

Expansion: 

More body parts can be added, from the body part charts. Names for these body parts are built into the 
introduction aS gST Nations to Walloon Body Parts can be created, such as touching a part of the ^ a 
oftimes (once on the first one called, twice on the second one called, three times on the thud one 

called, etc.), or blowing bubbles instead of balloons . 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



199 



45 




sdSnnSinrj snouaSipuj Snupvaj 




!'i 

'|! 

1 1 

!i 




ioz 



05 




T 



c 



0 

a 



a 

x 

4 - 

< 4 - 

c 



t 



a: 

a 






AONHiououd NoavDiNnwwoo ivmnno mvdihbwv hallvn isxao* Anviaxi * 



ssSvnSutrj snou98ipuj Sunpv^J, 




;ULfl 

=-i 

— o 







Teaching Indigenous Languages 



rr REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



gjSg SnT; j j Hupa Language Body Parts 



Jr* 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



202 




Teaching Indigenous Languages 



6 IT REALL Y WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 

i Hupa Language Body Parts 

T-iiii? ^ ~ 







ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 203 5 




Teaching Indigenous Languages 



'Oi 

I 



- i 



t! * 



IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 7 

Hupa Language Body Parts 




204 



52 




Teaching Indigenous Languages 



1 




8 IT REALLY WORKS! NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL COMMUNICATION PROFICIENCY 



r l t * 

■i&iM&iMz... * « J t 



Hupa Language Body Parts 



| & V >)ag a^£»sawM 







[rr^-yrV'-. L^yf, ?' 

my lucnuiiz 

<X2&C2ai 



ERIC 



205 



53 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



■: t 

; * 

I: 

I i 



!: 1 



■;» 



U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI), 
ERIC REPRODUCTION RELEASE _ . ... 

I. Document Identification: 

Title: Teaching Indigenous Languages 
Author: Jon Reyhner, Editor 
Corporate Source: Northern Arizona University 
Publication Date: 1997 

II. Reproduction Release: (check one) 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to 
the educational community, documents announced in Resources in Education (REE) are 
usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced in paper copy, and 
electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. If permission is granted to reproduce the identified 
document, please check one of the following options and sign the release form. 

Level 1 - Permitting reproduction in microfiche or other ERIC archival media (e.g. 
electronic or optical) and in paper copy. 

Level 2 - Permitting reproduction in microfiche or other ERIC archival media but 

not in paper copy. 

Sign Here: "I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 
nonexclusive permission to reproduce this document as indicated above. Reproduction 
from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than ERIC 
employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. 
Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to 
satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries." 

Position: Associate Professor 



Printed Name: Jon Reyhner Organization: Northern Arizona University 




Address: P.O. Box 5774, NAU Telephone No: 520 523 0580 
Flagstaff, AZ 8601 1-5774 



Date: 




/y 



EH. Document Availability Information (from Non-ERIC Source): 



Complete if permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or if you want 
ERIC to cite availability of this document from another source. 



Publisher/Distributor: Division of Educational Servicess, CEE 

Northern Arizona University 



Address: P.O. Box 5774, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5774 



Price per copy: $6.95 Quantity price: Call or Write 



