DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 287 618 



RC 016 286 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 

GRANT 

NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



0*Connell, Joanne Curry 

Assessment Issues. Native American Rehabilitation: A 
Bibliographic Series, No. 1. 

Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff. Native American 
Research and Training Center. 

Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 

Servici^s (ED), Washington, DC. 

86 

G0083C0095 
40p. 

Native American Research and Training Center, Box 
5360, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
($4.00). 

Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 
MF01/PC02 Pl.^r. Postage. 

Adolescents; Adults; American Indian Education; 
^American Indians; Annotated Bibliographies; 
Children; Databases; ^Diagnostic Tests; Disabilities; 
Educational Research; ^Educational Testing; ^Handicap 
Identification; Learning Problems; Literature 
Reviews; ^Rehabilitation; Tribes 



ABSTRACT 

Fifty-seven studies addressing assessment issues of 
Native American rehabilitation are briefly described in this 
annotated bibliography. Cited alphabetically by author, the 
information is intended to provide consumers, policy makers, direct 
service providers, researchers, advocates, a:'*d parents with a 
synthesis of knowledge regarding key issues related to the 
rehabilitation of Native Americans who are disabled. Materials listed 
include journal articles, theses and dissertations, bibliographies, 
papers presented at conferences, and research reports. Materials were 
identified through a comprehensive search of five databases from 1966 



to 1986: (1) Educational Resources 
Bibliographical Retrieval Services 
Rehabilitation Information Center: 
(ABI/Inform, Medline, Psych Info, 
FAMULUS. (NEC) 



Information Center (ERIC); (2) 
(BPS); (3) National Association of 
RenabData (NARIC); (4) Dialog 
Sociological Abstracts); and (5) 



i(^ieicic'kicici<iciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciciricicicicicicicicicici^ 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

'klclclclclclclelelcleicititiciciiiicicicicicicicicicicticicicicicicicicicicicicicicicic^ 



ERIC 







Native American Rehabilitation: 
A Bibliographic Series, No. l 

Assessment Issues 



Joanne Curry O'Connell 
Northern Arizona University 





KtrM VfQriif^iMb^^^ to consider 





U W ^RTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Otftce c -u*jcatK>n»l Rewtrch and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ Tht$ document has been reproduced as 
recetved from the person or organization 
q^ginating it 
^^^inor changes h^ve been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



• Points of vtew or opimonsstatedin this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or poltcy 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFO. MATION CENTER (ERlO" 



ativl&tMIti^^ Trttining Cent er 



8EST COPY AVAILABLE 




Native American Rehsibilitation: 
A Bibliographic Series, No. 1 

Assessment Issues 



Joanne Curry O'Connell 
Northern Arizona University 



With assistance from 

Bob Colgrove 
Mary Havatone 
David DePauw 



Project Officer: Dr. Deno Reed 

The author would like to actoowledge the assistance of 
Sherry Hostler and Martha Probst in the preparation of 
these materials and their dissemination. The project was 
conducted under the auspices of the Northern Arizona 
University Native American Rehabilitation Research and 
Training center, funded by the National Institute of 
Handicapped Research, Office of Special Education and 
Rehabilitative Services, Department of Education, 
Washington, D.C. (Grant No. G0083C00S5) . 



Copyright© 1936 by Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, Arizona (All rights reserved) 



3 



Introduction 

The inforination listed here is intended to provide 
consumers, policy makers, direct service providers, 
researchers, advocates, and parents with a synthesis of 
knowledge regarding key issues related to the 
rehabilitation of Native Americans who are disabled. The 
Bibliographic Series consists of seven key topical areas 
including: (a) assessment issues; (b) rehabilitation 
issues; (c) special education issues; (d) family issues; 
(e) mental health issues; (f) health care issues; and (g) 
medically related disability issues. 
Selection Process 

Materials for inclusion in the Bibliographic Series 
were identified through a comprehensive search of relevant 
databases. The years of the computerized search included 
1966 to 1S86, varying across databases, depending on the 
availability of computerized material and the 
comprehensiveness of the database within this time period. 
The databases included in the search were: (a) ERIC 
(Educational Resource Information Center) ; (b) BRS 
(bibliographical Retrieval Services: attitudes, education, 
intellectual development, language, and rehabilitation) ; 
(c) NARIC (National Association of Rehabilitation 



4 



Information Center: RehabData) ; (d) Dialog (ABI/Inform, 
Medline, Pscyhlnfo, Sociological Abstracts); and (e) 
FAMULUS • 

In addition, materials identified by the Native 
American Research and Training Center research staff 
through journal content analysis were included. Materials 
identified through this first step were then individually 
reviewed for inclusion based on the criteria outlined 
below • 

Selection Criteria 

Materials were selected for inclusion in the 
Bibliographic Series if the information was relevant to one 
of the seven identified topical areas. In addition, 
material that was identified from non-computerized sources 
and consisted of incomplete bibliographic information such 
that the material could not be located through assistance 
from the library, or by writing the authors, was excluded. 
Abstracts were rewritten when necessary to provide further 
clarity of the study findings. The materials selected here 
represent what is believed to be a comprehensive summary of 
information related to the seven topical areas. 



ASSESSMENT 



Asmussen, J.M, (1976) • Visual-motor perception of Sioux 
and Chippewa children and the normative population on the 
Bender Gestalt test using the Koppitz, Diss e rtation 
Abstract s International , 37, 7012A-7013A. (University 
Microfilms No, 77-11,046) 

The purpose of this study was to determine if normative 

data in the Koppitz system for the Bender Gestalt test of 

visual-motor perception is appropriate to use for the 

e\^aluation of non-reservation and reservation Sioux and 

Chippewa children. Comparisons were mcide on mean error 

scores between non-reservation and reservation placement, 

Sioux and Chippewa tribal affiliation, and beys and girls. 

Children were between the ages of 5 years and 10 years, li 

months. The results showed that Pioux and Chippewa 

children differed significantly from the Koppitz normative 

sample at all age levels. Therefore, it was concluded that 

the Koppitz system is not appropriate for use with Sioux 

and Chippewa children. There was no significant difference 

between reservation and non-reservation placement, between 

girls and boys, ^r between the two tribes. 

Bowd, A.D. (1972). Some determinants of school 

achievement in several Indian groups. Alberta Journal of 
Educational Research , 18, 69-76. 

This study examined the relative importance of 

vocabulary, general intelligence, language background, and 



2 



socioeconomic status in determining the grade level 
achieved by Indian boys aged 12-14 years from several 
cultural groups in Western Canada. The author accepted the 
distinction between present ability and educability for 
people undergoing acculturation. Therefore, it was 
anticipated that while general intelligence would be a 
satisfactory predictor of achievement among white children, 
vocabulary and socioeconomic status would be most important 
for Indian groups. This expectation received general 
confirmation, and some implications for teachers of Indian 
children are discussed briefly. 

Boyer, de Vos, G.A., & Boyer, R.M. (1983). A 

longitudinal study of three Apache brothers as reflected 
in their Rorschach protocols. Journal of Psychoanalytic 
Anthropology , 6(2), 125-161. 

Three brothers were administered the Rorschach 

protocols at 6 and 10, 17 and 20, and 27 and 30 years of 

age. Performance was compared with those obtained from 

their parents. The authors used life history formats to 

discuss the effects of parental emotional problems ^ 

disordered family life, and deprived emotional nurturing of 

the three brothers. Results indicated a pattern of 

passivity and weakness of emotional integration. 



ERIC 



7 



3 



Brandt^ E.A. (1984) . The cognitive functioning of 
American Indian children: A critique of McShane and 
Plas. School Psvcholoov Review ^ 13(1), 74-82. 

The author believed that the McShane and Plas 

literature review did not critically examine the 

methodological or theoretical problems in the cited 

studies. The authors reported that th*=> 'examination 

resulted in a profile of Native American performance which 

did not control for English language fluency or for normal 

versus handicapped Indian populations. 

Browne, D.B. (1984). WISC-R scoring patterns among 
Native Americans of the Northern Plains. White Cloud 
Journal . 3(2), 3-15. 

The author explored the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 

Children-Revised (WISC-R) scoring patterns of 197 Native 

American children (ages 6-16) to identify characteristic 

cognitive processing strengths. Analysis of subtest 

specificity, mean profiles and subtest scatter, and of 

factor structure revealed a pattern of WISC-R performance 

different from that of the standardization population. The 

findings of positive Performance-Verbal (P-V) differences, 

with highest performance scores or subtests identified as 

"right brain", suggested that this characteristically 

different pattern reflects relatively greater strength in 

relational, holistic, and right hemisphere information 

processing. Picture Completion and Codincj abilities played 



ERIC 



8 



4 

a different role for tnese children than that reported for 
the WISC-R standardization population. Rather th^in 
contributing to Perceptual Organization, Picture Completion 
showed a high degree of specificity. Coding did not 
contribute to Freedom from Distractibility . The appearance 
of these two subtests in an inverse relationship in a 
fourth factor suggested they represent opposite ends of an 
information processing continuum. 

Butcher, J,, Braswell, L. , & Raney, D. (1983). A 

cross-cultural comparison of American Indiein, Black, and 
White inpatients on the JJIPI and presenting symptoms. 
Journal of Consulting & clinical Psvcholoav . 51(4), 
587-594. 

This article studied personality differences among 97 
Black, 454 White, and 36 American Indian psychiatric 
inpatients, aged 16-70 years. Comparisons were made both 
on the total samples and on matched samples of Black-White 
and American Indian-White patients according to SES. Data 
included presenting complaints, diagnoses, demographic 
information, and the MMPI. Results showed that Black 
inpatients, in both representative and matched comparison, 
had significantly higher scores than other groups on the 
Validity, Paranoia, Schizophrenia, and Hypomania subscales 
of the MMPI. Results may have reflected actual symptomatic 
differences between the groups rather than supporting the 
conclusion that the MMPI "overpathologizes" for Black 
patients. 



ERIC 



9 



5 

Cress, J.w. (1974). Cognitive and personality testing 
use and eOjuse. Journal of American Indian Education . 
13(3), 16-19. 

This article discussed the validity of using cognitive 
and personality tests that have been standardized on a 
majority culture to assess students from a non-white 
minority culture. Research was discussed that provides 
evidence that the cognitive scores of minority culture 
students may be considered good indices of future levels of 
academic performance, but in no way as indicators of 
capacity or intelligence. The author presented evidence to 
suggest that the ilidity of personality tests standardized 
on the majority culture must be demonstrated in each case 
when used for American Indian populations. It was 
concluded that without demonstrated validity of personality 
tests the results are unreliable and suspect. 

Dana, R,H. (1984). Intelligence testing of American 
Indian children: Sidesteps in quest of ethical 
practice, white Cloud Journal ^ 3(3), 35-43. 

The author reviewed the literature to suggest a 

rationale for a lack of representation in 

state-of-the-science research in current assessment 

practices with American Indian children. Alternative 

measures are described, and a perspective on the use of 

intelligence tests with traditional and acculturated 

American Indian children was offered. A culturally learned 



ERIC 



basis for intellectual functioning among traditional 
children supports alternative assessment functions for 
traditional reservation lifestyle and for acculturation and 
entry into mainstream society. It was suggested that 
performance measures including the Draw-A-Man test, the 
System of Multiculturol Pluralistic Assessment, and 
Piagetian and Luria-derived tasks may provide less biased 
intelligence estimates. Suggestions for increasing 
awareness of responsible practice, including training in 
cultural contents, and constant monitoring of research 
findings were discussed. 

Dana, R.H. , Hornby, R. , & Hoffman, T. fl984). Local 

norms of personality assessment for Rosebud Sioux* white 
Cloud Journal r 3(2), 17-24. 

Measures of life stress, locus of control, world view, 

and values were administered to 91 individuals of the 

Rosebud Sioux Tribe. The results provided some limited 

norms for local use of these measures and descriptive data 

for this tribe. These measures provided examples of 

culturally relevant, non-discriminatory instruments for 

assessment of Native Americans. 



Das, J. P., & Krywaniuk, L.W. (1976). Cognitive 
strategies in Native children: analysis and 
intervention. Alberta Journal of Educational Research . 
22, 271-280. 

The purpose of this study was to investigate whether or 
noc Native children use a different cognitive approach to 
specific skills and whether these strategies can be changed 
through training. The children were administered the 
Raven's Progressive Matrices and the wechsler Intelligence 
Scale for Children (WISC) . Two cognitive strategies were 
isolated: successive and simultaneous. On the initial 
assessment, the students did not perform as expected, but 
after an intervention in successive strategies, they 
improved on '.he Raven's. 

Educational Testing Service. (1982). Tests appropriate 
for use with Native Americans . Princeton, N.J.: 
Educational Testing Service. 

This annotated bibliography described 13 standardized 

tests appropriate for use with American Indians from 

preschool through high school levels, furnishing authors, 

copyright date, appropriate acje level, physical format, and 

publisher. A separate listing included the names, 

addresses, and telephone numbers of 3 3 major U.S. 

publishers, of standardized tests. 



12 



8 



Evard, B.L., & Sabers, D.L. (1979). Speech and language 
testing with distinct ethnic-racial groups: A survey of 
procedures for improving validity. Journal of Speech and 
Hearing Disorders . 44/ 271-281- 

This article indicated that several procedures are 

being used currently to improve the validity of speech and 

language evaluation for ethnic or racial groups from 

lower-income populations. The procedures mentioned in this 

article included: (1) development of a new test; (2) 

modification of test items or keyed responses on existing 

tests; and (3) development of new norms for existing 

tests. Examples were given for each procedure, and the 

advantages and disadvantages were discussed. 

Fifield, M. (1983) . Improving the utilization and 
educational r elevance of individual psvchoeducational 
assessment reports in the placement of and lEP 
development f or handicapped Native American children . 
Final Report, Logan, Utah: Utah State University, 
Exceptional Child Center. 

This report revealed the findings of a study in which 

psychoeducational te^iting reports were used in one Navajo 

school district. An analysis of the relationship between 

psychoeducational reports and lEP recommendations was 

provided. The study identified strengths and weaknesses of 

the psychoeducational report system and designs for 

inservice training of school officials. 



Giordano, G. (1978) • Commentary: "Congenital verbal 

deficiency" in Navajo children — more on testing. Readin g 
Teacher, 32(2), i32-134. 

While working on the Navajo Reservation the author 

observed questionable placement of students into special 

education programs. Objections to this practice were 

dismissed by team members with the observation that the BIA 

would receive more money for these students, thus offering 

better materials and instruction. The author suggested 

that the attitude of "quantity is quality" was primarily 

responsible for the poor state of education o)i the Navajo 

Reservation. Recommendations were made that changes should 

originate from and be perceived as functional by the 

Navaj^s and should incorporate their value patterns. 

Golub, L.S. (1975) • English syntax of Black, White, 

Indian, and Spanish American children. Elementary School 
Journal, 75(5), 323-334. 

The language ability of 268 children (grades 4-6) from 

four ethnic groups (Black, White, Indian, Spanish-American) 

3 compared to determine whether differences existed in 

language performance (written English syntax) and 

linguistic awareness (competence in manipulating and 

deriving meaning from language structure) . The Language 

Performance Score was used to measure 11 syntactic 

variables, and the Linguistic Ability Test was used to 

assess language competence in 12 areas. Samples were also 

gathered of the subjects • written and oral use of 



10 

language. Multivariate analysis indicated no significant 
differences among the four groups on any variables in che 
Language Performance Score, but significant differences 
were found on 11 of the 12 variables in the Linguistic 
Ability Test, leading to the conclusion that written 
language performance does not completely reflect a child's 
linguistic competence. 

Gonzales, E. (1982) . A cross-cultural comparison of the 
developmental items of five ethnic groups in the 
Southwest. Journal of Personalitv Assessment , 46, 
26-31. 

The purpose of this s .ady was to compare the 
performance of children on the Draw-a-Person as a measure 
of intellectual development, utilizing two different 
normative samples: the Koppitz norms (1968) cor 'asted with 
a recently developed Southwest norm. The 3,067 children 
were from 5 through 9 years of age and were representative 
of Anglo, Mexican-American, Pueblo, Navajo and Blacks from 
the Southwest, with almost equal numbers of males and 
females. Those who were identified by their teacher as 
having emotional or educational problems were excluded. 
Except for Anglo, Mexican-American, and Pueblo males, the 
performance of the group moved into the exceptional 
category because of a higher score from the Southwest 
sample. The author recommended developing regional ethnic 
norms. 



11 



Gray, & Wiltshire, E.B. (1969). Draw-a-Man and 

Raven's Progressive Matrices (1938) Intelligence Test 
performance of reserve Indian children. Canadian Journal 
of Behavioral Sciences ^ 1, 119-122 . 

A total of 86 Canadian reserve Indian children, from 7 

to 15 years of age, were tested on the Harris-Goodenough 

Draw-a-Man and Raven's Progressive Matrices (1938) tests. 

Mean I.Q.s for Draw-A-Man represented a significant 

difference between girls (M=100) and boys (M=113). 

Similarly, mean I.Q.s on the Ra^'en's were not significantly 

different for girls (M=79) and boys (M=85) . Test results 

were significantly correlated. Older children had 

significantly lower I.Q.s on the Raven's only. The authors 

cautioned against assuming that these tests, especially the 

Raven's (1938), are "culture free" measures of 

intelligence. 

Guilliams, C.I. (1976). Item analyses of Amerindian and 
Chicano responses on che Vocabulary: Scales of the 
Stanford-Binet LM and Wechsler Batteries . Final Report . 
Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Education. 

Chicano and Amerindian vocabulary scale responses from 

the Stanford-Binet (LM) and Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 

Children were analyzed for 1,009 subjects. The response 

patterns differed both by ethnic group and test, as well as 

by age. The most common and recurring pattern found was 

'•level of difficulty" gradient inconsistencies. Tribes 

sampled were Navajo, Apache, and a group of subjects with 



ERLC 



16 



12 

mixed-tribal backgrounds. It was concluded that bilingual 
programs similar to those being used in Texas' NIE funded 
program be adopted for other large minority groups whose 
primary language is not either English or Spanish. 

Hoffmann, T., Dana, R.H., & Bottom B. (1985). Measured 
acculturation and MMPI-168 performance of Native American 
adults. Journal of Cross-cultural Psychology , 16(2) , 
243-256. 

To test the hypothesis that acculturation influences 
the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) 
performance of Native Americans, an instrument was 
developed to measure five components of acculturation. 
When both the acculturation instrument and the MMPI-168 was 
administered to 69 individuals of the Rosebud Sioux Tribe, 
the results supported the hypothesis. Thus, caution should 
be used in interpreting the MMPI profiles of Native 
Americans. 

Hunter, J. (1984) . Fairness of the General Aptitude Test 
Battery; Ability differences and their impact on 
minority hiring rates. Users test research report No. 
46. Sacramento, California: California State Department 
of Employment Development. 

This paper reviewed the large mass of general 

literature showing that psychological tests are fair to 



mc 



17 



13 

minorities* This literature showed that there is no single 
group validity, there is no differential validity, and 
tests overpredict rather than underpredict minority job 
performanca. General Aptitude Test Battery norms for 
Blacks, Indians, Mexican Americans, Orientals and the 
majority white population are compared. Although the 
majority is higher on cognitive abilities, three out of 
four minority groups are higher than the majority on 
psychomotor ability. Thus, there is a varied pattern of 
rank orders among groups across jobs of different 
complexity. 

Hynd, G.W. , Quackenbush, R., Kramer, R. , Conner, R. , & 
Weed, W. (1980). Concurrent validity of the McCarthy 
Scales of Children's Abilities with the Native American 
primary grade children. Measurement and Evaluation in 
Guidance, 13, 29-34. 

Using the McCarthy Scales and WISC-R, the Navajo 

children in the study performed considerably lower than the 

standardization sample. From a mean score of 100, they had 

a score of 75.86 on the McCarthy Scales and 77.86 on the 

WISC-R, 



Immerman, M.A. (1381). The effect of eliminating time 
restraints on a standardized test with American Indian 
adults. (ERIC Dociament Reproduction Service No. RC 012 
398) 

To investigate the effect of time restraints on the 
diagnostic test scores of Native American students entering 



^ 1 o 

ERLC 1^ 



14 

Bureau of Indian Affairs schools, two groups of students at 
Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute ^,SIPI) in 
Albuquerque, New Mexico, were given the Stanford Diagnostic 
Reading Test, 1977 edition* The test scores indicated that 
the experimental group, with no time restraints, scored 
higher than the control group. It was recommended that the 
Stanford Diagnostic Reading Test be given to SIPI students 
without the same time limits, to allow SIPI students the 
additional time for interpretation, eliminate the 
atmosphere of competition that Native Americans are not 
accustomed to, and to remove the additional anxiety caused 
by time pressure. 

Jayagopal^ R. (1974). ProLlem solving abilities and 
psychomotor skills of high school students belonging to 
different cultures (ethnic groups) in U.S.A. Journal of 
Psychological Researcher 18 , 4. 

Three ethnic groups (Mexican, Navajo, and Anglo 

students) in two junior high schools from Albuquerque, NM, 

were tested using three performance subtests of the WISC 

and five psychomotor skills — perception. Performances of 

Mexican students were lower than Anglos and Navajos on all 

three performance subtests and the five psychomotor 

skills. Significant relationships between problem-solving 

and psychomotor skills was demonstrated by all subjects. 



15 

Jenson, A. (1973). The differences are real. Psychology 
Today . 7(7), 80^86. 

The author defended his idea that differences in 

intelligence are based primarily on genetic rather than 

environmental factors and maintains that his theories are 

not racist for they do not condone discrimination on the 

basis of racial origins. The author discussed research 

evidence that Blacks perform, on the average, one standard 

deviation below Whites on I.Q. tests, and when Blacks were 

administered culture-fair and culture-loaded tests, they 

failed to perform better on the culture-fair test. Yet, 

Native Americans and Mexican Americans did better on 

culture-fair I.Q. tests, even though Native Americans 

experience greater or equal socioeconomic deprivation. The 

author concluded that racial differences are still an open 

question and not to be politicized. 

Kazimour, K.K. , & Reschly, D.J. (1981). Investigation of 
the norms and concurrent validity for the Adaptive 
Behavior Inventory for Children (ABIC) . American Journal 
of Mental Deficiency . 85(5), 512-520. 

The over-placement of minority children into the 

category of mildly retarded was investigated using the 

ABIC, which is the social system measure of the child's 

performance on a number of social roles and settings in the 

SOMPA (System of Multicultural Pluralistic Assessment) . 

The 482 children were from four sociocultural groups 



20 



16 

(White, Black, Hispanic, and Papago) residing in Pima 
County, Arizona, and in first, third, and fifth grades. 
The published ABIC norms were higher than that of the White 
and Black children in the sample. The means for the 
Papagos were lower for both the published and Arizona 
norms. There was little evidence of correlation among 
ABIC, WICS-R, and teachers' ratings. The authors 
questioned the nonrelatedness of ABIC to academic 
abilities/difficulties . 

Kirk, S.A. (1972). Ethnic differences in 

psycholinguistic edDilities. Exceptional Children , 39(2), 
112-118. 

This article summarized the results of several research 
studies on the psycholinguistic abilities of three ethnic 
groups (Blacks, Indians, and Mexican Americans) using the 
Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities. Black 
children appeared to have superior ability (as compared to 
their other abilities and to other ethnic groups) in short 
term auditory sequential memory, while Indian and Mexican 
American children appeared to have superior ability in 
short term visual sequential memory. The author 
hypothesized that ethnic group differences may be accounted 
for by different child rearing practices among the ethnic 
groups . 



17 

Lansford, L.M. (1978, June) . Performance of American 
Indian children compared with Koppitz norm atj^ve 
populat ion on the Bender , Paper presented at the World 
Congress on Future Special Education, Stirling, 
Scotland. 

Differences in the normative data presented in the 
Koppitz Scoring System for the Bender Gestalt Test were 
compared for 838 elementary-age children of the Sioux, 
Chippewa, Navrjo, and Apache tribes and a Koppitz normative 
group. The results indicated statistically significant 
differences between American Indian samples and the 
non-Indian group at a number of age levels on mean errors. 
It was also found that differences existed between tribes 
at certain age levels. It was recommended that normative 
information specific to tribes be collected. 

Lidz, C.S. (1983) . Psychological assessment of the 
preschool disadvantaged child , (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 219 912) 

The author described a psychological assessment process 

for use with the disadvantaged preschooler which involves 

screening, diagnostic evaluation, instruction related 

assessment, evaluation of the results of instruction, and 

readiness. Attempts to devise culture-free measures were 

discussed. A need for an understanding of language usage 

in the home was discussed. For Native Ar*ericans, the use 

of nonverbal measures was stressed. 



22 



18 

Lombardi, T.P. (1969). Psycholinguistic eibilities of 
Papago Indian school children. Exceptional Children . 
36(7) , 485-493. 

This study investigated the psycholinguisti c abilities 

of Papago Indian school children utilizing the 1968 edition 

of the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities (ITPA) . 

Data obtained were analyzed by a comparison of mean scaled 

scores using t-tests of paired comparisons for the 

following groups: (1) ITPA normative sample and Papago 

sample; (2) first and third graders; and (3) segregated and 

integrated populations. Statistical interactions between 

children, grade, and school were analyzed. Results 

indicated poorer performance of the Indians, especially on 

the auditory vocal tests, better performance of the Indians 

attending integrated schools, and the ineffective aspects 

of cumulative education. 

McAreavey, J. P. (1975). An analysis of selected 
educationally handicapped South Dakota Sioux Indian 
children's responses to the Wechsler Intel? Igence Scale 
for Children and wide Range Achievement Test of Reading. 
Dissert ation Abstracts International . 36, 5154A. 
(University Microfilms No. 76-3927) 

The purpose of the study was to determine the extent of 
fairness and of bias exhibited by selected intelligence and 
achievement tests when administered to educationally 
handicapped (EH) South Dakota Sioux Indian children. In 
conducting this study, 100 EH South Dakota Sioux Indian 
children were selected. The WISC and WRAT tests in reading 



ERIC 



23 



19 

were administered. The data was then analyzed to ascertain 
the extent of fairness, bias, and, more specifically, those 
concerns regarding WISC scores compared to performance 
scores, ordering discrepancies, WISC subtests correlation 
with reading, and constancy of profile pattern across age, 
sex, in-town, and out-of-town groupings. Significant 
differences were found between Verbal and Performance 
I.Q.s. Ordering discrepancies occurred on five subtests. 
All WISC subtests correlated positively with the WRAT 
Reading Score. A significant main effect for Reading on 
the Full, Verbal and Performance I.Q. was found. It was 
recommended that users of the WISC be aware of the 
variability within age groups found in this study. 

McKeever, W.F. (1981) • Evidence against the hypothesis 
of right hemisphere language dominance in the Native 
American Navajo. Neuropsvcholoaia . 19(4), 59i:-598. 

The hypothesis that the Native American Navajo 
possesses a reverse (right hemisphere) language function 
dominance was tested, using the Lateralized Object Naming 
Latency Task as a measure of hemispheric language 
specialization. Navajo performances were indistinguishable 
from those of "Anglo" university students. The Navajo 
appeared no less consistently left hemisphere dominant for 
language than other neurological ly-nonnal, right-handed 
persons. 



mc 



McShane, D*A* , & Plas, J.M. (1984). The cognitive 

functioning of American Indian Children: Moving from the 
Wise to the WISC-R* School Psvcholocrv Review ,, 13(1), 
61-73 • 

Studies examining the performance of American Indian 
children on the Wechsler instru.ments were reviewed to 
provide the basis for an analysis of research with the 
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised. The 
factors that potentially influence Indian performance on 
the Wechsler were presented. Suggestions for 
interpretation of the Wechsler Intelligence Scales with 
American Indians are offered. 

Middleton, A.H. (1976). Structure of intellect in 
A2neric2Ui Indian children. Dissertation Abstracts 
International . 17(8), 4156B. (University Microfilms No. 
77-2792) 

The author concluded from a study of 80 American Indian 
children (3.5 to 4.5 years of age) that American Indian 
children differed in memory ability on the basis of social 
class. The structure of intellect factors was not related 
to the sex of American Indian children. Certain semantic 
and memory factors were found to favor rural American 
Indian children, and American Indian children exceeded 
other ethnic groups on tests involving spatial skills. 



21 

Mishra, s.P. (1984). WISC-R performance patterns of 

leaming-disaUsled children from Papago culture. Journal 
of Clinical PsYcholooV r 4ja(6) , 1489-1492. 

Forty-six third through fifth grade learning disabled 

Papago children, with an average I.Q. of 81.96, were 

examined using their wiSC-R profiles recategorized by the 

Bannatyne system. The subjects were not characterized by 

the spatial-conceptual-sequential pattern as proposed by 

Bannatyne (1974), although their wiSC-R performance was 

similar on sequential and spatial categories. The author 

suggested that caution be used when interpreting the 

Bannatyne profile for learning disabled minority children. 

Moore, C.L. , & Zarske, j.A. (1984). Comparison of Native 
American Navajo Bender-Gestalt performance with Koppitz 
and SOMPA norms. Psvcholocrv in the Schools . 21(2), 
148-153. 

This study investigated the use of the Bender-Gestalt 
for diagnosing learning disabled children by comparing 
their Bender-Gestalt performance with Koppitz (1974) norms 
and the System of Multicultural Pluralistic Assessment 
(SOMPA) norms. The 452 Navajo children were diagnosed as 
either learning disabled, educationally disadvantaged, or 
non-handicapped. The findings indicated that SOMPA and 
Koppitz norms may be useful in the psychological assessment 
of Navajo children. 



26 



.a 



More, A.J,, & Oldridge, B. (1980) • An approach to 

non-discriminatory assessment of Native Indian children. 
B.C. Journal of Special Education , 4(1), 51-59. 

This article focused on evidence that intelligence 

testing is a culture-laden instrument when it comes to 

twisting American Indian children who are having learning 

difficulties in school and their placement into special 

education programs is indicated. The System of 

Multicultural Pluralistic Assessment (SOMPA) was discussed 

in this article as a non-discriminatory approach because it 

reduces som*:* of the cultural factors present in traditional 

assessment instruments. The SOMPA analyzes cognitive 

functioning, provides an estimated learning potential, and 

suggests developments in adaptive behavior areas. The 

authors recommended that the SOMPA be used as a more 

effective assessment instrument, although norms have not 

been developed for American Indian children, 

N^^.glieri, J. A., & Yazzie, C. (1983). Comparison of the 
WISC-R and PPVT-R with Navajo children. Journal of 
Clinical Psvcholoav . 39(4), 598-600. 

This study explored the relationship between the 

Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) 

and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-R) for 37 

Native Americ^.n children. The PPVT-R standard scores 

correlated significantly with the WISC-R Verbal I.Q., 

Performance l.Q. , and Full Scale I.Q.. 



23 



Nelson, L,, Tadlock, L. , Dawes, J,, Hippie, J,, & 
Jetmalani, N. (1964) . Screening for emotionally 
disturbed students in an Indian boarding school. 
Experience with the Cornell Medical Index Health 
Questionnaire. American Journal of Psychiatry . 120(12), 
1155-1159. 

The present study was based on the need to identify 
those Indian boarding school students who suffer from 
psychiatric disturbances. The limitation of psychiatric 
consultation time makes it desirable to determine with a 
practical screening program the population at risk for 
developing disruptive psychiatric problems, thus detecting 
the disturbed student often before overt syiriptoms become 
apparent to school personnel, and with a minimal 
expenditure of consultant's time. The Cornell Medical 
Index (CMI) has been shown to be a usable instrument for 
detecting mentally disturbed individuals. 

Olion, L. , & Gillis-Olion, M. (1984). Assessing 

culturally diverse exceptional children. Early Child 
Development and Care , 15(2--3), 203-231. 

This article reviewed the traditional cultural values, 

learning styles, and problems in identifying ethnic groups 

in the United States. The authors recommended alternative 

techniques and strategies in assessing culturally diverse 

exceptional children. The difference between testing and 

'assessment is examined, along with the purpose of 

assessment and the factors that should be considered in the 



o 2b 



24 



assessment of culturally diverse children. A definition of 
cultural diversity is examined along with some discussion 
of the importance of cultural awareness in the assessment 
process. 

Pine, C.J. (1983). Obese and non-obese American Indian 
and Caucasian performance on the Mini-Mult MMPI and I-E 
scale. Journal of Clinical Psvcholoav . 39(2), 251-256. 

The author suggested that recent concerns over high 

incidences of obesity among various American Indian tribes 

and groups have been ignored by the psychological 

literature. Relationships between obesity, MMPI, and I-E 

Scale scores have been reported without regard for 

ethnicity. This study compared urbanized obese and 

non-obese American Indians and Caucasians on the Mini-Mult 

MMPI and I-E Scale (N=160) . The major findings were that 

the Indian sample had higher Hypomania scale scores than 

the Caucasian sample and that males had higher Depression 

and Hypochondriasis scale scores than females. The scores 

were similiar across weight conditions. These results are 

discussed in terms of the complexity of obesity in general 

as well as ethnic/cultural and sex difference factors. 

Ramstad, V.V. , & Potter, R.E. (1974). Differences in 
vocabulary and syntax usage between Nez Perce Indian and 
White kindergarten children. Journal of Learning 
Dis>abilities . 7(8), 491-497. 

Through the use of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test 

and the Northwestern Syntax Screening Test, the study 

ERIC 2^ 



25 

examined whether there were significant differences between 
Nez Perce Indian and White kindergarten children (21 in 
each group) in their u£.e of receptive vocabulary, and 
receptive and expressive syntax. The study also attempted 
to determine if there were any significant differences 
between receptive vocabulary and receptive syntax, and 
between receptive and expressive syntax within v>ach 
population. Significant differences in favor of the White 
children were found in all three tasks measured. 

Reschly, D.J. (1981). Evaluation of the effects of SOMPA 
measures on classification of students as mildly mentally 
retarded. American Journal of Mental Deficiency , 86(1) , 
16-20- 

The over^-classification of minority children into the 
mild mental retardation cat'^gory was the impetus for this 
study. The performance of children from four sociocultural 
groups, White (149), Hispanic (125), Native American 
Papago (122), and Black (128), were investigated on the 
Sy --.em of Multicultural Pluralistic Assessment (SOMPA) , 
Adaptive Behavior for Children and Estimated Learning 
Potential measures. The data revealed that there was a 
marked reduction in the number and percentage of children 
classified as mildly retarded in all sociocultural groups. 



26 

Rosenbluth, A.R. (1976) . The feasibility of test 
translation between xinrelated languages — English to 
Mavajo. TESOL Quarterly , Ifl(l) , 33-43. 

This study investigated whether or not a test can be 

translated into Navajo in a foim suitable for assessing/ the 

language development of kindergarten, first, and second 

grade Navajo students. The norms from an English test 

administered in Albuquerque, New Mexico, as well as from 

the Boehm Test of Basic Concepts norm group, were used to 

provide a comparison of the difficulty and discrimination 

of the translated test. Though words for basic concepts 

must exist in every language, the way they are incorporated 

into surface grammar for expression differs so widely 

between Navajo and English that the universality of this 

concept core probably cannot be tapped in a practical way 

by the translator or teacher. 

Sacks, B. (1981). A study to investigate whether Navajo 
special education elementary students develop differences 
in cognitive aODilities from regularly placed Navajo 
elementary children. Dissertation Abstracts 
International . 43, 3250A-3251A. (University Microfilms 
No. DA 8305290) 

The purpose of this study was to determine whether 

Navajo learning disabled (LD) children, 7 through 13 years 

of age, differed in cognitive abilities from regularly 

placed Navajo elementary children of the same ages. The LD 

children scored significantly lower than regular children 

in overall cognitive abilities. It was concluded that the 



mc 



31 



Navajo LD children have not developed overall cognitive 
abilities as effectively as regular Navajo children. 
Learning disabled Navajo children, 7-8 years of age, scored 
lower than regular 7-8 year-old Navajo children in the 
verbal ability subtest. Finding Causes. The conclusion 
drawn was that this verbal ability is deficient among the 
LD children. Also, as Navajo children grow older, the 
cognitive differences apparent at ages 7 and 8 become 
smaller. It was concluded that experiences with cognitive 
processing skills should be emphasized to decrease 
discrepancies. 

Seyfort, B. (1980). A critical look at the WISC-R with 
Native Indian children. Alberta Journal of Educational 
Research , 26(1), 14-24. 

Analysis of the performance of American Indian children 

on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (Revised) 

confiimed prior results regarding rhe verbal and perceptual 

motor skills of that population. Because so many items did 

not contribute significantly to the total test variance, 

clinicians should interpret test results with caution. 

Sidles, C, & MacAvoy, J. (1986, in press). Navajo 
adolescents on a primary language questionnaire, the 
Raven Standard Progressive Matrices (RSPM) and the 
Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills (CTBS) : A 
correlational study. Journal of Indian Education . 

One hundred twenty-four Navajo 14, 15, anJ 16 year-old 

regular classroom adolescents from schools in Arizona and 

32 



28 

New Mexico were administered three instruments: (1) a 
primary language questionnaire; (2) the Raven Standard 
Progressive Matrices (RSPM) ; and (3) the Comprehensive 
Tests of Basic Skills (CTBS). Raw scores were obtained for 
the RSPM and CTBS and then transformed into derived scores 
to allow for descriptive and correlational analysis. There 
was close correspondence of mean scores on the RSPM across 
the variables of sex, grade level, and primary language 
results. Correlational analysis between the RSPM scores 
and CTBS achievement levels ranged from the upper .30s to 
the upper •40s, and all were significant at the p<.01 
level. Correlational data indicated that the level of 
agreement between RSPM and CTBS scores was higher for 
female th^n male students. Norms were established for this 
sample of Navajo adolescents on the RSPM. Interpretations 
of the findings included implications for educators and 
psychometricians working with Navajo adolescents. Also 
included is a discussion of these findings as they relate 
to cultural sensitivity in testing and research questions 
for future exploration. 

Street, D.R. (1984) • The Das Simultaneous-Successive 
model applied to the WISC-R with referred Native American 
Navajo students. Dissertation Abstracts International , 
45, 471A. (University Microfilms No. DA 8411457) 

The purpose of this study was to determi.ne whether 

referred Navajo Indian children manifested the pattern of 



33 



29 



WISC-R subtest scaled scores predicted by Kaufman (1979) 
and Naglieri, Kamphus, and Kaufman (1983), and to determine 
how the forward and backward components of the Digit Span 
subtest load on the emergent pattern. The simultaneous 
grouping of WISC-R subtests was significantly greater than 
the successive grouping for each group of referred 
Navajos. The results also indicated that the educationally 
disadvantaged and non-handicapped groups demonstrated 
significantly greater simultaneous and successive scores 
than the learning disabled group. 



Taylor, H.D., & Thwcatt, R.C. (1972). Cross cultural 
development performance of Navajo children on the 
Bender-Gestalt test. Perceptual and Motor Skills . 35, 
307-309. 

This study focused on Navajo performance on the 
BenUer-Gestalt test by obtaining developmental data from 
160 Navajos and Anglos, who were in the 6 to 7 and 11 to 12 
age group. There were significant differences between 
ethnic groups and age groups. Greater distortion was 
reported by the 6 to 7 year-old Navajo children than by the 
Anglo children of equivalent age. The study showed 
evidence that Navajo children functioned at the same 
competence level at the 12 year stage as their Anglo 
counterpart. 



o 34 

ERIC 



Teeter, A, (1980) . The intellectual characteristics of 
the Native American learning disabled student: A 
diagnostic perspective. Dissertation Abstracts 
International , 41, 1503A. (University Microfilms No. 
8022666) 

In this study, 452 Navajo children were tested using 
three diagnostic instruments to determine the efficacy of 
the approaches in distinguishing learning disabled 
students. Children had previously been classified as 
learning disabled (150), non-handicapped (113), and 
educationally disadvantaged (189) . The results suggested 
that 50% of the subjects should have been diagnosed as 
learning disabled. 

Teeter, A., Moore, C.L., & Peterson, j.d. (1982). WISC R 
verbal and performance eJ^ilities of Native American 
students referred for school learning problems. 
PsvcholoQV in the School s. 19 , 39-44. 

This study was designed to determine if three 

diagnostic groups of Navajo children differed on 

intellectual dimensions as measured by the WISC-R. 

Subjects had been previously diagnosed by state certified 

prof-5ssionals and V7ere identified as non-handicapped (NH) 

(N=113), educationally disadvantaged (ED) (N=189) , and 

learning disabled (LD) (N=150) . Group means of the 

non-handicapped children were significantly higher than the 

LD group means on all WISC-R variables. The ED and the LD 

group means were similar on the verbal measures, but the LD 

group scores were lower than the ED group scores on 



35 



performance measures. The NH group demonstrated 
intellectual abilities and deficits similar to those 
reported for other primary-grade Navajo children who had 
not been referred for services. 

Thorum, A.R., & Riley, G.D. (1971). A pilot study of tne 
psycholinguist ic abilities of Navajo school children. 
California State Federation CEC Journal , 20(3), 43-45. 

Twenty- five Navajo students aged 8 through 10 were 

selected randomly and tested in order to determine 

psychoiinguistic abilities. The scores were high on the 

visual component of the Illinois Test of Psychoiinguistic 

Abilities, while the performance on the grammatical 

closure task showed a significant deficit, which suggested 

a language disability. Further investigation was needed in 

the areas of how children acquire language, and how it can 

be assessed and remediated. 

Thurber, S. (1976). Changes in Navajo response to the 
Draw-a-M2m test. Journal of Social Psychology 99, 
139-140. 

This study was done to test Dennis' hypothesis (1966) 
that increasing acculturation of Navajos would decrease the 
disparity in Draw-a-Man scores as previously shown by 
Steggerda (1936). Steggerda showed that between boys and 
girls there was a significant 24 point disparity. The 



32 

assumption was that males were more visually stimulated 
because of more exposure to rituals and artistic 
achievements. This study concluded that scores declined 
from previous studies. The author suggested that the 
decline of scores was due to the level of poverty in 
existence now, with less influence from traditional values, 
and more influence from the media. 



Vincent, L.L. (1974). The performance of Navajo and 
Apache Indian children on the Bender Gestalt test using 
the Koppitz developmental scoring system for visual-motor 
perception. Dissertation Abstracts International . 35, 
5628A. (University Microfilms No. ECD75-11107) 

The purpose of this study was to determine whether the 

norms presented in the Koppitz system for the Bender 

Gestalt are suitable for a comparison of two groups of 

children. The sample was comprised of 142 Navajo and 208 

Apache children, ranging i.. age from 6 through 10 years. 

The normative sample, although larger, was of the same 

age. The author concluded that it may be appropriate to 

use Koppitz norms for Native American children 7 through 10 

years of age, but caution should be used in applying these 

norms to American Indian children under 7 years of age. 

There was no evidence that the two tribes differed 

significantly in the time taken to complete the drawings, 

and the boys and girls within tribes did not differ 

significantly. 



hi 



ERIC 



37 



33 

Zarske, J. A., Moore, C.L., & Peterson, J.D. (1981). 
WISC-R factor structure for diagnosed learning disabled 
Navajo and Papago children. Pavchology in the schools . 
18(4), 402-407. 

The factor structures of 192 Navajo children and 50 

Papago learning disabled children on the Wechsler 

Intelligence Scale for Children (Revised) were compared. 

The previously diagnosed learning disabled children were 

ages 6 years, 8 months and 15 years, 2 months. Both groups 

were similar in the proportion of common factor variance by 

general factor, and the verbal-performance distinction was 

notable for both groups. The results supported the 

validity of the wiSC-R as a measure of general intelligence 

functioning and deemed appropriate for diverse groups of 

children. 

Zarske, j.A. (1980). The use of the Wechsler 

Intelligence Scale for Children (Revised) with learning 
disabled Navajo and Papago American Indian children. 
Disseration Abs tracts International ^ 41 . lOOOA. 
(University Microfilms No. 8018713) 

The purpose of this study was to determine whether 
Navajo and Papago American Indian learning disabled 
children manifested the pattern of WISC-R subtest scaled 
scores predicted by Bannatyne (1968, 1971), and to 
determine the factor structure of the WISC-R when it is 
used with learning disabled Navajo and Papago children. 
The scores for this group characterized by spatial- 
sequential-conceptual differences were responsible for the 



ERIC 



absence of the predicted pattern. A three factor solution 
was found which supported the use of the WISC-R as a 
measure of spatial, conceptual and sequential intellectual 
skills* 

Zarske, J. A., & Moore, C.L. (1982) • Recategorized WISC-R 
scores of learning dis2aDled Navajo Indian children. 
Psvcholoav in the Schools , 19(2), 156-159. 

Bannatyne's system (1974) recategorizes WISC-R scores 

to form spatial, conceptual, and sequential categories. In 

this study, the WISC-R scores of 192 learning disabled 

Navajo children, ages 6 through 16 years, were 

recategorized according to the Bannatyne system. The study 

found that the subjects failed to demonstrate the predicted 

spatial-conceptual-sequential pattern by Bannatyne. 

Zarske, J.A., & Moore, C.L. (1982). Recategorized WISC-R 
scores for non-handicapped, learning dis2d)led, 
educationally disadvantaged and regular classroom Navajo 
children. School Psvcholoav Review , 11(3), 319-323. 

For this study, a comparison was made of WISC-R verbal, 

performance, and full scale I.Q-s and the Bannatyne 

recategorized system. The sample consisted of 113 

non-handicipped, 189 educationally disadvantaged, 150 

learning disabled, and 44 regular classroom Navajo 

children. The students ranged from age 6 through 16 



3y 



35 



years. The predicted Banna tyne pattern (spatial- 
conceptual-sequential) failed to be demonstrated by the 
learning disabled group. All four groups displayed a 
characterization pattern of spatial-sequential-conceptual, 
and all showed a low verbal score-below 70. Although the 
sequential category differentiated the learning disabled 
from the other groups, Bannatyne is not supported for use 
by findings from this study. 




40 



