English Teaching: Practice and Critique December 2014, Volume 13, Number 3 

http://education.waikato.ac.nz/research/files/etpc/files/2014vl3n3art5.pdf pp. 89-109 

Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 

SEYYEDED FAHIMEH PARSAIYAN 
Alzahra University 
SUE-SAN GHAHREMANI GHAJAR 
Alzahra University 
SOHEILA SALAHIMOGHADDAM 
Alzahra University 
FATEMEH JANAHMADI 
Alzahra University 

ABSTRACT: The recent decades of English Language Teaching (ELT) appear 
to be particularly concerned with the marginalisation caused by English 
linguistic, cultural, and academic colonisation and imperialism. Bold 
footprin ts of this academic monopoly can be seen in the wide incorporation of 
abridged or unabridged British and American literary works in foreign 
language settings. Such literary products are often legitimised as authentic 
materials authored by native speakers. Inspired by the idea of incorporating 
non-native literature and translated first language literature into English 
classes, the authors of this article sought to explore the possibilities of 
opening spaces for English translations of Persian classic works of literature 
in English as foreign language classrooms arid tracing the language events 
that unfolded as a result of incorporating such literature. The participants of 
this two-semester long action research project were non-English major 
Iranian female university students, majoring in various fields at Alzahra 
University, Tehran, Iran. The sense of familiarity the students had with such 
national literary works led to the emergence of language instances lightened 
by sparks of virtue, vision, life and art. 

KEYWORDS: Academic imperialism, art, life, Persian classic literature, 
virtue, vision. 


INTRODUCTION 

The 13th-century Persian Poet, Mowlana Jalal-al-Din Rumi (1207-1273 AD), in one 
of his poems, Tree of Life, narrates the story of a messenger who in running an errand 
for a king is sent to India to find a mysterious tree whose fruits grant immortality. For 
years, this man desperately wanders around, from town to town, seeking this 
mysterious tree, but nowhere does he fmd it, nor a clue or trace of it. Feeling fed up 
and disappointed with false directions and rumours, he eventually decides to depart 
that foreign land and leave his mission unaccomplished. On his way back home, he 
happens to meet a spiritual man at a halting-place. He goes to him in despair and 
opens up his heart. Having listened to his adventures, the sage tells him how he has 
been mistaken all this time since the so-called “tree”, which can have a thousand other 
names, is “knowledge”—pouring out from divine fountain—through which “a million 
things arise” including everlasting life, and without which the person is a lifeless 
corpse. The sage says: 


Copyright © 2014, ISSN 1175 8708 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Hey simple-brain, 

This tree is knowledge which the mystics gain. 

It’s the most tall, wide, and expansive tree; 

It’s Water of Life from God’s boundless sea. 

You looked for the tree’s form, so in the end 

You picked no fruit of inner truth, my friend. 

In fact, it’s only sometimes called “a tree”— 

At other times it’s “sun”, “cloud”, or “the sea”; 

From that one source a million things arise, 

With immortality its smallest prize... (Mathnavi, Book II / 3683-3692) 1 . 

As a community of Iranian researchers involved in the disciplines of English 
Language Teaching (ELT), Persian Literature and Islamic History, we have at times 
drawn analogies between Rumi’s Tree of Life and the mission, we, as non-native 
teachers, are accomplishing in the wonderland of Teaching English as a Foreign 
Language (TEFL). 

Living in an age in which English has carved a well-established niche as the language 
of global economy, science, mass media, business, technology, and the like, we, as 
speakers of other languages, have come to feel a pressing demand to address this 
disadvantage by having a share of this target language. Turning such demand into an 
advantage, native American and British publishers—traditionally legitimised as 
authorities for producing expert discourses and setting norms and standards for 
English usage —are seen to play a pivotal role in churning out flamboyant packages 
of language teaching and learning products and delivering them to diverse, targeted 
consumers, including Iranian language teachers and learners. Through this lens, 
language appears to resemble a tradable, market-wise commercial “commodity”, with 
“exchange value” (Tan & Rubdy, 2008, p. 2) and “economic cachet” (Wee, 2008, p. 
37), which is likely to provide its investors, shareholders, and marketers with a 
lucrative payoff (Gong & Holliday, 2013; Gray, 2010a; 2010b & 2013; Heller, 2010; 
Poorsaduqi, 2013; Tan & Rubdy, 2008). 

Despite the existing endorsement of imported language products, such materials have 
been criticised on several grounds. Though debates on the topic abound, among the 
critically observed issues is the salience of knowledge constructs, interests, norms, 
values, and worldviews that are almost Western or Eurocentric in nature, and selling 
them to the rest of the world “as if they were universal” (Asante, 2012, p. 35), and in 
fact at the expense of local knowledge constructs. This hegemony has been 
conceptualised under complicated notions of linguistic, cultural, intellectual or 
academic imperialism or colonisation in a broader socio-political and historical scope 
(Bhatt, 2005; Canagarajah, 2005; Pennycook, 2010). 

As argued, one of the lingering legacies of deference to Eurocentric knowledge is the 
creation of a sense of contempt, inferiority or worthlessness towards local sources 
knowledge and wisdom (Asante, 2012; Bhatt, 2005; Kumaravadivelu, 2006), whereby 
individuals become the consumers, rather than producers of their own knowledge. In 
other words, the dominated consumers are paralyzed not only by their reliance on 
others but also by what Kumaravadivelu (2006) calls “self-marginalisation” as they 


1 Translated by Mojaddedi (2007, p. 216) 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


90 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


“knowingly or unknowingly legitimise the characteristics of inferiority attributed to 
them by the dominating group” (p. 22). 

Among other disciplines, English literature is a domain in which bold footprints of 
academic imperialism and marginalisation of local knowledge have been traced. The 
fact that a substantial body of literary works used in English as Foreign Language 
(EFL) courses is written in native or standard English and limited to mono-cultural, 
Western or Eurocentric literature has raised voices against the neglect or rarity of non¬ 
native varieties of English (Floris, 2005; Kachru, 1999; Talib, 1992; Vethamani, 
1996). According to Sridhar (1983), non-native literatures include literary texts and 
creative writings in English produced by its non-native users, particularly those 
coming from “former British colonies, such as the countries in the Indian 
subcontinent, in East and West Africa, and in the Caribbean” (p. 291). 

However, during the last two decades and with the increasing numbers of non-native 
speakers and the development of Englishes around the world—each having its own 
structural features, lexis, phonology, pragmatics, and discourse practices—some have 
recognised that solely adhering to stable forms, norms, models, and standards of the 
BANA (standing for Britain, Australasia, and North America) is not only mythical but 
also problematic (Cook, 2007; Matsuda, 2009; Sifakis & Sougari, 2003). 

One line of argument, also followed in this paper, is that literature teaching should not 
be limited to mono-cultural, Eurocentric literature. Speaking defensively, the Indian 
linguist, Kachru (1999, p. 148) states that non-native literary texts—also called “new 
literatures”, “colonial and post-colonial literature”, or “contact literature”—are “a 
repertoire of resources for providing linguistic and cross-cultural explanations as they 
reveal how English can be redefined in non-Western contexts and how language and 
culture are interrelated” (cited in Nault, 2006, p. 323). Likewise, Kachru and Smith 
(2008) argue that the variety of cultural contexts, themes, genres, rhetorical strategies, 
patterns of verbal interactions, and meaningful signs contained in non-native works of 
literature can raise awareness and consciousness of the readers. In a practical case, 
Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin (2002) in The Empire Writes Back: Theory and 
Practice in Post-Colonial Literatures list examples of attempts made by fonnerly 
colonised African writers to avoid an approved variety of Standard English by 
creating a national English. Their non-translated words create linguistic gaps, which 
require readers to “accept and understand the native culture on its own terms” (cited 
in Jaffar, 2005, p. 101). 

Extending non-native literature to translated first language literature, Ronald Gray 
(2005) maintains that “one excellent but frequently overlooked type of literature is the 
translated first language literature of the students” (p. 2). He mentions several 
additional advantages such works carry over other types of literature. They include 
greater contiguity with the cultural identity or heritage of the students and the 
existence of more familiar characters, themes, plots, values, and linguistic elements. 
His voice is not an isolated one. Selin Yasmin (2008), a Muslim literary critic, argues 
that literature from the Muslim countries is rare in the realm of World Englishes. She 
laments: “Even in the Muslim universities of Muslim countries, English literature is 
taught, leaving out Islamic literature” (p. 3). Floris (2005) also states that exclusive 
focus on the standard variety of English is likely to prevent “our learners [from] 
enjoying and experiencing the wealth of the new varieties of English” (p. 46). She 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


91 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


points to the findings of some studies in South Asian countries which suggest that 
students face difficulties in dealing with and comprehending native literary texts as 
they are often loaded with cultural complexities with which students are unfamiliar. 
As an alternative, she provides guidelines for dealing with literary works written by 
Asian writers in English and indicates that the relevance of these types of Asian 
literary texts to students’ collective identity and their familiar settings render them 
potential assets. 

Talib (1992), a researcher from Singapore, argues that Singaporean literary texts 
written in English are likely to help non-native students to develop a sense of cultural 
identity and belonging. As an example, he refers to The Taximan’s Story, an English 
story created by a Singaporean writer (Catherine Lim) in which features of 
Singaporean English are reflected in the whole text, and explains how it can be used 
as a possible resource for teaching English in Singapore. In yet another example, three 
Indonesian researchers, Muslim, Nafisah, and Damayanti (2009) recount how the 
majority of stories incorporated in Indonesian high school-level English textbooks are 
foreign ones “such as Cinderella, Goldy Locks, Snow White, and Sleeping Beauty ” (p. 
14). They state that one of the reasons for the salience of foreign literary works is that 
textbook writers find it difficult to translate local literature into good English, thus 
preferrin to pick up available foreign stories. They are emphatic that English 
translations of local stories can make students feel proud of their country, history, and 
culture, as a predominately Muslim one, and help them to “visualize or prove what 
they have found or read in the stories in their daily life. This makes learning more 
meaningful to them” (p. 10). 

Locally speaking, Iranian language teachers and learners are not unfamiliar with such 
issues. Re-reading the same sugar-coated story of imported international ELT 
products widely used in the Iranian English language institutes and in academia, a 
good number of local studies have pointed to the salience of topics imbued with the 
lifestyle and ideology of the West, namely capitalism, materialism, neo-liberalism, 
consumerism, and individualism (Abdollahzadeh & Baniasad, 2010; Baleghizadeh & 
Motahed, 2010; Keshavarz & Akbari Malek, 2009; Koosha, Talebinezhad, & Taki, 
2004). This in turn has raised concerns with regard to the nature of foreign language 
knowledge absorbed, consumed and re-produced by Iranian language teachers and 
learners, as well as the extent to which such depicted life worlds are representatives of 
socio-cultural realities, norms or priorities lived daily by the individuals in the Iranian 
contexts. Among others, two Iranian researchers, Pishghadam and Zabihi (2012) 
maintain that: 

[Reaching the English language to learners who bring with themselves a confluence 
of political, social, historical, cultural and religious backgrounds to the ELT 
classrooms may not be fully accomplished through mere exposure and blatant 
ballyhoos of the Western culture which is prevalent in the market of their English 
teaching materials (p. 66). 

From a broader perspective, the issue of national identity and the need for the lived 
experiences and social identities of language learners to be incorporated into the 
second language curricula are recently receiving considerable attention. A number of 
Iranian writers (Ashoori, 1997; Hajiyani, 2009), while avoiding dogmatic nationalism, 
see Iranian identity as consisting of four indexes named as nationality (or Iranian- 
ness), religion (mainly Islam), traditions (or customs), and modernity. They believe 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


92 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


that these indexes need to be taken into consideration when designing educational 
curricula. 

Turning the spotlight on teaching literary works, one can see a wide incorporation of 
abridged or unabridged British and American literary works such as short stories, 
poems, dramas, and novels in the Iranian foreign language settings (Azizi, 2014). 
Such literary works are often legitimised as presenting “standard” or “native” 
varieties of English. In objecting to the current hegemony of native speakerism, 
Khatib, Ranjbar, and Fat’hi (2012) propose that the literature in foreign language 
classes should include multicultural and multinational literary works. They also warn 
that “becoming too preoccupied with monocultural literature ... will culminate into 
more linguistic imperialism, self-marginalisation, self-alienation, cultural 
colonialisation and hegemony” (p. 12). 

While the importance of taking seriously attempts to confront and alleviate “the 
harshness of all marginalisations Iranians have suffered for centuries” (Pishghadam & 
Zabihi, 2012, p. 68) has been voiced, few remedial undertakings have been reported. 
In one rare instance, Azizi (2014) observed that the large number of storybooks which 
are published in Iran for English language learners and used in the language institutes 
are based on either American or British literature. She argues that the Persian literary 
heritage, as an invaluable source, has thus far been disregarded. Consequently, she 
worked to recreate a number of English narratives based on Persian classic stories 
taken from Mathnavi and Shahnameh for EFL courses. On another level, she sought 
English teachers’ perceptions on using English texts out of Persian stories. On the one 
hand, the majority of interviewed teachers stated that “the familiar content which 
makes the text more comprehensible for Iranian learners causes more emotional and 
intellectual engagement in learners” (p. 130) and they “can provide learners with 
models of how topics... frequent in the lives of Iranians are expressed in English” (p. 
131). On the other hand, some teachers expressed their worries about the complicated 
or possibly inaccurate language of the texts, which might hamper English language 
learning. 

Recognising the need to design educational literary programs which can “talk back” 
to the present academic monopoly, we, as researchers from different disciplines, 
sought to explore how Persian classic literary works could be prepared for English 
language classes, and how they might inspire the language re/created by the students. 
Regrettably, despite the richness of our Muslim Iranian culture and its world 
renowned artistic and literary heritage, there have rarely been serious attempts to 
capitalise on this richness; neither has this potential been drawn on for foreign 
language teaching or to explore how such roots might invigorate our English language 
teaching and learning practices. We believed that like the messenger in Rumi’s story, 
we need to take deeper stock of our mission, and seek the tree we are searching in our 
vicinity, maybe at home, through trees of knowledge rooted in our divinely-oriented 
knowledge. We, like Rumi, hope that from that one source a million things would 
flourish. 

Before narrating the journey, we briefly outline the history of English teaching in 
Iran. 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


93 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


English language teaching in Iran 

The position of Iran, as an Islamic, anti-western country, has resulted in noticeable 
challenges with regard to English language teaching. English has been the most 
significant foreign language in Iran for the last 50 years. During the Pahlavi Dynasty 
(1925-1979), due to pro-Western policies and the close political, social, economic, 
and military relationship between Iran’s kings (Shah) and British and American 
companies and institutions, English—as the language of Modernity—was selected as 
the foreign language of the country. During the years following the establishment of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran (1979-present), the teaching of English was dealt with 
ambivalently. Initially, English was viewed as the language of the enemy (i.e. the 
United States and England) whose spread could threaten the national and Islamic 
identity of the country. However, the idea of “exporting the Islamic revolution to the 
rest of the world” (Sharifian, 2010, p. 139) as well as the need for access to scientific, 
economic, and technological development references made the presence of English a 
practical necessity. 

This necessity, coupled with the desire to maintain the national culture and values, led 
to attempts to write locally made textbooks which could address the English language 
needs of Iranian students. Within a centralised system of education, English textbooks 
prepared by Iranian authorities in the national curriculum committee and Ministry of 
Education have been assigned for junior high school, high school, and pre-university 
levels. Adherence to the assigned textbook is guaranteed by a standardised testing 
scheme issued by the central office. A glance over the textbooks suggests that their 
major focus is on reading skills, vocabulary learning, and grammar. The inability of 
public schools and universities in meeting the communicative needs of Iranian 
learners has resulted in the mushrooming of an astonishing number of English private 
and semi-private language institutes in many cities. In the private sector, cutting-edge, 
imported textbooks, published mainly by international publishing centres form the 
backbone of instruction in a good number of language institutes. Seeing imported 
foreign textbooks as sources for disseminating covert and overt socio-political 
ideologies and cultural values, local researchers have been seen to turn a critical eye 
on such teaching and learning materials. The salience of topics such as American 
lifestyle, festivals and ceremonies, eating habits and Hollywood celebrities, as well as 
Western cultural values or living standards that are at variance with the realities, local 
specifications, and real-life concerns of Iranian language teachers and learners have 
been reported frequently (Abdollahzadeh & Baniasad, 2010; Baleghizadeh & 
Motahed, 2010; Kazemi, Asadi Aidinlou, Savaedi, & Alaviniya, 2013; Keshavarz & 
Akbari Malek, 2009; Koosha, Talebinezhad, & Taki, 2004; Poorsaduqi, 2013). With 
that orientation, Pishghadam and Zabihi (2012) see language institutes in Iran as 
being responsible for current “marginalisation and identity loss” as they keep 
“indirectly smoothing the way for the maintenance of the status quo, i.e. the 
dominance of the Western culture in an Iranian and Islamic context, under the guise 
of competitiveness and professionalism” (p. 65). 

As a point of departure, this investigation capitalises on English translations of 
seminal Persian classic literary texts, instead of foreign American or British literary 
products including widely-used commercial textbooks. 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


94 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


METHOD 

This research was conducted by three academics from ELT, Persian Literature and 
Islamic History disciplines and a doctoral candidate of TEFL, all from the same 
institution. Our collaborative venture laid the foundations of an interdisciplinary 
action research project in which one of the researchers was responsible for conducting 
classroom actions and reporting the results to other co-researchers. At the outset of the 
journey, we made lists of Persian works of literature that could feature in our 
program. From among available options, we focused on three major masterpieces, 
namely Mathnavi Couplets composed by Jalal Al-Din Rumi (1207-1273 AD), The 
Epic of Kings by Abolqasem Ferdowsi (977-1010 AD) and Conference of the Birds 
by Farid Al-Din Attar (1145-1221 AD). The rationale for choosing these literary 
works was their narrative-like, allegorical structure as well as the deep, thought- 
provoking implicit and explicit moral messages they offered. The quality and richness 
of the poems’ content, their attraction and appeal to the assumed readers, their 
interpretability, and their relevance to learners’ everyday personal and social lives 
(Azizi, 2014) were the four criteria we applied in selecting the stories. 

With a shortlist of poems gradually being prepared, we spent more time preparing 
them for classroom practices, mainly through adopting or adapting prose narrations of 
such poems. In occasions when the available abridged prose narratives employed 
extensive, archaic vocabulary or sophisticated literary styles of writing, we simplified 
and streamlined the available translations. To simplify the texts, we used common 
simplification techniques such as replacing uncommon or difficult words with more 
familiar synonyms, replacing complex syntactic structures with simpler ones, splitting 
long sentences into multiple sentences, dropping and adding some parts while trying 
to keep the content and meaning intact. Below is an example of an original paragraph 
translated by Whinfield (1979) and the prepared simplified version: 

In the book of Kalila and Damna a story is told of a lion who held all the beasts of the 
neighborhood in subjection, and was in the habit of making constant raids upon them, 
to take and kill such of them as he required for his daily food. At last the beasts took 
counsel together, and agreed to deliver up one of their company every day, to satisfy 
the lion’s hunger, if he, on his part, would cease to annoy them by his continual 
forays (p. 14). 

The simplified version: 

There was once a lion that harmed and harassed other beasts of the neighborhood and 
was in the habit of attacking and killing them for his daily food. Being fed up with his 
attacks, the beasts took counsel together, and agreed to deliver up one of themselves 
every day, to satisfy the lion’s hunger, if he, on his part, would agree to stop hunting 
them. 

Moreover, since the prepared narratives were meant to act not only as classroom 
content but as springboards for further learning events and actions, we spent more 
time negotiating how they could be livened up. In designing such language events, we 
were determined not to imitate conventional drill-like language practices (e.g., 
true/false, multiple choice, matching, gap-filling, sentence completion exercises) 
which could present a mechanical view of language nor the more communicative ones 
(e.g., opinion-gap, infonnation-gap, and reasoning-gap tasks) which could eventually 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


95 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


create artificial, life-detached activities. What we wanted was for literature to be 
experienced as “artworks” rather than a means for delivering narratives as top-down, 
factual pieces of information such as summaries of plots and themes. Accordingly, 
our classroom events were meant to provide space for the individual learners to 
actualise their linguistic and non-linguistic potential and develop their creativity. 

With our hopes that classrooms should be sites for deeper self-recognition, we routed 
our journey from a miniature picture of self (I in contact with myself and others) 
towards a broader picture of self (I in contact with the world around me and the world 
beyond). Given that itinerary, our journey commenced with a number of stories whose 
deep moral and mystical concepts and symbolic characters and events set the grounds 
for going back to the inner self and examining the idea of who we are in a more 
complex way. 


RESEARCH CONTEXT AND PARTICIPANTS 

During our two-semester long research project (from October 2012 to June 2013), we 
were with five different communities of learners majoring in various fields including 
Logic & Philosophy, Social Studies, Management, Industrial Engineering and 
Computer Engineering at Alzahra University, an accredited state university in north of 
Tehran, Iran. The number of students varied from thirty to fifty in each community. 
They were young Iranian women, mainly in their late teens or early twenties. Nearly 
ah these students had gained entry to this university after passing the Iranian 
University Entrance Exam (Konkoor). Despite Persian being the main medium of 
instruction for university courses, ah non-English major students are required to enroll 
in a prerequisite three-unit general English course, which lasts approximately 26 
ninety-minute sessions. 

In each community, we had a range of students with regard to their backgrounds in 
general as well as to their English language experiences in particular. While some of 
the students had already studied English in private language institutes for years and 
enjoyed a fairly good command of English (intermediate and above), others did not 
have much experience with English beyond school. 

Both during and after the teaching of the courses, the written transcripts of classroom 
conversations, participants’ in-and-out-of-class documents including their reflective 
notes, and PowerPoint presentation slides, final exam papers, and surveys enabled us 
to analyse the events in more details. We analysed the data by clustering ideas into 
major themes and labeling them according to the language use of the participants. 
Accordingly, our examples and the discussions which follow are rooted in the 
language taken up or created by the learners. To maintain a sense of naturalness, 
students’ speech and writing remain largely unedited and intact, but anonymous, with 
minor typographical corrections done for the sake of clarity. 

In this article, we aim to recount a number of language events that blossomed as a 
result of exposure to Persian works of literature. What needs to be underscored is that 
the coming language events, coded with the suffix “lit”, are not separate, exclusive 
categories of events but rather fairly overlapping ones. 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


96 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Although the present research did not aim to conduct a rigorous examination of ELT 
materials, the contents of three intemationally-used ELT reading textbooks including 
Active Skills for Reading 1 by Neil J. Anderson, Cover to Cover: Reading 
Comprehension and Fluency 1 by Richard R. Day and Junko Yamanka, and Pre- 
intermediate Select Readings by Linda Lee and Erik Gundersen were focused 
narrowly. The selection of these books was based on recommendations from 
university teachers who commonly used these books for the same General English 
courses in the same institution, as well as the textbooks’ wide readership by other 
Iranian university students and instructors. A selected number of texts was examined 
and their stated or implied values were juxtaposed or compared against the themes 
presented in the designed Persian narratives. 

The findings of the study revealed that the sense of familiarity the students had with 
such national literary works led to the emergence of language instances lightened by 
sparks of virtue, vision, life, and art. These language events are discussed below. 

“Heart full of flaming love”: Yirtue-lit language 

With the availability of various Persian narratives, a good ground was established for 
analysing the salient themes they offered and comparing them with a number of topics 
of the same category covered in three internationally used reading textbooks. The 
analysis demonstrated that “inward self’ versus “outward self’ and “individualism” 
versus “collectivism” were key points of difference. 

The concept of the soul was one of the mainstays of a number of Persian narratives 
and parables shared with various communities of the students. This issue is presented 
differently through different symbolic stories. One of these eventful, soul-focused 
stories was Conference of the Birds by Farid Al-Din Attar (1145-1221). Through this 
allegorical story, the poet tells the story of “the birds in the world” that are 
encouraged by their leader, Hoopoe, to start a journey in search of their king— 
Simorgh. Having heard of the difficulties of the route, a number of the birds (such as 
the nightingale, parrot, peacock, duck, partridge, owl and sparrow) are filled in with 
terror and express their inability to accompany Hoopoe through this journey. Hoopoe 
confronts them one by one and warns that it is better to lose their life than to languish 
miserably. With a change of heart, the birds set on a journey which requires them to 
cross over seven deadly valleys. Finally, out of thousands of birds, only thirty birds 
reach the dwelling place of Simorgh, but as they enter his court, all they find is a lake 
in which they see their own reflection. Beneath its allegorical, fable-like surface, the 
narrative is indeed talking about complex issues with regard to internal connectedness 
to God and divinity. Significantly, the poet uses the birds to symbolise human beings 
and their spirits or failings and the Persian pun thirty (si) birds (morgh) and Simorgh 
to suggest that the birds and Simorgh are one and the same. The whole story is the 
mystical journey of souls. 

The underlying meaning conveyed by this story and other similar narratives is that 
human beings—irrespective of their status, position, talent and preparedness—need to 
ponder the reason and truth of creation and existence, consider God in each and every 
aspect and conduct of their short-lived lives, have sincerity, wholeheartedness, zeal 
and depth in their faith, and make practical efforts to attain virtue. Such teachings are 
derived from Islamic principles—as represented in the holy Quran and the sayings of 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


91 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


the Prophet and the Imams. In the holy Quran, God has frequently and emphatically 
drawn the attention of individuals to the soul, and the necessity of persistently 
attempting to cleanse the heart of unethical thoughts, viciousness, wrong and wicked 
deeds that degenerate man to the level of animals. In other words, individuals are 
strongly advised not to engage with trivial, worldly matters, mundane enjoyments, 
carnal desires, bodily needs or worthless things so that they can find peace, serenity, 
and tranquility in their heart. 

While going through oral and written reflections made by the students on Conference 
of the Birds, we particularly paid attention to the ways the students were making sense 
of the story and were putting their thoughts into words. What grabbed our attention 
was that the students were taking up impressive expressions, chains of words, 
sentences, or messages from the story and were intenningling them with their own 
utterances to display their various symbolic understandings of the story. For example, 
in the Industrial Engineering community, Fatemeh and Parisa borrowed the 
expression “charming sceneries” from the story and wrote that “the writer wants to 
say us that we don’t be deceived with charming sceneries and we never lose our way 
and our purpose in life...”. Mozhgan and Zeinab wote about how “our life is like a 
long journey with many problems and to solve these problems and be successful we 
should be like the thirty birds”. Fahimeh had recapped the story in a well-known 

Persian verse by the famous poet Hafez, as follows: 

^ 2 

i/v° G 0 *- 1 j * si “tji jt /'h J a I“JI^ 

Simply put, the verse indicates that divine knowledge should be sought within the 
self, rather than outside. 

When it came to birds, the students had interestingly related individual birds to 
various types of humans and their attributes. Zahra took up the expression “shake off 
the self’ from the story and mentioned that to her “the birds that could finish the 
journey are those know themselves and they are ready to shake off their self to get 
their goal”. Erfaneh and Elham saw the peacock as representing the person who 
“doesn’t believe in himself and doesn’t like to progress and have a promotion in his 
life”, and the duck as representing the person who “can’t abandon his mundane 
belongings ...”. 

What we could see was that the story, and the subsequent reflections and discussions, 
helped a unique spiritual language atmosphere to blossom within our communities. 
This language was characterised by concepts of “shaking off the self’, “soul”, “cage 
of the body”, “heart full of flaming love”, enduring “difficulties”, “abandoning 
mundane belongings and possessions”, “reaching God”, not being “deceived by 
charming sceneries” in this “long journey”, “Simorgh”, as well as meaningful 
allusions to Persian poetic verses, Quranic verses, Hadith (the Prophet and Imams’ 
sayings), and the like. 

The abundance of spirit-involved expressions in the language instances of the 
students, regardless of the depth or degree of religious or theological positioning of 


2 For years my heart inquired of me 
Where Jamshid’s sacred cup might be, 
And what was in its own possession 
It asked from strangers, constantly; 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


98 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


their users, might derive its strength and texture from their inner spiritual beliefs. Or 
they may resonate from the discourses of spirituality they were in contact with in their 
immediate social lives including family settings, academic or non-academic institutes, 
religious ceremonies, rituals, the mass media, and the like. The rootedness of this 
issue revealed itself more as we could observe how this kind of language kept 
appearing and flourishing throughout the sessions, like flowers that have more lasting 
scents. As we traced the unfolding events, we could see how a fair number of students 
adopted expressions such as “shaking off the self’ or “heart full of love” for 
conveying their inner spiritual feelings in their later talks and consecutive reflections. 

This might indicate how such concepts probably touched their hearts or had a more 
lasting impact on their minds and lives. For example, in the following excerpt 
produced by Arefeh, nearly half way throughout the course, she revealed how the 
story had made her come to new realisation of life principles and purposes. She wrote: 

In the hoopoe story, I understood that I didn’t know my God in fact after that story I 
have try to know God and progress my principles... . Before this story my life didn’t 
have purpose and it wasn’t good and I didn’t keep my mind on God ... but nowadays 
I try to do everything for my purposes (God and best level). I know if I want to find 
God I shouldn’t go another place because God is near ... (Written reflection, second 
semester, Session 15). 

Significantly, such language constructions in which the students use their foreign 
language for expressing their intricate thoughts and feelings about essential issues like 
spiritual purposes, the importance of the soul, reaching God and the like stand in 
contrast with the “anesthetized” language developed as a result of engagement with 
trivial, mundane topics which eventually make the learners think and talk down 
through shallow issues (Poorsaduqi, 2013). 

While there was not much consideration of “inward self’ in the three mentioned 
reading textbooks, there was great concern with “outward self’, “personality” and 
“characteristics”. This encompasses various topics including psychological texts 
about personality types (relationships between personality and blood types; 
personality and colors; different personality types; character traits; and verbal and 
non-verbal behaviors). An example of this could be seen in a text entitled 
“Understanding Ourselves” in Cover to Cover 1 in which the personality differences 
of three sisters, Fei, Meilan and Lihua, are mentioned. Fei is “friendly”, “outgoing”, 
“rebellious” and “active”. “Meilan is a happy person, but, unlike Fei, she prefers to be 
alone” and Lihua is “quiet and reserved” and “she doesn’t smile or laugh very often”, 
but her friends don’t find her “unfriendly”. The texts are followed by some arguments 
about relationship between personality and “blood types” (pp. 114-115). 

Another category of texts focused on the self includes interviews with people who 
talk about their families, jobs, studies, homes, personal ambitions, memories, 
challenges and adventures. They openly share their feelings or negotiate their 
problems with experts or consultants and seek their suggestions. Taking that into 
consideration, John Kullman (2013) sees a “peculiar and partial” Western “discourse 
of individualism”—which encompasses characteristics of “assertiveness” and 
“communicativeness”—to demonstrate how “learners’ lives, personalities, personal 
qualities, lifestyles and personal change have become primary foci of the 
coursebooks” (p. 32). An example of such self-disclosure is presented in Cover to 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


99 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Cover 1, in a text entitled “Just Ask! Ms. Hope answers all of your questions on life”. 
In one part, a boy, Jon introduces himself as a not “very good-looking”, “pretty short” 
and “shy and quiet” person. He is writing to Ms. Hope because he is worried that if he 
introduces his fiancee to his “best friend”, “she will like him better than” him as he is 
“tall and very good-looking”, “funny” and “very much outgoing” (pp. 104-105). 

Other texts include instructional strategies, tips or recipes for how to improve your 
personal or social life, including how to lead a happy life and healthy life style, how 
to avoid unhealthy diets, how to live longer, how to maintain beauty or keep fit, how 
to deal with stress, or how to observe etiquette in modern technology. 

Though no rigid claims can be made, from the present scenarios, the vision of the self, 
or the nature of human beings foregrounded appears to fall mainly within an outward 
picture of self too preoccupied with worldly affairs such as “enjoyment”, “money”, 
“fashion”, “looking good”, “happiness”, “public life” and the like. Seemingly a broad 
ideology governing texts of this sort is a humanistic outlook towards life or existence 
with inclinations towards a hedonistic worldview in which pleasure and materialistic 
values are given priority. 

Conversely, the concepts of altruism, patriotism, love of country or countrymen and 
rejection of oppression were seen to be the focal point of a number of Persian 
narratives. For example, one mythical Persian story, “Kaveh, the Blacksmith” from 
Ferdowsi’s Epic of Kings narrates the story of Kaveh, a blacksmith, who saved 
the Iranian nation by killing the cruel king, Zahak. In one scene of the story, Kaveh 
goes to Zahak’s court to ask him “not to kill his last son”. The king makes him “sign 
an agreement telling everyone how righteous, kind and forgiving Zahak was”. Kaveh 
tears the agreement to pieces, runs out of the court, and encourages people to start an 
uprising against the evil tyrant. 

Another Persian character is Arash, the Iranian legendary archer who is remembered 
for the way he sacrificed his life for his country. The story starts with the attack of the 
Tooranian nomads on the Persians and their triumph. The enemies then negotiate a 
cunning condition of peace. “This condition was to determine the new boundary 
between their country and the Persia by firing an arrow ... because they knew that the 
distance an arrow could be shot was not too great.” Arash expresses his readiness to 
shoot the arrow. He goes up the Alborz Mountain and fires an arrow, putting his 
whole soul into this deed. Despite his death, the arrow reaches the former boarder, 
and Persia remains the same as before. 

Across the three textbooks, similar texts could be found on celebrity lives in which 
real or invented figures become the focus of attention and their dedication to fame and 
financial success are narrated. An example of this could be seen in a text in pre¬ 
intermediate Select Readings entitled “How to Be a Successful Businessman”. It tells 
the story of a poor Indian, Zubeir Kazi, who migrated from a small town in southeast 
of India to the United States in his youth in the hope of getting a job. To save money, 
he decides to find a job as a cook’s assistant with KFC. His hard work impressed the 
owners of the restaurants to such an extent that they decided to appoint him as the 
manager of a newly opened restaurant. A few years later, Mr. Kazi could afford to 
buy a restaurant which was losing money and in a short time he changed it into a 
profitable restaurant. With the money he earned from selling the restaurant he bought 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


100 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


three other ones, which were again losing the money. Since that time, Mr. Kazi has 
continually been engaged in the act of buying restaurants and despite owning 168 
ones, “He is not planning to stop there. He’s looking for more poorly managed 
restaurants to buy” (p. 54). 

In this story, Mr. Kazi is introduced as a “successful businessperson”, because he has 
been able to earn more money and add to his wealth. This implies that the more 
money one owns, the more successful and the more valuable s/he is. Furthermore, a 
glance at the scenario shows that our leading character has earned his present 
economic status by pursuing a cyclical strategy of buying restaurants which are 
operating at a loss, changing them in some way and then selling them at a profit. This 
magic formula can change the face of Mr. Kazi from a “hardworking” man—as 
emphatically presented in the text—to an opportunist whose apparent concern is to 
make profit out of the loss of others. The other side of the coin is that what is 
presented here as Mr. Kazi’s progress is in fact others’ downfall; the economic growth 
he benefits from is dependent on the economic shrinkage of others. And this is where 
the concepts of capitalism and consumerism come to the fore. Discourses of this sort 
are representative of a neoliberal commercial world and labour market—characterised 
by “survival of the fittest” and hyper-competitive economic conditions (Gray, 2013). 
Given such ideologies, the text cannot be seen as merely biographical or 
informational but rather as promoting or advertising—produced for the sake of selling 
the products of a certain market and “branding” an individual. 

To conclude, such worldviews are incompatible with the “balance” or “moderation” 
which has been recommended in Islamic teachings upon which individuals are 
advised to build their lives, making hannony between their natural physical needs and 
worldly lives and those of their souls. Accordingly, individuals are advised to reign in 
their consumerist habits and show concern for others, especially the poor. They are 
warned that ongoing dissatisfaction with their possessions and an obsession with 
worldly and superficial affairs, like financial gains or profits, could possibly make 
them turn a blind eye to the reality of their moral beings, the attainment of spiritual 
wealth, the care for humanity, and that which is truly important. 

“The walls are symbols ofVision-lit language 

As we proceeded with our story readings, discussing and sharing our personal 
interpretations of the stories’ underlying themes, key episodes or characters became 
part and parcel of our classroom lives. On many occasions, such sharing of insights 
moved our talks well beyond mechanical conversations, aimless free discussions or 
written assignments, and our conversations became fertile soil for cultivating deeper 
vision and broader insight. 

For example, one of the memorable stories we shared with students was the famous 
parable of “The Chinese and Greek Artists” by Rumi. It narrates the adventures of 
two groups of painters. To show their expertise in art, these artists agree to compete 
with each other in two rooms facing each other and separated by a curtain. While the 
Chinese painters were engaged in coloring the walls, the Greeks rubbed and brushed 
the walls. When the Chinese painters finally displayed their work, everybody 
marveled at the incredible beauty of their creations. When it was the Greeks’ turn, 
they simply drew the intervening curtain with the result that all the colors of the other 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


101 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


room mirrored on their reflective walls in an endless variety of shapes and colours. 
This story with its symbolic concepts like “competition”, “painting”, 
“colour/coloration”, “cleansing the walls”, and “reflection” provided opportunities for 
us to delve below the surface to discover the parable’s hidden mysteries. In one of our 
classroom discussions, Mahnaz, a Philosophy student whose fairly poor English 
fortunately did not discourage her from expressing her bright remarks, stated that to 
her “the walls are... symbols of the humans’ soul”; and following her, Neda hesitantly 
said, “...the Chinese used the colours to show the appearance while the Greeks 
showed the soul”. The concepts of “body”, “soul”, “colours”, “paints”, “polished 
walls” were among the words which went well beyond their denotative meanings, and 
students in various communities were seen to mold them into various shapes, like 
pieces of soft clay that meld themselves to the shape of various casts. For example, in 
her mid-term written reflection, Pegah, a vocal Industry Engineering student whose 
command of English enabled her to put complex ideas into words, had shown how the 
words “colours and paints” had broader and deeper meanings to her. Through drawing 
analogies between the “Chinese and Greek Artists” story and another one, 
“Disunion”, she had pointed out that attractive but deceptive “actions and behaviors”, 
like superficial, mask-like “colours and paints”, are used “to defraud people”, 
especially the individuals who “pay attention to appearance”. Bringing the issue into a 
wider scope, she had concluded: 

I want to insist that our problem isn’t just like...Chinese people with their beautiful 
words and paints. Our problem is the superficial and innocent people...who aren’t 
like Greeks, underestimate themselves, pay attention to appearance and they are 
always lost. (Written reflection, Session 15) 

By reading between and beyond the lines, students became engaged in looking 
through and thinking through the concepts, and seeing how they are impacted on 
them. Such practices broaden these concepts by constructing personal meanings from 
them as well as applying them—symbolically, figuratively or metaphorically—to 
other contexts. This is suggestive of the deeper levels of thinking or visioning 
(making visible the invisible) the students were engaged in. Such kinds of vision- 
involved or vision-lit language constructions are different from conventional 
academic reading practices, in which students are expected to look up the new words 
in the dictionary and memorise them fairly mechanically, get the main points of texts, 
paraphrase or summarise the texts, and provide stock responses to a set of reading 
comprehension questions—where their voices, views, words and wonders are mainly 
absent or stifled (Abdollahi, 2011). 

Going through the written questionnaires completed by the students, we could see 
how such deeper thinking and putting these thoughts into words had made them come 
to new understandings of how English as a foreign language could be used for more 
than grammar and vocabulary activities. For example, Sepideh, a Computer 
Engineering student with good background in English learning, had mentioned that 
she “had never thought about learning language through thinking and commenting” 
since to her “language was always a memorising stuff’. Similarly, Fahimeh had 
mentioned that the course had helped her to learn “to critique the texts and think more 
deeply”. Narges, while mentioning that she prefers more “academic and current 
texts”, had added that her “view of language [had] changed a little” as she had 
realised that “language is not limited to grammar and vocabulary”. 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


102 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


“My story is like the story of...”: Life-lit language 

Within our discussions, we often tried to connect the classic stories to our lived- 
through experiences and our contemporary world. This often led to interesting 
comments on the part of the students. A memorable example of this happened as we 
were reading a prose version of “The Rabbit and the Lion”, from Book I of Mathnavi, 
with students of Sociology. Briefly, this fable narrates the adventures of a small rabbit 
that succeeded at defeating a fierce lion. Through this mystical, symbolic story, Rumi 
attempts to remind the readers that we all have fierce lions inside ourselves that keep 
attacking us and the brave man is the one who can defeat not only “outward lions” but 
the “inward lions” too. Seeing as the concept of “outside lions” and “inside lions” had 
raised interesting interpretations and discoveries on the part of the students, the 
students were asked if they had ever acted like a rabbit conquering a so-called lion. A 
few seconds after this question, Sayeh, a calm and shy student, who often spoke softly 
and with long pauses, broke the classroom silence and said: “Yes ... I remember ... 
one person ... told me ... you ... you can’t ... you can’t do anything good. And I ... 
very sad ... but I tried ... tried and I could do it ... like the rabbit in the story”. Her 
excitement and candor spread through the class as other students began talking about 
how they succeeded at “giving up” their “bad habits” as examples of inside lions. 
Fannehr, an English translator, whose rapid English speech often made it difficult for 
her classmates to understand her, also mentioned the time she was preparing for the 
University Entrance Exam and how the “vampire inside” wanted more 
“entertainments”, “fun with friends”, and not just “sticking in the room ... just 
studying... not seeing movies”, but she had conquered it. 

In another event, after reading the story of “Disunion”, one of the students, Leila, had 
reflected in writing about how she could relate the story to a similar event that had 
happened to her family. “Disunion” was an adapted story from Book I Mathavi, 
which narrates the story of a Greek king and his vizier who due to their long enmity 
with the Romans cleverly plotted to deceive their rivals and cause disunion among 
them. Relying on the concept of “deception” within the story, Leila had told her story 
as follows: 

Nine years ago we (my family and I) wanted to bought a house and we searched a lot 
after a few days we liked a house that it was very big and really pretty but its price is 
very low. But after we thought that, “Today we have very good luck” and we didn’t 
think about it that why this house had very low price!! Finally we bought that house 
and after one month when we paid all of money for house (...) we understood that 
house selled to (2) family and finally we understood why that price of house is very 
low. My story is like the story of king and I think we like Romans that we didn’t 
think before we do work. (Written Reflection, second semester, Session 15) 

On yet another occasion after sharing the same story, “Disunion, with Computer 
Engineering students, Nastaran, who often showed great interests in political 
statements, surprised us by lecturing about “ways of disunion in these days”. Coming 
to the front of the class, she talked about types of “enmity or animosity” in the 
modem world where “the developed countries find out that war isn’t advisable, so 
they take an action for dividing between governments and nations” through 
“penetrating among them”, “using the unconsciousness of ordinary people”, and 
“dominating on the people’s mind”. She then explained: 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


103 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Enemies for their dominating on the societies with weapons such as mass media and 
making movies...with inaccurate and unpleasant aims...want to impress the thoughts 
and minds of juvenile in the society and...reach their destinations. In this way they 
get the society’s movement, but people with their union can be obstacle for them. We 
also have a verse about this in Quran. If people don’t change their fate, God won’t 
change it. I wish a world with peace and without...injustice and...tyranny. (Oral 
presentation, second semester, Session 20) 

Such personally generated linkages through which the students began to see 
themselves through the stories, or identify themselves with the characters, not only 
showed us how such classic, symbolic stories can have contemporary relevance or 
implications, but also how they can be pushed further than black and white, lifeless 
texts, and be resurrected and enlivened. 

Such livening up of classic stories via contemporary stories gradually created a 
familiar atmosphere in which topics of local immediacy, concern, worth and 
significance took place of alien issues. A good example of this occurred as we read 
the story of “Arash, the Archer” with Computer Engineering students. During the 
session, a summary of the story was initially presented by three students. The 
presenters finished the story by showing some pictures of the Iraq-Iran war (1981- 
1989) martyrs, as those who “sacrificed their lives for our country...like Arash”. The 
pictures on the board took our discussions in a different direction, as Raziyeh, one of 
the presenters, asked the class if we were ready to die for our country if a war 
happened. The students responded to her question in a variety of ways. Some quickly 
and abruptly announced their readiness, while others had different views. Fatemeh, 
for example, was emphatic that “when we want to do a revolution or something like 
that for our country...we should think a lot”. She then referred to the Islamic 
revolution in Iran in 1357/1979 and the eight-year war which followed as “valuable 
activities” for which many people had “passed their soul”, yet she stated that what 
dissatisfied her most was that new generations do not have the necessary “respect for 
this activity”. She said: “Young people like me and teenagers that are in their twenties 
don’t know about this revolution or they don’t like it...or they ask why our parents 
did this.” Partly agreeing with her, Raziyeh—while talking excitedly—stated that the 
main problem is that “people who think about their benefits come and they try to 
be...richer after war...or after revolution and misuse it and the young people don’t 
like this.. .this misusing”. 

Events of this type, involving both supporting and opposing voices, created an 
opportunity for the students to talk around the immediate, familiar world they inhabit, 
the meanings and understandings they attribute to this world, the realities they live 
with and their collective and individual memories, experiences and concerns. Such 
events can be good examples of carrying “linguaculture” from one’s mother tongue to 
a foreign language in which language learners “use their existing experience to take 
ownership and stamp their identities on English” (Holliday, 2014, p. 8). 

Probably, through this “ownership”, the language of our immediate community 
became closer to language events taking place in our foreign language classrooms. 
Interestingly, the issue of familiarity, or closeness, was among the factors mentioned 
by the students, which made the course more “pleasing” to them. Among others, 
Sayeh had mentioned that “such Persian texts are quite effective for learning English 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


104 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


language, firstly, because of their sweet and interesting subjects and their moral points 
and secondly, because of our relative familiarity with the topics.” Zahra had also 
mentioned that, “Such texts are good because you may not feel distanced from the 
text you are reading.” 

MIGHT: Art-lit language 

Throughout the second round of our action research, and with the aim of developing 
students’ creativity, we chose to involve students in presenting the stories. To 
encourage the students to act artistically, it was suggested that they could make use of 
MIGHT—where M stands for Music, IG for Image and Graphic, H for Heart-full 
narration of the stories, and T for Time-wise interpretations and critiques of the 
stories. The students picked up on this artistic suggestion and we began to see 
creative, artistic crafting on the part of students in various communities. 

One of these MIGHT-involved performances was delivered by three Computer 
Engineering students presenting an abridged prose version of “Kaveh, the 
Blacksmith” from Ferdowsi’s Book of Kings. They presented the story using 
PowerPoint slides containing scenes of the story, relevant pictures illustrating events 
and characters, and selected Persian verses from the original poem. Their performance 
demonstrated harmonious cooperation among the presenters as well as an organised 
division of responsibilities. Sanaz, the story-teller, was in charge of narrating different 
episodes of the story in English. At the end of each scene, she left the stage and 
Hamideh took her place and passionately declaimed the Persian verses she knew by 
heart. Moones, known as a skillful musician, supplemented the work by playing 
pleasant live background music with her Setar. Depending on various scenes, the 
music was played at low or high volumes. 

Their MIGHT-involved presentation and follow-up discussions in which we talked 
about various episodes of the story and their symbolic meanings changed the 
classroom moments into memorable ones. At the end of their presentation, they told 
us that they had spent plenty of time negotiating how they could make the story more 
alive and dramatic. 

Other student-generated artistic performances and artworks involved dramatising the 
stories in front of the class, making hand-drawn images and illustrations out of stories, 
and weaving personally created stories or poems inspired by other stories or poems. 
The time, energy and hearts devoted to producing such artistic performances hint at 
what can possibly happen when the students are encouraged to actualise their 
potential and put their creativity into practice. 


CONCLUSION 

As non-native English language teachers and learners, we live in an atmosphere in 
which the authority, dominance and hegemony of Eurocentric products—including 
American or British literary works—have led to low estimation, disparagement and 
even abandonment of local knowledge. This has alienated individuals from their root 
ethnicity, language, and culture and subsequently has made them reconstruct their 
identities. Although an outright rejection of foreign literary works is not 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


105 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


recommended, there seems to be a need for non-native English speakers to 
occasionally veer away from conventional Eurocentric sources and share their literary 
heritage among themselves and with the rest of the world. 

In this study, we sought to explore the possibilities of opening spaces for English 
translations of Persian classic works of literature in ELT classrooms and tracing the 
language events that unfolded as a result of this. The artistic, interpretative 
environments that were created provided spaces for the language learners to dig into 
their collective identity, current lives, roots, and local wisdom to re/create a “familiar” 
language—the language which comes from their everyday lives and rooted in their 
beliefs, values, collective literary and spiritual legacy. Such a sense of familiarity 
reiterates the advantages such national works of literature carry over other types of 
literature, including greater contiguity with the cultural background or heritage of the 
Iranian students and the existence of more familiar characters, themes, plots, values, 
and linguistic elements (Gray, 2005). 

As Lazar (1993) also suggests, when students—particularly those coming from a rich 
literary heritage—are familiar with literature in their own language, “then studying 
some literature in English can provide an interesting and thought-provoking point of 
comparison” (p. 15). By the same token, Azizi (2014) suggests “if a portion of 
syllabus is allocated to literary texts and stories, it will make it more possible for 
Iranians who routinely refer to Persian literature in their daily talk in Farsi, to grasp 
the art of language in English” (p. 51). The emergence of language instances 
lightened by sparks of virtue, vision, life and art might be similar to what Canagarajah 
(1999) calls a “third way” in language decolonisation through which “periphery 
students will become insiders and use the language in their own terms according to 
their own aspirations, needs, and values ... not as slaves, but as agents ... creatively 
and critically” (p. 176). 

The results of this endeavour can be critically revealing about Iranian language 
learners’ cultural and linguistic norms and concerns. This can be better achieved if the 
Iranian knowledge base and its riches are capitalised on, critiqued, interpreted and 
appropriated for contemporary demands. Otherwise, we are more likely to be over 
taken by foreign identities sooner or later or become more crippled in our knowledge 
of first language and culture. Our search for the “tree of life at home” still needs 
further developing. 


REFERENCES 

Abdollahi, M. (2011). An ethnographic study on critical/functional literacy: 
Dialogic/monologic reading, practiced in two Iranian English major 
university classrooms (Unpublished master’s thesis). Alzahra University, 
Tehran, Iran. 

Abdollahzadeh, E., & Baniasad, S. (2010). Ideologies in the imported English 
textbooks: EFL learners and teachers’ awareness and attitude. Journal of 
English Language Teaching and Research, 53(217), 1-17. Retrieved March 3, 
2013 from http://literature.tabrizu.ac.ir/Files/1 abdollahzadeh217.pdf 
Anderson, N. J. (2009). Active skills for reading: Book 1( 2nd ed.). Boston, MA: 
Heinle Language Learning. 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


106 



F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Asante, M. (2012). Reconstituting curricula in African universities: In search of an 
Afrocentric design. In C. Alvares & S. S. Faruqi (Eds.), Decolonizing the 
university: The emerging quest for non-European paradigms (pp. 33-47). 
Pinang, Malaysia: Penerbit Univirsiti Sains Malaysia. 

Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G., & Tiffin, H. (2002). The empire writes back: Theory and 
practice in post-colonial literature. London, England: Routledge. 

Ashoori, D. (1997). Ma va moderniyat [We and modernity]. Tehran, Iran: Serat 
Cultural Institute. 

Azizi, F. (2014). Exploring and recreating Persian narrative texts as resources for 
EFL classes (Unpublished master’s thesis). Alzahra University, Tehran, Iran. 

Baleghizadeh, S., & Motahed, M. J. (2010). An analysis of the ideological content of 
internationally-developed British and American ELT textbooks. The Journal 
of Teaching Language Skills, 2(2), 1-27. 

Bhatt, M. R. (2005). Expert discourses, local practices, and hybridity: The case of 
Indian Englishes. In S. Canagarajah (Ed.), Reclaiming the local in language 
policy and practice (pp. 25-54). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erbaum Associates. 

Canagarajah, S. (1999). Resisting linguistic imperialism. Oxford, England: Oxford 
University Press. 

Canagarajah, S. (2005). Introduction. In S. Canagarajah (Ed.), Reclaiming the local in 
language policy and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Cook, V. (2007). The goals of ELT: Reproducing native-speakers or promoting 
multicompetence among second language users? In J. Cummins & C. Davison 
(Eds.), International handbook of English language teaching (pp. 237-248). 
New York, NY: Springer. 

Day, R. R., & Yamanaka, J. (2010). Cover to cover: Reading comprehension and 
fluency 1. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Floris, F. D. (2005). Using English literature written by Asian authors in EFL/ESL 
classrooms in Asia. K@ta, 7(1), 43-53. 

Gong, Y., & Holliday, A. R. (2013). Cultures of change. In K. Hyland & L. Wong 
(Eds.), Innovation and change in English language education (pp. 44-57). 
London, England: Routledge. 

Gray, R. (2005). Using translated first language literature in the second language 
classroom. The Internet TESL Journal, Xl( 12). Retrieved July 6, 2014 from 
http ://iteslj. org/T echniq ues/Gray-T ranslatedL 1 Literatue. html 

Gray, J. (2010a). The branding of English and the culture of the new capitalism: 
Representations of the world of work in English language textbooks. Applied 
Linguistics, 31(5), 714-733. 

Gray, J. (2010b). The construction of English: Culture, consumerism and promotion 
in the ELT global coursebook. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Gray, J. (Ed.). (2013). Critical perspectives on language teaching materials. 
Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Hajiyani, A. (2009). Jame’ shenasi hoviyate Irani [Sociology of Iranian identity]. 
Tehran, Iran: Strategic Research Center. 

Heller, M. (2010). Language as resource in the globalized new economy. In N. 
Coupland (Ed.), Handbook of language and globalization (pp. 349-365). 
Oxford, England: Blackwell. 

Holliday, A. (2014). Using existing cultural experience to stamp identity on English. 
Retrieved June 8, 2014 from http://adrianholliday.com/articles/ . 

Jaffar, Sh. (2005). The politics of English language. Journal of Research 
(Humanities), XLI( 1), 99-108. 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


107 




F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Kachru, B. (1999). Non-native literatures in English as a resource for language 
teaching. In C. J. Brumfit & R.A. Carter (Eds.) Literature and language 
learning (pp. 140-149). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Kachru, Y., & Smith, L. (2008). Cultures, contexts, and world Englishes. London, 
England: Routledge. 

Kazemi, S. A., Asadi Aidinlou, N., Savaedi, S. Y., & Alaviniya, M. (2013). 
Subliminal culture, sexism, and hidden curriculum in the internationally 
distributed Interchange textbooks. Advances in Environmental Biology, 7(7), 
1233-1243. 

Keshavarz, M. H., & Akbari Malek, L. (2009). Critical discourse analysis of ELT 
textbooks. Iranian EFL Journal, 5, 6-19. 

Khatib, M., Ranjbar, Sh., & Fat’hi, J. (2012). The role of literature in EFL classroom 
from an EIL perspective. Journal of Academic and Applied Studies, 2(2), 12- 
21 . 

Koosha, M., Talebinezhad, M. R., & Taki, S. (2004). An analysis of the ideological 
import of internationally and locally developed ELT textbooks widely used in 
Iran. Iranian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 7, 45-79. 

Kullman, J. (2013). Telling tales: Changing discourses of identity in the “global” UK- 
published English language coursebook. In J. Gray (Ed.), Critical perspectives 
on language teaching materials (pp. 17-39). London, England: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 

Kumaravadivelu, B. (2006). Dangerous liaison: Globalization, empire and TESOL. In 
J. Edge (Ed.), (Re)locating TESOL in an age of empire (pp. 1-26). London, 
England: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Lazar, G. (1993). Literature and language teaching: A guide for teachers and 
trainers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 

Lee, L., & Gundersen, E. (2011). Pre-intermediate select readings (2nd ed). Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press. 

Matsuda, A. (2009). Desirable but not necessary? The place of world Englishes and 
English as an international language in English teacher preparation programs 
in Japan. In F. Sharifian (Ed.), English as an international language: 
Perspectives and pedagogical issues (pp. 169-189). Bristol, England: 
Multilingual Matters. 

Mojaddedi, J. (2007). Introduction. The Mathnavi Book II. (Translation, notes and 
preface: J. Mojaddedi). London, England: Oxford University Press. 

Muslim, A, B., Nafisah, N., & Damayanti, I. L. (2009, May). Locality and self- 
identity: Local story inclusion in Indonesian English text books. Paper 
presented at Soils Intec International Conference, Universiti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia. Retrieved September 18, 2014 from 

http://www.ukm.mv/solls09/Proceeding/PDF/Ahmad%20Bukhori%20Muslim 

%20et.%20aL.pdf 

Nault, D. (2006). Going global: Rethinking culture teaching in ELT contexts. 
Language, culture and curriculum. 19(3), 314-328. 

Pennycook, A. (2010). Rethinking origins and localisation in global Englishes. In M. 
Saxena & T. Omoniyi (Eds.), Contending with globalization in world 
Englishes (pp. 196-210). Buffalo, NY: Multilingual Matters. 

Pishghadam, R., & Zabihi, R. (2012). Crossing the threshold of Iranian TEFL. 
Applied Research in English, 7(1), 57-71. Retrieved August 4, 2014 from 
http://uiis.ui.ac.ir/are/browse.php7a code=A-10 

15&slc lang=en&sid=l&sw=EFL 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


108 






F. S. Parsaiyan et al. 


Inquiring “tree of life” at home: Persian classic literature in English classes 


Poorsaduqi, S. (2013). A case study of the “hidden curriculum’’ of prevalent 
commercial ELT coursebooks in Dezful following the imposed war 
(Unpublished master’s thesis). Alzahra University, Tehran, Iran. 

Rumi, J. A. (2007). The Masnavi: Book one (or Volume I, J. Mojaddedi, Trans.) 
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Rumi, J. A. (2007). The Masnavi: Book two (or Volume II, J. Mojaddedi, Trans.) 
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Sharifian, F. (2010). Glocalisation of English in world Englishes: An emerging 
variety among Persian speakers of English. In M. Saxena & T. Omoniyi 
(Eds.), Contending with globalisation in world Englishes (pp. 137-158). 
Buffalo, NY: Multilingual Matters. 

Sifakis, N. C., & Sougari, A. M. (2003). Facing the globalisation challenge in the 
realm of English language teaching. Language and Education 77(1), 59-71. 

Sridhar, S. N. (1983). Non-native English literatures: Context and relevance. In B. B. 
Kachru (Ed.), The other tongue: English across cultures (pp. 291-306). 
Oxford, England: Pergamon Press. 

Talib, I. (1992). Why not teach non-native English literature? ELT journal. 46( 1), 51- 
55. 

Tan, P. K. W., & Rubdy, R. (2008). Language as commodity: Global structures, local 
marketplaces. London, England: Continuum. 

Vethamani, M. E. (1996). Common ground: Incorporating new literatures in English 
language and literature teaching. In R. Carter, & J. McRae (Eds.), Language, 
literature and the learner (pp. 204-216). London, England: Addison Wesley 
Longman Limited. 

Wee, L. (2008). Linguistic instrumentalism in Singapore. In P. K. W. Tan & R. 
Rubdy (Eds.), Language as commodity: Global structures, local market places 
(pp. 31-43). London, England: Continuum. 

Whinheld, E. H. (1979). Masnavi I, the spiritual couplets of Maulana Jalalu-d’in 
Muhamad Rumi. London, England: Octagon. 

Yasmin, S. (2008). Curriculum reform series: Islamization of knowledge: Language 
and literature. Retrieved August 6, 2014 from http;//i- 

epistemology.net/literature/221-curriculum-reform-series—islamization-of- 
knowledge-language-and-literature.html. 

Manuscript received: April 24, 2014 
Revision received: November 3, 2014 
Accepted: November 17, 2014 


English Teaching: Practice and Critique 


109 






